Ketamine for Treatment of 
Multiple Sclerosis-related Fatigue   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
12/
6/2018
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
 Randomized controlled trial of ketamine for treatment of 
multiple sclerosis- related fatigue  
A. Background of the study 
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory, demyelinating and degenerative disease of the 
central nervous system and, after trauma, is the most common cause of disability in young 
adults, affecting more than 400,000 individuals in the US. (1,2) Of all the symptoms that can 
occur with MS, chronic fatigue is the most common and disabling, reported by [CONTACT_2669] 75% 
of patients at some point. (3–5) Fatigue limits patients’ daily activities, (6) and challenges 
employment, resulting in substantial socioeconomic consequences. (7) Despi[INVESTIGATOR_783019], fatigue treatments have been inconsistently studied, in part due to poorly 
understood underlying pathophysiological mechanisms. (8), (9) Yet to be defined biological 
processes and lack of clear treatment targets have also hampered the development of drugs 
for fatigue. As a result, there are no medications approved by [CONTACT_33438] (FDA) for the treatment of MS fatigue.  Although several agents have been 
tested for fatigue, methodological limitations in the design, execution and reporting of those 
trials have not allowed meta- analyses or systematic reviews to conclude about efficacy. 
Instead systematic reviews have recommended performing rigorously designed trials to 
confirm drug effect. (10,11)  
We recently reported that riluzole, a medication with anti -glutamatergic effects, increased 
the fatigue severity in patients with relapsing MS who had participated in a clinical trial 
evaluating potential neuroprotective effects of riluzole versus placebo. (12) Three other clinic 
trials which examined memantine effects on cognition in patient with MS also report ed 
worsening fatigue as a major side effect. (13–15) Memantine main mechanism of action is 
blocking the N -methyl D -aspartate (NMDA) glutamate receptor. These observations 
prompted us that glutamatergic transmission probably plays an important role in fatigue 
pathogenesis and modulating these pathways could have potential therapeutic effect on MS-related fatigue. A recent paper reported that ketamine, an NMDA receptor blocker with 
different kinetics compared to memantine, had a strong and prolonged effect in reducing 
fatigue in bipolar patients who participated in a clini cal trial, evaluating anti -depressive 
effects of ketamine versus placebo. Interestingly, the effect of ketamine on fatigue was 
independent of its antidepressant effects. The reduction in fatigue scores started in less than 
one hour after the infusion and l asted for two weeks. However, this was a post -hoc analysis 
of a clinical trial and the possibility of a false positive finding cannot be rule out.  
Intravenous ( IV) ketamine infusion has been used in many clinical studies for treatment of 
treatment -resistant depression and refractory pain. (16,17)   Depression and fatigue are 
highly correlated in patients with MS. (18) If ketamine improves fatigue scores in MS, it is 
possi ble that improvement in depression is the underlying cause of fatigue improvement. 
So, to explore if ketamine has anti -fatigue effects independent of its anti -depressive effects, 
we will recruit fatigued, non- depressed patients with MS in this study.  
Demonstrating ant i-fatigue effects of ketamine in MS would argue for an important role of 
glutamatergic pathways in fatigue pathogenesis and provide a new treatment target for this 
disabling condition.  
 
B. Objectives  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/[ADDRESS_1076765] udy is to determine if modulating glutamatergic transmission with 
ketamine is safe and efficacious in improving MS -related fatigue. These objectives will be 
answered in a proof of concept, randomized controlled trial of ketamine versus an active 
placebo (m idazolam) in patients with relapsing or progressive MS who have clinically significant 
fatigue.  
 
1. Primary question and response variable  
To determine if treatment with ketamine as opposed to midazolam improves fatigue severity in 
patients with MS.  We hypothesize that one infusion of ketamine, as compared to midazolam, in 
patients with MS, will be associated with improvement of fatigue scores over one week.  
The primary outcome of the study will be Daily Fatigue Severity measured at or around [ADDRESS_1076766] -infusion. It is a single item question: ‘how much fatigue 
(tiredness, weariness, problems thinking clearly) have you felt today?’ with responses from 0 
‘None at all’ to 10 ‘Extreme Fatigue’. It has shown very good correlation w ith the validated 
fatigue measure, “ Chalder  Fatigue Questionnaire” in patients with MS.  
 
 
2. Secondary questions and response variables  
Secondary outcomes of the study include NeuroQOL fatigue item bank,  Fatigue Severity Scale 
(FSS), Beck Depression Inventor y (BDI)  and Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS) at days seven  
and [ADDRESS_1076767] scale (MFIS) at day [ADDRESS_1076768] or 
complement patient -reported fatigue in future clinical trials. Ple ase see the appendix 1 at the 
end of this protocol for the details.   
4. Adverse effects  
The occurrence of AEs will be sought by [CONTACT_105]- directive questioning of the participant up to one 
hour after the infusion is finished and at one week after the infusion.  
C. Design of the study  
This is a randomized, double blind, active placebo- controlled trial of ketamine (versus 
midazolam ) for treatment of multiple sclerosis -related fatigue.  
1. Study population  
Patients with multiple sclerosis and at least moderate fatigue (defined as modified fatigue 
impact scale (MFIS) score >33 )   
(a) Inclusion criteria  
- Age betw een 18 years 65 years .  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/[ADDRESS_1076769] at baseline and use 
an effective method of contraception during the study.  
- Diagnosis of MS (according to the 2010 McDonald criteria).  
- Ambulatory (at least 20 feet using bilateral assistance).   
- Fatigue reportedly present and screening MFIS  score > 33. 
- Internet and email access  and able to use a computer or tablet  
(b) Exclusion criteria  
- Beck Depression Inventory  (BDI) score of more t han 30.  
- Neurodegenerative disorders other than relapsing or progressive MS.  
- Breastfeeding or pregnant.  
- History of coronary artery disease or congestive heart failure.  
- Uncontrolled hypertension at screening (history of high blood pressure and sc reening systolic 
blood pressure >160 or diastolic blood pressure>100).  
- History of severe liver disease, including cirrhosis . 
- Terminal medical conditions.  
- Currently treated for active malignancy.  
- Alcohol or substance abuse in the past year (except marijuana or other cannabinoids).  
- A history of intolerance or allergic or anaphylactic reaction to ketamine or midazolam  
- Clinically unstable medical or psychiatric disorders that require acute trea tment as determined 
by [CONTACT_978].  
- History of severe or untreated coronary artery disease or history of congestive heart failure.  
- History of prior ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke  and cerebral vascular aneurysms.  
- History of recurrent seizures or epi[INVESTIGATOR_002].  
- Taking any disallowed therapy(ies) as noted in Appendix 2.  
2. Sample size assumptions and estimates  
With a two -sided alpha of  0.05, [ADDRESS_1076770] 80% power to detect  3 points  difference on the Daily 
Fatigue Severity score.    
3. Enrollment of participants  
Participants will be recruited from Johns Hopkins multiple sclerosis clinic.  
(a) Informed consent  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/[ADDRESS_1076771] also explain to the subjects that they are completely free to refuse 
to enter the study or to withdraw from it at any time, for any reason. The study participants will 
be notified about any new study information during the study participation period, and will be re -
consented when applicable. A copy of the signed informed consent form will be given to the subjects for their records.  
(b) Assessment of eligibility 
After signing the informed consent form, patients will undergo screening assessment s, which 
include: recording demographic variables, medical and medication history,  vital signs,  physical 
examination, assessment of Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS), administration of the  
Daily Fatigue Severity  question,  modified fatigue impact scale (MFIS) , NeuroQOL Fatigue item 
bank , fatigue severity scale (FSS), Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_783020], and for females of child-
bearing potential, a urine pregnancy test. If any physical examination  or EDSS has been done 
clinically in the previous 30 days, there is no need to repeat them and those values can be used 
for screening purposes.  
Study par ticipants will be enrolled into the study after the study physician confirms participants’ 
eligibility to move forward with the study. We will notify the study participants about their eligibility before planning the baseline fatigue assessment.  
(c) Intervention allocation (e.g., randomization method)  
One of the study team members who has no role in the assessment of participants will generate a randomization table and send it to the phar macist who will be dispensing the medication. 
Participants will be randomized in block sizes of 3 and 6 to ketamine versus midazolam in a 2:1 
ratio.  
(d) Baseline examination  
Participants will be randomized within 30 days of screening visit. For the patients who we can 
verify the eligibility during the screening visit and can receive the infusion during the same visit, 
the screening measures will be considered the baseline measures.  
Baseline assessment will include vital signs , Daily Fatigue Severity , MFIS, NeuroQOL fatigue 
item bank, FSS, BDI , Epworth sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_783021].  
  
4. Intervention(s)  
(a) Description and schedule  
Within four hours of the baseline assessment, patients will receive ketamine of midazolam 
infusion.  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Participants who are assigned to ketamine group will receive an IV infusion of ketamine 0.5 
mg/kg over 40 minutes. Participants who are assigned to midazolam group will receive an IV infusion of midazolam 0.05 mg/kg over 40 minutes. The infusions will be d one through a 
peripheral IV access on the participants’ upper extremity. The infusion will be done by [CONTACT_783037] -
certified  research nurse under the supervision of an ACLS -certified neurologist  (the PI) . 
The infusions will be performed at Johns Hopkins Clinical Research Unit (CRU). CRU is staffed by [CONTACT_783038] -certified nurses and is equipped with a full crash cart, standard emergency drug box, 
oxygen and a defibrillator. The Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_783022] t eam in the event of a 
medical emergency. Please see the Appendix 3  for the details of the infusion procedures.  
Participants will be monitored for one hour after finishing the infusion. Immediately after the 
infusion and a t the end of one hour, participant s will be questioned about adverse drug 
reactions.  The subjective effort evaluation will be repeated at this time.   
5. Follow -up visit description and schedule  
After the Baseline (infusion) visit, all the subsequent assessments will be done remotely. 
Patients will receive an email with instructions on how to answer a group of questionnaires.  
On days one  through seven post-infusion, the patient will be assessed by [CONTACT_783039]. On day seven post -infusion, participants will answer the following questionnaires on 
the web: NeuroQOL, FSS, ESS and BDI . A study team member will also contact [CONTACT_783040] [ADDRESS_1076772] happened 
since the infusion.  
Table 1 –  The schedule for study procedures and assessments  
Tests and 
assessments  Screening 
visit Infusion 
visit Days  
 [ADDRESS_1076773] -
infusion  
Informed Consent  X      
Inclusion/exclusion criteria  X      
Medical history  X      
Vital signs  X X     
Physical examination  X      
Urine pregnancy test X      
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Ketamine/midaz
olam infusion   X     
EDSS  X      
Subjective effort evaluation   X (before 
and after 
the 
infusion)      
Daily Fatigue Severity  X X X    
MFIS  X      X  
NeuroQoL Fatigue  X   X X X 
FSS X   X X X 
Beck Depression Inventory  X   X X X 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]  X   X X X 
Side effects assessment   X  X   
 
 
 
 
6. Ascertainment of response variables  
(a) Data collection and quality control  
We will use REDCap  (Research Electronic Data Capture) [https://projectredcap.org/], a secure 
web application to build and manage online surveys and databases, collect data, create the trial 
database and access the data for analysis.   
During the screening visit, data will be collected using case report forms (on paper), however, all 
the questionnaires during the screening and baseline visits will be answered directly on a 
computer or tablet by [CONTACT_2299]. The information that is captured on paper case report forms will b e entered into REDCap by [CONTACT_9137]. The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_783023].  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
After the baseline/infusion visit, all the outcomes will be collected through a web interface . Study 
coordinator will review the process to make sure the questionnaires are answered in a timely 
manner.  
7. Assessment of Adverse Events  
Ketamine and midazolam are FDA -approved anesthetic which have been in clinical use for 
many years and have well -known adverse effect profiles. Ketamine has also been used off -label 
for the treatment of pain and depression and our proposed study is based on the dosage and route of administration used in several clinical trials for treatment of depression.  
Our infusions wi ll be performed in a clinical research setting (Johns Hopkins Clinical Research 
Unit), under the supervision of an ACLS certified neurologist  and by a ACLS certified  nurse with 
experience in performing these infusions.    
(a) Type and frequency  
Participants will be monitored for the development of adverse events from the beginning of 
infusion to one hour -post infusion. They also will be questioned for the emergence of adverse 
events up to one-week  post-infusion. The occurrence of AEs will be sought by [CONTACT_105]- directive 
questioning of the participants.  
An Adverse event (AE) is the appearance or worsening of any undesirable sign, symptom or 
medical condition occurring after the start of the study medications, even if the event is not 
considered to be related to study drug.  
All patient -reported AEs must be recorded with the following information:  
- The severity grade (mild, moderate, severe)  
- Its relationship to the study medications (suspected/not suspected)  
- Its duration (start and end dates)  
- If it constitutes a serious adverse event (SAE)  
An SAE is defined as an event which:  
- is fatal or life -threatening 
- results in persistent or significant disability  
- constitutes a birth defect/congenital abnormality  
- requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_403403] [ADDRESS_1076774] 24 hours. Pre -planned, elective hospi[INVESTIGATOR_783024].  
- is medic ally significant  
All AEs should be treated appropriately. Treatment may include one or more of the following: no 
action taken; study drug dosage adjustment; study drug permanently discontinued; concomitant 
medication given; non -drug therapy given; patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057].  
(b) Instruments  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Adverse events will be graded according to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE), version 4 and is provided to the investigator in a separate handout entitled “Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0” . Adverse events not listed by [CONTACT_783041]:  
Grade 1: Discomfort noticed but no disruption of normal daily activity  
Grade 2: Discomfort sufficient to reduce or affect normal daily activity  
Grade 3: Inability to w ork or perform normal daily activity  
Grade 4: Represents an immediate threat to life.  
 
8. Data analysis  (Statistical A nalysis Plan) 
Because of the short duration of the study, there will be no interim analysis.  
Patient demographics and other baseline characteristics, will be summarized using frequency 
distributions (for categorical variables) and descriptive statistics of mean, standard deviation, minimum, median and maximum (for continuous variables).  
Background information includes MS subtype, prior medication, past/current medical conditions, 
duration of the disease, baseline fatigue level and baseline EDSS.  
For the analysis of the primary and secondary outcomes , we will use a linear mixed model with 
restricted maximum likelihood estimate and an unstructured covariance struc ture. Both the 
allocation group and time will be within- subject covariate and the interaction between them will 
be included in the model. The models will be adjusted for the baseline value of the outcome 
variable. In sensitivity analysis, we will further adjust the fatigue models for the change in the 
Beck Depression Inventory score . The purpose of these adjustments is to try to separate the 
anti-depressive effects of ketamine from its anti -fatigue effects. The analysis will be done 
according to intention- to-treat principal.  
Post-hoc simple effects tests will be used to evaluate the difference between the two groups at 
each time point. Significance will be evaluated at p<0.[ADDRESS_1076775] to compare  the change in 
the subjective effort valuation ( after-the -infusion value minus before -the-infusion value) 
between the ketamine and midazolam groups . 
D. Organization  
1. Participating investigators  
-Bardia Nourbakhsh, M D, MAS, Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Nourbakhsh is an assistant professor 
in the department of Neurology at JHU. He will oversee the overall conduct of the entire 
research project.  He will be present during in the infusion room during the study medication 
infusions.  He has been involved in designing clinical trials of symptomatic treatment in MS for 
the past few years and has completed formal education in epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biostatistics and trial design as part of the Masters’ in Clinical  Research. He is current ly the PI [CONTACT_4007] a multi -center study 
of fatigue medications in MS.  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
- Adam Kaplin, MD, PhD, Co-investigator: [CONTACT_783048] is an assistant professor in the 
department s of Neurology and P sychiatry at JHU. He has extensive experience in the design 
and execution of clinical trials and use of ketamine in psychiatric diseases. Along with [CONTACT_783049], he will oversee the conduct of the trial and participate in data analysis and preparation of reports and manuscripts.  
- Vikram Chib , PhD: [CONTACT_783050] is an assistant professor of Biomedical Engineering. H e has 
expertise in modeling of behavioral and neural data related to decision- making and learning.  
- Bridget Morris, RN, BSN,  Research Nurse: [CONTACT_783051] is a research nurse in the department 
of Neurology at JHU.  She will explain the study and related processes to the subjects, and 
consent them for the study. She will be the primary subject contact [INVESTIGATOR_72188]. She will also 
prepare recruitment m aterials and distribute according to IRB approval . She will work with the 
MS clinic to identify potential candidates for the study. She will pre -screen subjects and 
schedule study visits. She will enroll subjects, collect data, and perform data entry and 
cleaning. She will work closely with participants regarding completing necessary testing that is 
part of the primary and secondary outcomes.   She will serve as the subject’s point -of-contact 
[CONTACT_9881].  She will triage concerns and AEs , involving the PI [INVESTIGATOR_363379].  She will 
collect AE’s.  She is an ACLS -certified nurse and has experience in critical care nursing. She 
will be in charge of administering the ketamine or midazolam at the Clinical Research Unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
 
 
 
1.  Frohman EM, Racke MK, Raine CS. Multiple sclerosis --the plaque and its pathogenesis. N 
Engl J Med. 2006 Mar 2;354(9):942– 55.  
2.  Dilokthornsakul P, Valuck RJ, Nair KV, Corboy JR, Allen RR, Campbell JD.  Multiple 
sclerosis prevalence in the [LOCATION_002] commercially insured population. Neurology. 
2016 Mar 15;86(11):1014– 21.  
3.  Krupp L. Fatigue is intrinsic to multiple sclerosis (MS) and is the most commonly reported 
symptom of the disease. Mult Scler H oundmills Basingstoke Engl. 2006 Aug;12(4):367– 8.  
4.  Lerdal A, Celius EG, Krupp L, Dahl AA. A prospective study of patterns of fatigue in 
multiple sclerosis. Eur J Neurol Off J Eur Fed Neurol Soc. 2007 Dec;14(12):1338– 43.  
5.  Janardhan V, Bakshi R. Qual ity of life in patients with multiple sclerosis: the impact of 
fatigue and depression. J Neurol Sci. 2002 Dec 15;205(1):51– 8.  
6.  Blaney DBE, Lowe- Strong A. The impact of fatigue on communication in multiple sclerosis. 
The insider’s perspective. Disabil R ehabil. 2009 Jan 1;31(3):170– 80.  
7.  Smith MM, Arnett PA. Factors related to employment status changes in individuals with 
multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler Houndmills Basingstoke Engl. [ADDRESS_1076776];11(5):602– 9.  
8.  Toosy A, Ciccarelli O, Thompson A. Symptomati c treatment and management of multiple 
sclerosis. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;122:513– 62.  
9.  Braley TJ, Chervin RD. Fatigue in Multiple Sclerosis: Mechanisms, Evaluation, and 
Treatment. Sleep. 2010 Aug 1;33(8):1061– 7.  
10.  Pucci E, Branãs P, D’Amico R, Giuliani G, Solari A, Taus C. Amantadine for fatigue in 
multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database S yst Rev. 2007;(1):CD002818.  
11.  Tejani AM, Wasdell M, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_783025] R, Rowell G, Nathwani S. Carnitine for fatigue in multiple 
sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;5:CD007280.  
12.  Nourbakhsh B, Revirajan N, Waubant E. Association Between Glutamate Bloc kade and 
Fatigue in Patients With Multiple Sclerosis. JAMA Neurol. 2015 Nov 1;72(11):1374– 5.  
13.  Peyro Saint Paul L, Creveuil C, Heinzlef O, De Seze J, Vermersch P, Castelnovo G, et al. 
Efficacy and safety profile of memantine in patients with cognitive impairment in multiple 
sclerosis: A randomized, placebo- controlled study. J Neurol Sci. 2016 Apr 15;363:69– 76.  
14.  Lovera JF, Frohman E, Brown TR, Bandari D, Nguyen L, Yadav V, et al. Memantine for cognitive impairment in multiple sclerosis: a randomized placebo- controlled trial. Mult Scler 
Houndmills Basingstoke Engl. 2010 Jun;16(6):715– 23.  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
15.  Villoslada P, Arrondo G, Sepulcre J, Alegre M, Artieda J. Memantine induces reversible 
neurologic impairment in patients with MS. Neurology. 2009 May 12;72(19): 1630– 3.  
16.  Murrough JW, Iosifescu DV, Chang LC, Al Jurdi RK, Green CE, Perez AM, et al. Antidepressant efficacy of ketamine in treatment -resistant major depression: a two- site 
randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry. [ADDRESS_1076777];170(10):1134– 42.  
17.  Maher DP, Chen L, Mao J. Intravenous Ketamine Infusions for Neuropathic Pain 
Management: A Promising Therapy in Need of Optimization. Anesth Analg. 2017 
Feb;124(2):661– 74.  
18.  Kroencke DC, Lynch SG, Denney DR. Fatigue in multiple sclerosis: relationship to 
depression, disability, and disease pattern. Mult Scler Houndmills Basingstoke Engl. 2000 
Apr;6(2):131– 6.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Subjective effort evaluation paradigm:  
The experiments outlined in this proposal are centered around an effort -based choice paradigm, 
designed by [CONTACT_281333] ([CONTACT_783052]) at Kennedy -Krieger Institute, that mathematically 
characterizes subjective effort valuation for effort.  
 Physical Ef fort Task.  
Subjects maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) will be obtained by [CONTACT_783042], each lasting 14 
seconds, with a hand clench dynamometer (TSD121B -MRI; Biopa c Systems Inc.; Goleta, CA 
[LOCATION_003]). It is important to mention that individuals could have different subjective preferences for 
different types of effort (e.g., walking, arm strength exercise, etc.). In this study we chose to focus on an isometric grip task because it easily operationalizes levels of effort as a percentage 
of participants’ maximum grip capacity. Furthermore grip recruits motor units that are readily imaged with our TMS paradigm. Future studies could examine if the mechanisms of effort valuation identified in this proposal generalize to other types of effort, however this is beyond 
the scope of this proposal.  
 
(a) Association phase. Participants will be trained to associate effort levels (which will be 
defined relative to MVC) with the force they exert on the hand dynamometer. The effort levels will range from 0 to 100, corresponding to no exertion and a force equal to 80% of participants’ MVC, respectively. A single training block will consist of five trials of training for each target 
level, wh ere the targets will vary from 10 to 80 in increments of 10, and training blocks will be 
presented in a randomized order. Participants will be instructed to reach a target zone (defined 
as ±5 effort units of the target effort level) as fast as possible and maintain force within the 
target for as long as possible over the course of 14 seconds. This will ensure that participants exert effort for roughly the same duration regardless of the amount of effort to exert. At the end 
of the effort task, if individual s are within the target zone for more than 2/3 of the total time 
observed during squeezing (9.33 seconds), the trial will be counted as a success, and 
participants will be cued as such. To minimize participants’ fatigue, a fixation cross (2- 5 
seconds) will  separate the trials within a training block and [ADDRESS_1076778] will be provided 
between training blocks.  
 
(b) Recall phase. We will next gauge if participants develop a stable association between the 
effort levels and the effort produced. Each recall trial will involve the display of a black horizontal bar that participants will be instructed to completely fill by [CONTACT_783043]. For the 
recall phase, the full bar will not correspond to level 100 as in the association phase, but instead 
Version: 4.0   
12/06/[ADDRESS_1076779] as possible and to maintain their produced force as long as possible. Following this exertion period, participants will be presented with a number line (from 0 to 100) and asked to select the level they  believe they had just squeezed. Our preliminary investigations 
have shown that participants are able to accurately associate physical effort levels to amounts 
of effort applied, and recall these associations following effort exertion.  
 
(b) Choice phase. To characterize and quantify their subjective effort costs, participants will be 
presented with a series of risky binary gambles for effort. A trial will consist of choosing between 
two options shown on the screen under a 4 second time constraint: (1) exert ing a low amount of 
force with absolute certainty (the “sure” option), and (2) taking a risk which could result in either high exertion or zero exertion, with equal probability of both outcomes (the “flip” option). The 
effort levels in question will be conveyed using the same [ADDRESS_1076780] been tailored to predominately sample the effort options 
over which there would be indifference between the “flip” and “sure” options —  if the sure option 
is roughly more than half the flip, we can assume that participants will choose the flip option 
[14]. We use this procedure to uniformly sample the prospective effort space and generate a set 
of [ADDRESS_1076781] (“flip”) or second (“sure”) digits. The outcomes of the choices will not be provided 
during the trials and will therefore be unknown to participants after making a choice. All gambles will be presented consecutively, in a randomized order, and participants will be informed that ten 
of their choices will be selected at random and played out at the end of the experiment. This is a 
common procedure in behavioral economics, that  ensures participants treat each option 
separately and that trial -to-trial choices do not influence subsequent choices. Moreover, we will 
focus our imaging analyses to effort valuation at the time of choice, so our imaging will not be 
subject to movement artifacts associated effortful exertion.  
 
Modeling of behavioral choice data:  A critical component of this proposal is our ability to extract 
reliable measures of participants’ subjective effort value using the behavioral choice data. We will 
generate struc tural models of effort -choice in which the subjectivity of participants’ choices will be 
characterized based on the assumption that effort cost functions can be mathematically 
represented by [CONTACT_294300]: .  is the subjective utility/cost of an effort l evel , and  
is a curvature parameter which characterizes how individuals subjectively represent the effort 
level in question (i.e, risk averse or risk seeking to avoid effort).   Given the options presented 
during the choice phase, if one assumes that participants integrate probability with utility linearly 
(as is common in economic choice), the expected cost of choosing the “flip” option rather than the 
“sure” option can be written as . In this expression,  is the effort level 
which stands as a possibl e outcome against no exertion under the flip option, and  is the effort 
level of the sure choice. The probability that a participant chooses to make a gamble is given by 
[CONTACT_783044] . The subjective effort cost curvature parameter  is 

Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
contained within , and  is a temperature parameter representing stochasticity of a 
participants’ choice (  = 0 means choices are random). We will use a maximum likelihood 
estimation (MLE) procedure to estimate both the curvature and temperature parameters for eac h 
participant, using the 170 trials of gambles  and associated responses.  
 
Appendix  2: Prohibited  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_783026],  please  contact  [CONTACT_783045][INVESTIGATOR_129464] a subject.  
The pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_313307] (Y) or excluded (N) due to potential impact 
on efficacy evaluation and/or subject safety or because they are indicated for ex clusionary 
conditions.  
Except  where  specifically  noted in the protocol,  the prohibited  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_783027] 12 hours after the infusion of the study medication.  
 
 
 
Drug  Class  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_783028]
s Use  
Comments  
ADHD  medications  
(eg, atomoxetine,  
guanfacine)  N Y See also “Psychostimulants”  row 
Amantadine  N N Subjects should be at least 7 days off of 
amantadine before receiving the study 
medication  
Anorexiants  
(eg, 
phenteramine)  N N  
Anticonvulsants  N N Subjects  with seizures  are excluded.  
Anticonvulsants  used for other  indications  
may be allowed (eg, valproate for migraine,  
lamotrigine  for mood  disorder).  PI [INVESTIGATOR_783029] a case- by-case 
basis   
Antidepressants  
(except  monoamine 
oxidase  inhibitors)  N Y Epi[INVESTIGATOR_783030] (PRN)  of trazodone  is permitted  
but should  not be used within  8 hours  prior to 
the study  drug administration.  
Antidepressants:  
Monoamine  
oxidase  inhibitors  N N Prohibited  within  the past 2 weeks  prior to 
study  drug administration  

Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Antipsychotics  Y (for 
sleep  
only)  Y  
Benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651]  (at 
dosages  equal  to or 
less than the 
equivalent  of 6 
mg/day  lorazepam)  Y Y Prohibited  within  8 hours  prior to the study  
drug administration.  Additionally,  no 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_783031]  8 
hours  after study  administration.  
Chloral  hydrate  N N  
Clonidine  Y Y Prohibited  within  8 hours  prior to the study  
drug administration.  
Corticosteriods  Y N Inhaled,  intranasal,  topi[INVESTIGATOR_2855],  and 
ophthalmic  steroids  are not prohibited.  
Intermittent  IM/IV  corticosteroids  are 
permitted  (chronic  use prohibited).  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_783032]  a 
case -by-case  (according to the PI)  
Cough/Cold/Allergy  
preparations  (except  
those  containing  
dextromethorphan)  Y Y Pseudoephedrine - containing  products  
should not be used within  12 hours  prior to 
study medication administration.  
Dextromethorphan  N N  
DHEA  Y Y  
Diphenhydramine  Y N PRN  use is permitted,  but should  not be 
used  within  8 hours  prior to the study  drug 
administration.  
Hypnotics  
(Non -
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_783033])  Y Y Do not use within  8 hours  prior to the study  
drug administration.  
Ketanserin  N N  
Lithium  N Y  
Methyldopa  N N  
Metyrosine  N N  
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]  Y Y Prescription  opi[INVESTIGATOR_783034](s)  
can be continued,  per clinician’s  
 Non-vitamin  K 
antagonist  oral 
anticoagulation  agents  
(eg, dabigatran,  
rivaroxaban,  api[INVESTIGATOR_3822])  N N  
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Psychostimulants  
(eg, 
amphetamines,  
methylphenidate,  
and modafinil,  
armodafinil)  N Y The use of amphetamines  (including  
prescribed  amphetamines)  can be continued 
but must  not be taken within  [ADDRESS_1076782]. John’s  Wort  N N  
Thyroid  
hormone  
supplement  N Y Subjects needing supplements must be on a 
stable thyroid supplement dose for at least 4 
weeks prior to the study drug administration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
       
       
      
      
 
     
       
     
       
    
      
      
       
          
   
 
 
 
    
    
 
    
     
  
    Warfarin  N N  
 
Appendix  3: Infusion procedure:   
A. Assessment  
1. The nurse shall assess the following prior to initiation of infusion:  
a. Baseline level of sedation using Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS)  
b. Baseline vital signs, including respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], blood pressure, heart rate and 
pulse oximetry  
2. After initiation of the infusion, the nurse will assess and document the vital signs 
every 15 minutes until 75 minutes after the start of the infusion and one more time, 
100 minutes after the start of the infusion ( or one hour after finishing the infusion) .  
3. RASS every 15 minutes until 75 minutes after the start of the infusion and one more 
time, 100 minutes after the start of the infusion (or one hour after finishing the infusion) . 
4. Adverse effects every 15 minutes until 75 minutes after the start of the infusion and 
one more time, 100 minutes after the start of the infusion (or one hour after finishing the infusion) . 
 
Schedule of the assessment of vital signs , adverse effects, and RASS.  
 
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Vital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASSVital 
signs , 
AE and 
RASS
Infusion 
start
(Time 0) 15 min 30 min 45 
min60 min 75 min 100 min
Infusion 
end
(40 min)  
B. Intervention  
1. IV ketamine or midazolam will be administered via an infusion pump.  
2. The infusion is completed in 40 minutes. For ketamine, the total dose will be 0.5 
mg/kg (administered at the rate of 0.75 mg/kg/hour) . For midazolam, the total dose 
will be 0.05 mg/kg (administered at the rate of 0.075 mg/kg/hour)  
3. For nausea, the neurologist can decide to give IV ondansetron (4 to 8 mg) during the 
infusion.  
4. For the unlikely event of apnea or very low respi[INVESTIGATOR_783035], the neurologist can decide to give 0.2 to 1 mg of flumazenil.  
5. Recovery process:  
a. Participant can be discharged when the following criteria are met:  
i. Sedat ion score of 0 per RASS scale 
ii. Ability to swallow oral fluids/secretions  
iii. No evidence of severe hypertension or hypotension exists, or blood 
pressure at participant’s baseline 
iv. Pulse is regular and within the range defined for that 
participant's age group or at participant's baseline 
v. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_783036]'s baseline 
vi. Oxygen saturation on room air is >95% or at participant's 
baseline 
b. Aside from asking participants open- ended question about having 
any new or worsening symptoms right after the infusion, they will be asked if they experienced the following symptoms: Feeling Strange 
or Unreal, Abnormal Sensations, Blurred Vision, Feeling Drowsy or 
Sleepy, Dizziness or Faintness, Dry  Mouth, Numbness or Tingling, 
Appetite Increased, Trouble Concentrating, Slurred Speech, 
Version: 4.0   
12/06/2018  
Difficulties Finding Words, Hearing or Seeing Things, Headache, 
Ringing in Ears, Increased Salivation  
6. Presence of a responsible adult (family/friend) to accompany part icipant at 
time of discharge  
a. Participant and responsible adult have received information 
regarding side effects/duration of sedation and have had all 
questions answered.  
7. Written discharge instructions are provided to the participant to include 
recommendat ions for:  
a. Light activity for 24 hours  
b. No driving, dangerous activities for up to 24 hours.  
c. Diet progression as tolerated 
d. No business transactions or legally binding agreements for 24 hours.  
 Medical Reasons for Discontinuation:  
 
1- In the event that the participant’s systolic or diastolic blood pressure (BP) 
increases by [CONTACT_7809] 25% above baseline value [baseline is defined by [CONTACT_783046], is greater than 190/110, or in the event of 
tachy cardia >130 beats per minute. The nurse will hold the infusion and assess the 
blood pressure and heart rate every 5 minutes. If the blood pressure decreased to 
less than 165/100 or in the event of tachycardia heart rate decreased to less than 
110, the infusion can be resumed. In this situation, the blood pressure and heart rate 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_783047] 10 minutes through the end of the infusion. If at any 
time, the blood pressure is greater than 190/110 or hear rate >130 beats per minute, 
the infusion will be permanently stopped.  
 2- In the event that the participant becomes sedated to the point that he/she is 
unresponsive to verbal commands or there is complete or partial airway obstruction, the study infusion will be discontinued. Should either of these problems occur, the 
neurologist will treat the participant according to standard protocols (ACLS).  
 
3- In the event that the SpO2 is <94% over a 5- minute interval, the neurologist has 
the option of using nasal cannula to administer O2, adjusting the nasal cannula 
position or flow rate. If SpO2 does not increase to 94% or greater with intervention, the infusion is discontinued, and further therapy is administered by [CONTACT_22971].  
 
  
 
 