1  Research Protocol  
Version 1.4      14 June 2017 
Title: Neurobehavioral Measurement of Substance Users in an Outpatient Treatment Setting 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_14407] M. Bjork, Ph.D.  
Coordinator :  James M. Bjork , Ph.D. 
1.Purpose and 
Objectives:
This protocol does not include any administration of medication or other interventions. This
protocol will record cognitive performance and decision- making behavior in Veterans who seek 
mental health services in the substance use disorder intensive outpati ent program  (IOP) . The 
goal is to identify the neurobehavioral effects  of a structured, brie f cognitive -based 
psychotherapy currently being conducted in the IOP along with other supportive, unstructured, 
treatments.  The benefit of this study will be to obtain a better understanding of neurobehavioral 
changes occurring from evidence- informed treatments.  
Aim 1: T
o determine if measurable neurobehavioral  function  in the domains of problem solving, 
decision making, and motoric impulsivity is predictive of treatment success and adherence 
outcomes (e.g. Urinary Drug Screen/Breathalyzer Analysis results, appointment no shows, early 
drop out, recidivism).  
Explor
atory Aim: To determine if there are between group differences in neurobehavioral 
function as a result of treatment modality being received as standard of care in the substance 
use outpatient setting.  
2. Background,
 Significance,  and Scientific Rationale:
It is established that impulsivity is a tremendous risk factor for the development of 
addiction (Bickel et al., 2007)  and for treatment failure  (Loree, Lundahl, & Ledgerwood, 2015).  
Impulsivity  is a multi- faceted trait that has been conceptually divided into a more decision- based 
domain and rapid “acting without thinking” motoric domain(Swann, Bjork, Moeller, & Dougherty, 
2002) , where greater impulsivity in both domains has been found in patients addicted to 
stimulants in particular  (Ahn & Vassileva, 2016). Trait personality measures of impulsivity 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_359853].  Therefore, comprehensive assessment of cognitive change (as it may underlie improvements in mental perseverance and thus changes in substance use) should include objective behavioral measures of both decision- making and motoric impulsivity.  The 
addition of focused neurocognitive tasks holds potential to identify mechanisms  of 
psychotherapy effects, such as whether a structured cognitive behavioral therapy may reduce substance use by [CONTACT_359859], or whether it influences future -
orientation specifically.   
There are currently multiple treatments being conducted in the IOP clinic as standard of 
care, with a particular psychotherapy of interest for this study being a brief, structured cognitive-based treatment, called the Mind Freedom Plan (MFP). This treatment is one of two treatments being administered, with the other being a supportive, unstructured treatment that is also provided as standard of care.  The aim of the MFP treatment is to improve problem solving abilities, increase engagement in pleasurable activities, and teach the patient to identify and 
change maladaptive thoughts. Structured worksheets for each session have been developed for 
[ADDRESS_448849] limited the number of sessions providers are 
allotted with patients. Additionally, there are significant efforts to roll out and integrate evidence based practices across the VA. This exploratory aim will be an effort to meet the intersection of 
these demands by [CONTACT_66567]  a brief evidence- informed therapy for substance users in 
outpatient treatment. The focus of this aim will be to  determine whether this treatment results in 
measurable changes in neurobehavioral performance shown to be aberrant in addiction.  These behaviors might serve as early -indicator proxy markers  for improvement in cognitive domains 
relevant to addiction, which could in turn result in longer -term benefits of alcohol or drug 
abstinence.   
 
 3. Study Design:  
This protocol will recruit approximately 35 Veterans once they enroll in the McGuire VA 
Medical Center Substance Abuse Treatment Program (SATP) IOP to complete two sessions of 
questionnaires and neurobehavioral measures, lasting approximately [ADDRESS_448850] will meet initially with research staff after their SATP intake (conducted as standard of care), but prior to initiating treatment for the first session. Subjects will then meet with research staff again approximately one month later following their completion (or potentially incompletion) of the treatment. Following this meeting, research staff will complete a targeted CPRS medical 
chart review to collect information on appointment no shows, early termination of services, and 
results of Urinary Drug Screen (UDS) and Breathalyzer collections, and results of the Beck Depression Scale and Quality of Life Inventory administered during the SATP intake. [ADDRESS_448851] re-
entered treatment.  
 
4. Methods:  
a. Procedures : 
The study  will take place at the Substance Abuse Rehabilitation Program -Intensive Outpatient 
Program (IOP)  of the Richmond VA Medical Center  (RICVAMC) .  To minimize subject burden, 
consent and the first visit testing  procedures will take place in the same  visit to RICVAMC if 
possible. The study entails two visits with study staff. The first visit will include retrieving informed 
consent, and once enrolled, the completion of several questionnaires (see below). This visit is 
expected to last 60- [ADDRESS_448852] will then be scheduled for a follow up visit in to be 
conducted after he/she completes the intensive outpatient  substance use program. This visit will 
last approximately 2 hours, and will involve questionnaires and desktop performance based tasks (see below)  
 CPRS Chart Review.   CPRS records will first be reviewed by [CONTACT_44498] (research 
assistants) for intake and progress notes pertaining to the entry into IOP.   When a V eteran is 
[ADDRESS_448853] legal involvement from 
examining the intake, the Veteran will be contact[CONTACT_359860] a face- to-face encounter 
in the SATP clinic to explore his/her interest in participating in the current study.  If interested, an 
appointment will be scheduled to meet to complete informed consent and the initial self -report 
tests. For the purposes of this study, legal involvement will be defined as a current legal issue 
identified during the clinic screening that mandates the completion of a substance use treatment program.  
Once a su bject has consented and is confirmed eligible to participate in the protocol, he or she 
will be assigned a five- digit ID number for this protocol.  The subject will be identified by [CONTACT_359861], questionnaires, and surveys.  The file that links a subject’s name [CONTACT_359873] -identifiable information to this ID code number will be an electronic excel file on 
a password- protected virtual drive furnished by [CONTACT_20248] . 
 CPRS will also be used to complete a review following the second visit wi th subjects to 
collect information on appointment no shows, early termination of services, results of Urinary Drug 
Screen (UDS) and Breathalyzer collections, and results of the Beck Depression Inventory and 
Quality of Life Inventory administered during the  SATP intake. [ADDRESS_448854] re- entered treatment.  
b. Data  
The study features a series  of questionnaires in the initial visit, and a combination of 
questionnaires alternating with desktop behavioral tests  during the second visit .  Below are the 
descriptions of each measure:  
Visit One:  
 The following self -report measures (questionnaires) will be administered with paper -and-pencil:  
 Brief Addiction Monitor (BAM)  – The BAM is a 17- item self -report questionnaire that assesses the 
recent occurrence and frequency of various substances, including marijuana, cocaine, stimulants, 
and opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]. It additionally has items for the rater to respond to recent health (excellent , very 
good, good, fair, poor), and recent engagement in risky situations or treatment. Lastly, it has several items asking about symptoms of substance use disorder, such as cravings and difficulties 
related to substance use (Cacciola et al., 2013) . We hypothesize subjects with more reported 
substance use and less engagement in treatment resources will have poorer treatment 
adherence. This measure will take approximately 10 minutes to complete. 
 Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS- 11) - The BIS -11 is a reliable and valid self -report measure of 
attentional, motor, and non- planning impulsivity composed of 30 items rated on a 4 point Likert 
scale from rarely/never to almost always/always  (Patton, Stanford, & Barratt, 1995) . We 
hypothesize subjects with higher impulsivity will be more likely to have poorer treatment 
adherence. This measure will take approximately [ADDRESS_448855] 5  - This is a VA -distributed measure of 20 PTSD- related symptoms (each scored 
from 0 -4) that align with DSM -5 PTSD criteria.  It is a dministered in addition to the SCID itself in 
order to provide a continuous variable of PTSD symptom severity  (Bovin et al., 2016) . This 
measure is being used to account for potential confounding symptomology that may lead to 
treatment adherence issues.  This measure will take approximately [ADDRESS_448856]’s self -reported experience of [ADDRESS_448857] week -includin g the day of testing, where each item is rated 
on a scale from 0-3 (A. T. Beck, Epstein, Brown, & Steer, 1988) . This measure is being used to 
4 
 account for potential confounding symptomology that may lead to treatment adherence issues. 
This measure will take approximately 10 minutes to complete. 
 
Visit Two:  
The following self -report measures (questionnaires) will be administered with paper -and-pencil:  
 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS- 11) – See above for description   
 Quality of Life Inventory  (QOLI)  – The QOLI assesses the importance of 16 life domains on a 3 -
point rating scale, as well as current satisfaction of each domain (6- point scale). The scores are 
summed to determine quality of life. This is a quick self -repor t questionnaire that has been normed 
in a community sample of adults. Higher scores indicate better quality of life.  We hypothesize that 
those with better treatment adherence and less evident impulsivity on neurobehavioral measures will indicate better quality of life  (Frisch, Cornell, Villaneuva, & Retzlaff, 1992) . This measure takes 
approximately 10 minutes to complete.  
 
Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II) -  The BDI -II is a 21 -question, multiple- choice self -report 
questionnaire that is widely used in clinical and research practice for the purposes of measuring 
reported symptoms of depression. This has been widely established as a reliable and valid 
measure  (Aaron  T. Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). This measure takes approximately 10 minutes 
to complete.  
 
The following tasks will be completed via administration by [CONTACT_3647]:  
 
Delis -Kaplan Executive Function System (DKEFS) Tower Test  – The DKEFS Tower Test is a  
neuropsychological measure examining the executive functioning ability, specifically the ability to plan and sequence behavior. The test consists of two boards with pegs and several beads with 
different shapes. The test requires the individual to complete a timed- task requiring planning and 
sequencing in order to move the pegs in an instructed manner.  We hypothesize errors  on the 
Tower Test will be significant associated with poorer performance on neurobehavioral measures (as evident by [CONTACT_359862]) and with poorer treatment adherence. T ime 
and errors are considered for scoring. The task requires approximately 10 minutes to complete.  
 The following laboratory performance measures will be conducted on a desktop computer:  
 Adjusting Delay Discounting (DD) Task  - This decision task assesses how a subject de- values a 
hypothetical money reward the longer he or she would have to wait to receive it  (“delay -
discounting”) . The participant chooses between immediate adjusting rewards (e.g., ‘‘$5 now’’), 
and delayed rewards (e.g., ‘‘$10 in 1 week’’). Participants are exposed to a series of choices 
where the future reward magnitudes are $10, $25, $100, $250, $1000 or $2500 (for delayed rewards) at delay periods of [ADDRESS_448858] amount.  These indifferences points enable calculation of a single constant (“k”) that characterizes the severity of 
DD for that subject. The task ends once indifference points have been determined for each 
magnitude at each delay, usually within four minutes. Two different question series will be 
administered, one series involving smaller dollar amounts (per above), and another series 
involving much higher amounts (e.g. $50,000) in order to assess individual differences in the reduction of delay -discounting severity typi[INVESTIGATOR_359854].  We hypothesize that subjects who do not adhere to treatment  
will devalue delayed rewards more severely, and will not show as great a reduction in discounting 
5 
 when very large hypothetical rewards are pres ented.  This task requires approximately 15 minutes.  
 
Stop-Signal Task (SST)  - In this rapid -response impulsivity task, participants  view a series of go 
stimuli (“X” or “O”) in the center of the screen and are told to press the keyboard left arrow button when they saw an “X” and to press the right arrow button when they see an “O”. On a subset of 
trials, a stop -signal (a 500 Hz tone presented for 250ms) is presented as a  short delay after the 
go stimulus. Participants are instructed to respond as quickly and accurately as possible, but to 
withhold their response on Stop trials (on trials with the tone). The delay of the onset of the stop-
signal is dynamically titrated by 50 ms intervals to promote a 50% rate of successful stops.   The 
Stop Signal Reaction T ime (SSRT) will be  calculated as the interval between “go” and subsequent 
“stop” signals at which the subject can stop half the time .  We hypothesize that subjects who do 
not adhere to treatment will show a faster SSRT, meaning that their response style is  more 
“ballistic,” and difficult to stop once -launched.  This task requires approximately 12 minutes.  
 
The Emotional Go -NoGo T ask – This task presents a series of facial stimuli with either no facial 
expression, or with expression of an emotion, for 500 ms each, atop a black screen.   A white 
fixation crosshair is displayed between Face stimuli.   Facial stimuli are composed of sets of 
multiple faces of each of several actors/models, across neutral and different emotions.  The 
subject is to respond with a keyboard or mouse press when he or she sees either a neutral face 
(neutral blocks) or an emotional face (emotion blocks).   Blocks of trials are set in pairs, where at 
the start of one block, subjects are instructed on -screen that the emotional face is the target (to 
which to respond) and the neutral face is the non -target, and at the start of the counterpart 
block, the reverse instruction holds true in the other block.   Attentional capture by [CONTACT_359863] -target 
faces relative to commission errors to neutral non -target faces . The task lasts roughly [ADDRESS_448859] timeline (Day [ADDRESS_448860] day of IOP)  
Timeline  Study a ctivities  Measures  
Day -7 – 
Day -[ADDRESS_448861] withpotential subjects for 
recruitment  during a face to face 
meeting when they are in the SATP clinic   
- Consent and pre -treatment baseline 
assessment  Brief Addiction Monitor (BAM), Barrett 
Impulsivity Scale -11 (BIS -11), 
Posttraumatic Checklist -5 (PCL -5), Beck’s 
Anxiety Inventory  
Day 0 – 
Day 28 - Participants engage in either MFP or 
TAU treatment  during their IOP 
engagement  N/A 
Day 29 – 
Day [ADDRESS_448862]-treatment assessment  
- Chart review: treatment engagement 
(appointment no shows, early drop out) 
and Breathalyzer/UDS results , results 
of Beck Depression Inventory and 
Quality of Life Inventory.  BIS-11, Delay Discounting Task, Stop -
Signal Task, Emotional G o-NoGo task, 
Quality of Life Inventory  
Day 120  - Chart Review: recidivism (treatment 
re-entry) and Breathalyzer/UDS results  N/A 
 
Data Analysis  
The analytic plan includes conduct ing an independent -group t -test of each of the 
following continuous dependent variables, or chi -square for categorical dependent variables: 1) 
6 
 proportion drug- free urines; 2) retention in program (Chi- Square); 3) Quality of life score on the 
QOLI; 4) Delay discounting constant k; 5) Stop signal reaction time (SSRT) on the stop -signal 
task; 7 ) Reaction time in the Emotional Go- NoGo task , 8) errors in the DKEFS Tower Test.  
A repeated -measures design will be used to examine the within- subjects effects of the 
treatments on state depression and quality of life, as well as for a group X treatment interaction 
effect.  Although we do not expect an intervention of this  time scale of to alter trait impulsivity, 
we will also analyze within- subject changes in BIS11 scores as an exploratory analysis. Lastly, 
a between- group design comparing the MFP group vs. TAU group for substance use primary 
outcomes of symptomology and neurobehavioral measures for problem solving and impulsivity.  
Individual differences in PTSD and anxiety measures and other symptomatology will be 
included as covariates to account for confounding factors in the analyses.  
c. Facilities and Resources  
The consent procedures and behavioral testing of this protocol will take place in the new second-
floor Mental Health services facility at RICVAMC. Written informed consent procedures and 
clinical interviewing will take place in private interview rooms  of this new s econd- floor RICVAMC 
wing.  Questionnaires and laboratory behavioral tasks will be administered at dedicated research 
task workstations installed in testing rooms.   
d.  Staff Qualifications  
James M. Bjork, Ph.D.  will be the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_291859] p rotocol. [CONTACT_359874]  has a 5/8 VA 
appointment and a joint (faculty) appointment as Associate Professor of Psychiatry at Virginia Commonwealth University.  He has extensive experience in the laboratory testing of impulse 
control and decision- making  in addicted inpatients, outpatients, and at -risk human subjects. He 
is also known for his successful  design and execution of protocols to examine the neurocircuitry 
of motivation and self -control in addicted and adolescent at -risk populations.  He has over 50 
peer-reviewed publications  and book chapters, 48 of which are available in PUBMED. 
Thomas Burroughs, Ph.D.  is the co- designer of this protocol, and will play a role in data 
interpretation and analysis .  He has extensive experience conducting neuropsychological tests 
and structured clinical interviews for DSM -IV at RICVAMC in the course of his graduate school 
fellowship.  
 5. Risk/Benefit Assessment:  
The procedures proposed herein are limited to computerized psychological tasks  and  
symptomatology questionnaires . This protocol is considered to be minimal risk.  
Risks : 
5.a. Psychological distress due to performance of cognitive tasks or completion of questionnaire 
instruments on depression and PTSD.  
There is a small possibility that a  subject may feel uncomfortable in endorsing symptoms of 
depression, PTSD, or anxiety.  In addition, subjects may perceive lack of self -efficacy or cognitive 
skill when performing the desktop computerized tasks.  
Risk mitigation steps : Research staff are t rained to be encouraging of the subjects and their 
efforts, and to not comment negatively on performance, other than the automatically -generated 
“please try harder” feedback of the CEDT, which is required to help ensure that the subject tries 
his/her best.  
Either the study PI  [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a designated mental health clinician from the suicide response team of the 
Mental Health Service Line will be on the Richmond VAMC campus while the participants are 
completing the questionnaires and assessments. The research staff w ill have updated contact 
[CONTACT_359864], designated mental health clinician (if different that day from the PI), the Richmond VAMC Urgent Care Clinic (aka, SOS Clinic), and the Veterans Suicide Hotline 
(aka Veterans  Crisis Line, 1 -[PHONE_113]).  
[ADDRESS_448863] numbers for suicide prevention should their symptoms 
become acute at any point during/after the protocol . 
5.b.  Disclosure of sensitive information  There is a small  possibility of an unauthorized party gaining access to sensitive research- collected 
information in conjunction with personally -identifiable information (PII) or protected health 
information ( PHI) contained in the CPRS database.  
Risk mitigation steps : This risk is mitigated by [CONTACT_359865]- technology (IT) procedures  (see 
“Data Safety Monitoring” below)  for CPRS, coupled with the sequestration of PII/PHI from 
research data by [CONTACT_359866].  The document 
that enables linkage of  research data (protocol ID number) with PII is not electronic, and is kept 
physically secured. 
Benefits : 
There are no medical benefits for participation in this protocol.   
Risk/Benefit Assessment:  This protocol is minimal risk.  The investigative team contends that the 
benefits of this study in terms of generalizable neurobehavioral  and psychiatric knowledge 
outweigh the risks to subjects.  
Importance of knowledge to be expected: It is important to understand the effect of treatments 
being conducted in clinical settings here at McGuire VA Medical Center. This study has the 
opportunity to establish that a brief cognitive- based intervention is effective in treating patients  
with substance use disorders. Additionally, this study can expand our understanding of neurobehavioral effects of treatment on impulsivity and substance use outcomes.   
Subject Compensation: 
All subject compensation will come in the form of a direct deposit payment  issued by [CONTACT_359867] .  The original grant funding source  for this study  was the Durham VA Mental Illness, 
Research, Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC) . These funds have been transferred to the 
McGuire VA Medical Center, and will be paid to participants directly from the VA. Subjects who 
consent to participate in the current study will be compensated $20.[ADDRESS_448864] meeting 
(approximately 60- 90 minutes), and $30.00 for the second meeting (90 minutes).   
 6. Data Safety  and Monitoring: 
Data Sharing 
This protocol will not create a data repository and is not a multi -site study. It is not anticipated that 
data will be shared with an entity outside of this  facility. If this is to occur, IRB approval will be 
sought and any shared data will be completely de- identified, per VA regulation (1605.1 Appendix 
B).  
 
Data -Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP):   
DSMP Element 1: Handling of Unexpected or Adverse Events  
Veteran participants will only be scheduled for testing during business hours, when a clinician of 
the suicide response team is always on call at  RICVAMC. Should a participant express suicide 
ideation, t he research assistant will first call or page the PI  (Bjork)  to notify him,  then will summon 
the SOS Crisis Team that is operated by [CONTACT_359868], where responders will include 
an MSW or clinical psychologist to further evaluat e the subject.  As a backup, the research team 
will contact t he RICVAM C Suicide Prevention Coordinator, and/or a study staff member  will escort 
the participant to the RICVAMC emergency department and wait with the participant until 
assessed by a mental health clinician.   Following the intervention and complete disposition o f the 
subject, the research staff member and Clinicians will fully document the incident.   If the subject does not agree to undergo clinical evaluation, and the (SOS Crisis Team  clinician 
meeting with the subject determines that it is appropriate to initiate the civil -commitment process 
consistent with state law, the clinician and/or the research staff member may initiate direct contact 
[ADDRESS_448865]'s family members, friends, local magistrate, and/or local law -enforcement 
authorities in order to assure appropriate evaluation and treatment.  Information collected as part 
of this clinical evaluation will become part of the subject’s mental -health record.  Thus, the 
identified clinician will communicate details of the intervention to the subject’s out patient mental -
health- care provider or primary -care provider , as appropriate , to assure safety and continuity of 
clinical care .  
With respect to after -hours suicidal or other psychiatric reactions in outpatients or community 
subjects that do not take place during testing at RICVAMC, subjects will have been provided with 
both a VA suicide hotline information card, as well as a copy of the signed consent form, on which 
after-hours numbers for the PI (Bjork ) are available.  Should a subject call with a mental health 
crisis, they will be referred to the national VA suicide hotline, and a member of the research team 
will notify clinical staff at RICVAMC as appropriate, and will follow up with the subject.  
For all adverse events, the IRB will be notified in writing by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_359855].  
DSMP Element 2: Data Storage and Confidentiality  
This protocol will yield a mixture of electronic and paper data.  All study records, database 
information containing subjects’ data, and their identities will be kept confidential as required by 
[CONTACT_359869]. All paper questionnaire response forms will be secured in a locked cabinet that 
has limited access.  As  electronic  data from computerized behavioral tasks are collected at the 
McGuire VAMC, data will be transferred as needed using encrypted VA -issued thumb drive and 
stored on the secure RICVAMC virtual (U) drive  with access  limited to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_359856], 
through use of a shared folder .  Individual data files, such as spreadsheets for statistical analysis 
import will be individually password- protected.  Finally, t he RICVAMC virtual drive  itself is also 
password- and PIV -card- protected.   
Except when required by [CONTACT_2371], approved through a separate IRB protocol, or authorized by a HIPAA authorization or other approved mechanism (e.g., limited dataset, data use agreement, 
etc.), we will not identify subjects by [CONTACT_2300], social security number, address, telephone number , 
or any other personal identifier in study records outside the Richmond VAMC. For records 
disclosed outside RICVAMC , subjects will be assigned a unique  protocol  code number. The 
subject ID code file (i.e. linking each subject’s protocol ID number/code his/her PII/PHI and 
medical record) will be maintained in an excel electronic file on the PI’s VA -issued virtual drive.  
This code file will be a separate from any data- analysis file that would contain results of any 
testing, psychiatric interviews or questionnaires .  
 
7. Recruitment:  
Recruitment:  This project will recruit Veterans enrolled in the Substance Abuse Intensive 
Outpatient Program (IOP). The IOP includes five different groups over three days of the week for 
four weeks. Veterans are also randomly assigned to meet with a provider for four weekly individual sessions. Currently, Veterans either meet with one of two providers to complete the Mind 
Freedom Plan treatment, or they meet with a different provider to receive supportive, unstructured, therapy . 
 For the study, Veterans will be identified in their medical chart as being enrolled in IOP 
following the clinic intake and prior to beginning treatment. Research staff will contact [CONTACT_359870]. If they express interest, staff will schedule an appointment to meet with the potential participant to introduce the study, review and sign consent, 
and complete the baseline assessment self -report measure before they begin treatment.  
Subject groups (inclusion and exclusion criteria) : 
Inclusion criteria:  
• Enrollment in the Substance Abuse Treatment Program – Intensive Outpatient Program  
• Currently meets criteria for an Alcohol or Substance Use Disorder per SUD clinic intake  
9 
  
Exclusion criteria: 
• Unable to read and speak English 
• Currently active- duty military  
• Current engaged with legal involvement that is mandating the completion of the substance 
use program.  
 
Collection of written informed consent:  
The capacity to provide informed consent may be impaired in some patients, and we will not enroll decisionally -impaired individuals.  Therefore, we will pay special attention to mental capacity and 
ability to provide informed consent.  The  determination of such capacity rests in a few key items:  
• The subject should be able to understand the general procedures of the experiment and what is expected of him/her during participation.  
• The subject should be able to understand the risks and benefits associated with the study.  
• The subject should be able to understand that he/she can decline the study or withdraw 
from the study at any time after entering the study.  
We will confirm that all participants understand the informed consent process by [CONTACT_359871].   The consent form will convey that confidentiality is limited in situations where the subject is assessed to be a threat in harming self or others.   
Subjects will be provided with a written copy  of the consent form.  The research staff will point out 
the contact [CONTACT_359872] [INVESTIGATOR_359857] (for questions, comments, or 
concerns) .  Finally, as a safety precaution, each subject will be provided with a VA suicide hotline 
information card.  
 8. Consultants:  none  
 9. Curriculum Vitae:   Principal Investigator’s CV is on file with other projects, but can be provided 
if requested.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
References Cited  
Ahn, W. -Y., & Vassileva, J. (2016). Machine- learning identifies substance- specific behavioral 
markers for opi[INVESTIGATOR_359858]. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 161, 247–
257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.02.008 
10 
 Beck, A. T., Epstein, N., Brown, G., & Steer, R. A. (1988). An inventory for measuring clinical 
anxiety: psychometric properties. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 56(6), 
893– 897. 
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Invento ry-II. 
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Bickel, W. K., Miller, M. L., Yi, R., Kowal, B. P., Lindquist, D. M., & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_197917], J. A. (2007). 
Behavioral and neuroeconomics of drug addiction: competing neural systems and 
temporal discounting processes. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, [ADDRESS_448866] 1, S85 -91. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.09.016  
Bovin, M. J., Marx, B. P., Weathers, F. W., Gallagher, M. W., Rodriguez, P., Schnurr, P. P., & 
Keane, T. M. (2016). Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders -Fifth Edition (PCL- 5) in veterans. Psychological 
Assessment , 28(11), 1379–1391. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000254  
Cacciola, J. S., Alterman, A. I., DePhilippis, D., Drapkin, M. L., Valadez, C.,  Fala, N. C., … 
McKay, J. R. (2013). Development and initial evaluation of the Brief Addiction Monitor (BAM). Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment , 44(3), 256–263. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsat.2012.07.013  
Frisch, M., Cornell, J., Villaneuva, M., & Retzlaff, P. J. (1992). Clinical Validation of the Quality 
of Life Inventory: A Measure of Life Satisfaction for Use in Treatment Planning and 
Outcome Assessment. Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology , 4, 92– 101. 
Loree, A. M.,  Lundahl, L. H., & Ledgerwood, D. M. (2015). Impulsivity as a predictor of treatment 
outcome in substance use disorders: Review and synthesis: Impulsivity in substance use 
treatment. Drug and Alcohol Review , 34(2), 119–134. https://doi.org/10.1111/dar.[ADDRESS_448867], M. S., & Barratt, E. S. (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt 
impulsiveness scale. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 51(6), 768– 774. 
11 
 Swann, A. C., Bjork, J. M., Moeller, F. G., & Dougherty, D. M. (2002). Two models of impulsivity : 
relationship to personality traits and psychopathology. Biol Psychiatry , 51(12), 988– 94. 
 