 
Study Title:    The Grandmother Study: Gra ndmother Initiatives in 
Family Transformation (GIFT)  
  
NCT Number   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Document Description:    Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan    
Document Date:    7/21/2022    
Document History:    The current version, approved on 7/21/2022, removes 
the highlighting of previously approved changes to the 
protocol, as requested by [CONTACT_139844].gov review process.  
  
 
      
     
Kimberly Volarcik  
Executive Director, Human Research Protection Program  
                Office of Research & Technology Management  
[ADDRESS_158660]  
Cleveland, Ohio [ZIP_CODE]- 7340 
Phone: [PHONE_3142]  
[EMAIL_2880]   
 
                                       
 
Dear ClinicalTrials.gov Administrator,  
This letter is to inform you that the header of each Case  Western Reserve University  IRB 
protocol template incudes the name [CONTACT_139876]. This is how our 
electronic protocol system was set- up and is required for the IRB administrative processing of 
protocol submissions.  
The “TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER IRB Template V. 09 -2019” is admin istratively required  for the 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]: The Grandmother Study: Grandmother Initiatives in Family Transformation 
(GIFT) record. This is in line with the IRB needing to know the exact version of the protocol template  is being reviewed or approved by [CONTACT_32629] B for the life of the protocol submission.  
Therefore, this is the reason why the protocol template  
Please contact [CONTACT_139845].  
 
Sincerely,  
  Kimberly Volarcik  

IRB Administration Offices
UH IRB Phone: [PHONE_3143]
CWRU  IRB Phone: [PHONE_3144] 
The UH IRB operates  under HHS Federalwide  Assurance (FWA) number 00003937 and 
IRB registration numbers 00000684, 00001691 and 00008600. The CWRU IRB operates under DHHS FWA00004428 and IRB registration number  00000683.
HRP-510 Page  1 of 2
APPROVAL 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_139835]: GIFT Web Based Resourcefulness Training  for 
Grandmother Caregivers
IRB Number: IRB-2014-725
Submission Number: MOD00023524
IRB Office: CWRU IRB
Approval Date: 7/21/2022
Effective Date: 7/21/2022
Approval End  Date: N/A
Type of  Submission: Modification
Type of Review: Expedited
Documents Reviewed: • 9-15-21 protocol supplement template - updated,  Category: 
IRB Protocol;
The IRB reviewed  this submission.
Per Federal regulation, changes MAY NOT be made to any element of the current 
research without  prior IRB approval,  except to eliminate an immediate and apparent  
hazard to subjects  enrolled in the study.
Per Federal regulation, the research  may  not continue beyond the Approval  End 
date. You must submit a continuing  review  form  6-8 weeks  before  this Approval  End 
date in order to maintain IRB  approval. Failure to maintain  IRB approval is human 
subjects non-compliance.  Please note that  even  if your study falls into a category that  
does not require  an Approval End date,  the institution may require a yearly “check-
in” to confirm  the status of the study.  
***Approval by [CONTACT_139846]. 
Prior to starting your  study, you may be  required to obtain (1) a coverage analysis for 
studies that involve patient care, regardless  of source of funding,  and/or (2) a contract 
with the Sponsor of your  study or an  agreement with any third-party  collaborator  that 
may receive UH or CWRU patient  information in any format. Please ensure that  all 
required approvals are obtained before initiation of research  activity. ***
IRB Administration Offices
UH IRB Phone: [PHONE_3143]
CWRU  IRB Phone: [PHONE_3144] 
The UH IRB operates  under HHS Federalwide  Assurance (FWA) number 00003937 and 
IRB registration numbers 00000684, 00001691 and 00008600. The CWRU IRB operates under DHHS FWA00004428 and IRB registration number  00000683.
HRP-510 Page  2 of 2

 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 1 of 22 
[USE THIS SOCIAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ED UCATIONAL PROTOCOL TEMPLATE IF YOUR 
PROJECT INCLUDES SURVEY, INTERVIEW S, FOCUS GROUPS OR EDUCATIONAL 
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES WITH NO BI OMEDICAL/CLINICAL COMPONENTS]  
 INSTRUCTIONS: 
 Use this template to prepare a document with the information from the following 
sections.  
 Depending on the nature of what you are doing, some sections may not be applicable to 
your research. If so, please mark as N/A. Y ou may delete contents of sections, but will not 
be able to delete the headings of the sections. 
 When you write a protocol, keep an electronic copy. You will need to modify this copy 
when making changes.  
 Consider using a different co lor font for your answers. 
 PROTOCOL TITLE: 
 
GIFT Web Based Resourcefulness  Training for Grandmother  Caregivers . 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: 
 [INVESTIGATOR_139836]  
 368‐2545  
 [EMAIL_2881]  
 
 OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED IN THIS STUDY (IF APPLICABLE): 
Click here to enter text. 
VERSION NUMBER: 
 Include the version number of this protoc ol if assigned by [CONTACT_139847].  
2.0 
 
DATE:   12/4/2019 
   
 
 
Indicate the origin of this protocol  (who conceived of and leads the development of the 
protocol regardless of funding):  
☒     Investigator initiated (Investigator(s) developed protocol, regardless of funding)  
☐     Industry (Pharmaceutical, Device, etc.) (Industry developed protocol)  
☐     Federal (NIH, DOD, etc.)  
☐     Cooperative Group (SWOG, GOG, etc.)  
☐     Other - Please specify: C lick here to enter text.  
 
 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158661] ease note that your department 
pays for your time and resources and should be listed here. Click here to enter text.  
 
 
Has this study been disapproved by [CONTACT_139848]? 
☐  Yes ☒  No 
If so, please explain: Cl ick here to enter text. 
*Does this study involve cancer rese arch or cancer-related issues? 
☐  Yes ☒  No 
 If yes, indicate the PRMC number: Click here to enter text. 
 
 
2.0 Objectives 
Directions: Describe the purpose, specific aims or objectives. Be sure to also include the 
hypothesis being tested. 12‐04‐2019 Modification:  Adds a 5th data collection  point one year after 
the last described  data point (the [ADDRESS_158662]‐intervention  collection  point) Aim 1: Determine  
whether the 4‐week GIFT intervention,  compared  to a 4‐week unstructured  journal‐only   
condition,  improves  grandmothers’  [a] mental health (general mental health and depressive  
symptoms),  [b] physical health (self‐rated and general health) and [c] family well‐being (family 
functioning)  at 2, 12, and [ADDRESS_158663]‐intervention.  Aim 2: Determine  if changes in [a] problem 
solving/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  (resourcefulness),  [b] resources  (subjective  and instrumental  social support),  and [c] 
situational  appraisals  (appraised  stress, appraised  reward, and depressive  cognitions)  mediate the 
relationships  between GIFT and individual  and family outcomes  at [ADDRESS_158664]‐intervention.  Aim 3. Determine  if [a] grandmother  demographics  (age, race, education,  marital 
status, and employment  status), [b] caregiving  status, and [c] family demands  (intra‐family strains) 
moderate  the relationship  between the intervention  and the outcomes  in Aims 1 and 2. COVID‐19 
Supplemental  Survey – Participants  who expressed  an interest in future research at the 4th data 
collection  point will be asked by [CONTACT_139849] a survey asking about their experiences  
during the covid epi[INVESTIGATOR_901].  They will be emailed an online consent form that follows the same signing 
protocol we have used previously  with this sample  
 
 
3.0 Background 
Directions: Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps in current knowledge 
describing how it will add to existing know ledge. Include any relevant preliminary data. 12‐
04‐2019 Modification:  Adds a 5th data collection  point one year after the last described  data point 
(the [ADDRESS_158665]‐intervention  collection  point).     In 2009, 7.8 million American  children age 18 or 
younger lived with a grandparent,  a 64% increase from 1991.[ADDRESS_158666] types of such 
households:  grandmothers  raising grandchildren  whose parents are unable to care for them and 
grandmothers  living in multigenerational  homes with grandchildren  and their parents. Those who are 
very involved in caring for their grandchildren  are at greater risk of depression  and poorer overall 
health than their non‐caregiving  peers.3‐[ADDRESS_158667] on the family, creating an increased  risk for poor 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 3 of 22 
family functioning,  especially  if the grandmother  is raising grandchildren  without the children’s  
parents in the home.7‐[ADDRESS_158668] of the relevant research to date has been descriptive  and focused 
on the stress and health risks, particularly  depressive  symptoms,  of raising grandchildren  in 
grandparent ‐headed homes, although grandmothers  in multigenerational  households  often face 
complex stresses as well.11‐18 Little research,       however,  has examined  interventions  to support 
grandmothers  during their caregiving  experience.  Transitions  from lower levels to higher levels of 
grandchild  caregiving  (e.g., starting to raise a grandchild  or initiating a multigenerational  home) are 
associated  with worsening  health problems.19  During and after grandchild  caregiving  transitions,  
the presence  of positive copi[INVESTIGATOR_139837],  such as resourcefulness  and social support, 
may reduce the negative effects of caregiving  and family demands  on the well‐being of the 
grandmother  and family.19,22  Our prior work links greater resourcefulness  with fewer depressive  
symptoms  and better health.11,23 ‐[ADDRESS_158669] shown that face‐to‐face resourcefulness  training in 
older adults, including  grandmothers,  improves  both mental and physical health.27 ‐[ADDRESS_158670] laid the foundation  for grandparent  research in the 
area of resourcefulness,30 ‐34 and we propose to apply this knowledge  to a widely accessible  
intervention  that reduces stress and health risks. The purpose of this study is to extend our 
previously  successful  face‐to‐face resourcefulness  intervention  to a web‐based format for 
grandmothers,  a population  with which our team has considerable  experience.  The web‐ based 
intervention,  Grandmother  Initiatives  in Family Transformation  (GIFT), provides online 
resourcefulness  training using structured  reflective  journaling  to reinforce  resourcefulness  skills. 
We will conduct a randomized  clinical trial (RCT) comparing  the health effects of two online 
conditions:  GIFT vs. unstructured  journaling  alone. Given the limited interventions  available to these 
groups of women, an intervention  that transcends  time and place and is available [ADDRESS_158671] individual  and family health outcomes.  In this two‐group 
randomized  trial, we will randomly  assign 320 grandmothers  to a web‐based (a) GIFT 
resourcefulness  training (n=160) or (b) an unstructured  journal‐only comparison  group (n=160). 
Grandmothers’  demographic  characteristics,  caregiving  status relative to grandchildren  (raising 
grandchildren  versus sharing a home with grandchildren  and their parents) and family demands  
(intra‐family strain) will serve as covariates.  Study aims are: Aim 1: Determine  whether the 4‐week 
GIFT intervention,  compared  to a 4‐week unstructured  journal‐only condition,  improves  
grandmothers’  [a] mental health (general mental health and depressive  symptoms),  [b] physical 
health (self‐rated and general health) and [c] family well‐being (family functioning)  at 2, 12, and [ADDRESS_158672]‐intervention.  Aim 2: Determine  if changes in [a] problem solving/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
(resourcefulness),  [b] resources  (subjective  and instrumental  social support),  and [c] situational  
appraisals  (appraised  stress, appraised  reward, and depressive  cognitions)  mediate the relationships  
between GIFT and individual  and family outcomes  at [ADDRESS_158673]‐
intervention.  Aim 3. Determine  if [a] grandmother  demographics  (age, race, education,  marital 
status, and employment  status), [b] caregiving  status, and [c] family demands  (intra‐family strains) 
moderate  the relationship  between the intervention  and the outcomes  in Aims [ADDRESS_158674] and support, and by [CONTACT_139850],  
family demands  and demographic  factors on outcomes—mechanisms  that will be disentangled  in 
this 4 year randomized  trial. If our study validates our hypotheses,  the GIFT intervention  can provide a 
low‐cost, readily accessible  intervention  to help grandmothers  raising grandchildren  to improve 
their own mental and physical well‐being and thereby [CONTACT_139851]‐being, outcomes  
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158675] long‐term individual,  family, and societal benefits. Study Design We will conduct a two‐
group RCT with a longitudinal,  multivariate  design using a convenience  sample of [ADDRESS_158676] will compare GIFT 
Resourcefulness  Training (video plus structured  journal to practice resourcefulness  skills) to the use 
of an unstructured  journal, which has been found to have a small effect on improving  stress and 
depressive  symptoms,  but significantly  less than the resourcefulness  intervention.27,52,85  We 
believe that no “usual care/no‐care” control group is necessary  to test our hypothesis,  given evidence  
showing the relative stability of the major study variables (physical and mental health, family 
functioning,  resourcefulness,  support) over 6.5 years in Musil’s descriptive  longitudinal  study of 
grandmothers  and over 18 weeks in the control group of Zauszniewski’s  resourcefulness  trial with 
grandmothers.  We will extend the time of follow‐up and obtain measures  of outcomes,  mediating  
variables,  and potential  moderating  covariates  at baseline/pre ‐intervention  (T1) and 2 weeks (T2), 12 
weeks (T3), and 24 weeks (T4) post intervention  to evaluate early, lagged, and extended  effects.  
 
 
Please add relevant references at the end of th e protocol, not at the end of this section. 
 
4.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
Directions: Describe how individuals will be screen ed for eligibility. Using the tables below, 
describe the inclusion and exclusion criteri a that will define who will be included and 
excluded in your final study sample.  
  
 Inclusion 
1. 
Grandmothers ages 18-64 and/or 64+  of a grandchild aged 18 or under  
 
2. Live in the same home as one or more grandchildren  age 18 or younger and either 
[a] are the primary caregiver  for grandchildren  whose parents do not live in the home 
or [b] help in the care of the grandchildren  and live in a multigenerational  home with 
the grandchildren’s  parent(s).  We focus on these two groups because grandmothers  
raising grandchildren  have significantly  more stress, depressive  symptoms,  and 
problems  in family functioning  and worse health than other women their 
age,13,15,16,  17,[ADDRESS_158677] excluded  grandfathers  because they comprise  fewer than 3% of 
grandparents  with any caretaking  responsibilities  and are less likely to live in 
multigenerational  homes  
3. Grandmothers who do not have regular a ccess to a computer or  hand-held internet 
capable device as the study will be completed online 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 5 of 22 
4. Grandmothers who do not speak English.  While we recognize  that our English 
literacy requirement  will preclude participation  by [CONTACT_139852].  If the GIFT intervention  is successful,  we will expand our testing and 
translate instruments  and training into Spanish and other languages  in future projects  
 
5.0 Number of Research Participants 
Directions: Indicate the target number of research  participants to be accrued locally, and, 
if this is a multi-site study, indicate the tota l number of research part icipants to be accrued 
across all sites.  Example language that can be used: We will enroll 25 subjects at CWRU and plan to enroll 
150 subjects study wide. We will enroll up to 350 participants, recruiting nationally across the United 
States.  
 
6.0 Special/Vulnerable Populations 
1. Indicate specifically if you will include ea ch of the following special populations by 
[CONTACT_61951]:  
☐   Adults unable to consent 
 ☐   Minors  (infants, children, teenagers)   
 ☐   Wards of the state/Foster Children 
 ☐   Pregnant Women   
 ☐   Neonates 
☐   Neonates of Uncertain Viability  
 ☐   Employees of CWRU or UHHS 
 ☐   Prisoners  
 ☐   Illiterate Individuals  
 ☐   Non-English Speaking  
 ☐   University Students 
 ☒   None  
 
2. If the research involves indivi duals that are included in a special/vulnerable population, 
describe the additional safeguards included to  protect the rights and welfare of the 
individuals for each population indicated. We are not recruiting from special/vulnerable 
populations.  
 
3. If excluding pregnant women, illiterate or non-English speaking individuals, provide a 
scientific rationale for the exclusion.  Inconvenience or cost is not an acceptable 
rationale. While we recognize  that our English literacy and speaking requirement  will 
preclude participation  by [CONTACT_139853].  
 
7.0 International information 
☒  This is not an international study – please leave rest of this section blank.  
☐  We will be conducting this research at the following international sites: 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 6 of 22 
 Click here to enter text. 
☐  We are recruiting participants outside of the US from the following locations: 
 Click here to enter text. 
☐  We are sending data outside of the US to the following locations: 
 Click here to enter text. 
☐  We are receiving data from outside of the US from the following locations: 
 Click here to enter text. 
 
 
8.0 Recruitment Methods 
Note: Attach all applicab le recruitment materials to the la st section of the Smart form under 
“Recruitment Materials.” 
1. Which of the following methods will be us ed to recruit research participants. – Select  all 
that apply  
☒  Email 
☒  Phone call 
☒  Letter 
☒  Advertisement (e.g., poster, flyer, etc.) 
☒  Social media 
☐  Other. Please specify: Click here to enter text.  
 
2. Describe when, where, and how potential res earch participants will be recruited.  
We will seek a national convenience  sample of up to [ADDRESS_158678] established  relationships  with several such organizations  and will work 
with them to notify grandmothers  who may meet eligibility  criteria. Among these groups are 
Generations  United, a national non‐profit group focused on intergenerational  relationships,  
and Grandparents.com,  with a dedicated  section for grandparent  caregivers.  Both groups 
reach large audiences  of grandparents,  health and social service providers,  and other 
consumers.  We have a relationship  with the Public Children’s  Services Association  of Ohio 
and their network of national organizations  addressing  children’s  needs, including  
grandparent  caregiving  (see letters of support).  The study will be publicized  through each 
organization’s  website, printed material,  and email, and their network of organizations.  In 
addition, there are over [ADDRESS_158679] at 
Clinical Trials.Gov  and ResearchMatch.org,  two online resources  that facilitate research‐
subject recruitment.  We will also contact [CONTACT_139854], newspapers,  and radio stations as 
appropriate,  and will track subjects’ region of the country for purposes  of describing  the 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 7 of 22 
sample. Because our GIFT pi[INVESTIGATOR_139838]‐
person contact, we propose a modest travel budget to attend events for grandmother  
caregivers  in various parts of the country, such as the annual meetings  of statewide  kinship 
groups, if needed to meet recruitment  goals.  Prior: we will use ads in newspapers  and flyers 
and at Grandparents.com  and Generations  United. We will employ additional  strategies  but 
seek approval prior to employing  any. New: grandmothers  are eligible if grandchildren  are age 
18 or younger.  9.7.17 Social Media Strategy:  Our Facebook  page includes an already IRB 
approved  self‐screener,  and as previously  discussed  in person, the Facebook  page will be 
shared with grandparent  and related family support groups. Information  about the Links to 
our Facebook  page [and the CWRU website ([EMAIL_2882])]  will be included 
in advertising  materials  (already approved).  We do not plan to use twitter,snapchat  or 
instagram  at this time.  
 
3. Describe the source (e.g., from what departme nt, EMR, etc.) of the research participants. 
From the community 
 
4. Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential research participants. 
Study staff will conduct a phone screener with pot ential participants who contact [CONTACT_1758].  
Potential participants will be screened based  on the inclusion criteria and willingness to 
complete the study components.  
 
5. Describe the feasibility of recruiting the requi red number of suitable research participants 
within the agreed recruitment period. Fo r example, how many potential research 
participants do you have access to?   
The study is open to partici pation across all [ADDRESS_158680] Ohio 
grandmothers living with grandchildren, we do no t anticipate difficulty reaching our sample 
goals.  
 
9.0 Setting  
Directions: Describe the sites and locati ons where your research team will conduct the 
research. All components of the study will be complete d entirely online.  Upon request from the 
participants (or if electronic components are not completed), we may provide paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_139839]’s location.  
 
10.0 Consent Process 
Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent: 
☒  Yes  ☐  No 
If yes, answer the following questions: 
1. Describe where the consent process will take place: The Project Director or 
research team member will screen prospective  participants  over the phone to 
determine  eligibility  for participation:  grandmothers  who (a) live with one or more 
grandchildren  under age 18 and participate  in their care; (b) understand  and write 
English; and (c) have personal access to a computer  or mobile device. If eligible, we 
will outline the nature and requirements  of the study: informed  consent, the 
duration of the study, the timing and content of questionnaires  and journal 
maintenance,  and their willingness  to participate  in the random assignment  process. 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158681] staff into a data entry 
module. After telephone  screening,  those eligible and verbally agreeing to participate  
will be sent an informed  consent by [CONTACT_139855].  
   
2. The time that will be devoted to the consent discussion: As much time as the 
participant needs to consider enrollment. Th e online screener includ es a prompt for the 
study staff to ask potential participants if they have any questions.  Study staff will be instructed to take as much time is n ecessary with each potential participant. 
 
 
3. Any waiting period available between informing the prospective subject and 
obtaining the consent: Participants will be emailed a consent form and can take as 
much time as they need and consult with any one they wish before returning the consent 
form.   
 
4. Steps that will be taken to ensure the research participants’ understanding  The 
phone screening process includes a series of questions regarding eligibility and the 
opportunity to ask questions of the study staff.  
 
5. Any process to ensure ongoing consent: Participants will be contact[CONTACT_139856].  
 
6. Steps that will be taken to minimize the po ssibility of coercion or undue influence 
to the subjects: Participants are reminded that participation is voluntary, they can stop 
at any time and will be compensated for the portions of the study they complete.  
 
For Adult Participants 
Indicate if you will be asking for a waiv er or alteration of consent process or 
documentation (consent will not be obtained, written consent will not be documented) 
☒  Yes  ☐  No 
 
If yes, indicate which part of the consen t process you are requesting be waived or 
altered and the rationale for requesting the waiver or alteration: 
☒   I will obtain consent, but not participant’s signature 
☐   I will obtain consent, but request a waiver for pre-screening purposes 
 ☐    I will obtain consent, but request a waiver of some of the elements of consent  
                      (e.g. use of deception) 
 ☐    I will not obtain any consent, and I am requesting a full waiver of consent 
 
1. Give the rationale for the request of a waiv er or alteration of the consent process or 
documentation. As our study is completed online, completing an online consent document 
1) streamlines enrollment by [CONTACT_139857]. 2) Serves 
as a check on computer access, which is one of our inclusion criteria.  
 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158682] 
the same access to information as if they received a paper copy. 
 
4. Explain why the research could not practicab ly be carried out without the waiver or 
alteration of consent. As we are recruiting nationally, the burden of face to face consents 
and/or mailing consent forms would be cost -prohibitive, without adding any additional 
protections to the participants. 
 
5. Indicate if the subjects will be provided w ith additional information about the study after 
participation. Participants will receive a newsletter with results when the study is 
complete.  
 
6. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent in writing (e.g. over the phone, 
verbally, electronic survey, etc.), plea se describe and provide a rationale.  
☐ N/A We will have an electronic consent form that participants will be emailed to read, 
consider, and electronically si gn, on their own time, after verbally assenting during the 
phone screening process.  
 
7. Describe how you will be documenting that a research participant has consented. 
Participants will electronically sign both by [CONTACT_139858][INVESTIGATOR_139840] a written signature.  
 
 
*Be sure to upload a consent script or info rmation sheet with your study protocol 
 
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults 
Non English Speakers (Please select one)  
 
☒  I am not enrolling non-English speaking individuals in this research study. The following is 
justification for why non-E nglish speaking individuals cannot be enrolled: While we 
recognize  that our English literacy requirement  will preclude participation  by [CONTACT_139859],  the intervention  is not available in languages  other than English. If the 
GIFT intervention  is successful,  we will expand our testing and translate instruments  and 
training into Spanish and other languages  in future projects  
☐  I will be targeting non-English speaking adults 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158683] the language(s) other than English that will be targeted: Click here to enter text.   
 
☐  I am not targeting non-English speaking individuals . If a non-English speaking individual is 
eligible for the study, we will use th e following procedures to enroll:  
1. Describe the process to ensure that the or al and written information provided to those 
research participants will be in that language  during initial consent as well as throughout 
the study. Click here to enter text. 
 
2. List the language(s) other than  English that will be targeted : Click here to enter text.  
 
 
Adults Unable to Consent 
☒  I am not enrolling adults unable to c onsent in this research study – please leave the rest of 
this section blank. 
 
 ☐  There is an anticipated direct benefit to the subject. Explain: Clic k here to enter text. 
 
 ☐  There is NOT an anticipated direct benefit to the subject. Explain: Click here to enter 
text. 
 
1. Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of  consent. Click here 
to enter text. 
 
2. List the individuals from whom permission wi ll be obtained in order of priority (e.g. 
durable power of attorney for health care, court appointed guardian for health care 
decisions, spouse, and adult child ). Click here to enter text. 
 
3. For research conducted outside of the state,  provide information that describes which 
individuals are authorized unde r applicable law to consent on behalf of a prospective 
subject to their participation in the procedure(s) involved in  the research. Click here to 
enter text. 
☐ N/A    
 
4. Describe the process for assent of the research participants. Indicate: 
 Which subjects that are unable to consent wi ll be required to give  assent? If not all, 
explain why. Click here to enter text. 
 
 Describe whether assent of the research participants will be documented and the 
process to document assent. Click here to enter text.  
 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 11 of 22 
☐   The subject will be informed about the rese arch to the extent compatible with the 
subject’s understanding.  
☐   Subjects will be closely monitored.  
☐  The subject will be withdraw n if they appear unduly distressed.  
 
 
Research Participants Who Are Not Ye t Adults (infants, children, teenagers) 
☒  I am not enrolling partic ipants who are not yet adults  in this research study. – please leave the 
rest of this section blank 
 
1. Will parental permission be obtained from: 
☐  One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably 
available, and shares legal responsibility  for the care and custody of the child 
☐  Both parents unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not 
reasonably available, or when only one pa rent has legal responsibility for the 
care and custody of the child 
☐  Requesting a waiver of parental permission  
 
If you are getting parental/guardian permission: 
a. Indicate how you will be documenting the permission: 
 ☐  Signed consent form 
 ☐  Requesting a waiver of docum entation of parental permission 
 
b. Describe whether permission will be obt ained from individuals other than 
parents, and if so, who will be allowe d to provide permission. Describe the 
process used to determine these individuals’ authority to consent to each child’s participation in research. Click here to enter text. 
 
If a waiver of parental permission is being requested: 
a. Describe how the study is designed  for a subject population for which 
parental/guardian permission is not a reasonable requirement to protect the 
subjects, if applicable. Click here to enter text. 
 
b. Describe how the research could not pr acticably be carried  out without the 
waiver of parental permission.  Click here to enter text. 
 
c. Indicate if the subjects will be provide d with additional information about the 
study after participation. C lick here to enter text. 
 
2.   Will assent be obtained from: 
☐  all of the children 
☐  some of the children 
☐  none of the children 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 12 of 22 
 
If assent will be obtained from some children, indicate which children will be 
required to assent. Clic k here to enter text. 
 
When assent of children is obtained, desc ribe how it will be documented. Click here 
to enter text. 
 
3. For children who are pregnant, describe how assent and permission are obtained. Click 
here to enter text. 
☐ N/A  
 
 
11.0 Sharing of Results with  Research Participants 
Results will be shared with research participants: 
☒ Yes  ☐ No   
If yes, describe how the results will be shar ed. Participants will recei ve a newsletter with 
results after the study is complete.  
 
Results will be shared with others: 
☒ Yes  ☐ No   
 If yes, describe with whom and how the results will be shared. Results will be 
disseminated via conference presenta tions and scholarly articles.  
 
 
12.0 Study Design/Procedures 
Directions:  
1) Describe the overall study design (e.g.:  single visit, single-blind, double-blind, 
non-randomized, randomized, blood draw , investigational drug, device etc.). 
2) Provide a description of all study-related research procedures being performed, 
including the length of time involved.  
3) Include procedures being performed to monitor research participants for safety or minimize risks.  4) Describe the source records including me dical or educational records, which will 
be used to collect data about subjects. 
Study Design We will conduct a two‐group RCT with a longitudinal,  multivariate  design using a 
convenience  sample of [ADDRESS_158684] will 
compare GIFT Resourcefulness  Training (video plus structured  journal to practice resourcefulness  
skills) to the use of an unstructured  journal, which has been found to have a small effect on improving  
stress and depressive  symptoms,  but significantly  less than the resourcefulness  intervention.  We 
believe that no “usual care/no‐care” control group is necessary  to test our hypothesis,  given evidence  
showing the relative stability of the major study variables (physical and mental health, family 
functioning,  resourcefulness,  support) over 6.5 years in Musil’s descriptive  longitudinal  study of 
grandmothers19,  25 and over 18 weeks in the control group of Zauszniewski’s  resourcefulness  trial 
with grandmothers.27  We will extend the time of follow‐up and obtain measures  of outcomes,  
mediating  variables,  and potential  moderating  covariates  at baseline/pre ‐intervention  (T1) and 2 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 13 of 22 
weeks (T2), 12 weeks (T3), and 24 weeks (T4) post intervention  to evaluate early, lagged, and 
extended  effects.   12‐04‐2019 addendum:   We will also collect information  one year after the 
completion  of the [ADDRESS_158685]‐intervention  follow‐up.  Each questionnaire  is anticipated  to take 
between 15 and 25 minutes to complete.  The journals take 1‐15 minutes each day that the 
participants  journal up to 28 days. COVID ‐[ADDRESS_158686] 
in future participation  will be asked to complete  a survey regarding  their experiences  during the 
pandemic.  They will be compensated  an additional  $10 if they complete  the survey. Previously  collected 
data will be linked to the Covid‐19 supplemental  survey, but only using participant’s  coded identifiers,  
no using personally  identifiable  data.  9‐15‐2021 modification:  At the end of the study participants  will 
be given the opportunity  to view the video and journal prompt text for the other arm.  We will use 
Qualtrics to display this content but will not collect data.  They will have an opportunity  to view this 
material for [ADDRESS_158687].   
 
13.0 Study Timeline (optional) 
 
 
14.0 ClinicalTrials.gov Information 
Directions: If this study has been registe red on ClinicalTrials.gov, provide the 
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier and the investigator /sponsor responsible fo r registering. If this 
study has not been registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, provide the rationale as to why and if/when it will be. If it does not meet the requirement for being registered on ClinicalTrials.gov, please state that. 
ClinicalTrials.gov  Identifier:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   NIH grant 
R01NR015999   
 
15.[ADDRESS_158688]  
☒ Name 
☒ Address (e.g., Zip code, other geographical designation, etc.)  
☐ Dates related to an individual (e.g., Date of admission, birth, surgery, etc.)  
☒ Telephone number 
☐ Fax number 
☒ Email address 
☐ Social security number 
☐ Medical record number 
☐ Health plan beneficiary number 
☐ Account number 
☐ Certificate/license number 
☐ Any vehicle or other device serial 
☐ Device identifiers or serial numbers 
☐ Web URL 
☒ Internet protocol (IP) address 
☐ Finger or voice prints (includes audio recordings)  
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 14 of 22 
☐ Photographic images (includes video recordings)  
☐ Other: Any characteristic that would uniquely iden tify the individual 
 If other, please explain:  Click here to enter text. 
 
2. List all other data to be collected for the re search study. Attach all data collection tools on 
the Local Site Documents page of the Sp artaIRB smart form (Other Attachments).  See 
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 ,Q5, COVID ‐19 supplemental  survey  and weekly journals for control and 
intervention groups, attached  .  
  
16.0 Data Analysis Plan 
Directions: Describe the data analysis plan , including any statistical procedures. If 
applicable, provide a power analysis, and study/safety endpoints. Statistical  Power Analysis for 
Sample Size Estimation.  For Aim 1, power analysis using G‐Power [ADDRESS_158689] size of .07, as was obtained for the social support mediators  in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_62751]. 
The major outcome variables show much larger effects (Figure 3), and therefore,  the sample size of 250 
is adequate.  For Aims 2 and 3, power analyses were conducted  applying MacCallum,  Browne, and 
Sugawara’s 118 calculations  to determine  sample size for Structural  Equation Models. We use the Root 
Mean Square Error of Approximation  (RMSEA) to assess goodness ‐of‐fit of a hypothesized  model and the 
sample data. In testing for power, two hypotheses  (close fit and not close fit) are tested. For close fit 
hypotheses,  the higher the power the more likely to reject an incorrect model. For not close fit 
hypotheses,  the higher the power, the more likely to detect a reasonably  correct model. [ADDRESS_158690] size. RMSEAs of .05 (good fit) and .08 (acceptable  fit) are used for close fit 
hypotheses,  while .05 (good fit) and .01 (extremely  good fit) are used for not close fit hypotheses. 118 We 
constructed  a multivariate  cross‐lagged autoregressive  model with four waves of data testing how 
problem solving/copi[INVESTIGATOR_007],  resources,  and situational  appraisals  mediate the impact of the GIFT 
intervention  on the individual  and family well‐being outcomes. 34,55‐56 Using the sample size of 250 as an 
estimate for a close fit hypothesis  with an alpha of .05, an RMSEA1 of .05, an RMSEA2=.08,  and a model 
with 124 degrees of freedom, the SEM had a power =.996. For a not close fit hypothesis  with an alpha of 
.05, an RMSEA1=.05,  an RMSEA2=.01,  and a model with 124 degrees of freedom, the SEM had a power 
=.984. Thus, our final sample of 250 will provide adequate  power.  Sample size and attrition. We will 
enroll 167 subjects per group to achieve a sample of 125 per group at T4. While our prior longitudinal  
survey research had a low attrition rate (12%) over 24 months, and our web‐based GIFT pi[INVESTIGATOR_139841] 92% 
continuation  at 6 weeks, the face‐to‐face intervention  study 27 had 19% loss over 18 weeks, suggesting  
slightly greater losses by [CONTACT_941] 24‐week follow‐up. Therefore,  we estimate 25% attrition over the 28 week 
study duration (intervention  plus follow‐up) and plan to enroll a total of 334 subjects. Subjects tend to 
remain in our studies in large part due to their commitment  to grandmother  caregiving  and the team’s 
sensitivity  to diversity, which will again be overseen by [CONTACT_15957]‐I Warner.  
 
17.0 Confidentiality of Data 
1. To maintain the confidentiality of the data: 
☒ I will use a unique study identifier to code individuals’ identifiable data and will 
store the master list sepa rate from the study data. 
☐  I will use a unique study identifier to code individuals’ data, but it will never be 
linked to a master list. 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 15 of 22 
☐ Other- please explain: Click here to enter text. 
 
Provide a plan to destroy iden tifiers including how and when. Identifiers  will be destroyed  
one year after study completion,  in case we conduct a long term follow‐up of participants.    
As previously  approved,  we cannot prevent Qualtrics from collecting  IP addresses,  but we 
will remove them from the SPSS files we save.  
 
2. How are you storing your electronic data? 
☐ UH Redcap 
☐ CWRU Redcap  
☐ CWRU Secure Research Environment (SRE) 
☒ CWRU Box 
☐ OnCore 
☐ UH Secure Network Drive 
☒ CWRU Secure Network Drive 
☒ Other - List storage method and provide justification: Materials  include the 
information  obtained  by [CONTACT_50205],  journals (either structured  or unstructured)  using an 
integrated,  password ‐protected  system designed  by [CONTACT_139860]. The system is implemented  using 
Qualtrics and will allow participants  to access all study components  (video, all surveys, 
journals and system‐related resources)  at one secure site. Access to the subject’s email 
address and phone number is necessary  for this web‐based study. Subject identifying  data 
will be stored separately  from other study material.  Data will be collected  on a firewalled,  
dedicated  server with a backup server in the School of Nursing following  established  security 
guidelines  for storing Protected  Health Information.  Only the research team can access the 
server to retrieve data.  Qualtrics allows us to password ‐protect the entire site and allows 
project staff to monitor participants’  journaling,  and for those in the GIFT intervention  
group, the number of times each person viewed the GIFT training video. Participants  move 
from the T1 baseline questionnaire,  to the GIFT Resourcefulness  training video for those in 
the GIFT intervention  group, to the 4‐week structured  GIFT journal or the 4‐week 
unstructured  journal, to subsequent  questionnaires.  Participants  will be able to access the 
site and their information  [ADDRESS_158691] consulted  with the CWRU Full INclusion  of persons with Disabilities  (FIND) Lab for 
maximizing  ease of use and readability  (e.g., contrast, background,  font, print and graphic 
elements).   Our Project Manager  and research team will oversee that the systems are 
working smoothly,  monitor participants’  enrollment  in the system and their progress on a 
weekly basis during the first six weeks after their enrollment,  and provide email and 
telephone  reminders.   Subjects will be assured that only the study team and the Human 
Subjects Review Committee  and staff members  will have access to the information.     Data 
stored on Box or elsewhere  will not include any personal identifying  information.  
 
Please note: if you’re storing or entering your  electronic data in any system other than an 
approved system listed above, pl ease contact [CONTACT_139861] ( [EMAIL_2883] ). 
 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 16 of 22 
3. ☒ I acknowledge that paper research data and documents will be stored in a double-
locked secure environment in the following location:  Although we do not intend to 
keep paper research documents , any such documents would be kept in a locked office 
in locked files of the principal investigator.   
  ☒ We will not have paper research documents. 
 
4. Will data be shared? 
☐ Yes  
 List the exact data elements that will  be shared: Click here to enter text. 
 Describe how data will be sent : Click here to enter text. 
☒ No 
☐ N/A    
 (Please note: if sharing data, please contact [CONTACT_139862]/agreements are in place.)  
 
18.[ADDRESS_158692], access, use, or distribut e any Protected Health Information (PHI)? 
☐  Yes  ☒ No 
 
If yes, indicate how HIPAA authorization will be obtained (check  all that apply): 
☐  HIPAA authorization is in the consent form 
☐  Requesting a full or partial wa iver of HIPAA for prescreening 
☐  I will complete the Request for Waiver of HIPAA Authorization form.  See 
SpartaIRB Library  
☐  Requesting a full or partial waiver of HIPAA 
☐  I will complete the Request for Waiver of HIPAA Authorization form.  See 
SpartaIRB Library  
 
 
19.[ADDRESS_158693] the reasonably foreseeable risks such as breach of confidentiality, discomforts, 
hazards, or inconveniences to the research partic ipants related to thei r participation in the 
research. Include a description of the proba bility, magnitude, duration, and reversibility 
of the risks. Include the physical psychologi cal, social, legal, and economic risks. This is a 
2‐group treatment  trial, with subjects assigned either to GIFT Resourcefulness  Training with a 
4 week structured  journal to reinforce  skill development  or to group in which women 
complete  4 week unstructured  journals. All subjects are volunteers  and non‐participation  
and withdrawal  from the study are alternatives  to study participation.  There are no risks to 
non‐participation  or withdrawal  from the study No physical or psychological  risks other than 
those associated  with daily living are expected  for the women who participate  in this study. 
The discomforts  of completing  the web surveys, journals are minimal. Reflecting  on feelings 
or experiences  of being a grandmother  raising or living with and caring for a grandchild  may 
make some women anxious, although this has not been our experience  previous research;  
the Intervention  Specialist  will monitor journal content for signs of subject distress. 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158694] staff will be available 
by [CONTACT_139863]‐based pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. Subjects 
who receive scores of 30 or greater on the CES‐ D measure of depressed  mood (the cut off 
score for moderately  depressed  mood) will be referred to their primary care provider for 
follow‐up.  If it is learned that a grandchild  has been a victim of any type of abuse, or is a 
danger to him/herself  or others, then the appropriate  agencies will need to be notified. 
Additionally,  if grandmothers  contact [CONTACT_139864]’s First Call for Help telephone  number. The First Call service provides resources  
on various issues such as legal matters, housing, etc. We also will have a list of local, 
statewide  and national agencies for making necessary  referrals.   
 
2. If applicable, indicate which experimental procedures may have risks to the research 
participants that are currently unfor eseeable. Click here to enter text. 
☐ N/A    
3. If applicable, describe the risks to others w ho are not research partic ipants. Click here to 
enter text. 
☐ N/A    
4. Describe the availability of me dical or psychological resources  that research participants 
might need. Click here to enter text. 
☐ N/A    
 
20.[ADDRESS_158695] the Privacy Interests of Research Participants 
Directions: Describe the steps that will be ta ken to protect research participants’ privacy 
interests.  (consider issues such as physical space, proximity to other, and participant preferences)  
Only the PI, the Co‐Is, the Project Manager  and the research assistant(s)  directly 
involved with managing  the project and monitoring  participation  will have access to the data and 
codes  .  Identifiers  will be destroyed  one year after study completion,  in case we conduct a long term 
follow‐up of participants.     Confidentiality:  Every effort will be made to protect participants  and keep 
the study data confidential.  Confidentiality  will be assured in the following  manner. All data 
collection  will be conducted  using an integrated,  password ‐protected  system designed  by [CONTACT_139865]. The system uses 
Qualtrics to allow participants  to access all study components  (video, all surveys, journal or diary and 
system‐related resources)  at one secure site. Data will be collected  on a firewalled,  dedicated  server 
with a backup server in the CWRU School of Nursing following  established  security guidelines  for 
storing Protected  Health Information.  Only the research team can access the server to retrieve data. 
We will use established  web‐ based technology  that is accessible  on a standard web browser 
compatible  with an average household  or library computer.  The LMS allows us to password ‐protect 
the entire site.  All responses  will remain confidential  and results will be reported in aggregate  form. 
A single index of subjects' names, identifying  information  (email addresses,  phone and physical 
address contact [CONTACT_3031])  and research identification  numbers will be kept in password  project 
files on password  protected  files during the data collection  phase. Identifying  information  from the 
informed  consent (email and street address) will be on a tear sheet and stored separately  from the 
consent forms.  Downloaded  data will be de‐identified.  Only personnel  directly related to the project 
(Investigators,  Project Staff, and IRB and NIH officials) will have access to the data. At the end of the 
study, the list linking the subject name, contact [CONTACT_139866].  
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/[ADDRESS_158696] office. 5‐
8‐20 modification:  Researcher  Greg Smith of Kent State University  has added our Covid‐19 
questions  to their research study of custodial  grandmothers.   We plan to combine de‐identified  
data (our Covid‐19 as well as selected relevant data from prior waves of our research (ex: 
demographic  data, health status data) for the purpose of comparing  our samples.    
 
21.0 Potential Benefit to Research Participants 
☐ There is potential benefit to research participants.  
Describe the potential benefits that indivi dual research participants may experience from 
taking part in the research . Include the probabi lity, magnitude, a nd duration of the 
potential benefits . Do not list compensation.  A possible benefit to subjects in either arm of 
this study is an opportunity  to develop insights into their own  behavior and feelings and 
strategies  to help themselves  and their family. Participants  in the GIFT Intervention  Group 
may benefit from resourcefulness  training  
 
☒ There is no direct benefit to research participants. 
If no direct benefit, state the poten tial benefit to society or others. Do not list 
compensation. Importance  of the Knowledge  to be Gained The number of grandparent ‐
headed homes has increased  over the past two decades, primarily  due to parental drug use 
leading to family instability,  and recent increases  in multigenerational  homes due to the 
economic  downturn  in 2008. There are very few interventions  targeted at grandmothers  
with extensive  or primary caregiving  responsibility  to grandchildren,  who do so typi[INVESTIGATOR_139842],  despi[INVESTIGATOR_139843], 
and effects on overall family well‐being. This intervention  trial tests GIFT resourcefulness  
training, a low‐cost, easily available set of strategies  to help grandmothers  living with and 
raising grandchildren  to improve their mental and physical well‐being and promote better 
family functioning.  The GIFT intervention  is expected  to facilitate better outcomes  directly, 
but also indirectly  by [CONTACT_139867],  by [CONTACT_139868], and by [CONTACT_139869].  
Understanding  these mechanisms  will facilitate improvements  in the intervention  and 
generalizing  effects to other populations.  The risks to participants  are minimal to relation to 
the knowledge  to be gained.  
 
22.0 Withdrawal of Re search Participants 
Directions: Describe the anticipated circumsta nces under which research participants will 
be withdrawn from the research without their consent. Also include the procedures that 
will be followed when a research participan t withdraws or are withdrawn from the 
research, including partial withdrawal from pr ocedures with continued data collection. We 
do not anticipate involuntary withdrawal of pa rticipants.  Participants who choose to stop 
participating will be compensated for study components that have been completed and will not be contact[CONTACT_139870].  
☐ N/A   
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 19 of 22 
 
23.0 Alternatives to Participation 
Directions: List other options to participation.  If subjects will be compensated with extra 
course credit, the course instructor offering ex tra course credit must provide alternatives 
to earn extra course credit.  The alternative assignment must require e qual or less time and 
effort for the same amount of earned extra c redit that you can earn through participation 
in research.  If there are other available clinic al treatments, what would be included if a 
subject continued on standard of care therapy. If  there is a viable alte rnative you must list 
it in the consent. Click here to enter text.  
☒   The alternative is for research subjects not to participate. 
 
24.0 Costs to Research Participants 
☒  There are no costs to research participants or their insurance companies (there are no clinical 
visits or billable procedures.) – please leave rest of this section blank   
 1. Describe what costs research participants  will be responsible for as a result of their 
participation in the research, including but not  limited to: clinical services required by [CONTACT_139871], transpor tation to study visits, parking, costs of drugs, 
cost of therapy, lost broken or  stolen devices, etc. There are no  financial costs associated with 
participation 
 
2. Explain who will be responsible for payment of  provided services in the event of insurance 
denials. N/A 
 3. List what procedures, drugs, devices, supplies will be paid by [CONTACT_139872]. List the other funding source. N/A 
 
25.0 Research Participant Compensation 
☐  There is no compensation or reimbur sement for research participants – please leave rest of 
this section blank  
☒  There is compensation for research participants.  
Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of any incentives or 
compensation that research participants will receive  for participation in the research (e.g., gift 
cards or cash with amount, t-shirts, devices, bags, swag, etc.) electronic gift cards as follows: 
$30.[ADDRESS_158697] questionnaire, $50 after the journal and 2nd questionnaire, $[ADDRESS_158698] 
questionnaire, $50 after the 4th questionnaire, $25 for the 5th questionnaire  
☐  There will be reimbursement for research participants.  
Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of any reimbursement that 
research participants will receive for participatio n in the research (e.g., gift cards or cash with 
amount, etc.) Click here to enter text. 
 
26.0 Compensation for Re search Related Injury 
Describe who will pay for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in the event of a 
research related injury: 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 20 of 22 
☐   Funding agency is providing some/all payment for injury 
☐   Funding agency is providing no payment for injury 
☒   N/A  
 
27.[ADDRESS_158699] or Committee:  
☐ There will not be a formal Data and Safe ty Monitoring Board/Committee. 
 
☒ There will be a formal Data and Safety Monitoring Board/Committee.   
Provide information about the DSMB/C including the contact [CONTACT_139873](s) (as applicable); whether it is independent from the study sponsor; how often it meets; the type of data that wi ll be used; written reports, etc. Our DSMC will meet twice 
annually.  Members of the committee are as foll ows: [CONTACT_139877] ([EMAIL_2884]), [CONTACT_139878] ([EMAIL_2885]), & [CONTACT_139879] ( [EMAIL_2886] ).  Written reports 
regarding data collection, sample demographi cs, and participants requiring followup for 
elevated depressive symptoms will be provided prior to each meeting.  
 
28.[ADDRESS_158700] any additional informat ion regarding your study not co vered in the template, please 
include it here. Click here to enter text.  
 
  
29.0 Devices 
☒  This is not device study. The protocol is considered non-therapeutic (non-th erapeutic is defined 
as research not intended to diagnose, prevent, cu re, mitigate, treat, etc. a disease or condition) 
by [CONTACT_1622]. – please leave rest of this section blank.  
OR 
☐  This is a device study. The protocol is cons idered therapeutic (research intended to diagnose, 
prevent, cure, mitigate, treat a di sease or condition) by [CONTACT_1622].  
 
1. Is there an IDE (Investigational Devi ce Exemption) for the proposed study? 
☐  Yes, provide an official letter of suppor t or proof of approval which identifies the IDE 
holder and IDE number. Please attach this in the SpartaIRB smartform  
☐  No, see question below: 
 
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 21 of 22 
2. Is the device (and its use) a non-significan t risk device for the proposed study design? 
☐  Yes, please identify the authorized party w ho made the determination and provide 
supporting documentation as applicable. Click here to enter text. 
☐ No NOTE: either an active IDE or an exemption would be required for 
investigational product use in  a therapeutic protocol. 
☐   N/A  
3. If the research involves device(s), describe your  plans to use, store, handle, administer and 
track those device(s) to ensure that they will be used only on research participants and be used only by [CONTACT_10733].  Click here to enter text. 
 
 
30.0 Community-Based Participatory Research 
☒   This is not a community-based participatory research project – please leave the rest of 
this section blank  
☐ This is a community-based participatory research project 
Describe the involvement of the community in the design and conduct of the research. 
Click here to enter text.  
  
Note: Community based research is research that  is conducted as an equal partnership between 
academic investigators and members of a co mmunity. In Community Based Participatory 
Research (CBPR) projects, the community partic ipates fully in all aspects of the research 
process.    
31.0 MULTI-SITE RESEARCH (when CWRU is the IRB of Record ) 
Does this project have multiple sites? 
☐   Yes 
☒   No – please leave the rest of this section blank 
 
Non-Local Site Information for Multi-Site Studies 
If this is a multi-site study where you are the lead investigator,  list the following information for 
each relying site: 
1. Name [CONTACT_50854]: Click here to enter text. 
2. PI [INVESTIGATOR_137653]: Click here to enter text. 
3. Name [CONTACT_137719]: [CONTACT_139874]. 
4. Phone number of IRB contact: [CONTACT_139874]. 
5. Email address of IRB contact: [CONTACT_139874]. 
 
Non-Local Recruitment Methods for Multi-Site Studies 
If this is a multi-site study and research participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_137715]  (e.g. call centers, national adverti sements) describe those methods. 
Local recruitment methods are described above.  
 HRP-
503SBER TEMPLATE: CWRU SBER  
IRB Template V. 09/2019 
 
Additional information can be provided in section 28, or added as a comment.   Page 22 of 22 
1. Describe when, where, and how potential rese arch participants will be recruited. Click 
here to enter text.  
2. Describe the methods that will be used to  identify potential research participants. Click 
here to enter text.  
 
3. Describe the materials that will be used to recruit research participants. Click here to 
enter text.  
 
Multi-Site Research Communication Plan  (when you are the lead investigator) 
If this is a multi-site study where you are the lead investigator , describe the processes to ensure 
communication among sites including: 
☐   All sites will have the most current versi on of the protocol, consent document, and 
HIPAA authorization      
☐ All required approvals (initial, continuing review and modifications) have been obtained 
at each site (including approval by  [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record)     
☐ All modifications have been communicated to sites, and appr oved (including approval of 
the site’s IRB of record) before th e modification is implemented     
☐ All engaged participating site s will safeguard data, including  secure transmission of 
data, as required by [CONTACT_28584] 
☐ All engaged participating s ites will safeguard data, includi ng secure transmission of 
data, as required by [CONTACT_139875]      
☐ All local site investigator s conduct the study in accor dance with applicable federal 
regulations and local laws      
☐ All non-compliance with the study protocol or applicable requirements will be reported 
in accordance with local policy      
If this is a multi-site study where you are the lead investigator, describe the method for 
communicating to engaged partici pant sites the following:  
1.   Problems:  Click here to enter text.       
2.   Interim results:  Click here to enter text.       
3.   The closure of the study: Click here to enter text.      
 
32.0 References 
Click here to enter text.  
 
  
 
 