Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans With Substance Abuse Problem s 
 
NCT0324664 6 
 
September 8, 2015  
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   1 
(NCT0324664 6)            
2a. Research Plan  
Background and Significance  
One of the barriers to successful reintegration for many Veterans of the wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan is the development of substance use disorders  (SUDs) . Many of the new Veterans with 
illicit substance or al cohol misuse are reluctant to initiate or fully engage in treatment. Since 2001, 
over 1.[ADDRESS_1019794] become Veterans and only 
about 60% of these recent Veterans have accessed general health care in VA [1]. Recent studies of 
OEF -OIF-OND Veterans indicate that 11% of fir st-time users of the VA healthcare system were 
diagnosed with an illicit substance use disorder, alcohol use disorder, or both [2]. There is evidence 
that only about half of those with mental health or SUDs  attend an initial mental health treatment 
session when referred [3]. The concern about stigma from others [4], as well as negative personal 
beliefs about treatment for mental health and SUDs  [5], are barriers to Veterans’ seeking treatment. 
Thus, many SUD s are likely to remain untreated or undertreated due to lack of engagement in care. 
This difficulty is an important but not unique problem among Veterans; data for the US general 
population indicate that fewe r than 20% of individuals with SUD s seek care [6].  
Family members appear to play a significant role in encouraging Veterans with SUD s to engage 
in treatment. In general, Veterans tend to welcome family members’ involvement in care for medical 
and mental health problems [7-9] and report that improving relations with family members are 
significant reasons for entering treatment [10]. As a response, in June 2011 VA launched Coaching 
Into Care  (CIC) [11] a national call center whose goal is to help  the family members and friends of 
Veterans who believe that the Veteran in their lives needs mental health or substance abuse 
treatment. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], callers are concerned about the functioning of a Veteran who is reluctant to seek 
care. CIC has developed a manualized, flexible telephone -based coaching strategy that consists of 
social support, problem solving, communication training, and referral in working with callers, usually 
over a series of telephone cal ls (see Appendix). Initial quality assurance data suggest that CIC services 
lead to an increase in treatment seeking (see 
Preliminary Studies). Unfortunately, our data also 
indicate that family members calling about a 
Veteran with substance misuse have a g reater 
difficulty in encouraging the Veteran to seek care.   
Our goal is to enhance the usual CIC 
coaching strategy using a variant of an 
intervention that has strong empi[INVESTIGATOR_205552], the 
Community Reinforcement and Family Training 
(CRAFT). CRAFT is a fa ce-to-face intervention that was designed to increase the likelihood that an 
individual with a n SUD  will seek treatment through positive reinforcement. CRAFT works with a 
concerned significant other (CSO) as the client. An initial step is to help the CSO w ith safety planning 
to reduce the risks of relationship violence, especially when the Veteran is not sober. A major goal is 
to help the CSO make changes to reinforce clean and sober behaviors (e.g., spending time with the 
Veteran only when he or she is sob er). The intervention helps the CSO decrease inadvertent support 
for substance/alcohol misuse (i.e., cease being attentive when the Veteran is hung -over from 
drinking). It also supports the CSO so he or she can help the Veteran enter treatment when the 
Veteran signals readiness for treatment. Finally, CRAFT seeks to reduce the CSO’s ineffective coercion 
toward the Veteran about  treatment (e.g., demanding the Veteran get help).  
CRAFT has received a great deal of empi[INVESTIGATOR_745529] [12]. In 4 randomized clinical tria ls comparing CRAFT to a 
traditional approach (i.e., Al -Anon or Nar -Anon) in getting the person with alcohol or substance use 
problems to seek treatment, CRAFT demonstrated consistent superiority. The smallest between -
group margin was 64% (CRAFT) vs. 30% (C ontrol) [12, 13]. The largest margin reported was 86% vs. 
0%, and most of the studies showed that CRAFT increas es CSOs’ mental and physical health. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_745530]/terms : 
SUD = Substance Use Disorder  
OEF-OIF-OND  = Veterans of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars  
CSO  = Concerned  Significant Other  
CRAFT  = Community Reinforcement and Family Training 
intervention  
CIC = VA’s Coaching Into Care call center  
VA-CRAFT  = Web -based online course for delivering CRAFT  
Coaching -CRAFT  = CIC coaching + VA -CRAFT online course  
 
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   2 
(NCT0324664 6)            
this empi[INVESTIGATOR_205552], it is a face -to-face intervention that requires a great deal of time, resources, 
and access to trained providers, all of which may limit availability  and successful outcomes.  
Our approac h is to combine the strengths of a telephone -based coaching strategy for CSOs with 
the structure of the CRAFT concepts in an intervention we call Coaching -CRAFT. Our research team 
for this proposal has developed a systematic web -based delivery of CRAFT (VA -CRAFT) in an 
educational course that focuses on the CSO helpi[INVESTIGATOR_745531] (see 
Preliminary Studies, below). Our initial data show that this web -based material may not fully engage 
CSO’s in changing their behavior toward the Vetera n without some additional support, 
encouragement and guidance. Thus, neither the existing CIC coaching strategy nor the VA -CRAFT 
educational course alone appear sufficient to increase Veteran engagement in care for substance 
misuse; however, combin ing the telephone based service (i.e., Coaching Into Care) with the web 
course to help deliver CRAFT concepts is promising.  
 
Preliminary Studies  
Coaching Into Care  (CIC) call center  
[CONTACT_126829] began CIC in [ADDRESS_1019795] and continues as the Director. Coaching Into 
Care  has grown significantly since 2011  when it became a national program ; in 2014 alone, CIC 
received over 3000 initial (incoming) calls. About 50% concerned a Veteran from the OEF/OIF/  OND 
eras. About 70% of the calls in 2014 concerned psycho social issues, including mental health, 
substance abuse , and/or behavioral concerns that may have an impact on the Veterans’ or others’ 
physical safety. Seventy -five percent of the callers were female, with 28% of them being a spouse or 
other intimate part ner, 19% parents, 12% were sons, daughters or siblings, 28% were other types of 
family members, friends or other relationships. Thirteen percent of the calls were directly from 
Veterans about mental health, benefits, or other concerns. Virtually all of the  callers to CIC have 
internet access; exceptions tend to be older callers and/or those with low er financial resources.  
Quality Assurance (QA) data from our call center operations have indicated that the service is 
highly rated by [CONTACT_745539], especially in the cases of 
substance misuse. Within about [ADDRESS_1019796] of the calls with CIC rises modestly [11]. In 939 CSO callers who started coaching 
since November 2014 whose concerns were specifically focused on mental he alth problems and no 
substance misuse of the Veteran, 248 of the Veterans were engaged in mental health care; this 
number rose 54% to [ADDRESS_1019797] 40%, or 35 to 49 Veterans in care. In these 
uncontrolled findings the initial treatment  engagement  rate of those who entered coaching was 
somewhat hi gher for those with substance misuse vs. no  substance misuse (34% vs 26%) . It does 
appear, however,  that additional systematic strategies are needed for those Veterans with substance 
misuse problems. See the Appendix for CIC Manuals.  
Preliminary feasibilit y test of the web -based delivery of CRAFT for PTSD   
Co-Investigators Erbes and Kuhn have recently led a group in the development of a web -based 
version of CRAFT (VA -CRAFT) for CSOs of Veterans. They are currently completing an HSR&D 
funded pi[INVESTIGATOR_745532] -CRAFT among family members of Army National 
Guard Veterans who had returned from combat missions to Iraq and Afghanistan. Family members of 
Veterans who had screened positive for PTSD  (some had comorbid SUD) but who were not engag ed in 
mental health services were randomly assigned to complete the VA -CRAFT online training (n = 34) or 
a wait -list condition (n = 32). VA -CRAFT participants were reminded to log in every few weeks when 
needed but no coaching or support was provided. Prel iminary analyses suggested that VA -CRAFT did 
not lead to greater engagement in VA mental health or SUD  treatment in the three months following 
initiation of VA -CRAFT than the CSOs in the wait -list condition. However, there was a significantly 
greater decre ase in CSOs reports of caregiver burden in the VA -CRAFT group (from 1.92 to 1.56) than 
the control group (from 1.81 to 1.84, interaction p < .0001). Qualitative interviews with 20 CSOs who 
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   3 
(NCT0324664 6)            
were in the VA -CRAFT condition suggested that 1) most CSOs perceive d the course’s benefit and 
would recommend it to others, 2) CSOs reported that i t enhanced their understanding of their 
Veteran, reduced conflict, and increased shared positive activities and 3) CSOs did not actually talk 
with their Veterans about getting into treatment due to past failures in these conversations. These 
findings suggest that more structure and support is needed to help CSOs to actually engage in some of 
the changes in communication behavior consistent with CRAFT. Thus, a telephone -based coa ching 
intervention that uses the CRAFT approach in concert with the website could be a significant 
enhancement of CIC coaching as currently practiced. As such, integrating the structure and content 
(e.g., communication skills training, reinforcement techni ques) of VA -CRAFT with the delivery 
method and coaching approach of CIC represents a significant enhanc ement over both programs.  The 
project also tested  version of VA -CRAFT in 6 participants focused primar ily on the Veteran’s 
substance misuse problems (see  Appendix 2 for screen shots of the course and outline). The feasibility 
and acceptability of this version was very similar but the sample was too small for formal testing of 
the effects. This is the version that will be utilized in the Coaching -CRAFT inte rvention to be 
developed and manualized in the proposed study.  
The VA-CRAFT sample was identified by [CONTACT_745540] a small portion (~19%) 
of potentially eligible family member participants were enrolled. However,  most of those who 
withdrew did so because they did not remain concern ed about the Veteran’s symptoms  as they went 
through the enrollment process . We anticipate a higher enrollment rate for the proposed study. 
Nearly all of the CIC callers persist in their concern about the Veteran’s s ymptoms.  
Experience with manualized telephone -based intervention research   
Members of our team are experienced developers of manualized telephone -based interventions 
for substance abusing populations. Co -I McKay and colleagues have developed a method of 
monitoring and counseling following acute care for people with alcohol and substance dependence 
[14, 15]. This m anualized treatment has shown efficacy relative to controls in several randomized 
controlled trials [14-16] (see Appendix  2). In addition, Mavandadi and colleagues  have developed an 
intervention for caregivers of Veterans with dementia to decrease caregiver burden and improve 
engagement in dementia care. A feasibility pi[INVESTIGATOR_745533] a VA 
MERIT award (see biosketch).  [CONTACT_126829] (P I) continues  as Director of CIC and has experience in 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_745534].  
 
Research Design and Methods  
Overview  
First, we will develop a detailed manual for Coaching -CRAFT, which will be a telephone -based 
model of coaching that uses the web -version of the CRAFT intervention already developed and 
available to the investigators. Second, we will conduct a preliminary nonrandomized feasibility trial of 
the use of Coaching -CRAFT with a sample of [ADDRESS_1019798] for this trial close family member callers who reach CIC with the concern about 
an OEF -OIF-OND Veteran in their family whom they believe is in need of treatment for a SUD .  
An important  goal will b e to compare the findings to CIC Quality Assurance (QA) data of callers 
matched on the type of substance misuse of the Veteran and demographic variables (see Trial 
Procedures). We propose an uncontrolled trial in order to maximize the intervention sample s ize and 
based on the strength of our ability to use existing CIC QA data. We will also conduct a test  of the 
assessment of the Veterans regarding their perception of their family members’ involvement in their 
decisions to seek or not seek care, their actua l decisions to seek care, and their current symptom s. 
Intervention and manual development process  
The Coaching -CRAFT intervention is meant to be a combination of CIC’s coaching strategy 
combined with the didactic material in the recently developed web -base d CRAFT intervention, VA -
CRAFT [17]. The VA -CRAFT course for substance misuse has 8 modules that follow the original 
CRAFT intervention [9] (see Appendix 2 for module details): 1) Intro duction to CRAFT, 2) Overview 
of CRAFT, 3) Getting Started with CRAFT: Safety Planning, 4) Understanding substance abuse, 5) 
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   4 
(NCT0324664 6)            
How to respond to substance abuse, 6) How to rebuild your life together, 7) How to help someone 
consider treatment, 8) Wrappi[INVESTIGATOR_158002].  The goals of the intervention include understanding triggers and 
long -term reinforce ment  of substance misuse, ignoring unhealthy behaviors and rewarding healthy 
behaviors, getting support, and how to help the CSO caller help the Veteran enter treatment.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_745535]: 1) format of the 
manual, 2) level of manual detail, 3) optimal pace of work with the CSO using the web -based CRAFT 
content, 4) optimal number and length of calls, 5) points of indivi dualizing the material in CRAFT to 
the CSO’s’ specific situation, and 6) the coach’s role in identifying appropriate programs and 
facilitating entry into treatment soon after the Veteran  indicates  his or her readiness. The group will 
meet by [CONTACT_737613] l regarding these factors, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_745536], and the Key Personnel 
will meet again to discuss the draft. This iterative process will continue until we have a suitable 
draft manual . We will then seek feedback from volunteer Veteran s and their family members  at the 
CPL Michael J Crescenz VA Medical Center (Philadelphia) . This feedback will be incorporated and 
the draft will be discussed again by [CONTACT_745541] [INVESTIGATOR_745537]  a final draft for the 
trial.  We will also develop a fidelity scale for the essential targets for the telephone interventionist of 
Coaching -CRAFT. The manual development will occur  in months [ADDRESS_1019799] 1-3 calls, often 
involving consultation with a licensed supervisor. Potential participants include the fol lowing: 1) CSO 
is a sibling, spouse/  intimate partner, or parent of a US military Veteran who served in Iraq or 
Afghanistan since 2001, 2) by [CONTACT_745542] a substance abuse 
problem that has led to interpersonal, legal, occupational, and/or health related negative 
consequences, 3) the CSO reports that the Veteran is not currently receiving treatment for this 
problem, and 4) the CSO has contact 4+times/week and lives with or within 30 min. of the Veteran. 
Exclusion criteri a include: 1) CSO has a n SUD  (Form 90, see Measures), 2) the Veteran is currently 
incarcerated, 3) the CSO has no  computer or other device with Internet access able to view video 
content, and 4) the CSO or Veteran likely has a psychotic disorder  (CSO repor t on the MINI ) (see 
Measures). Potential participants will be presented the option of being involved in the research trial, 
and if interested, will be contact[CONTACT_70769] . If the CSO is interested after hearing more 
details t he research staff w ill conduct the additional screening, consent procedures, and baseline 
assessment.  We will also engage Veterans in the study at two points. First, if/when the CSO 
indicates that the Veteran wan ts treatment, we will offer help to the Veteran in an initial t elephone 
conversation. In this conversation we will ask to use their responses as research data. Second,  we 
will ask the CSO at 12 months after the baseline to invite the Veteran  to participate (see below ). 
Measures .  
Demographic information  (from CSO) . Age, gender, race, marital status, relationship of CSO to 
the Veteran, living status (i.e., with the Veteran), hours in contact [CONTACT_745543] , Veteran’s military service 
details (branch, highest rank, combat deployments, National Guard/Reserve component vs. regul ar 
Army/Navy/Marines/Air Force), Veteran’s age, race, marital status, and number of children.  
Alcohol and substance misuse —CSO and Veteran. Form 90 will be used to assess abuse 
(including alcohol)  [18] for the target Veteran and the CSO. Responses on this form will be used to 
confirm initial reports by [CONTACT_745544]. Form [ADDRESS_1019800] MATCH [19]. It 
has demonstrated high reliability and validity for assessing substance  misuse [20] and allows for 
telephone assessment. It has also been shown to have adequate correspondence through collateral 
(i.e., family member) reports [20], and is maximized when the CSO has greater contact (>40% of 
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   5 
(NCT0324664 6)            
days), and lives with the target person with substance abuse . Because of the nature of the collateral 
report, it will not be possible to confirm SUDs among the Veterans. The measure, however, will be 
used with those Veterans who agree to the 12 -month telephone assessment after the intervention. To 
assess the CSO’s perceptions and preferences of substance use, we will add two questions for each 
substance identified: “Do you believe [ Veteran] should drink/use [substance]  less often?” and, “How 
much problem does [Veteran’s]  use of [substance]  cause for him/her or for others?”  
CSO and Veteran symptoms. In order to characterize the sample of CSOs, we plan to use the 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)  [21] to assess generalized anxiety disorder, 
panic di sorder, current mania, and psychosis, and the PHQ -9 [22, 23] for depression. These measures 
have demonstrate d good reliability and validity, and have been used successfully in telephone -based 
assessment and depression management in a primary care setting [24-26]. We will  measure the 
subjec tive burden felt by [CONTACT_745545] [27]. 
We will also use the CSO’s report of Veteran sympt oms on the MINI -psychosis module, to 
exclude CSOs in which the Veteran may have a psychotic disorder, and the PTSD Checklist 5 (PCL -5) 
family member version [28] to assess the CSO’s perceptions of the Veterans trauma  symptoms. The 
MINI, PCL -5, and PHQ -9 will also be used with the Veterans in the 12 month tel ephone assessment.  
Intervention acceptability, satisfaction, and engagement. We will measure satisfaction with the 
intervention using questions used currently by [CONTACT_745546]’s expectations 
of service, helpfulness, changes in hopefulness, and report of the Veterans desire for and engagement 
in care (see Appendix  2). Additional open -ended questions will assess how  the telephone -based 
support or VA-CRAFT content could be changed to improve convenience, acceptability, or 
effective ness.  We also plan to secure a HIPAA waiver to obtain VHA administrative data to verify  
the CSO’s report of the Veteran’s engagement in VHA care (see Human Subjects).  
We will assess the engagement of the CSO in the intervention by [CONTACT_745547], and the number of sessions the CSO logs in to use 
the web -based CRAFT material, repeat visits to sessions, and the degree of completion of each of the 
modules. Drop -outs from the intervention  and drop -outs  from assessment follow -up will also be 
carefully tracked. Drop -outs will be defined as no response after [ADDRESS_1019801] of the feasibility of Coaching -CRAFT, 
CSO’s experience and engagement in the intervention, and within -subject estimates of changes  in 
Veterans’ engagement in treatment. We will seek to enter [ADDRESS_1019802] not been offered Coaching -CRAFT, matched on the basis of the Veteran’s 
primary substance use problem(s), relationship of CSO to Veteran, co ntact time and co -habiting Measure (source: domain)  Baseline  6 months  12 months  
CSO:  CSO’s alcohol & substance misuse, 
Veterans  alcohol & substance misuse  Form 90  Form 90  
 Form 90  
Treatment utilization  Form 90  Form 90  Form 90  
Burden  Caregiver Burden 
Scale  Caregiver Burden 
Scale  Caregiver  Burden Scale  
CSO Symptoms, CSO perceptions of 
Veteran’s PTSD symptoms  MINI, PHQ -9,  
PCL- 5 (family ver.)  MINI, PHQ -9,  
PCL- 5 (family ver.)  MINI, PHQ -9,  
PCL- 5 (family ver.)  
CSO perceptions of intervention    Open -ended questions  
Web-host tracking: Engagement in 
interventions    Website use  (time on sessions, 
repeat visits to sessions, compl etion)  
Veteran:  Vet’s subst. abuse & Treatment    Form 90  
Veteran symptoms    MINI, PCL 5, PHQ -9 
Veteran perceptions of interaction with CSO    Open -ended questions  
Veteran’s MH/SA treatment engagement  Questions about treatment engagement, 
if/when the Ve teran agrees to treatment  VHA administrative data  
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   6 
(NCT0324664 6)            
status, Veteran age and gender, and race. We will select comparison cases from a several year time -
frame to ensure an appropriate comparison.  
The length of the active coaching of the CSO using the web -based CRAFT material is 
anticipated to last no longer than 6 months, but this will be determined by [CONTACT_745548]. Additional assessment s will occur at 6 and 12 months after study entry and will 
include the measures as detailed in the table (above). At 12 mon ths, w e will ask the CSO to invite the 
Veteran to engage in the study and answer study questions about their symptoms, treatment, and 
the CSO’s approach to them. We will carefully assess the safety and risk to the CSO -Veteran 
relationship prior to making t he decision to pursue this assessment. Working with the CSO, we will 
ask the CSO to ask the Veteran to be involved, including type of discussi on between CSO and Veteran 
might be helpful, and ask the CSO to ask the Veteran to call the study staff (see Human  Subjects).  
Timeline   
We anticipate the trial will begin in Year [ADDRESS_1019803] 80% of those 
rating the intervention as helpful, leading to increase d hopefulness and preparedness to help the 
Veteran, and that the intervention had helped the family overall. We will also examine  the degree to 
which the subjective symptoms of distress (PHQ -9, subjective burden), decline over the Baseline, [ADDRESS_1019804] of within -subjects change over 
time.  We will compare the completion rates of  the Coaching -CRAFT sample of CSOs with a sample of 
CSOs from the CIC QA data. “Completion” will mean  at least 6 months of telephone  coaching of 8 + 
calls. We will match CSOs receiving Coaching -CRAFT with the treatment as usual data (see above ). 
Interventio n comparisons   
In a key analysis we will also plan to test the proportion of the Veterans of the CSOs who 
entered treatment for substance misuse against the matched CSOs from the CIC QA data. We will use 
an intent -to-treat approach. Those CSOs lost to foll ow-up will be deemed intervention failure s 
regarding the Veteran s’ engagement in treatment. We plan to use a basic test of difference between 
proportions in independent samples ( a two sample z -test). To detect a difference between the rate of 
engagement in  treatment using CIC QA data (i.e., 4 1%) and conservative outcomes drawn from the 
CRAFT RCTs (67%), the sample group needed to detect a difference with power of 80% in post -
intervention treatment engagement outcomes , is N = 45, for each group [29]. Our intent -to-treat 
sample size of N = 50  exceeds this num ber.  
Review of CSO and Veteran report : Qualitative and treatment engagement reports   
We plan to conduct a systematic review  of the responses to the post -intervention open -ended 
questions in order to modify the intervention  as needed  in preparation for a l arge  RCT . In addition, 
we plan  to assess the rate of Veteran inclusion in the study at [ADDRESS_1019805]’s have focused on CRAFT for SUDs , even when trauma 
related symptoms may be an important clinical focus for these populations.  
Narrowing the SUD focus to alcohol misuse -only or illicit substance misuse -only . There are 
perhaps different issues associate d with alcohol misuse compared to illicit substance misuse (e.g., 
Telephone Coaching of Family Members of Veterans with Substance Abuse  Problems   7 
(NCT0324664 6)            
legal issues overlay the situation with illicit substance misuse). However, we chose not to choose one 
category of SUD for several reasons: 1) there is high comorbidity of alcohol misuse wit h illicit 
substance misuse, 2) there is a predominance of alcohol misuse compared to illicit substances in this 
population, 3) the primary focus of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_745538], rather 
than testing efficacy. We will have the  opportunity to make our choices of the specific population to 
test Coaching -CRAFT at the next phase when conducting an RCT.  