 
 
Study Protocol  
 
Clinical Investigation of the  
TECNIS® Next -Generation Intraocular Lenses   
 
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Version 1.0 
Document date: February 201 7 
 
 
 
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  i     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  CONFIDENTIAL  
The following contains confidential, proprietary information  
that is the property of Abbott Medical Optics Inc.  
Clinical Investigation of the  
TECNIS® Next-Generation Intraocular Lenses  
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  EDOF-121-NGPC 
 
SPONSOR:  Abbott Medical Optics Inc.  
[ADDRESS_242183] 
Santa Ana, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
[PHONE_4375]  
 
Investigator Agreement  
 
As an Investigator, I agree to : 
• Implement and conduct this study diligently and in strict compliance with this agreement; the protocol; Good Clinical Practices; 21CFR812, ISO [ZIP_CODE] and all 
other applicable FDA regulations; conditions of approval imposed by [CONTACT_203168] (IRB) or Independent Ethics Committee 
(IEC), FDA or other regulatory authorities; and all other applicable laws and 
regulations.  
• Supervise all testing of the device where human subjects are involved.  
• Ensure that the requirements for obtaining informed consent are met.  
• Obtain authorization for use/disclosure of health information (e.g., HIPAA 
authorization or equivalent).  
• Maintain all information supplied by [CONTACT_203169], when this information is submitted to an independent IRB or any other group, it will be submitted with a designation that the material is confidential.  
 I have read this protocol in its entirety and I agree to all aspects.  
 
      
Investigator Printed Name [CONTACT_203204]-Investigator Printed Name [CONTACT_203205]:  
      
[CONTACT_203170]’s Representative  Date  
  
Printed Name [CONTACT_203206].  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  ii     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
TITLE PAGE 
Table of Contents  .......................................................................................................... ii 
Personnel and Facilities............................................................................................... iv 
Protocol Change History ............................................................................................... v  
1. Synopsis ............................................................................................................. 1  
2. Background/Introduction .................................................................................. [ADDRESS_242184] Complaint/Device Deficiency Definition .............................................. 33 
11.3  Adverse Event and Complaint Reporting Requirements  .................................. 33 
11.4  Causal Relationship ......................................................................................... 34 
11.5  Adverse Event Follow -up ................................................................................. 35 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  iii     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  12. Protocol Changes/Amendments  ..................................................................... [ADDRESS_242185] (IRB)  ...................................................................... [ADDRESS_242186] Refraction Technique with 
Cylinder  Refinement  ............................................................................. 50 
Appendix D Refraction Adjustments  .......................................................................... 51 
Appendix E Instructions for Using the M&S System  ................................................ [ADDRESS_242187] sensitivity Testing  ......................................... 62 
Appendix M Slit -Lamp Exam Ratings  ......................................................................... 64 
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  v     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  PROTOCOL CHANGE HIST ORY 
Version Section(s)  Page(s) Description of Change(s)  Rationale for Change(s)  
1.0 N/A N/A Original  N/A 
     
     
 
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  1     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  1. SYNOPSIS  
PROTOCOL:  Clinical Investigation of the TECNIS® Next-Generation 
Intraocular Lenses  
Protocol Number:  EDOF -121-NGPC  
STUDY TREATMENTS:  
Investigational Lens 1 :  
• TECNIS® Next-Generation IOL, Model ZHR00  
Investigational Lens 2 :  
• TECNIS® Next-Generation IOL, Model ZQR00  
Control Lens:   
• TECNIS Symfony® Extended Range of Vision IOL 
(“Symfony”), Model ZXR00 (Abbott Medical Optics, 
Santa Ana, CA), commercially available  
STUDY OBJECTIVE:  The purpose of this clinical trial is to evaluate the saf ety 
and effectiveness of the next -generation TECNIS® IOLs. 
CLINICAL HYPOTHESIS:  The next generation of TECNIS IOLs, Models ZHR00 and ZQR00, will provide improved near (at 40 cm) visual acuity compared to the TECNIS Symfony control IOL. 
Complication and adverse event rates associated with the 
next-generation IOLs will be within the rates for posterior 
chamber IOLs given in ISO [ZIP_CODE] -7:2006/ Amd 1:2012(E).  
OVERALL STUDY DESIGN:  
Structure:  Prospective, multicenter, randomized, bilateral subject/evaluator -masked clinical trial 
Number of sites:  Up to 14 sites in the [LOCATION_002]  
Duration:  6 months  
Administration:  Surgeons will perform routine, small- incision, cataract 
surgery and implant the study lenses using a sponsor -recommended implantation system. The target 
for refractive outcomes will be emmetropia for both eyes.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  2     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Visit Schedule:  Subjects will be bilaterally implanted with the same lens 
type; the second eye is to be implanted within [ADDRESS_242188] -eye surgery.  
 All subjects will undergo a minimum of 9 visits:  Preoperative for both eyes; Operative, 1- day and 1- week 
visits for each eye; and 1 -month and 6- month visits for 
both eyes together.  
STUDY POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS:  
Condition:  Bilateral cataracts with otherwise healthy eyes  
Number of Subjects:  Up to 260 subjects will be enrolled to achieve approximately 220 randomized and bilaterally -implanted 
subjects, resulting in approximately 195 evaluable subjects ([ADDRESS_242189] group and 65 in the control group) at 1 and 6 months.  
Each site should enroll approximately 15 subjects, and no 
site may enroll more than 25% of the enrollment total.  
 
Inclusion Criteria (all criteria apply to each study eye):  
• Minimum 22 years of age 
• Bilateral cataracts for which posterior chamber IOL implantation has been planned  
• Preoperative best corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) of 20/40 Snellen or 
worse with or without a glare source  
• Potential for postoperative BCDVA of 20/30 Snellen or better  
• Corneal astigmatism:  
o Normal corneal topography  
o Preoperative corneal astigmatism of 1.00 D or less in both eyes  
• Clear intraocular media other than cataract in each eye  
• Availability, willingness and sufficient cognitive awareness to comply with examination procedures  
• Signed informed consent and HIPAA authorization or equivalent documentation 
necessary to comply with applicable privacy laws pertaining to medical treatment in 
the governing countries  
• Ability to understand and respond to a questionnaire in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria (all criteria apply to each study eye):  
• Requiring an intraocular lens power outside the available range of +16.0 D  
to +28.0 D  
• Any clinically -significant pupil abnormalities (non- reactive, fixed pupi[INVESTIGATOR_8324], or 
abnormally -shaped pupi[INVESTIGATOR_8324])  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  3     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  • Irregular corn eal astigmatism  
• Inability to focus or fixate for prolonged periods of time (e.g., due to strabismus, 
nystagmus, etc.)  
• Prior corneal refractive (LASIK, LASEK, RK, PRK, etc.) or intraocular surgery. 
Note:  Prophylactic peripheral iridotomies and peripheral laser retinal repairs that, in 
the opi[INVESTIGATOR_203152], are acceptable.  
• Corneal abnormalities such as stromal, epi[INVESTIGATOR_203153] a level worse than 20/30 Snellen during the 
study  
• Inability to achieve keratometric stability for contact [CONTACT_19554] (per procedure outlined in Section 10.3)  
• Recent ocular trauma or ocular surgery that is not resolved/stable or may affect  
visual outcomes or increase risk to the subject  
• Subjects with diagnosed degenerative visual disorders (e.g., macular degeneration 
or other retinal disorders) that are predicted to cause visual acuity losses to a level 
worse than 20/30 Snellen during the s tudy 
• Subjects with conditions associated with increased risk of zonular rupture, including 
capsular or zonular abnormalities that may lead to IOL decentration or tilt, such as 
pseudoexfoliation, trauma, or posterior capsule defects  
• Use of systemic or ocular medications that may affect vision  
• Prior, current, or anticipated use during the course of the 6- month study of 
tamsulosin or silodosin (e.g., Flomax, Flomaxtra, Rapaflo) that may, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_13046], confound the outcome or increase the risk to the subject (e.g., poor 
dilation or a lack of adequate iris structure to perform standard cataract surgery) 
• Poorly -controlled diabetes  
• Acute, chronic, or uncontrolled systemic or ocular disease or illness that, in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], would increase the operative risk or confound the outcome(s) of the study (e.g., immunocompromised, connective tissue disease, 
suspected glaucoma, glaucomatous changes in the fundus or visual field, ocular 
inflammation, etc.).  Note: controlled  ocular hypertension without glaucomatous 
changes (optic nerve cuppi[INVESTIGATOR_203154]) is acceptable. 
• Known ocular disease or pathology that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871],  
o may affect visual acuity  
o may require surgical intervention during the course of the study (macular degeneration, cystoid macular edema, diabetic retinopathy, uncontrolled 
glaucoma, etc.)  
o may be expected to require retinal laser treatment or other surgical intervention 
during the course of the study (macular degeneration, cys toid macular edema, 
diabetic retinopathy, etc.)  
• Patient is pregnant, plans to become pregnant, is lactating or has another condition associated with the fluctuation of hormones that could lead to refractive changes  
• Concurrent participation or participation within 45 days prior to preoperative visit in 
any other clinical trial  
• Desire for monovision correction 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  4     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  EVALUATION CRITERIA:  
The purpose of this clinical study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the 
next-generation TECNIS IOLs.  The primary ef fectiveness endpoint is mean, monocular, 
distance corrected near visual acuity under photopic conditions at [ADDRESS_242190] corrected distance, uncorrected intermediate, 
distance corrected intermediate and uncorrected near visual acuities, monocular 10% low-contrast distance corrected and best corrected intermediate acuity and 
questionnaire responses.   
The primary safety endpoint is adverse event rates versus ISO [ZIP_CODE]- 7:2006/ 
Amd.1:2012(E) Safety and Performance Endpoint (SPE) rates. Additional safety endpoints include the proportion of first -implanted eyes achieving 20/[ADDRESS_242191] corrected distance visual acuity vs . the ISO SPE rate, 
optical/visual symptoms, medical/lens findings, binocular best corrected distance 
contrast sensitivity and visual symptoms via PRO instrument.  
DATA ANALYSIS : 
The investigational TECNIS Model ZHR00 and Model ZQR00 IOLs will each be 
compared separately to the TECNIS Symfony control IOL. For the primary effectiveness endpoints of monocular distance corrected near visual acuity, comparisons between the Model ZHR00 group vs the TECNIS Symfony control group, and comparisons between the Model ZQR00 group vs the TECNIS Symfony control group, will be performed using 
one-sided, two- sample t -tests with an alpha of 0.025.  For the primary safety endpoints, 
adverse event rates, the adverse event rate of the Model ZHR00 IOL will be compared 
to the ISO  grid value using one- sided exact tests with an alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_242192] sensitivity.  The frequency and proportion will be reported for subjects with adverse events, medical findings, lens findings, ocular visual symptoms and questionnaires data.  
STUDY VISITS AND PROCEDURES:  
Inclusion and exclusion qualifications will be assessed at the preoperative visit according to the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  The Informed Consent Document and Authorization for Use/Disclosure of Health Information form (HIPAA authorization) must be signed by 
[CONTACT_32476] -specific 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  5     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  procedures.  Those subjects who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria and agree to 
participate will be randomized to receive lenses from the same lens group in both eyes, either  Model ZHR00, Model ZQR00 or control, Model ZXR00.  The eye implanted first 
will be considered the primary study eye.  All subjects are intended to have bilateral cataract surgery with the second- eye surgery occurring after the [ADDRESS_242193] sensitivity, defocus curve, slit-lamp findings, non -directed visual symptoms, questionnaires and adverse events.   
2. BACKGROUND/INTRODUCT ION 
Presby[CONTACT_19555], defined as the age-related loss of accommodative amplitude, affects 
essentially all human beings beyond the age of [ADDRESS_242194] monofocal lenses often need spectacles 
for reading or performing other near tasks, even if a monovision option is selected.  
Patients implanted with multifocal lenses, while being able to read and perform other near tasks without spectacles, sometimes experience dysphotopsias (e.g., halos), particularly at night, and may have limited intermediate ability (e.g., may need spectacles 
to work on a computer ).  Some accommodating lenses are also available on the market, 
although their effect depends upon fit within the capsular bag or capsular bag elasticity.  
On July 15, 2016, another option was made available to cataract patients when the 
TECNIS Symfony Extended Range of Vision IOL, Model ZXR00, became commercially available.  Utilizing a diffractive technology to elongate the depth of focus, the Symfony 
IOLs provide cataract patients with good distance vision, and improved intermediate and 
near vision compared to standard monofocal IOLs.   
The investigational IOL devices in this protocol, Models ZHR00 and ZQR00, are 
enhanced versions of the commercially -availa ble Symfony IOL.  The diffractive 
technology on the posterior optic surface of the TECNIS Symfony IOL was modified slightly for both investigational IOLs, with the goal of further elongating the depth of focus compared to the Symfony IOL.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  6     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  3. CLINICAL HYPOTHE SIS 
This study will demonstrate that the TECNIS Model ZHR00 and Model ZQR00 IOLs will 
provide improved near (at 40 cm) visual acuity compared to the TECNIS Symfony control IOL.  Complication and adverse event rates associated with the next generation 
IOLs will be within the rates for posterior chamber IOLs given in ISO [ZIP_CODE] -7:2006/ 
Amd 1:2012(E).  
4. STUDY DESIGN  
This study is a 6- month, prospective, multicenter, subject/evaluator -masked, bilateral, 
randomized clinical investigation of the TECNIS Next -Generati on Model  ZHR00 and 
Model ZQR00 IOLs versus the TECNIS Symfony control IOL.   
The study will be conducted at up to 14 sites in the U.S.A and will enroll up to 
260 subjects to achieve approximately 220 randomized and bilaterally -implanted 
subjects, resulting in approximately 195 evaluable subjects ([ADDRESS_242195] group and 
65 in the control group) at [ADDRESS_242196]/evaluator -masked, bilateral, randomized study design 
was chosen to optimize comparison of visual outcomes between the Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 investigational IOLs and the Symfony control IOL, while minimizing the number of subjects by [CONTACT_203171].  
5. ACRONYMS  
The following acronyms are used throughout the document:   
• UCDVA:  uncorrected distance visual acuity  
• BCDVA:  best corrected distance visual acuity  
• UCIVA:  uncorrected intermediate visual acuity  
• DCIVA:  distance corrected intermediate visual acuity  
• BCIVA:  best corrected intermediate visual acuity (DCIVA with add)  
• UCNVA:  uncorrected near visual acuity  
• DCNVA:  distance corrected near visual acuity  
• D: diopters  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  7     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  6. STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the next-
generation TECNIS Model ZHR00 and Model ZQR00 IOLs.  The key study timeframe for effectiveness endpoints will be 1 month and for safety endpoints the key study timeframe 
is 6 months.  
6.1 PRIMARY EFFECTIVENESS ENDPOINTS  
FOR MODEL ZHR00:  MO NOCULAR, PHOTOPIC DCNVA AT 40  CM  
Success criteria:  Statistically significant improvement in mean distance corrected 
near visual acuity for the investigational Model ZHR00 eyes vs. control eyes.   
FOR MODEL ZQR00:  MONOCULAR, PHOTOPIC DCNVA AT 40  CM  
Success criteria:  Statistically signi ficant improvement in mean distance corrected 
near visual acuity for the investigational Model ZQR00 eyes vs. control eyes.   
6.2 PRIMARY SAFETY ENDPO INTS  
For Model ZHR00: Rates of adverse events vs. ISO SPE rates  
For Model ZQR00: Rates of adverse events vs. ISO SPE rates  
6.3 OTHER ENDPOINTS  
• Monocular and binocular, best corrected distance depth of focus  
• Monocular BCDVA percent 20/40 or better vs. ISO SPE rate  
• Binocular  UCDVA, BCDVA, UCIVA, DCIVA, UCNVA and DCNVA  
• Monocular UCDVA, UCIVA, DCIVA and UCNVA  
• Monocular low -contrast DCIVA and BCIVA (10%)  
• Monocular and binocular best corrected distance contrast sensitivity vs 
control (mesopic with and without glare at 1.5, 3 and 6 cpd, photopic with glare at 3, 6, 12, and 18 cpd)  
• Binocular tolerance to cylinder  
• Visual symptoms via PRO instrument  
• Ocular/visual symptoms (non- directed responses as obtained from the open-
ended question “Are you having any difficulties with your eyes  or vision?”)  
• Subject spectacle independence and satisfaction questionnaire responses  
• Medical findings/complications  
• Lens findings/complications  
 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  8     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  7. STUDY PRODUCTS  
7.1 INTRAOCULAR LENSES  
The three lens models used in this study include the investigational TECNIS Next -
Generation IOLs, Model ZHR00 and ZQR00, and the TECNIS Symfony Extended Range 
of Vision IOL, Model ZXR00, control IOL. The investigational IOLs are modifications of the Symfony IOL, a single -pi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], SENSAR acrylic IOL with a modified prolate (aspheric) 
design on the anterior optic surface to reduce spherical aberration and a diffractive posterior optic design to extend the depth of focus.   
Investigational TECNIS Next -Generation  Acrylic IOLs, Models ZHR00 and ZQR00  
The TECNIS Next -Generation Acrylic IOLs, Models ZHR00 and ZQR00, are 
posterior -chamber, 1 -pi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], aspheric, diffractive, acrylic, foldable IOLs designed for 
placement in the capsular bag ( Figures 1 and 2).  The lenses are made of the same 
hydrophobic SENSAR acrylic material and have the same overall geometry/dimensions 
(13 mm overall length and 6 mm optic diameter) as the original material/mechanical 
1-pi[INVESTIGATOR_203155], the AMO SENSAR 1- Pi[INVESTIGATOR_203156], Model AAB00,  and the optical 
parent, the TECNIS Symfony IOL, Model ZXR00 ( Figure 3 ).  The investigational lenses 
also have the same TECNIS modified prolate (aspheric) design on the anterior optic 
surface as the Symfony IOL, to reduce spherical aberration, and a similar diffract ive 
posterior optic to the Symfony IOL, designed to extend the depth of focus.   
However, the posterior optic designs of the investigational lenses have been modified 
slightly compared to the Symfony IOL.  The Model ZHR00 has a diffractive profile consisti ng of eight annular rings (or nine zones) compared to the nine annular rings (ten 
zones) of the Symfony IOL.  The Model ZQR00 diffractive profile consists of nine annular rings (ten zones) similar to the Symfony IOL but also includes a refractive profile w ith 
higher -order asphere than the Symfony IOL.  The modifications to the posterior 
diffractive optics of both investigational IOLs are designed to further extend the depth of 
focus compared to the Symfony IOL.  
Figure 1:  Drawing and Photograph of a TECNIS Model ZHR00 IOL  
         

ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  9     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC   
Figure 2:  Drawing and Photograph of a TECNIS Model ZQR00 IOL 
            
Figure 3:  Drawing and Photograph of a TECNIS Symfony IOL  
         
 
Like all SENSAR [ADDRESS_242197] a surface treatment of Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) to reduce 
tackiness of the lens surface and include a ProTEC 360° barrier edge, the stability of Tri-Fix 3 -point design, and a frosted- edge treatment.  
INDICATIONS FOR  INVESTIGATIONAL  IOLS  
The Model ZHR00 is currently indicated for primary implantation for the visual correction of aphakia, in adult patients with less than 1 diopter of preexisting corneal astigmati sm, 
in whom a cataractous lens has been removed.  The lens mitigates the effects of presby[CONTACT_203172].  Compared to an aspheric monofocal IOL, the lens provides improved intermediate and near visual acuity, while maintaining comparable distance visual acuity.  The Model ZHR00 IOL is intended for 
capsular bag placement only.  
The Model ZQR00 is currently indicated for primary implantation for the visual correction 
of aphakia, in adult patients with less than 1 diopter of preex isting corneal astigmatism, 
in whom a cataractous lens has been removed.  The lens mitigates the effects of 

ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  10     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  presby[CONTACT_203172].  Compared to an aspheric 
monofocal IOL, the lens provides improved intermediate and near visual acuity, while 
maintaining comparable distance visual acuity.  The Model ZQR00 IOL is intended for 
capsular bag placement only.  
INDICATIONS FOR CONTROL IOL  
The TECNIS Symfony® Extended range of Vision IOL, Model ZXR00, is indicated for primary implantation for the visual correction of aphakia, in adult patients with less than 
[ADDRESS_242198] sunlight or at temperatures greater than 45° C (113°F).  Each lens is packaged in a lens tray and sealed in a peel -pouch.  The lens is sterile as long as the 
package has not been opened or damaged and the shelf -life expi[INVESTIGATOR_203157]. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_203158].  
COMPARISON CHART  
Table 1  describes the dimensional and optical similarities between the study lenses and 
other associated AMO lenses.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  12     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  7.2 IOL IMPLANTATION SYS TEMS  
The investigational TECNIS Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 and the control TECNIS Model 
ZXR00 lenses are to be implanted using the UNFOLDER Platinum 1 Series Implantation System (DK7796 handpi[INVESTIGATOR_203159] 1 Series cartridge, Model 
1MTEC30) or the ONE SERIES Ultra Implantation System (DK7786 or DK7791 
handpi[INVESTIGATOR_203160]).  
8. STUDY POPULATION  
All study subjects will be enrolled from the normal surgical cataract population at up t o 
14 sites in the U.S.A.  Approximately 260 subjects will be enrolled (signed informed 
consent document) to achieve approximately 220 randomized and bilaterally -implanted 
subjects, resulting in approximately 195 evaluable subjects ([ADDRESS_242199] group and 65 in the control group) at 1 and 6 months.   This allows a screen failure rate of 
approximately 8% and a drop- out rate of approximately 5% for implanted subjects.  Each 
site should implant a minimum of 15 subjects, and no site may implant more than 25% of the enrollment total.   
This study will include only subjects undergoing bilateral primary cataract extraction and IOL implantation and who meet all of the study inclusion and exclusion criteria in both eyes.  All subjects who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be offered enrollment in 
the study.  Eligibility criteria may not be waived by [CONTACT_093].  Any questions 
regarding patient eligibility are to be discussed with AMO prior to subject enrollment.  
Those subjects who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria and agree to participate will be randomized to receive lenses from the same lens group in both eyes, either Model ZHR00, Model ZQR00 or Symfony control.  Subjects will be enrolled at each site 
sequentially until the recruitment goals are met or the site limit is reached.   
8.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  
Note: All criteria apply to each eye  
• Minimum 22 years of age 
• Bilateral cataracts for which posterior chamber IOL implantation has been planned  
• Preoperative best corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) of 20/40 Snellen or 
worse with or without a glare source  
• Potential for postoperative BCDVA of 20/30 Snellen or better  
• Corneal astigmatism:  
o Normal corneal topography  
o Preoperative corneal astigmatism of 1.00 D or less in both eyes  
• Clear intraocular media other than cataract in each eye  
• Availability, willingness and sufficient cognitive awareness to comply with examination procedures  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  13     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  • Signed informed consent and HIPAA authorization or equivalent documentation 
necessary to comply with applicable privacy laws pertaining to medical treatment in 
the governing countries  
• Ability to understand and respond to a questionnaire in English  
8.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Note: All criteria apply to each eye  
• Requiring an intraocular lens power outside the available range of +16.0 D  
to +28.0 D  
• Any clinically- significant pupil abnormalities (non- reactive, fixed pupi[INVESTIGATOR_8324], or 
abnormally -shaped pupi[INVESTIGATOR_8324])  
• Irregular corneal astigmatism  
• Inability to focus or fixate for prolonged periods of time (e.g., due to strabismus, nystagmus, etc.)  
• Prior corneal refractive (LASIK, LASEK, RK, PRK, etc.) or intraocular surgery. 
Note:  Prophylactic peripheral iridotomies and peripheral laser retinal repairs that, in 
the opi[INVESTIGATOR_203152], are acceptable.  
• Corneal abnormalities such as stromal, epi[INVESTIGATOR_203153] a level worse than 20/30 Snellen during the 
study  
• Inability to achieve keratometric stability for contact [CONTACT_19554] (per procedure outlined in Section 10.3)  
• Recent ocular trauma or ocular surgery that is not resolved/stable or may affect visual outcomes or increase risk to the subject  
• Subjects with diagnosed degenerative visual disorders (e.g., macular degeneration 
or other retinal disorders) that are predicted to cause visual acuity losses to a level worse than 20/30 Snellen during the study  
• Subjects with conditions associated with increased risk of zonular rupture, including 
capsular or zonular abnormalities that may lead to IOL decentration or tilt, such as 
pseudoexfoliation, trauma, or posterior capsule defects  
• Use of systemic or ocular medications that may affect vision  
• Prior, current, or anticipated use during the course of the 6- month study of 
tams ulosin or silodosin (e.g., Flomax, Flomaxtra, Rapaflo) that may, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_13046], confound the outcome or increase the risk to the subject (e.g., poor dilation or a lack of adequate iris structure to perform standard cataract surgery) 
• Poorly-controlled diabetes  
• Acute, chronic, or uncontrolled systemic or ocular disease or illness that, in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], would increase the operative risk or confound the 
outcome(s) of the study (e.g., immunocompromised, connective tissue disease, 
suspected glaucoma, glaucomatous changes in the fundus or visual field, ocular 
inflammation, etc.).  Note: controlled ocular hypertension without glaucomatous changes (optic nerve cuppi[INVESTIGATOR_203154]) is acceptable. 
• Known ocular disease or pathology that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871],  
o may affect visual acuity  
o may require surgical intervention during the course of the study (macular degeneration, cystoid macular edema, diabetic retinopathy, uncontrolled glaucoma, etc.)  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  14     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  o may be expected to require retinal laser treatment or other surgical intervention 
during the course of the study (macular degeneration, cystoid macular edema, 
diabetic retinopathy, etc.)  
• Patient is pregnant, plans to become pregnant, is lactating or has another condition 
associated with the fluctuation of hormones that could lead to refractive changes  
• Concurrent participation or participation within 45 days prior to preoperative visit in any other clinical trial  
• Desire for monovision correction 
9. INVESTIGATOR SELECTION  
9.[ADDRESS_242200] completed a residency in ophthalmology 
(or its documented equivalent) and are licensed to practice medicine and perform surgery at his/her investigative site. Each site will have one designated principal 
investi gator; some sites may have additional implanting sub- investigators/surgeons.   
Investigators will be selected from surgeons who are experienced in small -incision, 
surgery and have implanted TECNIS Symfony IOL s in cataract patients.  Investigators 
should have established their personalized A -constant for the TECNIS Symfony Model 
ZXR00 IOL.  All sites are required to have adequate staff support for reporting and subject follow -up, as well as the necessary instrumentation to conduct study testing. 
9.2 INVESTIGATOR  OBLIGATIONS  
Investigators are required to fulfill the following obligations:  
• Conduct the study in accordance with the relevant and current protocol.  Investigator 
will only make changes to a protocol after notifying and obtaining approval from AMO, the FD A and the Investigational Review Board (IRB), except when necessary 
to protect the safety, rights or welfare of subjects  
• Personally conduct and supervise the study  
• Maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom the investigator has delegated significant trial -related duties  
• Be responsible for protecting the rights, safety and welfare of subjects under the investigator’s care and be responsible for the control and documentation of the 
devices under investigation 
• Inform patients that the device(s)  are being used for investigational purposes and 
that requirements relating to obtaining informed consent and IRB approval are met 
according to 21CFR50, 21CFR56, 21CFR812 and all other applicable laws and regulations  
• Maintain confidentiality as required by  [CONTACT_32480]  
• Shall not obtain written informed consent from any subject to participate or allow any subject to participate before obtaining FDA and IRB approval  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  15     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  • Document in each subject’s case history that informed consent was obtained prior to 
participation in the study as required by 21CFR812 
• Report to AMO and the reviewing IRB any adverse experiences that occur during the course of the study in accordance with applicable laws and regulations  
• Maintain adequate and accurate records in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and make available all study documents and subject medical records for inspection by [CONTACT_203173], duly authorized regulatory agencies (e.g., FDA, PMDA, Health Canada, MOH, etc.) and/or the IRB  
• Submit progress reports on the investigation to AMO and the reviewing IRB at regular intervals, but no less often than yearly as required by 21CFR812.150  
• Ensure the IRB that is responsible for initial and continuing review of the study complies with applicable laws and regulations  
• Report all changes in research activity and all unanticipated problems involving risks to patients to the IRB and AMO  
• Supervise and permit investigational device use and disposition in accordance with applicable regulations and protocol requirements.  Upon completion of enrollment or 
termination of the study or the investigator’s part of the study, or at AMO’s request, 
return to AMO any remaining supply of the investigational device 
• Provide sufficient accurate financial information to AMO to allow AMO to submit 
complete and accurate certification or disclosure statements as required by 
21CFR54.  Promptly update this information if any relevant changes occur during the 
course of the investigation or for up to one year following completion of the study  
• Comply with all other obligations of clinical investigators and requirements according to all applicable FDA regulations (e.g., 21CFR812), all other applicable laws and regulations, and all conditions of approval imposed by [CONTACT_36170] t he 
FDA 
• Ensure that all associates, colleagues and employees assisting in the conduct of the study are adequately informed about the protocol, the investigational device, their study -related duties and functions and agree to fulfill their obligations in meeting the 
above commitments.  
Investigators shall provide adequate time and resources to conduct and report on the 
study. The Investigator, or delegate, shall notify AMO of any change in the conduct of the study including changes in study personnel assigned to the study project, location of 
the investigational device(s), or maintenance of study records, etc.  
9.3 INVESTIGATOR APPROVA L  
It is the responsibility of the investigator to obtain prospective approval of the study 
protocol, protocol amendments or changes, informed consent forms and other relevant documents (e.g., advertisements) from the IRB.  All correspondence with the IRB should be retained in the Investigator Study Files/Notebook.  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_203161].  Study sites will obtain IRB approvals and fulfill 
any other site- specific regulatory requirements.  The investigator is required to report to 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  16     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  AMO within five working days any withdrawal of approval by [CONTACT_203174]/her participation in the investigation. 
Prior to the start of subject enrollment, the following documents must be signed and 
returned to AMO:  
• Confidentiality  Agreement  
• Clinical Trial Agreement  
• Investigator Agreement/Protocol Signature [CONTACT_3264]  
• Clinical Investigator Brochure Signature [CONTACT_3264]  
• Financial Disclosure form  
• Signed and dated copy of investigator’s current curriculum vitae  
• Copy of the investigator’s current medical license  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/Ambulatory Surgery Center Clinical Study Acknowledgement, if required 
By [CONTACT_32486], the investigator agrees to conduct this study according to the obligations above and all other applicable regulatory and legal requirements.  
10. EXPERIMENTAL PLAN  
10.[ADDRESS_242201]/evaluator -masked clinical investigation conducted at up to 14 sites.  Up to 
260 subjects will be enrolled to achieve approximately 220 randomized and bilaterally 
implanted subjects, resulting in approximately 195 evaluable subjects ([ADDRESS_242202] group and 65 in the control group) at 1 and 6 months.   After informed consent is 
obtained and confirmation that all inclusion/exclusion criteria are met, the eye(s) may be 
treated.  
After signing the informed consent, subjects meeting all eligibility criteria will be 
randomized to receive lenses from the same lens group in both eyes, either the investigational Model ZHR00 or Model ZQR00 IOLs, or the Symfony control IOLs.  For each subject, the investigator will choose which eye to operate on first at his/her 
discretion based on his/her standard clinical practice (e.g., the eye with the worse cataract, poorer best corrected distance vision and/or more severe optical/visual complaints).  All subjects are intended to have bilateral cataract surgery with the second- eye surgery occurring after the [ADDRESS_242203] -eye surgery.  All subjects will be examined through 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  17     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  [ADDRESS_242204] be taken to maintain masking of study technicians.  As such, it is 
recommended that only the investigator, sub- investigator or other designated and 
trained clinician perform all biomicroscopic slit -lamp exams.  To maintain c onsistency, as 
well as masking, it is recommended that a single individual (study technician or 
coordinator designated by [CONTACT_093]) conduct all postoperative study -related vision 
testing, although a back -up person should also be designated and trai ned. 
Key preoperative data include ocular health and history, visual acuities, manifest refraction, keratometry, biomicroscopic slit -lamp findings, ocular symptoms and 
biometry.  The operative visit will include standard procedures for cataract surgery and 
IOL implantation.  Key postoperative data collection includes monocular and binocular 
uncorrected and distance corrected visual acuities, contrast sensitivity, defocus curve, slit-lamp findings, non -directed visual symptoms, questionnaires and adverse events.  A 
chart summary of all examination procedures required at each study visit is provided in 
Appendix  A.  If needed, specific equipment necessary to perform the required 
procedures will be supplied for the duration of the study ( Appendix B ). 
10.[ADDRESS_242205]-eye surgery.  After each surgery, each eye will be examined 1 day 
postoperatively (1 -2 days) and again at 1 week (7- 14 days).  Following the second- eye 
surgery, both eyes will be evaluated at 1 month (30- 60 days) and 6 months 
(120- 180 days).  Unscheduled visits may be conducted as necessary at the discretion 
of the investigator for medically -indicated follow -up.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  19     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  participate further in the study, or if they decide not to proceed with surgery. These 
subjects will be exited from the study.   
Preo perative testing to be performed for each eye includes the following:  
POTENTIAL DISTANCE VISUAL ACUITY   
The subject must be capable of achieving Snellen 20/[ADDRESS_242206] extraction and IOL implantation.  The surgeon 
may use his/her judgment, the Potential Acuity Meter (PAM), or other methods (e.g.,  pi[INVESTIGATOR_21828], laser interferometer, etc.) to estimate the subject’s potential postoperative 
acuity.  
UNCORRECTED DISTANCE  VISUAL ACUITY   
Monocular uncorrected distance visual acuity (UCDVA) is to be measured using a standard Snellen chart or equivalent.  
BEST CORRECTED DISTA NCE VISUAL ACUITY AN D MANIFEST REFRACTIO N  
Preoperative manifest refraction is required.  Monocular, best corrected distance visual acuity (B CDVA) is to be measured using a standard Snellen chart or equivalent and 
must be Snellen 20/40 or worse, with or without a glare source.  
KERATOMETRY   
Preoperative corneal astigmatism, as measured by [CONTACT_203175], should 
be 1.00 D or less.  No irregular astigmatism should be present preoperatively, and 
topography (if performed) should be normal.  
CONTACT [CONTACT_203176], keratometric corneal stability following cessation of contact [CONTACT_203177].  PMMA contact [CONTACT_203178] 6 months; rigid gas -permeable contact [CONTACT_203178] 
1 month; and extended -wear or daily -wear soft contact [CONTACT_203179] [ADDRESS_242207] 1 week after the initial preoperative baseline keratometric 
measurement.  Corneal curvature is considered to be stable if the difference in 
keratometric cylinder (vertical vs. horizontal keratometric readings) between the two time points does not exceed 0.[ADDRESS_242208] be no more than ±15
○.  If a 
change exceeding these criteria is noted, surgery is to be postponed until keratometric 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  20     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  stability is demonstrated.  Final biometry measurements and surgery should not take 
place until keratometric stability is achieved.  Note: if this method of determining corneal stability is not a standard procedure in your practice, the subject must sign the informed 
consent form prior to starting the stability procedure.  
IOL POWER AND TARGETED R EFRACTION  
Axial length and anterior chamber depth (ACD) must be measured to determine the appropriate lens power to implant using an A -Constant.  IOLMaster, Lenstar or 
immersion biometry methods are preferred; however, surgeons should use the biometry method with which they have the most experience and which was used in the 
determination of the personalized A -Constant for the TECNIS Symfony Model ZXR00 
lens.  The investigator’s personalized A -Constant for the TECNIS Symfony Model 
ZXR00 lens will also be used for the investigational TECNIS Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 
lenses .  The lens power should be calculated to achieve emmetropia at distance.  
Intentional over - or under -correction (outside ± 0.50 D) should NOT be planned for either 
eye; how ever, surgeons may adjust the targeted refraction as necessary to achieve 
emmetropia based on surgeon factors, study subject experience and/or subject first -eye 
outcomes.  
ADDITIONAL PREOPERAT IVE INFORMATION TO B E COLLECTED:  
• Informed consent documentation  
• Subject demographic information  
• Planned surgery dates for each eye  
• Ocular history, including presence of ocular pathology for each eye  
• Intraocular pressure for each eye  
• Photopic (ambient) pupil size for each eye  
• Cataract t ype and density for each eye  
• Dilated fundus exam results for each eye  
• Medical findings from a biomicroscopic slit -lamp exam for each eye  
• Ocular symptoms for each eye  
• Ocular and systemic medications  
• Questionnaire to collect preoperative patient expectations   
10.[ADDRESS_242209] will be created by [CONTACT_203180] 
(EDC).  Subjects will be randomized to the investigational Model ZHR00 IOL, the 
investigational Model ZQR00 IOL or the Symfony control IOL.  Unmasked study personnel at the site will be trained to the randomization process through the EDC system and will randomize subjects after the subject has signed the informed consent form, has met all eligibility criteria and the investigator has documented which eye will be 
the first implanted.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  21     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  As part of the informed consent process, the investigator or delegate will explain to the 
subject the requirements of a random ized study and the differences expected between 
the three lens models: the Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 investigational lenses and the 
Symfony control lens.  The surgeon and the operative staff will know which lens type is implanted.  There may also be site coordinators and other site study staff, such as those performing slit -lamp exams, who will be unmasked.  Unmasked study site staff will be 
instructed not to disclose the lens type the subject received or to talk about the lens to 
any masked evaluators or to the study subjects.   
The subjects and the study technicians performing the postoperative vision tests are to 
be masked through study completion.  To maintain subject/technician- masking through 
the [ADDRESS_242210] medical records until after completion of the final study visit.  For 
example, lens stickers (indicating the lens model implanted) may be kept in the 
operating room study notebook until completion of the final study visit, at which time they may be placed in the subject medical charts.  In the meantime, temporary lens stickers (without lens model designations) may be used in the subject’s medical chart.   
To maintain subject masking, a temporary IOL implant identification card will be issued to the subject at the time of surgery.  Following completion of the final study exam, each subject will be given the permanent IOL implant identification card.  
10.[ADDRESS_242211] be controlled and complete lens accountability maintained (See Section 15.2.1 Lens Accountability).   
10.[ADDRESS_242212] extr action 
surgical technique.  Lenses should be folded for implantation and inserted into the capsular bag using one of the AMO -validated insertion systems  described in Section 7.2 . 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  22     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Investigators should manage surgical outcomes to ensure that the total postoperative 
refractive astigmatism is as minimal as possible.  The total postoperative astigmatism, including surgically -induced astigmatism, should be targeted to be no greater than 1.0 D.  
Astigmatism may be managed by [CONTACT_203181].  No additional 
refractive procedures are to be performed during the operative procedure or throughout the postoperative study period (e.g., LRI, OCCI, CRI, AK, PRK, LASIK or LASEK).  
Operative case report forms will include the following information: 
INCISION TYPE AND SI ZE   
Lenses should be inserted through an incision ranging in size from approximately 2.2-3.0 mm, per the investigator’s standard technique when using the UNFOLDER 
Platin um 1 Series Implantation System or the ONE SERIES Ultra Implantation System. 
The incision may be clear corneal, limbal or scleral tunnel at the discretion of the investigator.  
CAPSULORHEXIS SIZE AND METHOD  
The anterior capsulotomy should be a continuous, curvilinear capsulorhexis 
approximately 5.0  to 5.5 mm in diameter to allow slight overlap of the lens optic edge.  
The anterior capsulotomy method may be manual (rhexis) or laser- assisted.  
LENS REMOVAL  
Lens removal may occur using laser fragmentation combined with 
phacoemulsification/aspi[INVESTIGATOR_203162]/aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516].  
VISCOELASTIC   
Viscoelastic materials should be used as is customary for each investigator and recorded on the case report form (CRF).  
IMPLANT INSTRUMENTATION USED   
Lenses should be folded for implantation and inserted into the capsular bag using either the UNFOLDER Platinum 1 Series Implantation System (DK7796 handpi[INVESTIGATOR_203163]  1 Series cartridge, Model 1MTEC30) or the ONE SERIES Ultra Implantation 
System (DK7786 [plunger] or the DK7791 [twist] handpi[INVESTIGATOR_203164], Model 1VIPR30).   
SURGICAL COMPLICATIO NS   
Should a surgical complication occur, implantation of a study lens will be at the 
investigator’s discretion.  In the event of capsular bag or zonular rupture, the lens should not be implanted if the complication may result in lens instability.  Additionally, the lens is 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  23     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  not to be implanted in the sulcus.  In this case, the investigator may implant his/her 
choice of a back -up, non -investigational IOL.  The subject should be exited from the 
study if a non- study lens is implanted as a result of a surgical complication during the 
first-eye implantation; however, the eye will be followed until resolution of the 
complication prior to exiting the subject.  Should a surgical complication occur during the second- eye surgery and result in implantation of a non- study lens, the subject will not be 
exited from the study; the first eye will cont inue to be followed per -protocol, although 
data may be analyzed separately, and the second eye will be followed for safety until resolution of the complication.  
MEDICATIONS   
Preoperative, operative and intraoperative medications should be used as is customary for each investigator and will be recorded on the CRF.   
TYPE OF CLOSURE   
Wound closure is left to the surgeon’s discretion and will be recorded on the CRF.  
ADDITIONAL OPERATIVE INFORMATION COLLECT ED INCLUDES:  
• Date of surgery  
• Operative eye  
• Lens power  and serial number  
• Lens placement  
• Other surgical procedures  
• Surgical technique according to protocol  
• Product complaints  
• Serious and/or device -related adverse events  
10.[ADDRESS_242213] recently operated eye will be evaluated at the 1- day and 
1-week visits.  Both eyes will be evaluated at the 1- month and 6- month visits.   
Study technicians responsible for conducting all vision testing will be masked.  Therefore, it is recommended that only the investigator/sub- investigator or other 
designated and trained clinician perform the biomicroscopic slit -lamp exams.  To 
maintain consistency and masking throughout the study, it is recommended that a single individual (study technician or coordinator designated by [CONTACT_093]) conduct all postoperative study -related vision testing, although a back -up person should also be 
designated and trained.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  24     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Note:  Subjects are not to wear contact [CONTACT_203182].  Wearing contact [CONTACT_203183].  During the study, if correction is 
required, spectacles should be prescribed.  
A postoperative CRF will collect the following information, although not all data are 
required at every visit (see Appendix A ): 
MANIFEST REFRACTION AND REFRACTION ADJUS TMENTS (MASKED 
PROCEDURE)  
Postopera tive study manifest refractions are to be performed using the M&S System at a 
distance of 4.[ADDRESS_242214] refraction (MR) is to be performed using the Maximum Plus refraction method as detailed in Appendix C .   
Because 4.[ADDRESS_242215] distance and refraction distance.  
Appendix  D lists the refraction adjustments required for the various vision tests using 
the BCDVA refraction.  
DISTANCE VISUAL ACUITY TESTING (MASKED PROCEDURE)  
Distance visual acuity will be measured postoperatively under photopic lighting conditions (85  cd/m
2, 80–110 cd/m2 acceptable) using the M&S System at a test 
distance of 4.0 meters.  For eyes unable to achieve a postoperative BCDVA of Snellen 
20/40 (i.e.,  LogMAR 0.3, number of letters correct 70), a reason must be specified.  
Instructions for using the M&S System are detailed in Appendix E , and for distance 
visual acuity in Appendix F .  
The following distance visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the visit schedule in Appendix A :  
Test Test 
Distance  Illumination  Type of Testing  Refraction 
Adjustment  
UCDVA  4 m Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  +0.25 D 
adjustment only  
BCDVA  4 m Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  No adjustment; 
ETDRS Rx only  
INTERMEDIATE VISUAL ACUITY (MASKED PROCEDURE)  
Intermediate visual acuity (100% contrast) will be measured under photopic conditions 
(85 cd/m2, 80-110 cd/m2 acceptable) using the M&S System at a test distance of 66 cm.  
Instructions for using the M&S System are detailed in Appendix E  and for intermediate 
testing in Appendix G.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  25     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  The following intermediate visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the  visit 
schedule in Appendix A : 
Test Test 
Distance  Illumination  Type of Testing  Refraction 
Adjustment  
UCIVA  66 cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  No adjustment  
DCIVA  66 cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  -0.[ADDRESS_242216] INTERMEDIATE VISUAL ACUITY (10%) (MASKED  PROCEDURE)  
Low contrast (10%  contrast ) intermediate visual acuity will be measured under photopic 
conditions (85  cd/m2, 80-110 cd/m2 acceptable) using the M&S System at a test distance 
of [ADDRESS_242217] corrected intermediate visual acuity (BCIVA) at [ADDRESS_242218] acuity (10%) conditions will be performed to determine the minimum 
amount of add necessary over the distance correction for the subject to achieve their best intermediate visual acuity similar to distance visual acuity in the primary eye (first eye to be implanted).  Instructions for low contrast intermediate testing are detailed in 
Appendix G.   
The following intermediate visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the visit 
schedule in Appendix A : 
Test 
Test 
Distance  Illumination  Type of Testing  Refraction 
Adjustment  
DCIVA  66cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  -0.25 D added to 
ETDRS sphere Rx  
BCIVA*  66 cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  -0.25 D added to 
ETDRS sphere Rx  
* Intermediate visual acuity tested through distance correction with minimum add required to reach best 
corrected intermediate visual acuity.  
NEAR VISUAL ACUITY (MASKED PROCEDURE)  
Near visual acuity will be measured under photopic conditions (85 cd/m2, 80-110 cd/m2 
acceptable) using the Good- Lite self -calibrating, retro -illuminated box with 100% contrast 
ETDRS near charts at a test distance of 40 cm.   
Instructions for using the ETDRS near chart, including setting appropriate lighting conditions, and the visual acuity conversion chart between the number of ETDRS letters read and Snellen equivalents  are provided in Appendix H .   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  26     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  The following near visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the visit 
schedule in Appendix A : 
Test Test 
Distance  Illumination  Type of Testing  Refraction 
Adjustment  
UCNVA  40 cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  No adjustment  
DCNVA  40 cm  Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  
Binocular  -0.25 D added to 
ETDRS sphere Rx  
 
DEPTH OF FOCUS TESTI NG (MASKED PROCEDURE ) 
Monocular, best corrected distance depth of focus testing will be performed at the 1-month visit on the first eye only for all subjects, and binocular best corrected distance 
depth of focus testing will be performed at the 6- month visit on all subjects.   
Depth of focus testing will be performed under photopic conditions (85  cd/m
2, 
80-110 cd/m2 acceptable) using the M&S System at 4.[ADDRESS_242219] (no adjustment necessary for test distance).  The subject is to be defocused in -0.50 D increments with spherical minus lenses; at each defocus 
increment, a LogMAR measurement is obtained.  Testing is to be conducted from +2.00  D through -4.00 D of defocus.  Defocus curves will be generated for small 
(≤2.5  mm), medium (>2.5  to <4.0  mm), and large (≥4.0 mm) pupil sizes.  Further 
instructions for defocus testing are detailed in Appendix I . 
The following defocus curve measurements are to be performed per the visit schedule in Appendix A :  
Test 
Test 
Distance  Illumination  Type of 
Testing Refraction 
Adjustment  
Monocular Depth 
of Focus  4 m Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Monocular  No adjustment; 
ETDRS Rx only  
Binocular Depth of 
Focus  4 m Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) Binocular  No adjustment; 
ETDRS Rx only  
TOLERANCE TO CYLINDER (MASKED PROCEDURE)  
Binocular best corrected manifest cylinder defocus testing will be performed at the 1-month visit under photopic conditions (85 cd/m
2, 80-110 cd/m2 acceptable) using the 
M&S System at 4.[ADDRESS_242220] (no adjustment necessary 
for test distance).  The subject is to be defocused in -0.50 D incre ments, from -0.50 D 
to -3.00 D of cylinder; at each cylinder defocus increment, a LogMAR measurement is 
obtained.  Refer to Appendix J  for further instructions.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  27     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  PUPIL SIZE  
Photopic, photopic with glare, mesopic and mesopic with glare pupil sizes will be 
measured postoperatively during the study.  For consistency, the same method of measurement should be used throughout the study.  
Photopic pupil size measurements are to be performed under the same lighting 
conditions at which photopic distance visual acuity is tested.  Pupil sizes under the other 
lighting conditions will be measured during the contrast sensitivity testing procedures.  Instructions for measuring pupil size are detailed in Appendix K.  
DISTANCE CONTRAST SE NSITIVITY TESTING (M ASKED PROCEDURE)  
Best corrected distance contrast sensitivity will be tested under mesopic, mesopic with glare, and photopic with glare conditions using the M&S System for sine- wave gratings 
at 1.5, 3.0, 6.0, 12.0 cycles per degree (cpd) (mesopic and mesopic with glare) and 3.0, 
6.0, 12.0 and 18.0 (photopic with glare).  The test distance is 8 feet (2.5 meters).   Best 
corrected distance contrast sensitivity is to be performed with a +0.[ADDRESS_242221] sensitivity measurements are to be performed per the visit 
schedule in Appendix A : 
Contrast 
Sensitivity 
Test Test 
Distance  Spatial 
Frequency Type of Testing Refraction 
Adjustment  
Mesopic  
(3 cd/m2) 
without glare  2.5 m  1.5, 3, 6 and 
12 cpd  Monocular  
Binocular  +0.12 D added to 
ETDRS sphere Rx  
Mesopic  
(3 cd/m2) 
with glare  2.5 m  1.5, 3, 6 and 
12 cpd  Monocular  
Binocular  +0.12 D added to 
ETDRS sphere Rx  
Photopic  
(85 cd/m2) 
with glare  2.5 m  3, 6, 12 and 
18 cpd  Monocular  
Binocular  +0.[ADDRESS_242222] be performed at each postoperative visit to 
determine the presence or absence of any medical or lens findings, complications or 
adverse events.  IOL decentration and tilt are to be determined subjectively.  The center of the lens relative to the pupil can be used to determine IOL decentration, with the 
diffractive rings used as a guide to locate the center of the IOL.  Note that the pupil center may not always be aligned with the visual axis of the eye; therefore, the investigator should consider deviations in pupil center from visual axis when reporting 
IOL decentration.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  28     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Findings of aqueous cells and flare, corneal edema, posterior capsule striae (wrinkles), 
posterior capsular opacification and IOL glistenings are to be rated using standardized grading scales of 0 to +4 (0  = none, +4  = severe) during the slit -lamp biomicroscopy.  
The specific grading scales are provided in Appendix M .   
ND:YAG CAPSULOTOMY 
If an Nd:YAG capsulotomy is necessary, it is recommended that the  procedure be 
performed at least 1 week prior to a study exam; this is particularly important for the 6-month study visit, as this is the key study exam for evaluation of safety and 
effectiveness.  
DILATED FUNDUS EXAM  
A dilated fundus exam is to be performed at the 6 -month visit to evaluate retinal status  
and fundus visualization.  
INTRAOCULAR PRESSURE  AND KERATOMETRY  
Intraocular pressure (IOP) and keratometry are to be measured using the investigator’s usual methods.  It is recommended that the same methods be used for all study subjects 
at the site for the duration of the study.  
OCULAR SYMPTOMS (NON- DIRECTED; SPONTANEO US) 
Subjective ocular symptoms are to be assessed at each postoperative visit by [CONTACT_7939] “Are you having any difficulties with your eyes/vision?”  Subjects should not be prompted 
for specific responses; however, if a subject reports halos, night glare or starbursts, the level of severity should be determined (mild, moderate or severe). 
MEDICATIONS   
Postoperative ocular medications should be used as is customary for each investigator and recorded in the source document for each subject.  Medications will be recorded on 
a medication log CRF as applicable.  
ADVERSE EVENTS  
Subjects should be assessed at each visit for occurrence of and/or change in status of 
any adverse events, particularly serious and/or device- related adverse events.  See 
Section 11.0, Adverse Events, for further information.  
QUESTIONNAIRES  
Questionnaires will be administered at the 1- month and 6- month visits to collect 
informati on regarding spectacle usage, visual symptoms, visual quality and subject 
satisfaction.  In order to minimize any effect the doctor -patient relationship may have on 
a subject’s responses on the questionnaire, the study questionnaires will be 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  29     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  self-administe red by [CONTACT_748].  The questionnaires are to be administered at the start 
of the [ADDRESS_242223] is seen at an Unscheduled visit due to an optical/visual symptom 
complaint, the PRO Visual Symptoms Questionnaire will be administered at that visit, as 
well as prior to any secondary surgical intervention for an optical/visual symptom 
complaint.  If additional unscheduled visits and/or a secondary surgical intervention due to the same optical/visual symptom complaint occur within [ADDRESS_242224] will be considered a "screen failure" if he/she does not meet the eligibility criteria or if consent is withdrawn prior to randomization.   
A subject will be considered "discontinued prior to treatment"  if the subject is randomized 
but does not undergo surgery or receive a study lens for various reasons including: the planned implant being aborted due to surgical complications, the subject withdrawing consent prior to treatment or the subject died prior to treatment.   
Subjects will be "discontinued" from the study if one study lens (if implanted unilaterally) 
or both study lenses (if implanted bilaterally) are removed  or if the subject dies.  
If a subject receives at least one study lens, he/she is to be followed according to the schedule in Table 2 (Section 10.2) for visit windows.   
Subjects will be considered “lost -to-follow- up” from the study only if irretrievably lost for 
unavoidable reasons such as: subject moved/unable to locate, subject ill/unable to travel, subject uncooperative/refuses further study participation.  In the event of subject 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  30     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  relocation, effort must be made by [CONTACT_203184] -up information 
(i.e., slit-lamp findings and general visual acuity, etc.) from the subject’s new physician.   
If a subject is exited early from the study, the investigator must indicate the reason for 
study exit on the CRF.  In the event of a lens removal or other serious adverse event, 
the subject may be exited from the study; however, effort must be made by [CONTACT_203185].  
Following study completion or early exit, subjects will be informed about which lens model they received.  Additionally, all study subjects are to be instructed to undergo regular eye examinations at least yearly and also to return to their doctor if any eye complications are experienced.   
10.9 UNSCHEDULED VISITS  
During the study period, if a non- protocol -required visit is done for the purpose of 
medically -indicated follo w-up for a study eye, data from this visit should be reported 
using the Unscheduled Visit CRF.  The need for unscheduled visits is at the 
investigator’s discretion.  Specific examinations to be performed at unscheduled visits are also at the discretion of the investigator (based on the reason for the unscheduled 
visit) and data are to be recorded in the appropriate section of the CRF. 
Data to be collected may include:  
• Snellen manifest refraction 
• Uncorrected and best corrected distance visual acuity using a Snellen chart  
• Intraocular pressure  
• Slit-lamp examination for medical and/or lens findings  
• Dilated fundus exam  
• Ocular symptoms  
• Adverse events  
• Medications  
In addition, if a subject is seen at an Unscheduled visit due to an optical/visual symptom 
complaint, the PRO Visual Symptoms Questionnaire will be administered at that visit, as 
well as prior to any secondary surgical intervention for an optical/visual symptom complaint.  If additional unscheduled visits and/or a secondary surgical intervention due to the same optical/visual symptom complaint occur within [ADDRESS_242225] -based (e.g., inclusion/exclusion criteria, informed consent 
deviation, etc.) or procedural -based (e.g., out -of-interval visits, non- compliance with 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  31     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  testing procedures, etc.).  All protocol deviations will be documented using the protocol 
deviation CRF.  Any deviation made to protect the life or physical well- being of a subject 
in an emergency as well as any use of the investigational device without obtaining 
informed consent must be reported to AMO within 5 working days .  Protocol deviations 
will be monitored by [CONTACT_32580], and if the non -compliance is persistent or egregious, AMO 
may take action, including but not limited to termination of the investigator’s participation in the study.  The investigator is also responsible for informing the reviewing IRB of 
instances of protocol non -compliance in accordance with the IRB requirements. 
11. ADVERSE EVENTS AND PRODUCT COMPLAINTS  
11.1 ADVERSE EVENT DEFINI TIONS 
Adverse Event (AE)  
An adverse event is defined (following ISO [ZIP_CODE]) as any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory 
findings) in subjects, users or other persons, whether or not related to the study  device.   
Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
An adverse event is considered serious (following ISO [ZIP_CODE]) if it is an untoward occurrence which may or may not be related to use of the study device that 
• is sight - or life -threatening,  
• results in death,  
• requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_318] (a planned 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a pre -existing condition without a serious deterioration in 
health is not considered a serious adverse event), 
• results in permanent impairment of a body structure or body function,  
• necessitates medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment to 
a body structure or function, or  
• results in fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth defect  
Device-Related Adverse Event/Adverse Devi ce Effect (ADE)  
A device- related adverse event is defined as any adverse event that is believed to be 
definitely, probably or possibly related to the study device (following the guidelines in 
Section 11.4, Causal Relationship).  A device- related event is also considered an 
adverse device effect (ADE; following ISO [ZIP_CODE]) resulting from the use of the study device that may result from user error, insufficiencies or inadequacies in the instructions 
for use, deployment, implantation, installation, operation of any malfunction of the 
device.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  32     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Study-Specific Serious Anticipated Adverse E vents 
The following is a list including, but not limited to, ocular serious adverse events (SAE) 
that are anticipated and must be reported to AMO for this study.  Any events that are unlikely but anticipated (i.e., endophthalmitis) will be reported to the FDA and other appropriate regulatory agencies. 
• Endophthalmitis/Intraocular infection 
• Hypopyon 
• Hyphema  
• IOL dislocation  
• Cystoid macular edema  
• Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_32465]  
• Retinal detachment/tear  
• Persistent corneal edema 
• Persistent iritis  
• Persistent raised IOP requiring treatment  
• Visual symptoms requiring secondary surgical intervention (e.g., lens removal)  
• Tilt and decentration requiring secondary surgical intervention (e.g., 
repositioning)  
• Residual refractive error resulting in a secondary surgical intervention 
• Retained lens material resulting in secondary surgical intervention  
NOTE 1:  Wound burps during the first week postoperatively, suture removal, planned 
blepharoplasty and Nd:YAG capsulotomy (for PCO) are not considered adverse events 
for this study.  
NOTE 2: Raised IOP requiring treatment, cornea edema, and iritis will only be 
considered serious if persistent at the final study visit (120 -180 days postoperative) or 
sight -threatening at the time of occurrence.  Treatment merely to hasten the resolution of 
such conditions (and not intended to prevent permanent damage to the eye) will not be reported as serious adverse events.    
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE)/Unanticipated Serious Adverse 
Device Effect ([LOCATION_003]DE)  
Any UADE ([LOCATION_003] 21CFR 812.3(s)) or [LOCATION_003]DE (ISO [ZIP_CODE]) is defined as any serious 
adverse effect on health or safety or any life- threatening problem or death caused by, or 
associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in 
nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan (i.e., this protocol), 
application (including a supplementary plan or application), or risk assessment, or any 
other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare o f subjects.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  33     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  11.[ADDRESS_242226] COMPLAINT/DEVICE DEFICIENCY DEFI NITION 
A product complaint/device deficiency is defined (21 CFR 820.3(b) and ISO [ZIP_CODE]) as 
any alleged deficiency related to the identity, quality, durability, reliability, safety, effectiveness, or performance of a device. This may include malfunctions, use error and inadequacies in labeling.  Product complaints can pertain to any marketed AMO device 
being used in the study as well as the investigational device.  The investigator is to 
assess whether the deficiency could have led to a serious adverse event without suitable action or intervention or under less fortunate circumstances. 
11.[ADDRESS_242227],  regardless 
of severity and whether or not attributed to the study device(s), are to be reported to 
AMO and recorded on the case report form corresponding to the visit during which 
awareness of the event occurred.  Adverse events are also to be reported to the 
reviewing IRB as per the IRB’s reporting requirements.  If required, adverse events will 
be reported to the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., FDA) according to all applicable laws and regulations.   
Reporting of adverse events shall follow the [LOCATION_003] Code of Federal Regulations (21CFR812) for sites in the [LOCATION_003].  General guidelines are provided below:  
Adverse Event Reporting 
An adverse event that is not serious or device -related is to be reported to AMO in a 
timely manner.  Notification of non- serious and non- device related adverse events will 
occur by [CONTACT_32500].  Such adverse events are also to be 
reported to the reviewing IRB per their reporting requirements.  
Complaints/Device Deficiency Reporting  
A general product complaint or device deficiency is to be reported to AMO in a timely 
manner.  Notification of complaints/device deficiencies will occur by [CONTACT_203186] (e.g., operative visit) and/or by a phone call 
to AMO.   
Any device deficiency that could have led to a serious adverse event without suitable 
action or intervention, or under less fortunate circumstances, must be reported to the 
sponsor immediately (no later than 48 hours after detection). Device deficiencies t hat 
could have led to a serious adverse event should also be reported to the investigator’s IRB per their reporting requirements.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  34     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Serious and/or Device -Related Adverse Event Reporting  
SAEs and/or ADEs are to be documented using the SAE/ADE CRF.  In the event of an 
SAE/ADE, AMO must be notified immediately (no later than 48 hours after detection) .  
Any SAE/ADE is to be reported to AMO by [CONTACT_648], email and/or by [CONTACT_203187]/ADE CRF.  Any SAE or device -related AE should also be reported to the 
investigator’s IRB per their reporting requirements. 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE)/Unanticipated Serious Adverse 
Device Effect ([LOCATION_003]DE) Reporting  
If during the study, a serious adverse event occurs that may reasonably be regarded as 
device- related and was not previously expected in nature, severity, or degree of 
incidence, the investigator is to report the UADE/[LOCATION_003]DE to AMO within 48  hours , and to 
the investigator’s IRB as soon as possible (and no later than 10 working days after 
learning of the event for sites in the [LOCATION_003] as required by 21CFR812).  
11.4 CA[LOCATION_003]L RELATIONSHIP  
The investigator should always be alert to adverse events that may be related to the study device or the use of the study device (i.e., the procedure specific to the initial application of the device).  An attempt should be made in every case to determine the 
causality of the event.  The following definitions are to be used as guidelines in 
determining the relationship between the event and the study device and/or use of the 
device.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  35     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Definitely related:  If the event is associated with the device and/or the use of the 
device beyond a reasonable doubt, a causal relationship exists 
between the adverse event and the device and/or the use of the 
study device.  
Probably related:   There is a reasonable possibility of a causal relationship 
between the adverse event  and the device and/or the use of the 
study device and/or the adverse event cannot be reasonably 
explained by [CONTACT_5748]. 
Possibly related:   The adverse event has not been determined to be related to the 
device or the use of the device, but no other cause has been identified and the device and/or the use of the study device cannot be ruled out as a possible cause.  
Unlikely to be related:  The possibility of a potential causal relationship between adverse event and the device and/or the use of the device could 
exist, but the adverse event can be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_5748].  
Not related:  There is no possibility of a causal relationship between the 
adverse event and the device and/or the use of the study device and/or the adverse event can be attributed to another cause.  
If an adverse event is believed to be definitely, probably or possibly related to the study 
device and/or the use of the device, the event will be considered related to the study device and/or the use of the device.   
11.5 ADVERSE EVENT FOLLOW -UP 
For every adverse event, appropriate measures should be undertaken to treat and/or monitor the subject until resolution occurs.  The subject's files are to include all pertinent 
medical data relating to the event including the subject’s medical r ecords, medical 
reports and/or judgments from colleagues or outside specialists who assisted in the 
treatment and follow -up of the subject.  The investigator should keep AMO closely 
informed as to the outcome of serious and/or device- related adverse events, thereby 
[CONTACT_203188].  A 
Detailed Adverse Event Update CRF should be completed each time the subject returns to the investigator or other specialist(s) for follow- up of serious and/or devic e-related 
adverse event until resolution of the event.   Any subject who is to be exited from the 
study due to a serious and/or device- related adverse event should be followed until the 
outcome is determined prior to being exited from the study . 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  36     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  12. PROTOCOL CHANGES/AMENDMENTS  
If the investigator wishes to modify any procedure and/or the design of the study, he or 
she must contact [CONTACT_203189].  Any modifications (including additional data collection) require approval 
by [CONTACT_32505], as well as approval of the governing IRBs prior to implementation.   
13. ETHICS REVIEW AND PA TIENT WELFARE  
13.[ADDRESS_242228] (IRB)  
It is the responsibility of the investigator to obtain prospective approval of the study protocol, protocol amendments or changes, informed consent forms and other relevant documents (e.g., advertisements) from the IRB.  All correspondence with the IRB should 
be retained in the Investigator  Notebook.  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_203165].  
The investigator is responsible for notifying the IRB of reportable adverse events as well 
as any other circumstance in which additional procedures outside the protocol were conducted to eliminate apparent hazards to subjects.  
13.[ADDRESS_242229]’s medical records.  A copy of the signed and dated form is to be provided to the subject.  
The investigator will provide AMO written acknowledgement on the preoperative case 
report form that a signed agreement of informed consent has been obtained and is in the investigator’s possession for  each subject.  As required by 21CFR812 Part G, the site 
shall document in the source documents that informed consent was obtained prior to 
participation in the study for each subject enrolled. 
NOTE:  The informed consent process also includes obtaining the subject’s signature [CONTACT_203207]/Disclosure of Health Information for Research Form or equivalent documentation necessary to comply with applicable privacy laws pertaining to 
medical treatment in the governing countries.   
NOTE:  The spons or will secure appropriate insurance for study subjects prior to study 
start.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  37     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  14. DOCUMENTATION  
14.[ADDRESS_242230]’s medical records, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1332], clinic charts, the investigator’s subject study files, as well as results of any diagnostic tests or procedures such as topographies or laboratory tests with photographs or instrument printouts.  
Each site is expected to adhere to the clinic’s own standard documentation requirements for medical charts/clinic notes.  For the purposes of this clinical study, the medical charts/clinic notes must also include, at a minimum, the following data that will be considered source data and will be reviewed by [CONTACT_32580]: 
• Subject’s name [CONTACT_32513]  
• Subject’s contact [CONTACT_3031] 
• Study protocol number and the Sponsor name (AMO)  
• A statement that informed consent was obtained prior to participation in the study 
(including the date)  
• Evidence of subject eligibility  
• Dates of all subject visits and surgeries throughout the duration of the study  
• Implant serial number identification (NOTE: This is masked information, and may only be reviewed by [CONTACT_203190])  
• Concurrent medications  
• Corrected and uncorrected distance visual  acuity (NOTE: M&S electronic data and 
near visual acuity score sheets are considered source documentation and are to be retained by [CONTACT_779].  A paper copy of the M&S results will be printed and validated by 
[CONTACT_779])  
• Manifest refraction  
• Occurrence and status of any operative complications, postoperative medical or lens 
findings and adverse events  
• Occurrence and status of any subject complaints, e.g., ocular/visual symptoms  
• The date the subject exited the study, and a notation as to whether the subject completed the study or reason for early exit.  
14.[ADDRESS_242231] CONFIDENTIAL ITY 
Subjects will be assigned a site/subject number to maintain subject confidentiality.  
Subject names may possibly be disclosed to AMO or regulatory agencies during inspection of medical records related to the study, but reasonable precautions will be taken to maintain confidentiality of personal information to the extent permitted by 
[CONTACT_774].  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  38     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  14.[ADDRESS_242232]’s case report forms and related documents.  Prior to database lock, the investigator will 
verify completeness and accuracy of data submitted to AMO.  
14.4 STUDY SUMMARY  
A final investigator’s summary (study close- out) will be provided to AMO and the 
reviewing IRB after termination or the completion of the study or the investigator’s part of 
the investigation, as directed by [CONTACT_32580].  
15. MONITORING  
AMO will perform three types of monitoring to ensure compliance with regulations: data 
monitoring, administrative monitoring, and safety monitoring. 
15.1 DATA MONITO RING 
In order to ensure a well -controlled clinical trial, AMO will follow specific data monitoring 
procedures, routinely generate reports and periodically review safety and effectiveness 
data.  To avoid bias, any analyses generated prior to site closures w ill not be 
disseminated to any of the investigative sites.  
An electronic data capture system (EDC) will be used to transmit case report forms from 
the investigative site to AMO.  Requests for data clarification will be handled through this 
same system.   
To minimize data omissions and inconsistencies on clinical r eports and to ensure that 
data are accurately transcribed to computer data files, AMO will follow internal data 
processing procedures that include automated and manual quality control checks to 
identify any data discrepancies.  Any such items will be resolved and documented as 
needed in EDC.  
Prevention of Missing Data 
Methods used to safeguard against missing data that can have deleterious effects on the 
study integrity and reliability of its outcomes will include training study staff with WebEx, centralized and/or on- site programs.  In addition, subjects will be encouraged at the time 
of informed consent to avoid missing study visits, as missing data may affect the study 
reliability and diminish the scientific value of their contribution to the study. 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  39     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  15.2 ADMINISTRATIVE MONITORING  
Administrative monitoring procedures will ensure that study devices, subjects, and forms 
can be traced and will allow monitoring of investigator progress and compliance.  Accountability and traceability of study devices will be monitored by [CONTACT_203191].  
Device Accountability  
Complete lens accountability will be maintained at the investigative site by [CONTACT_203192] (Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 lenses) received from 
and returned to AMO.  A site log will be used to track all lenses for date of receipt, eye 
implanted, serial number, lens power, use and disposition/return to AMO.  This site log 
and any other investigational lens information will be maintained in the operative room study binder.  During  periodic investigative site monitoring visits, AMO personnel will 
review investigative site lens inventory records and logs to ensure IOL accountability compliance and complete investigational lens traceability.   
Site Monitoring Plan  
Prior to performing any study implants, the requirements of the study and reporting 
mechanisms will be explained to each investigator either personally at the investigative site or at a formal study investigator meeting.  When necessary, a pre- study site 
qualification visit m ay be performed to assess the adequacy of the site to perform the 
study for sites that have not previously worked with AMO or have undergone significant changes, or have not been visited in the past year.  A study initiation visit will be conducted for all sites prior to the first implant.  
Throughout the duration of the study, site visits to monitor compliance to this protocol will 
be made at each investigative site.  During interim site monitoring visits, AMO will review 
informed consent documents and subject eligibility, and the data on study case report forms will be verified against subject charts and other source documents to ensure complete and accurate reporting.  The subject files will also be reviewed to assure that all adverse events and any issues encountered with AMO products have been reported 
in a timely fashion.  
AMO will also review source documents to verify that all required items have been documented in the subject medical charts.  Refer to Section 14.1, Source Documents, for a list of ite ms that are required for source documentation.  In addition to subject files, 
study logs will be checked and conformance to lighting levels for visual acuity tests will be verified.   
Training on study -specific procedures may also be conducted during monit oring visits.  
For this study in particular, a training/monitoring visit is likely to occur just prior to or 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  40     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  during the first of the 1- month and 6- month visits, wherein the most extensive vision 
testing occurs.  
Upon study completion, a final close- out sit e visit to each site will be made to monitor the 
last of the subject data records and finalize any outstanding study issues.  
A separate Study Monitoring Plan will be established prior to study start that will define 
the type and frequency of monitoring visits and frequency of record monitoring.  
15.3 SAFETY MONITORING  
The medical monitor will review results throughout the clinical trial as necessary to ensure the continued safety of the device and to ensure that no subjects are exposed to unreasonable risk.  The medical monitor will be available to answer all questions from 
investigators.  The medical monitor will review and assess any reports of serious and/or device- related adverse events as well as device deficiencies that could have led to a 
serious adverse event, and discuss these with the reporting investigator(s) as 
necessary.  The medical monitor, as well as any other qualified personnel designated by 
[CONTACT_32580], shall also review any interim progress reports, as applicable.   
16. PUBLICATIONS  
Refer to the Clinical Trial Agreement for information regarding AMO publication policies.  
17. RISK ANALYSIS  
POTENTIAL RISKS AND RISK MANAGEMENT  
RISKS OF THE TECNIS NEXT -GENERATION IOLS, MODELS ZHR00 AND Z QR00  
The TECNIS Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 IOLs are designed to provide far, intermediate and near vision; however, glasses may still be needed to improve distance vision and/or 
to have useful vision for intermediate or near tasks.  Visual symptoms, particularly dysphotopsias such as halos, night glare, starbursts, etc., are expected to be less than with a standard multifocal IOL; however, such symptoms may still occur.  Dysphotopsias 
may become less noticeable over time; however, the IOL may be removed if necessary.  
There may be a reduction in contrast sensitivity under certain conditions compared to a monofocal lens.  Due to the diffractive optic design, the ability to perform some eye treatments (e.g., retinal photocoagulation) may be affected, and caution should be used 
when interpreting results of autorefractors or wavefront aberrometers that utilize infrared 
light, or when performing a duochrome test.  These risks are not unlike other diffractive technology IOLs.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  41     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  GENERAL RISKS OF CAT ARACT SURGERY AND IO L IMPLANTATION  
There are risks and complications associated with cataract surgery and IOL implantation 
in general.  These can include worsening of vision, hemorrhage, loss of corneal clarity, inflammation, infections, retinal detachment, pupil changes, glaucoma, etc.  Complications can result in poor vision, loss of vision or loss of the eye.   
RISK MANAGEMENT  
Subjects will be closely monitored thought the trial duration.  The occurrence of adverse events and complaints will be assessed at each study visit and reported to AMO 
according to Section 11.0, Adverse Events and Product Complaints.  Additionally, AMO 
will monitor incoming data following the procedures outlined in Section 15.0, Monitoring.  The Medical Monitor will ensure subjects are not exposed to additional risks by [CONTACT_203193], device- related adverse events, and device-
deficiencies that could have led to serious adverse events (Section 15.3, Safety Monitoring).  
POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
The general clinical performance of the TECNIS Next -Generation IOLs, Models ZHR00 
and ZQR00, are expected to be similar to the TECNIS Symfony control IOL regarding distance and intermediate visual acuities and safety outcomes.  An extended range of vision and improved near visual acuity and functionality may be achieved with the 
TECNIS Next -Generation IOLs, Models ZHR00 and ZQR00.  
CONCLUSION  
The hazards/risks associated with the TECNIS Next -Generation IOLs, Models ZHR00 
and ZQR00, are acceptable and within those of AMO’s other advanced optic IOLs.  The 
potential clinical benefits of the TECNIS Next -Generation IOLs, Models ZHR00 and 
ZQR00, outweigh the residual risks when the device is used as intended.  
18. RECORDS RETENTION 
All study -related correspondence, subject records, consent forms, Authorization for 
Use/Disclosure of Health Information Forms or similar medical treatment privacy law documentation, records of the distribution and use of all study products, and original case report forms should be maintained by [CONTACT_093].   
The investigator must maintain and have access to the following essential documents 
until notified by [CONTACT_1034].  Note:  This may be for a minimum of 15 years after 
completion of the study.  AMO requires notification if the inves tigator wishes to relinquish 
ownership of the data so that mutually agreed- upon arrangements can be made for 
transfer of ownership to a suitably qualified, responsible person.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  42     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  • All case report forms  
• All adverse event information (i.e., medical records, medical reports and/or 
judgments from colleagues or outside specialists who assisted in the treatment and 
follow- up of the subject)  
• Investigational supply records/inventory  
• IRB approval documentation 
• Study correspondence  
• Study agreements  
• Site visit documentation  
• Protocol(s)  
• Subject log(s)  
• Clinical Investigator’s Brochure  
• Completed subject informed consent forms and medical privacy forms (e.g., Authorization for Use/Disclosure of Health information) 
• Subject medical chart/clinic notes (Not applicable for transfer of ownership to 
AMO)  
19. TERMINATION OF THE I NVESTIGATION  
The clinical investigation will be suspended in the event of high levels of complications 
and/or adverse events that are unexpected in nature and/or severity and evaluated as to 
causality relative to the study device.  The clinical investigation may be suspended if the 
Medical Monitor or the IRB, upon review and evaluation of the clinical data, finds unacceptable clinical performance or the level of single or total complications and/or adverse events unacceptable for continuation of the investigation.  
If causality is shown not to be related to the study device, the study may be resumed in 
accordance with the IRB and regulations of the FDA.  The study will be terminated if 
causality is shown to be related to the study device.  
Additionally, the investigator or AMO may stop a subject’s participation at any time.  AMO may also stop the study at any time for reasons it determines appropriate.  
However, no suspension of the study would be made to disadv antage the study 
subjects.  Following suspension of the study for any reason, all study subjects who have 
already received treatment would continue to be followed through completion of the study visit schedule.  
20. STATISTICAL METHODS  
This section highlights the analyses to be performed for key study endpoints.  The key study timeframe for effectiveness endpoints will be 1 month and for safety endpoints the 
key study timeframe will be 6 months, although data will be reviewed at other time points 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  43     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  as well.  TECNI S Models ZHR00 and ZQR00 will both be compared to TECNIS Symfony 
control separately and independently for all analyses.  All data will be reported by [CONTACT_203194].   
20.1 ANALYSIS POPULATION 
The safety population (SP) of all subjects implanted who have available data will be 
used for all analysis.  No data imputation will be performed for missing data.  For the 
monocular endpoints, the safety population will consist of first eyes implanted with a study IOL; for binocular endpoints, the safety population will consist of subjects implanted with the same IOL in both eyes. The primary analysis population will be the safety population (SP) for all endpoints.   
20.2 PRIMARY STUDY ENDPOI NTS 
Primary Effectiveness Endpoints  
MODEL ZHR00: MONOCUL AR DISTANCE CORRECTE D NEAR VISUAL AC UITY 
(DCNVA) AT 40 CM  
The primary effectiveness endpoint for the Model ZHR00 IOL is mean (LogMAR), 
photopic, monocular, first -eye, distance corrected near visual acuity (40 cm) at 1 month 
postoperative.  Note that a lower LogMAR value is a better acuity and a higher LogMAR 
value is a poorer acuity.  The mean, SD, median, minimum, maximum and 95% confidence interval (CI) will be reported by [CONTACT_203195].   
o A statistical comparison between the Model ZHR00 and control lens groups will be 
performed using a 1- sided, [ADDRESS_242233] with an alpha set at 0.025.  The null 
hypothesis is that the mean monocular DCNVA for the Model ZHR00 eyes is worse 
than or equal to that for control eyes.  The alternate hypothesis is that the mean monocular DCNVA for Model ZHR00 eyes is better than that for control eyes.
 
Ho: μc - μ t ≤ 0 (Model ZHR00 lens is worse than (higher LogMAR) or equal  to control)  
H1: μc - μ t > 0 (Model ZHR00 lens is better (lower LogMAR) than control)  
 
where 
μt = mean LogMAR DCNVA for the Model ZHR00 lens  
μc = mean LogMAR DCNVA for control lens   
 Reject the null hypothesis if one -sided p -value ≤ 0.025.  
The success criterion is a statistically significantly lower mean LogMAR value for the 
Model ZHR00 investigational lens compared to the control lens (p ≤ 0.025).   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  44     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  MODEL ZQR00: MONOCUL AR DISTANCE CORRECTE D NEAR VISUAL ACUITY 
(DCNVA) AT 40 CM  
The primary effectiveness endpoint for the Model ZQR00 IOL is mean (LogMAR), 
photopic, monocular, first -eye, distance corrected near visual acuity (40 cm) at 1 month 
postoperative.  Note that a lower LogMAR value is a better acuity and a higher LogMAR 
value is a poorer acuity.  The mean, SD, median, minimum, maximum and 95% CI will be reported by [CONTACT_203195].   
o Analysis for the Model ZQR00 will be similar to the Model ZHR00 analysis described 
above.  A statistical comparison between the Model ZQR00 and control lens groups 
will be performed using a 1- sided, 2- sample, t -test with an alpha set at 0.025.  The 
null hypothesis is that the mean monocular DCNVA for the Model ZQR00 lens eyes is worse than or equal to that for control eyes.  The alternate hypothesis is that the 
mean monocular DCNVA for Model ZQR00 eyes is better than that for control eyes.
 
Ho: μc - μ t ≤ 0 (Model ZQR00 lens is worse than (higher LogMAR) or equal to control) 
H1: μc - μ t > 0 (Model ZQR00 lens is better (lower LogMAR) than control) 
 
where 
μt = mean LogMAR DCNVA for the Model ZQR00 lens  
μc = mean LogMAR DCNVA for control lens   
 
Reject the null hypothesis if one -sided p -value ≤ 0.025.  
The success criterion is a statistically significantly lower mean LogMAR value for the 
Model ZQR00 compared to the control lens (p ≤ 0.025).   
Primary Safety Endpoints 
MODEL ZHR00 : RATES OF ADVERSE EVENTS VS. ISO SPE RATES 
The primary Model ZHR00 safety endpoint for this study is the rate of adver se events vs. 
ISO SPE rates at [ADDRESS_242234] -eye data; adverse event 
rates for the Model ZHR00 investigational lens first eyes will be compared to the ISO SPE rates using a one- sided, exact test based on the binomial distribution.  The null 
hypothesis is that the AE rate for the Model ZHR00 investigational lens eyes is lower than or equal to the ISO SPE values, and the alternative hypothesis is that the AE rate for study eyes is higher than the ISO SPE values.  
H
o: pt ≤  p i  
H1: pt  > p i 
 
where 
pt = proportion of Model ZHR00 investigational lens eyes with the AE  
pi = proportion of eyes reported in ISO SPE rates with the AE  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  45     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Reject the null hypothesis if one -sided p -value < 0.05.  
MODEL ZQR00: RATES OF ADVERSE EVENTS VS. ISO SPE RATES 
The primary Model ZQR00 safety endpoint for this study is the rate of adverse events vs. 
ISO SPE rates at [ADDRESS_242235] -eye data; adverse event 
rates for Model ZQR00 investigational lens first eyes will be compared to the ISO SPE rates using a one- sided, exact test based on the binomial distribution.  The null 
hypot hesis is that the AE rate for Model ZQR00 investigational lens eyes is lower than or 
equal to the ISO SPE values, and the alternative hypothesis is that the AE rate for study eyes is higher than the ISO SPE values.  
H
o: pt ≤  p i  
H1: pt  > p i 
 
where 
pt = proportion of Model ZQR00 investigational lens eyes with the AE  
pi = proportion of eyes reported in ISO SPE rates with the AE  
Reject the null hypothesis if one -sided p -value < 0.05.  
20.3 ADDITIONAL ENDPOINTS  
For BCDVA, the frequency and proportion of eyes achieving each acuity line will be 
reported over time by [CONTACT_203195].  The proportion of investigational lens eyes achieving 
20/40 or better at 6 months will be compared to the ISO SPE rate for posterior chamber IOLs (all first eyes) using a one -sided, exact tes t based on binomial distribution.  The null 
hypothesis (based on the ISO guidance document) is that the proportion of 
investigational lens eyes achieving 20/40 or better BCDVA is greater than or equal to the 
ISO SPE values, and the alternative hypothesis is that the proportion of investigational lens eyes achieving 20/[ADDRESS_242236] 
eyes using a non- inferiority method.  The null hypothesis is that the mean difference 
(control minus investigational lens) between the control and investigational IOLs is 
≤-0.1 LogMAR (1 line) with the alternative hypothesis that the mean difference is 
>-0.1 LogMAR.  A 90% confidence interval (CI) of a two- sample , two -sided, t -test will be 
used for evaluation.  
For all other near endpoints, statistics similar to DCNVA described above will be used.  In addition, the frequency and proportion of first eyes achieving each line will be reported over time by [CONTACT_203195].  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  46     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  For intermediate endpoints, the mean LogMAR values will be analyzed similar to 
BCDVA described above.  The frequency and proportion of first eyes achieving each line 
will also be reported over time by [CONTACT_203195].  
For defocus results, the defocus curve will be produced by [CONTACT_203195].  The diopters of defocus where the mean visual acuity 20/[ADDRESS_242237] will be used for ordinal data, and Fisher’s exact 
test will be used for categorical data.  The null hypothesis is that there is no difference 
between responses, and the alternative hypothesis is that there is a difference between 
responses.  Two- sided testing and alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_242238] deviation, 
median, minimum, maximum and 90% confidence intervals will be presented by [CONTACT_203194].  
The frequency and percentage of medical findings, lens findings and non- directed 
ocular/visual symptoms will be reported over time by [CONTACT_203196].  
20.[ADDRESS_242239] distance for the chart.  Descriptive statistics will typi[INVESTIGATOR_203166] (N), mean, standard deviation (SD),  median, 
minimum (Min) and maximum (Max) as appropriate for continuous variables.  For continuous variables, statistical tests (e.g., t -test) assuming normality will generally be 
used.  For categorical data, the frequency and proportion will be reported and Fisher’s exact test or Chi -square test will generally be applied.  For ordinal categorical data, the 
frequency and proportion will be reported with the Wilcoxon Rank -Sum test generally 
used.   
20.5 INTERIM REPORTS  
Although interim study progress reports will be conducted for this study, all masking of study subjects and masked study technicians will be maintained and interim reports will not be disseminated to investigators/site personnel.  
20.6 SAMPLE SIZE CALCULAT IONS 
For the primary endpoint of distance corrected near visual acuity, there is 90% power 
to detect a 1 -line or greater difference in mean visual acuity between the investigational 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Versi on 1.0  47     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  lens groups and the control group (assume one- sided testing with an alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_242240] deviation of 1.6  lines) with [ADDRESS_242241] sensitivity there is 80% power to detect a non- inferiority margin of 0.15 log 
units between the investigational lens groups and the control group (assume one -sided 
alpha=0.[ADDRESS_242242] deviation of 0.34) with 65 subjects in each lens group.  
If the dropout rate is assumed at 10%, approximately 73 subjects will be implanted in 
each lens group to achieve a minimum of 65 subjects in each lens group at 1 and 6 
months.  
 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  49     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX B EQUIPMENT  LIST 
The following equipment will be supplied to an investigative site for the duration of the 
study provided that the site does not already have such equipment available for use.  This equipment loan will be documented in the Clinical Trial Agreement, which indicates 
that the equipment is to be returned to Abbott Medical Optics at the completion of the study.  
• M&S Technologies CTS -1000 Smart System© Computerized Vision Testing 
System, including laptop computer, tablet, and glare bracket 
• Good- Lite EVS- 1500 retro- illuminated visual acuity light box and stand  
• Four Good- Lite ETDRS near visual acuity charts (100% contrast) on two cards, 
for a test distance of  40 cm  
• Neutral density trial frame lenses for mesopic testing 
• +0.12 D trial frame lenses  
• Gossen Light Meter  
• Tape measure (meters)  
• Colvard Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187] (if site does not use a NeurOptics pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187]) 
• AMO insertion systems:  
o ONE SERIES Ultra Implantation System with cartridges, or  
o UNFOLDER Platinum 1 Series Implantation System with cartridges  
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  50     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX C MAXIMUM P LUS MANIFEST REFRACTION TECHNIQUE  WITH 
CYLINDER REFINEMENT  
Manifest refraction testing will be performed using a self -illuminating light box and 100% 
contrast ETDRS charts designed for 4.0 meters with the room lighting set to that 
required for photopic distance visual acuity testing (85 cd/m2).  NOTE:  Objective 
refraction by [CONTACT_203197] a starting point for the Manifest Refraction.  Always ensure that the endpoint of refraction is maximum plus (or 
minimum minus) power that yields maximum visual acuity.  
1) Occlude the fellow eye.  
2) SPHERE: Starting with the objective refraction, refine the sphere to yield best visual 
acuity.  Important:  Add plus power (or reduce minus) until subject demonstrates  at 
least a [ADDRESS_242243] visual acuity (fogging).  Then step down to the most plus 
(or least minus) sphere power until visual acuity and clarity show no improvement. 
3) CYLINDER AXIS: Refine cylinder with a cross -cylinder and the objective cylinder 
refraction as the starting point.  Refine axis first and power second, since the correct axis can be found with an incorrect power, but the correct power cannot be found 
with a n incorrect axis.  
a. Direct the subject’s attention to 1 line above (larger letters) the best visual acuity.  With the trial cylinder (axis and power) in the phoropter, introduce cross -cylinder 
for axis refinement.  When asking the subject which cross -cylind er axis position 
is better, “one or two?”, remind the subject to look at different letters on the line and report preference based on the overall  clarity of the letters.  
b. Refine the axis based on the subject’s responses, using small steps (less than five d egrees), until the subject reports no difference in the two choices.  
c. Cylinder axis may be further confirmed by [CONTACT_203198]:  Slowly rotate the trial 
cylinder in one direction until the subject reports blurring and note the axis.  
Rotate the trial cylinder in the opposite direction past the presumed axis until the 
subject reports blurring, again noting the axis. The average of the two noted axes 
can be taken as the final astigmatism axis.  
4) CYLINDER POWER:  Set the cross cylinder to refine cylinder power and pr esent 
choices to the subject, reminding the subject to look at different letters on the line 
and report preference based on overall clarity of the letters.  Reduce or increase trial cylinder power accordingly.  
a. Maintain the spherical equivalent throughout cylinder power refinement by [CONTACT_203199].  
5) SPHERE CHECK: Introduce plus sphere in 0.[ADDRESS_242244] reports and demonstrates  a reduction in visual acuity.  Then reduce sphere power in 
0.25 D steps until visual acuity and clarity show no improvement. 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  51     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX D REFRACTION ADJUSTMENTS  
Postoperative study manifest refractions are to be performed using the 100% ETDRS 
charts at a distance of 4.[ADDRESS_242245] 
distance and refraction distance.  The adjustment required (in diopters) is 1/test distance 
(in meters).  To adjust a 4.0- meter refractio n to optical infinity, -0.25 D is to be added to 
the sphere of the refraction to obtain a true distance (infinity) correction.  On the other hand, to adjust optical infinity to a 4.0- meter test distance, +0.25 D is to be given.  In the 
case where the refraction distance (4.0 meters) and the vision test distance (4.0 meters) are the same, no adjustment is necessary.  The following table lists the refraction adjustments required for the various vision tests in this study:  
Refraction Adjustments for Vision Tes ting 
 
Vision Test  Test 
Distance  Correction/Adjustment  
Uncorrected distance visual acuity (UCDVA)  4.0 m  +0.[ADDRESS_242246] corrected distance visual acuity 
(BCDVA)  4.0 m  No adjustment; ETDRS Rx only  
Best corrected distance defocus curve testing  4.0 m  No adjustment; ETDRS Rx only  
Uncorrected intermediate visual acuity 
(UCIVA)  66 cm  No adjustment  
Distance corrected intermediate visual acuity 
(DCIVA) , 100% and 10% contrast  [ADDRESS_242247] corrected intermediate visual acuity 
(BCIVA, with add) ,10% contrast  66 cm  -0.25 D added to ETDRS sphere Rx  
Uncorrected near visual acuity  
(UCNVA)  40 cm  No adjustment  
Distance corrected near visual acuity 
(DCNVA)  [ADDRESS_242248] sensitivity  2.5 m  +0.12 D added to ETDRS sphere Rx  
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  52     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX E INSTRUCTI ONS FOR USING THE M&S SYSTEM  
Distance and intermediate visual acuity, low -contrast intermediate visual acuity, defocus, 
manifest cylinder defocus and contrast sensitivity testing will be performed using the 
M&S Technologies CTS -1000 Smart System© computerized vision testing system (M&S 
System).  This system provides descending LogMAR charts with proportionally spaced SLOAN letters at 100% contrast for high contrast visual acuity and defocus testing, 10% contrast for low -contrast intermediate visual acuity and appropriate contrast levels for 
contrast sensitivity testing.  Each presentation is randomized and is consistent and 
repeatable.  The system is calibrated for both distance to subject and pi[INVESTIGATOR_41463]/inch so that 
optotypes precisely follow ANSI Z80.21 -2010 and ISO 8596:[ADDRESS_242249] to size, 
spacing between optotypes and spacing between lines.    
Figure 4:  Example of LogMAR 4.0 meter chart screen  
 
The M&S System background luminance is automatically set to 85 cd/m2 (range of 
80-110 cd/m2 is acceptable) for photopic testing, and 3 ± 0.5 cd/m2 for mesopic testing.  
Room lighting is to be set to a level lower than the illumination from the laptop screen.  Ambient lighting should be dim to dark (less than 50 lux) to maximize pupil size.  No 
surface (including reflective surfaces) within the subject’s field of vision should be 
brighter than the chart background in luminance.  The room lighting and screen luminance will be verified each time the computer is turned on using the AMO- provided, 
auto- adjusting, monitor -calibration system to ensure light levels are appropriate.  
The M&S System will be set up to perform required visual tests in a specific order, with prompts on the screen to allow the technician to set up the subject for monocular or binocular testing, refraction adjustments as needed and uncorrected or best corrected testing.  Letters on all charts will appear randomly, with the technician controlling 
movement through charts based on subject responses.  
As a subject completes a visual acuity line, the technician will select the total number  of 
letters correctly read for that line on the handheld controller, press “Enter” and then 

ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  53     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  confirm the number of letters correct at the next prompt.  The M&S System will then 
advance to the next line of testing and the process will repeat.  The system will end the test when the subject no longer has any correct responses.  The number of letters 
correctly read will be displayed on the laptop screen, along with the LogMAR value and 
Snellen acuity.  Record the total number of letters read.  A similar process will be done for contrast sensitivity grating responses.  Once a test is completed, follow the prompts on the computer screen to start the next test.  
Test results are stored in the M&S computer and a hard copy will be printed and 
validated as a back -up. 
 
 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  54     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX F INSTRUCTIONS FOR DISTANCE VIS UAL ACUITY TESTING  
For distance visual acuities, the M&S System laptop should be placed at a test distance 
of 4.[ADDRESS_242250] for testing distance visual acuities.  A laptop setting may be used to reverse charts for rooms that require “folding” via a mirror to reach a distance 
of 4.[ADDRESS_242251] or “folded”, measure and record the test distance accurately.  If the room set -up does not allow the computer to be placed at precisely 
4.0 meters, the M&S System can be adjusted to account for the actual test distance 
used.  
The M&S System will be set up to perform the required distance visual acuity tests in a specific order, with prompts on the screen to allow the technician to set up the subject for monocular or binocular testing, refraction adjustment as needed and uncorrected or 
best corrected testing.   
Subjects should be reminded prior to testing that squinting is not allowed.  The technician is to observe the subject to ensure the subject is not  squinting during visual 
acuity testing.  If squinting is observed, the subject is to be reminded by [CONTACT_203200].   
Distance visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the visit schedule in Appendix A .  Monocular testing is  required on the first eye implanted only; to test 
subjects monocularly, occlude the second eye in the phoropter or with an occluder if trial lenses are used.   
Visual acuity measurements are based on the total number of correctly read letters.  Subjects should be persuaded to read the smallest letters possible even if they have to guess.  Follow the testing process listed in Appendix E .  At the end of the test, the 
number of letters correctly read will be displayed on the laptop screen, along with the 
LogM AR value and Snellen acuity.  Record the total number of letters read in the EDC 
system.   
 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  55     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX G INSTRUCTI ONS FOR INTERMEDIATE  VISUAL ACUITY 
TESTING  
Intermediate visual acuity will be measured using the M&S System at a test distance of 
[ADDRESS_242252] is 
to be reminded by [CONTACT_203200].   
The M&S System will be set up to perform the required intermediate visual acuity tests in a specific order, with prompts on the screen to allow the technician to set up the subject 
for monocular or binocular testing, refraction adjustment as needed, and uncorrected or 
best corrected testing.   
Subjects should be reminded prior to testing that squinting is not allowed.  Trial frames should be used for visual acuity testing with careful observation by [CONTACT_203201].  If squinting is observed, the subject is to be 
reminded by [CONTACT_203200].   
Intermediate visual acuity measurements are to be performed per the visit schedule in Appendix A .  Both 100% contrast and 10% contrast intermediate acuity tests will be 
done on the M&S System.  Monocular testing is required on the first eye implanted only; to test subjects monocularly, occlude the second eye in the phoropter or with an occluder if trial lenses are used.   
Visual acuity measurements are based on the total number of correctly read letters.  
Subjects should be persuaded to read the smallest letters possible even if they have to 
guess.  Follow the testing process listed in Appendix E .  At the end of the test, the 
number of letters correctly read will be displayed on the laptop screen, along with the LogMAR value and Snellen acuity.  Record the total number of letters read in the EDC 
system.   
BEST CORRECTED INTEM EDIATE VISUAL ACUITY TESTING WITH ADD (B CIVA):  
First eye monocular best corrected intermediate visual acuity (10% contrast) with 
minimum add will be performed to determine the minimum amount of add necessary to achieve an intermediate visual acuity similar to the best corrected distance visual acuity.  
BCIVA is to be tested at 66 cm under photopic conditions using the M&S System at 
[ADDRESS_242253] be achieved : 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  56     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  BCIVA similar to the subject’s BCDVA .  Document the amount of add necessary 
to achieve a BCIVA that matches the subject’s BCDVA in the first eye.  For example, 
if the subject’s BCDVA is 20/20, the minimum ADD power will be the amount of add 
necessary to achieve a BCIVA of 20/[ADDRESS_242254] the minimum add power and BCIVA (# of letters correct).  
Increasing ADD power does not lead to improvement in near visual acuity .  
When an additional +0.50 add (in two +0.25 D increments) does not increase the subject’s visual acuity by [ADDRESS_242255] the minimum add power and BCIVA (# of letters correct).  For example, the subject shows progressive improvement in intermediate visual acuity and achieves 20/25  with +0.75 add over 
the distance correction.  Increasing the add further by +0.50 (in two +0.25 D increments) only allows the subject to get 20/25+2 with a total of +1.[ADDRESS_242256] a  minimum add of  +0.[ADDRESS_242257].   
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  57     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX H INSTRUCTIONS FOR NEAR VISUAL ACUITY TESTING  
Near visual acuity will be measured using a using Good -Lite 100% ETDRS near charts 
designed for 40 cm and the Good -Lite self -illuminated and self -calibrated illumina tion 
box.  The Good -Lite illumination box is self -illuminated and self -calibrates to a light level 
of approximately 85 cd/m2 (range of 80–110 cd/m2 is acceptable).  Room lighting is to be 
set at a level lower than the illumination from the light box, per m anufacturer instructions.  
Ambient luminance should be from dim to dark to maximize pupil size.  No surface 
(including reflective surfaces) within the subject’s field of vision should exceed the chart 
background in luminance.  
The light box should be placed at a test distance of [ADDRESS_242258] be retained as source documentation.  A reference chart for the conversion of the number of correctly -read ETDRS letters to a 
Snellen line equivalent is provided later in this section.  
PROCEDURE:  Begin with monocular uncorrected near visual acuity testing for the first eye implanted, and instruct subjects to start from the top, reading each line from left to right until they cannot read any additional letters.  Alternate the near chart per the score 
sheet and repeat the testing with distance correction in place.  For binocular testing, 
change the near charts per the score sheet and test uncorrected and distance corrected 
binocular acuities.  Record the total number of letters read for each test condition in the EDC system.  
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  58     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  Conversion Reference Chart for GOOD -LITE Near (40 cm) Chart (ETDRS)  
Standard Snellen 
Line Equivalent  Number of 
ETDRS Letters 
Read at [ADDRESS_242259] Snellen 
Line Equivalent  Number of 
ETDRS Letters 
Read at 40 cm   
20/10  85  20/50  49 
84  48 
83  
20/60  47 
20/13  82  46 
81  45 
80  44 
79  43 
78  
20/80  42 
20/16  77  41 
76  40 
75  39 
74  38 
73  
20/100  37 
20/20  72  36 
71  35 
70  34 
69  33 
68  
20/126  32 
20/25  67  31 
66  30 
65  29 
64  28 
63  
20/160  27 
20/32  62  26 
61  25 
60  24 
59  23 
58  
20/200  22 
20/40  57  21 
56  20 
55  19 
54  18 
53  
>20/200  17 
20/50  52  16 
51  15 
50    
 
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  59     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX I INSTRUCTIONS FOR DEPTH OF FOCUS TESTI NG 
All depth of focus testing is to be performed under photopic conditions using the M&S 
System at a test distance of 4.[ADDRESS_242260] eye implanted will be tested at the 1-
month visit.    
Monocular Depth of Focus Testing (1 -month visit) :  With the subject’s distance correction 
in place for the first eye and the second eye occluded, defocus the image by +2.[ADDRESS_242261] to read as many letters as possible on the M&S system, even if they have to 
guess.  The technician will control movement through charts based on subject responses and the system will end the testing when a threshold is reached.  The number 
of letters correctly read and the LogMAR score will be displayed on the laptop screen; 
record the total number of letters correct in EDC.  Continue to change the defocus in -0.[ADDRESS_242262]’s 
distance correction.  
Binocular Depth of Focus Testing (6 -month visit) :  Begin binocular testing by [CONTACT_203202] +2.[ADDRESS_242263] to read as many letters as they can on the M&S system, even 
if they have to guess.  The technician will control movement through charts based on 
subject responses and the system will end the testing when a threshold is reached.  The number of letters correctly read and the LogMAR score will be displayed on the laptop screen; record the total number of letters correct in EDC.  Continue to change the defocus in -0.[ADDRESS_242264]’s distance correction.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  60     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX J INSTRUCTIONS FOR MANIFEST CYLINDER DEFOCUS 
TESTING  
All manifest cylinder defocus testing is to be performed binocularly on all subjects at the 
1-month study visit under photopic conditions using the M&S System at a test distance 
of 4.[ADDRESS_242265] refraction (sphere and cylinder) in place 
for both eyes.  Add cylindrical power -0.[ADDRESS_242266] refraction (or place at 90 axis for subjects with 
no refractive cylinder).  Start the test by [CONTACT_203203] M&S system, even if they have to guess.  The technician will control 
movement through charts based on subject responses and the system will end the 
testing when a threshold is reached.  The number of letters correctly read and the LogMAR score will be displayed on the laptop screen; record the total number of letters correct in EDC.  Continue to change the amount of in -0.[ADDRESS_242267]’s distance 
correction and record the number of letters correct for each cylinder lens.  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  61     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX K  INSTRUCTIONS FOR PUPIL SIZE MEASUREMENT S 
Pupil size under photopic and photopic with glare conditions should be measured by a 
Colvard pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187] (Oasis Medical), a NeurOptics pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187] (NeurOptics, Inc.) or a pupil card.   A Colvard or NeurOptics pupi[INVESTIGATOR_203167].  For consistency, the same method  should be used throughout the study.  Pupil size should be recorded to the 
nearest one- half mi llimeter (one- tenth millimeter for NeurOptics).  
PHOTOPIC PUPIL SIZE:  
Photopic pupil size for each eye should be measured under the same lighting conditions as the photopic distance visual acuity testing .  To measure photopic pupil size, have the 
subject look at a spot in the distance (without glasses) and allow one eye to be exposed 
to the ambient room lighting while measuring the other pupil of the other eye.  Repeat the measurement on the second eye, and record the photopic pupil size for both eyes.   
PHOTOPIC WITH GLARE PUPIL SIZE:  
Photopic with glare pupil size for each eye should be measured under the same lighting conditions as the photopic with glare contrast sensitivity testing.  To measure photopic 
with glare pupil size, have the subject (without glasses) look at a spot on the photopic 
with glare contrast sensitivity chart and allow one eye to continuously be exposed to the 
lighting condition while measuring the pupil of the other eye.  Repeat the measurement 
on the second eye, and record the photopic with glare pupil size for both eyes.   
MESOPIC PUPIL SIZE:  
Mesopic pupil size for each eye should be measured under mesopic conditions.  Room lights should be off and the 1.5 ND filter placed in front of  the M&S System to reduce the 
lighting to 3 cd/m
2.  After [ADDRESS_242268] (without 
glasses) look at a spot on the mesopic contrast sensitivity chart and allow one eye to 
continuously be exposed to the lighting condition while measuring the pupil of the other eye.  Repeat the measurement on the second eye, and record the mesopic pupil size for both eyes.   
MESOPIC WITH GLARE PUPIL SIZE:  
Mesopic with glare pupil size for each eye should be measured under mesopic with glar e 
contrast sensitivity conditions.  Room lights should be off and the 1.5 ND filter placed in 
front of the M&S System to reduce the lighting to 3 cd/m2, with the glare lights on.  Have 
the subject (without glasses) look at a spot on the mesopic with glare contrast sensitivity 
chart and allow one eye to continuously be exposed to the lighting condition while 
measuring the pupil of the other eye.  Repeat the measurement on the second eye, and record the mesopic with glare pupil size for both eyes.   
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  62     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX  L INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONTRAST SENSITIVITY  TESTING  
Contrast sensitivity testing will be measured using the M&S system for sine -wave 
gratings (1.5, 3, 6, 12 and/or 18 cycles per degree).  Testing will be done under mesopic, 
mesopic with glare and photopic with glare lighting conditions.  The test distance for 
the M&S system is 8 feet (2.5 meters).   Mesopic testing without glare will be performed 
before contrast sensitivity with glare testing.   
This test is to be done monocularly at the 1- month and binocularly  at the [ADDRESS_242269], and a refraction adjustment of +0.[ADDRESS_242270] grating (vertical, horizontal, tilted left or tilted right).  For each grating 
presented, the subject will have to identify or guess the orientation of the grating.  After an automated protocol, contrast sensitivity values will be displayed on the laptop screen for 1.5, 3, 6, 1 2 and/or 18 cpd.   
Monocular Testing (1- month visit) :  The test will begin with the mesopic without glare 
lighting condition.  Dim to dark room lighting will be used along with a 1.5 ND filter in front of the M&S system laptop computer screen.  Dark adapt the subject for [ADDRESS_242271]’s distance correction with the +0.[ADDRESS_242272]’s first eye implanted and an occluder in front of the second eye implanted in the trial frames before removing the 1.5 ND filter from the front of the M&S System.   
Begin testing and instruct the subject to r eport the orientation of the contrast grating out 
loud as they view the grating, documenting the subject responses on the M&S tablet.  
Encourage the subject to continue through all gratings, even if they have to guess.  The M&S System will advance to the next set of gratings based on the technician input of the subject’s responses.  Record the contrast sensitivity percentages displayed on the 
laptop computer for all the spatial frequencies in EDC.  
Proceed to mesopic with glare and photopic with glare testing, measuring the pupil size per Appendix K  prior to beginning each test.  
Binocular Testing (6- month visit) :  The test will begin with the mesopic without glare 
lighting condition.  Dim to dark room lighting will be used along with a 1.5 ND filter in front of the M&S system laptop computer screen.  Dark adapt the subject for [ADDRESS_242273] the 
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  63     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  subject’s distance correction with the +0.[ADDRESS_242274]’s first eye implanted and an occluder in 
front of the second eye implanted in the trial frames before removing the 1.5 ND filter 
from the front of the M&S System.   Begin testing and instruct the subjects  to report the 
orientation of the contrast grating out loud as they view the grating, documenting the 
subject responses on the M&S tablet.  Encourage the subject to continue through all gratings, even if they have to guess.  The M&S System will advance to the next set of 
gratings based on the technician input of the subject’s responses.  Record the contrast 
sensitivity percentages displayed on the laptop computer for all the spatial frequencies in 
EDC.  
Proceed to mesopic with glare and photopic with glare testing, measuring the pupil size 
per Appendix K  prior to beginning each test.  
  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  64     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  APPENDIX M SLIT -LAMP EXAM RATINGS  
A.  Ratings of Aqueous Cells and Flare  
For consistency across study sites, the SUN (Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature) 
Working Group Gr ading Scheme is to be used for grading of anterior chamber cells and 
flare as reported in: Standardization of uveitis nomenclature for reporting clinical data.  Results of The First International Workshop; The standardization of uveitis nomenclature 
(SUN) working group.  Am J Ophthalmol 2005;140:509- 516. 
CELLS 
Grade Cells in Field (Field is a 1x1 mm slit beam)  
0 <1 
0.5+ 1 - 5 
1+ 6 - 15 
2+ 16 - 25 
3+ 26 - 50 
4+ >50 
 
FLARE 
Grade Description  
0 None  
1+ Faint  
2+ Moderate (iris and lens details clear)  
3+ Marked (iris and lens details hazy)  
4+ Intense (fibrin or plastic aqueous)  
B.  Ratings of Corneal Edema 
Corneal edema should be classified according to the haziness of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_2130], the 
number of microcysts  observed, and the clouding of the stroma.  
Amount  Grade Description  
None 0 Normal transparency:  
a. No epi[INVESTIGATOR_32468]-epi[INVESTIGATOR_32469]  
b. No microcysts  
c. No stromal cloudiness  
Trace +1 a. Barely discernable localized epi[INVESTIGATOR_32468] -epi[INVESTIGATOR_32469], and/or  
b. 1 to 20 microcysts, and/or  
c. Barely discernable localized stromal cloudiness  
Mild +2 a. Faint but definite localized or generalized epi[INVESTIGATOR_018], sub -epi[INVESTIGATOR_32470]/cloudiness, and/or  
b. 21-50 microcysts  
Moderate  +3 a. Significant localized or generalized epi[INVESTIGATOR_018], sub -epi[INVESTIGATOR_32471]/cloudiness and/or  
b. 51-100 microcysts  
Severe +4 a. Definite widespread epi[INVESTIGATOR_32472], giving dull glass 
appearance to cornea or numerous coalescent bullae (please note the 
number and location of bullae), and/or  
b. >100 microcysts or bullae, and/or  
c. Numerous striae (please note the number and location of striae or folds)  
ABBOTT MEDICAL OPTICS INC.  CONFIDENTIAL  
Version 1.0  65     PR/EDOF -121-NGPC  C.  Posterior Capsule Striae Grading Scale  
The following five- point grading scale is to be used for rating striae in the posterior 
capsule:  
Amount  Grade Description  
None  0 None  
Trace  +1 One detectable, barely noticeable striae  
Mild +2 One or two prominent striae  
Moderate  +3 Three or more prominent striae, but visibility of retina is 
not impacted  
Severe  +4 Three or more prominent striae affecting visualization of 
retina  
 
D.  Posterior Capsule Opacification Grading Scale 
Below is the five -point grading scale to be used for PCO determination: 
Amount  Grade Description  
None  0 Normal posterior capsule with no area of opacity.  Red reflex 
bright.  
Trace  +1 Some loss of transparency involving the posterior capsule.  
Red reflex fairly bright  
Mild +[ADDRESS_242275] of the posterior capsule.  There may be a few Elschnig’s 
pearls in the posterior capsule.  Red reflex mildly diminished.  
Moderate  +3 Moderate loss of transparency with difficulty visualizing the 
retina.  There may be multiple Elschnig’s pearls in the 
posterior capsule.  Red reflex markedly diminished.  
Severe  +[ADDRESS_242276] confluent Elschnig’s pearls 
and fibrous scarring.  Red reflex barely visible.  
 
E.  IOL Glistenings  
Use the following scale to grade IOL glistenings, using a slit beam 2.0 mm wide and 
10.0 mm long:  
Amount  Grade Description  
None  0 No glistenings visible  
Rare  +0.5 <10 glistenings visible  
Trace  [PHONE_518] glistenings visible  
Mild [PHONE_519] glistenings visible  
Moderate  [PHONE_520] glistenings visible  
Severe  +4 ≥40 glistenings visible  
 