Protocol (SPI[INVESTIGATOR_181652])  
Administrative Information  
1. Title: Obesity risk in African American women is determined by a diet -by-phenotype 
interaction  
Trial acronym: CHAMPI[INVESTIGATOR_45372] ( A Clinical Health Approach that Motivates Participation and 
Inspi[INVESTIGATOR_181653])  
2a Trial Registration  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
2b Trial registration data set  
N/A 
3. Protocol Version  
Issue Date:  June 2019   
Authors: Catia Martins, Barbara Gower, Laura Lee Goree  
4. Funding  
1R01 DK115483 -01A1 National Institutes of Health - National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).   
 
5a Roles and responsibilities: contributorship  
Authors contributions  
Barbara Gower conceived of the study and is the grant holder. Barbara Gower, Timothy Garvey, 
Kevin Fontaine, and Gareth Dutton initiated study design.  Barbara Gower, Timothy Garvey, 
Kevin Fontaine, Gareth Dutton, and David Bryan helped with implementation. Catia Martins and 
Barbara Gower prepared the statistical plan. All authors contributed to the refinement of the 
study protocol and approved the final version . 
5b Roles and responsibilities: sponsor contact [CONTACT_181658]: National Institutes of Health - National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)  
Sponsor’s Reference:  
Contact [CONTACT_5627]:  Padma Maruvada  
Telephone:  [PHONE_3889]  
Email:  [EMAIL_3562]  
5c Roles and responsibilities: sponsor and funder  
This funding source had no role in the design of this study and will not have any role during its 
execution, analyses, interpretation of the data, or decision to submit results.  
5d Roles and responsibilities: committees  
Principal investigators : Design and conduct of trial, preparations of protocol and revisions, 
publication of study reports, agreement of final protocol , reviewing progress of study and if 
necessary agreeing changes to the protocol to facilitate the smooth running of the study.  Barbara 
Gower, Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_181654], study design, database integrity, 
and study conduct.  
Holly Wyatt, MD –Professor in the Department of Nutrition Sciences w ill be  appointed as the 
Independent Safety Monitor to provide independent monitoring and review of the protocol every 
6 months.  
Introduction  
6a Background and rationale  
Introduction: The Scientific Premise of this study is that the high level of obesity displayed by 
[CONTACT_148316] (AA) women is due to their ability to secrete large amounts of insulin when 
high glycemic index foods  are consumed.   
Mechanisms:  When AA women eat a diet rich in starchy or sugary food (a “high -glycemic” diet 
that stimulates insulin secretion), the food that is eaten is stored as fat rather than being burned as 
fuel.   
Existing knowledge:  AA women, as a group, are more obese than AA men or Caucasians of 
either sex.   We believe that this is due to the unique biology of AA women. Specifically, AA 
women secrete a lot of insulin when they eat sugary foods.    Because insulin promotes  fat 
storage , this could make the food unavailable to burn as fuel and  explain greater body fat in AA 
women. In fact, AA women have lower energy requirements than white women, and are more 
energetically efficient.   High insulin secretion, however, is only one factor that determines 
insulin action; another major factor is insulin sensitivity.   Our data have shown that over time, 
weight (fat) gain in obesity -prone AA women is higher in those who are more insulin sensitive, 
whereas “obesity -resistant” AA women have lower insulin sensitivity.   Our data also suggest that 
the fat -storing actions of insulin in AA women are worsened by a diet that promotes insulin 
secretion.   This diet is called a “high -glycemic diet.”   Finally, our data have shown that over  time 
weight (fat) gain in AA women is predicted by [CONTACT_181659] (called diet “glycemic load”).    
Need for a trial:  We think that AA women will have an easier time losing weight if they eat a 
“low glycemic” diet.   In fact, we have seen in our research that AA women lose 50% more fat 
with low - vs high -glycemic diet.   This project will test this in a larger group of women, under 
controlled conditions.   We will also see if it is easier to keep the weight off with a low glycemic 
diet.  Additionally, we will determine if insulin sensitivity affects the weight loss response to diet 
composition. This study will test the effect of high and low glycemic diets for weight loss and 
weight -loss-maintenance in obese AA women.   
 
6b Background and rationale: choice of comparators  
Explanation for choice of comparators :  
We will be comparing a low glycemic diet versus a high glycemic diet . These diets were chosen  
based on our previous research mentioned above.  
 
7. Objectives  
Specific objectives  or hypotheses  
1.1 Research hypothesis   
AA women with lower S I and/or higher AIRg  will lose more FM when on low -CHO, versus low -
fat diet, and that this effect would be modulated by [CONTACT_181660] (REE, TEE or ME) . 
2. Study objectives  
To examine the independent and interactive effects of S I, AIRg, and diet with changes in fat 
mass (FM), resting (REE) and total energy expenditure (TEE), and mechanical efficiency (ME) 
in AA women with obesity during weight loss.  
 
2.1 Primary objective  
To examine the independent and interactive effects of S I, AIRg, and diet on changes in fat mass 
in African American women with obesity.  
2.2 Secondary objectives  
To characterize REE, TEE, and ME following low -CHO, versus low -fat diet.  
8. Trial design  
The CHAMPI[INVESTIGATOR_181655] a  two-arm randomized clinical trial.  Randomization 
(1:1) was performed  using a computer -generated randomization scheme prepared with PROC 
PLAN in SAS Ver. 9.4.  
 
Methods: Participants, interventions, and outcomes  
9. Study setting  
Data w ill be collected from  healthy, but obese, AA women in the Birmingham, AL , metro area  in 
The [LOCATION_002] of America . Study testing will be  performed in the Core facilities of the Center 
for Clinical and Translational Science (CCTS), Nutrition Obesity Research Center (NORC), and 
Diabetes Research Center (DRC) at UAB.  
10. Eligibility criteria:  
Participants will provid e written, informed consent before  the start of the  study (see Appendix 1 
for sample Informed Consent Form).  
Inclusion criteria  
Participants eligible for the study must comply with all of the following  at randomization:  
1. Age 19 -65 years  
2. African American female  
3. BMI 30 -45 kg/m2  
4. Sedentary to moderately active  
5. Normal menstrual cycle in premenopausal women  
6. Normal glucose tolerance based on HbA1c less than 6.0%  
Exclusion criteria  
1. History of eating disorder  
2. Daily use of tobacco (>1 pk/wk)  
3. Change in weight greater than 5 lb in the previous 3 mo nths 
4. Presence of any condition (e.g. PCOS) or use of any medication (e.g., glucocorticoid) 
deemed by [CONTACT_181661].   
11a Interventions: description  
Participants w ill be  randomized to either low -fat or low -CHO hypocaloric diets for 10wks, 
followed by a [ADDRESS_214336] calorimetry, 
by 1.5 (PA factor), and all participants will receive an individualized dietary prescription 
throughout the weight loss phase (60% of estimated energy needs or 40 % energy deficit) and 
during the 4 -week weight stabilization period (energy balance (EB)). During the weight stable 
phase, diets will be adjusted if weight is not stable. All the food for the duration of Phases 1 and 
2 was delivered to the participants’ ho mes on a weekly basis. The low -fat diet was aligned with 
the USDA guidelines ( http://health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2015/ guidelines/), and was comprised 
of 55% CHO, 20% fat, and 25% protein . The low -CHO diet was comprised of 25% CHO, 55% 
fat and 25% protein. Both diets emphasized complex over simple CHO, and allowed dairy 
products, fruits, and vegetables, within the CHO allowance of each diet.    
This will be followed by a 6 -month weight maintenance phase with dietary prescription only , 
where p articipants will provide their own food . There will be monthly peer group support 
meetings with the dietitian to discuss nutrition education  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (such as food label reading, 
portion sizes, tips on eating out, etc). Participants will individually report their body weight to 
the dietitian and turn in an [ADDRESS_214337]  every month for 6 months.  
 
11b Interventions: modifications  
On 06/17/[ADDRESS_214338] intervention  (week 14)  IVGTT  and Mixed Meal 
Tolerance tests were omitted from the protocol. The Oral Glucose Tolerance Test at screening 
was replaced with measurement of Hemoglobin A1c  finger stick (choice of at home or in 
person).  Food was delivered to participants home  via a commercial provider . The REE and 
Exercise tests were optional , if participants were not comfortable completing these in -person 
visits.  Participants were given the option to complete the TEE visit at home or in -person.  The 
weekly in -person meetings with the dietitian were moved to a Zoom or phone call and the 
monthly peer group meetings in Phase 3 were moved to Zoom . Food records were emailed  
and/or discussed via phone call, with food intake and body weight reported.  
 
11c Interventions: adherance  
Strategies used to improve adherence to intervention protocols included weekly phone calls  with 
participants to report previous week’s specific food intake , report current body weight, and 
troubleshooting/support from a Registered Dietitian . Procedures for monitoring adherence 
include  the measurement of respi[INVESTIGATOR_181656], body weight  and 
composition by b ioelectrical Impedance A nalysis and blood draw for the quantification of -
hydroxybutyrate, insulin, glucose, triglycerides, and cholesterol .  
 
 
11d Interventions: concomitant care  
Participants w ill be  prohibited from participating in other weight loss programs (diet, exercise, 
and/or medications that induce weight loss).  Participants w ill be instructed to continue their usual 
physical activity while in the study.  
 
12. Outcomes  
Main outcome measures : SI and AIRg w ill be  measured at baseline with an intravenous glucose 
tolerance test, body composition with bioimpedance at baseline and Wk10 . REE and body 
composition will also be  measured at week 5.  REE, TEE, and mechanical efficiency ( ME) will 
be measured with indirect calorimetry, doubly labeled water, and a submaximal bike test, 
respectively, at baseline and Wk14.  
 
13. Participant timeline  
Participants were enrolled between June [ADDRESS_214339] 202 3. Participants will complete  10 
weeks of  hypocaloric diet, 4 weeks of weight stabilization, and 6 months of weight loss 
maintenance. See figure 1.  
 
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the study design.  
 
14. Sample size  
This study was powered for differences in FM loss between the two diet groups. Our published 
data indicate that AA (both men and women) lose more FM when consuming a LG vs HG diet 
over 16 weeks  (1). Subgroup analysis within only the AA women (n=17), for only the [ADDRESS_214340] more FM with the LG diet [4.5  1.0 (SEM) 
kg] vs the HG diet [2.0 + 0.9 (SEM) kg] at a significance level of P=0.113. Based on these 
numbers, with 74 women (37/ group) we would have 80% power to detect a difference of 2.5 kg 
in FM loss between diets.   
15. Recruitment  
We will recruit from the local communities (UAB, city of Birmingham, and Jefferson and Shelby 
[CONTACT_181662]) via radio, newspaper, web -based advertisement, television advertisement, Research 
Match, UAB Reporter, word of mouth, and posting of flyers . 
 

Methods: Assignment of interventions  
16a Allocation: sequence generation  
After baseline testing, participants were randomized to one of two diets (low -glycemic, LG or 
high glycemic, HG) using a computer generated randomization scheme prepared with PROC 
PLAN in SAS Ver. 9.4.   
16b Allocation concealment mechanism  
Randomizations were placed in sealed sequentially numbered envelopes until interventions were 
assigned. All participants who give consent for participation , who fulfill the inclusion criteria , 
and complete baseline testing will be randomized . Participants w ill be enrolled by [CONTACT_181663] (principal investigator, coordinators, and dietitians ). Study Coordinator will 
open sequent ially numbered  envelope s for diet intervention.  The study dietitians will reveal the 
diet intervention to participants, along with a detailed diet introduction  and explanation.  
17a Blinding (masking)  
No b linding. Since it was necessary to reveal the diet assignment to the study dietitian  and the 
participant  for appropriate diet introduction and education to the participant, this study will not 
involve blinding.  
17b Blinding (masking): emergency unblinding  
N/A  
Methods: Data collection, management, and analys is 
18a Data collection plan  
All measurements w ill be  done in the Core facilities of the Center for Clinical and 
Translational Science (CCTS), Nutrition Obesity Research Center (NORC), and Diabetes 
Research Center (DRC) at UAB.  Participants w ill be  instructed to avoid strenuous physical 
activity (PA) the day prior to testing, and all PA on the morning of testing. All S I tests w ill be 
performed in the Clinical Research Unit (CRU) at UAB’s CCTS after an overnight fast of [ADDRESS_214341] (IVGTT) and 
minimal modeling, as previously described (2), but using 300 mg of glucose (20 % dextrose)/kg 
of body weight. AIRg w ill be  calculated as the incremental insulin area -under -the-curve from 
minutes 0 –10 following glucose injection using the trapezoidal method.  
Body composition  (FM and fat -free mass) will be  determined by [CONTACT_181664] (BIA) 
(Seca 514 mBCA, Seca GmHb & Co. KG, Hamburg, [LOCATION_013]).  
Resting Energy Expenditure and substrate utilization  will be  determined in the 
CCTS/NORC/DRC Core Laboratory by [CONTACT_46146] (TrueOne 2400, Parvo Medics, 
Sandy, UT). Participants w ill be  tested in the fasted (10h) condition following a [ADDRESS_214342] at baseline and week 14.  
Total Energy Expenditure  will be  measured through the CCTS/NORC/DRC Core Laboratory by 
[CONTACT_181665] -labeled water (DLW), at baseline and week 14, using a protocol based on established 
procedures (3). A FQ of 0.[ADDRESS_214343] omnivorous diet, while 
at week 14, the FQ of the intervention diets w ill be  used (4). FQ will be calculated using the 
equation of Black et al, FQ = (CHO% x 1.00) + (fat% x 0.71 ) + (protein% x 0.81) (4). 
 
Mechanical efficiency  will be  assessed using a submaximal cycling test, in the fasted state, at 
baseline and week 14. Following a familiarization period, participants cycled at 60 RPM at 10, 
20 and 50 watts of power in 4 -minute increments. Ventilation, oxygen uptake, carbon dioxide 
production, respi[INVESTIGATOR_17864], and heart rate were obtained throughout. Net skeletal 
muscle work efficiency w ill be  expressed as the ratio of power generated (kcal/min) to the 
change in EE above REE (kcal/min) at each power output (5).      
Laboratory analyses . Blood samples w ill be  collected in the fasting state and concentrations of 
glucose, βHB, total cholesterol, HDL -cholesterol and triglycerides measured using a SIRRUS 
analyzer (Stanbio, Boerne, TX), and insulin using a TOSOH A1A -900 immunoassay analyzer 
(TOSOH Bioscience, South  San Francisco, CA) in the CCTS/DRC Core Laboratory. LDL -
cholesterol will be  calculated using the Friedewald formula (6). 
 
18b Data collection plan: retention  
Participant retention w ill be  promoted by [CONTACT_181666] s from the study dietitians and 
reminder  communications from the study coordinators for upcoming in -person testing visits.  
 
19.  Data management  
Confidentiality will be  maintained by [CONTACT_181667]’s identification number.  
Computerized data will be stored in the Department of Nutrition Sciences database.  Paper data 
will be stored in the Department of Nutrition Sciences in a locked room in a file cabin et. Only 
qualified research personnel  will have access to the database containing the subject information.  
All subject data that are entered into statistical analyses and publication reports will refer to 
individuals only by [CONTACT_181668].  
All records pertaining to medical history, participation in this study, and data collected will be 
kept strictly confidential and will be recorded only by [CONTACT_5056], to protect participant 
privacy.  Only study investigators and the UAB IRB will have acc ess to this data. Information 
regarding participant demographics, body composition, metabolic outcomes, or blood outcome 
measures will be shared and labeled with the study number, a unique identifier, and the date of 
acquisition.  
 
20a Statistics: outcomes  
Statistical analysis w ill be  performed with SPSS version 29 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL), and 
data presented as mean ± SD (or SEM). Statistical significance w ill be  set at P < 0.05, unless 
otherwise specified, and normality of variables was assessed by [CONTACT_181669][INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilk test. Participants w ill be  included in the analysis if they ha ve SI data at 
baseline, and body composition at baseline and week [ADDRESS_214344] the hypothesis that AA women with obesity randomized to a low -CHO diet lose 
more FM than those randomized to a low -fat diet, we will analyze data from Phase 1 with 
generalized linear models (GLM). FM at week 10 w ill be  the dependent variable, baseline FM, 
diet group, and S I (and/or AIR) the covariates. Finally, to test the hypothesis that S I (and/or) 
modulates the response to diet, a “diet x S I” interaction term w ill be  added to the models ; i.e., 
∆FM=β0+ β1 baseline  FM+ β2  baseline  Si + β3 diet  group + β4 diet  group ∗ Si + e1.   
To test the hypothesis that AA women with obesity randomized to a low -CHO diet 
maintain a higher TEE and REE, and a lower ME, than those randomized to a low -fat diet, we 
analyzed data from the end of Phase 2 with GLM.  TEE, REE, or ME (week 14) were the de pendent 
variables; baseline TEE, REE, or ME, diet group, and S I (and/or AIRg) the covariates. For all 
outcomes, we tested for a phenotype -by-diet interaction by [CONTACT_181670]; e.g., ∆TEE  (week  14−baseline )=β0+ β1 baseline  TEE + β2  baseline  Si+
β3 diet  group + β4 diet  group ∗ Si + e1.   
We will also test for menopausal status as potential predictors of the independent 
variables of interest, and include this variable in the models if necessary. The primary analyses 
will treat S I as a continuous variable and test for independent and interactive effects of S I and 
diet in statistical models. For sub -group analyses the median S I will be  used to designate status: 
high vs low S I.  
 
20b Statistics: additional analyses  
N/A  
20c Statistics: analysis population and missing data  
N/A  
 
Methods: Monitoring  
21a Data monitoring: formal committee  
Holly Wyatt, MD –Professor in the Department of Nutrition Sciences is appointed as the 
Independent Safety Monitor to provide independent monitoring and review of the protocol every 
6 months.  
21b Data monitoring: interim analysis  
Description of interim analyses and stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_15381]:    
22. Harms  
If an individual indicates discomfort or the desire to discontinue testing, tests will be terminated 
immediately. During routine visits and telephone calls, the study coordinator will query 
participants for any adverse events since their last contact [CONTACT_181671]. In the case of an 
adverse event during times of testing, a study physician will be on call.  The physician  will 
provide medical supervision for this study.  All adverse events will be reported to the UAB IRB 
and reviewed by [CONTACT_20685].  Should any of these individuals and/or the IRB identify 
that any adverse event may be related to the study protoc ol, testing will be suspended , and the 
protocol will be amended acc ordingly.  
23. Auditing  
A progress report will be submitted annually to the sponsor and to UAB IRB . 
Ethics and dissemination  
24. Research ethics approval  
The study is approved by [CONTACT_181672] ( IRB-300001324 ) and annual  progress report s will be sent to 
UAB IRB during the full duration of the study.   
25. Protocol amendments  
On 06/17/2020, the protocol was amended and approved by [CONTACT_181673]. DXA was replaced with an at home creatine dilution 
test to measure muscle mass. The post intervention (week 14) IVGTT and Mixed Me al 
Tolerance tests were omitted from the protocol. The Oral Glucose Tolerance Test at screening 
was replaced with measurement of Hemoglobin A1c finger stick (choice of at home or in 
person). Food was delivered to participants home via a commercial provider . The REE and 
Exercise tests were optional, if participants were not comfortable completing these in -person 
visits. Participants were given the option to complete the TEE visit at home or in -person. The 
weekly in -person meetings with the dietitian were mov ed to a Zoom or phone call and the 
monthly peer group meetings in Phase 3 were moved to Zoom. Food records were emailed 
and/or discussed via phone call, with food intake and body weight reported.  
 
26a Consent  
The study coordinator will obtain informed consent from trial participants. Potential participants 
who met the inclusion criteria for the study w ill be  asked to review the consent form and if 
interested, to contact [CONTACT_181674].  If an individual is eligible to join the study, a 
screening measurement w ill be  scheduled . During  this visit, the project coordinator will review  
the consent form and obtain informed consent.  The consenting process is confidential, and will 
take place in a private room.  
26b Consent: ancillary studies  
N/A 
27. Confidentiality  
Confidentiality is maintained by [CONTACT_181667]’s identification number.  
Computerized data will be stored in the Department of Nutrition Sciences database.  Paper data 
will be stored in the Department of Nutrition Sciences in a locked ro om in a file cabinet. Only 
qualified research personnel have access to the database containing the subject information.  All 
subject data that are entered into statistical analyses and publication reports will refer to 
individuals only by [CONTACT_181675] n name.  
All records pertaining to medical history, participation in this study, and data collected will be 
kept strictly confidential and will be recorded only by [CONTACT_5056], to protect participant 
privacy.  Only study investigators and the UAB IRB will have acc ess to this data.  Information 
regarding participant demographics, body composition, metabolic outcomes, or blood outcome 
measures will be  shared and labeled with the study number, a unique identifier, and the date of 
acquisition.  
28. Declaration of interests  
All study investigators and other personnel will complete conflict of interest disclosure training 
and form s. 
29. Data access  
Only those listed on the study protocol, as approved by [CONTACT_181676].  
30. Ancillary and post trial care  
UAB and NIDDK will not provid e any payment if participants  are harmed as a result of  taking 
part in this study. If such harm occurs, treatment will be provided. However, this treatment will 
not be provided free of charge.  
 
31a Dissemination policy: trial results  
Study investigators will report study analyses and results via publications . Participants will 
receive individual clinical test results after completion of the study.  
31b Dissemination policy: authorship  
Authorship eligibility guidelines and any intended use of professional writers  
 
31c Dissemination policy: reproducible research   
Plans, if any, for granting public access to the full protocol, participant -level dataset, and 
statistical code  
The protocol and results will be posted on Clinicaltrials.gov website . 
Appendices  
32. Informed consent  materials  
33. Biological  specimens  
DNA will be collected for admixture analysis and analysis of SNPs related to beta cell function.   
 
 
1. Gower BA, Goss AM. A lower -carbohydrate, higher -fat diet reduces abdominal and 
intermuscular fat and increases insulin sensitivity in adults at risk of type 2 diabetes. J Nutr. 
2015;145(1):177s -83s. 
2. Gower BA, Bergman R, Stefanovski D, Darnell B, Ovalle F, Fisher G, et al. Baseline 
insulin sensitivity affects response to high -amylose maize resistant starch in women: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2016;13:2.  
3. Goran MI, Carpenter WH, McGloin A, Johnson R, Hardin JM, Weinsier RL. Energy 
expenditure in children of lean and obese parents. American Journal of Physiology. 
1995;31:E917 -E24. 
4. Black AE, Prentice AM, Coward WA. Use of food quotients to predict respi[INVESTIGATOR_181657] -labelled water method of measuring energy expenditure. Hum Nutr Clin 
Nutr. 1986;40(5):[ADDRESS_214345]. 2005;115(12):3579 -86. 
6. Friedewald WT, Levy RI, Fredrickson DS. Estimation of the concentration of low -
density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma, without use of the preparative ultracentrifuge. Clinical 
Chemistry. 1972;18(499):502.  
 