Prevention Focused Home -Based Physical Therapy Utilizing Community Partnership Referrals  
Study Protocol  
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
6/23/21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Objective:  The purpose of this study was to describe outcomes of HOP -UP-PT program 
participants and then to compare these outcomes to non -participants.  
 
Design:  Prospective randomized Controlled Trial  
 
Methods:  
 
Recruitment:  Six Michigan senior centers referred adults ≥ 65 years who were at -risk for 
functional decline or falls. 144 participants (n=72 per group) were randomized to either the 
HOP -UP-PT group  or the Normal level of activity group.  Physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437] (PTs) delive red 
physical, environmental, and health interventions to the HOP -UP-PT group  over nine 
encounters (six in -person, three telerehabilitation) spanning seven months. The Normal level of 
activity group  participants were told to continue their usual physical ac tivity routines during the 
same time frame. Baseline and re -assessments were conducted at 0 -, 3-, and 7 -months.  
 
Randomization: Within each S enior Community Center , the first participant was randomized to 
either the HOP -UP-PT group  or Normal level of acti vity and subsequent participants from that 
Senior Community Center  were distributed in an alternating order of referral receipt and 
blinded to the S enior Community Center  staff during the group assignment process (i.e., 
participant #1 assigned to HOP -UP-PT group , participant #2 Normal level of activity group , 
participant #3 HOP -UP-PT group ). Exceptions to this process were made when participants lived 
in the same home (e.g ., spouses, siblings, housemates, parent -child) to reduce participant 
observation bias. In these situations, both participants were assigned to the same group using 
the next open spot (i.e., if the next spot was a Normal level of activity group , both were 
assigned to this group and the next referral was back -filled to the HOP -UP-PT group .) Once 
participants were assigned to either the HOP -UP-PT group  or Normal level of activity group , it 
was no longer feasible to blind data collectors, participants, or Senior Community Center  staff 
to groupi[INVESTIGATOR_14839].  
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria: Study participants were included if they were (1) greater than 
or equal to 65 years of age, (2) S enior Community Center  staff identified them as ‘at -risk’ for 
decline in community dwelling status due to physical, social, economic, or community -related 
barriers, and (3) willing to participate in the HOP -UP-PT program. Participants were excluded if 
they (1) received physical  therapy services within the prior two months in any setting, (2) had 
been hospi[INVESTIGATOR_630533], or (3) were currently receiving palliative or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677]. Additionally, participants were excluded if the initial evaluation by [CONTACT_630536]’s cognitive status (as determined by [CONTACT_630537] B) or medical status (as determined by [CONTACT_630538]) would not permit safe PT  examination or 
interventions without further physician assessment.  
 
 
A detailed figure of the protocol is available below . 
HOP -UP-PT Participants Protocol  
Visit #0 - Participant will receive the following via US mail:  
1. Informed Consent  
2. Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) 
3. Health Behavior  Questionnaire (HBQ)  
4. Stay Independent Brochure Questionnaire   
5. Modified Falls Efficacy Scale Questionnaire  
 
Visit #1 - In Participants Home (1-2 weeks after Visit # 0) 
1. Licensed Physical Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] ( PT)secures consent and Visit #0 documents.  
2. Mini Cog administered to assure not decisionally impaired  (If Mini -Cog inconclusive, 
Trail Making Test B to be administered)  
3. ACSM Participation Index  
4. Assessment of blood pressure  (BP) in supi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  (laying on back), sitting (seated), standi ng 
and heart  rate, weight, height, body mass index calculated  
5. Participants will be provided with an automated BP cuff which will be used by [CONTACT_630539]-home  visits and can be used by [CONTACT_630540].   Participants will be provided with the manufacturer’s instructions including 
safety, maintenance and operations. Additionally, the physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_630534]. If the participant is deemed 
unsafe for independent use the device it will not be left in the home until such time the 
participant is consid ered safe.  
6. Functional Co -morbidity Index administered  
7. Fall Risk Assessment using STEADI Algorithm completed (Timed Up and Go (TUG ) test)  
8. HOME FAST assessment completed  
9. Short Physical Performance Battery  (SPPB)  performed  (Four  Test Balance Scale Test, 
Three Meter Walk Test, Five time Sit to Stand Test)  
10. Grip Strength assessed (hand grip dynamometry)  
11. Results of HBQ  reviewed with patient and discussed using motivation interviewing  (MI) 
Techniques  
12. If nutritional  concerns , social work  needs , equipment or home modifications are 
recommended and participant  agrees , the referring Senior Center Director  or Staff  will 
be notified  to assist in providing resources.   
 
Visit #2 - In Participants Home (5-8 days after Visit #1)  
1. Document a) home or environmental modification completed b) change(s) in health 
status including falls c) progress regarding identified positive lifestyle modification 
since prior visit d) vital signs: seated BP, heart rate , and weight.   
2. Wearable activity monitoring technology  (i.e., Fitbit, Garmin, Apple Watch)  will be 
provided to monitor  and provide feedback to participant on ambulation  volume.  PT 
will provide education on purpose , use, functionality,  and wearability .  
3. The Otago Exercise Program  (OEP) education including written handout and the 
exercise log will be provided.   Participant will perform exercises under the direction of  
the PT. Modification to exercises will be documented.  
4. Participant directed primary and secondary prevention education and intervention 
utilizing MI technique  will be employed during this visit . 
 
VISIT #3 and #4 - In Participants Home (4-5 weeks after visit #2)  
1. Document a) home or environmental modification completed b) changes in health 
status including falls c) participants p rogress regarding identified positive lifestyle 
modification since prior visit d) vital signs: seated BP, heart rate , and weight.      
2. Confirm or assist participant to d ownload wearable activity monitor data to  
computerized data base.  
3. The OEP will be performed  under the direction of PT. Modification to exercises will be 
documented. Exercise log will be reviewed.  
4. Participant directed primary and secondary prevention education and intervention 
utilizing MI technique.  
 
Visit #5: (4 -5weeks after Visit #4)- In Participant Home  
1. Document a) home or environmental modification completed b) change(s) in health 
status including falls c) progress regarding identified positive lifestyle modification 
since prior visit d) vital signs: supi[INVESTIGATOR_050], sitting and standing BP and heart rate.  Weight 
will also be measured and recorded.  
2. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_166248], Deaths & Injuries (STEADI) Algorithm for Fall Risk 
Assessment and Intervention, TUG and Modified Falls Efficacy Scale, Stay Independent 
Brochure Questionnaire, PHQ -[ADDRESS_841310] participant in downloading wearable activity monitor to 
computerized data base.  
4. The OEP will be performed under the direction of PT. Modification to exercises will be 
documented. Exercise log will be reviewed.  
 
Phone Visit #6, 7, 8: (3 ,4, 5 months after Visit #1) -PI [INVESTIGATOR_630535]  
(telehealth  visit) : 
1. Document a) home or environmental modification completed b) changes in health 
status including falls, c ) progress regarding identified positive lifestyle modification 
since prior visit  
2. Verbal support and encourage compliance with OEP and BP monitor  
3. Participant directed primary and secondary prevention education and intervention 
utilizing MI techniqu e. 
 
Visit #9 ( [ADDRESS_841311] Visit #1) - In Participant Home  
1. Document a) home or environmental modification completed b) change(s) in health 
status including falls c) progress regarding identified positive lifestyle modification 
since prior visit d) vital si gns: supi[INVESTIGATOR_050],  sitting and standing BP and heart rate.  W eight  
will also be measured .  
2. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_166248], Deaths & Injuries (STEADI) Algorithm for Fall Risk 
Assessment and Intervention, TUG and Modified Falls Efficacy Scale, Stay Independent 
Brochure Questionnaire, PHQ -9, and Health Behaviors Survey Instrument re -
administered.  Components of the SPPB will be readministered.  
3. Confirm or assist participant to d ownload wearable activity monitor to computerized 
data base.  
4. The OEP  will be  performed under the direction of PT. Modification to exercises will be 
documented. Exercise log will be reviewed.  
5. Discharge recommendations including reintegration into to the referring community 
senior center activities and a home exercise program will be provided.  
 
Normal Activity  Group Participant Protocol  
Visit #0 - Participant will receive the following via US mail:  
1. Informed Consent  
2. Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9) 
3. Health Behavior Questionnaire  (HBQ)  
4. Stay Independent Brochure Questionnaire   
5. Modified Falls Efficacy Scale Questionnaire  
 
Visit #1 - In Participants Home (1-2 weeks after Visit # 0) 
1. Licensed Physical Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] (PT)secures consent and Visit #0 documents.  
2. Mini Cog administered to assure not decisionally impaired  (if Mini Cog is inconclusive, 
Trail Making Test Part B is administered)  
3. ACSM Participation Index  
4. Assessment of blood pressure (BP) in s upi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (laying on back), sitting (seated), standing 
and heart rate, weight, height, body mass index calculated  
5. Functional Co -morbidity Index administered  
6. Fall Risk Assessment using STEADI Algorithm completed (Timed Up and Go (TUG ) test)  
7. HOME FAST assessment  completed  
8. Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) performed (Four  Test Balance Scale Test, 
Three Meter Walk Test, Five Time Sit to Stand Test)  
9. Grip Strength assessed (hand grip dynamometry)  
 
Visit # 2 and #3 : (3 and 7 months after Visit # 1)- In Participant Home  
1. Document health status including falls, HOME FAST, vital signs: supi[INVESTIGATOR_050],  sitting and  
standing BP and heart rate.  Weight will also be measured and recorded.   
2. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_166248], Deaths & Injuries (STEADI) Algorithm for Fall Risk 
Assessment and Intervention, TUG and Modified Falls Efficacy Scale, Stay Independent 
Brochure Questionnaire, PHQ -9, HBQ, and SPPB  re-administered.  
3. Control group participants offered opportunity to participate in HOP -UP-PT program 
after concluding their rol e as CG participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  
Figure 1. Key assessments and interventions performed during each encounter  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Descriptive statistics will be  generated to analyze demographic and outcome variables. The 
baseline encounters for the HOP -UP-PT group  at visit 1  (E1) and the Normal level of activity 
group  at Visit 1  (C1) were compared to 3 -month encounters  (visit 5)  (E2 and C2) and 7 -month 
encounters  (visit 9)  (E3 and C3) via a two -sample Wilcoxon test (for continuous or ordinal 
variables) and a Chi -squared test (for binary variables). As adjusted means will be utilized  for 
interval changes, 95% confidence intervals will be  included. Statistical anal ysis will be  
performed by [CONTACT_630541] v.9.4 
(SAS Institute, Cary, NC) software for Windows with significance determined at P < .05.  
 
 
 