Non-invasive MR Imaging Diagnosis of Transplant 
Rejection  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
November 30, [ADDRESS_1017013] for in vivo detection 
of kidney transplant rejection. We propose to use an FDA -approved iron supplement "off 
label" as a marker for macrophages. After intravenous injection, the iron compo und is 
taken up by [CONTACT_743808] a detectable signal on magnetic resonance 
MRimages. Since kidney transplants that undergo a rejection contain macrophages, but 
not unimpaired transplants, this approach should enable us to detect kidney transpla nt 
rejection with a simple imaging test.  
b. Objectives  
If successful, this ferumoxytol -based MR imaging test could reduce the number of  renal 
allograft biopsies and associated anesthesia. If at  least some of these biopsies of could be 
replaced by a non -invas ive imaging test, this would have immense impact on patient 
management and patient quality of life, and reduce health care costs. Exclusion of renal 
allograft rejection based on ferumoxytol -enhanced MRI would help avoid unnecessary 
biopsies, accelerate dia gnostic workup of other reasons for an impaired renal function, 
and ultimately, improve patient outcomes. The proposed non -invasive imaging test could 
be in principle also applied to evaluation of other  solid organ or stem cell transplants. 
Data derived fr om this project will be used as preliminary data for a subsequent NIH 
grant application.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
Initial studies have been performed in animal models. We now have to verify the animal 
model  results can be reproduced in patients.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  

November 30, 2016   Page 2 of 12 The patients and their parents will be informed about the nature of  the study and a written 
informed consent will be obtained. 12 -24 h before a planned MRI study, Ferumoxytol 
will be administered intravenously at a dose of 5 mg Fe/kg over approximately [ADDRESS_1017014]  
images . This long interval between injection and imaging is needed in order to allow for 
sufficient time for macrophage phagocytosis to occur. Patients will be placed supi[INVESTIGATOR_105683] a 
3T MR scanner, the area of the transplant kidney will be covered by a dedicated surface 
coil, and T1 - and T2 -weighted MR images will be obtained of the transplant, using axial 
and/or coronal T1 -LAVA and  T2-FSE sequences as well as multi -TE SE, multi -TI IR 
sequences and QSM sequences for iron quantifications. All MR images will be 
transferred  to a postprocessing work station and T1 - and T2 -relaxation times will  be 
calculated of the kidney transplant as well as adjacent muscle and bone marrow in a 
pelvic bone as an internal standard. The patients  will undergo a routine biopsy of their 
transplant within 3 weeks  before or  preferably after the MRI study. Based on renal 
biopsies  and histopathology results, patients will be divided into groups of  "no rejection" 
and "positive rejection". Various MRI and histopathological parameters will be compared 
between these two groups  using student's t -tests, an analysis of variance e.g. for 
comparison  of data from multiple time points, multiple pulse sequences,  different  
histopathologic stains and regression analyses. Significant  differences will be assigned 
for a p -value of less than  0.05.  
Ferumoxytol is an FDA approved iron supplement, and it is slowly metabolized and  
release iron in vivo. In order to determine the effect and clearance of ferumoxytol, we  
propose to monitor the participant's blood iron levels immediately before and up  to 6 
months 3-4 times in total after ferumoxytol injection. Furthermore, we want to  
investigate the blood for interaction between blood plasma proteins and iron as well as  
related immune cell responses and potential mechanisms for hypersensitivity  react ions. 
We will collect small blood samples <5ml each from the participant  when  we 
administer ferumoxytol intravenously and when the participant visits Stanford for  their 
routine blood tests to avoid additional visits or needle  sticks. The tests will be  ordered 
through Stanford Clinical Laboratories.  
b. Procedure Risks  
Once MRI contraindications have been excluded e.g. MRI incompatible metal devices , 
the imaging test itself does not involve any risks  for the patient. Contrast agent injection 
will occur ou tside of the magnet, in order to allow for close observation of the patient for 
any side effects. Of note, our other clinical imaging studies with ferumoxytol did not 
show any subjective or objective side effects in our patient population so far.  
November 30, [ADDRESS_1017015] ications.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
yes, all patients undergo a biopsy  
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
Endpoint: To generate a non -invasive, easily applicable and widel y available MR 
imaging test for evaluation of kidney transplant rejection. Primary endpoint is to develop 
a sensitive and reliable, non -invasive and quantitative imaging test for detection of 
macrophages in kidney transplants as a biomarker for rejection. As a secondary endpoint, 
since different oxygenation states of iron have scaled but measurable changes on the 
inherent tissue magnetic susceptibility, we plan to also evaluate the utility of 
simultaneously  generated 3D maps of arterial and venous supplies of kidney transplants, 
provided by [CONTACT_743809], in comparison with ultrasound as the current diagnostic 
standard. The ultimate  goal is to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the morphology, 
vascular supply and host immune responses in kidney trans plants with one single, non -
invasive and comprehensive diagnostic test.  
3. BACKGROUND   
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
In patients with end stage renal failure, renal transplantation is  the treatment modality of 
choice, leading to markedly improved quality of life and survival when compared to 
chronic dialysis. To date, more than 1.[ADDRESS_1017016] Animal Experiments  
We chose macrophages as our target for imaging transplant rejection, because 
macrophages play a critical role in transplant rejection and because macrophages can be 
imaged with immediately clinically applicable MR i maging approaches. Macrophages are 
key inflammatory mediators of the innate immune response that contribute to both acute 
and chronic allograft rejection through a variety of mechanisms. Macrophages are 
attracted to sites of immune complex formation by [CONTACT_743810] (e.g. C5a) and 
specific cytokines/chemokines. In the transplant, the macrophages are activated by [CONTACT_743811] (produced by T cells or NK cells) and TNF alpha (produced by [CONTACT_85804]) which 
leads to a pro inflammatory cascade with production of re active oxygen species, 
progressive transplant injury, and ultimately, graft rejection. In renal allografts that 
undergo rejection, CD68 positive macrophages comprise approximately 50% of the 
infiltrating leukocyte population, they co -localize with areas of  tissue -damage and 
fibrosis, are preponderant in more severe forms of rejection and represent an independent 
predictor of worse outcomes. As new immune -modulating therapeutic agents enter the 
clinic whose mechanism of action involves diminishing macrophage  infiltration or 
presence in allografts, it becomes increasingly important to identify those transplants 
heavily infiltrated by [CONTACT_179968], as well as monitoring response to these new 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION  MACHINES  
a. Standard of Care (SOC) Procedures  
Identify Week/Month of Study  Name [CONTACT_208129] 
b. Radioisotopes  
i. Radionuclide(s) and chemical form(s)  
NA 
ii. Total number of times the radioisotope and activity will be administered (mCi) and 
the route of administration  for a typi[INVESTIGATOR_208076]. If not FDA approved:  dosimetry information and  source documents (package insert, 
Medical Internal Radiation Dose [ MIRD ] calculation, and peer reviewed literature ) 
NA 
c. Radiation Machines – Diagnostic Procedures  
i. Examination  description (well -established procedures)  
NA 
ii. Total number of times each procedure will be performed  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_187753])  
November 30, 2016   Page 5 of 12 NA 
iii. Setup and techniques to support dose modeling  
NA 
iv. FDA status of the machine and information on dose modeling  (if procedure is  not 
well-established)  
NA 
d. Radiation Machines  – Therapeutic  Procedures  
i. Area treated, dose per fraction/number of fractions, performed as part of normal 
clinical management or due to research participation (well -established p rocedures ) 
NA 
ii. FDA status of the machine, basis for dosimetry, area treated, dose per fraction and 
number of fractions (if procedure is not well -established)  
NA 
5. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices  (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_743814]:  NA 
 
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  NA 
 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  NA 
 
Investigational  Device 2  
Name:  N/A 
Description:  N/A 
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  N/A 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  N/A 
Investigational  Device 3  
Name:  N/A 
Description:  N/A 
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  N/A 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  N/A 
 
b. IDE-Exempt Devices  
IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_743815]:  GE Healthcare, is a designated NSR 
device per the published IRB guidance 
GUI-7m 
November 30, 2016   Page 6 of 12  
IND-Exempt Device 2  
Name:  N/A 
Description:  N/A 
IND-Exempt Device 3 
Name:  N/A 
Description:  N/A 
 
6. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
Investigational  Product 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_743816] (Feraheme , AMAG Pharmaceuticals), IND 111 154  
Dosage : 5mg Fe/kg bodyweight  
Administration Route : intravenous  
Investigational  Product  2 
Name:  N/A 
Dosage:  N/A 
Administration Route : N/A 
Investigational  Product 3  
Name:  N/A 
Dosage:  N/A 
Administration Route : N/A 
b. Commercial Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
Commercial Product 1  
Name:  N/A 
Dosage:  N/A 
Administration Route  N/A 
New and different use? (Y/N)  N/A 
Commercial Product 2  
Name:  N/A 
Dosage:  N/A 
Administration Route  N/A 
New and different use? (Y/N)  N/A 
Commercial Product 3  
Name:  N/A 
Dosage:  N/A 
Administration Route  N/A 
New and different use? (Y/N)  N/A 
7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
We will use MR scanners at Lucas Center or Lucile Packard Childrens Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_743804]. The bed/table and accessories that are used for the animals is 
different than the table humans use. Physiologic monitoring equipment is cleaned with a 
comm ercial disinfectant such as Roccal, Conflick, Sani -Wipes, or a 10 Bleach solution. 
All RF coils and positioning accessories are wrapped in plastic wrap or plastic bags for 
use with animals. Everything, even if it is animal use only, is cleaned with the abo ve 
disinfectants after every use even if they are wrapped in plastic. The Lucas Center is 
checked yearly by [CONTACT_743812] 30, 2016   Page 7 of 12 systems: Stanford Health & Safety. The facility is reviewed by: [CONTACT_307297] ; 
USDA; NIH; and Aaalac.  
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
[ADDRESS_1017017] Populations  
NA 
f. Healthy Volunt eers 
NA 
g. Recruitment Details  
Participants will be referred from their treating physician's office, either [CONTACT_743817] or 
[CONTACT_743818] invitation only .  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_22874] a solid organ transplant, scheduled for a standard  of care rejection survey  
November 30, 2016   Page 8 of 12 ii. Exclusion Criteria  
contraindication for MRI  hemosiderosis/hemochromatosis, diagnosed based on routine 
lab values obtained within 30 days prior to MRI scan and/or precontrast MRI  
i. Screening Procedures  
Referring treating physician discusses study with potential participant. Potential 
participant is referred to study coordinator to schedule a screening visit. The protocol 
director or other IRB approved trained personnel complete consent/assent, MRI screen, 
and chart review lab values .  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
We will ask the participant and their family if they are enrolled in any other studies. If 
they are enrolled in a drug study, we will consult with the other PI [INVESTIGATOR_743805].  
k. Payments to P articipants  
Reimbursement for gas/mileage to a max of $50 per visit to the family/driver. A $[ADDRESS_1017018] to the participant.  
l. Costs to Participants  
No research costs will be charged to the participants.  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
The study is e xpected to enroll patients for two years, with data analysis continuing for 
possibly another year total: three years . iscreening: 20 -45 minutes; ii 90-120 minutes; 
iii3-[ADDRESS_1017019]. Daldrup -Link has applied USPIO ultra small superparamagnetic iron oxides as MR 
contrast agents in phase II and III clinical trials in adult patients. In addition, [CONTACT_551988] -
Link has currently two active clinical trials on the use of ferumoxytol in children for MR 
imaging of bone lesions and for whole body tumor staging. The USP IO contrast agents 
November 30, 2016   Page 9 of 12 are very well tolerated and show excellent safety profiles. The delivered iron dose via a 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_481820] 150 -500 mg iron oxides note that 
these are coated iron particles, not free iron , which is eq uivalent to or lower than the iron 
dose administered with one blood transfusion. USPIO are slowly metabolized in the liver 
and not excreted via the kidneys. Thus, they are safe to use in patients with renal 
insufficiencies and are not associated with any r isk of nephrogenic sclerosis a potential 
adverse event after injections of certain gadolinium chelates . Expected risks include 
dizziness and nausea, possible localized twitching sensation, etc. Anaphylaxis or 
anaphylactoid reactions were reported in 0.2 of subjects, which is in the order of other 
MR contrast agents.  
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
NA 
iv. Procedures  
MRI w/ contrast  Magnetic fields do not cause harmful effects at the levels used in the 
MRI machine. However, the MRI scanner uses a very strong magnet that will attract 
some metals and affect some electronic devices.  In some cases, having those devices 
means the participant should be excluded.  Additionally, when contrast is injected, as 
with any intravenous injection , there are risks of bruising, bleeding, or infection from the 
venipuncture; and allergic reaction to the injected contrast.  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
NA 
vi. Physical  well-being  
NA 
vii. Psych ological  well-being  
Some small risk of a patient experiencing claustrophobia. This is an infrequent but 
regular occurrence in any MRI facility. Every effort is made to minimize this risk and the 
research and clinical staff are well trained to act appropriately.  
viii. Economic well -being  
NA 
ix. Social  well-being  
NA 
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low - innocuous procedures such as phlebotomy, urine or stool collection, no therapeutic 
November 30, [ADDRESS_1017020] 
University as a HIPAA compliant, secure, encrypted database for research purposes. Data 
exported by [CONTACT_743813] a 
deidentified form to minimize risks to confidentiality.  
d. Study Conclusion  
Endpoint: To generate a non -invasive, easily applicable and widely available MR 
imaging test for evaluation of kidney transplant rejection. Pri mary endpoint is to develop 
a sensitive and reliable, non -invasive and quantitative imaging test for detection of 
macrophages in kidney transplants as a biomarker for rejection. As a secondary endpoint, 
since different oxygenation states of iron have scale d but measurable changes on the 
inherent tissue magnetic susceptibility, we plan to also evaluate the utility of 
simultaneously generated 3D maps of arterial and venous supplies of kidney transplants, 
provided by [CONTACT_743809], in comparison with ultr asound as the current diagnostic 
standard. The ultimate goal is to provide a comprehensive evaluation of the morphology, 
vascular supply and host immune responses in kidney transplants with one single, non -
invasive and comprehensive diagnostic test.  
In terms of individual participation, each patient's experimental participation is over 
when their individual MRI is collected, analyzed, and reported. If a patient experiences 
an anaphylactoid reaction to the study agent during initial administration, particip ation 
would be terminated - administration of the agent would be discontinued, counteracting 
medication would be given, and the patient would not undergo MRI. Such reactions are 
very rare reported in 0.2 of subjects but anticipated, and as such, the contra st agent is 
only administered in a clinical setting under the direct supervision of an experienced MD, 
with access to a crash cart and appropriate anti -anaphylactoid medication.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
Of note, [CONTACT_551988] -Link has applied iron oxide nanoparticles as MR contrast agents in 
phase II and III clinical trials in adult patients. These contrast agents are very well 
tolerated and show excellent safety profiles. The delivered iron dose via a typi [INVESTIGATOR_743806] 30, 2016   Page 11 of 12 ferumoxytol administration is in the order of 150 -500 mg iron oxides note that these are 
coated iron particles, not free iron , which is equivalent to or lower than the iron dose 
administered with one blood transfusion. Iron oxide nanoparticles are slo wly metabolized 
in the liver and not excreted via the kidneys. Thus, they are safe to use in patients with 
renal insufficiencies and are not associated with any risk of nephrogenic sclerosis a 
potential adverse event after injections of certain gadolinium chelates. Anaphylaxis or 
anaphylactoid reactions were reported in 0.2 of subjects, which is in the order of or lower 
compared to other MR contrast agents see FDA report: Lu M, Cohen MH, Rieves D, 
Pazdur R. FDA report: Ferumoxytol for intravenous iron ther apy in adult patients with 
chronic kidney disease. Am J Hematol. 2010;85 5:315-9. In the unlikely event of an 
anaphylactoid reaction, appropriate actions will be taken as with any other contrast agent 
reaction and the event will be reported to the IRB.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring  
[CONTACT_551988] -Link will serve as the ME. In an unanticipated and unlikely event of any 
adverse event or anaphylactoid reaction to this contrast agent, appropriate actions will be 
taken to treat the reactio n and the event will be reported to the IRB.  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
NA 
iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_743807], such as rash, urticaria, nausea, cough, breathing 
difficulty will lead to discontinuation of contrast ad ministration and symptomatic 
treatment.  
v. DSMB Reporting  
The ME will forward written reports to the appropriate entities via email  
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
y 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
y 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
The study involves an non -invasive imaging study and the off -label use of an FDA 
approved drug, with an FDA IND to do so. Side effects for this drug have been observed 
in less than 0.2 of the population. Informed Consent and Assent are acquired 
appropriately and all data and safety precautions are observed. Risks are thus assessed as 
minimal.  
November 30, 2016   Page 12 of 12 10. BENEFITS  
Participants may immediately benefit from more accurate assessment of arterial and 
venous supply to their allograft. In the long term, validating a method for accurately 
assessing rejection status/health of an allograft without general anesthesia or invasive 
biopsy reduces  risk and cost to the patient.  
11. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All parti cipant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  