 
  
 
 
  
 
Collaborative Care for Chronic Pain in 
Primary Care  (PPACT )  
 
PROTOCOL  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
07/07/2015  
 
 
Sponsored by  
[CONTACT_60625] (NIH) Health Care Systems Research Collaboratory by [CONTACT_433753] U24AT009676 from the Office of 
Strategic Coordination within the Office of the NIH Director and coope rative agreements 
UH2AT007788 and UH3NS088731 from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke  (NINDS)   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549586] INTEGRATED INTERVENTION COMPONENTS .................................................................................. 10 
4.1. Comprehensive Intake Evaluation and Re -Assessment  ................................................................................ 11 
4.1.1. Overview of Goals and Strategies  .......................................................................................................... 11 
4.2. Core Groups fo r Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295230] / Yoga- Based Adapted Movement Practice  ..................................... [ADDRESS_549587] Chart Review ............................................................................................................................... 16 
4.5. Physical Therapy Consultation  ...................................................................................................................... 16 
5. MEASUR EMENTS AND EVALUATIONS  ....................................................................................................... 16 
5.2. Primary and Secondary Patient Outcome Measures  .................................................................................... 16 
5.2.1. Pain Severity and Functioning ................................................................................................................ 16 
5.2.2. Use of Opi[INVESTIGATOR_433693]  .................................................................................................. 17 
5.2.3. Utilization of Health Care Services  ......................................................................................................... 17 
5.2.4. Other Second ary Outcomes  ................................................................................................................... 17 
5.2.5. Clinical Covariates ................................................................................................................................... 18 
5.3. Quantitative Data Collection Schedule  ......................................................................................................... 18 
5.4. Supporting the Clinical Collection of Patient Reported Outcomes  ............................................................... 19 
5.5. Process Evaluation  ......................................................................................................................................... 19 
6. STUDY  INTERVENTION  STAFF  TRAINING AND  SUPERVISION  ...................................................................... 21 
7. SAFETY  REPORTING  AND MONITORING  .................................................................................................... 22 
7.1. Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  .................................................................................................  22 
7.2. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP)  ............................................................................................................ 22 
8. STATISTICAL METHODS  ............................................................................................................................ 23 
8.1. Sample Size and Power .................................................................................................................................. 23 
8.2. Randomization ............................................................................................................................................... 23 
8.3. Dropout and Withdrawal ............................................................................................................................... 23 
8.4. Quantitative Data Methods and Analysis  ...................................................................................................... 24 
8.5. Economic Data Methods and Analysis  .......................................................................................................... 25 
9. LITERATURE CITED  ................................................................................................................................... 26 
 
 
For publication    3  STUDY PROTOCO L MODIFICATIONS  
04/21/2014 : Originally, primary care providers  could  opt out after  clustering and randomizatio n occurred. 
However, with this approach we could not include an additional PCP to take the place of the PCP who had opted 
out. Therefore, we would be left with fewer than  the optimal number of  PCPs in each cluster wave. We changed 
the proto col to have PCPs  opt out prior  to clustering and randomization .  
 
07/07 /2015:  The target nu mber for enrol lment was changed  from “up to 160 primary care providers ( PCPs ) and 
1,200 pa tients with chronic  pain on long ter m opi[INVESTIGATOR_2512] (C P-LOT) ” to “up to  375 PCPs and 1, 000 patients 
with chronic pain on long ter m opi[INVESTIGATOR_2512] (C P-LOT) .” In addition, the n umber of PCP cluste rs changed from 
[ADDRESS_549588] pa tients 
seek and recei ve care for pain. Patients with chronic pain are seen  primarily by [CONTACT_433754] (PCPs) in 
settings where medicatio ns have become the mains tay of pain treatment for many PCPs with few oth er trea tment 
options avail able to them.  Yet rising concerns about the safety and efficacy of opi[INVESTIGATOR_433694] n have heightened awareness of the need for better treatment options. Primary care -based treatment 
of chronic pa in by i nterdisciplinary t eams ( includin g behavioral specialists, nurse care  managers, physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437],  
and ph armacists) is one of the most p romising approaches for improving ou tcomes a nd managing costs. R ecent 
national health policy changes, in additio n to th e increasing recog nition  of the high prevalence and c ost of chronic 
pain conditions present a uniqu e oppor tunity to shift the care paradigm for patients with chronic pain.  
The over arching goal of the  Pain Program for Active Copi[INVESTIGATOR_433695] ( PPACT) is to test the effecti venes s of 
integrating an evidence -based, interdisciplinary pain management inter vention  within a primary care environm ent. 
The trial is conducted in three  health care delivery s ystem s (Kaiser Permanente  Georgia, Hawaii, and Northw est) and 
is anticipated t o invo lve up to  375 PCPs and  1,000 patients with chronic pain on long ter m opi[INVESTIGATOR_433696] (C P-LOT) .  
The PPACT trial compares usual care service s to an interdis ciplinary, primary c are-based approach to treating CP -LOT 
patients. The pri mary outcome for th e trial is a composite of  pain severity and interference as measured by [CONTACT_941]  4-
item version of the Brief Pain Inventory –  Short Form, known as the PEGS ,1 and administe red routinely  in clinic al care . 
Secondary outcome s include pat ient satisfaction, potential reductions in dispensed opi[INVESTIGATOR_433697] (measured as 
morphine equivalent dose), and other health service  use v ariables  extractable through  patients’ electronic health 
records (EHR).  
 
 
For publication    5 2. STUDY AIMS 
Aim 1:  Conduct  a clu ster rand omized pragmatic clinical trial in 106  PCP clusters across the th ree KP health plan 
settings (Hawaii, Northwest, Georgia) to compare the effects of the PPACT  interventi on to usual care on:  
• Patients’ pain symptoms, p ain-related functioning, and sa tisfaction  with health care servic es; 
• Patients’ use of health care service s, including receipt of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2536] ; and,  
• The cost of the progra m and ec onomic impact of the  interventi on.  
Aim 2:   Conduct process and formativ e evaluations  to understan d, des cribe,  explain, a nd enhance interv ention 
Reach , Effectiveness, Adoption, I mplementatio n, and Maintenance . 
 
 
For publication    6 3. STUDY DESIGN  
3.1. Cluster Randomize d Design  
The trial compare s usual care services to a multidisciplinary , primary  care-based approach to tr eating CP-LOT 
patients . The study team ha s planned for up to 1, 000 patients from  106 clusters of PCP s (6-12 patients  per cl uster ) 
across t hree KP health plans ( KPNW, KPGA,  and KPH ) to participate in the trial , with [ADDRESS_549589] i nterven tion and 53 PCP clusters  to usual care  representing 9-30 PCP c lusters in each of the three 
participating KP regions.  
3.2. Eligibility  
 3.2.1. Prim ary Care Providers  
Primary care provider participants (PCPs) . All PCPs (intern al medicine and family p ractice providers [medical doctors 
– MD, doctors of osteopathic me dicine – DO, p hysician assistants –  PA, and nurse practitio ners – NP with establ ished 
panels of patients]) in the  three participating KP regions are  eligible to part icipate in the trial.  
 3.2.2. Patients  
Patient inclusionary  eligibility criteria include s the following:  
1. Adult (18 years of age or older) h ealth plan  members from KPNW, KPGA, an d KPH  who receive their pr imary 
care services  from participating PC Ps 
2. Health  plan memb ership of at leas t 180 d ays/6 months duration   
3. Long term o pi[INVESTIGATOR_433698]: 90+ day supply of  short acting opi [INVESTIGATOR_433699] [ADDRESS_549590] year  
Patie nt exclusionary  criteria  are lim ited to the following:  
1. Patients currently enrolled in intensive addictio n medicine servi ces or wit h evidence of activ e substance  
dependen ce of su fficient severity to inter fere with their ab ility to actively participate in t he 
behav ioral/lifestyle change p rogram  
2. Patients with cognitive imp airment severe enough to preclude their  participation in  a behavi oral/lifestyle 
chan ge program  
3. Patients with current malignant cancer diag nosis  
4. Any evidence  of  patient having received hospi [INVESTIGATOR_433700]-of-life palliativ e care  within past year  
5. Patients  unwilling to participate in the skills training/lifestyl e change elements of the pro gram (PCPs cannot 
mandate th at their referred patients  participate in th e program ).  
Exclusionary criteria are pur posively kept to  a minim um to ensure that study participan ts resemble those most in 
need of these services in the broader p opulation .  
3.3. Recruitment a nd Retention Str ategies  
 3.3.1. Recru itment   
Based o n the previously stated eligibility criteria , one d atabase for each  region al healthplan  compi[INVESTIGATOR_433701] ( HRNs ) of all PPACT eligible patients who are paneled to a ll participating PCPs. This database is 
refres hed j ust prior to beginning recruitment of any given cluster to ensure t he most accurate PC P pan eling of 
patients.  PCPs in each clinic are  invited to participate in  an information al meeting  held in their pri mary care clinic 
prior to recruitment efforts in that clinic. During this meeting, PCPs are in formed of their option to o pt out o f 
 
 
For publication    7 participation in the s tudy. The PCP’s  receipt of the study overview, expectations of  participat ing, and absence  of 
opting o ut of the study constitutes that PCP’ s informed consen t.  
For half of th e participating PCPs their patie nts are randomized t o participate in the in terventi on while for the 
other half their p atients are randomized to  the usual car e condition.  PCPs, other clinic , and study staff  are blinded to 
their randomization status until all of their patients have been recruited . The number of PPAC T eligible patien ts on a 
given PCP’s  panel ranges from [ADDRESS_549591] is to target t he 
more complex pa tients with chronic pain; those whic h often place the greatest strain o n PCPs and the region s as a 
whole. In a n effo rt to ac complish this goal the  study team 1) prioritize s recruitment of patients on ≥ 120 daily 
morphine equivalent dose o f opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], patient s concom itantly prescribed benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], and patients with  high  
primary care service utili zation (defined as 12 o r more c ontacts in the pr ior 3 months) and 2) ask s that PCPs review a 
list of their prioritized patients to ensure that all pat ients on the list are  appropriate can didates for the program .  
All PCP approved PPACT eligible patients are maile d a recruitment  brochure  summarizing the s tudy and providi ng an 
opt out contact [CONTACT_6227] .. Additionally, it states that patients might be contact[CONTACT_11252] a week to participate in the 
study if they have not called to opt -out. The brochure  specifies t hat ther e are limited sp aces in t he program such that 
not eve ryone  receiving a brochur e will be c ontacted to  participate.  
Consistent with the pragmatic nature of this trial and the full partnership of the three KP healthcare systems  in 
incorporating this in tervention reorganizing  pain -related services and enh ancing pain-related assessments, p atients 
are informed  that the stud y represents a partnership between their KP providers and the research team to evaluate 
existing pain -related services within the heal th plan and to evaluate the impa ct of providing a clos er coo rdination of 
pain -related se rvices av ailable wit hin the primary care clinics. KP staff working in coordination with the health plan 
and the research center then attempt to contact [CONTACT_433755] p atients who do not opt ou t. Recruitment callers 
invite patients to  enroll in  the cli nic summarizing the inte rvention as one that p rovides closer coordination of  pain -
related services within the primary care clinics , verbally reviewing the elements of conse nt (waiv ed wr itten consen t), 
and obtain baseline patient reported outcomes . The study’s target cluster size is 10-[ADDRESS_549592] has been finalized , interventionists ( staff not invo lved in the initial recruitm ent calls of 
patient s) are unblinded to the study cond ition of  each PCP cluste r and their associated patients. These 
interventionists cont act patients in the usual c arecondit ion to inform them of the ir next assessment study contact [INVESTIGATOR_2993] 
[ADDRESS_549593] in terven tion.5 A rescue session proto col details the process 
interven tionists unde rgo when individuals do not attend sess ions regularly or unable  to attend due to various 
circumstances (e.g., surgery, tr ansportation issues). While attempts are made by [CONTACT_433756] s with the highest “dose ” of intervention tha t is feasible , as a pragmatic trial, attention to retention is 
informe d by  [CONTACT_433757] .  
Data collecti on retention . The study  empl oys a tiered sy stem (pat ient hea lth record se nt to patient through hea lth 
plan  secured e -mail system, automated telephone  calls using the KP  Message Center, live te lephone calls by [CONTACT_433758]) to enhance collection of the  primary study out come , the PEGS.[ADDRESS_549594] granted a  waiver of signed informed 
consent and an alteration  of privacy rule authorizatio n (HIPAA ) (no signature) . When s tudy interviewer s obtain  oral 
consent from a prospec tive study participant over the telephone, the intervi ewer indi cate s that each element of 
informed consent and HIPAA privacy guide lines/study u se of  health  data have been r eviewed with the KP memb er by 
[CONTACT_433759] . This help s ensure 
that each element of informed  consent and HIPAA privacy guidelines/s tudy use of h ealth  data h ave be en thorough ly 
revie wed with all pro spective  participants.   Following scre ening and oral consent , an informational letter including all 
elements of informed consent, is sent to all participants recently enrolled in both intervention and us ual c are. For 
individu als randomized to the  intervention  arm, the letter includes details o f study activitie s and  expectations . For 
this study,  obtaining oral rather than written consent is an app ropriate c onsent pr ocedure because intervention  
activities involv e the coordination of clinical care services  already available to most KP members (e.g ., physical 
therapy, b ehavioral services, nurse care  management, and pharmacy) and therefore  the interven tion is expected to  
cause  no more risk of harm than wh at already exists for pa tients unde rgoing usual care  treatment for chron ic pain. 
Some patients pa rticipating  in the int ervention are expected to have worsening pain and/or other physical or 
emotional problems during the study period. However, these are risks inh erent  in the popul ation and w ould occ ur 
whether or not they were enrolled in the study  and  the risk of adverse o utcomes should not be  heightened as a 
function of being enrolled in the study. Further, because the intervention  is embedd ed direct ly in the pr imary  care 
clinics  and con ducted in partnership with pa rticipating patients’ PCP s, in the event that a patient’s symptoms 
significantly worsen during the intervention, their PCP will be immediately contact[CONTACT_426] a PPACT interv ention tea m 
member and their PC P will  work with  the patie nt to ident ify and provide ap propriate care. This is c onsistent with the 
standard of care provided at KP.  
For the pragmatic trial, data is  assessed and recorded in accordance with regular clinical care (either in the 
intervention  arm or the compar ison usual care condition), and subse quently extracted by [CONTACT_433760]. As such the IRBs have granted  
a waiver of consent to use compute rized  records to c ollect asse ssment data for t he trial.  The study team  believe s 
that the as sessment porti on of th e pragmat ic trial clearly satisfie s the criteria of 45 CFR 46:116 for waiver of informed 
consent. Those criteria are:  
• “The research involves no  more  than minimal  risks to th e subjects”  – The only ri sk to participants from 
this procedu re is violatio n of con fidentiality, which the study  prot ects against.  
• “The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights or welfare of the subjects”  – Researc h use of 
reco rds will ha ve no e ffect on i nsurance coverage, access to care, or eligibility for any b enefit f rom 
participating health systems. The various HMO regions already routinely permit the use of EHR  records 
for research purposes without member conse nt.  
• “The res earch could not practically be carrie d out without the waiver or alterati on” – It would  not be 
possible to meet in person with al l PPACT participants to obtain written consent . 
Finally, patients in the intervention arm of the study are  informe d that group sessions ma y be rec orded and shared 
with supervising staff  to evalua te the quali ty of service s the patient is receiving and to help the PPACT providers and 
the health plan understand how to best improve services for health plan members. A  signe d release of informatio n is 
obtained for the potential recordin g of groups.  Should a patient not be willing to sign the release of information, the 
group they are assigned to is not audio recorded.  
 3.4.2. Primary Care Providers  
 
 
For publication    9 PCPs are provided a  thoro ugh presentat ion at their regula r primary care meeting (or present ation materi als when  not 
in attendance ), which include s all elements of informed  consent . The PCPs have a on e week opt-out opportu nity 
after the meeting  or receipt of materials . The s IRB dee ms this is an  appropriat e consen t procedure given the minimal 
risk t o the PCP po sed by  [CONTACT_1758]. Benefits t o the PCPs who are randomized to the intervention arm of the study 
include ass istance managing the ir patien ts with chronic pain who are on opio ids, patients who often utiliz e primary 
care services at a greater  capacity. The PCPs in t he intervention arm are provided with a comprehensive assessment 
of their study patients , the intervention team ’s pain mana gement recommendations , and te mplates for 
commun icating wi th those patien ts who often pres ent with challenging communication styles. A ll PCPs participating 
in the trial regardless of  which study arm they (and the ir patients) are randomized have the benefit of the study 
supporting quarterly collecti on of  patient rep orts of pain  and pain-relate d functioning using the standard monitoring 
tool adopted in all K P region  to monitor  patients on long term opi[INVESTIGATOR_433702]. Participating prov iders, regardless of 
study arm, are free to refer t heir patient s to an y pai n-related ser vices they deem warranted .  
3.5. Treatment Arms  
 3.5.1. Usual Care   
As noted in th e earlier sec tion 3.3.1 on “Recruitment ,” all poten tial patient participants are approached about their 
willingness t o participate in  regular quarterly assessm ent of their pain and relat ed func tioning and status as w ell as 
their availability  and willingne ss to particip ate in the PPACT intervention if offere d and oral c onsent is obta ined 
before they are enrolled in the study. For those p atients whose PC Ps are randomize d to the usual care  conditio n, 
furth er study -related contact [CONTACT_433761].  
Thos e pat ients in PC P cluste rs rando mized to either the PPACT intervention or the usual care  arm of t he study are  
able to utilize all diagnostic  and tr eatment health plan services availab le to them for pain and related conditi ons.  
 3.5.2. PPACT  Interventio n 
The intervention involves  (1) a comprehensive intake evaluation with periodic reev aluation (evaluations performed 
by a behavioral health spe cialist or nurse care  manage r, physical t herapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]  (PT), and a chart based medication  review 
by a p harmacist), (2) group coaching sessions ( co-led by a behavioral specialist and nurse care manager, w ith 
consultation from the PT to support the adapted move ment activ ities), and (3)  interim care  mana gement contacts 
(conducted  by [CONTACT_433762] l health speci alist or the  nurse care  manager). Section [ADDRESS_549595] INTEGRAT ED INTERVENTION COMPO NENTS  
The int erve ntion co nsists of (1) a compre hensive intake evaluation  with , (2) gro up coaching ses sions, and (3) interim 
care  management contacts by [CONTACT_433763]. The interdisciplin ary interve ntion team 
includ es a behavioral healt h specia list (mos t often a social worker or master’s -level counselor), a nurse care  manager, 
and a PT  with additional consultation from a pharmacist.  
The in tervention approa ch integrates ancillary services —behavioral services, nursing care  management , PT,  and 
pharmacy  consultatio n—into the primary care environment with the goal of helpi[INVESTIGATOR_433703] p the skills to 
increasingly self- manage their condition . Many CP -LOT pat ients ma y have received b rief trials of one or more of 
these services, albeit  in a fragmented f ashion. By c oordinating such services within the primary care setting and  
providing serv ices consistent with evidence -based treatment protocols,  CP-LOT patients receivin g the interventio n 
are expected to be better able to manage their chr onic pain and redu ce their relia nce on opi[INVESTIGATOR_2536]. This 
approach is consistent with chronic care mo dels of care,7-11 previous collabo rative c are and multidisciplinary 
approaches  to the management of  chronic p ain,12-16 and chronic pain treatment gu ideline criteria.17-19 A visual 
depic tion of participant flow through the interve ntion is shown in Fig ure 1: PPACT Intervention Descrip tion. Each 
segment of the inte rvention is described in more det ail below.  
 
 
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549596] program involves a comprehensive  up-front assessment  of th e patient s’ pain and 
func tional status to elucidate possib le contributing factors to their pain and impaired functio ning. The evaluation is 
designed to orient patients to the program app roach, a ddress any questions or concerns the y have about 
particip ating  in the p rogram, and use assessment findings to develop in dividualized treatment plans that can t hen be 
added to the  patients’ EHR to guide PPACT program staff, PCPs, an d other health pl an provi ders. The  “persistent pain 
cycle” depi [INVESTIGATOR_6517] 2 : Revers ing the Persi stent Pain C ycle prov ides the f ramework that the PPACT team uses to 
orient patients,  PCPs, and other health care providers to the potentia l contributors to chronic pain and those most 
pertine nt for a gi ven p atient. This framework is also u sed as a mea ns of  helpi[INVESTIGATOR_433704] e role of pain 
management skills training and utilizi ng movement and body awareness strategies  in reversing  the cycle of persistent 
pain. Further, as the  framework orients b oth pati ents and clinical providers to the m any fact ors (the  pain amplifiers  
in Fig ure 2) that may exacerbate  pain and contribute  to pain manage ment difficulties , it helps motivate patients and 
providers alike to begin to address these 
factors.  
Although some of these “pain amplifiers ” 
are addre ssed directly  within the PPACT 
program  or us e CBT techniques useful for 
treating such conditio ns (e.g., stress , 
depression ), other problems  are outside  the 
purview of the progr am b ut instru ctional 
materials have been developed to help patients unders tand t he link betwee n 
persisten t pain and these  “amplifiers ” 
(smoking and pain, sleep problems and 
pain) or intervention staff work with 
patients  and their P CPs to identify health 
plan and c ommunity resources for 
addressing their nee ds. Throughout the 
PPAC T program, pat ients  are encou raged to 
focus on the  pain management  pratices and 
treatments from the upp er quadrants  of the 
figure labeled as “ First Line 
Reco mmendations/Active Approaches ” 
(green and blue domains summarizing “Pain 
Man agement Skills ” and “Movement  & 
Body Aware ness Strateg ies”)  to rein force  
the active role patients can take in 
managing the ir pain and be ginning to 
revers e the cy cle depi[INVESTIGATOR_433705] 2. Our 
clinic al and research exp erience suggests 
that many patients focus most of their 
energy  on tr ying to ident ify causes a nd 
contributor s to pain and seeking out 
“Common Conventional M edical Treatment 
Options ” (depi[INVESTIGATOR_433706] ); patients are encouraged to view 
the more passive approach es to pain Figure 2. Reversing the Persistent Pain Cyc le 
 
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549597] identify targets for skills training and ancillary treatment needs 
and to gauge patients’ functional progress in the p rogram. Interventi on assessment t ools inclu de those designed to 
address the following : 
• Pain -related sy mptoms and disability . Altho ugh administered routinel y through every day  clinical care, the 
intervention team  administers the complete  BPI20,21 to gauge change s in pain severity and impairment related 
to pain (pain interference)  and to give patien ts and their  PCPs information about patient funct ioning during 
the course  of the intervention. The intervention team  also administer s the Oswestry Disability Index,22-[ADDRESS_549598] patient functioning and change. Finally, a few 
questions  are inclu ded to get a sense of the duration of par ticipants’ chronic p ain, their attrib ution regard ing 
the cause , and the impact of thei r condition on  employment and/ or disability  status.  
• Identifying treatab le comorbidities and pain generators . Several clinical iss ues can exacerbate pain severity 
and cont ribute to functiona l impairment . Acco rdingly, the intervention  team  screen s for depres sion using the  
Personal Health  Questionnaire,[ADDRESS_549599] demonstrated strong ps ychometric propert ies and are regularly used in everyday clinical  care settings, 
including the heal th plans in which the study is conducted.  
• Helpi[INVESTIGATOR_433707] . Beca use a primary focus of the 
proposed  study is to help patients in the PPA CT intervention identify non -opi[INVESTIGATOR_433708], the intervention team  uses the Presc ribed Opi[INVESTIGATOR_433709]37 to help patients identify 
consequences of their opi[INVESTIGATOR_433696] (e.g., difficulty concentrating,  exces s sedation or fatigue, 
const ipation). The scale also provides an entry p oint for the PP ACT interventionists to initiat e a dialogue with 
participating patie nts about the pros and cons  of using opi[INVESTIGATOR_433710].  
• Identifying modif iable psychosocial and behav ioral mediators of pain . The intervention team  include s 
questionnaires that he lp underscor e for patient s their copi[INVESTIGATOR_433711] s to pain and their emotion al and 
attitudin al reactions to pain, factors that can either exacerbate o r help reverse the chro nic p ain cycle. 
Exacerbating factors include fear of movement (m easured using an ab breviated version of the Tampa Scale for 
Kinesiop hobia38) and pain  catastrophi zing.39-41 Helpful factors includ e patients’  ability to cope with t heir pain; 
e.g., b y increasing physical and social a ctivities (m easured using a modified version  of the CHAMPS Physical 
Activity Q uestionnaire42,43), increasing levels of adap tive copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (as measured using an adaptation of the 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_433712]44,45), and improving their percei ved self -efficacy beliefs  about their ability to 
cope with the cons equences  of chronic pain (as measured by [CONTACT_433764]- efficacy scale ).[ADDRESS_549600] intake a nd follow -up evaluati ons (including scale scores from the 
instrument s described above) are includ ed in the 
treatment plan in the EHR and are extractable by 
[CONTACT_433765] a means to  gauge patients’ success 
in the program, these are not primary research data 
for the study  (see Figur e 3 for a fictional example of 
a comple ted patient feedback form).  
These feedback forms are provided to participating 
patie nts at  the third intake  visit and attached to an 
enco unter in th e EHR fo r PCP and other K P provider 
access. Patients are asked to compl ete the 
evaluation utilized to produ ce and update these 
feedback forms upon entry into  the program  and  
brief meeting s are held  with patients’ P CPs to r eview 
the information . This allows the PC P and nurse care  
manager or beh avioral healt h specialist to discuss 
areas of strength for the pat ient, areas of need 
targeted by [CONTACT_78311], and strategic opportunities for t he PCP an d the program to partne r in del ivering 
a consistent messag e to the patient. Following this 
collaboratio n between intervention team and PCP, 
the PCP is encouraged to hold a  scheduled teleph one 
appointment with th e participating patient to 
comme nd their part icipat ion in  the progra m, recog nize their identified stren gths, an d enco urage their work on 
targeted op portunities for enhancement.  
This outrea ch by [CONTACT_433766] c oordin ation occur ring amo ng the patient’s overall team. The PCP is  provided with an optional 
script template to use during this call. This  script template and proact ive nature of the  PCP ou treach is design ed to 
promote enhanced collaboration between the PC P and p atien t.  
4.1.2. Schedule and Delivery  
Each pa tient in the i ntervention arm is scheduled fo r three [ADDRESS_549601] month:  
1) Intake #1 – behaviora l specialist or nurse care manager “new” visit  
2) Intake #2 – PT evaluation  
3) Intake # 3 – behavi oral spe cialist or nurse care manag er: 60 minute “follow -up” visit  
The pharmacis t completes a medication chart review aft er the in -person medication  review done duri ng intake vis it 
#[ADDRESS_549602] or nurse care  manager.  
PT visits are  also schedule mid-treatment to allow t he PT to refine physical activity goals and to help patients utilize 
more advance d portions of the adapt ed movement yog a DVD  (e.g., floor -based exercises) if warranted.  Post -
treatment assessment/ma intenance planning with the nurse care manager or behavioral specialist is to occur shortl y 
after the last group session (approximately fou r months after enro llment).  Figure 3. Examp le Completed Patient Feedback Form  
 
 
 
For publication    14 4.2. Core Groups for Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295230] / Yoga -Based Adapted Movement Pr actice  
 4.2.1. Overvi ew of Goal s and Strategies  
Group  coaching sessions . The g roup coaching sessions a re based upon the approach ut ilized in the study t eam’s  
previous stud ies of persistent pain47-[ADDRESS_549603] 
found to be related to pain and functional  impairment .39,40,57- 62 The variables targeted for change are (1) self -effic acy 
for pain and pain  catastrophizing, (2) fear of mo vement,  and (3 ) physical deconditioning. The group coach ing portion 
of the int erventio n is designed  to (1) enhance patient s' self -efficacy in u sing copi[INVESTIGATOR_433713] , (2) de crease 
maladaptive  pain c atastrophizing, (3) decrease fear of movement , and (4 ) incre ase social and p hysical activities . The 
group session s occur every week over [ADDRESS_549604] and /or nurse  care manager, with consultation from a PT to support the a dapted movement a ctivit ies and 
physical activity -relevant portions  of the interv ention.  
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_25125] m odules . Table 1 provides an overview of our copi[INVESTIGATOR_433714], which are s ummarized 
below . 
• Session 1: Understan ding pain/pain education an d role of 
pain co pi[INVESTIGATOR_433715]. Simple diagrams, including the 
neuro matrix and persis tent pain cyc le, are used to illustrate 
the pain cycle along  with  the role of the  brain and other 
parts of the central nervous sy stem in influenci ng the pain 
experience. The  group explores p ain’s e ffect on patients’ 
activities, feelings, and thoughts and h ow these chan ges 
similarly impact the pain t hey experience. The m enu of 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_433716], as well as the fact t hat 
these skills can be used not only for ma nagin g pain, but 
also fo r mana ging stressors related to pain. Patients are 
taught h ow to use a b rief relaxation method (progres sive 
muscle relaxatio n) that enables them to apply relaxation 
during daily activities  that may increas e their pain (e.g., 
walking , transferring from one positi on to another, 
prolonged sitting).  
• Session 2: Applyin g progressive  muscle relaxation (PMR) 
and ad aptation model.  Using  the information  presented in 
Session 1, experiential activities  encourage the gr oup to 
envision how applica tion of the progr am’s co pi[INVESTIGATOR_007] s kills can 
change their pain, stress,  and adaptation t o challenging 
situations. Time is spent brea king down the PM R act ivity to 
promote  a successful experience of this important skill  and an overall u nderstanding of how this di rectl y 
impacts th e percep tion of pain and stress in the brain.  
• Session 3: Activity -rest cycle . Patients are taught to use a quo ta system to pac e the ir activities an d increase 
activity level. The quota system invo lves targeting a daily activity that the pat ient tends to ove rdo and  
learn ing to split this activity into peri ods of moderate activity (e.g. , 10 min utes walking) followed by [CONTACT_433767] (e.g. , [ADDRESS_549605] ). The patient will build up the activity quota over time. A rang e of activity options 
are d iscus sed, along w ith ben efits of gradually increasing activity. Barriers and obstac les to using this quo ta 
system are identifie d and solutions for o vercoming them a re formulated.  
• Session 4: Pleasant activity scheduling.  Pleasant activity scheduling is used  to help patients  identi fy and  
incorporate a variety of enjoyable and realistic act ivities in th eir day -to-day life that help t hem overcome the Table 1. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_433717]    15 deac tivation common for pain patients and to address mood -related im pairments common among patients 
with chronic  pain . 
• Session 5:  Relaxa tion m ini-practices.  Patients are taught to use, and then p ractice as a group, t hese brief 
relaxation t echniques that a re de signed for use i n the midst of various daily activities. These m ini-practices 
provide an alternative to long er re laxation met hods, s uch as  the full PMR, but still provide the  mental and 
physi ological bene fits nec essary to overcome inst ances of pain, t ensio n, and stress.  
• Session 6: Pleasant imagery.  Patients are assiste d in identifying an imaginary, personal scen e and  are then 
guided th rough pleasant imagery sessions that focus  attention on ple asant experie nces in the midst of pain, 
stress, or negative thoug hts. The group t hen strategizes about building these imagery ses sions into their day 
to promote relaxation.  
• Sessi on 7: Emotio nal reg ulatio n: leaning in . Mood modulation skills, mindfulness, a nd the role o f accept ance 
are taught and pra cticed to assist  patients in working with strong emotions.63  
• Session 8: E motional regulation: leaning out . In work ing with patients  to counterbalance leaning into and 
away from  challengin g emotions, distraction techniques usi ng physical or auditory stimuli are d iscussed and 
practiced as helpful tools  in m anaging pain .63  
• Session 9: Co gnitive restr uctu ring. Cognitive restructuring is used to help p atients recogn ize overly negative 
thoughts that occ ur in respon se to pain. E ffects of such thoughts on feelings and behaviors are  discussed.  
• Session 1 0: Use of calming self- statements.  Patients develop alternative, calming /copi[INVESTIGATOR_433718] -
statemen ts that are mo re helpful/useful in copi[INVESTIGATOR_54241] . 
• Session 11 : Problem- solving/reinforcing the application of learned skills.  Following patient -stated reviews of 
the copin g skills us ed through out the program, the group w orks through several problem -solvi ng scenarios t o 
gain experience applying learned co pi[INVESTIGATOR_433719] t of challenges faced.  
• Session 12: R elapse prevention  and maintenance enha ncement training.  Patie nts are tau ght strategies to 
enhance maintenance of learned copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]. In order to pi[INVESTIGATOR_263097] s ituational factors affecting maintenance , 
each pa tient is taug ht to identify high -risk situations that are likely t o interfere with copi[INVESTIGATOR_433720]. A 
rationale  for anticipating and  copi[INVESTIGATOR_433721]. Cognitive strategies for recognizing ear ly 
warning signs of pain and symptom flares and c opi[INVESTIGATOR_433722].  
Adapted move ment component of  group . During the ad apted movement componen t of the gr oup, patie nts are 
instructed in yoga -based movement (stretching and stre ngthening). Th is approach to practice utilizes  the “Relax into  
Yoga ” DVD (base d on  the Yoga of Awareness res earch trials64-67) which offers a gen tle  yoga practice tailored to 
enco urage patie nts to participat e daily in gentle and accessible move ments  with the intentio n that th ese skills will 
begin to gene ralize to everyday a ctivities  requiring physical move ment.  In-session, yog a-based adapted movemen t is 
limited to seated and suppor ted standing poses because t he degree of deconditioning expec ted for this target 
populat ion sugge sts that these p ractices are best suit ed to their  current fun ctional limitations. The “ Relax Into Yoga” 
DVD  that is used in group sessions and giv en to patien ts to support them in adopti ng a regular stretching/yoga 
pract ice outside of class do es contain f loor-base d rout ines. Participants able to get up and down from the floor may 
augment their practice with the use of these routines and work with th e PPACT PT t o ensure that they know and 
have practice d safe ways of gettin g down to and up from t he floor.  
 4.2.2. Schedule and Delivery  
Following the complet ion of the Comprehensive Intake Eval uation for each patient in a given cluster (estimated to 
take 4 weeks), al l patients in the cluster be gin the Core Group Series. This se ries of group sessions consists of one [ADDRESS_549606] and /or nurse care  manager,  with consultation fr om the 
Intervention Tea m Pharmacist  and PT. These groups are held at the patients ’ primary care clinic or clinic hub.   
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549607] i ntervention, the study te am recogniz es there are 
instan ces when individuals are  unavailable for gro up sessions an d brief in -person or telephone session s are indicated. 
Such contacts are focused on brief  review of copi[INVESTIGATOR_433723], monitoring p articipants’ pro gress in meeting 
their individualized goals,  and help ing address bar riers or obstacles to meeting these goals. Su ch calls last no more 
than 10-[ADDRESS_549608] conducts a chart re view targe ting the fo llowing are as of the patient’s current 
medication regimen: (1) dr ug therapy gaps or redu ndancies; (2) d rug–drug o r drug– disease interacti ons; (3) adequacy 
of current doses; (4 ) adherence conc erns  (based on participant ’s response to intake questi ons about pattern and 
frequency of medication  use) ; and (5) adverse  events. The patient’s medicatio n history is  also reviewed in order to 
assess the  success of previously tried medicatio ns and adequacy of those trials. The o utcome of this review is to 
advise the referring PCP o n potenti al adjustments to the  patients ’ opi[INVESTIGATOR_433724], provid e feedback on 
othe r current pain medications (and po ssibly psychotropic medi cations) being prescribed to help the  PCP identify 
therapeutic  alternatives to opi[INVESTIGATOR_433725] b est meet the patients’ needs, and provi de information  that 
can assis t the tre ating PCP in be ginning to taper the patient’s opi [INVESTIGATOR_2536].  
4.5. Physical Therapy Consultation 
During the intake process , patients meet with the PPACT PT to assess current functionin g and identify movement 
adaptations t hat will help them most  realistically begin to i ncrease activity and thus most  fully particip ate in  the 
group coaching sessions. The PT evaluat ion targets the following areas: (1) history  and physical exam, wh ich inform  
the remaining evaluation components;  (2) education regardin g biomech anics to assist  patients’ movement during 
day-to-day activiti es; (3) development of a p lan for graduated aerobi c physical activity; and (4) modifications 
necessary for the yoga -based adap ted movement component of program.  
Follow-up evaluations with the PT occur at mid -program and focus on extending pati ents’ progress with graduated 
aerobic physical activity and yo ga-based adapted movement. Progress m eeting  patients’ goals is  evaluated, with a 
focus on helpi[INVESTIGATOR_433726]. Th e PT works wit h patients who are re ady to progres s 
to more advanced forms of the yoga -based adapted movement in  order to review body mechanics that ensure  safe 
use of the DV D guided poses.   
5. MEA SUREMENTS AND EVALUATIONS  
5.2. Primary  and Secondar y Patient  Outcome Measur es 
This se ction includes  a descrip tion of primary and secondary outc omes  with appropriate supportive evidence, 
justification, and validatio n. Pr imary and seconda ry outcomes are me asured at the patient level unless other wise 
indicate d. Table 3 summarizes pr imary and secondary outc ome measur es for the study, their source, an d de signated 
analytic purpose.   
 5.2.1. Pain Severity and Functioning  
The pr imary outc ome mea sure for the study  is the PEGS,1 a psyc hometrically val idated 4 -item version of the shor t 
form of the Brie f Pain  Invent ory (BP I-SF).72 The 4 -item PEGS asks pat ients to report on their avera ge p ain severity as 
well as report on pain -related impairments in functioning in key life domains (general activity, enjoy ment of life, and 
 
 
For publication    17 quality of sleep)  on an 11 -point Likert scale  [0  to 10] . The 3-item PEG has been wide ly adopted for clinical pain 
assessment, epi[INVESTIGATOR_433727],  and st udies of pain treatment effectiv eness72,73 and found to be  more 
acceptable for use b y PCPs and their support staff in the bu sy everyday clinical practice setting . We used the 4-item 
version as PCPs in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_433728] s’ pain was interfering with their s leep. .  
Distribution of PEGS  and PEGS  slope.  The PEGS questions are measure d on a [ADDRESS_549609] o f pain on functioning 
(general activity, sleep, and enjoyment of life). The sum of these four questions con stitutes the study’s  primary 
measure of pain  (PEGS -overall), while the pain severity ite m and the s um of three ite ms mea suring the impact of pain 
on functioning form subscales of severit y (PEGS -severity) and impact ( PEGS -impact) . Based on data for KPNW 
mem bers, the distributions  of thes e scales are unimodal, centered at about the midpoint of the  scale, and reasonably 
symmet ric. The primary outcome variable for PPACT will be the slope of PEGS-overall on time (measured over t he 12 
months following study enrol lmen t). Table 2 provide s summary information  for these measures for KPNW patients. 
The distribution s for all three  slope s are symmetric ally distribut ed about 0. We also used  these slopes  to calculat e 
intra- class correlation (ICC) estimates using the patien t’s paneled PCP as the cluster -level variable (mimicking the 
planned cluster structure  for the main  study). The re sulting ICC was 0.001 3. 
 5.2.2. Use of Op ioids and Other  Medications  
An important secondary out come for this study is th e level of opi[INVESTIGATOR_433729] -acting  (U.S.  Drug Enforcemen t Agenc y Schedule II or Non -Schedule  II) or 
long- acting o pi[INVESTIGATOR_2438] . Morphin e equivalents per dispen sing (MEDs ) is calculated  by [CONTACT_433768], times the op ioid-spec ific morphine  equivalents 
conversion factor.74,75 Next, total daily morphine equivalent s are calculated by [CONTACT_185529] g the total morphine 
equivalen ts per dispensing by [CONTACT_3433] e days’ supply dispen sed. Finally, daily morphin e equivalents  are applied across the  
correspondin g days. If an i ndividual had opi[INVESTIGATOR_433730], morphine 
equival ents are summed for that day. This method of calculat ing MED has been wide ly used and applie d to EHR data. 
181;[ADDRESS_549610] tar get patient population that are hypothesized  to be reduced for  those randomize d to the 
intervention when compared to the ir usua l care  counterparts . These utiliz ation variables include both aggregated 
and disaggregated primary care co ntacts  (outpatient visits, e- mail contacts, telephone contacts), use of spe cialty pain 
services (incl uding physia try, pain medicine, physical therapy,  and occupational therapy service s), inpatient services 
related to the participant’s pain condition  (e.g.,  surgeries, implementation of p ain-related devices),  and overall 
outpatien t utilizat ion. Utilization  of other he alth services for which directional h ypotheses are not indicated but f or 
which data will be collected include the receipt of acupuncture or chi ropractic care for pain reimbursed by [CONTACT_433769].  Resource and time pe rmitting, analyse s will be  conducted w ith these additional secondary health  service 
utilization variables. V alidation of these utilization variables is reviewed in section 7.[ADDRESS_549611] survey. That information i s not sampled consistently and  frequently 
among our target po pulation , nor is it nec essarily available in  a manner that ca n be link ed to a KP m ember’s record, 
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549612] the informati on in both KPGA and KPH . Accordingly, we worked with our 
regional stake holders to identify the critical patien t satisfaction questions that they b elieved to  be of importanc e in 
evaluat ing the intervention. These included t wo questions assessing patients’ satisfaction with their primary care 
services as well as their satisfact ion with overall pain -related s ervices provided by [CONTACT_433770]. The que stions 
assess sat isfaction  over the pa st three months on a 5 -point Likert s cale (“very dissatisfied” to “very satisfied”). 
Because satisfaction measure s are not routinely collected in the EHR, these data will be collecte d directly by s tudy 
personnel and st ored apart  from t he patien ts’ EHR. The  data will be collected twice: at the time the patient initially 
enrolls  in the study and at [ADDRESS_549613] 
completed the s tudy intervention.  
 5.2.5. Clinical Co variates  
Patient -level clinical covariates that are extrac ted from either the EHR or other existing clin ical information systems 
include demographics (age, gender, race/ethn icity) and diagnostic variables that are impo rtant in categorizing  the 
patie nt popu lation, including the  presence of concomitant psychiatric d iagnoses, evidence of substance us e disorder 
history, and number of pain disorder conditions. These varia bles are be extracted from the EHR for the six months 
preceding study enrol lment for each pa rticipant  to better c haracterize the patient as he/she ente rs the study.  
5.3. Quantitative D ata Collection Schedule  
Table [ADDRESS_549614] Outcome V ariables  
Measure                                                                       Sour ce Schedule of Assessment  
Up to 12 months 
preceding patient 
enrollment  Study Month  
0 3 6 9 12 
Patient -Reported Outcomes  
PEGS Primary outcome  Study 
survey        
Roland Morr is Disability 
Questionnaire  Secondar y outcome  Study 
surv ey       
Patient Satisfaction Survey  Secondary outcome  Study 
survey        
Medication -Related Outcomes  
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_433731] 
(outpatient visits, emails, 
telephone contacts and total)  Secondary o utcome  EHR  
Emergency and urgent care 
services  Secondary outcome  EHR  
Use of specialty pain services 
(physiatry, pain clinic, physical 
and occupational therapy)  Secondary outcome  EHR  
Overall outpatient service 
utilization  Secondary outcome  EHR  
Inpatient ser vices related to 
pain condition  Secondary outcome  EHR  
 
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549615] a data 
file of all patients’ PEGS  data .  The lead analyst uploads the non -completers  to the K P Message Center, an automated 
calling vendor service that the study  uses to cond uct the PEGS  over the telephone. This service also allows  for a 
message to be left; the patient can call back at a later date an d still do the brief automated interview. Five days after 
the KP Message Center  pushes out their automated phone calls, the  resu lts from tho se interviews is extracted and a 
list of  PEGS  non-completers is again  generated  and uploaded into the tracking syste m. In the last step of this three-
phase process , a medical assistant will c all th e non -completers to attempt to conduct the brief interview with a live 
person . This multi -step process ta kes advantage of what data is already  captured via the individual regi ons’ clinical 
processes while still trying to g et as much data as possible in a c ost-effective manner . 
5.5. Process Evaluat ion 
The PPACT process evaluation assesses fidelity of intervention delivery (the extent to which the intervention is 
delivered as int ended), the intervention dose  (how much of the intended intervention is delivered ), and the reach to 
the groups targeted by  [CONTACT_25234]  (the proportion of intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_433732] ) using the RE-AIM framework  as a guide .79,80  
For the study’s formative e valuation framework , we use PRISM,81 created to complement RE -AIM and focused on 
delineating  criteria for successful implem entation of int erventions in health systems. Further, t he structure, staffing, 
and analysis o f formative evaluation data is guided by t he Rapid A ssess ment Process (RAP),82,83 which employs 
ethnogra phic assessment by [CONTACT_433771] y to build an  evolving understanding of 
conditio ns related to a p lanned or existing interv ention . Data used for the process evaluation include: journal entries  
comp iled by [CONTACT_3476]  (to document the conversations, current practices, and PP ACT-related concerns that  
arise in the course of their interactions with stakeholders , project staff a nd teams ) as well as patient surveys and 
telephone interviews  with patients, clinicians and operation al leaders . As part of RAP, the qua litative team meets 
regularly to review dat a collection and incremental data analyses t o compi[INVESTIGATOR_433733], and the results of these analyses become part of debriefing meeting s and progress reports to the 
large r research team .  
Reach is an  individual -level measure reflectin g the percentage and characteristics of pe rsons who receive or are 
affected by a program —in th is case, patients and PCPs. For patients, the pro ject uses EHR data  to examine:  
1. The percentage of pati ents excluded f rom the tr ial and the rat ionale for exclusion  (diagnostic criteria, patient 
availabilit y, level o f pain)  
2. The percentage of patients who par ticipate in the program based on the denominator of all patients wh o were 
approached  for participation  in each hea lth plan, as well as all pot entially eligible patients in the he alth plan 
regardless of wh ether or n ot they were approached for participation  
3. The characteristics of participating patients com pared to non -participating patients  in the health pla n (both thos e 
refusing pa rticipation, an d those never approa ched for recruit ment)  
To describe the reac h as it ap plies to participating PCPs, the project u ses health plan administrative data to examine:  
1. The percentage of P CPs who participa te in the program based on the  denominator of all PCPs app roached for 
particip ation in the hea lth plan, as well as all p otentially  eligible PCPs in the health plan regardle ss of whether or 
not they were approach for participation.  
2. The char acteristics of participating PCPs c ompared to t hose of non -participating PC Ps (both those decli ning 
participation as well as those never approached  for participation).  
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549616] of the interventi on on important outcomes . 
This includ es the following : 
1. Broader outcomes of impo rtance inc lude patient satisfaction , shifts in patient utilizat ion of health serv ices 
and medicatio n use , and overall intervention  cost and potential cost offset as sociated with  the program . 
2. Resou rce and time permitting, the  team  may conduct exploratory ana lyses examin ing the robus tness  of the 
intervention across pati ent subgroups (e.g., gender, age, ethnicities, pai n type(s), comorbid conditions) . 
3. Short -term attrition in the intervention  will be e xamined as well as different ial rates by [CONTACT_433772].  
In addition to the quant itative data described above, the qualitativ e data collected as part of the f ormative 
evaluation will better allow the study team  to be st understand the reach and recruitment findings.  
Adoption. No prim ary care clin ics in any of the  participating health plan  regions have declined to participate, nor has 
the study team  identified conditions that  would restrict a given clinic from participating. However, the team will 
continue to monitor adop tion as the in tervention  is more broadly rolled  out in each of the reg ions, identifying clinics 
who do not  participate and the reason for non -participation . The study team  will also com pare the ch aracteristics 
(e.g., size, location type, demographics of pa tients served)  of those cli nics who particip ate compared to those who 
don’t.   
Implementation is assessed both at the individual and organization level. Each is described in turn below.  
Individual implementation adherence . Individual im plementation  measures the  adherence of pat ients to the 
intended inte rvention level as measur ed through attendance at i ntervention -related sessions (assessme nt intake 
evaluations and reassessment s, group ses sions, scheduled telephone contacts) and complet ion of intende d home 
practice . As each inter vention visit is s cheduled using a PPACT program -specific identity code and visit type, this can 
be easily extract ed from the EHR to evaluate degree of implementation.  
Organization implementation adherence . Orga nization imple men tation mea sure s how closely  the intervention staff 
follow the intend ed interv ention program as well as the consistency  of the program over time. To examine 
intervention staff’s ad herence to t he intervention protocol, all interven tion individ ual and grou p sessions are digitally 
recorded, and  sections of these tapes are reviewed in t he supervision s essions (see section 8.1) to ensure that study 
procedures are closely followed. Remedi al training is provided for any clinicians who deviate from th e establishe d 
protocol. T reatment adherence and th erapi[INVESTIGATOR_433734] a s part of the supervision process. 
Treatment adherence refers to the extent to which a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_433735] . 
Protocol adherenc e criteria are used for e ach session, with satisf actory adherence defined as 90% or more of t he 
maximum possible score on the ad herence rating scale . Ratings of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]' competence in deliver ing the 
interventions  is used to evaluate digital recordings o f the sessio ns reviewed i n supervision s essions .[ADDRESS_549617] in terventionis ts (b ehavi oral specialists, nurse care  managers, physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], and pharmacis ts) 
receive training prior to cond ucting treatm ent sessions with study participants. The initial training consist s of a 3-day 
didactic and experiential course co nducted by D rs. K eefe,  DeBa r, and Benes  with participation from the KPNW PT 
(Gabriel), and pharmacist  (Thorsness) .  
Inter ventionists are provi ded with a detai led out line of the inta ke and reass essme nt pr ocess  as well as detailed 
outlines for each group treatment session, and the treatment strategies taught through didactic instruction, taped 
illustrations of techniques from m odel cases, and role -play of common scenarios. All instruct ion sessions are 
video taped  for reference and/or educatio n of new intervent ionists and retraining as need . 
Procedures to ensure consistency of treatment. To ensure that the interventionists  consis tently follow the 
appropriate treatme nt prot ocol, (1) the in terventionis ts follow a det ailed intervention manual , (2) telephone -based 
supervision sessions are  conducted with all interventionists , (3) each treatment session is audiotaped to provide 
opportun ities for review during the weekly su pervisi on meetings, whe re study inv estig ators  give feedback on 
interventionists’  performance, and (4) ratings of treatment adherence are  conducted. Protocol adherence criteria 
have been  developed for each session with sa tisfactory adherence  defined as 90% o r more of the maximum possible 
score on  the adher ence rating scale. Ratings of i nterventionists ' competence in delivering the intervention85 are used 
to evaluate 10% of th e session s. Sess ions to be evaluated are  randomly selected . However, the intensity of 
supervision  will be decreased over the course o f the trial as PPACT providers gain more experience delivering the 
intervention mimicking the way supe rvision is o ften prov ided in e veryday  care settings. We antic ipate supervi sion 
occurring weekly for the first four mon ths, bi -weekly for the next four mon ths, and monthly thereafter. In addition, 
we have planned for  annua l “booster” training to ensure that  any new sta ff are fu lly train ed and to refresh skills 
among interventioni sts. We considered carefully the intensity a nd frequency of training and supervision that is  most 
appropriate for this intervention. While some sim ple and most systems -level interven tions in pra gmatic trials may 
call for little in the way of specifi c training f or implementing the protocol nor system atic review of practit ioner 
effort s,86 the c omplicated problems of CP -LOT patients call for mo re systematic training and clin ical supervision. This 
level of o versight  is consistent w ith what regularly o ccurs in clinical settings. Import antly, many CP -LOT patients hav e 
had ma ny treatment failures, du e in part to the fragmented nature of their care; our approach is designed to address 
this with strong initial sup port and  training for th e interventionists w orking with these patients. While the increasing  
reliance in health care on less highly sp ecialize d and trained providers (e.g., nurse care  managers , masters -level 
behavioral specialists) represents an exciting n ew direction for behavio ral science in ensur ing the sustainability of 
evidence -based interve ntions in everyda y practi ce settings, it i s impera tive to determine the level of training and 
superv ision necessary to ensure that the treatment is both effective f or patients and feasible  for providers.  
 
 
For publication    [ADDRESS_549618]  
operationally defin ed a serious adverse eve nt as a death or hosp italization during a patient’s p articipation in the trial. 
Becaus e patients w ith chronic p ain are an ticipated to have fluctuating physical and emo tional symptoms as part of 
the natural course of their condition ( and would be expected t o occur regardless of patients’ enrollment in the tr ial), 
such sympto ms will not be sy stematically  monitored as  part of the trial. However, because the intervention is  
embedded directly in th e primary care clinics and conducted in partne rship with particip ating patients’ PCP s, in the 
event that a patient’s s ymptoms signific antly worsen duri ng the inte rvention, thei r PCP wi ll be immediately 
contact[CONTACT_426] a PPACT intervention team member and thei r PCP will work with the patient to identify a nd provide 
appropri ate care. This is con sistent with the standard of ca re provided at KP . 
7.2. Data Safet y Monitorin g Plan (DSMP)  
As the i ntervention aspect of  this study is based on bes t available evidence and constitutes a reorganization of 
currently  available clinical serv ices, we do not foresee any new risks above and beyo nd standard clin ical care. 
Noneth eless, pati ents with comp lex chro nic pain conditions a re vulnerable to clinical o utcomes that constitute 
serious adverse  events, and while such eve nts are unlikely to occu r as a consequence o f study participation, we are 
obliged to investigate and respond appropriate ly to these ev ents. Co nsequently, we will i mplement a safety 
monitorin g plan based on those used successfully  in other, similar interven tions. This plan involve s EHR monitoring of 
all study participants every [ADDRESS_549619] estimates of th e intraclass 
correlation coefficient ( ICC) of PEG slopes clust ered wi thin provider groups that we derived from his torical data from 
the KPNW region, we estimate the ICC to be .0013. In the calculations presented below we conservatively use ICCs of 
.002,  .[ADDRESS_549620] deviation u nits (SDUs ).  
Our initial stud y design nom inally called f or [ADDRESS_549621]  93% to detect a 
stan dard effect size of 0.24 and 88% po wer to detect  an ef fect size of 0.[ADDRESS_549622] sizes under various design scenario s 
  
Number of  
Clusters    
Patients 
per Cluster  ICC=.002 ICC=. 005 ICC=.[ADDRESS_549623] Size (in SDUs)  Effect Size (in SDUs)  Effect Size (in SDUs ) 
.16 .18 .20 .22 .24 .16 .18 .20 .22 .24 .16 .18 .20 .22 .24 
120 8 68%  78%  86%  92%  96%  68%  78%  86%  91%  95%  66%  76%  84%  90%  95%  
106 8 63%  73%  82%  88%  93%  62%  72%  81%  88%  93%  61%  71%  80%  87%  92%  
 
8.2. Randomizatio n 
Given the lagged nature of the inter vention ro llout,  even within a giv en clinic, it is neces sary to rando mize all 
providers in a given clinic at the out set of intervention activ ities in that clinic. However, the assignmen ts are not 
revealed to either patients or provid ers un til all of the pat ients for a given PCP have b een recruite d. To preserve 
blinding, rec ruitment staff are totally distinct from the in tervention staff  and rema in blinded during the entire course 
of the s tudy as they collect follow -up assessments.  
8.3. Drop out and Withdrawal  
Primary Care Provider. If an enrolled PCP leaves their  KP practice, changes clinics, or asks to withdraw from the s tudy, 
every effort will be m ade to collect process  data from the PCP  before their departu re and to document the reas on for 
leaving . We will cont inue to collect data on  the provider ’s enrolled pat ients and will analyze them acco rding to the 
group to which t hey were originally assigned  (i.e., per intention to treat, ITT) .  
Patients . If an enrolled patient discontinues KP coverage or changes prov iders during the study , we will continue  to 
collect dat a on them and will analyze them according to the group to which they were originally assi gned . Such 
patients who are in clusters randomized to the intervention arm of the study will c ontinue to be offe red individual or 
telephone contact [CONTACT_433773] t hroughout the time that their enrolled cohort i s in the  active 
phase of  the intervention so as to provide as much t herapeutic benefit to these patients as is possi ble. 
We will document th e extent to which either of  the above ev ents occurs and  will compare the frequency of such 
occurrences between inter vention and control part icipants .  
 
 
For publication    24 8.4. Quantitative Data Methods a nd Analysi s 
The following analytic framework will be used for our primary  and secondary outcome anal yses. All an alyses will be 
performed  using an intention -to-treat framework , and tests will be evaluated at a two -tailed alpha level of .05. 
Because of the nested structure of the data (observations nested within patients nested within provider groups), we 
will use a t hree -level hierarchical linear model (HLM : mixed mo dels, random effects regre ssion, and multilevel 
models) to account for the intraclass correlation that results from the nesting.93-[ADDRESS_549624] level of 
the model will include  time as a pred ictor ( five timepoints, representi ng the number of weeks since  baseline), thus 
modeling the within -person trajectories across time. We will use two parameters (linear and quadratic slope) to 
characteriz e change across time, with linear slope  capturing init ial rate of change and quadratic s lope reflecting the 
degree to which the change slowed (or increased) over time.  The second level of the model may include patient -level 
covariates as predictors of the baseline PEGS score and the  slope  param eters for time.  Randomization is expected to 
balan ce most potential patient- level covariates, however, in the case of remaining residual imbalances, covariates 
will be included in the model. These may include variable s such as substance use pro blems/histor y, number of pa in 
conditions a nd type, and other c omorbid medical and mental health conditions. The third level will include a dummy 
variable for arm  as the predictor of the patient -level  intercept and slope parameter s for time .  A significant 
coefficient for arm on the slope(s) of tim e would indicate tha t there are different trajectories across time for each 
arm. A pattern in which those in PPACT  demonstrate a greater reduction  in pain impact over time than those in t he 
usual care arm would provide support  for the effectiveness of PPAC T. We will use the s ame analytical framework fo r 
the RMDQ. Because there are only two timepoints available for satisfaction, we will be limited to a two -level model 
of the difference scor es between 6 months and bas eline of pat ients nested wi thin provider groups.   
Level -1 Mode l 
    Y tij = π0ij + π1ij*(LIN_TIME tij) + π2ij*(QUAD_TIME tij) + etij 
 Level -2 Model  
    π 0ij = β00j + β01j*(Patient_covariates ij) + r0ij 
    π 1ij = β10j + β11j*(Patient_covariates ij) + r1ij 
    π 2ij = β20j + β21j*(Patient_ covariates ij) + r2ij 
Level -3 Model  
    β 00j = γ000 + γ001(ARM j) + u00j 
    β 01j = γ010  
    β 10j = γ100 + γ101(ARM j) + u10j 
    β 11j = γ110  
    β 20j = γ200 + γ201(ARM j) + u20j 
    β 21j = γ210  
where : Ytij is the outcome for pers on i under p rovider j at ti me t, π are lev el 1 (occasion) regression coeffi cients, e tij is 
the random error associated with person i under provider  cluster  j at time t, Lin_Time is the number of weeks since 
baseline and Quad_ Time is the number of weeks sin ce baseline squared, β are level 2  (patien t) regression 
coefficients, r are  level 2 rando m effects, γ are level 3  (provider cluster ) regression coefficients, u are level 3 random 
effects, and arm is an indicator variable.    
Hierarchical generalized linear modeling (HGLM) will be use d to test the s econdary outcomes : opi[INVESTIGATOR_433736], 
pain treatment and  diagnostic procedures, emergency/urgent care visits, primary care visits, and  specialty care visits 
over [ADDRESS_549625] whether  the secondary  outcomes diffe r for the two 
groups, controlling for difference s in patient c haracteristics. Because  the utilization  variables are likely to follow non -
 
 
For publication    25 normal distributions, we will use Poisson, Negative Binomial, or Gamma  distributions as appr opriate for the 
distributio n of each secon dary outcome variable.  
Level -1 Mo del 
    η ij = β0j + β1j*(Patient_covariates ij) 
Level -2 Model  
    β 0j = γ00 + γ01*(ARM j) + u0j 
    β 1j = γ10  
where: ηij is the outcome defined by [CONTACT_433774] (log) and distribution (gamma, Poisson, or Negative Binomial), β 
are level 1 (person) regression  coefficie nts, γ are level 2 (provider  cluster ) regression coefficients, u is the level [ADDRESS_549626] intervention compared with 
usual care . Costs will be reported at three levels: 1) cos ts related to t he interven tion delivery, 2) medical care costs 
related to pain control, and 3) the total cost of medical care. Intervention costs will be estimated using E HR data , 
supplemented with data  collected directly from intervention team staff . A sampling of clin ical visits and interviews 
with intervention delivery staff will be used to determine the time needed to deliver the intervention. We will also 
consider costs related to the administration of the PPACT intervention in practice, including proj ect management , 
training, and additional team meetings.  
Using EH R data, we will aggregate medical care events related to pain control and total costs  at meaningful levels in 
order  to demonstrate how the intervention impacts medical  care resource use, spec ifically  inpat ient stays, outpatient 
procedures, clinic visits, and pharmacy dispenses. We will identify medical care utilization events that are related to pain control and the intervention using ICD -9CM , ICD -10CM, and CPT codes. To facilitate costing, we  will examine the 
number a nd type of health care encounters participant s receive over the course of their [ADDRESS_549627] the event.  
Medical care utilization events will be analyzed using mixed effects Poisson regression analysis, with primary care provider cluster as a random effects factor and follow -up time as an offset variable. We will estimate quantit ies of 
medical care events (i.e.,  inpatient stays, outpatient procedures, clinic visits, and pharmacy dispenses) using separate 
regression models.  
 
 
 
For publication    26 9. LITERATURE C ITED  
1. Krebs EE, Lorenz KA, B air MJ, et a l. Development and initial validation of the PEG, a three -item scale assessing 
pain intensity and interference. J Gen Intern Med. 2009;24(6):733- 738.  
2. Jensen MP, Nielson W R, Kerns RD. Toward the development of a motivational model of pain se lf-
management . The Journal of Pain. 2003;4(9):477 -492.  
3. Jensen MP, Nielson WR, Turner JA, Romano JM, Hill ML. Changes in readiness to self- manage pain are 
associated with improvement i n multidisciplinary pain treatment and pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Pain. 2004;111(1 -2):84-95. 
4. Vong SK, Cheing GL, Chan F, So EM, Chan CC. Motivational enhancement therapy in addition to physical 
therapy improves motivational factors and treatment outcomes in people wi th low back pain: a randomized 
controlled trial. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. 2011;92(2):176- 183.  
5. Rollnick S, Miller WR, Butler C. Motivational interviewing in health care: helpi[INVESTIGATOR_9988].  
Guilford Press; 2008.  
6. Owen -Smith A, Mayhew M, Leo MC, et al. Automating Collection of Pain -Related Patien t-Reported Outcomes 
to Enhance Clinical Care and Research. J Gen Intern Med. 2018;33(Suppl 1):31- 37. 
7. Wagner EH. The Chronic Care Model. 2006; http://www.improvingchronicc are.org/ . 
8. Wag ner EH, Austi n BT, Davis C, Hindmarsh M, Schaefer J, Bonomi A. Improving chronic illness care: 
translating evidence into action. Health affairs. 2001;20(6):64 -78. 
9. Coleman K, Austin BT, Brach C, Wagner EH. Evidence on the chronic care mod el in the new mi llennium. 
Health affairs. 2009;28(1):75- 85. 
10. Wagner EH. Chronic disease management: what will it take to improve care for chronic illness? Effective 
clinical practice: ECP. 1998;1(1):2.  
11. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Von Korff M. Organizing c are for patients  with chronic  illness. The Milbank Quarterly. 
1996:511- 544.  
12. Dobscha SK, Corson K, Perrin NA, et al. Collaborative care for chronic pain in primary care: a cluster randomized trial. Jama. 2009;301(12):1242- 1252.  
13. Kroenke K, Bair M, Da mush T, et al. S tepped Care for Affective Disorders and Musculoskeletal Pain (SCAMP) 
study: design and practical implications of an intervention for comorbid pain and depression. General 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9417]. 2007;29(6):506- 517.  
14. Loeser JD, Turk DC. Multidisciplinary pai n management . Paper presented at: Seminars in Neurosurgery2004.  
15. Turk DC. [ADDRESS_549628] -Effectiveness Treatment for Chronic Pain: An Analysis and Evidence -Based 
Synthesis. Chronic pain management: Guidelines for multidisciplinary program developm ent. 2007:15.  
16. Von Korff M, Moore JE, Lorig K, et al. A randomized trial of a lay person -led self- management group 
intervention for back pain patients in primary care. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 1998;23(23):2608- 2615.  
17. Chou R, Huffman LH. Nonpharmacologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_433737] w back pain: a review of the 
evidence for an American Pain Society/American College of Physicians clinical practice guideline. Annals of internal medicine. 2007;147(7):492 -504.  
18. Chou R, Loeser JD, Owens DK, et al. Interventional ther api[INVESTIGATOR_014], surger y, and interdisciplinary rehabilitation for 
low back pain: an evidence -based clinical practice guideline from the American Pain Society. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 
2009;34(10):1066- 1077.  
19. Management ASoATFoCP. Practice guidelines for chronic pain management: an  updated rep ort by [CONTACT_433775]. Anesthesiology. 2010;112(4):810.  
20. Cleeland C, Ryan K. Pain assessment: global use of t he Brief Pain  Invent ory. Annals, Academy of Medicine, 
Singapore. 1994.  
21. Keller S, Bann CM, Dodd SL, Schein J, Mendoza TR, Cleeland CS. Validity of the brief pain inventory for use in documenting the outcomes of patients with noncancer pain. The Clinical  journal of pain. 2004;20(5):309- 318.  
22. Roland M, Fairbank J. The Roland –Morris disability questionnaire and the Oswestry disability questionnaire. 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 2000;25(24):3115- 3124.  
 
 
For publication    27 23. Vianin M. Psychometric properties and clinical usefulness of the Oswestr y Disability Index. Journal of 
chiropractic medicine. 2008;7(4):161 -163.  
24. Wittink H, Turk DC, Carr DB, Sukiennik A, Rogers W. Comparison of the redundancy, reliability, and 
responsiveness to change among SF -36, Oswestry Disability Index, and Multidimens ional Pain In ventory . The 
Clinical journal of pain. 2004;20(3):133- 142.  
25. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a measure of current 
depression in the general population. Journal of affective disorders. 2009;114 (1-3):163 -173. 
26. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: the 
GAD -7. Archives of internal medicine. 2006;166(10):1092- 1097.  
27. Kimerling R, Ouimette P, Prins A, et al. Brief report: Utility of a short sc reening scale for DSM -IV PTSD in 
primary care. Journal of general internal medicine. 2006;21(1):65 -67. 
28. Ouimette P, Wade M, Prins A, Schohn M. Identifying PTSD in primary care: Comparison of the Primary Care -
PTSD screen (PC -PTSD) and the Gen eral Health Questio nnaire -12 (GHQ). Journal of Anxiety disorders. 
2008;22(2):337 -343.  
29. Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, et al. Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults: The Adverse Chil dhood Experi ences ( ACE) Study. American journal of 
preventive medicine. 2019;56(6):774- 786.  
30. Berner MM, Kriston L, Bentele M, Härter M. The alcohol use disorders identification test for detecting at -risk 
drinking: a systematic review and meta- analysis.  Journal of s tudies on alcohol and drugs. 2007;68(3):461 -473.  
31. Kriston L, H ölzel L, Weiser A -K, Berner MM, H ärter M. Meta -analysis: are [ADDRESS_549629] 
unhealthy alcohol use? Annals of internal medicine. 2008;149(12):879- 888.  
32. Beaudrea u SA, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_20116] A P, Stew art A, et al. Validation of the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_433738]. Sleep medicine. 2012;13(1):36 -42. 
33. Hayes AL, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_5782], Patel SR. The Epworth score in African American  populations . Journ al of Clinical Sleep 
Medicine. 2009;5(04):344- 348.  
34. Heaton K. A psychometric analysis of the Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]. Journal of nursing measurement. 
2007;15(3).  
35. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]: the Epwor th sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_433739].  sleep. 
1991;14(6):540 -545.  
36. Nguyen ATD, Baltzan MA, Small D, Wolkove N, Guillon S, Palayew M. Clinical reproducibility of the Epworth 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_50526]. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine. 2006;2(02):170 -174.  
37. Banta -Green CJ, Von Korff M, Sullivan MD , Merrill JO, Doyle SR, Saunders K. The prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_433740]: a patient -centered assessment of problems and concerns. The Clinical journal of pain. 
2010;26(6):489.  
38. Shelby [CONTACT_14687], Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, et al. Brief fear o f movement sc ale for  osteoarthritis. Arthritis care & 
research. 2012;64(6):862- 871.  
39. Keefe FJ, Brown GK, Wallston KA, Caldwell DS. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_433741]: catastrophizing as a maladaptive strategy. Pain. 1989;37(1):51- 56. 
40. Keefe FJ, Lef ebvre JC, Eg ert JR,  Affleck G, Sullivan MJ, Caldwell DS. The relationship of gender to pain, pain 
behavior, and disability in osteoarthritis patients: the role of catastrophizing. Pain. 2000;87(3):325 -334.  
41. Sullivan MJ, Bishop SR, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331] J. The pain cat astrophizing scale: development and validation. Psychological 
assessment. 1995;7(4):524.  
42. Mills KM, Stewart AL, King AC, et al. Factors associated with enrollment of older adults into a physical activity promotion program. Journal of Aging and Health. 1 996;8(1):96- 113. 
43. Sepsis P, Stewart A, McLellan B, et al. Seniors' ratings of the helpfulness of health promotion program 
features in starting and maintaining physical activity. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity. 1995;3(2):193 -
207.  
44. Jensen MP, K eefe FJ, Lefebvre JC , Romano JM, Turner JA. One -and two -item measures of pain beliefs and 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]. Pain. 2003;104(3):453 -469.  
 
 
For publication    28 45. Rosenstiel AK, Keefe FJ. The use of copi[INVESTIGATOR_100778]: relationship to patient 
characteristics and current adjustment. Pain. 1983;17(1):33- 44. 
46. Anderson KO, Dowds BN, Pelletz RE, Edwards WT, Peeters -Asdourian C. Dev elopment and initial validation of 
a scale to measure self- efficacy beliefs in patients with chronic pain. Pain. 1995;63 (1):77-83. 
47. Emery CF, Keefe FJ, [LOCATION_009] CR, et al. Effects of a brief copi[INVESTIGATOR_433742] x threshold in patients having osteoarthritic knee pain: a preliminary laboratory study of sex differences. 
Journal of pa in and sympt om management. 2006;31(3):262 -269.  
48. Keefe FJ, Ahles TA, Sutton L, et al. Partner -guided cancer pain management at the en d of life: a preliminary 
study. Journal of pain and symptom management. 2005;29(3):263- 272.  
49. Keefe FJ, Blumenthal J, Baucom D, et al. Effects of spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_433743]: a randomized controlled study. Pain. 2004;110(3):539- 549.  
50. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Baucom D, et al. Spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_433744]. Arthritis & Rheumatism: Official Journal of the American College of Rheu matology. 
1996;9(4):279- 291.  
51. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Baucom D, et al. Spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_433745] m anagement of knee pain 
in osteoarthritis: Long -term followup results. Arthritis Care & Research. 1999;12(2):101 -111.  
52. Keefe FJ, Caldw ell DS, Williams DA, et al. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_433746]: a comparative stu dy. Behavior Therapy. 1990;21(1):49 -62. 
53. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Williams DA, et al. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_433746] -II: follow -up results. Behavior Therapy. 1990;21(4):[ADDRESS_549630] pain: a randomized controlled study. PAIN®. 2011;152(4):[ADDRESS_549631] for the treatment of  chronic 
pain : a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. The Journal of Pain. 2002;3(6):429 -438.  
56. Naylor MR, Naud S, Keefe FJ, Helzer JE. Therapeutic Interactiv e Voice Response (TIVR) to reduce analgesic 
medication use for chronic pain management. The Journal of Pain. 2010;11(12) :1410-1419.  
57. Buckelew SP, Parker JC, Keefe FJ, et al. Self -efficacy and pain behavior among subjects with fibromyalgia. 
Pain. 1994;59 (3):377- 384.  
58. Geisser ME, Robinson ME, Keefe FJ, Weiner ML. Catastrophizing, depression and the sensory, affective an d 
evaluative aspects of chronic pain. Pain. 1994;59(1):79- 83. 
59. Keefe FJ, Kashikar -Zuck S, Robinson E, et al. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] t hat predict patients' and spouses' ratings 
of patients' self -efficacy. Pain. 1997;73(2):191- 199.  
60. Keefe FJ, Lipkus I,  Lefebvre JC,  et al. The social context of gastrointestinal cancer pain: a preliminary study 
examining the relation of patient pain catastrophizing to patient perceptions of social support and caregiver 
stress and negative responses. PAIN®. 2003;103(1 -2):151-156.  
61. Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, Carson JW, Pells JJ, LaCaille L. Pain catastrophizing in borderline morbidly obese and 
morbidly obese i ndividuals with osteoarthritic knee pain. Pain Research and Management. 2008;13(5):401 -
406.  
62. Sullivan MJ, Thorn B, Ha ythornthwaite  JA, et al. Theoretical perspectives on the relation between 
catastrophizing and pain. The Clinical journal of pain. 2001;1 7(1):[ADDRESS_549632] M. Pain and behavioral medicine: A cognitive -behavioral perspective.  Vol 1: 
Guilford P ress; 1983.  
64. Carson JW, Carson KM, Jones KD, Bennett RM, Wright CL, Mist SD. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_433747]. PAIN®. 2010;151(2):530- 539.  
65. Carson JW, Carson KM, Porte r LS, Keefe F J, Seewaldt VL. Yoga of Awareness program for menopausal 
symptoms in breast cancer survivors: results from a randomized trial. Supportive care in cancer. 
2009;17(10):1301- 1309.  
66. Carson JW, Carson KM, Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Shaw H, Miller JM. Y oga for wome n with metastatic breast 
cancer: results from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Journal of pain and symptom management. 2007;33(3):331- 341.  
 
 
For publication    29 67. Wren AA, Wright MA, Carson JW, Keefe FJ. Yoga for persistent pain: new findings and directions for an 
ancient practice . Pain. 2011;152(3):477.  
68. DeBar LL, Ritenbaugh C, Aickin M, et al. YOUTH: a health plan –based lifestyle intervention increases bone 
mineral density in adolescent girls. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 2006;160(12):1269- 1276.  
69. DeBar LL, S tevens VJ, P errin N, et al. A primary care –based, multicomponent lifestyle intervention for 
overweight adolescent females. Pediatrics. 2012;129(3):e611 -e620.  
70. DeBar LL, Striegel -Moore RH, Wilson GT, et al. Guided self- help treatment for recurrent binge  eating: 
Repl ication and extension. Psychiatric Services. 2011;62(4):367 -373.  
71. DeBar LL, Wilson GT, Yarborough BJ, et al. Cognitive b ehavioral treatment for recurrent binge eating in 
adolescent girls: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Cognitive and behavioral practice. 20 13;20(2):147- 161.  
72. Kroenke K, Theobald D, Wu J, Tu W, Krebs EE. Comparative responsiveness of pain measures in cancer 
patients. The J ournal of Pain. 2012;13(8):764 -772.  
73. Krebs EE, Bair MJ, Damush TM, Tu W, Wu J, Kroenke K. Comparative responsiveness of pain outco me 
measures among primary care patients with musculoskeletal pain. Medical care. 2010;48(11):1007.  
74. Boudreau D, Von Korff M, Rutter CM, et al. Trends in long -term opi[INVESTIGATOR_289054] -cancer pain. 
Pharmacoepi[INVESTIGATOR_65783]. 2009;18(12):1166- 1175.  
75. Von Korff M, Saunders K, Ray GT, et al. Defacto long -term opi[INVESTIGATOR_433748] -cancer pain. The Clinical 
journal of pain. 2008;24(6):521.  
76. Gudin JA, Mogali S, Jones JD, Comer SD. Risks, management, and monitoring of combination opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480], 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], and/or alcohol use. Postgraduate medicine. 2013;125(4):115- 130.  
77. Jones JD, Mogali S, Comer SD. Polydrug abuse: a review of opi[INVESTIGATOR_433749]. Drug 
and alcohol dependence. 2012;125(1- 2):8- 18. 
78. Webster LR. Considering the risks of benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_433750]. Blackwell Publishing Inc Malden, 
[LOCATION_003];  2010.  
79. RJ B-W, PJ C, CL T, BD L. The use of the eating di sorder examination with children: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Int J Eat 
Disord. 1996;19(4):391- 397.  
80. Campbell CI, Weisner C, LeResche L, et al. Age and gender trends in long -term opi[INVESTIGATOR_433751]. American journal of public health. 2010;100(12 ):2541 -2547.  
81. Dunn KM, Saunders KW, Rutter CM, et al. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_378558]: a cohort study. Annals of internal medicine. 2010;152(2):85- 92. 
82. Kuehn BM. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] p rescriptions soar. Jama. 2007;297(3):249 -251.  
83. Sullivan MD , Von Korff M, Banta- Green C, Merrill JO, Saunders K. Problems and concerns of patients receiving 
chronic opi[INVESTIGATOR_289054] -cancer pain. PAIN®. 2010;149(2):345 -353.  
84. Waltz J, Addi s ME, Koerner K, Jacobson NS. Testing the integrity of a psyc hotherapy protocol: assessment of 
adherence and competence. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. 1993;61(4):620.  
85. Borkovec TD, Nau SD. Credibility of analogue therapy rationales. Jou rnal of behavior therapy and 
experimental psychiatry. 1972;3( 4):257 -260.  
86. Thorpe KE, Zwarenstein M, Oxman AD, et al. A pragmatic –explanatory continuum indicator summary 
(PRECIS): a tool to help trial designers. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2009;62( 5):464 -475.  
87. Von Korff M, Kolodny A, Deyo R A, Chou R. Long- term opi[INVESTIGATOR_197959]. Annals of internal 
medicine. 2011;155(5):325 -328.  
88. Dixon KE, Keefe FJ, Scipio CD, Perri LM, Abernethy AP. Psychological interventions for arthritis pain mana gement in adults: a meta -analysis. Health Psychology. 2007;26 (3):241.  
89. Goldenberg DL. Multidisciplinary modalities in the treatment of fibromyalgia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 2008;69(Suppl 2):30- 34. 
90. Sarzi- Puttini P, Atzeni F, Salaffi F, Cazzola M, Benucci M, Mease PJ. Multidisciplinary ap proach to 
fibro myalgia: what is the teaching? Best Practice & Research Clinical Rheumatology. 2011;25(2):311- 319.  
91. Scascighini L, Toma V, Dober- Spi[INVESTIGATOR_23061] S, Sprott H. Multidisciplinary treatment for chronic pain: a systematic 
review of interventions and  outcomes. Rheu matology. 2008;47(5):670- 678.  
 
 
For publication    30 92. Smith BH, Torrance N. Management of chronic pain in primary care. Current Opi[INVESTIGATOR_433752]. 2011;5(2):137- 142.  
93. Hox JJ. Multilevel an alysis: techniques and applications.  Routledge ; 2010.  
94. Raudenbush SW, Bryk AS. Hierarchical linear models:  Applications and data analysis methods.  2nd ed. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc; 2002.  
95. Snijders T, Bosker R. Multilevel analysis: An  introduction to basic and advanced multilevel  modeling.  
Thou sand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1999.  
 