 
 
 
 
DIGITAL INTERVENTIONS TO TREAT HAZARDOUS DRINKING  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
PROTOCOL VERSION DATE 9/4/2022 
 
Page 1 of 23 
 
                    
                                    
HRP-503B  – BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
(201 7-1) 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Title:   Effects of Stress on Emotion and R isky Drinking  
 
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_469064], PhD  
 
 
(If applicable ) Clinicaltrials.gov  Registration  #: Click or tap here to enter text.  
 
 
SECTION  I: RESEARCH PLAN 
 
1. Statement of Purpose:  
 
Studies have shown that stress is a major contributor to stress -related clinical disorders and to substance use 
problems including alcohol ism (Perkins, 1999; Sebena, El Ansari, Stock, Orosova, & Mikolajczyk, 2012) . Stress 
response involves increased arousals in the autonomic nervous system (ANS)  (Thayer, Ahs, Fredrikson, 
Sollers, & Wager, 2012) . In particular, i t is well documented that alcoholism is highly associated with stress 
and ANS disruption, suggesting that a strategy to address stress and ANS regulation  may be helpful to reduce 
symptoms related to stress, mood, and addiction . For example,  a breathing technique has shown to be 
effective  in relieving stress -induced arousal . Studies have found that voluntarily regulated breathing practices 
normalize ANS system  and improve sympatho -vagal balance, which resulted in reduction in psychiatric 
symptoms including anxiety, stressor -related symptoms, and addiction  (Gerbarg & Brown, 2016) . Relieving 
stress and  arousal is particularly crucial in preventing alcohol addiction, as an inability to relax even during the 
neutrally relaxing state has been associated with high alcohol craving and early relapse  in patients with 
alcoholism  (Seo et al., 2013) . 
 
Overall purpose:  
The current study will examine the effects of a n intervention involving Problem -focused target intervention, 
Stress management , and Breathing modulation (PSB  intervention)  on improving symptoms of mood and 
addiction related symptoms including mood , craving, and addictive behaviors . The purpose of the 4-week  
intervention  is to test the efficacy of the [ADDRESS_601135] a month of their time towards  improving their symptoms and subsequent follow -up.  
 
The specific aims are as follows:  
 
Aim  (4-week intervention) : To examine the effects of the PSB  intervention on mood and addiction related  
symptoms ( emotional problems, craving,  substance use) in individuals with either risky  drinking  problems  or 
with high stress after the 4-week  interventi on (8 sessions)  of two sessions per week . The effects will be 
examined before and after the 4- week intervention.  
Page [ADDRESS_601136]: State the expected duration of the project, including all follow -up and data 
analysis activities.   
 
Study  (4-week intervention): 2.5 months  
 (2-3 weeks for 4 -5 baseline intake sessions; 4 weeks for the telehealth  intervention (8 session, twice 
weekly)  with daily monitoring  and intervention aids for assessing treatment progress via smartphone 
app survey ; [ADDRESS_601137] assessment; 30 days for daily follow -up via smartphone app ; [ADDRESS_601138] follow -up 
assessment ) 
 
3. Background:  Describe the background information that led to the plan for this project. Provide  references to 
support the expectation of obtaining useful scientific data.  
 
Habitual alcohol  abuse  and stress -related mood disturbance are serious problems (Naimi et al., 2003; 
Wechsler et al., 2002) . Studies have shown that stress  is one of  major contributor s to mental health disorders  
including emotional disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety) or alcohol abu se problems  (e.g., hazardous drinking ) 
(Perkins, 1999; Sebena et al., 2012) . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_469065] -related clinical disorders , challenges 
remain in implementing effective prevention and treatment approaches, as those with  either high -risk 
drinking or high stress n ot only disregard their mood and substance -related problems, but also respond 
inadequately to currently available prevention or treatment programs.  
 
It is well documented that  stress and  alcohol  abuse are associated with stress and ANS disruption including 
high stress sensitivity and negative emotion, increased basal heart rate (HR), sustained phasic HR 
acceleration, and reduced heart rate variability (Karpyak, Romanowicz, Schmidt, Lewis, & Bostwick, 2013; 
Sinha et al., 2009; Stormark, Laberg, Nordby, & Hugdahl, 1998; Vaschillo et al., 2008) . In those with mood and 
drinking related problems , impaired autonomic regulation characterized by [CONTACT_469074] (HRV; a primary index of ANS modulation) has been consistently reported  (Ingjaldsson, Laberg, 
& Thayer, 2003; Quintana, Guastella, McGregor, Hickie, & Kemp, 2013; Shively et al., 2007; Thayer, Hall, 
Sollers, & Fischer, 2006) .  
 
In particular, in times o f national crisis , the prevalence of stress - and alcohol - related disorders increases 
substantially. Over the course of the ongoing COVID -19 pandemic, there has been a significance rise in mental 
health symptoms including high levels of emotional distress and alcohol/substance misuse, presenting 
unprecedented public health challenges  (Callinan & MacLean, 2020; Rodriguez, Litt, & Stewart, 2020) . 
Immediate clinical interventions are exigent to reach out to vulnerable individuals in high -risk areas to 
evaluate and treat those at risk for alcohol - and stress - related disorders.  
 
A strong association between stress and addiction  suggest s that a strategy to address stress and arousal 
should be included in mood and addiction related  treatment or prevention strategies. For example, to relieve 
stress and ANS arousal, a breathing technique has shown to be effective. Studies have found that voluntarily 
regulate d breathing practices normalize  autonomic activity  and improve sympatho -vagal balance, which 
resulted in reduction in psychiatric symptoms including anxiety disorders, trauma - and stressor -related 
disorders, and addiction  (Gerbarg & Brown, 2016) . Relieving ANS arousal is particularly crucial in preventing 
Page 3 of 23 
 alcohol addiction, as an inability to achieving a relax ing state  has been associated with high alcohol craving 
and early relapse in AUD patients (Seo et al., 2013) . In addition, stress reduction  technique s including 
mindfulness have  been useful in reducing stress and treating mood and addiction related problems  (Kober, 
Brewer, Height, & Sinha, 2017) . Taken together, these studies suggest that  stress management and a method 
to relieve physiological arousal  should be incorporated into  prevention  and treatment programs for stress 
and addiction related symptoms , emphasizing the need for the PSB  intervention described above . 
 
In addition, d uring the COVID -19, the infectious nature of the pandemic is  a significant obstacle to treatment 
efforts. Telehealth  interventions have emerged as an ideal tool to overcome this difficulty and treat 
problematic alcohol use by [CONTACT_469075] -risk zones.  
 
To achieve these goals, t he current study is intended to ex amine the efficacy of the PSB  intervention on 
addiction symptoms in individuals (age 18 -55) with either hazardous drinking or high stress  using  4-week  
telehealth intervention as described in the Statement of Purpose . We will utilize  an approach that allows a 
concurrent 4 -week telehealth intervention using video communications and daily monitoring via a 
smartphone app.  
 
4. Research Plan:  Summarize t he study design and research procedures  using non -technical language that can 
be readily understood by [CONTACT_20894]. Be sure to distinguish between standard of care vs. 
research procedures when applicable and  include any flowcharts of  visits specifying their individual times and 
lengths . Describe the setting in which the research will take place.  
 
A total of [ADDRESS_601139] risky drinking habits 
at levels to match heavy or binge drinking groups based on the NIAAA clinician guide (2005).  COVID -19 
related stress will be identified on the basis of two validated measures including the COVID Stress Scale  
(Taylor et al., 2020)  and Perceived Stress Scale  (Cohen et al., 1983) . All study procedure will be conducted at 
the Yale Stress Center. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_469066] a co-investigator, [CONTACT_58728] and the YSC clinical team. [CONTACT_469088] is the Chief of Psychology Section in Yale Psychiatry.  
 
In response to the current COVID -19 epi[INVESTIGATOR_901], the following study processes will be carried out. To limit 
exposure to COVID -19 and ensure the safety , we will mostly use virtual options, such as video communications 
(zoom, Skype for business, or Microsoft team etc. depending on participants’ convenience), REDCap, or phone.  
An exception will be given to participants who do not have computers or electronic devices; these individuals will 
visit Yale Stress Center for experimental procedure.     
 
For the 4-week  intervention , subjects will participate in the 4 -week telehealth intervention (8 sessions, twice 
a week) for target intervention  and subsequent smartphone app follow -up. During the [ADDRESS_601140] will use prospective monitoring using smartphone  app technology  in the participants’ natu ral 
environment during the  30 -days follow -up, during which we will  monitor mood, stress, and alcohol  intake 
daily .  The intervention will be conducted via telehealth using Yale ITS approved video communications 
technology (e.g., Zoom, Skype for Business, or Microsoft Teams).   After the [ADDRESS_601141] -study assessments 
and be remotely instructed on how to uninstall the app from their smartphone.  
 
 
Page 4 of 23 
 (a) Intake pre -intervention phases   
 
Baseline Assessment  (4-week  intervention ): Following screening  using a Qualtrics prescreen survey or via 
phone , eligible subjects will be invited for a video session to obtain an informed eConsent (via REDcap) and an 
initial assessment to further determine eligibility via DSM -[ADDRESS_601142] meets criteria, he/she 
will be scheduled for  baseline sessions (2 hours each) to complete online assessments (via REDCap link) or in -
person video interview. There will be 4 -5 intake sessions depending on individual speed. All participants will 
work w ith specially trained research staff using standardized psycho social assessments, self -report rating 
forms, and physical health questionnaires via remote sessions.  
 
Assessments  
All participants  will be assess ed across the following domains  using psychometri cally established measures.  
The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -V (SCID -I) will be used to ascertain DSM -5 Axis I and II psychiatric 
and substance abuse diagnoses (First, Williams, Karg, & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], 2015)  and specifically to determine 
presence/absence of DSM -5 alcohol use disorder ( AUD ). 
The Shipley Institute of Living Scale (SHIPLEY)  (Shipley, 1940) has been widely used to assess cognitive 
functioning and impairment.  
 
Assessment for Alcohol use and addiction:  
Family history of alcoholism (FH) will be assessed using the Family Tree Questionnaire (Mann, Sobell, Sobell, & 
Pavan, 1985) ; (Vogel -Sprott, Chipperfield, & Hart, 1985)  which provides a method to obtain drinking status 
and alcohol -related problems for all maternal and paternal first and second degree relatives above the age of 
18. 
The Time -Line Follow -Back Interview  will also be used to assess alcohol, other drugs and nicotine use in the 
previous ninety days, during the study and during follow -up. This is a reliable experimenter -administered 
assessment (Sobell & Sobell, 1992) , which uses a calendar prompt to facilitate recall of drug use during a 
targeted period, and has been well-validated in alcohol and drug abuse treatment studies (Fals -Stewart, 
O'Farrell, Freitas, McFarlin, & Rutigliano, 2000) . 
Smoking History Questionnaire (Brown et al., 2002):  A smoking screening questionnaire consisting of items 
about current and past smoking habits  will be used to obtain smoking history.  
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT)  (Bohn et al., 1995) is a 10 -item screening tool 
developed by [CONTACT_38375] (WHO) to assess alcohol consumption, drinking behaviors, and 
alcohol -related problems.  
The Quantity -Frequency Variability Index (CAHALAN)  (Cahalan et al, 1969) measures alcohol consumption 
patterns over a specific time period.  
The Alcohol Urge Questionnaire (AUQ ); (Bohn, Krahn, & Staehler, 1995)  is a reliable and valid [ADDRESS_601143] -Revised (CUDIT) will be used to quantify the severity of 
cannabis use over the past six  months (S. J. Adamson et al., 2010) .  
The Marijuana Motives Questionnaire (MMQ)  (Simons et al., 1998) is a self -report questionnaire that will be 
administered at baseline to assess reasons for using marijuana, including  copi[INVESTIGATOR_7315].  
The Marijuana Craving Questionnaire – Short Form  (MjCQ -SF) (Heishman et al., 2009) will be administered 
weekly to assess craving for marijuana along four dimensions: compulsivity, emotionality, expectancy, and 
purposefulness.  
 
Page 5 of 23 
  
Assessment f or Emotional/Behavioral Problems  associated with Addiction:  The following assessments will be 
administered to assess stress,  impulsivity, depression, trauma, and mood symptoms.  
The Perceived Stress Scale  (Cohen, Kamarck, & Mermelstein, 1983)  is a 14 -item self -report assessing the 
degree to which situations are appraised as threatening or demanding.  
The Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593] /Trait Anxiety  and Anger  Questionnaire s (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996] & . 1970)  is a reliable and valid 
measure of both state and trait anxiety and anger . 
The Beck Depression Inventory  (Beck, Ward, Mendelson, Mock, & Erbaugh, 1961)  is regarded as a well -
established, sensitive self -report measure of depression . 
The Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6328] (CES -D) (Lewinsohn et al., 1997) a screening test for 
depression and depressive disorder.  
The Emotion Regulation Scale (ERS, Gratz & Roemer, 2004)  a 36 -item questionnaire to provide a 
comprehensive measure of the difficulties in emotion regulation.  
The Self -Control Scale -Brief (SCS -Brief)  (Tangney, 2004) is a [ADDRESS_601144] long -term goals, rather 
than distal behavioral outcomes of self -control. The SCS -Brief will be administered at intake appointments.  
The Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS -11) (Patton et al., 1995) is a questionnaire designed to assess the 
personality/behavioral construct of impulsiveness.  
       The Mindfulness Attention Awareness  Scale (MAAS) (Brown & Ryan, 2003) is a 15 -item  scale  designed to  
        assess a  receptive state of mindfulness and attention.  
The Perseverative Thinking Questionnaire  (Ehring et al., 2011) is a [ADDRESS_601145] idea of repetitive negative thought.  Intrusive thoughts are one of the symptoms of trauma.  
The Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory  (ZTPI) (Zimbardo & Boyd, 1999) is a 56-item  questionnaire  that 
measures individual differences in time -orientation which has been associated with emotional problems.  
The Multidimensional Personality Questionnaire  (MPQ) (155 items; Patrick et al., 2002) provides for a 
comprehensive analysis of personality including Positive Emotionality, Negative Emotionality, and Constraint  
which  embody affect and temperament constructs.  
The Brief Pain Inventory  (BPI)  (Cleeland & Ryan, 1994)  assesses the severity of pain and its impact on functioning.  
The Pain Catastrophizing Scale  (PCS)  (Sullivan, Bishop, & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331], 1995)  measures the tendency to magnify the threat 
value of a pain stimulus and to feel helpless in the presence of pain.  
The Externalizing Spectrum Inventory  (Kruger et al., 2007) is 100 -item questionnaire that indexes a range of 
correlated problem behaviors and traits in the domain of deficient impulse control such as alcohol or 
substance use problems.   
 The Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  (Posner et al. 2008) is a survey toolkit to assess severity  
 and intensity of suicidal ideation and behaviors. Suicidality can be one of  the symptoms of major depressive  
 disorder.  
The Childhood Trauma Questionnaires (CTQ)   (Bernstein et al., 1997) : This is a [ADDRESS_601146] (CSC)  adapted from the  Cumulative Adversity Interview (adapted from (Turner & 
Lloyd, 2004) . This measures chronic stress and adversity.   
The Dutch Eating Behavior Questionnaire (DEBQ)  (van Strien, 1986) measures eating styles that may 
contribute to or attenuate the development of obesity, through three scales that measure emotional, 
external and restrained eating. The DEBQ is administered to examine  stress -driven eating behaviors  
The Lifestyle and Behavior Survey , adapted from the Cornell Medical Index (Costa & McCrae, 1985; 
Perlmutter & Nyquist, 1990)  and the NHANES is administered at intake.  
The Social Media Questionnaire (SMQ)  is a 5 -item questionnaire  given at intake to assess social media use.  
The COPE Inventory (Carver et al., 1989) was developed to assess individuals’ use of different copi[INVESTIGATOR_152274]. The COPE is composed of fifteen subscales. This scale will be administered at intake.  
Page 6 of 23 
 The Cornell Medical Index  (Abramson, 1966)  measures current adverse physical and psychological health 
symptoms.  
 
Additional surveys to assess the COVID -19 related stress  
 
The COVID Stress Scales (CSS)  (Taylor et al., 2020)  is a [ADDRESS_601147] of COVID -19 (PIC ) (Chung, 2020)  is a 2 -item assessing the level of difficulties and 
distress in people’s lives over the past two weeks.   
 
The Psychological Stress Associated with the COVID -19 Crisis questionnaire (PSACC)  (M. Adamson, 2020)  is a 
37-item designed to measure the level of stress during the COVID -19 pandemic and characterize it according 
to location, gender, income, and other factor.  
 
The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version3)  (Russell, 1996)  is a [ADDRESS_601148] (ISEL)  (Russell, 1996)  is designed to measure perceptions of social 
support among individuals in the general population.  
 
The COVID -19 Community Response Survey -Social Distancing Impacts  (JHU -SDI) (Johns -Hopkins, 2020a)  is 
designed to measure the impact of COVID -19 on people’s lives due to a precautionary measure of social 
distancing.  
  
The COVID -19 Community Response Survey -Substance Use (JHU -SU) (Johns -Hopkins, 2020b)  is a 15 -item 
designed to assess the use of substance after and during the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
 
(b) Target Intervention  Combined with Brea thing and Stress Management (PSB ) 
Subsequently, after the completion of the baseline assessment, all subjects will remotely participate in a 4 -
week digital intervention via video communications using platforms approved by [CONTACT_469076], Skype for Business, or Mic rosoft Teams. For 4 weeks, participants will attend 1.5 to 2 hours 
individual therapy sessions (8 sessions in total, twice a week) with [CONTACT_469089] and her clinical team for prevention 
for alcohol use disorder using video communications. They will also be asked to use a smartphone app daily to 
assess treatment progress and learn copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110] (e.g., homework).  At the end of the [ADDRESS_601149] -treatment evaluations.  Some components of the PSB  intervention  include :  
(1) Problem -focused target intervention partially adapted from  cognitive behavioral therapy  and NIAAA -  
approved copi[INVESTIGATOR_469067]  (Kadden et al., 2003) .   
(2) Breathing modulation  to normalize ANS function including techniques  partially adapted from  resonance 
breathing (e.g, the Breath -Body -Mind (BBM)  technique (Brown & Gerbarg, 2012) ). 
The content involve s increasing knowledge on stress reactivity , emotional problems,  and drinking habits, 
culti vating breathing and emotion and stress regulation strategies , including  self-regulated  breathing. Each 
session involves self -monitoring of current stressors and challenges to handling stressors (communication, 
emotional reactivity, drinking, substance use) and a pplying strategies of awareness , reflecting, goal setting as 
well as integrating healthy lifestyle  and choices.  
Page 7 of 23 
  
(c) Follow -up: real-world smartphone app   
The method of daily monitoring has an advantage over traditional follow -up measures by [CONTACT_469077], real -time behavioral data in natural settings (Shiffman, Stone, & 
Hufford, 2008) . This approach has been well supported in studies examining daily mood, stress and 
substance -use patterns (Runyan et al., 2013; Wray, Merrill, & Monti, 2014) . We will provide smartphones to 
those who do not have. If it is lost or broken, we will provide another one. The app will only be shown to 
participants who will register the study. The  app does not require a password to access once they register. 
However, no respon se will be stored in the phone, and a ll the data will be coded and transferred 
immediately. The MetricWire app is not commercial and research only app. This app is HIPPA compliant and 
passed Yale IRB and IT review previously.  
 
The MetricWire app has previously be en used in clinical  research and is HIP AA compliant. All participan ts 
will complete a daily questionnaire during  the study  in the evening . Before  the smartphone app phase, 
subjects will initially  complete a  face-to-face 15–20-minute  training session where a research assistant will  
assist in installing an app on their smartphone devices which they will use to report their daily experiences. 
They will be given instructions on how to operate the smartphone app and a guide that they may take home 
with them that will outline the informa tion covered in the training session. They will also be given contact 
[CONTACT_3031] , should they have any problems or questions with the smartphone app over the course of the 
study. It will be explained that al l data on the app is encrypted,  and that the data is sent to a secure server 
where data is identified by [CONTACT_9170] . Subjects will also be informed that we will be monitoring the 
upload of data from the smartphone app to the  secure server to verify that everything is working correctly . 
Upon the completion of all study procedure, all participants will be debriefed about the study.  
 
Data Management and Processing:  
 
Data Management :  Research data is collected using Yale University’s REDCap system. REDCap is a secure 
HIPAA compliant web application for building and managing online surveys and databases, supported,  and 
approved by [CONTACT_34756]. Research data is exported and stored on a secure shared virtual drive maintained by 
[CONTACT_34756].  
 
All subjective data are kept in locked cabinets at the Yale Stress Center (YSC), New Haven and are identified 
only by [CONTACT_40337].  Data are de -identified and stored on the  workstations at the Yale Stress Center, which are 
highly secure and HIPPA co mpliant. Access to YSC workstations is password -restricted and is only available to 
[CONTACT_469089] and her research  staff . All research data is kept in two places --one as a hardcopy in a locked file with 
records identified only by [CONTACT_3038] ’ study number and the second in computerized databases 
protected by [CONTACT_1192] -level password systems  that are managed by [CONTACT_34756] . Upon completion of the study, all 
hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_417740]. The only documents linking participants’ names to their study numbers will be 
the consent forms. These will be stored in a separate locked f ile cabinet  and may only be accessed by [INVESTIGATOR_124] . Seo 
(PI) and relevant study staff.  
 
Safety planning in response to the COVID -[ADDRESS_601150] be held in perso n, the 
following guidelines will  be carried out.  
 
Page 8 of 23 
 Before any study visits, research participants will be screened for COVID -19 symptoms by [CONTACT_469078] -
19 questionnaires prior to the study visit at Yale Stress Center (YSC) and at the time of the on -site study visit.   
 
Participant will be asked to fill out YSC safety questionnaire for YSC visit s. If study participants say “yes” to any 
of the COVID -19 related questions, their appointment will be moved to a later date,  and they will be directed 
to the YNHH COVID -19 Support Call Center (203 -688-1700 option 1).  
 
The study site will be disinfected before and after each study visit based on CDC guideline. The measurements 
of temperature and oxygen saturation levels of research staff will be taken for both research personnel and 
study participants with a non -contact [CONTACT_469079] a pulse oximeter.  If temperature is greater 
than 99.[ADDRESS_601151] and seek 
medical attention. If oxygen saturation is below 95% in subject or research  staff, participants will not be allowed 
to participate in research appointment, and research staff will be asked to leave and seek medical attention.  
 
During in -person visits, both participants and research staff should maintain the required distancing (6 feet) 
and wear a mask.  Anybody entering the study site should properly wash their hands with alcohol -based hand 
sanitizer (containing at least 60% alc ohol) or soap and water in protecting against the spread of germs and 
viruses. In case participants do not have proper masks to wear, a mask and glove will be provided on -site study 
visits.  
 
 
5. Genetic Testing    N/A ☒ 
A. Describe  
i. the types of future research to be conducted using the materials , specifying if immortalization of 
cell lines, whole exome or genome sequencing, genome wide association studies, or animal 
studies are planned  Write here  
ii. the plan for the collection of material or the conditions under which material will be received  
Write here  
iii. the types of information about the donor/individual contributors that will be entered into a 
database  Write here  
iv. the methods to uphold confidentiality  Write here  
 
B. What are the conditions or procedures for sharing of materials and/or distributing for future research 
projects ? Write here  
C. Is widespread sharing of materials planned?  Write here  
D. When and under what conditions will materials be stripped of all identifiers?  Write here  
E. Can donor -subjects withdraw their materials at any time , and/or withdraw the identifiers that connect 
them to their materials ?  Write here  
i. How will requests to withdraw materials be handled (e.g. , material no longer identified: that is, 
anonymized) or  material destroyed)?  Write here  
F. Describe the provisions for protection of participant privacy  Write here  
G. Describe the methods for the security of storage and sharing of materials  Write here  
 
6. Subject Population: heavy /binge  drinkers   
 
7. Subject classification:  Check off all classifications of subjects that will be specifically recruited  for enrollment  in 
the research project.  Will subjects who may require additional safeguards or other considerations be enrolled 
Page 9 of 23 
 in the study? If so, identify the population of subjects requiring special safeguards and provide a justification 
for their involvement.  
 
☐Children    ☒ Healthy    ☐Fetal material, placenta, or dead fetus  
☐Non-English Speaking   ☐ Prisoners    ☐Economically disadvantaged persons  
☐Decisionally Impaired   ☐ Employees    ☐Pregnant women and/or fetuses  
☐Yale Students    ☐ Females of childbearing potential  
 
NOTE: Is this research proposal designed to enroll  children who are wards of the state as potential subjects?  
Yes ☐  No ☒  
 
8. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : What are the criteria used to determine subject inclusion or  exclusion?  
 
Inclusion Criteria :  
(1) Aged 18 -55 years ;  
(2) Ability to read and write English ;  
(3) Heavy/Binge Drinkers: Drinking at levels to match heavy or binge drinking groups (NIAAA Clinician Guide, 
2005) :  Heavy Drinkers (HD):  Regular alcohol use over the past year of, at least [ADDRESS_601152] drinks/wk for 
women and at least 15 drinks/wk for men. Binge Drinkers (BD): Binge drinking patterns (Women: 4 or more 
drinks; men: 5 or more drinks in one setting ).  
(4) COVID -19 related stress will be identified on the basis of two validated measures including the COVID Stress 
Scale  (Taylor et al., 2020)  and Perceived Stress Scale. (Cohen et al., 1983) . The PSS is a widely used  measure of 
stress that provides standardized cut scores.  
  
Exclusion Criteria :  
(1) Meet current or past DSM -V criteria for Axis I psychiatric disorders including any substance use disorders 
except for mild alcohol use disorder  (AUD),  marij uana use disorder , tobacco use disorder, and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2428] .   
(The current study targets alcoholism prevention in risky drinkers, and thus exclude s those who already 
have moderate and severe AUD. However, many risk y drinkers  often  have mild AUD, thus we include this. 
In addition, marij uana , tobacco,  and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2427] s are  included , given the high comorbidity found 
between marij uana/opi[INVESTIGATOR_469068] .) 
(2) Any significant current medical conditions;  
(3) Women : peri- and post -menopausal or pregnant women due to hormonal interactions with stress 
response;  
(4) Current use of psychotropic  and other medications or illicit drugs.  
 
9. How will eligibility  be determined, and by [CONTACT_20898]? Write here  
Research staff will determine eligibility. Potential subjects will complete an initial telephone  screening  and 
then  will be scheduled to meet using video communications with research staff to complete an intake 
appointment at the Yale Stress Center. Research staff will review the  medical history of the participant  to 
ensure all inclusion and exclusion criteria are met, under t he supervision of [CONTACT_469089].  
 
10. Risks:  Describe the reasonably foreseeable risks, including risks to subject privacy, discomforts, or 
inconveniences associated with subjects participating in the research.  
 
The potential risks to the subjects in the proposed study are listed below .  
Page [ADDRESS_601153] been effective in previous research, and only patients’ code numbers will be 
recorded on the forms themselves to p rotect confidentiality. If the subject reports discomfort completing the 
questionnaires or the visual stimuli task, they are free to drop out at any time without penalty. Any subject that 
reports emotional discomfort during or after the completion of quest ionnaires will receive an individual counseling 
session by a trained clinical staff  who is experienced in therapy.  The screening of subjects using the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, and the comprehensive physical and psychiatric evaluation will minimize the risk of including 
subjects who are otherwise inappropriate.  
 
PSB Intervention   
Participation in the study in completely voluntary. If a participant feels uncomfortable at any time during the 
intervention, counseling can be provided to address these concerns. Outpatient subjects are free to choose not to 
take part  in this study and stop disclosing their health information at any time.  
 
Smartphone app survey:   
Subjects will respond to smartphone surveys as they go about their daily lives, which may occur in the presence of 
others. However, smartphones are widely used in public for many tasks by [CONTACT_469080]. Responses gathered on the smartphones will be 
encrypted and sent to a secure server. C onfidentiality will be maintained to the degree permitted by [CONTACT_469081]. Data will be connected with subject ID only. The MetricWire smartphone app has been designed 
to be compliant with HIPAA regulations. This app is not commercial and research o nly app and passed Yale IRB 
and IT review previously. The app encrypts data on participants’ phones and while data is wirelessly transferred. 
The app randomly generates a [ADDRESS_601154] ID that is assigned to subjects upon their initial laboratory visit.  
The data is monitored daily, and if any duplicate data  or suspi[INVESTIGATOR_469069]’s data, the research team  will immediately contact  [CONTACT_469082] a problem or issue has 
occurred. Also, all smartphones are required to be password protected in order to restrict access to the app other 
than the participants.   
 
Confidentiality:   
All data will be kept confidential except in cases of imminent danger to the participants. Such limits to 
confidentiality will be clearly explained to participants verbally and in the written consent forms. Confidentiality 
regarding collected materials will be maintained via a numbered reference system maintained by [CONTACT_473]. 
Subjects' names will appear only on a consent form and a "key" form kept by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_203985]. Only the 
PI ([CONTACT_469090]), D r. Sinha ( co-investigat or) and relevant research staff will have access to any forms specifying both 
participant name [CONTACT_417021].  All number -coded subjective  data will be kept in locked offices with access 
only to investigators and research staff.  In case we obtain eConsent, the completed PDFs will be downloaded and 
stored in a study folder that can only be accessed with a unique password in a 3 -lock Yale ITS managed storage. The e -
consent also records the IP address of the participant and displays this information in the file repository in order to  
help regulate potential duplicate forms from a single IP address. Furthermore, good clinical and research practi ce 
procedures and HIPAA regulations will be followed . 
 
11. Minimizing Risks:  Describe the manner in which the above -mentioned risks will be minimized.  
See above  
Page 11 of 23 
 12. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) based on 
the investigator’s risk assessment stated below. (Note: the HIC will make the final determination of the risk to 
subjects.)  
 a.  What is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for subjects participating in this 
study? minimal  
b. If children are involved, what is the investigator’s assessment of the overall risk level for the 
children participating in this study? N/A 
c. Include an appropriate Data and Safety Monitoring Plan . Examples of DSMPs are   
available here  http://your.yale.edu/policies -procedures/forms/420 -fr-01-data -and-safety -
monitoring -plans -templates  for 
i. Minimal risk  
ii. Greater than minimal  
 
d. For multi -site studies for which the Yale PI [INVESTIGATOR_22422] : 
i. How will adverse events and unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others be 
reported, reviewed and managed?  Write here  
ii. What provisions are in place for management of interim results?  Write here  
iii. What will the multi -site process be for protocol modifications?  Write here  
 
Minimal Risk DSMP  
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_22419], assuring protocol compliance, and conducting 
the safety reviews quarterly . During the r eview process the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_30277], require modification/amendment, or close to enrollment.  The principal investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_74118] (IRB) have the authority  to stop or suspend the study or require modifications.  
 
This protocol presents minimal risks to the subjects and Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or 
Others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]), including adverse events, are not anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, 
Reportable Events (which are event s that are serious or life -threatening and unanticipated (or anticipated but 
occurring with a greater frequency than expected) and possibly, probably, or definitely related) or Unanticipated 
Problems Involving Risks to Subjects or Others that may require a  temporary or permanent interruption of study 
activities will be reported immediately (if possible), followed by a written report within 5 calendar days of the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_20866] (using the appropriate forms from the website) and 
any appropriate funding and regulatory agencies. The investigator will apprise fellow investigators and study 
personnel of all UPI[INVESTIGATOR_469070],  and via email as they are reviewed by [CONTACT_458].  The protocol’s funding agenc y, 
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA),  and Yale Faculty Account,  will be informed of 
Reportable Events adverse events within 5 days of the event becoming known to the principal investigator . 
 
13. Statistical Considerations:  Describe the statistical analyses that support the study design.  
 
Baseline screening, intake, self-report,  and interview data will be collected using the web -based R EDCap  system 
that is fully supported by [CONTACT_469083]. All rating data will be 
double -entered for verification. Quality control measures for out -of-range values and error checking programs are 
well established and will be implemented . 
Page [ADDRESS_601155] the efficacy of the  PSB intervention  in reducing stress , alcohol craving  and use , all analyses will be 
conducted using the intent -to-treat sample and each hypothesis will be tested using General Linear  models 
(GLMs ) (Diggle, Heagerty, Liang, & Zeger, 2002)  examining  the main effects of Time  (pre-/post -/Follow -up).  
 
For smartphone da ta, alcohol use outcomes obtained from mobile app will be defined in both dichotomous and 
continuous manner (e.g., time to first drink or time to heavy drinking after the prevention; percent days 
abstinence and heavy drinking days (men: 5 or more; women: 4 or more) as continuous measures). Frequency, 
the total number of days of stress or alcohol use; and quantity, the average amount of alcohol use (number of 
drinks) or average levels of stress per occasion will also be computed.  Multiple regression and mixed eff ects 
regression models (MRMs) will be used to evaluate the effects of prevention on prospective repeated 
assessments of stress, emotion, alcohol use, craving, and mood related data. Specific MRMs will model within 
person time varying and invariant data from daily stress and substance use  patterns to assess group difference s 
and examine whether behavioral changes after prevention predicts future stress and alcohol -related behaviors.  
 
SECTION  II: RESEARCH INVOLVING DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , RADIOTRACERS , PLACEBOS  AND DEVICES  
 
 If this section (or one of its parts, A or B) is not applicable, check off  N/A and delete the rest of the section.  
 
A.  RADIOTRACERS  ☒N/A 
 
 
B.  DRUGS/BIOLOGICS     ☒N/A 
 
 
 B.  DEVICES   ☒N/A 
 
SECTION  III: RECRUITMENT /CONSENT AND ASSENT PROCEDURES   
1. Targeted Enrollment: Give the number of subjects:   
a. Targeted for enrollment at Yale for this protocol : 100 
b. If this is a multi -site study, give the total number of subjects targeted across all sites : n/a 
 
2. Indicate recruitment methods below.   Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_20881].  
☒ Flyers  ☐ Internet/web postings  ☐ Radio  
☐ Posters  ☐ Mass email solicitation  ☐ Telephone  
☐ Letter  ☐ Departmental/Center website  ☐ Television  
☐ Medical record review*  ☐ Departmental/Center research boards  ☐ Newspaper  
☐ Departmental/Center newsletters  ☒ Web -based clinical trial registries  ☐ Clinicaltrails.gov  
☒ YCCI Recruitment database  ☐ Social Media (Twitter/Facebook):   
☐ Other:    
 
* Requests for medical records should be made through JDAT as described at  
http://medicine.yale.edu/ycci/oncore/availableservices/datarequests/datarequests.aspx  
 
3.  Recruitment Procedures:   
a. Describe how potential subjects will be identified.  Write here  
Page 13 of 23 
  
Subjects will be recruited through flyers posted in the community, and advertisements on social media/internet sites.  
Potential subjects will complete an initial telephone  screening  or be asked to complete a Qualtrics prescreening 
survey and then  will be scheduled to meet with research staff to complete an intake appointment at the Yale 
Stress Center . 
 
For the COVID study , participants with COVID -[ADDRESS_601156] significantly affected by [CONTACT_4113] -19 in the US (based on the Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), www.cdc.gov ) in addition to Connecticut area  by [CONTACT_469084] (e.g., Craigslist, Facebook, and Twitter) or other local platforms . 
  
b. Recruitment of participan ts  will also be conducted through a dedicated Yale Stress  Center (YSC) Recruitment 
Channel  specializing in coordinating centralized recruitment of participants into center studies. This 
recruitment team that has a well -developed treatment referral network comprising a variety of treatment, 
social service and addiction referral sources in the Gr eater New Haven area.  
 
The YSC Recruitment Team provides coordinated centralized recruitment of participants into YSC affiliated 
studies typi[INVESTIGATOR_469071], posting flyers in local 
areas. In addition, referrals from the Yale Substance Abuse Treatment facilities will also be a source of 
patients for study participation. Staff at these facilities will be gi ven flyers detailing the study and encouraged 
to have their clients contact [CONTACT_469085]. This approach has allowed us to recruit subjects from a variety 
of race and socioeconomic backgrounds. Describe how potential subjects are contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
Potential subjects will contact [CONTACT_469086]-free phone number , which can be obtain ed from the study  
advertisements on social media/internet sites, or flyers posted in the community , and be screened by 
[CONTACT_3647] . 
 
c. Who is recruiting potential subjects?  Research staff at the Ya le Stress Center  
 
 
4. Assessment  of Current Health Provider Relationship for HIPAA Consideration:  
Does the Investigator or any member of the research team have a direct existing clinical relationship with any 
potential subject?  
☐Yes, all subjects  
☐Yes, some of the subjects  
☒No 
 
If yes, describe the nature of this relationship.  Write here  
5. Request for waiver of HIPAA authorization:  (When requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for either the 
entire study, or for recruitment purposes only.  Note: if you are collecting PHI as part of a phone or email 
screen, you must request a HIPAA waiver for recruitment purposes.)  
Choose one:  
☐ For entire study  
☒ For recruitment /screening  purposes only   
☐ For inclusion of non -English speaking subject if short form is being used  and there is no translated HIPAA 
research authorization form  available on the University’s HIPAA website at hipaa.yale.edu.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_601157]’s authorization for use/disclosure of this 
data :  
 
ii. If requesting a waiver of signed  authorization, describe why it would be impracticable to obtain the 
subject’s signed authorization for use/disclosure of this data :  
 
The investigator assures that the protected health information for which a Waiver of Authorization has been 
requested will not be reused or disclosed to any person or entity other than those listed in this application, except 
as required by [CONTACT_2371], for authori zed oversight of this research study, or as specifically approved for use in another 
study by [CONTACT_2717].  
 
Researchers are reminded that unauthorized disclosures of PHI to individuals outside of the Yale HIPAA -Covered 
entity must be accounted for in the “accounting for disclosures log”, by [CONTACT_20911], purpose, date, recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840], 
and a description of informatio n provided.  Logs are to be forwarded to the Deputy HIPAA Privacy Officer.  
 
6. Process of Consent/Assent:  Describe the setting and conditions under which consent/assent will be obtained, 
including parental permission or surrogate permission and the steps taken to ensure subjects’ independent 
decision -making.  
 
Following the initial telephone screening , eligible participants will meet with a research assistant to obtain 
informed consent.  The consent process can be done either in person or remotely via a REDCap eConsent if 
needed. The following procedure will be implemented for the eConsent procedure.  
 
First, the potential participants will receive a secure REDCap link to view the consent form and have a remote 
session with research staff. After reviewing the consent form, they will go over the study procedure and all 
aspects of the consent form with staff and have enough time for study Q & A and the risk involved before 
making decisions. If they agree to participate, they will be asked to sign their name [CONTACT_2329] a mouse on an 
eConsent form. Then, they will select “Next Page” at the bottom and a read only c opy of the consent will be 
generated that they can review, download, and/or print. Also, at the bottom of the page they will view “I 
certify that all the information in the document above is correct, and I understand that signing this form 
electronically i s the equivalent of signing a physical document.” Once this is selected, they will be able to 
submit the consent from. The completed PDFs will be downloaded and stored in a study folder that can only 
be accessed with a unique password in a [ADDRESS_601158](s) Capacity to Provide Informed Consent/Assent:  Indicate how the personnel obtaining 
consent will assess the potential subject’s ability and capacity to consent to the research being proposed.  
 
After the participant has read over the consent form, research staff will further explain the study, including 
the risks involved. Research staff will ask the potential subject how well they understood the consent, and 
answer questions they may  have.  
 
8. Non-English Speaking Subjects:  Explain provisions in place to ensure comprehension for research involving 
non-English speaking subjects. If enrollment of these subjects is anticipated, translated copi[INVESTIGATOR_20885].  
 
Page 15 of 23 
 Non-English speaking individuals will not be recruited for this study . 
 
As a limited alternative to the above requirement, will you use the short form* for consenting process if you 
unexpectedly encounter a non -English speaking individual interested in study participation and the translation of 
the long form is not possible pr ior to intended enrollment?   YES ☐  NO ☒ 
 
Note * If more than [ADDRESS_601159] speaking that 
language is to be enrolled.  
 
Several translated short form templates are available on the HRPP website (yale.edu/hrpp) and translated HIPAA 
Research Authorization Forms are available on the HIPAA website (hipaa.yale.edu) . If the translation of the short 
form is not available on our website, then the translated short form needs to be submitted to the IRB office for 
approval via modification prior to enrolling the subject.    Please review the guidance and presentation on use of 
the short form available on the HRPP website.  
 
If using a short form without a translated HIPAA Research Authorization Form, please request a HIPAA waiver in 
the section above.  
 
9. Consent Waiver: In certain circumstances, the HIC may grant a waiver of signed consent, or a full waiver 
of consent, depending on the study. If you will request either a waiver of consent, or a waiver of signed consent 
for this study, complete the appropriate section below.   
 
☐Not Requesting any consent waivers  
 
☒Requesting a waiver of signed consent:  
☒ Recruitment/Screening only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)  telephone screen  
☐ Entire Study ( Note that an information sheet may be required.)  
 
 
  
  ☐ Requesting a waiver of consent:  
☐ Recruitment/Screening  only (if for recruitment, the questions in the box below will apply to 
recruitment activities only)  
☐ Entire Study      For a waiver of signed consent, address the following:  
• Would the signed consent form be the only record linking the subject and the research?  YES ☐  NO ☒  
• Does a breach of confidentiality constitute the principal risk to subjects? YES ☐  NO ☒ 
  
 OR 
• Does the research pose greater than minimal risk? YES ☐    NO☒  
• Does the research include any activities that would require signed consent in a non -research context? YES ☐   
NO ☒ 
Page 16 of 23 
     
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION  IV: PROTECTION OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS  
 
    Confidentiality & Security of Data:  
1. What protected health information (medical information along with the HIPAA identifiers) about subjects will 
be collected and used for the research?    
Results of the  psychological assessments, self -reports,  and data collected during pre-intervention, post -
intervention, and interventions, will be collected and used for research. The proposed study will be conducted by 
[CONTACT_469087]. Data collected and 
analyzed in the study will be derived from two  main sources : semi -structured clinical interviews and self -rating 
scales: psychiatric history, medical history, demographic self -reports of age, race, socioeconomic status, marital 
status, educational and occupational levels.  
 
2. How will the research data be collected, recorded and stored?      
 
Research data will be collected on paper assessments and using Yale University’s REDCap system.  All research 
data is stored in two places --one as a hardcopy in a locked file, with records identified only by [CONTACT_2299]’s 
study number, and the second in computerized databases protected by [CONTACT_1192] -level password systems on Yale 
encrypted desktop  computers.  
 
3. How will the digital data be stored? ☐CD  ☐DVD  ☐Flash Drive  ☐Portable Hard  Drive    ☒Secured Server  
☐Laptop Computer  ☒Desktop Computer  ☐Other  
 
4. What methods and procedures will be used to safeguard the confidentiality and security of  the identifiable 
study data and the storage media indicated above during and after the subject’s participation in the study?    
 
Upon enrollment, all study subjects will be assigned a unique study number. The study number —and no 
personal identifiers —will be used as labels for study records, samples and any other related research 
documentation. All electronic and digital files will b e stored on the secure Yale network, and the PC accessing 
the network will be password protected and encrypted. All paper files, such as consent forms, will be stored in 
a locked file cabinet in a locked office and access is limited to members of the study  research  team.  
 For a full waiver of consent, please address all of the following:  
• Does the research pose greater than minimal risk to subjects?   
☐ Yes If you answered yes, stop. A waiver cannot be granted.    
☐ No 
• Will the waiver adversely affect subjects’ rights and welfare? YES ☐    NO☐ 
• Why would the research be impracticable to conduct without the waiver? Write here  
• Where appropriate, how will pertinent information be returned to, or shared with subjects at a later date? 
Write here  
Page [ADDRESS_601160] to the Information Security, Policy and Compliance 
Office by [CONTACT_20912]://its.yale.edu/egrc or email [EMAIL_364]  
 
5. What will be done with the data when the research is completed? Are there plans to destroy the identifiable 
data? If yes, describe how, by [CONTACT_22467]. If no, describe how the data and/or 
identifiers will be secured.  
 
Upon completion of study and data analysis, a professional information protection, storage, and disposal 
company will be retained to dispose of research files and informed consent documentation.  
 
6. If appropriate, has a Certificate of Confidentiality been obtained?  Yes, we  obtained CoC.  
 
SECTION  V: POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
 
 Potential Benefits:  Identify any benefits that may be reasonably expected to result from the research, either to 
the subject(s) or to society at large. (Payment of subjects is not considered a benefit in this context of the risk 
benefit assessment.)  
 
There are some potential benefits of the proposed  study. First, monitoring drinking , learning stress reduction and  
breathing  modulation  may be helpful to some subjects. Second , this study will evaluate the PSB  as a potential 
alcoholism  prevention p rogram. If the efficacy of the PSB  intervention  is supported, our findings will identify an 
effective prevention strategy that can be delivered in the participants’ community. Given these valuable benefits 
to the subjects and their community and the minimal risks of the study procedures, we believe tha t the study risks 
are reasonable in relation to the potential benefits . 
 
Also, stress reduction and breathing  methods  may help participants  self-regulate distress and  emotion without 
over -reactivity . Thus, these  skills may  then allow participants  to be particularly effective in i mplementing 
knowledge about regulating craving  and drinking urge and to adopt  healthier  choices and habits . 
 
         SECTION  VI: RESEARCH ALTERNATIVES AND ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS  
 
1. Alternatives:  What other alternatives are available to the study subjects outside of the research?   
Subjects need not participate in this study to receive stress management or breathing training or substance 
use counseling . 
 
Payments for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Describe any payments that will be made to subjects , 
the amount and schedule of payments, and the conditions for receiving this compensation.  
 
For the 4 -week intervention :  participants will be compensated for their time taken for a series of study 
appointments and participations over the course of 2.5 months of the study period. The total amount that 
each participant may receive is up to $ 778 per participant for completing all aspects of the study (baseline 
assessments, 4 -week digital interventions, 28-day daily monitoring, and a follow -up evaluation  at the end of 
30 days ). 
 
 
Page 18 of 23 
 Baseline Assessments:  Participants  in the assessment and intervention groups  will be paid up to $100 for 
screening, DSM -5 diagnosis, & 4-5 online baseline assessments ($20 per session).  
 
4-week  Period :  
 Intervention  grou p 
Participant  will receive up to $[ADDRESS_601161] -treatment evaluation.  
 
Sessions: Participants  will receive up to $2 00 including $20 for per session (two sessions weekly; 8 sessions in 
total (8 x $20 = $160) and bonus. An additional $20 bonus will be rewarded for the completion of all 4 
sessions every 2 weeks of treatment during the 4 -week treatment period.  
 
Smartphone surveys: They  will also receive up to $2 48 for the completion of a 28 -day daily smartphone app 
surveys including $3 for each daily intervention exercise (28 x $3 = $84), smartphone monitoring survey ( 28 x 
$3 = $84), and weekly bonus. They  will receive an additional weekly bonus of $20 for completing 100% (14/14 
surveys; submitted a total number of two surveys (daily evening surveys + daily intervention exercise) per 
week), $[ADDRESS_601162] 92.5% (13/14 surveys;  submitted a tota l number of two surveys (daily 
evening surveys + daily inte rvention exercise) per week) or $[ADDRESS_601163] 86% (12/14 surveys; 
submitted a total number of two surveys (daily evening surveys + daily intervention exercise) per week) of the 
surveys in each week. Both the daily evening survey and daily int ervention exercise must be completed for a 
day to count towards the weekly bonus.  
 
At the end of treatment, they  will also receive $[ADDRESS_601164] assessment at the end of 4 -week intervention.    
 
Follow -up evaluations : Participant  will be compensated for their  time up to $ 190 for 30 -days follow -up after 
treatment. For daily monitoring follow -up assessments, they  will be paid $3 for daily survey over 30 days ( 30 x $3 
= $90). They  will also receive additional $[ADDRESS_601165] 100% (14 out of 14 surveys), 
$15 for 90% (13 out of 14 surveys), and $10 for 80% (12 out of 14 surveys) of every 14 -day survey. Additionally, 
they  will also receive $60 for a video session and completing online evaluation assessments at the end of the 30 -
day follow -up period.   
 
Therefore, the total that the intervention group  may be reimbursed for their  time if they  complete the study, 
attend all 8 treatment sessions and a 100% completion rate for the smartphone surveys, is $778.  
 
2. Costs for Participation (Economic Considerations):  Clearly describe the subject’s costs associated with 
participation in the research, and the interventions or procedures of the study that will be provided at no cost 
to subjects.   
 
All parts of the research process will be provided at no cost to the  subjects.  
 
3. In Case of Injury:  This section is required for any research involving more than minimal risk , and for minimal 
risk research that presents the potential for physical harm (e.g., research involving blood draws) . 
 
While medical therapy will be offered for any physical injuries sustained as a consequence of participation in this 
research, the subject and their insurance carrier will be responsible for the cost of such treatment. Financial 
compensation for injury is n ot available.    
 
Page 19 of 23 
 a. Will medical treatment be available if research -related injury occurs? Medical therapy will be 
offered for any physical injuries sustained as a consequence of participation in this research.  
b. Where and from whom may treatment be obtained? Any licensed facility / practitioner  
c. Are there any limits to the treatment being provided? No 
d. Who will pay for this treatment? The subject and their insurance carrier will be responsible for 
the cost of treatment. Financial compensation for injury is not available.  
e. How will the medical treatment be accessed by [CONTACT_1766]? Subjects will be encouraged to receive 
services through practitioners in any licensed facility where their insurance company may cover 
their medical expenses.  
 
 
IMPORTANT  REMINDERS  
 
Will this study have a billable service?  Yes ☐   No☒ 
 
A billable service is defined as any service rendered to a study subject that, if he/she was not on a study, would 
normally generate a bill from either Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57171]’s 
insurer. The service may o r may not be performed by [CONTACT_20916], but may be provided by 
[CONTACT_20917] -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20888] (examples include x -rays, MRIs, CT 
scans, specimens sent to central labs, or specimens sent to path ology). Notes: 1. There is no distinction made 
whether the service is paid for by [CONTACT_20918] (Standard of Care) or by [CONTACT_1758]’s funding 
mechanism (Research Sponsored). 2. This generally includes new services or orders placed in EPIC f or research 
subjects .  
 
If answered, “yes”, this study will need to be set up in OnCore, Yale’s clinical research management system, for 
Epic to appropriately route research related charges. Please contact [EMAIL_365]  
 
Are there any procedures involved in this protocol that will be performed at YNHH or one of its affiliated entities?  
Yes ☐  No ☒  
 
If Yes, please answer questions a through c and note instructions below.   
a. Does your YNHH privilege delineation currently  include the specific procedure  that you will perform? Yes ☐  No 
☐ 
b. Will you be using any new equipment or equipment that you have not used in the past for this  procedure? Yes 
☐  No ☐ 
c. Will a novel approach using existing equipment be applied? Yes ☐  No ☐ 
  
If you answered “no” to question 4a, or "yes" to question 4b or c, please contact [CONTACT_79703] (688 -2615) for prior approval before commencing with your research protocol . 
 
IMPORTANT REMINDER ABOUT RESEARCH AT YNHH  
Please note that if this protocol includes Yale -New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20889], including patients at the HRU, the 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_20890] -investigators who are physicians or mid -level practitioners (includes PAs, APRNs, 
psychologists and speech pat hologists) who may have direct patient contact [CONTACT_20920]. If you are uncertain whether 
the study personnel meet the criteria, please telephone the Physicia n Services Department at [ADDRESS_601166] has a 
medical staff appointment and appropriate clinical privileges at YNHH.  
 
 
 
References  
 
Abramson, J. H. (1966). The cornell medical index as an epi[INVESTIGATOR_469072]. Am J Public Health 
Nations Health, 56 (2), 287 -298 PMC1256865.  
Adamson, M. (2020). Psychological Stress Associated with the COVID -[ADDRESS_601167] University.  
Retrieved from 
https://www.nlm.nih.gov/dr2/Psychological_Stress_Associated_with_the_COVID -
19_Crisis_14.pdf  
Adamson, S. J., Kay -Lambkin, F. J., Baker, A. L., Lewin, T. J., Thornton, L., Kelly, B. J., & Sellman, J. 
D. (2010). An improved brief measure of cannabis misuse: The Cannabis Use Disorders 
Identification Test -Revised (CUDIT -R). Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 110 (1-2), 137 -143. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.02.[ADDRESS_601168], C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory for measuring 
depression. Archives of general psychiatry, 4 , 561 -571.  
Bernstein, D. P., Ahluvalia, T., Pogge, D., & Handelsman, L. (1997). Validity of the Childhood Trauma 
Questionnaire in an adolescent psychiatric population. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 
36(3), 340 -348. doi:10.1097/00004583 -199703000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
Bohn, M. J., Krahn, D. D., & Staehler, B. A. (1995). Development and initial validation of a measure of 
drinking urges in abstinent alcoholics. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research, 19 (3), 
600-606.  
Brown, R., & Gerbarg, P. (2012). The Healing Power of the Breath: Simple Techniques to Reduce 
Stress, Anxiety, Enhance Concentration and Balance Your Emotions . [LOCATION_011], [LOCATION_005]: 
Shambhala Publications, Inc.  
Butler, S. F., Budman, S. H., Fernandez, K. C., Houle, B., Benoit, C., Katz, N., & Jamison, R. N. (2007). 
Development and validation of the Current Opi[INVESTIGATOR_85581]. Pain, 130 (1-2), 144 -156. 
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2007.01.014  
Callinan, S., & MacLean, S. (2020). COVID -19 makes a stronger research focus on home drinking more 
important than ever. Drug Alcohol Rev . doi:10.1111/dar.[ZIP_CODE]  
Chung, J. (2020). Psychosocial Impact of COVID -19 Survey . National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH).  Retrieved from 
https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/toolkit_content/PDF/NIMH_DailyFunctioning.pdf  
Cleeland, C. S., & Ryan, K. M. (1994). Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann 
Acad Med Singapore, 23 (2), 129 -138.  
Cohen, S., Kamarck, T., & Mermelstein, R. (1983). A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc 
Behav, 24 (4), 385 -396 PMID6668417.  
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). Hypochondriasis, neuroticism, and aging. When are somatic 
complaints unfounded? Am Psychol, 40 (1), 19 -28.  
Diggle, P. J., Heagerty, P., Liang, K. Y., & Zeger, S. L. (2002). Analysis of longitudinal data  (2nd ed.). 
[LOCATION_001]: Oxford.  
Page 21 of 23 
 Fals-Stewart, W., O'Farrell, T. J., Freitas, T. T., McFarlin, S. K., & Rutigliano, P. (2000). The timeline 
followback reports of psychoactive substance use by [CONTACT_9934] -abusing patients: psychometric 
properties. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 68 (1), [ADDRESS_601169], M., Williams, J., Karg, R., & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview For DSM -5, 
Research Version . Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.  
Gerbarg, P., & Brown, R. (2016). Neurobiology and neurophysiology of breath practices in psychiatric 
care. Psychiatric times, 33 (11), 22 -25.  
Ingjaldsson, J. T., Laberg, J. C., & Thayer, J. F. (2003). Reduced heart rate variability in chronic alcohol 
abuse: relationship with negative mood, chronic thought suppression, and compulsive drinking. 
Biol Psychiatry, 54 (12), 1427 -1436. doi:S0006322302019261 [pii]  
Johns -Hopkins, U. (2020a). COVID -19 Community Response Survey: Social Distancing Impacts . 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University Retrieved from 
https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/toolkit_content/PDF/JHU_C4WARD_Social_Distancing.pdf  
Johns -Hopkins, U. (2020b). COVID -19 Community Response Survey: Substance Use . Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, John Hopkins University.  Retrieved from 
https://www.phenxtoolkit.org/toolkit_content/PDF/JHU_C4WARD_Substance_Use.pdf  
Kabat -Zinn, J. (2013). Full Catastrophe Living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, 
pain, and illness . [LOCATION_001], NY: Dell publishing, a division of Bantam.  
Kadden, R., Carroll, K., Donovan, D., Coney, N., Monti, P., Abrams, D., . . . Hester, R. (2003). 
Cognitive -behavioral copi[INVESTIGATOR_280394] . Rockwille, Maryland: National Institute on 
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism.  
Karpyak, V. M., Romanowicz, M., Schmidt, J. E., Lewis, K. A., & Bostwick, J. M. (2013). 
Characteristics of Heart Rate Variability in Alcohol -Dependent Subjects and Nondependent 
Chronic Alcohol Users. Alcohol Clin Exp Res , PMID24117482. doi:10.1111/acer.[ZIP_CODE]  
Kober, H., Brewer, J. A., Height, K. L., & Sinha, R. (2017). Neural stress reactivity relates to smoking 
outcomes and differentiates between mindfulness and cognitive -behavioral treatments. 
Neuroimage, 151 , 4-13. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.09.042  
Kraemer, H. C., Wilson, G. T., Fairburn, C. G., & Agras, W. S. (2002). Mediators and moderators of 
treatment effects in randomized clinical trials. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 59 (10), 877 -883.  
Mann, R. E., Sobell, L. C., Sobell, M. B., & Pavan, D. (1985). Reliability of a family tree questionnaire 
for assessing family history of alcohol problems. Drug and alcohol dependence, 15 (1-2), 61 -67.  
Naimi, T. S., Brewer, R. D., Mokdad, A., Denny, C., Serdula, M. K., & Marks, J. S. (2003). Binge 
drinking among US adults. JAMA, 289 (1), 70 -75 PMID12503979.  
Perkins, H. W. (1999). Stress -motivated drinking in collegiate and postcollegiate young adulthood: life 
course and gender patterns. J Stud Alcohol, 60 (2), 219 -227 PMID10091960.  
Perlmutter, M., & Nyquist, L. (1990). Relationships between self -reported physical and mental health 
and intelligence performance across adulthood. J Gerontol, 45 (4), P145 -155.  
Quintana, D. S., Guastella, A. J., McGregor, I. S., Hickie, I. B., & Kemp, A. H. (2013). Heart rate 
variability predicts alcohol craving in alcohol dependent outpatients: further evidence for HRV 
as a psychophysiological marker of self -regulation. Drug Alcohol Depend, 132 (1-2), 395 -398 
PMID23601925. doi:S0376 -8716(13)[ZIP_CODE] -7 [pii]  
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.02.025  
Rodriguez, L. M., Litt, D. M., & Stewart, S. H. (2020). Drinking to cope with the pandemic: The unique 
associations of COVID -19-related perceived threat and psychological distress to drinking 
behaviors in American men and women. Addict Behav, 110 , 106532. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2020.106532  
Page 22 of 23 
 Runyan, J. D., Steenbergh, T. A., Bainbridge, C., Daugherty, D. A., Oke, L., & Fry, B. N. (2013). A 
smartphone ecological momentary assessment/intervention "app" for collecting real -time data 
and promoting self -awareness. PLoS One, 8 (8), e71325. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071325  
Russell, D. W. (1996). UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): reliability, validity, and factor structure. J 
Pers Assess, 66 (1), 20 -40. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa6601_2  
Sebena, R., El Ansari, W., Stock, C., Orosova, O., & Mikolajczyk, R. T. (2012). Are perceived stress, 
depressive symptoms and religiosity associated with alcohol consumption? A survey of freshmen 
university students across five European countries. Subst Abuse Treat Prev Policy, 7 (1), 21 
PMC3395565. doi:10.1186/1747 -597X -7-21 
Seo, D., Lacadie, C. M., Tuit, K., Hong, K. I., Constable, R. T., & Sinha, R. (2013). Disrupted 
Ventromedial Prefrontal Function, Alcohol Craving, and Subsequent Relapse Risk. JAMA 
Psychiatry, 70 (7), 727 -739. doi:1684869 [pii]  
10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.762  
Shiffman, S., Stone, A. A., & Hufford, M. R. (2008). Ecological Momentary Assessment. Annual 
Review of Clinical Psychology, 4 (1), 1 -32. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091415  
Shively, C. A., Mietus, J. E., Grant, K. A., Goldberger, A. L., Bennett, A. J., & Willard, S. L. (2007). 
Effects of chronic moderate alcohol consumption and novel environment on heart rate variability 
in primates (Macaca fascicularis). Psychopharmacology (Berl), 192 (2), 183 -191. 
doi:10.1007/s00213 -007-[ADDRESS_601170], K., Bhagwagar, Z., & Siedlarz, K. M. (2009). Enhanced 
negative emotion and alcohol craving, and altered physiological responses following stress and 
cue exposure in alcohol dependent individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology, 34 (5), 1198 -1208 
PMCID2734452. doi:npp200878 [pii]  
10.1038/npp.2008.78  
Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline Follow -back: A technique for assessing self -reported 
ethanol consumption. In L. Allen & R. Litten (Eds.), Measuring Alcohol Consumption: 
Psychosocial and Biological Methods  (pp. 41 -72). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.  
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], C., & ., G. R. (1970). Test manual for the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory . Palo Alto, CA 
Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.  
Stormark, K. M., Laberg, J. C., Nordby, H., & Hugdahl, K. (1998). Heart rate responses indicate locked -
in attention in alcoholics immediately prior to drinking. Addict Behav, 23 (2), 251 -255 
PMID9573428. doi:S0306 -4603(97)[ZIP_CODE] -9 [pii]  
Sullivan, M. J., Bishop, S. R., & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331], J. (1995). The pain catastrophizing scale: development and 
validation. Psychological assessment, 7 (4), 524.  
Taylor, S., Landry, C. A., Paluszek, M. M., Fergus, T. A., McKay, D., & Asmundson, G. J. G. (2020). 
Development and initial validation of the COVID Stress Scales. J Anxiety Disord, 72 , 102232. 
doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.[ADDRESS_601171], & Wager, T. D. (2012). A meta -analysis of 
heart rate variability and neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate variability as a marker 
of stress and health. Neurosci Biobehav Rev, 36 (2), 747 -756 PMID22178086. doi:S0149 -
7634(11)[ZIP_CODE] -7 [pii]  
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.11.[ADDRESS_601172], & Fischer, J. E. (2006). Alcohol use, urinary cortisol, and heart 
rate variability in apparently healthy men: Evidence for impaired inhibitory control of the HPA 
axis in heavy drinkers. Int J Psychophysiol, 59 (3), 244 -250. doi:S0167 -8760(05)[ZIP_CODE] -2 [pii]  
10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2005.10.013  
Page 23 of 23 
 Turner, R. J., & Lloyd, D. A. (2004). Stress burden and the lifetime incidence of psychiatric disorder in 
young adults: racial and ethnic contrasts. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 61 (5), 481 -488. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.61.5.[ZIP_CODE]/5/481 [pii]  
Vaschillo, E. G., Bates, M. E., Vaschillo, B., Lehrer, P., Udo, T., Mun, E. Y., & Ray, S. (2008). Heart 
rate variability response to alcohol, placebo, and emotional pi[INVESTIGATOR_469073]: effects of 0.1 -
Hz stimulation. Psychophysiology, 45 (5), 847 -858 PMCID2964051. doi:PSYP673 [pii]  
10.1111/j.1469 -8986.2008.[ZIP_CODE].x  
Vogel -Sprott, M., Chipperfield, B., & Hart, D. M. (1985). Family history of problem drinking among 
young male social drinkers: reliability of the Family Tree Questionnaire. Drug and alcohol 
dependence, 16 (3), 251 -256.  
Wechsler, H., Lee, J. E., Kuo, M., Seibring, M., Nelson, T. F., & Lee, H. (2002). Trends in college binge 
drinking during a period of increased prevention efforts. Findings from [ADDRESS_601173] School of 
Public Health College Alcohol Study surveys: 1993 -2001. J Am Coll Health, 50 (5), 203 -217 
PMID11990979  
doi:10.1080/07448480209595713  
Wray, T. B., Merrill, J. E., & Monti, P. M. (2014). Using Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA) to 
Assess Situation -Level Predictors of Alcohol Use and Alcohol -Related Consequences. Alcohol 
Res, 36 (1), 19 -27.  
 