 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Trial’s Official Title:   Water UP at Home  
05/18/2022   
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
This study tested the preliminary effects of an intervention to reduce sugary drinks among low -
income, primarily minority parents (n=45 )(primary caregivers) and their young children (6 
months -3 year olds) compared to a control/comparison group (n=47). The main outcome was 
behavioral: sugary drink consumption (self -reported oz/day) among parents and among their 
children (parent -reported oz /day). These outcomes were measured at baseline and immediately 
after the [ADDRESS_950983] anthropometric data at baseline.  
Our mixed methods multi -phase approach included a quantitative component (randomized 
controlled trial – Aim 1) and a qualit ative component (in- depth interviews and focus groups - Aim 
2) to test the effects of a behavioral intervention to replace sugary drinks with water at home.  
Sample Size Estimation:  Based on the effect  size of a previous  study38 and on our own 
proof  of concept  work18, a net effect  of 6 fl oz/day  (SD=1)  was hypothesized among adult  
parents,  assuming  two-sided α=0.05,  power=80%,  and a minimum  sample  size of [ADDRESS_950984]  38 parents  per treatment  group  (n=76 total parents)  to account  for 
up to a 20% loss to follow -up. 
Data  Collection for Intervention  Evaluation  
A survey  was developed in Spanish to document  participants’  descriptive  characteristics,  
including  sociodemographic  (self-reported  age and sex for parents  and their children),  
anthropometric  (collected  by [CONTACT_600638])   and self-reported health variables,  as well as 
change  in our behavioral  outcomes  of interest,  which  are described in detail  below.  The survey  
language was refined  and further  tested  after discussions  with the community  partners  and a 
professional  data collector  group.  Finally,  it was translated into English  for use with non-Spanish  
speakers.  
The survey  was administered by a professional  bilingual  (Spanish/English)  data collector  
group that was blinded to treatment  randomization.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_700570] a 4-hour training to collect  
these data with high fidelity.  A portion of the training was led by [CONTACT_700573] ’s institution;  data collectors  practiced anthropometric  data collection  until 
an acceptable  interrater  reliability  was achieved (>0.90).  
Parent  beverage  consumption was assessed using a modified version of the BEVQ -15 
beverage intake  questionnaire,  an established self-reported  survey  that assesses  habitual  
consumption (frequency  and quantity)  of [ADDRESS_950985] month.39,40 Prior  to 
survey  administration,  it was tested for comprehension in English  and Spanish among parents  
who were  residents  of this community,  resulting  in the following  modifications:  a) asking  
separately  about  bottled,  unfiltered  tap and filtered  tap water;  b) including  examples  such  as 
Tampi[CONTACT_3252]®,  Sunny  Delight  ®, horchatas  (sugary  rice- or seed -based  beverages)  and lemonades  
made at home  or bought  at the store  in the category  of sweetened fruit drink.  
Infant/toddler  beverage  consumption  was assessed  using a modified  version of the 
BEVQ -PS, which  is an established parent -reported survey  about  habitual  consumption  
(frequency  and quantity)  of 12 beverage  categories  for preschoolers,  and an open- ended  line.41 
Prior  to implementation,  the instrument  was cognitively  tested,  and the following  modifications  
were  made:  (a) adding  three  categories  of water:  bottled,  filtered  tap, and unfiltered tap water,  
(b) adding an energy  drink  category,  per recommendation of the EHS staff, (c) adding separate  
categories  for: formula,  toddler  milks,  breastmilk,  and drinkable yogurts.  The resulting  
instrum ent had 18 drink  categories  and a space  to write -in ‘other’  beverages.  
Anthropometric  Measures  for Parents : Anthropometric  measures  were  collected at 
baseline for cohorts  1 and 2 (due to COVID -19 social  distancing guidelines,  anthropometric  data 
were  not collected  from cohort  3). Body  weight,  height  and waist  and hip circumferences  were  
collected following  standard methodology.42 The average of multiple  measures  for weight  and 
for height  at each  time point  was used to calculate body  mass  index  (BMI)  as kg/m2. 
Theoretical  Underpi[INVESTIGATOR_11423]:  The following  data collection  tools  were  specifically  
devel oped for this study  to measure parental  preferences,  community  action,  perception  of 
household water  insecurity  as well as psychosocial  constructs  of parental  self-efficacy,  
susceptibility,  and beliefs.  Cronbach alphas  presented were  calculated  using data from this 
study . 
 
Parental  preferences  for drinking  plain  water  and SSB were  assessed  via three 
questions  developed for this study:  How much do you like to drink:  plain  water,  SSB;  how do 
you feel about  replacing  a sugary  drink  with water.  Response  options  were  5-point  Likert  scales  
ranging from “Don’t like it” to “I like it a lot”; or from “I would hate to replace it” to “I would love to 
replace it if I could  do it”. 
Community  Action  (Exploratory  Outcome):  To explore if participating  in a public  health 
nutrition intervention such  as this one led to increased willingness  to participate in community  
action,  we included the following  question:  ‘Would  you participate  in a community  action to 
reduce the availabil ity of sugary  drinks  and increase access  to drinking  water?  ’There  were  4 
ordered  option responses  from “not at all” to “yes.”  
Perception of Household  Water  Insecurity:  To assess  if the intervention had any effect  
on perception of the quality  and safety  of tap water  at home  for drinking,  the following  question 
was developed:  ‘Which one of these  statements  best describes  your home ’s drinking  water  in 
the last 3 months?’  Response options  ranged  from 1-4, with 1. “We always  have drinking  tap 
water  and it is of good  quality”;  2. “We have drinking  tap water  but it is not always  good quality”;  
3. “Often,  we don’t have  drinking  tap water  that is good  in quality”;  4. “We never  have drinking  
tap water  that is good  in quality.”  
Parents’  self-efficacy  was assessed  using a unifactorial  scale  of 15-questions  developed 
de novo to ask about  capability/confidence to act to replace SSB with water.  The questions  
were  asked  as: ‘How sure are you that you can…?’  Response options  were  5-point  Likert  scales  
from “totally  unsure”  to “totally  sure.”  Higher  scoring indicated a higher  degree of confidence.  
The scale  shows  a Cronbach alpha of 0.88.  
Parents’  perceived susceptibility  to health costs  associated with SSB consumption  was 
assessed  using  a unifactorial  scale  of 10 questions  developed de novo that asked  parents:  How 
much do you agree with the following?  Examples  included:  “Drinking  sugary  beverages  can 
cause you and your family  health problems  like diabetes”;  “Sugary  drinks  can negatively  affect  
the developi[INVESTIGATOR_700571] a child”;  “Drinking  tap water  instead  of sugary  drinks  is part of 
a healthy  diet for my child.”  Response options  were  5-point  Likert  scales,  with higher  scores  
indicating  higher  level of agreement.  The scale  shows  a Cronbach alpha of 0.83.  
Parental  beliefs  about  the health benefits  of replacing  SSB with tap water  were  assessed  
via three close -ended  questions  developed de novo  for this study  that asked  how much parents  
agreed with the following  statements: “Reducing  the amount  of SSB is good  for your child’s 
health”;  “Tap water  in your community  is clean and safe to drink”;  “Drinking  water  instead  of 
SSB is going  to improve your health”  (Cronbach  alpha:  0.53).  
Responses  on the Likert  scales  for each  item within  each construct  were  summed.  Mean 
scores  were then used  for each  scale.  
All data were  collected using  Qualtrics  XM© from all families  at baseline and within  two 
months  of the end of the implementation period.   For the first cohort,  data collection  occurred in 
person at the participants ’ home  at a time that was convenient  for them.  For the second  cohort,  
baseline was collected in person  in the same  fashion as cohort  1, but follow -up data were  
collected remotely  via Zoom,  due to interruptions  caused by [CONTACT_25963] -[ADDRESS_950986] cohort,  all data were  collected remotely.  Participants  were  surveyed  in Spanish or English,  
according  to their preference.  The survey  took approximately  40-60 minutes  to complete.  
Data  Analysis 
All survey  data were  exported  from Qualtrics  into SASⓇ9.4. Univariate procedures  and 
frequency  distributions  were  generated  to summarize  the participants  in the comparison (n=47)  
and intervention (n=45)  groups.  The two groups  were  assessed  for comparability  of baseline 
characteristics  using  t-tests  and Chi-Square  or Fisher ’s exact  tests.  
Descriptive  Analyses:  Frequency  and quantity  beverage data were  used  to create  daily 
consumption variables  (in fluid ounces  per day).  Two composite variables  were  created:  
composite  water  and composite  SSB.  The composite  water  summed  the daily consumption of 
bottled water,  unfiltered  tap water,  and filtered  tap water.  The composite  SSB was defined  as 
the sum of sweetened fruit drink,  soda,  flavored milk, sweetened coffee/tea,  and sports  or 
energy  drinks,  as done elsewhere.39,41,43 Beverage consumption was reported  by [CONTACT_8477],  median 
and range due to the non-normal  distributions  of beverage variables.  Wilcoxon  two-sample 
nonparametric  tests  were  performed to compare the baseline beverage consumption  between 
intervention and comparison groups  due to their non-normal  distributions  (p<0.05).  
Intervention Effects: The differences  in beverage  consumption from baseline to follow -up 
were  calculated by [CONTACT_700574] -squares  mean follow -up 
consumption.  T-tests  were  conducted to assess  which  groups  (i.e. parents  and infants/toddlers  
in each treatment  group)  reported  changes  from baseline to follow -up. Changes  in theoretical  
underpi[INVESTIGATOR_700572] e consumption (SSB,  100%  fruit juice,  and water)  for infants/toddlers  
and parents  were  assessed using ANCOVA  to examine the least -square  means  in each 
experimental  group.  The least -squares  means  of follow -up beverage consumption and the p-
value for the difference  between the groups  were  reported.  
Sensitivity  analyses  included:  1) restricting  the sample  to only Hispanic  families,  and 2) 
stratifying  by [CONTACT_700575] -19. Additional  post-hoc analyses  included:  1) 
mean contribution of individual  water  variables  (bottled,  tap) to total water  consumption,  and 2) 
a count  of infants  under  12 months  reporting  100%  fruit juice consumption  at baseline,  as was 
seen in formative  work.18 All analyses  were  conducted using  SASⓇ9.4 software.  
 