Protocol Page
RANDOMIZED COMPARISON  OF AMBU® AURAGAIN™ AND  TELEFLEX® 
LMA PROTECTOR™  USING CLINICAL  AND FIBEROPTIC ASSESSMENTS 
IN ELECTIVE  PATIENTS
2017-0449
Core  Protocol Information
Short Title AMBU® AURAGAIN™ AND TELEFLEX® LMA 
PROTECTOR™ FIBEROPTIC ASSESMENTS IN 
ELECTIVE PATIENTS
Study Chair: Carin Hagberg
Additional Contact:[CONTACT_908859] C. Sweetin
Tariq A. Syed
Tyrone Burnett Jr.
Additional Memo Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]: Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_244369] (for OPR use only)
None
Study Staff Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_908844] C. Sweetin
Tariq A. Syed
Tyrone Burnett Jr.
Department:Anesthesiology
Phone:[PHONE_18854]
Unit:409
Full Title:  RANDOMIZED COMPARISON OF AMBU® AURAGAIN™ 
AND TELEFLEX® LMA PROTECTOR™ USING  CLINICAL 
AND FIBEROPTIC  ASSESSMENTS  IN ELECTIVE 
PATIENTS
Protocol Type:Standard Protocol
Protocol Phase: N/A
Version Status: Activated -- Closed to new patient entry as of 05/28/2019
Version: 04
Document Status:Saved as "Final"
Submitted by: [CONTACT_908860] A. Syed--3/13/2018  2:14:13  PM
OPR Action: Accepted by:  [CONTACT_598336] -- 3/16/2018 4:31:28 PM
Which Committee  will review this protocol?
 The Clinical Research  Committee - (CRC)
Protocol Body
1.[ADDRESS_1276031], the Classic LMA®, the use of supraglottic airway devices (SGADs) have 
experienced a remarkable evolution and are now routinely used in clinical  anesthesia practice. One of the SGADs on the market 
is the LMA Protector™ (Teleflex Medical Europe Ltd., IDA Business and Technology Park, Dublin  Road, Athlone, Co. 
Westmeath, Ireland),  which is a single-use modification of the older, reusable LMA Proseal™ (Teleflex).  The LMA Protector™ has 
a pre-curved,  rigid airway tube similar  to the Ambu AuraGain™ (Ambu A/S-Copenhagen, Demark).  The concept of a curved 
airway tube is to imitate the airway anatomy during device placement,  thus making insertion relatively easy  and smooth. Like 
some of the newer SGADs, they have  a built-in gastric  drainage channel to facilitate efflux of gastric  fluid and gas, and allows 
for the insertion of a gastric tube. These devices are  referred to as second generation  SGADs.
Due to the similarities between the AuraGain™ and the LMA Protector™, a randomized, prospective clinical study with a detailed 
evaluation of the performance of these two devices will be conducted. The AuraGain™ is Ambu’s 3rd generation  laryngeal  mask, 
satisfying [ADDRESS_1276032]. The LMA® Protector™ is a next-generation, single-
use laryngeal mask  with a dual gastric drainage channel and pharyngeal chamber designed specifically  to channel high volume, 
high pressure gastric contents  away from the airway. A clinical evaluation  will be performed on elective patients with normal  
airway anatomy for device insertion,  function  as a ventilatory device and as an intubation conduit,  functionality of the gastric 
drainage channel, oropharyngeal leak pressure  (OLP). Also, a fiberoptic assessment, utilizing the Ambu® aScope™ [ADDRESS_1276033] morbidity will be investigated.
2.0 Objectives and Hypothesis
The purpose of this study is to estimate the ratio or difference in success rate of both the Ambu® AuraGain™ and Teleflex® LMA 
Protector™ during insertion and placement  into an airway.  Other findings  include ease of supraglottic airway device (SGAD) 
insertion, anatomical fit of the SGAD (i.e. SGAD displacement, bloodstaining),  rate of successful ventilation and intubation, 
functionality of gastric drainage channel (via orogastric tube insertion through each  SGAD;  to ensure  easy insertion), 
oropharyngeal leak pressure (OLP;  measured  by a portable, handheld manometer), and postoperative  complications in elective  
surgical patients who are not expected to have a difficult airway. Also, a fiberoptic assessment (with the Ambu® aScope™ 3 Slim) 
of the glottic view via the SGAD device and signs of airway morbidity will be investigated.
2.1 Primary:  The ratio or difference in success  rates of either the Ambu® AuraGain™ or Teleflex® LMA Protector™ during insertion 
and placement into an airway.
2.2 Secondary: Rate of successful ventilation and intubation (by [CONTACT_908861]® aScope™ 3 Slim), ease of SGAD insertion (based on a numerical subjective rating scale), anatomical fit of SGAD (i.e. 
SGAD displacement, bloodstaining), OLP (measured by a portable, handheld manometer), functionality of gastric drainage 
channel which  will be inserted through the appropriate channel of the SGAD,  and postoperative complications
2.3 Exploratory : Fiberoptic assessment  of the glottic view via the SGAD device  and signs  of airway morbidity
3.0 Device Description
The AuraGain™ is Ambu’s  2nd generation laryngeal mask, which satisfies three fundamental airway management  needs by 
[CONTACT_908862]-use device that facilitates rapid  
establishment of a safe airway. AuraGain™ is the only anatomically curved  SGAD with integrated gastric access  and intubation 
capability. The integrated gastric  access channel is designed  with a low friction inner  surface to facilitate easy placement of a 
gastric tube. The AuraGain also provides intubation capabilities in case of an unexpected  difficult airway, or a ‘Cannot Intubate,  
Cannot mask Ventilate’  (CICV) situation.  The AuraGain™ can be used as a conduit  for direct endotracheal intubation assisted by 
a flexible scope  (such  as the Ambu® aScope3).
The LMA® Protector™ is a next-generation, single-use laryngeal mask with a dual gastric drainage channel  and pharyngeal  
chamber designed  specifically to channel high volume, high pressure gastric  contents away from the airway. The 
LMA® Protector™, with its 100% silicone cuff and airway tube , is designed to be gentle to one’s airway anatomy. The elongated  
cuff integrates two technological advancements for facilitating esophageal seal and indicating cuff pressure levels. This enables  
clinicians to monitor pressure levels  at a glance  and adjust when necessary. The LMA® Protector™also allows for intubation with 
compatible sizes of endotracheal tubes to provide a safer and more effective  option for airway replacement.
The Ambu® aScope™ 3 Slim is an ultra slim, single-use, flexible scope that once and for all solves the problem of accessibility, 
simplifies set-up procedures and eliminates the need for complex  cleaning procedures thus releasing valuable resources for 
other procedures as an alternative to reusable scopes. The Ambu® aScope™ 3 Slim’s distal end contains a camera  with two LED 
light sources, a maneuverable tip with a bending  angle  of 130°/130°, as well as, suction and channel  ports (including an ETT 
connection). When connected to the aView  monitor,  the Ambu® aScope™  [ADDRESS_1276034] inspection, double  lumen  tube placement, 
bronchial blocker placement, and even Aintree catheter placement. 
4.0 Patient Population
A total of 50 patients will be included  in this study to be carried out at the Outpatient Surgical Center by [CONTACT_908863], Houston.  All patients 
will be adult surgical candidates, ASA I-III, Age >18 years,  Mallampati I – III, BMI ≤ 30 kg/m2. Patients will be excluded  if they 
meet any of the listed following:   ASA IV-V, Age < 18 years old (as the SGADs will not be supplied in pediatric sizes), require 
prone position for surgery,  planned operating time > 4 hours,  liquid only diet < [ADDRESS_1276035]  a sore throat preoperatively.  In addition, patients with any of the following features 
will also be excluded: Mallampati IV, upper  lip bite not possible, inter-incisor distance  < 2.5 cm, thyromental distance < [ADDRESS_1276036] pathology/facial abnormality,  diagnosed with dementia or exhibit any neurological mental 
disorders (handicaps) such as epi[INVESTIGATOR_002],  Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, etc.
Inclusion Criteria
Subjects enrolled in this study will meet  the following inclusion  criteria:
1) Age 18 years of age or older
2) Scheduled for an elective surgery requiring general anesthesia
3) Scheduled surgery < 4hrs
4) American Society of Anesthesiology  (ASA) Physical Status  I-III
5) BMI < 30 kg/m2
6) Mallampati  I-III
7) Able to bite upper lip via Upper Lip Bite Test (ULBT)
8) Inter-incisor distance > 2.5cm
9) Thyromental distance > 6cm
10) Full range of motion  in the neck
11) Has provided written informed consent
Exclusion Criteria
Subjects will not be enrolled in this study  if they meet any of the following exclusion  criteria:
1) Under the age of 18 years  old 
2) ASA IV-V
3) Require  prone  positioning for surgery
4) Scheduled surgery > 4hrs
5) Liquid only diet < 2hrs and/or solids  < 8hrs
6) High risk of regurgitation
7) Exhibits  signs of respi[INVESTIGATOR_908845] (including  a sore throat preoperatively)
8) Mallampati  IV
9) Unable to bite upper lip via ULBT
10) Inter-incisor distance < 2.5cm
11) Thyromental distance < 6cm
12) Limited neck movement
13) Airway pathology/facial  abnormality
14) Has been diagnosed with/exhibits any mental neurological disorder/disease/condition that would prevent  participation  
in the study  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871].
5.0 Randomization
CORe will be the designated software for the randomization of each intervening  device (SGAD)  arm. The treatment  will be 
named 1 for Ambu® AuraGain™, 2 for Teleflex® LMA Protector™ for both parts of the study in the list. Block randomization is 25 
blocks of size of 2.
The following demographic data and medical history will be collected  on the case report form (CRF): Gender, age, height,  
weight, body mass index, fasting time, ASA class, Mallampati classification,  thyromental distance, sternomental distance, 
interincisor distance,  and ability  to protrude  lower jaw. Please refer to Appendix 'C'.
6.[ADDRESS_1276037] Identification And Recruitment
Eligible subjects will receive a detailed  explanation of the study, its purpose, their role, and study  procedures in relation to 
what’s considered  research and standard  of care (SOC); as well as the potential  risks, benefits and alternatives prior to study 
enrollment. They will be given  a consent form to read and if they so choose, to discuss  with friends, family,  and other clinicians. 
They will be invited to ask questions and, after all questions  are answered to their satisfaction, invited to sign the consent form 
in accordance. The Principal Investigator  (or delegate) will participate in the consenting process to ensure the subject has full 
understanding of the procedure and risks. No study-specific procedure  will be  performed before  the consent form is signed.
Consent Process
Eligible subjects will receive a detailed  explanation of the study, its purpose, their role, and study  procedures in relation to 
what’s considered  research and standard  of care (SOC); as well as the potential  risks, benefits and alternatives prior to study 
enrollment. They will be given  a consent form to read and if they so choose, to discuss  with friends, family,  and other clinicians. 
They will be invited to ask questions and, after all questions  are answered to their satisfaction, invited to sign the consent form 
in accordance. The Principal Investigator  (or delegate) will participate in the consenting process to ensure the subject has full 
understanding of the procedure and risks. No study-specific procedure  will be  performed before  the consent form is signed.
Subject participation in this investigation is voluntary. Written informed consent is  required from all subjects prior  to the subject's  
participation in the investigation. Also, an obtained  permission of the faculty anesthesiologist, in charge of the patient’s 
anesthesia care, must also be granted  for subject  participation. If the subject is illiterate or unable  to adequately read the 
informed consent  form, a witness' signature [INVESTIGATOR_1238] a cross mark or a fingerprint of the subject is required. In accordance with  FDA 
regulation [ADDRESS_1276038]. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_908846]-stamped copy to 
Sponsor.
7.0 Criteria for Removal from the Study
Subjects may be withdrawn from the study  for the following reasons:  
1)Subject non-compliance with study procedures
2)Unacceptable adverse events (safety or tolerability)
3)The subject  may withdraw  from the study at any time and for  any reason
Clinician decision that it is in the best interest of the subject  to withdraw from the study
8.[ADDRESS_1276039]  
device/equipment, oxygen administration, mechanical ventilation,  fiberoptic  assistance, and tracheal intubation. The subject will 
have a surgical procedure that is incidental to his or her study participation, along with tracheal intubation. Besides the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_6254]-investigator,  listed collaborators (anesthesiologists) will be involved in managing enrolled patient airways  in 
accordance to the protocol.  Randomization of the anesthesia practitioner is not necessary  and will not occur.  All patients will be 
recruited and enrolled based on the availability  of the [ADDRESS_1276040]. The patient will be monitored  with 5-lead ECG, pulse oximetry, non-
invasive blood pressure (BP) and end-expi[INVESTIGATOR_908847]. Vital sign measurements will be taken and recorded at the 
following time points:  Pre-oxygenation, pre-induction,  post-induction, post-SGAD insertion,  [ADDRESS_1276041] anesthesia recovery  unit (PACU),  and every 30 minutes until discharge from PACU. The patient will be 
positioned supi[INVESTIGATOR_908848] a foam cushion and/or pi[INVESTIGATOR_621915] (if needed).  The 
patient will be pre-oxygenated via full facemask for a minimum of [ADDRESS_1276042] system  will be 
filled with 100% oxygen. The flow of oxygen  will be set  at [ADDRESS_1276043] end tidal concentration of oxygen (EtO 2).
General anesthesia will be induced via traditional methods  as requested  by [CONTACT_101034]. Appropriate doses of propofol,  
fentanyl, and rocuronium will be administered  as recommended by [CONTACT_101034]’s  discretion. A mixture of sevoflurane or 
desflurane will be utilized for maintenance of anesthesia. Vital signs will be recorded throughout. Lungs  will be mechanically  
ventilated with a semi-closed  circle  system to maintain an end-tidal CO 2 near 35mmHg.  Once  there  are no twitches  on the train 
of four (ToF)  twitch  monitor, following rocuronium administration, insertion of the randomized SGAD will then be performed. The 
size of the SGAD device used  will be based  on the manufacturers’ recommendations or by [CONTACT_908864].
SGAD Preparation Materials
The following materials will be ready on a preparation table before  the anesthesia procedure is commenced: tablecloth, water-
soluble lubricant,  correct size of SGAD and one size bigger and one size smaller, 20 & 50 ml syringes, pressure  gauge, silk tape 
for fixation of the SGAD, 16 Fr. gastric  tube (max. size gastric tube recommended  by [CONTACT_3455] – is listed in the CRF),  5 
gauze wipes, and a timer.   
aScope Preparation  Procedures
Prior to its use, the Ambu  aScope3 Slim, and compatible Ambu aScope monitor, will be inspected for: visual harm  to the scope, 
mechanical performance by [CONTACT_908865], in which the distal end should  be bent to a maximum in both directions while the 
scope is held in a straight position  (The bending degree  should  be at least 110°), and aScope3  to aScope  monitor connection.  
The quality of the monitors’ standard installation should be evaluated. If the pi[INVESTIGATOR_908849], the 
quality will be adjusted  via the contrast button and light button. When the pi[INVESTIGATOR_908850], the aScope3 Slim will be 
placed [ADDRESS_1276044] should be well lubricated.  When  the aScope3 Slim has fulfilled the functional criteria, it should be placed on the 
preparation table and turned  off. If flaws  or errors are detected  with the aScope3 Slim or the aScope monitor, either should  be 
replaced and a new aScope3 evaluation will be performed with the new device. An alcohol  wipe shall be used to thoroughly 
clean the lens if the image is not clear. Antifog should not be  used for cleaning  the aScope™ 3 Slim lens.
1. Insertion of the SGAD 
The patient will be placed in the sniffing position to optimize the oropharyngeal angle. The SGAD will be lubricated on  the 
posterior surface of the cuff prior to insertion.  Timing  will begin  when  the tip of the cuff of the device  touches the patient’s lips. 
During insertion, the tip of the cuff will be pressed upwards  against the hard palate and the cuff will be flattened  against it. Jaw 
lift technique will be used on all patients.  A jaw lift is performed by [CONTACT_908866]-dominant hand  to 
lift the chin while  the device is passed along the hard palate with  the dominant  hand. Additional  maneuvers performed to  
optimize positioning  or ventilation, such  as adjusting head/neck position,  additional jaw lift, adjusting depth  of insertion,  lateral  
insertion technique, or changing  size of the SGAD.  For the SGAD to be considered as placed correctly, the teeth  of the patient 
should be between the teeth-marks indicated on the proximal end of the airway tube designed  as a bite absorption area. The 
appearance of the first square  end tidal carbon  dioxide trace will indicate establishment of effective ventilation, and T1 (watch 1) 
will be stopped.  Once successful placement has been  confirmed, the cuff of SGAD will be inflated with air to attain an intra-cuff 
pressure of 60 cm H2O, measured  with a handheld aneroid  manometer (pressure gauge). The volume  of air will be recorded. 
The SGAD  will be taped  to the participant’s  cheek with adhesive tape. 
 
Unsuccessful appearance of CO2 curve suggests incomplete placement of the SGAD, and the device will be removed 
completely and another  insertion  attempt  should  be performed  while the recording of time continues.  An insertion attempt is 
defined as, when the SGAD touches  the patient’s lips. Only three attempts  shall be made for proper device placement.  The first 
two attempts will be made by [CONTACT_908867] (CRNA) and the final  
attempt by [CONTACT_24694].  In case of failure  of both SGAD and bag-mask  ventilation, the airway will be secured 
according to the discretion of the attending anesthesiologist. 
 
2. Fiberoptic Evaluation of the SGADs Anatomical Position 
Once ventilation  is achieved, the laryngeal view will be  determined, thus illustrating the anatomical positioning of the device. The 
investigation will be performed with the aid of the flexible  scope, the Ambu  aScope3  Slim,  which will be introduced into the 
airway tube and guided  through the SGAD until it is possible to view the vocal cords.  Description  of the maximal optical view will 
be measured by [CONTACT_908868]  (POGO).1 The POGO score and any presence of blood will be recorded. 
If the epi[INVESTIGATOR_908851]-folded obscuring the optical view, a jaw lift will be performed and another POGO score will be obtained. 
In case of secretions  or blood, the channel of the aScope3  Slim will be used for removing the debris. If this fails, the aScope3 
Slim will be withdrawn and a suction  catheter will be used,  and the lens of the aScope3  Slim will be cleaned  using an alcohol  
wipe, before a new attempt  is commenced. 
 
3. Investigation of the Functionality of the Gastric  Drainage Channel of the SGADs  
A size 16 Fr. gastric  tube will be pre-lubricated with a water-soluble lubricant and will be passed  through the gastric drainage 
channel, of either  SGAD, until depth  mark of 40-50  cm. The female gastric  drainage channel will be used on the Protector. 
Confirmation of gastric  tube placement  will be obtained by [CONTACT_6149][INVESTIGATOR_908852] 2 ml of gastric content and/or auscultation  of inflated  air 
at the epi[INVESTIGATOR_6331].
An insertion  attempt  is defined as when  the tip of the gastric tube touches the proximal channel.  Insertion failure is defined as 
inability to pass a gastric  tube until appropriate depth mark, lack of confirmation of correct  placement by [CONTACT_162014], and 
inability to evacuate any gastric content.  
 
Additionally, the ease  of insertion of gastric tube, number  of insertion attempts, volume of air evacuated, volume  of gastric 
content, and fluid observed in gastric  drainage channel will be recorded.
4. Measurement of Oropharyngeal Leak Pressure (OLP) 
The measurement of OLP will be performed, with an Ambu cuff pressure gauge, prior to surgical incision  and at the end of 
surgery; this measurement will be performed  by [CONTACT_908869]-limiting valve, with a fresh gas flow of 3 L/min,  
and noting the airway  pressure at equilibrium. The maximum  pressure allowed is 40 cmH2O. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_908853]. Moreover, OLP and any audible leak into the stomach or over the mouth will also be recorded.
5. Use of SGAD as an Intubation Conduit  
1)Intubation Procedure
An intubation procedure  will be performed by [CONTACT_908870]3  Slim. A standard  use Parker Flex  
Tip™ ETT of maximum recommended  size will be used depending  on SGAD size  for both female and male patients.  ETTs of 
6.0, 7.0, and 8.[ADDRESS_1276045] ETT placement. End-tidal capnography will be  used to confirm  successful intubation. In addition, size of 
SGAD, size of ETT, and number of intubation attempts  will also be recorded.  Qualitative assessment of ease of intubation, and 
will be based on an analog scale from 1-4: 1: Easy 2: Resistance 3: Difficult  4: Unsuccessful.
9.[ADDRESS_1276046] adverse events.  
As with use of all medical devices, complications may occur.  Recognized risks  associated  with the use of the study intervention 
include, but are not limited to, the following:
•Allergic reactions: although the materials being used are hypoallergenic  and the risk is small, there remains a risk for an 
allergic reaction that may result in hives,  swelling, or anaphylaxis.
•Oropharyngeal injury: although the both LMAs  were designed  for supraglottic placement,  some bleeding/bloodstaining may 
occur upon placement
•Oropharyngeal pressure: over inflation of the both LMAs  can occur that  can cause an increase in pressure
Risk Minimization
•To minimize the risk of allergic reactions,  both Auragain and LMA Protector have undergone  and successfully passed 
biocompatibility testing.
•To minimize the risk of an oropharyngeal  injury, it is recommended  that all clinicians be properly trained on how to use the 
both LMAs and be familiar with the Instructions For Use (IFU).
•To minimize the risk of increased  pressure, it is recommended that all clinicians be  properly trained  on how to both LMAs 
and the recommended  inflation pressure.  There  will also be a recording  of the both LMA cuffs when inflated measured by [CONTACT_908871], to aid in adequate cuff inflation.
Potential Benefits to Subject
•Improved  oxygen delivery, administration, and oxygenation
•Potentially  able to reduce post-op respi[INVESTIGATOR_908854]. Therefore, a 
traditional alternative (the standard  of care) such as a laryngoscope would be utilized for tracheal intubation. 
10.0 Statistical Methods
Descriptive statistics such as the mean (standard deviation) or median (range) will be used to summarize continuous variables 
as appropriate.     Frequencies and percentages  will be  used to summarize  categorical variables,  such as success rates.   
Independent samples t-tests or Wilcoxon  rank-sum tests (if more appropriate)  will be used to compare differences in continuous  
variables between study arms.  Fisher’s exact  test or Chi Square test will be used to  compare  categorical variables between 
study arms.  Correlations and regression  will be used to estimate  associations of interest, primarily for exploratory analyses and 
further hypothesis  generation.
11.0 Sample Size
The AMBU® AURAGAIN™ and TELEFLEX® LMA PROTECTOR™ are FDA approved SGADs that can be used for ventilation, and 
as a conduit for intubation. For patients in the general hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885], each device  has exhibited a relatively high success rate 
of at least  90% as a ventilatory device.3,[ADDRESS_1276047] attempt. 
Success rates will be computed as proportions for each  study arm. Taking the ratio of the success rates  for each study arm will 
derive the relative risk. A two-sided  95% confidence interval  will have the following  lower and upper limits:  (0.945, 1.255)  
assuming a relative risk of 1.089 (ie. success  rate for study arm 1 = 0.90 and success rate for study arm 2 = 0.98) and [ADDRESS_1276048] (IRB)
Prior to participating in this investigation, the site will be  required to  obtain approval from its governing IRB. The  Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_908855]. Prior to subject 
enrollment, a signed copy of the IRB approval letter addressed  to the Investigator certifying study approval must  be submitted  to 
the Sponsor. The IRB for this study  is the local IRB at the University  of [LOCATION_007]  MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, TX 
(IRB00000308, IRB00003763, IRB00004604 or IRB00008445).
The Investigator will report to the Sponsor immediately if,  for any reason, the approval to conduct the investigation  is withdrawn. 
This report  will include a complete  description  of the reason(s) for which approval was withdrawn.
Subject Data Confidentiality
All information recorded on the anesthetic records will be  kept strictly confidential and all data will be kept in a data logbook 
locked in the office of the principal investigator.  We will record patients  only by [CONTACT_472437].
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to  the requirements of the Health Insurance  
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996  (HIPAA).  Patient  data will be  entered into a password protected electronic 
spreadsheet and online database (i.e. REDCap).  Only the investigators, who have  been invited  to participate  in the study and 
who are registered with the IRB, as well as have documented completion of all IRB and HIPAA regulations will have access to 
the file and password. No identifiable data will be collected. Electronic records will be stored for five years after study conclusion 
on the agreed upon investigator’s laptop computer,  after which time they will be deleted. If there is a breach in confidentiality  or 
violation of IRB and HIPAA regulations, the IRB will be notified in a timely  manner (within 7 days) and appropriate actions taken  
thereafter.  
Sponsor will consider all information and data sent to  Sponsor concerning  a subject  or their participation in  this investigation as 
confidential. Only authorized  Sponsor personnel will have access  to these confidential files and have the right to inspect and 
copy all of the records pertinent to this study for data verification. This may include  medical information gathered prior  to the 
onset of the study.  All data used in the analysis and reporting of this investigation  will be  conducted without identifiable 
reference to specific subject name.  The site will maintain a list matching each subject’s  name [CONTACT_908878].
Data collected and stored by [CONTACT_908872]. 
Any photos taken  during the study will make every effort not to include subject faces or other identifying marks such as scars  or 
tattoos.
In order to ensure  compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), all subjects enrolled  in the 
study will be required to provide authorization to disclose Protected Health Information  (PHI).  This authorization will be included 
in the informed consent document as required by [CONTACT_1201]. In all study  reports and in any resulting  publications, subjects will not 
be referred to by [CONTACT_71959]/or study  identification number.
13.[ADDRESS_1276049] purposes, adverse  events  will be categorized  at the investigative site into  two groups: Serious Adverse  
Events, and Non-Serious Adverse Events. The Investigator as either related to the device or its deployment, or not related to the 
device or its deployment will assess  the causal relationship of each  adverse event. Each Adverse  Event assessed as being  
related to the device or its deployment will also be assessed  by [CONTACT_908873].
Adverse Events Definitions
Adverse Event (AE): An Adverse  Event  is any undesirable  clinical event  occurring to the subject during clinical study, whether or 
not it is considered related to the investigational  product. This includes a change in a subject's condition or  laboratory results, 
which has or could have a deleterious  effect on the subject's  health  or well-being. An Adverse Event that is related to the 
investigational device may be referred  to as an Adverse Device  Effect (ADE). 
An adverse  event does  not include:  
•Medical or surgical procedures; the condition that  leads to the procedure is  not an adverse event
•Pre-existing  disease, conditions, or laboratory abnormalities present at the start of the study that do not worsen in frequency  
or intensity
•Situations  where  an untoward medical  occurrence has not occurred (e.g., hospi[INVESTIGATOR_908856]/convenience admissions)
•Expected  post-operative course
Unanticipated Adverse  Device Effect  (UADE): Any device related adverse event, the nature or severity of which is not consistent 
with or listed in the applicable product information (e.g., instructions  for use, subject informed  consent document, subject 
information brochure [if applicable], promotional literature)  or any  other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device  
that relates  to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.
Reporting of Adverse Events
All adverse events, whether observed by [CONTACT_737], elicited from or volunteered by [CONTACT_423], should be  documented. 
Each adverse event  will include  a brief description of the experience, the date of onset, the date of resolution, the duration and 
type of experience, the severity, the relationship to investigational product  (i.e., drug or device),  contributing  factors, and any 
action taken with respect to the study drug/device.
Investigators and research coordinators will be instructed that all AE and corresponding relevant information  should  be recorded 
on the Adverse Event Form. In addition, the clinical site will be responsible for notifying Sponsor within  [ADDRESS_1276050] all serious adverse experiences that occur during the study period in the appropriate 
source documents and/or AE log as applicable.  
14.0 Data Monitoring  Plan
Training of Clinical Site Personnel
The training  of clinical site personnel will be the responsibility of the Sponsor. To ensure  uniform  data collection and protocol 
compliance, personnel from Sponsor  will review the investigational plan, techniques for the identification of eligible subjects, 
instructions on data collection, methods for soliciting  data from alternate sources, and schedules  for follow-up, as necessary,  
with the research coordinator.
Data Reporting
All data will be recorded on the site's standard  source documentation. The Investigator or designee is responsible for 
transferring the information  to the appropriate Case Report Forms (CRFs)  supplied by [CONTACT_1034]. The Investigator is 
responsible for ensuring the forms are accurately completed at the time of, or as soon as possible after, the subject procedure  
or the availability of test results. The Investigator is required  to sign the CRF  on the appropriate  page(s) to verify  that he/she has 
reviewed the recorded data. 
Data Review
The Sponsor will review all deidentified CRFs for completeness and  clarity upon  receipt. Missing or unclear data will be 
requested as necessary throughout the study. The Sponsor will request  further documentation such as physician  procedure 
notes when UADEs  and/or malfunctions  are observed and reported.
The Sponsor will provide clinical monitoring including comparison of CRFs to source documentation for accuracy and 
appropriateness, review of/for adverse  events, prompt evaluation of  UADE, and site compliance. To this end, the Principal  
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_908857]/or responsible  
government agencies.
Prior to initiation of the study,  sites will be trained on the clinical protocol, accepted clinical practices  and Federal regulations  
pertaining to clinical research. Study sites will receive interim  monitoring, as needed,  and a final visit prior to study closure.
15.0 Deviation and Compliance
Compliance
It is expected that sites (Investigators,  study coordinators, ancillary  site personnel, and study subjects) will be  compliant with the 
study protocol. Should  it be determined that the site is non-compliant, reasonable efforts will be made to secure compliance. 
These efforts/actions  shall be documented in writing and maintained within the study administration file at the Sponsor’s  
location.
Should the site continue to remain non-compliant, the study Sponsor may restrict device availability and/or  notify the governing  
IRB. Should efforts to bring the site into compliance fail, the site may be  suspended from study participation until the 
noncompliance is resolved. Federal regulations  require the Sponsor to report  non-compliances in the study to the appropriate  
regulatory authorities. Therefore, in the event  of an Investigator or site suspension, the governing IRB  and other appropriate  
regulatory authorities shall be notified.
Protocol Deviations
Protocol Deviations (PDs) will be documented on a Protocol Deviation Case Report Form.  PDs are reportable  to the institution's  
governing IRB and regulatory agencies during the annual reporting process,  unless  otherwise directed by [CONTACT_908874].  
Every attempt shall be made to adhere to the study protocol. However,  should an Investigator be required  to deviate from the 
protocol to protect the life or physical well-being of  a study subject  in an emergent  circumstance, such  notice shall be given to 
the study  Sponsor  as soon as possible, but no more than [ADDRESS_1276051] the soundness of  the investigation or the rights,  safety, and 
welfare of study subjects.
16.0 Investigator Responsibilities
Investigators are responsible for ensuring  the investigation  is conducted  in accordance with the study  protocol and applicable  
Federal regulations  (21 CFR, Part 812, Subpart E). Investigators are  also responsible for: 
 
•Obtaining IRB approval  for study conduct and re-approval as applicable  (if more  than one Investigator is participating in  the 
study at a site, the Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_908858]-approvals) 
•Obtaining informed  consent of study subjects prior to enrollment into the clinical study
•Protecting the subject rights,  safety,  and welfare
•Maintenance of subject records and confidentiality
•Record retention as defined in Federal  regulations 21 CFR, Part 812.140  (a), (d), and (e)
•Management of investigation  and study  related activities according  to the Clinical Investigator Agreement  and the Study 
Research Agreement
•Submission of site-specific study  closure  report to governing IRB within 3 months of notification from study Sponsor (if more 
than one Investigator  is conducting  the study, the Primary Investigator is responsible for submission of the study closure report) 
•Return of any unused investigational  product to the study Sponsor upon request  or at the conclusion of  the clinical study
In addition:
•An Investigator shall report to the Sponsor, within 5 working days,  a withdrawal of approval by [CONTACT_908875]'s part of an investigation
•If an Investigator  uses a device without obtaining informed consent,  the Investigator shall report such use to the Sponsor  and 
the reviewing IRB within 5 working days after the use occurs
•An Investigator shall, upon request by a reviewing IRB or regulatory agency  official, provide accurate,  complete,  and current 
information about any aspect of the investigation
17.0 Sponsor Responsibilities
The study Sponsor is responsible for ensuring  the study is conducted  in accordance with the study protocol and applicable 
federal regulations (21 CFR,  Part 812, Subpart  C). Further,  the study Sponsor  is responsible for the following: 
•Selecting  qualified  Investigators and providing  Investigators with appropriate information for study conduct 
•Ensuring review and approval process  for governing IRB is obtained
•Training all clinical investigators in the study on how to properly use  both Ambu  Auragain and Teleflex  LMA Protector  
•Appropriate monitoring of the clinical study
•Prompt notification to the appropriate regulatory and all Investigators of  UADE
•Record maintenance and retention per Federal regulations  (21 CFR, Part 812.140 (b), (d), and (e)
•Submission of final study closure report  that details cumulative study experience  to the appropriate regulatory  authorities, 
governing IRBs, and Investigators within 6 months of completing the clinical investigation in addition to fulfilling annual reporting  
requirements
In addition:
•A Sponsor who conducts  an evaluation of an UADE shall report the results of such evaluation to all  reviewing  IRBs  and 
participating Investigators  within [ADDRESS_1276052]
•A Sponsor shall notify  all reviewing IRBs  and participating  Investigators of any  withdrawal of approval of an investigation or a 
part of an investigation  by a reviewing IRB within 5 working days  after receipt of the withdrawal of approval
•At regular intervals,  and at least  yearly, a Sponsor shall submit progress  reports  to all reviewing IRBs. In the case  of a 
significant risk device,  a Sponsor shall also submit progress  reports  to the regulatory authority
•A Sponsor shall notify  all reviewing IRBs  of any request that  an Investigator return, repair, or otherwise dispose  of any units  
of a device.  Such notice shall occur  within  [ADDRESS_1276053] was made
•In the case of a significant risk device,  the Sponsor shall  notify the IRB within  30 working days of the completion or 
termination of the investigation and shall submit  a final report to all reviewing IRBs  and participating Investigators within 6 
months after completion  or termination.  In the case of a device that is  not a significant risk device,  the Sponsor shall submit a 
final report to all reviewing IRB's within 6 months after  termination or completion
•A Sponsor shall submit to the IRB a copy of any report by [CONTACT_908876] a device without obtaining  informed 
consent, within 5 working days of receipt of notice of such use
•If an IRB determines that a device is a significant risk  device, and the Sponsor had proposed that the IRB consider  the 
device not to be a significant risk device, the Sponsor shall submit  to the appropriate  regulatory agency a report  of the IRB's 
determination within [ADDRESS_1276054]  learns  of the IRB's determination
•A Sponsor shall, upon request  by a reviewing IRB, provide accurate, complete, and current  information about any aspect  of 
the investigation
18.[ADDRESS_1276055]: an updated report  by 
[CONTACT_908877]. Anesthesiology  2013; 118: 251-
[ADDRESS_1276056]  Laryngoscopy in Adults: A Retrospective Comparative Analysis from the Multicenter Perioperative Outcomes  
Group. Anesthesiology 2016;125:656-66.
3. Ruetzler K, Guzzella SE, Tscholl DW, Restin T, Cribari  M, Turan A, et. al. Blind Intubation through  Self-pressurized,  
Disposable Supraglottic Airway Laryngeal Intubation  Masks: An International,  Multicenter, Prospective Cohort Study.  
Anesthesiology: The Journal of the American  Society of Anesthesiologists . 2017  Aug 1;127(2):307-[ADDRESS_1276057] 
and CTrach Laryngeal Mask in Patients  with Predicted Difficult Laryngoscopy. Prague medical  report. 2016;117(4):164-75.
5.   Baskett PJ, Parr MJ, Nolan JP. The intubating  laryngeal mask. Results of a multicentre  trial with experience of 500 
cases. Anaesthesia  1998; 53: 1174-9
6. Hagberg CA. Benumof’s  Airway  Management Principles and Practice. 2nd edition  2007. Section IV: The airway 
techniques, chapter 21 page  491.
7. Jagannathan N, Hajduk J, Sohn  L, Huang A, Sawardekar A, Gebhardt ER, Johnson  K, De Oliveira  GS. A randomised 
comparison of the Ambu® AuraGain™  and the LMA® supreme in infants and children. Anaesthesia. 2016 Feb;71(2):205-12. 
8. Joo HS, Rose DK. The intubating laryngeal mask  airway with and without fiberoptic guidance.  Anesth  Analg 1999; 88: 
662-6.
9. Joly N, Poulin  LP, Tanoubi I, Drolet P, Donati  F, St-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] P. Randomized prospective trial comparing two supraglottic 
airway devices: i-gel™ and LMA-Supreme™ in paralyzed patients. Can J Anaesth. 2014 Sep;61(9):794-800.
10.  Lopez AM, Agusti M, Gambus P, Pons M, Anglada T, Valero  R. A randomized  comparison of the Ambu  AuraGain  
versus the LMA supreme in patients undergoing gynaecologic  laparoscopic surgery.  J Clin Monit Comput.  [ADDRESS_1276058]. A randomized Trial of the LMA 
Fastrach and LMA Ctrach. Anesthesiology  2008;108:621-6
12. Shariffuddin II, Teoh WH, Tang  E, Hashim  N, Loh  PS. Ambu® AuraGain™ versus LMA Supreme™ Second  Seal™: a 
randomised controlled trial comparing  oropharyngeal leak pressures and gastric drain  functionality in spontaneously 
breathing patients. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2017 Mar;45(2):244-250.
13. Ochroch  EA, Hollander JE, Kush S, Shofer FS, Levitan  RM. Assessment of laryngeal  view:  percentage of glottic 
opening scorevs Cormack and Lehane grading. Canadian Journal  of Anaesthesia.  [ADDRESS_1276059] 1;46(10):987-90.
14. Ott T, Barth A, Kriege M, Jahn‐Eimermacher A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_345776] T, Noppens RR. The novel  video‐assisted intubating laryngeal  
mask Totaltrack compared to the intubating  laryngeal mask  Fastrach–a  controlled  randomized manikin study. Acta 
Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica. 2017  Apr 1;61(4):381-9.