PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 1 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
 
COVER PAGE  
 
 
Study Title: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve Neurodevelopment 
and Minimize Metabolic Risk  
  
Date of Document: 6/28/17 
 
Title of Document: Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
    
 
     
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 2 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
PROTOCOL TITLE: 
Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve Neurodevelopment and 
Minimize Metabolic Risk  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
  
[INVESTIGATOR_58004], M.D .  
Division of Neonatology  
Department of Pediatrics  
University of Minnesota  
East Building - MB628  
[ADDRESS_63342]  
Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE] 
Phone:  [PHONE_1039]  
Email: sram [EMAIL_1082]  
  
VERSION NUMBER/DATE : 2/ June 28, 2017   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 3 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
 REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent Change?  
1 4/18/2017  Edits to statistical design  no 
2 5/9/[ADDRESS_63343]  no 
3 6/28/17  Edits to protocol per IRB 
stipulations  Yes 
    
    
    
    
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 4 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63344] the Privacy Interests of Participants  .................................... 23 
20.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ........................................................... 24 
21.0  Consent Process  ..................................................................................................... 24 
22.0  Setting  .................................................................................................................... 25 
23.0  Multi- Site Research  ............................................................................................... 25 
24.0  Resources Available ............................................................................................... 25 
25.0  References  .............................................................................................................. 25 
   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 5 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
 
ABBREVIATIONS/DEFINITIONS  
•  VLBW: Very Low Birth Weight (weighing <1500 grams at birth)  
• NICU: Neonatal Intensive Care Unit  
• GA: Gestational Age  
• CA: Corrected age for prematurity  
• ADP: Air Displacement Plethysmography  
• ERP: electrophysiologic  
• FFM: Fat -free mass  
• FM: Fat mass  
• IGF-1: Insulin Like Growth Factor -1 
• MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
• MDI: Mental Developmental Index  
• IGF-BP3: Insulin Like Growth Factor Binding Protein- 3 
• GIR: Glucose Infusion Rate  
• DOL: Day of Life  
• IL: Intralipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]  
• IV: Intrav enous  
• TPN: Total Parenteral Nutrition  
• MMN: Mismatch Negativity  
• VEP: Visual Evoked Potentials   
• CNBD: Center for Neurobehavioral Development  
• SNAP: Score for Neonatal Acute Physiology  
• EMR: Electronic Medical Record  
• ROP: Retinopathy of Prematurity  
• NEC: Necro tizing Entercolitis  
• CTSI: Clinical and Translational Science Institute  
• DSMC: Data Safety and Monitoring Committee  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 6 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63345] week of life to VLBW preterm 
infants.  
Secondary Objective(s)  The second ary objective is to generate pi[INVESTIGATOR_58005].  
Research 
Intervention(s)/Investigational  
Agents  Infants will be randomized to receive either standard  
parenteral  nutrition via the NICU protocol or enhanced 
parenteral  nutrition via the Study protocol during their 
first week of life through  higher initial macronutrient 
provision and faster advancement of macronutrient 
provision.  
IND/IDE # (if applicable)  N/A 
Study Population  VLBW (birth weight <1500grams) preterm 
(gestational age (GA) at birth < 32 weeks) infants admitted to the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58006], for which written informed consent can be secured from a parent within 12 hours 
of birth.  
Sample Size (number of 
participants)  80 
Study Duration for Individual 
Participants  From Birth through 4 months corrected age for 
prematurity ([ADDRESS_63346])  
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 7 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63347] improved FFM gains and higher levels of IGF -1 
prior to discharge, and improved early cognition and faster speed of neural processing measured at term and 4 months corrected age (CA). To address these h ypotheses, we propose the following specific aims:  
  Specific Aim I . Examine whether infants receiving earlier initiation of 
intralipi[INVESTIGATOR_58007] (“enhanced nutrition protocol”) have improved growth, indexed by [CONTACT_58028], compared to a standard 
nutrition protocol . Body composition will be measured weekly using air 
displacement plethysmography (ADP) until discharge and at term and 4 months CA.  
  Specific Aim II . Determine if infants on the “enhanced nutrition 
protocol” have improved cognition and faster speed of processing at term and [ADDRESS_63348] nutrition protocol. 
Neurodevelopmental outcomes will be measured using electrophysiologic 
(ERP) techniques.  
 
 Specific Aim III. To assess whether growth factors, including IGF -1 
and IGFBP3, mediate th e relationship between improved nutritional 
provision and improved FFM gains, cognition, and speed of processing 
in preterm infants. Growth factors will be drawn at 1 week of age and 35 
weeks PMA.  
 
2.0 Background  
 
2.1       Significance: VLBW preterm infants commonly experience growth  
failure, most significantly in length and FFM, during their first weeks of  
life while they are sick and dependent on parenteral nutrition1-5. This 
growth failure is occurring at a critical time in brain development and has  
been  shown to have a lasting negative impact on their  
neurodevelopment4,6-[ADDRESS_63349] even beyond  
2 years CA1-4. In addition to the neurodevelopmental consequences, early  
growth failure also increases these inf ants risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_58008]: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 8 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
hypertension, insulin resistance, obesity and other components of 
metabolic syndrome, by [CONTACT_58029] -up growth in 
infancy and toddlerhood8-11.   
 
 There are several factors contributing to this early grow th failure, and 
many (e.g. illness and inflammation) of them remain largely out of our control. In contrast, nutrition is a factor the health care team can control, and early enhancements in nutrient provision may be our opportunity to 
prevent the above de scribed early growth failure, improve 
neurodevelopment and optimize the later metabolic health of VLBW 
preterm infants. Multiple small retrospective studies have found 
significant decreases in growth failure (defined as weight z -score <10
th 
percentile at d ischarge) after a slight change in their NICU parenteral 
nutrition protocol12-15. In addition, multiple groups have reported 
improved neurodevelopmental outcomes, including improved language scores
13, increased developmental quotient16 and decreased incidence of 
brain lesions on MRI17 in infants receiving more aggressive parenteral 
nutrition in the first weeks of life. Specifically, Stephens et al reported an increase of 4.6 points in the Mental Developmental Index (MDI) at 18 months for every additional 10 kcal/kg/day of energy provided in the first week of life and an 8.2 point increase in the MDI for every additional gram/kg/day of protein provided in the first week
18.   
 
 Despi[INVESTIGATOR_58009], early enhanced m acronutrient provision to 
VLBW pret erm infants is not routinely practiced due to concerns about 
intolerance and toxicity . These concerns are based on older trials using 
different nutritional products than those routinely used in NICU’s today. More recent studies (mostly small and retrospect ive) have found that 
earlier introduction and more rapid advancement of lipi[INVESTIGATOR_58010], and in fact may decrease the incidence of hyperglycemia and parenteral nutrition associated cholestasis
14-15. In addition, recent findings 
of increased adi posity among preterm infants at term CA has discouraged 
early enhanced nutrient provision based on a fear that this strategy, while being beneficial for the brain, will nonetheless lead to further increases in adiposity
11. However, our group and others have instead found that 
increased nutrition provision, both in calories and in protein, leads to increased FFM gains, without accompanying increases in FM or adiposity
7.19. Work under Specific Aims 1 and 2 will address this 
uncertainty through a comprehensive  examination of both 
neurodevelopmental and metabolic outcomes (i.e., body composition) in a randomized nutrition intervention trial. 
  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 9 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63350] the need for randomized trials of nutritional interventions that focus not only on weight 
gain, but more importantly on linear growth and FFM gains, and that can measure both neurodevelopmental and metabolic outcomes. Our expertise and experience in both neonatal body com position measurement AND 
methods of measuring early neurodevelopmental outcomes put us in an ideal position to trial an early enhanced nutrition intervention and potentially become a leader for future larger multi -center studies with 
long-term follow -up. T his trial will not only allow us to determine the 
feasibility of providing additional nutrition to these sick infants, through close monitoring of metabolic tolerance (glucose, triglyceride and bilirubin levels) and careful detailed tracking of nutrient in take throughout 
their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7959], but will also provide us with preliminary data testing whether increasing all macronutrients incrementally shortly after birth eliminates early malnutrition, subsequent growth failure and neurodevelopmental delays.  
            
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 10 of 28  Revised : June 28, 2017   
 
  
2.2 Prelim Data:  In our extensive prior work we have described differences in 
body composition between preterm and term infants, developed the first reference curves for preterm infant body composition, and shown relationships between early  nutrition, illness and body composition  
trajectories through infancy among preterm infants. We were the first to describe associations between early FFM gains (not fat mass (FM) gains) and speed of processing and cognition. This observational work provides the necessary basis for our next phase of research aimed at increasing FFM gains prior to discharge and improving long-term growth, neurodevelopment and metabolic health for VLBW preterm infants through a randomized controlled nutritional intervention t rial.  
 
2.3  Innovation: The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_58011], to our knowledge, to 
comprehensively assess both infant metabolic (body composition) and neurodevelopmental outcomes following randomization to early enhanced nutritional intervention for preterm infants. In aim 1 we will examine growth, not only in weight and length, but also in different compartments (FFM and FM) during a critical time period of brain development using weekly ADP measurements. Given that FFM is considered a better marker  
of brain growth, and is associated with improved neurodevelopment, and increased adiposity a potential risk factor for later metabolic disease, using 
this more specific method of growth measurement allows a more 
comprehensive assessment of the risks and benefits of an early nutritional intervention. We will also continue to track gains in these compartments beyond hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58012] [ADDRESS_63351] of this enhanced nutrition protocol. To our knowledge there is only one prior preterm nutrition intervention trial that assessed total 
body composition as an outcome and they were limited to two inpatient measures. In Aim 2, we will utilize ERP techniques to look specifically at  
the effects of early enhanced nutriti on on neural speed of processing and 
early cognition. These techniques are more sensitive than standardized  

PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 11 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63352] standardized cognitive 
testing minimizing the effects of confounders such as parental education 
and home environment by [CONTACT_58030]. Finally, thes e methods of testing are 
specifically targeting areas of the brain found previously to be impacted by [CONTACT_58031]/nutritional status. Our previous observational work has established relationships between nutrient intake, FFM gains and speed of 
neural pro cessing/cognition
7, 23. To our knowledge there are no preterm 
infant nutritional intervention trials that have assessed early 
neurodevelopment using ERP. Aim [ADDRESS_63353] 
nutritional interventio n trial to assess growth factors, as well as 
neurodevelopmental and metabolic outcomes in preterm infants.  
 
3.0 Study Outcomes  
             3.1 Primary Outcome: The primary outcome of this  feasibility trial will be to 
 determine if infants randomized to the enhanced nutrition protocol receive 
 higher amounts of calories and protein throughout the first week of 
 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
             3.2    Secondary  Outcomes : The secondary outcomes will include measures of  
 growth, neurodevelopment and growth hormone levels. Specifically, we  
 will examine growth, not only in weight and length, but also in different 
 compartments (FFM and FM) using weekly ADP measurements. We will  
 also continue to track gains in these compa rtments beyond hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58013] [ADDRESS_63354] of early enhanced nutrition on IGF -1 and IGF -BP3 levels.  
 
4.0 Study Intervention  
  
            4.1       Description: This nutritional intervention is designed to accelerate the   
addition of macronutrients over the first week of life to minimize the  
period of malnutrition, and is based upon the findings of numerous  
smaller, less comprehensive studies and expert opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]. Once consent  
is obtained, and the infant is admitted to the NICU, enrolled infants  
will be randomized to either receive parenteral nutrition per the  
standard NICU parenteral nutrition protocol or via the enhanced nutrition 
protocol for the first week of life via random envelope selection. Stratified 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 12 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  block randomization will be performed. Infants will be stratified by 
[CONTACT_58032] (22 -25, 26- 29, 30- 32 weeks). Within each stratum, 
permuted block randomization will ensure that study personal are unable 
to predict treatment allocation.  Infants  
randomized to the enhanced nutrition protoc ol will receive starter total  
parenteral nutrition (TPN) initiated at 80 mls/kg/day to provide protein at  
4 grams/kg/day and a glucose infusion rate (GIR) of ~5.5 mgs/kg/min as  
soon as IV  access has been obtained. Enhanced nutrition protocol infants 
will also be started on intralipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] (IL) at 2 grams/kg/day once IV access is 
obtained. Infants randomized to the enhanced nutrition protocol will 
receive 4 grams/kg/day of protein throughout the first week of life. IL will 
be increased to 3 grams/kg/day on day  of life  (DOL) 2 and to 3.5 
grams/kg/day on DOL 3. They will remain on this amount for at least the 
first week of life or until sufficient enteral feeding volumes have been estab lished.  GIR will be advanced by ~1.5 mgs/kg/min per day 
throughout the first week of life to a maximum of 12 -14 mgs/kg/min. 
Again, they will then remain on this  
amount until sufficient enteral feedings have been established  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_58014] 1 -2 weeks). Infants randomized to the  
 standard nutrition protocol will receive m acronutrients per the  
caregivers  discretion, most commonly initiated with starter TPN at 60   
mls/kg/day giving 3 grams/kg/day of protein and a GIR of ~4 and IL   
provided at 0- 1 gram/kg/day. Advancement is most typi[INVESTIGATOR_58015] 1  
mg/kg/min per day for GIR an d 1 gram/kg/day per day for IL and  
protein in the standard NICU protocol . Pertinent aspects of the differences 
in nutritional treatment in intervention and control groups are summarized 
in the table  below  
 
  Day 1  Day 2  Day 3  Day 4  Day 5  Day 6  Day 7  
   Control          
     
   GIR 4.2 5 6 7 8 9 10 
   IL (gm/kg)  0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 
   Kcals/kg  26 40 55 70 75 80 85 431 total Kcals/kg/ week  
                (avg 61.6 Kcals/kg/day)  
Intervention                
   GIR 5.5 7 8.5 10 11.5 12 12 
   IL (gm/kg)  2 3 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 
   Kcals/kg  47.5 55 77.5 85 92.5 95 95 547.5  total kcals/kg/ week  
                 (avg 78.2 Kcals/kg/day)  
 *Each gm/kg of IL (Intralipid) provides 10 
Kcals/kg  
     
  Each 1 mg/kg/min of GIR (Glucos e Infusion Rate) provides ~5 Kcals/kg  
 
           5.0 Procedures Involved  
 5.1       Study Design: This exploratory study will use a simple randomized  
            controlled trial design, and the parents, investigators, and all study  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 13 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017              personnel (other than the in -patient study coordinator who oversees the  
            ordering of the  parenteral nutrition, the dietician and the data analyst in  
            charge of assessing results of the study) will be blinded as to group  
            assignment.  
           5.2      Study Procedures: Study Sample: Inclusions: We will include VLBW  
        (birth  weight <1500grams) preterm (gestational age (GA) at birth < 32  
         weeks) infants admitted to the University of Minnesota Masonic  
         C hildren’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58006], for which written informed consent can be   
         secured from a parent within 12 hours of birth. Exclusions: Infants who  
         are diagnosed prenatally with a clinical condition (other than prematurity)  
         that is known to affect growth rate, adiposity, or neurocognitive  
         development, who experienced severe birth asphyxia, who are enrolled in           another study affecting nutritional management, or who are likely to be           transferred out of the NICU will be excluded from participation. We will          
 attempt to enroll an equal number of female and male subjects, as well as  
         those from a variety of  racial and ethnic backgrounds.  
            Admissions to the antepartum unit and to the NICU will be screened daily  
         by [CONTACT_58033].           Once identified, the coordinator will present the mother/parents with a           study  brochure and offer to share more information and answer questions  
         regarding the study if the famil y is interested. When possible , consent will  
         be obtained prior to delivery. If unable to obtain consent prior to the  
         infants del ivery, the family will be approached within 12 hours of delivery  
         to explain the study, answer questions and obtain consent. They will be  
         allowed ample time to consider participation, as well as to ask questions  
         of the clinical ca re team/ PI [INVESTIGATOR_58016].            
      
 
 Nutritional Intervention:  Once consent is obtained, and the infant is 
admitted to the NICU, enrolled infants will be randomized to either receive parenteral nutrition per the standard NICU parenteral nutr ition 
protocol or via the enhanced nutrition protocol for the first week of life via random envelope selection. Infants randomized to the enhanced nutrition protocol will receive starter total parenteral nutrition (TPN) initiated at 80 mls/kg/day to provid e protein at 4 grams/kg/day and a glucose infusion 
rate (GIR) of ~5.5 mgs/kg/min as soon as IV access has been obtained. Enhanced nutrition protocol infants will also be started on intralipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] (IL) at 2 grams/kg/day once IV access is obtained. Infants randomized to the enhanced nutrition protocol will receive 4 grams/kg/day of protein throughout the first week of life. IL will be increased to 3 grams/kg/day on day of life (DOL) 2 and to 3.5 grams/kg/day on DOL 3. They will remain on this amount for at least  the first week of life or until sufficient enteral 
feeding volumes have been established.  GIR will be advanced by ~1.5 mgs/kg/min per day throughout the first week of life to a maximum of 12 mgs/kg/min. Again, they will then remain on this amount until s ufficient 
enteral feedings have been established (typi[INVESTIGATOR_58014] 1 -2 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 14 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  weeks). Infants randomized to the standard nutrition protocol will receive 
macronutrients per the caregivers discretion, most commonly initiated 
with starter TPN at 60 mls/kg/day  giving 3 grams/kg/day of protein and a 
GIR of ~4 and IL provided at 0- 1 gram/kg/day. Advancement is most 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_58015] 1 mg/kg/min per day for GIR and 1 gram/kg/day per day for IL and protein in the standard NICU protocol. 
 
 Glucose, conjugated bilirubin and triglyceride levels will be monitored per 
standard NICU protocol and nutrition will be adjusted accordingly and 
insulin given per NICU protocol. 
 
 Nutritional intake will be recorded daily throughout the hopi[INVESTIGATOR_059], including kcal/kg/day and g/kg/day of protein by [CONTACT_58034]. We  
will also gather data on days requiring TPN, type of feedings given (breast milk vs. formula) and degree of fortification (feeding additives).  
Following hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58017] (4 month CA) follow -up visit . 
  
 Growth and Body Composition Measures (Outcomes for Aim 1):  Daily 
weights will be measured per unit protocol on an electronic scale to the nearest 1 gram. Weekly recumbent length (using an infant length board) and head circumference (using a flexible tape measure) measurements will be performed by a consistent meas urement team to the nearest 0.1cm 
throughout their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], as well as at the term and 4 mo CA  
 follow -up visits. Once clinically stable and able to tolerate room air for >5 
minutes, we will begin measurements of body composition (FM, FFM and percent body fat) via infant ADP (“Pea Pod”; COSMED, INC, Concord, CA) by a trained NICU nurse, physician or research staff, and repeat these measurements weekly as tolerated. A detailed description of the Pea Pod’s physical design, operating principles, valid ation and measurement 
procedures is provided elsewhere
24-28. Briefly, the Pea Pod (1 -8kg) 
measure the infant’s volume using air -displacement plethysmography, and 
then calculates the density using the infant’s mass and length. FM and FFM are then calculated  using Fomon’s model
29. At a minimum, we plan 
to obtain one body composition measurement prior to discharge home 
from the NICU.  
 
 Families will be contact[CONTACT_58035] -up/maintain engagement in the study and will be 
scheduled for follow -up body composition and neurodevelopmental 
assessment at term (or as soon as possible post -discharge) and again at 4 
months CA, when weight, recumbent le ngth and head circumference will 
be measured, along with body composition using ADP. Raw body composition variables will be converted to z scores using our new preterm 
and term -corrected infant body composition reference data for ADP.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 15 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   
 Neurodevelopmental  Testing (Outcomes for Aim 2): Infants will be tested 
at term (or as soon as possible after hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]) and 4 months CA; 
at both ages they will participate in a single one -hour session during which 
ERP data will be obtained.  In order to obtain ERP data, infants will be fitted w ith a 128- channel Geodesic Sensor net.  Once we have placed the 
electrode net on the infant’s head, the infant will sit/lay on the parent's lap and an auditory oddball paradigm will be administered.  The Mismatch Negativity (MMN) component is widely used i n electrophysiological 
research to measure cognitive function; it is thought to represent perceptual learning and the detection of incongruence between two stimuli.  The MMN is most reliably elicited by [CONTACT_58036], distinct  “oddball” stimuli against a bac kground of a repeating stimulus, and 
represents the comparison of the current auditory input to memory traces  
of previous inputs. The neural generators of the MMN component are widely distributed throughout the brain, and there is strong evidence to sugge st that the frontal and temporal lobes are among them
30. The 
University of Minnesota is one of only a few sites around the county with expertise in measuring cognition in early infancy using ERP technology, and one of the only who also has expertise in mea suring infant body 
composition as well.  
  
 We will also use pattern -reversal visual evoked proteintals (VEP) at 4 
months CA  (type of ERP), which provides an early indication of neuronal 
speed of processing and myelination, which are critical to cognitive function. Infants will view a visual stimulus which consists of a pattern -
reversing black and white checkerboard and VEPs will be recorded from ongoing EEG using the above mentioned net. As in our previous studies, the outcome variable with be the latency to the P100 waveform in msec
23. 
  Our prelimiary data has shown an association between speed of processing, cognition and FFM in other groups of preterm infants
7, 23, and 
thus we hypothesize that these findings will be robust amongst this population of at risk infants and potentially allow us to detect changes in cognitive measures related to enhanced nutritional provision. Our team in 
the CNBD has performed this testing on a variety of clinical populations 
(>500 infants) as well as healthy controls for ove r a decade
31-33. 
 
   Markers of Growth hormone axis activity (Outcomes for Aim 3) : IGF -1 
and IGFBP3 levels will be obtained in serum at 1 week of age and ~[ADDRESS_63355] been seen between linear growth, FFM gains, metabolic risk (e.g. increased adiposity and higher blood pressure), neurodevelopmental outcomes and IGF-1 and IGFBP3 in preterm born infants 
12, 20 -22. IGF -1 and IGFBP3 will 
be analyzed by [CONTACT_58037].  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 16 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   Additional Measures: The randomized design of this trial is expected to 
make the distribution of potential confounder values and characteristics 
similar in the intervention and control groups. Nonetheless, to confirm their equivalence and to describe the study sample, we will obtain birth anthropometrics, maternal age, education, and ethnicity, infant s ex, 
gestational age at birth, weight- for-age z score at birth, and degree of 
illness from the medical record or parental self -report at enrollment. 
Degree of illness will be assessed using the Score for Neonatal Acute Physiology (SNAP) on DOL#1, 7, [ADDRESS_63356] data 
on other non- specific markers of illness, including days on the ventilator, 
requirement for blood pressure support, sepsis evaluations and antibiotic  therapy, steroid administration, necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), diagnosis  
of chronic lung disease and retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) etc. These  
measures will also allow us to track the safety of the intervention to ensure 
that rates of these common m orbidities are similar in both groups.  
 
         5.3  Storage and Access: The records of this study will be ke pt private. In any 
publications or presentations, we will not include any information that will 
make it possible to identify the mother or baby a s a subject. Any hard 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_58018]’s research records will be kept in a locked desk in the locked office of the PI, co- I or study coordinator, and will be identified 
ONLY by [CONTACT_6295] (other identifying information will be removed).  The study information will not be recorded in the medical 
record.  These de- identified data will be entered into electronic format for 
storage and analysis; only the PI, co- Is, study coordinators and data 
analyst will have access to this electronic dataset.  
 
6.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
6.1 Storage and Access: Data from the various domains will be entered by [CONTACT_58038] a web- based secure database (RedCap) for storage, 
retrieval and analysis. This database will be password protected and only 
accessible to study personne l. The datasets will then be securely stored 
using Box.com per HRPP policy. We will need to download them to our 
University/AHC desktops for statistical analysis, however only a subset of 
the team will  be given access to all fi les (study coordinator and PI) and the 
rest will have access to the deidentified  files only .This data will be kept 
indefinitely to allow for the possibility of adding future study visits and/or future analyses.  There will be no specimen banking.  
6.2 Data: The full dataset for the study will be maintained as above, including demographic information, pregnancy history and ultrasound results, details of delivery, clinical history of infant including nutritional intake, blood test results, growth measurements and neurodevelopmental testing results.  
6.3 Release/Sharing: Sharing of this data outside of our study personnel will only occur after appropriate IRB approval of additional studies or analyses. When possible, the data shared will be de -identified.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 17 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63357] for their records. ERP/VEP result s will be  
            shared with families  who wish to receive them.  
  
 Families will be asked on the consent form if they wish to receive the  
 study results when they are published. If they desire to receive the results,  
 they will be emailed or mailed to the family per their preference when  
 they are available.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_63358] patients, this will be a total of approximately 6 -8 months. It is 
expected to take approximately 18 months to enroll all of the patients in this study.  It is expected  to ta ke approximately 2 years to complete 
enrollment and all study visits. It will likely take an additional 6 months to complete data analysis.   
9.0 Study Population  
9.1 Inclusion Criteria: We will include VLBW (birth weight <1500grams) preterm (gestational age  (GA) at birth < 32 weeks) infants admitted to the 
University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58006], for which written informed consent can be secured from a parent within 12 hours of  
birth.  
9.2 Exclusion Criteria: Infants who are diagnosed prenatall y with a clinical 
condition (other than prematurity) that is known to affect growth rate, adiposity, or neurocognitive development, who experienced severe birth asphyxia, who are enrolled in another study affecting nutritional management, or who are likely  to be transferred out of the NICU will be 
excluded from participation. 
9.3 Screening: Admissions to the antepartum unit and to the NICU will be screened daily by [CONTACT_58033].  
 
10.0 Vulnerable Populations  
10.1 Vulnerable Populations:  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 18 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  ☒ Children 
☒ Pregnant w omen /Fetuses/Neonates  
☐ Prisoners  
☐ Adults lacking capacity to consent and/or adults with diminished 
capacity to consent, including, but not limited to, those with acute 
medical conditions , psychiatric disorders, neurologic disorders, 
developmental disorders, and behavioral disorders  
☒ Non -English speakers  
☒ Those unable to read (illiterate)  
☐ Employees of the researcher  
☐ Students of the researcher  
☐ None of the above  
10.2 Additional Safeguards: This study is aimed at optimizing the nutrition 
provided to preterm born neonates. Given this and the potential benefit to 
them they will be included in the study. Consent will be obtained from parents (mom and/or dad (if married)). Non -English speakers and illiterate 
persons will be included in the study, but not targeted, to allow for diversity in the study and equal opportunity for participation and potential benefit.  
 
11.0 Local Number of Participants  
11.1 Local Number of Participants to be Consented: We will plan to enroll approximately 80 infants in this study. We will potentially consent up to  
100 infants, as some infants who are prenatally consented will no longer be eligible to participate in the study at th e time of birth. For example,  
parents may give consent at 26 weeks gestation, but the inf ant may remain 
in utero until 33 weeks gestation, at which time they would no longer be eligible to participate.  
 
12.0 Local Recruitment Methods  
12.1 Recruitment Process: Admi ssions to the antepartum unit and to the NICU 
will be screened daily by [CONTACT_58033]. Once identified, the coordinator will present the mother/parents with a study brochure and offer to share more information and answer questions regarding the study if the family is interested. When possible, and if there is IRB approval for this, consent will be obtained prior to delivery. If unable to obtain consent prior to the infant’s  delivery, 
the family will be approached within 12 hours of delivery to explain the study, answer questions and obtain consent. They will be allowed ample time to consider participation, as well as to ask questions of the clinical care team/PI [INVESTIGATOR_58016].  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 19 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  12.2 Source of Parti cipants: The Epic (EMR) census for antepartum, labor and 
delivery and the NICU will be screened by [CONTACT_23164].   
12.3 Identification of Potential Participants: The unit census will be reviewed  
daily by [CONTACT_58039] .    
These patients will be drawn from the PI’s patient population. Prior to 
birth, this will include mothers who have had a Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit consult placed. After birth, parents whose infant is under the care of 
the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or her colleagues will be approached. Patients will not self -        
identify, but rather will be approached based on eligibility criteria that is 
contained in the medical record (i.e. gestational age). The inpatient study 
coordinator will present the parent(s) with a brochure describing the study. 
Following this initial contact, the study coordinator will follow -up with 
parents  at their convenience  to describe the study in more detail and 
answer any questions before obtaining consent. The family will a lso have 
an opportunity to meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_58019]. Th ose patients who have “research 
opt out” in their medical record will not be approached for participation in this study.  
12.4 Recruitmen t Materials: Parents will initially be given a study brochure that  
generally describes the study. If the parents are then interested in hearing more about the study, they will be given a consent form and a time to    discuss the details of the study with the inpatient study coordinator , their   
care teams  and/or the PI.  
11.5     Payment: $[ADDRESS_63359] ’s parent at 3    
           time points (including discharge and the 2 outpatient visits).  
 
13.0 Withdrawal of Participants  
13.1 Withdrawal Circumstances: There are no specific circumstances under   which the infant will be withdrawn from the study without parental consent;  however changes in the nutrition protocol for the study can be 
made at the discretion of the attending neonatologist. These changes will not preclude continuing in the study, but rather will be adjusted for when analyzing the study data.  On the other hand, parents can withdraw their 
infant from the study at any time point.    
13.2 Withdrawal Procedures: If the infant i s withdrawn from the study prior to             
study completion (4 months corrected age), the data collected prior to             
withdrawal will be analyzed, but no further data collected.  
13.3 Termination Procedures: If the infant is withdr awn from the study , the               
remainder  of their NICU care will be per standard NICU protocol. Again,             
data collected prior to withdrawal  will be analyzed, but no further data             
collected.  
 
14.0 Risks to Participants  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 20 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  14.1 Foreseeable Risks:   
 Intolerance  of IV nutrition: Preterm infants often experience 
 hyperglycemia , hypertriglyceridemia  and cholestasis (elevated direct 
 bilirubin) while on total parenteral nutrition in the first few weeks of life. 
 It is possible that rates or severity of these problems may be increased in 
 infants receiving higher amounts and/or faster advancement of 
 macronutrients. Infant’s glucose, triglyceride levels and direct bilirubin 
 will be monitored per the clinical routine which is at least daily for the 
 first week of life  for glucose , twice  weekly for triglycerides and at least 
 weekly for bilirubin. More frequent checks will be initiated, again per 
 clinical routine, should infants show any signs of intolerance. 
 Hyperglycemia often requires treatment with insulin in very  low birth 
 weight preterm infants, and infants in the study will again be treated per  
 the usual  NICU protocol at the discretion of the care team . In addition, 
 macronutrient provision will be decreased per clinical routine should 
 infants show these sign of intolerance. Two recent small studies have 
 found that earlier initiation and more rapid advancement of these 
 macronutrients actually result in less hyperglycemia/insulin use14, similar 
 rates of hypertriglyceridemia14 and lower  rates of parenteral nutrition 
 associated cholestasis15. Therefore, an important aspect of this 
 exploratory research project is to assess whether early initiation and more  
 rapid advancement will lead to increased provision of macronutrients or 
 whether  the nutrition will have to be scaled back due to intolerance and 
 result in similar nutrient provision.  
15.0 Potential Benefits to Participants  
15.1 Potential Benefits: There may or may not be benefits to receiving higher 
amounts of macronutrients during the first  week of life. In a few small 
retrospective studies infants receiving higher amounts of nutrition in the first week of life had improved neurodevelopmental scores on standardized testing and improved growth, including improved head growth, increased amount s of lean mass and increased weight gain. Also, 
in a few small randomized trials infants had less hyperglycemia, and lower rates of cholestasis. Infants wh o are randomized to the enhanced nutrition 
protocol may experience these benefits.  
16.0 Data Management  
 
15.1     Data Analysis Plan: Data from the various domains will be entered by [CONTACT_58040] a web- based secure database (RedCap) for storage, 
retrieval and analysis. The NICU dietician is responsible for abstracting 
nutritional data from the electronic medical record (Epic). ADP data will 
be entered into the database by [CONTACT_58041]. ERP data will be 
abstracted by [CONTACT_58042]. The data analyst will examine each variable for outliers and distributional properties and flag and correct entry errors where possible 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 21 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  and will log -transform or otherwise normalize variables prior to analysis. 
From RedCap  all datasets wi ll then be securely stored using Box.com per 
the HRPP policy. They may need to be downloaded to University/AHC 
desktops for statistical analysis, however only a subset of the team will  be 
given access to all files (study coordinator and PI) and the rest w ill have 
access to the de- identified  files only. These laptops are password protected 
and maintained by [CONTACT_58043]. Although we do not anticipate many missing 
values in this short -term follow -up study, multiple imputation methods 
(e.g., Proc MI in SAS) will be used if missing data can reasonably be considered missing at random. Analyses will also be run without imputation and results compared. Analyses will be carried out using SAS version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc.) using an intent -to-treat approach, with a 2 -
tailed p<0.05 as the threshold for statistical significance. For Specific 
Aims 1, 2, and 3, body composition data, neurodevelopmental outcomes, and IGF -1 and IGFBP3 will be treated as continuously -distributed 
variables assessed at multiple time points. For the ERP outcomes (which are measured twice), t he primary hypotheses will be addressed using a 
simple general linear regression model for term -equivalent measures, and 
another similar model for 4 month corrected age measures, with assigned group as the inde pendent variable in both cases. For FFM (with up to 10 
repeated measures) and IGF -1 models, mixed effects  regression models 
(using  
PROC MIXED) will be used. The primary  models will test assigned group 
(standard versus enhanced nutrition protocol) and assi gned group x  
time interaction as the tests of differences in the group mean values for initial levels, and change over time, respectively, between intervention and  
control groups.  To improve the precision of estimates, variables of interest 
(e.g., gestatio nal age  at birth , anthropometric z scores at birth, degree of 
illness, etc.) will be included in  additional, secondary models. In addition, 
in Specific Aim 3, IGF -1 levels at both 1 week and 35 weeks will be 
examined as predictors of later neurodevelopment  and body composition 
outcomes. IGF -1 will be considered a potential mediator of the 
intervention- outcome relationships if 1) the intervention is significantly 
associated with both IGF-1 levels  and outcomes , 2) IGF -1 levels are 
significantly associated with FFM and neurodevelopmental outcomes, and 3) in a model that includes both IGF -[ADDRESS_63360] of treatment group on outcomes (mean differences) is diminished  compared to results from models unadjusted for IGF -1. Other 
ways of assessing the possible role of IGF -1 in the treatment- outcome 
relationship will also be explored.  
           15.2      Power Analysis: A sample size of 40 infants in each treatment group (80  
 total) allows for up to a ~12% loss to follow -up after discharge and still  
 have 35 infants per group. Our prior work showed a significant association 
 of early nutrition (protein and calories in first week of life) with FFM  
 gains throughout hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (p<0.01 for both) in 34 VLBW preterm  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 22 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63361] also shown that higher energy (kcal/kg/day) across  
 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58020] (shorter  
 latency) in [ADDRESS_63362] size that will then be used to calculate sample size for our planned 
 larger  trial.  
 
           15.3    Data Integrity: Describe any procedures that will be used for quality  
 control of collected data.  All data will be stored in a Red Cap database 
 designed by [CONTACT_58044]. All 
 necessary medical record data (including the daily information on 
 nutritional intake, procedures, and clinical outcomes, among others) will 
 be abstracted by [CONTACT_58045] a weekly or biweekly 
 basis. Body composition and ERP data will be exported in Excel format 
 on a weekly or biweekly basis and shared on a password protected server 
 with the data manager. While body composition data and ERP data g o 
 directly from Excel into RedCap, there is a possibility of data entry errors 
 for the medical record data, and so the data manager or PI [INVESTIGATOR_58021] (initially) then monthly checks of data accuracy by [CONTACT_58046] a subset of  
 subjects. On a monthly basis, data quality will be examined for outliers 
 and unusual values by [CONTACT_58047], who will then communicate with 
 the clinical research manager or other data collection personnel wit h 
 access to the original data to resolve the errors and insure consistency in 
 units and data collection processes.  
 
17.[ADDRESS_63363]. This link is necessary in order that the infant's families may be contact[CONTACT_58048] -up studies. 
A copy of the consent form will be placed in the infants medical record after randomization occurs in order that all medical providers are made aware of the infants enrollment in the study
. The study ID will not be 
recorded in the infant’s medical record.  
 
18.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of 
Participants  
18.1 Data Integrity Monitoring : 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 23 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   Independent monitoring of the clinical study for protocol, SOP, and 
regulatory compliance will be cond ucted periodically (i.e., at a minimum 
of annually) by [CONTACT_58049]’s Clinical 
and Translational Science Institute (CTSI) monitoring staff. Utilizing 
UMN CTSI staff for this task ensures that only qualified monitors will b e 
selected. Study monitors will review study materials (documents, records, 
Case Report Forms, etc.) to assure that the study is being conducted, 
recorded, and reported in compliance with FDA Good Clinical Practice. They will also ensure that the study is conducted in accordance with the 
protocol and inclusion/exclusion criteria as approved by [CONTACT_1201].  
 The monitoring report will summarizes items reviewed during the 
monitoring visit. The summary will also include any data 
discrepancies/findings noted during the monitoring visit and the actions required by [CONTACT_58050]. The investigator will permit study monitors and appropriate regulatory authorities access to the study data and to the corresponding source data and documents  to 
verify the accuracy of these data.  
18.2 Data Safety Monitoring  
    Data Safety and Monitoring Committee (DSMC): An independent DSMC 
will be formed prior to the initiation of the study to monitor the progress of the study when 50% of the trial subjects have reached hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]. The DSMC will include individuals with expertise in neonatology, biostatistics and clinical trials and will review accumulated blinded study data at the interim study point to ensure that the intervention is not leading to harm. The data they will review will included all labs related to nutritional tolerance as described above and other common co -
morbidities of prematurity. The DSMC will not be charged with assessing efficacy before conclusion. Any adverse event, defined as a reaction or side effect that occurs during the course of the trial associated with the intervention, whether or not the event is considered related to the 
treatment or clinically significant will be reported to the appropriate 
institutional IRB and the DSMC.  If the DSMC recommends modification 
or cessation of the study protocol at any time point, the IRB and the 
Department of Pediatrics (sponsor of the study) will be notified. 
    
19.[ADDRESS_63364] the Privacy Interests of Participants  
19.1 Parents of eligible  subjects will be approached by [CONTACT_58051] a brochure. They will be asked for their permission to spend time reviewing further details of the study at a time convenient to them. Parents will be given the opportunity to ask questions and also to speak to a clinician (attending neonatologist or neonatal fellow) regarding the study prior to consenting to the study. Data gathered for the study will not be shared outside of the research team. Only data described in the HIPAA 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 24 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  form will be collected. Any questions that the parents feel uncomfortable 
answering can be omitted.  
19.2 Access to Participants : The research team will only access information 
discussed in the HIPAA release form that was signed by [CONTACT_423]’s 
parents. The research team has access to the data contained in the medical 
record as the PI [CONTACT_832] a caregiver for this patient population.  
20.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
20.1 Compensation for Research -Related Injury: In the event that this research 
activity results in an injury, trea tment will be available, including first aid, 
emergency treatment and follow -up care as needed. Care for such injuries 
will be billed in the ordinary manner to you or your insurance company. If  
you think that your child has suffered a research related inj ury, let the 
study physicians know right away.  
21.0 Consent Process 
21.1 Consent Process (when consent will be obtained): Consent will be 
obtained either prior to delivery or within 12 hours after delivery of the infant. Parents will be approached for consent either in the mother’s inpatient room or in the NICU .  They will initially be approached by [CONTACT_58052] a brochure generally introducing the study. They will be asked permission and also for a conv enient time to discuss 
further details of the study and potentially obtain consent. If they are interested, they will be allowed ample time to look over the documentation and ask questions of the study coordinator. They will also be allowed to ask questions of their own care team and/or the NICU care team including the attending neonatologist or fellow on service. Consent will be obtained and documenting in writing on the approved consent form. A copy of the consent will be given to the family and also incl uded in the infant ’s 
medical record.  
21.2 Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (whe n consent will not be 
obtained): N/A  
21.3 Non-English Speaking Participants : Families who are non -English 
speaking will be included but not targeted. Languages for which short 
forms are available on the University of Minnesota IRB website will be included.  Interpreter services will be used to review the consent form in 
detail with parents of potential participants. They will also be given an IRB approved short form and allowed ample time to ask questions with an interpreter present. Informed consent will be documented on the short form per IRB policy. Fairview Interpreter services will be used to ensure 
that qualified interpreters are utilized.  
21.4 Participants Who Are Not Yet Adults (infants, children, teenagers under 18 years of age):  Participants in this study are neonates and are unable to 
provide consent. Consent will be  obtained from their parent(s) ( mother 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 25 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017  and/or father if parents are married).   
 
22.0 Setting  
22.1 Research Sites: Admissions to the antepartum unit at the University of 
Minnesota Birthplace and to the University of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58022]. Research p rocedures will 
be performed in the Uni versity of Minnesota Masonic Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58023] ([ADDRESS_63365] SE, Minneapolis, MN)  
as an outpatient.  
 
23.0 Multi -Site Research  
• N/A 
24.0 Resources Available  
24.1 Resources Available:  Our [ADDRESS_63366] 100 infants per year to be eligible for the study, and participation rate is expected to be >70% based upon our past experience, yiel ding >[ADDRESS_63367] enrolled ~50 patients in a 12 month period in a recent longitudinal study on VLBW’s and ~[ADDRESS_63368] a ~85% return to follow -up 
rate in our previous longit udinal study on body composition and speed of 
processing.  
The infants will be monitored closely for any signs of intolerance and the neonatal care team including the attending neonatologist will have the ability to change the nutritional provision the infa nt is receiving if these 
signs are present.  
All research staff will be adequately informed about the protocol, research procedures and their duties and functions. Nursing staff and other members of the care team will also be made aware of the protocol and  research 
procedures and will have access to copi[INVESTIGATOR_58024].  
 
25.0 References  
 
 1. Ehrenkranz  RA, Younes N , Lemons JA , Fanaroff AA , Donovan 
EF, Wright LL , et al. Longitudinal growth of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58025]. Pediatrics.  1999; 104:280- 9. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 26 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   2. Cole TJ , Statnikov Y , Santhakumaran S , Pan H , Modi N , et al. Birth 
weight and longitudinal growth in infants born below 32 weeks'  gestation: 
a [LOCATION_006] population study. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed.  2014; 
99(1):F34 -40. 
3. Horbar  JD, Ehrenkranz RA , Badger GJ , Edwards EM , Morrow 
KA, Soll  RF, Buzas JS , et al. Pediatrics.  Weight Growth Velo city and 
Postnatal Growth  Failure in Infants 501 to 1500 Grams: 2000- 2013. 
Pediatrics. 2015; 136(1):e84-  92.  
4. Ramel SE, Demerath E, Gray H, Younge N, Boys C, Georgieff M. The 
Relationship of Poor Linear Growth Velocity with Neonatal Illness and 
Two-Year Neurodevelopment in Preterm Infants. Neonatology. 2012; 
102:19- 24. 
5. Ramel SE, Gray H, Larson Ode K, Georgieff M, Demerath EW. Body Composition Changes in Preterm Infants Following Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3849]: A Comparison to Term Infants. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011; 53(3): 333-8. 
6. Ehrenkranz RA, Dusick AM, Vohr BR, et al.  Growth in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit Influences Neurodevelopmental and Growth Outcomes of Extremely Low Birth Weight Infants. Pediatrics 2006; 117: 1253- 1261. 
7. Ra mel, SE, Gray H, Christiansen E, Boys C, Georgieff MK and 
Demerath EW. Greater Early Gains in Fat -Free Mass, but not Fat Mass, 
are Associated with Improved Neurodevelopment at 1 Year Corrected Age 
for Prematurity in Very Low Birth Weight Preterm Infants. J  Pediatr. 
2016; 173:108- 15.  
8. Belfort MB, Gillman MW, Buka SL, Casey PH, McCormick MC. 
Preterm  infant linear growth and adiposity gain: trade -offs for later 
weight status and intelligence quotient. J Pediatr. 2013; 163(6):1564 9.e2.  
 9. Casey PH, Bradley RH, Whiteside -Mansell L, Barrett K, Gossett JM, 
 Simpson PM. Evolution of obesity in a low birth weight cohort. J 
 Perinatol.  2012; 32:91–6. 
  10. Euser AM, Finken MJJ, Keijzer -Veen MG, et al. Associations between 
  prenatal and infan cy weight gain and BMI, fat mass, and fat distribution in 
  young adulthood: a prospective cohort study in males and females born   
  very preterm. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005; 81:480–7. 
 11. Pfister K and Ramel SE. Optimizing Growth and Neurocognitive 
 Developme nt while Minimalizing  Metabolic Risk in Preterm Infants. 
 Current Pediatrics. 2014. DOI: 10.1007/s40124- 014-0057- 5. 
 12. Can E, Bülbül A, Uslu S, Cömert S, Bolat F and Nuhoǧlu A. Effects 
 of  aggressive parenteral nutrition on growth and clinical outcome i n 
 preterm  infants.  Pediatrics International. 2012; 54:869–874. 
 13. Shim S, Ahn H, Cho S and Park E. Early aggressive nutrition enhances 
 language development in very low -birthweight infants. Pediatrics 
 International. 2014; 56:845–850. 
 14. Drenckpohl D , McConnell C, Gaffney S, Niehaus M and Macwan 
 KS. Randomized Trial of Very Low Birth Weight Infants Receiving 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 27 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, [ADDRESS_63369] 
 Week of Life. Pediatrics 2008; 122:743–751. 
 15. Repa A, Lochmann R, Unterasinger L, Weber M, Berger A and 
 Haiden N. Aggressive nutrition in extremely low birth weight infants: 
 impact on parenteral nutrition associated cholestasis and growth. PeerJ. 
 2016; 4:e2483; DOI  10.7717/peerj.2483.  
 16. dit Trolli SE, Kermorvant -Duchemin E, Huon C, Bremond- Gignac D 
 and Lapi[INVESTIGATOR_58026] A. Early lipid supply and neurological development at one 
 year in very low birth weight preterm infants. Early Human Development; 
 2012; 88: S25–S29.  
 17. Beauport L, Schneider J, Faouzi M, Hagmann P, Hüppi [INVESTIGATOR_58027], Tolsa J, 
 Truttmann AC a nd Fischer Fumeaux CJ. Impact of Early Nutritional 
 Intake on Preterm Brain: A Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study. J 
 Pediatrics. 2016. E -pub ahead of print.  
 18. Stephens BE, Walden RV, Gargus RA, Tucker R, McKinley L, Mance 
 M, Nye J and Vohr BR. First -Week Protein and Energy Intakes Are 
 Associated  With 18- Month Developmental Outcomes in Extremely Low 
 Birth Weight Infants. Pediatrics 2009; 123:1337–1343.  
 19. Costa -Orvay  JA, Figueras -Aloy J, Romera G, Closa -Monasterolo R, 
 Carbonell -Estrany X.  The effects of varying protein and energy intakes on 
 the growth and body composition of very low birth weight infants. Nutr J. 
 2011; 10:140.  
 20. Yumani DFJ, Lafeber HN and van Weissenbruch MM.  Dietary 
 proteins and IGF I levels in preterm infants: determinants of growth, body 
 composition, and neurodevelopment. Pediatric Research. 2015; 1 (77): 
 156-163. 
 21. Beardsall K, Vanhaesebrouck S, Frystyk J, Ogilvy -Stuart AL, Va nhole 
 C,  van Weissenbruch M et al. Relationship between Insulin- Like Growth 
 Factor I Levels, Early Insulin Treatment, and Clinical Outcomes of Very 
 Low Birth Weight Infants. J Pediatr 2014; 164:1038- 44. 
 22. Kistner A, Sigurdsson J, Niklasson A, Löfqvi st C, Hall K and 
 Hellström A. Neonatal IGF -1/IGFBP -1 axis and retinopathy of  
 prematurity are associated with increased blood pressure in preterm 
 children. Acta Paediatrica. 2014; 103:149–156. 
 23. Pfister K, Gray H, Miller N, Demerath EW, Georgieff MK and Ramel 
 SE. Exploratory Study of the relationship of fat -free mass to speed of 
 brain processing in preterm infants. Pediatric Research. 2013; 74(5):576-
 83 
 24. Urlando A, Dempster P, Aitkens S. A new air displacement 
 plethysmograph for the measurement of body composition in infants. 
 Pediatr Res 2003; 53:486- 92. 
 25. Sainz RD, Urlando A. Evaluation of a new pediatric air -displacement 
 plethysmography for body -composition assessment by [CONTACT_58053]. Am J Clin Nutr 2003; 77:364–70. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Enhanced Early Nutrition for Preterm Infants to Improve  
Neurodevelopment and Minimiz e Metabolic Risk  
VERSION DATE: 6/28/17 
 Page 28 of 28  Revis ed: June 28, 2017   26. Yao M, Nommsen- Rivers L, Dewey K, et al. Preliminary evaluation of 
 a new pediatric air displacement plethysmograph for body composition 
 assessment in infants. Acta Diabetol 2003;40:S55–8. 
 27. Ma GS, Yao M, Liu Y, et al. Validation a new pediatric air 
 displacement  plethysmograph for assessing body composition in infants. 
 Am J Clin Nutr 2004; 79:653–60. 
 28. Ellis K, Yao M, and Shypailo JR, et al. Body -composition assessment 
 in  infancy: air displacement plethysmography compared with a reference 
 4- compartment model. Am J of Clin Nutr 2007; 85:90–5. 
 29. Fomon SJ, Haschke F, Zeigler EE and Nelson SE. Body Composition 
 of  Reference Children from Birth to Age 10 Years. American Jo urnal of 
 Clinical Nutrition. 1982; 35:1169- 75. 
 30. Garrido MI, Kilner JM, Stephan KE, Friston KJ. The mismatch 
 negativity: A review of underlying mechanisms. Clinical 
 Neurophysiology. 2009; 120(3):453-  463.  
 31. Siddappa AM, Georgieff MK, Wewerka S, W orwa C, Nelson CA, 
 deRegnier R -A. Auditory recognition memory in iron- deficient infants of 
 diabetic mothers. Pediatric Research. 2004; 55: 1034- 1041. 
 32. Stolarova M, Whitney H, Webb S, deRegneir RA, Georgieff MK, 
 Nelson  CA. Electrophysiologic brain re sponses of six -month- old low risk 
 premature  infants. Infancy. 2003; 4:437- 450. 
 33. deRegnier RA, Georgieff MK, Nelson CA. Cognitive event -related 
 brain potentials in four -month- old infants at risk for neurodevelopmental 
 impairments. Dev Psychobiol. 1997; 30:11- 28. 
 34. Richardson DK, Corcoran JD, Escobar GJ, Lee SK. SNAPII and 
 SNAPPE - II: simplified newborn illness severity and mortality risk 
 scores. J Pediatr. 2001; 138:92–100. 
           35. Richardson DK, Gray JE, McCormick MC, Workman K, Goldmann    
           DA.Score for neonatal acute physiology: a physiologic severity index for  
           neonatal intensive care. Pediatrics. 1993; 91:617–23. 
 