HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  1 of 26PROTOCOL TITLE:
Oral Ketorolac as an Adjuvant Agent  for Postoperative Pain  Control following Arthroscopic 
Rotator Cuff  Repair
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
[INVESTIGATOR_453153],  M.D.
Primary Department Orthopaedic  Surgery
Telephone Number [PHONE_9503]
Email Address [EMAIL_8705]
UH FACULTY ADVISOR:
If the principal investigator’s primary role at UH is resident,  fellow or  student, identify a faculty 
advisor.
Name N/A
Primary Department N/A
Telephone Number N/A
Email Address N/A
OTHER DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED  IN THIS STUDY  (IF APPLICABLE):    
N/A
VERSION NUMBER:
Version  5. 
DATE: 
2/19/2019 
Indicate the  origin of this protocol  (who  conceived  of and  leads the  development of the 
protocol regardless of  funding):
☒  Investigator initiated (Investigator(s)  developed  protocol, regardless of funding)
☐  Industry (Pharmaceutical, Device, etc.) (Industry developed protocol)
☐  Federal (NIH, DOD,  etc.)
☐  Cooperative Group  (SWOG, GOG, etc.)
☐  Other - Please specify:     
Funding
There is no funder for this study. The UH Department of Orthopaedic  Surgery  will cover any 
necessary costs for  this study.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577936]  been  the preferred analgesic 
postoperatively in orthopaedic surgery.  However, these agents are associated with several side 
effects, including nausea/vomiting, constipation, and somnolence. In addition, opi[INVESTIGATOR_453154] 
a significant  potential for abuse  in comparison to non-narcotic analgesics.  In light of the rising 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_453155], surgeons must  explore  alternate 
pain modalities in the acute postoperative  period. Ketorolac (trade name:  [CONTACT_453187]) is an NSAID 
with analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties.[ADDRESS_577937] not been 
described. 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
At University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], patients  in the practices  of the orthopaedic investigators meeting the 
below inclusion  and exclusion criteria will be  eligible for enrollment in  this investigation.   
Patients will be  evaluated for potential inclusion  in the  office  setting  during pre-operative 
discussion. Patients will be evaluated for exclusion criteria before enrollment. The patient’s  past 
medical history  will be evaluated for  contraindications to ketorolac and  the other  exclusion  
criteria. A patient’s medical record and the pre-operative history form  will be reviewed to  ensure  
the patient does not meet any of the exclusion criteria. The patient will also  be questioned prior  
to enrollment about having any of the  conditions in the exclusion criteria  using the questions on 
the patient enrollment  form created  for this study (see “Other  Documents” in Sparta submission).
 
Inclusion Criteria
1.Patients between  the ages of 18 and 89 years old, male or female
2.Patients undergoing primary shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff  repair
3.
4.
Exclusion Criteria
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  3 of 261.Patients below  the age of 18 or above the age  of 89
2.Illiterate or non-English speaking patients
3.Patients with contraindications  to Ketorolac
4.History of  alcohol  of drug abuse
5.Chronic use of analgesic or psychotropic  drugs
6.Known peptic ulcer disease  or bleeding  diathesis
7.Renal dysfunction
Number of Research Participants
We are seeking  to enroll 43 patients in this single-center study.
Vulnerable Populations
1.Indicate specifically if you will include each  of the  following  special populations  by 
[CONTACT_61951]:
☐  Adults unable to consent
☐  Minors (infants, children, teenagers) 
☐  Wards of the state
☐  Foster Children
☐  Pregnant Women 
☐  Neonates
☐  Neonates  of Uncertain Viability
☒  Employees of  CWRU or  UHHS
☐  Prisoners
☐  Illiterate  Individuals
☐  Non-English Speaking
☐  University Students
☐  None
2.If excluding pregnant  women, illiterate or non-English speaking individuals, provide a 
scientific rationale for the  exclusion.  Inconvenience or cost is  not an acceptable rationale .
Pregnant women  are unlikely to  undergo  any elective operative procedures, as such the 
authors do not believe they will encounter pregnant  patients during  the study. In order to 
appropriate study data collection, patients must have  the ability  to comprehend the study 
procedure as  defined in the consent form, while being able to objectively identify their 
pain and record analgesic requirements in the  post-operative period.  Due to concern  that 
patients may not fully understand study procedure  or the requirements  for post-operative 
pain control recording, illiterate and non-English speaking study subjects will be excluded. 
3.If the research involves individuals that  are included in a vulnerable population, describe 
the additional  safeguards included  to protect  the rights and welfare of the individuals for 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577938]  
will result from employee or student refusal to participate.  As such, employees  and 
students will be included as study candidates.   
Recruitment Methods 
Note: Attach all applicable recruitment  materials to the last section of  the Smart form under 
“Recruitment Materials.”
1.Which of  the following methods will be used to recruit  research participants. – Select all 
that apply
☐  Email
☐  Phone call
☐  Letter
☐  Advertisement (e.g., poster, flyer,  etc.)
☐  Social media
☒  Other. Please specify:  
Patients will only be  approached about study enrollment in the outpatient  clinics of the 
orthopaedic investigators after they have agreed to undergo arthroscopic rotator cuff  
surgery as part of the  standard of care for  their rotator cuff pathology.   
2.Describe when, where,  and how potential research participants  will be  recruited.  
Following appropriate referral to one of the  orthopaedic investigators, patients will be 
evaluated in the  clinic setting.  Appropriate imaging  will be  obtained  and then reviewed  
to determine if the  patient’s pathology meets  appropriate criteria  to be treated  using a  
shoulder arthroscopic  rotator cuff repair and if the  patient meets appropriate 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  These  interactions will all occur in  the pre-operative period.  
3.Describe the source (e.g., from  what department, EMR, etc.) of the research participants.
The source of patients  will be  from the practices of the Drs. Gillespie, Karns, Voos, and  
Salata.
4.Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential research  participants.
Patients will be  evaluated for potential inclusion  in the  research  study based  on meeting 
the above inclusion/exclusion criteria.  Patient must be between the ages of 18 to 89, and presenting with shoulder  pathology amendable to shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577939] access  to? 
The orthopaedic investigators included in this  investigation receives dozens  of consults  
every week  for orthopaedic injuries to the shoulder  and pain secondary to rotator cuff 
disease that require operative intervention.   As such, the investigators will have access to 
more than the required number of research  participants  required to appropriately power 
this investigation.   
Setting
The research will be  conducted at University  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453156], UH Westlake 
Health Center, UH Cleveland  Medical  Center,  and UH Richmond Medical Center. Recruitment  
will occur in the office setting of the  orthopaedic investigators in  outpatient clinics. The primary 
research location for University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453157]  ([ADDRESS_577940]., Cleveland, OH, [ZIP_CODE]), UH Ahuja  Medical Center ([ADDRESS_577941].,  
Beachwood, OH,  [ZIP_CODE]) or UH Westlake Health  Center ([ADDRESS_577942]., Westlake, Ohio 
[ZIP_CODE]). 
Consent Process
1. Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent:
☒  Yes ☐  No
If yes, answer the  following questions:  
1.Describe where the consent process will take  place:
  
2.The time  that will  be devoted  to the consent discussion: 
3.Any waiting period available between informing  the prospective  subject  and 
obtaining the  consent: 
4.Steps  that will be  taken to ensure the  research  participants’ understanding:  
5.Any process to ensure ongoing consent: 
6.The role  of the individuals listed in the application  as being involved  in the 
consent process: 
7.Steps  that will be  taken to minimize the possibility  of coercion  or undue influence 
to the subjects: 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577943]-operative  time will  be experienced based on the 
patient’s decision. Investigators  obtaining  consent will ensure adequate understanding 
by [CONTACT_453169]. All patients who enroll in  the study will sign their  
consent form in the presence  of a UH IRB-approved study team member.
2. Indicate if you will be asking for  a waiver  or alteration of consent process or  
documentation (consent will not be obtained,  written  consent  will not be 
documented)
☒  Yes ☐  No
If yes, indicate  which part of the consent process  you are  requesting to be waiver or  
altered and  the rationale  for requesting the waiver or alteration.
☐  I will obtain  consent,  but not participant’s signature
☒  I will obtain  consent,  but request  a waiver for pre-screening purposes
☐  I will obtain  consent, but request  a waiver of some  of the elements of consent 
                  (e.g. use of deception)
☐  I will not obtain consent  and I am requesting a full waiver of consent
1.Give the rationale for  the request of a waiver or alteration of the consent  process 
or documentation:       
A consent waiver is requested for prescreening purposes, only.  Subjects will sign a consent form to participate in the research study.
2.Explain how  the research involves no more  than minimal risk    
The risks to patients enrolled in this study are minimal.  All  patients scheduled for 
elective shoulder  arthroscopic rotator  cuff repair undergo pre-operative testing  to 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577944] the rights 
and welfare of the participants:    
All patients who  enroll  in the study will sign a consent form to  participate. The 
waiver is requested for  screening the  patients to ensure they satisfy the inclusion 
criteria and do  not meet any of  the exclusion criteria.  
4.Explain why  the research could  not practicably be carried  out without the waiver 
or alteration of consent.    
Patients will eventually  sign  a consent  to formally  enroll in the study. However, 
the investigators need to be able  to evaluate  patients’ eligibility for the study 
before discussing the  procedures of it with them to obtain consent. Specifically, 
the investigators will pre-screen patients  to ensure they are  a candidate for 
arthroscopic rotator cuff surgery, do not have contraindications to ketorolac,  and 
fulfill the inclusion criteria of the study.
5.If you will obtain  consent, but not document consent in  writing (e.g. over  the 
phone, verbally, electronic survey,  etc.),  please describe and provide a rationale.  
   ☒  N/A 
6.Describe how  you will be documenting  that a research participant has consented:      
They will  be signing  a consent form to participate. All of  the consent forms for 
patients from this study will be  stored in the office of the Principal Investigator,  
Robert Gillespie, M.D., Hanna House 6, Room 542, [ADDRESS_577945]. Cleveland, Ohio.
*Be sure to upload a consent script or information  sheet with your study  protocol
Additional Considerations for Consent Process with Adults  
Non-English Speakers (Please select one)
☒  I am not  enrolling non-English speaking individuals in this research study. The following is 
justification for  why non-English  speaking  individuals  cannot  be enrolled: 
Due to concern  that non-English speakers may not have a reliable, medically  trained  and 
approved interpreter  present, the study will not involve non-English speakers  as it is the  
preference of  the investigations  that all patients  have a comprehensive understanding of the study 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577946]-operative requirements.   As none  of the investigators speak Spanish or any 
other language fluently,  only English speaking  patients will be  enrolled.
☐  I will be targeting non-English speaking  adults
1.Describe the process to ensure that  the oral and  written  information provided to  those  
research participants will be in that language during  initial consent  as well as throughout 
the study. 
2.List the language(s)  other than English that will be targeted:   
☐  I am not  targeting non-English speaking  individuals. If a  non-English  speaking individual  is 
eligible for the trial, we will use the following procedures to enroll: 
1.Describe the process to ensure that  the oral and  written  information provided to  those  
research participants will be in that language during  initial consent  as well as throughout 
the study. 
2.List the language(s)  other than English that will be targeted:
Adults Unable  to Consent
☒  I am not  enrolling adults unable  to consent  in this research  study  – please  leave the rest of    
this section blank.
☐  There  is an anticipated direct  benefit to the subject.  Explain: 
☐  There  is NOT  an anticipated direct benefit to the subject. Explain: 
1.Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent.
2.List the individuals from  whom permission will be  obtained  in order of priority (e.g.  
durable power of attorney  for health care, court appointed guardian for health  care 
decisions, spouse,  and adult child). 
3.For research  conducted outside of  the state, provide information that describes which 
individuals are authorized under applicable  law to consent on behalf of a  prospective  
subject to their participation in the procedure(s) involved in the research.
☐  N/A 
4.Describe the process for assent  of the research participants. Indicate:
Which subjects  that are unable  to consent will be  required to  give  assent? If not  all, 
explain why. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  9 of 26Describe whether assent of the  research  participants  will be documented and the 
process to document assent. 
☐The subject  will be informed about  the research to the extent  compatible with the 
subject’s understanding.
☐   Subjects will be closely  monitored.
☐  The subject  will be withdrawn if they  appear unduly distressed.
Research Participants Who Are Not Yet  Adults (infants, children, teenagers)
☒  I am not enrolling participants who are not yet adults in  this research study. – please leave the  
rest of this section blank
1.Will parental permission  be obtained from :
☐  One  parent even if the  other parent is alive, known,  competent, reasonably 
available, and  shares legal responsibility for the care and  custody  of the child
☐  Both parents  unless one parent  is deceased, unknown,  incompetent, or not  
reasonably available, or when only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child
☐  Waiver  of parental permission
2.Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provide  permission. Describe  the process  used to  
determine these individuals’ authority to consent to each child’s  participation  in 
research. 
3.Indicate whether assent will be  obtained from all, some, or none  of the children. If 
assent will be  obtained from some children, indicate  which  children will be required to  
assent. 
4.When assent of children  is obtained,  describe how it will be documented.
5.For children who are pregnant, describe how assent and  permission are  obtained.
☐  N/A 
6.Describe how  the risk is justified  by [CONTACT_453170].
7.Describe how  the anticipated risk-to-benefit ratio  is at least as favorable  to the subjects 
as that presented by [CONTACT_453171].
Sharing of Results with Research Participants
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  10 of 26☒  Results  will not  be shared with research participants
☒  Results  will not  be shared with research participants’ doctors
Study Design
This is  a prospective randomized clinical study that involves studying ketorolac  as an  adjuvant  
pain medication for  arthroscopic rotator  cuff surgery  patients. All  patients enrolled  in this study 
will receive  the standard pain control protocol before, during,  and after surgery. This includes a  
1) a regional block  during the pre-operative period, 2), IV Dexamethasone and IV  Odansetron 
during surgery, and 3) analgesics (as directed by [CONTACT_453172]) in the PACU. Both groups 
will also receive  the standard of  care discharge pain  medication for arthroscopic  rotator cuff 
repair: oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325 (1-2  tablets PO q4-6h PRN for moderate to  severe  pain 
#28 tabs). 
Patients will be  randomized into one of two groups. Group [ADDRESS_577947] of  care pain protocol  before, during,  and after surgery but  will also 
receive an intraoperative dose of IV ketorolac at  the completion of the procedure  and oral 
ketorolac on discharge (10mg PO  q6 x3 days).  Patients  will record their pain levels, oxycodone-
acetaminophen 5-[ADDRESS_577948]-operative appointment.  Participation in this study will not  require  any 
additional visits to the  surgeon’s office or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453158]- and  post-operative  
appointments. 
Study Procedures
1. All patients  scheduled to undergo  elective shoulder arthroscopic  rotator cuff repair identified 
in the office of one of the  orthopaedic investigations will undergo the process of obtaining  
consent prior to surgery.  The consent form will be reviewed in depth with an IRB approved-
member of  the research  team, all questions answered, and written consent obtained by [CONTACT_453173]  a full understanding of the 
investigation and their role in the  study.  The patient’s home medications will be reviewed, and  
any potential drug-drug interactions will be discussed with  the patient.    
2.  As part of the  standard of care,  patients undergoing elective shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff  
repair will undergo  pre-operative testing to ensure  patients are optimized for surgery  from  a 
medical perspective. During the  pre-operative testing period, the  standard blood draw  taken  as 
part of the standard  of care, utilizing no more of  the patient’s time or blood than generally  
performed if the patient  were not enrolled  in the investigation. Before surgery  patients will fill  
out the following  patient reported outcome metrics:  Visual Analogue Score (VAS),  American  
Shoulder and  Elbow Surgery (ASES), and Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation (SANE). 
These questionnaires should only take  patients  5 to 10 minutes to  complete.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577949] of care pain protocol  for arthroscopic rotator  cuff repair surgery, which 
consists of: 1) a  regional block during the  pre-operative period, 2),  IV Dexamethasone and IV 
Odansetron during surgery, and 3)  analgesics  (as directed by [CONTACT_101034]) in  the PACU.  
Both groups  will also receive the standard of care  discharge pain medications for arthroscopic 
rotator cuff repair: oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325 (1-2 tablets PO q4-6h PRN for moderate  to 
severe pain #28 tabs). Group [ADDRESS_577950] of care  pain 
protocol on the day of surgery  and an intraoperative dose of IV ketorolac at the completion of 
surgery (dosing individualized by [CONTACT_453174]). Group [ADDRESS_577951] 
of care discharge pain medications and scheduled oral  ketorolac  (10mg  PO q6 x3 days). In 
addition, Group 2 will receive a prescription for omeprazole (20 mg PO, once  per day x3 days) 
to take for 3 days after surgery to decrease  their  risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_453159]. A  1:1 
randomization ratio  will be used (an equal number of patients will be placed in  each group). 
Patients will then  undergo  standard  shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff  repair  with one of the 
surgical investigators. Prior to discharge, all patients  will be provided a handout on safely using 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]. Patients in both Group 1 and Group 2 will receive all their  medications  on the day  of 
surgery. 
4. Following discharge from the ambulatory surgery center, patients in Group  1 and Group  2 will 
be asked  to document their VAS pain  scores at 6 hour intervals (morning, afternoon, and 
evening) for five days in a  journal administered to them  at the time of study enrollment. They 
will also be asked to record the number  of oxycodone-acetaminophen  5-325 pi[INVESTIGATOR_453160]. At the  end of each day,  patients will be asked to 
document the  following  adverse effects:  nausea, vomiting, somnolence, dizziness, headache, 
pain, pruritis,  other  in their journal. All patients  in Group [ADDRESS_577952] the number  of ketorolac pi[INVESTIGATOR_453161].  To ensure safety, all 
patients assigned to Group 2 will receive  a form outlining the  common  and serious side  effects  of 
Ketorolac and  specific  instructions for  when they should  call their  doctor  or go to  the emergency  
room. All patients  who receive rotator cuff  repair surgery at UH are instructed  to call their 
surgeon’s office if they feel their pain is not controlled at home  after surgery. 
5. Patients in Group [ADDRESS_577953] of  care for range of 
motion to the operative  shoulder, pain levels, strength and  questioned regarding functionality of 
the operative shoulder. In the setting of a  complication (wound  breakdown, infection), patient 
information will be  recorded and communicated using university  password  protected email  to 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577954]  and second follow-up  clinic 
appointments after  surgery patients will fill out the  following patient reported outcome metrics: 
VAS, ASES,  and SANE questionnaires. The  first appointment is about [ADDRESS_577955]-operative appointment  
their participation in the study will be complete.
8. The investigators  will also review  the patient’s  medical record up to [ADDRESS_577956]-operative complications (wound  breakdown, infection) and 
if they had been re-admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453162].
Study Timeline
Patients are evaluated in the orthopaedic  investigators’ outpatient clinics for shoulder pathology.  
If a patient’s condition is amenable to arthroscopic shoulder surgery and  they  elect  to undergo 
the procedure they will be approached for participation in this  study. This  evaluation and 
discussion of the surgical procedure should take 10-15 minutes. The  time for enrolling a patient  
should take 10  minutes with  5 minutes for  patients’  questions. Therefore, an outpatient visit for a 
patient enrolling this  study would take 25-[ADDRESS_577957]  received  for their prescription pain medication. Patients  will be 
asked to complete a  follow-up MRI at six months  postoperative.  
Radiation and Radioactive Substances
1.Does  the research involve the  use of radiation  or radioactive substances?
☐  Yes     ☒  No – you may  delete  the rest of this section
If yes, answer the following questions.
2.Is the radiation use only for the  purposes of the research study (e.g. over and  above  
standard of  care)
☐  Yes     ☐  No
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577958] 
receive Radiation Safety  Committee (RSC) approval.  You can  obtain RSC  approval  by [CONTACT_453175]: “Radiation Safety Committee Application” which  can be found in the templates 
section of SpartaIRB. Then use the “Manage Ancillary  Reviews” button to send to “Radiation 
Safety.” You can find the  template section of SpartaIRB by  [CONTACT_453176], clicking  on 
“Library” and then clicking on the “Templates” tab.
3.Does  the protocol use radionuclides?
☐  Yes     ☐  No
4.Provide justification for the additional  risk associated with the research radiation use.
ClinicalTrials.gov Information
There are no plans to register this study  on ClinicalTrials.gov  because it does not involve clinical 
investigation of an  experimental therapy.
List of Data to  be Collected
Note: If using REDCap, all selected identifiers  below must be indicated as PHI.
Indicate what identifiers you will collect
☒  Name
☐  Address (e.g., Zip  code, other geographical designation, etc.)
☒  Dates related to  an individual (e.g.,  Date of admission, birth, surgery, etc.)
☒  Telephone  number
☐  Fax number
☒  Email address
☐  Social security number
☒  Medical record number
☐  Health plan  beneficiary number
☐  Account number
☐  Certificate/license number
☐  Any vehicle  or other  device serial
☐  Device  identifiers or serial  numbers
☐  Web URL
☐  Internet  protocol (IP) address
☐  Finger or  voice  prints
☐  Photographic  images
☐ Other: Any characteristic that would uniquely identify the individual
List all other data to be collected for the research study (e.g. laboratory values, physician  
notes, length of stay, etc.) 
Pre-operative diagnosis
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  14 of 26Mechanism of injury/disease, if relevant
Narcotic pain  medication and  side effects in patient journal (number of opi[INVESTIGATOR_453163])
Pre- and post-operative scores for  the following
a.Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System  (PROMIS)
b.Visual Analog  (VAS)
c.American Shoulder and Elbow Surgery (ASES)
d.Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation  (SANE)
Complications after  surgery, such as wound breakdown, infection, etc.
If the patient was re-admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_265453]
Post-operative MRI results
Data Analysis  Plan
Statistically significant  differences  in patient demographics and comorbidities between Group [ADDRESS_577959]  will be utilized 
to compare  the differences  in mean  VAS scores and narcotics utilization between the  two groups 
at each time point.  Linear  regression models will be utilized to identify trends over  time. 
Descriptive analyses  (e.g.,  percentages) will be used to report qualitative  data  as appropriate.  
The minimal  clinically important  difference  in VAS  scores is [ADDRESS_577960] deviation in 
VAS scores  was 11 points.6 Using this data, our  power analysis showed  that, with an alpha of 
0.05 and 90% power, we  would need  34 patients, or 17 per  group, to  achieve adequate power.  
However, to account for a 20% dropout rate we will recruit for 43 patients. Power analysis was performed using G*Power  [IP_ADDRESS].
The primary endpoint of this study is VAS pain scores and  number of  narcotic medications 
consumed. Secondary scores include PROIS, VAS, ASES, SANE scores.  
Confidentiality of Specimens and Banking
Are you storing the  specimen(s) for future  use for other research projects?
☒  I am not  collecting specimens in this research project  – you  may  delete  the rest of this 
section
☒  I am not  storing specimens in this research  project  – you may delete the rest of  this 
section
☐  Yes
☐  No
If yes, describe:
1.The source of the  specimens:      
2.Where the  specimens will be stored:      
3.How long the  specimens will be stored:     
4.How the specimens will be labeled:      
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  15 of 265.How the specimens will be accessed:       
6.Who will have access to the specimens:       
7.When and how will the specimens  be destroyed:      
8.How will the specimens be transported? (Please  note if  transporting specimens, a  
Material Transfer Agreement  (MTA) is required)
     
9.The procedures to release specimens including:
The process to request a  release:   
Approvals  required  for a release:     
Who can obtain specimens:      
The data to be provided  with  specimens,  including if  the data will be identifiable  to 
others:   
  
☐  For genomic  data, please  check  the box to attest there is no master list and  no attempt 
will be made to re-identify the specimens.     
Confidentiality of Data
1.To maintain the confidentiality of the data:
☒  I will use  a unique  study  identifier  (not derived from the participants’ personal 
identifiers) to  code individuals’ data  and I will store this ID log separate from study 
data.
☒  Other (please explain)
Data collected from subjects participating  in the study will be immediately protected as each 
subject will be assigned a number  based  on their enrollment and the institution  in which they 
were enrolled  that will in no way  correspond  to any  pertinent data relating to  the subject’s 
protected health information. Following the results of lab studies  and follow up appointments, all  
data will be entered electronically into RedCap software. Electronic copi[INVESTIGATOR_453164]’s investigators office.  Data will be 
accessed by [CONTACT_453177].    Data  will be assessed for completeness, accuracy  
and per strict adherence to the approved protocol by [CONTACT_453178] (LS) and during  bi-
monthly meetings  with  the investigative team  who will be  responsible  for data  protection using 
files on only protected hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453165].  In addition, monitoring of the data by [CONTACT_453179]-monthly meeting in which the standards and  rules of the  protocol will be reviewed  to ensure that all  regulations set forth in the 
confidentiality agreement are met and complete.  Following the complete  data  transfer 
electronically, all documentation  will be properly disposed of to ensure complete participant 
protection of  information.  Following the conclusion of the study, all  documentation will be 
disposed of  while maintaining patient  confidentiality for 3 years following study closure per UH 
policy.  
2.How are you  storing your electronic data?
☒  UH Redcap  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  16 of 26☐  CWRU Redcap  
☐  CWRU’s SRE  (Secure Research Environment)
☐  CWRU Box☐  OnCore☒  UH Secure  Network Drive
☐  CWRU Secure  Network Drive
☐  Other -  List storage method and provide  justification:
3.☒  I acknowledge  that paper research  data and documents will be stored  in a double-
      locked secure environment in the  following location: 
            Location: ☐  The  Office of Robert J. Gillespie, Hanna House 6, Room 542, 
[ADDRESS_577961].  Cleveland, Ohio.
4.Will data be shared?
☐  N/A
☒  No  
☐  Yes 
List the exact data elements that will be shared:
1.
Describe how  data will be sent: 
 (Please note: if sharing  data, please contact  [CONTACT_453180].)
No data will be  shared  outside  of the IRB-approved investigators.  
HIPAA Authorization 
If you are going to be accessing PHI (Protected Health Information),  indicate how  HIPAA 
authorization will be  obtained (check all  that apply):
☐  HIPAA  authorization is in the consent form
☒  Requesting a  full or partial waiver of HIPAA for prescreening
☐  Requesting a  full or partial waiver of HIPAA
1.Describe why  the study cannot be completed without the specified identifiable 
information. 
In addition  to measuring patient’s  pain  levels in response to  the intra-operative pain 
control protocol we are investigating, a central  aim of  the study is  to follow  these  patients 
during their post-operative course and  track  their  clinical progress and  any complications 
that would arise.  Therefore,  patients’ identifiable information to follow  their outcomes 
post-operatively is  necessary.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  17 of 262.If the identifiable information  will be used  or disclosed by [CONTACT_453181], please state who those  individuals/entities are and provide justification for the 
disclosure. 
☒  Identifiable information will not be used or disclosed by [CONTACT_453182] 
☐  Identifiable information will be used or disclosed  to: 
3.Describe how  long identifiers will be kept for  in relation to  study length and  data 
collection and analysis. 
3 years per UH policy
☒  I assure that  protected health  information collected for purposes of this research  study will 
not be reused or disclosed to any other  person or entity, except as required by [CONTACT_2371], for 
authorized oversight  of the research study, or for other research  for which  the use of  
disclosure of protected health  information  for which an authorization or opportunity  to 
agree or object is not required by [ADDRESS_577962] the reasonably foreseeable  risks such as  breach  of confidentiality, discomforts, 
hazards, or inconveniences to the research participants related to their participation in the research. Include a  description of the probability,  magnitude, duration,  and reversibility 
of the risks.  Include the physical  psychological, social, legal, and economic  risks . 
All patients scheduled for  elective shoulder arthroscopic rotator cuff repair undergo pre-
operative testing to ensure they are medically optimized  for surgery. Patients  with  
contraindications to Ketorolac will not be enrolled  in the study:
Previous allergic  reaction to Ketorolac
History of any  of the following: peptic  ulcer disease, gastrointestinal bleeding, or 
perforation of the stomach or bowel
Having experienced an asthma,  urticarial, or a  allergic-type reactions after taking aspi[INVESTIGATOR_453166]
History of kidney  disease or kidney failure
History of a  brain bleed
History of a  bleeding disorder
Currently taking  the medication probenecid
Currently taking  the medication pentoxifylline
The investigators will ensure no patient with contraindications to  Ketorolac  are enrolled via the 
following: 1)  the patient’s past medical history in their electronic medical record and  pre-
operative history  form  will be evaluated  for contraindications  to ketorolac, and 2) the patient will 
be questioned prior to enrollment  about  having any of the conditions that are contraindications to 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  18 of 26Ketorolac using  the patient enrollment form created  for this study (see “Other Documents” in 
Sparta submission). 
Common non-serious side effects  of Ketorolac:
Nausea, stomach pain,  indigestion, diarrhea
Dizziness, drowsiness
Headache
Swelling
Serious side effects of Ketorolac:
Gastrointestinal problems: ulcers, bleeding,  or peforation
Hemorrhage
Impaired renal function
Impaired liver  function
Allergic or  anaphylactoid  reaction
Anemia
Ketorolac, like  other NSAIDs, may cause serious cardiovascular side effects, such as 
myocardial infarction or stroke, which  may result in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_453167],  and will be given two informative handouts 
on taking ketorolac and its  side effects (see  “Other  Documents”  in Sparta submission). These 
handouts also have  instructions for when patients  should call  their  surgeon’s office or seek 
immediate medical assistance. In addition, all  patients  enrolled  in this study will receive a phone  
call on Day 2 after surgery  to ensure they are filling out their pain diary. Patients  who received 
ketorolac will  also be  questioned about having  any side  effects  of ketorolac.
Patients who receive  Omeprazole will only be  taking it for  3 days after surgery while they are  
taking Ketorolac.  There are no known interactions  between Omeprazole and Ketorolac.
Common non-serious side effects  of Omeprazole:
Headaches
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Stomach pain
Constipation
Fatigue
Serious side effects of Omeprazole:
Serious allergic  reaction – skin rash, wheezing, throat swelling, trouble  breathing,  
Liver problems  – yellow skin, dark urine,  and fatigue
Also, enrollment in the  investigation does increase  the risk for  breach of confidentiality during 
subject enrollment in study.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  19 of 26MRI risks:
A known risk is that the  magnet could attract certain  kinds of metal that  may cause  injury to the 
subject. Subjects  will be  asked about metal within their body (this includes certain dyes used in 
tattoos and body  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2982]). If there is any question about potentially  hazardous metal within 
their body,  they will not be able  to participate in this portion of the research study. We  will also  
keep the MRI room  locked so that no one  carrying metal objects  enters  the room  while the  scan  
is being performed. In addition, the MRI scanner makes a  loud  buzzing noise  that could affect 
hearing ability. Subjects will be provided  with  earplugs and assistance  in their use in order to  
protect hearing.
2.If applicable,  indicate  which experimental procedures may have risks  to the research  
participants that are currently unforeseeable. 
☒  N/A  
No unforeseen risks are anticipated  outside  of the risks documented in  the prior section.
3.If applicable,  describe the risks to others who are not  research participants. 
☒  N/A 
No risks are  anticipated to individuals outside of the  research investigation.
4.Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that research participants might need. 
☐  N/A 
No such  resources are likely to be  required, however patients  will be instructed to  call the office 
of the operative surgeon with any questions or concerns during  the study  period,  however  this is 
standard of  care based on whether the patient  is involved in the  research study or not. 
Additional Considerations for Pregnant  Women: 
5.Indicate which procedures may have risks to an embryo or fetus  should the research  
participant or  their partner be or become pregnant. 
☒  N/A   
☐  Each individual  providing  consent  is fully informed regarding the  reasonably 
foreseeable impact of the research  on the  fetus or neonate.
☐  No inducements, monetary or otherwise, will be offered to  terminate a pregnancy.
☐  Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  any decisions as to the timing, 
method, or  procedures  used to terminate a pregnancy.
☐  Individuals engaged  in the  research  will have no part in  determining the viability of a 
neonate. 
Provisions to Protect  the Privacy  Interests of Research Participan ts
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/[ADDRESS_577963] documentation will be stored within the locked  file 
cabinet in the investigators office  after being transferred onto electronic files protected by 
[CONTACT_412860].  All documentation  will be disposed of at  the end of the study to ensure  confidentiality  
is maintained.  In addition, participants and their information will not be  discussed  in any public  
areas or with any  medical  or non-medical personnel not directly  involved with  and approved  as 
an active investigative member of the  research  study.  
Potential Benefit to Research Participants
☒  There  is potential benefit to research participants.
1.Describe the potential benefits  that individual research participants  may experience from  
taking part in the research. Include  the probability, magnitude, and duration  of the  
potential benefits.
There is no guaranteed direct  benefit from participating in the study. All  subjects undergoing  
surgery will benefit from  the known effects of shoulder arthroscopic  rotator cuff repair 
following surgery whether or not they  are enrolled in the  study.   Possible benefit  of the 
research is patients could experience increased  pain relief, compared  to standard pain control 
protocols, after surgery from receiving  intra-operative  IV and  PO Ketorolac. This  will make 
their post-op  period more comfortable. 
☐  There  is no direct benefit to research participants.
2.If no direct benefit, state the potential benefit to society or others. Do not list compensation. 
Withdrawal of Research Participants
☐  N/A 
Patients can withdraw at any  point  during  the study period.  Patients will be  withdrawn if  they  
fail to appropriately follow up in the post-operative period. If  a patient withdraws from the study 
before their  surgery, they  will proceed with their shoulder arthroscopic  rotator cuff repair and 
clinical follow-up, and no further data will be  collected on them. If a  patient withdraws during 
the post-operative  period, then no more  follow-up data will be collected past their  withdrawal 
date.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  21 of 26Alternatives to Participation
☐  The alternative is  for research subjects not to participate.
Patients may elect to proceed with arthroscopic  shoulder rotator cuff repair with  the standard  of 
care postoperative pain  regiment oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325  (1-2 tabs PO q4-6h PRN 
moderate to severe pain #28 tabs))
Arthroscopic repair is a well-established  treatment  option for patients with rotator  cuff 
pathology. Therefore, if their  surgeon has recommended they receive arthroscopic repair, it will 
be because the surgeon believes  it is the best treatment option for their condition, not  for research 
purposes. If a  patient elects to withdraw  from the  Ketorolac arm, they will simply be asked to 
discontinue use of Ketorolac and continue with the use of oxycodone-acetaminophen 5-325. Since this is the standard of care there is no alternative treatment to  list in  the consent.
Costs to  Research  Participants
☐  There  are no costs to research participants or their insurance companies (there are  no clinical  
visits or  billable  procedures). – You may delete the rest of  the section.
1. Describe what costs research participants will be responsible for as a result of their  
participation in  the research, including but not limited to: clinical services required by [CONTACT_139871], transportation  to study visits, parking,  costs of drugs,  cost 
of therapy,  lost broken or stolen devices, etc.  
2. Explain who  will be  responsible for payment of provided services in the event of insurance 
denials. 
3. List what procedures,  drugs, devices,  supplies will be paid by [CONTACT_139872]. List the  other funding source.
There are not sufficient funds within our department to cover the cost of ketorolac and omeprazole for patients randomized  into Group 2. As such, the patient’s insurance company will 
be responsible  for the cost  of ketorolac  and omeprazole. However,  ketorolac is a  generic drug 
that is commonly utilized  both  within and outside of Orthopaedics. Patients will ultimately be 
responsible if the  insurance company does not pay, and for any  associated  co-pay. Paying  for 
Ketorolac and  Omeprazole will be discussed  with the patient in clinic during  the consent process. 
The six-month MRI  costs will be covered  through the research fund  of the principal investigator.  
Research Participant  Compensation
☒  There  is no compensation or reimbursement for research participants.
☐  There  is compensation for research participants.  
Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of  any incentives or  
compensation that research participants will  receive for participation in  the research (e.g., 
gift cards or  cash with amount, t-shirts,  devices, bags, swag,  etc.)
☐  There  will be  reimbursement for research participants. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  22 of 26Describe the schedule, payment method, and payment total of  any reimbursement  that 
research participants will receive for participation in the research  (e.g.,  gift cards or  cash 
with amount, etc.)
Compensation for Research Related Injury
Describe who  will pay  for the costs of medical treatment and/or compensation in  the event of a 
research related injury:
☐  Funding agency is  providing some/all payment for injury
☒  Funding agency is  providing no payment for  injury
☐  N/A
Provisions to Monitor the  Data to Ensure the  Safety  of Research  Participants
1.Describe how  often  the data will be  monitored for completeness, accuracy  and adherence 
to the protocol.
Data collected from subjects participating  in the study will be immediately protected as 
each subject will be assigned a number that will in no way correspond to  any pertinent 
data relating to the  subject’s protected health information.  Following  collection of data 
from questionnaires and pain journals,  the orthopaedic resident will collect all 
documentation and after being entered  electronically behind  RedCap  software,  will be 
placed within  the locked file cabinets located within the primary investigators office.  
Data will be accessed  by [CONTACT_453183].   Data will be assessed for 
completeness, accuracy and per strict  adherence  to the approved  protocol  by [CONTACT_453184]-monthly meetings  with the investigative team who 
will be responsible  for data  protection  using files on only protected hospi[INVESTIGATOR_406613].   
In addition,  monitoring  of the data by [CONTACT_453185]-monthly meeting in which the standards and  rules of the 
protocol will be reviewed to ensure that all regulations set forth  in the confidentiality 
agreement are  met and complete.   Following the complete  data  transfer electronically, all  
documentation will be properly  disposed of  to ensure complete participant  protection  of 
information.  Following the conclusion  of the study, all information  and hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_453168] a locked file cabinet located  within the primary investigators office per 
UH policy.
2.Indicate if there will be a  Data and Safety  Monitoring Board  or Committee:
☒  There  will not be  a formal Data and Safety Monitoring  Board/Committee.
☐  There  will be  a formal Data  and Safety Monitoring Board/Committee. 
Provide information about the DSMB/C including  the contact [CONTACT_441423](s) (as applicable); whether it is independent  from the study sponsor; how  often it 
meets; the type of data that will be used; written reports, etc.
As stated above, data will  be monitored during a bi-monthly  research meeting with  the 
investigative team.  
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  23 of 26Drugs or Devices
☐  This is not a drug or device study. The protocol is considered  non-therapeutic (non-therapeutic 
is defined as research not intended  to diagnose, prevent, cure, mitigate, treat, etc. a disease  or 
condition) by  [CONTACT_1622].  – You  may delete the rest of this  section.
OR
☒ This is a drug or device  study. The protocol  is considered therapeutic (research  intended to 
diagnose, prevent, cure,  mitigate, treat a disease  or condition)  by [CONTACT_1622]. 
1.Is there  an active IND (Investigational New Drug) or IDE (Investigational Device Exemption) 
for the proposed clinical  research study?
☐ Yes, provide  an official letter of support or proof of approval which identifies the 
IND/IDE holder and IND/IDE  number.  Please attach this in  the SpartaIRB smartform
☒  No, see question below:
2.Is the drug IND exempt OR is the device  (and its use) a non-significant risk device for the 
proposed study design?
☐  Yes, please identify the authorized party who made the determination and provide  
supporting documentation as applicable.
☒ No NOTE: either  an active IND/IDE or an exemption would  be required for 
investigational product use  in a therapeutic  protocol.
☐  N/A
Ketorolac is  an FDA-approved drug for  pain relief.
3.If the research involves drug(s) or device(s), describe your plans to store, handle, administer 
and track those  drug(s) or device(s)  to ensure that they will be used only on research  
participants and be used  only  by [CONTACT_441424].
Patients will be  provided  IV and oral ketorolac  during  the study. The IV  ketorolac will be 
provided by [CONTACT_453186].  The study 
investigators will provide  patients with a prescription for the oral ketorolac,  which  they may fill 
at a pharmacy of their choice.
Additional Information
Directions: If  you have any additional information  regarding your study not  covered in the 
template, please include  it here.
Community-Based Participatory Research
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  24 of 26☒  This is  not a community-based participatory research project  – please leave the rest of  this 
section blank
☐  This is  a community-based  participatory  research project
Describe the involvement  of the community  in the design and conduct  of the research.
Note: Community based research is research that is conducted as an equal partnership between academic investigators and members of a community. In Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) protects, the  community participates fully in all  aspects  of the research 
process.  
International information
☒  This is  not an international study  – you may  delete the rest of  this section.
☐  We will be  conducting this research at the following international sites:
1.
☐  We are  recruiting participants outside of the US from the following locations:
1.
☐  We are  sending data outside of the US to the following  locations:
1.
☐  We are  receiving  data from outside of the  US from the following locations:
1.
MULTI-SITE RESEARCH (when  UH or CWRU is the IRB of  Record)
Does this project have multiple sites?
☐  Yes
☒  No – please leave the  rest of this section blank
Non-Local Site Information for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, list the following information  for 
each relying  site:
1.Name [CONTACT_441431]:  
2.PI [INVESTIGATOR_441395]: 
3.Name [CONTACT_441432] : 
4.Phone number of IRB contact: 
5.Email address  of IRB  contact: 
[CONTACT_51584]-Local Recruitment Methods for  Multi-Site Studies
If this is  a multi-site study and research participants  will be recruited by [CONTACT_441426]  (e.g. call centers, national advertisements) describe those methods. 
Local recruitment methods are described  above. 
1.   Describe when, where, and how potential research participants will  be recruited. 
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  25 of 262.Describe the methods that will be used to identify  potential  research  participants . 
3.Describe the materials that will be used to recruit research participants. 
Multi-Site Research Communication Plan (when you are the lead  investigator)
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the processes to ensure 
communication among sites including:
☐  All sites will  have  the most current  version of the protocol, consent document,  and HIPAA 
authorization     
☐  All required approvals (initial, continuing review  and modifications)  have been obtained at  
each site (including approval by [CONTACT_81120]’s IRB of record)    
☐  All modifications have been communicated to sites, and approved (including approval  of the 
site’s IRB of record) before the  modification is implemented    
☐  All engaged participating  sites will  safeguard data, including secure transmission  of data,  as 
required by [CONTACT_441427]
☐  All engaged participating  sites will  safeguard data, including secure transmission  of data,  as 
required by [CONTACT_441427]     
☐  All local site investigators  conduct  the study in accordance with applicable  federal 
regulations and local laws     
☐  All non-compliance with the study  protocol or  applicable requirements will be reported  in 
accordance with local  policy     
If this is  a multi-site study where you  are the lead investigator, describe the method for 
communicating to engaged participant sites the following: 
1.   Problems:     
2.   Interim results:      
3.   The closure  of the study:     
References   
 1. Barber FA, Gladu DE. Comparison  of oral ketorolac and hydrocodone for pain relief after 
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthroscopy. 1998;14(6):605-612.
2. Gebuhr PH, Soelberg M, Strauss W. A multiple-dose, double-blind comparison  of intramuscularly 
and orally administered ketorolac  tromethamine and Ketogan in patients  with  pain following 
orthopaedic surgery. J Int Med Res. 1994;22(4):202-217.
3. McQuay HJ, Poppleton  P, Carroll D, Summerfield  RJ, Bullingham RE, Moore RA. Ketorolac and 
acetaminophen for orthopedic postoperative pain. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 1986;39(1):89-93.
4. Tashjian RZ, Deloach J, Porucznik CA, Powell AP. Minimal clinically important differences (MCID)  
and patient acceptable symptomatic state (PASS)  for visual analog  scales (VAS) measuring  pain  
in patients  treated for rotator  cuff disease. J Shoulder Elbow  Surg.  2009;18(6):927-932.
5. Uquillas CA, Capogna BM, Rossy WH, Mahure SA, Rokito AS. Postoperative pain control after 
arthroscopic rotator cuff repair. J Shoulder Elbow Surg. 2016;25(7):1204-1213.
6. White PF, Joshi  GP, Carpenter RL, Fragen RJ. A comparison of oral ketorolac and hydrocodone-
acetaminophen for analgesia after ambulatory surgery: arthroscopy  versus laparoscopic tubal 
ligation. Anesth Analg. 1997;85(1):37-43.
HRP-
503BIOTEMPLATE: Biomedical Protocol
Approved: Prior Version: 08/16/2018
Page  26 of 26Please reference the Investigator Manual for local  institutional  requirements.