 
Metabolic Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_14827] (Aim 1)  
 
NCT# 03420833 
 
June 20, 2021 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 1 of 27 STUDY OVERVIEW  
 
Title  Metabolic Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_14828]  (Aim 1)  
Running Title  Metabolic Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_14829]  17-003359  
Phase  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14830]- Mei Cha, MD  
Mayo Clinic  
Objective  To determine early alterations in metabolic pathways and metabolomics 
biomarkers in patients with mild heart failure (HF) and left bundle branch block 
(LBBB), and their role in the prediction of outcomes by [CONTACT_14858].  
Study Design  Single -center, randomized cross -over study  
Overall Study 
Design  We plan to complete subject enrollment by [CONTACT_14859] 3. Data validation, 
adjudication and analysis will be finished by [CONTACT_14859] 5. 
Subject Participation 
Duration  Approximately 12 months  
Primary  
Objectives  Primary efficacy objectives (composite endpoint)  
The study primary endpoint is a reduction in the LV end- systolic volume index 
(LVESVI, reverse LV remodeling) in the CRT- ON gorup as compared to the CRT-
OFF group.  
Primary Safety Objective 
• Freedom from system -related complications in randomized subjects will 
be calculated at 1,  6, and [ADDRESS_14156] efficacy to quantify 
the risk -benefit  ratio. 
 
Secondary  
Objectives  Secondary efficacy objectives  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14831] 
• Increase in NT pro- BNP level by 30%  
• Sustained ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation greater than 30 seconds  
• Decrease in LVEF to ≤3 4% 
• Death 
 
Device  BIOTRONIK Edora HF -T QP, or Ilivia HF -T QP DF4  
Number of 
Subjects  100 subjects (of these 30 will be female)  
Subject  
Inclusion  
Criteria  • LVEF 3 5%-50% 
• NYHA class I- II  
• QRS duration of ≥1 20ms 
• Left bundle branch block (LBBB)  
• Patient is able to receive a transve nous pectoral CRT implant  
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 2 of 27 • Patient is able to sign informed consent  
• Two echocardiograms are required to confirm LVEF ≤ 50% (one echo 
must be within 12 months of enrollment)  
• Patient is on optimal a nd stable medical therapy (ACE inhibitor or AT1 
blocker, beta blocker, etc. over the last 6 months)  
 
Subject  
Exclusion  
Criteria  • Advanced comorbid conditions with life expectancy <1 year  
• Patient is <18 of years of age  
• Patient has a CRT device 
• Female patients who is pregnant or not on a reliable form of birth control. 
Women of childbearing potential are required to have negative pregnancy test within the 7 days prior to device implant  
• Unwilling or unable to return for required follow -up visits  
• Patient decides study participation is cost -prohibited 
 
Duration of 
Exposure At the [ADDRESS_14157] completes his/her cross -
over 6 -month therapy, the CRT (Edora HF- T QP, or Ilivia HF -T QP DF4 ) 
function will be programmed on to provide chronic benefit from CRT for a 
battery life of 8.[ADDRESS_14158] group differences (using a 2- sample t -test), and response to CRT 
therapy. In particular, we will relate these principal components to 
response to CRT using multiple linear regression (for the LVESVI 
endpoint) and Cox Regression (for the Clinical endpoint).   
 
 
 
 
  
 
         
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 3 of 27  
 RESEARCH STRATEGY
 
A. Background and Significance  
Heart failure is a progressive disease  with high mortality and morbidity.  Heart failure (HF) affects  5.7 
million American adults  and claim s nearly 300,000 lives annually .1 HF progresses  along a continuum from 
asymptomatic ( Stage A and B) to sy mptomatic ( Stage C and D) .2 Nearly three times as many people with 
left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction are in Stage B as in Stages C and D combined.3,4 In the 
Framingham Heart S tudy, total mortality rates within four years of symptomatic HF development were 24% 
in women and 55% in men.5 In the community, the prevalence was 6% for those with a left ventricular  
ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50% or less and 2% for those with an LVEF of 40% or less .6 This translates  to 
4% of the population who have mild LV systolic dysfunction with LVEF between 41 %-50%.7 Although the 
risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14832], an LVEF in the range of 36% to 50% still 
confers a considerable risk of adverse outcomes. For instance, the CHARM study showed that patients with 
an LVEF between 33%- 52% had annual cardiovascular mortality rates in the range of  4.0%-6.0% and HF 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14833] 5.7%- 7.2% .8  
Left bundle branch block (LBBB) and ventricular dyssynchrony.  LBBB is frequently ( >20%) 
accompanied by [CONTACT_14860], with the consequence of delayed electrical 
conduction to the LV lateral wall .9,10 This recognized ventricular dyssynchrony further reduces myocardial 
efficiency and cardiac output, worsening cardiac performance. Compared with normal ventricular 
conduction, the presence of LBBB is associated with a near two-fold increase in all- cause mortality .11 
Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)  resynchronizes electrical and mechanical coupling by 
[CONTACT_14861] . It improves chronic LV systolic dysfunction and reverse 
LV re modeling in patients with LVEF of 35%  or lower .12-[ADDRESS_14159] not been well determined. Based on our own preliminary data (see below), w e 
propose that early  CRT, in patients with LVEF of 3 5%-50% and LBBB, may have potential clinical impact 
that reverses the initial stage s of LV metabolic  and structural  remodeling and prevent s HF progression to an 
advanced stage.[ADDRESS_14160] HF biomarkers (e.g., B -type natriuretic peptide [BNP] ), 
has significant diagnositic and prognostic values, and facilitates understanding the mechanisms of 
metabolic derrangements and assessing therapeutic outcomes .36-[ADDRESS_14161] discovered  an energetic and metabolomic  signature [CONTACT_14888], and potential  therapeutic 
effects of CRT on the metabolomic  profile .28,52,56 Thus, assessment  of the metabolomic  state  before CRT 
may provide new biomarkers  for evaluation of treatment efficac y from CRT.45,51  
Gender difference in CRT outcome. Although 50% of patients with HF are women, they constitute less 
than 25% of the patients enrolled in CRT trials. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_14834], women 
may benefit more than men from CRT.18,19,57-[ADDRESS_14162] 
favorable factors such as a substrate of nonischemic cardiomyopathy (NICM) and a LBBB pattern, whereas 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 4 of 27 Figure 1: Clinical database screening process for 
patients with LVEF 36%-50% and LBBB, and matched-
control group .  
a greater proportion of men have ischemic cardiomyopathy  (ICM) and renal dysfunction, which are 
associated with a poor prognosis. In the proposed study , we will particularly enroll a higher proportion of 
female  patients  than  the clinical trials to address whether  sex is  a biological variable in CRT outcome. We 
aim to determine the cardiac  metabolomic  signature [CONTACT_14889], which may 
differ from that of men, as an underlying mechanism by [CONTACT_14862] a more favorable outcome.45,[ADDRESS_14163] the patient’s HF and therapeutic  metabolic status, which is an 
integral outcome of the upstream genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic events, and will allow the identification of the exact phenotype, potential biomarkers, and mechanisms of underlying diseases.  
Discovery of cardiac metabolomics pathways that facilitate favorable CRT outcomes in women. We 
will evaluate the metabolic reserve, which is  the capacity to increase metabolism of energy providing 
substrates  in response to an increase in the workload of the heart.
[ADDRESS_14164] mild HF, with a decreased LVEF of 35 % to 50% and a LBBB. This patient 
population is at high risk for progression from mild to severe HF, which represents an increasing burden to the community and the health care system. Reversal of myocardial dysfunction in the early stage, before it 
becomes irreversible, is a sound and innovative strategy.  
C. Approach  
Preliminary results  
Mild HF and clinical outcomes   
We screened the Mayo Clinic electrocardiography (ECG) database for patients with a diagnosis of LBBB from 1994 
through 2014. Among 12,879 patients  identified, 1,436 
patients met the criteria of having transthoracic 
echocardiography (TTE) within one -year of the ECG 
diagnosis of LBBB and a LVEF of 36% to 50% ( Figure 1). 
These study patients were matched 1:1 to 1,4 36 patients 
without LBBB on the basis of age, sex, baseline LVEF, and year of TTE. The mean (SD) age in both groups was 67 (13) years, and 54% were men. Clinical outcomes were 
compared between the LBBB and control groups. 
Long- term survival . The Kaplan- Meier 20 -year probability 
of survival in both groups is shown in Figure 2. Patients 
with mild HF (LVEF 36% -50%) and LBBB had lower 
survival rates at 5 (72% vs. 76%; P=.04), 10 (53% vs 61%; 
P<.001), and 20 years (27% vs 46%; P<.001) compared 
with the controls who had a normal QRS duration . 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 5 of 27 
Figure 2 . Kaplan -Meier  Survival. Overall 20 -year survival in 
patients with LBBB and controls.  LBBB, left branch bundle block  
Figure 3. Kaplan -Meier Survival in patients with  mild HF and 
LBBB according to LVEF changes at follow -up.   
LVEF deterioration to <35% . The event -free rates of 
the LVEF reduction to <35% at 1 year (83% vs 89%) 
and 5 years (63% vs 70%) (hazard ratio, 1.34; 95% 
CI, 1.09 -1.63; P=.005— were lower in the LBBB group 
than the control group. This finding suggests that, 
compared with a normal QRS  duration, the presence 
of LBBB in p atients with mild HF led to a greater 
LVEF deterioration with time, which could be 
attributed to ventricular dyssynchrony . 
Implantable cardioverter -defibrillator  and CRT-  
defibrillator  implantation.  The survival free of an 
implantable cardioverter -defibrillator (ICD) or CRT -
defibrillator (CRT -D) placement in the LBBB group 
was lower than the  control group (87% vs 92% at 1 
year; 80% vs 88% at 5 years) (hazard ratio, 1.73; 
95% CI, 1.30 -2.30; P<.001). Thus, patients in the 
LBBB group received ICD/CRT- D more often than the non- LBBB control group. This finding is consistent 
with evidence of greater LVEF deterioration in the LBBB group. 
Progression of LV dysfunction in mild HF with 
LBBB.  Among the 1,436 patients with LVEF of 36% -
50% and LBBB, [ADDRESS_14165] two-years. The mean (SD) patient age 
was 65 (14) years, 57% were men, and mean LVEF 
was 42% (13%). Of these 485 patients, 281 (58%) 
had no decrease in LVEF, 103 (21%) had an LVEF decrease of 1% to 5%, 43 (9%) had a decrease of 6% 
to 10%, and 58 (12%) had a decrease of more than 
10% ( P<.001). Overall, 42% of participants had a 
further LVEF reduction within the next two-years. The 
Kaplan- Meier curves showed a significant difference 
in survival by [CONTACT_14863] ( P<.001; 
Figure 3). Patients with a decrease of >10% had the 
worst survival.  
Metabolomic profiles in HF and CRT  
Baseline transcardiac metabolomics and acute 
response to CRT.  We studied the metabolomic profiles of 18 patients with advanced HF who underwent 
CRT-D implantation and 7 controls who underwent catheter ablation for supraventricular tachycardia. Blood 
samples were collected from the peripheral vein, femoral artery, and coronary sinus  at 
baseline. Metabolomic profiling of plasma samples was performed using gas 
chromatography -mass spectrometry ( GC-
MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy ( NMR ).
52 Compared with 
controls, the HF patients had an increased 
releas e of myocardial succinate, which is a 
biomarker of mitochondrial dysfunction, and 
increased uptake of fatty acids and ketone 
bodies (2- HB) indicating  alterations in 
substrate metabolism and/or deposition (Figure 4). After acute biventricular pacing 
for 15 minutes, the repeat transcardiac 
Figure 4 . Transcardiac metabolomics changes (peripheral vs coronary 
sinus) in HF  patients (blue) compared with controls (red). 2-HD -2-
hydroxybutyrate; * P<.05, ** P<.01.  HF, heart failure  
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 6 of 27 
Figure 6 . Transitions in metabolomics states from control to mild heart 
failure (HF mild), to severe heart failure (HF severe) and 3- month after 
CRT in severe heart failure (HF -CRT). Principal component (OPLS -DA) 
analysis of metabolomics  profiles.  metabolomic profile shifted to a different 
state, with increased myocardial uptake and 
metabolism of free fatty acids and decreased 
release of creatinine.   
Metabolomic profile in severe HF and chronic response to CRT.  In our 
prospective study of the effect of  chronic  
CRT  on  plasma  metabolomic profiles,
52 we  
analyzed 24  patients who had  CRT 
implantation  for 
advanced HF (LVEF≤ 35%) and 10 controls 
who underwent catheter ablation for 
supraventricular tachycardia. Blood samples  
were collected before and 3 months after the 
procedure. We performed a metabolomic profiling , using GC-MS and NMR. The  
plasma metabolomic profiles changed significantly 3 months  after CRT ( Figure 5A ). 
For each patient with HF, scores of the integral metabolomic profile after CRT 
clustered separately from the original state on the orthogonal partial least squares –
discriminant analysis (PLS- DA) plot, which 
indicates a transition to a new metabolic state. An integrated panel of the most important metabolites for 
discrimination of the CRT group included isoleucine, glutamine, and glycerol -1-phosphate ( Figure 5B ). The 
pattern of metabolite changes (decrease in succinate and increase in glutamate) indicated an improved 
mitochondrial  substrate metabolism after CRT ( Figure 5 C). Among the most improved metabolic pathways 
were amino acid and lipid metabolism  (Figure 5D). 
Metabolomic profile in mild HF.  We 
prospectively studied metabolomic profiles 
in subjects with a normal LVEF of > 55% 
and LBBB (control, n= 9), in patients with 
LVEF of 36%- 50% and LBBB (HF mild, 
n=8), LVEF of ≤35% and LBBB before 
(HF severe, n=9) and after CRT (HF-CRT). Figure [ADDRESS_14166] important metabolites in the 
discrimination of HF severity were  amino 
acids (asparagine, lysine, glutamine ), 
branched- chain amino acid s (isoleucine, 
leucine, valine) and products of catabolism, carnitine and nucleotide 
degradation. The finding suggest s an 
early alteration  and progression in the 
amino acid, fatty acid and nucleotide 
metabolism in mild HF with LBBB in 
parallel to the advancement of HF.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Metabolomic signature [CONTACT_14890] (HF). (A) Changes in 
plasma metabolomic profile of HF patients and controls by [CONTACT_14864] (OPLS -DA). CRT, cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. (B) Most important metabolites in the 
metabolomic signature [CONTACT_14891] [CONTACT_14865] 
(VIP). (C) Pattern of plasma metabolite changes in HF patients (n = 24; 
*P < .05; **P < .001). (D) Metabolic pathways most affected in HF as 
deduced from an altered plasma metabolomic profile.  
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 7 of 27 
Figure 9 . Different Metabolomic Profiles in Patients With Ischemic and 
Nonis chemic HF Before and After CRT by [CONTACT_14866] -DA.  Figure 8. Patients with LBBB (Control LBBB) have 
different  metabolic state which is further exacerbated by 
[CONTACT_14867] (HF mild LBBB) as compare to control 
with no LBBB (Control). Principal component (OPLS -DA) 
analysis of metabolomics profiles. n=8 -14. 
 
To further specify the 
metabolite biomarker 
changes, we measured 
the carnitine and 
acylcarnitine levels using 
liquid chromatography -
tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS ), and 
discovered a significant 
elevation of plasma  
carnitine, acetylcarnitine 
and long- chain 
oleoylcarnitine in mild HF patients compared to controls ( Figure 7). Such changes i ndicate  that impaired 
tissue free fatty acid  oxidation in mitochondria is associated with an increased release of metabolites  into 
plasma and deficient overall lipid metabolism .
44  
Metabolomic alteration in LBBB.  To further 
understand whether LBBB itself impacts the 
metabolomics profile, we compared  metabolic 
measurements  in subjects , who had an ECG 
diagnosis of LBBB with  a normal LVEF of >55% , to 
the control group who had a normal QRS and LVEF, 
and the group who had mild HF ( LVEF 36 %-50%) 
and LBBB. Notably, the metabolomics profile in 
LBBB with normal LV function (Figure 8) is different 
from the normal QRS controls and is  further shifted 
in patients with mild HF and LBBB. The principal components for group separat ion are lactate, 
glucose,  carnitine, glutamine and succinate, 
indicating altered pathway s of carbohydrate, amino 
acid and nucleotide metabolism by  [CONTACT_14868]. 
Metabolomic profiles in 
ischemic and nonischemic  
cardiomyopathy.  In our previous 
study, patients  with NICM  (n=14) 
and ICM (n=10) had different bas al 
plasma metabolomics profiles (Figure  9 ). After CRT, 
metabolomic profiles shifted 
differently, with NICM  showing 
better improvement in the plasma metabolomics . Compared with 
ICM, patients with NICM, had 
higher levels of amino acids, lactate, and acetate after CRT  
associated with more active amino acid, carbohydrate and fatty acid metabolism.  
 
 Figure 7.  Change s in plasma carnitine and acyl carnitine levels in mild HF. n= 7 in each 
group.  

Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 8 of 27 
Figure 10 . Metabolomic profiles of responders and nonresponders to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy (CRT). (A) Distinction of basal plasma metabolomic profiles of 
responders and nonresponders to CRT by [CONTACT_14869] (OPLS -DA). (B) An integral panel of the most important metabolites permitting 
prediction of responders by [CONTACT_14865] (VIP). (C) A panel of 
the most important metabolite differences between responders and nonresponders (*P < 
.05). 
 
Figure 11 . Plasma metabolomics profiles of male a nd female HF patients 
(A); Metabolite differences in female and male HF patients (B ). [n = 31 
(male) and 7 (female); *P < .05; **P < .001].  
Metabolomic profile predicts 
improvement in LVEF after 
CRT.  Of the 24 patients with HF 
who received CRT, 10 (41%) had an improvement in LVEF by 
>5% and a decrease of 1 or greater in the [LOCATION_001] Heart 
Association (NYHA) functional class; they were considered to 
be CRT responders . This group 
of patients differed in their pre -
CRT baseline plasma metabolomic profile from non -
responders in the orthogonal 
PLS- DA plot analysis ( Figure 
10A). The panel of the most 
important metabolites allowing distinction between responders 
and non- responders to CRT is 
shown ( Figure 10B ). Patients 
who responded to CRT had higher levels of branched- chain 
amino acids (isoleucine, leucine, and valine), essential for protein 
synthesis and metabolic 
signaling. (Figure 10C ; P<.05). It 
indicates branched- chain amino 
acids  are catabolized to 
metabolic intermediates as 
important substrates for energy 
production in the failing heart.  
CRT and gender difference Women have a greater response to CRT than men.  We conducted a retrospective study of 728 
consecutive CRT recipi[INVESTIGATOR_14835]- D device placement. The 
outcomes of CRT were compared between women (n=166, 22.8%) and men (n=562, 77.2%). Women were  
found to  more often ha ve NICM  (68% vs 36% , P<.01). After CRT, as compared to men, women had a 
greater improvement in the NYHA class and a trend greater improvement in LVEF and reverse LV 
remodeling.
[ADDRESS_14167] different metabolomic profiles.  The m etabolomic 
profile was prospectively studied in 38 patients (7 women,  18%) who had 
advanced HF with LVEF ≤ 35%. Male and 
female patients had different plasma metabolomic profiles  (Figure 11A ). 
Women  had higher plasma levels of 
linoleic acid, palmitoleic acid , glycolic acid 
and glycine, which indicated a better lipid 
and amino acid metabolism than men (Figure 11B). A distinct feature of the 
female metabolome was a higher                                                           
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 9 of 27 glycerol/glycerol -1-phosphate ratio (mean [SD], 2.79 [1.30] than men, 1.19 [0.18]; P< .05) indicating lower 
triglyceride biosynthesis in women. The NMR data indicates that male metabolome had higher levels of N -
methylhistidine and creatinine, which is associated with  higher protein degradation and energetic stress .  
Experimental protocol  
Aim: To determine early alterations in metabolic pathways and metabolomic biomarkers in patients 
with mild HF and LBBB, and their role in the prediction of outcomes by [CONTACT_14858].  
Rationale  
Reversal of myocardial dysfunction in the early  stage is of great importance to prevent the progression of 
HF. Here we will investigate the novel use of CRT in patients who have mild HF and LBBB. This patient 
population is at high risk for progression from mild to severe HF. However, the metabolomics signature [CONTACT_14892].  
Study Patients   
Subject inclusion criteria.  LVEF 3 5%-50%, NYHA class I- II, QRS duration of ≥12 0ms63, LBBB64, and on 
optimal and stable medical therapy (ACE inhibitor or AT1 blocker, beta blocker over the last 6- month ), able 
and willing to sign informed consent .  
Subject exclusion criteria.  Advanced comorbid conditions with life expectancy <1 year, unwilling or unable 
to return for required  follow -up visits , <[ADDRESS_14168] indicated that among 1,436 patients with LVEF of 36% to 50% and LBBB, [ADDRESS_14169] LVEF of 35 % to 50%. Of these patients, 30 will be 
women. Participants will undergo placement of a CRT- pacemaker (CRT- P) after the completion of the 
baseline assessment  if all inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria are met. Participants who have an 
ICD in place , or who meet clinical indication for an ICD, will undergo placement of a CRT- defibrillator (CRT -
D). Defibrillation will not be added for patients who do not have an existing ICD system  or do not meet 
clinical indications for an ICD. Participants who have a successful CRT implantation will be randomly 
assigned 1:[ADDRESS_14170] the CRT programmed on (CRT- ON, treatment group) or off (CRT -OFF, control group) 
within 7 days of completing the implant procedure. Participants will be randomly assigned using an 
allocation method defined by a biostatistician. Investigators managing HF in study participants will be 
blinded to the randomization method to minimize potential bias. A washout period after the device 
implantation will not be used in this study .
19 At 6-month follow- up, the CRT function will be turned on in the 
CRT-OFF group and the CRT function will be turned off in the CRT-ON group in a cross -over design. All 
participants will cross -over at the  6-m onth follow- up visit. At 12 -month follow -up, wh en each patient  
completes his/her  cross- over 6-month therapy, the CRT fun ction will be programmed on to provide chronic  
benefit fr om CRT for a battery life of 8.6  years.  The subjects will be blinded from whether biventricular 
pacing is on or off. For participants who receive a CRT- D, the defibrillation function will be programmed on 
for the duration of the study.  
Study device  
A [LOCATION_002]  Food and Drug Administration (FDA) -approved CRT device will be used for this study. 
Because the clinical application of CRT in patients with an LVEF of 35 % to 50% has not been approved by 
[CONTACT_14870]/ACC/HRS guidelines ,[ADDRESS_14171] obtained the approval of an Investigational 
Device Exemption (IDE) from the FDA for this study aim ( FDA-approval letter is attached). BIOTRONIK SE 
& Co. KG has agreed to donate the FDA -approved CRT device, model s Edora HF- T QP  or Ilivia HFT -QP 
DF4, along with Setrox S, Solia S,  Plexa S, Plexa DF- 1 S, and Sentus QP leads (agreement letter is 
attached) for the study.   
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 10 of 27 Figure 1 2. Shows coronary sinus blood sampling locations. The 
circles indicate blood exampling from the coronary sinus ostium 
and the proximal lateral vein from the LV lateral wall (the site of latest activation) that reflect the local metabolism will be collected and compared.  
Preprocedure Evaluation 
Clinical evaluation.  Patient baseline information including age, comorbid conditions such as hypertension, 
coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus, and etiology of cardiomyopathy ( ICM vs NICM)  will be collected. 
The HF symptoms  (measured by [CONTACT_14871]: KCCQ) , physical signs, 
NYHA class, ECG, echocardiography  (may include 3D echo images ), and 6-minute walk test  will be 
assessed.  
12-Lead ECG.  The ECG results will be reviewed by [CONTACT_14872]’ 
clinical status. Intrinsic QRS duration and morphology will be measured and validated.  
Six-minute walk test.  The 6- minute walk test will be conducted according to a standardized protocol. 
Patients will perform the test using a 100- foot internal hallway ,66, [ADDRESS_14172], and blood pressure 
and pulse rate will   be monitored during the study.  
Echocardiography  Two-dimensional echocardiography will be performed to assess changes in LV 
dimension, volumes, and LV EF. Volumes will be estimated by [CONTACT_14873] 2- chamber 
and -chamber views according to the Simpson method, and the LVEF will be calculated in the usual fashion 
(derived from 2-dimensional measurements of 
diastolic and systolic LV dimension or volumetric 
analysis using the method of disks).17,19 Two 
echocardiograms are required to confirm a stable reduced LVEF prior to randomization (one echo 
must be within 12 months of enrollment) . Three -
dimensional (3D) echo offers a reproducible assessment of left ventricular (LV) structure, 
function, volumes and LV mechanical 
dyssynchrony. It has been shown that the LV 
mechanical dyssynchrony quantification by 3D echo is reproducible and, systolic dyssynchrony 
index (SDI) is an excellent predictor of response 
to CRT. For the purpose of the study patients will 
undergo an additional 3D echoc ardiographic 
examination. Datasets will be obtaiıned by [CONTACT_14874] 3D probes. Full -volume 6 -
beat LV 3D echo data sets will be acquired from 
the api[INVESTIGATOR_14836].  
The LV -3D echocardiographic images will be 
exported in VolDICOM format to a separate 
workstation equipped with dedicated vendor -
independent software packages for 3D echo (4D 
LV-Analysis 3.1, TomTec Imaging Systems, 
Unterschleissheim, [LOCATION_013]).  
LV end- diastolic (EDV) and end- systolic volumes (ESV), LV ejection fraction (EF), strain including global 
longitudinal strain (GLS) and global circumferential strain (GCS) and, systolic dyssynchrony index (SDI)  will 
be calculated offline.  
 
 
CRT implantation   
The FDA-approved, commercially available CRT devices and leads will be used. The transvenous LV lead 
will be placed into coronary lateral vein to correct delayed lateral wall activation in LBBB, if possible.
68,69 
After the blood sample is taken, the LV lead will be advanced to the distal tributary of this vein. A QRS -to–
local ventricular activation time (Q RS-LV time) will be measured to assess the conduction delay .70-[ADDRESS_14173] e d b ef or e C R T, at 6 -m o nt h a n d 1 2 -m o nt h f oll o w -u p ( eit h er 
C R T -O N f or 6 -m o nt h or C R T -O F F  f or 6 -m o nt h ). At i m pl a nt, bl o o d s a m pl e s fr o m f e m or al art er y a n d c or o n ar y 
si n u s  will  b e  c oll e ct e d  t o  m e a s ur e  tr a n s c ar di a c  m et a b ol o mi c  gr a di e nt.  M or e  oft e n ,  t h e  L V  l e a d  d eli v er  
s h e at h f or c or o n ar y si n u s c a n n ul ati o n i s a bl e t o b e a d v a n c e d i nt o t h e b e gi n ni n g of l at er al v ei n  t o f a cilit at e 
t h e  L V  l e a d  pl a c e m e nt   ( 7 0 %- 8 0 %),  w h er e  bl o o d  s a m pl e  will  b e  c oll e ct e d  t o  d et er mi n e  t h e  r e gi o n al  
m et a b o li c  pr ofil e a s s h o w n i n Fi g ur e 1 2. T h e r ati o n al f or c oll e cti n g t h e r e gi o n al bl o o d i s t o d et er mi n e 1) 
w h et h er  t h er e  i s  a  diff er e nti al  m et a b oli s m s  b et w e e n  I C M  ( di s cr et e  s c ar  v s  n o  s c ar  a c c e s s e d  b y  
e c h o c ar di o gr a p h y) v s NI C M  ( diff u s e d fi br o si s) , a n d 2) m et a b oli c f e at ur e at t h e m o st d el a y e d c o n d u cti o n 
ar e a at t h e L V  l at er al w all i n c o pi n g wit h Q R S -L V ti m e.   
M u s c ul ar s a m pl e s c oll e cti o n f or m et a b ol o mi c s m e a s ur e m e nt  
W h e n t h e p ati e nt i s u n d er g oi n g a C R T d e vi c e i m pl a nt, a pr e -p e ct or al p o c k et i s m a d e r o uti n el y t o h o u s e t h e 
g e n er at or. T h e s ki n a n d s u b c ut a n e o u s pl a n e s ar e di s s e ct e d t o e x p o s e t h e f a s ci a of t h e p e ct or ali s m aj or. A 
s m all pi e c e ( 0. 5 -1. 0 g) of t h e c h e st m u s cl e ( P e ct or ali s m aj or) bi o p s y will b e t a k e n f or m et a b ol o mi c s a n al y si s, 
a n d mit o c h o n dri al p h y si ol o g y. A p pr o xi m at el y 1 0 0 m g of m u s cl e ti s s u e will b e i m m e di at el y u s e d t o e v al u at e 
mit o c h o n dri al  c a p a cit y  a n d  bi o e n er g eti c  effi ci e n c y  u si n g  hi g h -r e s ol uti o n  r e s pir o m etr y  a n d  
s p e ctr ofl u or o m etr y, a s w e h a v e d e s cri b e d pr e vi o u sl y [ s u p 1, 2].  T h e r e m ai n d er of t h e m u s cl e ti s s u e will b e 
i m m e di at el y bl ott e d, fr o z e n i n li q ui d nitr o g e n, a n d st or e d at -8 0 C.  M u s cl e mit o c h o n dri al c o nt e nt will b e 
e v al u at e d  b y  l a b or at or y -b a s e d  e n z y m ati c  a s s a y s,  pr ot ei n  e x pr e s si o n,  a n d  m R N A  a b u n d a n c e  [ s u p  3].   
M a s s  s p e ctr o m etr y  a n d  N M R  s p e ctr o s c o p y  will  b e  u s e d  t o  d et e ct  a n d  q u a ntit at e  m et a b olit e s  i n  m u s cl e  
ti s s u e l y s at e s [ s u p 4]. M u s cl e bi o p s y m a y c a u s e bl e e di n g. W e will u s e r e a dil y a v ail a bl e c a ut er y t o st o p t h e 
bl e e di n g.  
 
D e vi c e pr o gr a m mi n g a n d f oll o w -u p  
D e vi c e p a ci n g s etti n g s will b e pr o gr a m m e d i n t h e D D D R m o d e at 6 0 t o 1 5 0 b e at s/ mi n ut e s . T h e C R T -O N or 
C R T -O F F will b e pr o gr a m m e d a c c or di n g t o t h e r a n d o mi z ati o n.  P ati e nt s will b e c all e d at 1 -m o nt h t o e v al u at e 
f or p ot e nti al p o c k et di s c o m f ort a n d pr o c e d ur e -r el at e d c o m pli c ati o n s. P ati e nt s will r et ur n f or f oll o w -u p at 6- 
m o nt h  (i niti al pr o gr a m  C R T -O N  or C R T -O F F ) a n d 1 2 -m o nt h  ( cr o s s o v er pr o gr a m  C R T - O N or C R T -O F F ). 
P eri p h er al b l o o d will b e dr a w n f or m et a b ol o mi c st u d y, a n d e c h o c ar di o gr a p h y, 6- mi n ut e w al k, K C C Q, a n d 
N Y H A cl a s s will b e a s s e s s e d at e a c h f oll o w -u p. P ati e nt s will u n d er g o st a n d ar d cli ni c al c ar e t o m a xi mi z e 
C R T r e s p o n s e.  D e vi c e f u n cti o n will b e cl o s el y m o nit or e d o n a d ail y b a si s vi a a r e m ot e m o nit ori n g s y st e m. 
P ati e nt s will c o nti n u e a st a bl e m e di c al t h er a p y t hr o u g h e ntir e st u d y  t o mi ni mi z e c o nf o u n di n g d u e t o dr u g 
c h a n g e s d uri n g t h e st u d y . A n y a dj u st m e nt i n  m e di c ati o n s, if cli ni c all y n e e d e d, will b e c ar ef ull y r e c or d e d  a n d 
w e will t a k e i nt o c o n si d er ati o n t h e c o nf o u n di n g dr u g eff e ct i n a n al y si s . Aft er p ati e nt s c o m pl et e t h e st u d y, 
t h e y will b e f oll o w e d a n n u all y b y p h o n e t o a s s e s s a d v er s e e v e nt s.  
 
S c h e d ul e of E v e nt s  
 S cr e e ni n g 
( wit hi n [ADDRESS_14174] a nt)  D e vi c e 
I m pl a nt 
( D a y 0 ± 
4 d a y s)  P o st -
I m pl a nt  
( D a y 0 ± 
4 d a y s)  1 M o nt h 
P h o n e 
C all ( ±  7 
d a y s)  6 M o nt h 
( ± 3 0  
d a y s)  7 
m o nt h 
( ±  7 
d a y s)  1 2 M o nt h 
( ± 3 0 
d a y s)  2 4, 36, & 
4 8 M o nt h 
P h o n e 
C all s ( ±  3 0 
d a y s)  
E c h o c ar di o gr a m  
( m a y i n cl u d e 3 D 
e c h o i m a gi n g ) X2    X  
X  
P h y si c al e x a m  X    X  X  
[ADDRESS_14175] X    X  X  
Kansas City 
Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire 
(KCCQ)  X    X  X  
Chest X -ray   X      
Pregnancy test (if 
applicable)  X1        
Blood collection  
For biomarker analysis  X X   X  X  
Device 
programming/ interrogation    X  X  X  
 SAE/ AE 
Assessment 
(heart failure 
symptoms, pocket pain, device function, etc.)    X X X X X X 
Medication 
Reconciliation  X  X X X X X  
1. Females of child- bearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test within [ADDRESS_14176] mass spectrometric technologies permits better assessment of metabolite levels and dynamics. Selected metabolomics profiling will be done using LC/MS,  GC/MS and 
1H NMR technologies 
available at our  Metabolomics Resources Core . The Core is staffed with experienced analytical and 
statistical/bioinformatics staf f. In addition, we will employ novel whole blood 18O-stable isotope labeling 
technique – 18O-assisted GC/MS and 31P NMR, to detect subtle  alterations in metabolite dynamics and 
metabolic pathways .42,[ADDRESS_14177] samples will be tested for several other specific metabolomics biomarkers.  I
n HF,  the plasma long -chain acylcarnitines  are substantially elevated due to impaired mitochondrial 
oxidative capacity.  Simply a signal of mitochondrial dysfunction, the long- chain acylcarnitines  is considered 
as a prognostic biomarker in end- stage HF and as an early detectable biomarker in mild LV dysfunction.   
Amino acids are important substrates for energy production in the heart.  The branched -chain amino acids, 
specifically valine, leucine and isoleucine are elevated in HF.  The amnio acids valine, leucine and 
isoleucine will be determined as biomarkers.  Using the new technology of whole blood 18O metabolic 
labeling, we will measure 2,3- BPG[18O] and G -3-P[18O] turnover rates that are reduced, while inorgani c 
phosphate (Pi[18O]) and γ -ATP[18O] are elevated in mild LV dysfunction.       
LC/MS  and G C/MS.  The LC -MS analyses will be  performed using a 6500 Series Accurate- Mass 
Quadrupole Time -of-Flight LC -MS (Agilent Technologies) coupled with an Acquity UPLC Syst em (Waters). 
Metabolomic profiling data are acquired under both positive and negative electrospray ionization conditions.  
Metabolite separation is achieved using [ADDRESS_14178] the 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 13 of 27 Figure 13 . Metabolite dynamics in HF patients whole blood as assessed by 18O-
assisted 31P NMR. HF patient had lower labeling and turnover rate of 2,3 -
bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG[18O]), which regulates hemoglobin affinity to O 2 and 
blood oxygen transport capacity. At the same time labeling, the turnover rate of 
inorganic phosphate (Pi[18O]) was increased, signifying a higher ATP hydrolysis and 
degradation rate (ATP+H 218OADP+Pi[18O]). 
Figure 14 . Metabolic pathways and metabolites involved in metabolic 
remodeling of  myocardium in heart failure. Marked in blue are 
metabolites altered in plasma.  METLIN metabolite database to 
give putative molecular 
identifications. Components 
assigned putative identification are 
further verified by [CONTACT_14875] -MS data. Acyl- carnitines 
were measured by [CONTACT_14876].
74 The 
samples and calibration standards were analyzed on Thermo TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer 
(West Palm Beach, FL).  Data 
acquisition was done using selective ion monitoring (SRM).  
Data files from GC -MS analyses 
will be de convoluted using AMDIS software; SpectConnect will be used to list and track metabolite 
peaks
.42,[ADDRESS_14179]. P etras  Dzeja at 
Mayo Clinic . Blood plasma and cells carry a wealth of metabolic information about health status and 
disease biomarkers.25,76,77 Labeling of fresh whole blood will be performed by [CONTACT_14877] 30%  
H2[18O] in 0.9% NaCl and labeling for 5- 10 min, extracting metabolites and analyzing by 18O-assisted 
GC/MS and 31P NMR.42 Preliminary studies 
indicate that abnormal G-3-P[18O] turnover 
indicates defects in α-glycerophosphate shuttle 
and substrate supply to mitochondria.72 Figure 
13 shows an example of dysregulation of 2,3 -
BPG [18O] and Pi[18O] turnover rates , which 
normally regulates nucleotide metabolism and 
hemoglobin affinity to O 2 and blood oxygen 
transport capacity in a severe HF patient.   
18O-assisted 31P NMR and 1H NMR.  This 
technology is unique to Mayo Clinic permiting detection dynamics of phosphorylated metabolites in human blood.
42 High-resolution 
1H NMR spectra will be acquired on a Bruker 
Avance III 600 spectrometer (Avance) while 31P 
spectra are acquired with 500 MHz on a Bruker  
11 T spectrometer (Avance). Percentages of 
16O, 18O1, 18O2 and 18O3 phosphoryl species in 
phosphometabolites are proportional to the integrals of their respective peaks in the 
31P 
NMR spectrum. Spectra peaks will be identified according to Chenomx NMR Suite 6.1 software as previously described.
78,79 
 Objectives of metabolomic measurements  
1) We will perform anatomical metabolomic mappi[INVESTIGATOR_14837]. The blood samples from the coronary sinus that reflect the overall myocardial metabolism 
and from the LV lateral wall (the site of latest activation) that reflect the local metabolism will be collected 
and compared. A differential feature of regional metabolism will provide insight into fundamental 
metabolomic regulation in ventricular dyssynchrony. QRS duration is a clinical predictor of CRT response. 
We will correlate the metabolic predictive value of CRT outcomes with QRS duration.    
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 14 of 27 2) The metabolomi c mappi[INVESTIGATOR_14838].   
3) We will gain insight in early perturbation of myocardial metabolomic profile in patients with mildly reduced 
LVEF. Specific focus will be paid to the following metabolic pathways  or markers . 
a. Myocardium primarily meets its requirements for energy through the oxidation of long- chain fatty acids 
(LCFA), where carnitine plays a key role as a carrier.  The “carnitine shuttle” facilitate s transfer of LCFA to 
cross mitochondrial membrane for β -oxidation.80 In HF, the plasma long -chain acylcarnitines (LCAC) are 
substantially elevated due to impaired mitochondrial oxidative capacity  (Figure 7 and 14 , green box ).55 The 
LCAC has adverse effects on HF including an increase in cytoloic calcium loading, myocardial inflammation, 
and bioenergetics deficiency .50 Simply a signal of mitochondrial dysfunction, LCAC is considered as a 
prognostic biomarker in end-stage HF.51 With a cross -over study design, the role  of LCAC will be examined  
as an early detectable biomarker in relation to LV dysfuction.  
b. Amino acids are important substrates for energy production in the heart. Through a series of reactions, 
branched- chain amino acids (BCAAs) can be converted to metabolic intermediates and fed into the 
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle  as potential sources of anaplerotic input  (Figure 14, red box). Due to the down 
regulation of gene expression related to the BCAA degradation and utilization, specifically, valine, leucine 
and isoleucine are accumulated in HF.53,81,82 Our preliminary data (shown in F igure 6 and 10) , showed that 
the level of these BCAAs  were  disturbed even in mild HF and was  significantly lower in CRT non-
responders than in CRT responders  with severe HF . Further, amino acids are not only cell building blocks, 
energy source and signaling molecules but are also regulators of gene expression and protein synthesis. 
Taken together, the BCAAs are critical metabolite markers in HF. 
c. Using the new technology  of whole blood 18O metabolic labeling, we  will test  the hypothesis  that the 2,3-
BPG[18O] and G -3-P[18O] turnover rate s are reduced, while  inorganic phosphate (Pi[18O]) and γ -ATP[18O] 
are elevated in mild LV dysfunction in which the impaired O2 and substrate transport and ATP synthesis  
may precede  the HF symptoms  (Figure 13).  
d. We will develop strong metabolic biomarkers as proposed in above to determine the prognostication with 
clinical outcomes in patients with mild HF.  
Primary cl inical efficacy objective  
The  study  primary  endpoint  is  a  reduction  in  the  LV  end- systolic  volume  index (LVESVI,  reverse LV  
remodeling) in the CRT -ON group as compared to CRT- OFF group.   
Secondary clinical efficacy objectives (composite events)  
1) Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14831]; 2) Increase in NT pro- BNP level by 30%  and its predictive value of 
response to CRT; 3) Sustained ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation greater than 30 seconds ; 4) 
Decrease in LVEF to ≤35% ; and 5)  death. 
 
The analytical imprecision of natriuretic peptides depends on the assay but for NTprpoBNP it is roughly 
1.6%.   Inter and intradividual variation is roughly 30% (American Journal of Cardiology. 92(5):628 -31, 
2003) .  Thus values above 30% have been suggested to define significant changes in natriuretic peptides 
(Journal of Investigative Medicine. 61(6):950- 5, 2013 Aug,).   This value was   shown to have prognostic 
significance in the VALHEFT trial (Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 52(12):997 -1003, 2008 
Sep 16) and thus will provide an end point in our proposed analysis.  
 
Primary safety objectives 
Freedom from system -related complications in randomized participants will be calculated at 1, 6,  and [ADDRESS_14180], which combines both 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 15 of 27 randomized groups together (n=50 + 50 = 100), and compares the CRT- ON condition to the CRT- OFF 
condition. The power can be estimated based on REVERSE  (LVEF ≤40%)  showing a mean change of -18.4 
+/- 29.5 ml/m2.  Let us assume that in the current mildly impaired EF group, the reduction will be, not - 18, 
but -12. Assuming the SD is 26, the power for the one- sample paired t -test is over 99%.  If we assume an 
80% attrition (n=40 + 40), the detectable difference with 80% power is 8.3 ml/m2, less than half of that 
observed in REVERSE.  A secondary analysis will be a generalized linear model in which baseline, period 1, 
and period [ADDRESS_14181] of any of these component events.  The 
crossover design can be accommodated by [CONTACT_14878] -OFF as a time dependent 
binary variable that  is 1 (ON) or 0 (OFF).  Order effects can be accommodated by [CONTACT_14879]-period in the model.   
Metabolomics data analysis.  The timing of metabolomics data analysis will occur when all subjects have 
completed study procedures. Data sets will be mean- centered and pareto -scaled to adjust the importance of 
high- and low-abundance metabolites to an equal level before carrying out statistical analyses.42,52,77-79,84-86 
The SIMCA -P+ 12.0 software package (Umetrics, Umea, Sweden) will be used for pattern recognition 
multivariate analysis, including unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA), supervised partial least 
squares discriminant analysis (PLS -DA), and orthogonal partial least -squares discriminant analysis (OPLS -
DA). The data will be examined with PCA scatter plot of the first two score vectors (t1- t2) in order to reveal 
the homogeneity of the data, any groupi[INVESTIGATOR_14839], outliers, and trends. Then PLS -DA is applied to increase the 
class separation, simplify interpretation, and find potential biomarkers. The OPLS- DA will be used to identify 
the significantly different metabolites between groups.  For validation, R2 (the fraction of variance explained 
by a component) and Q2 (the fraction of the total variation predicted by a component) values will be considered as measures of goodness of model and the model robustness, respectively. The value of Q2 
ranges from [ADDRESS_14182] important 
metabolites will be selected according to the variable importance in the projection (VIP) values and the variables with VIP>[ADDRESS_14183] 3.0 software.
83 In addition, w e will explore the new multivariate 
metabolomics data (80 variables on 80 subjects), and construct principal components agnostically using SAS PROC FACTOR. Preliminary data suggest that 5 to 10 factors will represent 60% or more of the joint 
variation among the [ADDRESS_14184] group differences  (using a two -sample t -test), and response to CRT therapy. In particular, w e will 
then relate these principal components (PC’s) to response to CRT using multiple linear regression ( for the 
LVESVI  endpoint ) and Cox Regression (for the Clinical endpoint).   
  
Safety and Adverse Events  
 
All adverse events occurring related to the procedure or protocol required testing during the study, including 
those not meeting the criteria of an Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE) will be recorded on the 
appropriate case report form.  Records of these events will be maintained and reports submitted to the FDA 
and IRB according to the regulatory requirements.  Expected clinical adverse events and nonsignificant (not 
serious) clinical adverse events will not be reported. Expected clinical adverse events and anticipated adverse device effects are those listed below.  
 
The safety and clinical performance of market -released CRT systems have been demonstrated through 
previous clinical studies. All products used within this study are FDA approved and market -released. 
Therefore, it is not anticipated that subjects enrolled in this study will be exposed to any risks beyond those normally associated with CRT systems, transvenous lead systems, or their implant procedure. Because 
only patients who have existing ICD systems  or who meet clinical indications for ICD implant  will receive 
Protocol version  [ADDRESS_14185] will remain in the study for intention to treat analysis, but the investigator will avoid any 
procedures that may be determined harmful.Study subjects will receive a CRT device with the associated three leads (one right atrial, one right ventricular and one left ventricular lead).  
 
The risks normally associated with the implant of the CRT system include, but are not limited to the 
following s: pain, swelling and/or bruising around the device, collection of blood (hematoma) or fluid 
(seroma) in the tissues, infection, allergy to the device material , movement of the device from its original 
location, or generator erosion through the skin over time. The risks normally related to the use of 
transvenous lead systems include, but are not limited to the following: cardiac perforation, cardiac 
tamponade, pneumothorax, pericardial effusion, pericarditis, valve damage, thromboembolism, 
endocarditis, ventricular fibrillation or other arrhythmias, non -cardiac muscle and/or nerve stimulation, 
myopotential sensing, hemothorax, thrombosis, heart failure, tissue necrosis or infection. The pacemaker, software, or programmer may malfunction and fail to detect and/or treat arrhythmia leading to death. Other 
potential adverse events related to the leads include, but are not limited to, the following: lead insulation 
failure, lead breakage difficulty removing the lead, poor connection to the device, elevated thresholds, lead 
damage lead disloged from its original location that may require that the lead be replaced or repositioned. 
Additional risks associated with the CRT system include, but are not limited to:  
• The placement of the LV lead requires the use of a dye to conduct the venogram.  
With the venogram there is a risk of an allergic reaction to this x -ray dye that  
Could result in serious injury (such as shock or death). There is also a chance that the dye may damage the kidneys.  
• Exposure to an increased amount of radiation through fluoroscopy and x-rays. 
• Vein wall rupture, dissection and perforation of the coronary sinus, cardiac vein,  
• Myocardium or pericardium from the left ventricular pacing lead or implant tool.  
• Due to the nature of the coronary sinus anatomy, a chronically implanted coronary sinus lead may 
be more difficult to remove than a traditional endocardial lead.  
• There may be risks associated with worsening of the subject’s heart failure. 
• Complications during surgery include, but are not limited to: stroke, heart attack, blood clots, bleeding, and death.  
• The Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (CRT) is considered investigational and/or outside current medical guidelines in qualifying patients and may be no more effective or less effective than optimal 
medical therapy.  
• Study -related blood tests (e.g. BNP) might cause mild discomfort or irritation or some discomfort 
following blood draw.  
• Contrast agent allergy is usually infrequent and symptoms are shortness of breath, hives, itching, 
back pain, chest pain, or rash; allergic and potentially life threatening hypersensitivity reactions may 
occur rarely, including anaphylactoid and/or anaphylactic reactions, shock, bronchospasm, tongue and/or throat swelling, decreased oxygen saturation, and loss of consciousness.  
 
Risk Minimization  
The potential risks associated with the commercially available CRT implant were identified and have been successfully mitigated from clinical practice. Any potential risks associated with this study are further minimized by [CONTACT_14880]. A Data Monitoring Committee will be formed to review safety 
issues as part of the study. In addition, investigators will be actively involved in the implantation and follow -
up of the subjects implanted with the CRT systems. Risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_14881], during, and after implant of the CRT. Prior to implant, it is recommended subjects undergo a 
complete cardiac evaluation. After implantation, subjects will be followed at regular intervals to monitor the 
condition of the implanted system and the battery.  At each protocol required follow -up, , the investigator 
must interrogate the CRT to verify appropriate CRT function and to evaluate pacing and sensing characteristics and to assess any adverse events.  
Protocol version  [ADDRESS_14186] (UADE) : A UADE is any serious adverse effect on health or safety 
or any life- threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device if that effect, problem or 
death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem 
associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
Adverse Effect (Event) : Any untoward medical occurrence in a subject involved in clinical study of an 
investigational device; regardless of the causal relationship of the problem with the device or, if applicable, 
other study related treatment(s).  
 
Associated with the investigational device: There is a reasonable possibility that the adverse effect may 
have been caused by [CONTACT_14882].  
 Life- threatening adverse effect:  Any adverse effect that places the subject, in the view of either the 
investigator or the sponsor, at immediate risk of death from the effect as it occurred .  It does not include a 
reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
 Serious adverse effect:  An adverse effect is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the investigator or 
the sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes:  
• death  
• a life -threatening AE  
• inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
• a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly/birth defect. 
 Unanticipated adverse effect:  Any adverse effect, the nature, specificity, severity, or frequency of which is 
not consistent with the risk information in the clinical study protocol or elsewhere in the current IDE 
application.  
General Physical Examination Findings : At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be 
recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically significant findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be recorded and documented 
as an adverse event.  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14840].  
Any condition responsible for surgery should be documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the 
criteria for an adverse event.  
Neither the condition, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], nor surgery are reported as an adverse 
event in the following circumstances:  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14841] a preexisting condition.  Surgery should not  be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the 
purpose of the surgery was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14842] 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14843], unless it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14844].  
 
Protocol version  [ADDRESS_14187] to report, to the local investigator, any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to participation in this 
study.  The local investigator should notify the study regulatory sponsor of any death or adverse event occurring at any time after a subject has discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably 
be related to this study.  The sponsor should also be notified if the local investigator should become aware 
of the development of problems, cancer or of a congenital anomaly in a subsequently conceived offspring of 
a subject that has participated in this study.  
 
Preexisting Condition  
A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting condition should be 
recorded as an adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition worsens during 
the study period.  
 
  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects or Others (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_14845])  
Any unanticipated problem or adverse event that meets all of the following three criteria:  
• Serious: Serious problems or events that results in significant harm, (which may be physical, 
psychological, financial, social, economic, or legal) or increased risk for the subject or others (including individuals who are not research subjects). These include: (1) death; (2) life threatening adverse experience; (3) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] - inpatient, new, or prolonged; (4) disability/incapacity - 
persistent or significant; (5) birth defect/anomaly; (6) breach of confidentiality and (7) other problems, events, or new information (i.e. publications, DSMB reports, interim findings, product 
labeling change) that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_14846], safety, 
or welfare of the subjects or others, or substantially compromise the research data, AND  
• Unanticipated: (i.e. unexpected) problems or events are those that are not already described as potential risks in the protocol, consent document, not listed in the Investigator’s Brochure, or not part of an underlying disease. A problem or event is "unanticipated" when it was unforeseeable at the 
time of its occurrence. A problem or event is "unanticipated" when it occurs at an increased 
frequency or at an increased severity than expected, AND  
• Related: A problem or event is "related" if it is possibly related to the research procedures.  
 
At each contact [CONTACT_1155], the investigator must seek information on adverse events by [CONTACT_5147], as appropriate, by [CONTACT_5148].  Study subjects will be routinely questioned about adverse 
effects at study visits. Information on all adverse events should be recorded immediately in the source 
document, and also in the appropriate adverse event section of the case report form (CRF) or in a separate adverse event worksheet.  All clearly related signs, symptoms, and abnormal diagnostic, laboratory or 
procedure results should recorded in the source document.  
 
All adverse events related to the procedure or testing required by [CONTACT_14883].  All observed or volunteered adverse effects (serious or non- serious) and 
abnormal test findings, regardless of the treatment group if applicable or suspected causal relationship to 
the investigational device or if applicable other study treatment or diagnostic product(s) will be recorded in 
the subjects’ case history.  For all adverse effects sufficient information will be pursued and or obtained as 
to permit; an adequate determination of the outcome, an assessment of the casual relationship between the 
adverse effect and the investigational device or, if applicable other study treatment or diagnostic product.  The clinical course of each event should be followed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been 
ultimately determined that the study treatment or participation is not the probable cause.  Serious adverse 
events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up, to determine the final 
Protocol version  [ADDRESS_14188].  
 
Medical Monitoring  
It is the responsibility of the sponsor -investigator to oversee the safety of the study.  This safety monitoring 
will include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events as noted above, as well as the construction and implementation of a site data and safety -monitoring plan (see Section 10 Auditing, 
Monitoring and Inspecting).  Medical monitoring will include a regular assessment of the number and type of serious adverse events.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
A Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) has  been  established for this study.  
 
Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_14847] 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by [CONTACT_5151], retains 
the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at 
least vital status (long term survival status that the subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study 
period.  
Source Documents  
Source data comprise all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in 
source documents.  Examples of these original documents, and data records include: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], 
clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copi[INVESTIGATOR_14848], microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico- technical 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 20 of 27 departments involved in the clinical trial. When applicable, information recorded on the CRF shall match the 
Source Data recorded on the Source Documents.  
Case Report Forms  
Case Report Forms (CRFs) will be completed for each subject enrolled into the clinical study.   
Records Retention  
The sponsor -investigator will maintain records and essential documents related to the conduct of the study.  
These will include subject case histories and regulatory documents. 
 
The sponsor -investigator will retain the specified records and reports for: 
1. Up to 2 years after the marketing application is approved for the drug; or, if a marketing application 
is not submitted or approved for the drug, until 2 years after shipment and delivery of the drug for investigational use is discontinued and the FDA has been so notified.  
 OR 
2. As outlined in the Mayo Clinic Research Policy Manual –“Retention of and Access to Research Data 
Policy” http://mayocontent.mayo.edu/research -policy/MSS_669717 , w
hichever is longer.  
Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting 
Study Monitoring Plan  
The investigator will allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities.  The Investigator will also ensure that the monitor or other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given access to all the study -related 
documents and study related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the monitoring visit.  
Auditing and Inspecting 
The sponsor -investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by [CONTACT_1201], the 
monitor, and government regulatory agencies, of all study related documents (e.g., source documents, 
regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  The sponsor -investigator will ensure 
the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g., pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, 
etc.). 
Participation as a sponsor -investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by 
[CONTACT_5152].  
Ethical Considerations  
This study is to be conducted according to [LOCATION_002] government regulations and Institutional research 
policies and procedures.  
This protocol and any amendments will be submitted to a properly constituted local Institutional Review Board (IRB), in agreement with local legal prescriptions, for formal approval of the study.  The decision of 
the IRB concerning the conduct of the study will be made in writing to the sponsor -investigator before 
commencement of this study.  
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient information for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study.  This consent 
form will be submitted with the protocol for review and approval by [CONTACT_14884].  The formal 
consent of a subject, using the Approved IRB consent form, must be obtained before that subject undergoes any study procedure.  The consent form must be signed and dated by [CONTACT_14885].  
Protocol version  [ADDRESS_14189], Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Pandey DK, Paynter NP, 
Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D and Turner MB. Heart 
disease and stroke statistics --2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2014;129:e28 -e292.  
2. Hunt SA. ACC/AHA 2005 guideline update for the diagnosis and management of chronic heart 
failure in the adult: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Update the 2001 Guidelines for the Evaluation and 
Management of Heart Failure). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:e1 -82. 
3. Ammar KA, Jacobsen SJ, Mahoney DW, Kors JA, Redfield MM, Burnett JC, Jr. and Rodeheffer RJ. 
Prevalence and prognostic significance of heart failure stages: application of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association heart failure staging criteria in the community. Circulation. 
2007;115:1563 -70. 
4. Wang TJ, Levy D, Benjamin EJ and Vasan RS. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_14849] "asymptomatic" left ventricular 
systolic dysfunction: implications for screening. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138:907- 16. 
5. Kannel WB, Plehn JF and Cupples LA. Cardiac failure and sudden death in the Framingham Study. 
Am Heart J. 1988;115:869- 75. 
6. Redfield MM, Jacobsen SJ, Burnett JC, Jr., Mahoney DW, Bailey KR and Rodeheffer RJ. Burden of 
systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community: appreciating the scope of the heart failure epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. Jama. 2003;289:194- 202. 
7. Fonarow GC, Stough WG, Abraham WT, Albert NM, Gheorghiade M, Greenberg BH, O'Connor CM, 
Sun JL, Yancy CW and Young JB. Characteristics, treatments, and outcomes of patients with preserved systolic function hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14850]: a report from the OPTIMIZE -HF Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2007;50:[ADDRESS_14190] spectrum of heart failure patients. Circulation. 2005;112:[ADDRESS_14191] MH and Singh JP. Integrating functional and anatomical information to facilitate cardiac resynchronization therapy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2007;30:1021- 2. 
10. Lund LH, Benson L, Stahlberg M, Braunschweig F, Edner M, Dahlstrom U and Linde C. Age, 
prognostic impact of QRS prolongation and left bundle branch block, and utilization of cardiac resynchronization therapy: findings from 14,713 patients in the Swedish Heart Failure Registry. European 
Journal of Heart Failure. 2014;16:1073 -81. 
11. Zhang Z- m, Rautaharju PM, Prineas RJ, Whitsel EA, Tereshchenko L and Soliman EZ. A wide 
QRS/T angle in bundle branch blocks is associated with increased risk for coronary heart disease and all -
cause mortality in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study. Journal of Electrocardiology. 
2015;48:672 -677. 
12. Abraham WT, Fisher WG, Smith AL, Delurgio DB, Leon AR, Loh E, Kocovic DZ, Packer M, Clavell 
AL, Hayes DL, Ellestad M, Trupp RJ, Underwood J, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11721] F, Truex C, McAtee P and Messenger J. 
Cardiac Resynchronization in Chronic Heart Failure. New England Journal of Medicine. 2002;346:1845-
1853.  
13. Bristow M, Saxon L, Boehmer J, Krueger S, Kass D, De Marco T, Carson P, DiCarlo L, DeMets D 
and White B. Cardiac -resynchronization therapy with or without an implantable defibrillator in advanced 
chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:[ADDRESS_14192] of Cardiac Resynchronization on Morbidity and Mortality in Heart Failure. New England Journal of 
Medicine. 2005;352:1539- 1549.  
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 23 of 27 15. Bristow MR, Saxon LA, Boehmer J, Krueger S, Kass DA, De Marco T, Carson P, DiCarlo L, DeMets 
D, White BG, DeVries DW and Feldman AM. Cardiac -Resynchronization Therapy with or without an 
Implantable Defibrillator in Advanced Chronic Heart Failure. New England Journal of Medicine. 
2004;350:2140 -2150.  
16. Tracy CM, Epstein AE, Darbar D, DiMarco JP, Dunbar SB, Estes Iii NAM, Ferguson Jr TB, Hammill 
SC, Karasik PE, Link MS, Marine JE, Schoenfeld MH, Shanker AJ, Silka MJ, Stevenson LW, Stevenson WG and Varosy PD. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS Focused Update Incorporated Into the ACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 
Guidelines for Device -Based Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: A Report of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:e6- e75. 
17. Linde C, Abraham WT, Gold MR, St John Sutton M, Ghio S and Daubert C. Randomized trial of 
cardiac resynchronization in mildly symptomatic heart failure patients and in asymptomatic patients with left ventricular dysfunction and previous heart failure symptoms. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1834 -43. 
18. Tang AS, Wells GA, Talajic M, Arnold MO, Sheldon R, Connolly S, Hohnloser SH, Nichol G, Birnie 
DH, Sapp JL, Yee R, Healey JS and Rouleau JL. Cardiac -resynchronization therapy for mild- to-moderate 
heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:[ADDRESS_14193], Foster E, 
Greenberg H, Higgins SL, Pfeffer MA, Solomon SD, Wilber D and Zareba W. Cardiac -resynchronization 
therapy for the prevention of heart -failure events. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1329- 38. 
20. Wokhlu A, Rea RF, Asirvatham SJ, Webster T, Brooke K, Hodge DO, Wiste HJ, Dong Y, Hayes DL 
and Cha Y- M. Upgrade and de novo cardiac resynchronization therapy: Impact of paced or intrinsic QRS 
morphology on outcomes and survival. Heart Rhythm. 2009;6:1439- 1447.  
21. Gold MR, Thebault C, Linde C, Abraham WT, Gerritse B, Ghio S, St John Sutton M and Daubert JC. 
Effect of QRS duration and morphology on cardiac resynchronization therapy outcomes in mild heart failure: results from the Resynchronization Reverses Remodeling in Systolic Left Ventricular Dysfunction 
(REVERSE) study. Circulation. 2012;126:822 -9. 
22. Perrin MJ, Green MS, Redpath CJ, Nery PB, Keren A, Beanlands RS and Birnie DH. Greater 
response to cardiac resynchronization therapy in patients with true complete left bundle branch block: a PREDICT substudy. Europace. 2012;14:690 -695. 
23. Mascioli G, Padeletti L, Sassone B, Zecchin M, Lucca E, Sacchi S, Boggian G, Tondo AL, Belvito C, 
Bakhtadze N, Borrelli A and Sinagra G. Electrocardiographic criteria of true left bundle branch block: a 
simple sign to predict a better clinical and instrumental response to CRT. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 
2012;35:927 -34. 
24. Witt CM, Wu G, Yang D, Hodge DO, Roger VL and Cha YM. Outcomes With Left Bundle Branch 
Block and Mildly to Moderately Reduced Left Ventricular Function. JACC Heart Fail. 2016;4:897 -903. 
25. Ingwall JS. Energy metabolism in heart failure and remodelling. Cardiovascular Research. 
2009;81:412 -419. 
26. Osterholt M, Sen S, Dilsizian V and Taegtmeyer H. Targeted metabolic imaging to improve the 
management of heart disease. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:214 -26. 
27. Dzeja P, Redfield M, Burnett J and Terzic A. Failing energetics in failing hearts. Curr Cardiol Rep. 
2000;2:212 -217. 
28. Cha Y -M, Dzeja PP, Shen WK, Jahangir A, Hart CYT, Terzic A and Redfield MM. Failing atrial 
myocardium: energetic deficits accompany structural remodeling and electrical instability. American Journal of Physiology - Heart and Circulatory Physiology. 2003;284:H1313- H1320.  
29. Kirk JA and Kass DA. Cellular and Molecular Aspects of Dyssynchrony and Resynchronization. Card 
Electrophysiol Clin. 2015;7:585 -97. 
30. Gupta A. Creatine kinase- mediated improvement of function in failing mouse hearts provides causal 
evidence the failing heart is energy starved. Journal Clinical Investigators. 2012;122:291 -302. 
31. Ventura- Clapi[INVESTIGATOR_3694] R, Garnier A, Veksler V and Joubert F. Bioenergetics of the failing heart. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular Cell Research. 2011;1813:1360 -1372.  
32. Neubauer S. The failing heart --an engine out of fuel. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1140- 51. 
33. Nascimben L, Ingwall JS, Pauletto P, Friedrich J, Gwathmey JK, Saks V, Pessina AC and Allen PD. 
Creatine kinase system in failing and nonfailing human myocardium. Circulation. 1996;94:1894 -901. 
34. Linde C, Curtis AB, Fonarow GC, Lee K, Little W, Tang A, Levya F, Momomura S -i, Manrodt C, 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 24 of 27 Bergemann T and Cowie MR. Cardiac resynchronization therapy in chronic heart failure with moderately 
reduced left ventricular ejection fraction: Lessons from the Multicenter InSync Randomized Clinical 
Evaluation MIRACLE EF study. International Journal of Cardiology. 2016;202:349- 355. 
35. Wu YW, Naya M, Tsukamoto T, Komatsu H, Morita K, Yoshinaga K, Kuge Y, Tsutsui H and Tamaki 
N. Heterogeneous reduction of myocardial oxidative metabolism in patients with ischemic and dilated 
cardiomyopathy using C- 11 acetate PET. Circulation journal : official journal of the Japanese Circulation 
Society. 2008;72:786- 92. 
36. Lindner O, Vogt J, Kammeier A, Wielepp P, Holzinger J, Baller D, Lamp B, Hansky B, Körfer R, 
Horstkotte D and Burchert W. Effect of cardiac resynchronization therapy on global and regional oxygen 
consumption and myocardial blood flow in patients with non -ischaemic and ischaemic cardiomyopathy. 
European Heart Journal. 2005;26:70- 76. 
37. Alexander D, Lombardi R, Rodriguez G, Mitchell MM and Marian AJ. Metabolomic distinction and 
insights into the pathogenesis of human primary dilated cardiomyopathy. European Journal of Clinical 
Investigation. 2011;41:527- 538. 
38. Cheng S, Rhee EP, Larson MG, Lewis GD, McCabe EL, Shen D, Palma MJ, Roberts LD, Dejam A, 
Souza AL, Deik AA, Magnusson M, Fox CS, O'Donnell CJ, Vasan RS, Melander O, Clish CB, Gerszten RE and Wang TJ. Metabolite Profiling Identifies Pathways Associated With Metabolic Risk in Humans. 
Circulation. 2012;125:2222- 2231.  
39. Dunn WB. Metabolomics. 2007;3:413 -416. 
40. Griffin JL, Atherton H, Shockcor J and Atzori L. Metabolomics as a tool for cardiac research. Nat 
Rev Cardiol. 2011;8:630 -643. 
41. Kang S- M, Park J -C, Shin M -J, Lee H, Oh J, Ryu DH, Hwang G -S and Chung JH. 1H nuclear 
magnetic resonance based metabolic urinary profiling of patients with ischemic heart failure. Clinical 
Biochemistry. 2011;44:293- 299. 
42. Nemutlu E, Zhang S, Gupta A, Juranic NO, Macura SI, Terzic A, Jahangir A and Dzeja P. Dynamic 
phosphometabolomic profiling of human tissues and transgenic models by 18O -assisted 31P NMR and 
mass spectrometry. Physiological Genomics. 2012;44:386 -402. 
43. Sabatine MS, Liu E, Morrow DA, Heller E, McCarroll R, Wiegand R, Berriz GF, Roth FP and 
Gerszten RE. Metabolomic Identification of Novel Biomarkers of Myocardial Ischemia. Circulation. 
2005;112:[ADDRESS_14194] Patterns of 
Myocardial Substrate Use in Humans With Coronary Artery Disease or Left Ventricular Dysfunction During Surgical Ischemia/Reperfusion. Circulation. 2009;119:1736- 1746.  
45. Wurtz P, Havulinna AS, Soininen P, Tynkkynen T, Prieto -Merino D, Tillin T, Ghorbani A, Artati A, 
Wang Q, Tiainen M, Kangas AJ, Kettunen J, Kaikkonen J, Mikkila V, Jula A, Kahonen M, Lehtimaki T, 
Lawlor DA, Gaunt TR, Hughes AD, Sattar N, Illig T, Adamski J, Wang TJ, Perola M, Ripatti S, Vasan RS, 
Raitakari OT, Gerszten RE, Casas JP, Chaturvedi N, Ala- Korpela M and Salomaa V. Metabolite profiling 
and cardiovascular event risk: a prospective study of 3 population- based cohorts. Circulation. 
2015;131:[ADDRESS_14195], Lin JF, Ho HY and Yang 
NI. Metabolic disturbances identified in plasma are associated with outcomes in patients with heart failure: diagnostic and prognostic value of metabolomics. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:1509- 20. 
47. Zordoky BN, Sung MM, Ezekowitz J, Mandal R, Han B, Bjorndahl TC, Bouatra S, Anderson T, Oudit 
GY, Wishart DS and Dyck JR. Metabolomic fingerprint of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0124844. 
48. Wang J, Li Z, Chen J, Zhao H, Luo L, Chen C, Xu X, Zhang W, Gao K, Li B, Zhang J and Wang W. 
Metabolomic identification of diagnostic plasma biomarkers in humans with chronic heart failure. Mol 
Biosyst. 2013;9:2618- 26. 
49. Deidda M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14851] C, Dessalvi CC, Locci E, Barberini L, Torri F, Ascedu F, Atzori L and Mercuro G. 
Metabolomic approach to profile functional and metabolic changes in heart failure. Journal of translational 
medicine. 2015;13:297.  
50. Hunter WG, Kelly JP, McGarrah RW, 3rd, Khouri MG, Craig D, Haynes C, Ilkayeva O, Stevens RD, 
Bain JR, Muehlbauer MJ, Newgard CB, Felker GM, Hernandez AF, Velazquez EJ, Kraus WE and Shah SH. 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 25 of 27 Metabolomic Profiling Identifies Novel Circulating Biomarkers of Mitochondrial Dysfunction Differentially 
Elevated in Heart Failure With Preserved Versus Reduced Ejection Fraction: Evidence for Shared Metabolic 
Impairments in Clinical Heart Failure. Journal of the American Heart Association. 2016;5.  
51. Ahmad T, Kelly JP, McGarrah RW, Hellkamp AS, Fiuzat M, Testani JM, Wang TS, Verma A, 
Samsky MD, Donahue MP, Ilkayeva OR, Bowles DE, Patel CB, Milano CA, Rogers JG, Felker GM, 
O'Connor CM, Shah SH and Kraus WE. Prognostic Implications of Long- Chain Acylcarnitines in Heart 
Failure and Reversibility With Mechanical Circulatory Support. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:[ADDRESS_14196] Fail. 
2015;21:460 -9. 
53. Lai L, Leone TC, Keller MP, Martin OJ, Broman AT, Nigro J, Kapoor K, Koves TR, Stevens R, 
Ilkayeva OR, Vega RB, Attie AD, Muoio DM and Kelly DP. Energy metabolic reprogramming in the hypertrophied and early stage failing heart: a multisystems approach. Circ Heart Fail. 2014;7:[ADDRESS_14197] response to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy in patients with heart failure. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown). 2014;15:295- 300. 
55. Shibayama J, Yuzyuk TN, Cox J, Makaju A, Miller M, Lichter J, Li H, Leavy JD, Franklin S and 
Zaitsev AV. Metabolic remodeling in moderate synchronous versus dyssynchronous pacing- induced heart 
failure: integrated metabolomics and proteomics study. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0118974.  
56. Xu YZ, Chen CF, Chen B, Gao XF, Hua W, Cha YM and Dzeja PP. The Modulating Effects of 
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy on Myocardial Metabolism in Heart Failure. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2016;39:1404 -1409.  
57. Schuchert A, Muto C, Maounis T, Frank R, Ella RO, Polauck A and Padeletti L. Gender -related 
safety and efficacy of cardiac resynchronization therapy. Clin Cardiol. 2013;36:683 -90. 
58. Arshad A, Moss AJ, Foster E, Padeletti L, Barsheshet A, Goldenberg I, Greenberg H, Hall WJ, 
McNitt S, Zareba W, Solomon S and Steinberg JS. Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Is More Effective in Women Than in Men: The MADIT -CRT (Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Implantation Trial With Cardiac 
Resynchronization Therapy) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:813- 820. 
59. Leyva F, Foley PW, Chalil S, Irwin N and Smith RE. Female gender is associated with a better 
outcome after cardiac resynchronization therapy. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2011;34:82- 8. 
60. Krumsiek J, Mittelstrass K, Do KT, Stuckler F, Ried J, Adamski J, Peters A, Illig T, Kronenberg F, 
Friedrich N, Nauck M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14852] M, Mook -Kanamori DO, Suhre K, Gieger C, Grallert H, Theis FJ and 
Kastenmuller G. Gender -specific pathway differences in the human serum metabolome. Metabolomics. 
2015;11:1815 -1833.  
61. Kassiotis C, Rajabi M and Taegtmeyer H. Metabolic reserve of the heart: the forgotten link between 
contraction and coronary flow. Progress in cardiovascular diseases. 2008;51:74- 88. 
62. Xu Y- Z, Friedman PA, Webster T, Brooke K, Hodge DO, Wiste HJ, Hua WEI, Zhang SHU, Hayes DL 
and Cha Y -M. Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy: Do Women Benefit More Than Men? Journal of 
Cardiovascular Electrophysiology. 2012;23:[ADDRESS_14198] P and Holzmeister J. Cardiac -Resynchronization Therapy in Heart Failure with a 
Narrow QRS Complex. New England Journal of Medicine. 2013;369:1395- 1405.  
64. Zareba W, Klein H, Cygankiewicz I, Hall WJ, McNitt S, Brown M, Cannom D, Daubert JP, Eldar M, 
Gold MR, Goldberger JJ, Goldenberg I, Lichstein E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14853] H, Rashtian M, Solomon S, Viskin S, Wang P 
and Moss AJ. Effectiveness of Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy by [CONTACT_14886] –Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (MADIT- CRT). Circulation. 
2011;123:1061 -1072.  
65. Rector TS and Cohn JN. Assessment of patient outcome with the minnesota living with heart failure 
questionnaire:  Reliability and validity during a randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled trial of 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_14854].  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_14855]. . Am Heart J. 1992;124:1017 -1025.  
66. Auricchio A, Stellbrink C, Butter C, Sack S, Vogt J, Misier AR, Böcker D, Block M, Kirkels JH, 
Kramer A and Huvelle E. Clinical efficacy of cardiac resynchronization therapy using left ventricular pacing in heart failure patients stratified by [CONTACT_14887]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;42:[ADDRESS_14199] in moderate chronic heart failure patients. Archives of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation. 2004;85:1513- 1518.  
68. Dong Y -X, Powell BD, Asirvatham SJ, Friedman PA, Rea RF, Webster TL, Brooke KL, Hodge DO, 
Wiste HJ, Yang Y- Z, Hayes DL and Cha Y- M. Left ventricular lead position for cardiac resynchronization: a 
comprehensive cinegraphic, echocardiographic, clinical, and survival analysis. Europace. 2012;14:1139-
1147.  
69. Singh JP, Klein HU, Huang DT, Reek S, Kuniss M, Quesada A, Barsheshet A, Cannom D, 
Goldenberg I, McNitt S, Daubert JP, Zareba W and Moss AJ. Left ventricular lead position and clinical 
outcome in the multicenter automatic defibrillator implantation trial -cardiac resynchronization therapy 
(MADIT -CRT) trial. Circulation. 2011;123:1159 -66. 
70. Gold M, Birgersdotter -Green U, Singh J, Ellenbogen K, Yu Y, Meyer T, Seth M and Tchou P. The 
relationship between ventricular electrical delay and left ventricular remodelling with cardiac 
resynchronization therapy. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:[ADDRESS_14200] of Mechanical Activation, Scar, and Electrical Timing on 
Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy Response and Clinical Outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1657-
1666.  
72. Polasek R, Kucera P, Nedbal P, Roubicek T, Belza T, Hanuliakova J, Horak D, Wichterle D and 
Kautzner J. Local electrogram delay recorded from left ventricular lead at implant predicts response to cardiac resynchronization therapy: Retrospective study with 1-year follow up. BMC Cardiovascular 
Disorders. 2012;12:34.  
73. Nemutlu E, Gupta A, Zhang S, Viqar M, Holmuhamedov E, Terzic A, Jahangir A and Dzeja P. 
Decline of Phosphotransfer and Substrate Supply Metabolic Circuits Hinders ATP Cycling in Aging 
Myocardium. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0136556.  
74. Chace DH, DiPerna JC, Mitchell BL, Sgroi B, Hofman LF and Naylor EW. Electrospray tandem mass 
spectrometry for analysis of acylcarnitines in dried postmortem blood specimens collected at autopsy from infants with unexplained cause of death. Clinical chemistry. 2001;47:1166- 82. 
75. Xiong Q, Du F, Zhu X, Zhang P, Suntharalingam P, Ippolito J, Kamdar FD, Chen W and Zhang J. 
ATP Production Rate via Creatine Kinase or ATP Synthase In Vivo: A Novel Superfast Magnetization 
Saturation Transfer Method. Circulation Research. 2011;108:653 -663. 
76. Dunn WB, Goodacre R, Neyses L and Mamas M. Integration of metabolomics in heart disease and 
diabetes research: current achievements and future outlook. Bioanalysis. 2011;3:2205 -2222.  
77. Gerszten RE and Wang TJ. The search for new cardiovascular biomarkers. Nature. 2008;451:949-
952. 
78. Nicholson JK, Foxall PJD, Spraul M, Farrant RD and Lindon JC. 750 MHz 1H and 1H -13C NMR 
Spectroscopy of Human Blood Plasma. Analytical Chemistry. 1995;67:793 -811. 
79. Wishart DS, Lewis MJ, Morrissey JA, Flegel MD, Jeroncic K, Xiong Y, Cheng D, Eisner R, Gautam 
B, Tzur D, Sawhney S, Bamforth F, Greiner R and Li L. The human cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_14856]. Journal 
of Chromatography B. 2008;871:164 -173. 
80. Reuter SE and Evans AM. Carnitine and acylcarnitines: pharmacokinetic, pharmacological and 
clinical aspects. Clinical pharmacokinetics. 2012;51:553- 72. 
81. Huang Y, Zhou M, Sun H and Wang Y. Branched- chain amino acid metabolism in heart disease: an 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_14857] a real culprit? Cardiovasc Res. 2011;90:220- 3. 
82. Lu G, Ren S, Korge P, Choi J, Dong Y, Weiss J, Koehler C, Chen JN and Wang Y. A novel 
mitochondrial matrix serine/threonine protein phosphatase regulates the mitochondria permeability transition pore and is essential for cellular survival and development. Genes &amp; development. 2007;21:784 -96. 
83. McLeod CJ, Shen W -K, Rea RF, Friedman PA, Hayes DL, Wokhlu A, Webster TL, Wiste HJ, Hodge 
DO, Bradley DJ, Hammill SC, Packer DL and Cha Y -M. Differential outcome of cardiac resynchronization 
therapy in ischemic cardiomyopathy and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:377- 382. 
84. Titman CM, Downs JA, Oliver SG, Carmichael PL, Scott AD and Griffin JL. A metabolomic and 
multivariate statistical process to assess the effects of genotoxins in Saccharomycescerevisiae. Molecular 
Protocol version  10 dated June 20, 2021 
Page 27 of 27 BioSystems. 2009;5:1913- 1924.  
85. Want E J, Nordström A, Morita H and Siuzdak G. From Exogenous to Endogenous:  The Inevitable 
Imprint of Mass Spectrometry in Metabolomics. Journal of Proteome Research. 2006;6:459- 468. 
86. Xia J, Psychogios N, Young N and Wishart DS. MetaboAnalyst: a web server f or metabolomic data 
analysis and interpretation. Nucleic Acids Research. 2009;37:W652- W660.  
87. Wu, AHB, Smith, A, Wieczorek, S, Mather, JF, Duncan, B, White, CM,  McGill, C, Katten, D,  Heller, G. 
Biological variation for N -Terminal Pro - and B -type natriuretic peptides and implications for therapeutic 
monitoring of patients with congestive heart failure,  American Journal of Cardiology. 92(5):628- 31, 2003)  
88. Januzzi, J. Natriuretic Peptides as Biomarkers in Heart Failure. Journal of Investigative Medicine. 
61(6):950- 5, 2013 Aug,  
89. Masson, S, Latini, R, Anand, IS, Barlera, S, Angelici, L, Vago, T, Tognoni, G, Cohn, JN,  Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 52(12):997 -1003, 2008 Sep 16  
 
Supplement references  
 
[1] Functional assessment of isolated mitochondria in vitro. Lanza IR, Nair KS. Methods Enzymol. 2009;457:349-72. doi: 10.1016/S0076-6879(09)[ZIP_CODE]-4. PMID: 19426878  [2] Endurance exercise as a countermeasure for aging. Lanza IR, Short DK, Short KR, Raghavakaimal S, Basu R, Joyner MJ, McConnell JP, Nair KS. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):2933-42. doi: 10.2337/db08-0349. Epub 2008 Aug 20. PMID: 18716044  [3] Chronic caloric restriction preserves mitochondrial function in senescence without increasing mitochondrial biogenesis. Lanza IR, Zabielski P, Klaus KA, Morse DM, Heppelmann CJ, Bergen HR 3rd, Dasari S, Walrand S, Short KR, Johnson ML, Robinson MM, Schimke JM, Jakaitis DR, Asmann YW, Sun Z, Nair KS. Cell Metab. 2012 Dec 5;16(6):777-88. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.11.003. PMID: 23217257  [4] Distinct Influence of Omega-3 Fatty Acids on the Plasma Metabolome of Healthy Older Adults. Xyda SE, Vuckovic I, Petterson XM, Dasari S, Lalia AZ, Parvizi M, Macura SI, Lanza IR. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Apr 17;75(5):875-884. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glz141. PMID: 31168623 
 