 
  
Randomized Controlled Trial of Preoperative Steroids in 
Autoimmune Thyroid Disease  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
DOCUMENT DAT E: 10/22/2020  
Randomized Controlled Trial of Preoperative Steroids in Autoimmune Thyroid 
Disease 
o Dawn Elfenbein, University of Wisconsin, Madison  
o Protocol Version Date : April  2020 
o Coordinating Center Identification: N/A  
o Co-Investigators : Rebecca Sippel, David Schneider, Kristin Long  
o Study Coordinator: N/A  
o Funding Sponsor:  UW-Madison Department of Surgery,  American Association of 
Endocrine Surgeons  
Abbreviations:  
AE = adverse event  
ATA = American Thyroid Association  
Ca = Calcium  
FT4 = thyroxine  
HIPAA = Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
Ig = Immunoglobulin 
PHI = protected health information  
PTH = parathyroid hormone 
QoL = quality of life  
RAI = radioactive iodine RLN = recurrent laryngeal nerve  
SAE = serious adverse event  
SF-12 = 12 question Short Form Health Survey  
TgAb – Thyroglobulin Antibody  
ThyPRO = thyroid- specific quality of life patient -reported outcome measure for benign thyroid 
disorders  
TNF = tumor necrosis factor  
TPO – Thyroid peroxidase antibody  
TRAb  – Thyrotropin Receptor antibody  
TSI – Thyroid Stimulating Ig antibody  
TSH = thyroid stimulating hormone  
  
 
 
Project Summary:  
Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis are autoimmune conditions affecting the thyroid 
gland. Surgery to remove the thyroid gland in these patients may be complicated by [CONTACT_649941]. Prednisone is a steroid medication used to decrease 
inflammation of the thyroid gland in other disease states such as sub- acute thyroiditis, but has 
not been used systematically to reduce inflammation in patients about to undergo surgery. This 
is a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_649932] a small sample of patients about to undergo 
surgery for their autoimmune, inflammatory thyroid disease, and determine if a short course of 
prednisone alters the inflammation of the gland and makes surgery less difficult. This could 
potentially lead to better outcomes for these patients, as well as increased time to recovery and 
improved quality of life. This project proposes to administer short quality of life surveys at three  
time points, as well as draw additional labs to measure antibody levels at times when patients 
will already be getting labs drawn for clinical purposes.  The purpose of this study is to generate 
preliminary data from which a larger, blinded, placebo- controlled trial could be designed.  
Background and Significance:  
Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis are conditions increasingly being treated with 
surgery. High circulating auto- antibody levels in these diseases are correlated with lower quality 
of life ( QoL) regardless of thyroid hormone status1-3. A recent randomized trial for patients with 
euthyroid Hashimoto’s disease showed improved QoL and antibody clearance than patients treated with levothyroxine alone
4. Surgical complications of hypocalcemia and recurrent nerve 
palsy may be higher in autoimmune thyroid conditions as compared to thyroidectomy for benign 
nodules or cancer5, and this is commonly attributed to the greater difficulty of the operation 
because of increased size and inflammation of the thyroid gland6.  
Some clinicians hesitate to recommend thyroidectomy for autoimmune disease without some other indication (such as compressive symptoms or indeterminate nodule) because of this 
increased risk of complications. However, the benefit to patients in terms of QoL and antibody -
mediated symptoms resolution may be much greater
7 and sustained for these patients than 
previously understood. Instead of focusing on comparing complications rates for different 
indications for thyroid surgery, research is needed to develop strategies that can  decrease the 
inherent technical challenges and thus improve surgical outcomes specifically for these 
inflammatory autoimmune conditions.  
A course of steroids is an accepted and proven treatment to calm inflammation in patients with subacute thyroiditis
8. There is low quality and anecdotal evidence that administering high- dose 
steroids in the perioperative period may make thyroid surgery easier to perform, and the 
American Thyroid Association (ATA) guidelines recommend using steroid in the rapid prep of 
Graves’ thyrotoxicosis9, but whether steroid prep translates into improved surgical outcomes or 
improved time to recovery after surgery for patients with autoimmune thyroid disease is not known. The lack of good data in this area represents a critical deficiency in the care of patients 
with autoimmune thyroid disease. Emerging data on the benefits for surgery in this population 
will continue to expand the indications for surgery; c onsequently, there is an urgent need  to 
understand the effects of the use of steroids in the preoperative period on outcomes for  patients 
with autoimmune thyroid disease.    
We will be administering a medication to patients – prednisone – which is not a new drug and is 
not investigational. It is an accepted treatment of patients with subacute thyroiditis at similar 
doses to what we are proposing. The regimen recommended by [CONTACT_649942]: Prednisone 40mg x 1- [ADDRESS_871659] 
infections15. Long term use is associated with severe risks such as fungal, viral or opportunistic 
infections, poorly controlled blood glucose, avascular necrosis, fracture, hypertension, weight 
gain, poor would healing, venous thr omboembolism , and risks to a fetus in pregnancy . Risks of 
a short course are generally  low, as the risks are dose and duration dependent. Risks of a short 
course (1 week) of prednisone include elevated blood sugar , increased risk of infection, venous 
thromboembolism, and bone fractures. The absolute risks in one well done study showed that 
the 90 -day risk of a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649933] a <30 day course of corticosteroids was 
0.05% compared to 0.02% for non- users. Risk of venous thromboembolism was 0.14% 
compared to 0.09% of non- users, and risk of fracture was 0.51% compared with 0 .39% of non-
users. Additionally, there may be side effects of taking the medication such as nausea, 
gastrointestinal upset, appetite changes, mood changes,  or insomnia. The risk of wound 
infection for thyroid surgery is low – less than 0.5%, and we will exclude pregnant patients, 
patients with diabetes who are at higher risk of elevated blood glucose, and patients with other 
immunocompromised states . 
 
Specific Aims/Study Objectives:   
We hypothesize that administering a course of steroids to patients with Graves’ or Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis prior to thyroidectomy will result in  a less difficult thyroid operation (measured by a 
previously validated scale) and a lower rate of surgical complications . Furthermore, we 
hypothesize administering steroids will results in faster improvement in antibody levels, antibody 
mediated cytokine levels,  and health care quality of life as measured by [CONTACT_150499] . 
Over the past 5 years, our group has performed nearly 350 thyroidectomies for Graves’ or 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, giving us nearly [ADDRESS_871660] will be a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_649934] a non -blinded, ra ndomized trial of patients of glucocorticoids in 
patients about to undergo surgery for autoimmune thyroid disease.  The primary aim of this  pi[INVESTIGATOR_649935]: determining willingness of participants and clinicians to 
enroll, rates of follow up and response to questionnaires , and time needed for recruitment, 
collection of data and analysis. The specific aims are for the larger, definitive trial, but will be 
assessed for this small pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].   
These  specific aims are:  
• Determine the benefits and safety of preoperatively administered prednisone for 
patients with autoimmune thyroid disease undergoing thyroidectomy on:  
o Difficulty of  surgery6,10 and rates of surgical complications  
o Serum autoantibody levels  
• Longitudinally assess the impact  of surgical treatment on QoL in pat ients with 
autoimmune thyroid disease 
Outcomes:  
• Primary  
o Thyroid difficulty Scale score  
o Autoantibody levels   
o QoL scores (12 question Short Form Health Survey [ SF-12], thyroid-specific 
quality of life patient -reported outcome measure for benign thyroid disorders 
[ThyPRO ]) 
• Secondary  
o Ultrasound doppler quantification of blood flow  
o Surgical complications ( parathyroid hormone [ PTH] level,  recurrent laryngeal 
nerve [ RLN] injury)  
Research Design and Methods:   
o Study population  = [ADDRESS_871661] of 
preoperative care.  We are doing a stratified randomization in blocks of four within 
four groups of patients, as determined by [CONTACT_649943] (Graves’ vs. 
Hashimoto’s) and BMI (<35 vs >=35). The small block size will allow for equal 
numbers of control and treatment subjects even if category sizes are small.  
 Inclusion Criteria : Graves’ disease or Hashimoto’s disease with positive 
thyroid autoantibodies (Thyroglobulin Antibody  [TgAb ], Thyroid 
peroxidase antibody  [TPO], Thyroid Stimulating Ig antibody  [TSI], and/or 
Thyrotropin Receptor antibody  [TRAb ]). This information is found in the 
patient ’s medical record which is available at the time of surgical 
consultation.  If a patient has not had antibody levels checked prior (this is 
rare), we can discuss the trial with the patient and draw the first set of 
clinical and research labs. If the clinical labs return that antibody levels 
are negative, we will inform the patient that they are not eligible to 
participate and will withdraw them from the study and discard the 
research serum sample. All patients must first agree to undergo total 
thyroidectomy for their disease before they are even approached about 
the trial .  
 Exclusion Criteria : Pediatric patients < 18. Prior treatment with radioactive 
iodine ( RAI). Known diagnosis of thyroid cancer. Diabetic patients . 
Patients on any immunosuppressive regiment (such as organ transplant 
patients or patients treated for other autoimmune condition) . Pregnant 
patients. Patients being treated for active infection. Any patient for whom 
the surgeon feels steroids would provide a clear benefit (ie. Extremely 
high auto- antibody levels with a very large, inflamed thyroid gland) will be 
treated according to the clinical judgement of the surgeon. If a surgeon 
feels steroids are indicated and prescribes them, the patient will not be 
eligible for the trial.  
 Subject identification and recruitment. We will identify patients from our 
own clinic who have been referred to us for consideration of 
thyroidectomy as treatment for their autoimmune thyroid disease.  Each 
surgeon spends time prior to each clinic looking through their patient list, 
and will flag anyone with an autoimmune thyroid disease coming to 
discuss thyroidectomy as a potential study participant. After the normal 
clinical consult, those patients who choose to undergo thyroidectomy and 
otherwise meet criteria will be given the opportunity to participate in the 
trial. This will all occur in the same physical setting of our UW endocrine 
surgery clinic.  
o Because this is a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_649936], patients and surgeons will not be 
blinded to treatment. The operating surgeon is typi[INVESTIGATOR_649937], and we lack the resources to coordinate a study -specific 
preoperative visit.  
 Because participants are not blinded, knowledge of their group 
assignment may affect their behavior. Subject non -blinding should not 
affect our primary outcomes of thyroid difficulty, serum antibody, or 
cytokine levels. It may alter their responses on the QoL surveys, however, 
as steroids can cause a euphoric effect while a person is taking them. 
QoL surveys are to be administered before the study begins, and then not 
again until [ADDRESS_871662] ultrasound 
measurements or surgical outcomes.  
 Because surgeons are not blinded, it is possible that their responses for 
the thyroid difficulty scale will be altered by [CONTACT_649944]. The logistics of having the patients  leave the 
surgeons clinic not knowing their group assignment, then having a 
different researcher assign and provide the medication would be beyond 
the budget and capabilities of our team  for this feasibility trial. We feel the 
benefits of ease of enrollment and ability to recruit sufficient patients 
outweigh the possible bias in the thyroid difficulty scale.  
o There are no additional collaborating sites – this will all be performed at UW 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84059]  
o Identify information extracted from medical records  – demographics, length of 
time of disease, lab values related to thyroiditis disease, indications for surgery, 
surgical data including blood loss and length of operation, postoperative 
laboratory values related to thyroiditis.  
o We know that glucocorticoids may decrease Immunoglobulin ( Ig)G and IgA levels 
with moderate -to-high dose steroids given over short term. (10- 20 percent at one 
week in rheumatoid arthritis  patients)13, therefore we intend to collect serum for 
antibody levels at intervals more frequent than our standard of care.  
o Specimen/data collection, handling, storage  
 Data will be collected electronically (REDCap) on the Institute for Clinical 
and Translational Research (ICTR) secure version of the software and on 
paper. The only data recorded on paper will be the Thyroid difficulty scale 
and the prednisone compliance survey and these will be stored in the PI’s 
office in a locked file cabinet.  
 All information obtained and associated data files will be confidential and 
will be kept in a locked file or password protected secure departmental 
server through the department of surgery (U:). This server is backed up according to standard protocols. All  computer s used to access this server 
are password protected. The risk of breach of confidentiality regarding participation in the study outside of the scope of the research will be handled by [CONTACT_649945].  
 Confidentiality will be protected further by: (1) using a participant log form 
that contains only the minimum necessary protected health information 
(PHI) concerning participants, and storing this log in a locked area when not in use, (2) not sharing PHI with any outside institution, (3) coding data 
collection forms with a consecutive participant number that is not derived 
from any participant personal identifiers, and linking that data collection 
form to the participant log, and (4) storing the participant  log, the key 
linking the code to the PHI,  and data collection forms separately.  
 It is highly likely that these measures will result in avoidance of breach of 
confidentiality outside of the research. In addition, the data to be collected 
are not sensitive to participants.  
o Study Procedures : 
 Eligible patients  will have a diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis, positive 
auto- antibodies, and an indication or preference for surgical treatment 
with a total thyroidectomy. This will be a randomized, non -blinded pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480], and all patients who are eligible will be given the opportunity to 
participate.  
 Preoperative Testing:  All randomized patients will undergo our current 
standard of care pre- operative testing, which includes a clinic ultrasound 
and laboratory testing of thyroid function and autoantibody levels. All 
study patients will be directed to complete the online quality of life surveys 
(SF-12 and ThyPRO) prior to surgery.  Each survey will take 
approximately 10- 20 minutes to complete.  Patients randomized to the 
steroid arm will be given a prescription for prednisone 20 mg daily for 7 
days prior to surgery. Patients will be instructed to take the prednisone 
once a day, in the morning, with food. All patients (steroid or not) will 
receive our standard instructions for TUMS and saturated iodine (in 
Graves’ disease)  if indicated. Our current standard of care for patients 
with Graves’ disease is to take 1- 2 drops of saturated iodine solution 
twice a day and 1000mg of TUMS three times a day for the 7 days 
leading up to surgery. There is no consistent regiment for TUMS or 
saturated iodine for patients with Hashimoto’s in our clinic, but it is up to 
the clinical judgement of the surgeon whether to use these medications 
on an individual basis. There are no interactions of these medications 
with prednisone, and administration or non- use of these medications does 
not exclude anyone from participating in the trial.   
 Day of Surgery : Surgeon will repeat the ultrasound in the operating room  
to compare area of blood flow. As part of the clinical workup, each 
surgeon always performs thyroid ultrasound using our GE Logiq clinic 
equipment, and this includes a single image using “doppler” mode to 
measure blood flow. Surgeons then do an ultrasound once the patient is 
positioned in the operating room to verify incision placement, and for 
study patients we will save one “Doppler” image for comparison purposes 
to the preop image. While the single image is unique to this study, 
performing the ultrasound is part of our routine clinical care and saving 
one additional image takes 10 seconds and confers no additional risk. 
There is no charge for this image and it will be uploaded with the clinical 
image to the radiology digital storage system for the surgeons to compare 
blood flow from before and after steroid administration. Research specific 
blood draw (15mL) will occur at the time of IV placement and sent for 
antibody levels . Patients will be asked whether they took their course of 
steroids as described and we will record their answers. If they report not 
taking it as directed, their narrative reasons for not doing so will be 
recorded. Total thyroidectomy will be performed using standard 
techniques in all patients potentially eligible for randomization. An open 
technique will be used to remove the entire thyroid including pyramidal 
lobe and all visible thyroid tissue. Care will be taken to visualize and 
preserve both recurrent laryngeal nerves and to preserve all parathyroids 
in situ. All removed specimens will be carefully examined for any 
parathyroid tissue and any devascularized or resected normal parathyroid 
glands will be confirmed by [CONTACT_649946], as per our standard of care. The surgeon 
will then fill out the “Thyroid D ifficult y Scale” at the conclusion of the 
operation, either by [CONTACT_649947] . If on paper and coded, surgeons will store the paper 
separately from any PHI related to that subject and will destroy the paper 
as soon as it is entered into the database.   
 2 weeks postoperatively : Patients are all seen in clinic 10- [ADDRESS_871663] of care. Research specific labs of antibody levels will be 
checked for our study patients  (15-45 mL, depending on individual 
antibody profiles of subjects) .  
 6 weeks postoperatively : Patients are all given a lab slip to have thyroid 
stimulating hormone ( TSH) and thyroxine (FT4 ) drawn to check 
levothyroxine dosing as per our standard of care, as well as checking 
antibodies to monitor for treatment success. This can be done at a lab of 
their choosing. Patients will be sent an electronic link to fill out the quality 
of life surveys  (SF-12 and ThyPRO) .  
 6 months postope ratively : Patients have TSH and FT4 drawn again to 
check levothyroxine dosing as per our standard of care, as well as 
checking antibodies to monitor for treatment success. Again, this can be 
drawn at the lab of their choice. Patients will be sent an electronic link to 
fill out the quality of life surveys  (SF-12 and ThyPRO) .  
 
Time point  Procedures  (all standard of 
care)  Labs ( italics are current standard of care,  
black are study specific and in the budget)  Surveys  (study 
specific)  
Preop 
clinic visit  
(2-4 
weeks 
preop)  Ultrasound with color doppler 
quantification of blood flow, 
vocal fold ultrasound  Ca, PTH, TSH, FT4, Tg, TgAb, TSI, TPO, 
TRAB   SF-12, ThyPRO  
Day of 
Surgery  Repeat ultrasound with color 
doppler  TgAb/TPO/TSI/ TRAB for any that were 
positive preop  Thyroid difficulty 
scale (surgeon)  
2 weeks 
postop  Clinical voice assessment, 
vocal fold ultrasound  Ca, PTH,  TgAb/TSI/TPO/TRAB if they were 
positive    
6 weeks 
postop  Laryngoscopy if clinically 
indicated  TSH, FT4, Tg, TgAb/TSI/TPO/TRAB if they 
were positive  SF-12, ThyPRO  
6 months 
postop   TSH, FT4, TgAb/TSI/TPO/TRAB if they were 
positive  SF-12, ThyPRO  
o Study Drug:  
 Rx will be provided to patients randomized to steroid prep group for 
“Prednis one 20mg tabs. Sig: Seven days before your scheduled surgery, 
Take 1 tab (2 0mg) daily in the morning for 7 days Take with food. Disp: 7 
tabs. Refills: none ” 
 Patients will fill this at the UW American Center outpatient pharmacy at no 
charge, no drug accountability procedures are required for this 
commercially available drug that is being used in the standard of care 
dosing and route.  
 Concomitant medications allowed/disallowed: No other steroids or 
immunosuppressive medications , No antibiotics, antitubercular drugs, or 
anti-fungals. No anticoagulants. Caution in many anti -seizure 
medications.  
 No placebo  
 While chronic systemic steroids may impair wound healing, there is 
literature to support that acute (< 10 days), high- dose systemic 
corticosteroid use has no clinically significant effect on wound healing14  
 The prednisone dose is within the accepted guidelines for rapid prep for 
Graves’ disease patients, and is considered a moderate dose. It is 
expected to contribute negligible  increased risk  for wound complications  
in this population where wound infection rates are already extremely low 
(less than 0.5%) . 
• Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
o This is a  study that involves randomizing patients to receive a pres cription drug, 
therefore is greater  than a minimal risk  study .  It is using a commonly prescribed 
medication for a short duration and has been shown to have a low incidence of 
adverse events at these doses and durations. Prednisone is already prescribed 
in a subset of similar patients  to our population outside the context of a trial 
(Graves’ disease requiring rapid surgical prep). Potential problems will be 
monitored and handled by [CONTACT_96193], clinic staff and principal 
investigator . This is appropriate given the small number of participants (15 
subjects will receive the intervention drug), single site, and low risk medication. 
We will not assemble a formal external  Data and Safety monitoring committee. .  
o [CONTACT_649951] will be notified by [CONTACT_649948] a subject enrolls 
in the trial and of any protocol deviations. Adverse events from the study 
medication will be reported immediately. We anticipate that the manner in which 
subjects will rep ort adverse events is by (1) directly notifying the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_649938], (2) calling our clinic 
staff who will notify [CONTACT_649951], or (3) by [CONTACT_649949].  
o Protocol violations and deviations, side effects, and adverse events will be noted 
in the secure RedCap database.  
o A monthly clinical research meeting occurs among our group to discuss all 
clinical research, and this study will become a standing item on our agenda 
during the duration of the trial for any surgeon to discuss possible adverse events 
or concerns  
o Given low rates of wound infection in this population, any wound infection 
requiring treatment with antibiotics in the steroid group will be considered an 
adverse event  (AE) and will be investigated immediately by [CONTACT_1961]  [INVESTIGATOR_649939], and reported to the IRB within 14 business 
days  If a wound infection requires an operation, it is considered a serious 
adverse event (SAE), although it is not immediately life threatening or debilitating 
to other subjects, so also will be reported with [ADDRESS_871664] concerns (redness, warmth, 
drainage) about  their incisions. No specific study -specific instructions will be 
given to study subjects, we will simply ask them to call the clinic staff if they have 
any concerns, and clinic staff will be trained to immediately notify [CONTACT_649951] if 
a study patient reports wound complications.  
• Statistical Considerations: Provides an explanation as to why the number of subjects 
was chosen and the means for analyzing data will meet the specific aims/study 
objectives  
o As a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], feasibility study, the size of 30  is based on our estimate of a 
realistic recruitment rate for the future definitive trial. We see approximately 70 
potential subjects in our clinics per year, and our listed exclusion criteria are rare 
in our population. We estimate that fewer than one fourth will not meet criteria , 
and an additional one fourth may  decline to participate. From the patient 
perspective, enrollment involves only answering QoL surveys and possibly taking 
a medication 1 week prior to surgery, the risks and effort are not much greater, 
which is why we estimate a generous rate of inclusion. We are giving ourselves 1 
year to enroll all 30 patients (with an additional [ADDRESS_871665] follow up 
data).   Our biostatistics team has already been engaged and feels this is an 
aggressive but realistic expectation. For all primary aims, data will be analyzed 
using a mixed model two -way analysis of variance examining the effects of the 
treatment group. When appropriate, t -tests comparing the steroid prep vs non-
steroid prep groups will be performed. Our WISOR biostatistics core will perform 
this analysis using SAS statistical software. This supplemental data analysis will 
then be used to obtain a sample size calculation for our future study.  
o There is no planned interim analyses  for this short study  
o The data will be analyzed in an “intent -to-treat” fashion with groups being 
analyzed based on their initial group and not on whether or not they report taking 
the steroid medication. However, if large numbers of patients report not taking 
the medication as directed, this is very important information for our future larger 
study  and we will record patient responses and reasons for this.  
o Drop -outs are not expected in high numbers for this population. Everyone who 
undergoes thyroidectomy  requires levothyroxine therapy postoperatively, and we 
follow all of our patients very closely for at least 6 weeks. It is possible that the 6 
month data will be more challenging to obtain, and that is also very important 
information to know in this feasibility trial. 
• Data and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: Addresses how data will be captured, protected, and shared 
with others  
o The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_649940]  
o Data confidentiality will be assured by  [CONTACT_649950], storing coding keys and data 
separately, as previously described.  Data will be destroyed 10 years after 
publication of study findings.  
 
• Bibliography & References Cited:  
1. Ott J, Promberger R, Kober F, et al. Hashimoto's thyroiditis affects symptom load and 
quality of life unrelated to hypothyroidism: a prospective case- control study in women 
undergoing thyroidectomy for benign goiter. Thyroid : official journal of the American 
Thyroid Association. 2011;21(2):161- 167.  
2. Bektas Uysal H, Ayhan M. Autoimmunity affects health -related quality of life in 
patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2016;32(8):427- 433.  
3. Frohlich E, Wahl R. Thyroid Autoimmunity: Role of Anti -thyroid Antibodies in 
Thyroid and Extra- Thyroidal Diseases. Front Immunol. 2017;8:521.  
4. Guldvog I, Reitsma LC, Johnsen L, et al. Thyroidectomy Versus Medical Management 
for Euthyroid Patients With Hashimoto Disease and Persisting Symptoms: A Randomized Trial. Ann Intern Med. 2019;170(7):453- 464.  
5. Thomusch O, Sekulla C, Billmann F, Seifert G, Dralle H, Lorenz K. Risk profile analysis 
and complications after surgery for autoimmune thyroid disease. The British journal of surgery. 2018;105(6):677- 685.  
6. Schneider DF, Mazeh H, Oltmann SC, Chen H, Sippel RS. Novel thyroidectomy 
difficulty scale correlates with operative times. World journal of surgery. 
2014;38(8):1984- 1989.  
7. Mirallie E, Borel F, Tresallet C, et al. Impact of total thyroidectomy on quality of life 
at 6 months: the prospective ThyrQoL multicentre trial. European journal of 
endocrinology / European Federation of Endocrine Societies. 2019.  
8. Sato J, Uchida T, Komiya K, et al. Comparison of the therapeutic effects of 
prednisolone and nonsteroidal anti- inflammatory drugs in patients with subacute 
thyroiditis. Endocrine. 2017;55(1):209 -214.  
9. Ross DS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. 2016 American Thyroid Association Guidelines 
for Diagnosis and Management of Hyperthyroidism and Other Causes of Thyrotoxicosis. 
Thyroid : official journal of the American Thyroid Association. 2016;26(10):1343- 1421.  
10. Bothra S, Sabaretnam M, Kannujia A, et al. Patient, thyroid, and surgeon related 
factors that make thyroidectomy difficult- cohort study. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 
2020;49:14- 18. 
11. Sencar ME, Calapkulu M, Sakiz D, et al. An Evaluation of the Results of the Steroid 
and Non -steroidal Anti- inflammatory Drug Treatments in Subacute Thyroiditis in 
relation to Persistent Hypothyroidism and Recurrence. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):[ZIP_CODE].  
12. Marchiori RC, Pereira LAF, Naujorks AA, et al. Improvement of blood inflammatory 
marker levels in patients with hypothyroidism under levothyroxine treatment. BMC 
Endocr Disord. 2015;15:32- 32. 
13. Fan PT, Yu DT, Clements PJ, Fowlston S, Eisman J, Bluestone R. Effect of 
corticosteroids on the human immune response: comparison of one and three daily 1 gm intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone. J Lab Clin Med. 1978;91(4):625- 634.  
14. Wang AS, Armstrong EJ, Armstrong AW. Corticosteroids and wound healing: clinical considerations in the perioperative period. Am J Surg. 2013;206(3):410- 715. Waljee 
AW, Rogers MAM, Lin P, Singal AG, Stein JD, Marks RM, Ayanian JZ, Nallamothu BK. Short term use of oral corticosteroids and related harms among adults in the [LOCATION_002]: population based cohort study. BMJ  2017;357:j1415  
 