Official Title: Optimizing Decision Making About Breast Reconstruction After Mastectomy: A 
Patient -Centered Approach  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date:  05/07/[ADDRESS_1043404] a clinical decision  support  tool that is 
risk-stratified and reflective of patients' preferences  and clinical needs.  
In this phase of th e project , the effectiveness of the tool will be evaluated  through a 
randomized control led trial. Eligible patients will be identified through char t review. We will  
recruit patients who are scheduled for a plastic/reconstruction consultation with one of the 
surgeons who has agreed to  participate. We will also identify patients who have completed a 
mastectomy, or are scheduled for one, and may be  cons idering reconstruction, but do not have 
an appointment with a plastic/reconstructive surgeon. A study team member will phone the 
patient to determine her interest and  ask her to come to their scheduled appointment [ADDRESS_1043405] an appointment with a 
plastic/reconstructive  surgeon, a study team member will phone the patient to determine their 
interest, and if they would like to participate,  obtain phone consent. Patients will be 
randomized using computer random assignment, block size of 4. Patients will  either interact 
with the decision tool (BREASTChoice ) or the usual care American Society of Plastic Surgeons  
booklet “Breast Reconstruction ” depending on random assignment.  Both groups will be asked 
to answ er a survey containing the same outcome measures and sociodemographic information. 
The pre-reconstruction Breast -Q will be administered to participants who did not complete it as  
part of standard of care. After the appointment, we will collect information about the duration 
of the consultation , decision process quality, and shared decision making  measures.  We will 
also document reconstruction outcome (receipt or not, type, and timing) from the EHR. The 
patient  participation time is expected to be approximately [ADDRESS_1043406] patient is 
enrolled, we will ask participating  surgeons to answer a short follow -up survey about their 
experience and offer feedback about the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
For this clinical trial portion , 120 eligible patients , 60 per randomized group,  were  enrolled for 
evaluation of the clinical decision tool ( CDT). Descriptive statistics were computed. Groups were 
compared across demographics and variables to  ensure the randomization procedure produced 
balanced groups. The primary outcomes of this phase  include d knowledge,  decision process 
quality subscale of the Decision Quality Index ( DQI), and decisional conflict evaluated by [CONTACT_761877] ( DCS), while all others are secondary  or explor atory outcomes. 
Secondary outcomes included: preferences and preference concordance, quality of life as 
assessed by [CONTACT_761878] -Q, patient activation, shared decision -making, and treatment received. 
Implementation outcomes included: time spent using BREASTC hoice , clinical consultation time, 
and usability of the CDT. Covariates were considered including: age, education, race, ethnicity, 
household income, zip code of residence, stage of disease, health insurance status, and 
subjective health literacy. Proper t ransformation (e.g., logarithm and square root) will be 
considered for conformation to normality  whenever normality is assumed. Relationship among 
outcomes will be evaluated based on pairwise Pearson or  Spearman correlation coefficient. To 
determine whet her the CDT increased  knowledge about options and reduced  the number of 
individuals uncertain about their choice as well as whether CDT impacts other outcomes we 
conduct ed a linear regression model examining the relationship between group (decision tool 
vs. usual care) and outcomes  controlling for health literacy and provider . Significance of α=0.05 
was used; all tests were two -sided.  
Feedback from 4 supporting physicians who allowed study team to recruit in their clinics will 
also be assessed.  
 