  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662443]. #350  
San Diego, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: [PHONE_10638]  
Fax: [PHONE_10639]  
[EMAIL_9731]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 2  
Proposed starting date: August  1, [ADDRESS_662444] -Treatme nt Satisfaction Questionnaire 27  
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 3  
I. Background and Significance  
A. Historical background  
Deoxycholic acid (ATX -101; Kybella) is an FDA -approved injectable for t he 
treatment of submental fat. Unwanted upper inner thigh fat is a common aesthetic 
complaint from patients, and current treatment options include liposuction and 
cryolipolysis (CoolSculpting , Allergan , Irvine , CA ). Liposuction is an invasive surgical 
procedure, w ith rare but serious risks including nerve damage, bleeding, fat embolization, 
and complications from anesthesia.1 Cryolipolysis is a non -invasive option, but adverse 
effects include up to two weeks of pain and aching; temporary redness, swelling, or 
bruising; and very rarely, paradoxical adipose hyperplasia.[ADDRESS_662445] adipocyte cell membrane damage.3,4 Histologically, it appears that 
deoxycholic acid  causes adipocytolysis by  [CONTACT_512166], which 
involves predominantly neutrophils, followed by T -cells. Debris is digested by  
[CONTACT_179968], and delayed fibrosis is also present.3,6-8 
 Phosphatidylcholine with deoxycholic acid (PC/DC) has been studied as an agent 
for injection lipolysis in a nimal and human studies.6-8 Lipostabil, a PC/DC formulation, 
has been advertised in South A merica, South Africa, and Europe for several decades.9 
However, high-quality clinical trials are lacking, and PC/DC has not been developed by 
[CONTACT_512167] .3 On the other hand, deoxycholic acid for 
reduction of submental fat has been stu died extensively; with four double -blind, multi -
center, randomized clinical trials , enrolling about 1800 patients,  demonstrating its safety 
and efficacy.3,10-13 It is marketed as Kybella  (Allergan, Irvine, CA ), and is a popular 
FDA -approved  cosmetic treatment. Deoxycholic acid has been proposed for use in body 
contouring in areas other than submental fat.14 There are no studies in the literature on the 
use of deoxycholic acid (Kybella) for the treatme nt of unwanted  upper  inner thigh fat.  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 4  
B. Previous preclinical or clinical studies  
 Deoxycholic acid (ATX -101, Kybella) has been found in several large double -
blind, randomized clinical trials to be safe and effective for the treatment of submental 
fat.3,10-13 In phase 3 trials, doses of deoxycholi c acid 1 mg/cm2 and 2 mg/cm2 were 
evaluated.[ADDRESS_662446] self -rating scale (0 to 6), a clinician -reporte d submental fat 
rating scale, patient -reported submental fat rating scale, and assessment of skin laxity.10 
Both 1 mg/cm2 and 2 mg/cm2 doses were safe and well -tolerated , and more effective than 
placebo in reducing submental fat .10  At 12 -week follow -up, p atient satisfaction  with 
appearance  was 65.4% with deoxycholic acid 2 mg/cm2, compared with 60.8% with 
deoxycholic acid 1 mg/cm2, and 29.0% with placebo.10 Common side effects were mild -
to-moderate pain, swelling, ecchymosis, numbness, bleeding, and indura tion including 
fibrosis.3,10-13 Moderate -to-severe pain was reported in 60% of deoxycholic acid patients, 
but lasted a median of only 1 day.10 Temporary nerve injury, affecting the marginal 
mandibular nerve and resulting in asymmetric smile, occurred in 2. 1% of patients  treated 
with deoxycholic acid, and all occurred with the 2 mg/cm2 dose. All nerve injury resolved 
without sequelae during the study period.10 There were no clinically significant changes 
in labora tory values or vital signs. No  deaths were re ported in association with 
deoxycholic acid.3,10-13  
 Treatment of localized fat deposits with phosphatidylcholine injection was 
performed in 50 patients for body contouring; treated areas varied by [CONTACT_4676], and 
included abdomen, arms, and thighs. Subjects  received one to four treatments of 5 mL 
(250 mg/5 mL) phosphatidylcholine in an [ADDRESS_662447] -inflammatory 
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662448]. Otherwise, no atrophy 
or other side effects were noted.15  
 One pi[INVESTIGATOR_512158]/DC for injection lipolysis of the hips and upper lateral thi gh 
showed favorable safety and efficacy results. Fifteen women were treated. F at reduction  
was confirmed with circumferential measurements and ultrasound. Treatment with  
PC/DC was well -tolerated, with side effects limited to local injection -site reactions,  
including pain, erythema, and edema; itching and bruising occurred in one subject.  
Reduction in cholesterol, triglycerides, and low -density lipoprotein was noted; this  was  
attributed to phosphatidylcholine. There were no significant adverse lab abnormalities  
associated with the procedure, including  in renal and liver function. The procedure was  
well tolerated and  73% of patients reported satisfaction.16  
   There are  no previous reports of deoxycholic acid injection alone as a treatment for 
upper inner thigh fat.  
 
C. Rationale behind the proposed research , and potential benefits to 
patients and/or society  
         The use of de oxycholic acid injection for  treatment of u pper inner thigh fat has not 
been previously studied. Deoxycholic acid injection has been studied extensively for 
submental fat. The proposed doses of deoxycholic acid in the present clinical trial have 
been shown to be systemically safe based on previous large clinical trials.3,10-[ADDRESS_662449]  
 
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662450] Selection  
A. Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  
Inclusion  
1.  Adults aged 18 to 65  
2.  Discrete area of mild -to-moderat e excess upper inner thigh fat, amenable to treatment 
at the discretion of the investigator  
3.  Subjects who score 0 (extremely dissatisfied) to 2 (slightly dissatisfied) on a Subject   
     Self-Rating Scale, pertaining to  upper  inner thigh fat, with the scale ranging from 0  
     (extr emely dissatisfied) to 6 (extremely satisfied)  
4.  Body mas s index (BMI) less than 30 kg/m2 
5.  Stable body weight for previous 6 months (weight within 10 pounds of baseline)  
6.  Subjects must be in stable health, as confirmed by [CONTACT_9870], per inves tigator 
judgment  
7.  Subjects must be able to read, sign, and understand the informed consent  
8. Subjects must we willing to avoid any other treatments to the inner thigh, including 
cryolipolysis and liposuction, during the study period.  
9. Subjects must b e willing to avoid changes in di et or exercise, any weight loss 
program, and any weight loss supplements, during the study period.  
10. Subjects must be able and willing to avoid anticoagulation (aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], warfarin, 
hepain, rivaroxaban) for 1 week prior to each study treatment   
 
Exclusion : 
1. History of  treatment for inner thig h fat, including cryolipolysis, noninvasive 
body contouring or liposuction  in the last year  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 7 2.  Previous trauma or surgery to pelvis or thighs  
3.  Subjects with an unstable medical con dition, as deemed by [CONTACT_093]  
4.  Women who are pregnant or lactating or plan to become pregnant during the study 
period  
5. Lymphedema or edema of thigh  
6. Excessive skin laxity in the treatment area, as judged by [CONTACT_093]  
7. Severe thigh c ellulite  
8. Subjects with any disease in the treatment area, such as dermatologic disease, that may 
be exac erbated by [CONTACT_104841]  
9. Subjects with any condition that may impair the evaluation of inner thigh fat  
10. Subjects with known bleeding diat hesis  
11. Subjects with any known hypersensitivity to Kybella (deoxycholic acid) or any of the 
inactive ingredients: benzyl alcohol, dibasic sodium phosphate, sodium chloride, sodium 
hydroxide, hydrochloric acid  
 
B. Source of subjects  and recruitment methods  
Subjects will be recruited by [CONTACT_512168]. Eligible patients will be determined from the inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
Eligible patients will be informed of the proposed study and its purpose and given the  
opportunity to ask any questions.  
         
      Standard HIP AA authorization to collect research data from the subject’s medical  
      record will be obtained at the time of informed consent.  
 
C. Equitable Selection of Subjects  
The risks and benefits of  the research are fairly distributed among the populations that 
stand to benefit from it. Although the risk of this study is minimal, to be prudent, 
pregnant women will be excluded because of the potential harm posed to the fetus.  
 
IV. Subject Enrollment  
A. Numb er of subjects  
15 subjects will be enrolled in the study.  
 
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662451] and perform a simple clini cal examination, particularly examining 
the thighs . Following the investigator's determination that the inclusion and exclusio n 
criteria are met, the subject be invited to participate in the study.  
 
C. Procedures for obtaining informed consent  
Written informed consent must be obtained from each subject prior to enrollment in 
the study (see attached). The investigator will explain th e nature of the study, its purpose 
and associated procedures, the expected duration and the potential benefits and risks of 
participation to each subject prior to his/her entry into the study. The information given 
will be based on a subject informed conse nt document approved for this study. Each 
subject will have ample opportunity to ask questions and will be informed about the right 
to withdraw from the study at any time without any disadvantage and without having to 
provide reasons for this decision.  
Following this informative discussion, the subject will be asked if he/she is willing to 
sign and date the subject informed consent document (attached). Only if the subject 
voluntarily signs the informed consent document may he/she enter the study.  
The subjec t will receive a copy of the signed and dated document. No study related 
procedures shall commence prior to obtaining subject informed consent.  
The informed consent sheet is to remain in the investigator’s files. By [CONTACT_512169], the invest igator (or his/her representative) provides support that he/she 
has participated in the consent process with the subject.  
The subject informed consent document will be revised whenever important new 
information becomes available that may be relevant to the  subject’s consent, or there is 
an amendment to the protocol which necessitates a change to the content of the subject 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 9 information/informed consent document. Any revision to the informed consent 
document, and written information must receive the IRB/IEC’s approval prior to use. The 
investigator will inform the subject of changes in timely manner and will ask the subject 
to confirm his/her interest in continued study participation by [CONTACT_5657]/her signature [CONTACT_512177].  
In addition, No n-English speaking subjects will be given an approved translation of 
the consent form and the Experimental Subject's Bill of Rights in their native language to 
sign. Unless the researchers are fluent in the subject’s language, a qualified translator will 
be included in the consent process and will  sign his or her name [CONTACT_512178].  
D. Treatment assignment and randomization  
There will be no randomization. Study participan ts will be treated with  
deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 1 0 mg/ mL injected subcutaneously, targeting the medial 
thigh deep fat compartment (pre -fascial). Subjects will receive deoxycholic acid 2 mg/ 
cm2, with injections of 0.[ADDRESS_662452] of a maximum of 
8 mL (40 injection sites) of the study drug, with a maximum of 4 mL (20 injection sites) 
of the study drug for each thigh. All treatments will be performed by a study physician.  
Subjects will recei ve 1 to 4 treatment sessions, each spaced 6 weeks +/ -  1 week. 
Treatment #2, #3, or #4 will be pursued if patient desires more treatment, and if there is 
sufficient fat for treatmen t, per investigator’s judgment.  
 
V. Study Procedures   
a) Study visits and parame ters to be measured  
All visits in this study will be performed at the UCSD Dermatology Clinic , 3rd floor, 
[ADDRESS_662453]., San Diego, CA 921 22. 
 
Screening/ Baseline  Visit (Visit 1 , Day -14 to 1 ) 
This visit is expected to take approximately 1 hou r.  The following describes the 
procedures performed at this visit.  
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662454] will be as ked to sign and date the informed consent form.  The 
investigator will then sign and date the form.   
2. A detailed medical history of information pertaining to treatment will be obtained.  
3. The investigator will perform a relevant physical examination .  
4. Patien t's weight will be obtained.  
5. The subject will be asked to complete the Subject Self -Rating Scale (0 to 6 scale).  
6. If the subject meets the criteria for the study, the subject will be assigned the next 
consecutive subject number .  
7.  Females of childbea ring age will undergo a urine pregnancy test  
8.   The investigator will determine the patient's eligibility for the study.  
 
First treatment  (Visit 2, Day 1)  
The treatment visit is expected to take approximately [ADDRESS_662455] treatment may be 
combined with Screening/ Baseline.  
 
Prior to Kybella treatment:  
1. Patient will be asked to complete the Subject Self -Rating Scale, rated from 0 to 6.  
2. Patient’s weight will be obtained.  
3. Concomitant medications and procedures will be confirmed and recorded.  
4. The invest igator will perform a relevant physical examination.  
5. Thigh circumferenc e measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape  
            measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be measured at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circumference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
6. Caliper measurement of inner thigh skin -fold thickness will be obtained.  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 11 •     Caliper measurement will be performe d at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same site.  
7. Thigh g ap measurement will be obtained.  
•     Patient w ill be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance apart. Measurement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
distance of these sites from the floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
8. Pre-treatment photographs will be taken.  
• Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposterior and posteroanterior photos will be taken.  
 
Treatment:  
9. Deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 10 mg/ mL will be inj ected subcutaneously, targeting  
the medial thigh deep fat compartment (pre -fascial). Subjects will receive 
deoxycholic acid 2 mg/ cm2, with injections of 0.[ADDRESS_662456] of a maximum of 8 mL (40 injection sites) of the study drug, with a 
maximum of 4 mL (20 injection sites) of the study drug for each thigh. All 
treatments will be performed by a study physician.  
 
Post-Treatment Phone Call #1  (Day 3)  
Phone call expected to take [ADDRESS_662457] treatment. All adverse events will be recorded.  
 
Second treatment (+/ -) (Day 36 to 50)  
The treatment visit is expected to take approximately 1 hour.  
 
Prior to Kybella treatment:  
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662458] Self -Rating Scale, rated from 0 
to 6. 
2.       Patient’s weight will be obtained.  
3.       Concomitant medications and procedures wi ll be confirmed and recorded.  
4.       Adverse events will be recorded.  
5.       The investigator will perform a relevant physical examination.  
6.       Thigh circumference measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape  
            measure.  
• Thigh circumfer ence will be measured at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circumference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
7.      Caliper measurem ent of inner thigh skin -fold thickness will be obtained.  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study asse ssments are performed at the same site.  
8.     Thigh gap measurement will be obtained.  
• Patient will be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance apart. Measurement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
distance of these si tes from the floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
9.     Pre-treatment photographs will be taken.  
•   Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance.  
Anteroposterior and posteroanterior photos will be taken.  
 
Treatment:  
10. Deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 10 mg/ mL will be inj ected subcutaneously, targeting  
the medial thigh deep fat compartment (pre -fascial). Subjects will receive 
deoxycholic acid 2 mg/ cm2, w ith injections of 0.[ADDRESS_662459] 
of a maximum of 8 mL (40 injection sites) of the study drug, with a maximum of 4 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 13 mL (20 injection sites) of the study  drug for each thigh. All treatments will be 
performed by a study physician.  
 
Post-Treatment Phone Call #2  (Day 38 to 52 ) 
Phone call expected to take [ADDRESS_662460] Treatment  (+/-) (Day 71 to 99)   
The treatment visit is expected to take approximately 1 hour.  
 
Prior to Kybella treatment:  
1.        Patient will be asked to complete the Subject Self -Rating Scal e, rated from 0 to 
6. 
2.       Patient’s weight will be obtained.  
3.       Concomitant medications and procedures will be confirmed and recorded.  
4.       Adverse events will be recorded.  
5.       The investigator will perform a relevant physical examination.  
6.       Thigh circumference measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape  
            measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be measured at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circu mference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
7.      Caliper measurement of inner thigh skin -fold thickness will be obtained.  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical dis tance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same site.  
8.     Thigh gap measurement will be obtained.  
• Patient will be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance a part. Measurement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 14 distance of these sites from the floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
9.     Pre-treatment photographs will be taken.  
•   Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposterior and posteroanterior photos will be taken.  
 
Treatment:  
10. Deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 10 mg/ mL will be inj ected subcutaneously, targ eting  
the medial thigh deep fat compartment (pre -fascial). Subjects will receive 
deoxycholic acid 2 mg/ cm2, with injections of 0.[ADDRESS_662461] 
of a ma ximum of 8 mL (40 injection sites) of the study drug, with a maximum of 4 
mL (20 injection sites) of the study drug for each thigh. All treatments will be 
performed by a study physician.  
 
Post-Treatment Phone Call # 3 (~Day 73 to 101 ) 
Phone call expected to  take [ADDRESS_662462] treatment. All adverse events will be recorded.  
 
Fourth Treatment (+/-) (Day 106 to 148)  
The treatment visit is expected to take approximat ely 1 hour.  
 
Prior to Kybella treatment:  
1.         Patient will be asked to complete the Subject Self -Rating Scale, rated from 0 
to 6. 
2.       Patient’s weight will be obtained.  
3.       Concomitant medications and procedures will be confirmed and recorded.  
4.       Adverse events will be recorded.  
5.       The investigator will perform a relevant physical examination.  
6.       Thigh circumference measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 15             measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be measured at site o f maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circumference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
7.      Caliper measurement of inner thigh skin -fold th ickness will be obtained.  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the sa me site.  
8.     Thigh gap measurement will be obtained.  
• Patient will be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance apart. Measurement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
distance of these sites from the floor will be meas ured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
9.     Pre-treatment photographs will be taken.  
• Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposterior and posteroanter ior photos will be taken.  
 
Treatment:  
10. Deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 10 mg/ mL will be inj ected subcutaneously, targeting  
the medial thigh deep fat compartment (pre -fascial). Subjects will receive 
deoxycholic acid 2 mg/ cm2, with injections of 0.[ADDRESS_662463] 
of a maximum of 8 mL (40 injection sites) of the study drug, with a maximum of 4 
mL (20 injection sites) of the study drug for each thigh. All treatme nts will be 
performed by a study physician.  
 
Post-Treatment Phone Call # 4 (~Day 108 to 150 ) 
Phone call expected to take [ADDRESS_662464] treatment. All adverse eve nts will be recorded.  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 16  
Week 4 Follow Up  (~Day 134 to 176)  
Visit expected to take [ADDRESS_662465] -Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire.  
3. Concomitant meds and procedures will be confirmed and recorded.  
4. Adverse events will be confirmed and recorded.  
5. Patient weight will be obtained.  
6. A relevant physical exam will be performed by [CONTACT_8647].  
7.  Thigh circumference measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape 
measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be measured at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circum ference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
8. Caliper measurement of inner thigh skin -fold thickness will be obtained.  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same site.  
9. Thigh gap measurement will be obtained.  
• Patient will be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance apart. Meas urement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
distance of these sites from the floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
10.    Follow -up photographs will be taken.  
• Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposterior and posteroanterior photos will be taken.  
 
Week 12 Follow Up  (~Day 190 to 232 ) 
Visit expected to take [ADDRESS_662466] treatment.  
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662467] -Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire.  
3. Concomitant meds and procedures will be confirmed and recorded.  
4. Adverse events will be confirmed and recorded.  
5. Patient weight will be obtained.  
6. A relevant physical exam will be performed by [CONTACT_093].  
7. Thigh circumference measurement will be obtained with anthropometric tape  
measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be  measured at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that thigh 
circumference measurements at all following study assessments are performed at 
the same site.  
8. Caliper measurement of inner thig h skin -fold thickness will be obtained.  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at Screening. 
Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, such that caliper 
measurements at all following study assessments are perfo rmed at the same site.  
9.Thigh gap measurement will be obtained.  
• Patient will be asked to stand with legs at a fixed distance apart. Measurement 
will be performed between sites of maximum bulge at Screening. Vertical 
distance of these sites from the floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
measurements at all following study assessments are performed at the same sites.  
10.    Follow -up photographs will be taken.  
• Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposterior and p osteroanterior photos will be taken.  
b) Drugs to be used  
Deoxycholic acid (Kybella) 10 mg/ mL will be injected subcutaneously, targeting the medial 
thigh deep   fat compartment (pre -fascial).  
  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 18 c) Data to be collected and when data is to be collected  
Data to be collected throughout the study  includes  the items listed in Schedule of 
Events . 
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis  
A. Study endpoints  
1. Primary Endpoint:  
 The primary endpoint will be safety endpoint, as defined by [CONTACT_512170]:  
a) Any adverse event (AE) ascertained by [CONTACT_512171]  
b) One or more serious adverse events (SAE) as defined by [CONTACT_37366]4  
c) Adverse events leading to study drug discontinuation.  
 
2. Secondary Endpoints:  
a) Efficacy, defined as reduction in  inner thigh fat, measured as follows:  
i. Change in thigh circumference, as recorded with 
anthropometric tape measure.  
• Thigh circumference will be measured at site of maximum bulge at 
Screening. Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured , 
such that thigh circumference measurements at all following study 
assessments are performed at the same site.  
ii. Change in inner thigh skin -fold thickness, as 
measured by [CONTACT_416430]  
• Caliper measurement will be performed at site of maximum bulge at 
Screening. Vertical distance of this site from the floor will be measured, 
such that caliper measurements at all following study assessments are 
performed at the same site.  
iii. Increase in “thigh gap,” measured with patient standing 
with legs at a fixed distance apa rt. Measurement will be 
performed between sites of maximum bulge at 
Screening. Vertical distance of these sites from the 
floor will be measured, such that thigh gap 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 19 measurements at all following study assessments are 
performed at the same sites.  
 
iv. Percent a ccuracy by [CONTACT_512172], upon 
independent review of before -and-after clinical 
photographs of the treatment area.  
 
• Patients will be asked to stand with feet apart at a uniform distance. 
Anteroposteri or and posteroanterior photos will be taken.  
 
 
b) Patient satisfaction related to study treatment:  
i. Improvement in patient satisfaction, as measured by 
[CONTACT_464369] -Rating Scale, a 0 (extremely dissatisfied) to 6 
(extremely satisfied) scale  
ii. Scores on add itional post -treatment patient satisfaction 
questionnaire  
 
B. Statistical methods  
This is a small descriptive study, with the primary safety endpoint of the incidence rate of 
patients who experience:  
1) Any adverse event (AE) ascertained by [CONTACT_52168], physician evaluation, or 
laboratory value  
2) One or more serious adverse events (SAE) as defined by [CONTACT_37366]4  
3) Adverse events leading to study drug discontinuation.  
The safety analysis will be based on the safety population, which is defined as all patient s 
who have received at least one dose of study medication and who have had at least one 
post-baseline safety evaluation.  
Adverse events will be explored for trends.  
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 20 The efficacy analysis will be based on the intent -to-treat (ITT) population. In the ITT 
population, patients will be counted in the treatment group upon informed consent and 
completion of Baseline measurements, regardless of receiving any dose of study 
medication.  
In the case of a subject’s early termination from study, missing values will be  imputed 
using last observation carried forward (LOCF) method.  
Baseline values will be those values measured on day of screening, which may be 
combined with Day 1.  
 
Reduction in inner thigh fat, as measur ed by [CONTACT_512173], will be presented 
as change in millimeters or centimeters, and presented descriptively. Percent accuracy by 
[CONTACT_512174], when 
comparing before -and-after clinical photographs of the treatment area, will be  reported.  
Patient satisfaction scores on Subject Self -Rating scale and post -treatment patient 
satisfaction questionnaire will be presented descriptively.  
 
VII. Risks and Discomforts  
A. Complications of  treatment procedure / drug side effects and toxicities  
Deoxyc holic acid will be injected subcutaneously in the treatment area by [CONTACT_28824]  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Arisa Ortiz , or by a member of the study team who is a UCSD 
Dermatology resident physician, under direction of [CONTACT_512179].  
      Common s ide effects of  deoxycholic acid injection are injection site reactions, 
including swelling, pain, numbness, redness, and hardness of treatment area. Bruising, 
itching, warmth, hardness, tingling or burning sensation, skin tightness, hair loss, open 
sores (ulcers), damag e, and tissue cell -death (necrosis) around the injection site are other 
possible side effects.  
Deoxycholic acid injection in submental fat has been rarely associated with nerve 
injury, headache, mouth or throat pain, hypertension, nausea, or difficulty swa llowing.  
Patients will be asked regarding allergy to medications. Allergic reaction may occur 
with any medication.  
 Subjects wil l be provided  post-treatment instructions (see attached).   
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 21 B. Psychosocial (non -medical) risks  
We do not anticipate any psychoso cial risks due to this study.  However,  if any 
participants experience emotional distress during the study we will assist them to resolve 
this stress with appropriate referrals.  Steps to prevent this outcome will include detailed 
explanation of the study and what to expect from the study treatment.  
 
VIII.  Potential Benefits  
A. Potential benefits to participating individuals  
Subjects participating in the study may receive the benefit of reduced inner thigh fat due 
to the study treatment.  
B.  Potential benefits to soci ety 
The results of this study will help us acquire information that may lead to the 
development of a new treatment for reduction of inner thigh fat .  
  
IX. Cost and Remuneration  
a. Remun eration  
Subjects will receive financial compensation for their participation in the study. 
Screening and treatment visits will not be compensated. Subjects will receive $50 per in-
person follow -up visit. Therefore, subjects will receive a total of $[ADDRESS_662468] one of the investigators.  The 
study objectives, inclusion and e xclusion criteria, possible risks and benefits of the study, 
and the information included in the informed consent form shall be discussed with 
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662469] and 
perform a simple clinical examination, particularly examining the thighs. Following the 
investigator' s determination that the inclusion and exclusion criteria are met, the subject 
will be invited to participate in the study.  
 We wi ll make every effort to accurat ely document all data on study case report 
forms. All source data will be organized and filed i nto individual subject binders.  Any 
pertinent notes to file regarding the subjec t shall be documented by a study investigator 
and kept in the applicable subject binder.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_512159].  Study numbers will 
be used to deidentify patients . All subjects must be assigned a study identification 
number that is the only item that appears on the subject binder and photographs.  
Electronic digital images, labeled w ith the study identification number, will be stored 
both in the patient binders and  on a secured hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512160]. Only investigators involved 
in the study will have access to this data. Even with these precautions, there is a risk of 
loss of confidentialit y. If this occurs, the subject will be notifi ed immediately.  
This study shall be performed in accordance with all applicable federal, state and 
local laws and regulations, including without limitation [ADDRESS_662470] of 1996 (“ HIPAA ”) and any 
regulations and official guidance promulgated there under .   
B. Safety monitoring  
Safety data will be collected at each visit of the study  by [CONTACT_512175] ([CONTACT_512180]) . Investigators will perform 
overall efficacy assessments of this study.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_512161]. [CONTACT_512180] 
will ensure that the study is  conducted according to the protocol and that the data was 
accurately recorded. The Principal Investigator  ([CONTACT_512180])  is responsible for protecting 
the rights, safety, and welfare of subjects under his/her care. The Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_512162]: Jun [ADDRESS_662471]’s binder. Any unexpected 
adverse reactions will be reported by [CONTACT_512176] [ADDRESS_662472] occurs, Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_512163].  
 
XII. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_512164] . 
 
XIII.  References  
 
1. Platt M S, Kohler L J, Ruiz R, Cohle S D, & Ravichandran P. Deaths associated 
with liposuction: case reports and review of the literature. Journal of Forensic 
Sciences. 2002;47(1):205 -207. 
2. Ingargiola M J, Motakef S, Chung M T, Vasconez H C, & Sasaki G H. 
Cryolipolysis for fat reduction and body contouring: safety and efficacy of current 
treatment paradigms. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery. 2015;135(6):1581 -1590.  
3. Wollina U, & Goldman A. ATX -101 for reduction of submental fat. Expert 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649] o n pharmacotherapy. 2015;16(5):755 -762. 
4. Rotunda A M, Suzuki H, Moy R L, & Kolodney M S. Detergent effects of sodium 
deoxycholate are a major feature of an injectable phosphatidylcholine formulation 
used for localized fat dissolution. Dermatologic Surgery. 2 004;30(7):1001 -1008.  
5. Hübner N, Horch R E, Polykandriotis E, Rau T, & Dragu A. A histopathologic 
and immunohistochemical study on liquification of human adipose tissue ex vivo. 
Aesthetic plastic surgery. 2014;38(5):976 -984. 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 24 6. Bechara F G, Sand M, Hoffmann K, Sand D, Altmeyer P, et al. Fat tissue after 
lipolysis of lipomas: a histopathological and immunohistochemical study. Journal 
of Cutaneous Pathology. 2007;34(7):552 -557. 
7. Bechara F G, Mannherz H G, Jacob M, Mazur A J, Sand M, et al. Induction of fat 
cell nec rosis in human fat tissue after treatment with phosphatidylcholine and 
deoxycholate. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology. 2012;26(2):180 -185. 
8. Park E, Kim H, Kim M, & Oh H. Histological changes after treatment for 
localized fat de posits with phosphatidylcholine and sodium deoxycholate. Journal 
of Cosmetic Dermatology. 2013;12(3):240 -243. 
9. V. Leroy Young. Lipostabil: The Effect of Phosphatidylcholine on Subcutaneous 
Fat. Aesthetic Surgery Journal. 2003; 23(5): 413 –417.  
10. McDiarmid J, Ruiz JB, Lee D, et al.  Results from a pooled analysis of two  
            European, randomized, placebo  controlled,  Phase III studies of ATX -[ADDRESS_662473] Surg ; 2014;  
38(5):849 -60. 
11. Rzany B, Griffi ths T, Walker P, et al.  Reduction of unwanted submental fat  with 
ATX -101 (deoxycholic acid), an  adipocytolytic injectable treatment:  results from 
a Phase III, randomized,  placebo -controlled study. Br J Dermatol . 
2014;170(2):445 -53.  
12. Ascher B, Hoffmann K, W alker P, et al.  Efficacy, patient -reported outcomes and  
safety profile of ATX -101 (deoxycholic  acid). An injectable drug for the  
reduction of unwanted submental fat:  results from a Phase III, randomized,  
placebo -controlled study. J Eur Acad  Dermatol Venere ol. 2014;  38(12):[ADDRESS_662474] Reconstr 2014;134([ADDRESS_662475] 1):123 . 
14. Sykes J M, Allak A, & Klink B. Future Applications of Deoxycholic Acid in 
Body Contouring. Journal of drugs in dermatology. 2017;16(1):43 -46. 
  Version: Jun 27 , 2018  
 
 25 15. Rittes P G. The u se of phosphatidylcholine for correction of localized fat deposits. 
Aesthetic plastic surgery. 2003;27(4):315 -318. 
16. Hunter N S, El Tawdy A M, Hegazy R A, El Samanoudy S I, & El Kaffas K. A 
15-patient pi[INVESTIGATOR_512165] a 
phosphatidylcholine and deoxycholate formulation. Dermatologic Surgery. 
2013;39(5):791 -794. 
 
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662476] Self -Rating Scale  
 
How satisfied are you with the current appearance of your upper inner thighs?  
 
 
 
 Extremely satisfied (6)  
Somewhat satisfi ed (5)  
Slightly satisfied (4)  
Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied (3)  
Slightly dissatisfied (2)  
Somewhat dissatisfied (1)  
Extremely dissatisfied (0)  
  Version: Jun [ADDRESS_662477] -Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire  
 
1. Were you satisfied with the Kybella treat ments you received for reduction of inner thigh 
fat?   
Yes/ No  
2. Have you noticed a reduction in inner thigh fat, compared to prior to treatments?  
 
No improvement   
0-25% improvement  
25-50% improvement  
50-75% improvement  
75-100% improvement  
 
3. Would you re commend Kybella treatments to a friend interested in reducing inner thigh 
fat?  
Yes/ No  
 
4. Considering the side effects and disadvantages, would you undergo Kybella treatment 
for reduction of inner thigh fat again?  
Yes/ No  
 
 