April 3, 2017  1 
Protocol Title:  A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_896440]-2 inhibition in LAM and TSC  
Version Date: [ADDRESS_1256588] #:   0248466 4 
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_896441], MD, PhD  
April 3, 2017  2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_896440]-2 inhibition in LAM and TSC  
 
 
Abbreviated Protocol Title:  COLA Trial  
    
Identifying words:  LAM, COX -2, Celecoxib, Circulating LAM cells  
 
Principal  Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_896441], MD, PhD  
    [ADDRESS_1256589], Rm. 6 -013 
Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3824], MA  [ZIP_CODE]  
[PHONE_18600]  
 
Associate Investigators:   Elizabeth Henske, MD  
Joel Moss, MD, PhD  
       Souheil El -Chemaly, MD  
       Hilary Goldberg, MD  
    Ivan Rosas, MD  
    Tracey Doyle, MD  
    Gary M. H unninghake, MD  
    
Research Contact:   [CONTACT_896460] -Chemaly, MD  
 
 
Duration of study:    2 years  
 
Number and type of subjects:  12 adult female subjects  diagnosed with lymphangioleiomyomatosis  
 
Ionizing radiation:    No  
 
Project uses IND/IDE:   IND/IDE Exempt - Exemption letter at tached  
 
Multi -Institutional Project:  Yes 
 
Participating Institutions:   Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], [LOCATION_011], MA; Division of Intramural Research 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
April 3, 2017  3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I- Background  and significance  
 
A- Overview  
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is a progressive pulmonary disease which affects almost exclusively 
women. LAM is characterized pathologically by [CONTACT_896461], which typi[INVESTIGATOR_896442]2 , and by [CONTACT_896462] 
(McCormack and Henske 2010 , Taveira -DaSilva et al. 2010 , Henske and McCormack 2012 ). Cystic lung 
changes are seen by [CONTACT_896463] 80% of women with TSC of age > 40 years (Cudzilo et al. 2013 ). 
LAM is also commonly diagnosed in women who do n ot have clinical features of TSC or germ line mutations 
in TSC1 or TSC2 , and is called  sporadic LAM. Inactivating mutations  of both alleles of either TSC1 or TSC2 
have been found in LAM cells from both TSC -LAM and sporadic LAM patients (Carsillo et al. 2000 , Badri et 
al. 2013 ). Approximately 60% of women with the spora dic form of LAM also have renal angiomyolipoma 
(McCormac k and Henske 2010 ).  The presence of the same TSC2 mutation in LAM cells and renal 
angiomyolipoma cells from women with sporadic LAM, but not in normal tissues, indi cates that they are part of 
the same clonal neoplasm (Carsillo et al. 2000 ).  This has led to the model that L AM is a systemic disease with 
neoplastic cells that spread to the lungs via a metastatic  mechanism (Crino et al. 2006 , Henske and McCormack 
2012 ). 63% of TSC LAM  patients defined radiographically developed pulmonary symptoms, and 12.5% died 
from LAM  in a recent large series (Cudzilo et al. 2013 ). Thus, LAM is a major contributor to morbidity and 
mortality in the TSC population.  
The protein products of TSC1 and TSC2 , hamartin and tuberin, respectively, along with the TBC1D7 protein 
form a protein complex called the TSC complex that has GTPase acti vity toward the small GTPase Rheb (Ras 
homologue enriched in brain) (Dibble and Manning 2013 ). Loss of tuberin or hamartin inactivates the TSC 
protein complex, and leads to constitutive high levels of Rheb -GTP, whic h leads to hyperactivation of the 
mammalian target of Rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) (Kwiatkowski and Manning  2005 , Dibble and Manning 
2013 ). mTORC1 is recognized as a master regulator of cell growth, with many anabolic effects that expand cell 
mass and all the critical building blocks required for cell growt h, including NADPH, glycolytic intermediates, 
lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], nucleotides, and ribosomes (Duvel et al. 2010 , Dibble and  Manning 2013 ). In the randomized controlled 
MILES (Multicenter International LAM Efficacy of Sirolimus) trial, the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin 
stabilized lung function and improved symptoms in LAM patients (McCormack et al. 2011 ).  However, lung 
function in treated subjects declined when rapamycin was discontinued.  Furthermore, renal angiomyolipomas 
that had responded to sirolimus also re -grew when the drug was discontinue d (Bissler et al. 2008 ).  Thus, other 
approaches to LAM treatment and/or control are urgently needed.  
Although regulation of mTORC1 activity is re cognized as the major canonical function of the TSC protein 
complex, multiple other effects oc cur in cells lacking the TSC complex, which appear to be independent of 
mTORC1 (Henske and Mc Cormack 2012 ).  We have recently demonstrated that loss of TSC2 increases COX -2 
and PTGIS levels, and prostaglandin biosynthesis in a rapamycin -insensitive man ner, but dependent on 
mTORC2 and EGFR (Li et al, 2014). In addition, celecoxib, a selective CO X-2 inhibitor, reduced renal tumor 
incidence in Tsc2+/- mice, and aspi[INVESTIGATOR_896443] a xenograft tumor model utilizing LAM 
patient -derived an giomyolipoma cells (Li et al. 2014 ). This recently published study motivates the current Pi[INVESTIGATOR_896444] -2 inhibition as a novel therapeutic str ategy for LAM.  
 
b- In vitro and precl inical evidence  
April 3, 2017  4 
 
Preliminary studies  
Our recent publication provides the rationale for this clinical trial  (Li et al. 2014 ).  
 
Loss of TSC2 upregulates both COX -2 and prostacyclin  synthase expression and prostaglandin production, 
independent of mTORC1 (Li et al. 2014 ) 
Prostaglandins are produc ts of prostaglandin -endoperoxide synthases (PTGSs) 1 and 2, more commonly 
known as COX -1 and COX -2. COX -1 and COX -2 convert arachidonic acid released from membrane 
phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_896445]2. Prostaglandin I2 (prostacyclin) synthase (PTGIS) then produces pros tacyclin (PGI2) 
from PGH2. We had previously noted that both COX -2 (PTGS2 ) and PTGIS expression were significantly 
increased, by 2 - and 40 -fold, respectively, in TSC2 -deficient angiomyolipoma (101) cells relative to TSC2 -
addback cells, through microarray a nalysis (Lee et al. 2010 ). To validate these findings, we performed real -time 
RT-PCR analysis. TSC2 -deficient cells exhibited a 101 -fold increase of PTGS2, and a 15 -fold increase of 
PTGIS in compari son to addback TSC2 -expressing cells (P < 0.001).  
 
Effects of COX inhibitors on COX expression, PG levels, and proliferation (Li et a l. 2014 ) 
To assess the effects of COX inhibition on TSC2 deficient cells, we treated the angiomyolipoma (101) cells 
with Sulindac (COX -1 inhibitor), NS398 (COX -2 inhibitor), o r aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] (an irreversible COX -1 and COX -2 
inhibitor that acetylates COX -2, res ulting in production of 15 -epi-LXA4) for 24 h. NS398 and aspi[INVESTIGATOR_896446] -2 and COX -1 levels without affecting phosphorylation of p44/42 –MAPK or S6. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_896447]2 levels and furthermore, reduced proliferation of the 101 c ells in v itro  (Li et al. 2014 ) 
 
Effects of COX in hibitors in Tsc mouse models (Li et al. 2014 ) 
We then assessed the effects of COX inhibition on TSC2 null tumor development in vivo.  First, we 
used the COX -2–specific inhibitor Celecoxib to treat Tsc2+/- mice, which spontaneously develop renal 
cystadenomas (Onda et al. 1999 ). Celecoxib treatment (0.1% wt/wt in chow) for 4 months, beginning at 1 m of 
age, reduced the volume of renal cystadenomas in Tsc2+/- mice by 50% at age 5m relative to vehicle control (p 
= 0.0002).  Then, we assessed the effect of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_36838] a xenograft tum or model us ing Tsc2 -deficient ELT3 cells, 
modified to express luciferase. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_896448] 3 weeks decreased bioluminescent signal as well as tumor 
size. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] -treated tumors also had reduced expression of COX -2 and c -Myc, and had increased levels o f 
cleaved-caspase -3 and cleaved -PARP . Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] -treated mice bearing ELT3 xenograft tumors had markedly 
reduced urinary levels of PGE2, consistent with strong inhibition of each of COX -1 and COX -2, as expected. 
Together, these data indicate that COX inhibiti on reduces tumor growth in two different in vivo Tsc models (Li 
et al. 2014 ).  
 
Evidence for COX -2 activation in vivo i n LAM (Li et al. 2014 ) 
We then examined COX -2 expression directly in LAM lung samples. LAM lungs were found to express 
higher levels of COX -2 in comparison with control lungs by [CONTACT_9064]. COX -2 expression was 
seen in cells also expressing smoo th muscle actin and phospho -S6 in LAM nodules, commonly called LAM 
cells (Li et al. 2014 ).  
To gain some insight into th e functional  effects of COX -2 expression in LAM, 15 -epi-lipoxin A4 
(LXA4), a product of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] -acetylated COX -2, was measured in exhaled breath condensate (EBC) from three 
LAM subjects. LXA4 was detected in the LAM EBCs and levels were increased following  transient a spi[INVESTIGATOR_437646]. We also hypothesized that LAM cell activity might increase serum PG metabolites in LAM patients.  
The mean serum PGE2 level of LAM patients (27.8 pg/ml) was higher than that of healthy women (19.6 pg/ml; 
P = 0.0021). In additi on, the mean  serum 6 -keto-PGF 1
 level of LAM patients (192 pg/ml) was also higher 
than the mean of healthy women (82.6 pg/ml; P = 0.0006).  These results suggest that COX -2 activity is high in 
LAM cells in vivo (Li et al. 2014 ). 
 
Use of next -generation sequencing (NGS) for TSC2  mutation detection  
April 3, [ADDRESS_1256590] employed NGS for sensitive detection of TSC1/TSC2  mutations in multiple settings.  This 
includes on microdissected LAM tissue, in collaboration w ith Lucia Schuger (Badri et al. 2013 ), analysis of 
cultured skin tumor cell s, in collaboratio n with Tom Darling (Tyburczy et al. 2014 ), and on a large number of 
TSC patients with no mutation identified (data not shown).  In brief we either pr epare large amplic ons from 
TSC1 /TSC2 , or perform hybrid capture of those genomic regions using Agilent probe sets, to create NGS 
libraries highly enriched for the TSC1/TSC2  regions.  Following sequencing on the Illumina [ADDRESS_1256591] all sequence variants present at allele frequency > 1%, and then 
review all calls using IGV.  By [CONTACT_896464] i dentified several sequence variants that are present 
at 1-2% frequency, and validated them by [CONTACT_896465] (Badri et al. 2013 , Tyburczy et al. 2014 ). 
 
Current clinical use and toxicities of celecoxib: implications for the COLA  trial 
Celecoxib is a COX -2 selective non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drug (NSAID).  It is used to treat 
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid a rthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and several other inflammatory conditions.  It has 
been in clinical use in the [LOCATION_003] for [ADDRESS_1256592] common adverse event (McCormack 2011 ).  Althou gh celecoxib has been 
associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events, including myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke, th is 
has been inconsistent in meta -analyses (McCormack 2011 ).  Nonetheless, due to this potential risk, LAM 
patients with a history of MI or stroke will not be entered on this trial. Celecoxib and other NSAIDs may 
increase risk of serious gastrointestinal (GI) ulceration, ble eding, and perforation.  To minimize this risk, LAM 
subjects on this protocol will not take any other NSAID, and omeprazole will be p ermitted for use concurrently 
for any LAM subjects on this trial.  In addition, LAM patients with a prior history of ulcer disease or GI 
bleeding will be excluded from this protocol.  Celecoxib and other non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) are k nown to reversibly affect renal function.  For this reason, subjects with impairment of renal 
function will be excluded fro m the trial, and renal function will be monitored among subjects on this trial.  
 
c- Rationale and hypothesis  
  
As shown above, we hav e demonstrated that COX -[ADDRESS_1256593] shown that circulating LAM cells 
can be isolated by a combination of density gradient separation and FACS separation using antibodies to CD45 
and CD235a (Crooks et al. 2004 , Cai et al. 2014 ).  We will use this same methodology followed by [CONTACT_896466]2  in patients enrolled on this study.  We will then use simi lar methods to quantify the 
number of circulating LAM cells in the subjects enrolled on this trial, developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a novel biomarker of LAM.   
Since this method works on a blood sample, it is non -invasive.  
 
II- Specific Aims  
The main objective of COLA: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_896449]-[ADDRESS_1256594] in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_896450].  If successful, this pi[INVESTIGATOR_896451]/III stud ies formally evaluating efficacy 
of this therapy for LAM.  A second objective of this study is to develop a novel biomarker of LAM, the number 
of circulating LAM cells per ml of blood.  
Specific Aims  
April 3, 2017  6 
 
Aim 1:  To investigate whether, in LAM patients , celecoxib  is safe and well tolerated, and has evidence of 
clinical benefit.  LAM patients diagnosed by [CONTACT_463095] (Johnson et al. 2010) and with mild to moderate 
disease will be treated with celecoxib at 200mg PO QD. Assessments will include hist ory and phy sical 
examination, chemistries, complete blood count, renal function assessment, and health status questionnaire 
during [ADDRESS_1256595]. George’s Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015], before and after therapy 
with celecoxib.  Twelve LAM patients at the two sites (BWH and NIH) will be enrolled on this study.  
Aim 2:  To investigate the potential value of novel biomarker s of LAM, quantitativ e measurement of the 
number of TSC2  mutant LAM cells per ml of blood  and/or identification of TSC2 mutations in plasma 
cell-free DNA , to assess disease severity.  We will develop a next gen sequencing (NGS) assay on FACS 
sorted circulating LAM c ells and/or  plasma cell-free DNA to quantitatively determine the number of TSC2  
mutant LAM cells per ml of blood  and/or the amount of TSC2 mutant DNA molecules per ml of plasma .  
 
 
III- Subject selection  
a- Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
We will perform a two-center phase I trial of celecoxib (COX -2 inhibitor) administered at 200mg by [CONTACT_755711] 6 months .  The two centers are BWH and the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center.  Up to 12 
adult women with LAM will be recruited  at both sites , and u p to 8 subjects a t BWH  (between 4 -8 at each site). 
The study will use the following eligibility criteria.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
a. Female of age [ADDRESS_1256596] plus  one o f the following  i) biopsy or cytology of any 
tissue demonstrating LAM, ii) angiomyolipoma, chylothorax , clinical or genetic diagnosis of 
tuberous sclerosis, iii) serum VEGF -D > 800pg/ml  
d. post -bronchodilator forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_31737] ≥ 70% of   predicted and DLCO ≥ 
70% predicted during baseline visit.  
e. Women of childbearing potential must agree to use two forms of barrier contraception after 
screening visit, for the durati on of study participation and for [ADDRESS_1256597] dose.  
 
Exclusion criteria  
a. History of intolerance to non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)  
b. History of current regular use (daily most days of the week) of NSAIDs  
c. History of use of rapamy cin or everolimus  
d. Uncontrolled intercu rrent illness  
e. Pregnant, breast feeding or planning to become pregnant in the next 2 years  
f. Significant hematological (platelet count <100.000 /µl or hepatic abnormalities (Liver function 
tests >2 times normal).  
g. Use of an investigational drug within  30 days of study start  
h. Inability to attend scheduled clinic visits  
i. Inability to give informed consent  
j. Inability to perform spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]  
k. Creatinine > 1.0 mg/dl or eGFR < 60 ml/min   
l. Pneumothorax within p ast [ADDRESS_1256598] year  
r. History of hepatitis or known active hepatitis B or C, or HIV positive serology  
s. Angiomyolipoma of diameter > [ADDRESS_1256599] an ad vertisement on the Brigham and 
Women’s website and on clinicaltrials.gov  as well as use flyers to advertise the study in the clinics and event s 
for LAM patients.  
 
IV- Subject enrollment  
 
The primary specialist or heath care provider, usually a physician, who i s known to the potential subject and has 
first- hand knowledge of the patient’s medical history must (1) give approval for his/her patient to be contact[CONTACT_896467] (2) initially introduce the study to the patient and (3) obtain the patient’s p ermission to be 
contact[CONTACT_66696]. A nurse or study coordinator will review the informed consent with the subject to 
avoid the possibil ity of coercion or bias since subjects will be recruited from Investigator’s own practice. 
Subjects will be remind ed that refusal to participate in this trial will not change the quality of care that she will 
receive at BWH. Study participation is voluntar y and the subject will be advised that she can withdraw at any 
time.  
 
The subject will be given the opportunity t o take the consent home to consider participation. The subject will be 
asked to read the informed consent form prior to the physician or study coordinator asking the subject any 
questions concerning their health. Written, informed consent will be obtained after one of the investigators has 
reviewed the protocol verbally in detail with the subject. The physician will inform the subject that she has the 
alternative not to participate in the study. Subjects will recei ve a signed copy of the consent form for th eir 
records. After all questions are answered, and only after the consent form is signed by [CONTACT_896468]. Subjects unable to give consent w ill not be 
approached.  
 
 
Participation in other trials  
April 3, 2017  8 
 
Subjects will be allowed to participate in other research studi es, as long as they do not involve the use of an 
investigational therapy.  
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities in this study  
Adult women ( >18 years of age) without any restrictions on age, race or ethnic group are eligible to participate 
in this trial. We will make every attempt to reach women of all ethnic groups, by [CONTACT_896469], LAM foundation and the interne t.  
 
 
V- Study procedures  
Prior to enrolling i n the study subjects must undergo the following tests to determine eligibility and baseline 
characteristics.  
 
Screening and baseline testing  Timing prior to start of therapy  
Informed consent  To be obtained before entry   
Medical history and physical 
exam ination  Including weight, height, SaO2, 
vital signs (heart rate, blood 
pressure, temperature)  Within 28 days  
Hematology  Complete blood count and 
differential (CBCD)  Within [ADDRESS_1256600]  Within 28 days  
Electrocardiogram (ECG)   Within [ADDRESS_1256601] 
Bronchodilator spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] , 
TLC, DLCO  Within 28 days  
Abdominal MR I  Within 3 months  
 
Study Visit Summary  
 
Study Procedures  
All study procedures will be performed in accordance with accepted standards of practice. Relevant changes in 
clinical status and medication use, symptom history and adverse events will be reviewed  at each study visit and 
in between study visit by a phone call placed from the research team to subjects enrolled in the study.  
 
Blood samples (chemistry, CBC) and biomarkers (VEGF -D, circulating TSC2 mutant cells) will be obtained via 
blood draws at ind icated study visits. In addition, urine pregnancy testing will be performed at each study visit 
during the course of drug administration. Pulmonary function testing will be performed in accordance with ATS 
guidelines  (Anonymous 1991 ) and according the sche dule outlined in Table 1. Abdominal MRI will be 
performed at enrollment –if not done in the  past [ADDRESS_1256602]. Georges Respi[INVESTIGATOR_896452] ( SGRQ ) will also be administered and scored in accordance 
with published guidelines ( Barr et al. 2000) .  Information on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_896453].  
Table 1: study visits  and testing  
Week  
April 3, 2017  9 
 
 Baseline  8 16 24 
Visit number  1 2 3 4/early 
termination  
Informed consent  X    
History and physical  X X X X 
Concurrent Medication 
Reconciliation  X X X X 
Adverse Event Review  X X X X 
Drug Administration Record  X X X X 
Liver, renal, glucose, 
cholesterol  X X X X 
EKG X    
Urine pregnancy  X X X X 
CBC diff  X X X X 
MRI abdomen  X   X 
Full PFT  X   X 
St George’s questionnaire  X   X 
Stored serum and plasma  X X X X 
Exhaled breath  condensate  X   X 
measurement of TSC2 mutant 
cells  X   X 
Study Windows  
The screening to first dose period will be 28 days. All other study visit windows  will be +/ - one week.  
 
Study visit procedures  
Screening Visit (Visit 1)  
The Screening Visit will ta ke about 5 hours.   
The following testing will be performed at the screening visit:  
• Medical history  
• Full physical exam  
• Medication reconciliation  
• Blood collection as outlined in table 1  
• Urine pregnancy testing  
• EKG  
• MRI of the abdomen if not done in the last 3 months  
• St. George’s Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015] (SGRQ)  
• Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] , Post Bronchodilator spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] ,  body plethysmography and diffusing capacity for 
carbon monoxide (DLCO)  
• Stored blood for all exploratory endpoints  
• Collection  of exhaled breath condensates  
 
Subjects who meet the inclusion criteria will be enrolled in the study and will start taking their medications  
 
Visit [ADDRESS_1256603] starts taking  study medication and will require about o ne hour. 
The following t esting w ill be obtained at this visit : 
April 3, 2017  10 
 
 
• Interval history and adverse event review  
• Physical exam  
• Blood collection as outlined in table 1  
• Urine pregnancy testing  
Visit [ADDRESS_1256604] starts taking  study medication and will requir e about one hour. 
The following t esting will be obtained at this visit : 
 
• Interval history and adverse event review  
• Physical exam  
• Blood collection as outlined in table 1  
• Urine pregnancy testing  
 
Visit [ADDRESS_1256605] will  stop taking the 
medication.  This visit will require about 5 hours.  The following testing will be obt ained at this visit:  
 
• Medical history  
• Full physical examination  
• Medication reconciliation  
• Blood collection as outlined in table 1  
• Urine pregnancy testing  
• MRI of the abdomen if angiomyolipoma  or any other kidney abnormalities  are present on 
screening MRI  
• St. George’s Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015] (SGRQ)  
• Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] , Post Bronchodilator spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] , body plethysmograph y and diffusing capacity for 
carbon monoxide (DLCO)  
• Collection of exhaled breath condensates  
 
 
Early termination study visit  
If a subject decides to stop taking part in the study for any reason, she will make a final study visit. The final 
study visit will  take about 6 hours. The following testing will be obtained at this visit:  
• Medical history  
• Full physical examination  
• Medication reconcilia tion 
• Blood collection as outlined in table 1  
• Urine pregnancy testing  
• MRI of the abdomen if angiomyolipoma are  present on screening MRI  
• St. George’s Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015] (SGRQ)  
• Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038],  Post Bronchodilator spi[INVESTIGATOR_038],  body plethysmography and diffus ing capacity for 
carbon monoxide (DLCO)  
• Collect any unused study drug and drug diaries  
• Collection of exhaled breath co ndensate  
 
Subject study participation may be discontinued by [CONTACT_978] [CONTACT_39646]:  
 
April 3, 2017  11 
 
- At the PI’s discretion in the best interest of the subject  
- Subjec t can’t make study visits  
- The sponsor decides to stop the study  
- The subject has intolerable side effects even at the l ower dose of Celecoxib  
- Subject becomes pregnant  
- Subject does not follow study requirements  
 
Labs performing evaluations and special precautions  
The clinical laboratory evaluations will be performed in CLIA approved laboratories at BWH and the NIH 
Clinical Center.  
 
Investigational analyses of VEGF -D and circulating LAM cells will be conducted in research laboratories at 
BWH and NIH.  
i- VEGF-D analysis will be performed in [CONTACT_896476]’s laboratory at BWH  
ii- Next generation  sequencing (NGS) assay  to detect TSC2  mutant LAM cells in FACS sorted 
circulating LAM cells  and/or TSC2 mutations in plasma cell-free DN A will be performed at BWH 
in [CONTACT_896476]’s laboratory  
 
Transfer of specimens between sites will be necessary to complete the investigational analyses. S amples will be 
shipped overnight on dry ice Monday to Thursday to keep specimens frozen. Transferrin g site will keep a log of 
all specimens transferred. The receiving site will keep a log of when samples are received and analyzed.  
 
Primary outcome measure ments  
We will perform a two -center phase I trial of celecoxib (COX -2 inhibitor) administered at 200m g by [CONTACT_755711] 6 months.  A study investigator will obtain informed consent after detailed review of the consent form 
with potential study participant s. Consenting subjects will be screened at the initial visit based on predefined 
inclusion/exclusion  criteria.   Subjects must have mild to moderate LAM (defined as definite LAM not requiring 
rapalog therapy), have no history of chronic non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drug use, have no previous history 
of treatment with rapamycin or everolimus, and have n o angiomyolipoma of diameter > [ADDRESS_1256606] one dose of celecoxib will be inclu ded in the analysis for side effects. 
Dose limiting toxicity will be graded according to the National Cancer Institute’s CTCAE v3.0 
(http://ctep.cancer.g ov/protocoldevelopment/electronic_applications /docs/ctcaev3.pdf ).  During the 6 months 
of the trial, there will be 3 study related visits. Clinical and lab oratory evaluation is described below.  
Since this dose of celecoxib (200mg PO QD) is routinely well tolerated in the clinical setting in patients 
with arthritis and other inflammatory disorders, we expect that it will be well -tolerated in LAM patients. 
How ever, we will carefully monitor GI tolerance and renal function, since celecoxib can lead to reversi ble renal 
impairment.  
We will perform assessments of clinical, functional and subject  self-reported outcomes to assess 
potential benefit of celecoxib. Since  lung function decline is a hallmark of LAM, we will perform spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], 
which will be interpreted in accordance with standard guidelines (Anonymous 1991 ). We will utilize the St. 
George’s Respir atory Questionnaire (SGRQ) (Barr et al. 2000 ), as an assessment of the impact of treatment on 
dyspnea levels. Finally, we will reco rd the incidence of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], complications from the disease, an d 
other medical problems occurring during the study period  
 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_896454] a specified set of treatm ent related serious adverse events 
(TRSAE). The following two types of TRSAEs will be considered for early  stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_68660]:  
- Death considered to be probably or definitely  related to Celecoxib  
April 3, 2017  12 
 
- Any grade IV toxicity considered to be probably or definitely related to Celecoxib  
 
Subjects w ill be followed for 24 weeks while on therapy. During the 24 weeks of t he trial, there will 4 study 
visits (screening visit and 3 visits while on therapy). Clinical and laboratory evaluations will be performed as 
outlined in Table 1.  
 
Secondary outcome measurements   
We will be performing several correlative studies as part o f this protocol.  
a. VEGF -D levels.  VEGF -D is well -known as a biomarker of LAM, and disease extent correlates 
with VEGF -D levels.  Therefore we will measure VEGF -D prior to treat ment and at serial time 
points during treatment.  As this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], forma l statistical analysis is not planned.  
b. Circulating LAM ce lls.  Circulating LAM cells may  be isolated from peripheral blood of subjects 
on this trial, using density gradient and FACS methods.  TSC2 mutations will be identified in 
these cells, if possible, a nd then the prevalence of LAM cells will be measured serially over time 
in subjects on t his study.  If no TSC2 mutation is identified, then mutations in other genes in this 
pathway (RHEB, MTOR) will be sought. However, we will not scan the entire genome  in these 
analyses , but rather focus on just a few genes.  We will test the number of circu lating LAM cells 
over time to help assess whether the treatment, celecoxib, reduces the number of LAM cells.  
c. Plasma  biomarker analyses . Prostaglandin metabolites (PGE2 and 6 -keto-PGF1 -alpha), matrix 
metalloproteinases MMP2 and MMP9, cathepsin K, and a cyto kine array will be measured on 
serial plasma  samples (weeks 0, 8, 16, 24) from subjects on this trial. Marked changes in these 
metabolites are expected when subjects ar e on celecoxib, and this will serve as a potential 
biomarker of drug effect and complian ce. 
d. Exhaled breath condensates (E BCs). EBCs will be obtained from subjects on this trial at the time 
of pulmonary function testing (week 0, 24).  Subjects will be requi red to withhold food and 
carbonated beverages for one hour prior to EBC collection. An R tube (Respi[INVESTIGATOR_113175], 
Austin, TX) will be used to collect EBCs by [CONTACT_896470] 10 minutes 
without a nose clip. The metal sleeve surroundi ng the collection chamber will be chilled to -20°C 
for at least one hour prior to EBC co llection. The EBC will then be stored at -80°C under N2 gas 
to prevent non -enzymatic oxidation of the parent fatty acids and lipid mediators. Samples will be 
analyzed for prostaglandin metabolites (PGE2 and 6 -keto-PGF1 -alpha) .  
e. Plasma cell -free DNA (cfDNA)  will be isolated from each subject on this trial at each time point 
a sample is drawn.  The plasma will be separated, and cfDNA isolated.   The cfDNA will be 
subject t o targeted next generation sequencing to search for mutations in TSC2.  
 
 
VI- Biostatistical analysis  
b- Data variables  
We will collect information about the safety of Celecoxib in women with LAM and TSC. In particular , 
we will collect data on the  incidence of adv erse events and severe adverse events.  In addition, we will 
collect information about lung function at the screening visist and at the end of the study period. If 
subject has a renal angiomyolipoma  at the screening visit, we will collect information about  
angiomyolipoma size at the end of the 6  months of therapy.  
c- Statistical Methods  
Sample Size Considerations  
Common adverse event rate with Celecoxib provided in the package insert are between 0.2% and 6.0%. 
The below table gives the probability of seeing at least one case of common adverse even t associated 
with Celecoxib, using different event rates  (Table 2) .  
  
Table 2. Probability of observing at least one case of an adverse event  
April 3, 2017  13 
  
Adverse event rate  
Sample size  6% 2.5%  0.2%  
12 52% 26% 2.3%  
  
With th e proposed sample size of [ADDRESS_1256607] one case of common 
adverse event with probability of 2.3% to 52%.   Rates of side effects related to celecoxib in the LAM 
population are unknown.  
 
For lung function parameters (F EV1, FV C, DLCO) and angiomyolipoma size (when applicable), the 
difference between baseline and [ADDRESS_1256608] similar risk. This risk may increase with 
duration of use. Patients with cardiovascular disease or r isk factors for c ardiovascular disease may be at greater 
risk. The cumulative risk is 2.5% over 3 years at the Celecoxib dose that we are using in this study.  
 
Hypertension  
Celecoxib can lead to new onset hypertension or worsening of exisiting hypertension. The rate of 
hypertension in one trial was 2.4%  
 
Gastrointestinal Risk  
Celecoxib cause an increased risk of serious gastrointestinal adverse events including bleeding, 
ulceration, and perforation of the stomach or intestines, which can be fatal. These events can occur at  any time 
during use and without warning symptoms. Elderly patients are at greater risk for serious gastrointestinal 
events. The incidence after 9 months of therapy of complicated and symptomatic ulcers was 0.78% in one 
study, but the risk was 1.4% in pati ents older than the age of 65. Concomitant use of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_896455] 
3.06%.  
 
Hepatic Risk  
The incidence of borderline elevation (greater than 1.2  times and less than 3 times the upper limit of 
normal) of liver enzymes was 6% in one trial. The i ncidence of significant elevation in liver enzymes was 0.2%  
 
Renal Risk  
Renal toxicity can be seen especially in patients with pre -existing impairment of kid ney function, heart 
failure or liver disease taking diuretics. No percentage on the occurrence of r enal toxicity with Celecoxib  is 
provided in the package insert.  
 
Skin reactions  
Celecoxib  is a sulfonamide and can cause serious skin adverse events such as  exfoliative dermatitis, 
Stevens -Johnson syndrome and toxic epi[INVESTIGATOR_896456] . These serious adverse events can 
occur without warning and in patients without prior history of sulfa allergy.  
 
April 3, [ADDRESS_1256609] s: 
- Cough  
- Lightheadedness  
- Discomfort due to technique  
- Shortness of breath  
- Fatigue  
Lung function tests will be performed by a qualified respi[INVESTIGATOR_105489] a nd will be done according to 
ATS guidelines  
 
Risk of questionnaires:  
- Fatigue  
- Distress related to qu estions  
 
Risk of blood draws:  
- Bruising  
- Pain 
- Infection  
- Lightheadedness and/or fainting  
Specimens will be collected by a qualified member of the research team at the time of study visit and 
drawn according to institutional standards.  
 
Risk of MRI:  
There ha ve been no ill effects reported from exposure to the magnetism or radio waves used in the MRI. A 
known risk of MRI is that magnet could attract certain types of metal. Metal within the subject’s body is 
evaluated (this includes certain dyes found i n tattoo s, pacemakers, implanted defibrillator, metallic particles in 
the eye, non -fixed metallic particles, vascular clips in the head, prosthetic heart valves, etc) in order to acquire 
the image data.  
 
Risk of exhaled breath condensate:  
It is possible t hat subj ect may become lighheaded while breathing into the tube to collect breath condensate.  
 
Genetic Risks  
There is a potential psychosocial risk to subjects related to learning genetic information.  However, we will not 
be looking across the entire gen ome in t hese subjects, and will be focusing on genetic changes in TSC2 , the 
known genetic cause of LAM.  In addition, our findings will be somatic mutations, which are very common in 
neoplasms in general. Last, the information is safeguarded and not provid ed to an yone outside of our laboratory 
in a manner that identifiers may be used to identify the specific subject . 
 
 
c- Celecoxib drug interactions:  
- Celecoxib metabolosm is predemoninantly mediated via cytochrome P450 (CYP)2C9 in the liver. 
Co-administration of celeco xib with drugs that are known to inhibit CYP2C9 should be done with 
caution.  
- Warfarin  
April 3, 2017  15 
 
- Lithium  
- Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248]  
- Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin II antagonists.  
- Fluconazole  
- Furosemide  
- Concomittant NSAID use  
- Methotrexate  
 
 
Celecoxib formulati on, instruction and storage  
Celecoxib  200mg capsules are white, with reverse printed on gold band with markings of 7767 on the  cap and 
200 on the body. Celecoxib  should be stored at 25 °C (77 °F); excursions permitted to 15 -30°C (59 -86°F). 
Celecoxib  will be taken once daily with meals.   
 
Dose interruption, modification or discontinuation due to toxicities related to study drug  
Single dose adjustement to 100mg daily is allowed if subject s develop adverse events related to study drug . If 
symptoms persist at th e reduced dose of Celecoxib then subject is withdrawn from the study.  
 
Protection against general subject  risks  
Highly trai ned physician and nursing personnel familiar with clinical care and research protocols will conduct 
the study procedures. Experienced  personnel following established guidelines will perform venipuncture. To 
maintain confidentiality, all laboratory specimen s, evaluation forms, and reports will be identified only by a 
coded number. A computer will generate the coded number at random and o nly the study investigators will have 
access to the codes. All records will be kept in a locked, password protected compute r. The case report forms 
for the protocols will be maintained on line under the supervision of the investigator . Subject s will be pro vided 
with contact [CONTACT_896471], who will be accessible to subject s at all times through the phone, 
paging or email.  
 
All testing will be reviewed with the potential subjects during the consent process.  
 
Celecoxib is a category C d rug before [ADDRESS_1256610] will be assigned an anonymous study ID, which be used on all study 
forms. Any study forms and paper records containing personal identifier information (e.g., address, phone 
number) will be kept secured and locked at each clinical site. No personal identifiers will be placed on 
biological samples and other documents forwarded to central labs and  reading centers.  
Access to all subject data and  information at the clinical sites, including biological samples, will be restricted to 
authorized personnel. Only authorized personnel at the coordinating center will have access to study data files. 
Author ized personnel will be assigned user logon IDs, p asswords and appropriate access privileges to study 
data. Study subjects will be identified only by [CONTACT_896472]. No personal identifiers such 
as name, address, social security number  will be entered into the study database. Any sub ject-specific data 
reported to any study committees will only be identified by [CONTACT_12929].  
Finally, subjects will not be identified by [CONTACT_169351], nor will the data be presen ted in 
such a way that the identity of individual  subjects can be inferred. Analysis files created for further study by [CONTACT_896473].   
 
 
Protection against subject  risks related to the study medication  
Subjects  will be provided with written, detailed instruction for calling the study coordinator or physician, 
including but not limited to infections requiring antibiotics, planeed or emergent procedures, or addition of 
drugs known to interact with Celecoxib. The r isk associated with Celecoxib will be explained to the subject  in 
detail. A plan for dose interruption and reduction is included in the experiemntal plan. Subject s may withdraw 
from the trial at any time, or be withdrawn by [CONTACT_7880] [INVESTIGATOR_730331] a t his/her discretion. The Data and 
Safety Monitor will review routine adverse events and trial results every six months, and serious adverse events 
within [ADDRESS_1256611] risk from the medica tion including:  
1- Small sample size consistent with the exploratory nature of the trial.  
2- Specific exclusion criteria to prevent enrollment of subject s with significant co -morbidities that might 
place them at excess risk (see exclusion criteria)  
3- Specific defi ned dose and holding criteria related to study adverse events.  
 
VIII - Potential benefits  
Participation in the proposed research will not guarantee direct benefit to participants, although it remains 
possible that a previously undiagnosed clinical abnormali ty will be brought to the clinician’s attention. 
Information obtained from this research will provide information about the relationship between LAM 
treatment and patient outcomes. Sporadic LAM and Tuberous sclerosis affect more than 1.[ADDRESS_1256612] implications for patients suffering 
from other diseases as well.  
 
IX-Data management  
Data management overview  
April 3, 2017  17 
 
This study will use  REDC ap for electronic data capture. R EDC ap is a secure, web -based data management tool. 
Data will be entered into R EDC ap directly from the information collected on the source documents.  All staff 
will be trained on R EDC ap.  Traning modules can be accesse d via the website https://redcap.partn ers.org/redcap  
Data entry in to Redcap should be done within [ADDRESS_1256613] entered in the trial:  
 Copy of Confidential Subject Information page  
 Original signed consent form  
 Copi[INVESTIGATOR_896457] t provide written informed consent and signed HIPAA authorization prior to the performance 
of any screening or main study procedures. Subject confidentiality will be protected throughout the study and 
no subject -identifying information will b e released to anyone outside the project. Confidentiality will be secured 
through several mechanisms. Each subject will be assigned an anonymous study ID, which be used on all study 
forms. Any study forms and paper records containing personal identifier in formation (e.g ., address, phone 
number) will be kept secured and locked at each clinical site. No personal identifiers will be placed on 
biological samples and other documents forwarded to central labs and reading centers.  
Access to all subject data and i nformation at the clinical sites, including biological samples, will be restricted to 
authorized personnel. Only authorized personnel at the coordinating center will have access to study data files. 
Authorized personnel will be assigned user logon IDs, pas swords and app ropriate access privileges to study 
data. Study subjects will be identified only by [CONTACT_896472]. No personal identifiers such 
as name, address, social security number will be entered into the study database. Any subje ct-specific da ta 
reported to any study committees will only be identified by [CONTACT_12929].  
Finally, subjects will not be identified by [CONTACT_169351], nor will the data be presented in 
such a way that the identity of individual s ubjects can be  inferred. Analysis files created for further study by [CONTACT_896473].  
 
 
IX- Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
 
a- Safety Monitoring  
We will institute an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board to review procedures and adverse events that 
occur during the clinical study. Board members will not be involved in the active recruitment and daily routine 
of the study. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_896458] a routine basis to the board m embers. 
Board memb ers will review new cases and decide whether the study goals should be altered or the study should 
be stopped.  
 
b- Monitoring of Subjects and Criteria for Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subjects will be monitored throughout the clinical trial for ne w symptoms or comp laints.  
April 3, [ADDRESS_1256614], including any 
abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally 
associated wit the subject’s participation in the research, whether or not considered related to  the subject’s 
participation  in the research (modified from the definition of adverse events in the 1996 International 
Conference on Harmonization E -6 Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice).   
  
Serious adverse event means any event temporally associated wi th the subject’s participati on in the research 
that meets any of the following criteria:  
- Results in death  
- Is life threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred)  
- Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5183] o f existing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
- Results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
- Results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect or  
- Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the 
subject’s health and may requi re medical or surgical inter vention to prevent one of the outcomes 
listed above.  
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_91403], based on appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardiz e the subject and 
may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent on of the outcomes listed above.  
 
An Unexpected Adverse Event is an adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not consistent with the 
applicab le product information per t he Investigator Brochure.  
Life-threatening means that the subject was, in the view of the investigator, at immediate risk of death from the 
AE as it occurred. It does not include an AE that, had it occurred in a more severe for m might have caused 
death.  
Persistent or significant disability/incapacity means that the event resulted in permanent or significant and 
substantial disruption of the subject’s ability to carry out normal life functions.  
Associated with the use of the dr ug means there is reasonable  possibility that the AE may have been caused by 
[CONTACT_33641].  
 
Adverse event reporting  
All AEs (serious and non -serious) will be recorded from start of study treatment (enrollment) through final 
study visit on the AE case report f orm.  
 
All adverse events will be reported to the Partners Human Research Committee (PHRC) in accordance with the  
accepted guidelines. A 24 -hour/7 -day telephone number will be provided for contact[CONTACT_896474].  
 
April 3, 2017  19 
 
The research staff will monitor all subjects during their study involvement for evidence of any adverse events. 
Local study site personnel will report all serious adverse events (SAEs) to a designated medical monitor who 
will collect initial reports and ov ersee medical record retrieval for determination of final diagnosis.  
 
Serious Adverse Events Reporting  
All death s and all SAEs require reporting form the start of treatment through 28 days after discontinuation of 
the study. The site is requried to call t he coordinating center to inform them of the SAE within the 24 hours of 
knowledge of the event. The site should a lso submit an SAE form via fax to the coordinating center and enter 
the SAE information onto the CRF within 24hours of knowledge of the event.  
 
An updated full written report will be filed as additional information becomes available within 10 working days  
(14 calendar days). The report will include a complete description of the event, use of all concomitant 
medications, and the local investigato r’s assessment of causality of the SAE. Non -serious adverse events will be 
reported at routine visits, documented  on a separate adverse event form, and transmitted to the central 
coordinating center. All serious and unexpected adverse events will be report ed to the overall study PI’s.  
 
Expedited Event Reporting  
Adverse events that meet the definition of serious, stu dy drug -related and unexpected (per the Investigator’s 
Drug Brochure) qualify for expedited reporting to the regulatory authorities. The DSMB w ill perform a medical 
review of all deaths and study drug -related serious adverse events and evaluate for “unexpe ctedness”.  
The coordinating center will prepare Med Watch repots for those events identified as serious, study drug -related 
and unexpected as determined by [CONTACT_4318]. The coordinating center will submit all unexpected study drug 
related SAEs as per [ADDRESS_1256615] members.  
 
 
Coding for Adverse Events  
All reported adverse events will be classified using the Co mmon Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(CTCAE), version 4.  
 
 
X- References  
 
Anonymous. (1991). "Lung function testin g: selection of reference values and interpretative strategies. 
American Thoracic Society." Am Rev Respir Dis  144(5): 1202 -1218.  
Badri, K. R., L. Gao, E. Hyjek, N. Schuger, L. Schuger, W. Qin, Y. Chekaluk, D. J. Kwiatkowski and X. Zhe 
(2013). "Exonic mutat ions of TSC2/TSC1 are common but not seen in all sporadic pulmonary 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis." Am J Respir Cri t Care Med  187(6): [ADDRESS_1256616] and P. W. Jones (2000). "American 
translation, modi fication, and validation of the St. George's Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015]." Clin Ther  22(9): [ADDRESS_1256617], T. 
Laor, A. S. Brody, J. Bean, S. Salisbury and D. N. Franz (2008). "Sirolimus for angiomyolipoma in tuberous 
sclerosis complex or lymphangioleiomyomato sis." N Engl J Med  358(2): 140 -151. 
Cai, X., G. Pacheco -Rodriguez, Q. Y. Fan, M. Haughey, L. Samsel, S. El -Chemaly, H. P. Wu, J. P. McCoy, W. 
K. Steagall, J. P. Lin, T. N. Darling and J. Moss (2010). "Phenotypic characterization of disseminated cells 
April 3, 2017  20 
 
with TSC2 loss of heterozygosity in patients with lymphangioleiomyomatosis." Am J Respir Crit Care Med  
182(11): 1410 -1418.  
Cai, X., G. Pacheco -Rodriguez, M. Hau ghey, L. Samsel, S. Xu, H. P. Wu, J. P. McCoy, M. Stylianou, T. N. 
Darling and J. Moss (2014). "Sirol imus decreases circulating lymphangioleiomyomatosis cells in patients with 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis." Chest  145(1): 108 -112. 
Carsillo, T., A. Astrinidis an d E. P. Henske (2000). "Mutations in the tuberous sclerosis complex gene TSC2 are 
a cause of sporadic  pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  97(11): 6085 -6090.  
Crino, P. B., K. L. Nathanson and E. P. Henske (2006). "The tuberous scle rosis complex." N Engl J Med  
355(13): 1345 -1356.  
Crooks, D. M., G. Pacheco -Rodriguez, R. M. Decastro,  J. P. McCoy, Jr., J. A. Wang, F. Kumaki, T. Darling and 
J. Moss (2004). "Molecular and genetic analysis of disseminated neoplastic cells in 
lymphangioleio myomatosis." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  101(50): [ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  
Cudzilo, C. J., R. D. Szczesniak, A. S. B rody, M. Rattan, D. A. Krueger, J. J. Bissler, D. N. Franz, F. X. 
McCormack and L. R. Young (2013). "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Screening in Women with Tuber ous 
Sclerosis." Chest . 
Dibble, C. C. and B. D. Manning (2013). "Signal integration by [CONTACT_218525]1 coordina tes nutrient input with 
biosynthetic output." Nat Cell Biol  15(6): 555 -564. 
Duvel, K., J. L. Yecies, S. Menon, P. Raman, A. I. Lipovsky, A. L. Souza, E. Tr iantafellow, Q. Ma, R. Gorski, 
S. Cleaver, M. G. Vander Heiden, J. P. MacKeigan, P. M. Finan, C. B. C lish, L. O. Murphy and B. D. 
Manning (2010). "Activation of a metabolic gene regulatory network downstream of mTOR complex 1." Mol 
Cell 39(2): 171 -183. 
Guo, Y. and D. J. Kwiatkowski (2013). "Equivalent Benefit of Rapamycin and a Potent mTOR ATP -
Competitive  Inhibitor, MLN0128 (INK128), in a Mouse Model of Tuberous Sclerosis." Mol Cancer Res  11(5): 
467-473. 
Henske, E. P. and F. X. McCormack (2012). "Lymphangio leiomyomatosis - a wolf in sheep's clothing." J Clin 
Invest  122(11): 3807 -3816.  
Johnson SR, Cordier JF, Lazor R, Cottin V, Costabel U, Harari S, Reynaud -Gaubert M, Boehler A, Brauner M, 
Popper H, Bonetti F, Kingswood C; Review Panel of the ERS LAM Task For ce. (2010). "  European 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_896459]. " Eur Respir 
J. 35(1):14 -26.  
Kwiatkowski, D. J. and B. D. Manning (2005). "Tuberous sclerosis: a GAP at the crossroads of multiple 
signaling  pathways." Hum Mol Genet  14 Spec No. 2 : R251 -258. 
Lee, P. S., S. W. Tsang, M. A. Moses, Z. Trayes -Gibson, L. L. Hsiao, R. Jensen, R. Squillace and D. J. 
Kwiatkowski (2010). "Rapamycin -insensitive up -regulation of MMP2 and other genes in tuberous sclerosis  
complex 2 -deficient lymphangioleiomyomatosis -like cells." Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol  42(2): 227-234. 
Li, C., P. S. Lee, Y. Sun, X. Gu, E. Zhang, Y. Guo, C. L. Wu, N. Auricchio, C. Priolo, J. Li, A. Csibi, A. 
Parkhitko, T. Morrison, A. Planaguma, S. Kazani,  E. Israel, K. F. Xu, E. P. Henske, J. Blenis, B. D. Levy, D. 
Kwiatkowski and J. J. Yu (2014 ). "Estradiol and mTORC2 cooperate to enhance prostaglandin biosynthesis 
and tumorigenesis in TSC2 -deficient LAM cells." J Exp Med  211(1): 15 -28. 
McCormack, F. X. a nd E. P. Henske (2010). Lymphangioleiomyomatosis and Pulmonary Disease in TSC. 
Tuberous Scle rosis Complex . D. J. Kwiatkowski, V. H. Whittemore and E. A. Thiele. Weinheim, [LOCATION_013], 
Wiley -VCH : 345-368. 
McCormack, F. X., Y. Inoue, J. Moss, L. G. Singer, C. St range, K. Nakata, A. F. Barker, J. T. Chapman, M. L. 
Brantly, J. M. Stocks, K. K. Brown, J. P. Lynch, H. J. Goldberg, L. R. Young, B. W. Kinder, G. P. Downey, E. 
J. Sullivan, T. V. Colby, R. T. McKay, M. M. Cohen, L. Korbee, A. M. Taveira -Dasilva, H. S. Le e, J. P. 
Krischer and B. C. Trapnell (2011). "Efficacy and Safety of Sirolimus in Lymphangio leiomyomatosis." N Engl 
J Med  364: 1595 -1606.  
McCormack, P. L. (2011). "Celecoxib: a review of its use for symptomatic relief in the treatment of 
osteoarthritis, rh eumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis." Drugs  71(18): 2457 -2489.  
April 3, 2017  21 
 
Onda, H., A. Lueck,  P. W. Marks, H. B. Warren and D. J. Kwiatkowski (1999). "Tsc2(+/ -) mice develop tumors 
in multiple sites that express gelsolin and are influenced by [CONTACT_896475]." J Clin Invest  104(6): 687 -
695. 
Taveira -DaSilva, A. M., G. Pacheco -Rodriguez and J. Mo ss (2010). "The natural history of 
lymphangioleiomyomatosis: markers of severity, rate of progression and prognosis." Lymphat Res Biol  8(1): 
9-19. 
Tyburczy, M. E., J. A. Wang, S. Li, R. Thangapazham, Y. Chekaluk, J. Moss, D. J. Kwiatkowski and T. N. 
Darlin g (2014). "Sun exposure causes somatic second -hit mutations and angiofibroma development in tuberous 
sclerosis complex." Hum Mol Genet  23(8): [ADDRESS_1256618], H. J. Goldberg, G. P. Downey, J. J. Swigris, A. M. 
Taveira -DaSilva, J. P. Krischer, B. C. Trapnell, F. X. McCormack and M. T. Group (2013). "Serum VEGF -D a 
concentration as a biomarker of lymp hangioleiomyomatosis severity and treatment response: a prospective 
analysis of the Multicenter International Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Efficacy of Sirolimus (MILES) trial." 
Lancet Respir Med  1(6): 445 -452. 
 
 