 An Open -label Study to Investigate the Efficacy and Tolerability of Aczone Gel, 7.5% in the Treatment of 
Acne Vulgaris in Men and Women With Skin of Color   
Saakshi Khattri  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: Feb 7, 2022   
 Protocol Document for 17 -[ZIP_CODE]  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_55267], M.D.  
Mount Sinai  
 
Brief Summary of Research  
Acne vulgaris is a common skin disease characterized by [CONTACT_55294], pustules, and 
comedones that is prevalent in men and women of color. Research has demonstrated that Aczone 
® (dapsone) gel, 7.5% used once daily is effective, safe, and well -tolerated for the treatment of 
acne in both men and women; however, no data is available regarding its efficacy and safety in 
skin of color (SOC). The current study aims to investigate the therapeutic impact of Aczone gel 
7.5% in SOC males and females ages [ADDRESS_59653] of Aczone ® gel on hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55268].  
 
Objectives  
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of Aczone ® gel, 7.5% administered once 
daily for 2 4 weeks in males or females with skin of color (SOC), defined as Fitzpatrick Skin Types IV, V, 
or VI, for the treatment of facial acne vulgaris.  
 
Background  
Acne vulgaris is a common skin disease characterized by [CONTACT_55294], pustules, and 
comedon es that is prevalent in men and women of color. In fact, acne is the most common 
dermatologic diagnosis made in SOC populations (1). Although individuals of all skin types can 
develop acne vulgaris, there are important differences in darker skin types that  are important to 
consider when choosing an optimal treatment (2).  
From a diagnosis standpoint, acne in women of color is more likely to present on the cheek area, 
as opposed to a chin and cheek predominance in white women (2). Complications from acne are of 
great concern in this population, as women of color are more likely to develop keloids, 
hypertrophic scars, and post -inflammatory hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_371] (PIH) as a result of acne lesions (3). 
PIH may last for weeks to months and, in many cases, is more troub lesome to patients than the 
acne itself (2). Overall, facial acne and its sequelae have a greater impact on perception of 
appearance, negative emotions, and social functioning in women of color than white women (2).  
Dapsone is a sulfone compound with anti -inflammatory properties that has been shown to be 
effective in the treatment of acne vulgaris in SOC (4). Aczone ® (dapsone) gel, 5% administered 
twice daily has been associated with significant improvement in overall acne severity, acne signs, 
and impact on quality of life in women of color (4). Two phase III trials of a newer formulation of 
Aczone ® (dapsone) gel, 7.5% used once daily demonstrated that this product is effective, safe, 
and well -tolerated for the treatment of acne in both men and women (5);  however, no data is 
available regarding its efficacy and safety in SOC.  
Further, some investigators of the phase IV study on the safety and efficacy of dapsone gel 5% in 
SOC anecdotally reported improvement in hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55269] 12 weeks, although th is was 
not a planned efficacy outcome (4). Further research is needed on the potential effects of dapsone 
gel on hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55270].  
 The current study will investigate the therapeutic impact of Aczone  gel 7.5% in SOC males and 
females ages [ADDRESS_59654] -inflammatory hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55271] 
(PAHPI) and mexameter -measured melanin index (M I). 
 
 
Setting of the Human Research  
All research activity will take place at Mount Sinai Department of Dermatology . 
 
Resources Available to Conduct the Human Research  
 
The research team consists of the Principal Investigator, Sub -Investigator and Research Coordinator. We 
do not foresee any difficulties in recruiting the suggested number of patients for this research study.  
 
All members of the study team have several years of research experience and have all completed the 
required trainings and certification s mandated by [CONTACT_55295].  
 
All research team members have read and understand the protocol and all study related procedures.  
 
 
Study Design  
 
a) Recruitment Methods  
 
Subjects will be recruited from the dermatology faculty practices and the dermatology 
resident clinics in the Mount Sinai Health System. Once approved by [CONTACT_1034], we will 
use IRB approved flyers, online advertisements (including social media postings and 
clinical trials listing services) as well as questionnaires and phone scripts.  
 
b) Inclusion an d Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion:  
1. Provide written, signed and dated informed consent prior to initiating any study -related 
activities.  
2. Male or female subjects who are ≥ 18 years of age  
3. Subjects with Fitzpatrick Skin Type IV, V, or VI  
4. Subjects with moderate t o severe acne as defined by [CONTACT_1697] -assessed Global Acne 
Assessment Score (GAAS) of 3 or 4 at screening  
5. Facial acne vulgaris with 20 to 50 (inclusive) inflammatory lesions and 30 to 100 
(inclusive) noninflammatory lesion  
6. Stable non -progressive or regr essive acne vulgaris in the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]  
 7. Females of childbearing potential (FCBP) must have a negative pregnancy test at 
Screening and Baseline. A female is considered not to be of childbearing potential if 
she is post -menopausal with at least [ADDRESS_59655] use  one of the approved contraceptive options 
described below:  
Option 1:  Any one of the following highly effective methods:  hormonal 
contraception (oral, injection, implant, transdermal patch, vaginal ring); intrauterine 
device (IUD); tubal ligation; or pa rtner’s vasectomy;  
OR  
Option 2:  Male or female condom (latex condom or nonlatex condom NOT made 
out of natural [animal] membrane [for example, polyurethane]; PLUS one 
additional barrier method: (a) diaphragm with spermicide; (b) cervical cap with 
spermic ide; or (c) contraceptive sponge with spermicide.  
8. Must be in general good as judged by [CONTACT_737]  
9. Subject is willing to avoid excessive or prolonged exposure of the treated skin to ultraviolet 
light (i.e. sunlight, tanning beds) throughout the study  
10. Subject is willing to follow study instructions and complete study assessments without 
assistance and is likely to complete all required visits  
 
Exclusion:  
1. Diagnosis of other dermatologic diagnosis that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], 
would interfere with diagnosis, examination, or treatment of the studied condition 
(i.e. psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, lupus, dermatomyositis, seborrheic dermatitis, 
perioral dermatitis, etc.)  
2. Subjects with severe cystic acne, acne conglobate, acne fulminans, or secondary  acne 
(chloracne or drug -induced acne)  
3. Uncontrolled systemic disease(s) that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], would put 
the patient at significant risk if enrolled in the study or would interfere with subject’s 
participation in the study  
4. Subjects with a history of clinically significant hemolysis, anemia, or enteritis 
(regional enteritis, ulcerative colitis, pseudomembranous colitis, antibiotic -associated 
colitis)  
5. Subjects with allergy or sensitivity to the study drug or its components  
6. Subjects who have  not complied with the proper wash -out periods:  
a. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_900] -inflammatory medications, salicylic acid, corticosteroids, 
antibiotics, antibacterials, peroxide -containing products, or retinoids within 2 
weeks of baseline  
b. Systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids , antimalarials or oral dapsone within 4 
weeks of baseline  
 c. Other anti -acne medication, including isotretinoin or spi[INVESTIGATOR_8407], within 6 
months of baseline  
d. Chemical peels or other facial acne procedures (laser therapy, light therapy) 
within 3 months of ba seline  
e. Treatment with botulinum toxin of any serotype in the face within 6 months of 
baseline  
f. Estrogens/Birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_55272] ≥ [ADDRESS_59656] feeding.  
8. Subjects with evidence of alcohol or substance abuse.  
9. Use of any investigational drug within 4 weeks prior to randomization, or 
5 pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic half -lives, if known (whichever is longer).  
 
c) Number of Subjects  
Up to 40 subjects with acne vulgaris will be screened with a goal of 20 total subjects 
randomized. All 20 randomized subjects are expected to complete all study procedures. 
Individuals who provide informed consent and fail to meet all of the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria during the initial evaluation will be considered a “screening failure.”  
 
d) Study Timelines  
The study will consist of 6 in -person visits and one phone visit (7 total visits) over up to 28 
weeks (4 week screening period plus 24 weeks enrolle d in study). Study visits will be 
conducted at Screening (Visit 1), Baseline (Visit 2, Week 0), Week 4 (Visit 3), Week 8 
phone visit (Visit 4), Week 12 (Visit 5), Week 18 (Visit 6), Week 24 (Visit 7).  
Enrollment will occur over a 24 -36 month period from Ja nuary 2018 to December 2020. 
The study is anticipated to be completed by [CONTACT_466] 2021.  
 
e) Endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoint:  
1. Mean change from baseline to week 12 in Global Acne Assessment Score (GAAS)  
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
1. Change from baseline in Global Acne Assessment Score (GAAS) at week 4, 18, and 24.  
2. Change from baseline in Post Acne Hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55273] (PAHPI) at weeks 12, 18, and 
24. 
3. Change from baseline in Melanin Index (MI) of target lesion at weeks 12, 18, and 24  
4. Change from baseline in the proport ion of subjects with score of 0 or 1 on ASIS “dark spot” 
score at weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24.  
5. Proportion of subjects with GAAS of 0 (none) or 1 (minimal) at weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24  
 6. Percent change from baseline in all lesion counts (inflammatory, noninflammato ry, and total) 
at weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24.  
 
 
f) Procedures Involved in the Human Research  
This is a single -center, single -group, open -label study using Aczone ® (dapsone) gel 7.5%. 
All subjects will receive the study medication. Aczone ® gel is an off -white t o yellow gel 
with suspended particles. It is supplied in an airless pump containing a polypropylene 
bottle with a high density polyethylene pi[INVESTIGATOR_55274]. It will be dispensed as a 60g pump.  
Subject will apply Aczone  ® once daily to the entire face. Study drug must not be applied 
to other areas of the body, including the upper chest, upper back or shoulders.  
Prior to the start of the study, potential subjects will be given an IRB -approved Informed Consent 
Document (IC D) containing a Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
disclosure agreement to read, understand, and sign. All questions about the study should be 
answered to the satisfaction of the candidate subject. They will have all of their study -related 
questions answered by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1461], and if they agree to participate, the subject will sign two 
original copi[INVESTIGATOR_55275]. The subjects will retain one original copy and one original copy will be 
kept in the study file. The subjects who sig n an ICD will be assigned a screening number.  
 
After providing informed consent, subjects will be assessed for study eligibility at the Screening 
visit (day -28 to day -1), which includes review of medical history and concomitant, acne lesion 
counting and severity ratings, and serum pregnancy test (if applicable). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a medically 
qualified designee must review this information (i.e. medical history, concomitant medication, and 
eligibility review) for each subject to confirm their eligibility before en rollment. A total of 20 
subjects who meet eligibility criteria will undergo Baseline / Day 0 assessments. Subjects will 
return for visits at weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24. There will be a phone visit at week 8.  
 
Study Assessments and Efficacy Measures:  
 
Global Acne Assessment Score (GAAS):  
The subject’s acne severity will be assessed by [CONTACT_55296] a 5 -point GAAS at screening, 
baseline, and weeks 4, 12, 18, 24.  
 
Grade  Description  
0 None  No evidence of facial acne vulgaris  
1 Minimal  Few noninflammatory lesions are present; a few inflammatory lesions 
(papules/pustules) may be present; no nodulo -cystic lesions present  
2 Mild  Several to many noninflammatory lesions are present; a few inflammatory 
lesions are present; no nodulo -cystic le sions present.  
3 Moderate  Many noninflammatory and inflammatory lesions are present; no nodulo -
cystic lesions are present.  
4 Severe  Significant degree of inflammatory disease; papules and pustules are a 
predominant feature; a few nodulo -cystic lesions ar e present (no more than 2)  
 
 
 
Lesion Counts:  
The lesion counts, including inflammatory and non -inflammatory lesions, will be performed at screening, 
baseline, and weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24. Inflammatory lesions (papules, pustules, nodules/cysts) and 
 noninflammatory lesions (open comedone, closed comedone) will be counted individually. The sum of the 
inflammatory lesion counts and non -inflammatory lesion counts will be totaled.  
 
ASIS ®:  
Acne Symptom and Impact Scale (ASIS ®) will be given to subjects’ for completion at baseline and weeks 
4, 12, 18, and 24. The ASIS ® contains [ADDRESS_59657] of acne vulgaris (6). High scores on the ASIS® indicate the presence of more severe 
symptoms, where as higher scores on the ASIS indicate better outcomes on acne health -related quality of 
life. 
 
PAPHI:  
The postacne hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55276] (PAHPI) has been shown to be a reliable and valid score measuring 
post-inflammatory hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55277] (7). PAHPI [INVESTIGATOR_55278]:  
 
Total PAHPI = S + I + N  
PAHPI [INVESTIGATOR_55279] 6 -22. 
 
 
Lesion Size (S)  
Weighted 
Score (S)  Median 
Lesion size  
2 <3mm  
4 3-6mm  
6 7-10mm  
8 >10mm  
 
Lesion Intensity (I)  
Weighted 
Score (I)  Median Lesion Intensity  
3 Slightly darker than surrounding 
skin 
6 Moderately darker than 
surrounding skin  
9 Significantly darker than 
surrounding skin  
 
  Lesion Number (N)  
Weighted 
Score (N)  Number of 
Lesions  
1 1-15 
2 16-30 
3 31-45 
4 46-60 5 >60 
 Melanin Index:  
A narrowband reflectance spectrophotometer (mexameter  MX-16) will be used to measure the 
degree of pi[INVESTIGATOR_55280] (8).  
The mexameter contains 16 light emitting diodes arranged circularly that emit light at 
wavelengths of 568nm (gr een), 660nm (red), and 880nm (near infrared). The machine then 
measures the amount of light absorbed and reflected by [CONTACT_55297] 
(melanin index or “M” – red and near infrared light) and hemoglobin content (erythema index or 
“E” – green and right light).  
One target lesion will be chosen by [CONTACT_093], which will be the darkest spot involved by 
[CONTACT_447]-inflammatory hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55281] (inflammatory or 
non-inflammatory lesion). The target le sion must be on the face and easily accessible with the 
mexameter probe. The probe will be applied to the target lesion on the skin with light, constant 
pressure. Both the “M” and “E” indices will be recorded. The location of the target site will be 
record ed using distance from anatomic landmarks.  
 
Skin Phototype Assessment:  
At screening, Fitzpatrick skin type (FST) will be rated by [CONTACT_093]:  
I: always burns, never tans (very pale)  
II: always burns, tans minimally (pale)  
III: burns moderately, tans gradually (light brown)  
IV: burns minimally, always tans well (moderate brown)  
V: rarely burns, tans profusely (dark brown)  
VI: never burns, deeply pi[INVESTIGATOR_49194] (very dark brown)  
 
Photography:  
Standardized photographs will be taken by [CONTACT_55298] 12, 18, and [ADDRESS_59658] Safety Measures:  
The following safety measures will be collected:  
- Adverse events  
o The investigato r will question the subject at all scheduled visits and one phone visit 
to determine whether adverse events were experienced since the prior visit. The 
adverse event and all applicable information (date of onset, date of stop, duration, 
outcome, severity, relationship to study drug, action or treatment required) will be 
obtained and recorded on the source documents and adverse event CRF.  
- Local tolerability assessments  
o Investigator will ask subject to rate subjective burning/stinging using the following 
scale: 0 = absent (normal, no discomfort), 1 = trace (an awareness, but no discomfort 
and no intervention required), 2 = mild (noticeable discomfort causing intermittent 
awareness), 3 = moderate (noticeable discomfort causing continuous awareness),  4= 
marked  (definite discomfort causing continuous awareness, interfering occasionally 
with normal daily activities), 5 = severe (definite, continuous discomfort interfering 
with normal daily activities)  
o Investigator will rate erythema, dryness, peeling, and oilines s using the following 
scale:  
 
 
Score  Erythema  Dryness  Peeling  Oiliness  
0=absent  No redness  None  Smooth  Normal  
 1=trace  Faint red or pi[INVESTIGATOR_55282], barely 
perceptible  Barely perceptible dryness by 
[CONTACT_55299], skin 
desquamation (flakes) or fissure 
formation  Fine peeling, 
barely perceptible  Mild and localized  
2=mild  Light red or pi[INVESTIGATOR_55283] (flakes) or fissure 
formation  Slight peeling  Mild and diffuse  
3=moderate  Medium red 
coloration  Easily noted dryness with 
accentuation of skin markings 
and skin desquamation (small 
flakes) but no fissure formation  Definitely 
noticeable peeling  Moderate and diffuse  
4=severe  Beet red 
coloration  Easily noted dryness with 
accentuation of skin marking, 
desquamation (large flakes) 
and/or fissure formation  Extensive peeling  Prominent and dense  
 
- Urine pregnancy tests at screening, baseline, and weeks 4, 12, 18, and 24.  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
 
Drug Dispensation:  
 
Drug will be dispensed at the baseline visit and the first dose of study drug will occur during this 
visit in the office under the investigator’s supervision. The subject will gently wash the face and 
pat it dry. Then the subject will apply a pea -sized amo unt in a thin layer to the entire face and rub 
in the product gently and completely until there is no visible mass of gel observed on the face. All 
subjects will be provided a subject application instruction sheet. Adherence to the instructions 
will be ass essed at subsequent visits and subjects will be re -trained at scheduled visits if 
necessary. Additional study drug will be dispensed every 4 -8 weeks as needed.  
 
 
Visit Schedule:  
Screening:  
 
- Informed Consent  
- Demographics  
- Inclusion/Exclusion  
- Medical History  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Skin phototype assessment (Fitzpatrick Skin Type)  
- Lesion Counting  
- Global Acne Assessment Score (GAAS)  
- Adverse events  
- Urine pregnancy  
 
Baseline  
- Inclusion/Exclusion  
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Lesion Counting  
- Melanin index  
 - GAAS  
- Post Acne Hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55284] (PAHPI)  
- ASIS dark spot score  
- Local tolerability assessment  
- Photography  
- Urine pregnancy  
- Product dispensation/return  
 
Week 4 – 
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Lesion C ount 
- GAAS  
- ASIS dark spot score  
- Local tolerability assessment  
- Pregnancy test  
- Product dispensation/return  
Week 8 Phone Visit –  
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
Week 12 –  
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Lesion Counting  
- GAAS  
- PAHPI  
- ASIS dark spot score  
- MI  
- Photography  
- Local tolerability assessment  
- Product dispensation/return  
- Urine pregnancy test  
Week 18 – 
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Lesion Counting  
- GAAS  
- PAHPI  
- ASIS dark spot score  
- MI  
- Photography  
- Local tolerability assessment  
- Product dispensation/return  
- Urine Pregnancy test  
 Week 24 –  
- Adverse events  
- Concomitant medications and procedures  
- Lesion Counting  
- GAAS  
- PAHPI  
- ASIS dark spot score  
- MI  
- Photography  
- Local tolerability assessment  
- Product return  
- Urine Pregnancy test  
 
 
Table 1: Assessment Schedule  
 
 
 
 Visit  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Week  -4 to BL  
 0 (BL)  4 8 
phone  12 18 24 
Visit Window (days)    ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 ±3 
Assessment         
Informed Consent  X       
Demographics  X       
Inclusion/Exclusion  X X      
Medical History  X       
Fitzpatrick Skin Type  X       
AE/SAE assessment  X X X X X X X 
Concomitant medications  X X X X X X X 
Concomitant procedures  X X X X X X X 
Photography   X   X X X 
Urine Pregnancy Test  X X X  X X X 
Lesion Count  X X X  X X X 
GAAS  X X X  X X X 
ASIS ®   X X  X X X 
PAHPI   X   X X X 
Mexameter – Melanin Index   X   X X X 
Local tolerability   X X  X X X 
Study Drug Dispensation and 
Return   X X  X X X 
 g) Specimen Banking  
Not applicable.  
 
h) Data Management and Confidentiality  
 
As used in this protocol, the term case report form (CRF) should be understood to refer to 
either a paper form or an electronic data record or both, depending on the data collection 
method used in this trial. All subject source documents are the site’s sub ject records and 
are to be maintained at the study site. These source documents must be attributable, 
legible, contemporaneous, original, and accurate.  
 
A CRF/source document is required and should be completed for each included subject. 
It is the PI's re sponsibility to ensure completion and to review and approve all 
CRFs/source documents. These must be signed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_55285]. These signatures serve to attest that the information contained on the 
CRFs/source documents is true. At  all times, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_55286]/source documents.  SAE forms and pregnancy notification forms will be provided 
by [CONTACT_1034] .  
 
Good documentati on practices should be used on all study documentation. The clinical 
study will be performed in accordance with the protocol, applicable standard operating 
procedures (SOPs), the International Conference on Harmonization Good Clinical 
Practice (ICH GCP) gu idelines, and applicable local regulatory requirements and laws.  
 
The Sponsor requires that all records (e.g., ICFs, documents, test article dispensing record, 
etc.) which support CRFs/source documentation of this study must be retained in the files 
of the  responsible investigator for a period of [ADDRESS_59659] obtain Sponsor's written permission before disposing of any records, 
even if retention requirements have been met.  The Sponsor must  be notified in writing of 
the name [CONTACT_55317] -assignment/transfer.  
All records identifying the subject will be kept confidential and, to the extent 
permitted by [CONTACT_29695]/or regulations, will not be made pub licly 
available. Only the subject number will be recorded in the CRF. The code that 
links the subject to the subject’s ID# is stored on paper in a locked cabinet, 
accessible only by [CONTACT_55300]. Photographs 
will be stored o n the camera for approximately one week before being transferred 
to the computer database. Study findings stored on a password - protected 
computer will be encrypted and stored in accordance with local data protection 
laws. As part of the informed consent p rocess, the subjects will be informed in 
 writing that representatives of the IRB, or regulatory authorities may inspect their 
medical records to verify the information collected, and that all personal 
information made available for inspection will be handl ed in strictest confidence 
and in accordance with local data protection laws. If the results of the study are 
published, the subject’s identity will remain confidential. Only the investigator 
will maintain a list to enable subjects to be identified. The da ta will be stored 
indefinitely.  
 
i) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
 
Part I: Elements of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
MSSM Principal Monitor:  
Indicate whether this person is the PI, a Team Member, or is Independent:  
Last Name:  [CONTACT_55318]  (PI) 
First Name:  [CONTACT_55319]:  MD 
Department:  Dermatology  
Mailing Address:    , [LOCATION_001], NY [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone:  [PHONE_986]  
Fax: [PHONE_987]  
E-mail:  Saakshi.khattr @mountsinai.org  
 
MSSM Additional Monitor:  
Indicate whether this person is the PI, a Team Member, or is Independent:  
Last Name: [CONTACT_55320] -Gonzalez (Team Member)  
First Name: [CONTACT_55321]: Research Manager  
Department: Dermatology  
Mailing Address:   , [LOCATION_001], NY [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: 212 -523-3812  
Fax: 212 -523-6293  
E-mail: [EMAIL_1033]  
 
3. The principal monitor is the Principal Investigator. Please refer to curriculum vitae for 
further information.  
4.  The specific items that will be monitored for safety are adverse events, subject 
compliance with the protocol and withdrawals.  Subjects will be monitored for adverse 
events the day of their participation in the study. Should subjects experience any 
adverse effects after their participation in the study, they will be ins tructed to contact 
[CONTACT_093](s) and make an appointment immediately.  
5. Accumulated safety and data information will be reviewed annually.  
6. N/A  
7. N/A 

 8.  Adverse events will be graded using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse 
Events  (CTCAE ).    
9. The study will be conducted in compliance with regulatory requirements and Good 
Clinical Practice. Quality control will be applied to each stage of data handling to 
ensure that data are accurate, reliable and processed correctly.  
10.  Should  a temporary or permanent suspension of our study occur, the occurrence will 
be reported to the PPHS, sponsor, and IRB.  
 
 
Part II. Data Monitoring Committee/Data Safety Monitoring Board (DMC/DSMB)  
  
Not applicable  
 
j) Withdrawal of Subjects  
When an individual who has signed the ICF is not enrolled in the study or withdraws/is 
withdrawn prior to completing the study, the reason is to be documented on the 
Discontinuation/Completion Form (or equivalent) and in the final study report.  Reasons 
for subject withdrawal may include:  
 Not enrolled (e.g. fails to meet inclusion/exclusion criteria, chooses not to enroll, etc.)  
 Participant is determined to be ineligible after enrollment  
 Subject’s choice to withdraw  
 Investigator terminated (e.g. noncompliance, etc.)  
 Adverse Event  
 Pregnancy  
 Lost to follow -up 
 Other  
 
Subjects may withdraw from the trial at any time at their request, or they may be withdrawn 
at any time at the discretion of the Sponsor, PI, or designee for safety, behavioral, or 
admin istrative reasons. Subjects may be withdrawn from this study without their consent 
if the research study is being stopped; or if the instructions of the study team have not been 
followed.  
 If a subject does not return for a scheduled visit, three documente d attempts will be made 
to contact [CONTACT_55301], and the outcome 
will be documented.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_55287], 
request that the subject return for a final visit, if ap plicable, and follow -up with the 
subject regarding any unresolved adverse events.   
 
Should a subject withdraw from the trial and also withdraw consent for disclosure of 
future information, no further evaluations should be performed and no additional data 
should be collected.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_55288].  Removed or withdrawn subjects will not be replaced.  
 
 If a subject fails to report to the test facility for a scheduled visit and ca nnot be 
rescheduled within the permitted window of time (as applicable), the Site should consult 
with the Sponsor to determine if the subject should be documented as having 
withdrawn/dropped from the study.  
 
Risks to Subjects  
 
The following list of side effects is the ones that may be associated with the use of dapsone gel:  
  
Common:  
 Application site reactions:  
o Dryness  
o Peeling  
o Oiliness  
o Erythema  
o Pruritus  
 Temporary yellow or orange discoloration of treated skin and local facial hair 
(when used in conjunctio n with benzoyl peroxide)  
 
Rare:  
 Methemoglobinemia – Cases of methemoglobinemia have been reported post -
marketing in subjects using dapsone 5% gel twice daily. Initial signs and 
symptoms include slate grey cyanosis, which may be observed on the buccal 
mucou s membranes, lips, and nail beds.  Increased susceptibility to 
methemoglobinemia is seen patients with glucose -6-phosphate (G6PD) 
deficiency. The risk is also elevated in individuals taking other medications that 
induce the formation of methemoglobin (i.e.  sulfonamides, acetaminophen, 
acetanilide, aniline dyes, benzocaine, chloroquine, naphthalene, nitrates and 
nitrites, nitrofurantoin, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, pamaquine, para -
aminosalicylic acid, phenacetin, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primaquine, quini ne). 
Dapsone gel should be avoided in patients with known history of congenital or 
idiopathic methemoglobinemia. Patients should be instructed to discontinue use of 
dapsone gel immediately and seek medical attention if they develop any signs of 
cyanosis.  
 Hemolysis – The use of oral dapsone has been associated with the development of 
hemolysis and hemolytic anemia, particularly in patients with G6PD deficiency. 
G6PD deficiency is most common in individuals of Mediterranean, African, 
South Asian, and Middle Eastern descent. Studies and post -marketing on dapsone 
gel has not demonstrated any clinically relevant hemolysis of hemolytic anemia in 
treated subjects. Lab changes suggestive of hemolysis have been seen in patients 
with G6PD deficiency using dapsone gel  5%. Dapsone gel should be used with 
caution in patients taking oral medications known to increase serum levels of 
dapsone, including trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and should be avoided in 
patients taking oral dapsone and anti -malarial medications due to risk of 
hemolytic reactions.  
  Peripheral neuropathy – peripheral neuropathy has been observed with use of oral 
dapsone. No cases have been reported in patients using dapsone gel.  
 Significant skin reactions (toxic epi[INVESTIGATOR_194], erythema multiforme, 
morbilliform and scarlitiniform reactions, bullous and exfoliative dermatitis, 
erythema nodosum, urticarial) – With the exception of urticaria, no significant 
skin reactions have been observed during clinical trials and post -marketing with 
use of dapsone g el.  
 
 
 
Aczone gel is designated as pregnancy category C, meaning that there are no adequate and 
well controlled studies in pregnant women. Dapsone administered orally in rats and rabbits 
has demonstrated embryocidal effects during the period of organogene sis when dosed at 425 
to 1400 times the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD).  
Pregnancies and suspected pregnancies (including a positive pregnancy test regardless of age 
or disease state) of a female subject or the female partner of a male subject  occurr ing while 
the subject is on study drug, or within [ADDRESS_59660] ’s last dose of study drug, are 
considered immediately reportable events.  Study drug is to be discontinued immediately and 
the subject instructed to return any unused portion of the s tudy drug to the investigator(s).  
The pregnancy, suspected pregnancy, or positive pregnancy test must be reported to Allergan 
Safety immediately facsimile using the Pregnancy Report form provided by [CONTACT_7904]. 
The female should be referred to an obstetr ician -gynecologist experienced in reproductive 
toxicity for further evaluation and counseling. The Investigator(s) will follow the female 
subject until completion of the pregnancy, and must notify Allergan Safety of the outcome of 
the pregnancy as a follow -up on the follow up Pregnancy Reporting form.  
 
 
Provisions for Research Related Harm/Injury  
 
If a subject experiences a research injury, Mount Sinai West will provide or arrange for medical 
treatment at no cost. If the subject chooses to see their own personal doctor we will not offer to 
pay for the expenses. A research injury is any physical injury or illness caused by [CONTACT_55302]. If a subject is injured by a medical treatment or procedure that would have been 
received even if the subje ct weren't in the study; that is not a research injury.  Payment for things 
such as lost wages, expenses other than medical care, or pain and suffering is not offered. To 
help avoid injury, it is very important to follow all study directions.  
 
Please be aw are that some insurance plans may not pay for research -related injuries.  Subjects 
should contact [CONTACT_55303].  
 
Unreimbursed medical expenses not covered by [CONTACT_55304], in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_55289], is directly caused by [CONTACT_5257]/investigational product or by 
[CONTACT_55305].  
 
 Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Only subjects who have given us permission to c ontact them for studies will be 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. All conversations with subjects  and potential subjects will be conducted in a 
private examination room with the subject. Subjects’ privacy will be protected by 
[CONTACT_55306] -related procedures in a private examination room. Family members 
will be allowed to remain in the room only if the subject allows this. No information  
regarding the subject’s disease, treatment or the fact that he/she is involved in a study will 
be conveyed. Subjects will be made to feel at ease, by a llowing them sufficient time to 
discuss the study and any potential queries.  
All parties will ensure protec tion of subject personal data and will not include subject names on 
any Sponsor forms, reports, publications, or in any other disclosures. In case of data transfer, 
Sponsor will maintain high standards of confidentiality and protection of subject personal data.   
The IC F (containing the HIPAA disclosure agreement) must be agreed to by [CONTACT_55307], local regulatory requirements, and legal 
requirements.  
The investigator must ensure that each study subject is fully informed about the nature and 
objectives of the trial, possible risks associated with participation. The investigator, or a trained 
person designated by [CONTACT_093], will obtain written inf ormed consent on two copi[INVESTIGATOR_55290] -specific activity is performed.  The subject will retain one copy, and 
one will be kept in the study file. The IC F used in this trial, and any changes made during the 
course of the trial, must be prospectively approved by [CONTACT_55308].  
 
Economic Impact on Subjects  
Allergan, the manufacturer of the study drug, will provide the study drug. Allergan also covers 
the cost of all study -related tests and procedures. While in the  study, the subject will still need to 
get regular medical care. The subject will still have to pay for the costs of regular medical care 
that is not a part of this study.  
 
Taking part in this research study may lead to added costs to the subject. If the l aboratory tests or 
physical examinations reveal information about his/her health, additional tests, treatments and 
doctors appointments may be required which could present additional costs to him/her or his/her 
insurance company.  
 
Payments to Subjects  
Subjects will be compensated $25.00 per completed in -person visit for a total of $150.[ADDRESS_59661] withdraws or is withdrawn before completing the study, 
he/she will receive an amount of money for the visits which have been completed.  They 
will not have to submit receipts to receive this reimbursement. This payment will come in 
the form of a check at the end of the subject’s participation in the study.  
 Consent Process  
We will be obtaining written consent as a part of this study. No subject will be evaluated without 
a signed Informed Consent Form  (ICF).  
 
The consent process will take place in a private exam room where the subject will have ample 
time to review and read the consent form. Subjects will be given time to ask questions and may 
take additional time to consider their options. Subjects will be inf ormed that they do not have to 
participate and may withdraw consent at any time.  
 
After understanding and agreeing, the subject will express their consent to participate in the 
study by [CONTACT_55309] F. The subject will receive a copy of their signed 
document for their records.  
 
We will follow the SOP HRP -[ADDRESS_59662] be in compliance with ICH GCP, local 
regulatory requirements, and legal requirements.  
The consent process and date that the consent is signed is documented in our source 
notes.  
Study personnel will adhere to “SOP HRP -091 Written Doc umentation of Consent”.  
 
Vulnerable Populations  
 
 This project will not include any vulnerable population subjects . 
 
 
Multi -Site Human Research (Coordinating Center)  
 
 This project is a single site study.  
 
Community -Based Participatory Research  
 
  This project will not involve any community -based participation.  
 
Sharing of Results with Subjects  
 
At the completion of the study, subjects will have the right to access their protected health 
information that is created during this research study that relates  to their treatment or to payment,  
 provided such information is not exempted under certain laws and regulations.   To request this 
information, subjects should contact [CONTACT_55310].  
 
Subject to certain exceptions prescribed b y law, subjects have a right to request access to the health 
information that we hold about and to request changes if the health information is incorrect or 
incomplete. Any request for access or corrections should be made to the principal doctor 
conducting  this study.  
 
Once all data and results are finalized, a summary will be made available to subjects.  
 
External IRB Review History  
This project is not using an external IRB.  
 
Control of Drugs, Biologics, or Devices  
 
Study drug is stored in a combination -locked room accessible only by [CONTACT_55311]. All 
study materials should be stored at room temperature (59° -77°F), and the Site is responsible for 
maintaining temperature logs. All study products received a nd dispensed will be inventoried and 
accounted for throughout the study. The investigator must maintain adequate records documenting 
the receipt, use, loss, or other disposition of the products on the Product Accountability Log. The 
log must identify the i nvestigational product and account for its disposition by [CONTACT_1130], including 
specific dates and quantities dispensed and returned. The log must be signed by [CONTACT_55312]/retrieved the study product and copi[INVESTIGATOR_55291].  
 
At the completion of the study, all units of product dispensed (whether empty or containing unused 
product) must be collected by [CONTACT_55313], along with un -dispensed product, to the 
Sponsor.  Any containe r not returned by [CONTACT_55314].    
 
 
 
k) Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
The adverse events will be tabulated according to their date of onset, duration, severity and 
relationship to the treatment. We will build Clopper -Pearson 90% confidence intervals for the 
proportion of adverse events considering their aggregation and strat ification (e.g., by [CONTACT_926]).  
 
Sample Size Considerations  
 A sample size of n=20 subjects allows >90% power at 5% significance level  for a two -sided paired 
t-test to detect at week 12 a minimum change in GAAS from baseline of 1 grade point. This 
calculati on was performed in G*Power and it  assumes a mean GAAS of 3.[ADDRESS_59663] to assess the significance of the change 
in GAAS from  baseline to week 12 . However, GAAS is an ordinal measurement  and, for this 
reason , we will also apply a Generalized Linear Mixed -effects Model (GLMM) to assess the 
significance of the changes in GAAS after including potential covariates.  
Analysis of secondary Endpoints  
At each time point, the changes from baseline in ordinal secondary endpoints GAAS, PAHPI, 
MI, the proportion of subjects with a score of 0 or 1 on ASIS “dark spot,” the proportion of 
subjects with GAAS <2 will be presented in frequency tables. The (i,j) entries in the table s are 
counts of subjects in category i at baseline that moved to category j at that time point. A high 
frequency of counts falling off the main diagonal of the table  is evidence in favor of  a significant 
treatment effect.  Similarly,  to the primary endpoint, we will apply a two-sided paired t -test to 
assess the significance of changes from baseline in each outcome. We will apply the Bonferroni 
correction to adjust for the multiplicity of test s. In parallel, w e will t est pre vs. post differences in 
these ordinal outcomes with the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test.  Discrepancies between the 
parametric and non -parametric approaches will be discussed on a case basis.  In addition to this 
approach, we will fit an ordinal logit mod el, including all  available  time points, age , and gender 
as covariates.  
The changes from baseline in lesion counts (inflammatory, non -inflammatory , and their 
aggregation) will be assessed with the two -sided paired t -test followed by [CONTACT_55315].  
A Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLM M) will be fitted to model the count  of lesions  as the 
dependent variable, time and inflammation as fixed effects, age, and gender as covariates. In this 
framework , we will include random intercept and slope for each subject’s trajectory. The 
contrasts will reveal differences between time points and treatment effect in inflammatory vs. 
non-inflammatory lesions.  
Missing Data and Outliers  
Missing data in the longitudinal data analysis will b e handled by [CONTACT_55316] -effects approach  
which performs an appropriate adjustment of the coefficients’  degrees of freedom for each fitted 
model. We do not foresee issues with outliers due to the endpoint s’ measurement level, most of 
them  being  ordinal.  
 
 
  
 
Reference:  
1. Davis SA, Narahari S, Feldman SR, et al. Top dermatologic in patients of color: an 
analysis of nationally representative data. J Drugs Dermatol. 2012;11:466 -473. 
2. Callendar  VD, Alexis AF, Daniels SR, et al. Racial differences in clinical 
characteristics, perceptions and behaviors, and psychosocial impacts of adult female 
acne. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7(7):19 -31. 
3. Alexis AF. Acne vulgaris in skin of color: understanding nuances and optimizing 
treatment outcomes. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13:s61 -s65. 
4. Alexis AF, Burgess C, Callendar V, et al. The efficacy and safety of topi[INVESTIGATOR_55292], 5% for the treatment of acne vulgaris in adult females with skin of color. J Drugs 
Derma tol. 2016;15(2):197 -204. 
5. Thiboutot DM, Kircik L, McMichael A, et al. Efficacy, safety, and dermal tolerability 
of Dapsone gel, 7.5% in patients with moderate acne vulgaris: a pooled analysis of 
two phase 3 trials. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2016;9(10):18 -27. 
6. Hudgens S, Harper JC, Daniels SR et al. Validation of a New Patient -Reported 
Outcome Measure for Facial Acne: The Acne Symptom and Impact Scale (ASIS). J 
Drugs Dermatol.2015 Jun;14(6):552 -9. 
7. Savory SA, Agim NG, Mao R, et al. Reliability assessment and val idation of the 
postacne hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55276] (PAHPI), a new instrument to measure 
postinflammatory hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_55293]. J Am Acad Dermatol.2014 
Jan;70(1):108 -14. 
8. Clarys P, Alewaeters K, Lambrecht R, et al. Skin color measurements: compa rison 
between three instruments: the Chromameter(R), the DermaSpectrometer(R) and the 
Mexameter(R). Skin ResTechnol. 2000;6(4):230 -238. 
 
 
 