Official Title of Study: CPAP to Improve Swallow Function Post Total Laryngectomy 
NCT# [ADDRESS_384478] been no protocol changes 
since 2016. 
Sincerely,  
Peter C. Belafsky, M.D., M.P.H., Ph.D.  
Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery  
University of [LOCATION_004], Davis School of Medicine  

PROTOCOL TITLE:  Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
to Improve Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
 
Page 1 of 5  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  1) Protocol Title  
Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure to Improve 
Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
Version date: 5.3.16  
 
2) Objectives  
To determine whether use of Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
(CPAP) can improve the swallow function in patients who underwent 
total laryngectomy and are experiencing difficulty swallowing.  
 
3) Background  
Total laryngectomy is a procedure that involves surgical removal 
of the larynx and separation of the digestive and airway tracts. 
The procedure is typi[INVESTIGATOR_311999]. Following this procedure, 
patients are no longer at risk for aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516];  however some 
patients continue to experience difficulties in propulsion of food 
or drink throughout the pharynx. These difficulties can result 
from pharyngeal neuromuscular damage caused by [CONTACT_312001] (1). Previous research has demonstrated a reduction in 
pharyngeal contractile pressure and increased pharyngeal transit 
time in patients post laryngectomy (2,3).  Continuous Positive 
Airway Pressure (CPAP) may assist bolus propulsion in these 
patients by [CONTACT_312002]. 
This study aims to evaluate the utility of a CPAP mask to 
improve pharyngeal swallow outcomes in patients with 
dysphagia following total laryngectomy. This specific population 
could be well -suited for this application, since the digestive tract 
and airway are completely separate and there is no risk of the 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_312000].  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
to Improve Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
 
Page 2 of 5  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria:  
- Age ≥[ADDRESS_384479] 2 months after total laryngectomy undergoing a 
dynamic  swallow study  (DSS) .  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
- Patients with 100% neopharyngeal stenosis  
- Patients with a ctive cancer within 2 months of the study   
- Patients with p haryngocutaneous fistula  
- Vulnerable population:  
• Adults unable to consent  
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, 
teenagers)  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
 
5) Study Timelines  
The subjects will be in study from the time they sign the consent form 
to completion of the videofluoroscopy study. Approximately [ADDRESS_384480]’s clinical DSS study, 
with no more than  1-2 seconds o f additional  fluoroscopic exposure  
The estimated date of complete of the study will be 12 months after 
IRB approval.  
 
6) Study Endpoints  
Primary endpoint of the study is complete videofluoroscopic data for all 
10 patients.  
 
7) Procedures Involved  
Each subject will undergo a standard DSS for the purpose of medical 
diagnosis. The research study portion will be incorporated into the 
procedure for patients who consent to participation in the study. The 
dynamic swallow study is a radiologic examination 
of swallowing  function using fluoroscopy.  Standard examinations 
consist of multiple radio -opaque boluses of different consistencies . 
During a standard videof luoroscopic study, subject are asked to 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
to Improve Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
 
Page 3 of 5  Revis ed: February 9, [ADDRESS_384481]  
• 1 ml liquid barium (X2) 
• 20 ml liquid barium (X2) 
• 60 ml thin liquid barium consecutive sips via straw  
• [ADDRESS_384482]  
• 20 ml liquid barium  
• [ADDRESS_384483] for one of 
the two swallows of the following consistencies in side view : 
• 1 ml thin liquid barium   
• 20 ml thin liquid barium  
 
One additional 3ml pudding bolus swallow  with the CPAP mask  will be 
added in order to compare swallow function of a pudding consistency with 
and without the CPAP. This additional swallow will add no more than 1 -2 
seconds of videofluoroscopic exposure time.  
 
8) Data  and/or Specimen  Management and Confidentiality  
The measures  explained in the online application  will be taken to 
protect the confidentiality of subjects : 
 
Videofluoroscopic  data collected from the above protocol will be 
analyzed by [CONTACT_312003] T test and repeated measures of analysis of 
variance.  Data will be stored anonymously and securely, accessible 
with a password available only to participating researchers.  
 
9) Data and /or Specimen Banking  
N/A 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
to Improve Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
 
Page 4 of 5  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  10) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects  
N/A. This study does not pose more than a minimal risk to subjects.  
 
11) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Subjects unable to complete the entire protocol may be withdrawn from 
the study and not included in data analysis.  
 
12) Risks to Subjects  
Patients are undergoing the videofluoroscopic procedure as standard of 
care. One additional swallow will be added to the standard protocol, 
adding a minimal  1-2 seconds of fluoroscopic exposure time.   
   
The risks of the CPAP device include skin irritation, dry mouth, nasal  
congestion. These risks are unlikely to occur during this study in which 
patients will be wearing the mask for only several minutes.  Subjects 
may experience stomach bloating. Subjects may experience discomfort 
from wearing the mask.  
 
13) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
No direct benefit to participating subjects is anticipated.  
 
14) Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
 
15) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Results will not be shared with subjects.  
16) Prior Approvals  
Radiation Use Committee approval was obtained before IRB 
submission  
17) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
Subjects will undergo the protocol privately with a limited 
number of qualified personnel present.  Beyond determining 
eligibility as described above, no personal or medical 
information will be sought from participants.  The procedure 
will be limited to only what is described in the above protocol. 
Only qualified research  personnel  working on the project  will 
access subjects’ secure data, which will be password -protected.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Utilization o f Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 
to Improve Swallow Function in Patients Post Total Laryngectomy  
 
Page 5 of 5  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  18) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
N/A. The study procedure does not pose more than minimal risk to 
subject s. 
19) Economic Burden to Subjects  
N/A  
 
20) Drugs or Devices  
N/A 
 
References  
 1.  Zhang T, Szczesniak M, Maclean J, Bertrand P, Wu PI, Omari T, et 
al. Biomechanics of Pharyngeal Deglutitive Function Following Total 
Laryngectomy. Otolaryngol --Head Neck Surg Off J Am Acad Otolaryngol -
Head Neck Surg. 2016 Apr 26;  
2.  McConnel FM, Mendelsohn MS, Logemann JA. Manofluorography 
of deglutition after supraglottic laryngectomy. Head Neck Surg. 1987 
Feb;9(3):142 –50.  
3.  McConnel FM, Cerenko D, Mendelsohn MS. Dysphagia after total 
laryngectomy. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 1988 Nov;21(4):721 –6.  
 