 
   
 
 
 
 
  
Sildenafil for Prevention of Swimming -Induced Pulmonary Edema (SIPE)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: 12/14/2021  
 
  
 
             
 
 
           
Purpose of the Study  
  
Problem to be Addressed. The problem address ed in this proposal is occurrence of immersion 
pulmonary edema (SIPE) during heavy exertion while swimming or diving in cold water.  
Hypothesis and Specific Aim. We hypothesize that a [ADDRESS_235312] dose of sildenafil for prevention of SIPE in healthy SIPE -susceptible  individuals. The objective is 
to perform a placebo controlled trial of a single 50 mg dose of sildenafil one hour before a 40 -minute 
exercise during head -out immersion in 20°C water.  
Deliverable. The aim is verify a pharmacological method to prevent SIPE in susceptible individuals.  
 Background & Significance  
 
Immersion pulmonary edema (IPE, also known as swimming -induced pulmonary edema, SIPE) is a 
condition in which cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea and hypoxemia  develop after surface swimming or 
diving, often in young, healthy individuals (1 -11). It has been reported predominantly in males, including 
naval trainees during strenuous swimming (6,7,10,12,13). The condition generally spontaneously 
resolves within [ADDRESS_235313] or diuretic therapy, but it can be fatal (5,14).  
SIPE -susceptible individuals have higher pulmonary artery (PA) and PA wedge pressures during exercise 
in cold water (15). Thus it is believed that SIPE represents a form o f hemodynamic pulmonary edema 
due to excessive pulmonary vascular pressures in response to cold water exercise.  
 There are some risk factors for SIPE, which include swimming or diving in cold water (1,3,11), negative 
static lung load (16), heavy exertion (3 ,4,6-8,10 -12), fluid loading (12) and low vital capacity (7). Other 
predisposing factors are hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and other cardiac abnormalities (17). It also tends to recur in susceptible individuals (1,3,7,11,13,17). Pulmonary 
hemorrhage can also occur in certain breath -hold divers due to pressure -related engorgement of the 
pulmonary vasculature induced by [CONTACT_197990]. In those 
susceptible to hemorrhage certain genotypes (related to eNOS and angiotensin converting enzyme) have been observed to be more frequent (18), providing plausible rationale that genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_197986] -susceptibility.  
 Approximately 30 -40 cases per year are observed at the Naval Special Warfare C enter (8,10,19). Cases of 
SIPE are also seen at the Naval Diving and Salvage Training Center. Its prevalence in 2.4 -3.6 km open sea 
swimming trials has been reported to be from 1.8 -60%, depending upon the severity (7,13). Prevalence 
during SEAL training is  1-3% of trainees during spring, summer and fall, and 5% in the winter (20).  
Pulmonary edema in a normal lung occurs when pulmonary artery (PA) wedge pressure acutely exceeds a critical value of 18 -25 mmHg (21 -23). Both PA and PA wedge pressures increase d uring immersion, 
primarily due to central redistribution of blood from the extremities (24,25), which engorges the central veins, heart and pulmonary vessels (24,26 -28). This peripheral to central redistribution of blood is 
augmented by [CONTACT_197991] n (28,29) and attenuated by a concurrent reduction in venous tone 
(26). Studies from our lab have demonstrated significant pulmonary arterial and venous hypertension (and systemic hypertension) during submersion, particularly in cold water (28). We have de monstrated 
that in SIPE -susceptible volunteers the peripheral -to-central blood redistribution leads to excessively 
high PA and PA wedge pressures at levels sufficient to precipi[INVESTIGATOR_197987].  
 
With a technique developed in our lab we have the ability  to examine susceptibility to SIPE and test 
medications that might prevent it. Identification of a medication to prevent SIPE would be applicable not 
only to Navy divers and swimmers, but civilians known to be at risk for SIPE (e.g. triathletes) and indivi duals with heart failure, for whom swimming exercise may be beneficial for aerobic fitness but 
dangerous because of a risk of inducing pulmonary edema (30).  
 
RELEVANCE  
 
SIPE remains a problem during training for SEALs and Special Warfare Combatant -Craft Crew men. 
Nevertheless, SEAL candidates who experience SIPE have graduation rates similar to those who have not experienced it (31). Therefore, there must be a significant number of SIPE -susceptible operational SEALs 
and Special Warfare Combatant -Craft Crewmen who are at risk for SIPE during an operation. A 
medication with few side effects such as sildenafil that could prevent SIPE in susceptible individuals 
would be a valuable tool for use in mission -critical tasks where the individual best -suited for the task is 
SIPE -susceptible. An effective prophylactic drug would also be useful for civilians, particularly the 
increasing number of recreational triathletes in whom SIPE -susceptibility is around 1.5% (32). Deaths 
among amateur divers and triathletes due to SIPE have been reported (14,33,34).  
 
PRELIMINARY WORK  
 Previous studies in our laboratory supported by [CONTACT_197992], and even higher in cold water (28). When compared with individuals wi th no SIPE history, SIPE -susceptible 
individuals have higher PA and PA wedge pressures during exercise submerged in cold water. This study 
demonstrated the following (15):  
 SIPE -susceptible individuals have higher pulmonary artery and wedge pressures during exercise in cold 
water, thus demonstrating the mechanism for hemodynamic pulmonary edema in SIPE.  
 Sildenafil, a drug known to reduce pulmonary artery pressure in other settings, also does so in SIPE -
susceptible individuals, suggesting that sildenafil may be an effective preventive medication.  
 Sildenafil is a phosphodiesterase -5 (PDE -5) inhibitor that is used clinically for treatment of erectile 
dysfunction and primary pulmonary hypertension. It has a peak plasma level approximately one hour 
after oral inge stion and a 4 -hour half -life (35). In normal individuals the drug induces a slight decrease in 
blood pressure at rest and during exercise in the dry (36), but no significant change during submersed 
exercise (15). While it is plausible that PDE -5 inhibitors  could improve exercise performance (37), the 
evidence is mixed. Some studies have shown that sildenafil tends to improve exercise performance at altitude but not at sea level (38). More importantly, exercise performance is not impaired by [CONTACT_197993]. In a group of trained cyclists and triathletes aged [ADDRESS_235314] on a 10 km time trial or hemodynamic parameters during 
cycle exercise at 55% peak work for 60 minutes (39).  In another study of fit volunteers aged 24 -56 years, 
oral sildenafil 50 mg did not decrease O2max (40). In a test of anaerobic performance on a cycle 
ergometer in [ADDRESS_235315] to exhaustion (41). The same dose also had no adverse 
effect on aerobic performance in a study of 14 healthy male athletes (42).  
 
Sildenafil is the logical drug to test as a prophylactic against SIPE for the Navy bec ause:  
Its hemodynamic properties in humans have been measured during cold water immersion under a Duke 
IRB (Pro00003158), providing a plausible rationale for its use as prophylaxis against SIPE (15).  
 There is anecdotal evidence of its effectiveness in prev enting SIPE (43).  
 Sildenafil does not impair exercise performance (39,42).  
 
Overhydration was previously identified as contributing factor to SIPE: in one report each of 8 navy 
trainees who subsequently developed SIPE had consumed about 5 liters of water du ring two hours 
before exercise (12). This is confirmed by [CONTACT_197994] (Pro00019996), in which oral pre -
loading with a standard rehydration solution (Pedialyte®) followed by 40 minutes of head -out immersed 
exercise in 20°C water produced SIPE manifestations in 7 of 9 individuals with previous SIPE and 1 of 14 with no such history, thus providing a model for testing of an intervention to prevent SIPE.  
 
Design & Procedures  
 
The specific aim of this study will be addressed using a randomized, placebo controlled study of sildenafil in a group of individuals with proven susceptibility to SIPE. Volunteers between the ages of [ADDRESS_235316]. Pre -exercise blood 
pressure, heart rate and SpO2 will be recorded. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_197988] g to 
recommendations of the American Thoracic Society (1) using best of three efforts. One hour before the study the subject will be administered oral sildenafil (50 mg) or placebo in a re -encapsulated 
unidentifiable pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]. During the [ADDRESS_235317] will drink 2 L Pedialyte® then, while immersed to the neck in 20°C water, perform exercise on a cycle ergometer (60 rpm, approximate VO2=70% VO2max). Subjects will be instrumented with EKG, pulse oximetry and noninvasive blood pressure me asurement. VO2 will be measured 10 minutes after the start of exercise using a metabolic 
cart (ParvoMedics, East Sandy, UT). Subjects will be periodically asked about symptoms of shortness of breath, cough, chest tightness and whether they can continue. If  symptoms occur the chest will be 
auscultated. The exercise will be stopped when any of the following occur:  
Dyspnea  
Cough  
Audible wheezing  
Hypoxemia  
Unwillingness of the subject to continue  
 Immediately following exercise subjects will be removed from the water. Post -exercise assessment will 
include chest auscultation and measurement of vital signs and spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]. Chest radiography (PA and lateral) will be performed if pulmonary edema is suspected. Symptomatic subjects will be treated as appropriate with ox ygen and albuterol until they are asymptomatic.  
Randomization will be performed by [CONTACT_197995]. Both subjects and investigators will remain blinded until the end  
of the study.  
 
The primary outcome will be pulmonary edema after exercise defined as one or more of the following:  
Hypoxemia (SpO2< 95% room air)  
Productive cough  
Pulmonary edema on chest radiograph  
Wheezing on chest auscultation  
Secondary outcomes will be : 
Voluntary premature cessation of exercise due to shortness of breath  
Post -exercise 10% decrease in forced vital capacity (FVC) or forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_31737] 
(FEV1)  
‘Comet tails’ seen on ultrasound of the lungs (2)  
One blood sample will be obt ained for extraction of DNA and storage in the Duke Biofluids Shared 
Resource for future analysis.  
 
Selection of Subjects  
  
Inclusion Criteria:  
Healthy volunteers between 18 and 45 years  
History of SIPE  
 Exclusion Criteria : 
Pregnant women  
Significant heart valve disease  
Cardiomyopathy  
Untreated hypertension  
Coronary artery disease  
Obstructive lung disease  
VO2max < 25 mL/kg as estimated by [CONTACT_197996] -Exercise Test (1)  
Previ ous adverse reaction to sildenafil  
Use of antihypertensives or other drugs that are known to interact adversely with sildenafil (e.g. nitrates, alpha adrenergic blockers)  
Concomitant use of erythromycin or other potent cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibitors  
Histor y of non -arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION)  
COVID positive test  
Subjects who are already taking sildenafil for another indication  
 The medical record of each individual will be screened carefully for underlying predisposing conditions. Every effort will be made to ensure that none of these exclusions are present before volunteers come to 
Duke. Volunteers who have not undergone resting and stress echocardiography as a result of previous workups will undergo these studies here.  
 
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
 
The main hazard in the proposed studies is the development of SIPE, although the risk is low. A physician will be monitoring the studies and will interrupt any exercise study in which signs of early SIPE develop. 
The study will be conducted at the Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Environmental Physiology within 
Duke Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], where diagnostic and therapeutic modalities including radiology, oxyg en, 
bronchodilators, advanced monitoring and critical care facilities are immediately available. The investigative team has experience detecting and treating SIPE. Immersed exercise will be stopped 
immediately upon development of symptoms or signs suggesti ve of SIPE. Unlike development of SIPE in 
open water swimming, in the lab rapid removal from the water immediately reverses the 
hemodynamics that predispose to SIPE and allows appropriate support for resolution.  
 
With sildenafil administration, the common adverse reactions include headache, flushing, dyspepsia, nasal congestion, urinary tract infection, diarrhea, dizziness, nosebleeds, insomnia, and rash. These effects are generally mild to moderate, transient, and more common at the maximum recommended dose  (100 mg) and above (1). There is risk of visual disturbances, with alteration in color vision and 
excessive brightness, but these are also dose- dependent and reversible (1). Non -arteritic anterior 
ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION) has been reported rarely  in temporal association with the use of 
sildenafil and other phosphodiesterase -V (PDE5) inhibitors. This effect is much less likely with only a 
single administration of sildenafil, and the annual incidence of NAION in sildenafil users is 2.8 cases per 100,000 men per year, similar to the estimated general incidence in the US (2.5 -11.8/100,000/year) 
(2,3). It is difficult to determine if these events are related to PDE5 inhibitors or to other factors as those who experienced it already had autonomic or vasc ular risk factors for NAION (4). Single dose 
administrations of sildenafil in studies of high altitude pulmonary edema found no different secondary effects between sildenafil and placebo, and no erectile responses were reported in this setting as this effect would require sexual stimulus (5). No hemodynamic or other side effects were observed in an 
earlier study (6).  
 
The main benefit to these SIPE -susceptible subjects will be to know whether their risk of SIPE can be 
reduced by [CONTACT_197997] 50 mg.  
 
Data Analysis & Statistical Considerations  
 
Power analysis has been performed using previously obtained data from Pro00019996. Conservatively assuming that the study will result in SIPE in 70% of individuals wit h placebo and 5% with sildenafil, 
using a two -sided McNemar’s test at alpha level 0.05 will achieve 96.7% power to detect a difference 
between sildenafil and placebo with N=20. There may be some washout of subjects due to screen failures or other reasons, however the same analysis reveals that a study of only 13 subjects will achieve 
81% power to detect a difference between sildenafil and placebo. For the final analysis, comparison of 
the numbers of SIPE cases after sildenafil and placebo will be performed using McNemar’s test (SAS software, SAS Institute, Cary, NC). N=40 subjects are planned for enrollment with the goal of 20 subjects participating and matched testing.  
 Data & Safety Monitoring  
 
During the exercise portions of the study, subjects will be continuously monitored with EKG, SpO2, VO2 
and intermittent noninvasive blood pressure, as wll as with a physician adjacent to the imm ersion pool. 
Data will be uiploaded to REDCap, where all observations will be stored. [CONTACT_197998][INVESTIGATOR_37341], who is 
not part of the study, will act as the safety monitor. He will review the data on a regular basis and will be 
consulted for any adverse even t. 
  
All subjects will be monitored for safety while participating in the study and immediately (24 hours) 
post -participation, and the study investigators will be monitoring for adverse events throughout the 
course of the study. [CONTACT_197998][INVESTIGATOR_197989] (also termed Research Monitor) for this study. He shall have authority to stop a research protocol in progress, remove 
individual human subjects from a research protocol, and take whatever steps are necessary to pro tect 
the safety and well- being of human subjects until the IRB can assess the monitor's report. The Research 
Monitor shall have the responsibility to promptly report his observations and findings to the IRB or other 
designated official. The Navy Human Rese arch Protection Program will be notified of any adverse 
events.  
 