IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 1 of 27    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identifying Electrophysiological Targets for Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in Cocaine Use 
Disorder  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100740] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED].  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 2 of 27   Protocol  Title:  Identifying Electrophysiological Targets for Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation 
in Cocaine Use  Disorder 
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Heather  Webber  
 
Co-Investigators:  [CONTACT_91244], [CONTACT_91245], [CONTACT_91246], [CONTACT_91247] de Quevedo,  [CONTACT_91248]:  Jessica  Vincent  
 
Population:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]: N = 5 participants with cocaine use disorder Main Trial: N = 75  participants  
 
Number  of Sites:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]: 1 year Main Trial: [ADDRESS_100741]  Duration:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]: 3 -4 days  
Main Trial: [ADDRESS_100742] system 
and hypoactivation of the prefrontal cortex2. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_91184] -known effects of chronic cocaine use, treating deficits in 
dopamine functioning with pharmacological agents has been largely unsuccessful. There are c urrently no FDA -approved 
medications for the treatment of cocaine use disorder (CUD). Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is an approved treatment for several psychiatric disorders. Recent research shows promise for the use of TMS for CUD
3,4. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] c onsiderable promise, there are addressable issues for optimizing treatment with TMS. The first  issue 
has to do with stimulation sites. In accordance with the depression literature, the majority of rTMS studies have stimulated dlPFC to rectify the prefrontal hypoactivation commonly observed in addiction. Other prefrontal structures involving emotional and reward functioning are also potential sites for TMS
5, including dorsomedial PFC (dmPFC) and its 
connections to anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). dmPFC is a promising target for TMS, as cocaine users show reduced dmPFC and ACC activity in response to pleasant emotional images/monetary outcomes
6–8, and reduced functional 
connectivity of mesocorticolimbic circuits9. A second  issue involves identifying relevant b iomarkers for TMS effects. Two 
event- related potential (ERP) components that are sensitive to treatment change (RewP and LPP)10,[ADDRESS_100743]/emotional processing could potentially serve as biomarkers for assessing the effects of iTBS relative to s ham.  
Measuring both RewP and LPP will provide critical information on whether TMS alters overall reward functioning or a bias toward drug rewards compared to non -drug rewards. We propose to conduct the first study that assesses the  
effects of iTBS to the d mPFC on physiological measures of reward functioning . This pi[INVESTIGATOR_91185] a larger clinical trial. Recruitment of participants for the larger main trial will begin upon receiving NIH grant funds (application currently under review) and will specifically compare iTBS to the dlPFC and dmPFC to sham (no stimulation).  
 
Background Information  
 
Cocaine use disorder (CUD) is a significant public health problem for which treatments are only moderately  
effective.  
Chronic use of psychostimulants leads to changes in neural circuitry, including the dopamine reward system2. 
These changes in neural function are in part responsible for the hallmark features of stimulant addiction: increased  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100744] largely failed. There are no FDA -approved  
medications for the treatment of CUD.  Alternative approaches that dire ctly target neural circuits may hold promise for 
treating CUD -related deficits.  
 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) is a promising treatment for CUD.  
TMS is an approved treatment for depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, and nicotine use15,16. Clinical 
research has also shown promising results for the use of rTMS (repetitive TMS) in the treatment of CUD3. It is well 
known that cocaine addiction is associated with changes in prefrontal (e.g., dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [dlPFC], 
orbitofrontal co rtex, and anterior cingulate cortex[ACC])5,17– [ADDRESS_100745] system networks observed with chronic 
use of drugs, as it projects to midbrain dopamine  cells within the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra. The 
hypothesized result would be an increase in dopamine within the nucleus accumbens20. 
Preliminary evidence in humans supports this hypothesis. Multiple sessions of active rTMS of 5 -15 Hz to dlPFC 
appear to reduce self- reported craving, cocaine positive urines, and other unwanted symptoms3,4,21– 27. In addition to 
traditional 10/15Hz rTMS, intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) has also shown early success in lowering cocaine 
use and cravi ng. Importantly, iTBS protocols take about 3 minutes to complete compared to the 15 minutes it takes for a 
15Hz protocol and has similar clinical effectiveness for treatment of depression28. Steele et al. (2019) reported iTBS to 
left dlPFC reduced cocaine use and craving29, while Sanna et al. (2019) reported no differences in 15 Hz stimulation 
compared to iTBS to the bilateral PFC on cocaine use30. Taken together, iTBS to either area could be useful in treating 
CUD.  
TMS to dorsomedial PFC (dmPFC) is a potential therapeutic target for CUD . While dlPFC has been the 
conventional target for CUD based on the depression literature, recent studies have provided preliminary evidence that TMS to dmPFC could be beneficial in treating depressive symptoms
31–33. Similar to depression, dmPFC is also implicated 
in reduced emotional and reward functioning in addiction. For example, functional connectivity in emotional and reward circuits are reduced in cocaine dependent individuals, including medial PFC with amygdala and dmP FC with 
hippocampus
9. Similarly, fMRI response to pleasant images is reduced in the dmPFC in cocaine users compared to 
healthy controls7. More broadly, studies have shown that medial PFC and ACC are reduced in response to differences in 
monetary outcomes c ompared to controls6,8,34,35. Yet, no studies have directly compared dlPFC and dmPFC in a sham - 
controlled design for CUD.  
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a relevant and useful biomarker of TMS effects on brain function.  
While some research has looked at the effects of TMS on neuroimaging measures36–41, thus far, the majority of 
TMS studies have focused on subjective measures of craving as the main outcomes. However, evidence suggests that subjective measures may not capture the substantial heterogeneity in r isk for relapse
3, especially in persons with 
substance use disorders, who may lack insight42. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_91186], there is no accepted self - 
report measure of craving. Recognizing these limitations, researchers have turned to psy chophysiological responses as 
an indirect measure of craving.  
The current proposal will utilize event -related potentials (ERPs) as objective biomarkers to assess the effects of 
TMS on overall reward sensitivity and cue reactivity, two main constructs associated with CUD treatment outcomes43,44. 
ERPs directly measure brain activity with excellent temporal precision and reliability45. ERP paradigms are well-  
researched and widely used, with published guidelines for best practices46. In our work leading up to this proposal, we 
have successfully integrated EEG measurements into the clinical trials research setting and have demonstrated how ERP components can be used to classify cocaine users based on risk for relapse
47. The Reward positivity (RewP) and the late 
positive potential (LPP) are ERP components associated with re ward and emotional processing and are ideal candidate 
biomarkers of treatment response.  
Reward sensitivity as a target in treating CUD with TMS . The RewP is an ERP component that occurs over the 
medial fronto -central electrodes ~[ADDRESS_100746] prediction error signal from midbrain dopamine neurons to the ACC48–55. 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 4 of 27   Research has linked dopamine with the generation of the RewP56–60, and thus, is theorized to be an indicator of overall 
reward sensitivity or anhedonia61,62. In fact, anhedonia has been shown to account for a significant amount of variance in 
predicting Re wP amplitude in individuals with CUD63. Recent evidence suggests that the time- domain RewP effects are 
better described by [CONTACT_91221] (3 -7Hz) and delta (<3 Hz) activity using time frequency analysis64–66. Theta 
and delta activity may represen t different aspects of reward feedback processing67–70, with theta indexing simple 
stimulus characteristics and delta capturing complex features such as expectancy and magnitude of reward66,71. 
Importantly, only delta- related activity is associated with de pressive symptoms62, and thus, could be key in evaluating 
reward sensitivity in CUD . The RewP is sensitive to TMS manipulation72,73, is reliable48,74, and is known to change with 
treatment11,75, and thus, is well positioned to serve as a biomarker of chang e in reward sensitivity observed after TMS 
treatment. While prior studies demonstrated TMS effects on the RewP when stimulating dlPFC72,73, stimulation to dmPFC 
may be optimal given the connection between ACC and dmPFC76,77. 
Cue reactivity as a target in treating CUD with  
TMS . The LPP is an ERP component occurring over 
the centro -parietal electrodes (starting ~400ms post 
stimulus) that is larger to unpleasant and pleasant 
compared to neutral images78,79. The LPP is thought 
to be marker of motivated attenti on toward 
emotionally salient cues and cue reactivity80, as 
studies in drug users show that the LPP is enhanced 
in response to drug cues10,81– 84 and is  associated  
with craving84. The LPP is thought to arise from a 
complex network of brain areas, including the visual 
cortex, amygdala, prefrontal cortex, and insula85–87. 
Further, visual representations of rewarding stimuli 
are mediated by [CONTACT_91222]88 and thus, 
LPP could be altered by [CONTACT_91223]. Importantly, the LPP changes with 
treatment and abstinence status89 and is altered by 
[CONTACT_91224]. In one study, prior to treatment 
cocaine users displayed a larger LPP response to 
drug compared to pleasant images, and this pattern flipped after treatment
10. Therefore, the LPP ma y 
serve as a biomarker of cue reactivity change  
observed after TMS treatment. Specifically, measuring  
both RewP and LPP will provide critical information on whether TMS alters overall reward functioning or a bias toward 
drug rewards compared to non -drug re wards. It is unknown if stimulation to the dlPFC or dmPFC would be more 
effective in manipulating the LPP amplitude. fMRI studies of cue reactivity implicate dlPFC and dmPFC in the processing 
of drug cues in addiction90, so both stimulation sites should ha ve an effect on LPP to drug/non -drug cues.  
Preliminary Data. The following preliminary studies indicate the feasibility of the trial and ability of the team to 
carry out the proposed research. Support for utilizing EEG to assess reward sensitivity and cue reactivity in CUD : We are 
currently completing a NIDA -funded F32 project (1F32DA048542) titled “ Using event -related potentials to predict 
treatment outcomes in cocaine use disorder ”. This project is utilizing identical EEG tasks to elicit the RewP and LPP at a 
baseline assessment before participants receive treatment of CUD. Fig [ADDRESS_100747] on the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91187]. Fig 1  shows variability in the LPP 
amplitude, sugges ting that individuals with higher LPP at baseline may be more likely to benefit from TMS treatment 
compared to those with smaller LPPs (i.e., they have more room to reduce LPP response). Fig 1  also shows preliminary 
data collected from the Doors Task, showing a typi[INVESTIGATOR_91188] (more positive to wins, negative to losses).  
Together, these results highlight the feasibility of utilizing these ERP components to assess reward sensitivity and cue  
reactivity in CUD and the ability of the team to collect high quality and relevant EEG data in a clinical setting.  
 
Summary of Significance  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100748] sensitivity and cue reactivity, as measured by [CONTACT_91225], respectively, will demonstrate utility as biomarkers of TMS effects. There is an urgent need to improve 
treatments for CUD in the wake of recent trends indicating rising cocaine use and overdose deaths93. Research indicates 
that a decreased RewP to wins and increased LPP to cocaine cues  are potential targetable physiological patterns for TMS 
manipulation. This proposal is significant because it will 1) establish feasibility of a novel stimulation site utilizing a biomarker approach and 2) lay the ground work for a future larger clinical trial comparing the novel site to a traditional site and sham. For the main study, we will compare the effects of dmPFC to dlPFC and sham. We hypothesize that dmPFC compared to dlPFC or sham will lead to greater changes in EEG measures of reward functionin g (i.e., RewP and 
LPP).  
 
Aims and Hypotheses 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91189] 1: To assess the effects of active iTBS to dmPFC on EEG measures of reward sensitivity and cue reactivity. 
Hypothesis 1a. Primary hypothesis: iTBS will increase the amplitude of the RewP  and switch the drug>pleasant LPP bias 
to pleasant>drug compared to sham iTBS.  
 
Specific Aim 2: To assess the effects of active iTBS to dmPFC on cocaine craving in cocaine users.  
Hypothesis 2a: Primary hypothesis: iTBS to dmPFC compared to sham iTBS will r educe cocaine craving (Minnesota 
Cocaine Craving Scale) in cocaine users.  
 
Primary Outcome Measures  
 
1. Reward sensitivity as assessed by [CONTACT_91226] –  the RewP is an EEG component that will be 
measured immediately before and immediately following iTBS sessions on the test  day.  
2. Cue reactivity as assessed by [CONTACT_91227]. pleasant cues –  the LPP is an EEG 
component  that will be measured  immediately  before  and immediately  following  iTBS  sessions on the test days.  
 
Secondary Ou tcome Measures  
 
1. Craving – craving will be assessed immediately before and immediately following iTBS sessions on the test 
days.  
2. Pain  – pain  will be assessed  via a Visual Analogue  Scale  (1-10) immediately  before  and immediately  following 
iTBS  sessions on the test  days.  
3. Cognitive  function  – a brief assessment  of cognitive  function  will be included  immediately  before  and after 
the iTBS sessions on the test  days.  
 
Main Trial  
 
AIM 1: Assess effects of iTBS to left dlPFC and dmPFC compared to sham on reward sensitivity.  
Primary Hypothesis 1a: Active iTBS relative to sham will increase the amplitude of the RewP/delta power to rewards compared to non -rewards.  
Exploratory Hypothesis 1b: iTBS to dmPFC will result in a greater increase in the RewP/delta power compared to dlPFC.  
 
AIM 2: Assess effects of iTBS to left dlPFC and dmPFC compared to sham on motivated attention. Primary Hypothesis 2a: Active iTBS relative to sham will switch the drug>pleasant LPP bias.  
Exploratory Hypothesis 2b: iTBS to dmPFC wi ll result in a greater increase in LPP to pleasant images.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 6 of 27   EXPLORATORY AIM 3: Identify individual differences in iTBS response with baseline characteristics. 
Exploratory Hypothesis 3a: We will explore CUD severity, impulsivity, and craving as  predicters of iTBS effects.  
 
Primary Outcome Measures  
 
1. Reward sensitivity as assessed by [CONTACT_91226] –  the RewP is an EEG component that will be 
measured immediately before and immediately following iTBS sessions on the test  day.  
2. Cue reactivity as assessed by [CONTACT_91227]. pleasant cues –  the LPP is an EEG 
component  that will be measured  immediately  before  and immediately  following  iTBS  sessions on the test days.  
 
Secondary Outcome Measures  
 
1. Craving – craving via the Minnesota Cocaine Craving scale will be assessed immediately before and 
immediately following iTBS sessions on the test days.  
2. Pain  – pain  will be assessed  via a Visual Analogue  Scale  (1-10) immediately  before  and immediately  following 
iTBS sessions on the test  days.  
3. Cognitive  function  – a brief assessment  of cognitive  function  will be included  immediately  before  and after 
the iTBS sessions on the test  days.  
4. Behavioral reward learning –  participants will complete the Pavlovian Go/No -Go task before and after iTBS 
sessions.  
5. Anhedonia – the Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale (SHAPS) will be collected before and after iTBS  sessions.  
 
 
Study design 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91190]. Five individuals will serve as pi[INVESTIGATOR_91191] (currently under review at NIH). We will enroll five individuals with CUD. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_91192] r currently approved protocol (HSC -MS-05-0322) and a two -day test session. Each 
participant will complete two test days: A) iTBS to dmPFC and B) sham iTBS. The order (dmPFC or sham) of test days will be counterbalanced and double -blind. Recruitment of addi tional 75 participants for the main trial will begin upon 
receiving NIH grant funds (application currently under review).  
Overall Research Strategy. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_798] (N = 5) with a primary CUD diagnosis will complete screening and 
baseline assess ments prior to undergoing a two -day within -subjects pre -post EEG design. Participants will complete an 
EEG session, undergo the iTBS session (either dmPFC or sham), and then repeat the EEG session. The iTBS intervention will consist of 2 3 -minute sessions with a 15 -20-minute interval in between sessions.  
Participants, Recruitment, and Setting. The study will be conducted at the Center for Neurobehavioral Research 
on Addiction (CNRA), where [CONTACT_91244] has been running treatment and non -treatment studies  for CUD for over [ADDRESS_100749]. de 
Quevedo uses TMS to treat depression and mood disorders. Recruitment will follow typi[INVESTIGATOR_91193], including 
calls from protocol number HSC -MS-05-0322, and additionally distribute unique study flyers locally. Eligible participants 
will be between the ages of 18 and 65. Potential participants will attend an in -person intake over several days to 
determine eligibility based on the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 (SCID)
94, Colombia Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale (C -SSRS)95, Assault & Homicidal Danger Assessment Tool96, urine drug screening, breath alcohol testing, a urine 
pregnancy test, and a TMS safety screen. E ligibility criteria will be assessed through our CPHS approved “General 
Evaluation of Eligibility for Substance Abuse/Dependence Research” protocol (HSC -MS-05-0322) and will be conducted 
by [CONTACT_91228].  Please  see Table  1 for the Schedule  of Assessments  regarding  the general 
evaluation protocol. Individuals meeting moderate or severe criteria for substances other than cocaine, cannabis, or nicotine will be excluded. Other exclusionary criteria are: unstable psychiatric disord er, medical conditions  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 7 of 27   contraindicated to TMS (e.g., medical implants, history of seizure or seizure disorder, medications lowering the seizure 
threshold, neurological conditions, moderate -to-severe heart disease), pregnancy, hairstyles incom patible with the EEG 
net, and head injury with loss of consciousness. See Protection of Human Subjects for a more detailed description of eligibility criteria.  
 
Table 1. Schedule of Assessments – Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91194]  
(1-2 days)  Study Visits 
(2 days)  
Structured Clinical Interview for  
DSM -5 X  
Urine drug screen  
(UDS)/breathalyzer  X X 
Pregnancy test  X X 
Colombia Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale/Assault & Homicidal  
Danger Assessment Tool  X  
TMS Safety Screen  X  
Timeline Follow Back  X X 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment  
(MoCA)4  X 
EEG Tasks1  X 
iTBS2  X 
Minnesota Cocaine Craving  
Scale   X 
Snaith -Hamilton Pleasure Scale   X 
Safety Measures3  X 
Note. 1EEG tasks are collected before and after 2 sessions of iTBS – 3 
minutes of resting EEG data, the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91195], the Doors Task. 2iTBS  
– two sessions of iTBS, separated by [ADDRESS_100750]. Either sham iTBS or 
iTBS to dmPFC. 3Safety Measures – hours of sleep, Cocaine Selective 
Severity Assessment (CSSA; withdrawal), and AE/SAE form will be collected 
prior to iTBS. AE/SAE form will be completed both before and after iTBS sessions. 
[ADDRESS_100751] iTBS session and after 2nd iTBS  
session.  
 
Payment and Compensation. Participants will be paid $35 for the screening/intake visits, plus compensation for 
parking/bus passes. Participants will receive $150 for each EEG/TMS evaluation days.  
Baseline Screening. Participants will receive a psychiatric evaluation during the first week including a complete 
psychiatric diagnosis using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 (SCID -5) administered by [CONTACT_91229] r the supervision of a licensed clinical psychologist. Screening will include urine sample for 
urinalysis testing for drugs of abuse and pregnancy. In addition to the general evaluation, participants will complete the 
TMS Adult Safety Screen per Keel et al97. Upon completion of this intake evaluation, eligible participants will be invited 
to participate in the study.  
TMS Session. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a trained research assistant/nurse under the supervision of [CONTACT_91247] de Quevedo, will 
perform the TMS at the Treatment- Resistant Mood Disorders Program at UTHealth, adjacent to the CNRA. TMS will be  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 8 of 27   will be collected using a 64 -channel actiCAP  delivered with a MagVenture Mag Pro R30 with the Cool -B70 A/P coil with active liquid cooling and active/sham sides 
(Farum, Denmark). A member of the CNRA not inv olved in the study will be the only person aware of the randomization 
results and will program the system to ensure double blinding.). For dmPFC, we will measure approximately 25% of the 
nasion -inion distance, or Talairah coordinates X 0 Y+60 Z[PHONE_2144],98. The first session will begin with the acquisition of the 
resting motor threshold (rMT; lowest stimulus intensity that elicits a visible twitch on 50% of the trials) on the contralateral hand. iTBS (triplet 50 Hz bursts, repeated at 5 Hz, 2 sec on and 8 sec o ff; 600 pulses per session) will be 
delivered at 80% of the rMT and will last ~[ADDRESS_100752] iTBS session 
(baseline) and immediately following the  two stimulation  sessions. This will conclude participation for the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_91196].  
EEG Protocol. During the tasks described below, EEG 
electrode cap, amplified with BrainAmp MR and digitized  using 
Brain Vision Recorder (Brain Products, Munich). Before 
collection, impedances will be maintained below 50 k(OHM). 
The sampling rate will be 500 Hz and data will be filtered  with  
.1 Hz high -pass and 100 Hz low -pass filters. Resting data will be 
collected for 3 minutes (90 -seconds eyes open and 90 -seconds 
eyes clos ed). After collection, data reduction will be performed 
with a combination of programs including Brain Vision Analyzer 2, MATLAB (EEGLab; PCA Toolkit) and BESA. Both traditional windowed ERP (mean amplitude) and TFA approaches will  be 
used to analyze the R ewP. The LPP will be defined as the mean amplitude between [ADDRESS_100753] Sensitivity: The Doors Task59 will be used to elicit the RewP component, representing reward 
sensitivity47,60. The task is a guessing game, where participants guess which door contains a reward behind it. After 
selecting a door, the participants are notified if they found the prize by a green arrow pointing up or if they did not find the prize by a red arrow pointing down. Unknown to the participants, winning and losi ng outcomes are presented 50% 
of the time in a random order. The RewP is larger in response to rewards (wins) than non -rewards (losses). Self- reported 
anhedonia (Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale; SHAPS) will also be assessed as a secondary measure of reward sensitivity in 
addition to the RewP.  
Cue Reactivity: The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91197], reflecting the motivational salience of a 
stimulus. During this task, participants are asked to view a slideshow of images including pleasant, unp leasant, neutral, 
and cocaine -related images61. Pleasant and unpleasant images elicit a more positive LPP amplitude than neutral 
images55. In cocaine users, the LPP is also larger to cocaine images compared to neutral images, similar to pleasant and 
unpleasant images  10,101. 
Other  Measures.  
Cocaine Use . Urine samples will be collected at the study visit and tested for the cocaine metabolite, 
benzoylecgonine (BE). Samples containing ≥ 300 ng/ml of BE will be considered positive. Additionally, the Timel ine 
Follow Back102 method will be used as a secondary self -reported measure of daily cocaine use in the month prior to 
participating in the study. These measures will be used to assess severity of cocaine use.  
Cocaine Craving. Cocaine craving will be measu red using the Minnesota Cocaine Craving Scale (MCCS)103. The 
MCCS is a widely used and reliable self- report measure of craving for cocaine, with 3 subscales (craving intensity, 
frequency, duration) and will be assessed before and after the EEG session.  
Cognitive Function. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)[ADDRESS_100754] the following before the iTBS sessions: ho urs of sleep, UDS/TLFB, breathalyzer, 
the AE/SAE form, pain, and the Cocaine Selective Severity Assessment (CSSA –  a measure of withdrawal). The AE/SAE 
form and pain will also be completed after the iTBS session. See Table 2 for the Study Visit Timeline.  
iTBS to dmPFC  
 Table 2. Study Visit Timeline – Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91198]:  5-10 min  UDS, TLFB, pregnancy, sleep, CSSA, C -SSRS, AE/SAE form  
Cognitive 
Assessment  10 min  MoCA  
Fit EEG cap:  30 min  Measure & place cap on head, gel electrodes  
Complete EEG 
Session 1:  35 min  Resting EEG, Doors Task, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91199]:  [ADDRESS_100755] resting motor threshold  
iTBS Session 
1: [ADDRESS_100756]:  15-20 min  Sit quietly  
iTBS Session 2  3 min  iTBS to dmPFC or sham iTBS  
Assess safety:  5-10 min  AE/SAE form  
Cognitive 
Assessment  10 min  MoCA  
Complete EEG  
Session 2:  35 min  Resting EEG, Doors Task, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91200]. The proposed study will use a within -subjects cross over design as shown in Fig 2 . Non -treatment- seeking adults 
with a primary CUD diagnosis (N = 75) will complete screening and baseline assessments prior to completing three 
separate iTBS days (sham, dlPFC  iTBS, or dmPFC iTBS), order counterbalanced across participants. On each day, EEG will 
be collected before and after 3 iTBS successive sessions (15 -minutes between sessions). Days will be spaced at least 24 - 
hours apart and will be completed within 2 week s. We will aim to consent 115 participants to achieve 75 completed.  
 
Setting and Participants. The study will be conducted at the Center for Neurobehavioral Research on Addiction (CNRA) 
in Houston, TX. Participants will be recruited through print, radio, and internet advertisements in the local media.  
Eligible participants will be non -treatment- seeking adults (ages 18 -65) meeting DSM -5 criteria for current moderate -to- 
severe CUD. Potential participants will attend a multiday intake to determine eligibility based on a clinical interview (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5 (SCID)
94, Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS)95, Assault and 
Homicidal Danger Assessment Tool105), urine drug screening, breath alcohol testing, urine pregnancy test, and TMS 
safety screen97. Individuals meeting moderate or severe criteria for substances other than cocaine, cannabis, or nicotine 
will be excluded. Other exclusionary criteria are: unstable psychiat ric disorder, medical conditions or medications 
contraindicated to TMS (e.g., medical implants, history of seizure, see Protection of Human Subjects for a full list), 
pregnancy, impending incarceration, and inability to read or write. Day -of TMS session re quirements will include: 
negative UDS for any substance other than cocaine and cannabis, 0% blood alcohol level, and > participants’ typi[INVESTIGATOR_91201] ( Safety Outcomes ). Appointments will be rescheduled if these criteria are not met. Participants 
will receive compensation for travel and study visits to promote retention, including $35 for the screening, escalating payments ($40/hour for 1st  
session, $45/hour for 2nd and $50/hour for 3
rd) for 
completion of the EEG/iTBS sessions, and $10 per vi sit 
for parking.  
 
TMS protocol. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a 
trained research assistant/nurse under the supervision of [CONTACT_91247] de  
Page 8 of 27  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 9 of 27   Quevedo ( Biosketch ), will perform the TMS at the Treatment- Resistant Mood Disorders Program at UTHealth, adjacent 
to the CNRA. TMS will be delivered with a MagVenture Mag Pro R30 with the Cool -B70 A/P coil with active liquid cooling 
and active/sham  sides  (Farum,  Denmark).  A member  of the CNRA  not involved  in the study  will be the only  person  aware 
of the counterbalanced order and will program the system to ensure double blinding. For dlPFC, we will measure 
position F3, using probabilistic EEG placement. For dmPFC,  we will measure approximately 25% of the nasion -inion 
distance, or Talairah coordinates X 0 Y+60 Z[PHONE_2144],98. The first session will begin with the acquisition of the resting motor 
threshold (rMT; lowest stimulus intensity that elicits a visible twitch on 5 0% of the trials) on the contralateral hand. iTBS 
(triplet 50 Hz bursts, repeated at 5 Hz, 2 sec on and 8 sec off; 600 pulses per session) will be delivered at 110% of the 
rMT and will last ~[ADDRESS_100757] iTBS 
session (baseline) and immediately following stimulation sessions ( Table  1). 
 
Measures.  
Baseline Measures . Urine samples will be collected at each study visit and tested for the cocaine metabolite, 
benzoylecgonine (BE) and other drugs of abuse. Samples containing ≥ 300 ng/ml of BE will be considered positive. Additionally, self- reported substance use will be assessed using the Ti meline Follow Back
102 to assess cocaine use 
severity (number of days used in the past 30 days). Impulsivity will be measured with the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-11)
106. Cocaine craving (below) will also be measured at baseline.  
 
Table 3. Schedule of Activities by [CONTACT_4838] (Order of Study Visit Number counterbalanced and 
randomized across participants) Main Trial  
  Sham  dmPFC1 dlPFC2 
Study Visit  Intake/Baseline  [ADDRESS_100758] (UPT)  X X X X 
Urine Drug Screen (UDS)  X X X X 
Breathalyzer  X X X X 
Vitals  X X X X 
Concomitant Medications Tracking Log  X X X X 
Columbia Suicidal Severity Rating Scale 
(C-SSRS)  X X X X 
Danger Assessment Tool  X X X X 
Cocaine Selective Severity Assessment 
(CSSA)   X X X 
Hours of Sleep   X X X 
TMS Side Effects Questionnaire*   X X X 
Pain Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)*   X X X 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)*   X X X 
TMS      
Intermittent theta burst stimulation 3x with 
15-minute intervals in between   X X X 
Study Manipulation Measures      
Blinding Question   X X X 
Main Outcomes      
EEG (Doors Task & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91202]   X X X 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 10 of 27   Task)*      
Behavioral Reward (Pavlovian Go/No -Go)*  X X X 
Other Measures/Outcomes      
Minnesota Cocaine Craving Scale 
(MCCS)*  X X X X 
Snaith -Hamilton Anhedonia Scale 
(SHAPS)*  X X X X 
Cocaine Use Timeline Follow Back (TLFB)  X X X X 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS -11) X    
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance/Impairment   X X X 
Profile of Mood States (POMS)   X X X 
Delay Task*   X X X 
Cocaine Purchasing Task  X    
1dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; 2dorsomedial prefrontal cortex; * measured before and after 
TMS  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
EEG Measures. During the tasks described below, EEG will be collected using a 64 -channel actiCAP electrode cap, 
amplified with BrainAmp MR and digitized using Brain Vision Recorder (Brain Products, Munich). Impedances will be 
maintained below 50 k(OHM). The sampling rat e will be 500 Hz and data will be filtered with .1 Hz high -pass and 100 Hz 
low-pass filters. Data reduction will be performed with Brain Vision Analyzer 2, MATLAB, and BESA. Both ERP (mean 
amplitude) and TFA approaches will be used to analyze the RewP. Whi le the main hypotheses will look at delta power, 
we will also examine changes in other frequencies, including theta, in exploratory analyses. The LPP will be defined as the mean amplitude between [ADDRESS_100759] stimulus
47,81 and a difference score (cocaine  minus pleasant) will be used 
to assess LPP bias.  
 
Reward Sensitivity. The Doors Task59 will be used to elicit the RewP. Participants guess which door contains a reward 
behind it. After selecting a door, the participants are notified if they won by a green arrow pointing up or if they lost by a red arrow pointing down. Unknown to the participants, winning and losing outcomes are presented 50% of the time in a random order. Self- reported anhedonia (Snaith Hamilton Pleasure Scale; SHAPS) will also be ass essed at each visit as a 
secondary measure of reward sensitivity.  
 
Cue Reactivity. The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91203], reflecting the motivational salience of a stimulus. 
During this task, participants are asked to view a slideshow of images including pleasant, unpleasant, neutral, and cocaine -related images
61. 
 
Cocaine Craving. Cocaine craving will be measured using the Minnesota Cocaine Craving Scale (MCCS)103. The MCCS is a 
widely used and reliable self- report measure of craving for cocaine. It will be assessed before and after each iTBS 
session.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100760] Learning. Participants will complete a Pavlovian Go/No -Go task to assess Pavlovian influences on 
instrumental learning107– 110. In the first “learning” phase, p articipants learn whether to press a button or withhold a 
response to receive a monetary reward or avoid a loss. In the second “transfer” phase, participants perform a forced 
choice task, where each of the predictive cues in the learning phase are paired w ith each other. Participants must select 
the “most rewarding” cue.  
 
Delay Discounting and Cocaine Demand.  Both delay discounting and cocaine demand are measures that provide 
information about cost -benefit trade -offs and are often associated with substance use outcomes. Previous studies have 
shown that TMS might alter these principles111. The delay task will specifically measure delay discounting and will consist 
of [ADDRESS_100761] of cocaine113,114. 
 
Safety/Other outcomes . We will collect the following day -of measures before iTBS sessions: Profile of Mood States 
(POMS)115, hours of sleep, Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Sleep Disturbance 
(SD) and Sleep -Related Impairment (SRI) short forms116,117, UDS/TLFB, breathalyzer, withdrawal (Cocaine Selective 
Severity Assessment; CSSA118), and the TMS AE/SAE form. The TMS AE/SAE form will also be completed after iTBS 
sessions. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)104 will be used to assess for chang es in cognition and will be 
administered before and after the 3 iTBS sessions.  
 
Analysis Plan 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91204].  
Statistical Modeling. Analyses will primarily rely on generalized linear modeling (GLM) with a random intercept for 
participan t. This model may fit normally or non -normally distributed outcomes as needed (e.g., Binomial with logit link 
for dichotomous outcomes). Analyses will be performed in Mplus110 and R111 via packages lme4112, mediation113, rstan114, 
and brms115. Inferences and Assumptions . Bayesian inference will be used to directly evaluate the probability of the 
alternative hypothesis (i.e., that an effect of TMS exists). As a default, weakly informative priors will be used for all analyses (e.g., regression coefficients: b  ~N[µ=0,σ
2=10]; error/dispersion terms: ~Half -Normal [µ=0,σ2=10]) in order to 
emphasize the influence of the present data on posterior probabilities (PP). Sensitivity analyses will test a range of prior distributions to ascertain the degree to which analyse s are robust to prior specifications
119. Evaluation of posterior 
distributions will permit statements regarding the probability that effects of varying magnitudes exist, given the data.  
Bayesian models will be evaluated via PP threshold guidelines in the literature120,121 suggesting that PP = 75% to 90% 
indicates moderate evidence, PP = 91% to 96% indicates strong evidence, and PP = 97% or above indicates very strong to 
extreme evidence. Bayesian analyses calibrate probability in terms of the prior distribution and are less influenced by 
[CONTACT_91230]122. However, additional analyses will employ 
regularization (e.g., “horseshoe” priors) with best practices suggested by [CONTACT_80669]123– 125 to maximize the robustness 
of any identified effects. Bayesian convergence and modeling assumptions will be evaluated by [CONTACT_91231], 
scale reduction factors ("rhat"), and posterior predictive checking. Violated assumptions will be addressed  via model re - 
specification, variable transformation, robust estimation, stratification, and/or coefficient scaling where appropriate.  
 
Specific Analyses. Aim 1 . iTBS to dmPFC compared to sham will increase the amplitude of the RewP and switch the 
drug>pl easant LPP bias to pleasant>drug. GLM will model RewP amplitude as a function of time (pre vs. post iTBS 
session) and location (dmPFC or sham). GLM will model LPP amplitude as a function of time (pre vs. post iTBS sessions), 
condition (i.e., image type [pleasant, unpleasant, cocaine, and neutral]), and location (dmPFC or sham). Aim 2 . iTBS will 
reduce cocaine craving (Minnesota Cocaine Craving Scale). GLM will model craving as a function of time (pre vs. post  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 12 of 27   iTBS sessions) and location (dmPFC  or sham). Non- Primary Measures . Secondary analyses will also model pain and MoCA 
scores as a function of time (pre vs. post iTBS sessions) and location (dmPFC or sham).  
 
Sample Size and Power Analysis. The current pi[INVESTIGATOR_91205], retention, assessment procedures, and implementation. Although preliminary statistical 
analyses will evaluate the magnitude of any changes observed over time, these are not expected to provid e a 
meaningful estimate that would generalize beyond the small sample observed here. By [CONTACT_91232], the present study will inform a subsequent study with formal hypothesis testing. This approach to pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]
119 is 
explicitly in line with current literature on trial design.  
 
Main Trial  
 
General Data Analytic Strategy  
Statistical Modeling . Analyses will rely on generalized linear modeling (GLM) with multilevel (GLMM) components 
where necessary to evaluate predictor -outcome relationships. These models may fit normally or non -normally 
distributed outcomes as needed (e.g., Binomial with logit link for dichotomous outcomes). GLMM may also account for 
correlated observations via inclusion of random effects (e.g. , a level 2 intercept). Preliminary analyses will use GLM to 
evaluate relationships between baseline sample characteristics, predictors, and outcomes prior to formal hypothesis 
testing. Confounders are defined as any sample characteristics that demonstrate  relationships with both the predictor 
and outcome in a given model120,121. Subsequent models will be tested with and without adjustment for each potential 
confounder; if resulting inferences are different, we will report both models; otherwise, we retain the simpler model. Moderation analyses will evaluate the potential influence of essential covariates and other baseline sample 
characteristics (including sex) by [CONTACT_91233]- order interactions with model predictors. Analyses will be 
performed in  R
[ADDRESS_100762] results yield the probability of the data (or data more extreme),  given the null hypothesis, while 
Bayesian results directly yield the probability of an alternative hypothesis127,128. As a default, weakly informative priors 
will be used for all Bayesian analyses (e.g., regression coefficients: b ~N [µ=0,σ2=10]; error/dis persion terms: ~Half - 
Normal [µ=0,σ2=10]) in order to emphasize the influence of the present data on posterior probabilities (PP) . Sensitivity 
analyses will test a range of prior distributions to ascertain the degree to which analyses are robust to prior 
specifications129. Evaluation of posterior distributions will permit statements regarding the probability that effects of 
varying magnitudes exist, given the data. With respect to multiple comparisons , frequentist analyses will evaluate all a 
priori defined primary outcomes (listed by [CONTACT_91234]) at the α=0.05 (two -tailed) significance level 
and will employ false discovery rate (FDR) to control for Type I error across any exploratory or post hoc analyses.  
Bayesian models will be evaluated v ia PP threshold guidelines in the literature130,131 suggesting that PP = 75% to 90% 
indicates moderate evidence, PP = 91% to 96% indicates strong evidence, and PP > 97% indicates very strong/extreme 
evidence. Bayesian analyses calibrate probability in term s of the prior distribution and are less influenced by [CONTACT_91235]132. However, additional analyses will employ regularization 
(e.g., “horseshoe” priors)133– [ADDRESS_100763] models will use graphical evidence (e.g., residual 
plots) and formal statistical tests. Bayesian convergence and modeling assumptions will be evaluated by [CONTACT_91231], scale reduction factors ("rhat"), and posterior predictive checking. Violated assumptions will be addressed 
via model re -specification, variable transformation, robust estimation, stratification, and/or coefficient scaling where 
appropriate. Intentio n-to-treat (ITT) primary analyses will included all randomized participants; follow -up analyses may 
evaluate modified ITT samples should specific participants merit exclusion (e.g., randomized but never initiated the 
trial). A per protocol analysis will co mplement the primary ITT analysis as due diligence. Missing data patterns will be 
evaluated using Little's Test of Missing Completely at Random (MCAR)
136 for continuous outcomes and the Park and Lee 
approach137 for discrete outcomes. Models will handle mis singness via maximum likelihood, explicit modeling of 
missingness138, and/or imputation with sensitivity analyses to evaluate the robustness of findings. Each approach is  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100764] to ignorable missingness (i.e., missing completely at random and  missing at random). Pattern -mixture modeling 
will be used to address identified non -ignorable missing data patterns139. 
 
Specific Analyses  
All statistical models (described below) will account for correlated observations via the best -fitting structure of random 
effects (i.e., lowest information criteria) found when fitting level- 2 intercepts and/or slopes) for repeated measures 
(where necessary) and statistically control for potential confounders as defined above. Outcome variables will be 
mod eled as difference scores to account for the pre/post design (i.e., post- iTBS minus pre -iTBS).  
Hypothesis 1a (Primary): Active iTBS relative to sham will increase the amplitude of the RewP/delta power to rewards 
compared to non -rewards. GLMM will model the  change in amplitude of the RewP/delta power to rewards as a function 
of iTBS condition, with random effects to account for repeated measures.  
Hypothesis 1b (Exploratory): iTBS to dmPFC will result in a greater increase in the RewP/delta power compared to 
dlPFC. Follow -up testing of the model described above for Hypothesis 1a will evaluate pairwise comparisons between 
iTBS conditions.  
Hypothesis 2a (Primary): Active iTBS relative to sham will switch the drug>pleasant LPP bias. GLMM will model the 
change in LPP bias as a function of iTBS condition.  
Hypothesis 2b (Exploratory): iTBS to dmPFC will result in a greater increase in LPP bias (i.e., greater LPP to pleasant 
images compared to cocaine images). Follow -up testing of the model for Hypothesis 2a will evaluate pairwise 
comparisons between iTBS conditions.  
Hypothesis 3a (Exploratory): Analyses will explore baseline CUD severity, impulsivity, and craving as predicters of iTBS 
effects on EEG. GLMM will model EEG outcomes as a function of the interaction betwee n iTBS condition and each 
named predictor (in separate models): baseline CUD severity, impulsivity, and craving, controlling for constituent main effects.  
Sample Size and Power Analysis  
The current proposal is powered with respect to the primary hypothesis  in the study (Hypothesis 1a). G*Power v. [IP_ADDRESS] 
provides calculations from the frequentist perspective via a within -factor repeated measures model, a simplified version 
of the GLMM described above. Assuming a correlation among repeated measures r = 0.50 and two -tailed α = 0.05, the 
current feasible sample size N = 75 provides 80% power to detect an effect size as small as Cohen’s f = 0.149 
(comparable to a small- to-moderate Cohen’s d = 0.30). These estimates also broadly apply to Hypothesis 2a. Bayesian 
analyses proposed above will then provide a complementary analysis of all models that yields probabilistic estimates for 
all model effects, even in the context of relatively smaller sample sizes140 (i.e., the available data for subgroup analyses 
or higher -complexity  models).  
  
Protection of Human Subjects Inclusion Criteria:  
1. be between [ADDRESS_100765] study visit (iTBS session  day)  
2. meet DSM -[ADDRESS_100766] moderate severity (≥ 4  symptoms)  
3. have at least 1 positive urine BE specimen (≥ 300 ng/mL) during  intake  
4. be able to understand the consent form and provide written informed  consent  
5. be able  to provide  the following  verifiable  information  for a minimum  of [ADDRESS_100767]  persons:  full legal  name, 
email address, local mailing address, and as applicable, home, work, and cell phone  numbers  
Exclusion criteria : 
1. current  DSM -5 diagnosis  for substance  use disorder  (of at least  moderate  severity)  other  than  cocaine, 
marijuana, or nicotine  
2. in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_14371] (PI), the presence of any medical, neurological, psychiatric, or physical 
condition, disease, or illness that, may: (a) compromise interfere, limit, effect or reduce the subject’s ability to 
complete the study; o r (b) adversely impact the safety of the subject or the integrity of the data  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 14 of 27   3. has current  or recent (within  3 months  of potential  enrollment)  suicidal ideation,  suicidal behavior,  homicidal 
ideation or a homicidal plan sufficient to raise sub ject safety concerns based on the following assessments 
according to the  PI: 
a. SCID -5 
b. C-SSRS Screener –  Answers YES to Questions 3, 4, 5, or  6 
c. Assault & Homicidal Danger Assessment Tool –  Key to Danger >  1 
4. medical implants contraindicating TMS (i.e., aneurysm clips or coils, stents, implanted stimulators, implanted 
vagus nerve or deep brain stimulators, implanted electrical devices such as pacemakers or medication pumps, electrodes for monitoring brain activ ity, cochlear implants for hearing, any magnetic implants, bullet fragments, 
any other metal device or object implanted in your body closer than 30 cm from the  coil)  
5. history of brain  surgery  
6. history of an intracranial lesion or any medical or neurological diagnosis/condition associated with increased intracranial pressure  (i.e.,  Idiopathic  Intracranial Hypertension/Pseudotumor  Cerebri)  OR any of the following 
symptoms  within  30 days  of enrollment:  headaches  > 15 days/month,  loss of vision  or decreased  visio n 
7. moderate -to-severe heart  disease  
8. history of  stroke  
9. is taking any antidepressant or antipsychotic medication at a dose above the maximum recommended dose or at a dose  deemed  to be potentially  unsafe  according  to the PI; has taken  any of the following  medications,  which 
are known to increase the risk of seizures, within 1 week of study enrollment; or does not agree to abstain from 
taking the following medications during study  participation:  
1. clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]
141 
2. chlorpromazine141 
3. bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394]  
4. clomipramine  hydrochloride  
5. amoxapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  
6. maprotiline  hydrochloride  
7. diphenhydramine  
8. stimulants other than cocaine including the  following:  
a. Dextroamphetamine and  amphetamine  
b. Dextroamphetamine  
c. Lisdexamfetamine  dimesylate  
d. Methamphetamine  
e. Methylphenidate  
9. tramadol  
10. isoniazid  
10. having conditions of probation or parole requiring reports of drug use to officers of the  court  
11. personal history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_91206]/or family history including a first -degree relative  
12. serious head injury with loss of consciousnes s 
13. impending incarceration  
14. pregnant or nursing for female  patients  
15. inability to read, write, or speak  English  
16. for adolescent  aged participants  (18-21 only):  any risk factor  for neurocardiogenic  syncope  (history  of syncope/ 
presyncope related to noxious stim uli, anxiety, micturition, or posture)?  
17. hair style that is incompatible with EEG nets  
 
Potential Risks  
 
TMS. There are several potential risks of TMS administration. The most serious risk is risk of seizure or prolonged seizure 
(convulsive status epi[INVESTIGATOR_91207] [CSE]), although most seizures associated with TMS are self- limiting. Overall, the risk of 
seizures is very low with TMS (< 1%) and specifically iTBS (<.02%)142. The risk of seizures should be low for the 
participants that are eligible for this study, as conditions and medications that lower the seizure threshold will be  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 15 of 27   exclusionary. Hearing impairment can occur without protection; however, the risk of this is extremely low in this study, 
as proper hearing protection will be used. There is also a risk for manic switch or psychotic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], especially in patients with bi -polar disorder. Individuals with bipolar disorder or schizophrenia/psychotic symptoms will not be included in the 
study. There are also risks associated with magneti c field effects on functioning of other medical devices, but individuals 
with any medical implant will be excluded from the study. While the risks associated with TMS in substance using populations is still being evaluated, there are now several studies sh owing safety of TMS for these 
populations
3,24,25,27,29,30,40,143. There is also a risk that TMS can affect cognitive functioning, such as working memory and 
executive function. However, the current literature on iTBS specifically is suggestive of improveme nt of cognitive 
functioning with iTBS to the prefrontal cortex, rather than harm. A recent systematic review reported that 6/[ADDRESS_100768] after a few hours. The presentation of emotional images and drug images in the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91195] (e.g., mutilations or violence) may cause an affective response, which typi[INVESTIGATOR_91208]. Participants are shown example images beforehand and agree to watch the slideshow. They can also ask 
for the slideshow to be stopped at any time. Participants may also feel tired or bored while participating in the EEG 
session.  
 
Adequacy of Protection against Risks  
 
TMS. Participants will be made aware of the risks of TMS administration. We will primarily protect against TMS risks by [CONTACT_91236]/psychotic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. Additionally, safety 
measures will be taken at each visit by [CONTACT_978], trained research assistant, or nurse, including the AE/SAE form. We will 
also measure hours of sleep and recent drug/alcohol use to assess day -of eligibility criteria. Our risk mitigation strategy 
regarding a seizure/CSE, includes the following: 1) staff/PI/physician education about the signs and symptoms focal seizure with or without awareness and generalized seizure, 2) in the rare event of a seizure, the staff will perform the 
following: a) stop TMS immediately, b) turn subject on their side to reduce chance of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], c) protect the 
participant from falling  or hitting their head or other injury, d) call 911, e) time the length of the seizure. In the event of 
a seizure, anti- seizure medication may be administered, at the discretion of the physician present. The CNRA outpatient 
clinic is situated on the south side of the [LOCATION_007] Medical Center, a 2.[ADDRESS_100769]. There are several 
options for emergency rooms, all within 2 miles. The study physicians (Dr. de Quevedo and Michael Weaver) will be available via phone to address additional patient safe ty issues. Participants experiencing any severe side effects from the 
TMS administration will be referred to the study physician for examination and recommendations before continuation of the TMS administration. Participants experiencing the more common, m ilder side effects such as headache or neck 
pain, will be monitored and referred to the study physician if symptoms do not subside or improve with over- the- 
counter analgesic. In the unlikely event that the participant cannot tolerate the side effects (suc h as facial twitching), the 
intensity can be lowered to reduce these  effects.  
Diagnostic Procedures. The potential risk of participant discomfort associated with collection of sensitive information will be described in the informed consent process. Further , while participants may be uncomfortable reporting these 
issues, the risks of serious sequelae are extremely low. Confidentiality will be protected in several ways. All information collected solely for research purpose will be kept in locked, restricted a ccess files. Participant records will be coded and 
filed by a number code. Participant identities will not be revealed in any publication of the data. Individual participant information will be transferred to outside sources only with the express written r equest of the participant. Participants 
will receive a copy of their signed consent form.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100770] the blunted needle (which is 
used to inject gel into the sensor s) come in contact [CONTACT_8124]. We will ask participants frequently if applying the 
sensors is bothering them and will stop at the request of the participant. The consent form details what types of images will be shown on the screen and they will be told  that we can stop the experiment at any time if they no longer want to 
view the images. The participants are instructed to notify the experimenter of an adverse emotional reactions and if a participant experiences an adverse emotional reaction to the image s, the task will be stopped immediately. The 
participant will meet with a study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_91209].  
  
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Participants  
 
There are no potential benefits to the individuals participating in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_91210]. All assessment and treatment services provided in the main trial of this study will be at no cost to the participant. Based on prior studies, 
the treatment may help in lowering cocaine use. P articipants will be informed of any new information discovered during 
the study that might impact their treatment for CUD or other problems.  
 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
Data Monitoring  
The data will be collected and stored as described in the research strategy and protection of human subjects, 
and will follow the typi[INVESTIGATOR_91211] (CNRA). The 
CNRA protocols include: 1) staff training, 2) weekly audit of data collection/entry by [CONTACT_91237], 3) medical screening with results reviewed by [INVESTIGATOR_2394] -site physician, 4) use of standardized assessments, 5) 
collaboration with [CONTACT_91249] who oversees data analys is and management. All data entry forms will only be accessible 
to trained research staff and will require double entry. [CONTACT_91250] will be responsible for ensuring the above -mentioned 
protocols are in place before and during the proposed study.  
 
Safety Mo nitoring  
 
The CNRA has a DSM Board set for all CNRA studies. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_91212]. The DSM Board members will consist of the following  individuals : Jan Blalock,  Ph.D.,  Dept.  of Behavioral  Science,  MD Anderson  Cancer Center;  William  E. Fann,  M.D., 
Dept. of Psychiatry, Baylor College of Medicine; Claudia Pedroza, M.D., Dept. of Pediatrics, UTHealth; and Daryl Shorter, M.D., Dept. of Psychiatry, Baylor  College of Medicine. These individuals have served previously on the DSMB at the 
CRNA and have the relevant expertise and experience in monitoring clinical trials. The members of the DSM Board will be responsible for: 1) reviewing the research protocol an d plans for data and safety monitoring, 2) evaluating the study 
progress, including data quality, participant recruitment rates, retention rates, outcome and adverse experience data, and risk versus benefit profile, 3) making recommendations to terminate o r make changes to the trial because of safety 
concerns, and 4) ensuring protect the confidentiality of the trial data and the results of monitoring.  
 
All Adverse events (AE) will be collected and reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a daily basis. AEs are collected before and 
after the iTBS sessions on the study visit day. As most side effects are minor and disappear rapi[INVESTIGATOR_91213], participants will be told to contact [CONTACT_91238] -the-counter analgesics. The study physician will be informed of any relevant AEs following TMS and will 
determine course of treatment or discontinuation of the study, if necessary. AEs will be reported to the CPHS on an annual basis. Serious adverse events (SAE ) will be reported immediately (verbally within 24 hours) to the CPHS, DSMB, 
and to NIDA (if funded). A written report will follow within three days and will include: date of the AE, description of the AE, severity rating (Grade 1 to 4), assessment of caus e, whether the AE indicates an increased risk for current or future 
participants, and whether changes to the informed consent form are necessary.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 17 of 27   REFERENCES  
1. Pomara C, Cassano  T, D’Errico  S, et al. Data  available  on the extent  of cocaine  use and dependence:  biochemistry, 
pharmacologic effects and global burden of disease of cocaine abusers. Curr Med Chem . 2012;19(33):5647- 5657. 
Accessed May 11, 2018.  http://www.ncbi.nlm .nih.gov/pubmed/22856655  
2. Volkow ND, Wang G- J, Fowler JS, Tomasi D, Telang F. Addiction: Beyond dopamine reward circuitry. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci . 2011;108(37):[ZIP_CODE]- [ZIP_CODE].  doi:10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_2141]  
3. Moretti J, Poh EZ, Rodger J. rTMS -Induced Changes in Glutama tergic and Dopaminergic Systems: Relevance to 
Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use Disorders. Front Neurosci . 2020;14.  doi:10.3389/fnins.2020.[ZIP_CODE] 
4. Ma T, Sun Y, Ku Y. Effects of Non -invasive Brain Stimulation on Stimulant Craving in Users of Cocaine, 
Amphetamin e, or Methamphetamine:  A Systematic  Review  and Meta -Analysis.  Front  Neurosci . 2019;13:1095. 
doi:10.3389/fnins.2019.[ZIP_CODE]  
5. Goldstein RZ, Tomasi D, Rajaram S, et al. Role of the anterior cingulate and medial orbitofrontal cortex in 
processing drug cues in cocaine addiction. Neuroscience . 2007;144(4):1153- 1159. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.11.024  
6. Goldstein RZ, Alia- Klein N, Tomasi D, et al. Anterior cingulate cortex hypoactivations to an emotionally salient 
task in cocaine addiction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106(23):9453 -9458.  doi:10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_2142] 
7. Asensio S, Romero MJ, Palau C, et al. Altered neural response of the appetitive emotional system in cocaine 
addiction: An fMRI Study. Addict Biol . 2010;15(4):504- 516.  doi:10.1111/j.1369- 1600.2010.[ZIP_CODE].x  
8. Goldstein RZ, Alia- Klein N, Tomasi D, et al. Is decreased prefrontal cortical sensitivity to monetary reward 
associated with impaired motivation and self- control in cocaine addiction? Am J Psychiatry . 2007;164(1):43- 51. 
doi:10.1176/ajp.2007.164.1.43  
9. Gu H, Salmeron BJ, Ross TJ, et al. Mesocorticolimbic circuits are impaired in chronic cocaine us ers as 
demonstrated by [CONTACT_91239]- state functional connectivity. Neuroimage . 2010;53(2):593- 601. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.066  
10. Parvaz MA, Moeller SJ, Malaker P, Sinha R, Alia- Klein N, Goldstein RZ. Abstinence reverses EEG -indexed attention 
bias between  drug- related and pleasant stimuli in cocaine -addicted individuals. J Psychiatry Neurosci . 
2017;42(2):78 -86. doi:10.1503/jpn.[ADDRESS_100771] as an index of depressive symptom change following cognitive -behavioral therapy and SSRI treatment. J Clin Psychiatry . 2018;79(4). 
doi:10.4088/JCP.17m11836 
12. Robinson MJF, Robinson TE, Berridge KC. Incentive Salience and the Transition to Addiction. In: Miller PM, ed. Biological Research on Addiction. Academ ic Press, San Diego, CA; 2013:391 -399. doi:10.1016/B978 -0-12-398335 - 
0.[ZIP_CODE]- X 
13. Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Wang GJ, Baler R, Telang F. Imaging dopamine’s role in drug abuse and  addiction.  
Neuropharmacology . 2009;56(SUPPL. 1):3- 8. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2008.05.022 
14. Ashok AH, Mizuno Y, Volkow ND, Howes OD. Association of stimulant use with dopaminergic alterations in users 
of cocaine, amphetamine, or methamphetamine a systematic review and meta -analysis. JAMA Psychiatry . 
2017;74(5) :511 -519.  doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.[ADDRESS_100772] receives FDA clearance for smoking addiction in adults. Published 2020. Accessed 
November 17, 2020.  https:/ /www.globenewswire.com/news -release/2020/08/24/2082476/0/en/BrainsWay-  
Receives -FDA-Clearance -for-Smoking -Addiction -in-Adults.html  
16. FDA. FDA permits marketing of TMS for obsessive compulsive disorder. Published 2018. Accessed November 17, 
2020. https:/ /www.fda. gov/new s-events/press -announcements/fda -permits -marketing -transcranial- magnetic - 
stimulation -treatment -obsessive -compulsive -disorder  
17. Moeller SJ, Konova AB, Parvaz MA, et al. Functional, structural, and emotional correlates of impaired insight in 
cocaine addiction . JAMA Psychiatry . 2014;71(1):61- 70. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.[ADDRESS_100773] underlies cognitive regulation of craving.  
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;107(33):[ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE]. doi:10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_2143]  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 18 of 27   19. Ochsner KN, Silvers JA, Buhle JT. Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation: a synthetic review and 
evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion. Ann N Y Acad Sci . 2012;1251:E 1-E24. doi:10.1111/j.1749-  
6632.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x  
20. Diana M. The dopamine hypothesis of drug addiction and its potential therapeutic value. Front Psychiatry . 
2011;2(NOV):64.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2011.[ZIP_CODE]  
21. Bolloni  C, Panella R, Pedetti  M, et al. Bilateral Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation  of the Prefrontal  Cortex  Reduces 
Cocaine Intake: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Front psychiatry . 2016;7(AUG):133.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2016.[ZIP_CODE]  
22. Cardullo  S, Gomez Perez LJ, Marconi L, et al. Clinical Improvements in Comorbid Gambling/Cocaine Use Disorder 
(GD/CUD) Patients Undergoing Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS). J Clin Med . 2019;8(6):768. 
doi:10.3390/jcm8060768 
23. Pettorruso M, Spagnolo  PA, Leggio L, et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the left dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex may improve symptoms of anhedonia in individuals with cocaine use disorder: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Brain Stimul . 2018;11(5):1195 -1197.  doi:10.1016/j.brs.2018.06.001  
24. Martinez D, Urban N, Grassetti A, et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of medial prefrontal and cingulate 
cortices reduces cocaine self- administration: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Front Psychiatry . 2018;9(MAR):80. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2018.[ZIP_CODE]  
25. Pettorruso M, Martinotti G, Santacroce R, et al. rTMS Reduces Psychopathological Burden and Cocaine 
Consumption  in Treatment -Seeking  Subjects  With  Cocaine  Use Disorder:  An Open  Label,  Feasibility  Study.  Front 
psychiatry . 2019;10:621.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.[ZIP_CODE] 
26. Gómez  Pérez  LJ, Cardullo  S, Cellini N, et al. Sleep  quality  improves  during treatment with  repetitive  transcranial 
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) in patients with cocaine use disorder: A retrospective observational study. BMC 
Psyc hiatry . 2020;20(1).  doi:10.1186/s12888 -020-[ZIP_CODE] -2 
27. Terraneo A, Leggio L, Saladini M, Ermani M, Bonci A, Gallimberti L. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of dorsolateral prefrontal  cortex  reduces  cocaine  use: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_27041].  Eur Neuropsychopharmacol . 2016;26(1):37- 44. 
doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2015.11.[ADDRESS_100774] versus High -Frequency Repetitive 
Transcranial  Magnetic Stimulation  in Patients  with  Depression  (THREE- D): A Randomised Non- Inferiority Trial . Vol 
391.; 2018. Accessed March 24, [ADDRESS_100775] stimulation as a 
treatment for cocain e use disorder: A proof -of-concept study. Front Neurosci . 2019;13(OCT). 
doi:10.3389/fnins.2019.[ADDRESS_100776] Stimulation of the Prefrontal Cortex  in Cocaine  Use Disorder:  A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_52081].  Front  Neurosci . 2019;13(JUL):765.  doi:10.3389/fnins.2019.[ZIP_CODE]  
31. Downar J, Sankar A, Giacobbe  P, Woodside B, Colton P. Unanticipated Rapid Remission of Refractory Bulimia 
Nervosa,  during High- Dose  Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation  of the Dorsomedial Prefrontal Cortex:  A 
Case Report. Front Psychiatry . 2012;3(APR):30.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.[ADDRESS_100777] -Circuit Connectivity Distinguish Nonresponders 
from Responders to Dorsomedial Prefrontal Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation in Major Depression. Biol Psyc hiatry . 2014;76(3):176 -185.  doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.[ADDRESS_100778] stimulation over the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex modulates  resting -state  connectivity  in depressive  patients:  A sham -controlled 
study. Behav Brain Res . 2020;394:112834.  doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2020.[ADDRESS_100779]  loss in current  and former 
cocaine users during performance of a monetary incen tive delay task. Biol Psychiatry . 2013;74(7):529 -537. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.04.029 
35. Meade CS, Lowen SB, MacLean RR, Key MD, Lukas SE. FMRI brain activation during a delay discounting task in 
HIV-positive adults with and without cocaine dependence. Psy chiatry Res -  Neuroimaging.  2011;192(3):167- 175. 
doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2010.12.011  
36. Hanlon CA, DeVries W, Dowdle  LT, et al. A comprehensive study of sensorimotor cortex excitability in chronic 
cocaine users: Integrating TMS and functional MRI data. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2015;157:28 -35. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.07.1196 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/[ADDRESS_100780] stimulation decreases orbitofrontal and insula 
activity in cocaine users and alcohol users. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017;178:310 -317. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.03.039 
38. Hanlon  CA, Dowdle  LT, Moss  H, Canterberry  M, George MS. Mobilization  of Medial  and Lateral  Frontal- Striatal 
Circuits in Cocaine Users and Controls: An Interleaved TMS/BOLD Functional Connectivity Study. 
Neuropsychopharmacology . 2016;41(13):3032- 3041.  doi:10.1038/npp.2016.[ADDRESS_100781]  Stimulation  on Cocaine  Cue Reactivity  in Chronic  Cocaine 
Users. Front Psychiatry . 2019;10(MAY):317.  doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2019.[ZIP_CODE]  
40. Kearney -Ramos TE, Dowdle LT, Lench DH, et al. Transdiagnostic Effects of Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation on Cue Reactivity. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2018;3(7):599 - 
609.  doi:10 .1016/j.bpsc.2018.03.016 
41. Hanlon CA, Kearney -Ramos T, Dowdle LT, et al. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_91214] (rTMS) 
as a Treatment Tool for Cocaine Use Disorder: a Series of Six Translational Studies. Curr Behav Neurosci reports . 
2017;4(4):341- 352.  doi:10.1007/s40473 -017-0135- 4 
42. Moeller SJ, Hajcak  G, Parvaz  MA, Dunning JP, Volkow  ND, Goldstein  RZ. Psychophysiological  prediction  of choice: 
Relevance to insight and dru g addiction. Brain . 2012;135(11):3481- 3494.  doi:10.1093/brain/aws252 
43. Courtney KE, Schacht JP, Hutchison K, [COMPANY_002] DJO, Ray LA. Neural substrates of cue reactivity: Association with 
treatment outcomes and relapse. Addict Biol . 2016;21(1):3- 22. doi:10.1111/ad b.[ZIP_CODE] 
44. Volkow ND, Wang GJ, Fowler JS, Tomasi D, Telang F, Baler R. Addiction: Decreased reward sensitivity and increased expectation sensitivity conspi[INVESTIGATOR_67922]’s control circuit. BioEssays. 2010;32(9):748 - 
755.  doi:10.1002/bies.201000042 
45. Thigpen NN, Kappenman ES, Keil A. Assessing the internal consistency of the event -related potential: An example 
analysis. Psychophysiology . 2017;54(1):123- 138.  doi:10.1111/psyp.[ADDRESS_100782] Practices for Event -Related Potential Researc h in Clinical Populations. Biol Psychiatry 
Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2016;1(2):110- 115.  doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2015.11.007 
47. Webber HE, de Dios C, Wardle MC, et al. Electrophysiological Responses to Emotional and Cocaine Cues Reveal 
Individual Neuroaffective P rofiles in Cocaine Users. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol . 2021;30(5):514 -524. 
doi:10.1037/pha0000450 
48. Proudfit GH. The reward positivity: From basic research on reward to a biomarker for depression.  
Psychophysiology . 2015;52(4):449 -459. doi:10.1111/psyp.[ZIP_CODE]  
49. Holroyd  CB, Coles  MGH.  The neural  basis  of human  error  processing:  Reinforcement  learning,  dopamine,  and the 
error- related negativity. Psychol Rev . 2002;109(4):679- 709.  doi:10.1037/0033 -295X.109.4.679  
50. Nieuwenhuis  S, Slagter  HA, Von Alting  Geusau  NJ, Heslenfeld  DJ, Holroyd  CB. Knowing good  from  bad:  Differential 
activation of human cortical areas by [CONTACT_91240]. Eur J Neurosci . 2005;21(11):3161- 3168. 
doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_100783] 
prediction violation. Neuroreport . 2009;20(13):1140 -1143.  doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832f0dca  
52. Carlson  JM, Foti D, Mujica -Parodi  LR, Harmon -Jones  E, Hajcak  G. Ventral striatal  and medial  prefrontal BOLD 
activation is correlated with reward -related electrocortical activity: A combined ERP and fMRI study. 
Neuroimage . 2011;57(4):1608 -1616.  doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.05.037  
53. Hauser TU, Iannaccone R, Stämpfli P, et al. The feedback -related negativity (FRN) revisited: New insights into the 
localization, meaning and network organization. Neuroimage . 2014;84:159 -168. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.028  
54. Becker  MPI,  Nitsch  AM, Miltner  WHR,  Straube  T. A Single -Trial Estimation  of the Feedbac k-Related  Negativity  and 
Its Relation to BOLD Responses in a Time- Estimation Task. J Neurosci . 2014;34(8):3005- 3012. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3684 -13.2014  
55. Warren  CM, Hyman JM, Seamans  JK, Holroyd  CB. Feedback -related  negativity  observed  in rodent  anterior 
cingulate cortex. J Physiol . 2015;109(1- 3):87 -94. doi:10.1016/j.jphysparis.2014.08.[ADDRESS_100784] and probability event -related potentials. Psychopharmacology (Berl) . 2020;237(7):2019 - 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 20 of 27   2030.  doi:10.1007/s00213- 020-[ADDRESS_100785] anticipation and 
delivery: Evidence from event- related potentials. Psychophysiology . 2012;49(5):617- 626. doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_100786] positivity and P3a in a 
gambling task: Exploring a genetic basis for cultural learning. Psychophysiology . 2020;57(10). 
doi:10.1111/psyp.[ADDRESS_100787]  of Dopamine  Hyper - and Hyposensitivity  in 
Alcohol Use Tendencies. Manuscr Submitt Publ . Published online  2018.  
60. Jocham G, Ullsperger M. Neuropharmacology of performance monitoring. Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 2009;33(1):48 - 
60. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.08.[ADDRESS_100788] dysfunction in major depression: Multimodal neuroimaging 
evidence for refining the melancholic phenotype. Neuroimage . 2014;101:50 -58. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.06.[ADDRESS_100789] positivity: From basic research  on reward to a biomarker for depression.  
Psychophysiology . 2015;52(4):449 -459. doi:10.1111/psyp.[ZIP_CODE]  
63. Parvaz MA, Gabbay V, Malaker P, Goldstein RZ. Objective and specific tracking of anhedonia via event -related 
potentials in individuals with cocaine use d isorders. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2016;164:158 -165. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.05.004 
64. Başar E, Başar- Eroglu C, Karakaş S, Schürmann  M. Gamma, alpha, delta, and theta oscillations govern cognitive 
processes. Int J Psychophysiol . 2001;39(2- 3):241- 248.  doi:10.1016/S0167 -8760(00)[ZIP_CODE] -8 
65. Cavanagh JF, Zambrano -Vazquez L, Allen JJB. Theta lingua franca: A common mid -frontal substrate for act ion 
monitoring processes. Psychophysiology . 2012;49(2):220- 238.  doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_100790] expectation modulates feedback -related negativity and EEG  spectra.  
Neuroimage . 2007;35(2):968 -978. doi:10.1016/j.ne uroimage.2006.11.056 
67. Foti D, Weinberg A, Bernat EM, Proudfit GH. Anterior cingulate activity to monetary loss and basal ganglia activity 
to monetary gain uniquely contribute to the feedback negativity. Clin Neurophysiol . 2015;126(7):1338- 1347. 
doi:10.1016/ j.clinph.2014.08.025  
68. Bernat EM, Nelson LD, Steele VR, Gehring WJ, Patrick CJ. Externalizing Psychopathology and Gain -Loss Feedback 
in a Simulated  Gambling  Task:  Dissociable  Components  of Brain  Response  Revealed  by [CONTACT_91241] -Frequency  Analysis.  J 
Abnorm  Psychol . 2011;120(2):352 -364.  doi:10.1037/a0022124  
69. Bernat EM, Nelson LD, Holroyd CB, Gehring WJ, Patrick CJ. Separating cognitive processes with principal components analysis of EEG time -frequency distributions. In: Luk FT, ed. Advanced Signal Processing Algorithms, 
Architectures, and Implementations XVIII . Vol 7074. SPIE; 2008:70740S.  doi:10.1117/12.801362 
70. Bernat EM, Nelson LD, Baskin -Sommers AR. Time -frequency theta and delta measures index separable 
components of feedback processing in a gambling task. Psychophysiology . 2015;52(5):626- 637. 
doi:10.1111/psyp.[ADDRESS_100791] context on feedback processing as indexed by [CONTACT_5586]- frequency  analysis.  
Psychophysiology . 2018;55(9):e13195. doi:10.1111/psyp.[ZIP_CODE]  
72. Baker TE, Lesperance P, Tucholka A, et al. Reversing the Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_91215]. Biol Psychiatry. 2017;82(11):819- 827. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.01.015 
73. Baker TE, Lin MH, Gueth M, Biernacki  K, Parikh S. Beyond the Motor Cortex: Theta Burst Stimulation of the 
Anterior Midcingulate Cortex. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2020;5(11):1052- 1060. 
doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2020.06.009 
74. Webber  TA, Soder  HE, Potts  GF, Bornovalova  MA. Preliminary  evidence that digit  length  ratio  (2D:4D)  predicts 
neural response to delivery of motivational stimuli. Biol Psychol . 2018;132:91 -95. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2017.11.[ADDRESS_100792] -Related Neural Predictors and 
Mechanisms of Symptom Change in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Depressed Adolescent Girls. Biol Psychiatry 
Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2021;6(1):39- 49. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2020.07.010 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 21 of 27   76. Etkin  A, Egner  T, Kalisch  R. Emotional  processing in anterior  cingulate  and medial prefrontal  cortex.  Trends  Cogn 
Sci. 2011;15(2):85- 93. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.11.[ADDRESS_100793] AR, Fox PT, Bzdok D, Hensel L. Functional Segregation of the Human Dorsomedial Prefrontal 
Cortex. Cereb Cortex . 2016;26(1):304- 321.  doi:10.1093/cercor/bhu250 
78. Lang PJ, Bradley MM. Emotion and the motivational brain. Biol Psychol . 2010;84(3):437- 450. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2009.10.007 
79. Olofsson  JK, Nordin  S, Sequeira H, Polich  J. Affective  pi[INVESTIGATOR_91216]:  An integrative  review  of ERP findings.  Biol 
Psychol . 2008;77(3):247- 265.  doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2007.11.006  
80. Schupp  H, Cuthbert  BN, Bradley  MM,  Cacioppo  JT, Ito T, Lang  PJ. Affective  pi[INVESTIGATOR_91217]:  The late positive 
potential is modulated by [CONTACT_91242]. Psychophysiology . 2000;37(2):257- 261. doi:10.1111/1469 - 
8986.3720257  
81. Versace F, Lam CY, Engelmann JM, et al. Beyond cue reactivity: Blunted brain responses to pleasant stimuli predict long- term smoking abstinence. Addict Biol . 2012;17(6):991 -1000.  doi:10.1111/j.1369 -1600.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x  
82. Engelmann JM, Versace F, Gewirtz JC, Cin ciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629]. Individual differences in brain responses to cigarette -related 
cues and pleasant stimuli in young smokers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2016;163:229 -235. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.04.025 
83. Dunning JP, Parvaz MA, Hajcak G, et al. Motivated attention to cocaine and emotional cues in abstinent and current cocaine users -  an ERP study. Eur J Neurosci . 2011;33(9):1716- 1723. doi:10.1111/j.1460-  
9568.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x  
84. Franken  IHA,  Dietvorst  RC, Hesselmans M, Franzek  EJ, Van De Wetering  BJM,  Van Strien  JW. Cocain e craving  is 
associated with electrophysiological brain responses to cocaine -related stimuli. Addict Biol . 2008;13(3- 4):386 - 
392.  doi:10.1111/j.1369 -1600.2008.[ZIP_CODE].x  
85. Liu Y, Huang H, McGinnis -Deweese M, Keil A, Ding M. Neural substrate of the late positive potential in emotional 
processing. J Neurosci . 2012;32(42):[ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3109 -12.2012  
86. Sabatinelli D, Keil A, Frank DW, Lang PJ. Emotional perception: Correspondence of early and  late event -related 
potentials with cortical and subcortical functional MRI. Biol Psychol . 2013;92(3):513- 519. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.04.005 
87. Sabatinelli D, Lang PJ, Keil A, Bradley MM. Emotional perception: Correlation of functional MRI and event -related 
potentials. Cereb Cortex . 2007;17(5):1085- 1091.  doi:10.1093/cercor/bhl017 
88. Hickey C, Peelen M V. Neural mechanisms of incentive salience in naturalistic human vision. Neuron . 
2015;85(3):512 -518.  doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.049  
89. Parvaz MA, Moeller SJ, G oldstein RZ. Incubation of cue -induced craving in adults addicted to cocaine measured 
by [CONTACT_66954]. JAMA Psychiatry . 2016;73(11):1127- 1134.  doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2181  
90. Engelmann JM, Versace F, Robinson JD, et al. Neural substrates of smoking cue reactivity: A meta- analysis of fMRI 
studies. Neuroimage . 2012;60(1):252 -262.  doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.024 
91. Baker TE, Lesperance P, Tucholka A, et al. Reversing the Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_19529] l Valuation of Drug and Nondrug Rewards in 
Smokers Using Multimodal Neuroimaging. Published online 2017.  doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.01.015  
92. Baker TE, Wood JMA, Holroyd CB. Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_91218].  Published online 2016.  doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2015.11.002  
93. Cano M, Oh S, Salas -Wright CP, Vaughn MG. Cocaine use and overdose mortality in the [LOCATION_002]: Evidence 
from two national data sources, 2002 –2018. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2020;214:108148. 
doi:10.101 6/j.drugalcdep.2020.[ADDRESS_100794]  MB, Williams  JBW,  Karg  RS, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_91219]. Structured Clinical Interview  for DSM -V Research  Version . American 
Psychiatric Association Publishing;  2015.  
95. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, et al. The Columbia -suicide severity rating scale: Initial validity and internal 
consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J Psychiatry . 
2011;168(12):1266- 1277.  doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111704 
96. Hoff  LA, Hallisey  BJ, Brown  L, Hoff  MR. People  in Crisis:  Clinical and Diversity Perspectives . Taylor & Francis;  2011. 
Accessed January 23, 2022. 
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=V12AUbxubNEC&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=People+in+crisis:+Clinica l 
+and+diversity+perspectives+&ots=9AtPhnCmmp&sig=FBPee- SOhBUvOEzRL2NVjKmNIF8#v=onepage&q=People  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 22 of 27   in crisis%3A Clinical and diversity perspectives&f=false  
97. Keel JC, Smith MJ, Wassermann EM. A safety screening questionnaire for transcranial magnetic stimulation. Clin 
Neurophysiol . 2001;112(4):720.  doi:10.1016/S1388 -2457(00)[ZIP_CODE] -6 
98. Mir- Moghtadaei A, Giacobbe P, Daskalakis ZJ, Blumberger DM, Downar J. Validation  of a 25% Nasion –Inion 
Heuristic  for Locating  the Dorsomedial Prefrontal  Cortex  for Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation.  Brain 
Stimul . 2016;9(5):793- 795.  doi:10.1016/j.brs.2016.05.[ADDRESS_100795] Circuit –Targeted Transcranial 
Magnetic Stimulation. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2022;7(8):833 -840. 
doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2022.02.011 
100. Fitzgerald PB, Hoy KE, Elliot D, Susan McQueen RN, Wa mbeek LE, Daskalakis ZJ. Accelerated repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment of depression. Neuropsychopharmacology . 2018;43(7):1565 - 
1572.  doi:10.1038/s41386- 018-0009 -9 
101. Dunning JP, Parvaz MA, Hajcak G, et al. Motivated attention to c ocaine and emotional cues in abstinent and 
current cocaine users -  an ERP study. Eur J Neurosci . 2011;33(9):1716- 1723. doi:10.1111/j.1460-  
9568.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x  
102. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline Follow -Back. In: Measuring Alcohol Consumption. Humana Press; 1992:41 -72. 
doi:10.1007/978 -1-4612 -0357 -5_3 
103. Halikas  JA, Kuhn  KL, Crosby  R, Carlson  G, Crea  F. The measurement  of craving  in cocaine  patients  using the 
minnesota cocaine craving scale. Compr Psychiatry . 1991;32(1):22 -27. doi:10.1016/0010- 440X(91)[ZIP_CODE]- L 
104. Nasreddin e ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: A Brief Screening Tool 
For Mild Cognitive Impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2005;53(4):695 -699.  doi:10.1111/J.1532 -5415.2005.[ZIP_CODE].X  
105. Campbell JC, Webster  DW,  Glass  N. The danger  assessment:  Validation  of a lethality  risk assessment  instrument 
for intimate partner femicide. J Interpers Violence . 2009;24(4):653 -674.  doi:10.1177/[ADDRESS_100796] MS, Barratt ES. Factor structure of the barratt impulsiveness scale. J Clin Psychol . 
1995;51(6):768 -774.  doi:10.1002/1097 -4679(199511)51:6<768::AID- JCLP2270510607>3.0.CO;2- 1 
107. Frank MJ, Seeberger LC, O’Reilly RC. By [CONTACT_91243]: Co gnitive reinforcement learning in  Parkinsonism.  
Science (80 - ). 2004;306(5703):1940- 1943. doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.1102941/SUPPL_FILE/FRANK.SOM.PDF  
108. Guitart -Masip M, Huys QJM, Fuentemilla L, Dayan P, Duzel E, Dolan RJ. Go and no -go learning in reward and 
punishm ent: Interactions between affect and effect. Neuroimage . 2012;62(1):154 -166. 
doi:10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2012.04.[ADDRESS_100797], et al. Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive  Action  Dominates  Valence  in 
Anticipatory Representations in the H uman Striatum and Dopaminergic Midbrain. Published online 2011. 
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6376 -10.2011  
110. Cavanagh JF, Eisenberg I, Guitart -Masip M, Huys Q, Frank MJ. Frontal theta overrides Pavlovian learning biases. J 
Neurosci . 2013;33(19):8541 -8548.  doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5754- 12.2013  
111. Moro AS, Saccenti D, Ferro M, Scaini S, Malgaroli A, Lamanna J. Neural Correlates of Delay Discounting in the Light of Brain Imaging and Non -Invasive Brain Stimulation: What We Know and What Is Miss ed. Brain Sci . 
2023;13(3):403.  doi:10.3390/brainsci13030403 
112. Koffarnus MN, Bickel WK. A 5 -trial adjusting delay discounting task: Accurate discount rates in less than one 
minute. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol . 2014;22(3):222 -228.  doi:10.1037/a0035973  
113. Yoon  JH, de Dios  C, Suchting R, et al. Initial development  of a brief  assessment  of cocaine  demand.  Behav 
Pharmacol . 2021;32(4):351 -355.  doi:10.1097/fbp.0000000000000617 
114. Yoon JH, Suchting R, de Dios C, et al. Decreased cocaine demand following contingency management  treatment.  
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2021;226:108883. doi:10.1016/J.DRUGALCDEP.2021.108883 
115. Shacham S. A Shortened Version of the Profile of Mood States. J Pers Assess . 1983;47(3):305 -306. 
doi:10.1207/S15327752JPA4703_14 
116. Buysse DJ, Yu L, Moul  DE, et al. 781 Patient -Reported Outcome Measures -Buysse et al PATIENT -REPORTED 
OUTCOMES  OF SLEEP  DISTURBANCE  Development  and Validation  of Patient- Reported  Outcome  Measures  for 
Sleep  Disturbance and Sleep -Related Impairments. Sleep . 2010;33(6). Accessed February 28, 2022. 
www.journalsleep.  
117. Yu L, Buysse DJ, Germain A, et al. Development of Short Forms from the PROMIS Sleep Disturbance and  Sleep - 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 23 of 27   Related Impairment Item Ba nks. Behav Sleep Med . 2011;10(1):6. doi:10.1080/15402002.2012.[ADDRESS_100798] Behav . 1998;23(4):449 -461.  doi:10.1016/S0306 -4603(98)[ZIP_CODE] -2 
119. Leon AC, Davis LL, Kraemer HC. The role and interpretation of pi[INVESTIGATOR_36156]. J Psychiatr Res . 
2011;45(5):626 -629.  doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.10.008 
120. Assmann  SF, Pocock  SJ, Enos  LE, Kasten  LE. Subgroup  analysis  and other  (mis)uses of baseline  data  in clinical 
trials. Lancet . 2000;355(9209):1064 -1069.  doi:10.1016/S0140- 6736(00)[ZIP_CODE]- 0 
121. Pocock  SJ, Assmann  SE, Enos  LE, Kasten  LE. Subgroup  analysis,  covariate  adjustment  and baseline  comparisons  in 
clinical trial reporting: current practice and problems. Stat Med Stat Med . 2002;21:2917 -2930. 
doi:10.1002/sim.[ADDRESS_100799]. A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Found Stat Comput . 
2018;2: https://www.R -project. org. 
123. Bates  D, Machler  M, Bolker  B, Walker  S. Fitting  linear mixed -effects  models  using  lme4.  Published  online  2014. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.[ZIP_CODE]/jss.v067.i01  
124. Stan Development Team. RStan: The R interface to Stan. R package version 2.18.2. Published online  2018.  
125. Bürkner  PC. brms: An R package for Bayesian multilevel models using Stan. J Stat Softw. 2017;80:1 -28. 
doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/jss.v080.i01 
126. Wijeysundera DN, Austin PC, Hux JE, Beattie WS, Laupacis A. Bayesian statistical inference enhances the interpretation of contemporary randomized controlled trials. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2009;62(1):13 -21.e5. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2008.07.006 
127. McElreath R. Statistical Rethinking: A Bayesian Course with Examples in R and Stan. CRC Press, LLC; 2018. 
doi:10.1201/9781315372495 
128. Gelman A, Carlin JB,  Stern HS, Dunson D., Vehtari A, Rubin DB. Bayesian Data Analysis (3rd Ed.) . 3rd ed. CRC 
Press, LLC;  2013.  
129. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_59898]. Incorporating  Bayesian  Ideas  into Health -Care  Evaluation.  Stat Sci. 2004;19(1):156- 174. 
doi:10.1214/[ADDRESS_100800] University Press; 2006.  doi:10.2307/3619118  
131. Lee MD, Wagenmakers EJ. Bayesian Cognitive Modeling: A Practical Course . Cambridge University Press; 2013. 
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139087759 
132. Berry DA. A guide to drug discovery: B ayesian clinical trials. Nat Rev Drug Discov . 2006;5(1):27- 36. 
doi:10.1038/nrd1927 
133. Vehtari A, Gelman A, Gabry J. Practical Bayesian model evaluation using leave -one-out cross -validation and  WAIC. 
Stat Comput . 2016;27(5):1413 -1432. Accessed July 31, 2018. h ttps://github.com/stan -dev/loo.  
134. Carvalho  CM, Polson  NG, Scott  JG. The horseshoe  estimator  for sparse  signals.  Biometrika . 2010;97(2):465- 480. 
doi:10.1093/biomet/asq017 
135. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_91220] J, Vehtari A. Sparsity Information and Regularization in the Horseshoe and Other Shrinkage  Priors . 
136. Little  RJA. A test of missing  completely  at random  for multivariate  data  with  missing  values.  J Am Stat Assoc . 
1988;83(404):1198 -1202.  doi:10.1080/01621459.1988.[ADDRESS_100801] of missing  completely  at random  for longitudinal  data  with  missing  observations.  Stat Med . 
1997;16(16):1859- 1871.  doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097- 0258(19970830)16:16<1859::AID -SIM593>3.0.CO;2- [ADDRESS_100802] N, Thomas A. Generalized Linear Models: A Bayesian Perspective. In: Generalized Linear Models: A Bayes ian 
Perspective . Marcel Dekker, Inc; 2000. Accessed April 26, 2021. 
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=Y5AARf7oTNkC&oi=fnd&pg=PA387&dq=Bayeisan+Graphical+Mo 
dels+and+Software+for+GLMs&ots=80WecFpr8y&sig=4Vde4uYsviJ3J30WUtZ6_m2_5sA#v=onepage&q=Baye isan 
Graphical Models and Software for GLMs&f=false  
139. Fitzmaurice GM. Generalized linear mixture models for handling nonignorable dropouts in longitudinal studies.  
Biostatistics. 2000;1(2):141- 156. doi:10.1093/biostatistics/1.2.[ADDRESS_100803]  RJ, Thornton  JG, Braunholtz D. Clinical trials  and rare diseases:  a way out of a conundrum.  BMJ . 
1995;311(7020):1621- 1625.  doi:10.1136/bmj.311.7020.1621 
141. Górska N, Słupski J, Cubała WJ. Antipsychotic drugs in epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]. Neurol Neurochir Pol . 2019;53(6):408- 412. 
doi:10.5603/PJNNS.A2019.0052  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-21-0813 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/11/2023  Page 24 of 27   142. Stultz  DJ, Osburn  S, Burns  T, Pawlowska -Wajswol  S, Walton  R. Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation  (TMS)  Safety 
with Respect to Seizures: A Literature Review. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat . 2020;16:2989 . 
doi:10.2147/NDT.S276635  
143. Madeo  G, Terraneo  A, Cardullo  S, et al. Long- Term  Outcome  of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic  Stimulation  in a 
Large Cohort of Patients With  Cocaine -Use Disorder: An Observational Study. Front Psychiatry . 2020;11:158. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2020.[ADDRESS_100804] stimulation (TBS) targeting the prefrontal 
cortex on executive functioning: A sy stematic review and meta -analysis. Neuropsychologia. 2018;111:344- 359. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.02.[ADDRESS_100805] 
Transcranial Magnetic Stim ulation Modalities for Treating Methamphetamine Use Disorder— A Randomized 
Clinical Trial. Front Psychiatry . 2021;12:774192.  doi:10.3389/FPSYT.2021.774192 