 
 Notice of Approval: New Submission  
March 3, 2023 
 
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_744900] -Johnson  
CC Heejin Kim 
Protocol Title  NOVA HABILITAS (NOVA H) Consortium  
Protocol Number  [ZIP_CODE]  
Funding Source  Industry Consortium  
Review Type  Expedited 6, 7  
Status  Active  
Risk Determination  No more than minimal risk  
Approval Date  March 3, 2023  
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_744901] 2, 2028  
  
Sites Approved:  University of Illinois Urbana -Champaign  
Davis Phinney Foundation  
LSVT Global  
  
 
This letter authorizes the use of human subjects in the above protocol. The University of Illinois at Urbana -
Champaign Institutional Review Board (IRB) has reviewed and approved the research study as described.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_665855]: 
• Conducting research in a manner consistent with the requirements of the University and federal regulations found at 45 CFR 46.  
• Using the approved consent documents, with the footer, from this approved package.  
• Requesting approval from the IRB prior to implementing modifications. 
• Notifying OPRS of any problems involving human subjects, including unanticipated events, 
participant complaints, or protocol deviations. 
• Notifying OPRS of the completion of the study.  
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]  Human Subjects Research – Protocol Form  Guidelines for completing this research protocol: • Please submit typed applications via email. Handwritten forms and hard copy forms will not be accepted.  • For items and questions that do not apply to the research, indicate as “not applicable.” • Provide information for all other items clearly and avoid using discipline specific jargon.  • Please only include text in the provided boxes. The text boxes will expand as they are typed in to accommodate large amounts of text.    Before submitting this application, ensure that the following have been completed.  • Protocol Form is complete. • Relevant CITI modules have been completed for all members of the research team at www.citiprogram.org. • Informed consent/assent/parental permission document(s) are provided.  • Relevant waivers and appendices are provided.  • Recruitment materials are provided.  • Research materials (e.g. surveys, interview guides, etc.) are provided.  • Any relevant letters of support are provided.   Instructions on the non-exempt review process and guidance to submitting applications, can be found on the OPRS website. You may also contact [CONTACT_263631] [EMAIL_5045] or phone at [PHONE_10044].  Submit completed applications via email to: [EMAIL_5045].     
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 Section 1: PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (PI)  The Illinois Campus Administrative Manual allows assistant, associate, and full professors to act as PI. Other individuals may serve as PI [INVESTIGATOR_263615].  Last Name:  [CONTACT_744967]-Johnson First Name: [CONTACT_744968](s):  Ph.D. Dept. or Unit:  Beckman Institute Office Address:  [ADDRESS_1019011] Address:  405 N Mathews Av City:  Urbana State:  IL Zip Code:  [ZIP_CODE] Phone:  [PHONE_15542] E-mail:  [EMAIL_14213]  Urbana-Champaign Campus Status:   Non-visiting member of (Mark One)   Faculty        Academic Professional/Staff  (Student Investigators cannot serve as PI) Training  Required CITI Training, Date of Completion (valid within the last 3 years), 3/19/22  Additional training, Date of Completion,          Section 2.  RESEARCH TEAM 2A. Are there other investigators engaged in the research?  Yes (include a Research Team Form)  No 2B. If yes, are any of the researchers not affiliated with Illinois?  Yes  No  Section 3.  PROTOCOL TITLE NOVA HABILITAS (NOVA H) Consortium  Section 4.  FUNDING SOURCE 4A. Is the research funded?   Research is not funded and is not pending a funding decision (Proceed to Section 5).   Research is funded (funding decision has been made).   Funding decision is pending.  Funding proposal submission date:  4B. Indicate the source of the funding.   University of Illinois Department, College or Campus, please specify:        Federal, please specify:        Commercial Sponsorship & Industry1,2, please specify: Industry consortium MOU.   1 Clarify whether or not sponsor requires specific language in the contractual agreement that impacts human subjects research  2 Clarify whether or not the sponsor requires the protocol adhere to ICH GCP (E6) standards 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  State of Illinois Department or Agency, please specify:        Other, please specify:       4C. Sponsor-assigned grant number, if known:       4D. A complete copy of the funding proposal or contract is attached.   Attached, please specify title: Membership Agreement for Artificial Intelligence Accessibility Coalition  4E. Funding Agency Official To Be Notified of IRB Approval (if Applicable) Name:       [CONTACT_744969]:       E-mail:       Phone:        Section 5. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST Please indicate below whether any investigators or members of their immediate families have any of the following. If the answer to any of the following items is yes, please submit the University of Illinois approved conflict management plan. If you have any questions about conflicts of interest, contact [EMAIL_5047]. 5A. Financial interest or fiduciary relationship with the research sponsor (e.g. investigator is a consultant for the research sponsor).  Yes  No 5B. Financial interest or fiduciary relationship that is related to the research (e.g. investigator owns a startup company, and the intellectual property developed in this protocol may be useful to the company).  Yes  No 5C. Two or more members of the same family are acting as research team members on this protocol.       Yes  No  Section 6. SUMMARY & PURPOSE OF RESEARCH 6A. In lay language, briefly summarize the objective and significance of the research.  The goal of the Speech Accessibility Project at the UIUC Beckman Institute (https://speechaccessibilityproject.beckman.illinois.edu) is to collect, annotate, and curate a shared database of speech samples from people with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744902], and share this data set with researchers at other organizations. This two-year project plans to collect 1,200,000 speech samples from 2,000 people, each of whom will provide 600 samples. In Year 1, the initial focus will be people with Parkinson’s.  In Year 2, four more etiologies of interest will be recruited (such as ALS patients, stroke patients, etc.). UIUC will build an open-source software infrastructure to collect annotated speech samples and share these data in an appropriately secure fashion with researchers from our partner technology companies (and eventually, other organizations as well) so that they can use these data to improve their automatic speech recognition algorithms. This project promotes diversity, equity, and inclusion by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_744903], and it is also more efficient and less burdensome for these specialized patient populations to have one centralized “collector” of speech samples. 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 6B. Indicate if your research includes any of the following:  Secondary data (use of data collected for purposes other than the current research project)  Data collected internationally (include International Research Form)  Translated documents (include Certificate of Translation Form and translated documents)  Research activities will take place at Carle (include documentation (email or letter) from Carle stating that the review of your Research Services Request Form is complete) 6C. Letters of support from outside institutions or entities that are allowing recruitment, research, or record access at their site(s) are attached.   Yes  Not Applicable  Section 7. PROCEDURES 7A. Select all research methods and/or data sources that apply.  Surveys or questionnaires,  select all that apply:  Paper  Telephone  Online  Interviews  Focus groups  Field work or ethnography  Standardized written, oral, or visual tests  Taste or smell testing  Intervention or experimental manipulation  Exercise and muscular strength testing  Noninvasive procedures to collect biological specimens (e.g., hair and nail clippi[INVESTIGATOR_14839], saliva, etc.)  Noninvasive procedures to collect physiological data (e.g., physical sensors, electrocardiography, etc.)  Procedures involving radiation  Recording audio and/or video and/or taking photographs: Yes  Recording other imaging  Materials that have already been collected or already exist, specify source of data:        HIPAA-protected data  FERPA-protected data   GDPR-protected data  Other, please specify:       7B. List all testing instruments, surveys, interview guides, etc. that will be used in this research.  Drafts or final copi[INVESTIGATOR_744904].  Yes  7C. List approximate study dates. February 2023 – August 2024 7D. What is the duration of participants’ involvement? Up to 5 hours, which is the time estimated to be trained on the system and then use it to provide 600 speech samples, where each sample is approximately 5 to 10 seconds of speech. 7E. How many times will participants engage in research activities? Multiple times as needed at their own pace and convenience to record speech samples. 7F. Narratively describe the research procedures in the order in which they will be conducted. 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/[ADDRESS_1019012] data from 400 people each from five different patient populations. Each person would provide 600 speech samples.  (600 samples/person x 400 persons/etiology x 5 etiologies = 1,200,000 samples)  Our schedule of research procedures is: 1. February or March-August 2023:  data collection of speech samples from 400 people with Parkinson’s. Parkinson’s Disease is “etiology 1”. 2. August 2023-August 2024: data collection of speech samples from 1,600 people with other etiologies to be determined (i.e., voted on by [CONTACT_744919]). One of these etiologies will be ALS.  The other three etiologies are to be determined.  In Year 1, we focus on people with Parkinson’s and therefore, recruitment will be managed by [CONTACT_744920], a well-known non-profit advocacy group for people with Parkinson’s.  DPF will distribute our recruitment flyer (see Attachment 3, recruitment for speech) and engage in informational sessions with potential participants. (In Year 2, we will do the same procedure for other populations of interest, such as ALS patients. Therefore, in Year 2, we will add additional patient advocacy organizations to assist in recruitment, such as Team Gleason to recruit patients with  ALS.)  Data collection of speech samples in Year 1 will be a collaboration of UIUC and LSVT Global team members. Potential participants will be screened both with a questionnaire and by [CONTACT_1541] a short set of “quality control” speech samples (Attachment 4). If the participant does not pass screening, they will be thanked for their interest. Otherwise, the participant is eligible for the study and can do the informed consent process (Attachment 5) and then engage in contributing speech samples (Attachment 7).  Participants can do as many recordings as they wish at whatever time of day is convenient for them. Participants will be able to login to the system at any time, 24/7.  In Year 2, this procedure will be performed with patients from other etiologies with additional advocacy organizations as partners.   Participants also have the option to provide additional data about themselves, such as their age, race and ethnicity, year of their diagnosis, and other information as shown in Attachment 9. These “metadata tags” are completely optional but are helpful for analysis.  The collected speech samples will be stored securely in a custom database built by [CONTACT_744921]. All samples are stored with a unique participant ID code along with any of the optional 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 metadata tags. All samples are annotated by [CONTACT_744922].     The entire database of speech samples will be shared with our coalition partners (Amazon, Apple, Google, Meta, and Microsoft).  Each partner has signed a data use agreement with UIUC that allows these deidentified data to be used for improvements in speech recognition technology and assures the privacy of participants and confidentiality of data.  In the future, other partners may join this coalition, subject to a vote by [CONTACT_744923], and those future partners would also sign a data use agreement with the same terms and conditions.  Section 8. PERFORMANCE SITES TO INCLUDE INTERNATIONAL, SCHOOL, AND COLLABORATIVE STUDIES 8A. List all research sites for the protocol. For non-University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign sites, describe their status of approval and provide contact [CONTACT_665888]. If the site has an IRB, note whether the IRB has approved the research or plans to defer review to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Performances Sites #1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign #2 Davis Phinney Foundation, Colorado #[ADDRESS_1019013] Global, Colorado and Arizona If there are additional performance sites, include them on an attachment and check here:  8B. Is this a multi-center study in which the Illinois investigator is the lead investigator, or the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is the lead site?  Yes  No If yes, answer 8C and 8D. If no, proceed to Section 8E.  8C. Who is the prime recipi[INVESTIGATOR_263616], if funded?  UIUC 8D. What is the management and communication plan for information that might be relevant to the protection of research subjects (e.g. unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects, interim results, and protocol modifications)?   UIUC will issue subawards to DPF and LSVT Global. UIUC, DPF, and LSVT Global will establish a regular series of Zoom meetings with shared documents on Box or Teams. Any issues with participant engagement will be discussed regularly and remediated as appropriate. UIUC is responsible for monthly reports out to our founding partners, the Artificial Intelligence Accessibility Consortium. 8E.  If subjects will be recruited from Illinois public or private elementary or secondary schools, additional deadlines and procedures may apply. Criminal background clearances might be required. Special consideration must be given to the exclusion of protected populations. Please contact [CONTACT_744924] ([EMAIL_5053]) for more information. Select one:   Illinois schools will be used   Illinois schools will not be used  Section 9. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT GOAL & EQUITABLE SELECTION OF SUBJECTS 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 9A. For each performance site, indicate the estimated total number of participants. Performance Site # Male # Female Total #1 UIUC (20 for focus groups, 2000 for speech samples) 1010 1010 2020 #2 Davis Phinney Foundation collaborates with UIUC on recruitment  1000 1000 2000 #[ADDRESS_1019014] Global collaborates with UIUC on focus groups, intake and collection of speech samples 1010 1010 2020 TOTALS 1010 1010 2020 If additional performance sites are included on an attachment, check here:   9B. Select all participant populations that will be recruited. Age:  Adults (18+ years old)  Minors (≤17 years old)  Specific age range, please specify:       Gender:  No targeted gender (both men and women will be recruited/included)  Targeted gender, please indicate:  Men/boys  Women/girls  Other, please specify:       Race/Ethnicity:  No targeted race or ethnicity (all races and ethnicities will be recruited/included)  Targeted race or ethnicity, please specify:       College Students:  No targeted college population  UIUC general student body  Targeted UIUC student population, provide the instructor or course information, name [CONTACT_744970], or other specific characteristics:        Students at institution(s) other than UIUC, please specify:       Any research with students on UIUC’s campus needs to be registered with the Office of the Dean of Students. Other:  Inpatients  Outpatients  People who are illiterate or educationally disadvantaged  People who are low-income or economically disadvantaged  People with mental or cognitive disabilities or otherwise impaired decision-making capacities  Adults with legal guardians   People who are non-English speaking  People with physical disabilities   Pregnant or lactating women, human fetuses, and/or neonates 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  Prisoners or people with otherwise limited civil freedoms  Other, please specify: Adults with caregivers to help participants use computers 9C. Describe additional safeguards included in the protocol to protect the rights and welfare of the populations selected above. We have designed the remuneration plan to include support for caregivers.   Our subawards with DPF and LSVT Global are meant to provide extra support for potential participants.  DPF’s recruitment activities include providing information and support as needed to potential participants to answer their questions. If a potential participant does not seem able to provide informed consent, they will not be recruited. LSVT Global will provide an intake coordinator and a number of mentors to support data collection. We anticipate that many participants will need advice and support during their attempts at data collection online, and so they will be able to schedule time with an LSVT Global mentor to get help.    Section 10.  INCLUSION/EXCLUSION 10A. List specific criteria for inclusion and exclusion of subjects in the study, including treatment and control groups.  For the main study to collect speech samples, total n=2000 where Cohort 1 (n=400) etiology is Parkinson’s Disease, and Cohort 2 etiologies are still to be decided (n=1600) for Year 2.  Inclusion criteria: • Adult (age >= 18 years) • Self-reported diagnosis of Parkinson’s Disease or other etiology of interest • Reads and speaks English • Has a valid email address • Ability to access web browser to participate in study  Exclusion criteria:  • Is a resident of the State of Washington, [LOCATION_007], or Illinois (because these states have privacy laws that would not allow us to collect ‘voice prints’) • If quality control screening of initial speech samples “fails” because of poor data quality (e.g., poor quality recording environment, or person’s speech is “too typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]” and not sufficiently interesting to continue collecting)   10B. Explain how the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be assessed and by [CONTACT_20898]. If special expertise is required to evaluate screening responses or data, list who will make this evaluation and describe their training and experience. 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 Assessing the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be in collaboration with patient advocacy organizations. In Year 1, that will be Davis Phinney Foundation and LSVT Global.  10C. Drafts or final copi[INVESTIGATOR_744905].  Yes  Not Applicable 10D. Describe procedures to assure equitable selection of subjects. Justify the use of the groups marked in Section 9B. Selection criteria that target one sex, race, or ethnic group require a clear scientific rationale. We will offer participants the optional ability to provide demographic data, so that we can assess the diversity and equitable representation of our sample.   Section 11. RECRUITMENT 11A. Select all recruitment procedures that will be used.  Student subject pool, please specify:        Email distribution   MTurk, Qualtrics Panel, or similar online population, please specify:        US Mail  Flyers/brochures  Website ad, online announcement (e.g. eWeek), or other online recruitment, please specify: newsletter announcements via organizations that advocate for and support people with disabilities.  Newspaper ad  Verbal announcement  Other, please specify:        Not applicable (secondary data only) 11B. Drafts or final copi[INVESTIGATOR_233657] (including verbal scripts) are attached.   Yes  Not Applicable 11C. For each group of participants, describe the details of the recruitment process. In Year 1, Davis Phinney Foundation will include our recruitment flyer in their distribution channels, will also host optional information and Q&A sessions with potential participants, and will answer individual questions as needed from potential participants. The UIUC Speech Accessibility Project’s website will remain as a public source of information, including an updated FAQ list that may be updated based on feedback from DPF.  Section 12. REMUNERATION AND PLAN FOR DISTRIBUTION Refer to the University Business and Financial Policies and Procedures for further guidance on the compensation process and reporting requirements. 12A. Will subjects receive inducements or rewards before, during, or after participation?   Yes  No  If yes, complete the rest of Section 12. If no, proceed to Section 13. 12B. Select all forms of remuneration that apply.  Cash, please specify amount:       
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  Check, please specify amount:        Gift Certificate, please specify amount: Amazon ecodes adding up to $180 per data contributor and up to $90 per caregiver.  Lottery, please specify amount:       and odds:        Course Credit, please specify amount:       and specify equivalent alternative activity:        Other, please specify:       12C. Will payment be prorated before, during, or after participation?   Yes, please specify how: prorated by [CONTACT_744925]  12D. For each group of participants, describe the details of the remuneration plan, including how, when and by [CONTACT_263645]. Our project plans to obtain a total of 600 recorded sentences per participant. Each participant will be compensated with up to $180: $60 after recording the 200th sentence, an additional $60 after recording their 400th sentence, and an additional $60 after recording their 600th sentence.   In addition to the participant compensation described above, participants will also be able to name a caregiver who is assisting them with performing the computer usage tasks in this study, and to specify additional compensation to the caregiver.  Named caregivers will be compensated with up to $90: $30 after recording the 200th sentence, an additional $30 after recording their 400th sentence, and  an additional $[ADDRESS_1019015] manager will assure that the team follows OBFS guidance and will work closely with the Beckman business affairs office to ensure that tax implications are addressed. 12E. The information listed above is provided on the relevant consent forms.   Yes   Section 13. RISKS & BENEFITS 13A. Describe all known risks to the participants for the activities proposed, such as risks to the participants’ physical well-being, privacy, dignity, self-respect, psyche, emotions, reputation, employability, and criminal and legal status. Risks must be described on consent forms. Risks include (1) the risk of loss of privacy in case any research institution that has been granted data access violates their data use agreement by [CONTACT_744926], and (2) the risk that subjects may get tired while recording sentences. 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  13B. Describe the steps that will be taken to minimize the risks listed above. (1) The risk of loss of privacy will be minimized in two ways.  First, we recognize that speech audio recordings are considered to be personally identifiable information, but no other personally identifiable information will be stored in the same database with the speech audio recordings.  Personally identifiable information other than the speech audio recordings will be stored securely in a database at the Beckman Institute, which will only be accessible to personnel named in this IRB application.  Second, before any research institution is permitted to receive any speech audio recordings, they will be required to sign a data use agreement.  Key terms of the data use agreement will include commitments that the research institution (a) is an organization or individual with the legal status necessary to sign a contract, (b) will not make the speech audio recordings available to any individual who is not bound by [CONTACT_227857]’s signature [CONTACT_744971], (c) will store the data in a secure fashion to prevent data theft, and (d) will not seek to identify any of the participants.    (2) The risk of tiredness will be minimized by [CONTACT_744927]. They will be allowed to record at their own pace.  They can log out at any time, then log in again to continue recording as they wish.  13C. Indicate the risk level.  No more than minimal risk (The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated for participation in the proposed research are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests).  More than minimal risk (answer 13D) 13D. If you checked that the research is more than minimal risk, describe the provisions for monitoring the data to ensure the safety of subjects, such as who will monitor data and how often, what criteria will be used to stop the research, etc.       13E. Describe the expected benefits of the research to the subjects and/or to society. There is no immediate benefit of the proposed research to the participants, but participants may eventually benefit from improved communication tools that will be developed based on the outcome of the proposed research. Potential benefits to society and people with speech disorders include automatic speech recognition (ASR) technologies of which accuracy will outperform any existing ASR tools applied to disordered speech. 13F. Weigh the risks with regard to the benefits. Provide evidence that benefits outweigh risks. The benefit to society of the proposed research is the development of improved communication tools for people with speech disorders, while no more than minimal risk is anticipated for participation in the proposed research. Thus, the potential benefits outweigh the minimal risks.  Section 14. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS TO INCLUDE: WAIVERS, ASSENTS, ALTERATIONS, ETC. 
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 14A. Indicate all that apply for the consent/assent/parental permission process.  Written informed consent (assent) with a document signed by  [CONTACT_263651](s) or guardian(s)  adolescents aged 8–17 years  Waiver of Documentation (signature) of Informed Consent (include the relevant Waiver Form)  adult subjects  parent(s) or guardian(s)  adolescents aged 8–17 years  Waiver of Informed Consent (include the relevant Waiver Form)  adult subjects  parent(s) or guardian(s)  adolescents aged 8–17 years  Alteration of Informed Consent (include the relevant Alteration Form)  adult subjects  parent(s) or guardian(s)  adolescents aged 8–[ADDRESS_1019016] all researchers who will obtain consent/assent/parental permission from participants. DPF personnel will publicize the opportunity to their clients and offer support as needed, such as group information sessions and one-on-one dialog. 14C. Describe the method for obtaining consent/assent/parental permission.  The consent procedure will be conducted online with optional support as needed. DPF will generate many referrals of potential participants who self-report that they meet initial inclusion criteria.  These referrals will be kept as a list of names and email addresses that are shared with LSVT Global and UIUC.  LSVT Global’s intake coordinator will contact [CONTACT_744928].  UIUC personnel will assess these two pre-screening data sources (initial questionnaire and quality control samples) and decide whether or not the participant is eligible.  If not, then the participant is thanked for their interest. If the person is eligible, then the person’s information is confirmed with LVST Global and the person is directed to the online informed consent document with the option to get help. While it is possible for the person to read and sign the online informed consent document and immediately begin data collection through the UIUC online system all by [CONTACT_1029], it is more likely that the LVST Global intake coordinator will schedule time with an LVST Global mentor or UIUC research team member to talk the person through the informed consent document and help them with the first few sessions of data collection. 14D. Describe when consent/assent/parental permission will be obtained. A pre-screening procedure will happen first, and once a participant is deemed eligible, then they will be offered  the opportunity to review and sign the informed consent document. 14E. Will participants receive a copy of the consent form for their records?   Yes  No, if no, explain:       14F. Indicate factors that may interfere or influence the collection of voluntary informed consent/assent/parental permission.  No known factors  Research will involve students enrolled in a course or program taught by a member of the research team  Research will involve employees whose supervisor(s) is/are recruiting participants  Participants have a close relationship to the research team  Other, specify any relationship that exists between the research team and participants:       
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020 If applicable, describe the procedures to mitigate the above factors.       14G. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_79642](s) are attached.  Yes  Not applicable 14H. Will this project be registered as a clinical trial?  Yes  No If yes, effective January 21, 2019, an informed consent form must be posted on the Federal Web site after the clinical trial is closed to recruitment, and no later than [ADDRESS_1019017] register our study as a clinical trial.  Therefore, we intend to do this registration after we receive UIUC IRB approval.    Section 15.  DEVICES & DRUGS Indicate if your research includes any of the following.  Equipment [Researchers collecting physiological data, not testing the device]  (include Appendix A, the Research Equipment Form)  Devices [Researchers planning to test devices on human subjects]  (include Appendix B, the Device Form)  Materials of Human Origin  (include Appendix C, the Biological Materials Form)  Drugs and Biologics  (include Appendix D, the Drug and Chemical Usage Form)  MRI AT BIC To use the Beckman Institute Biomedical Imaging Center (BIC) in human subject’s research, you must obtain prior approval from the BIC ([PHONE_5462]; [EMAIL_5054]) and use BIC-approved screening and consent forms. Attach:    BIC approval   BIC screening form   BIC consent form         Section 16. CONFIDENTIALITY OF DATA & PRIVACY OF PARTICIPATION 16A. How is participant data, records, or specimens identified when received or collected by [CONTACT_33365]? Identifiers include, but are not limited to, name, date of birth, email address, street address, phone number, audio or video recordings, and SSN.  No identifiers are collected  Direct identifiers are collected  Indirect identifiers (e.g. a code or pseudonym used to track participants);  Does the research team have access to the identity key?  Yes  No 16B. Select all methods used to safeguard research records during storage:  Written consent, assent, or parental permission forms are stored separately from the data  Data is collected or given to research team without identifiers  Data is recorded by [CONTACT_744929]: 02/07/[ADDRESS_1019018] identifiers are deleted and no identity key exists as soon as possible  Participant codes or pseudonyms are used on all data and the existing identity key is stored separately from the data  Electronic data is stored in a secure, UIUC-approved location, please specify Beckman Institute Dell/EMC Isolon storage system that is fully encrypted  Hard-copy data is stored in a secure location on UIUC’s campus, please specify        Other, please specify:       16C. How long will identifiable data be kept? In perpetuity according to the terms of the industry consortium agreement. The identity key linking participant data to their identity will be destroyed no less than three years after the date of the participant's last speech recording, by [CONTACT_744930]. 16D. Describe provisions to protect the privacy interests of subjects. Separation of identifiable information from speech samples in the database. Participant's recorded speech samples are stored on a virtual machine that contains no other information contributed by [CONTACT_2299]; on this virtual machine, the participant's identity is coded using a participant code that consists of a randomly generated sequence of letters and numbers.  Participant contact [CONTACT_3031], and any other information contributed by [CONTACT_2299], are stored in a separate database, on a separate virtual machine, accessible only by [CONTACT_744931].  Both virtual machines are implemented on the Beckman Institute Dell EMC Isilon/PowerScale encrypted storage array.  The Isilon system currently has storage to accommodate approximately 1 PB of data, with over 300 TB of open space available.  We can add additional storage, up to a maximum of 64 PB, by [CONTACT_744932].  The primary system is in a secure server room in the Beckman Institute building, and the disaster recovery (DR) system is in a secure data center on the Illinois State University campus.  Both systems are fully encrypted and connected on the University of Illinois WAN.  The data is synchronized from the production site to the DR site [ADDRESS_1019019] access to the data. The  team members are up to date on CITI modules and Research IT trainings on data privacy and security. 
  
  
Protocol Form  
 
 
 
Revised: 02/07/2020  The IT system developers are all professional full -time employees of the Beckman Institute’s IT services 
department.  
 
Section 17. DISSEMINATION OF RESULTS  
17A. List proposed forms of dissemination  (e.g. journal articles, thesis, academic paper, conferen ce 
presentation, sharing within industry, etc.) .   
The de -identified data repositor y is accessible only to institutions who sign a data use agreement with 
UIUC .  In addition, we expect this project to lead to the usual forms of research dissemination ( journal 
articles, conference presentations and papers ). 
17B. Will any identifiers be published, shared, or otherwise disseminated?   Yes  No  
If yes, does the consent form explicitly ask consent for such dissemination, or otherwise inform 
participants that it is required in order to participate in the study?  Yes, optionally, participants may 
also consent to allow the use of their voice recordings in research settings such as professional conference presentations or journal publications. This is completely optional and not required for 
participation.  
17C. Do you intend to put de -identified data in a data repository?  Yes  No 
If yes, explain how data will be de -identified. We will assign a unique universal ID number to each 
participant. The Beckman Institute will host this private data repository and only share its contents with 
partner organizations who have signed the data use agreement.  
 Section 18. INVESTIGATOR & DEPARTMENTAL ASSURANCES  
• I certify that the information provided in this application is complete and correct.  
• I certify that I will follow my IRB Approved Protocol.  
• I accept ultimate responsibility for the conduct of this study, the ethical performance of the 
project, and the protection of the rights and welfare of the hum an subjects who are directly or 
indirectly involved in this project.  
• I will comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws regarding the protection of human subjects in research.  
• I will ensure that the personnel performing this study are qualifie d and adhere to the provisions 
of this IRB -certified protocol.  
 
                        
Principal Investigator                     [INVESTIGATOR_744906] , the applicable 
academic dean, institute direc tor, or campus administrative officer indicates their approval of the 
researcher to act as Principal Investigator. Please note that departmental assurance only needs to be 
provided in the initial application.  
 
2023 February 10
    Protocol Form   
 
Revised: 02/07/2020              Name [CONTACT_744972] H IRB PROTOCOL ATTACHMENT 2:  
 
This is EXHIBIT C from the MOU signed by [CONTACT_744933]. “Organization” here refers to the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign.    
 
 
 
LICENSED SPEECH SIGNAL DATA  
DATA  USE TERMS  AND  CONDITIONS  
 
The licenses to Licensed Speec h Signal Data granted to each Member pursuant to 
Section 9.b. of the Agreement are subject to the following Terms and Conditions. Each 
Member receiving such a license is referred to herein as the “ Data User ”. Any  
capi[INVESTIGATOR_744907] C shall have the 
meanings  given to them  elsewhere in the Agreement.  
1. Provision  and Use of Data  
1.[ADDRESS_1019020] made, use, load,  
access, store, copy, reproduce, destroy, modify, transmit, dis play, make derivative 
works of and otherwise use the Data made available to it by [CONTACT_744934] a non -exclusive, non- assignable, non- sublicensable (except as  
provided in Section 2.1 below) basis solely for the Permitted Purpose subjec t to the  
terms of this Exhibit C and the Agreement. Any such modifications or derivative works  made by [CONTACT_744935] “Modification(s) ”. 
1.[ADDRESS_1019021] Data User’s use or modification of any  
portions of the Data that Organization makes publicly available under a more permissive license, if applicable, to the extent Data User uses or modifies the Data  
under  the terms  of such  public  license,  or that otherwise  become public.  
1.3 The rights and restrictions set forth in this Exhibit C as it relates to the use,  
modification, distribution, disclosure, and privacy of the Data may only be modified by a written agreement between Data User and Organization specifically indicating it  
is amending these Terms and Conditions, e.g.,  these Terms and Conditions may not  
be amended by [CONTACT_744936], data processing,  
platform,  or computing resources.  
2. Restrictions  
2.1 Data User may no t sell, rent, lease, lend, transfer or otherwise redistribute the 
Data or any Modification of the Data, in whole or in part, except that Data User may  
disclose or provide access to the Data (including any Modifications) to its  
employees, Affiliates, contractors, and consultants working on behalf of Data User  
for the Permitted  Purpose (collectively  “Representatives”).  
2.2 This Agreement  (including without  limitation  Section 2.1) does  not impose  any 
restriction with respect to the development, use, modification, or distribution of  
Results.  
2.3 All costs and expenses incurred by [CONTACT_744937] C shall be paid by [CONTACT_744938], and Data User  
shall not be entitled to reimbursement from Organization for such costs and  
expenses.  
3. Confidentiality  of Data,  Privacy  
3.1 Data User may not disclose or provide access to the Data (including any  
Modifications) to any third party, except that Data User may disclose or provide 
access to the Data (inc luding any Modifications) to its Representatives, and may  
allow such  Representatives  to use and modify  the Data  (including any Modifications)  
solely to the extent needed for the Permitted Purpose, provided that such  
Representatives are bound by [CONTACT_744939] (including 
Sections 3.2 and 3.3) or have entered into a written agreement with the Data User  
that (i) requires the Representative to process the Data on behalf of Data User and 
only in accordance with Data User’s docu mented instruction, and (ii) contains data 
protection obligations not less protective than those imposed on Data User in this  
Agreement with respect to the protection of the Data processed by [CONTACT_744940]. Data User is  
responsible for its Representatives’ compliance with the applicable terms of this  
Exhibit  C. 
3.[ADDRESS_1019022] the Data from inadvertent or  
unauthorized access, disclosure, or use, and shall comply with applicable privacy  
laws relating to its possession and use of the Data or any Modification of the Data,  
including any biometric  laws.  
3.3 Data  User  will not attempt  to identify  any natural  person from any anonymized,  
pseudonymized,  or otherwise  de-identified personal  data included in the Data.  
4. Representations and Certifications  
4.1 Organization represents and certifies that (i) it will provide Data composed 
solely of anonymi zed, pseudonymized, or otherwise de- identified data; (ii) it will 
provide Data to the Data User that does not violate any laws, rules, standards, or  
regulations governing the use of personal data, including but not limited to [LOCATION_002] privacy laws and  biometric laws; (iii) it will obtain all consents, waivers and  
clearances required to provide the Data to the Data User and for the Data User to 
process the Data for the Permitted Purpose, subject to the terms of this Exhibit C  
and the Agreement; and (iv)  it will promptly delete any Data from the centralized 
repository following a data contributor’s withdrawal of consent and/or request for  
data deletion and promptly  notify  Data  User  of the same.  
4.2 EXCEPT  AS PROVIDED  IN SECTION  4.1 ABOVE,  THE DATA  IS PROVIDED 
ON AN “AS IS” BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES, CERTIFICATIONS, OR  
CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING,  
WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES, CERTIFICATIONS, OR  
CONDITIONS OF TITLE, NON -INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR  A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  
5. Termination,  Terms  and Conditions,  Notices  
5.1 Organization may terminate Data User’s license to the Data upon written notice 
if Data User does not follow the terms of this Exhibit C, including the limitations set  
forth in Section 2, and does not fully cure such failure within thirty (30) days of  
receiving written notice from Organization. In the event Data User’s license is  
terminated under this Section 5.1, Data User shall cease use of the Data and any  
Modifications and us e reasonable efforts to delete any copi[INVESTIGATOR_744908], but shall  
not be restricted  from continued use of any  Results.  
5.2 Data User may terminate its license to the Data upon written notice to 
Organization. In the event Data User’s license is terminated under this Section 5.2,  
Data User shall not receive access to additional Data following termination, but shall  
not be restricted from continued use of the Data to which Data User was previously  
granted  access  pursuant  to this Exhibit  C or to any Modifications.  
5.3 The terms and conditions of the Agreement (including but not limited to 
Sections 11, 13.d., and 13.f. of the Agreement) shall continue to apply with respect  
to Data User’s exercise of its license rights pursuant to Section 9.b and this Exhi bit 
C; provided,  however,  in the event  of a conflict  between the terms  and conditions  of 
this Exhibit C and the terms and conditions elsewhere in the Agreement, the terms  
and conditions  of this Exhibit  C shall prevail.  
5.[ADDRESS_1019023] information listed in the 
Agreement.  
6. Definitions  
6.1 “Data” means the Licensed Speech Signal Data (as defined in the Agreement)  
that Data  User  receives  under the Agreement  during the Term  while  such  Data  User  
is a party to the Agreement, in modified or unmodified form. Data does not include 
Results.  
6.2 “Permitted Purpose” means research by [CONTACT_744941]- related data variances associated with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744909], and the development of products, technologies, and services by  
[CONTACT_744942], including computational use, processing of Biometric Data, and the 
creation and training of machine learning solutions and artificial intelligence models  
including for research  and for commercial  purposes.  
6.3 “Result” means anything that Data User develops or improves for the  
Permitted Pu rpose that does not include more than a de minimis portion of the Data 
(e.g., summary statistics such as the number of speakers, and the gender, age range, etiology, ethnicity, and similar characteristics of speakers) on which the use is based. Results may  include de minimis portions of the Data necessary to report  
on or explain use that has been conducted with the Data, such as figures in scientific papers, but do not include more. For example, machine learning and artificial intelligence models  trained on Data  (and which  do not include more  than a 
de minimis  portion of Data)  are Results  to the extent  they are developed by [CONTACT_744943]  C. 
6.4 “Biometric Data” means data relating to an individual’s physical and/or  behavioral 
characteristics that could be used for identification, including without  limitation 
information relating to an individual’s DNA, fingerprints, face, hand, retina,  gestures,  
voiceprint,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_744910],  and gait. 
 
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
Speech Accessibility Project: Individuals with disabilities helpi[INVESTIGATOR_744911] a voluntary research study that is called the “Speech Accessibility Project.” The purpose of this study is to help researchers at universities and companies to develop spoken-language user interfaces that work for people with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744902]. Software programs that understand speech are developed using machine learning. Machine learning is a software development method that imitates the way humans learn, by [CONTACT_744944], and changing its behavior whenever it makes a mistake. In this way, the software learns to reduce the risk of similar mistakes in the future. By [CONTACT_744945][INVESTIGATOR_744902], this study will make it possible for the software to learn how to make fewer mistakes when it encounters atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744912]. Participating in this study is all online and will involve recording sentences and uploading your audio recordings to a secure encrypted storage system. We ask you to provide up to 600 speech samples or about 5 hours of your time which you can do any time online, at your own pace and convenience. Risks associated with this study are no greater than those in everyday life. There is no expected benefit of this research to you personally; the expected benefit to society is that companies and organizations using your speech recordings will be able to train better speech technology for people with speech and motor disabilities, which will make technology more accessible for everyone. Project Name: [CONTACT_744973], which has the website: https://speechaccessibilityproject.beckman.illinois.edu/  Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_186209]: [CONTACT_745000]-Johnson, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (“UIUC”), Beckman Institute and Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Contact [CONTACT_7171]: [EMAIL_14214] is the team email address. Organizations that will perform this study: University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) is the lead organization that will perform this study and has partnered with the Davis Phinney Foundation and LSVT Global, two non-profit advocacy organizations. Sponsor: The Speech Accessibility Project is funded by a consortium that currently includes five companies: Amazon, Apple, Google, Microsoft, and Meta (parent company of Facebook). In the future, other companies, universities, and organizations may join this consortium as well.   Why am I being asked?  You are being asked to participate in this study because you are an adult who is part of a community of people who may have atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744913]-standard speech, and you have already qualified to be in the study by [CONTACT_744946]-screening questions and providing a set of speech samples.  We plan to recruit more than 1,[ADDRESS_1019024]. If you decide to participate, you are free to withdraw at any time without affecting that relationship.  
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
What procedures are involved?   We will provide you with access to a website where you can record up to 600 speech samples by [CONTACT_744947], or by [CONTACT_744948] a question. You can do these recordings at any time, 24/7, at whatever pace you wish. We encourage you to record at different times of day so that we can learn how your speech might change throughout the day. And don’t worry about giving us “bad” samples – all data are really helpful. The more diverse our data set is, the better!  You have the option to work with our partner organization, LSVT Global, to get help. LSVT Global can provide you with a mentor to help you do your recordings, give you advice about your microphone settings, and give you tips for when and where to do your recordings.  You may take up to three months to finish recording the [ADDRESS_1019025] the research team at UIUC at [EMAIL_14214].   We will also ask you to provide optional data about yourself, such as your age, racial and ethnic identity, and questions about how your speech ability may have impacted your everyday life. You are not required to answer any of these questions. This information will only be used to confirm diverse representation in this data collection, and, if provided, will not be shared outside of the UIUC research team.  The UIUC research team will review all of your speech samples, and we will edit them to protect your privacy by [CONTACT_744949]. We will also annotate your samples with “tags” that refer to technical aspects of the acoustic signals in your samples. We will not attach your name [CONTACT_744974]; instead, we will assign a unique participant identification code to you and will annotate your samples with that code. Only the UIUC research team will know the “identity key” that relates your email address to your participant identification code.  The UIUC Speech Accessibility Project research team has established a secure, fully encrypted storage system at the UIUC Beckman Institute to store your samples. We will separately store your identifiable information in a separate secure database. We have also established a secure data sharing mechanism with the partners in our consortium. Right now, our partners are the five company sponsors of this project: Amazon, Apple, Google, Meta, and Microsoft. UIUC researchers and researchers at each of the partners will use the collected speech samples to train machine learning algorithms to perform better on speech recognition tasks. These partners will only have access to your speech samples and to no other data about you.  The five corporate sponsors of this research at UIUC have signed a legal agreement with the University that sets forth the permitted purposes of the speech data collected from this research project.  These permitted purposes are only for research and technology development as stated here:   • Your samples will be kept forever, to assist in research and technology development in perpetuity. • Your samples are not identified with your name [CONTACT_3732], but only with a unique participant code that is only known to the UIUC research team. • Your samples will be analyzed by [CONTACT_744950]. 
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
• Your samples will be analyzed and combined with other people’s samples to create aggregate results that will be published in the research literature.  • Your samples will be used to advance understanding of machine learning-related data variances associated with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744914], and eventually to develop products, technologies, and services by [CONTACT_744951], including the creation and training of machine learning solutions and artificial intelligence models for both research and commercial purposes.    In the future, any additional partner organizations in this consortium will sign data use agreements with the same terms and conditions. For these future uses of your data, we will not ask you to consent again. In other words, the future use of your de-identified data could happen without additional informed consent.  In summary, your speech samples will help researchers at UIUC and its partner organizations to develop better speech recognition technology algorithms and may eventually help commercial products perform more effectively for people with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744902].    What are the potential risks and discomforts?  In general, we believe that the risks of your participation in this research study are no more than you would encounter in everyday life. However, we do recognize two issues that may be risks in this study, and we also have designed measures to minimize these risks.   First, you may get tired. To minimize your tiredness, we have arranged to let you record your speech samples over multiple sessions. You can log in to the system at a time and location convenient to you, and record at your own pace. You can also log out at any time, then log in again to continue recording as you wish. We hope that this flexibility and convenience will minimize any fatigue that you may experience.  Second, as is true for almost any online data collection research study, there is a risk that your speech samples could be released for purposes and to other individuals, companies, and organizations beyond the purposes to which you have given consent. Please know that the UIUC team has designed measures to minimize the possibility of unauthorized data release include the following: •  Participant code numbers will be used to annotate all speech recordings; your name [CONTACT_744975].  • All organizations using your speech recordings are required to sign a data use agreement, in which they agree that they will store the data securely, that they will prevent unauthorized access, and that they will not attempt to identify you or obtain any other identifying information about you.  • Researchers from outside UIUC will not know your name, e-mail address, state of residence, or any other identifying information about you. Identifying information will be stored separately from your speech recordings, in a database accessible only to UIUC research team members. In addition, as stated above, the UIUC team will edit and annotate your speech samples to protect your privacy. • You are allowed to withdraw your voluntary consent at any time and request that all of your data be destroyed. When you notify the UIUC team that you wish to have all of your speech samples destroyed, UIUC will ensure that your speech recordings are removed from the UIUC secure system and will direct our partners that you wish your data to be removed from any copi[INVESTIGATOR_744915].  
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
Are there benefits to participating in the research?  There is no immediate benefit of this research to you personally.   Information obtained from you in this research may help in the development of commercial products by [CONTACT_744952], its research partners, or members of the consortium. There are no plans to provide financial compensation to you should this occur. The expected benefit to society is that companies and organizations will be able to develop better spoken-language user interfaces so that people with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744916]. What other options are there?  You have the option to not participate in this study. This study is entirely voluntary. Will my study-related information be kept confidential?  The UIUC research team has made every effort to protect the audio records of your speech samples. The UIUC team will edit out identifying information from your speech samples (such as your name) and will only store your audio files with a participant code number. This participant code number is stored with your identifiable information on a secure server at the UIUC Beckman Institute, and this “identity key” information is only accessible by [CONTACT_744953]. This information is necessary in order to pay you for your participation in this project.  As described previously, the UIUC team will also listen to all of your speech samples and edit out any personaly identifiable information.   Faculty, staff, students, and others with permission or authority to see your study information (such as University auditors) will maintain its confidentiality to the extent permitted and required by [CONTACT_263671].   Speech recordings will be distributed only to companies and organizations that have signed a data use agreement, agreeing to confidentiality terms specified above. No other personally identifiable information will be published or presented.   Because this is a research project, we do expect to publish research papers as a result of this study. These papers may be in the public domain. Research papers will never state your name [CONTACT_744976]. Optionally, you may choose to allow the university to share anonymized samples of your voice as part of research publications or presentations, but this is not required.  Will I be reimbursed for any expenses or paid for my participation in this research?  You will be compensated up to $180 as follows: $60 after recording the 200th sample, an additional $60 after recording the 400th sample, and an additional $[ADDRESS_1019026] the UIUC research team at [EMAIL_14215] to validate that your caregiver may also receive compensation for helpi[INVESTIGATOR_56109]. Named caregivers will be compensated with up to $90 as 
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
follows: $30 after recording the 200th sentence, an additional $30 after recording the 400th sentence, and an additional $30 after recording the 600th sentence.  Payments will be made through email using Amazon ecodes.  Can I withdraw or be removed from the study?  Yes. You are free to withdraw your consent and discontinue participation at any time by [CONTACT_744954]. The UIUC research team also have the right to stop your participation in this study without your consent if they believe it is in your best interests. If you withdraw consent, the UIUC research team will remove your speech recordings from the UIUC database and will notify the sponsors and partners that they should also remove your data from their own databases using only your anonymized participant code number. If you withdraw consent, your data will not be used for any future research. If the data you previously provided has been used to inform or create computer code or machine learning algorithms it may not be possible for your data to be removed from them. Will data collected from me be used for any other research?  As stated above, UIUC and its partners in the Speech Accessibility Project consortium will use your speech samples to advance understanding of machine learning-related data variances associated with atypi[INVESTIGATOR_744914], and to develop products, technologies, and services to improve communications and increase access to technology, including computational use, and the creation and training of machine learning solutions and artificial intelligence models including for research and for commercial purposes.  It is possible that, in the future, other organizations will be granted access to the data, in addition to the founding consortium partners that are Amazon, Apple, Google, Meta, and Microsoft. These other organizations may be other universities or other companies. All organizations seeking access to the data will be required to sign data use agreements that specify the same terms as above: that your speech samples will only be used for research and technology development, that your data will be stored securely, and that you may withdraw consent at any time. You may not be asked to provide additional consent for these future uses of your data. Who should I contact [CONTACT_39646] I have questions?  Contact [CONTACT_744955], [CONTACT_745000]-Johnson ([EMAIL_14213] ), if you have any questions about this study or your part in it, or if you have concerns or complaints about the research.   What are my rights as a research subject? If you have any questions about your rights as a research subject, including concerns, complaints, or to offer input, you may call the UIUC Office for the Protection of Research Subjects (OPRS) at [PHONE_10044] or e-mail OPRS at [EMAIL_5045]. If you would like to complete a brief survey to provide OPRS feedback about your experiences as a research participant, please follow the link here or through a link on the OPRS website: https://oprs.research.illinois.edu/. You will have the option to provide feedback or concerns anonymously or you may provide your name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_61183]-up purposes.   Please print this consent form if you would like to retain a copy for your records.   Please read each item carefully and check each box to indicate your agreement. 
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/[ADDRESS_1019027] speech samples on my behalf.   I understand that the only financial compensation that I will receive for participating in this study is the payment for contributing speech samples, which will be $60 for every batch of 200 samples I provide.   I understand that my goal is to provide 600 samples total, and that therefore my maximum payment will be $180.   I understand that if I need the help of a caregiver to contribute speech samples, that I must notify the UIUC team and have my caregiver approved to be paid in addition to myself.   I understand that at any time, I can end my participation and withdraw my consent. When I do so, the UIUC research team will remove all of my speech samples from the UIUC secure system. I also understand that it is UIUC’s responsibility to ask all sponsors and partners to remove any copi[INVESTIGATOR_744917].   Optional checkbox: By [CONTACT_135383], you may also specifically grant your consent for the research team to play or provide audio files of your voice in a public research setting or publication.   I consent to have my voice samples shared in public at research conferences and similar professional meetings, and to have digital audio files of my voice be shared as part of professional research publications.  Optional checkbox: By [CONTACT_135383], you may also specifically grant your consent to share your contact [CONTACT_744956], so that they may contact [CONTACT_744957] a potential participant in their own research studies.  I consent to have my email address and phone number be shared with other research teams, who may contact [CONTACT_744958].  
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
   University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign  Online Consent Form  
By [CONTACT_17325] “I CONSENT” button below, I indicate my willingness to voluntarily take part in this study.  I CONSENT 
IRB Number: [ZIP_CODE]
IRB Approval Date: 03/03/2023
IRB Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]: 03/02/2028
 Waiver of Documentation 
of Informed Consent  
 
 
1 of 1 
                                         
 
Revised: 01/09 /[ADDRESS_1019028] be typewritten  and submitted via email to [EMAIL_5045].  
 
Section 1. PROTOCOL INFORMATION  
1A. Primary Investigator:  Mark Hasegawa -Johnson  
1B. Protocol Number:  [ADDRESS_1019029] Title:  Consortium NOVA HABILITAS (NOVA H)  
1D. Is this research regulated by [CONTACT_3133]?  Yes   No 
 Section 2. REQUEST FOR WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION  
A consent procedure which does not document obtained consent through  a physical signature [CONTACT_744977] [CONTACT_744959]. To request IRB approval of a consent procedure which does 
not document consent through a physical signature, provide a response to only one  of the following. Note 
that the IRB may r equire the investigator to provide subjects with a written statement regarding the 
research, even though the documentation requirement may be waived.  
2A. The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent document and the 
principal  risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subject will be 
asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, and the subject’s wishes will govern. (Note: A waiver of documentation of informed consent is not permissible under this category if the research is subject to FDA regulations.)  
      
2B. The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no procedures for 
which written consent is normally required outside the consent.  
This research will be conduc ted entirely online with adult volunteer participants from all states in the [LOCATION_003] 
except those that have laws restricting the use of “voice print” technologies ( WA, IL, TX).   Each participant 
will set up a login and password to the NOVA H Data Repository, will be assigned a unique user ID 
number, and will periodically upload speech samples via our website by [CONTACT_744960]’s microphone and having the resulting audio file stored in our system. They will be 
compensated for their participat ion through the emailing of Amazon ecodes.   After pre -screening, they 
will do the informed consent process online and check a series of checkboxes and a final button to 
provide consent to participate in the study.  
2C. The subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group or 
community in which signing forms is not the norm, the research presents no more than minimal risk of 
harm to subjects , and there is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that informed 
consent was obtained.  
      
 
  
Research Team  
 
 
1 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/[ADDRESS_1019030] be typewritten and submitted via email to [EMAIL_5045].  
 
When to use this form: If there are collaborating researchers participating in a research study, including 
those from other institutions, complete this form by [CONTACT_665949]. Include all 
persons who will be: 1) directly responsible for project oversight and implementation , 2) recruitment, 3) 
obtaining informed c onsent , or 4) involved in data collection, analysis of identifiable data, and/or follow -
up. Please copy and paste text fields to add additional research team members.  
Note:  
• Changes made to the Principal Investigator [CONTACT_554415] a revised Protocol Form  and an Amendment 
Form . 
• A complete Research Team form with all research team members included needs  to be submitted 
every time the research team is updated.  
 
Section 1. PROTOCOL INFORMATION  
1A. Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_744900] -Johnson  
1B. Protocol Number: [ADDRESS_1019031] Title: NOVA HABILITAS (NOVA H) Consortium  
 Section 2. ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATORS  
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744978]:  Ph.D.  Dept. or Unit: Linguistics  
Professional  Email: [EMAIL_14216]  Phone: 244-4972  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar   Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 04/12/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Te am (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures    Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active  research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
  
Research Team  
 
 
2 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021  Full Name:  [CONTACT_744979]:  M.A.  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14217]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate S tudent  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar   Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  06/13/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744980]:  M.S.  Dept. or Unit: Beckman Institute  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14218]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student   Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 02/28/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :  engaging with advocacy groups to share recruiting materials  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/22/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
  
  
Research Team  
 
 
3 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744981]:  B.S. Dept. or Unit: Beckman Institute  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14219]  Phone: 333-0636  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student   Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 7/22/2022  
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :  develop and maintain IT infrastructure for collection of speech samples from 
participants  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   2/22/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744982]:  B.S. Dept. or Unit: Beckman Institute  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14220]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student   Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 06/14/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :  develop and maintain IT infrastructure for collection of speech samples from 
participants  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
  
Research Team  
 
 
4 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/22/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744983]:  B.S. Dept. or Unit: Beckman Institute  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14221]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  06/13/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : develop and maintain IT infrastructure for collection of speech samples  from 
participants  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/22/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
  
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744984] -Bic Le  Degree:  B.S. Dept. or Unit: Beckman  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14222]  Phone: 265-5237  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student   Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 06/13/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : develop and maintain IT infrastructure for collection of speech samples from 
participants  
  
Research Team  
 
 
5 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021  If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please spe cify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   6/13/22                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744985]:  M.S. Dept. or Unit: Davis Phinney 
Foundation  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14223]   Phone: [PHONE_15543]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify : Davis Phinney Foundation  
[ADDRESS_1019032], Louisville , CO [ZIP_CODE], [PHONE_15544], [EMAIL_14224]  
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Subaward receipi[INVESTIGATOR_744918]:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   11/17/22                                  Date removed  from research team :         
 
  
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744986]:  PhD  Dept. or Unit: LSVT Global  
Professional Email:  [EMAIL_14225]  and 
[EMAIL_14226]  Phone: [PHONE_15545]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify : LSVT Global Research and 
Development Office, Speer Blvd. Denver, CO [ZIP_CODE], [EMAIL_14227]  and is also professor emerita of 
speech, language, and hearing science at University of Colorado 
(https://experts.colorado.edu/display/fisid_102662 )  
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
  
Research Team  
 
 
6 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Subaward rec ipi[INVESTIGATOR_744918]:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 10/28/22 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), p lease specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   11/30/22                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744987]:  M.M . Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14228]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting  Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  01/16/2 3 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting   Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   1/27/2023                                    Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744988]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14229]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
  
Research Team  
 
 
7 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021  Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  9/29/2020 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name : [CONTACT_744989]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14230]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  02/08/2023 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name : [CONTACT_744990]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14231]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
  
Research Team  
 
 
8 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021  Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  02/13/2023 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc. ), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name : [CONTACT_744991]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14232]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professio nal/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiti ng Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  08/12/2021 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifia ble data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
Full Name : [CONTACT_744992]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14233]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
  
Research Team  
 
 
9 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021  Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  02/01/2023 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc. ), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
Full Name : [CONTACT_744993]:  High 
school diploma  Dept. or Unit: Speech and Hearing Science  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14234]  Phone:       
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff     Graduate Student Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify :       
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):  01/31/2023 
 Additional training, Date of Completion:       
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify :       
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, depression index, etc.), please 
specify the procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team :   2/17/2023                                   Date removed  from research team :         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744994]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14235]  Phone: [PHONE_15546]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate S tudent  Undergraduate Student  
  
Research Team  
 
 
10 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Support  
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):       
 Additional training, Date of Completion: 2/23/2023  
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering bi omedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research te am member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                   Date removed from research team:         
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744995]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: ona.reed@ lsvtglobal.com  Phone: [PHONE_15547]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Suppo rt 
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years): 9/25/18  
 Additional training, Date of Completion:  
Role on  Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                      Date removed from research team:         
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744996]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: emily.nauman @lsvtglobal.com  Phone: [PHONE_15548]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/St aff   Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Support  
Training:  
  
Research Team  
 
 
11 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):       
 Additional training, Date of Completion: 2/28/2023  
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifia ble data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s) :       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                   Date removed from research team:         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744997]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14236]  Phone: [PHONE_15549]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Suppo rt 
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):       
 Additional training, Date of Completion: 2/27/2023  
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering biomedical  study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                   Date removed from research team:         
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744998]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14237]  Phone: [PHONE_15550]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Support  
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):       
  
Research Team  
 
 
12 of 12 
                                         
 
Revised: 4/19/2021   Additional training, Date of Completion: 3/1/2023  
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering biomedical  study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                   Date removed from research team:         
 
 
Full Name:  [CONTACT_744999]: MA Dept. or Unit:  
Professional Email: [EMAIL_14238]  Phone: [PHONE_15551]  
Campus Affiliation:  
 University of Illinois at Urbana -Champaign  Other, please specify :       
Campus Status: 
 Faculty  Academic Professional/Staff    Graduate Student  Undergraduate Student  
 Visiting Scholar  Other, please specify : Community member Research Suppo rt 
Training:  
 Required CITI Training, Date of Completion  (valid within last 3 years):       
 Additional training, Date of Completion: 2/28/ 2023  
Role on Research Team (check all that apply):  
 Recruiting  Consenting  Administering study procedures  Handling identifiable data  
 Other, please specify : Participant Education/Training on Software  
If administering biomedical study procedure (e.g., blood draws, scans, etc.), please specify the 
procedure(s):       
 This researcher should be copi[INVESTIGATOR_665876].   
 This researcher is no longer an active research team member.       
Date added to research team:   3/2/23                                   Date removed from research team:         
  
 
 
 
 
 
[CONTACT_745000] -Johnson  
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology  
University of Illinois Urbana -Champaign  
[ADDRESS_1019033]., STE 100               520- 867- 8838 Office  
Tucson, AZ [ZIP_CODE]           888- 438- 5788 Toll Free  
 www.lsvtglobal.com                     [EMAIL_14227]  Email  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 December 8, 2022  
 
Mark Hasegawa -Johnson, PhD  
University of Illinois Urbana Champaign (UIUC)  
Address  
 
Re: Support for Speech Accessibility Project  
 
Dear [CONTACT_745001] -Johnson,  
 
The Davis Phinney Foundation is  delighted to partner with UIUC on the Speech Accessibility 
Project . We look forward to working with you to recruit people with Parkinson’s to provid e 
speech samples for the University’s data repository  and ultimately to make  voice recognition  
technology more accessible for people living with Parkinson’s .  This will be a giant step forward 
in improving the quality of life for our Parkinson’s community.   
  
After  your team at  UIUC  receives IRB approval and the software is  functional and available , the 
Davis Phinney Foundation will assist  in recruiting 200-300 adult volunteers living with 
Parkinson’s  to participate by [CONTACT_744961].  
 
We are looking forward to the opportunity to collaborate with you and your team.  
 
Sincerely,     
  
Polly Dawkins  
Executive Director    
[PHONE_15552]  
[EMAIL_14239]    

NOVA H Attachment 3.2.  
Recruitment flyer  for participants to contribute data  
 
Your voice is needed to improve speech 
technology ! 
 
Intelligent devices can understand spoken commands because they've been trained using millions of hours of audiobooks and radio broadcasts.  If you have a speech impairment, though, your devices probably don't understand you so well.  The Speech Accessibil ity Project  
wants to record examples of your speech, so that researchers and companies can improve  their 
devices so that they work better for you.  
 Mission Statement:  The goal of the Speech Accessibility P roject is to improve speech 
technologies for all pe ople, by [CONTACT_744962] . 
 How it works:  You use a web browser to access our system 24/7, where you will be prompted 
to provide audio samples of your speech, either by [CONTACT_5978] a sentence or answering a questio n. 
You can provide speech samples at your own pace and on your own schedule.  
 Compensation:  You can earn up to $180 for contributing 600 verified samples  to the system.  If 
you need a caregiver to help you participate, your caregiver can earn up to $90 as well.  
 About us : The Speech Accessibility Project is managed at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign , is funded by a consortium of technology companies (currently Amazon, Apple, 
Google, Meta, and Microsoft) , and is partnered with the Davis Phinney Foundation and LSVT 
Global advocacy organizations .  The leader of the Speech Accessibility Project is [CONTACT_745002] -Johnson  at UIUC.  
 How to get started: You can sign up at our website 
(https://speechaccessibilityproject.beckman.illinois.edu  ) or contact [CONTACT_744963] ( [EMAIL_14240] ).  
 For more information , visit https://speechaccessibilityproject.beckman.illinois.edu/about -the-
project .  
  
 1 NOVA H Attachment 4: Participant  Pre-Screening  for Speech Samples  
 
Initial pre -screening will be conducted with a combination of online and live engagement with potential 
participants.  There are two parts to the pre -screening: Step 1 is a short questionnaire and Step 2 is 
providing a set of quality control speech samples.  The questionnaire may be answered online by [CONTACT_744964]  (via a URL that is shared with them via email and is not public) or may be 
conducted as a telephone or Zoom interview with a member of the research team.  Therefore, the Step 1 
Pre-Screening Questionnaire shown below will be implemented both as an interactive web page and as 
an interview script.  
 Step 1: Pre -Screening Questionnaire   
 Thank you for your interest in the Speech Accessibility Project!  To help us determine whether we can record your voice, please answer a few questions about yourself.  
 The information provided in these pre -screening questions will only be used to confirm y our eligibility in 
the study and will remain confidential.  This information will not be shared outside of the UIUC research 
team.  
  
1. Do people or devices (e.g., Alexa, Siri) have a hard time understanding your speech?  
<Answer field: Menu options  Yes or No>  
2. Have you been diagnosed with Parkinson’s Disease?  
<Answer field: Menu options  Yes or No>  
3. Are you 18 years of age or older?  
<Answer field: Menu options  Yes or No>  
4. What state do you live in?  
<Answer field: Drop -down menu listing all U.S. states, and the option "None of the above">  
5. Do you have a valid email address?  
<Answer field: Menu options  Yes or No>  
6. Do you have regular access to a web browser?  
<Answer field: Menu options  Yes or No>  
7. Do you have the ability to read and speak English?  
<Answer field: Menu opt ions Yes or No>  
 Note: ANSWER 1 and ANSWER 2 can be any answer; this is useful information but not screening criteria.  
 
IF ALL OF THE FOLLOWING CONDITIONS ARE TRUE:  
ANSWER 3 = Yes  
ANSWER 4 = any state except IL, TX, WA, “none of the above”  
ANSWER 5 = Yes 
ANSWER 6 = Yes  
ANSWER 7 = Yes  
THEN CONTINUING: “Thank you! So far it looks like you are eligible to be in the study.”  
ELSE FAILED PRE- SCREENING: “We’re sorry. It looks like you are not eligible to be in our study. Thank you 
for your interest. Please st ay in touch with us at https://speechaccessibilityproject.beckman.illinois.edu
”  
 
 
 2 IF CONTINUING , go to STEP 2 below. The text below is both on a web page and used as telephone/Zoom 
script by a member of the research team.  
 
Step 2: Quality Control Speech Samples  
 Thank you! So far, it looks like you are eligible to be in our study. To confirm your final eligibility, the  
next step is for you to provide us some examples o f your speech.   We will give you access to a website 
where you will be prompted to record a small number of s entences (about 20 sentences). After you 
establish a login and password, the website will present you with a text prompt and the capability to record and save your speech samples.  Your task is to  make a set of voice recordings. The system will 
prompt you to read some text, and you will record yourself reading that text aloud.   You can quit at any 
time and come back to this task later.  
 
This task is performed  entirely  online  at your  own  convenience.  You may  stop  this task and restart  it at 
any time  at your  own  convenience,  24/7.  You do not need  to make  all the recordings  in one session;  you 
can feel free to perform  this task for just a minute  or two each  day spread  over  one week.  We estimate 
that this task will take about  [ADDRESS_1019034]  you to either  confirm  
that you may  continue  to participate  in the study,  to work with  you to improve  your  recording 
environment,  or to let you know  that you will not be asked  to participate  any further  in this study.   
 
If you are not eligible  to be in the study  based  on your  speech  samples, we will delete  all of your  data  
including your  email address.  
 
If you are eligible  to participate  in the study  based  on your  speech  samples, the speech  samples  
provided  for pre-screening will only  be used  to confirm  your  eligibility  in the study,  will remain  
confidential,  and will not be shared  outside  of the UIUC  research  team.  
 
Go to this website (<insert URL here>).  If you need help to provide these samples  or have any 
questions , please contact (<insert name, email, telephone number of research team member>).  
 
“This website” will include the following text:  
  Welcome to the Speech Accessibility Project pre- screening website! At this site,  you wi ll be prompted to 
record a small number of sentences (about 20 sentences)  that our research team will analyze in order to 
make sure that you are eligible to participate in our study.  
 First, please establish a login and password.  
<Login and password process>  
 Thank  you!  Now,  you can start  recording  your  samples  at any time.   You may  do these recordings  at any 
time  at your  own  convenience.  We estimate that providing the full set of samples  will take about  [ADDRESS_1019035]  <Insert  name,  telephone  
number,  email  address  of research team  member>.  
 
 
 
 
 
NOVA H Attachment 7
Examples of research materials for speech sample data 
collection
You will be speaking many different 
sentences and phrases. 
Our goal is to get many different types of 
speech from many different people. 
Sometimes, you will be reading aloud 
digital assistant commands. These are 
common phrases that people may ask their phone or smart speaker to help them with. 
Example: What is the weather today? 
Sometimes, you will read aloud sentences 
that have been randomly selected from 
novels. 
Example: You would never have believed 
that one small elbow could make such a 
big hole
Some of the sentences may seem silly, or 
not make much sense. Please just read it as automatically as you can.
Lastly, sometimes you will speak a little 
longer by [CONTACT_744965]. 
Example: What is a favorite tv show of 
yours and why?
In summary, there are 3 sections.
1.30 digital assistant commands
2.10 sentences from novels
3.5 open questions
Section 1: 
Digital Assistant CommandsBlock One
What song is this?
1/30
Pause the music.
2/30
Resume.
3/30
Play music.
4/30
Stop.
5/30
Play some Beatles 
music.
6/[ADDRESS_1019036].
7/30
Set the volume to 5.
8/30
Turn up the sound.
9/[ADDRESS_1019037] 
2 minutes.
10/30
Play hip hop music.
11/[ADDRESS_1019038] 30 
seconds.
12/30
Decrease volume.
13/30
Skip this track.
14/30
Brighten the office lamp.
15/30
Turn on all switches . 
16/30
Dim the living room 
lights.  
17/30
Raise the 
temperature.
18/30
Set the heat to 68.
19/30
Turn off cooling.
20/30
Answer the door.
21/30
Lock the front door.
22/[ADDRESS_1019039] 
‘I’m home.’
23/30
What’s the 
weather like 
today?
24/30
Do I need an 
umbrella today?
25/30
What’s today’s news?
26/30
Who won the NFL 
game yesterday?
27/[ADDRESS_1019040] week?
28/30
Answer the call.
29/30
Hang up.
30/30
End of Section 1.
Thank You!Block One
Section 2: 
Sentences Selected from 
NovelsBlock One
Reminder : Some of these 
sentences might not make 
sense. Read them as 
naturally as you can! It’s OK 
to make mistakes!Block One
I'm sure I don't know 
how it happened.
1/[ADDRESS_1019041] 
believed that one 
small elbow could 
make such a big hole.
2/10
But it is too late.
3/10
It's not more than half 
an hour since Uncle 
George and Aunt Bella 
went.
4/10
I'll have you ready in a 
twinkling.
5/10
But the fire and the 
children!
6/10
Father says that this 
was very wrong of 
him, and I suppose it 
was, since he says so.
7/10
But I don't see how 
Father could do 
anything wrong.
8/[ADDRESS_1019042], he had a 
sister Esther whom he 
loved very much.
9/10
We had to hurry to fix 
the kite if we wanted 
to send it up before 
the wind fell.
10/10
End of Section 2.
Thank You!Block One
Section 3: 
Open QuestionsBlock One
Answer each question using 
one or more sentences.
Don’t read the question out 
loud –just speak your 
answer!Block One
Tell us about one 
of your favorite 
bands or singers.
1/5
Tell us about one 
of your favorite TV 
shows.
2/5
What kind of music 
do you dislike, and 
why?
3/5
Tell us how to 
make your favorite 
sandwich. 
4/5
Tell me all the steps 
involved in withdrawing money from a bank account, as if I had never done it before.
5/5
End of Section 3, and 
End of Block One!
Thank You!Block One
NOVA H Attachment [ADDRESS_1019043]  the option of providing extra information to help researchers interpret your speech 
recordings.  Providing answers to such questions is not a requirement for participation in this study; if 
you prefer not to answer, you will be able to choose the option “ Prefer not to answer.”  
 
This information will only be used to confirm diverse representation in this data collection, and, if 
provided, will not be shared outside of the UIUC research team.  
 
 
1. Do you consider yourself to be a member of one of the following racial groups?   
a. Answers: choose from  
i. American Indian or Alaska Native,  
ii. Asian,  
iii. Black or African American,  
iv. White,  
v. Some other race (text box to allow description),  
vi. Prefer not to answer  
 
2. Do you consider yourself to be Hispanic or Latino/a?   
a. Answers: ch oose from Yes, No, Prefer not to answer  
 
3. What is your gender?   
a. Answers: Male, Female, Non -binary, Prefer not to answer  
 
4. How old are you?   
a. Answers: Age range in years (scroll menu), or Prefer not to answer  
 
5. What state do you live in?  
a. Answers: Menu of US states (scroll menu), or Prefer not to answer  
 
6. Did you regularly converse in a language other than English before your 12th birthday?   
Answer: Yes, No, Prefer not to answer  
If Yes: what was/were the language(s)?    
Answer: Textbox  
If Yes: at what age did you start conversing in English?    
Answer: Age in years (scroll menu), or Prefer not to answer  
 
 
7. The next questions ask how easy or difficult it is for you to do certain things when you speak. 
Please answer as best you can. There ar e no wrong or right answers. It’s just your opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649].  
  For each item, please rate how easy or difficult it is for you to do.  
 
 Very 
Easy  Somewhat 
Easy  Neither 
easy nor 
difficult  Somewhat 
Difficult  Very 
difficult  Prefer 
not to 
answer  
Speak with a few familiar people 
at home (e.g. friends or family)?        
Speak with an unfamiliar person 
(e.g. waitstaff, store clerk)?        
Speak with a familiar person on 
the phone?        
Speak with a stranger over the 
phone?        
Speak in a noisy environment 
(e.g. a social gathering)?        
Speak while traveling in a car?        
Have a long conversation, an 
hour or longer?        
Speak when you’re upset or 
angry?        
 
 
8. How much do you agree or disagree with the statements below?  Please answer as best you can. There are no wrong or right answers. It’s just your opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649].  
 
 Strongly 
Agree  Somewhat 
agree  Neither 
agree nor 
disagree  Somewhat 
disagree  Strongly 
disagree  Prefer  
not to 
answer  
I am frustrated by [CONTACT_744966].        
I rely on others to help me 
communicate .       
I have to repeat myself 
often.        
Other people have difficulty 
hearing me .       
I avoid speaking when I am 
tired .       
My speech has impacted 
how often I participate in 
social activities .       
  
9. Does your speech change throughout the day?  
a. Answers: Yes, no unsure, prefer not to answer.  
b. If yes, please describe:  
i. Answers: textbox  
 
 