Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     1 
  
  
 
      
STUDY PROTOCOL  & STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
A NOVEL TREATMENT OF COMORBID INSOMNIA AND SLEEP APNEA  
IN OLDER VETERANS  
IIR 12 -353 
 
1I01HX001070-01A1  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_157488], MD  
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182240] insomnia 
behavioral treatment trials (including our own ongoing  work ) have excluded individuals with clear evidence of  
moderate- severe OSA.  PAP is the st andard for treatment of OSA, but adherence with PAP is problematic and 
best practice to improve PAP adherence when patients have coexisting insomnia is unknown.  Given the high 
prevalence and serious consequences of these disorders, it is clear that resear ch is needed to identify best 
practices for the management of coexisting OSA and comorbid insomnia in older adults.    
 
 Basic study design   
This 3.[ADDRESS_182241] will be a randomized controlled trial testing a combined, integrated behavioral 
approach to ma nagement  in older Veterans (aged  > 50 years)  who are diagnosed with OSA, are prescribed 
PAP therapy , and also meet diagnostic criteria for insomnia.  This novel intervention will combine essential 
elements of a CBT -I intervention (for insomnia) plus a behavioral intervention to improve PAP adherence.  The 
combined, integrated intervention will be provided using allied health personnel  compared to an active control 
condition (consisting of a general sleep and PAP education program) among older V eterans (N=120 total 
participants , 60 per group).  Structured outcome assessments will be collected at baseline, post -treatment  (i.e., 
after completion of the intervention or control condition), and at 3 - and 6- months follow -up.  A brief telephone 
interview will be co nducted at 12- month follow -up.  Outcomes assessed will include subjective (i.e., 
questionnaire, sleep diaries) and objective (i.e., wrist actigraphy) measures of sleep, objective measures  of 
PAP adherence (downloaded from PAP equipment ), mood and  other mea sures of health- related quality of life.  
Data will also be collected at post -treatment, and at [ADDRESS_182242] Los Angeles campuses, which are 
located 15 miles apart in the Los Angeles area, and serve a diverse population of Veterans.   In fiscal year 2011 
(FY11), the West Los Angeles VA campus served 53,[ADDRESS_182243] 52% were aged 5 0 years or older, and the majority (over 80%) 
were  referred for evaluation of OSA.  There were [ADDRESS_182244] 50 % of V eterans diagnosed with OSA and prescribed PAP will also meet diagnostic 
criteria for insomnia.   Based on this data, we conservatively estimate that at least 22 Veterans per month will 
be eligible for the study (i.e., [1037 PAP machines prescribed/12 months] x [.52 aged > 60 years] x [.50 
meeting diagnostic criteria for insomnia] = 22.5 ).  Based on consent rates in our prior VA studies enrolling older Veterans for interventional sleep research (e.g., VA HSRD IIR -04-321-3) we expect a 50% consent rate 
among eligible Veterans, which would provide 10 enrolled Veterans per month, with 50% (5 per month) proceeding to randomization. 
 
 
Figure  1:  Study design  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     3 
 Study Population  
• Recruitment  and consent  
We will use a two -step process to recruit participants for this study.  In the first step of recruitment, we will 
screen for insomnia among Veteran s aged 50 years and older who are referred to the VA GLAHS sleep c linics 
to rule out O SA (based on the reason for referral to the  sleep clinic indicated on t he electronic consultation 
form).  At our institution, the majority of individuals referred to sleep c linics are referred for possible OSA, and 
most referred patients receive an ambulatory (i.e., in -home portable) sleep study  (rather than a study in the 
sleep laboratory) to test  for OSA.  However, we will enroll participants regardless of the location (in- home or in-
laboratory) of their OSA testing.  Currently, there is a 3 -4 week wait for an ambulatory sleep study; the wait for 
an in- laboratory study is > 4 weeks.  We will mail a letter to these Veterans when their referral to sleep clinic is 
received to briefly introduce the research , and to  offer them a mechanism to “opt -out” of further contact [CONTACT_157496] , using a methodology previously approved by [CONTACT_157497].  For patients who 
do not opt out  within [ADDRESS_182245] them by [CONTACT_756] ( or in-person if 
preferred by  [CONTACT_92524]) to complete a brief screening  measure for insomnia.  T he insomnia screener is a 
brief questionnaire that summarizes key diagnostic criteria for insomnia according to ICSD2Error! Bookmark not 
defined.  (see Appendix 1), which we developed, tested and currently use in our ongoing study of CBT -I to treat 
insomnia in older outpatient Veterans (VA HSRD IIR 08 -296, PI [INVESTIGATOR_157489]).   Veterans who meet diagnostic criteria 
for insomnia will be invited to participate in the study and an in- person visit will be scheduled to explain study 
procedures, obtain written i nformed consent , and begin assessment procedures.  After consent, t he Veteran 
will be sent home with a wrist actigraph  to wear for 7 days and nights  as an objective measure of sleep/wake 
patterns.  Additional baseline data (e.g., demographic  information, subjective measures of sleep, assessment 
of depressive symptoms, medical comorbidity, health- related quality of life) will be collected using structured, 
validated questionnaires (see below) .  In addition, one blood sample will be collected.  All research d ata will be 
collected by [CONTACT_7628].  All study visits will be performed in dedicated office space, separate from 
the sleep clinics .  Separate research staff will perform assessment v ersus intervention activities, in order to 
maintain blinding of both clinic staff and research assessment staff.   
In the second step of recruitment , consented Veterans who have completed baseline testing, are 
diagnosed with OSA (based on sleep clinic physicians interpretation of sleep study results ) and are prescribed 
PAP therapy  (by [CONTACT_157498])  will be reminded of study procedures, and invited to participate in the 
randomized controlled trial.  Inclusion criteria will include:  1) age > 50 years , 2) meeting ICSD2 diagnostic 
criteria for insomnia, and 3) diagnosis of OSA with an AHI > 15 and prescription of PAP therapy.  Exclusion 
criter ia for randomization will include the following:  1) refusal to schedule an appointment to begin PAP 
therapy, 2) a Mini -mental State Examination (MMSE) score < 24 (used t o screen for significant cognitive 
impairment ), and 3) a history of mania (which is a contraindication for the sleep restriction component of CBT -
I), major psychopathology (e.g., psychosis) or a psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_157490].   
 
• Randomization  
Participants will be ran domized to the intervention or control group using a randomized block design 
based on results from the OSA testing , to increase the likelihood of comparable severity of OSA in both 
groups. Specifically, individuals will be categorized based on AHI < 30 or AHI > 30.  Consented participants will 
be randomized as a block within each category  (similar to block randomization techniques we have used in 
prior research).  Available randomization software (e.g., Random Allocation Software , Paradigm ) which allows 
for block randomized sequences for parallel group randomized trials will be used to assign participants to the 
intervention or control group,  using random allocation concealment. Par ticipants and research staff (except 
intervention staff) will be blinded to group assignment, and additional techniques (e.g., follow -up assessment in 
some consented, non -randomized partic ipants) will be used to prevent unmasking. It may be difficult to keep 
assessment research staff blinded to g roup assignment if participants inadvertently describe their assignment, 
but all assessment staff will also be blinded to study research questions.  
 
Dependent and Independent Variables (Measurement Tec hniques)  
A summary of all measurement techniques is shown in Table [ADDRESS_182246] -funded CBT -I trial, the participant will return after one week with the actigraph 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     4 
 and research staff will complete the second part of baseline assessment.  Veterans will receive $[ADDRESS_182247] assessment in sleep research.1   For ethical reasons, the 
participant’s primary provider will be notified (with the participant’s consent) if our assessments identify any serious, unrecognized sleep disorder, or other severe condition (e.g., severe pain, severe depression).   Our 
research team will also follow our established protocol when there is evidence of any serious, life- threatening 
situation (e.g., suicidality) identified during interactions with participants (see Human Subjects section).  
 
Medical Chart Review (Data Collected by [CONTACT_157499])  
• Structured clinical review of comorbidity, illness severity, and medications  
The Cumulative Illness Rating Scale for Geriatrics (CIRS -G)[ADDRESS_182248] sleep.  With a methodology we used in 
prior research,3  sedating medication use will be summarized categorically (i.e., was a certain class of sedating 
medication r eceive d, and at what time); then daily dose(s) will be converted to total daily equivalences by [CONTACT_157500]. Because of the intention to treat analysis, major outcomes will be compared 
between the intervention and control groups regardless of medication status.  How ever, the medication 
variables (e.g., total daily equivalence of sedating medication at each time point) may be ex plored as potential 
covariates in outcome analyses, and use/nonuse of sedating medications may be considered in subgroup comparisons (e.g., subgroup analysis in only par ticipants who did or did not receive sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_45156]).  
 
Questionnaires (Data Collected from Participants) 
• Descriptive information will be collected in all participants, i ncluding age, gender, ethni city, marital status,  
and other demographic characteristics.  
• Cognitive status  
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)  will be used to screen consented individuals for inclusion and 
to measure baseline cognitive status.4  This scale assesses orientation, registration, attention/calculation, 
recall, language and construction, and has standard instructions. MMSE scores range from 0 to 30, where higher scores indicate better mental status. A score below 24 is consistent with dementia or delirium. MMSE 
total score will be used in determining study eligibility (i.e., MMSE score < 24 is an exclusion criteria) and as an 
independent variable of cognitive status in anal yses.  
The Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – Revised (HVLT -R)
[ADDRESS_182249] includes the 12 target words, plus 12 distractors (six semantically -
related and six semantically -unrelated words). The HVLT- R has been validated in healthy and pathological 
aging sample s. 
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182250] these cognitive functions. This task consists of nine digit -symbol pairs (e.g. 1/ -
,2/┴ ... 7/Λ,8/X,9/=) followed by a list of digits. Under each digit the subject is instr ucted to write down the 
corresponding symbol as fast as possible. The number of correct symbols written within the allowed time (e.g. 
90) is the outcome measure.  
The Trails A and B7 tests will be used to estimate processing speed, attention, and executive functioning. 
Trails A will be used to assess processing speed, while Trails B will be used to assess attention and task switching (executive functions). Trails A requires individuals to connect circles containing numbers in 
sequential order. Trails B requires individuals to connect circles containing numbers and letters in alternating 
sequential and alphabetic order. The outcome measures are the time to complete the tasks.  
The Forward and Backward Digit Span8 tests will be used to estimate immediate memory and working 
memory. The Forward Digit Span tasks requires immediate recall of number presented aurally. The Backwards Digit Span requires mental manipulation and rearrangement of numbers presented aurally. The outcome 
measures are the total number of correct sequences recalled.  
The Letter -Number Sequencing8 test is another measure of working memory. This task requires mental 
manipulation and serial rearrangement of numbers and letters presented aurally. The outcome measure will be 
the total number of correct sequences recalled.  
The Control Oral Word Association (COWA)9 will be used to assess phonemic fluency, which is considered 
an executive function. Participants will be read a letter (“F”, “A”, and “S”) and ask ed to generate as many non-
proper nouns beginning with that letter as possible within sixty seconds. The outcome measure is the total 
number of correct words produced for each letter. 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     6 
  
Table 1: Study Variables and Their Measurement  
Independent var iables  Hypoth esis Measurement I nstrument  Data*  
Dem ographics   Questionnaire  I 
Health status measures:  
 Illness seve rity/comorbidity   Comorbidity Index   I 
 Use of medic ations   Medication review  MR, I 
 Cognitive status  
 
      Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)  
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – Revised 
(HVLT -R) 
Digit Symbol Substitution  
Trails A and B  
Forward and Backward Digit Span  
Letter -Number Sequencing 
Control Oral Word Association (COWA)  I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I 
 PTSD   Primary Care PTSD Screen  I 
 Pain  Geriatric Pain  Measure (GPM) pain  
intensity su bscale  I 
Dependent variables: Ou tcomes  
Intervention process mea sures:  
 Beliefs and attitudes about 
sleep 
 Beliefs and attitudes about 
OSA and PAP  4 
 
4 Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about 
Sleep (DBAS- 16) scale 
Self-efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional 
Balance Index subscales  I 
 
I 
Subjective sleep measures  
 Self-rated sleep quality  
 Severity of insomnia  
      sym ptoms  
 Daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]  1, 3 
1, 3 
 
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI)   
Insomnia Sever ity Index (ISI)  
 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS)   I 
I 
 
I 
 Sleep onset l atency, wake 
after sleep onset   Sleep diary  SR, I  
Objective sleep measures:  
 Total sleep time, nighttime &   
daytime sleep pe rcent  1, [ADDRESS_182251] actigraphy  M 
Quality of life measures:  
 Health -related qual ity of life  2, 3 MOS 12 -item Short -form Health Su rvey 
(SF-12v2) ; EuroQol -5D I 
 Depressive symptoms  2, 3 Patient Health Questionnaire 
Depression module (PHQ -9)  I 
 Anxiety   Patient Health Questionnaire 
Generalized Anxiety module   I 
PAP adherence     
  Hour s of PAP use per night  1, [ADDRESS_182252] or modem dow nload M 
*Data source: I=interview, MR=medical records, M=monitoring, SR=self r eport  
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     7 
  
• Comorbidity Index10:  The Comorbidity Index is a validated, self -report measure of physical and mental 
comorbidit y. This 36 -item self -report questionnaire has a 30 -item physical component and a 6- item mental 
component and was developed for a population of Veterans. Comorbidity index score and individual comorbid 
conditions will be used as independent variables.  
 Post-traumatic stress disorder  
The Primary Care PTSD Screen (PC -PTSD) [ADDRESS_182253] both sleep and PAP adherence .Error! Bookmark not defined.  This is a 4 -item 
scale, where endorsement of 3 of the 4 yes/no items suggests  PTSD. The scale has a sensitivity of . 78, and 
specificity of .87 compared to clinical diagnosis of PTSD in Veterans .  The PC -PTSD will be used as  an 
independent variable of PTSD status (i.e., presenc e/absence of PTSD and/or  number of PTSD symptoms 
endorsed, 0-4).   
• Subjective assessment of pain  
The pain intensity subscale (7 items) of the Geriatric Pain Measure (GPM)[ADDRESS_182254] sleep outcomes. The GPM is a 24 -item multidimensional pain measure (with 5 
subscales) for use in older adults. The pain intensity subscale will be used to minimize participant burden. 
Total score on the GPM subscale will be used as a covariate in analyses of sleep and quality of life outcomes.  
• Subjective sleep quality  
We will measure self -reported sleep quality using the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI) ,13 the 
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI),14 the Epworth Sleepi [INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS)15 and a sleep diary;  all of which have 
specifically been i dentified as reco mmended/essential measures of sleep and insomnia symptoms for  standard 
assessment in sleep research.1  
PSQI:  This is a n 18-item questionnaire that assesses sleep quality and disturbances over the last month. 
The PSQI is a widely used scale that measures subjective sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep duration, habitual 
sleep efficiency, sleep disturbances, use of sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_88794], and daytime dysfunc tion.  
ISI: This is a 7 -item scale of self -reported severity of insomnia symptoms, satisfaction with sleep, daytime 
functioning, impai rment and concern caused by [CONTACT_157501].   
ESS: This is an 8 -item questionnaire that assesses  daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]. The ESS measures the chances 
that an individual would doze off or fall asleep under 8 different circumstances (e.g., reading, watching television, sitting qui etly). Total PSQI, ISI, and ESS scores will be used at baseline and at each follow -up 
assessment as dependent subjective measures of sleep.   
Sleep diary:  Participants will complete a 7- day sleep diary at baseline and follow -up asses sments  (timed to 
occur at the same time as wrist actigraphy), which will be used to calculate self -reported sleep onset latency 
(SOL, time to fall asleep) and wake after sleep onset (WASO, the time spent awake from sleep onset to final awakening ) as dependent subjective measures of sleep (see Appendix 2) . 
• Health -related quality of life  
The Medical Outcomes Study 12- item Short -form Health Survey v2 (SF- 12v2)16 will be us ed as a measure 
of health -related quality of life. The SF- 12v2 Health Survey is a 12 -item ve rsion of the prior SF- 36 (therefo re 
with less participant burden) with evidence for improved format and precision.  The SF -12v2 can be scored as 
a global scale, in 8 doma ins (physical functioning, physical, bodily pain, general health, vitality, s ocial 
functioning,  emotional and mental health) or as two summary scores (Physical Compo nent and Mental 
Component Summary Scores).  Most population- based descriptive studies  of sleep and quality of life have 
used the longer 36- item version, and very few trials of behavioral interventions for insomnia have included 
quality of life as an outcome measure at all; these fac tors make the choice among these scales difficult.  In 
addition, the recently published recom mendations for standard research assessment in insomnia trials 
described above spe cifically mention the SF -36 as a recommended/essential measure of health- related quality 
of life .[ADDRESS_182255] chosen this scale for the current study.  We will use 
the global score, and the Physical Component Summary score and Mental Component Summary score at 
baseline and follow -up assessments as dependent measures of health -related qual ity of life.   
The EuroQol -5D (EQ -5D)17 will be used as another measure of health -related quality of life.  This 5- item 
questionnaire was developed by [CONTACT_157502] a simple, generic measure of health for clinical and economic appraisal.  The EQ -5D included 5 dimensions: mobility, self -care, usul activies, 
pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression. T otal EQ -5D score at baseline and follow -up assessments will be 
used as a dependent measure of health- related quality of life.   
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     8 
 The Patient Health Questionnaire- 9 (PHQ -9)18 will be used to measure depression as another component 
of health -related quality of  life. The PHQ -9 is the depression mod ule of the Patient Health Questionnaire (a 
self-administered diagnostic instrument for common mental disorders). The [ADDRESS_182256] of the diagnostic 
criteria used by [CONTACT_9288] -IV for depressive di sorders. The P HQ-9 als o measures depression severity.  T otal 
PHQ -9 score at baseline and follow -up assessments will be used as dependent measures of depression.  
The 7-item Generalized Anxiety Scale (GAD- 7) will be used to measure anxiety, which has been 
demonstrated as an important quality of life outcome in sleep research19 and may impact PAP adherence.   The 
GAD -7 is a component of the Primary Care Evaluation of Mental Disorders (PRIME -MD) suite of evaluation 
tools.  It was initially developed for evaluation of generalized anxiety disorder, and has also proved useful in 
screening for other DSM -IV Axis I anxiety disorders. The GAD -7 is a 7 -item scale (scores range from 0 to 27), 
with a cut off score of ≥[ADDRESS_182257] not 
included anxiety as a primary outcome measure in sample size calculations and data analysis (see below).   
Caregiving questions (21 items) .  To explore how caregiving impacts an individual’s sleep and quality of 
life, we will include questions from the National Alliance for Caregiving.  Questions pertain to the type and 
amount of caregiving provided.   
• Intervention process measures  
The Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep (DBAS -16) scale, brief version20 will be used to 
measure participants’ sleep-re lated cognitions. The DBAS -16 uses a Likert -type scale, and was developed 
from the original 30 -item DBAS. Total DBAS- 16 scores at baseline and at follow -up assessments will be 
compared between groups to measure ef fects of the intervention on participants' beliefs and attitudes about 
sleep as a measure of the process of the intervention.   
We will use the Self -efficacy (5-item), Knowledge (12-item) and Decision al Balance Index  (5-item) 
subscales from the 54-item scale of behavioral determinants of PAP adherence.21  These subscales provide 
Likert -type (for the Self -efficacy and Decisional Balance Index subscales) or yes/no (for the Knowledge 
subscale) response opt ions.  In prior work, the full scale (measured at 1 -week after start of PAP therapy) 
predicted PAP adherence, and the DBI individually accounted for 17% of the variance in PAP adherence in 
adjusted analyses.   The Self -efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional Balance Index subscale scores will be 
compared between groups to measure effects of the intervention on participants’ beliefs and attitudes about 
OSA ad PAP . 
• Blood sample  
One blood sample (8mL) will be drawn by a study phlebotomist at one of 4 possible locat ions (CRC at 
West Los Angeles, Building 200 or Building 25 at Sepulveda, or if requested, at a subjects’ home.  Blood samples will be processed and stored in the CRC or in a laboratory at Sepulveda (Building 7/C10) until transported to the UCLA Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology for analysis.  The blood samples will be 
assayed for proinflammatory cytokines and corresponding acute- phase proteins (i.e., CRP, TNFα, IL- 6, IL-8, 
and IL -10), which are markers of immune system activity.  
 
Sleep Assessment Monitoring (Data Obtained through Monitoring of Participants)  
• Objective sleep quality monitoring 
Wrist actigraphy  will be used as an outcome measure of the effects of the intervention on sleep. 
Participants will wear an actigraph on the dom inant wrist (unles s that arm is paralyzed) for [ADDRESS_182258]-treatment, and at 3- month and 6- month follow -up asses sments.  The actigraph is a 
small watch -sized device useful in longitudinal, naturalistic (i.e., not in a sleep laboratory) assessment of sleep-
wake patterns . The d evice contains subminiature solid state accelerometers and, in general, wrist activity 
below an established threshold is interpreted as sleep; high wrist activity is interpreted as wakefulness.  
Commercially available software uses validated algorithms that take into account wrist mov ement immediately 
before and after an epoch of interest in dete rmining the likelihood of sleep versus wakefulness during that 
epoch.  Wrist actigraphy has been validated as a measure of sleep versus wakefulness in older people.[ADDRESS_182259] actigraphy and EEG sco ring of sleep variables (e.g., total sleep 
time) in young and older people is 89- 95%.  
Wrist actigraphy has also been used to estimate circadian rhythms of activity; however the most 
appropriate analytic tec hniques to summarize these data and clinical significance of these variables are not 
clear, so we have not included these circadian variables as main outcomes in the cur rent proposal.  W e will 
use analytic software to perform least -squares anal yses to fit 24- hour cosine curves to actigraphy data, to 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     9 
 determine the mesor (mean value of the fitted curve), amplitude (height of the curve at its peak) and circadian 
quotient (amplitude/mesor, where a higher quotient suggests a "bet ter" rhythm).   
Careful visual review of raw actigraphy data will be performed to eliminate technical (device failure) and 
situational (e.g., device removed) artifact, prior to scoring variables with validated sof tware. We will anal yze 
actigraphy data defining "night" and "day" based on participant self -report of their bedtimes and rising times  in 
their sleep diary .  The following dependent variables (averaged over 7 days) will be used in analyses as 
measures of sleep- wake: 1) total sleep, 2) nighttime sleep efficiency (mean total sleep time divided by [CONTACT_157503] ), 3) daytime percent sleep (total sleep time divided by [CONTACT_157504]), and 4) 
mean awakening length at night (mean duration of nighttime wake epi [INVESTIGATOR_1841]).   
 PAP adherence.   In addition,  
• PAP equipment will be provided by [CONTACT_157505].  The VA GLAHS Sleep clinics nearly exclusively use Respi[INVESTIGATOR_5770]™ 
devices (Respi[INVESTIGATOR_5770], Inc., Murrysville, PA). The PAP devices are routinely dispensed with heated humidification 
to minimize upper airway dryness, which may affect adherence. The same clinical staff (i.e., sleep technicians) 
will provide PAP equipment  and usual setup instructions for both intervention and control participants; these 
clinical staff will be blinded to group assignment.  All PAP devices have an internal secure device (SD) memory card that stores PAP usage data and a modem that transmits d aily usage to a web-based application 
(EncoreAnywhere) maintained on a secure server by [CONTACT_50212][INVESTIGATOR_5770], Inc. The data on the server are linked 
only to the serial number of the PAP modem and do not include any personal identifiers.  Authorized research staff will retrieve data from the server using an assigned password. Philips Respi[INVESTIGATOR_5770], Inc. will have no access 
to the key that links PAP modem serial number to subject identification code or name. For participants who are 
unable to use the modem because they live outside the modem serve area, research staff will download the SD 
card (easily performed with an inexpensive reader device) at the time of the follow -up assessments.  Data will be 
obtained after the first week of PAP therapy, at the post -treatment assessment, and at 3- and 6- and 12- months  
follow -up.  Our primary dependent measure of PAP adherence will be the percentage of nights that the PAP 
equipment was used for > 4 hours per night.  In addition, we will define “adequate” PAP adherence  as P AP 
usage of  > 4 hours per night for 70% of days, and we will also record the mean hours of PAP use per 
night .[ADDRESS_182260] the capability to sense when the mask is on the patient’s face, so we will be 
able to assess the hour s per night of use at the effective PAP pressure (i.e., mask on at an effective 
pressure) .  Adherence data is automatically stored continuously in PAP equipment, and available by [CONTACT_4475].  
We plan to summarize data over the prior 7 days (at all data collection time- points) and/or the prior 30 days  
where appropriate  (i.e., at 3-¸ 6- , and 12- months follow -up).   
 
Treatment groups  
Participants will be randomized to one of two groups:  1) intervention group, who will receive an integrated,  
manual -based individual CBT -I plus PAP adherence behavioral self-management program, or 2) control group, 
who will receive an attention control condition (general sleep and OSA education).  All participants will be 
prescribed PAP therapy (through the sleep clinic), and will receive their PAP device through the sleep clinic,  as 
described above.  The intervention and control  conditions will be provided by [CONTACT_157506] 
(i.e., not psychologists).  The active intervention was designed to have a high enough intensity/potency for 
efficacy, w hile avoiding as much as possible the risks of excessive participant burden and excessive costs of 
implementation into routine care if successful. In addi tion, the intervention is structured and manual- based (i.e., 
using a concise intervention manual) in order to be highly translatable to routine care. The intervention and 
control programs will begin after  baseline assessment and randomization, and the intervention or control 
conditions will begin approximately 2 weeks prior to initiation of PAP therapy .  If there is a delay in receipt of 
PAP equipment, participants will receive a weekly phone call from intervention/control  staff to monitor progress 
and provide reinforcement  (of information learned in sessions 1 and 2 in the intervention group, and to 
encour age continued participation in the control group).  If the PAP equipment is received prior to completion 
of sessions 1 and 2, the intervention/control condition will progress as scheduled below over a 6 week period. 
 
Intervention condition  
The intervention provide s an integrated behavioral approach to OSA and insomnia, which combines a 
CBT-I treatment for insomnia with an OSA and PAP self -management program.  The aspects of each 
intervention are  integrated seamlessly into one intervention program, provided in individual (i.e., one- to-one) 
sessions  with master’s level allied health personnel ( e.g., health educator)  (see Appendix 3 for example of 
session material) .  The first two sessions will be timed to occur prior to the patient receiving their PAP 
equipmen t; sessions 3 – 5 will occur after the participant receives their PAP device, with session 3 timed to 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     10 
 occur approximately one week after receipt of PAP  (i.e., during or immediately after the first week of PAP 
therapy) . The intervention is provided in 5 sessions over 6 weeks, to allow for one week (week 5) for the 
participant to become accustomed to independent self -management of their sleep problems, prior to the final 
session (week 6).  The intervention staff will have weekly supervision with a study psychologist by [CONTACT_756], 
where intervention cases currently in progress are reviewed briefly to monitor participant progress (similar to a 
method used in our ongoing CBT -I trial).  Integrity of the intervention will be addressed car efully throughout the 
study,  including formal training of the intervention staff initially with ongoing review and oversight throughout 
the study and periodic audio- recording of inter vention sessions for review by a study psychologist ([CONTACT_56559]).  
In addition, intervention staff  will record specific intervention recommendations made to participants  and 
participant adherence with these recommendations  (similar t o work in our ongoing trial of CBT -I), to help 
document the process of the intervention.  
Table 2:  Session schedule for the  intervention group  
Week  Session  Session length  Content  
1 1 60 minutes  CBT-I: Sleep education, stimulus control, regularize sleep schedule  
PAP:  Understanding OSA and PAP therapy  
2 2 30-45 minutes  CBT-I: Introduction to sleep restriction  
PAP: Review of PAP equipment and set -up procedures, chronic disease 
management skills, communication skills, patient -provider relationship  
3 3 30-45 minutes  CBT-I: Sleep restriction  
PAP: Review prior week PAP adherence and ongoing problem -solving  
4 4 30 minutes  CBT-I: Sleep hygiene, adjust sleep restriction  
PAP: Review prior week PAP adherence and ongoing problem -solving  
6 5 30 minutes  CBT-I and PAP:  Review, relapse prevention and long -term 
management strategies   
 The CBT-I component of the intervention involve s a previously tested, manual -based CBT-I program using 
content developed in our prior work  which improved sleep among older Veterans meeting diagnostic criteria for 
insomnia (see Preliminary Studies) .  The  intervention will involve education and practical trai ning in key 
aspects of stimulus control (i.e., reducing anxiety about falling asleep), sleep restriction (i.e., an individualized, structured process of reducing time in bed to decrease nighttime wakefulness and consolidate sleep), sleep 
hygiene (i.e., est ablishing behavioral routines to promote restorative sleep), and cognitive therapy (i.e., 
addressing maladaptive and inaccurate perceptions and beliefs about sleep).    
 The PAP self-management component of the intervention involve s a previously tested OSA disease-
specific, self -management intervention based on the chronic disease model using the social cognitive theory 
and transtheoretical models of behavior change (see Preliminary Studies) .Error! Bookmark not defined. ,Error! Bookmark not 
defined. ,Error! Bookmark not defined.  This  program includes information specific to OSA, in addition to concepts in 
chronic illness self -management .  Issues covered include:  understanding OSA symptoms and consequences, 
problem -solving difficulties with PAP, managing emotional -cognitive symptoms, learning strategies to increase 
physical activity, improving communication skills  with providers, and developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a patient -provider relationship.  
The participant’s PAP use in the prior week will be reviewed, and a major focus of the program will involve  
troubleshooting common ly occurring problems with PAP , tailored to the participant’s ongoing experience with 
PAP, in addition to understanding how specific aspects of an individual’s use of PAP relates to the 
management of his/her OSA.  
 
Control condition  
The control condition  will be administered by [CONTACT_66185] a manual -based education program 
that focuses on general insomnia and O SA education, and is structured based on the control condition from 
our prior work ( IIR 08 -295-1, PI: [INVESTIGATOR_157489]) .  In our prior work, the control program was successful in providing an 
attention control placebo condition which also encouraged ongoing participation in the trial; an important fac tor 
in encouraging control participants to complete follow -up assessments.   
 
Table 3:  Session schedule for the control condition  
Week  Session  Session length  Content  
1 1 30 minutes  Introduction; general sleep and OSA education  
2 2 30 minutes  Sleep acro ss the lifespan, general health education  
3 3 30 minutes  Sleep and health  
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182261]-treatment and follow -up assessments will be performed by [CONTACT_157507] . Participants who can no longer travel to VA GLAHS (e.g., moved away, too ill) will be visited at 
their living  location (if < [ADDRESS_182262])  or interviewed by [CONTACT_82317] (if > [ADDRESS_182263]).  Vetera ns will receive 
$25 for each assessment for a possible total of $100 ( i.e., baseline, post -treatment, 3 -month and 6 -month).  
 
      Table 4: Time Points for Data Collection and Measures Used  
 Baseline Post -tx 3-mo 6-mo 12-mo 
Data Collected by R esearch Staf f      
Blood sample: assayed for proinflammatory cytokines and 
correspondin g acute -phase proteins (i.e., CRP, TNFα, IL -
6, IL-8, and IL -10)      
Medication review       
Data Collected from Participants       
Demographic data                                                            
Mini-Mental State E xamination (MMSE)        
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test – Revised (HVLT -R)      
Digit Symbol Substitution       
Trails A and B       
Forward and Backward Digit Span       
Letter -Number Sequencing       
Control Oral Word Association (COWA)       
Geriatric Pain Measure (GPM) intensity su bscale       
Restless Leg Syndrome scale (RLS)       
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI)                                            
Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)       
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS)                     
Patient Health Quest. d epression module (PHQ -9)                           
12-item Short -form Health Survey (SF -12v2)                                        
EuroQol -5D scale (EQ -5D)      
PHQ GAD       
PC-PTSD       
Caregiving questions       
Dysfunctional Beliefs & Attitudes about Sleep (DBAS -16)                          
PAP Self -efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional Balance 
Index subscales       
Data from Participant Monitoring       
Wrist actigraphy       
PAP adherence       
Follow -up Data from Participant/ Record R eview       
Sleep clinic visits       
 
Post-treatment assessment:   As is traditionally performed in behavioral insomnia interven tional studies, 
“post -treatment” assessments will be repeated soon after completion of the treatment (either intervention or 
control conditions).  Wrist actigraphy will be repeated for 7 days, in addition to the sleep quality (PSQI, ISI, 
ESS), cognitive functioning tests  (HVLT -R, Digit Symbol Substitution , Trails A and B, Forward and Backward 
Digit Span, Letter -Number Sequencing, COWA), depression (PHQ -9), quality of life (SF -12v2) , caregiving 
questions, process measures (DBAS- 16 and Self -efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional Balance Index 
subscales ), and other  questionnaires   (see Table 4) .  A blood sample will also be obtained from each 
participant. In addition, PAP adherence data will be collected as described above.  
Three- month follow -up assessment:  The main outcome assessment will be per formed at three months 
after baseline assessment , using the same measures included in the post -treatment assessment .   
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     12 
 Six-month follow -up assessment:  Follow -up assessment will be performed again at 6 months after 
baseline assessment  (to test for maintenance of outcomes) , using the same measures included in the post -
treatment and 3- month follow -up assessments.   
Twelve -month follow -up assessment:   Participants will be contact[CONTACT_157508] 12- months for a 
brief interview.  Research staff will administer the three sleep questionnaires (ISI, PSQI, and ESS) and PAP 
adherence data will be collected.  
 
Unblinded qualitative assessment among intervention participants:  After completion of the six -month 
follow -up assessment, intervention participants will be invited to partic ipate in focus groups (up to 6 focus 
groups, N = up to 40 intervention participants). Focus groups will take place during years [ADDRESS_182264]. Martin, who has previous training and experience moderating focus groups.  [CONTACT_157523] (project manager)  will take notes during the group. We will use a structured 
discussion guide to explore the key topi[INVESTIGATOR_23254], including participants’ 1) experiences with the intervention (e.g., What aspects of the program were most helpful? What aspects were least helpful?), 2) 
attitudes and adherence with the intervention (e.g., What recommendations were the most difficult to follow? 
What recommendations are you still following? What recommendations are you no longer following?), 3) perceptions of the program (e.g.,  What do you think about the format used? What do you think about the 
materials, such as readability, clarity, and graphics? What other information would have been helpful?), 4) barriers to participation (i.e., What makes it difficult to attend this program?), and 5) facilitators to participation 
(i.e., What would make it easier to attend this program?) The focus groups will be audio- taped and transcribed.  
 
Data Management  
At study entry, each participant will be assigned a unique identification number for entry on data 
collection forms and computerized files.  Participant identifying information will be kept separate, stored in a locked cabinet, with access limited to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_157491]. Electronic databases will be 
stored on the VA  GLAHS network server and the local HSR&D Center of Excellence server behind the VA 
firewall. Using project folders that are part of the architecture of the server, the research team will have varying 
levels of access to the d ata. [CONTACT_157524] (PI), [CONTACT_157525] in (co -investigator), [CONTACT_157523] (project manager), [CONTACT_157526] ( data manager) and [CONTACT_131854] (statistician) will have complete access to all data files. Other 
members of the research team will only have access to selected de -identified datasets. Or iginal data forms will 
be archived and stored in locked cabinets. All data will be entered into a database (SPSS for Windows 20.0) 
using procedures estab lished in prior work.  Equipment -derived data (e.g., actigraphy, PAP adherence data ) 
will be downloaded at the end of each monitoring period, and checked to ensure the equipment functioned 
properly. Down- loaded files will be backed up, cleaned and processed using special ized software to yield data 
variables. Separate data sets will be created for each major data type (e.g., equipment data, questionnaires, 
medical record review).  Unit of analysis will be the participant, and data sets will contain all baseline and follow-up measures for each variable.  Data in each set will be cleaned by [CONTACT_157509] -of-range or outlier 
values in frequency distributions, and compared against original data forms for accuracy.  Double entry procedures will be used on a 20% random sa mple of cases in each data set, with additional training and review 
of data if errors are identified. Sleep and related data will be processed immediately following each participant’s sleep monitoring session, and data from other instruments and measures will be entered within 
three days of data collection.  Data will be cleaned weekly.  Cleaned data will be merged into the main 
database for statist ical analyses.  
 
Sample s ize estimates    
As described above, participants will be enrolled from the sleep clinics at VA GLAHS Sepulveda and 
West Los Angeles campuses.  Based on FY11 data, at least 1037 p atients per year will be diagnosed with 
OSA and prescribed PAP ( using PAP equipment provided by [CONTACT_157510]).  We expect at least 52% will be 
aged > [ADDRESS_182265] 50% will also meet diagnostic criteria for insomnia.  Based on this data, we 
conservati vely estimate that at least 22 Veterans per month will be eligible for the study (i.e., [1037 PAP 
machines prescribed/12 months] x [.52 aged > 60 years] x [.50 meet  criteria for insomnia] =22.5 ).  Based on 
consent rates in our prior VA studies we expect a 50% consent rate among eligible Veterans, which would provide at least 10 enrolled Veterans per month.   We estimate that approximately 50% of enrolled participants 
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182266] to follow -up due to other reasons, resulting in only 
8.2% (10/122) loss by 6- months.  In the current proposal , we conservatively estimate 15 % loss by 6 months, 
which would result in approximately 102 (51 per group) participants completing  the 6 -month assessment.  
However, as in our prior work, we will monitor enrollment and participant loss throughout the study, to allow 
adjustment of the timeli ne and/or enrollment and retention procedures if we do not meet targets.   As described 
in the analysis plan below, we will use stan dard “intention to treat” analysis, and sample size calculations have 
been made based on this analysis.  Sample size calculations for each major outcome measure (described below) suggest that the target sample size will be sufficient to test our major hypotheses.  All sample size 
calculations are based on 80% power and two- tailed P -value < .05.  
 
Analysis Plan and Hypotheses   
 The analysis plan for each specific hypothesis is listed be low.  In addition to hypothesis testing to analyze 
effects of the i ntervention on sleep, PAP adherence, depressive symptoms  and quality of life, we will develop 
models showing which covariates predict the values of each of the outcome measures.  Prior to hypothesis 
testing, data will be cleaned, possible outliers identified, and data di stributions evaluated for assumptions of 
analysis (e.g. normality, hom ogeneity of variance).  If necessary, normalized rank transformations as described 
in Bonate24 will be performed and normalized rank scores will be sub mitted to analysis.  
 
Hypothesis 1:  Compared to control participants, participants randomized to the intervention will have 
improved nighttime sleep (i.e., higher sleep efficiency, better self -reported sleep) and better PAP 
adherence (measured objectively) at 3 -months follow -up.  
This hypothesis tests for differences between the intervention and control groups in our primary outcome 
measures of nighttime  sleep and PAP adherence, between baseline assessment and 3- months follow -up, 
which is our primary time endpoint.   Subjective measures of sleep outcomes will include sleep diary (sleep 
onset latency, wake after sleep onset  [WASO ], and sleep efficiency) and sleep quality (PSQI).  The objective 
measure of sleep ou tcome will be actigraphy (sleep efficiency), and the objective measure of PAP adherence 
will be downloaded from the PAP smart card (percent of nights with PAP  use > 4 hours, and mean hours of 
PAP use  per night ).   All outcomes will be assessed using intention to treat analyses.  A 2 X 2 (time X group; 
where time = baseline or 3- month assessment; and group = intervention or control)  analysis of covariance 
analysis will be used with Bonferroni- corrected post-hoc comparisons to investigate differences between the 
groups in terms of treatment effects in the sleep variables (where baseline and 3-month follow -up data will be 
available).  For PAP adherence outcomes , there will be no “baseline” data (i.e., PAP adherence data isn’t 
available until the participant starts PAP therapy), so outcomes between groups will be compared with 
independent samples t -tests and Chi -square test for difference in proportions.    
We expect that the group by [CONTACT_157511] a difference 
between groups, and post -hoc analyses will show increased nighttime sleep efficiency  and improved self -
reported sleep (indicated by [CONTACT_157512]) in the intervention group compared to the control group. 
Following review of graphical representation of our longitudinal results (on main outcome measures), we will 
use repeated measures ANCOVA models to test both li near and nonlinear (i.e., quadratic) differential changes 
over time.  P ost-hoc tests within each time point (using Tukey type 1 error control) will be conducted.  We 
expect there will be no difference between intervention and control groups at baseline, but diffe rences will be 
present at follow -up. Other participant characteristics will be considered as possible covariates  to reduce bias 
in our estimate of treatment effects and to increase precision. The major covariates that we ex pect to consider 
are age, cognition (estimated by [CONTACT_157513]) and comorbidity (estimated by [CONTACT_157514] -G).  Other covariates we wi ll 
consider include specific diagnoses and medications that may interfere with sleep, and measures of the intervention process (DBAS- 16 scores , Self -efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional Balance Index subscales ).  
Sample size calculations were performed for each of the main outcome variables using reported effect 
sizes and/or calculated effect sizes from reported sample means and standard deviations reported in the literature in prior studies of CBT -I for insomnia and behavioral PAP adherence interventions in outpatient 
adults  (see Table 5) .  Prior literature indicates that  CBT-I is an  extremely potent intervention for insomnia, and 
the studies typi[INVESTIGATOR_157492].  Some caution is warranted, however, since 
efficacy studies usual ly employ tightly controlled ‘ideal’ treatment conditions, which also yield larger effect sizes 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     14 
 than effectiveness studies with more ‘real world’ conditions.   Regardless of these issues, even the most 
conservative estimates of effect size from the liter ature suggest we will have an adequate sample size to test 
our sleep outcomes.  A recent meta -analysis of trials of PAP adherence interventions published as a Cochrane 
review was used in estimating sample size for the PAP adherence component of our intervent ion;Error! Bookmark 
not defined. this analysis suggests we will have an adequate sample size to test our PAP adherence outcome s. 
For the proposed study, we calculated sample size based on the outcome at post -treatment , and either 
the reported effect size (d) or d calculated from the reported means and SDs.  The table below lists sample 
size needs for the entire duration of the study (i.e., 6 months).  Based on an expected 15% loss  by [CONTACT_157515] , 
the 5th column in the table below projects  the sample size needed for each of [ADDRESS_182267] size, shown as the variable “d” (difference between interven tion and control 
groups a t follow -up divided by [CONTACT_157516]).  For many outcomes, we list sev eral expected effect sizes 
from the literature; references for these effect sizes are listed in the second column.  The effect size estimates 
take into account expected change in controls over time, since we expect controls will change, but not as much 
as the i ntervention group.  The sample size needed at randomization to detect effect size d is shown (column 
4), followed by [CONTACT_157517] 6- month analyses (column 5), taking into 
account expected dropout by [CONTACT_66791].  Based on these calculations,  120 randomized participants (60 
per group) will be adequate for analy ses at both [ADDRESS_182268] positive response to the intervention.  Testing for subgroups with better or worse response results in 
such a small sample that overfitting is  a potential problem; this risk is di scussed below.  
 For example, in Table [ADDRESS_182269] row (WASO by [CONTACT_157518]) shows that to have the needed sample size 
(N=19 per group) completing the study (i.e., with follow -up assessment data) to test for an effect (b ased on an 
expected 15% participant loss by 6 months), we need to enroll 22  participants per group (column 5) at baseline 
to have [ADDRESS_182270] our hypotheses.  For all sample size calculations, the drop outs are assumed not 
to change on average. All testing assumes a two- sided .05 signif icance level with 80% power.  
Table 5:  Sample size calculations  
Outcome  Refe rence  Reported (or 
calculated) e ffect size d  Enroll per group 
for d:  pos t-test Enroll per group for 
d at 6 months  
WASO  
Sleep d iary GermainError! Bookmark 
not defined. .67 19 22 
Sleep eff iciency  
Sleep d iary Espi[INVESTIGATOR_157493]! Bookmark not 
defined. .68 13 15 
GermainError! Bookmark 
not defined. .64 16 19 
Actigr aphy EdingerError! Bookmark 
not defi ned.  .60 27 32 
Sleep onset  l atency  
Sleep d iary Espi[INVESTIGATOR_157493]! Bookmark not 
defined. .58 20 23 
GermainError! Bookmark 
not defined. .80 10 12 
Sleep qua lity 
PSQI, similar 
scales  EdingerError! Bookmark 
not defined.  .58 20 23 
GermainError! Bookmark 
not defined. 1.37 10 12 
PAP adherence  
 Cochrane 
ReviewError! Bookmark 
not defined.   .59 47 54 
 OlsenError! Bookmark not .55 54 62 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     15 
  
Hypothesis 2: Compared to control participants, participants randomized to the intervention will report 
fewer depressive symptoms and better health- related quality of life at 3- months follow -up.  
This hypothesis tests for differences between the intervention and control groups in depressive 
symptoms  (using the PHQ -9) and health- related quality of life  (using  the SF -12v2)  between baseline 
assessment and 3- months follow -up.  All outcomes will be assessed using intention to treat analyses  in an 
identical manner as described for Hypothesis 2 .  For sample size calculations, we used data from studies  that 
used the same instrument as planned for the current proposal (if available) or from studies  where similar 
measures were used, if results from the identical measure were not available (see Table 5) .   
 
Hypothesis 3: Compared to control participants, participants who  receive the intervention will maintain 
improvements in sleep, PAP adherence, mood and quality of life at [ADDRESS_182271] for maintenance in differences between intervention 
and control groups in the key sleep, PAP adherence, depressive sym ptoms and quality of life outcomes at 6 
months follow -up.  The statistical analyses used will be the same as described for Hypotheses 1 and 2.   
 
Hypothesis 4a : Among intervention participants, improvements in beliefs and attitudes about sleep 
and OSA  will be associated with improved nighttime  sleep and better PAP adherence at 3- and 6-
months follow -up.   
 
Hypothesis 4b: Intervention participants will identify factors that act  as facilitators or barriers to their 
participation and adherence with the intervention.  
We will measure (in both the intervention and control groups) partic ipants’ beliefs and attitudes  about 
sleep (using the DBAS- 16 ) and OSA and PAP therapy (using the Self -efficacy, Knowledge and Decisional 
Balance Index subscales).  We will test for differences between groups in these scales between baseline and 
3-months follow -up using analysis of covariance (as described above under Hypothesis 1).   These scales will 
also be included as covariates in secondary analyses of main study outcomes  to address the effect of “dose” of 
intervention received on particular participant outcomes  (e.g,. nighttime s leep and PAP adherence) . Within the 
interven tion group, we will also review specific aspects of the process of the intervention (e.g., sleep diary data 
on bedtime, rise time, in- bed time and daytime nappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) to further clarify whether key aspects of the 
intervention were implemented by [CONTACT_4317].  
In addition, qualitative information will be collected from intervention participants during focus groups 
conducted after completion of the 6- month follow -up assessment  to determine participants’ experiences and 
attitudes about the intervention which may act as potential facilitators or barriers to future implementation into 
clinical practice (from the patient point of view) .   We will perfor m three types of analyses of this data. First, 
during the focus groups, the moderator will assure face validity and accuracy of understanding as the 
discussion progresses, and will summarize key points and invite further comment and clarification from 
participants . The second analysis will be completed immediately following the focus group, where the 
moderator and note taker will debrief each other, using notes and the audio- recording to generate a description 
of issues and themes that arose in response to each question in the interview guide. This grounded approach 
integrates data collection and analysis, so the individuals who are most familiar with narrative responses 
identify core themes (e.g., difficulty with adhering to certain aspects of the intervention) that emerged in 
discussions. These themes will be incorporated in the coding system for the final level of analysis. The third 
analysis will be a note -based25 aggregation of domains and thematic responses across the focus groups.  
Transcriptions and audio recordings will be used as reference documentation. Themes (e.g., beliefs about defined. 
 RichardsError! Bookmark 
not defined. 1.12 14 16 
Depression  
Hamilton 
Depression Scale  Germa inError! Bookmark 
not defined. .67 14 16 
Quality of life  
SF-36 BuysseError! Bookmark 
not defined. .57 50 58 
Study Protocol: 7/14/2015     16 
 acceptability of treatment ) and specific issues (e.g., barriers) will be identified and inform future broad 
implementation of the intervention.  
 
Potential Shortcomings in the Proposed Analysis  
         There are statistical problems we may encounter in analyses, including the statistical handling of 
participant dropout, possible differential treatment effects across randomization blocks, and the risk of overfitting the data.  To deal with dropouts, we will use standard "inten tion to treat" anal ysis.  The main 
independent variable will be whether a participant is in the i ntervention or control group, rather than whether 
the participant actually receives the interven tion.  If the participant rejects the intervention at some point after 
randomizati on, but allows us to collect follow -up data, we will use standard “intention to treat” analysis.  If the 
participant stops providing data, we will do analyses using all available data, and then repeat analyses after estimating missing data using an EM (expectation- maximization) al gorithm, which is less subject to bias than 
other methods such as carrying forward the last available value; results from both analyses will be reported .  It 
is important to address dropouts, since those who complete the study may be more compliant  or healthier than 
those who drop out.  To understand how “ completers ” may differ from “dropouts” , we will compare their 
baseline characteristics.  Dropout rates and characteristics of dropouts will also be compared between groups.  
To addr ess the risk of a differential effect of the intervention between randomization blocks , we will test for 
a block by [CONTACT_102938].  If one is present (suggesting the treatment is more or less effective for one stratification group over another), the results cannot be pooled, which im pacts statistical power.  However, we 
anticipate overall treatment effect will overshadow any differential effects across stratif ication blocks.  
Finally, there is a risk of overfitting the data when we perform follow -up subgroup analyses to identify 
characteristics of participants who have the greatest positive response to the intervention.  We will ad dress this 
issue in two ways.  First, we will use factor analysis with the full sample to group the independent var iables into 
a small number of factors , then use clinical judgment and the literature to pi[INVESTIGATOR_157494].  Second, we will use repeated split -sample methods in fitting the data.  These methods repeatedly 
test the fit developed on part  of the data on the r emaining data.  We have extensive experience with these 
methods to address potential shortcomings in  analysis, and additional local expertise and resources are readily 
available to advise the study team on these issues. 
 
Limitations of  the Proposed Research  
There are three  major limitations to the proposed research that will be addressed here.  First, although we 
will measure the effects of the intervention on attitudes and beliefs about sleep and PAP therapy , we may  not 
be able to determine a causative association between other aspects of the process of the inte rvention and 
study outcomes.  In addition, our qualitative data collection will focus on the experience of intervention 
participants, and may not address other issues of future implementation (e.g.., barriers and facilitators at the provider and healthcare facility level).  However, we will seek advisement from the local HSR&D Center of 
Excellence on these other implementation issues and, if the proposal is successful, we plan to pursue 
additional funding for work aimed at implementation of the intervention into clinical practice.  Second, we will 
not be able to test the role of CBT- I alone or the PAP adherence program alone, as compared to the 
combined, integrated intervention in determining outcomes.  This would require a 4 -group study design (i.e., 
CBT-I alone, PAP adherence program alone, integrated CBT- I plus PAP adherence program [our intervention], 
control group), which would at least double the necessary sample size.  In fac t, comparison of active treatment 
conditions (e.g., CBT -I alone versus integrated CBT -I plus PAP adherence program) would likely require an 
even higher sample size to achieve adequate power for statistical analyses.  Based on our clinical experience, we believe a behavioral approach to managing coexisting OSA and insomnia in older Veterans must address both conditions in an integrated manner, as included in the current proposal.  Third , because we have chosen 
an active control condition (rather than a usual  care control condition), we will not be able to test for a 
difference between our intervention and usual care.  However, based on our experience in testing behavioral 
interventions  and current thought  on how to best address the “placebo” effect with behavioral interventions, we 
feel it is e ssential to provide an active, “social attention”  control condition to address a possible placebo effect.  
In addition, we’ve found that an active control condition keeps participants randomized to the control group 
enga ged in the research, maintains contact [CONTACT_157519] a similar degree as the active treatment group, and 
thereby [CONTACT_157520].   
 
Dissemination and Implementation Plan 
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182272] dissemination of research findings an d 
implementation of the methods tested in this proposal.  Research findings will be disseminated at local, 
regional and national geriatrics/gerontology, health ser vices and sleep meetings and in publications in hi gh 
impact  journals . Findings will also be disseminated via educational venues of the VA GLAHS  GRECC, our 
local VA HSR&D Center of Excellence, and the UCLA/VA Multicampus Pr ogram in Geriatric  Medicine and 
Gerontology. The senior researchers involved in this  proposal have extensive professional links, both within 
and outside the VA, nationally and inter nationally, allowing for extensive dissemination.  For example, [CONTACT_157527] is a Member of the Board of Directors and is currently President of the American Ger iatrics Society, 
Immediate Past Chair of the Health Sciences Section of the Gerontological Society of America, a member of 
the VA National Geriatrics Task Force, and a prior Chair of the Circadian Rhythms Section of the American 
Academy of Sleep Medicine.  [CONTACT_56559] is a nationally recognized behavioral sleep medicine specialist and is 
one of [ADDRESS_182273] an extensive implementation plan that focuses on local and national implementation.  
Locally, if the intervention is successful, these methods will immediately be implemented at  VA GLAHS through 
our local insomnia treatment programs (which [CONTACT_56559] directs) and OSA treatment in our VA GLAHS sleep 
clinics (staffed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Zeidl er).  Both these programs are housed within the VA GLAHS American Academy of 
Sleep Medicine accredited Sleep Disorders Center (directed by [CONTACT_157521], MD, who has provided a letter of support for this proposal ).  The treatment materials and manuals developed for this intervention will be 
immediately adopted for use within these clinical programs.  This local dissemination will rapi[INVESTIGATOR_157495], and will provide information as to whether the intervention remains 
effective when implemented clinically.  In an ongoing process, we will track whether clinical outcomes from 
initial local implementation of this treatment program are comparable to outcomes obtained in the proposed 
trial.  If needed, revisions will  be made to the treatment prior to dissemination beyond VA  GLAHS.  As part of 
this local implementation, we will solicit feedback from clinicians and trainees who use the intervention program 
and materials, to modify the intervention materials prior to broader implementation. 
We believe that broader implementation outside VA GLAHS will require additional funding.  If the 
intervention is successful, we will propose a [ADDRESS_182274] appropriate for the intervention. This 
algorithm will be based on screening methods implemented in the current proposal, modified based on findings 
of the study.  Second, using results from the intervention focus groups performed in the current proposal , we 
will identify patients’ perspectives on potential facilitators and barriers to implementation of the intervention.   
These results will be used to modify the intervention methods prior to broader implementation testing.  Finally, 
using these results and intervention materials from the larger study, we will develop an implementation 
package for broader implementation, which will provide the actual tools needed to implement this model of 
care into current clinical practice. Toward that aim, we will devel op a multi -component intervention 
implementation package that will include screening tools, treatment materials, treatment adherence monitoring 
techniques, key pre- and post -intervention outcome measures, and training materials for providers who 
implement the intervention. This implementation package will be based on our research findings, input from 
Veterans who completed the program, and consultation from experts in behavioral treatment of insomnia and in adult education methodologies. We’ll test the revi sed materials in an iterative process, until ready for 
implementation.  
We believe this type of intervention will be most easily implemented in the context of sleep clinics, which 
house the expertise to oversee the CBT- I and PAP adherence aspects of the intervention.  It is possible the 
intervention can be implemented with oversight at a distance from the site of implementation, which would provider for even broader implementation.  [CONTACT_56559] is one of three national trainers for the Evidence- Based 
Psychotherapy Rollout of CBT-I .  In this program to date, over [ADDRESS_182275] completed 
training in CBT -I; this resource provides a tremendous opportunity for implementation of an intervention 
combining CBT- I and the behavioral PAP adherence program .   
 
Study Protocol: 7/14/[ADDRESS_182276] research 
assessment of insomnia.  Sleep 2006;29:[ADDRESS_182277]. Rating 
chronic medical illness burden in gerops ychiatric practice and research: application of the Cumulative Illness 
Rating Scale.  Ps ychiatry Research 1992;41: 237-248. 
3 Alessi CA, Schnelle JF, Traub S, Ouslander JG. Psychotropic medications in incontinent nursing home 
residents: association with sleep and bed mobility.  J Am Geriatr Soc. 1995;43:788 -792. 
4 Cockrell JR, Folstein MF. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).  Psychopharmacol Bull.  1988;24(4):689- 92 
5 Brandt, J., & Benedict, R.H.B. (2001). Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -Revised. Lutz, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources.   
6 Lezak, M.D.,  Howieson, D.B., & Loring, D.W. (2004).  Neuropsychological assessment . [LOCATION_001]: Oxford 
University Press.  
7 Reitan, R. M. (1992). Trail Making Test: Manual for Administration and Scoring. Tucson, AZ: Reitan   
Neuropsychology Lab.  
8 Wechsler, D. (1997). Wec hsler Memory Scale - Third Edition: Manual. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological 
Corporation.  
9 Benton, A., & Hamsher, K. (1989). Multilingual Aphasia Examination. Iowa City, IA: AJA Associates. 
10 Selim AJ, Fincke G, Ren XS et al. Comorbidity assessments bas ed on patient report: results from the 
Veterans Health Study. Journal of Ambulatory Care Management 2004;27:295.  
11 Prins A, Ouimette P, Kimerling R, Cameron RP, Hugelshofer DS, Shaw -Hegwer J, Thrailkill A, Gusman FD, 
Sheikh, JI. The primary care PTSD screen (PC -PTSD): development and operating characteristics. Primary 
Care Psychiatry 2003;9:9- 14. 
12 Ferrell BA, Stein WM, Beck JC. The Geriatric Pain Measure: v alidity, reliability and factor analysis. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2000;48:1669- 1673.  
13 Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]: A new 
instrument for psychiatric practice and research.  Psychiatry Res. 1989;28:193- 213. 
14 Bastien CH , Vallières A , Morin  CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index  as an outcome measure for 
insomnia research. Sleep Med.  2001 Jul;2(4):297 -307. 
15Johns MW. A new me thod for measuring daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]: the Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]. Sleep. 
1991;14:450 -545.  
16 Ware JE, Jr, Koskiski M, Turner -Bowker DM, Gandek B.  User's Manual for the SF- 12v2 Health Survey with 
a Supplement Documenting SF -[ADDRESS_182278], R I:  Qual ityMetric, Inc, 2002.  
17 EuroQol Group. EuroQol -a new facility for the measurement of health- related quality of life.  Health Policy. 
1990;16:199 -208. 
18 Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The PHQ -9. Validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen 
Intern Med. 2001;16:606 -613. 
19 Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Lowe B. The patient health questionnaire somatic, anxiety, and 
depressive symptom scales: a systematic review. General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33595] 2010;32:345- 359. 
20 Morin CM, Vallieres A, Ivers H. Dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep (DBAS): Val idation of a brief 
version (DBAS -16). Sleep. 2007;30(11):1547 -1554.  
21 Stepnowsky CJ, Marler M R.  Ancoli- Israel S.  Determinants of nasal CPAP compliance.  Sleep Med 
2002;3:239 -247 
22 Morgenthaler T, Alessi C, Friedman L, Owens J, Kapur V, Boehlecke B, Brown T, Chesson A Jr, Coleman J, 
Lee-Chiong T, Pancer J, Swick TJ; Standards of Practice Committee; American Academy of Sleep Medicine. 
Practice Parameters for the Use of Actigraphy in the Assessment of Sleep and Sleep Disorders: An Update for 
2007.Sleep 2007; 30(4):519- 29.  
23 Engleman HM, Wild MR. Improving CPAP use by [CONTACT_157522]/hypopnea syndrome. Sleep 
Med Rev 2003;7:81- [ADDRESS_182279] Designs. Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall, 2000, p.102, 159. 
25 Krueger RA. F ocus Groups. A Practical Guide for Applied Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 1994.  