Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 1 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupCLINICAL STUDY PROTOCOL  
A Multicenter, Randomized -Controlled Trial to Evaluate the 
Efficacy and Safety of Antithrombotic Therapy for Prevention of 
Arterial and Venous Thrombotic Complications in Critically -Ill 
COVID -19 Patients
Prevention of Arteri ovenous Thrombotic Events in Critically -Ill COVID -19 
Patients Trial (COVID -PACT)  
Academic Research Organization and Sponsor : 
Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network (CCCTN)  
TIMI Study Group  
Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  (BWH)  
Division of Cardiovascular M edicine  
[ADDRESS_679270] 2, [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
Telephone: 800 -385-4444  
Fax: 888 -249-5261  
Investigators:  
Marc S. Sabatine, MD, MPH, Chairman, TIMI Study Group, BWH, [LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_003]  
David A. Morrow , MD, MPH,  CCCTN, TIMI Study Group, BWH, [LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_003] 
Erin A Bohula , MD, DPhil, CCCTN, TIMI Study Group, BWH, [LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_003]  
David D. Berg, MD, CCCTN, TIMI Study Group, BWH, [LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_003]  
Jean M. Connors, MD, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, BWH, [LOCATION_011], MA, [LOCATION_003] 
Fund ed By : 
[CONTACT_523443]  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] - COVID-PACT
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 2 of 26 CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupTable of Con tents  
1.Abbreviations …………………………………………………………………………………………………….…………………. 3
2. Protocol Synopsis …………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 4
3.Study Background  & Rationale  …….……………………………………………………………………… .…………… .… 7
4. Study Objectives  ……………………………………………………… ………………………………………………………… ... 8
5.Study Design  ………… …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… .… 8
6. Study Population  ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… .. 9
7. Study Interv ention  …………………………………………………………………………………………………………… … 10
8. Study Outcomes  ….……………… ………………………………….…………………………………………………………. . 12
9.Study Procedures  …………………… ………………………………………………………………………………………... .. 13
10. Site Training and Monitoring……………………………………………………………………………….…… ……….. 1 4
11. Data Analysis Plan  ……… ..…………………………………………………………………………………… .…………… .. 14
12. Data and Safety Monitoring and Review  ………… ..……………………………………………… ..……………… 1 7
13. Ethics and Dissemination  ………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 19
14. References ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. 21
15. Appendices  …………………………………………………………… ……………………………………..………….………. 22
16. Changes to the protocol ………………….……………………………………………………………………………….. 26
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679271] -dose prophylactic anticoagulation  
SEE Systemic embolic event  
T1MI  Type 1 myocardial infarction  
TIMI  Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction  
UFH  Unfractionated heparin  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679272] enrolled  Q2 2020 4 
Study Design  
This is a multicenter, open -label, 2x2 factorial , randomized -controlled trial in  critically -ill 
patients with  novel coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID -19) evaluating the efficacy and safety of 
full-dose vs. standard prophylactic dose anticoagulation and of antiplatelet  vs. no antiplatelet 
therapy for prevention of venous and arterial thrombot ic events. The trial will follow the 
principles of a p rospective randomized open blinded end -point (PROBE)  design.  
Study Objectives  
Primary Efficacy Objective:  Primary Efficacy Outcome Measure:  
To assess the efficacy  of: 
1) full -dose anticoagulation  (FDAC) versus
standard -dose prophylactic anticoagulation 
(SDPAC) and  
2) antiplatelet (AP) therapy versus no AP
therapy  
on venous or arterial thrombotic events in 
critically -ill patients with COVID -19. The hierarchical composite endpoint  of: 
1.Death due to venous or arterial thrombosi s
2.Pulmonary embolism
3.Clinically evident deep venous thrombosis ( DVT)
4.Type 1 myocardial infarction ( MI)
5.Ischemic stroke
6.Systemic embolic event ( SEE) or acute limb
ischemia ( ALI)
7.Clinically silent DVT
Key Secondary  Efficacy Objecti ve: Key Secondary Efficacy Outcome Measure:  
To assess the efficacy  of: 
1)FDAC  versus SDPAC  and
2)AP therapy versus no AP therapy on
clinically evident  venous or arterial thrombotic 
events in critically -ill patients with COVID -19. The hierarchical com posite endpoint of : 
1.Death due to venous or arterial thrombosis
2.Pulmonary embolism
3.Clinically evident DVT
4.Type 1 MI
5.Ischemic stroke
6.SEE or ALI
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 5 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupPrimary Safety Objective:  Primary Safety Outcome Measure:  
To evaluate the safety of : 
1) FDAC versus SDPAC and
2)AP therapy versus no AP therapy in critically -
ill patients with COVID -19. Composite endpoint of fatal or life -threatening 
bleeding  
Target Population  
Patients with COVID -19 requiring intensive care unit ( ICU) admission (critically -ill) without an 
indication for full -dose anticoagulation .   
Inclusion Criteria  (See Section 6 for additional details)  
Patients must meet all the following criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
1.Age ≥18 years (male or female)
2.Acute infection wi th severe acute respi[INVESTIGATOR_218691] 2 (SARS -CoV2)
3.Currently admitted to an ICU
Key Exclusion Criteria  (See Section 6 for complete listing)  
1.Ongoing or planned full -dose (therapeutic) anticoagulation for any indication
2.Ongoing or planned treatment with dual antiplatelet ther apy
3.Contraindication to antithrombotic therapy or high risk of bleeding
Investigational Product, Dosage, and Mode of Ad ministration  
Acceptable initial regimens for full -dose anticoagulation:  
•Unfractionated heparin (UFH) administered intravenously with a nomogram targeting a n
aPTT of 1.5-2.5 times the control as per institutional therapeutic target for treatment of VTE
•Enoxaparin 1  mg/kg administered subcutaneously (SC) every 12 hours
Antiplatelet: 
•Clopi[INVESTIGATOR_7745] [ADDRESS_679273] dose prophylactic  anticoagulation:  
•Enoxaparin 40  mg administered SC once d aily (reduce to 30 mg if CrCl<30 ml/min )*
•Heparin 5,000 units administered SC three times daily
*Enoxaparin 30 -40 mg administered SC twice daily may also be considered if CrCl30 ml/min and BMI 35 kg/m2.
Antiplatelet: 
•None
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 6 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupStatistical Methods  
The primary  efficacy assessment s will involve on-treatment (OT)  comparison s of the effect of 1) 
full-dose anticoagulation (FDAC) versus standard -dose prophylactic anticoagulation  (SDPAC)  
(pooled across antiplatelet regimens)  and 2) antiplatelet (AP) versus no AP ther apy (pooled 
across anticoagulant regimens) on the composit e endpoint  of death due to venous or arterial 
thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, clinically evident  DVT, type 1 MI, ischemic stroke, SEE or ALI , 
or clinically silent  DVT through the follow -up period. Intention -to-treat (ITT) comparisons will 
also be performed as additional  analyses.  
The primary analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_523444] a hierarchical manner . A win ratio greater than [ADDRESS_679274] event  according to the cumulative 
incidence function. Differences in clinical outcomes betw een the two treatment groups will be 
assessed using  the Gray’s test for equality of cumulative incidence functions.  
With a 2 -sided alpha of 0.0 5, a 40% event rate in the group receiving  both SDPAC and no AP 
therapy  at a median follow -up of 14 days , a 10 % competing risk of mortality, and a 1% dropout  
rate,  approximately [ADDRESS_679275]  80% power to detect a  hazard ratio of 0.65  using Gray's test for equality of  cumulative 
incidence function . This approach is expected to be conservative with respect to the primary 
efficacy analysis, for which greater  power is expected using the win -ratio analysis.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 7 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group3.Study Background  & Rationale
In addition to respi[INVESTIGATOR_5448], patients with coronavirus dis ease (COVID) -19, the 
disease caused by [CONTACT_144878][INVESTIGATOR_6507] -2 (SARS -CoV2), have a 
range of serious cardiovascular (CV) complications1-4, including venous and arterial thrombotic 
events.5-8 Thrombotic event rates are believed to be substantially higher in patients requiring 
ICU-level care, among whom it is suggested  that up to 2/[ADDRESS_679276] doses of 
thromboprophylaxis.6-8 While an accurate  estimate of the rate of arterial thrombotic events is 
unknown at this time, case reports describe acute arterial thrombotic events , including 
ischemic stroke s, acute coronary syndrome s and ischemic limb events.5, 9, 1 0 Proposed 
mechanisms for the increased thrombotic risk in patients with COVID -19 include excessive 
inflammation and immobiliza tion in the setting of aberrant coagulation parameters and diffuse 
intravascular coagulation (DIC).11, [ADDRESS_679277] been notable for the 
presence of megakaryocytes in affected organs, s uggesting that platelet aggrega tion and 
platelet -rich clot formation may be important pathogenetic mechanisms.13 
The benefit of throm boprophylaxis with low -dose ant icoagulation for the prevention of 
venous thromboembolism (VTE) in acutely -ill hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523426] -established.14 
Moreover, in patients at very high risk for VTE (e. g., patients with a history of unprovoked VTE), 
thromboprophylaxis with full -dose anticoagulation has been shown to be more effective than 
low-dose anticoagulation in preventing thrombotic events.15 Given the appar ent very high risk 
of venous thrombo tic complication s in patients with severe COVID -19, FDAC  may be a more 
effective thromboprophylaxis strategy  than SDPAC , but may be associated with an increased 
risk of bleeding .  The safety of this strategy in patients with COVID -19 has not yet been 
adequately studied.  
Antiplatelet therapy is recommended for prevention of arterial thrombotic events in high -
risk patient populations.16-18 Antiplatelet therapy  has also demonstrated benefit for prevention 
of new and recurrent VTE in high -risk patient populations .19-21 The thienopyridine clopi[INVESTIGATOR_523427] a similar safety profile  and 
may be associated with less GI bleeding .22 Thus , it is reasonable to hypothesize that in critically -
ill patients with COVID -19, addition of antiplatlet therapy with clopi[INVESTIGATOR_523428].   However, 
the balance of safety (bleeding) and efficacy of this approach merits rigorous investigation.  
The study described here, COVID -PACT, is a multicenter, open -label, 2x2 factorial, 
randomized -controlled trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of antithrombotic therapy 
(anti coagulation and antiplatelet) versus standard of care for prevention of venous and arterial 
thrombotic events in critically -ill patients with COVID -19.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679278] of : 
1.FDAC  as compared with SDPAC , and
2.AP therapy  compared with  no AP therapy,
on the clinical outcomes of venous and arterial thrombotic events  in critically -ill patients with 
COVID -19.   
The key safety objectives are to assess the safety of : 
1.FDAC as compared with SDPAC, and
2.AP therapy compared with no AP therapy,
 with respect to  incidence of  fatal or life -threatening bleeding.  
See Section 8 (Study Outcomes) for additional second ary and exploratory  objectives.  
5.Study Design
This is a phase 4, multicenter, open -label, 2x2 factorial , randomized -controlled trial  using a 
PROBE design . The trial will be conducted in approximately  30 sites in the United State s. 
Approximately 750 patient s will be enrolled. Patients will be randomize d in a 1:1 allocation 
ratio to receive either FDAC  or SDPAC . In patients without an  ongoing  indication for AP therapy 
at baseline, a second randomization will be performed in a 1:[ADDRESS_679279],  for a maximum follow -up of 28 days. T he anticipated  total duration of the study is 
6-12 months . 

Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679280] meet all the following criteria to be eligible for enrollment:  
1.Age ≥18 years (male or female)
2.Acute infection with severe acute respi[INVESTIGATOR_6507] 2 (SARS -CoV2) *
3.Currently admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) **
*Acute SARS -CoV2 infection is defined as a documented, positive SARS -CoV2 RT -PCR, SARS -CoV2 IgM antibody test ,
or other accepted assay (see Manual of Site Operations)  with active respi[INVESTIGATOR_523429].  
**Where ICU admission occurred  96 hours  prior to randomization.  ICU admission  also includes patien ts requiring 
ICU-level care in other units.  Criteria for  ICU-level of care are defined in the Protocol Appendix.  
Exclusion Criteria  
Patients who meet any of the following criteria are excluded from the study:  
1.Ongoing (>48 hours) or planned full -dose (therapeutic) anticoagulation for any indication
2.Ongoing or planned treatment with dual antiplatelet therapy
3.Contraindication to antithrombotic therapy or hig h risk of bleeding due to conditions
including , but not limited to , any of the following:
a)History of intracranial hemorrhage, known CNS tumor or CNS vascular abnormality
b)Active or recent major bleeding within the past 30 days with untreated source
c)Platelet count < 70,000 or known functional platelet disorder
d)Fibrinogen <200 mg/dL
e)International normalized ratio (INR) >1.[ADDRESS_679281] 2 weeks
6.Pregnancy
7.Study  staff  or their  family members
8.Any condition which in the investigator’s assessment might increase the risk to the patient
or decrease the chance of obtaining satisfactory data to achieve the objectives of the study
9.Subjects for whom further care is being forgone at the decision of the  subject, family,
and/or treating team (“comfort measures only”)
Exclusion -based laboratory results are bas ed on most recent values from within 2 days prior to 
randomization for platelet count and INR and within 3 days prior to randomization for 
fibrinog en. 
Patients who meet the following criterion are excluded from the second randomization 
(antiplatelet thera py vs.  no antiplatelet therapy ): 
1.Ongoing or planned antiplatelet therapy, including aspi[INVESTIGATOR_523430] (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679282] Information :  
Acceptable initial regimens for  FDAC  include the following: 
•UFH administered intravenously wit h a nomogram targeting a n aPTT of 1.5-2.5 times the
control as per institutional therapeutic target for treatment of VTE
•Enoxaparin 1  mg/kg administered subcutaneously every 12 hours  (if CrCl30 ml/min)
Acceptable initial regimens for  SDPAC  include the fo llowing:  
•Enoxaparin 40  mg administered subcutaneously once daily (if CrCl 30 ml/min) *
•Enoxaparin 30  mg administered subcuta neously once daily (if CrCl<30 ml/min)
•Heparin 5,000 units administered subcutaneous three times daily
*Enoxaparin 30 -40 mg adminis tered SC twice daily may also be considered if CrCl 30 ml/min and BMI 35 kg/m2.
Acceptable regimen for randomized antiplatelet therapy is: 
•Clopi[INVESTIGATOR_7745] 300  mg administered once orally on the day of randomization, followed by 75
mg administered once daily on subsequent days
7.2 Randomized Treatment Assignment : Randomiza tion to FDAC  versus  SDPAC  and AP therapy 
versus no AP therapy  will be done via an Interactive Web -based Randomization System 
(IWRS ). Treatment will be open -label and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -supplied by [CONTACT_523445], standard formulations, con centrations and titration .  
Randomization and study treatment initiation should be done as soon as possible following 
ICU admission or the requirement for ICU -level of care and no longer than 96 hours  after 
meeting ICU-level criteria . 
7.3 Duration of Randomized  Treatment: The study allocated regimen should be continued until 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_47850] (including after ICU discharge) or through [ADDRESS_679283].  
7.4 Transition in Randomized Treatment Assignment: The in vestigator may transition between 
acceptable regimens within the randomized treatment assignment as deemed appropriate 
clinically (e.g. , transition from enoxaparin to subcutaneous heparin for SDPAC in the setting 
of new or worsening renal failure). Transit ions to direct thrombin inhibitors , or 
fondaparinux  are permitted if heparin -induced thrombocytopenia is confirmed or 
suspected. After a patient is transferred out of the ICU, transitions to ora l anticoagulation 
are also permitted i n the absence of signifi cant renal or hepatic dysfunction (see Protocol 
Appendix for further details).  Transitions in anticoagulant therapy will be recorded in the 
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 11 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupeCRF.  Refer to the Appendix for further guidelines reg arding transitions in randomized 
treatment assignment includin g acceptable alternative regimens.  
7.5 Blinding : Treatment will be open -label without blinding. 
7.6 Concomitant Medications : All non -antithrombotic therapy is at the discretion of the 
patient’s trea ting physicians. Non -study anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy is not 
permitted while receiving the study allocated regimen  unless there is a change in the 
patient’s clinical status  requiring an alternative regimen . 
7.7 Discontinuation of Study Drug : Patien ts and healthcare providers may voluntarily 
discontinue study drug for any reason at any time.  If adverse events occur that are believed 
to be due to study drug , or safety event s occu r that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], 
contraindicate further dosing  of study drug, study drug may be temporarily interrupted or  
permanently discontinued . Whenever possible,  restarting study drug should be encouraged, 
so long as the investigator judge s that the potential benefit outweighs the risk . Situations 
that warrant temporary or permanent study drug discontinuation include :  
•Active clinically significant bleeding
•Acute hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke  at meaningful risk for hemorrhagic
transformat ion
•Severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count  <50,000)
•Evidence of overt d isseminated intravascular coagulation  (e.g. fibrinogen levels <1 50
mg/dl  or INR >2.9 despi[INVESTIGATOR_523431] K repletion). See Manual of Site O perations
for guidelines to help discriminate DIC from sepsis induced coagulopathy.
•Need for invasive procedure s requiring extended interruption of antithrombotic therapy
The investigator should contact [CONTACT_523446] . Discontinuation of study drug  does not mean discontinuation of follow -up. All 
study assessments should be continued even if study drug is  discontinue d.  
In the course of the patient’s participation, use of the  alternative antithrombotic strategy 
(crossover)  may be deemed clinically indicated due to a change in the patient’s clinical 
status. Examples include: 1) a patient randomized to stand ard-dose prophylactic 
anticoagulation develops atrial fibrillation or deep venous thrombosis, requiring full -dose 
antico agulation; or 2) a patient randomized to no antiplatelet therapy experiences an acute 
coronary syndrome requiring addition of an antipla telet agent. The crossover in therapy will 
be recorded in the eCRF.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 12 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group7.8 Withdrawal of Consent : Patients are free to complet ely withdraw from the study  at any 
time  (which means permanent discontinuation of IP and all follow -up assessments) without 
prejudice to  further treatment. Withdrawal of consent should only occur if the patient 
refuses any further assessments or contact [CONTACT_523447]. Patients who do not want in -person 
follow -up after cessation of IP should be offered alternative methods of follow -up includin g 
assessment of health status via treating physicians or medical records. Such patients would 
then not be viewed as with drawal s of consent. The investigator must explain to the patient 
all options for continued participation, and document which options wer e refused by [CONTACT_523448]. Withdrawal of consent must be ascertained and 
documented in writing  by [CONTACT_779] i nvestigator who must inform the TIMI Hotline and 
document the withdrawal of consent in the eCRF and medical records. Patie nts will be 
asked about the reason(s) for withdrawal  of consent .  
8.Study Outcomes
Efficacy  Outcomes  
Primary Efficacy Outcome  
The hierarchical composite endpoint  of: 
1.Death due to venous or arterial thrombosis
2.Pulmonary embolism
3.Clinically evident DVT
4.Type 1 MI
5.Ischemic stroke
6.Systemic embolic event ( SEE) or acute limb ischemia ( ALI)
7.Clinically silent DVT
Key Secondary Efficacy O utcome  
The hierarchical composite endpoint  of: 
1.Death due to venous or arterial thrombosis
2.Pulmonary embolism
3.Clinically evident DVT
4.Type 1 MI
5.Ischemic stroke
6.SEE or ALI
Secondary Efficacy Outcomes  
•Composite of venous thrombotic events (PE or clinic ally evident or silent DVT)
•Composite of arterial thrombotic events  (ischemic stroke, SEE or ALI, or T1MI)
•Each of the individual components of the primary efficacy outcome
•Cardiovascular death
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 13 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study GroupExploratory  Efficacy Outcomes  
•Clinical improvement on COVID ordinal scale recommended by [CONTACT_120055] R&D Blueprint Group
•Ventilator -free d ays (at [ADDRESS_679284] -randomization)
•Time from ICU admission to ICU discharge
•Acute kidney injury
•Need for new renal replacement therapy
•Pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest
•Cathet er thrombosis
•Myocardial dysfunction
•All-cause mortality
Safet y Outcomes  
Primary Safety  Outcome  
Time to first occurrence of fatal or life -threatening bleeding  
Secondary Safety Outcome  
•GUSTO moderate or severe bleeding
9.Study Procedures
Screening and Rando mization  
•Obtain written informed consent from patient or legal aut horized representative
•Review inclusion/exclusion criteria (including pregnancy testing for women of child bearing
potential), relevant medical history, vital signs (including weight), and m edications
•Review or obtain labs  (platelet count, INR and fibrinogen)
•Randomize (Day 0) using the Interactive Web Randomization System (IWRS)
•Initiate randomized anticoagulant strategy and, if applicable, antiplatelet therapy
Follow -up (through day [ADDRESS_679285])  
•Continue randomized antithrombotic therapy
•Monitor anticoagulation as per local practice; obtain INR daily and fibrinogen at least every
3 days while receiving ICU -level care  (see Appendix for details )
•Obtain b ilateral lower extremity venous ultrasound  as a single assessment any time
between days 10 -14. If a patient crosses over or discontinues randomized anticoagulation
strategy on Day 4 through Day 9 , this assessment should be performed as close to the date
of discontinuation as possi ble (and no longer than 3 days after discontinuation) . For
crossover or permanent discontinuation prior to Day 4, this assessment  is not required.
•Assess for efficacy and safety events
Additional details about study operations  can b e found in the Manual o f Site Operations  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 14 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group10.Site Training and Monitoring
10.1 Training of Study Site Personnel: Before enrolling patients into the study, the 
requirements of the Clinical Study Protocol and related documents will be reviewed with 
the investigatio nal staff who will be train ed in any study -specific procedures. The site 
principal investigators will ensure that appropriate training relevant to the study is given to 
all staff, and that any new information relevant to the performance of this study is 
forwarded to the staff i nvolved. The site principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_523432] a record of 
all individuals involved in the study.  
10.[ADDRESS_679286] aff 
resolve any local problems and providing extra training focused on specific needs. 
Particular attention will be given to the effectiveness of strategies to recruit appropriate 
participants, the completeness of follow -up, the maintenance of participant adherence to 
study tre atment, and the reporting of study outcomes and collection of relevant supporting 
documentation. Details are provided in the Monitorting Plan.  
11.Data Analysis Plan
Further details can be found in the Statistical Analysis Plan  (SAP) . 
11.1 Analysis Sets  
a)The On-Treatment  Analysis Set will consist of all randomized patients who received at
least one dose of study drug. However, only those events/observations occuring during
therapy with the randomized treatment strategy or within [ADDRESS_679287] dose of
randomized treatment will be a part of this analysis set. A transition in randomized
treatment as defined in Section 7.4 is not considered a devi ation in therapeutic strategy
and observations occurring after th e transition will be a part of this analysis set.
Crossovers and permanent discontinuations (Section 7.7) of randomized treatment are
considered an end to the randomized anticoagulant or anti platelet  therapeutic strategy;
only observations occurring up to 3 days  after crossovers or discontinuations of
randomized treatment will be a part of this analysis set. The primary assessement for
efficacy outcomes will be analyzed based on the On-Treatme nt Analysis  Set.
b)The Intention -to-Treat  Analysis Set will consis t of all randomized patients with the
exception of those who did not qualif y for randomization and did not receive study drug
but were inadvertently randomized into the study. Following  the i ntention -to-treat
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679288] of 
allocation to : 1) FDAC  versus SDPAC  (pooled across AP regimens) ; and 2) AP therapy versus 
no AP therapy (pooled across anticoagulation regimens) on the primary composite endpoint 
of death due to venous or arterial thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, clinically evident  DVT, 
type 1 MI, ischemic stroke, SEE or ALI , or clinica lly silent  DVT through the follow -up period. 
Clinical event rates will be calculate d according to the cumulative incidence function.  
Intention -to-treat comparisons will also be performed as additional analyses.  
The primary analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_523449] 
1) every participant in the FDAC arm to every participant in the SDPAC arm to determine a
winner, and 2) every participant in the AP therapy  to every participant in the no AP therapy  
arm to determine a winner. The estimated win ratio (the total number of wins in the FDAC 
arm divided by [CONTACT_523450], and the total number of wins in 
the AP therapy  arm divided by [CONTACT_523451] t therapy  arm) 
will be calculated  evaluating the composite in a hierarchical manner . A win ratio greater 
than 1  will be in favor of the FDAC arm and AP therapy  arm, respectively.  
The corresponding two -sided 95% confidence intervals will be calculated. Th e analysis will 
be performed using the unmatched pair win ratio approach .23 For the comparison of FDAC 
vs. SDPAC, the analysis will be stratif ied by [CONTACT_523452] . no AP therapy for those eligible . For the 
analysis of AP therapy vs. no AP therapy , the analysis will be  stratified by  [CONTACT_523453]. SDPAC  
randomization . Contributions of each component of the com posite endpoint to total 
number of winners used in estimation of the win ratio will be reported.   
In a secondary analysis of the primary composite  endpoint, differences in clinical outcomes 
between the treatment groups will be assessed using  the Gray’s test for equality of 
cumulative incidence functions , incorporting stratification in the analysis as outlined for the 
primary analysis . Hazard ratios and 95% conf idence intervals will be calculated using a Fine -
Gray model to account for the competing risk of mortality. Analogous analyses will be 
performed for the secondary and exploratory efficacy outcomes involving time -to-event  
comparisons . Additional  details of the analytic approach can be found in the Statistical 
Analysis Plan (SAP).  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 16 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group11.3 Subgroup Analyses  
Subgroups will be analyzed for the primary and secondary efficacy outcome s, including, 
but not limited to : 
a)Age
b)Sex
c)Body -mass index (BMI)
d)Diabete s mellitus
e)History of cardiovascular disease
f)Baseline indication for antiplatelet therapy (i.e., eligible for 2nd randomization)  (only
for comparison of FDAC  vs. SDPAC )
g)D-dimer
h)Need for mechanical ventilation  at randomization
i)High -sensitivity C-reactive p rotein (hsC RP)
j)Prior history of VTE
Further details can be found in the Statistical Analysis Plan.  
11.5 Sample Size Considerations  
The sample size is based on the secondary analysis of the primary efficacy endpoint. With a 
2-sided alpha of 0.0 5, a 40% event rate in the control arm  rate in the group receiving  both 
SDPAC and no AP therapy  (estimated based on 3 recent case series of critically -ill patients  
with COVID -19), 6-8 a 10% competing risk of mortality, and a 1% dropout rate (e.g., 
withdrawal of consent, loss -to-follow -up), approximately [ADDRESS_679289]  80% power to detect a 35% relative risk reduction 
(RRR)  for the FDAC vs. SDPAC comparison  using Gray's te st for equality of cumulative 
incidence function . The power for the AP therapy comparison is expected to be slightly less 
(~70%) as it is assumed that 10% of patients will not be eligible for the AP randomization.  
The approach  of powering the trial based o n the secondary analysis of the primary efficacy 
endpoint  (i.e., cumulative inc idence function) is expected to be conservative with respect to 
the primary analysis  of the primary efficacy endpoint  (i.e., unmatched win ratio) , for which 
larger  power is expe cted.  
During the course of the trial , trial leadership will monitor the aggreg ate event rate and 
proportion of patients who proceed to  the second randomization to ensure consistency 
with the initial assumptions and preserve the planned power for the trial . The target sample 
size may be increased to ensure accrual of an adequate number of  efficacy  endpoint events  
to preserve the overall initial planned power . Refe r to the SAP for further details.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679290] form (eCRF) will be used for data collection and query handling. 
The site investigator will ensure that data are recorded in the eCRF as specified in the study 
protocol and in accordance with the instructions provided. The inves tigator ensures the 
accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the data recorded. The investigator will sign the 
completed eCRF. Data will be reviewed as defined in the Data Management Plan.  
12.[ADDRESS_679291]  been  approved for use in patients at risk for venous and arterial 
thrombotic events , this study has received an  exempt ion from the need for an 
Investigational New Drug (IND). Investigators are required to  report: (1)  Serious Adverse 
Events Related to Study Dru g, (2) Une xpected Problems , and (3) Adverse Events Leading to 
Drug Discontinuation . 
1.Reporting of Serious Adverse Events Related to Study Drug
A serious adverse event (SAE) related to study drug must meet th e following criteria :
a)Be serious, meaning that in the view  of either the local investigator or the TIMI
Study group physician , the adverse event results in any of the following outcomes:
death, a life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523433], persistent or s ignificant incapacity or substantial disruption
of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or
requir e hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based upon appropriate
medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient and may require medical or
surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.
b)Be related to study drug , meaning that  there is a reasonable possibility that the
drug caused the adverse event. “Reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to
suggest a causal relationship between the drug and the adverse event. In making
this assessment, there should be con sideration, based on the available i nformation,
of the probability of an alternative cause, the timing of the event with respect to
study treatment, the response to withdrawal of the study treatment, and (where
appropriate) the response to subsequent re -challenge.
Events that qualify as a n SAE related to study drug and occur after the first dose of study 
drug  has been administered (through the end of the study period ), should be reported 
in the eCRF on the appropriate pages. SAEs related to study drug must  be reported 
within 24 hours of know ledge of the ir occurrence . They  should be clinically followed 
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 18 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Groupuntil the event has resolved or stabilized.  All confirmed  SAEs  relat ed to study drug will 
be reported to relevant ethics committees, Institutional Review Boards , and 
investigators in an expedite d manner in accordance with regulatory requirements.  
2.Reporting of Unexpected Problems (UPs):
To qualify as a UP, an event must m eet all of the following criteria:
a)Be unexpected (in terms of nature, severity, or frequency) given (a) the research
procedur es that are described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -
approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the
characteristics of the subject population being studied.
b)Be related or possibly related to participation in the r esearch . “Possibly
related ” means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or
outcome may have be en caused by [CONTACT_3459].
c)Suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm
(including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously
known or recognized.
3.Reporting of Advers e Events Leading to Drug Discontinuation: A ll adverse event s (AEs)
leading to investigational product  discontinuation  should  be reporte d via the eCRF
within 3 working days of knowledge of their occurrence .
4.Pregnancy: If any pregnancy is discovered  during  the course of the study, then
investigators or other site personnel should contact [CONTACT_523454] e immediately but
no later than [ADDRESS_679292] should
be discontinued immediately. The outcome of all pregnancies (spontaneous miscarriage,
elective termination, ectopic pregnancy, normal birth or congenital abnormality) should
be followed  up (even if after trial completion) and documente d on the paper Pregnancy
Outcome Report form  and sent to the TIMI Safety Desk.
12.3 Data Monitoring Committee (DMC)  
An independent DMC will be appointed by [CONTACT_523455]. The DMC will be 
responsibl e for safeguarding the interests of the patients in the study by [CONTACT_523456] e intervention during the trial, and for reviewing the overall conduct 
of the clinical trial. They will review overall safety in the trial and specifica lly the incidence 
of fatal or life -threatening bleeding . The DMC statistician will be able to have access to the 
individual treatment codes and will be able to merge these with the collected study data 
while the study is ongoing. The DMC Charter will be pr epared to detail precise roles and 
responsibilities and procedures to ensure maintenance of the bli nding and integrity of the 
study in the review of accumulating data.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 19 of 26  
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group12.4 Clinical Events Committee (CEC)  
Suspected outcome events in the study including the  components of the primary and key 
secondary efficacy and primary and secondary safety endpoin ts will be centrally adjudicated 
by [CONTACT_422198].  Suspected outcome events in the study will 
be identified either by [CONTACT_523457]. For all 
events identified for adjudication, the investigator will complete the appropriate modules of 
the eCRF and provide required source documentation.  
13.Ethics and Dissemination
13.[ADDRESS_679293] of the S tudy  
This study will be conducted in compliance with G ood Clinical Practice (GCP), including 
International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) Guidelines, and in general, consistent 
with the most recent version of the Declaration of Helsinki.   
An Ethics Com mittee (EC) or Institutional Review Board (IRB) will a pprove the final study 
protocol, including the final version of the Informed Consent Form and any other written 
information and/or materials to be provided to patients . 
Study personnel involved in condu cting this trial will be qualified by [CONTACT_8640], training, 
and experience to perform their respective task(s). This trial will not use the services of 
study personnel where sanctions have been invoked o r where there has bee n scientific 
misconduct o r fraud (e.g. , loss of medical licensure).  
13.[ADDRESS_679294] be approved by [CONTACT_523458].  
13.3 Informed Consent  Procedures  
a)Eligible patients may only be included in the study after providing written informed
consent, or, if applicable, after  such consent has been provided by a legally acceptable
representative(s) of the patient .  Verb al or electronic consent (eConsen t) may be used
where consistent with local regulations.
b)Informed consent must be obtained before  conducting any study -specific procedures
(i.e., all procedures described in the protocol)
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 20 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group13.4 Publications  
The Principal Investigators, in collaboration w ith the other Steering Committee members, 
will be responsible for drafting the main report from the trial for publication  and for 
secondary and supplementary analyses.  
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 21 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group14.References
1.Zhou F, Yu T , Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wan g Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu J,
Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H and Cao B. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with
COVID -19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet . 2020;395:1054 -1062.
2.Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y, Liang WH, Ou CQ, He JX, Liu L, Shan H, Lei CL, Hui DSC, Du B, Li LJ, Zeng G,
Yuen KY, Chen RC, Tang CL, Wang T, Chen PY, Xiang J, Li SY, Wang JL, Liang ZJ, Peng YX, Wei L, Liu Y,
Hu YH, Peng P, Wang JM, Li u JY, Chen Z, Li G, Zheng ZJ, Qiu SQ, Luo  J, Ye CJ, Zhu SY, Zhong NS and
China Medical Treatment Expert Group for C. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in
China. N Engl J Med . 2020.
3.Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, Zhu F, Liu X, Zhang J, Wang B, Xi ang H, Cheng Z, Xiong Y, Zhao Y, Li Y, Wa ng X
and Peng Z. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_45077] 2019 Novel Coronavirus -
Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA . 2020.
4.Guo T, Fan Y, Chen M, Wu X, Zhang L, He T, Wang H, Wan J, Wang X and Lu Z. Cardiovascular
Implications of Fatal Outcomes of Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID -19). JAMA
Cardiol . 2020.
5.Bangalore S, Sharma A, Slotwiner A, Yatskar L, Harari R, Shah B, Ibrahim H, Friedman GH, Thompson
C, Alviar CL, Chadow HL, Fishman GI, Reynolds HR, Keller N and Hoc hman JS. ST -Segment Elevation
in Patients with Covid -[ADDRESS_679295] . 2020.
8.Poissy J, Goutay J, Caplan M, Parmentier E, Duburcq T, Lassalle F, Jea npi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] E, Rauch A, Labreuche J,
Susen S and Lille ICUHC -g. Pulmonary Embolism in COVID -19 Patients: Awareness of an Increased
Prevalence . Circulation . 2020.
9.Zhang Y, Xiao M, Zhang S, Xia P, Cao W, Jiang W, Chen H, Ding X, Zhao H, Zhang H, Wang C, Zhao J,
Sun X, Tian R, Wu W, Wu D, Ma J, Chen Y, Zhang D, Xie J, Yan X, Zhou X, Liu Z, Wang J, Du B, Qin Y,
Gao P, Qin X, Xu Y, Zhang W, Li T,  Zhang F, Zhao Y, Li Y and Zhang S. Coagulopathy and
Antiphospholipid Antibodies in Patients with Covid -19. The New Eng land journal of medicine .
2020;382:e38.
10.Oxley TJ, Mocco J, Majidi S, Kellner CP, Shoirah H, Singh IP, De Leacy RA, Shigematsu T, Ladn er TR,
Yaeger KA, Skliut M, Weinberger J, Dangayach NS, Bederson JB, Tuhrim S and Fifi JT. Large -Vessel
Stroke as a Pre senting Feature of Covid -19 in the Young. N Engl J Med . 2020.
11.Madjid M, Safavi -Naeini P, Solomon SD and Vardeny O. Potential Effects of Coronaviruses on the
Cardiovascular System: A Review. JAMA Cardiol . 2020.
12.Atri D, Siddiqi HK, Lang J, Nauffal V,  Morrow DA and Bohula EA. COVID -[ADDRESS_679296]: A
Current Review of the Virology, Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], Cardiac and Other Clini cal Manifestations and
Potential Therapeutic Strategies. JACC Basic Transl Sci . 2020.
13.Fox SE, Akmatbekov, A., Harbe rt, J.L., Li, G., Brown, Q., Vander Heide, R.S. Pulmonary and Cardiac
Pathology in Covid -19: The First Autopsy Series  from New Orleans. medRxiv . 2020.
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679297] of a near -universal
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5186] n-based prophylaxis regimen on annual number of venous thromboembolism events in
the US. Blood . 2017;130:[ADDRESS_679298], Wells P, Julian JA, MacKinnon B, Weitz JI, Crowther
MA, Dolan S, Turpie AG, Geerts W, Solym oss S, van Nguyen P, Demers C, Kahn SR, Kassis J, Rodger
M, Hambleton J, Gent M and Extended Low -Intensity Anticoagulation for Thrombo -Embolism I.
Comparison of low -intensity warfarin therapy with conventional -intensity warfarin therapy for long -
term preve ntion of recurrent venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med . 2003;349:631 -9.
16.Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden -Albala B, Braun LT, Bravata DM , Chaturvedi S, Creager MA, Eckel RH,
Elkind MS, Fornage M, Goldstein LB, Greenberg SM, Horvath SE, Iadecola C, Jauch E C, Moore WS,
Wilson JA, American Heart Association Stroke C, Council on C, Stroke N, Council on Clinical C, Council
on Functional G, Tran slational B and Council on H. Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke: a
statement for healthcare professionals  from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke . 2014;45:[ADDRESS_679299] -Herman MD, Gornik HL, Barrett C, Barshes NR, Corriere MA, Drachman DE, Fleisher LA,
Fowkes FGR, Hamburg NM, Kinlay S, Lookstein R, Misra S, Mureebe L, O lin JW, Patel RAG,
Regensteiner JG, Schanzer A, Shishehbor MH, Stewart KJ, Treat -Jacobson D and Walsh ME. 2016
AHA/ACC Guideline on the M anagement of Patients With Lower Extremity Peripheral Artery
Disease: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/Am erican Heart Association Task Force on
Clinical Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol . 2017;69:e71 -e126.
18.Arnett DK, Khera A and Blum enthal RS. 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Disease: Part 1, Lifestyle and Behavioral  Factors. JAMA Cardiol . 2019.
19.Becattini C, Agnelli G, Schenone A, Eichinger S, Bucherini E, Silingardi M, Bianchi M, Moia M, Ageno
W, Vandelli MR, Grandone E, Prandoni P and Investigators W. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_523434]. The New England journal of medicine . 2012;366:[ADDRESS_679300] P, Gibbs H, Hague W, Xavier D,
Diaz R, Kirby A, Simes J and Investigators A. Low -dose aspi[INVESTIGATOR_523435]. The New England journal of medicine . 2012;367:[ADDRESS_679301] of
Combined Antiplatelet Therapy on Venous Thromboembolism in Patients With Symptomatic
Atherosclerosis. Circulation . 2018;137: 684-692.
22.Committee CS. A randomised, blinded, trial of clopi[INVESTIGATOR_523436] (CAPRIE). CAPRIE Steering Committee. Lancet . 1996;348:1329 -39.
23.Pocock SJ, Ariti CA, Collier TJ and Wang D. The win ratio: a ne w approach to the analysis of
composite endpoints in clinical trials based on clinical priorities. Eur Heart J . 2012;33:176 -82.
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 23 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group15.Appendices
1.Study Organization and Oversight
This study was initiated by [CONTACT_523459], TIMI Study Group , at Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523437]. The TIMI Study Group will act as the sponsor for the trial .
TIMI Principal Investiga tors
The Principal Investigators have overall responsibility for:
a)Design an d conduct of the study in collaboration with the Steering Committee;
b)Preparation of the protocol and subsequent revisions;
c)Development of the eCRF;
d)Development of the statistical  analysis plan;
e)Interpretation of the final data and reporting of the study .
Steering Committee  
The Steering Committe e is responsible for:  
a)Reviewing and commenting on the final protocol and statistical analysis plans;
b)Reviewing progress of the study and, if necessary, advising on protocol revisions;
c)Review ing study publications and substudy proposals;
d)Reviewing external new studies that may be of relevance.
Data Monitoring Committee  
The indepedendent Data Monitoring Committee is responsible for:  
a)Reviewing unblinded data  as per the DMC charter ;
b)Advising the Principal Investigators if, in its view, the data provide evidence that may
warrant modification of the trial  protocol or early termination for either efficacy or
safety.
Clinical Events Committee  
The Clinical Events Committee is responsible fo r independently reviewing, interpretin g, and 
adjudicating potential endpoints that are experienced by [CONTACT_13935]. (NB: The precise 
responsibilities and procedures applicable to the CEC will be detailed in the CEC Charter. ) 
2.Guidelines for Monitoring Coagulation Parameters
Treatment will be o pen-label and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -supplied by [CONTACT_523460] e using local, standard formulations, concentrations and titration.
Unfractionated heparin (UFH) should be administered intravenously with a n institution - or
provider -dete rmined nomogram targeting a n aPTT of 1.5-2.[ADDRESS_679302]
thrombin inhibi tor (bivalirudin or argatroban), these should be administered intravenously
with a n institution - or provider -determined nomogram targeting a n aPTT of 1.5-2.5 times
the control as per institutional therapeutic target for treatment of VTE . It is also accepta ble
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 24 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Groupto use an institution - or provider -determined nomogram targeting an anti-Facto r Xa level  of 
0.3-0.7 IU/ml for any of the intravenous FDAC regimens. Prothrombin 
time(PT)/international normalized ratio (INR) should be monitored  daily, and f ibrinogen 
level should be monitored at least every [ADDRESS_679303] requires ICU level c are. 
3.Guidelines for Transitions in Randomized Treatment
The investigator may transition between acceptable regimens within the randomized
treatment assignment as deemed appr opriate clinically (e.g., transition from enoxaparin to
subcutaneous heparin for standard -dose prophylactic anticoagulation in the setting of new
or worsening renal failure). In addition, transitions to direct thrombin inhibitors are
permitted if heparin -induced thrombocytopenia is confirmed or suspected.
Accepatable alternative regimens for FDAC include:
•Bivalirudin administered intravenously with a nomogram targeting a n aPTT of 1.5-2.5
times the control as per institutional therapeutic target for treatm ent of VTE
•Argatroban administered intravenously with a nomogram targeting a n aPTT of 1.5-2.5
times the control as p er institutional therapeutic target for treatment of VTE
•Fondaparinux administered subcutaneously once daily with dosing according to weight
(<50 kg: 5 mg once daily; 50 -100 kg: 7.5 mg once daily; >100 kg: 10 mg once daily)
Review with the Central Coordin ating Center any modifications in dosing in your hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523438].   Equivalent dosing of alte rnative 
LMWH preparations is detailed in the Manual of  Site Operations.  
Acceptable alternative regimens for SDPAC  include: 
•Fondaparinux administered subcutaneously 2.5 mg once daily
After a patient is transferred out of the ICU, transitions to oral antico agulation are also 
permitted . 
Acceptable alternative regimens for FDAC  outside of the ICU  and prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523439]:  
•Api[INVESTIGATOR_523440] 5 mg twice daily
•Rivaroxaban administered orally 20 mg once daily
•Edoxaban administered orally 60 mg once daily (if body weight >60 kg) or 30 mg once
daily (if body weight <60 kg or CrCl  30-50 ml/min)
•Dabigatran 150mg orally twice daily
•Warfarin with a target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2 -3
Note that, in general, NOACs should not be use d in patients with significant renal 
dysfunction or with Child -Pugh B/C hepatic dysfunction . Refer to package insert 
recommendations for DVT/PE treatment dosing for each individual NOAC for patients with 
renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, [ADDRESS_679304] been admitted to an ICU if they were either admitted to a 
regular IC U room or if they were in a non -ICU room that is functioning as an ICU room to 
accommodate surge capacity.   Non -ICU rooms are considered to be functioning as an ICU 
under any of the following conditions:  
•The patient is being treated by [CONTACT_523461]
•The pati ent is receiving advanced respi[INVESTIGATOR_1413] (i.e, invasive mechanical
ventila tion, non -invasive positive pressure ventilation for respi[INVESTIGATOR_5448], or
high flow nasal canula of at least 10L/min), vasopressors for at least 1 hour, continuous
rena l replacement therapy or mechanical circulatory support.
Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  Version:                   Amendment 1  
Antithrombotic Therapy in Critically -Ill COVID -19 Patients  Version Date:  October 28, 2020  
Page 26 of 26 
CCCTN, TIMI Study Group16.Changes to the Protocol
16.1 Protocol Amendment 1 – October 2 8, 2020  
•Acceptable initial regimens for standard dose prophylactic anticoagulation
To be consistent with accepted dose modifications  for obesity,  enoxaparin 40 mg SC twice
daily is added as an alternative for  individuals with  CrCl30 ml/min and BMI 35 kg/m2.
•Inclusion criteria
oGiven emerging new technology for high specificity testing, confirmation of SARS -CoV2
may include acceptable a lternatives to SARS -CoV2 RT -PCR or SARS -CoV2 IgM antibod ies
oTo accommodate the range of turn -around times for SARS -CoV2 testing, the time
window from ICU admission to randomization  is increased  from 72 hours to 96 hours.
oClarification that ICU admission al so includes patients requiring ICU -level care in other
units .  Criteria for ICU -level of care are defined in the Protocol Appendix.
•Exclusion criteria
oClarification that study staff rather than any employee of the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523441].
oFor clarity, time windows for exclusions  based on local laboratory results  are added .
•Study procedures
oReview of laboratory results during screening added as an explicit procedure.
oTo reduce the burden of testing when not needed for saf ety, the  time period for
performance of INR daily and fibrin ogen every [ADDRESS_679305] practice.
oTo mitigate exposures to COVID -19, verbal or electron ic consent (eConsent) may be
used where consistent with loca l regulations.
•Acceptable alternative regimens for FDAC outside of the ICU and prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_523442] , both of which are acceptable
anticoagulants.
oFor consistency with standard practice, cautions  for subjects with renal or hepatic
dysfunction are updated to refer to individual package labeling.
•Correction of grammatical and typographic errors