A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 I.  Background  
  
A. Historical Background   
Physical inactivity among patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a major clinical and 
public health problem. Roughly [ADDRESS_1076051] had positi ve results in research trials but may be less 
feasible and effective when applied in front -line clinical settings.5-8  
Motivational interviewing (MI) is a more widely applied technique that can improve 
physical activity in T2D. MI is a patient -centered approach used to address  ambivalence and 
promote change,9 and it can be effectively delivered in person and by [CONTACT_648].10-12 MI can be used 
with patients at any stage of change, from those who currently are not ready to become active, to 
those who are highly motivated to make change.9 MI has been used in many settings for >[ADDRESS_1076052] 
size has been relatively small (~0.2 in 3 recent trials),[ADDRESS_1076053] low expectation of improvement, low overall optimism, or low perceived social support.
15-17 Fortunately, MI has integrated well with 
other treatments in research and clinical settings.18,19 
Positive psychology (PP) interventions have the potential to promote physical 
activity  in T2D. Baseline levels of optimism and positive affect are associated with greater 
subsequent improvements in physical activity  (and medical outcomes) in patients with T2D and 
other chronic illnesses, controlling for baseline physical activity , medical illness severity, and 
depression.20-[ADDRESS_1076054] reduced distress and improved well -being in >[ADDRESS_1076055] 
confidence, and reduce ambivalence related to physical activity . A PP intervention could 
enhance the effects of MI by [CONTACT_782448] (optimism, perceived support, and confidence) linked to superior outcomes in health behavior interventions,
19,[ADDRESS_1076056] effects 
on physica l activity  mediated by [CONTACT_782449] -being and confidence.23,29,31 Such a combined 
PP-MI intervention could be delivered by [CONTACT_648], allowing inclusion of patients who are unable 
to attend regular in -person visits. Novel components  that focus on social connection, built 
environment, and reducing sedentary time could further improve outcomes while maintaining a phone -based individual intervention.   
 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076057] continues our progress in developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a PP -MI 
intervention in T2D.  
Positive psychological states and physical activity. In 164 patients with an acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS), we found that optimism [ADDRESS_1076058] -ACS predicted greater 6 -month 
physical activity  (measured by [CONTACT_6317]), controlling for baseline physical activity , medical 
factors, sociodemographics, depression, and anxiety ( β=102.5; p=.026).[ADDRESS_1076059] with ACS patients (N=32), finding that optimism and positive affect led 
to initiation of physical activity  and predicted overall future health behavior adherence.33,34  
PP intervention studies in cardiac patients. We tested PP in two controlled trials in 
patients with heart disease. In a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (N=28), PP was associated with more improvement in mental  health outcomes than either attentional control or mindfulness interventions.
[ADDRESS_1076060] -ACS patients. T he intervention was well -accepted and led to 
improvements in psychological status (positive affect, depression, and anxiety), compared to 
usual care.[ADDRESS_1076061] developed a combined PP -MI intervention that is 
now being studied in a trial (N=128) comparing PP and PP -MI for ACS patients with low 
physical activity .[ADDRESS_1076062] 50 participants, both conditions were associated with increases in 
physical activity . However, PP -MI participants had even greater physical activity  improvement 
(12.6 metabolic equivalent [MET] -hours; effect size difference: d=.33) at [ADDRESS_1076063] 3 years developi[INVESTIGATOR_782423] -MI in T2D 
patients using the NIH -support ed Rounsaville37 and ORBIT38 models of iterative behavioral 
intervention development. We completed a review of positive psychological states and outcomes 
in diabetes22 and published a theoretical model for PP -MI in T2D.39 Empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675], we completed a 
single -arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_48085] t (N=15) of a 12- week PP -alone intervention to assess its feasibility in T2D.39,40 
PP exercise completion rates were high, and participants rated the exercises as useful (mean 
ratings: 7.8/10). PP was associated with improvements in optimism, depression, diabetes self -
care, and health behavior adherence, with a large pre- post effect (Cohen’s d=.81) on physical 
activity . We have  completed qualitative interviews in [ADDRESS_1076064] in PP activities that focus on the us e of personal strengths to meet new 
health goals.
41 We are currently completing a single -arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (N=12) of a 16- week PP -MI 
intervention to evaluate its feasibility and acceptability in T2D.   
Relevance to proposed project. In sum, w e have identified relationships between 
positive states and physical activity , generated PP and PP -MI interventions in cardiac patients, 
and begun to develop a PP -MI intervention for T2D using feedback from a PP -alone pi[INVESTIGATOR_782424] T2D patients. The T2D projects also provided valuable experience 
recruiting from the [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (MGH) Diabetes Center where the proposed 
project will occur, making us well -positioned to successfully complete the proposed trial.  
 
C. Rationale/potential benefits/overview of proposed research  
 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 Given: (a) the relationship between psychological w ell-being and physical activity , (b) 
the potential for combined PP and behavioral interventions to improve physical activity more 
than either alone, and (c) the great need for effective activity interventions in T2D patients, the use of a combined PP and MI intervention has the potentia l to increase physical activity and 
reduce adverse events in a high -risk, high -yield population of patients. This would have direct 
benefits to patients and would impact public health, given that >[ADDRESS_1076065] step in determining the feasibility and efficacy of such a 
program.  
 
II. Specific aims . In a randomized trial of 60 T2D patients with low baseline physical activity, 
our goal is to complete the following specific aims:   
Specific Aim 1 ( feasi bility and acceptability) : To determine whether the PP -MI intervention is 
feasible (assessed by % of total PP -MI phone sessions completed) and well -accepted (assessed 
by [CONTACT_782450] -MI session) among T2D patients with 
low baseline activity.  
 
Specific Aim 2 ( physical activity ): To assess whether PP -MI is associated with larger i ncreases 
in moderate to vigorous  physical activity  (MVPA ), and less sedentary time, on accelerometer at 
8 and 16 weeks, compared to standar d MI.  
 
Specific Aim 3 ( additional outcomes ): To explore whether the PP -MI intervention is associated 
with greater improvements on other psychological, behavioral, and medical outcomes, compared to MI.  
 
Hypotheses : Our primary hypotheses are that a majority  of the PP -MI participants (n=30 ) will 
fully complete at least 6 of 8 PP- MI sessions (feasibility) and provide mean ratings of over 7/10 
for the ease and utility of PP -MI sessions (acceptability). We also expect participants in PP -MI to 
have larger impr ovements in MVPA  (minutes/day) and other key outcomes, warranting further 
testing in a well- powered efficacy trial.   
 III. Subject selection  
 
A. Inclusion/exclusion criteria  
 
Inclusion criteria. We will enroll adults  who are seen in an outpatient clinic at MG H (including 
the MGH Diabetes Center)  and meet the following criteria :  
(1) T2D . Eligible patients will meet American Diabetes Association (ADA) criteria
42 for T2D 
(e.g., HbA1c  [A1C]  ≥6.5%, fasting glucose ≥ 126 mg/d), with diagnosis confirmed by [CONTACT_782451]/or medical record review . We will include patients with well- controlled 
T2D if they have low physical activity  because inactivity still puts them at risk for complications . 
(2) Low physical ac tivity . We will define low physical activity  as ≤150 minutes/week of MVPA 
(corresponding to ADA recommendations for moderate or greater intensity aerobic physical 
activity ). Physical activity will be measured using a brief questionnaire adapted from the 
International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ) which has been used and validated in 
medical cohorts.44,[ADDRESS_1076066] 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 week (or a t ypi[INVESTIGATOR_3711], if the past 7 days atypi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]) to assess # of minutes spent perf orming 
MVPA. Patients reporting ≤150 minutes/week of MVPA will be eligible for inclusion in the 
study.  We chose this cutoff in order to ensure adequate room for improvement over the course of the study.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
(1) Cognitive impairment precluding consent or meaningful participation , assessed using a six -
item screen  developed for this purpose .54  
(2) L ack of phone availability . 
(3) Inability to read/write in English .  We are excluding other languages for this initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_782425] (e.g., Spanish) if the intervention 
proves to be effective.  
(4) Additional medical conditions (e.g., severe arthritis) that preclude physical activity.  
(5) Enrollment in mind -body programs, lifestyle intervention programs (e.g., cardiac 
rehabilitation), or other clinical trials.  
  
B.  Source of subjects and recruitment methods  
The outpatient  MGH Diabetes Center  and MGH primary care clinics  will serve as the 
source of study participants. Recruitment and informed consent procedures for this trial will be highly similar to those outlined in our IRB -approved protocol (Partners Healthcare System IRB 
#2016P -002523) for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_782426] -MI study in T2D patients at the same outpatient location with 
similar inclusion and exclusion criteria. The procedures to protect enrolled and non- enrolled 
participants outlined below are being  used in the  pi[INVESTIGATOR_782426] -MI study to g ood effect . 
Potential particip ants will be adult outpatients in these clinics with a diagnosis of T2D for 
>[ADDRESS_1076067] 6.5%. Algorithms in TopCare  (a population- based 
information management system that is used in clinical care) and RPDR , as well as custo mized 
Epic reports  (including but not limited to PHS One View Report Diabetes PCP and 
2012p002605- 222010), will be used to generate lists of potential patients for providers to review 
and individually approve eligible patients. In addition, we will use the  D4Q data warehouse, a 
tool commonly used at MGH for clinical outcomes research and operations improvement, in our search for eligible participants. After these lists are generated, study staff will conduct  a manual 
electronic chart review to verify eligib ility criteria and physician linkage.  
For potentially eligible patients who are enrolled in the MGH Research Options Direct to 
You (RODY) Program, we will send them an opt -out letter and call [ADDRESS_1076068] from each 
potentially eligible patient’s physician or other health care provider (e.g., nurse practitioner). We will send provider -approved patients opt -out letters using the following two -letter approach:  
For t hese patients, a study coordinator will send an opt -out letter packet composed of two 
letters. The mailing will have a cover letter (see attached sample) with their clinician’s name [CONTACT_782468][INVESTIGATOR_782427]. The cover letter will also explain that their participation is completely voluntary and whether they enroll or not will have no bearing on their ability to receive care. The opt -out letter, signed by [CONTACT_83058], will briefly explain this optional study and will describe that if they do not wish to receive a call explaining the study, they can call the study team opt- out line to inform the study 
team. If the team does not receive an opt -out call after 10 days, a study coordinator will call the 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 potential participant and describe the study. The study coordinator will further describe details 
regarding the study, including its goals (to improve physical activity), study procedures (e.g., a total of 3 in -person visits, a total of 8 weekly s essions), and a review of risks and benefits. If 
patients do not meet criteria, they will also be asked for their permission to be contact[CONTACT_782452].  
In addition, we will reach out directly to physician groups, and patient ref erral will be 
encouraged. For directly referred patients, we will send opt -out letters as above. Finally, we may 
use hospi[INVESTIGATOR_782428], RSVP for Health, and/or the MGH Diabetes Research Center website to publicize the study.  
 IV. Subject enrollment  
 
A. Methods of enrollment  
If the patient is interested in the study during  the phone  discussion outlined above , the 
study staff member will evaluate for inclusion criteria, first assessing for physical activity using the brief IPAQ . Staff will similarly as sess for exclusion criteria (e.g., cognitive deficits on six -
item screen) via interview.  
  B. Procedures for obtaining informed consent  
If patients, as identified above, meet study criteria and remain interested in the study, the 
coordinator or other study staff will mail, or email, the patient a written IRB -approved consent 
form for their review, and will schedule an in- person visit that will take place at MGH . This will 
allow patients to have adequate time to read the consent form. Upon arrival at the  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], the 
study coordinator will review the consent form and allow the patent to ask any questions he or 
she may have; the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_782429]. To ensure that participants have the capacity to provide informed consent,  we will ask potential participants to 
describe their understanding of the study’s purpose and their role (i.e., that they understand the purpose of the study, timing of study visits/ accelerometers/phone calls and their purpose, confidentiality and its limits, our focused review of medical records, recording of phone sessions, and their ability to end participation in the study at any time for any reason). Participants will also complete a release of information to allow the study team to speak with their primary medical providers about safe physical activity goals.  They will also be asked for their permission 
to be contact[CONTACT_782453]. We will not exclude patients on the basis of 
race, ethnicity, or gender.  
If a potential subjec t is a patient in an investigator’s clinical practice (e.g., a patient of 
Co-I [CONTACT_215803]), we will ensure that this investigator will not be involved in recruitment, 
obtaining informed consent, or other aspects of the enrollment process. Patients will be given as much time as they desire to consider study participation and review the consent form, and enrollment will be deferred to a future appointment if desired.  
Upon signing informed consent, participants will complete baseline self -report 
assessments a nd a blood draw (for A1C) by a trained  phlebotomist in the MGH Corrigan 
Minehan Heart Center . A total of 5 ml/cc of blood will be drawn (this is equivalent to 1 
tablespoon of blood). We will collect basic de -identified information (e.g., age, race, gender, 
living alone, medical diagnoses) on eligible patients who decline participation to assess the representativeness of patients who enroll; such data will only be recorded, analyzed, and reported 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 in aggregate in comparison to enrollees, with no personal identifiable information collected.  We 
will also measure the participant’s weight at this initial visit.  
 
C. Treatment assignment/randomization  
Regarding randomization, we will utilize treatment allocation by [CONTACT_331858]55 under 
the direction of biostatistician [CONTACT_122138] to reduce accidental bias/chance imbalance of key 
participant variables b etween the two groups. Minimization is a dynamic randomization 
technique for achieving a balance of prognostic factors across treatment groups that allows 
balancing over a larger number of covariates than in stratification.56,57 Initially, slips of paper 
detailing study conditio n (with assignments generated using a random number generator; 30 per 
condition) will be generated by a research coordinator who is not otherwise involved in the project. The slips will be placed into sealed, opaque, and identical envelopes, and these will  be 
allocated to numbered study binders by  a study coordinator . Participants will be assigned to  a 
study condition via this simple randomization method initially. Once at least [ADDRESS_1076069] 
been enrolled in each group (to allow initial population of  both groups prior to balancing via 
minimization), we will activate the minimization procedure. For all subsequent enrollees, allocation of participants to study condition using a dynamic automated minimization 
algorithm
55 will occur to ensure balance on dichotomized age, gender , baseline physical activity , 
and medical comorbidity (Charlson index58) variables, using established methods.55,57,59 These 
covariables will also be included in the statistical models used to analyze study outcomes as per published methods using this technique.
60 No study staff or investigators will be aware of a 
participant’s condition until consent and all baseline assessments have been completed; participants and study st aff will learn of the participant’s study condition contemporaneously (via 
envelope [initial 16 enrollees] or computer assignment [subsequent enrollees]).     
 V. Study procedures  
A. Study visits /assessments (See Figure, below )   
 
          Overview.   At baseline, we will obtain self -report measures  (see below), height and 
weight , a blood sample for A1C, and accelerometer data for physical activity . At each 
intervention phone session, interventionists will collect feasibility  and acceptability  data (see 
below). At the  follow -up visit ( 8 weeks), a blinded assessor will obtain repeat self -report data, 
vitals, A1 C, and accelerometer data. At 16 weeks, a blinded assessor will obtain self -report data 
by [CONTACT_756], and an accelerometer will be mailed to the participant to measure physical activity. All participants will receive pedometers, free parking or public transportation at all visits, $20 Figure. Assessment procedures.  
Assessment for 
study criteria  
(T2D, low 
physical 
activity, oral 
T2D meds, 
exclusions)  Baseline data 
baseline 
characteristics
, self -report 
data, weight , 
A1C,  
accelerometer  PP-MI  
(n=30; 8 weeks)  Assessment by 
[CONTACT_152129], 
week 8:  
self-report data, 
vitals, A1C, 
accelerometer  MI alone 
(n=30; 8 weeks)  Assessment by 
[CONTACT_152129], 
week 16:  
self-report data, 
accelerometer  
Visit #1  
(in-person)  Follow -up 
Assessment (phone)  Follow -up Visit 
(in-person)  Phone Sessions  Visit #2  
(in-person)  Screening  
(phone)  Randomization 
participants 
receive 
manual, 
introduction to 
treatment arm  
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 after the second visit, $40 after the 8 -week follow -up visit, and $[ADDRESS_1076070] been returned.    
Initial/Enrollment  Visit (in -person  visit #1).   We will collect data on basic 
sociodemographic variables (age, gender, race/ethnicity, living alone, duration of T2D, 
medical/psychiatric comorbidities, medications) needed to characterize our population (and to be used as part of ra ndomization by [CONTACT_331858]).  Next, participants will complete self -report 
measures , and we will draw blood for A1C if participants did not have these procedures 
completed as part of a  clinical visit (if they had A1C in the last 3 weeks, including this visit, we 
will use that value to prevent subjecting participants to the blood draw).  This visi t will occur on 
site, partially in offices in the Warren building and partially in the MGH Corrigan Minehan Heart 
Center . Finally , participants will be given an accelerometer, which will be worn over the 
subsequent week (prior to visit #2) to measure baseline physical activity.  
Objective physical activity assessment  and in- person visit #2. In order to gather 
baseline physical activity data, participants will take  home and wear accelerometers for 1 week 
prior to visit #2. During in- person visit #2, participants will return their accelerometers and will 
begin the study intervention, as outlined below.    Intervention ( PP-MI vs. MI alone:  8 we ekly phone sessions ).  
PP-MI intervention . Participants randomized to PP -MI will receive a treatment manual. 
For each session, a PP exercise will be described in the manual, with instructions and space to write about the exercise and its effects. Next, an MI section will outline  specific MI -based topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] 
(e.g., pros/cons, managing slips) and facilitate physical activity goal -setting. Following 
randomization (in- person visit #2), interventionists will introduce  PP exercise #1 and MI session 
#1 to  participants to aid engagement. Fol lowing visit #2, participants will engage in weekly, 30 -
minute phone calls for the next 8 weeks. Participants will independently complete PP exercises and MI -based goals  between phone sessions  and review them during  phone sessions over 8 
weeks.  PP and MI c omponents will be delivered stepwise within sessions (rather than 
intertwined) based on our experience, participant feedback, and pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732].  
PP component details.  The PP portion of phone sessions (15 mins) will be structured to 
include: (i) review of the  prior PP exercise, (ii) discussion about how to translate the PP exercise 
skills to daily life (e.g., related to physical activity goals or other activities), including a specific 
focus on how such skills can be used to foster social support and interacti ons, and (iii) 
assignment of the next exercise via guided review of the treatment manual.  
 
Table 1. PP exercises  
Session 1: Counting blessings61  Participants recall three events, small or large, in the preceding week that were 
associated with satisfaction, happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], pride, or other positive states  
Session 2: Gratitude letter24 Participants write a letter of gratitude thanking a person for their support or 
kindness.  
Session 3:  Enjoyable and 
meaningful activities64 Participants complete three activities: an enjoyable activity alone, an enjoyable 
activity with another person, and a meaningful activity completed alone or with 
others.   
Session 4: Implementation  Participants focus on implementing positive psychology  skills into daily life.  
Session 5: Recalling past success63 Participants recall an event in which they experienced success. They next write 
about the event, their contribution to the success, and positive feelings elicited 
by [CONTACT_184375].  
Session 6: Using  personal 
strengths , part [ADDRESS_1076071] to use that 
strength in the next 7 days.  
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076072]. Park’s MI interventions,10-12 and data from T2D patients . The MI portion of calls 
(15 mins) will assess participant motivation to increase physical activity (safe, specific activity 
goals will be obtained from their me dical providers), and plan action steps or cognitive work to 
boost motivation. We will use established models of goal -setting and  feedback based in social 
cognitive theory67,[ADDRESS_1076073] step in 
becoming active for T2D patients70 and can improve health.71 The ultimate physical activity goal 
in nearly all cases will be moderate physical activity  for ≥150 min/week, per ADA guidelines.43 
Gradual, safe physical activity p rogression will be ensured via a stepwise approach, symptom 
monitoring, and coordination with participants’ physicians.  Participants will also be given a 
digital pedometer (Omron) that clips on a belt or other article of clothing, to promote and track phys ical activity.  Finally, this enhanced MI program will also focus on reduction of sedentary 
time by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_782430],
72-74 using the framework for increasing physical activity and our team’s  experience 
with sedentary time interventions.75 Participants will be mailed a graph o f their weekly step 
counts two times over the course of the study. The graph updates will be sent at the middle and end of the study  (i.e. following sessions 4 and 8 ).      
 
Walkability audit. Built environment audits (see attachment) can promote physical 
activity by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_782431], manage 
environmental barriers, and change perceptions about their environment.
76,77 PP-MI participants 
will complete the 15 -item Microscale Audit of Pedestrian Streetscapes -Mini (MAPS -Mini),78 a 
walkability audit that has participants identify walkways, parks, traffic, and other fea tures in their 
neighborhood and usual walking routes by [CONTACT_782454]. Participants will be oriented to MAPS -Mini administration in session 5  and complete it in the Session 7: Using personal 
strengths, part [ADDRESS_1076074] to 
use that strength in the next 7 days.  
Session 8:  Acts of kindness62 Participants complete three acts of kindness, planned or spontaneous, in a single 
day. 
Session 9: Planning for the f uture  Participants review the positive psychology skills they learned in the program, 
then make a plan to use their skills in the future.  
Table 2. MI sessions .  
5A’s model (all 
sessions)  Interventionists: (a) Ask about progress on the prior cognitive (e.g., pros/cons of becoming 
active) or physical activity goal, (b) Advise  about the benefits of physical activity on health 
and function, (c) Assess  current stage of change and barriers/facilitators to change, (d) As sist 
with setting a goal, and (e) Arrange  the next phone session.  
Session -specific 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_782432] 1: Introduction to MI tools and tracking of physical activity  
Session 2: Setting a SMART (Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, Time -based) 
activity goal  
Session 3: Identifying barriers and problem -solving around them  
Session 4: Using social and equipment resources  
Session 5: Finding new walking routes (neig hborhood walkability audit)  
Session 6: Using neighborhood resources  
Session 7: Managing slips  
Session 8 : Reducing sedent ary time/taking breaks  
Session 9 : Planning for the future   
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 next week. Information from this audit will be used dur ing MI sessions to facilitate the setting of 
practical physical activity goals based in participants’ local areas.   
Training and fidelity. All team interventionists have delivered PP -MI. Once the 
intervention is refined for T2D, they will receive additional training via didactics, role play, and 
supervised interviews. During the study, weekly interventionist supervision will be led by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Celano  (PP content) and [CONTACT_782469]  (MI). All sessions will be recorded; supervising study staff 
(Drs. Huffman, Celano, Millstein, or Park)  will rate a random selection (20%  at minimum) for 
fidelity using scales for the PP and MI components, respectively, and provide feedback.  
MI-based health behavior education condition (time matched). The MI -based health 
behavior e ducation intervention was selected as the control condition for several reasons.  The 
inclusion of MI and education regarding key diabetes health behaviors aims to increase the 
retention of participants included in this condition.  However, the focus of this intervention on multiple health behaviors and the lack of specific physical activity goal -setting make it less likely 
that this control intervention will significantly impact physical activity (our primary health behavior outcome).  Finally, as an attentional control, it has a parallel structure to the experimental arm with a treatment manual, weekly exercises, and weekly calls to review exercises.  
 
Each week, participants will learn about a different health behavior topic related to diabetes health. The y will also be introduced to motivational interviewing topi[INVESTIGATOR_122072].  The intervention is divided into four sections, focusing on different important diabetes health -related topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]:  
 
Part One: Diabetes Self -care 
How to Take Care of Your Diabetes (Session 1)  
Participants will review information about the importance of self -care (e.g., glucose 
monitoring, foot checks, eye exams) to reduce the risk of T2D complications.  
 
Part Two: Medication Adherence  
 Taking Medications Regularly  (Session 2)  
Participants will review the importance of medication adherence and learn about medications typi[INVESTIGATOR_324858] T2D.  Participants will be encouraged to create a list of their current medications, as well as any q uestions they have for their physicians about 
their medications.  
  Barriers to and Resources for Taking Medications Regularly  (Session 3)  
Participants will identify barriers to taking medications, problem- solve those barriers, and 
identify resources to hel p them maintain adherence to medications.  
 
Part Three: Staying Active  
 The Importance of Staying Active (Session 4)  
Participants will review the cardiovascular benefits of physical activity, questions to ask their physician prior to starting physical activ ity, and ways to set goals related to physical 
activity.  
  How You Can Stay Active  (Session 5)  
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076075] of pros and cons for behavior change.  
  Barriers to and Resources for Activity (Session 6)  
Participants will identify barriers to physical activity in their life and brainstorm ways to 
proble m-solve around those barriers.  Furthermore, they will identify social, community -
based, and equipment resources available to help them with physical activity.  
 
Part Four: Having a Healthy Diet  
 Making Dietary Changes  (Session 7)  
Participants will learn about the importance of reducing sugar, fat, and cholesterol in their 
diet.   Next, they will identify one way in which they wish to change their diet.  They will discuss the importance of making the change and their confidence about being able to do so.  Finally, they will create a list of pros and cons for behavior change.  
  Barriers to and Resources for a Healthy Diet  (Session 8)  
Participants will review how to properly read a food label and learn techniques to make healthy decisions while food shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  They also will identify barriers to a healthy diet, problem -solve those barriers, and identify resources that can help to improve their diet.  
  Planning for the Future  (Session 9)  
Participants will review the information learned over the course of the program and think of ways to remain healthy after the end of the program.  
 
Follow -up assessment s (week s 8 [in-person ] and 16 [by [CONTACT_648]] ).  After completion of 
the intervention, participants will wear the Actigraph accelerometers for 1 week ( they will have 
had the devices [ which have no identifying information outside of a serial #]  mailed to them 
prior to the visit and will return them at the in -person session) , then return to the TCRC for an in-
person session (8 weeks) . At this session,  height and weight, hemoglobin A1c , and self -report 
data will be obtained . These visits will occur on the MGH main campus ( TCRC) . At 16 weeks, a 
follow -up phone session will be performed to obtain self -reported outcome data, and participants 
will be asked to wear an accelerom eter for one week. We will allow a window of 3 weeks, to 
allow flexibility of scheduling such in -person appointments in [LOCATION_011] (and to allow coordination 
with other medical visits at MGH) while maintaining integrity of study findings.  Follow -up 
assessments will be completed by a study staff member who is blinded to the participant’s study condition.  
B.  Drugs to be used  
There are no drugs used in this study.  
 
C.  Devices to be used  To measure physical activity, we will use the ActiGraph GT3X + accelerometer,
82 a 
small,  silent device without readout that is worn at the hip and stores data for several weeks ; it 
has been validated and used in many populations, including T2D, to measure habitual physical activity.
83  The GT3X + is a hal f-dollar -sized device that is very lightweight, clips to a belt or 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 shoe, and has no sharp edges, shock risk, or visible  readout (or any identifying data).  
Participants will wear the devices for 7 days. We will consider 5 valid days of wear (8+ hours 
per day) to be sufficient; participants will re -wear devices if needed. In a recently completed  PP-
MI study in ACS patients (n= 128; PHS IRB# 2014P001756), we  used these devices/methods 
with good results. Sedentary time will also be measured with Actigraphs, using protocols to 
differentiate between sedentary time and device non -wear.84,85  Data will be downloaded onto 
our study team’s local computers without need to transmit data to external servers.  
 
D. Procedures  
A single venous blood sample will be collected at baseline  and 8 weeks by [CONTACT_782455], for A1C. No other  procedures will be performed.   
 
E.  Data collected and when the data is to be collected (see Table 1, below)  
Baseline characteristics . To allow us to better understand our study population (and to 
allow for limited/qualitative accounting for covariates, we will record subjects’ baseline 
characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, duration of diabetes diagnosis, medical and psychiatric comorbidities, medications, and baseline lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], and hemoglobin A1c). Data will be obtained at the initial interview and  supplemented with information from medical records.   
Feasibility and acc eptability ( Aim 1; # of PP- MI sessions completed, participant ratings 
of PP- MI ease and utility ). Interventionists will record completion of PP -MI sessions at each 
session (weeks 1 -8).  A completed PP -MI session requires both: (i) PP exercise completion and 
phone discussion, and (ii) the MI portion of the call must end with a specific physical activity -
based goal for the next week. In addition, a t intervention calls, participants will separately report 
ease and utility (0 -10 scales) of the prior week’s PP exercise and MI -based goal -setting, for 4 
total ratings  per session .  
Physical activity ( Aim 2; moderate to vigorous physical activity (MVPA)  and sedentary 
time,  in mean minutes/day ). As noted, w e will follow established protocols
86 for ActiGraphs. 
Participants will wear th e devices for 7 days and we will consider 5 valid days of wear (8+ hours 
per day) to be sufficient; participants will re -wear devices if needed. We will use standard cutoffs 
(in counts/minute) for MVPA and non- wear time per the literature87,[ADDRESS_1076076]. Kerr. Sedentary 
time w ill also be measured with Actigraphs.84,85  This data will be collected at baseline and  8 
weeks.  
Self-report measures (Aim 3; psychological, behavioral, and functional measures ).  
These measures , except for the AUDIT -C and Cigarette Use Questionnaire (baseline only),  will 
be collected by [CONTACT_782456], 8 weeks, and 16 weeks:   
• Positive affect  (our main psychological outcome given its links to health outcomes and 
sensitivity to change53,65) will be ass essed using the  relevant items from the  PANAS .50  
• Additional psychological measures  will include the well- validated Life Orientation Test -
Revised (LOT -R)89 for optimism, the Self -Efficacy for Exercise scale90-92 (SEE) for 
physical activity self -efficacy, and the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620] (HADS) 
for depression and anxiety;93 the HADS was designed for medically ill cohorts. We will 
also include validated measures that may mediate connections between PP -MI and PA; 
these include the Brief Resilience Scale (BRS), the Self -Efficacy for Exercise (SEE) 
scale, and the Multid imensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS).  
• Overall diabetes self -care (e.g., diet, medication, foot care), will be measured using we 
will use the 11 -item Summary of Diabetes Self -Care Activities (SDSCA),94 a well -
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 validated self -report measure associated with clinical outcomes.95,96  
• For T2D medication adherence, we will use a % -based self -report measure97 found to 
correlate highly with pi[INVESTIGATOR_782433] T2D patients, allowing us to include 
patients with varied medications/dosing schedules.  
• For dietary adherence , we will analyze the dietary items in the SDSCA a s a separate 
outcome.95  
• For physical function, the PROMIS 20- item short form (PF -20) will be used. The PF -20 
has strong item clarity,98 and it has been highly responsive to change in patients with a 
wide range of physical function.98-100  
• For pain -related disability , we will use the Pain Disability Index (PDI), validated in 
medical settings.  
• For self -reported physical activity , we will use the IPAQ, well -validated in diverse 
settings .  
• For self -reported smoking history , we will use the Cigarette Use Questionnaire.  
• For self -reported alcohol use , we will use the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test – 
Consumption (AUDIT -C).  
  
Medical outcomes (Aim #3 ; exploratory ). At baseline and follow -up, we will also 
measure weight  and A1C .  
 
Table 1. Schedule of study events /assessments.  
 
*Will use values from clinical visit (or within 3 weeks in the case of A1C) if available.  
 
VI. Biostatistical analyses:  
 
A and B. Specific data variables and study endpoints  
 
Specific Aim 1 ( feasibility and acceptability) : To determine whether the PP -MI intervention is 
feasible (assessed by % of total PP -MI phone sessions completed) and well -accepted (assessed 
by [CONTACT_782450] -MI session) among T2D patients with 
low baseline activity.   
 Measures :  Pre-
enrollment  Enrollment  Weeks 
1-8 Week 8 Week 
16 
Assessment for inclusion criteria (T2D, 
IPAQ )   X     
Assessment for exclusion criteria (e.g., 
cognitive screen, other medical conditions 
limiting activity)   X     
Interview and c hart review for baseline 
characteristics   X    
Self-report measures   X  X X 
Vital signs (weight) and A1C*   X  X  
Accelerometer ( MVPA  and sedentary time)   X  X X 
PP-MI exercise sessions    X   
Session ratings by [CONTACT_4317]  (ease/utility)    X   
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 • Rates of completion of exercises (recorded by [CONTACT_122117])  
 
Specific Aim 2 ( physical activity ): To assess whether PP -MI is associated with larger increases 
in MVPA, and less sede ntary time, on accelerometer at  8 and 16 weeks , compared to  MI. 
 
Measures : 
• MVPA in mean minutes per day  
• Sedentary time in mean minutes per day  
 
Specific Aim 3 ( additional outcomes ): To explore whether the PP -MI intervention is associated 
with greater improvements on other psychological, behavioral, and medical outcome s, compared 
to MI.  
 
Measures : 
• Psychological measures: PANAS, LOT -R, SEE, HADS , BRS, MSPSS  
• Behavioral measures: SDSCA, % medication adherence, IPAQ , PF-20, PDI  
• Medical outcomes: W eight , BMI,  and A1C  
 
C. Statistical methods  
All analyses will be performed under the direction of biostatistician [CONTACT_122138]. All 
analyses will be performed using Stata 14.0.  Alpha for between- group comparisons will be set at 
p=.05.  We will use descriptive statistics  (means, standard deviations, proportions  for the Aim 1 
feasibility/acceptability outcomes. For Aim 2, we will compare between -group improvement 
from baseline in mean minutes/day of MVPA  (and sedentary time) at 8 weeks using a random 
effects regression model, with a random intercept for each patient, allowing us to include 
participants with some missing data.101 For Aim 3, we will likewise compare change from 
baseline on all measures (e.g., self -care, A1C) at 8  weeks, using random effects models. We will 
secondarily compare outcomes at 16 weeks, and will complete sensitivity analyses by [CONTACT_4321]. All variables used in minimization (age, gender, baseline MVPA, Charlson index)  will be included 
as covariates in these models as per protocol using this method.
[ADDRESS_1076077] size (Coh en’s d, defined as change in the outcome measure divided by [CONTACT_782457] ) of PP -MI for each Aim 2/ [ADDRESS_1076078] from PP -MI to proximal targets (positive affect/optimism/self -
efficacy) to physical activity .  
  D. Power analysis  
For our primary aim (feasibility/acceptability), in our prior work, 75% of subjects 
completed three -quarters of sessions.
25,[ADDRESS_1076079] 80% power (two -sided α=0.05, binomial proporti on test) to demonstrate that the 
proportion who complete > 8 of 11 PP -MI sessions is larger than 50% (i.e., a majority). Likewise, 
mean PP ease/utility scores were 7.8+/ - 1.8 in prior work;35 with n=30 (and 4 weekly ratings per 
participant), we will have 93% power (using a within- person correlation of 0.5 for ratings across 
exercises) to detect a true mean score of >7.[ADDRESS_1076080] group differences on physical activity  and other Aim 2/3 outcomes, 
but it will allow us to gather data on PP -MI’s impact on these outcomes at this key early stage.  
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
   
VII. Risks and discomforts  
 
A. Complications of surgical/non -surgical procedures  
Blood sampling. We will obtain A1C data at baseline  and [ADDRESS_1076081] an 
infection at the site. We will minimize these risks by: (1) ensuring that blood samples are drawn 
by [CONTACT_782458] ( TCRC research protocol 
nurse ) and have specific experience with this procedure, and (2) i f A1C is drawn at the clinical 
visit or was obtained within the prior 3 weeks, that value will be used rather than subjecting the participant to an additional blood draw . Procedurally, we will make sure participants are seated 
comfortably during and after the sampling, and we will temporarily (or permanently) halt blood draws if patients voice pain or discomfort. If participants experience problems after blood draws (e.g., concerns about infection), they will be able to reach a study physician at any time, who can 
help to assess the situation over the phone or arrange to have the participant seen by [CONTACT_782459].  
 
B. Drug side effects and toxicities  
No medications are being used in this study.  
 
C. Device complications  
Accelerometer.  The devices used to measure physical activity  should pose minimal risk 
to subjects. The accelerometer (ActiGraph G3TX +) used to measure activity as a formal study 
outcome is small, lightweight, and without sharp edges. Immersing the device in water for a 
prolonged period may render it unusable, but does not pose a shock risk. We will provide explicit instructions regarding the use of this  device to ensure safety and proper use, and to reduce 
inconvenience/distress associated with uncertainty about their use. Participants will also have study staff contact [CONTACT_782460]; project staff will be well-versed in the use of these devices given their experience from our prior projects that have 
used the G3TX +.   
 
D. Psychosocial risks  
Confidentiality.  To minimize confidentiality -related risks, we will use participant ID 
numbers —as opposed to identifiable personal data or medical record numbers —on all study 
documents. We will discuss only information that is related directly to the study with subjects’ clinicians, and we will use locked cabinets and offices as well as password -protected databases 
to store personal information. Information from self -report assessments will be collected and 
stored using the secure, HIPPA -compliant, firewalled, and password- protected REDCap system. 
REDCap is a free web -based application developed for management of research and clini cal 
data; it has separate password -protected data collection repositories for each trial. We have used 
this system for numerous prior studies without difficulty. Accelerometers will be labeled only with participant numbers; they will be connected to staff computers via USB and staff will utilize the password- protected Actigraph software downloaded onto our local computers to obtain 
activity data. No personally identifiable information will be recorded physically or electronically onto the accelerometers or within the software program.  
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 Finally, digital recordings of PP -MI and MI sessions will be completed using portable 
recorders. Randomly -selected sessions will be reviewed for competence and adherence to the 
protocol  by [CONTACT_782461] (e.g., Project Director, PI) using PP and MI fidelity 
rating scales . For sessions in the MI alone condition, supervising study staff will complete  
fidelity ratings with additional rating items to ensure that interventionists are not delivering PP 
content or other content (e.g., related to sedentary time) specific to PP -MI. All recordings will be 
downloaded immediately from the recorders and the electronic files will be kept within the 
firewalled, password -protected shared file area for fidelity review. Reco rdings will contain no 
personally identifiable information (and study interventionists will be specifically trained not to use names or other identifying information on the recordings) and will be erased following review. We have used all of these methods to maintain confidentiality in prior projects using the same measures, data repository, accelerometers, and recorders.  
We will ensure that contact [CONTACT_782462] -
related messages for subjects unless expressly allowed by [CONTACT_1766]. Upon enrollment, we ask all participants if it is acceptable to leave voice messages on their phones, as well as the appropriate times to call them. We adhere to any and all patient requests regarding contact.   
Medical/psychiatric issues.  If there is an urgent medical or psychiatric condition that 
becomes apparent during in- person or phone -based sessions or at follow -up assessments, a stud y 
physician will assess the patient’s situation and ensure that the patient is seen immediately for an assessment in an emergency department or other urgent care setting if this is necessary; the PI ([CONTACT_102974]) and study internist/endocrinologist ([CONTACT_348727] xler) are available 24/[ADDRESS_1076082].  
Hypoglycemia. Some medications for T2D (i.e., insulin, sulfonylureas, repaglinide, 
nateglinide) can lead to hypoglycemia, and patients increasing their activity may become 
hypoglycemic . To address this for all participants who are on medications that can lower 
glucose, we will provide specific verbal and written guidance about symptoms of hypoglycemia, 
self-monitoring of blood glucose, and management of hypoglycemia, using handouts and 
protocols adapted from the NIDDK -funded Look AHEAD and REAL HEALTH -Diabetes (Look 
AHEAD implementation) studies focused on increasing activity in patients with T2D.103,[ADDRESS_1076083] the study team if hypoglycemia occurs during exercise. At all calls and follow -
up assessments, interventionists and study staff will also query participants who are currently 
taking medications known to predispose patients to hypoglycemia during exercise  (i.e., insulin, 
meglitinides, or sulfonylureas)  about signs and symptoms of hypoglycemia. If such symptoms 
arise, the study endocrinologist ( [CONTACT_215803]) will coordinate with participants’ medical care 
providers (and evaluate participants by [CONTACT_14379] -person as needed) to assist in making 
medication and other care adjustments to address these epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], utilizing the approach used by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Wexler  when managing T2D participants on glucose -lowering medications in REAL 
HEALTH -Diabetes. Patients who are not currently taking medications known to increase risk of 
hypoglycemia during physical activity will not be asked about hypoglycemia symptoms at ever y 
call, in order to minimize participant burden. However, these participants will still be encouraged 
to notify their interventionist should they experience any symptoms of hypoglycemia.  
Physical activity safety. To ensure that patients can safely particip ate in physical activity, 
we will confirm with the patient’s clinician (physician or nurse practitioner) that the patient is 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076084] the study physicians (e.g., [CONTACT_215803]), who will reach out to the participant’s clinician to inform them,  obtain direction, and alter the physical activity plan as 
needed; she will also reach out to participants as needed. As noted above, participants will sign a release of information to allow such contact [CONTACT_782463] (diabetologist, primary care physici an) during the informed consent process.  
Depression/anxiety symptoms and suicidal ideation. Participants will complete the 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620] (HADS)
93 as part of assessments; although this is a 
symptom meas ure and is not used to make a diagnosis of depression or an anxiety disorder, for 
participants with HADS depressio n or anxiety subscale scores of 10  or more, we will complete 
an assessment for suicidal ideation using our standardized, published protocol105 and inform 
patients’ primar y providers of the elevated depression/anxiety score. For participants who have 
active suicidal ideation or are otherwise considered to be at high risk (e.g., due to combinations of depression symptom severity, history of prior attempt, and passive suicidal ideation),  a study 
psychiatrist  will perform a separate assessment and will arrange for urgent evaluation (e.g., in an 
emergency department) if clinically indicated.  
 We will ask subjects to report adverse events related to study participation they may have experienced at any time throughout the study.  Any adverse events will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_782434].  
 VIII. Potential benefits  
 
A. Potential benefits to participants  
Participants in the project may not benefit from their participation. All participants (in 
either study condition) will receive serial assessments of medical, psychiatric, and functional status, allowing them access to emergent care if required. Participan ts in the control condition 
will receive MI, an established health behavior intervention associated with improvements in physical activity  in patients with T2D , as well as T2D -specific education .
[ADDRESS_1076085] on physical activ ity over 12 weeks. Furthermore, the PP intervention 
component may lead to improved engagement in MI, potentially leading to greater efficacy of 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076086] ivity (and re duced distress) in participants randomized to PP -MI. PP -MI 
participants will also have additional novel content, including systematic encouragement to 
utilize social supports, use of a neighborhood walkability audit to identify local physical activity  
opportunities, and a focus on reducing sitting time. These may further promote physical activity  
and reduce sedentary time, which has been associated with adverse medical outcomes in T2D 
independent of MVPA.106,107  
 
B. Potential benefits to society  
Participation in physical activity  (and other health behaviors) is crucial in preventing 
adverse events in T2D.1-3,[ADDRESS_1076087] 
efficacy. We postulate that a combined PP -MI intervention has the potential to increase physical 
activity  in inactive T2D patients through the combined effects of its two components. However, 
a PP-MI intervention has never been studied in patients with T2D prior to our team’s exploratory 
work. At this stage, there is still much knowledge to be gained about the feasibility, efficacy, and 
optimal implementation of this innovative intervention for T2D patients who are at elevated risk of adverse outcomes and mortality due to their inactivity.  
By [CONTACT_782464], we will learn whether this intervention is feasible and well-
accepted by T2D patients who have low physical activ ity at baseline. We will also examine 
whether the intervention is associated with increased physical activity  (objectively measured by 
[CONTACT_6317]) in this cohort compared to those receiving standard MI. Finally, we will be able to explore whether this P P-MI intervention may have  
effects on additional psychological, adherence -related, and medical outcomes.  
            This knowledge could be of substantial importance. If the PP -MI intervention proves to 
be feasible, well -accepted, and effective in this study and larger follow -up studies, it may be 
possible to implement this easily -delivered program as part of a clinical care package for T2D 
patients who have low physical activity . This, in turn, could lead to better glycemic control, 
greater self -care, and fewer complications in a vulnerable population at high risk of 
complications and mortality. Therefore the knowledge gained from this initial study may ultimately translate to substantial benefit for future patients and public health.   VIII. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
A. Independent monitoring of source data  
 Entry of data into REDCap will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_782435]/entered into this system.  They will also review do wnloading of data from REDCap into Stata to ensure that the data is being accurately 
transmitted to the study database for study analyses.  
.  
B. Safety monitoring  
We will utilize an Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for this study. The following 
proced ures will be followed to ensure participant safety and the validity and integrity of data:  
Functions of the DSMB . The DSMB will review proposed amendments to the study 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076088]. Andrew Nierenberg (Psychiatry), [CONTACT_782470] (Diabetes/Endocrinology), and [CONTACT_122136] ( Biostatistics); all have agreed to serve in this role throughout the study. The DSMB 
Chairperson ([CONTACT_122137]) will communicate by [CONTACT_122127], and will coordinate formal, scheduled meetings of all members of the study and the  PI.  
Monitoring of Safety Data by [CONTACT_4318] . Safety information for this study will be 
reported to the DSMB in an unblinded manner. A statistical penalty will not be assessed for the unblinded review of safety by [CONTACT_4318]. Unblinded data will not be releas ed to investigators 
unless necessary for safety reasons.  
Range of Safety Reporting to the DSMB . It is considered necessary that the DSMB 
review not only adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs), but other data that may reflect differences in safety between treatment groups. This includes treatment retention rates and reasons for dropout.  
Serious Adverse Events . Expedited review will occur for all events meeting the definition 
of Serious Adverse Events (SAEs); i.e., any fatal event, immediatel y life -threatening event, 
permanently or substantially disabling event, or event requiring or prolonging inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. This also includes any event that a study investigator or the DSMB judges to impose a significant hazard, contraindication, side effect, or precaution. All relevant information will be reported to the DSMB for each SAE including information about the event and its outcome, study group assignment, medications, the subject’s medical history and current conditions, and any relevant laboratory data. Notification by e -mail and FAX transmittal of all 
related study forms shall be made to the DSMB. Information will be reviewed and a determination made of possible relevance to the study.  
Non-Serious Adverse Events . At periodic intervals  determined by [CONTACT_4318] (e.g., 
quarterly during the study and then again at its completion), the DSMB will be provided with unblinded summaries of the numbers and rates of adverse events by [CONTACT_1570]. These reports will include types of events, sever ity, and treatment phase. Data on individual non-
serious adverse events is not expected to be needed for this review.  
Other Safety -Related Reports . At quarterly intervals, the DSMB will also receive 
unblinded summary reports of treatment retention and reas ons for drop -out, by [CONTACT_122128].  
Study Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869] . If at any time during the course of the study, the DSMB judges 
that risk to participants outweighs the potential benefits, the DSMB shall have the discretion and responsibility to r ecommend that the study be terminated.  
Monitoring of Data Quality by [CONTACT_4318] . At least on a quarterly basis during the course 
of the study, the DSMB will receive a report on data quality and completeness. [CONTACT_122138] (study biostatistician) will prepa re these reports in collaboration with [CONTACT_102974]. At a 
minimum, this will include an overview of the progress of patient intake and retention; summary reports describing patient compliance with evaluations as described in the protocol; and a summary of the completeness and quality of key data elements needed to characterize patients, 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 study interventions, and primary and secondary outcomes. These reports will be used by [CONTACT_782465].  
Annual DSMB Report to NIH/NIDDK . During the course of the study, the DSMB will 
prepare annual summary reports (two reports in total) of its findings regarding safety and quality based on data received to that point in the study. If  there are more specific concerns about data 
quality, study safety, or other issues, the DSMB can elect to generate reports more frequently. This report will include a summary of all safety findings, as well as an assessment of protocol compliance and data quality. Any recommendations to improve patient safety, protocol adherence, or data quality will be made in this DSMB report.  A copy of this DSMB report will 
also be sent to the PHS IRB along with the annual renewal report.  
In addition to the work of the DSMB, t he research team will meet on a weekly basis to 
review study progress. During these weekly meetings, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_782436], study forms, and procedures completed that week. The study team will also discuss  any procedural difficulties, recruitment issues, and adverse events at this 
meeting (and before if needed). If there are consistent issues with the logistics, feasibility, or acceptability of recruitment, enrollment, follow -ups, or the intervention (e.g.,  participant 
complaints about  length of follow -ups), we will review our methods and alter the study protocol 
as needed.  
Patient Alert System. MGH has an electronic system that lets the study team know if a 
participant is admitted to a Partners Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], o r if they visit a Partners Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_782437]. This alert will let the study doctors know why a participant is there, to make sure the study doctors know about any possible problems or side effects participants experience while taking part in the study.  
 
C. Outcomes monitoring  
For this initial randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], we will not plan to perform interim analyses  
beyond the analyses performed by [CONTACT_4318] . However, given the feasibility and acceptability 
focus of this study, we will review ratings of intervention ease/utility after 10 and/or [ADDRESS_1076089] that there are substantial barriers to acceptability (e.g., reports from participants at follow -ups/interviews, high rates of dropout ) and 
consider changes to the protocol as indicated .  
 
 D. Adverse event reporting guidelines  
We will follow all PHRC guidelines with respect to reporting unanticipated problems, 
including adverse events. Specifically, when a serious or nonserious adverse event occurs, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_782438]. For all unanticipated problems and adverse events deemed related or possibly related to the research, we will complete and submit  an Other Event report through Insight/eIRB as soon as 
possible and within 5 working days / 7 calendar days (as defined in the March 2014 Reporting Unanticipated Problems Including Adverse Events report). At Continuing Review, we will provide a summary of all unanticipated problems as per PHRC protocol. Finally, if there are 
unanticipated problems, especially if serious or recurrent, the PI ([CONTACT_102974]) will amend the protocol if it is deemed necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the participants.   
 X. References  
 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 1. Morrato EH, Hill JO, Wyatt HR, Sullivan PW. Physical activity in U.S. adults with 
diabetes and at risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_303729], 2003. Diabetes Care. Feb 2007;30(2):203-209. 
2. Blomster JI, Chow CK, Zoungas S, et al. The influence of physical activity on vascular complications and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. Nov 2013;15(11):1008- 1012.  
3. Brown RE, Riddell MC, Macpherson AK, Cannin g KL, Kuk JL. All -cause and 
cardiovascular mortality risk in U.S. adults with and without type 2 diabetes: influence of physical activity, pharmacological treatment and glycemic control. Journal of Diabetes and Its Complications. May -Jun 2014;28(3):311- 315. 
4. Reddigan JI, Riddell MC, Kuk JL. The joint association of physical activity and glycaemic control in predicting cardiovascular death and all -cause mortality in the US 
population. Diabetologia. Mar 2012;55(3):632- 635. 
5. Carroll J, Winters P, Fiscella K, et al. Process evaluation of practice -based diabetes 
prevention programs: what are the implementation challenges? Diabetes Educator. Jun 2015;41(3):271- 279. 
6. Matthews L, Kirk A, Macmillan F, Mutrie N. Can physical activity interventions for adults with type 2 diabetes be translated into practice settings? A systematic review. Translational Behavioral Medicine. Mar 2014;4(1):60- 78. 
7. Bastiaens H, Sunaert P, Wens J, et al. Supporting diabetes self -management in primary 
care: pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -study of a group- based  programme focusing on diet and exercise. Primary 
Care Diabetes. May 2009;3(2):103- 109. 
8. Osborn CY, Amico KR, Cruz N, et al. Development and implementation of a culturally tailored diabetes intervention in primary care. Translational Behavioral Medicine. Sep 2011;1(3):568- 479. 
9. Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change, 3rd 
edition. [LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford Press; 2012. 
10. Park ER, Japuntich S, Temel J, et al. A smoking cessation intervention for thoracic surgery and oncology clinics: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Journal of Thoracic Oncology. Jun 2011;6(6):1059- 1065.  
11. Park ER, Quinn VP, Chang Y, et al. Recruiting pregnant smokers into a clinical trial: using a network- model managed care organization versus community -based practices. 
Preventive Medicine. Mar 2007;44(3):223- 229. 
12. Park ER, Puleo E, Zorn M, et al. A process evaluation of a telephone -based peer -
delivered smoking cessation intervention for adult survivors of childhood cancer. Preventive Medicine. Jun 2006;42:435- 442. 
13. Christie D, Channon S. The potential for motivational interviewing to improve outcomes in the management of diabetes and obesity: a clinical review. Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism. May 2014;16(5):381- 387. 
14. Avery L, Flynn D, van Wersch A, Sniehotta  FF, Trenell MI. Changing activity behavior 
in type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta -analysis of behavioral interventions. 
Diabetes Care. Dec 2012;35(12):2681- 2689.  
15. Goossens ME, Vlaeyen JW, Hidding A, Kole -Snijders A, Evers SM. Treatment 
expect ancy affects the outcome of cognitive -behavioral interventions in chronic pain. 
Clinical Journal of Pain. Jan -Feb 2005;21(1):18- 26. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 16. Joseph CL, Havstad SL, Johnson D, et al. Factors associated with nonresponse to a 
computer -tailored asthma management pr ogram for urban adolescents with asthma. 
Journal of Asthma. Aug 2010;47(6):667- 673. 
17. Scheier MF, Helgeson VS, Schulz R, et al. Moderators of interventions designed to enhance physical and psychological functioning among younger women with early -stage 
breast cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology. Dec 20 2007;25(36):5710- 5714. 
18. Ismail K, Maissi E, Thomas S, et al. A randomised controlled trial of cognitive behaviour therapy and motivational interviewing for people with type 1 diabetes mellitus with persi stent sub- optimal glycaemic control. Health Technology Assessment. May 
2010;14(22):1- 101. 
19. Smith DE, Kratt PP, Mason DA. Motivational interviewing to improve adherence to a behavioral weight -control program for older obese women with NIDDM. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_1427] y. 
Diabetes Care. Jan 1997;20(1):52- 54. 
20. Scheier MF, Matthews KA, Owens JF, et al. Dispositional optimism and recovery from coronary artery by[CONTACT_4897]. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Dec 1989;57(6):1024- 1040.  
21. Steptoe A, Dockray S, Wardle J. Positive affect and psychobiological processes relevant to health. Journal of Personality. Dec 2009;77(6):1747- 1776. 
22. Celano CM, Beale EE, Moore SV, Wexler DJ, Huffman JC. Positive psychological characteristics in diabetes: a review. Current Diabetes Reports. 2013;13:917- 929. 
23. Bolier L, Haverman M, Westerhof GJ, Riper H, Smit F, Bohlmeijer E. Positive psychology interventions: a meta -analysis of randomized controlled studies. BMC Public 
Health. 2013;13:119. 
24. Seligman ME, Steen TA , Park N, Peterson C. Positive psychology progress: empi[INVESTIGATOR_122083]. American Psychologist. Jul -Aug 2005;60(5):410- 421. 
25. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Boehm JK, et al. Development of a positive psychology intervention for patients wi th acute cardiovascular disease. Heart International. 
2011;6(2):e14.  
26. Ogedegbe GO, Boutin- Foster C, Wells MT, et al. A randomized controlled trial of 
positive -affect intervention and medication adherence in hypertensive African 
Americans. Archives of In ternal Medicine. Feb 27 2012;172(4):322- 326. 
27. Peterson JC, Charlson ME, Hoffman Z, et al. A randomized controlled trial of positive -
affect induction to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention. Archives of Internal Medicine. Fe b 27 2012;172(4):329- 336. 
28. Aikens JE. Prospective associations between emotional distress and poor outcomes in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Dec 2012;35(12):2472- 2478. 
29. Cohn MA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_782439], Saslow LR, Hult JR, Moskowitz JT. An online positive affect skills intervention reduces depression in adults with type 2 diabetes. Journal of Positive Psychology. Jan 1 2014;9(6):523- 534. 
30. McClure JB, Ludman E, Grothaus L, Pabinia k C, Richards J, Mohelnitzky A. Immediate 
and short -term impact of a motivational smoking intervention using a biomedical risk 
assessment. Nicotine & Tobacco Research. Apr 2009;11(4):394- 403. 
31. Meevissen YM, Peters ML, Alberts HJ. Become more optimistic by [CONTACT_782466] a best possible self: effects of a two week intervention. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry. Mar 2 2011;42(3):371- 378. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 32. Huffman JC, Beale EE, Celano CM, et al. Effects of optimism and gratitude on physical 
activity, bi omarkers, and readmissions after an acute coronary syndrome: the Gratitude 
Research in Acute Coronary Events study. Circulation. Cardiovascular quality and outcomes. Jan 2016;9(1):55- 63. 
33. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Mastromauro CA, Moore SV, Suarez L, Park E R. Positive 
psychological states and health behaviors in acute coronary syndrome patients: a qualitative study. Journal of Health Psychology. Aug 11 2014 Aug 11 [epub ahead of 
print].  
34. Huffman JC, Moore SV, DuBois CM, Mastromauro CA, Suarez L, Park ER. An exploratory mixed methods analysis of adherence predictors following acute coronary syndrome. Psychology, Health & Medicine. Dec 15 2015;20:541- 550. 
35. Huffman JC, Millstein RA, Mastromauro CA, et al. A positive psychology intervention for patients with an acute coronary syndrome: treatment development and proof -of-
concept trial. Journal of Happi[INVESTIGATOR_122086]. 2015:Oct 19 [epub ahead of print].  
36. Millstein RA, Celano CM, Park ER, Mastromauro CA, Albanese AM, et al.  A psychological -behavioral intervent ion for physical activity in cardiac patients: trial 
rationale and methodology.  Abstract to be presented at the American College of Sports Medicine Annual Meeting, [LOCATION_011] MA, May 31, 2016. 
37. Rounsaville BJ, Carroll KM, Onken LS. A stage model of behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11482]: getting started and moving on from stage I. Clinical Psychology -Science and Practice. 
2001;8(2):133- 142. 
38. Czajkowski SM, Powell LH, Adler N, et al. From ideas to efficacy: the ORBIT model for developi[INVESTIGATOR_388194]. Health Psychology. Feb 2 
2015;34:971- 982. 
39. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Millstein RA, Celano CM, Wexler DJ. Positive psychological 
interventions for patients with type 2 diabetes: rationale, theoretical model, and intervention development. J ournal of Diabetes Research. 2015;428349:1- 18. 
40. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Millstein RA, Wexler DJ. A positive psychological intervention to promote physical activity and other health behaviors in patients with type 2 diabetes: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251].  Abstract pres ented at American Psychosomatic Society Meeting, 
Denver CO, March 9, 2016. 
41. Huffman JC, Beale EE, Albanese AM, Villegas AC, Wexler DJ.  Relationships between positive psychological constructs and physical activity in patients with type 2 diabetes: a qualitative study. Abstract presented at American Psychosomatic Society Annual 
Meeting, Denver, CO, March 10, 2016.  
42. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes: 2013. Diabetes Care. Jan 2013;[ADDRESS_1076090] 1:S11- 66. 
43. Colberg SR, Siga l RJ, Fernhall B, et al. Exercise and type 2 diabetes: the American 
College of Sports Medicine and the American Diabetes Association: joint position statement. Diabetes Care. Dec 2010;33(12):e147- 167. 
44. Lee PH, Macfarlane DJ, Lam T, Stewart SM. Validity of the international physical activity questionnaire short form (IPAQ -SF): A systematic review. International Journal 
of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2011;8(1):1. 
45. Booth ML, Ainsworth BE, Pratt M, et al. International physical activity qu estionnaire: 
12-country reliability and validity. Med sci sports Exerc. 2003;195(9131/03):3508- 1381. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, [ADDRESS_1076091]. American Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. Jan 1985;121(1):91- 106. 
47. Hayden -Wade HA, Coleman KJ, Sallis JF, Armstrong C. Validation of the telephone and 
in-person interview versions of the 7- day PAR. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise. May 2003;35(5):801- 809. 
48. Sarkin JA, Nichols JF, Sallis JF, C alfas KJ. Self -report measures and scoring protocols 
affect prevalence estimates of meeting physical activity guidelines. Medicine and Science 
in Sports and Exercise. Jan 2000;32(1):149- 156. 
49. Regensteiner JG, Shetterly SM, Mayer EJ, et al. Relationship between physical activity and insulin area in individuals with impaired glucose tolerance. Diabetes Care. Apr 1995;18(4):490- 497. 
50. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: the PANAS sc ales. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. Jun 1988;54(6):1063- 1070.  
51. Bedi G, Brown SL. Optimism, copi[INVESTIGATOR_782440] -being in cardiac patients. 
British Journal of Health Psychology. Feb 2005;10(Pt 1):57- 70. 
52. Brouwers C, Mommerst eeg PM, Nyklicek I, et al. Positive affect dimensions and their 
association with inflammatory biomarkers in patients with heart failure. Biological Psychology. Feb 2013;92(2):220- 226. 
53. Moskowitz JT, Epel ES, Acree M. Positive affect uniquely predicts lower risk of mortality in people with diabetes. Health Psychology. Jan 2008;27([ADDRESS_1076092]):S73- 82. 
54. Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six -item screener to 
identify cognitive impairment among potential subjects for clinical research.  Medical 
Care. Sep 2002;40(9):771- 781. 
55. Scott NW, McPherson GC, Ramsay CR, Campbell MK. The method of minimization for 
allocation to clinical trials: a review. Controlled clinical trials. Dec 2002;23(6):662- 674. 
56. Han B, Enas NH, McEntegart D. Randomization by [CONTACT_782467]. Statistics in medicine. Nov 30 2009;28(27):3329- 3346. 
57. Taves DR. Minimization: a new method of assigning patients to treatment and control groups. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics. May 1974;15(5):443- 453. 
58. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in longitudinal studies: development and validation. Journal of Chronic Diseases. 1987;40(5):373- 383. 
59. Saghaei M. An overview of randomization and minimization programs for randomized clinical trials. Journal of Medical Signals and Sensors. Jan 2011;1(1):55- 61. 
60. Senn S. Consensus and controversy in pharmaceutical statistics. The Statistician 2000;49: 135–176. 
61. Seligman ME, Steen TA, Park N, Peterson C. Positive psychology progress: empi[INVESTIGATOR_158841]. Am Psychol. Jul -Aug 2005;60(5):410- 421. 
62. Otake K, Shimai S, Tanaka -Matsumi J, Otsui K, Fredrickson BL. Happy people become 
happi [INVESTIGATOR_782441]: a counting kindnesses intervention. Journal of Happi[INVESTIGATOR_782442]. Sep 2006;7(3):361- 375. 
63. Selimbegovic L, Régner I, Sanitioso RB, Huguet P. Influence of general and specific autobiographical recall on subsequent behavior: the case o f cognitive performance. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 2011;47(1):72- 78. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 64. Peterson C, Park N, Seligman ME. Orientations to happi[INVESTIGATOR_102921]: the full 
life versus the empty life. Journal of Happi[INVESTIGATOR_122086]. 2005;6:25- 41. 
65. Moskowitz JT, Hult JR, Duncan LG, et al. A positive affect intervention for people experiencing health -related stress: development and non- randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087]. Journal of 
Health Psychology. Jul 2012;17(5):676- 692. 
66. Schueller SM, Parks AC. Disseminati ng self -help: positive psychology exercises in an 
online trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research. 2012;14(3):e63.  
67. Bandura A. Health promotion by [CONTACT_48164]. Health education & behavior : the official publication of the Society for Publi c Health Education. Apr 2004;31(2):143-
164. 
68. Bandura A, Locke EA. Negative self -efficacy and goal effects revisited. The Journal of 
applied psychology. Feb 2003;88(1):87- 99. 
69. Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Stages and processes of self -change of smoking : toward 
an integrative model of change. Journal of consulting and clinical psychology. Jun 1983;51(3):390- 395. 
70. De Feo P, Schwarz P. Is physical exercise a core therapeutical element for most patients with type 2 diabetes? Diabetes Care. Aug 2013;[ADDRESS_1076093] 2:S149- 154. 
71. Sung K, Bae S. Effects of a regular walking exercise program on behavioral and biochemical aspects in elderly people with type II diabetes. Nursing and Health Sciences. Dec 2012;14(4):[ADDRESS_1076094] sitting time in desk- based university 
employees. BMC Public Health. 2015;15(1):1294. 
73. Judice PB, Hamilton MT, Sardinha LB, Silva AM. Randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_782443]- up overweight/obese adults' overall sitting -time. Trials. 
2015;16:490. 
74. Wilmot EG, Davies MJ, Edwardson CL, et al. Rationale and study design for a randomised controlled trial to reduce sedentary time in adults at risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus: project STAND (Sedentary Time ANd Diabetes). BMC Public Health. 2011;11:908. 
75. Kerr J, Takemoto M, Bolling K, et al. Two -arm randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_782444] -to-stand transitions in working and non- working 
older adults. PloS one. 2016;11(1):e0145427.  
76. Cain KL, Millstein RA, Sallis JF, et al. Contribution of streetscape audits to explanation of physical activity in four age groups based on the Microscale Audit of Pedestrian Streetscapes (MAPS). Social science & medicine. Sep 2014;116:82- 92. 
77. Millstein RA, Cain KL, Sallis JF, et al. De velopment, scoring, and reliability of the 
Microscale Audit of Pedestrian Streetscapes (MAPS). BMC Public Health. 2013;13:403. 
78. Sallis JF, Cain KL, Conway TL, et al. Is your neighborhood designed to support physical activity? A brief streetscape audit t ool. Preventing chronic disease. 2015;12:E141. 
79. Henson J, Dunstan DW, Davies MJ, Yates T. Sedentary behaviour as a new behavioural target in the prevention and treatment of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes/metabolism research and reviews. Jan 2016;[ADDRESS_1076095] 1:213- 220. 
80. Robb SL, Burns DS, Docherty SL, Haase JE. Ensuring treatment fidelity in a multi -site 
behavioral intervention study: implementing NIH Behavior Change Consortium recommendations in the SMART trial. Psycho -oncology. Nov 2011;20(11):1193- 1201. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 81. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing fidelity in health behavior change 
studies: recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychology. Sep 2004;23(5):443- 451. 
82. Williams PT. Reduced total and cause -specific mortality from walking and running in 
diabetes. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise. 2014;46(5):933- 939. 
83. Hamer M, Hackett RA, Bostock S, Lazzarino AI, Carvalho LA, Steptoe A. Objectively assessed ph ysical activity, adiposity, and inflammatory markers in people with type 2 
diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes Research & Care. 2014;2(1):e000030.  
84. Prince SA, Blanchard CM, Grace SL, Reid RD. Objectively -measured sedentary time and 
its association with markers of cardiometabolic health and fitness among cardiac rehabilitation graduates. European journal of preventive cardiology. Nov 25 2015 Nov 
25 [epub ahead of print].  
85. Lynch BM, Boyle T, Winkler E, Occleston J, Courneya KS, Vallance JK. Patterns and correlates of accelerometer -assessed physical activity and sedentary time among colon 
cancer survivors. Cancer causes & control : CCC. Jan 2016;27(1):59- 68. 
86. Cain KL, Conway TL, Adams MA, Husak LE, Sallis JF. Comparison of actiGraph accelerometers with the nor mal filter and the low frequency extension. International 
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2013;10:51. 
87. Choi L, Ward SC, Schnelle JF, Buchowski MS. Assessment of wear/nonwear time classification algorithms for triaxial acceleromete r. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise. Oct 2012;44(10):2009- 2016. 
88. Copeland JL, Esliger DW. Accelerometer assessment of physical activity in active, healthy older adults. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity. Jan 2009;17(1):17- 30. 
89. Scheier  MF, Carver CS, Bridges MW. Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and 
trait anxiety, self -mastery, and self -esteem): a reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. Dec 1994;67(6):1063- 1078. 
90. Schneider KL, Pagoto SL, Handschin B, et al. Design and methods for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_782445] 2 diabetes and major depressive disorder. Mental health and physical activity. Jun 1 2011;4(1):13- 21. 
91. Dougherty CM, Glenny RW, Kudenchuk PJ, Malinick TE, Flo GL. Testing an exercise intervention to improve aerobic conditioning and autonomic function after an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD). Pacing and clinical electrophysiology : PACE. A ug 
2010;33(8):973- 980. 
92. Resnick B, Jenkins LS. Testing the reliability and validity of the Self -Efficacy for 
Exercise scale. Nursing research. May -Jun 2000;49(3):154- 159. 
93. Bjelland I, Dahl AA, Haug TT, Neckelmann D. The validity of the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_782446]. An updated literature review. Journal of psychosomatic research. Feb 
2002;52(2):69- 77. 
94. Toobert DJ, Hampson SE, Glasgow RE. The summary of diabetes self -care activities 
measure: results from 7 studies and a revised scale. Diabet es Care. Jul 2000;23(7):943-
950. 
95. Tan SL, Juliana S, Sakinah H. Dietary compliance and its association with glycemic control among poorly controlled type 2 diabetic outpatients in Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_782447]. Malaysian Journal of Nutrition. Dec 2 011;17(3):287- 299. 
A psychological -behavioral intervention for physical activity in type  2 diabetes —April 18, 2018  
 
 96. Tol A, Shojaeezadeh D, Eslami A, et al. Evaluation of self -care practices and relative 
components among type 2 diabetic patients. Journal of Education and Health Promotion. 
2012;1:19. 
97. Gonzalez JS, Schneider HE, Wexler DJ, et al. Validity of medication adherence self -
reports in adults with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. Apr 2013;36(4):831- 837. 
98. Bruce B, Fries J, Lingala B, Hussain YN, Krishnan E. Development and assessment of floor and ceiling items for the PROMIS physical func tion item bank. Arthritis Research 
& Therapy. 2013;15(5):R144. 
99. Hays RD, Spritzer KL, Fries JF, Krishnan E. Responsiveness and minimally important difference for the patient -reported outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) 
20-item physical func tioning short form in a prospective observational study of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases. Jan 2015;74(1):104- 107. 
100. Wagner LI, Schink J, Bass M, et al. Bringing PROMIS to practice: brief and precise symptom screening in ambulato ry cancer care. Cancer. Mar 15 2015;121(6):927- 934. 
101. Blackwell E, de Leon CF, Miller GE. Applying mixed regression models to the analysis of repeated -measures data in psychosomatic medicine. Psychosomatic medicine. Nov -
Dec 2006;68(6):870 -878. 
102. Albe rt JM. Mediation analysis via potential outcomes models. Statistics in medicine. Apr 
15 2008;27(8):1282- 1304. 
103. Delahanty LM, Dalton KM, Porneala B, et al. Improving diabetes outcomes through lifestyle change— a randomized controlled trial. Obesity. Sep 2015;23(9):1792- 1799. 
104. West DS, Krukowski RA. Translating the look AHEAD trial into action. Obesity. Sep 
2015;23(9):1738. 
105. Suarez L, Beach SR, Moore SV, et al. Use of the Patient Health Questionnaire- 9 and a 
detailed suicide evaluation in determining imminent suicidality in distressed patients with 
cardiac disease. Psychosomatics. Mar -Apr 2015;56(2):181- 189. 
106. Fritschi C, Park H, Richardson A, et al. Association between daily time spent in sedentary behavior and duration of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes. Biological research for nursing. Aug 16 2015. 
107. Falconer CL, Cooper AR, Walhin JP, et al. Sedentary time and markers of inflammation in people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes. Nutrition, metabolism, and 
cardiovascular diseases : NMCD. S ep 2014;24(9):956- 962. 
108. Ford ES, Herman WH. Leisure -time physical activity patterns in the U.S. diabetic 
population. Findings from the 1990 National Health Interview Survey: health promotion and disease prevention supplement. Diabetes Care. Jan 1995;18(1):[ADDRESS_1076096] Harlem, [LOCATION_001] City: Project HEED. American Journal of Public Health. Apr 1 2010;[ADDRESS_1076097] 1:S232- 239. 
110. Whittemore R, Melkus G, Wagner J, Dziura J, Northrup V, Grey M. Translating the diabetes prevention program to primary care: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Nursing research. Jan -Feb 
2009;58(1):2- 12. 
 