1 
 NICHD Human Subjects Research Protocol  
 
Date of this version : August 7, [ADDRESS_919951] Number  14-CH-0119 
 IND/IDE Number
 WITHDRAWN 120722 
 IND/IDE Holder  
To: Karim Calis, PharmD, Chair, IRB, NICHD  
Recommended by :   , Branch Chief, PE MG, NICHD 
  , Clinical Director, NICHD  
  , Clinical Director, N HLBI 
  , Clinical Director, NIDDK  
  , Clinical Director, CC  
Subject: Protocol Amendment : 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679835] -diabetic adults with 
metabolic syndrome  
 
Identifying words:  
• Disease(s ): Metabolic syndrome, obesity, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] , inflammation  
• Population :  Non-diabetic adults with Met abolic Syndrome  
• Other:  colchicine , NLRP3, cryopyrin, NALP3  
 
Principal Investigator:  *Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  SGO/DTM/NICHD 
 
Lead Associate Investigator:  *Andrew Demidowich, MD  OCD/NICHD 
 
Accountable Investigator:  Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  SGO/DTM/NICHD 
 
*May obtain consent from participants  
2 
 Study type (check all that apply):  
                Archived biological specimens/medical information  
                Natural history; definition of phenotype, genotype/phenotype correlation  
       x       Prospective linkage/gene identification, NOT providing information to participants  
                Prospective linkage/gene identification, providing information provided to participants  
                Social science; assessments of knowledge, attitudes and behavior  
                Genetic counseling  
       x       Drugs or devices  
                Gene transfer  
                Other interventions  
   
Estimated Duration of study: 3 years 
 
Subjects of Study:  
        
  
Description  Number Sex Age 
Adults screened for protocol  
- Screened but not enrolled  
- Non-diabetic obese adults with metabolic 
syndrome r andomized to colchicine or placebo  
- Studied, but not randomized  (Evaluation -only) 
- Open-Label T2DM arm  250 
163 
40 
 
40 
7 M, F  ≥ [ADDRESS_919952] uses ionizing radiation: Yes 
 Medically indicated or research?  Research 
 
Project involves use of durable power of attorney: No 
 
Offsite project:  No 
   
 
 Research participants to be seen at:  
      x        NIH only*  
                  Off-site only 
                  Both NIH* and off -site 
*Includes participants who physically come to the NIH Clinical Center and/or for whom 
specimens/data are analyzed by [CONTACT_679882]. If participants will be seen 
at NIH, a Medical Advisory Investigator must be indicated on the [ADDRESS_919953]:  No. 
 
 
3 
 Précis: 
 Obesity affects one-third of the adult U.S. population and is a major risk factor for the development 
of type [ADDRESS_919954] that  obesity-induced 
chronic inflammation is one mechanism promoting obesity -associated comorbid conditions .  In obesity,  
innate immunity is activated by  [CONTACT_679883] -binding oligomerization (NOD) -like receptor family, pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) 
receptors in adipocyte tissue macrophages  (ATMs).  This binding  stimulates NLRP3 oligomerization, 
inflammasome formation , and proinflammatory cytokine activation .  The resultant inflammatory cascade 
leads to insulin resistance  and decreased pancreatic beta -cell reserve .  It has been proposed that the 
suppression  of this chronic low-level inflammat ory state may impede the onset of diabetes and 
cardiovascular disease.  
Recent studies have shown colchicine, a potent microtubule inhibitor  commonly used for the 
treatment of gout and some rare inflammatory conditions , disrupts intracellular localization of NLRP3, 
thereby [CONTACT_679884].  As there are limited medical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_679836] e ffective to 
improve obesity -related metabolic dysregulation, w e propose to determine the efficacy of colchicine 0.[ADDRESS_919955]  a randomized, double -
blinded, placebo-controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_679837].  We will study changes in  insulin 
resistance , beta-cell reserve , and systemic inflammation.  Using adipo se tissue obtained from biopsies, we 
will also study colchicine’s local effects on inflammation and insulin resistance .  Should results prove 
promising, this pi[INVESTIGATOR_679838].  
Seven patients with type [ADDRESS_919956] Enrollment  20 
C. and D. Clinical evaluation and Research Testing/Treatment  20 
E. Biological Specimens  26 
F. Molecular Genetic Analysis of DNA  29 
G. Approved Drugs  29 
H. Unapproved Drugs  29 
I. Sharing of Data with Subjects  29 
J. Questionnaires /Psychological instruments  30 
K. Genetic Counsel ing 30 
L. Follow-up of Patients  30 
M. Conditions for Discharge from Protocol  30 
V. Analysis of the Study/Oversight  [ADDRESS_919957] Selection  35 
B. Participation of Vulnerable Populations  36 
C. Screening Methodology  36 
D. Risk/Benefit Analysis  37 
E. Privacy and Confidentiality Provisions  45 
F. Compensation  46 
G. Consent Procedures  46 
H. Pharmaceutical, Biologic, and Device Info  47 
I. Recruitment Strategies  49 
J. Existing Data  49 
K. Criteria for Withdrawal from Study  49 
L. Re-evaluation o f Study 51 
M. Collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting of adverse events  51 
a. Waiver of Reporting of Anticipated Non-UP adverse events  and 
minor protocol deviations  52 
b. Plan to monitor and report adverse events  54 
c. DSMB 54 
N. IND Monitoring Plan  54 
VIII. Appendices  58 
IX. References  88 
6 
 Introduction : 
 Obesity is a serious disorder that affects approximately one -third of the adult U.S. population  and is 
a major risk factor in the development of type 2 diabetes  (T2DM), hypertens ion, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] , and 
cardiovascular disease .1-3 The pathophysiology underly ing the relationship between obesity, insulin 
resistance , and cardiovascular disease  is not fully understood , but numerous studies give evidence that 
inflammation plays a prominent role .  
 Mouse models of diet -induced and genetically -induced obesity show increased levels of 
inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL) -1β, and IL-18.4  Further, injecting wild -type mice with 
IL-1β decreases insulin sensitivity, whereas IL -1β null mice are protected from insulin resistance after a 12 
week high fat diet (HFD)5.   
Cross-sectional human studies also implicate inflammation in the development of insulin resistance 
and cardiovascular disease.  Data from NHANES III indicate that inflammation is positively correlated with 
BMI6 and the presence of metabolic syndrome (MetS).  Individuals with MetS had more inflammation than 
those without  MetS. Higher C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were seen with increasing components of MetS.  
Inflammatory cytokine levels , such as IL -1β, IL-6, and IL-18, were also positively correlated with BMI.7  In 
the Women’s Health Initiative trial, elevated levels of hsCRP and IL -[ADDRESS_919958] also confirmed a relationship between 
inflammat ion and metabolic abnormalities12,13 and the development of coronary artery disease .14-17 
 The sources of the chronic low -grade inflammation of obesity arise from multiple organs, but it 
appears that adipose tissue  (AT) itself is a large contributor to the inflammatory process.  AT consists of 
adipocytes and the strom al vascular fraction (SVF), which includes fibroblasts, vascular tissue, and adipose 
tissue macrophages (ATM) .  In lean individuals , macrophages comprise less than 10% of the cells in AT .[ADDRESS_919959] on fat and muscle tissue to 
enhance insulin sensitivity .19 However, i n obese individuals, adipocytes are both greater in volume and 
number, leading to inefficient triglyceride storage and increased levels of circulating fatty acids  and 
ceramides .20  These molecules attach to the pattern recognition receptors in ATMs, which stimulate 
differentiation to the pro -inflammatory M1 phenotype .21  Chronic inflammation ensues, with an increased 
release of chemokines and cytokines including TNF α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-18, plasminogen activator inhibitor -1 
(PAI-1), monocyte chemoattractant protein -1 (MCP-1), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) .21-23  These 
7 
 factors furthe r augment adipose tissue inflammation by [CONTACT_679885] B and T 
cells.24    
The resultant inflammation is thought to lead to insulin resistance through several concomitant 
pathways.  GLUT4 mediates glucose uptake in adipocytes and skeletal muscle and is integral in glucose  
homeostasis.  In insulin resistant ( IR) states, GLUT4 expression in AT is downregulated, and insulin -
stimulated GLUT4 transport to the plasma membrane is impaired .25  Additionally, the chronic inflammatory 
state leads to serine phosphorylation and deactivation of insulin receptor substrate -1 (IRS-1), an impo rtant 
downstream mediator of the insulin receptor, by [CONTACT_679886] -β.26  IRS-1 expression is downregulated as well.   
Interestingly, Lumeng et al observed that in co-cultured adipocyte and macrophage cells this phenomenon 
was partially reversed when treated with anti-inflammatory TNFα neutralizing antibodies .25    
Moreover, low -grade systemic inflammation can impair pancreatic islet cell functioning and insulin 
secretion.  In early stages of β-cell dysfunction, inflammatory cytokines disrupt the proper intracellular 
calcium storage and flux necessary for adequate insulin secretion.27,28  Chronically, inflammatory signaling 
via the NF -kB and mitogen -activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways  leads to mitochondrial stress, 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation, and  eventual  β-cell apoptosis .29,30 
 
NLRP3 mediates inflammatory  activation  in obesity  
 
Leukocytes express pattern recognition receptors on their cell surface which allow for induction of a 
rapid inflammatory response  to pathogen -associated molecular patterns .  These components of the innate 
immune system , allow for rapid activation of cell -signaling pathways and produ ction of a pro -inflammatory 
cytokine cascade  in response to infection .  Similarly, members of the NOD -like receptor (NLR) family can 
recognize endogenous molecules (e.g. free fatty acids, ceramides, urate crystals, ATP) released during cell 
damage and stim ulate a robust inflammatory response .31 
 A member of the NLR family, the NLRP3 (Nod -like receptor family, pyrin domain containing 3) 
inflammasome has been implicated as the major source of chronic inflammation seen in obesity.  NLRP3 
(also known as cryopyrin or NALP3) is primarily expressed in monocytes and macrophages, with little 
production seen in adipocytes or other leukocytes .11,32  Upon binding with a “danger signal ,” NLRP3 
receptors oligomerize in the cytosol with procaspase -1 via the adaptor protein ASC (apoptosis -associated 
speck-like protein containing a caspase recruitment domain; also known as PYCARD).  The formation of 
this inflammasome autocatalytically cleaves the cysteine protease procaspase -1 to its active form, caspase -1, 
which in turn cleaves in active pro -IL-1 and pro -IL-18 into their active forms .33  IL-1β initiates the acute 
phase response and triggers the pr oduction and secretion of other pro -inflammatory cytokines, such as TNFα, 
8 
 IL-6, and MCP -1, resulting in a progressively amplified cytokine network .34  IL-18 also induces the 
production of a number of cytokines, chemokines, and cell -adhesion molecules .35 
 Obesity and T2DM are associated with elevated circulating levels of  danger-associated molecular 
patterns (DAMPs), such as free fatty acids and ceramides .36,[ADDRESS_919960].5  Likewise, c eramides, derived from the metabolism of long -chain saturated 
fatty acids, also activat e caspase-1 and IL-1β production in human wild-type macrophages , but not in 
NLRP3-knockouts.11 
In vivo mouse models demonstrated similar results.  Nlrp3 and IL1b expression in AT is positively 
correlated with body weight and adiposity in mice, and food restriction result s in significant  decreases in 
their expression .11  Knocking out components of the NLRP3 inflammasome (e.g. Nlrp3-/-, ASC-/-, caspase-1-/- 
and lL1b-/- mice) does not affect baseline glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity, but prevents the 
development of insulin resistance and inflammatory cytokine expression during a protracted HFD  state.4,5,11,38  
Additionally, ablation of the NLPR3 inflammasome result s in markedly smaller adipocytes, elevated levels 
of adipose GLUT4 and adiponectin, with decreased inhibition of IRS -1.11,39  Caspase-1 knockouts also 
demonstrate increase d fat oxidation and gain significantly less bodyweight than wild type mice during a 10 -
week HFD regimen, despi[INVESTIGATOR_679839] .4  Interestingly no changes in triglyceride or cholesterol 
levels are seen in obese Nlrp3 knockout mice .11 
In humans, metabolically unhealthy obese individuals ha ve greater levels of NLRP3 activity, IL -1β 
expression, AT macrophages, and regulatory T cells (T regs) in their visceral adipose tissue (VAT)  than either 
metabolically healthy obese or lean individuals.   Weight loss in obese subjects with T2DM leads to 
enhanced insulin sensitivity and decreased mRNA expression of IL1B and NLRP3 in subcutaneous adipose 
tissue (SAT).[ADDRESS_919961] been found to be potent 
NLRP3 activators .  Oxidized low -density lipoprotein (LDL) and cholesterol crystals increase NLRP3 
inflammasome formation in mice, l eading to macrophage activation and IL -1β secretion.  Conversely, 
ablation of the inflammasome reduce s early atherosclerosis in high cholesterol diet -fed mice.40  Monosodiu m 
urate (MSU) crystals, seen in gout  and obesity , can also act as a danger signal by [CONTACT_679887]3 
inflammasome .41,42   
The progression from insulin resistance to T2DM involves pancreatic inflammation , destruction, and 
reduced pancreatic β -cell reserve .43,44  In a study by [CONTACT_679888], et al, chronically DIO mice had greater levels of 
inflammation , islet fibrosis , and β-cell death  than their lean chow -fed littermates, whereas DIO Nlrp3-/- mice 
were protected from these untoward effects.  Consistent with this finding , the DIO Nlrp3-/-mice had lower 
9 
 fasting glucose and higher fasting insulin levels than thei r WT counterparts, suggesting that NLRP3 plays an 
important role in both early (i.e. peripheral insulin resistance) and late (i.e. pancreatic beta cell destruction) 
stages of metabolic dysfunction .[ADDRESS_919962] (IL -1Ra) treatment of DIO mice leads to similar results , with decreased β -cell apoptosis, increa sed 
β-cell proliferation, and improved glucose -stimulated insulin secretion .45,[ADDRESS_919963] ementary, if not redundant, 
roles in promoting inflammation.  C hemokines and endothelial adhesion molecules play integral roles in the 
sustained inflammatory response by [CONTACT_48918] c hemoattraction, diapedesis, and migration  of additional 
leukocytes  to adipose and pancreatic tissues.  For this reason, eliminating a single cytokine may not be 
sufficient to demonstrate significant changes in glucose homeostasis.  
 
Colchicine in preclinical trials  
 
Colchicine remains an intriguin g treatment for obesity -associated chronic inflammation because it 
mitigates inflammation through several mechanisms.  Colchicine is a tricyclic alkaloid, extracted from the 
10 
 flowering plants Colchicum autumnale  and Gloriosa superba .58  It has been used to treat gout for over 2000 
years, although the purified form was brought to prominence at the end o f the 19th century.59  Colchicine 
exerts its effects by [CONTACT_679889] a poorly reversible manner to tubulin, thereby [CONTACT_679890] .  At higher concentrations colchicine promotes depolymerization o f microtubules .60  
 Classically, colchicine was thought to exert its anti -inflammatory actions by [CONTACT_679891] .  Colchicine also decreases 
leukocyte recruitment by [CONTACT_679892]/or release of chemotactic molecules leukotriene B4 
and crystal -derived chemotactic factor (CCF) .61   Leukocyte recruitment is further impaired by [CONTACT_679893], such as E -selectin and P-selectins on endothelial cells, L -selectin on leukocytes, 
vascular cell adhesion molecule -1 (VCAM -1), and intercellular adhesion molecule -1 (ICAM-1)61,62.  Surface 
expression of the TNFα receptor in macrophages is also reduced with colchicine, as is n eutrophil super oxide 
anion production .63,[ADDRESS_919964]-pericardectomy syndrome .78,79 
 Notably, colchicine has great promise preventing acute coronary syndrome in high risk individuals.  
Among the 532 subjects with stable coronary artery disease on a statin and aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34251]/or clopi[INVESTIGATOR_7745], 30% 
of whom had Type 2 diabetes mellitus  (T2DM), those randomized to colchicine demonstrated a significantly 
decreased primary co mposite endpoint  of acute coronary syndrome , out-of-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679840] 
[ADDRESS_919965] being diarrhea/gastrointestinal disturbance s (7 – 16%).  
In addition to predisposing to cardiovascular disease, inflammation is thought to play a role in 
insulin resistance.  However, c olchicine’s effect on glucose or insulin in individuals with metabolic 
dysregulation is  unknown.  Early studies on colchicine suggested that it worsened glucose control by 
[CONTACT_679894].  However, these studies were done in healthy adults, and the 
treatment duration was less than two weeks.82,83  In subjects with Familial Mediterranean Fever chronically 
on colchicine for 2 -13 years, data from frequently -sampled intravenous glucose tolerance testing ( FSIVGTT ) 
and oral glucose t olerance testing did not demonstrate any differences in fasting insulin or glucose levels, 
early-phase insulin release, or glucose dynamics , as compared with age -matched healthy volunteers .[ADDRESS_919966] the potential to advance our knowledge regarding the interplay of 
inflammation and metabolic dysregulation in man.  
 
Adipocyte Ex -Vivo Studies  
 Whole body i nsulin-mediated glucose uptake depends primarily on glucose uptake in three organ 
systems: liver, adipose, and muscle.  Upon binding to the insulin receptors in peripheral tissues, insulin 
signaling increas es the number of insulin -stimulated glucose transp orters (GLUT4) at the cell surface and 
allows augmented glucose translocation across adipocyte and muscle plasma membranes.  However, most 
research on the kinetics of insulin signaling pathways and  the studies that examine  how inflammation 
perturbs these p athways ha ve been performed largely in either non -human models86-[ADDRESS_919967] appropriate representation of insulin 
12 
 kinetics, the logistics of these measurements make them unrealistic. Therefore, ex vivo experiments may 
instead serve as a more reasonable portrayal of the kinetics of the adipocyte ’s response to insulin wi thin 
obese insulin -resistant subjects with chronic inflammation.  
 Thus, collaborating with the NICHD Section on Membrane and Cellular Biophysics as a part of the 
NICHD Director’s Investigator Award, we have initiated investigat ions of the effects of colchicine on insulin 
sensitivity locally in the subcutaneous adipose tissue. [CONTACT_679957] McCormick, a member of this collaboration, 
is examining insulin kinetics in coded adipocyte  biopsy samples  obtained from our subjects by [CONTACT_40397] a 
novel reporter system in which we transfect subjects’ adipocytes with a HA -pHTomato -GLUT4-mEGFP 
plasmid to quantify GLUT4 translocation to the cell surface after maximal insulin stimulation in culture.  
 Additionally, it has been recently hypothesized that indiv idual adipocytes do not exhibit variable 
degrees of insulin sensitivity  along a spectrum , but rather  manifest a binary insulin -sensitive or insulin -
resistant state.[ADDRESS_919968]. McCormick is 
utilizing quantitative immuno fluorescence microscopy to investigate whether local SAT inflammation 
promotes IR states by [CONTACT_679895] -sensitive adipocytes into insulin -refractory  adipocytes  [Figure 1]. As 
Akt is phosphorylated upon insulin binding to the insulin  receptor, we are able to visualize and quantify 
phospho-Akt (phosphorylation at Thr308; pThr308 ). Ultimately this allow s us to evaluate insulin sensitivity 
at the cellular level. By [CONTACT_679896] -CD11c antibody to identify M1 pro -inflammatory 
macrophages as well as CD68, a universal macrophage marker, we are able to assess whether adipocytes in 
close proximity to activated macrophages lack phospho-Akt (pThr308) and therefore exhibit suppressed 
insulin signaling.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_919969] only of obese 
insulin-resistant non -diabetics.  Because of  the potentially significant findings and novel strategies to 
evaluate local insulin sensitivity in human SAT, it would be worthwhile  to investigate how these results 
compare with healthy non -insulin resistant volunteers and subjects with T2DM.   
 
II. Study Objectives : 
 We propose a pi[INVESTIGATOR_679841] -diabetic adults with metabolic 
syndrome to determine if colchicine treatment can improve metabolic and inflammatory parameters, both 
locally and systemically, independent of weight loss. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_679842].  
 We also propose enrolling additional subjects who do not qualify for the protocol to evaluation only. 
This group will consist of non -obese and obese adults  without significant insulin resistance  and/or 
inflammation  as well as  subjects with  diet-controlled  T2DM. They will not be randomized or receive study 
medication.  The results from these controls  will allow us to determine insulin kinetics in SAT over the entire 
spectrum of insulin sensitivity.  
 Subjects with T2DM have more severe metabolic abnormalities  and typi[INVESTIGATOR_679843], but their pancreatic function may possibly be past the point of reversibility .  Therefore , it is unclear 
whether such subjects would be the most likely or least likely group to derive benefit, if any, from colchicine.  
We propose  to enroll seven diet-controlled  subjects with T2DM to an open -label colchicine ar m. Results 
A 
B 
Figure 1. (A) Immunofluorescence imaging of a [ADDRESS_919970]. Blue 
staining represents AKT p308 (insulin sensitivity), red represents CD68 (macrophages), and green represents 
CD11c (M1 pro -inflammatory macrophages). Most adipocytes have Akt p308 staining, but some are notably 
absent. (B) Zoomed -in images of activated M1 macrophages on Bright field and confocal merge 
immunofluorescent microsco py.  Many of the adipocytes surrounding the M1 macrophages lack Akt p308 staining 
and are insulin -refractory.  
14 
 from this arm will allow us to determine the sample size that might be needed if a future study for the effects 
of colchicine in T2DM were to be carried out . 
 
III. Specific Aims and Hypotheses :  
 
Through this randomized, double-blind, placebo -controlled clinical trial , we will obtain pi[INVESTIGATOR_679844]:  
 
1. Aim 1: To explore changes  in insulin sensitivity, as measured by [CONTACT_679897], among obese 
non-diabetic adults following long -term colchicine administration.  
Hypothesis 1:  We hypothesize that obese non -diabetic adults on colchicine 0.6mg bid for 3 
months will exhibit significant improveme nts in insulin sensitivity compared with placebo, 
independent of weight loss.  We also hypothesize that reductions in systemic inflammation, 
as measured by [CONTACT_53832], will moderate this relationship.  
2. Aim 2: To explore changes in other parameters of glucose hom eostasis, among obese non -
diabetic adults following long -term colchicine administration.  
Hypothesis 2:  Using data from the FSIVGTT, we hypothesize that obese non -diabetic adults 
on colchicine will exhibit significant improvements in acute pancreatic reserve (as measured 
by [CONTACT_679898] (AIRg) ) and glucose homeostasis  (as measured by [CONTACT_679899]). We also hypothesize that insulin resistance as measured by [CONTACT_14785] -IR 
will demonstrate improvement in colchicine -treated subjects.  
3. Aim 3: To explore changes in cardiovascular risk factors among obese non -diabetic adults 
following long -term colchicine administration.  
Hypothesis 3:  We hypothesize that colchicine -treated subjects will demonstrate significant 
improvements in cardiovascular r isk factors and other lipid parameters, including blood 
pressure, LDL, HDL, Lp(a), fatty acid levels, uric acid, hemoglobin A1c, and fasting plasma 
glucose as compared with placebo -treated subjects.  
4. Aim 4: To explore changes in inflammation among obese non -diabetic adults following 
long-term colchicine administration.  
Hypothesis 4a:  We hypothesize that colchicine -treated subjects will demonstrate significant 
improvements in  systemic inflammat ory markers as well as leukocyte/endothelial adhesion 
markers. 
Hypothesis 4b:  We hypothesize that colchicine -treated subjects will demonstrate significant 
improvements in local adipose tissue inflammation.  
15 
 5. Aim 5: To explore insulin -dependent GLUT4 dynamics locally in human adipocytes  across 
the spectrum of insulin sen sitivity.  
Hypothesis 5a:  We hypothesize that colchicine -treated subjects will demonstrate significant 
improvements in adipose insulin -dependent GLUT4 kinetics  in vitro. 
 
IV. Study Design and Methods:  
 
A. Subject E ligibility: All adults who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria as listed below and who 
can attend all needed study visits  at the NIH Clinical Center  will be eligible : 
 
I. Inclusion Criteria  for subjects  randomized to colchicine or placebo : 
 Subjects will qualify for randomization to colchicine or placebo  if they meet the following criteria:  
1. Good general health.  In general subjects should take no medications.  However, individuals 
taking medications for obesity -related co -morbid conditions, who have not had changes  in 
dosage for more than 3 months, may be included, at the discretion of the principal 
investigator.  
2. Obesity, defined as a  body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2, but weight less than 450 lbs in 
order for subjects to undergo Dual-Energy X -ray Absorptiometry  (DXA) scanning.  
3.  Age 18-100 years. 
4.  Metabolic Syndrome93 
(Any 3 of the following 5):  
a. FPG ≥ 100  mg/dl or Impaired Glucose Tolerance (Glucose ≥ 140 mg/dl at 2 hours of 
OGTT) 
b. Triglycerides ≥ 150 mg/dl, or on treatment  
c. Waist Circumference: Men ≥  40 in (≥ 102 cm); Women ≥ 35 in (≥ 88 cm) 
d. Reduced HDL -C: Men < 40  mg/dl; Women < 50  mg/dl, or on treatment  
e. Hypertension : ≥130 mmHg systolic, or ≥85 mmHg diastolic, or on treatment  
5. HOMA-IR ≥ 2.6.  Our goal is to enroll participants who have pre -existing ins ulin 
resistance .94 
6. hsCRP ≥ 2.0  mg/L. We aim to recruit participants  with increased  baseline level of 
inflammation. Individuals with hsCRP above 2.0 mg/L have been shown to have an 
increased risk for cardiovascular events .16  
 
II. Exclusion Criteria  for subjects randomized to colchicine or placebo :  
16 
 1. Type 2 diabetes mellitus, as determined by [CONTACT_679900] : 
a. “clear clinical diagnosis” of diabetes, such as “ a patient in a hyperglycemic crisis or 
classic symptoms of hyperglycemia and a random plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL ” 
b. two of the following three:  
 i. fasting plasma glucose ≥ 126 mg/dL 
ii. Hemoglobin A1c ≥ 6.5%  
iii. An oral glucose tolerance test glucose concentration of ≥ 200 mg/dL at 2 
hours. 
c. one of the above three criteria ( bi.-biii.) meeting the T2DM cutoff on two different 
days. 
If only one of the above three criteria (bi.-biii.) meet the T2DM threshold  during the 
Screening Visit , that test will be repeated on another day  to determine if the subject has 
T2DM or not .  As per ADA guidelines, “The diagnosis [of T2DM] is made on the basis of 
the confirmed test.”95 
 Moreover, because HbA1c has been shown to be higher in African Americans (AA) 
as compared to other races for the same glycemia, non-diabetic AA may be unfairly 
excluded by [CONTACT_277115]1c alone .96-98  Therefore, for AA subjects, if their 2 ho ur OGTT and 
fasting glucoses are in the non -diabetic range, and the HbA1c is < 7.0%, we will consider 
them non-diabetic. 
2. Presence of  a significant active or chronic illness likely to limit life span and/or increase risk 
of intervention,  including  renal (GFR ≤ 6 0 ml/min/1.73m2), cardiovascular, hepatic (other 
than obesity -related steatosis), gastrointest inal, immunologic, endocrinologic (e.g.  Cushing 
syndrome), pulmonary (other than either asthma not requiring continuous medication or  
sleep apnea-related disorders), or other disorders at the discretion of the investigators.  
3. Recent use of colchicine or anorexiant medications in the last [ADDRESS_919971] enzymes involved in colchicine metabolism, such 
17 
 as CYP3A4 or P -glycoprotein (P -gp) (see Appendix B1 ).  Oral contraceptive use will be 
permitted, provided the contraceptive has been used for at least two months before starting 
study medication.  The use of over -the-counter and prescription medications will be 
reviewed on a case -by-case basis; depending on  the medication, subjects who have 
continued to take prescription medication or have stopped taking an exclusionary medication 
for at least 3 months prior  to study entry may be eligible  (see Appendix B2 ). 
9. Participation in a formal weight loss program (e.g.  Weight Watchers) or r ecent weight 
change of more than 3% of body weight in the past two months. 
10. Use of anti -inflammatory med ications (e.g. prednisone, NSAIDs) chronically or in the last 
7 days prior to fat biopsy.  
11. History of keloid formation.  
12. Current use rs of tobacco or nicotine products (e.g. nicotine patch, e -cigarettes) . 
 
III. Inclusion Criteria for subjects  who are evaluated but not eligible for randomization : 
 Subjects will qualify for the Evaluation-only arm if they meet the following criteria:  
1. Good general health.  In general subjects should take no medications.  The use of over -the-
counter and prescription medications will be reviewed on a case -by-case basis; depending on 
the medication, subjects who have continued to take prescription medicati on or have stopped 
taking an exclusionary medication for at least 3 months prior to study entry may be eligible 
(see Appendix B2 ). 
2. Weight less than 450 lbs in order for subjects to undergo Dual -Energy X -ray Absorptiometry  
(DXA) scanning.  
3.  Age 18-100 years. 
 
IV. Exclusion Criteria for subjects who are evaluated but not eligible for randomization :  
1. Type 2 diabetes mellitus  that is not well controlled with diet alone: subjects taking an anti-
diabetic medication (e.g. metformin, insulin, sulfonylureas, etc .) or having a H emoglobin 
A1c > 9.0% 
2. Presence of a significant active or chronic illness likely to limit life span and/or increase risk 
of intervention, including renal (GFR ≤ 60 ml/min/1.73m2), cardiovascular, hepatic (other 
than obes ity-related steatosis), gastrointestinal, immunologic, endocrinologic (e.g. Cushing 
syndrome), pulmonary (other than either asthma not requiring continuous medication or 
sleep apnea -related disorders), or other disorders at the discretion of the investigat ors. 
3. Recent use of colchicine or anorexiant medications in the last [ADDRESS_919972] current substance abuse or a psychiatric disorder or any  other 
condition that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_679845], compliance, or 
participation in the study.  
6. Participation in a formal weight loss program (e.g. Weight Watchers) or recent weight 
change of more than 3% of body weight in the past two months.  
7. Use of anti -inflammatory medications (e.g. prednisone, NSAIDs) chronically or in the last 
7 days prior to fat biopsy.  
8. History of keloid formation.  
9. Current users of tobacco or nicotine products (e.g. nicotine patch, e -cigarettes) . 
 
V. Inclusion Criteria for subjects with diet -controlled T2DM 
Subjects will qualify for the Open Label arm if they meet the following criteria  
1. Diet-controlled T2DM, as determined by [CONTACT_679901] : 
a  A diagnosis of T2DM (as defined above in Section IV.II.1.).  
b  Not on any diabetic/hypoglycemic agents  
c  Not having an alternate cause of hyperglycemia (e.g. T1DM, glucocorticoid -
induced, lipodystrophy, acromegaly, etc.)  
d Hemoglobin A1c ≤ 9.0%  
2. Good general health.  In general subjects should take no medications.  The use of over -the-
counter and prescription medications will be reviewed on a case -by-case basis; depending on 
the medication, subjects who have continued to t ake prescription medication or have stopped 
taking an exclusionary medication for at least 3 months prior to study entry may be eligible 
(see Appendix B2 ). 
3.  Age 18-100 years. 
4. Obesity, defined as a body mass index (BMI) ≥ 30 kg/m2, but weight less than 450 lbs in 
order for subjects to undergo Dual -Energy X -ray Absorptiometry  (DXA) scanning.  
5.  Metabolic Syndrome93 
(Any 3 of the following 5):  
a. FPG ≥ 100 mg/dl  or Impaired Glucose Tolerance (Glucose ≥ 140 mg/dl at 2 hours of 
OGTT) 
b. Triglycerides ≥ 150 mg/dl, or on treatment  
c. Waist Circumference: Men ≥ 40 in (≥ 102 cm); Women ≥ 35 in (≥ 88 cm)  
d. Reduced HDL -C: Men < 40 mg/dl; Women < 50 mg/dl, or on treatment  
19 
 e. Hypertension: ≥130 mmHg systolic, or ≥85 mmHg diastolic, or on treatment  
6. HOMA-IR ≥ 2.6.  Our g oal is to enroll participants who have pre -existing insulin 
resistance.94 
7. hsCRP ≥ 2.0 mg/L. We aim to recruit participants with increased baseline level of 
inflammation. Individuals with hsCRP above 2.0 mg/L have been shown to have an 
increased risk for cardiovascular events.16  
 
VI. Exclusion Criteria for subjects with diet-controlled T2DM 
1. T2DM that is not well controlled with diet alone: subjects will not be eligible if they take an 
anti-diabetic medication (e.g. metformin, insulin, sulfonylurea, etc. ), or have HbA1c > 9% . 
2. Presence of a significant active or chronic illness likely to limit life span and/or increase risk 
of intervention, including renal (GFR ≤ 30 ml/min/1.73m2), cardiovascular, hepatic (other 
than obesity -related steatosis), gastrointestinal, immunologic, endocrinologic (e.g. Cushing 
syndrome), pulmonary (other than either asthma not requiring continuous medication or 
sleep apnea -related disorders), or other disorders at the discretion of the investigators.  
3. Recent use of colchicine or anorexiant medications in the last [ADDRESS_919973] enzymes involved in colchicine metabolism, such 
as CYP3A4 or P -glycoprotein (P -gp) (see Appendix B1).  Oral contraceptive use will be 
permitted, provided the contraceptive has been used for at least two months before starting 
study medication.  The use of over -the-counter and prescription medications will be 
reviewed on a case -by-case basis; depending  on the medication, subjects who have 
continued to take prescription medication or have stopped taking an exclusionary medication 
for at least 3 months prior to study entry may be eligible ( see Appendix B2 ). 
9. Participation in a formal weight loss program (e .g. Weight Watchers) or recent weight 
change of more than 3% of body weight in the past two months.  
20 
 10. Use of anti -inflammatory medications (e.g. prednisone, NSAIDs) chronically or in the last 
7 days prior to fat biopsy.  
11. History of keloid formation.  
12. Current users of tobacco or nicotine products (e.g. nicotine patch, e -cigarettes) . 
 
 
B. Subject Enrollment  
Subjects will be enrolled only at the National Institutes of Health Hatfield Clinical Research Center. 
Each subject will be registered using the Clinical Resear ch Information System (CRIS), but will be 
considered enrolled only after the participant signs the study consent form.  
 
C. Clinical evaluation  and D. Research Testing, and/or Treatment 
Brief summary of study design:  Participants who appear qualified when first contact[CONTACT_679902], during which a history and physical  examination , initial protocol 
review, body composition DEXA, and screening lab oratory assessment  will take place.  If after the 
screening  visit, the subject still appears qualified he/she will return for a baseline visit, during which 
time baseline labs, Hollingshead questionnaire, FSIVGTT, body composition DEXA  (if not 
performed during the Screening Visit) , CT abdomen, and SAT biopsy will take place. After 
assessments are complete, participants  who qualify for and agree to randomization will be 
randomized to either placebo or colchicine  and given a n eight week  supply of medication .  
Randomized s ubjects will be called at [ADDRESS_919974] abdomen, SAT biopsy, and 
exit questi onnaire.  For randomized subjects who complete the study, they will be given the option 
to return for another “washout” visit three months later, which will involve the same testing as the 
baseline and final visits.  All study visits will take place at the  NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, MD. 
(Please see Appendices  A1-A6) 
 Subject who qualify for the Evaluation -Only arm will only undergo the Screening and 
Baseline visits as described above.  
 For the Open Label arm, seven subjects with T2DM will be recruited. They will undergo the 
same visits and testing as in the randomization arm, described above.  For the Open Label arm  only, 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_679846] a “smart bottle  cap” which will be able to record the time and date that 
21 
 the pi[INVESTIGATOR_679847]. Specifically, we will purchase the MEMSCaps system 
(http://www.mwvaardex.com/index.php/our -adherence -solutions-data-collection/memscap -tm).  
Each bottle supplied by [CONTACT_679903] a TrackCap® , with the participant’s subject 
ID number assigned to the specific cap.  At the end of the three months on study drug, when the 
subject returns the study drug bottle and cap, we will download the data directly to an SGO lab 
computer.  No PII or medical record  number will be associated with the TrackCap , and only the 
investigators involved in the study (e.g. JY, AD, SB) will have access to the data.   
 
i. Initial Contact: [CONTACT_679904] (see below), initial 
recruitment and eligibility screening will occur by [CONTACT_756]. Recruitment  will occur on a 
continuous basis until study enrollment  is complete.  Eligible subjects will then be scheduled for 
an outpatient screening visit.  Eligible subjects will be mailed paperwork in advance, including 
the NIH medical history form, which will then be reviewed in person with the potential subject 
at the outpatient screening visit.  
 
ii. Screening Evaluation  
Complete medical history and physical exam will be performed with weight (in kg) 
measured while the subject wears light clothes and height (in cm) measured in triplicate.  
Subjects will rest for 5 minutes in the seated position with the antecubital fossa s upported at 
heart level when blood pressure measurements are made.  Body mass index (BMI) will be 
calculated before protocol is signed  and current medications reviewed , so that individuals taking 
an exclusionary medication, have a disqualifying medical cond ition, or are weighing more than  
the maximum weight criterion (450 lbs) can be dismissed before the protocol is reviewed.   
Protocol review and signing of consent forms:  For those who may be eligible,  the relevant 
consent form  (either evaluation -only or ra ndomized study protocol)  will be discussed and study  
risks and benefits explained.  
EKG and f asting blood  for complete blood count (CBC), acute care, mineral, and hepatic 
profiles, PT/PTT, TSH, Free T4, Total T3, IGF-1, and creatine kinase (CK) will be obtained to 
ensure that the subject is in good general health .  Fasting blood samples for hsCRP, insulin, and 
HbA1c will be obtained, and a [ADDRESS_919975] eligibility 
for the study.  Additional samples for peripheral bl ood mononucleated cell (PBMC) analysis and 
future research and genomic DNA isolation will be obtained.   
[ADDRESS_919976] (female participants only) , and urine toxicology 
screen will be obtained to ensure that the subject is in good general health  and meets protocol 
entry criteria . 
If a potential subject is noted to meet any of the exclusion criteria, that individual will be 
dismissed without further e valuation and referred to their usual physician for any required 
treatment.  
DXA Scan for body composition analysis and fat mass will be obtained.  DXA involves 
passing a collimated X -ray beam of [ADDRESS_919977] X -ray detector. Because the delivery and attenuation 
of the X-rays are measured separately for the two principal energies, the procedure allows the 
differentiation of substances in their path if the attenuation coefficients of these substances are 
known. Because the delivery and attenuation of the X -rays are measured separately for the two 
principal energies, the procedure allows the differentiation of substances in their path if the 
attenuation coefficients of t hese substances are known. The manufacturer specifies that the array 
beam delivers an effective dose of 0.0 0003rem total body irradiation. Participants will undergo 
DXA scans in the Metabolic Clinical Research Unit (MCRU) using the Lunar iDXA (GE 
Healthcare, Madison, WI, [LOCATION_003]) machine. The scan takes approximately [ADDRESS_919978] allows calculation of total body fat, muscle, and bone  mass, and 
percentage of body fat.  
 
iii. Baseline evaluation  
An interval history and physical exam will be performed with weight (in kg), height (in cm), 
and blood pressure measured as above . 
Socioeconomic Status  will be determined using the Hollingshead Two -Factor Index of 
Social Position.100 
Fasting blood  samples of hsCRP, insulin, HbA1c, free fatty acids, lipid panel, uric acid, and 
serum beta HCG (female participants only) will be obtained. Blood samples will also be 
collected for PBMC analysis, as well as to measure inflammatory cytokines, endothelial 
adhesion molecules, lipoproteins ( e.g. Lp(a), oxidized HDL, NMR lipoprotein particle analysis), 
leptin, and adiponectin.  Additional research blood samples will be drawn for storage in a -80oC 
freezer for possible future research.  
[ADDRESS_919979] ( see Appendix G ). 
Urine sample as described previously.  In addition to the urine sample collected on 
admission, we will collect a timed  eight hour urine sample, which will be saved for future 
analyses.101,102 
FSIVGTT : As described previously ,103-105 two angiocatheters will be placed  in the 
antecubital veins, one for the administration of glucose and insulin and the other for blood 
sampling from the contralateral arm. A glucose load of 50% dextrose 0.3 g/kg given as a smooth 
bolus over 2 min is given at time 0 and a bolus of 0.0 5 U/kg insulin is given just before minute 
20. Blood samples are taken at times -15, -10, -5, -1, then at 2,  3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 14, 19, 22, 25, 
30, 40, 50, 70, 100, 140, and [ADDRESS_919980].108-110  Insulin sensitivity and glucose 
effectiveness will be assessed using Bergman’s minimal model,[ADDRESS_919981] been specified above.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_679848] 40 mg/dL. The principal investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_679849], situation -specific management pla n. 
 CT abdomen -adipose:  To quantify the fat content of the liver, subcutaneous, and visceral 
compartments, subjects will undergo a CT of the abdomen , where slices at only three levels will 
be obtained.  CT scanning parameters are [ADDRESS_919982] table. Once the body mask is created, an 
anisotropic diffusion filter reduces noise and voxels between -274 HU and  -49 HU. A contour 
around the outside of the body, the “external contour”, is initialized. Active contour models are 
then used to iteratively modify the external contour to find the inner boundary of the SAT; this 
results in a contour along the abdominal w all, specifically the “internal contour”. The adipose 
[ADDRESS_919983] and one DEXA scan (total effective radition dose = .031 rem. For all three  
protocol arms, this dose is  well below the dose guideline of 5 rem per year established by [CONTACT_679905].  
Subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue biopsy: Abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue 
samples will be obtained using a mini -liposuction technique ( see Appendix C  for checklist ). 
Subjects will be advised not to use non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAID; e.g. aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], 
ibuprofen, etc.) for at least one week prior to and following the procedure. The biopsies will be 
performed by [CONTACT_679906]. A mixture of 1:1 lactated Ringers or 
normal saline and lidocaine will be used as a local anesthetic until there is an “orange peel” 
appearance to the skin. A sterile approach will be used to min imize risk of infection. Using  10 or 
20 cc syringe s with blunt, fenestrated needle s, gentle to -and-fro movements will be used to 
obtain the samples. The contents of the syringe will be transferred onto a 250 Nylon mesh (Nitex 
screen cloth, Sefar America, Depew, NY) and rinsed with [ADDRESS_919984] -biopsy care 
instructions will be provided to the subjects.  
  
Medication Dispensation and Randomization:  Subjects eligible for, and willing to 
undergo randomization will be assigned consecutive study numbers.  I nvestigators , evaluators,  
and participants will be blinded to assignment to drug or placebo. Assignment of each study 
number to placebo or colchicine will be performed by [CONTACT_679907] (before 2017) or the NIH Investigational Drug Management  Section, with individuals 
randomized in blocks of four, stratified for sex (male vs. female)  and race (black vs. non -black).   
Subjects in the Open Label arm will receive purchased brand -name [CONTACT_586762] (Colcrys).  
  
iv. Interim safety evaluations  
[ADDRESS_919985] one interim 
safety visit at the NIH Clinical Center  with one of the investigators (e.g. JY, AD, SB) for a 
physical examination and blood work  (CBC, HbA1c, acute care profile, hepatic profile, lipid 
panel, insulin, uric acid, hsCRP and CK), between 4-[ADDRESS_919986] of one of the safety 
telephone calls.  
 
v. Final evaluation  
For randomized and open-label subjects, an interval history and physical exam will be 
performed with weight (in kg), height (in cm), and blood pressure measured as above.  
An exit questionnaire  will be performed  (See Appendix D).  
Fasting blood  for complete blood count (CBC), acute care, mineral, and hepatic profiles, 
PT/PTT, beta HCG (female participants only), and creatine kinase (CK) will be obtained to 
monitor for adverse events  and to ensure that the patient remains in good clinical health . 
Additionally, fasting research blood samples, as described in the baseline evaluation  for PBMC 
analysis, inflammatory cytokines, endothelial adhesion molecules, lipoproteins, leptin, 
adiponectin, and research specimens to store for future studies , will be obtained.   
Stool sample  for future analyses as described previously.  
Urine sample and eight hour urine collection  as described previously.  
FSIVGTT : As described previously . 
DXA Scan  as described previously.  
CT Abdomen -for liver and intra -abdominal adipose tissue as discussed previously.  
Subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue biopsy as described previously.  
 
vi. Washout evaluation  
For randomized and open-label subjects, a n interval history and physical exam will be 
performed , as above.  
Fasting blood  as described in the Final Visit.  
Urine sample and eight hour urine collection  as described previously.  
[ADDRESS_919987] Abdomen -for liver and intra -abdominal adipose  tissue as discussed previously.  
Subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue biopsy  as described previously.  
 
E. Biological Specimens  
i. Blood Loss  
a. Screening Visit  
i. Acute care, mineral, hepatic panel, CK,  8 ml 
TSH, Free T4, T3, insulin, hsCRP , IGF1 
ii. CBC/HbA1c  3 x2 = 6 ml 
iii. ESR 1 ml 
iv. PT/PTT 4.5 ml 
v. OGTT 2-hour glucose , GH 2 x3 x3= 18  ml 
vi. OGTT hsCRP (at 2hr time point)  1 mL 
vii. Research (Lavender)  18 ml 
viii. Research (Green)  10x4 = 40 ml 
ix. Research (Red) 20 ml 
x. Research ( Red/yellow ) 8 ml 
xi. Research ( Gut hormones ) 3 ml 
Total 127.5 ml 
 
b. Baseline Visit  
i. FSIVGTT  110 ml 
ii. Glucose ( Gray) 1 ml 
iii. CBC/HbA1c 3 x2 = 6 ml 
iv. ESR 1 ml 
v. Acute care, lipid panel , insulin, uric acid, CK 8 ml 
hsCRP, mineral panel, hepatic panel  
vi. Research (Lavender)  10 ml 
vii. Research (Green)  10x4= 40ml 
viii. Research (Red)  10x3= 30 ml 
ix. Research ( Red/yellow ) 8 ml 
27 
 x. Research (for [CONTACT_599223])  120 ml (optional)  
xi. Research ( Gut hormones ) 3 ml 
Total 217-337 ml 
 
c. Interim Safety  visit (randomized  and open-label participants)  
i. CBC/HbA1c 3 ml 
ii. Acute care , lipid and hepatic panels, CK ,  
insulin, uric acid, hsCRP  8 ml 
iii. Research (Red/yellow)  8 ml 
iv. Research (Red)  10 ml 
v. Research ( Green) 10 x3 = 30 ml 
Total 59 ml 
 
d. Final visit (randomized and open-label participants)  
i. FSIVGTT  110 ml 
ii. Glucose (GYY)  1 ml 
iii. CBC/HbA1c 3 x2 = 6 ml 
iv. ESR 1 ml 
v. PT/PTT 4.5 ml 
vi. Acute care,  mineral, hepatic,  lipid panel s, 8 ml 
insulin, uric acid, CK, hsCRP  
vii. Research (Lavender)  10 ml 
viii. Research (Green)  10x4= 40ml 
ix. Research (Red)  10x3 = 30 ml 
x. Research ( Red/yellow ) 8 ml 
xi. Research (for [CONTACT_599223])  120 ml (optional)  
xii. Research (Gut hormone s) 3 ml 
Total 221.5-341.5 ml 
 
e. Washout Visit (randomized and open-label participants)  
i. FSIVGTT  110 ml 
ii. Glucose (GYY)  1 ml 
iii. CBC/HbA1c 3 x2 = 6 ml 
iv. ESR 1 ml 
28 
 v. PT/PTT 4.5 ml 
vi. Acute care, mineral, hepatic, and lipid panel s, 8 ml 
insulin, uric acid,  CK, hsCRP  
vii. Research (Lavender)  10 ml 
viii. Research (Green)  10x4=40ml 
ix. Research (Red)  10x3= 30 ml 
x. Research (Red/yellow)  8 ml 
xi. Research (for [CONTACT_599223])  120 ml (optional)  
xii. Research ( Gut hormones ) 3 ml 
Total 221.5-341.5 ml 
 
Note: Some research blood samples will be sent to our collaborators for analysis of lipid, 
inflammatory, and endothelial parameters.  Other r esearch blood samples will be saved 
for storage in a  locked -80oC freezer for possible future research , although there are no 
specific additional studies planned at this time . 
 
ii. Adipose tissue biopsy  
a. Baseline visit        15 g 
b. Final visit (randomized and open-label participants only)   15 g 
c. Washout visit (randomized and open-label participants only)  15 g 
   
Note: A portion of the adipose samples will be snap frozen and stored in a  locked -80oC 
freezer for possible future research , although there are no specific additional studies 
planned at this time . 
 
iii. Urinalysis  
a. Screening visit       10 cc 
b. Baseline visit       10 cc + 8hr collection  
c. Interim visit  (randomized and open-label participants)  10 cc 
d. Final visit  (randomized and open-label participants)  10 cc + 8hr collection  
e. Washout visit  (randomized and open-label participants)  10 cc + 8hr collection  
 
iv. Stool sample  
a. Baseline visit       10 cc 
29 
 b. Final visit (randomized and open-label participants)  5 cc 
c. Washout visit  (randomized and open-label participants)  5 cc 
 
F. Molecula r Genetic Analysis of DNA: Yes.  Samples will be collected and stored for potential whole 
exome or whole genome sequencing for alleles linked to obesity, metabolic syndrome, or response to 
colchicine.  
 
G. Approved Drugs:   
No experimental studies involv e approved drugs. Insulin is administered during the FSIVGTT.  
Lidocaine is used during adipose tissue biop sies. 
 
H. Unapproved Drugs: Colchicine is FDA-approved for the treatment  of gout and Familial 
Mediterranean Fever . It is unapproved for the amelioration of insulin resistance or metabolic 
syndrome.  In this study we plan to use doses approved and previously proven safe for gout 
prophylaxis – 0.6mg PO BID.58,68  From 2014 -2016, the NIH Pharmaceutical Development Section 
used colchicine  USP compounding powder to make identical -looking colchicine 0.6 mg and placebo 
capsules. After this date, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679850].  For the Open Label arm, participants will receive brand-name 
[CONTACT_586762]  (Colcrys) .  Participants  will be instructed to take one capsule twice daily.  If participants  
develop intractable diarrhea, or other mild side effect that does not warrant medication 
discontinuation and/or study termination, the dose may be reduced to one capsule daily (see Section 
V.A.v. and Appendix F) .  If side effects resolve, and the subject remains considerably improved or 
symptom-free for two weeks, the dose may be increased back to twice daily at the investigator’s 
discretion.  All subjects will receive a “Medication Guide” ( See Appendix E).  An IND has been 
obtained from the FDA ( 120722). 
 
I. Sharing of Data with Subjects  
 
Specific results that will be given to participants or their health care providers :  If participants  have 
concerning results during any of the visits, this will be communicated both to the patient and their 
designated health care providers.  At the conclusion of the entire study, when the randomized 
assignment of subjects to medication is given to the Investigators and the analysis of the results is 
complete, the overall results of the investigation will be given to participants and they will  be 
informed of the group to which they were randomized.   For the Open Label arm, once all seven 
[ADDRESS_919988] completed their participation and analysis of the results of the arm has been completed, 
they will be communicated to the participants of the Open Label arm.  
 
J. Questionnaires/Psychological instruments: The Hollingshead Two Factor Index of Socioeconomic 
Status100 will be administered at the Baseline visit. A non-validated exit questionnaire examining the 
patients’ perceptions of their experience in the protocol will be performed at the final visit.  
 
K. Genetic counseling: n/a  
 
L. Follow-up of participants :  After the baseline visit, randomized  and open-label participants  will be 
contact[CONTACT_426] a study investigator by [CONTACT_1555] 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months to assess for any 
adverse outcomes and adherence.  If a partic ipant develops any concerning adverse events, the 
individual will be scheduled for an immediate clinic appointment with a trial investigator for further 
evaluation , as necessary.   Additionally, an interim safety visit at the NIH Clinical Center with one of  
the investigators (e.g. JY, AD, SB) and laboratory examination (e.g. CBC, acute care profile, hepatic 
profile, and CK), will be performed for randomized and open-label subjects between 4 -8 weeks. 
 Participants will be contact[CONTACT_426] a study investigator in the event that any abnormal laboratory , 
imaging or EKG findings are found during testing at any of the visits.  At the investigator’s clinical 
discretion in conjunction with the subject’s wishes, these abnormalities may be worked up further  at 
the NIH Clinical Center as necessary.  
 
M. Conditions for discharge from the protocol  (any of the following) :  
a. Completion of the protocol.  Specifically, for evaluation -only participants, the subject 
completes the screening visit  and baseline visit .  For randomized and open-label 
participants, the subject also completes at least 90 days of investigational medication 
(colchicine or placebo), and the final visit, as described above.  
b. Development of a significant toxicity , such as myositis, agranulocytosis, ac ute kidney 
injury (see Section V. A. v.), generally defined as grade II or greater toxicity on the 
CTCAE 4.[ADDRESS_919989]  (see Appendix F  and attached file for more information ).114 
c. Development of an exclusion criterion , besides T2DM  or weight change (see Section IV. 
B.) 
d. Voluntary withdrawal from the trial  
e. Non-compliance with the study procedures at baseline assessment (e.g. unwillingness to 
take investigational medication, undergo FSIVGTT, etc.)  
31 
  
V. Analysis of the Study/Oversight  
  
A. Clinical Description:   
i. Study Administration and Data Collection, Management, and Storage :   
 
The study will be conducted by [CONTACT_679908] .  Samples and data will 
be coded. Human biospecimens will be collected using procedures appropriate for the 
type of biospecimen being collected and will be handled in accordance with the U.S. 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration’s Bloodborne Pathoge ns Standard for 
Samples. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_5773] -investigators will have access to 
identifiable participant records. Data will be coded by [CONTACT_18022], but will be 
readily associated with identifiable participant records. Records containin g personal 
identifiers will be maintained consistent with the security measures required by [CONTACT_18121]. 
Data will either be transferred directly from the electronic medical record into the 
NICHD Clinical Trials Data Base ( CTDB), or for data where direct trans fer is 
unavailable, will be double -entered by [CONTACT_679909] .  All data will be kept on secure 
computers in the SGO office, who se doors will be locked when staff is not present.  All 
paper data will also be kept in locked areas in the SGO office. 
Serum and plasma samples not analyzed immediately (as described above) will be stored 
in locked freezers by [CONTACT_679910]/managed through CTDB. Human biospecimens in storage 
will have a unique identifier, will be labeled with a printed label and will contain a 
barcode. Samples will be tracked using a computer ‐based inventory system that records 
the location and detailed information of every specimen in the repository.  
Sample freezers w ill be operated using facility environments that include ambient 
temperature controls, good air circulation, lighting, and security. Systems are in place to 
allow for local and remote temperature monitoring of freezers. The NIH has an 
emergency preparednes s plan that covers equipment failures and power interruption, 
including back ‐up storage capacity and back ‐up power generators.  
 Participants give explicit permission regarding sample use in the consent form of the 
study, indicating if samples may be used for future experimental testing related to 
colchicine  response, body weight and metabolism and specify if additional consent  is 
[ADDRESS_919990] (DSMB): A data safety and monitoring board will be 
assembled as required by [CONTACT_679911] . 
 
ii. Publication  of Research Findings:   
 
On conclusion of the randomized trial, it is hoped that the results of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_679851]. If so, f indings will be submitted to  a peer-reviewed 
journal. Regardless of publishability, results will be depos ited on www.clinicaltrials.gov 
as required by [CONTACT_679912].  
 
iii. Statistical Analysis of the Data  
 Data analyses will be conducted by [CONTACT_473]. The primar y outcome of the 
randomized study will be  change in  insulin sensitivity as calculated by [CONTACT_679913] . Secondary outcomes will be changes in metabolic parameters 
(e.g. AIRg, disposition index , glucose effectiveness , HOMA-IR, HbA1c, lipid panel ), and 
the inflammatory marker hsCRP .  Additionally, changes in other inflammatory markers , 
endothelial cell adhesion markers, PBMC inflammatory parameters, SAT adipocyte size , 
SAT inflammatory parameters , and adipose tissue compartments  will be evaluated  as tertiary 
outcomes .   
 All analyses will be planned to be performed as intention -to-treat for all randomized 
subjects.  For the primary outcome and the secondary outcomes, we will use a n analysis of 
covariance (ANCOVA) to examine the differences between treatment arms, taking into 
account age, baseline body fat percentage, change in body fat percentage, and sex. Two -
sided significance tests will be performed for these analyses, so that bo th positive and 
negative treatment effects may be detected.   Spearman rank will be used for correlations.  
33 
  For the open -label trial of seven patients with T2DM, the mean change (and the 
standard deviation) for the same variables pre -post treatment will be evaluated to help 
calculate the power of a potential future RCT.  
 
iv. Monitoring Subjects and Criteria  for Withdrawal  
 
Screening evaluations may lead to withdrawal of subjects who are not eligible according to 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. Noncompliance with study procedures  before subjects are started 
on drug may lead to withdrawal of study participants.  Subjects will be followed using an 
“intention to treat” model once randomized.   Phone contacts will be made to review 
medication tolerance  and assess for development of serious adverse events after [ADDRESS_919991] the records 
for those visits to determine if they are possibly related to the research.  
 
v. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869]: 
 
Events that will result in discontinuation of treatment include: pregnancy or serious 
unanticipated complications, including development of any medical problem lis ted in the 
exclusion criteria after starting on drug . Subjects will be excluded if they have any verified 
abnormality in laboratory values or physical status that cannot be explained by a mild 
intercurrent illness (or by [CONTACT_679914]) that in general are considered  
CTCAE grade 2 (See Appendix F)  or greater for gastrointestinal, hematologic, clinical 
hemorrhage, kidney/bladder, alopecia, pulmonary, cardiac, neurocerebellar, allergy, flu -like 
symptoms, metabolic, or eye toxicities; and grade [ADDRESS_919992] will lead to treatment discontinuation as soon as the error 
is uncovered. Should discontinuation be required for any reason, no tapering of colchicine is 
necessary; subjects will be requested to return all  unused medication.  Because the randomized 
study is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_679852] a fully -powered trial, there are 
no formal stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_679853].  
34 
  
B. Molecular Studies  
 
Samples will be store d for future genetic studies of variants associated with body weight and 
inflammation. Examples of genes that may be examined include  obesity-associated genes such 
as leptin, leptin receptor, melanocortin 4 receptor, melanocortin 3 receptor, brain -derived 
neurotrophic factor, the beta 3 adrenergic receptor, and SIM1 , as well as inflammatory genes 
such as NLRP3, ASC, procaspase -1, IL-1, and IL-6. The consent form has be en prepared  to 
allow participants agree to whole -exome/genome sequencing for identification of genetic 
changes linked to inflammation, obesity or obesity -linked dysregulation of metabolism.  
 In some instances, investigators will share coded specimens from this protocol with 
collaborators who will not be provided with a key to the code .  Subcutaneous adipose biopsy 
specimens will be sent to [CONTACT_679958]’s lab in a de-identified manner , where they 
will be examined for local inflammation.  [CONTACT_679959] a Zimmerberg’s lab will receive coded 
samples for analysis of inflammation and metabolic function, such as adipose GLUT4 mobility.   
 In collaboration with the Center for Human Immunology, Autoimmunity, and 
Inflammation (CHI) at the NIH , coded samples will be sent for PBMC analysis, including 
mRNA expression array analysis, flow cytometry and cryopreservation.  Samples of PBMC for 
protein lysates will be analyzed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Vincent Manganiello’s lab via Western Blot analysis to 
examine colchicine’s effects on NLPR3 inflammasome assembly, as well as for its effects on 
inflammasome -mediated IL -1B production .   [CONTACT_679960], NHLBI, will also receive coded 
serum samples for analysis of PBMC inflammation.  
 [CONTACT_679961] (NCI) will receiv e coded samples of blood for analysis of estrogen 
and androgen markers, as they may change with changes in insulin sensitivity.  For collaborators 
outside the NIH, The PI [INVESTIGATOR_679854] a lis t of all collaborations established in this manner to the IRB at the 
time of CR.  
 Stool samples  will be obtained for future analyses to be performed by [CONTACT_4516].  
 [CONTACT_679962], NIEHS, will received coded samples of blood and adipose tissue 
for analysis. 
 
VI. Determination of Sample Size:  
 
[ADDRESS_919993] 
deviation for  colchicine ’s effects on change in  insulin sens itivity, to allow for adequate powering of a lar ger 
future study.  Nonetheless, we will power it so it might  be able to detect a moderate -to-large difference 
between treatment groups.  Based on the data of prior studies ,116,[ADDRESS_919994] deviation (SD) for change in  
insulin sensitivity as measured by [CONTACT_679915] 2 m IU/L/min.  If a similar SD is found in the present 
study, we estimate that a total sample size of 40 subjects  (20 colchicine and 20 placebo)  is necessary to have 
80% power (β) to detect a 60% difference in insulin sensitivity  between colchicine and placebo groups , at 
level of significance <0.05 (2 -sided). 
  
VII. Human Subjects Protection : 
A. Rationale for Subject Selection:   This study seeks to un derstand how colchicine affects insulin 
sensitivity, pancreatic beta -cell function, and low -grade inflammation in humans.  Because obese 
participants  have a greater level of insulin resistance than non -obese individuals, and participants  
with MetS have a greater level of inflammation than those without, we selected to test obese 
individuals with metabolic syndrome  who demonstrate both high  insulin resi stance and evidence 
for inflammation.  Participants  with type [ADDRESS_919995] beta -cell destruction which may b e too far advanced to demonstrate benefit from an 
intervention, whereas a disease process in an earlier stage (e.g. insulin resistance and/or 
prediabetes) may demonstrate benefit.  On the other hand, diabetics also have the greatest level of 
obesity-associated inflammation, so they may demonstrate benefit from colchicine.  To 
investigate this further, we will recruit seven subjects with diet -controlled DM to an Open Label 
arm.    
In order to expand our knowledge of local insulin action at the level of the adipocyte, we 
also plan to enroll subjects across a larger spectrum of insulin sensitivity/resistance for testing 
only at the Screen and Baseline Visits.  Subjects who are not eli gible to be randomized to study 
drug but who will be enrolled to the E valuation Only arm  will include those who are not obese, 
obese but without significant insulin -resistance or evidence of inflammation, and those with diet -
controlled type [ADDRESS_919996] a significant 
medical/psychiatric condition, or weigh too much for required procedures.  
Children are not studied because the nature of the experiment involves a minor increment 
above minimal risk (adipose tissue biopsies, potentially toxic medication) , that can be answered 
in adult subjects.   
36 
 Adults of all races and ethnicities will be included . Since metabolic syndrome is identified in 
large percentages among minority groups including Asian Americans, African American and 
Hispanic Americans, we anticipate good representation of all major races/ethnicities. It is 
expected, given our recruitment procedures targeting individuals living in the greater 
metropolitan Washington D.C. area, that we wi ll recruit rates of minority participation in excess 
of their representation in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area: 64.2% Caucasian, 27.2% 
African-American and 8.6% Hispanic.  
B. Participation of Children and Other Vulnerable Populations : n/a 
C. Screening Met hodology  
Subjects who appear eligible when assessed during a phone screening intended to assess general 
health and body weight/height (to determine BMI) will attend a screening visit at the NIH 
Clinical Center , during which time eligibility will be determined. History and physical 
examination will be conducted by a licensed practitioner. Laboratory data from blood draw and 
pregnancy testing will be reviewed before  subjects are scheduled for the Baseline visit and 
randomization  to drug/placebo  (or initiation of colchicine in the open -label arm) .  
 
Information regarding the key assays used for eligibility criteria  (all measured by [CONTACT_679916]) : 
 
Glucose 
 @75mg/dL    : intraassay CV 2%             interassay CV 3% 
 @ 379 mg/dL  : intraassay CV 1%             interassay CV 2%  
Sensitivity: 1 mg/dL  
 
  
Insulin 
@ 24.2 µU/mL    : intraassay CV 1.2%   interassay CV 6.0 % 
@ 82 µU/mL  : intraassay CV 1.0%   interassay CV  2.5% 
Sensitivity: 0.2uU/mL  
  
hsCRP 
@ 0.239 mg/dL     : intraassay CV 5.2%              interassay   5.2%  
@ 0.650 mg/dL    : intraassay CV 5.0%             interassay   5.7%  
Sensitivity: 0.016 mg/dL  
37 
   
Triglycerides  
@ 68 mg/dL     : intraassay CV 3%            interassay CV 4% 
@384 mg/dL    : intraassay CV 2%            interassay CV 2%  
Sensitivity: 2 mg/dL  
  
HDL cholesterol  
@ 26 mg/dL    : intraassay CV 2.3%            interassay  CV 2.7%   
@ 47 mg/dL    : intraassay CV 1.6%            interassay  CV 2.3%   
@ 67 mg /dL   : intraassay CV  1.9%           interassay CV 2.1% 
Sensitivity: 3 mg/dL  
 
Hemoglobin A1c  
@ 5.1%  : intraassay CV 0.4%   interassay 1.11%  
@9.9%  : intraassay CV 0.5%  interassay  0.73% 
Sensitivity: 4.2%  
 
D. Risks/Benefits Analysis (including considerations of alternatives to par ticipation)  
1. Potential Benefits , in addition to have the results of all screening testing,  (as outlined above)  
from randomization  include the following  
a. Improving insulin sensitivity  
b. Improving pancreatic beta -cell reserve  
c. Decreasing inflammation  
d. Decreasing cardiovascular risk  
e. Benefit to medicine and society  
2. Risks/Discomforts  
a.    Colchicine  (randomized and open -label participants only)  
i. Adverse Reactions  
Among post -marketing experience in the use of Col crys (the trade name [CONTACT_679953]), adverse reaction s have been generally 
reversible upon temporarily interrupting treatment or lowering the dose of 
colchicine. The following adverse reactions have been reported with colchicine:  
- Neurological: sensory motor neuropathy  
- Dermatological: alopecia, maculopapular rash, purpura, rash  
38 
 - Digestive: abdominal crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007], abdominal pain, diarrhea, lactose intolerance, 
nausea, vomiting  
- Hematological: leukopenia, granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, 
pancytopenia,  aplastic anemia  
- Hepatobiliary: elevated AST, elevated ALT  
- Musculoskeletal: myopathy, elevated CPK, myotonia, muscle weakness, 
muscle pain, rhabdomyolysis  
- Reproductive: azoospermia, oligospermia  
Tolerance, abuse, or dependence with colchicine  has not been reported .[ADDRESS_919997] commonly reported adverse reactions were 
abdominal symptoms such as diarrhea, crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007], nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, 
and vomiting. For example, in a randomized, placebo -controlled trial investigating 
colchicine 0.6mg PO bid for 6 months in participant s after coronary angioplasty, of 
the 130 subjects in the intervention group 28% developed diarrhea, whereas other 
side effects, including nausea or rash, were not significantly different from 
placebo.118  Another randomized placebo -controlled study investigating colchic ine 
0.5mg PO bid for 6 months in DM participants undergoing  percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) with a bare metal stent (BMS), of the 196 subjects 16% 
developed diarrhea or nausea in the colchicine group vs. 7% in the placebo group .81 
 
Subjects who may develop renal or hepatic impairment due to causes independent of 
participating in the protocol are at increased risk for develo pi[INVESTIGATOR_679855], and excreted in significant 
amounts in the bile and urine . (See Section VII. H.) 
 
ii. Fatal Overdose  
Fatal overdoses, both accidental and intentional, have been reported in ad ults and 
children who have ingested colchicine . The exact dose of colchicine that produces 
significant toxicity is unknown. Fatalities have occurred after ingestion of a dose as 
low as [ADDRESS_919998] survived after 
ingesting more than 60 mg. A review of 150 participants who overdosed on 
colchicine found that those who ingested less than 0.5 mg/kg survived and tended to 
have milder toxicities, such as gastrointestinal symptoms, whereas those who took 
39 
 0.5 to 0.8 mg/kg had more severe reactions, such as myelosuppress ion. There was 
100% mortality in those who ingested more than 0.8 mg/kg.  
 
The first stage of acute colchicine toxicity typi[INVESTIGATOR_34521] [ADDRESS_919999] been reported in individuals taking colchicine concurrently with P-
gp and/or strong CYP3A4 inhibitors  (see Appendix B 1). If treatment with a P -gp or 
strong CYP3A4 inhibitor is required in  a subject, the investigational medication will 
be discontinued and the patient will be withdrawn from the protocol.  
 
iv. Pregnancy  
Adequate well -controlled studies on the use of colchicine in pregnancy do not exist.  
Among published reports of pregnant women using colchicine to control their 
Familial Mediterranean Fever , no increased risk of miscarriage, stillbirth, or 
teratogenic eff ects was seen.  However, colchicine did demonstrate fetal toxicity and 
teratogenicity in the offspring of pregnant rats.  Subjects currently pregnant, 
breastfeeding, or planning to become pregnant will be excluded from the study.  
Enrolled f emale subjects will be strongly advised to use contraception and condoms 
if sexually active.  As noted above, women who become pregnant while taking study 
medication will be immediately told to stop medication and will be withdrawn from 
all study procedures . The study team will follow up with the participant regarding 
the outcome of the pregnancy.  
 
[ADDRESS_920000].  
c. Questionnaires are also without significant risk, but are inconvenient because of the 
time required to complete.  
d. DXA scanning  is not painful, but may be inconvenient because  of the time needed to 
complete the study. DXA scanning involves radiation exposure for research purposes 
only.  According to the manufacturer’s specifications, DXA scanning for body 
composition using the array beam delivers an effective dose of 0. 00003rem total body 
radiation. This calculated value is known as the “effective dose” and is used to relate the 
dose received by [CONTACT_96129] a single value. This amount of radiation from the three 
DXA scans to be performed in this study is 0.[ZIP_CODE] rem. For comparison, the average 
person in the U.S. receives a radiation exposure of 0.3 rem/yr from natural background 
sources, such as from the sun, outer space, and from radioactive materials that are found 
naturally in the earth’s air and soil.   
e. Blood withdrawa ls will remain well within the NIH guideline for adults of 7 ml/kg 
every [ADDRESS_920001] cases should be transient and not clinically significant.  
h. Subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue biopsies. The risks associated wi th biopsies 
include pain, bleeding, bruising, infection, numbness related to nerve injury, and 
scarring or keloid formation. Lidocaine will be used to diminish pain. A sterile approach 
will be incorporated to avoid risk of infection, and to our knowledge, there has not yet 
been a report of infection. After the procedure, sterile dressing will be applied, in 
addition to an ice pack; the latter will be used to decrease bleeding/hematoma formation. 
In the immediate post -procedure period (while subjects are observed), the site will be 
41 
 monitored for immediate complications, and addressed appropriately. Biopsies from 
abdominal subcutaneous fat will be taken. Subjects will also be instructed on signs of 
these risks and to observe the site after discharge, and to im mediately report any 
concerns to the clinical team. The physician/nurse practitioner who is in charge of 
performing the biopsy will fill out a "Surgical/Invasive Procedure Verification 
Checklist” during the procedure to make sure every prerequisite to ensu re safety of the 
subject is met. If increased occurrences of any of these risks are noted, technique will be 
adjusted in attempt to reduce the risk.  
i. Frequently Sampled Intravenous Glucose Tolerance Test (FSIVGTT)  is 
inconvenient because of the time it take s to complete, the need for two intravenous lines, 
and the need to be confined to bed.  The only risks from this kind of study are those 
described for any blood draw (see #5), mild arm tenderness while the dextrose is 
infused, and the possibility of a decr eased blood glucose value from the administration 
of insulin. The standard dose of insulin administered for evaluation of growth hormone 
secretory capacity, 0.05 U/Kg, will be administered.  With mildly low blood sugars (< 
50 mg/dL), subjects get hungry  and may become drowsy or sweaty.  With blood sugars 
under 30 mg/dL, subjects may be difficult to arouse or have seizures.  However, because 
the obese adults to be studied on this protocol will all have some degree of insulin 
resistance, significant hypoglyce mia is not anticipated.  Nevertheless, a physician or 
nurse practitioner will be present during this test for the first hour of the test (including 
the first thirty minutes following insulin administration) to monitor for signs of 
significant hypoglycemia.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_679856] 40 mg/dL. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_679857], situation -specific management plan.  Treatment 
will take place a s needed with dextrose or glucagon according to clinical evaluation.  
j. CT Abdomen  for hepatic and intra -abdominal adipose tissue is not painful, but  may 
be inconvenient because of the time needed to complete the study.  Some people feel 
anxious while inside the CT scanner.  
 Computed tomography involves radiation exposure for research purposes only.  
Although each organ will receive a different dose, t he amount of radiation exposure 
subjects will receive per scan is equal to a uniform whole -body exposure of 0.031 rem. 
This calculated value is known as the “effective dose” and is used to relate the dose 
received by [CONTACT_96129] a single value. The total effective radiation dose that patients 
will be exposed to in the study is 0.0 93 rem, well within the dose guideline established 
42 
 by [CONTACT_679917]. The guideline is an 
effective dose of less than 5 rem/yr.  No contrast dye  will be administered as part of this 
protocol. 
 One possible effect that could occur at these doses is a slight increase in the risk of 
cancer. The natural chance of a person getting a fatal cancer during his/her lifetime is 
about 25 %. The increase in the chance of getting a fatal cancer as a result of the 
radiation exposure received from this research study is 0.1%. Therefore, the total risk of 
fatal cancer may be estimated to increase from 25% to 25.1%. This change in risk is 
small and can not be measured directly. Compared with other everyday risks, such as 
flying in an airplane or driving a car, this increase is considered  slight. 
 Subjects will be advised to notify the research staff if they have participated in 
research studies at the NI H or other institutions that involved the use of radiation so as to 
make sure that the total radiation dose from all studies is not excessive. Wom en with 
childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test before undergoing the CT 
scan. 
k. “Smart” Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679858].   We will use  a “MEMS cap ” (MWV Switzerland, Ltd) on 
the top of the medicine bottles to record patient adherence to the study drug. As 
described above, the cap records the date and time that the bottle is opened, and the data 
will be downloaded by [CONTACT_679918] a laboratory computer.  
This will pose no additional risk to the  subjects.    
 
l. Testing for DNA including exome/whole genome sequencing.  The risks from DNA 
tests are primarily the risk of discovery of incidental medical information, risks of 
genetic discrimination and risks related to confidentiality and data availabili ty.  
a. Incidental medical information.   Genetic risk factors may be found for 
diseases unrelated to the condition for which the patient is being studied. This risk is 
inherent in any genetic analysis; however, the risk increases with increased 
magnitude of d ata and degree of analysis.  This study will uncover incidental 
information. In some cases this information will provide additional details about 
diseases already known to be present in a family. For example, identification of a 
BRCA1 mutation may be new i nformation for a family, but they may already know 
that breast cancer occurs in their family. Similarly, identification of a Huntington 
disease mutation is not likely to occur in a family without any prior family history. 
Clinically significant information  could be identified for diseases that were not 
[ADDRESS_920002]’s health directly, but this information does have 
potential reproductive implications for the subject  and other members of the family. 
This information could cause anxiety in some individuals; however, being aware of 
these conditions provides an opportunity for genetic counseling.  
As genetic understanding of genetic risk factors for multifactorial disorde rs 
increases, we may detect vast numbers of polymorphisms that slightly increase the risk 
of a specific disorder such as diabetes or heart disease.  The knowledge of these risk 
factors could provide an opportunity to alter lifestyle factors that contribute  to the risk, 
but at the same time could produce anxiety.  Unless felt to be of urgent medical 
importance, we will not report these results to patients or families.  General principles 
guiding a decision to inform guardians about genetic information obtain ed from this 
study will be:  
i. The genetic change must be known or predicted to be of urgent clinical 
significance to either a proband or a first degree relative.  
ii. Knowledge of the finding must have a clear direct benefit that would be lost if 
diagnosis was ma de at a later time point.  Specifically, knowledge of this risk 
factor will substantially alter the patient’s medical care.   
iii. The potential benefit of knowing a genetic disorder exists clearly outweighs the 
potential risks of anxiety and subsequent medical  testing that could result from 
this knowledge.  
iv. Autosomal recessive mutations will only be reported if a) the carrier frequency 
for mutations in that specific gene is greater than 1% (This corresponds to 
disorders with a disease incidence of more than 1/40 ,000), b) the syndrome results 
in significant morbidity, c) early diagnosis and intervention would have 
significant benefit for an affected individual, and d) early diagnosis is not likely 
to be made by [CONTACT_11174].   
 
The decision to notify or not notify will be made by [CONTACT_679919].  Although not precluded, the 
database will not be actively screened for changes that in the future are found to be 
[ADDRESS_920003] confirmatory testing performed in a 
CLIA approved laboratory.  Confirmatory testing will be performed on new DNA 
samples obtained from the probands.  Identification of genetic disease in a proband 
could produce anxiety for the parent, siblings or other relatives.  Relatives of the proband 
could learn that they are at risk for a genetic disorder.  
 
b. Genetic Discrimination :  If an individual elects  to have a genetic finding 
confirmed, that information will then become part of the medical record at the NIH.  
This information will be released to third parties if the individual sign a release of 
information form.  An insurance company or an employer co uld interpret this to be a 
pre-existing condition to deny benefits or coverage.   This however, is largely a 
theoretical concern.  No cases of discrimination are known to have resulted due to 
participation in a research study. The risk of genetic discrimin ation in the context of 
health insurance and employment should also be decreased by [CONTACT_679920] 2008.  
c. Confidentiality and Data availability :  Samples and data will be coded.  Only 
individuals involved in consenting and pati ent care will have access to identifiers.  
Records containing personal identifiers will be maintained consistent with the security 
measures required by [CONTACT_18121]. We will follow guidelines developed by [CONTACT_679921].  In lieu of specific guidelines, subjects 
may opt out of having sequence data deposited in public databases.  
 
Results of genetic tests performed for research will not be placed in the medical record.  
It is possible that we will send subject’s DNA to other  scientists working with us on 
obesity gene studies, but in this case personal identifiers will be removed. If a subject 
chooses to withdraw from the study, we will keep the DNA for analysis, unless the 
subject requests that the sample be destroyed.  
 
3. Assessment of Risk/Benefit Ratio:   Although it is impossible to quantify the exact risk to 
benefit ratio, we feel that the risks as mentioned above are a minor increment above minimal 
risk and mitigated whenever possible.  The potential benefit to the randomized and open-
label subjects can be large with a decrease in cardiovascular risk factors, improvement in 
metabolic profile, and decrease in chronic inflammation.  Additionally, we feel that this 
[ADDRESS_920004] not been studied in humans wi th metabolic syndrome.  
 
4. Alternatives to participation:  The major alternative is not to participate in this experiment, 
as there are no inflammasome -reducing medications approved for patients with metabolic 
syndrome. Participants  could also consider starti ng a formal lifestyle modification program, 
including improved diet and exercise.  Established medical options for obesity and metabolic 
syndrome include undergoing bariatric surgery or starting weight -loss medications (e.g. 
lorcaserin or phentermine/topi[INVESTIGATOR_052]).  Participants  can look up research alternatives for 
interventions for obesity or metabolic syndrome on www.clinicaltrials.gov .     
 
E. Privacy and Confidentiality Provisions  
We will follow  all relevant NIH policies and HRPP SOPs. Samples and data will be coded.  
Only individuals involved in consenting and patient care will have access to identifiers.  Records 
containing personal identifiers will be maintained consistent with the security me asures required 
by [CONTACT_18121]. Access to the code will be limited to the study investigators (e.g. JY, AD, TC, and 
SB).  Electronic data will be password protected and accessible only by [CONTACT_443801]. Electronic data will be backed up daily and stored at a secure server. All hardcopy 
data will be locked in [CONTACT_679963]’s storage cabinets in research offices at the NIH Clinical 
Research Center and will be accessible only by [CONTACT_21575]. All data will be 
collected specifically for th e purpose of the current proposed research project. Any email 
communications that involve PII will be sent using encryption or the secure email system of the 
NIH. Since even when precautions are taken to ensure participant confidentiality, data collection 
in any study is accompanied by [CONTACT_679922], in the unlikely event of a 
potential breach of confidentiality, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_679859]. The hsCRP and other 
clinical chemistry results are done by [CONTACT_679923]. 
Results of the serum cytokine profile, endothelial adhesion profile, lipoprotein NMR, DXA , 
DNA, and adipose tissue studies will not be placed in the medical record.   
 
In the Clinical Trials Database, clinical and demographic information will include age; sex; 
race/ethnicity; family history of diabetes, hypertension, or hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_679860] . 
46 
  
F. Compensation  
We will use NIH guidelines for payment of research volunteer. The remuneration is based on 
time and inconvenience during the stay. Payment will be as follows:  
 
[For randomized or open-label subjects] 
1. Outpatient screening visit:  $100 
2. Baseline evaluation  visit: $300 
3. Interim Safety Visit : $50 
4. Final Visit:  $300 
5. Washout Visit:  $300 
       Total= $1050 
 
[For evaluation -only subjects]  
1. Outpatient screening visit:  $100 
2. Baseline evaluation visit:  $300 
 Total= $[ADDRESS_920005] will receive a written explanation of the purposes, procedures, and potential 
hazards of the study  (See Consent Form ). The purpose of the project, all testing procedures, and 
study components will be described in detail. Potential participants will also be  informed of the 
possible risks and inconveniences of the study. Consent will be obtained only by [CONTACT_679924] (e.g. JY, AD, SB), in person at the beginning of the first Screening Visit.  
Communication of this information and of the subject’s consent will be documented in the 
medical record. A ll subjects will be informed of their right to withdraw from the study at any 
point of time during the study.  
 
Non-English–Speaking Participants  
If a non-English speaking participant is unexpectedly eligible for enrollment, the participant 
will be provided  with the CC Short Written Consent Form for Non -English Speaking Research 
Participants in the participant’s native language and a verbal explanation of the purpose, 
47 
 procedures and risks of the study as described in MAS Policy M77 -2, NIH HRPP SOP 12 and 
45 CFR 46.117(b)(2). The IRB -approved English consent form will serve as basis for the verbal 
explanation of the study. The investigator will obtain an interpreter unless the investigator is 
fluent in the prospective participant’s language. Preferably, the in terpreter will be someone who 
is independent of the participant (i.e., not a family member). Interpreters provided by [CONTACT_679925]. The interpreters will interpret  all oral communications (English 
to target language and conversely)  about the IRB-approved English consent form , facilitate 
discussion between the participant and investigator , and ensure understanding . 
The IRB-approved English consent form will be signed by [CONTACT_679926] a witness to the oral pre sentation. The CC Short Written Consent Form will be signed by 
[CONTACT_4538] a witness who observed the presentation of information. The interpreter may 
sign the consent document as the witness and, in this case, will note “Interpreter” under the 
signature [CONTACT_4548]. A copy of both signed forms will be provided to the participant to take home. 
The investigator obtaining consent will document the consent process in the participant’s 
medical record, including the name [CONTACT_4549].  
 
We request prospec tive IRB approval of the use of the short form for up to a maximum of [ADDRESS_920006] that 
consent document translated into the given inherent language.  
 
H. Pharmaceutical Info rmation 
Colchicine is an alkaloid chemically described as (S)N - (5,6,7,9-tetrahydro - 1,2,3,10-
tetramethoxy -9-oxobenzo [alpha] heptalen -7-yl) acetamide with a molecular formula of 
C22H25NO6 and a molecular weight of 399.4.  
 
Pharmacokinetics  
Absorption : “In healthy adults, colchicine is absorbed when given orally, reachi ng a mean C max 
of 2.5 ng/mL (range 1.1 to 4.4 ng/mL) in 1 to 2 hours (range 0.5 to 3 hours) after a single  dose of 
0.6 mg administered under fasting conditions.  After 10 days on a regimen of 0.6 mg twice daily, 
peak concentrations are 3.1 to 3.6 ng/mL (ra nge 1.6 to 6.0 ng/mL), occurring 1.[ADDRESS_920007]-dose (range 0.5 to 3.0 hours). In some subjects, secondary colchicine peaks are seen, 
occurring between [ADDRESS_920008] -dose and ranging from 39% to 155% of the height of the 
48 
 initial peak. These ob servations are attributed to intestinal secretion and reabsorption and/or 
biliary recirculation.  Absolute bioavailability is reported to be approximately 45%. 
Administration with food has no effect on the rate of absorption, but does decrease the extent o f 
colchicine by [CONTACT_3450] 15%, which is likely clinically insignificant. ”68  
 
Distribution  
“The mean apparent volume of distribution in healthy young volunteers was approximately 5 to 
8 L/kg. Colchicine binding to serum protein is low, 39 ± 5%, primarily to albumin regardless of  
concentration ”68.  Accumulation into neutrophils and macrophages is slow, only reaching peak 
concentration at 48 hours .119  
 
Colchicine crosses the placenta (plasma levels in the fetus are reported to be approximately 15% 
of the maternal concentration). Colchicine also distributes into breast milk at concentrations 
similar to those found in the maternal serum .68 
 
Metabolism  
Colchicine is demethylated to two primary metabolites, 2 -O-demethylcolchicine and  3-O-
demethylcolchicine (2 - and 3-DMC, respectively), and one minor metabolite,  10-O-
demethylcolchicine (also known as colchiceine) , primarily through CYP3A4. Plasma levels of 
these metabolites are minimal.68 
 
Elimination/Excretion  
“In healthy volunteers (n=12) 40 – 65% of 1 mg orally administered colchicine was  recovered 
unchanged in urine. Enterohepatic recirculation and biliary excretion are also  postulated to play a 
role in colchicine elimination. Following multiple oral doses (0.6 mg  twice daily), the mean 
elimination half -lives in young healthy volunteers (mean age 25 to 28  years of age) is 26.6 to 
31.2 hours .”[ADDRESS_920009] approaches by [CONTACT_679927] (before 2017), the NIH IDMS subsequently , or Pi[INVESTIGATOR_573612] . 
 
I. Recruitment Strategies  
Participants will be recruited from Washington, DC and local suburbs in Maryland and Virginia. 
Recruitment efforts will aim to enroll subjects in proportion t o their representation in the 
population of Maryland. Subjects of all racial, ethnic and socio -economic backgrounds will be 
invited to participate in this study.  We will contact [CONTACT_679928], adult obese subjects who 
have previously indicated interest in research and/or have already participated in protocols run 
by [CONTACT_679929] ( SGO), to inform them of this new study and assess their 
potential interest.  These potential subjects will be provided with a telephone n umber and email 
address to call or write if they are interested to request more information. Participants will be 
also be recruited by [CONTACT_679930], in other buildings at the 
NIH campus in Bethesda, MD, and in surroundi ng local businesses.  If necessary, further 
subjects will be recruited through newspaper advertisements  or letter mailings . Advertisements 
will be submitted to the IRB before use.  
 
J. Existing data: n/a  
 
K. Description of criteria for withdrawal from study  
 
 The types, frequency, and duration of tests and visits are outlined on the flow diagrams 
(Appendix A1 -6).  Subjects will be examined at each of their visits. If unanticipated reactions are 
uncovered during the study, we will report these promptly to the IR B. The CRC has ample medical 
resources should any unanticipated event occur. Additionally, study staff will seek evidence of 
emotional or physical distress or discomfort, and will be instructed to terminate the protocol if a 
participant demonstrates distre ss. 
 Study staff will emphasize to participants that they are able to withdraw from the study at 
any time, without penalty. Noncompliance with study procedures may lead to withdrawal of 
study subjects – for example, unwillingness to take the medication or inability to complete 
required testing (e.g. FSIVGTT). Other events that will result in discontinuation of treatment 
include:  
1.  Pregnancy.  
50 
 2.  Any verified abnormalities in laboratory values or physical status that cannot be explained 
by [CONTACT_679931] (or by [CONTACT_679932]) that are considered CTCAE grade 2 or 
greater for gastrointestinal, hematologic, clinical hemorrhage, kidney/bladder, alopecia, 
pulmonary, cardiac, neurocerebellar, allergy, flu -like symptoms, metabolic, or eye toxiciti es; and 
grade [ADDRESS_920010] been 
defined in the CTCAE v4.03 submitted to the IRB in conjunction with this protocol.   
 
Unblinding Procedure  
In the randomized portion of the trial, all participants, Study Site staff, and pathology 
and laboratory pe rsonnel are blinded to the individual assignment of the order in which 
colchicine and placebo are administered. Participants will learn their individual assignments (i.e., 
be unblinded) when the trial is complete. In rare instances, it may be necessary to unblind a 
participant's order of assignment before completion of the trial, to a physician, to the Study Site, 
or to the participant.  
In general, however, participants should not be unblinded. Anytime a staff member 
learns the treatment assignment of a pa rticipant, the staff member is at risk of being influenced 
by [CONTACT_679933]. For example, if the unblinded participant was known to have taken the 
active agent and reported a toxicity, the staff member might make inferences about the effects of 
colchicine on that participant, and possibly on other participants as well. The management of 
future participants may be influenced by [CONTACT_105584]. Maintaining the double -blind design 
offers the best protection against this potential bias.  
In the unlikely eve nt that a Serious and Unexpected Suspected Adverse Reaction 
(S[LOCATION_003]R) occurs and a physician must be unblinded to the treatment group to which an affected 
trial subject belongs, the Investigational Drug Management  Section (IDMS) will be contact[CONTACT_426] 
a study investigator (usually by [CONTACT_079]). The study investigator will request 
that IDMS release the needed information and specify the individual to receive the information. 
IDMS will normally supply unblinding information only to a physician w ho is not a co -
investigator on the study and make clear that group assignment must not be given to study 
investigators. This procedure is intended to ensure that the identity of the investigational 
medicinal product is revealed only insofar as is necessary . As much as possible, the blinding 
should be maintained for the investigators and for anyone responsible for data analysis or 
interpretation. A subject’s treatment group should not be revealed to a study investigator except 
in a medical emergency, i.e. wh en this appears necessary to ensure the subject’s safety and 
[ADDRESS_920011]’s treatment is unblinded, this 
must be documented by [CONTACT_679934]. In all cases, the reasons and rationale for 
unblinding will be also documented in writing and maintained in the study file.  
Unblinded data are also available to the Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC). In 
the case of a S[LOCATION_003]R, the DSMC is informed and will thus have the opportunity to review 
subject-level data and make any changes to the experimental plan that are required. In the case of 
a S[LOCATION_003]R, the DSMC may elect to reveal the treatment group to which a subject belongs, request 
additional safeguards, or stop the study. The DSMC will assist inve stigators in deciding if a 
S[LOCATION_003]R requires any of the study investigators to become unblinded so that the FDA can be 
informed of subject assignment because of a S[LOCATION_003]R.  
 
L. Re-evaluation of Study : Not Applicable for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
M. Collection, monitoring, analysis and reporting of adverse events  
Adverse events, protocol deviations,  unanticipated  problems (UP), serious adverse events, 
sponsor and serious,  are defined as described  in NIH HRPP  SOP 16 (“Reporting  Requirements  
for Unanticipated  Problems,  Adverse Events and Protocol Deviations.”).  All adverse events 
occurring  during the study, including  those observed by [CONTACT_679935], will be 
recorded. Serious unanticipated  problems and serious protocol deviations will be reported to the 
IRB and CD as soon as possible  but not more than [ADDRESS_920012] learns of 
the event.  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_679861] 21 
CFR 312.64(b) and as agreed upon with the sponsor. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_679862] (21 
CFR 312.64(b)).  
 
52 
 a. Waiver of Reporting to the IRB of  anticipated minor protocol deviations  and minor 
adverse events (AE)  
The following anticipated minor deviations in the conduct of the protocol will not be 
reported to the IRB unless they occur at a rate greater than that which is anticipated to 
occur: 
Problem Expected Frequency  
Rescheduled appointment for protocol visit  50% 
Unable to be contact[CONTACT_679936]  20% 
Inability to obtain blood sample after 2 attempts  25% 
Venous sample at a time point not obtained  25% 
Bruising, fainting or lightheadedness after a blood draw  10% 
Hemolysis or other issue preventing analysis of a blood or urine 
sample 25% 
Stool sample not obtained or obtained on a different day  25% 
Adequate subcutaneous adipose tissue sample not obtained  25% 
Subject needs to make an additional visit for labwork  (e.g. 
arrives too late for bloodwork, specimen result 
hemolyzed/equivocal , etc. ) 30% 
CT at time point not obtained  15% 
Loss of investigational medications  by [CONTACT_1130]  15% 
Inadvertent loss of samples or data  10% 
Appointment conducted >2 weeks beyond anticipated date  10% 
Extra sample s of blood drawn  10% 
Inadvertent collection of additional data (e .g. extra survey, food 
record, stool sample, etc .) 10% 
Becoming physically ill (e.g. abdominal pain, nausea, etc .) from 
consuming NIH  CC food 10% 
Sustaining minor bodily injury (e.g. twisted ankle) while 
participating in protocol  5% 
Subject missed at least one dose but took at least 50% of study 
medication prescribed  100% 
Subject took fewer than 50% of study medicat ion prescribed  15% 
Subject took an extra dose of study medication  5% 
Subject forgot to return study medications at subsequent visit  20% 
53 
 Loss of, or forgot to bring back,  MEMSCap  20% 
MEMSCap  not dispensed with open -label colchicine  20% 
 
The following  anticipated non-UP  adverse events will not be reported to the IRB unless 
they occur at a rate greater than that known to occur in this population:  
i. Colchicine administration  (events detailed in the FDA -approved package insert for 
colchicine) : We anticipate that up to 30% of subjects will experience gastrointestinal 
side effects (e.g. diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting),68 which may require 
dose reductions to 0.6mg once daily. If this dose adjustment does not improve 
symptoms, it will be decided by [CONTACT_679937], on a case by [CONTACT_413], 
whether to discontinue medication before the study is completed. Other anticipated 
adverse events from colchicine include: fatigue (4%), pharyngolaryngeal pain (3%), 
and headache  (2%). Rare events (< 1%) may include alopecia, blood dyscrasias, 
hepatotoxicity, hypersensitivity reaction, neuromuscular toxicity (e.g. myalgia, 
myasthenia, myopathy, neuropathy, dizziness, rhabdomyolysis), and rash.68 
If the rate or severity of these events exceeds the rate or severity anticipated in the 
protocol or FDA -approved package insert, the events will be classified and reported as 
though they are Unanticipated Problems.  
 
Because we anticipate that other mild symptoms may occur in the course of 
participation in the protocol unrelated to study drug or participation, we will not 
submit Unanticipated Problems to mild signs/symptoms (CTCAE Grade ≤ 2), such as 
rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, watery eyes, cough, lightheadedness, mild wheezing, 
menstrual cramps, muscle  weakness, fever blister, mild urinary tract infection, etc ., 
that occur infrequently (≤ 10%).   
 
ii. OGTT: Infection (<5%), bruising (<30%), phlebitis (10%), nausea (10%), vomiting 
(10%), lightheadedness (10%).  
iii. FSIVGTT: Infection (<5%), bruising (<30%), phle bitis (10%), nausea (10%), 
vomiting (10%), hypoglycemia (10%), lightheadedness (10%), hunger (10%).  
iv. Fat Biopsy: Infection (<5%), bruising (<30%), bleeding (10%), nausea (10%), 
lightheadedness (10%), soreness (50%), local skin reaction (10%).  
v. Other: Skin r eaction to EKG electrodes <15%  
 
54 
 If the rate of these events exceeds the rate specified in the protocol, the events will be 
classified and reported as though they are Unanticipated Problems.  
 
b. Plan to monitor and report adverse events  
As outlined in Appendix A, for randomized  and open-label subjects, adverse events will 
be monitored via telephone at one week, one month, and two months after the Baseline 
Visit using structured case report forms .  If any participant develops any concerning 
adverse events, the individual will be scheduled fo r an immediate clinic appointment 
with a trial investigator for further work up, as necessary.  Adverse events will also be 
assessed during the final visit via interim history and physical, as well as laboratory 
studies as described in Section IV C/D.  
 Once [ADDRESS_920013] been enrolled .  The DSMB 
will examine whether there is evidence of safety and efficacy for colchicine.  The 
primary outcome measure that we propose the DSMB examine for efficacy is change in 
insulin sensitivity as determined from the FSIVGTT using the minimal model 
calculation.  For safety, the DSMB will review adverse event questionnaire data, and 
reports of side effects from all visits.  These reports will also be supplemented by a 
manual review by t he investigators, who will add any other events not captured by [CONTACT_679938], and data files of laboratory values for CBC, acute care, hepatic, and mineral 
panels.  Results will be presented as an A vs. B analysis prepared by [CONTACT_58047].  
The DSMB w ill be asked to prepare a detailed report to supply to the IRB that describes 
any adverse events discussed, and that explains the DSMB's vote to allow the study to 
continue or to end the study.  
 
N.  IND Monitoring Plan  
55 
 1.   Purpose 
The purpose of this Mon itoring Plan is to describe the rationale and process for the collection, 
recording, and verification of data for NICHD Protocol, titled: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679863] -diabetic adults with metabolic syndrome.  
 
2.   Objectives 
a. To establish  a monitoring plan to ensure the protocol data are in compliance with 
Good Clinical Practice (GCP), NICHD Institutional Review Board (IRB) and 
Federal regulations.  
b. To ensure the validity, accuracy and integrity of the data  
 
 3.   Study Staff Responsibilities  
Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  (the principal investigator) is responsible for all aspects of the 
study. Some responsibilities may be delegated to the current associate investigator Andrew 
Demidowich, MD : 
 
Delegation of responsibil ity will be documented on a study staff Signature [CONTACT_679954].   
STUDY  STAFF  NAME  [CONTACT_288308]  *DELE GATED  RESPONSIBILITIES  
Jack Yanovski, MD, PhD  Principal -
Investiga tor 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12  
Andrew Demidowich , MD  Lead Associate 
Investigator  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12  
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Jordan Levine , BS Co-investiga tor 1, 6, 7, 8, 11 
   
 
56 
 *Delegated Study Tasks:    
1. Obtain Informed 
Consent  
2. Obtain Medical History  
3. Perform Physical Exam  
4. Assess Eligibility Criteria  5. Prescribe Study 
Drug/device  
6. CRF Completion  
7. CRF Queries  
8. Query completion  9. Maintain Regulatory Docs  
10. Maintain IRB documents  
11. Data Monitoring  
12. Safety Monitoring  
 
 
4.   Source Documentation and Case Report Forms  
Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  and Andrew Demidowich, MD are responsible for coordinating data 
collection and will review the data for accuracy and completeness  within seven days of each 
subject visit.  
 
The PI (Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD) along with study co -investigator  Andrew Demidowich, 
MD will conduct initial monitoring. Primary documents, Case Report Forms, and the 
Clinical Trials Database will also be audited per NICHD guidelines by [CONTACT_679939]. LLC. 
Patient cons ent documents, primary outcome and safety laboratory results, and diagnostic 
test results will be monitored for accuracy, correct dating, and agreement between case 
report forms and source documents. As case report forms are entered electronically into the  
NICHD Clinical Trials Database, the computer system contains logs indicating changes 
made and the circumstances leading to these changes.  
 
FDA regulatory requirements (annual reports, adverse events reporting, etc.) related to IND 
# 120722 (Colchicine) wi ll also be monitored. The medical records of active subjects 
(defined as subjects receiving study medication) will be monitored quarterly or more 
frequently as required.  The FDA issues will be monitored at least annually. Any major 
findings will be summar ized in writing and reported to the NICHD Instituti onal Review 
Board and DSMC, if indicated. Investigator credentials, training records, and the delegation 
of responsibility log will also be reviewed on an a nnual basis.  
 
[ADDRESS_920014] A versus B analyses on data, but may also see unblinded data 
from the trial for their review of adverse events.  
 
5.   IRB and DSMC Documentation  
All IRB documentation can be found in  PTMS. The Principal Investigator, Jack A. 
Yanovski, MD, PhD, is responsible for maintaining IRB and DSMC correspondence related 
to this protocol, including records of all reviews of the study and submissions to the IRB and 
DSMC. 
 
6.   FDA Documentation  
Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  is responsible for maintaining FDA correspondence, including 
forms 1571 and 1572 and other correspondence (e.g., annual reports, amendments, safety 
reports) in the electronic binder for IND # 120722 (Colchicine).  
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_3951] s uch correspondence are also maintained in PTMS as part of the NICHD protocol record.  
 
7.   Adverse Event Procedures and Documentation  
Please refer to Section M of the protocol.  
 
8. Study Completion  
Upon completion of the study Jack A. Yanovski, MD, PhD  will retain possession of the 
electronic IND binder and electronic Protocol Binder in a secure location.  FDA requires 
records be retained for at least 2 years after study completion.  HHS regulations require that 
subjects’ records be maintained for at leas t three years after completion of a study.  
 
58 
 Flyers, informational email and/or letters to 
previous subjects, newspaper 
advertisements  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria are 
reviewed.  If eligible, potential subjects 
scheduled for outpatient screening visit.  
 
 Appendix A1– Study Design  
 
Event        Procedure  
 
    
 
 
        
   
 
   (within 4 weeks)  
 
 
 
   (1 week) 
 
 
   (3 weeks later)  
 
     
    (1 month)  
 
 
    (1 month)  
 
 
    (3 months) Study advertisement  
Telephone screening  
In clinic/5 -SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: Interim 
H&P, baseline labs, FSIVGTT, and SAT 
biopsy will take place all on the same day.  
For subjects eligible for randomization, a 
[ADDRESS_920015], 
randomized to either placebo or colchicine .  In clinic/5 -SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: H&P, initial 
protocol review, EKG, body composition 
DEXA, screening labs, OGTT.   
Phone Call  (randomized and open -label 
subjects) Outpatient screening visit  
By [CONTACT_1697]: to assess for adverse 
events and adherence/tolerability.  Baseline visit  
Interim Safety Visi t (randomized and open -
label subjects)  
Phone Call  (randomized and open -label 
subjects) 
Final visit  (randomized and open -label 
subjects) In 5-SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: Interim H&P, 
labs, FSIVGTT, body composition DEXA, 
and SAT biopsy will take place all on the 
same day. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679864].  In clinic/5 -SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: Interim 
H&P, assess for  adverse events and 
adherence/tolerability , check safety labs 
(e.g. CBC, acute care and hepatic panels, 
CK). [ADDRESS_920016].  
Washout visit (optional) and discharge   
(randomized and open -label subjects)  
 In 5-SWSDH: Interim H&P, labs, 
FSIVGTT, DEXA, and SAT biopsy . 
 
[ADDRESS_920017] qualifies  Page Protocol team on arrival of patient.  
Accurate height x3 and weight.  H&P 
performed.  
Protocol is reviewed by [CONTACT_84048], and 
consent is signed formally with witness 
present.   
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679865] 7th floor, Metabolic Unit  Appendix A2  – Screening Visit Flowsheet  
 
                     Event        Procedure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 Fasting blood draw  
[ADDRESS_920018]  
Discharge from NIH  Arrive to NIH 5 -SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176629] 
8AM 
Protocol Review  
EKG 
DXA Scan  
60 
 Performed at Time -15 min of the 
FSIVGTT  
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Page Protocol team on arrival of patient.  
Accurate height x3 and weight.  Interval 
H&P performed.  
Performed by a study investigator.  
Performed in Radiology  Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Stool sample 
collected in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679866].  Appendix A3 – Baseline Visit Flowsheet  
 
                     Event        Procedure  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Fasting blood draw  
FSIVGTT  Stool sample and  
Hollingshead Questionnaire  Arrive to NIH [ADDRESS_920019] Scan 
Discharge from NIH  
61 
 Page Protocol team on arrival of patient.  
Accurate height x3 and weight.  Interval 
H&P performed.  
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Appendix A4  – Interim Safety  Visit Flowsheet  (randomized and open -label only) 
 
                     Event        Procedure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Arrive to NIH 5 -SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176629] 
8AM 
Fasting blood draw  
 
Discharge from NIH  
62 
 Performed by a study investigator.  Performed at Time -15 min of the 
FSIVGTT  Page Protocol team on arrival of patient.  
Accurate height x3 and weight.  Interval 
H&P performed.  
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
Performed on 7th floor, Metabolic Unit  
Performed in Radiology  
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Appendix A 5 – Final Visit Flowsheet  (randomized and open -label only) 
 
                     Event        Procedure  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Biopsy  Fasting blood draw  
DXA Scan  FSIVGTT  Arrive to NIH 5-SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176629] 
8AM 
CT Scan 
Exit Questionnaire  
Discharge from NIH Stool sample   Collected in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679867].  
63 
 Performed by a study investigator.  
 Performed at Time -15 min of the 
FSIVGTT  
 Page Protocol team on arrival of patient.  
Accurate height x3 and weight.  Interval 
H&P performed.  
 
Performed in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
 
Performed on 7th floor, Metabolic Unit  
 
Performed in Radiology  
 Appendix A 6 – Optional Washout  Visit Flowsheet  (randomized and open -label 
only) 
 
                     Event        Procedure  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue Biopsy  
 Fasting blood draw  
 
DXA Scan  
 FSIVGTT  
 Arrive to NIH 5-SWS Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_176629] 
8AM 
 
CT Scan 
 
Discharge from NIH  
 Stool sample   
 Collected in Day Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679867].  
 
64 
 Appendix B 1 
 
 Potentially Significant Drug Interactions  with Colchicine  
 
Drug Noted or Anticipated Outcome  
Strong CYP3A4 Inhibitors   
Atazanavir  
Clarithromycin  
Cimetidine  
Cobicistat  
Darunavir/Ritonavir  
Indinavir 
Itraconazole  
Ketoconazole  
Lopi[INVESTIGATOR_054]/Ritonavir  
Nefazodone  
Nelfinavir  
Ritonavir  
Saquinavir  
Telaprevir  
Telithromycin  
Tipranavir/Ritonavir  
Tolbutamide  Significant increase in colchicine plasma levels;  fatal colchicine toxicity 
has been reported with  clarithromycin, a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor. 
Similarly, significant increase in colchicine plasma levels is anticipated 
with other strong CYP3A4 inhibitors.  
  
Moderate CYP3A4 Inhibitors   
Amprenavir  
Aprepi[INVESTIGATOR_679868]. 
Neuromuscular toxicity has been reported with diltiazem and verapamil 
interactions.  
  
P-gp Inhibitors  Significant increase in colchicine plasma levels; fatal colchicine tox icity 
has been reported with cyclosporine, a P -gp inhibitor. Similarly, significant 
increase in colchicine plasma levels is anticipated with other P -gp 
inhibitors.  Cyclosporine  
Ranolazine  
 
HMG-Co A Reductase Inhibitors   
Atorvastatin  
Fluvastatin  
Lovastatin  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_679869] a stable long -term regimen of the other has 
resulted in myopathy and rhabdomyolysis (including a fatality).  
  
Other Lipid Lowering Drugs  The addition of one drug to a stable  long-term regimen of the other has 
resulted in  myopathy and rhabdomyolysis (including a  fatality). Fibrates 
Gemfibrozil  
  
Digitalis Glycosides   
Digoxin Rhabdomyolysis has been reported . 
  
65 
 Other 
Dasatinib  
Fusiric Acid (systemic)  
Ivacaftor 
Mifepristone  
  
Combination with colchicine may increase CYP3A4 substrates . 
Other (con’t)  
Aripi[INVESTIGATOR_679870] a decrease in serum concentrations.  
  
66 
 Appendix B2  
 
 Medications that may confound the assessment for diabetes  
 
Thiazide diuretics at a dose greater than 25mg/day  
Systemic non -cardioselective beta -blockers 
- Carvedilol  
- Labetalol  
- Nadolol  
- Penbutolol Sulfate  
- Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8405]  
- Propanolol  
- Timolol 
 
Niacin 
Systemic glucocorticoids  
Prescription or over -the-counter weight loss or weight gain medications/supplements  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67 
 Appendix C - Surgical/Invasive Procedure Verification Checklist  
 
Date:   Time:  
Procedure (PER CONSENT):  
Responsible Physician(s)/LIP(s):  
Surgical Site(s) Marked:      
INSTRUCTIONS : Check the boxes and sign in the appropriate boxes below to indicate the steps that have been completed. Do not 
continue with the process unless you are able to verify that each st ep has been completed as appropriate.  
 
Step    
Verification Process   Signature [CONTACT_679955]-Procedure Area:  
1)  Identification of Correct:   Yes  N/A    
  Patient        
  Procedure       
  Side, site, and level (if appropriate)       
2)  Surgical Site and/or Side Marked        
3)  Appropriate documents confirming the procedure side, site, and level 
where appropriate are present (for example, history and physical, nursing 
assessment, and pre -anesthesia assessment)       
  Accurately completed, and signed, procedure consent form       
  Correct diagnostic and radiology test results(for example, radiology 
images and scans, or pathology and biopsy reports) are properly labeled 
and available       
  Required blood products, implants, devices, and/or special equipment for 
the procedure are available       
Immediately Prior to the Start of the Surgery/Invasive Procedure:  
4)  “Time Out” – Prior to the procedure in the operating room/procedure 
area, ALL TEAM MEMBERS participate together in a time out to 
verbally verify:     
Yes    
N/A    
  Correct patient identity        
  Correct side, site, and level are marked as appropriate       
  Accurately completed, and signed, procedure consent form       
  Agreement on the procedure to be performed       
  Correct patient position       
  Availability of appropriately labeled relevant images and tests       
  The need for antibiotics or fluids for irrigation purposes       
  Safety precautions based on patient history or medication use       
*COMPLETE THIS SECTION ONLY IF UNABLE TO COMPLETE A STEP IN THE VERIFICATION PROCESS 
ABOVE – EXPLAIN WHY   
Step  Explanation  Signature  [CONTACT_679956]  
    
68 
 Appendix D  
3-Month Visit (Final Visit) Exit Questionnaire  
Date _____/_____/_____ 
 
Dear Study Participant,  
 
You recently completed a research study where half of the study participants took colchicine and 
half took placebo capsules for three months.  We would like to ask you some questions about your 
feelings and attitudes about the study.  With your help we hop e to be able to improve our studies in 
the future.  Please answer all questions as honestly as possible.  
 
1. Which capsule (colchicine or placebo) do you think you were taking?  
Check one  
 
_____  colchicine   _____  placebo  
 
Why do you think so?  ______________ _____________________________ __________ 
 
2. How sure or unsure are you about which capsules you were taking?  
 Circle one : 
 
3. When you agreed to join the study, do you think that you fully understood the study and 
everything you would need to do?     Check  one: 
 
 _____ yes  _____ no 
  
 If no, what didn’t you understand?  ____________________________ ________ _______ 
 
4. Knowing what you know now, if you could do it all over again, would you join this study?      
Check one : 
 
 _____  yes  _____  no 
 
5. What would you tell a friend who was thinking of entering the study?  Check one : 
 
 _____  join the study   _____  don’t join the study  [ADDRESS_920020] keep you from gaining a pound or two.   Would it be worth the effort of taking the 
colchicine ? 
 
 ______ yes  ______ no 
  
7. Do you feel yo ur overall health has improved due to being in the study?  
 
 ______yes   ______no   
 
8. What effect do you think the capsules had on your body weight?  
 
 ______ no effect ______ lost weight  ______ gained weight   
 
9. If you lost weight, what do you think was the reason?  
 Check all that apply  
 
 ______ study capsules       ______ changed eating habits  
 
 ______ exercise other (please list)  _________________ ___________________ ___ 
 
10. If you tried any special diets or weight loss supplements during the three month  period 
please describe (for example, Atkins, low fat, low carb, meal bars): 
 
 ________________________________________________________ _____________ ___ 
 
11. Do you feel the study capsules improved any of the following in you? (check all that apply):  
 
 ______ joint pain   ______ sense of taste  
 
 ______ mobility   ______ energy  
  
If yes, please explain:  ______________________________________________________  
 
12. Do you think the study capsules had any side effects?  
 
 ______ yes  ______ no 
  
If yes, please list: ____________________________ _____________ ________________  
 
70 
 ___________________________________________ ____________ _________________  
 
13. Did you find the alarm clock useful to help remind you to take your medication?   
(check one): 
 
 ______ yes   ______ no  
  
If no, why not? ____________________________________________ ______________  
 
___________________________________________________________ _____________  
 
14.   Why did you decide to be part of the study?  
Rank in order of importance ([ADDRESS_920021] choice, 2 for second choice, etc.)  
Leave blank if the reason does not apply to you at all : 
 
 ______  wanted to improve my health  
 ______  make a contribution to science / help other people  
 ______  try to lose weig ht 
 ______  financial compensation  
 ______  opportunity for medical care at no cost  
 ______  wanted to take colchicine  
 ______  other: ___________________________________________________________  
 
15. What was the worst part of the study?    
 Rank in order o f importance ([ADDRESS_920022] choice, 2 for second choice, etc.)  
 Leave blank if item does not apply to you : 
 
 ______  coming to NIH (traveling, security checks)  
 ______  taking the capsules  
 ______  blood draws  
 ______  FSIVGTT ([ADDRESS_920023])  
 ______  Fat biopsy  
 ______  DEXA (body fat) scan  
 ______  Collecting the stool sample  
 ______  physical exams and body measurements  
 ______  appointment times/having to take time off from work  
 ______  filling out questionnaires  
 ______  didn’t get the results I was expecting from the study capsules  
 ______  other: ___________________________________________________________  
 
[ADDRESS_920024] helped you to be better at 
taking the capsules?   (check all that apply ): 
 
  ______if I only had to take one capsule a day instead of two  
  ______if I could have taken the two capsules together, once a day  
  ______if the capsule s were smaller  
  ______if the capsules were easier to swallow  
  ______if it were easier to remember to take the capsules  
 ______  other: ________________________________________________________  
 
Please tell us anything else that may have helped you to do a  better job of taking your 
capsules 
 
   ____________________________________________________________________  
 
 
17. Please write in any other comments or suggestions for the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
THANK YOU FOR BEING A PART OF THE STUDY  
72 
 3-Month Visit (Final Visit) Exit Questionnaire  for T2DM Open Label Arm  
 
Date _____/_____/_____  
 
Dear Study Participant,  
 
You recently completed a research study where study participants  took colchicine capsules for three 
months.  We would like to ask you some questions about your feelings and attitudes about the 
study.  With your help we hope to be able to improve our studie s in the future.  Please answer all 
questions as honestly as possible.  
 
1. When you agreed to join the study, do you think that you fully understood the study and 
everything you would need to do?     Check one:  
 
 _____ yes   _____ no 
  
 If no, what didn’t y ou understand? ___________________________________________  
 
2. Knowing what you know now, if you could do it all over again, would you join this study?      
Check one:  
 
 _____  yes   _____  no  
 
3. What would you tell a friend who was thinking of entering the study?  Check one:  
 
 _____  join the study   _____  don’t join the study  
 
4. Suppose we knew for sure that taking colchicine could help you lose one pound per year, or 
at least keep you from gaining a pound or two.  Would it be worth the effort  of taking the 
colchicine?  
 
 ______ yes   ______ no  
  
7. Do you feel your overall health has improved due to being in the study?  
 
 ______yes   ______no   
 
8. What effect do you think the capsules had on your body weight?  
 
 ______ no effect  ______ lost weight ______ gained weight   
 
[ADDRESS_920025] weight, what do you think was the reason?  
 Check all that apply  
 
 ______ study capsules       ______ changed eating habits  
 
 ______ exercise  other (please list) _______________________________________  
 
10. If you tried any special diets or weight loss supplements during the three month period 
please describe (for example, Atkins, low fat, low carb, meal bars): 
 
 ________________________________________________________________________  
 
11. Do you feel the study cap sules improved any of the following in you? (check all that apply):  
 
 ______ joint pain   ______ sense of taste  
 
 ______ mobility   ______ energy  
  
If yes, please explain: ______________________________________________________  
 
12. Do you think the study cap sules had any side effects?  
 
 ______ yes   ______ no  
  
If yes, please list: _________________________________________________________  
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
13. Did you find the alarm clock useful to help remind you to take your medication?   
(check one):  
 
 ______ yes   ______ no  
  
If no, why not? _________________________________________ _________________  
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
 
 
74 
 14.   Why did you decide to be part of the study?  
Rank in order of importance ([ADDRESS_920026] choice, 2 for second choice, etc.)  
Leave blank if the reason does n ot apply to you at all:  
 
 ______  wanted to improve my health  
 ______  make a contribution to science / help other people  
 ______  try to lose weight  
 ______  financial compensation  
 ______  opportunity for medical care at no cost  
 ______  wanted to take colchicine  
 ______  other: ___________________________________________________________  
 
15. What was the worst part of the study?   
 Rank in order of importance ([ADDRESS_920027] choice, 2 for second choice, etc.)  
 Leave blank if item does not apply to yo u: 
 
 ______  coming to NIH (traveling, security checks)  
 ______  taking the capsules  
 ______  blood draws  
 ______  FSIVGTT ([ADDRESS_920028])  
 ______  Fat biopsy  
 ______  DEXA (body fat) scan  
 ______  Collecting the stool sample  
 ______  physical exa ms and body measurements  
 ______  appointment times/having to take time off from work  
 ______  filling out questionnaires  
 ______  didn’t get the results I was expecting from the study capsules  
 ______  other: ______________________________________________ _____________  
 
16. We know that for most people it is difficult to take every capsule on time every day and you 
probably missed some doses. What do you think might have helped you to be better at 
taking the capsules?  (check all that apply):  
 
  ______if I only had to take one capsule a day instead of two  
  ______if I could have taken the two capsules together, once a day  
  ______if the capsules were smaller  
  ______if the capsules were easier to swallow  
  ______if it were easier to remember to take the capsules 
 ______  other: ________________________________________________________  
 
[ADDRESS_920029] helped you to do a better job of taking your 
capsules 
 
   ____________________________________________________________________  
 
 
17. Please write in any other comments or suggestions for the study.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________  
 
THANK YOU FOR BEING A PART OF THE STUDY  
 
76 
  
Appendix E 
MEDICATION GUIDE  
Congratulations on starting your involvement with our research protocol!  Participants in the 
Randomization Arm of this study have been randomized to receive either the research medication 
(colchicine) 0.6 mg capsules twice a day or a placebo.  Neither the study subjects nor the 
investigators know which “version” of the research medication you are receiving.   Participants in 
the Open-Label Arm of the study will be taking colchicine 0.[ADDRESS_920030] important information I should know about the research medication?   
The research medication can cause serious side effects or death if levels of the research 
medication are too high in your body.  
• Taking certain medicines with the research medication can cause your level of the research 
medication to be too high, especia lly if you have kidney or liver problems.  
• Tell the NIH research team about all your medical conditions, including if you have kidney 
or liver problems. Your dose of the research medication may need to be changed.  
• Tell the NIH research team about all the medicines you take, including prescription and non -
prescription medicines, vitamins and herbal supplements.  
• Even medicines that you take for a short period of time, such as antibiotics, can interact with 
the research medication and cause serious side effe cts or death.  
• Talk to the NIH research team, your healthcare provider, and pharmacist before taking any 
new medicine.  
  
• Especially tell the NIH research team if you take:  
• atazanavir sulfate (Reyataz®
)    • clarithromycin (Biaxin®
)  
• cyclosporine (Neoral®
, Gengraf®
, Sandimmune®
)  • darunavir (Prezista®
)  
• fosamprenavir (Lexiva®
) with ritonavir   • fosamprenavir (Lexiva®
)  
• indinavir (Crixivan®
)     • itraconazole (Sporanox®
)  
• ketoconazole (Nizoral®
)    • lopi[INVESTIGATOR_054]/ritonavir (Kaletra®
)  
• nefazodone (Serzone®
)     • nelfinavir mesylate (Viracept®
)  
• ritonavir (Norvir®
)      • saquinavir mesylate (Invirase®
)  
• telithromycin (Ketek®
)     • tipranavir (Aptivus®
)  
[ADDRESS_920031] with the research medication.  
 
• Know the medicines you take. Keep a list of them and show it to your healthcare provider 
and pharmacist when you get  a new medicine.  
• Keep the research medication out of the reach of children.  
 
Who should not take the research medication?  
Do not take the research medication if you have liver or kidney problems and you take certain other 
medicines. Serious side effects , including death, have been reported in these patients even when 
taken as directed. See “What is the most important information I should know about the research 
medication?”  
What should I tell the NIH research team before starting the research medication ?  
See “What is the most important information I should know about the research medication?”  
Before you take the research medication tell the NIH research team about all of your medical 
conditions including if you:  
• have liver or kidney problems  
• are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if the research medication will 
harm your unborn baby. Please tell the NIH research team immediately if you are pregnant 
or plan to become pregnant.  
• are breast -feeding or plan to breast -feed. The research medication passes into your breast 
milk. Due to the possible risks to the child, you are not eligible for this study if you are 
nursing. 
 
Using the research medication with certain other medicines, such as cholesterol -lowering 
medications or digoxin, can affect each other causing serious side effects.  Talk to the NIH research 
team and your healthcare provider about whether the medications you are taking might interact with 
the research medication, and what side effects  to look for.  
How should I take the research medication?  
• Take the research medication exactly as the NIH research team instructs you to take it. If 
you are not sure about your dosing , call the NIH research team.  
• The medication can be taken with or withou t food.  
• If you take too much the research medication go to the nearest hospi[INVESTIGATOR_679871].  
• If you miss a dose, then take it as soon as you remember. If it is almost time for your next 
dose, just skip the missed dose. Take the next dose at  your regular time. Do not take 2 doses 
at the same time.  
 
What should I avoid while taking the research medication?  
Avoid eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while taking the research medication. It can 
increase your chances of getting seriou s side effects.  
78 
 What are the possible side effects of the research medication?  
The research medication can cause serious side effects or even cause death. See “What is the 
most important information I should know about the research medication?”  
Get medical help right away, if you have:  
• Muscle weakness or pain  
• Numbness or tingling in your fingers or toes  
• Unusual bleeding or bruising  
• Increased infections  
• Feel weak or tired  
• Have significant dizziness  
• Pale or gray color to your lips, tongue, or palms of your hands  
• Severe diarrhea or vomiting  
 
The most common side effects of the research medication are abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea 
and vomiting.  
Tell the NIH research team if you have any side effec t that bothers you or that does not go away.  
These are not all of the possible side effects of the research medication. For more information, 
ask the NIH research team, your healthcare provider, or pharmacist.  
How should I store the research medication?  
• Store at room temperature between 68° and 77°F (20° to 25°C).  
• Keep tightly closed in the provided container.  
• Keep out of the light.  
 
Keep the research medication and all medicines out of the reach of children.  
 
79 
 Appendix F  
(Adapted from Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 (CTCAE)  
Publish Date: May 28, 2009)  
 
Grades 
 
Grade refers to the severity of the adverse event ( AE). The CTCAE displays Grades 1 through 5 with unique 
clinical descriptions of severity for each AE based on this general guideline:  
 
Grade 1: Mild; asymptomatic or mild  symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; intervention not 
indicated.  
 
Grade 2: Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate 
instrumental Activities of Daily Living (ADL)*.  
 
Grade 3: Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77081]; disabling; limiting self-care ADL**. 
 
Grade 4: Life-threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated.  
 
Grade 5: Death related to AE.  
 
*Instrumental ADL refer to preparing meals, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_3112], using the telephone, 
managing money, etc.  
 
**Self-care ADL refer to bathing, dressing and undressing, feeding self, using the toilet, taking  medications, 
and not bedridden.  
 
80 
 Appendix G  
 
You will be completing Self Sampling at home (or at the NIH) for up to 4 visits  as part of the 
colchicine study:  
 Screening Visit  
 Medication Initiation Visit  
 3 month Final (Medication Completed) Visit  
 6 month Washout Visit (Optional)  
 
 
Supply list for Stool Collection:  
 
1. Fecocainter  stool container with toilet “frame”  
2. Brown Top Stool Collection Vial (x3)  
3. Permanent Marker  
4. Clear Bag for stool collection vial (biohazard bag)  
5. Disposable gloves  
6. Stool sampling instructions  
7. Food Dietary record + instructions  
 
 
For Questions Contact:  
[CONTACT_679940], Research Coordinator     [Phone Number Written Here]   
jordan.levine@ nih.gov 
Ginika Onyekaba, Research Coordinator    [Phone Number Written Here]  
[EMAIL_12971]  
Andrew Demidowich, MD, Lead Associate Investigator  [Phone Number Written Here]  
[EMAIL_12972]  
  
  
81 
 STOOL SPECIMEN COLLECTION : 
1. Wash your hands.  
2. Label your brown -lid container with the date and time of collection using the 
permanent marker provided. The inside of the container is sterile until opened. 
 
 
3. To minimize urine collection, first empty your bladder  before performing the next 
steps. 
 
4. Place the stool -collecting frame and Fecocontainer into the toilet, securely under 
the seat.  
                                  
5. Take a bowel movement in the bowl.   

82 
  
6. Put on gloves.  
 
7. As shown in Figure A, unscrew the cap carefully to avoid spi[INVESTIGATOR_679872].  Use the 
small spoon attachment on the lid to scoop up a “pea size” sample . Place the 
shovel with the sample into the specimen container, and s ecure the lid tightly and 
shake vial for 5 seconds .  Try not to spi[INVESTIGATOR_679873] (it helps 
preserve the stool).   
 
                 
 
8. Repeat two more times for a total of three stool vials.  Uncap and work with only 
ONE vial at a time .  
9. Place all three stool vials into the biospecimen bag provided.  
 
A B C 

83 
 10. Dispose of remaining feces into toilet and flush (optional).  Close Fecocontainer 
with the lid provided and throw away into a garbage bag. Throw the gloves away in 
the same bag. Wash Hands.  
  
11.  Return stool samples during your scheduled clinic visit.  Because the vials have the 
special preservative, they do not  need to be refrigerated or frozen.  However, you 
put the bag in the freezer if you wish.   
84 
 Colchicine Study (14 -CH-0119)  
Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_679874], 
please write down everything you eat and drink for a typi[INVESTIGATOR_5707].  
 
When should the food records be kept?    Write down  all foods and beverages you 
consume for 24 hours before you come to the Clinical Center for your appointment. This 
day should represent a fairly typi[INVESTIGATOR_679875].   
 
Eat normally on this day.  Don’t change your food choices, methods of food preparation, or 
where you eat just because you are recording your intake. There is no right or wrong way 
to eat for this evaluation.  
 
How and what should be recorded?   Use a new form each day.  It is best to record what 
you eat  immediately  after each meal and snack.  
 
You should write down:  
 
• the time you begin eating each meal and snack  
• all foods and beverages, except for plain water.  
• all condiments (such as ketchup, margarine, mayonnaise, salad dressing, sauces, 
gravy,  sugar, etc).  You do not  need to reco rd salt, pepper, herbs and spi[INVESTIGATOR_187621].  
• all medicines, vitamins, minerals, and/or other supplements taken.  
 
 
For each food and beverage that you list, include an amount and a description.  To guide 
you, refer to the sample food record and the hints for recording amounts and description 
information on the next few pages.  
 
What do I do with the forms after they ar e filled out?    Bring them back with you to the 
NIH when you come next time.  
 
 
If you have any questions or concerns, please contact [CONTACT_679941] e -mail or by [CONTACT_648].  
 
  
 
 
Dietitian’s name:_ Amber Courville ______  
Phone number: _ [PHONE_14083]  _________  
E-mail: __  [EMAIL_12973]  _______________  
85 
 Hints for Completing the Amount Column  
 
 
A.  Measure foods after preparation and cooking is completed.  
 
B.  Measurements can be listed in 4 ways:  
 
 1.  The number of items.  
 
  Examples:  saltines  [ADDRESS_920032] level measuring cups and spoons.  
 
  Examples:  applesauce  1/3 cup  
    popcorn  3 cups  
    jelly  1 ½  TB [tablespoons]  
    2% milk  1.5 CP [cup]  
 
  (Do not use non-standard measures like “handful” or “serving”)  
 
 3.  By [CONTACT_679942], as listed on a package (or by [CONTACT_2329] a kitchen scale if               
you have one).  
 
  Examples:  ginger ale  12 FL OZ [fluid ounces]  
    yogurt   4.5 oz [ounces]  
    Almond Joy  49 gm [grams]  
    roast beef  2 ½  oz  
    pretzels  1/3 of 6.5 oz bag  
     
 4.  By [CONTACT_53821], using a ruler.  
 
  Examples:  pancake  5” diameter  
    meatball  1 ¼” diameter  
    lasagna  3 ½” x 4” x 1½” cube  
    pi[INVESTIGATOR_6107]   1/8 of 14” diameter  [or draw it  with dimensions]  
  
   
 
 
• Remember not all food that is served is eaten, and at other times, you may go back for seconds.  
You may need to adjust portion sizes to reflect the amount you actually ate.  
 
 
86 
 Hints for Completing the Description  Column  
 
A.  Describe foods completely.  
 Examples:   
  sirloin  steak, fat partially trimmed  
  80% lean  ground beef (or 80/20 ground beef)  
  chicken drumstick,  skin removed before cooking  
  reduced fat  or 2% milk 
  baked  potato, skin eaten  
  carrot  cake with cream cheese  frosting  
 
B.  Include brand names whenever possible.  Also include terms like  calcium -fortified, light , and 
reduced calorie  if listed on the label.  
 Examples : 
  Country Crock Light spread  tub margarine  
Oreo  reduced -fat cookies  
Miller Lite draft beer  
  Hellmann’s fat -free cholesterol -free mayonnaise  
  Dannon lowfat  fruited yogurt  
  sliced peaches in light syrup  
 
C.  Include information about preparation and cooking methods.  
 Examples:  
  skinless chicken breast  floured and pan -fried in corn oil  
  canned c orn   tub margarine and sugar added  
  Campbell’s tomato soup  made with water  
  mac and cheese   from mix, made with whole  milk and   
             Parkay stick margarine  
 
D.  For mixed dishes and recipe items, you only need to list major ingredients.  You d o not need to 
write down the entire recipe.  
 Examples:  
  potato salad    made with potatoes, eggs, regular mayo  
  chocolate chip cookies  homemade with real butter, walnuts added  
  meatloaf    made with 85/[ADDRESS_920033] food items from major chains, you only need to name [CONTACT_265072].  No description is 
necessary, unless you “special order” an item.  Also, note if all of it wasn’t eaten.  
 Examples:  
  Biggie Fries (Wendy’s)   
  Quarter Pounder with Cheese (McDona ld’s) - didn’t eat pi[INVESTIGATOR_679876] -lovers Pan Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6107] (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_610957])  
 
F.  Remember to record any additions made at the table, such as margarine, sugar, ketchup, 
mustard, sauces, mayonnaise.  List them separately, and include amounts.  
 
References:  
 
1. Murphy NF, MacIntyre K, Stewart S, Hart CL, Hole D, McMurray JJ. Long -term 
cardiovascular consequences of obesity: 20 -year follow -up of more than 15 000 middle -aged 
men and women (the Renfrew -Paisley study). European heart journal 2006;27:96 -106. 
2. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, McDowell MA, Tabak CJ, Flegal KM. Prevalence of 
overweight and obesity in the [LOCATION_002], 1999 -2004. Jama -J Am Med Assoc 20 06;295:1549 -
55. 
3. Kuczmarski RJ, Flegal KM, Campbell SM, Johnson CL. Increasing prevalence of 
overweight among US adults. The National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, 1960 to 
1991. JAMA 1994;272:205 -11. 
4. Stienstra R, Joosten LA, Koenen T, et a l. The inflammasome -mediated caspase -1 
activation controls adipocyte differentiation and insulin sensitivity. Cell metabolism 
2010;12:593 -605. 
5. Wen H, Gris D, Lei Y, et al. Fatty acid -induced NLRP3 -ASC inflammasome activation 
interferes with insulin sign aling. Nature immunology 2011;12:408 -15. 
6. Visser M, Bouter LM, McQuillan GM, Wener MH, Harris TB. Elevated C -reactive 
protein levels in overweight and obese adults. JAMA 1999;282:[ADDRESS_920034] ES. The metabolic syndrome and C -reactive protein, fibrinog en, and leukocyte 
count: findings from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. 
Atherosclerosis 2003;168:351 -8. 
8. Pradhan AD, Manson JE, Rifai N, Buring JE, Ridker PM. C -reactive protein, interleukin 
6, and risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_36746] 2 dia betes mellitus. JAMA 2001;286:327 -34. 
9. Pradhan AD, Manson JE, Rossouw JE, et al. Inflammatory biomarkers, hormone 
replacement therapy, and incident coronary heart disease: prospective analysis from the Women's 
Health Initiative observational study. JAMA 2002;288:980 -7. 
10. Cancello R, Henegar C, Viguerie N, et al. Reduction of macrophage infiltration and 
chemoattractant gene expression changes in white adipose tissue of morbidly obese subjects after 
surgery -induced weight loss. Diabetes 2005;54:2277 -86. 
11. Vandanmagsar B, Youm YH, Ravussin A, et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome instigates 
obesity -induced inflammation and insulin resistance. Nature medicine 2011;17:[ADDRESS_920035] metabolic syndrome in a centrally obese population: 
a cross -sectional analysis. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2012;11:25.  
13. Phillips CM, Perry IJ. Does inflammation determine metabolic health status in obese and 
nonobese adults? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:E1610 -9. 
14. Pai JK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_17968] T, Ma J, et al. Inflammatory markers and the risk of coronary heart 
disease in men and women. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2599 -610. 
15. Danesh J, Kaptoge S, Mann AG, et al. Long -term interleukin -6 levels and subsequent risk 
of coronary heart disease: two new prospective studies and a systematic review. PLoS medicine 
2008;5:e78.  
16. Danesh J, Wheeler JG, Hirschfield GM, et al. C -reactive protein and other circulating 
markers of infla mmation in the prediction of coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med 
2004;350:1387 -97. 
17. Akbaraly TN, Hamer M, Ferrie JE, et al. Chronic inflammation as a determinant of future 
aging phenotypes. CMAJ 2013;185:E763 -70. 
89 
 18. Weisberg SP, McCann D, Desai M, Ros enbaum M, Leibel RL, Ferrante AW. Obesity is 
associated with macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue. Journal of Clinical Investigation 
2003;112:[ADDRESS_920036]: metabolism accelerates 
inflammator y traffic in obesity. Immunological reviews 2012;249:218 -38. 
20. Puri V, Ranjit S, Konda S, et al. Cidea is associated with lipid droplets and insulin 
sensitivity in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:[ADDRESS_920037] 2007;117:175 -84. 
22. Clement K, Viguerie N, Poitou C, et al. Weight loss regulates inflammation -related genes 
in white adipose tissue of obese subjects. FASEB J 2004 ;18:1657 -69. 
23. Lumeng CN, Deyoung SM, Bodzin JL, Saltiel AR. Increased inflammatory properties of 
adipose tissue macrophages recruited during diet -induced obesity. Diabetes 2007;56:[ADDRESS_920038] 2006;116:1494 -
505. 
25. Lumeng CN, Deyoung SM, Saltiel AR. Macrophages block insulin action in adipocytes 
by [CONTACT_679943]. Am J Physiol Endocrinol 
Metab 2007;292:E166 -74. 
26. Gao Z, Hwang D, Bataille F, et al. Serine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 
by [CONTACT_679944] B kinase complex. J Biol Chem 2002;277:[ZIP_CODE] -21. 
27. Ramadan JW, Stein er SR, O'Neill CM, Nunemaker CS. The central role of calcium in the 
effects of cytokines on beta -cell function: implications for type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Cell 
calcium 2011;50:481 -90. 
28. Dula SB, Jecmenica M, Wu R, et al. Evidence that low -grade systemi c inflammation can 
induce islet dysfunction as measured by [CONTACT_679945]. Cell calcium 2010;48:133 -
42. 
29. Osborn O, Brownell SE, Sanchez -Alavez M, Salomon D, Gram H, Bartfai T. Treatment 
with an Interleukin 1 beta antibody improves glycemic co ntrol in diet -induced obesity. Cytokine 
2008;44:141 -8. 
30. Westermark P, Andersson A, Westermark GT. Islet amyloid polypeptide, islet amyloid, 
and diabetes mellitus. Physiol Rev 2011;91:795 -826. 
31. Grant RW, Dixit VD. Mechanisms of disease: inflammasome a ctivation and the 
development of type 2 diabetes. Frontiers in immunology 2013;4:50.  
32. Guarda G, Zenger M, Yazdi AS, et al. Differential expression of NLRP3 among 
hematopoietic cells. J Immunol 2011;186:2529 -34. 
33. Barker BR, Taxman DJ, Ting JP. Cross -regulation between the IL -1beta/IL -18 
processing inflammasome and other inflammatory cytokines. Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_119530] 
2011;23:591 -7. 
34. Dinarello CA. A clinical perspective of IL -1beta as the gatekeeper of inflammation. Eur J 
Immunol 2011;41:1203 -17. 
35. Dinarello CA, Novick D, Kim S, Kaplanski G. Interleukin -18 and IL -18 Binding Protein. 
Frontiers in immunology 2013;4:289.  
36. Major CD, Gao ZY, Wolf BA. Activation of the sphingomyelinase/ceramide signal 
transduction pathway in insulin -secreting bet a-cells: role in cytokine -induced beta -cell death. 
Diabetes 1999;48:1372 -80. 
90 
 37. van Dijk SJ, Mensink M, Esser D, Feskens EJ, Muller M, Afman LA. Responses to high -
fat challenges varying in fat type in subjects with different metabolic risk phenotypes: a 
randomized trial. PLoS ONE 2012;7:e41388.  
38. Youm YH, Adijiang A, Vandanmagsar B, Burk D, Ravussin A, Dixit VD. Elimination of 
the NLRP3 -ASC inflammasome protects against chronic obesity -induced pancreatic damage. 
Endocrinology 2011;152:4039 -45. 
39. Stienstra R, van Diepen JA, Tack CJ, et al. Inflammasome is a central player in the 
induction of obesity and insulin resistance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:[ZIP_CODE] -9. 
40. Duewell P, Kono H, Rayner KJ, et al. NLRP3 inflammasomes are required for 
athero genesis and activated by [CONTACT_679946]. Nature 2010;464:1357 -61. 
41. Martinon F, Petrilli V, Mayor A, Tardivel A, Tschopp J. Gout -associated uric acid 
crystals activate the NALP3 inflammasome. Nature 2006;440:237 -41. 
42. Feig DI, Kang DH, Johnson RJ . Uric acid and cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med 
2008;359:1811 -21. 
43. Butler AE, Janson J, Bonner -Weir S, Ritzel R, Rizza RA, Butler PC. Beta -cell deficit and 
increased beta -cell apoptosis in humans with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 2003;52:102 -10. 
44. Dona th MY, Ehses JA, Maedler K, et al. Mechanisms of beta -cell death in type 2 
diabetes. Diabetes 2005;[ADDRESS_920039] 2:S108 -13. 
45. Owyang AM, Maedler K, Gross L, et al. XOMA 052, an anti -IL-1{beta} monoclonal 
antibody, improves glucose control and {beta} -cell func tion in the diet -induced obesity mouse 
model. Endocrinology 2010;151:[ADDRESS_920040] protects from high -fat diet -induced hyperglycem ia. 
Endocrinology 2008;149:2208 -18. 
47. Ofei F, Hurel S, Newkirk J, Sopwith M, Taylor R. Effects of an engineered human anti -
TNF -alpha antibody (CDP571) on insulin sensitivity and glycemic control in patients with 
NIDDM. Diabetes 1996;45:881 -5. 
48. Klover PJ, Clementi AH, Mooney RA. Interleukin -6 depletion selectively improves 
hepatic insulin action in obesity. Endocrinology 2005;146:[ADDRESS_920041] 2006;116:115 -24. 
50. Kim JE, Lee MH, Nam DH, et al. Celastrol, an NF -kappaB inhibitor, improves insulin 
resistance and attenuates renal injury in db/db mice. PLoS ONE 2013;8:e62068.  
51. Stanley TL, Zanni MV, Johnsen S, et al. TNF -alpha antagoni sm with etanercept 
decreases glucose and increases the proportion of high molecular weight adiponectin in obese 
subjects with features of the metabolic syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:E146 -50. 
52. Pradhan AD, Cook NR, Manson JE, Ridker PM, Buring  JE. A randomized trial of low -
dose aspi[INVESTIGATOR_679877] 2 diabetes in women. Diabetes Care 2009;32:[ADDRESS_920042] CP, Walter V, et al. Effects of interleukin -1beta inhibition with 
canakinumab on hemoglobin A1c, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], C -reactive protein, interleukin -6, and fibrinogen: a 
phase IIb randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Circulation 2012;126:[ADDRESS_920043] of anti -IL-1beta antibody 
(canakinumab) on insulin secretion rates in impa ired glucose tolerance or type 2 diabetes: results 
of a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Diabetes Obes Metab 2012.  
55. Cavelti -Weder C, Babians -Brunner A, Keller C, et al. Effects of gevokizumab on 
glycemia and inflammatory markers in type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes Care 2012;35:[ADDRESS_920044] in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 2007;356:1517 -26. 
91 
 57. van Asseldonk EJ, Stienstra R, Koenen TB, Joosten LA, Netea MG, Tack CJ. Treatment  
with Anakinra improves disposition index but not insulin sensitivity in nondiabetic subjects with 
the metabolic syndrome: a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2011;96:2119 -26. 
58. Yang LP. Oral colchicine (Colcrys) : in the treatment and prophylaxis of gout. Drugs 
2010;70:1603 -13. 
59. Terkeltaub RA. Colchicine update: 2008. Seminars in arthritis and rheumatism 
2009;38:411 -9. 
60. Bhattacharyya B, Panda D, Gupta S, Banerjee M. Anti -mitotic activity of colchicine and 
the structural basis for its interaction with tubulin. Medicinal research reviews 2008;28:155 -83. 
61. Nuki G. Colchicine: its mechanism of action and efficacy in crystal -induced 
inflammation. Current rheumatology reports 2008;10:[ADDRESS_920045] of regular colchicine treatment on 
biomarkers related with vascular injury in newly diagnosed patients with familial Mediterranean 
fever. Inflammation 2012;35:1191 -7. 
63. Ding AH, Porteu F, Sanchez E, Nathan CF. Downregulation of tumor necrosis factor 
receptors on macrophages and endothelial cells by [CONTACT_679947]. J Exp 
Med 1990;171:715 -27. 
64. Chia EW, Grainger R, Harper JL. Colchicine suppresses neutrophil superoxide 
production in a murine model of gouty a rthritis: a rationale for use of low -dose colchicine. 
British journal of pharmacology 2008;153:1288 -95. 
65. Li Z, Davis GS, Mohr C, Nain M, Gemsa D. Inhibition of LPS -induced tumor necrosis 
factor -alpha production by [CONTACT_679948]. Immunobiology 
1996;195:[ADDRESS_920046] of 
colchicine in rheumatic diseases: a possible new outlook through microarray analysis. 
Rheumatology (Oxford) 2006;45:274 -82. 
67. Misawa T, Takahama M, Kozaki T, et al. Microtubule -driven spatial arrangement of 
mitochondria promotes activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Nat Immunol 2013;14:454 -60. 
68. Colcrys Prescribing Information. In: [COMPANY_005] Pharmaceuticals America I, ed. Deerfield, 
IL; 2012.  
69. Miyachi Y, Taniguchi S, Ozaki M, Horio T. Colchicine in the treatment of the cutaneous 
manifestations of Behcet's disease. The British journal of dermatology 1981;104:67 -9. 
70. Suehisa S, Tagami H, Inoue F, Matsumoto K, Yoshikuni K . Colchicine in the treatment 
of acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome). The British journal of dermatology 
1983;108:99 -101. 
71. Hazen PG, Michel B. Management of necrotizing vasculitis with colchicine. 
Improvement in patients with cutane ous lesions and Behcet's syndrome. Arch Dermatol 
1979;115:[ADDRESS_920047] of colchicine (0.5 mg twice daily) on high -sensitivity C -
reactive protein independent of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_679878]. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:[ADDRESS_920048] of colchicine 
compared with placebo on high sensitivity C -reactive protein in patients with acute coronary 
syndrome or acute stroke: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_679879] d controlled trial. Journal of thrombosis and 
thrombolysis 2012;33:88 -94. 
92 
 74. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Kossyvakis C, et al. Colchicine for prevention of early 
atrial fibrillation recurrence after pulmonary vein isolation: a randomized controlled study.  J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2012;60:1790 -6. 
75. Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al. A randomized trial of colchicine for acute 
pericarditis. N Engl J Med 2013;369:1522 -8. 
76. Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, et al. Colchicine for recurrent pericarditis (CORP): a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2011;155:[ADDRESS_920049] L, Ducloux G. Treatment of recurrent 
pericarditis with colchicine. European heart journal 1994;15:120 -4. 
78. Finkelstein Y, Shemesh J, Mahlab K, et al. Colchicin e for the prevention of 
postpericardiotomy syndrome. Herz 2002;27:[ADDRESS_920050] -
pericardiotomy Syndrome (COPPS): a multicentre, randomized, double -blind, placebo -
controlled tri al. European heart journal 2010;31:[ADDRESS_920051]. Low -dose colchicine for 
secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;61:404 -10. 
81. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Raisakis K, et al. Colchicine treatment for the prevention 
of bare -metal stent restenosis in diabetic patients. Journal of the American College of Cardiology 
2013;61:1679 -85. 
82. Ertel NH, Akgun S. Inhibition of glucose -induced insulin secretion by [CONTACT_679949]. Metabolism 1979;28:1255 -60. 
83. Giugliano D, Cerciello T, Passariello N, et al. Colchicine and insulin secretion in man. 
Diabetes 1981;30:1008 -12. 
84. Burstein R, Seidman DS, Zemer D, et al. Chronic colchicine treatment does not impair 
glucose toleran ce in familial Mediterranean fever patients. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1997;52:[ADDRESS_920052] Rev 2006:CD006190.  
86. Karnieli E, Zarnowski MJ, Hissin PJ, Simpson IA,  Salans LB, Cushman SW. Insulin -
stimulated translocation of glucose transport systems in the isolated rat adipose cell. Time 
course, reversal, insulin concentration dependency, and relationship to glucose transport activity. 
The Journal of biological chemi stry 1981;256:4772 -7. 
87. Lizunov VA, Matsumoto H, Zimmerberg J, Cushman SW, Frolov VA. Insulin stimulates 
the halting, tethering, and fusion of mobile GLUT4 vesicles in rat adipose cells. The Journal of 
cell biology 2005;169:481 -9. 
88. Jimenez -Gomez Y, Ma ttison JA, Pearson KJ, et al. Resveratrol improves adipose insulin 
signaling and reduces the inflammatory response in adipose tissue of rhesus monkeys on high -
fat, high -sugar diet. Cell metabolism 2013;18:[ADDRESS_920053] of leptin on 
glucose transport, lipoprotein lipase, and insulin action in adipose and muscle cells. 
Endocrinology 1998;139:2509 -13. 
90. Vazquez -Prieto MA, Bettaieb A, Haj FG, Fraga CG, Oteiza PI. (-)-Epi[INVESTIGATOR_679880] -induced activation of signaling cascades involved in inflammation and insulin 
sensitivity in 3T3 -L1 adipocytes. Archives of biochemistry and biophysics 2012;527:113 -8. 
91. Handa M, Vanegas S, Maddux BA, et al. XOMA 052, an anti -IL-1beta monoclonal  
antibody, prevents IL -1beta -mediated insulin resistance in 3T3 -L1 adipocytes. Obesity (Silver 
Spring) 2013;21:[ADDRESS_920054]  metabolic state. PloS one 2015;10:e0119291.  
93 
 93. Grundy SM, Cleeman JI, Daniels SR, et al. Diagnosis and management of the metabolic 
syndrome: an American Heart Association/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Scientific 
Statement. Circulation 2005;11 2:2735 -52. 
94. Ascaso JF, Pardo S, Real JT, Lorente RI, Priego A, Carmena R. Diagnosing insulin 
resistance by [CONTACT_679950]. Diabetes 
Care 2003;26:3320 -5. 
95. Standards of medical care in diabetes --2014. Diabetes care 2014;[ADDRESS_920055] 1:S14 -80. 
96. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al. Differences in A1C by [CONTACT_679951]. Diabetes care 
2007;30:2453 -7. 
97. Herman WH, Dungan KM, Wolffenbuttel BH, et al. Racial and ethnic differences in 
mean plasma glucose, hemoglobin A1c, and 1,5 -anhydroglucitol in over 2000 patients with type 
2 diabetes. The Journal of clinical endocrinology and metabolism 2009;94:[ADDRESS_920056] of age and race/ethnicity on HbA1c levels in people 
without known diabetes mellitus: implications for the diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes research 
and clinical practice 2010;87:415 -21. 
99. World Health Organization multicenter stud y on menstrual and ovulatory patterns in 
adolescent girls. II. Longitudinal study of menstrual patterns in the early postmenarcheal period, 
duration of bleeding epi[INVESTIGATOR_679881]. World Health Organization Task Force on 
Adolescent Reproductive Health. Journal of adolescent health care : official publication of the 
Society for Adolescent Medicine 1986;7:236 -44. 
100. Hollingshead AB. Hollingshead two factor index of social position (1957). In: Miller DC, 
ed. Handbook of research design and social measurement. 5th edition ed. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage Publications; 1991:351 -9. 
101. O'Connell MB, Wong MO, Bannick -Mohrland SD, Dwinell AM. Accuracy of 2 - and 8 -
hour urine collections for measuring creatinine clearance in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29834]. 
Pharmacot herapy 1993;13:135 -42. 
102. Markantonis SL, Agathokleous -Kioupaki E. Can two -, four - or eight -hour urine 
collections after voluntary voiding be used instead of twenty -four-hour collections for the 
estimation of creatinine clearance in healthy subjects? Pha rmacy world & science : PWS 
1998;20:[ADDRESS_920057] physiological understanding of glucose 
tolerance. Minimal -model approach. Diabetes 1989;38:[ADDRESS_920058] -derived insulin sensitivity in diabetic subjects. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1990;71:[ADDRESS_920059] of Roux -en-Y gastr ic by[CONTACT_679952] -cell Function in type 
2 diabetic patients. Diabetes 2013;62:3027 -32. 
106. Anderson RL, Hamman RF, Savage PJ, et al. Exploration of simple insulin sensitivity 
measures derived from frequently sampled intravenous glu cose tolerance (FSIGT) tests. The 
Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 1995;142:724 -32. 
107. Saad MF, Anderson RL, Laws A, et al. A comparison between the minimal model and 
the glucose clamp in the assessment of insulin sensitivity acro ss the spectrum of glucose 
tolerance. Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Study. Diabetes 1994;43:1114 -21. 
108. Yang YJ, Youn JH, Bergman RN. Modified protocols improve insulin sensitivity 
estimation using the minimal model. Am J Physiol 1987;253:E595 -602. 
94 
 109. Korytkowski MT, Berga SL, Horwitz MJ. Comparison of the minimal model and the 
hyperglycemic clamp for measuring insulin sensitivity and acute insulin response to glucose. 
Metabolism 1995;44:[ADDRESS_920060] and the isoglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp in subjects with NIDDM. 
Diabetes 1995;44:631 -5. 
111. Davidson LE, K uk JL, Church TS, Ross R. Protocol for measurement of liver fat by 
[CONTACT_20420]. Journal of applied physiology 2006;100:864 -8. 
112. Speliotes EK, Massaro JM, Hoffmann U, et al. Liver fat is reproducibly measured using 
computed tomography in the Fram ingham Heart Study. Journal of gastroenterology and 
hepatology 2008;23:894 -9. 
113. Fujimoto WY, Jablonski KA, Bray GA, et al. Body size and shape changes and the risk 
of diabetes in the diabetes prevention program. Diabetes 2007;56:1680 -5. 
114. Common Term inology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.03. In: National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes Health, ed. Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services; 2010.  
115. Perry M. In: Williams, Wilkins, eds. The Chemotherapy Sourcebook. Balti more; [ADDRESS_920061] of 
combined metformin and oral contraceptive therapy on metabolic factors and endothelial 
function in overweight and obese women with polycystic ovary s yndrome. Fertility and sterility 
2011;96:501 -4 e2.  
117. Mitri J, Dawson -Hughes B, Hu FB, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_105319]. Effects of vitamin D and calcium 
supplementation on pancreatic beta cell function, insulin sensitivity, and glycemia in adults at 
high risk of diabetes: the  Calcium and Vitamin D for Diabetes Mellitus (CaDDM) randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Clin Nutr 2011;94:486 -94. 
118. O'Keefe JH, Jr., McCallister BD, Bateman TM, Kuhnlein DL, Ligon RW, Hartzler GO. 
Ineffectiveness of colchicine for the prevention of reste nosis after coronary angioplasty. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 1992;19:1597 -600. 
119. Chappey ON, Niel E, Wautier JL, et al. Colchicine disposition in human leukocytes after 
single and multiple oral administration. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1993;54:360 -7. 
 