Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page 1 o f 7 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_93763] 17 JANAURY 2013 	
  
	
  	
  
	
  
	
  
	
  
COM POUND AUTHO RIZATIO N AND CON SENT F OR PA RTICI PATION IN A 
RES EAR CH PROJEC T 
YALE UN IVERS ITY SCHO OL OF MEDIC INE – YA LE-NEW HAV EN HOS PI[INVESTIGATOR_93761]: Text Messa ging to Reduce Alcohol Relapse in Liver Transpla nt Patients 
Principal In vestigat or: Benjamin Toll , Ph.D. 
[ADDRESS_103770] 06 511 
Fundin g Source: Yale-New Hav en Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l, Psychological Medicine Servic e 
	
  
Invitat ion to Participate and Descrip tion of Project  
	
  
You  are  invited  to  take  part  in  a  research  study  de signed  to  look  at  the  feasibility  and 
acceptabili ty of a text-mess aging intervention to reduce alcohol relapse risk in pre-transpla nt 
liver transpla ntation patients. You have been asked to take pa rt because over the age of  18, have 
consume d alcohol within the pa st year, and have a diag nosis of alcohol-related liver disea se 
(ALD). If you are eligible to participa te, you would be one of 20 participa nts at the Liver 
Transpla ntation Clinic on the 4th  floor of the Yale Physician’s Building (YPB), part of Yale 
New-Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l. YPB is located a t [ADDRESS_103771] care at the 
liver  tra nspla ntation  clinic  and  some  will  receive  the  tex t-mess age  based  intervention.  In 
addition, all participa nts will receive a brief assessment of their alcoho l use and medical history. 
All of the components wi ll provided b y trained a nd experienced pro fessionals, fre e of charge. 
	
  
In order to decide whe ther or not you wish  to be a pa rt of thi s research study you should know 
enoug h about its risks and benefits to make an informed de cision.  This consent form gives you 
detailed inf ormation about the study, whic h a member of the research team wi ll discuss wit h you. 
This discussion should go over all aspects of this research: its purpo se, the procedures that will 
be performed, any risks of the procedu res, possi ble benefits and possi ble alternative treatments. 
Once you unde rstand the study, you will be asked if you wish  to particip ate; if so, you will be 
asked to sign this form. 
	
  
Dura tion 
	
  
Your participa tion in the treatment phase of the study will last [ADDRESS_103772] status. Thus, the total duration of study participa tion is 5 
mont hs. 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page 2 o f 7 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_93763] 17 JANAURY 2013 	
  
	
  	
  
	
  
Descrip tion of Procedures  
	
  
This stud y has thre e parts: 1) a screening period, 2 ) an 8-week stud y interventi on period a nd a 
post-study intervention follow-up, a nd 3) a medi cal cha rt review . 
	
  
Screen ing Period . If you chose to par ticipate in this study, you will be asked to complete a 
number of questi onna ires that will ask you about your a lcohol use , smoking, drug use, 
persona lity, and fa mily history. In addition, we will ask for demographic infor mation i ncluding 
age, sex, ethnic/racial ide ntity, sexual orie ntation, and e ducational history. We will ask you to 
compl ete a brief series of tasks to asse ss aspects of cognition, i ncluding memory and decisi on- 
making . You w ill also be asked to review your me dical history and will be asked to provide a 
urine sa mple. Urine samples w ill be use d to che ck on a lcohol a nd dr ug use. Women w ho are able 
to have children will also unde rgo a pregnancy test, which must be negative in orde r to 
participa te. A sta ff memb er will measure your breath alc ohol l evel. You w ill be a sked to hav e a 
Breathalyzer test by [CONTACT_93764] a small tube f or five seconds. This t est will be repeat ed at the 
Week [ADDRESS_103773] etely eligible to pa rticipa te in the study. 
	
  
Study Intervention Period.  If, on the b asis of your screening a ppoint ment, you are found to b e 
eligible and you wish to pa rticipa te, the n you will be enrolled in t he study. You w ill be randoml y 
assigned (like the flip of a coin) to re ceive either a tex t message intervention or sta ndard alcohol 
relapse prevention tre atment in the Liver Transpla nt Clinic. T he text mess age interve ntion will 
be given in conjunc tion with standa rd alcohol r elapse prevention treatm ent. 
	
  
If you are assigned to r eceive the text message treatment, you will be issued a cell phone , whi ch 
will have a pre-paid text-mess aging plan, for the d uration of the stud y. For the first four weeks of 
the stud y, you will receive two tex t messages per day and will be asked to respond to bot h 
mess ages. Af ter the first [ADDRESS_103774]-treatment at the e nd of week 8. We ask tha t you return th e phone to us a fter the 
8 week tre atment per iod. Urine a nalysis will be given at both appoint ments to biol ogically 
confir m alc ohol abstine nce. You wil l be pa id $20 for the W eek 4 a ppoint ment and $[ADDRESS_103775] cur rent Mode l for End-Stage Liver 
Disease (MELD) score, your liver transpla nt wait-list status, and infor mation about a ny medical 
compl ications tha t may have occurred sinc e the end of treatm ent. You will not nee d to come in to 
the Liver Transpla nt clini c for this chart review . This information wil l be c ollected to be tter 
unde rstand your r esponse to treatm ent and pr ogress in t he Liver Transpla ntation clinic. 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page 3 o f 7 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_93763] 17 JANAURY 2013 	
  
	
  	
  
	
  
	
  
	
  
Risk s and Inconveniences 
	
  
Before you de cide w hether you wa nt to participa te, ther e are some risks and inconve nienc es that 
you should know a bout. These include : 
	
  
Ratings Scales and Asse ssments: These are all non-invasive a nd should a dd no risk. The major 
disadva ntage is the time it t akes to comple te the se questionna ires. We have done our best to 
make these questionna ires brie f, and our past experience with t hese measures indi cates tha t they 
are acceptable to most study participa nts. C areful e fforts aime d at maintaining confid entiality 
will be made . 
	
  
Benefits 
	
  
You w ill receive a standa rd treatm ent to help wit h alcohol relaps e. Specific ally, indi vidual 
psychotherapy has bee n shown to be an effective treatm ent for alcohol rel apse. We expect t hat 
the result s of the study will bene fit scie nce and other s throu gh incr easin g our knowle dge about 
treatm ent for alcohol rela pse in live r transpla nt pat ients. 
	
  
Economic Considerations 
	
  
You w ill receive $20 for completion of stud y assessments at base line and $30 at the Week 8 
follow- up assessment a ppoint ment, f or a total of $50. 
	
  
Treat ment Alternatives/Alternatives 
	
  
You ma y engage in clini cal (i.e. , non -study) treatment with t he Liver Transplantation S ervice at 
Yale-New Haven Hospit al. Other treatments include A lcoholics Anon ymous or othe r 
psychotherapy provide d outsi de the Liver Transplantation clini c. Study staff can advise you of 
the othe r treatment opt ions t hat are available to you. 
	
  
Conf identiality and Privacy  
	
  
If you decid e to be in thi s study, the r esearcher will have infor mation t hat identifies you and your 
persona l health. This m ay include information tha t might directly identif y you, suc h as your 
name a nd stree t num ber, date of birth, a nd soc ial security number. This information will be kept 
for 7 years. A fter that time, it will be destroyed or de-identifie d, mea ning w e will replac e your 
identif ying infor mation with a c ode that doe s not directl y identify you. The princ ipal investiga tor 
(PI) will kee p a link that identifie s you to your coded infor mation, but this link will be kept 
secur e and available onl y to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_93762] s of the research team. An y infor mation 
that can identif y you will remain c onfid ential. The research team wil l only give this coded 
infor mation t o other s to c arry out this re search study . 
	
  
The infor mation about your healt h that will be collected in thi s study include s: 
 Past medical or la boratory records collected b y other member s of the Liver 
Transpla ntation clini cal team 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page [ADDRESS_103776] results, 
including drug toxicology tests 
Information obt ained via questionna ires 
	
  
Information about your o r your health whic h might identify you ma y be used by [CONTACT_93765]: 
The U.S. De partmen t of Healt h and Huma n Services (D HSS) age ncies 
Laboratories and other individuals and or ganizations tha t ana lyze your health infor mation 
in connecti on with t his study, according to the study plan 
 Represe ntatives of  Yale Unive rsity and the H uman Investigation Comm ittee, who a re 
responsi ble for ensurin g research compl iance. Th ese individuals a re required to kee p all 
infor mation conf idential. 
The Principal Investigator (Benjamin Toll, P h.D.) 
Co-Investigators a nd oth er inve stigators 
Study Coordin ator and Memb ers of the Res earch Team 
	
  
If you give pe rmission t o let us g ive your id entifiable healt h infor mation t o other s as 
listed a bove , the infor mation may no lon ger be protected b y law.  There is a risk that your 
infor mation wil l be f urther released to ot hers without your p ermission. 
Recor ds tha t include ide ntifiable inf ormation wil l be ke pt in a locke d research cabinet. 
Most of the infor mation that is c ollected w ill be c oded by [CONTACT_93766] b y name. 
Numbe r coded rec ords will be store d in a loc ked room. Numbe r coded records a re also stored as 
data in c omput er files, and the c omput ers storin g these data are passwor d protected a nd st ored in 
a locke d unit . Your name [CONTACT_93772] y disclosed a t any time, a nd the records will be 
strictl y maintaine d according to cur rent leg al requirements. W hen the resul ts of the rese arch are 
publi shed or discusse d in confe rences, no inf ormation wil l be inc luded tha t would re veal your 
identit y unless your spe cific c onsen t for this ac tivity is obt ained. 
Information about your s tudy particip ation will  not become a part of your Yale-New 
Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l (YNHH) medical re cord, whic h identifies you. Information about your 
participa tion in re search will not be e ntered int o your me dical record. Th e clinical and me dical 
treatm ent team at the Liver Transplantation clini c will not obt ain information about t he result s of 
your urine toxicolog y tests or your answe rs on que stionna ires. Ke lly DeMartini, P h.D. is the 
excepti on to t his rule. A s a Co -Investigator and Study Coordina tor, Dr. DeMartini, who is a 
clinical provider of ps ychotherap y in the Liver Transpla ntation C linic, w ill have access to and 
knowle dge of your qu estionna ire results and toxicology result s. Dr . DeMarti ni wil l not infor m 
any medical provide rs about these result s nor w ill she pa rticipa te in any UNOS listing decisi ons 
for any participa nts in this study. Your questionna ire result s and toxicolog y results will be 
strictl y kept from the rest of the medical t reatment team. As a result, your p articipa tion in t his 
study will have no effect on any UNOS listing decisi ons ma de about you no r will your 
participa tion im pact your treatm ent in the Liver Tra nspla ntation clini c in an y way. 
We may release identif ying infor mation in some c ircumst ances. For example, w e will 
disclose me dical information in ca ses of me dical necessi ty, or ta ke steps (in cluding notifying 
authorities) to protect you or some one else from s uspected or known abuse or neg lect of a child 
or elderly person, a risk o f harm to yourse lf or othe rs, or plans to dama ge to pro perty. 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page 5 o f 7 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_93763] 17 JANAURY 2013 	
  
	
  	
  
	
  
	
  
	
  
By [CONTACT_93767] s form, you authorize the use a nd/or disclosure of the information de scribed abov e 
for this research study.  The purpose for the uses and disclosure s you are authorizi ng is to 
ensure that t he information re lating to this rese arch is available to all parties who may need it 
for research purposes. 
	
  
All healt h care provide rs subject to HIPAA (Health Insura nce Portability and Accountabili ty 
Act) are require d to protect the privacy of your information.  The research staff at the Yale 
School of Medic ine and Yale-New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l are required to compl y with HIPAA and to 
ensure the confide ntiality of your information.   Some of the individuals or agencies listed 
above may not be subject to HIPAA and therefore may not be require d to provide the same 
type of confide ntiality protecti on. They could use or disclos e your information in ways not 
mentioned in this form.  Howeve r to better protect your health infor mation , agreements are in 
place with these individuals and/or companie s that require that they keep your infor mation 
confide ntial. You ha ve the rig ht to review and copy your he alth infor mation in your medical 
record in accordance with inst itutional medical recor ds policie s. 
	
  
This  authorizat ion  to  use  and  disclose  your  health  information  collected  durin g  your 
participa tion in t his study will never ex pi[INVESTIGATOR_1312]. 
	
  
Volu ntary Participation and With drawal 
	
  
You a re free to dec ide whether or no t to particip ate in thi s study.  Should you decide not to 
participa te in thi s study, or later withdraw f rom th e study, your d ecision wi ll in no wa y affect 
your eligibility for alcohol abstine nce services, treatm ent in the liver tra nsplant c linic or any 
futur e treatment. To w ithdraw, you can call a member of the research team at a ny time and tell 
them that you no lon ger want to take part. This wi ll cancel an y appoint ments in the f uture . When 
you withdr aw your p ermission, i nformation that ha s alread y been gathered about you ma y still be 
used and given to other s to complete the stud y. This may be done when it is necessa ry for the 
research to be reliable. To take away, or w ithdraw , your p ermission t o use and disc lose your 
healt h infor mation t hat has bee n collec ted dur ing this study, you must also f ollow up your p hone 
call by [CONTACT_5583] a written notice to the princ ipal in vestigator (name [CONTACT_93773] 1 of this 
form). You c an choose not to answe r spe cific q uestions on the pen and pape r que stionna ire that 
we ask you to complete , and thi s will in no wa y affect your stud y participa tion. The study 
doctors ma y stop your participa tion in t he study if they believe that it is in your best interest.  In 
addition, an y significant new findings developed during the course of this re search stud y that 
may relate to your willingness to continue participation will be provided to you. 
	
  
If you choose not to participa te or if  you withdr aw it will not harm your relationship with your 
own doctors or with Yale-New Haven Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17399] l. We would still treat you with standa rd therapy 
or, at your request, re fer you to a clinic or doctor who can of fer this t reatment. 
	
  
You may withdra w or take away your permission to use and disclose your healt h infor mation at 
any time.   You do this by [CONTACT_93768], Benjamin Toll, 
Ph.D.  If you withdra w your permission, you will not be able to stay in this study. When you 
withdra w your permission, no new healt h infor mation identif ying you will be gathered after that 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page 6 o f 7 
APPROVED BY [CONTACT_93763] 17 JANAURY 2013 	
  
	
  	
  
	
  
date.  Information that has alread y been gathered may still be used and given to other s until the 
end of the research stud y, as nec essary to insure the integrity of the study and/or stud y oversight. 
You do not wa ive a ny of your legal rights b y signing this form. 
	
  
Question s 
	
  
We have used some technical terms in this form.  Please feel free to ask about anything 
you don't unde rstand and to conside r this research and the consen t form carefully – as long as 
you feel is nece ssary – before you m ake a decision. 
	
  
CON SENT FOR F ORW ARD ING ADDRES S 
	
  
In the event that the investigat ors can n ot contact [CONTACT_93769] t address an d phone 
num ber, I give consent for the following person s to be c ontacted to obtain m y forwarding 
address an d phone number:  ( I will tell these person s that t hey may be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]) 
	
  
[CONTACT_5627]:    [CONTACT_5627]:    
	
  
Relationship: 	
  
   	
  
Relationship: 	
  
   
	
  
Address:  	
  
   	
  
Address:  	
  
   
	
  
Phone : Phone : 
	
  
	
  
	
  
CON SENT TO RECONTA CT 
	
  
The research tea m may wish to c ontac t you in t he future , to cl arify questions fr om the 
questionna ires or inter views, or to invite you to pa rticipa te in other studi es.  Therefore, we ask 
your permission t o contact [CONTACT_93770] t he future.  Giving your p ermission for the research team t o 
contac t you doe s not obli gate you to answer a ny future questions, or to pa rticipate in an y futur e 
research-- you always have the right to decli ne further participa tion in re search.  Please indica te 
your preference about future contact [CONTACT_93771] : 
	
  
Initials:   I give the res earch team pe rmission to contact m e in the future . Initials:  
 I do not g ive the research team per mission to contact m e in the future . 
Approved -  Valid through 16 -JAN-2014 
HIC#: [PHONE_2189] 
Page [ADDRESS_103777] read (or someone has read to me) this form and have decided to participa te in the project 
described above .  Its general purpo ses, the particulars of my invol vement and possi ble hazards 
and inconve niences have been explaine d to my satisfacti on.  My signature [CONTACT_93774] I 
have received a copy of this conse nt for m. 
	
  
By [CONTACT_3368], I give permission t o the rese archers to use [and give out] infor mation about 
me for the pur poses desc ribed in t his for m.  B y refusing to give pe rmission, I understand that I 
will not be a ble to be in this re search. 
	
  
Name [CONTACT_93775] t:   
	
  
Signature:   
	
  
[CONTACT_1782]:   
	
  
	
  
	
  
Signature [CONTACT_93776] t Date 
	
  
If after you ha ve signed this form you have any questions a bout your p rivacy rights, plea se 
contac t the Yale Privac y Officer at 203/ 432-5919. 
	
  
If you ha ve further que stions a bout t his projec t or if  you have a research-related proble m, you 
may contac t the Principal Investigator, Benjamin Toll, P h.D (wor k: 203 -974-5767, cell : 203 - 
376-6113) .  If you would like to talk wit h some one other than the researchers to disc uss 
problems, c oncerns, a nd questions you ma y have concernin g this research, or to discuss your 
rights as a research subje ct, you may contac t the Yale Human Investigation Comm ittee at (203) 
785-4688. 