   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 1 
 SCIENTIFIC REVIEW COMMITTEE  
 
Title:  Improving Informal Caregivers' and Cancer Survivors' Psychological Distress,  
Symptom Management and Health Care Use  
 
KEY PERSONNEL  
 
Name  [CONTACT_520489], PhD  Universi ty of Arizona  Principal Inv estigator    
Alla Sikorskii, P hD Michigan State University  Co-Investigator    
Chris Segrin, PhD University of A rizona  Co-Investigator    
Tracy Crane, PhD  University of Ar izona  Co-Investigator  
Pavani Chalasani,  MD, MPH  University of Ar izona  Co-Investigat or    
Charles Given, PhD  Mich igan State University  Consultant   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
INDEX         Section  
Schema/Study Flowchart  
Background & Rationale  1.0 
Objectives/Specific Aims  2.0 
Sample Eligibility Criteria  3.0 
Participant Regi stration  4.0 
Research Design, M ethods and Procedures  5.0 
Measures/Data Collection Instruments  6.0 
Detailed Description of Intervention  7.0 
Statistical Considerations  8.0 
Study Timeline  9.0 
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  10.0 
Reporting Adverse Events  11.0 
Patient Consent and Peer Judgme nt 12.0 
References  13.0 
Appendices:  14.0 
 
  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 2 
  
SCHEMA OR FLOWCHART  
Insert schematic or diagram outlining study design and procedures  
 
 
 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 3 
  
1.0 BACKGROUND & RATIONALE  
 Scientific background and basis for hypothesis(es) to be teste d. Include justification for 
conducting study and results of similar studies or pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299].   
 
Informal Caregivers of Cancer Survivors . Informal caregivers are people within the survivor ’s social  
network, related by [CONTACT_520444], who provide emotional, informational and/or instrumental  
support. [ADDRESS_675037] $306 billion annually, 54,55 with 5.7 million caregivers providing care to cancer survivors. 56 Caregivers of  
canc er patients become involved in complex care activities 57 for an average of 14 months. 58,59  A shift to patient -
centered care is facilitated by [CONTACT_520445] ’ and 
caregivers ’ outcomes resulting from such engagement. 60,61 Caregivers exp erience a range of  psychological 
problems, disruption of daily routines, financial burdens, and role changes that accompany the  care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841] ’s 
cancer diagnosis and treatment. 62-64 Caring for the survivor often has negative consequences  to the caregiver ’s 
family resources and health. 65,[ADDRESS_675038] poorer physical health than those in the  general population, 
reflected by [CONTACT_520446], chronic back pain, and heart disease. 67 Between  30-50% of 
caregivers  experience increased psychiatr ic morbidity, fatigue, sleep impairment. 68-70 Psychological  distress 
among caregivers is often present at levels equal to or greater than among cancer survivors. 40,71 -81 Risk of 
these morbidities is particularly high among c aregivers who are female, 82-84 less educated, 85 younger in  age, 86 
and who are caring for younger adult survivors. 87,88 These findings explain increased use of health care  
services among caregivers of those recently diagnosed with cancer. 89,90   
Meaningful i nvolvement in the survivor ’s car e may also have a positive impact on caregivers ’ health, 91-94 
which improves the quality of care they provide to the survivors. 95-98 For these reasons, interventions providing  
caregivers with tools such as the SM SH are highl y valuable. 99,100 Further, psycho social interventions that 
directly  improve caregivers ’ health, 101 reduce psychological distress and address problem -solving and 
communication  skills, 102 are also potentially beneficial to survivors and their caregivers. The  proposed research 
will deliver  psychosocial (TIP -C) and educational (SM SH) interventions and test their optimal sequencing for 
survivors with  known levels of distress and symptom severity as well as their impact on their caregivers who 
often experience  distress and associated other sympto ms (e.g., poor sleep, fatigue).  
Symptom burden in cancer survivors.  Physical and psychological symptoms are aggravated while cancer  
survivors are in treatment. 103,104 Survivors ’ symptom burden 105-[ADDRESS_675039], 115-117 and life threatening  
recurrence or metastasis at the extreme. 118,119 The prevalence of specific symptoms (e.g., fatigue, pain,  
depression, anxi ety, disturbed sleep, nausea and vomiting, neuropathy) 120-125 varies by [CONTACT_520447],  
treatment type, gender, ethnicity and age, 98,99 variables that will be empi[INVESTIGATOR_520430]. The number of symptoms reported by [CONTACT_520448] 14. 126 127 Approximately 30% of cancer survivors report psychological distress  
(depression and anxiety). Major depression occurs in approximately 16%, and subthreshold depress ive 
disorders occur in 22% of cancer survivors during treatment. [ADDRESS_675040] cancer reported a higher number and more sy mptom burden/distress than did non -Hispanic white 
women with similar diagnoses. 31 Therefore, we will enroll an  ethnically diverse sample (includes 30%  
Hispanic/ Latino participants) in this trial to address a significant  symptom management need. Given the  
increasing population of Hispanic cancer survivors, providing and  testing an intervention in the participant ’s 
primary language could have national significance.  A series of longitudinal studies 130-133 including those 
conducted by [CONTACT_78168] 130,131 , found an  association  between increasing symptom prevalence and poorer 
physical and emotional functioning. Our team ’s past  work 134 and that of others 135 documented the a ssociations 
between reductions in symptoms and lower number  of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], office and ED v isits.10 The proposed 
interventions are significant because they will address  the multiple symptoms experienced by [CONTACT_520449].  
 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 4 
 2.0 OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC AIMS  
 Purpose and spe cific aims of the stud y. 
 
Informal caregivers, typi[INVESTIGATOR_520431], provide more than half of the care needed for the 5.[ADDRESS_675041] 30% of  
survivors and t heir caregivers repor t psychological distress (depression and anxiety) and such distress may  
interfere with optimal symptom management. This study will support both members of the survivor -caregiver  
dyad in the management of the survivor ’s cancer - and trea tment -related symptom s and the dyad ’s 
psychological distress.  
Design : We will use the sequential multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART)  
design, a newer adaptive design. The SMART moves beyond a traditional RCT to a precision approach to  
determine the  right treatment at t he right dose with the right sequence for the right survivor -caregiver dyad. We  
will use two evidence -based interventions: Symptom Management and Survivorshi p Handbook (SMSH) and 
Telephone Interpersonal  
Counseling (TIP -C). While we have established the o verall efficacy of thes e interventions, but individuals differ  
in responses. When an intervention does not initially work, clinic logic is to either extend the timeframe or  
prescribe a different intervention. Yet, such alternatives are seldom tested nor ev idence -based. However, they 
will be in this study.  
Sample: We will enroll 298 survivors with elevated depression or anxiety who are  undergoing chemotherapy or 
targeted therapy for a solid tumor and their 298 caregivers.  
Procedure : Dyads  will be initially ran domized to SMSH  alone or TIP -C +SMSH . If the survivor ’s elevated 
depression or anxiety does  not respond to SMSH  alone by [CONTACT_5875] 4, dyads will be re -randomized to continue 
with SMSH  to give it more time or  to TIP -C+SMSH . Outcome data will be collected at base line, weeks 13 
(post -intervention) and 17 (follow -up). Assessments during weeks 1 -12 will docum ent changes in symptoms, 
intervention receipt, enactment and  fidelity.  
Specific aims : 1) Determine if dyads in the TIP -C+SMSH  as compared to the SMSH  alone group  created  by 
[CONTACT_520450]: a) lower depression, anxiety, and summed severity of 13 other symptoms  at 
weeks 1 -12, 13, and 17 (primary outcomes); b) lower use of healthcare services (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], urgent  
care or emergency department [ ED] visits) during 17 weeks (secondary outcomes); c) greater self -efficacy,  
social support, and l ower caregiver burden during weeks 13 and 17 (potential mediators). 2) Among 
nonresponders  to the SMSH  alone after 4 weeks, determine if dyads assigned to TIP -C+SMSH  as compared 
to the  SMSH  alone group created by [CONTACT_520451] 5 -12, 13, and 17. 3) Test the interdependence in survivor ’s and 
caregiver ’s 
primary and secondary  outcomes. 4) Determine which characteristics of the dyad are associated with  
responses to the SMSH  alone during weeks 1 -4 and optimal outcomes for the dyad during weeks 1 -12, 13 and  
17 so as to determine tailoring variables for the decision rules of indiv idualized sequencing of interve ntions.  
Findings will be used to improve symptom management and reduc e distress in survivor -caregiver dyads.   
 
 
3.0 SAMPLE ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
 Specific inclusion/exclusion requirements which must be met for entry.   
 
Inclus ion criteria for the survivors are: 1) age 18 or older; 2) undergoing chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, or 
targeted therapy for a solid tumor cancer;  3) able to perform basic activities of daily living; 4) cogniti vely 
oriented to time, place, and person (det ermined  by [CONTACT_520452]) ; 5) repor ting severity of >2 on depression or >4 on 
anxiety using a 0 -10 standardized scale; 6) able to speak and understand English or Spanish; 7) access to a 
telephone and 8) has a caregi ver who can  be in any relationship role (e.g. , spouse, sibling, parent, frie nd) who 
can participate with them.  
 
Exclusion  criteria are: 1) diagnosis of a psychotic disorder in the health record; 2) nursing home resident; 3) 
bedridden; 4) currently receiving  counseling and/or psychotherapy. Inclusion criteria for the caregivers are : 1) 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 5 
 age 18 or  older; 2) able to speak and understand English or Spanish; 3) access to a telephone; 4 ) not currently 
receiving  counseling and/or psychotherapy; and 5) not currently treated for cancer.  
 
The advantages of these  inclusion criteria are i n study  generalizability. Solid tumors have been selected  
because cancer - and treatment -related symptoms can be effectively managed in this population with the two  
interventions (see section C2). Site of cancer and other prognostic  factors will be controll ed in r andomization  
(see C7). Thus, groups compared in study hypotheses will be balanced on disease and treatment  
characteristics. The cut -offs of >2 on depression and >[ADDRESS_675042] their own caregivers, findin gs would be generalizable to  
the cancer survivor population who may be single or rely on other people for support. The exclusion of  
caregivers currently treated for cancer will preserve the distinguishability of th e “survivo r” and “caregiver ” roles  
within the dyad. Our prior research indicates that participation in counseling and/or psychotherapy for either  
dyad member is rare during survivors ’ treatment. These exclusion criteria will not substantially limit the  
population bu t will eliminate potential confo unding of the intervention effects with extraneous influences.  
 
4.0 PARTICIPANT RECRUITMENT/ENROLLMENT  
 Describe how study participants are to be recruited and enrolled i n the study with ap propriate 
contact  [CONTACT_520453], et c. Stratification factors, parti cipant characteristics which are 
balanced across treatment arms or used to determine intervention doses are described here.  
The randomization scheme is included here if applicable.  
 
Sample. We will recruit 298 dyads (see below fo r power ), allowing for 22%  attrition, for a final post -attrition  
sample of [ADDRESS_675043] of approximately 60% non -Hispanic white, 30% Hispanic/ Latino, 3% each African  
American  and Asian American, and 4% American Indian participants . There is an ample pool of cancer 
survivors available to meet enrollment targets. Of the estimated  35,[ADDRESS_675044]  (n=1000) should satisfy the inclusion criteria. Following 
the initial recruitment contact, we anticipate about 1 0% will consent to participate, thus we can recruit 100 
dyads per year. Given this team ’s past successful  recruitment at the UACC and community sites (letters of 
support), the proposed study will easily meet the  recruitment goal of 99 dyads each year of th e 3 years of 
recruitment.  
Sample  size and  power considerations. To determine sample size, we started at the right of the  
schematic in Figure 1 (the second randomization) and moved from right to left to determine the needed  
number of consenting dyads. To po wer the comparisons on primary o utcomes f or the groups created by [CONTACT_520454] (Aim 2), we used the effect size of Cohen ’s d=0.39 (adjusted for baseline), the smallest  
seen in the preliminary data for TIP -C against an educational intervention ( Table 1) to conservatively estim ate 
sampl e size requirements. We further adjusted this effect size for the reduction in error variance due to [ADDRESS_675045] studies, Pearson correlation coefficients between pairs of  
repea ted measures of depression, anxi ety and s ummed severity of other symptoms ranged from r=0.[ADDRESS_675046] sizes from d=0.[ADDRESS_675047] adjusted  
d=0.54, the required sample size is 60 per group crea ted by [CONTACT_520455],  for powe r of .80 or  
greater in two -tailed tests at the 0.05 level of significance.  
Moving from left to right in Figure 1  (schematic) , [ADDRESS_675048] work, re sponse rate to the SMSH  on 
depression and anxiety  was approximately 30%, 228 therefore 120 non -responders will be 70% of [ADDRESS_675049] randomization. The comparison of these 172 to 60 dyads al located 
to the TIP -C+SMSH  in the fir st randomization will have power of 0.[ADDRESS_675050] size of 0.54 (adjusted 
for the repeated measures) in  testing the hypothesis associated with Aim 1. The tests of mediation and 
interdependence effects in Aim [ADDRESS_675051] an even greater power bec ause of further reduction in error 
variance. Aim 4 is exploratory, thus formal  power considerations are not applicable. In summary, the total 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675052] -attrition sample size for all  specific aims is N=232. To account  for 22% attrition based on past 
work, we will need [ADDRESS_675053] recruiter training that includes didactic information,  
role-playing, and r eturn demonstration of recr uiting per script. Recruiters will i ntroduce the study to survivors:  
17-week study duration, randomizations to TIP -C+SMSH  versus SMSH  alone to help manage symptoms, [ADDRESS_675054] to study participati on, risks/benefits, and i ncentives.  
Subject incentives.  We will  provide gift cards for completing baseline, 13 and 17 -week  assessments.  
Incentive payments not only significantly improve recruitment rates 229, but there are no significant differences in  
key d ependent variables for t hose offered versus those not  offered an incentive. 230 Provision of incentives  
equivalent to the demands of participation is vital to successfully recruiting minorities into research and getting  
a culturally representative diverse s ample. 231-234 After ever y assessment, participants will receiv e thank you  
letters and gift cards from a large retail merchant in graduated amounts ($[ADDRESS_675055], $50 after 2 nd and $[ADDRESS_675056]). The total compensation will be $150 for about 6 -10 hours of  participants ’ time over  17 weeks.  
Strategies to minimize attr ition.  1) Recruiters will emphasize the importance of participating in the entire  
intervention each week. 2) Survivors and caregivers will be asked to mark their calendars for study calls. 3) 
email or text reminders ab out upcoming telephone contacts will b e sent if agreed to by [CONTACT_4317]. 4) Weekly  
calls will maintain contact [CONTACT_520456]. 5) Graduated compensation for  
assessments will be provided. These s trategies have worked w ell in the past. Participants will be assured of  
the confidentiality of all information and that refusing to participate will not alter their care. Survivors will  
continue to receive standard medical and nursing care and  may seek ca re from their health pro viders for any  
health problems that a rise. For dyads that refuse to participate, the recruiter will seek consent to collect their  
de-identified demographic data and ask about the reason for refusal. These data help us understand who  
declines and contribute  to external va lidity and generalizab ility of the findings.  
Community ties and cultural sensitivity.  We use experienced staff members with extensive ties to the  
local survivorship communities. The study brochures will be developed in English and in Spanish  with 
community advisors. 31,[ADDRESS_675057],  
mission or purpose, empathy, graciousness and credibility 235 will be incorporated in all interactions. We will  
show cultural sensitivity along tw o dimensions. 236,237 Surface structur e involves matching messages to  
observable ‘superficial ’ characteristics of the target population (e.g., speaking English or Spanish). Deep  
structures involve incorporating some of the socio -cultural, historical, enviro nmental and psyc hological forces  
that influence health behaviors. For example, we will incorporate the value of personalismo by [CONTACT_520457] ’ lives at the beginning of sessions. Participants from past studies have appreciated the flexibility  
and respect ( respeto) inherent in our  caregiver definition, which allowed survivors to choose the person to  
participate. [ADDRESS_675058] ( confianza ). 
Randomization. Following the baseline interview, dyads will be randomized to either SMSH  alone (N=[ADDRESS_675059]-attrition) or to TIP -C+SMSH  (N=[ADDRESS_675060] -attrition). A minimization algorithm will be programmed by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  
Sikorskii t o balance arms by r ecruitment location,  site of cancer, stage of cancer (early versus late), type of  
treatment, and survivor ’s relationship to the caregiver (spouse vs non -spouse). [ADDRESS_675061] randomization except in 1:1 ratio. The study coordinator will run the computer algorithm from the main  
study office (Tucson) to ensure allocation, concealment, and blinding.  
 
5.0 RESEA RCH DESIGN, MET HODS AND PROCEDURES  
 Describe res earch design, methods and all study procedures    
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675062] active and passive controls in  
traditional randomized controlled trials (RCTs). While  overall efficacy of these interventions  has been  
established 7,15,16,[ADDRESS_675063] of testing fixed “one 
size fits all ” interventions to the sequential multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART) 32-[ADDRESS_675064] 
intervention, a printed Symptom Management and Survivorshi p Handbook  (SMSH) with strategies for self -
management of  symptoms common during chemotherapy 15,16,30 will be given to bot h survivor and caregiver 
(the dyad). SM SH strategies, if successfully enacted by [CONTACT_29447], produce positive symptom responses for the 
survivor. However,  psychological distress of the survivor or the caregiver may diminish the receipt and  
enactment of the SM SH strategies and also exacerbate the sev erity of other symptoms 38 which, in turn, 
produces poor symptom  responses. 39 Research by [CONTACT_78168] 40,41 and others 42-48 has documented dyadic effects 
where survivors ’ psychosocial distress impact s that of the caregiv er and vice versa. 49 The survivor ’s and 
caregiver ’s distress  exhibit similar trajectories. Therefore, the second intervention tested in sequencing is the 
8-week telephone  interpersonal counseling intervention (TIP -C) to manage psycholo gical distress of the  
dyad. 8,[ADDRESS_675065] will determine w hich dyads require which  intervention sequence: SMSH  alone, SMSH  
alone stepped up  with TIP -C based on demonstrated needs after giving SM SH alone 4 weeks of time, or a 
combined TIP -C+SM SH for the first 8 weeks then SMSH  alone for 4 weeks. Dyads will be initiall y randomized 
to either SMSH  alone or TIP -C+SMSH  (Figure 1). If  the survivor ’s depr ession or anxiety does not respond to 
SMSH  alone at week 4, dyads will be re -randomized to the TIPC+  SMSH  or continue with SM SH alone. 
Outcome data will be  collected at baseline, weeks 13 (post -intervention) and 17  (follow -up). Brief assessments 
during weeks 1-12 will track  any change in the dyad ’s symptoms, intervention receipt,  enactment and fidelity. 
Assessmen ts and interventions are  telephone -delivered in English or Spanish bas ed on participant preference, 
as done in past studies. 8,50,51  
 
Design . We selected the SMART design (F igure 1) for this study over alternative designs (e.g.,  
implementation designs) beca use the SMART design allows a precision or personalized approach to  
determine the right treatment at the right dose with the right sequence for the right survivor -caregiver  dyad.  
SMART designs, although newer, show promise in developi[INVESTIGATOR_520432] -based interventions  
for more efficient and individualized patie nt- and caregiver -centered care. We will use findings from this study  
to create an algorithm for clini cally meaningful decision making about symptom management for survivors and  
their ca regivers to be tested in future implementation/dissemination studies. We w ill recruit 298 cancer  
survivors undergoing chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or hormonal therapy fo r a solid tumor at the NCI  
designated  University of Arizona Comprehensive Cancer Cen ter (UACC, Tucson and Phoenix locations) and  
at Arizona community onco logy settings. The survivors will be screened for moderate or severe depression  
and/or anxiety prior to enrollment and identify the informal caregivers who will participate in the study.  
Following enrollment, informed consent and baseline interview of both  survivor and caregiver, the dyad will be  
randomly assigned to either: 1) SMSH  alone or 2) TIP -C+SMSH  for [ADDRESS_675066] ment and fidelity. After the initial 4  
weeks in the SMSH  alone group, the survivor ’s response to the in tervention will be determined. If the survivor  
responds (defined as a redu ced score on depression and/or anxiety) (See C9a. Primary Outcomes), the dyad  
will continue with the SMSH  alone for 8 more weeks. If the survivor is a non -responder (defined as no  
improvement or a worsening score for depression and/or anxiety), the dyad wil l be re-randomized to either  
continue with SMSH  alone for 8 more weeks, or add 8 weeks of TIP -C. The rationale for using the survivor ’s 
response as the criterion for re -randomizatio n is from the extensive evidence of interdependence in survivor  
and caregive r outcomes presented, and on the caregiver ’s focus on the survivor ’s outcomes. T he rationale for  
timing of the assessment of response and re -randomization to add the TIP -C interven tion after [ADDRESS_675067] -intervention and follow -up telephone assessments are at weeks 13 and 17.  
  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675068] igated by [CONTACT_520458] , and models described below will be fit with  
and without outliers to examine their influence on the results.  
Attrition Analyses and Handling of Missing Data.  We will compare dyadic characteristi cs of those who  
completed t he study to those who did not within  their designated group to inform the generalizability of findings.  
Attrition will also be compared between each pair of randomized groups. The  regression techniques described  
below allow for m issing at random (MAR) mech anism. 264 If patterns of missing dat a indicate potential not  
missing at random (NMAR) mechanisms, then models describing missing mechanisms will be considered  
(e.g., pattern -mixtu re models), 265,266 and sensitivity analyses will i nvestigate the robustness o f the results.  
Primary Analysis.  Prima ry analyses will follow the intent to treat approach.  
Aim 1, Hypothesis 1: Dyads initially randomized to the TIP -C+SMSH  will report lower dep ression, anxiety, 
and 
summed severity of other symp toms at weeks 1 -12, 13, and  17, and lower unscheduled health servi ces use,  
higher self -efficacy and social support, and lower caregiver burden at weeks 13 and 17 as compared to those  
initially randomized t o the SMSH  alone. This hypothesis will be tested usi ng statistical model #1 tha t relates  
repeated measures of the surv ivor or caregiver outcome y (one at a time) to the group assignment variable 
𝑥𝑥1, outcome at baseline 𝑥𝑥2, time entered as a class var iable to model potentially non -linear patterns, and 
other  covariates. For norma lly distributed outcomes, this model wi ll be fit as a linear mixed effects model 
(LME).  Generalized linear mixed eff ects (GLME) modeling will be used if outcome is not normally distributed 
and cannot be normalized using transformations. For health service use, statistical model #1 will be 
imple mented  as a GLME model with Poisson distributed errors, or as a zero -inflated  Poisson or negative 
Binomial model  based on the distribution  of the counts of different health services uses. Each type of health 
services use (e.g.,  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], ED visits) will be analyzed separately. The explanatory variables including 
study group  will be  evaluated as predictors of ze ro inflation (whether o r not the count is zero), and also as 
predictors of the  magnitude of the count when it is not zero. The main effects of the group variable 𝑥𝑥1will be 
tested.  
Aim 2, Hypothesis 2: Dyads where su rvivors do not respond to the SMSH  alone  during weeks [ADDRESS_675069] for mediation, the study group will be treated as the  
independent variable, and each of the potential mediators (one at a time) will be tested for their effect on the  
symptom outcome variable at weeks [ADDRESS_675070] of study group on the outcome variable, through the mediator. To establish mediation, the  
95% confidence interval around the indirect effect  must not include 0.  
Aim 3 examines the dyadic interdepend ence in outcomes between survivors and car egivers. This  
interdependence will be modeled and tested with the actor -partner interdependence mediation model  
(API[INVESTIGATOR_520433]) 269 in structural equation modeling.  The API[INVESTIGATOR_520434]: actor effe cts 
(e.g., person A independent variable ( IV)→person A dependent variable (DV)), caregiver (partner) effects (e.g.,  
person A IV →person B DV), and mediation effects (e.g., person A IV → person B Media tor→ person A DV) in  
an omnibus mode l. These models will s pecify correlations between the survivors ’ and caregivers ’ IVs as well  
as covariances between the error terms of the mediators and outcome variables, recognizing that these  
residuals will covary bet ween dyad members due to unmeasured common causes. We will  fit both a saturated  
version of the model in which all actor, partner, and mediation effects are free to vary and compare that with a  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675071] whether baseline to week  
17 changes in survivors ’ outcomes of depression, anxiety and summed severity of other symptoms are  
mediated by [CONTACT_520459] (week 13) state or caregivers ’ outcomes or potential covariates.  
Explorato ry Aim 4. The dyadi c characteristics of responders will be compared to those of non -responders  
using t -tests, chi -square or Fisher ’s exact tests. Character istics found to differ, along with mediators and other  
covariates listed in section C9d will be furth er considered as po tential future tailoring variables. The decision  
rule (𝑑𝑑1, 𝑑𝑑2) specifying the first and second intervention to achieve optimal out come will be using the 
Qlearning  optimization method 258,[ADDRESS_675072]. Two Q -functions will be considered. The function  
𝑄𝑄2(𝐻𝐻2) = 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌2|𝐻𝐻2] is the expectation of the second stage outcome 𝑌𝑌2 given history after 2 stages, 
denoted by 𝐻𝐻2: dyadic ch aracteristics, outcomes observed during weeks 1 -12, 13 and 17, and interventions 
received. The  function 𝑄𝑄1(𝐻𝐻1) = 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌1 + max 𝑄𝑄2(𝐻𝐻2)] uses history through the first intervention stage 
𝐻𝐻1. The conditional  expectations i n the Q -functions w ill be estimated from regression analyses for the primary 
outcomes, and the  optimal decision rules will be found using backward induction by [CONTACT_520460]. 275,[ADDRESS_675073] intervention and switching from SMSH  alone to TIP -C+SMSH . 
These personalized decision rules can  then undergo testing in a future confirmatory RCT.  
 
6.0  MEASURES/DAT A COLLECTIO N INSTRUMENTS   
Describe all forms, questionnaires, instruments or other speci fic methods used to collect data. 
Include complete copi[INVESTIGATOR_520435], interview g uides, survey questionnaires,  in Appendi x I.  
 
Measures  
Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement I nformation Syste m (PROMIS) [ADDRESS_675074] good reliability ( α > .80) 41,84,178,[ADDRESS_675075] been translated 240 and tested with  
Spanish sp eaking participa nts in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. 31  
Primary outcomes.  
Caregiv ers’ and survivors ’ symptoms  will be measured using the adapted General Symptom Distress Scale  
(GSDS), 124,250 a brief instrument that allows for a quick assess ment of symptoms, w hich is especially impor tant 
during weekly calls. It evaluates 15 symptoms: sho rtness of breath, nausea, vomiting, pain, sleep difficulties,  
bowel problems, numbness or tingling, skin rashes or sores, swelling in hands and feet, difficul ty concentrating,  
poor appetite, cough, dep ression, anxiety, fatigue. Respondents indicate presenc e of each symptom (yes/no)  
and rate their severity on the scale from 1 to 10. The ability to manage symptoms is also assessed on a scale  
from 1=cannot manage to 10=can manage ex tremely well. The GSDS h as good test -retest and internal  
consistency reliabilit y and predictive and construct validity in both English and Spanish. [ADDRESS_675076],  
baseline, 13, and 17 week interviews.  
Survivors ’ symptom response on depression and/or anxiety during weeks [ADDRESS_675077] ered during weekly calls  to survivors. Based on the inclusion criteria and estab lished and validated 
symptom cut points , 224 survivors will enter with moderate or severe depression and/or anxiety (one symptom 
or both) . The  cut-points ar e anchored in how m uch symptoms are distres sing the participant by [CONTACT_520461], social relationships, and general daily activities. Participants indicate the severity/distress 
from 1 to 10. For  depression, the mild category correspon ds to a severity sc ore of 1, the moderate c ategory 
corresponds to  scores 2 -3, and scores of 4 -10 fal l into the severe category. For anxiety, the mild category is 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 10 
 severity of 1 -3, the moderate category corresponds to scores 4 -5, and the severe category is 6 -10. Survivors 
who start at  severe or moder ate on depression and/or anxiety symptoms at intake and end at a lower category 
by [CONTACT_68069]  [ADDRESS_675078] the value 
added by [CONTACT_520462] 2. To tal intervention time is 12 weeks.  
Caregivers ’ and survivors ’ depression and anxiety . PROMIS -short forms 8: depression  and anxiety 253-256 will be 
administered at baseline, 13 and 17 week telephone interviews to prov ide greater detail and precision in the  
measurement of these outcomes, as compared to single GSDS items administered in weekly calls. We chose  
8-item short forms to minimize respond ent burden while maintaining measurement precision.  
Secondary outcomes.  Secondary outcomes are  caregivers ’ and survi vors’ hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], urgent care or  
ED visits during the study. In baseline, week [ADDRESS_675079] to assess healthcare use, as it  would be impossible to access  
health (medical) records across the multip le systems and paye rs used by [CONTACT_3445] s in this study.  
Potential mediators . 
Caregivers ’ and survivors ’ self-efficacy.  PROMIS 4-item short forms  (sf) will be administered in interview s.253-256 
Self-efficacy specific to symptom management will be captured  by [CONTACT_520463] d escribed above.  
Careg ivers ’ and survivors ’ social support . PROMIS 4-item-sf for emotional support and PROMIS Informational 
Support 4a will be  used in interviews. 253-256 
Caregiver Reaction Assessment Tool. 257 This caregiver burden tool was developed and val idated with  
caregiv ers of patients wi th chronic conditions. It has 5 subscales: impact on schedule, caregiver ’s esteem,  
family support, impact on health, and impact on finances, with Cronbach ’s alphas exceeding 0.70.  
Potential Covariates and Future Tailori ng Variables.  These  variables will be  assessed during baseline 
interviews of survivors and caregivers. Demographic  characteristics include caregivers ’ and survivors ’ age, 
education, work, ethnicity, race, acculturation, marital  status, relationship between  survivor and the c aregiver, 
and livi ng arrangement. Comorbidity will be measured  with the Bayliss tool that queries the presence of [ADDRESS_675080] height and  weight to calculate BMI. The validity and reliability of self -
reported height an d wei ght are adequate 259-261, and  health risk estimates associated with BMI values are 
virtually the same, whether based on self -report or  measured BMI values. 262 Caregiver ’s activities of survivor 
care will be measured using a checklist 19, and quality  of relationship will be me asured using a 6 -item index 
designed to assess the relationship quality. The index  has established reliability with samples of married 
couples 263 and has also been used to capture survivors ’ perceptions of the quality o f relationship with  their 
friend/fami ly caregiver. Preferred language of intervention  delivery will be tracked. Receipt and enactment of 
intervention strategies are measured during weeks 1 -12. Receipt will be measured by [CONTACT_520464]. Enactment of the SMSH  strategie s is assessed at the beginning of calls during weeks 2 -12 
as described in section C8c. Enactment of the TIP -C will  be measured by [CONTACT_520465] c ounselor ’s field notes for 
each session. Assessment of survivors ’ radiation,  surgery, chemotherapy, targeted or hormonal therapy (dose, 
type, dates received), cancer site and stage, and  medications (e.g., supp ortive agents for symptoms) will be 
collected f rom health record  data corresponding  with the time -on-study. Every effort has been made to keep 
respondent burden to a minimum and to distribute  any burden over the course of the study. If needed, we can 
divide the assessments into two s essions over two  days. Yet, few part icipants requested such  
accommodations in past studies.  
 
 
7.0 DETAI LED DESCRIPTION OF INTERVE NTION  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 11 
 Describe in detail for intervention studies or indicate otherwise by [CONTACT_520466]:  
 
Interventions. We deliver interventions via the telep hone (see section  C2e for rationale) at convenient  times 
for both the survivor and c aregiver, including evenings and weekends.  
Symptom Management and Survivorship Handbook  (SMSM). is an evidence -based self -care management 
guide specific to each  symptom. 84-87 Each module is  presented in an identical format (frequently asked 
question s): what the symptom  is, how people describe the symptom, the causes of the symptom including 
medications, and a set of  
strategies presented in bullet points for managing the symptom. For each sym ptom, there are indications as to  
when and for what reasons to contact [CONTACT_520467]; other resources for management are listed. The  
previously tested English version will be translated into Spanish using an adaptation of Brislin ’s 
translation/back  translation process [ADDRESS_675081]. Profe ssor Jaime Fatás -Cabeza, Director  
of the Undergraduate Translation and Interpretation Program at the University of Arizona, will oversee the  
translation. Cultural experts will perform back transla tions of a random sample  of pages from the SMSH  for 
compariso n to the original English language versions, and all discrepancies corrected between the back  
translated and original English language pages. Finally, a focus group of six Spanish -speaking Latino s will 
discuss the transl ation in terms of understandability (language level and complexity), use of idioms, and  
consistency of meaning. Focus group data will be used to finalize the SMSH  translation and layout (i.e. 
design).  
Survivors and caregivers will be m ailed the Handb ook in the participant ’s preferred language following the  
baseline interviews. During each week, staff will call the survivors and then their caregivers. The call will begin  
with the assessment of  symptoms using the General Symptom Distr ess S cale (GSDS, described in measures).  
For each symptom rated  at [ADDRESS_675082] work. 75,76,81,82,89 During weeks 2 -12, the survivor ’s 
calls will begin with assessing SMSH  use since the last call (intervention enactment), followed by [CONTACT_520468] t he SMSH . During weekly calls to caregivers, symptoms will also be  
assessed using GSDS. The caregivers will be notified of any current symptoms above threshold experienced  
by [CONTACT_520469]. Shari ng symptom  
information between survivor and caregiver will  be part of the informed consent. During weeks 2 -12, the  
caregiver ’s calls will begin with assessing SMSH  use for the management of survivors ’ symptoms, followed by  
[CONTACT_520470], summary of sur vivors ’ symptoms and referral to the SMSH . Calls will last about 10 m inutes.  
 
 
Telephone Interpersonal Counseling Intervention (TIP -C). Social work counselors with a master ’s 
degree and beh avioral health and oncology expertise will deliver the 8 -week TIP -C intervent ion (Table 2).  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 12 
 During weekly contacts, the counselors targe t social support behaviors using interpersonal communications  
techniques. Interpersonal communication facilitates proces sing stressful affective reactions to a cancer  
diagnosis and treat ment, marsh alling instrumental support for assistance with roles and f unctions,  
informational support for advice and information, and appraisal support for gauging and adjusting to the  
stres sor. Counselors can personalize the counseling intervention for th e specific needs or interests as  
expressed during sessions while still  adhering to a structured protocol. For example, one survivor may need to  
focus on depression and family issues (e.g., r ole transitions such as job loss) rather than on anxiety and  
resou rce issues (e.g., transportation, lack of insurance) . This approach is  consistent with survivorship care  
recommendations 241 and recent evidence showing that improved psychological well -being  occurs when an  
intervention addresses practical resource needs. 242 
 Each sur vivor and caregiver receiving the TIP -C+SMSH  intervention wi ll receive one 40 -minute  
telephone call per week for 8 weeks (8 sessions). The first 10 minutes of the call will follow th e SMSH  only 
intervention procedures (see C8c). The next 30 minu tes will be d evoted to the delivery of TIP -C. The TIP -C 
sessions will in corporate the symptoms assessment performed at the beginning of the call as follows:  
discussion of depression, anxiety and  stress per protocol and referral to the SMSH  for symptoms. Th e final [ADDRESS_675083] adequate time 
and privacy to participate. Numerous interventions for ca ncer survivorship use individually delivered methods  
243-245 as we will use in this study. Dyadic delivery (i.e., both p resent at the s ame time) is not required and  
separate delivery resolves tw o major obstacles associated with delivering TIP -C to both mem bers 
simultaneously. 1) Participants may be unwilling to discuss certain issues when the other dyad member is  
present su ch as discussin g concerns that they have about each other. In such cases, the counselor can be an  
effective bridge between the two. Othe r times, participants may wish to discuss personal concerns (e.g.,  
survivor dying). 2) Scheduling and technological diff iculties multip ly when both members must speak on the  
phone with a third p arty at the same time.  
Training and intervention fidelity.  Intervention protocol fidelity will be assured using established methods  
outlined by [CONTACT_520471] o n consistency i n dose, providers, delivery, and receipt of  
the interventio n.[ADDRESS_675084] training that will  
continue until the couns elor is rated a s achieving > 90% on protocol implementation. Annual re -training occurs  
throughout the study . 
The intervention fidelity prot ocols used in past studies will be used in this study. All sessions will be  digitally 
recorded and about 10% randomly  reviewed throu ghout the study to maintain quality, with written and  
verbal feedback given to the counselors. Drs. Badger and Segrin will s upervise the intervention quality control  
activities. Through weekly case supervision, we will maintain fidelity of t he intervention  and counselor  
adherence to protocols. We will evaluate ad herence (number required elements discussed/ total number of  
eleme nts). 142,153,[ADDRESS_675085] 5 dyads (40 hours  
of su pervision) and then randomly review 10% of sessions throughout the study.  A bilingual counselor will  
review sessions in Spanish using estab lished protocols as in past studies. No one with less than 90%  
adherence will receive new cases until retraining has occurred, and D rs. Badger or Segrin will assume  
responsibility for those existing cases. Following retraining, 5 dyads will be monitored to  ensure  that >90%  
adherence is achieved and then we will return to randomly selected monitoring for quality control. Anyone  
unable t o adhere to the standardized protocols after a second retr aining will be replaced.  
Intervention reproducibility.  Interventions  must be standardized , yet the complexities of symptom distress  
demand a flexible approach to preserve the relevanc e of TIP -C for the individual. We will determine the  
amount of elements p ersonalized to the specific needs of the individual within the struc tured protocol (number  
of personalized elements/ total number of elements). We will then examine the effect of pers onalization (e. g., 
more discussion of socioeconomic needs with one partic ipant vs. another), if any, on outcomes. Counselors  
will keep detailed field notes after each session assessing intervention length, rapport, responsiveness, topi[INVESTIGATOR_520436], homewor k completed and  satisfaction. Our past adherence rate of >85% far exceeds  the rate  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 13 
 reported for community mental health patients who return for face -to-face appointments. 248 Participants who  
miss sessions (occurrence is rare) will be rescheduled, as we wil l obtain multip le points of contact (e.g., home,  
cell, work telephone, e -mail address). If we fail to contact [CONTACT_520472], we will schedule the following week.  
We will also send an e -mail, text, or letter asking the participant to call us. Attrition ra tes and reasons  will be 
documented, including being unable to reach the s urvivor or the caregiver or expressed desire to discontinue.  
 
 
 
 
8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
Analysis Plan for answering objectives including  endpoint definitio ns, patient accrual 
objec tives, and  estima ted duration of study. This s ection should b e developed in consultation 
with appropriat e biostatistician.  
  
Potential Covariates and Future Tailori ng Variables.  These variables will be assessed during baseline 
interviews of survivors and caregivers.  Demographic  characteristics include caregivers ’ and survivors ’ age, 
education, work, ethnicity, race, acculturation, marital  status, relationship between  survivor and the caregiver, 
and living arrangement. Comorbidity will be measured  with the Bayliss too l that queries the presence of [ADDRESS_675086] height and  weight to calculate BMI. The validity and reliability of self -
reported height an d weight are adequate 259-261, and  health risk estimates associated with B MI values are 
virtually the same, whether based on self -report or  measured BMI values. 262 Caregiver ’s activities of survivor 
care will be measured using a checklist 19, and quality  of relationship will be measured using a 6 -item index 
designed to assess the  relationship q uality. The index  has established reliability with samples of married 
couples 263 and has also been used to capture survivors ’ perceptions of the quality o f relationship with their 
friend/family caregiver. Preferred language of intervention  delivery will be  tracked. Receipt and enactment of 
intervention strategies are measured during weeks 1 -12. Receipt will be measured by [CONTACT_520464]. Enactment of the SMS H strategies is  assessed at the beginning of calls during wee ks 2-12 
as descr ibed in section C8c. Enactment of the TIP -C will  be measured by [CONTACT_520473] ’s field notes for 
each session. Assessment of survivors ’ radiation,  surger y, chemotherapy, targeted or hormonal therapy (dose, 
type, dates received), cancer site and stage, and  medications (e.g., supp ortive agents for symptoms) will be 
collected from health record data corresponding  with the time -on-study. Every effort has been made to keep 
respondent burden to a minimum and to distribute  any burden over the course of the study. If needed, we can 
divide the assessments into two s essions over two  days. Yet, few participants requested such  
accommodations in past stu dies.  
 
Scientifi c Rigor a nd Transparency . The scientific rigor of this study is ensured by [CONTACT_520474], 
complete inclusion/exclusion criteria defining the population to which findings would be generalizable,  
reproducible manualized protocol for t he interventions , trackin g of intervention fidelity, dose, receipt and  
enactment, use of measures with solid evidence of reliability and validity, blinding of data collectors,  
transparent assessment and statistical analysis plans including attention to bia ses and the miss ing data.  
 
Sex as a biological variable. We will consider survivors ’ and caregivers ’ sex as covariates in all  analyses. 
Past research indicates that the survivor -caregiver relationship (spouse/partner versus other) is a  
key factor that may influence outcom es62,[ADDRESS_675087]. Sikorskii. De -identified data will  
be transferred into SAS 9.4 for analyses. The distributions of outcomes and potential covariate s will be  
assess ed, outliers will be investigated by [CONTACT_520458] , and models described below will be fit with  
and without outliers to examine their influence on the results.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 14 
 Attrition Analyses and Handling of Missing Data.  We will compare dyad ic characteristi cs of those who  
completed the study to those who did not within  their designated group to inform the generalizability of findings.  
Attrition will also be compared between each pair of randomized groups. The regression techniques described  
below allow for m issing at random (MAR) mechanism. 264 If patterns of missing dat a indicate potential not  
missing at random (NMAR) mechanisms, then models describing missing mechanisms will be considered  
(e.g., pattern -mixture models), 265,266 and sensitivity  analyses will i nvestigate the robustness of the results.  
Primary Analysis.  Prima ry analyses will follow the intent to treat approach.  
Aim 1, Hypothesis 1: Dyads initially randomized to the TIP -C+SMSH  will report lower depression, anxiety, 
and 
summed sever ity of other symp toms at weeks 1 -12, 13, and 17, and lower unscheduled health servi ces use,  
higher self -efficacy and social support, and lower caregiver burden at weeks 13 and 17 as compared to those  
initially randomized to the SMSH  alone. This hypothesis will be tested usi ng statistical model #1 that relates  
repeated measures of the surv ivor or caregiver outcome y (one at a time) to the group assignment variable 
𝑥𝑥1, outcome at baseline 𝑥𝑥2, time entered as a class variable to model potentially non -linear patterns, and 
other  covariates. For normally distributed outcomes, this model wi ll be fit as a linear mixed effects model 
(LME).  Generalized linear mixed eff ects (GLME) modeling will be used if outcome is not normally distributed 
and cannot be normalized using transformations. For health service use, statistical model #1 will be 
imple mented  as a GLME model with Poisson distributed errors, or as a zero -inflated  Poisson or negative 
Binomial model  based on the distribution of the counts of different health services uses. Each type of health 
services use (e.g.,  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], ED visits) will be analyzed separately. The explanatory variables including 
study group  will be  evaluated as predictors of ze ro inflation (whether or not the count is zero), and also as 
predictors of the  magnitude of the count when it is not zero. The main effects of the group variable 𝑥𝑥1will be 
tested.  
Aim 2, Hypothesis 2: Dyads where su rvivors do not respond to the SMSH  alone  during weeks [ADDRESS_675088] for mediation, the study group will be treate d as the  
independent variable, and each of the potential mediators (one at a time) will be tested for their effect on the  
symptom outcome variable at weeks [ADDRESS_675089] of study group on the outcome variable, through the mediator. To establish mediation, the  
95% confidence interval around the indirect effect must not include 0.  
Aim 3 examines the dyadic interdepe ndence in outcomes between survivors and car egivers. This  
interdependence will be modeled and tested with the actor -partner interdependence mediation model  
(API[INVESTIGATOR_520433]) 269 in structural equation modeling. The API[INVESTIGATOR_520434]: actor ef fects 
(e.g., person A independent variable ( IV)→person A dependent variable (DV)), caregiver (partner) effects (e.g.,  
person A IV →person B DV), and mediation effects (e.g., person A IV → person B Mediator → person A DV) in  
an omnibus mode l. These models will  specify correlations between the survivors ’ and caregivers ’ IVs as well  
as covariances between the error terms of the mediators and outcome variables, recognizing that these  
residuals will covary between dyad members due to unmeasured common causes. We wi ll fit both a saturated  
version of the model in which all actor, partner, and mediation effects are free to vary and compare that with a  
constrained model in which the effects for one dyad member are constrained equal to the correspondi ng 
effects of the ot her dyad member. The χ2 difference test will determine whether the more parsimonious  
constrained model or the unconstrained model will be interpreted. This test will also indicate whether the effect  
for survivors is significantly differ ent from that of car egivers. These models will test whether baseline to week  
17 changes in survivors ’ outcomes of depression, anxiety and summed severity of other symptoms are  
mediated by [CONTACT_520459] (week 13) state or caregivers ’ outcomes or potential covariates.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 15 
 Explora tory Aim 4. The dyadic characteristics of responders will be compared to those of non -responders  
using t -tests, chi -square or Fisher ’s exact tests. Character istics found to differ, along with mediators and other  
covariates listed in section C9d will be fur ther considered as potential future tailoring variables. The decision  
rule (𝑑𝑑1, 𝑑𝑑2) specifying the first and second intervention to achieve optimal out come will be using the 
Qlearning  optimization method 258,[ADDRESS_675090]. Two Q -functions will be considered. The function  
𝑄𝑄2(𝐻𝐻2) = 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌2|𝐻𝐻2] is the expectation of the second stage outcome 𝑌𝑌2 given history after 2 stages, 
denote d by 𝐻𝐻2: dyadic characteristics, outcomes observed during weeks 1 -12, 13 and 17, and interventions 
received. The  function 𝑄𝑄1(𝐻𝐻1) = 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌1 + max 𝑄𝑄2(𝐻𝐻2)] uses history through the first intervention stage 
𝐻𝐻1. The conditional  expectations  in the Q -functions will be estimated from regression analyses for the primary 
outcomes, and the  optimal decision rules will be found using backward induction by [CONTACT_520460]. 275,[ADDRESS_675091] intervention and switching from SMSH  alone to TIP -C+SMSH . 
These personalized decision rules can  then undergo testing in a future confirmatory RCT.  
 
Potential Difficulties/L imitations and Alternative Approaches  
Potential problems from recruitment and retention will be minimized by [CONTACT_520475].  
Potential problems in interventio n delivery will be minimized by [CONTACT_520476]. There are no high -risk aspects of this trial, and all procedures are non -invasive. We recognize that in  
addressing depression and anxiet y our efforts might inadverten tly produce detrimental psychological  
responses. Should this occur , our experienced interventionists will refer the survivor and/or caregiver to mental  
health services. Because randomizations may not account for all possible e rror sources, we will adjust fo r 
baseline values of outcomes in the analysis to provide added control over possible confounding preintervention  
influences. Three primary outcomes (depression, anxiety, and summed severity of other  symptoms) and all 
hypothes es are stated a priori. In the exploratory analyses, the Benjamini -Hochberg or  Hochberg 
adjustment 277-279 will be used to control the false discovery rate.  
 
 
 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675092]  quality assurance.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan . This behavioral intervention study meets the definition of a clin ical 
trial. Data and Safety Mo nitoring will be accomplished through multiple approaches:  
Institutio nal Review Board (IRB) - All procedures related to data collecti on and safety will be approved 
by [CONTACT_469824] (UA) Health Sciences Center IRB a nd by [CONTACT_520477] r 
Center  Office of Clinical Trials. Processes will be establishe d to guide collection, transfer and storage of 
data and  training  of staff to ensure data safety. Quality assurance (QA) reviews of data and staff will be 
performed as  described below.  
 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675093] ca ll data for survivors allocate d to TIP-C + SMS H and survivor’s medical record 
data (collected at en rollment and during medical record audit after survivors complet e their 13 week  
interviews). First, enrollment data with identifiers will be stored separatel y from the study data. Second,  
all compu ters that will store data at the central location will be p assword protected. The system will  
have a secure login along wit h audit control mechanisms to meet the HIPAA guidelines. Third, servers  
will utilize state -of-the art security processes. E lectronic copi[INVESTIGATOR_136088], such as the consent or HIPAA  
authorization  form will be stored on a secure dedicated server with appropria te firewalls. The system  
will use encryption (SSL certificate) to transfer data between the m achines. This technology is th e sam e 
as that used for online e -commerce applications to protect con sumer information. Servers are scanned  
for viruses and systems a re in-place to detect attempts at unauthorized entry. All transactions to the  
database are st ored in archive logs as re -do data and a re accessible to enable quick recovery of all  
data should t he need arise. Backup files are written nightly to back up serve rs. 
 
2. Security Procedures for Collection, Transfer and Storage of Paper Data. Paper files w ill consist of  
consent and aut horiz ation forms and medical record audits. Paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_520437]. Faxed  copi[INVESTIGATOR_520438].  
 
3. Traini ng of  Staff.   
Recruiters - will follow UA institutional processes for en rollment of patients to clinical  trial(s). Training by 
[CONTACT_520478], study design 
and goals. Training w ill emp hasize strategies to maximize enrollment and  retention of minori ty 
participants. Additionally, training will occur to assure rec ruiters understand the  function and importance 
of data gathered during the medical record aud it at enrollment. Training w ill include co mpletion of 
simulated cases. Booster training sessions wi ll be scheduled as needed.  
Interviewers/Data Collectors - will b e carefully instructed and trained in appropriate interviewing  
techniques and will receive re gular monitoring by [CONTACT_43038] y Coord inator to ensure the ethics of research  
and scientific integrity  and protection of confidentiality. Participants are asked prior  to each interview if  
they want to continue and are given a toll-free number to contact [CONTACT_520479].  
Interventionist s- TIP-C interventionists will receive 24 hours of  education, augmented by [CONTACT_520480], about ca ncer diagnosis and treatment, psychological distress, and interpersonal  
counseling techniques  with training protocols dev eloped  in previous studies (Appendix C). The  
interventionists will list en to [ADDRESS_675094] training that will continue until  the interventionists are  
rated as  achieving > 90% on protocol implementation. Annual re -training w ill occur throughout the  
study . 
Medical Record Auditors  – will b e the recruiters or are employees of each recruitment site with  
oncology experience but train ed by [CONTACT_520481].  
Training will target job descript ions, and roles and responsibilities of group members and will c onsist of  
1) an overview of project objectives, theoretical framework, and research design an d rationale, 2)  
background a nd tra ining on collecting data free from bias, 3) information on scale and item response  
issues; 4) protection of human patients and co nfidentiality issues; and 5) data and intervention  
monitoring and quality assurance procedure s. Activities for training w ill consist of lectures, discussion,  
 
 4. Monthly Meetings – Monthly me etings with all research staff will be conducted to review accru al, 
attrition, discuss problems and/or concerns and ensure everyone understands and is follow ing the  
protocol.  
5. Quality  Assura nce Activities for Project Staff – Quarterly quality assurance ( QA) will involve engaging 
in good data management activities. Pr ocedures that include checking the integrity of data storage and  
examining frequency distribu tions to look for anomalies such as  an excessive number of “don’t know”  
responses or problems with skip patterns will be in place.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 18 
  
Recruiters – Enrollment data wil l be monitored monthly for completeness and consistency. If any  
missing data are identified, the completion of missing f ields wi ll be requested and questions clarified  
during quarterly QA revi ew of the data.  
 
Interviewers - The level of quality of each inte rviewer and the interview process are monitored monthly  
by [CONTACT_520482]. A cadre of well -trained inte rviewers at UA is available and  
used by [CONTACT_520483]. Early in the study, until proficiency is reached, the int erviewers  
digitally record every interview for QA. Following initial training, interviewers w ill be required to record  
and submi t 1 interview each month for review. There is no identifying inf ormation recorded. Booster  
training sessions are held with inter viewers on a scheduled basis. Written feedback on the quality of the  
telephone interview is p rovided to all interviewer s followi ng review of each recording.  
Interventionists - All sessions are  digitally recorded and about 10% randomly reviewed throughout t he 
study to maintain quality, with written and verbal feedback given to the counselors. Drs. Badger and  
Segrin will sup ervise th e intervention quality control activities. Through weekly case s upervision, we will  
maintain fidelity of the intervention and co unselor adherence to protocols. We will evaluate adherence  
(number re quired elements discusse d/ total number of element s). Drs. Badger and Segrin will listen to  
all sessions in English from th e first 5 dyads (40 hours of supervision) and then randomly revi ew 10% of  
sessions throughout the study. A bilingual counselor will r eview sessions in Spanis h using established  
protoc ols as in  past studies. Counselors who do not maintain 90% adherence will  not be given new  
cases until retraining has occurred, and Drs. Badger or Segrin will assume responsibility for those  
existing cases.  Following retraining, 5  dyads will be monitored t o ensure  that >90% adherence is  
achieved and then we will return to rando mly selected monitoring for quality control. Anyone unable to  
adhere to the standardized protocols is replaced after a second retrain ing. 
 
Data - Quality assu rance reports will be pre pared on a  quarterly basis by [CONTACT_520484] d by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Sikorskii and reviewed by [CONTACT_520485].  
That is, for the internal audit, someone independent  of the data collector w ill check the data. Data from 
10% o f the recorded interviews and intervention sessions compared to database entries. The  
acceptable error rate is 0.3 %, i.e., [ADDRESS_675095] 5 days  
before the scheduled  meeting. The report will include the summary of cumulative and quarterly accrual,  
randomization, cumulative attrition, and attrition by [CONTACT_2060], gender,  and race/ethnicity, adve rse 
events  and serious adverse events, data completeness and quality, and study Consolidated Standards  
of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) chart . Reports will also inform the Investigators about missing, invalid,  
or inconsistent data on selected key variables. F or the ext ernal oversight, [CONTACT_520490]  who is  
not involved in the study has agreed to participate in QA meetings.  
 
6. Identificati on of Adverse Effects - The following will be considered serious adverse events (SAE): 
death,  attempted suicide, major  depression , breach of confidentiality. Death, attempted suicide and 
major  depression would not occur as a direct result of study intervent ions, however, could be 
encountered during  implementation of this study due to the inclusion criteria of cancer survi vors. A 
breach in confidentiality may  result from participation in this stu dy. The investigators have successfully 
trained staff to monitor  and protect  confidentiality of participants in large research studies conducted 
over the pas t two decades. Similar t raining  strategies will be incorporated for training of staff in this 
study . Additionally, all research staff will complete  the human subje cts and HIPAA certification training.  
 
The following will be considered adverse events (AE): s evere symptoms requirin g hospi[INVESTIGATOR_520439]. Again, severe symptoms are not expected to  result from participation in this study but may  
result from can cer, its treat ment or other existing comorbid conditions.  
 
Averse events and serious adverse events  may be identifie d during imp lementation of the experimental  
protocols and are monitored by t he Investigators in several ways.  
Interviewers: Interviewers may  identify both s erious adverse events and/or adverse events  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 19 
 during completion of telephone in terviews or telephone c alls to sche dule telephone interviews.  
Interventionists: The interventionist s may identify both serious adverse events and/or adverse  
events  during their te lephone contacts with the participants.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_675096] atistics, 20 17. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians. 2017; 
67:7-30. 
2. Butle r AC, Chapman JE, Forman EM, Beck AT. The empi[INVESTIGATOR_520440] -behavioral therapy: 
a review of meta -analyses. Clinical psychology review. 2006;26(1) :17-31. 
3. Given C, Giv en B, Rahbar  M, et al. Effect of a cognitive behavioral intervention on redu cing symptom  
severity during chemotherapy. Journa l of Clinical O ncology. 2004;22(3):507 -516. 
4. Sikorskii A, Given C, Given B, Jeon S, Decker V, Decker D. Sy mptom management for ca ncer 
patient s: A trial comparing two multimodal interventions. Journal of Pa in and Symptom Management.  
2007;34(3):253 -264. 
5. Northouse LL, Mood DW, Schafenacker A, et al. Randomized clinical trial of a family intervention for  
prosta te cancer patients and their spouse s. Cancer. 2007;110(12):[ADDRESS_675097] cancer: First results from the moving beyond cancer randomiz ed trial. 
Journal of th e National C ancer Institute. 2004;96(5):[ADDRESS_675098] cancer patients. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of  
the American Society of Clinical Oncology. 2005;23 (25):[ADDRESS_675099] cancer: A longitudial study. International Journal of  Nursing Studies. 2014: 582-592. 
9. Mitchell S, Berger A. Cancer -related fatigue: the evidence base for assessment and management. .  
Cancer. 2006;12(5):374 -387. 
10. Kim HJ, Malone PS, Barsevick AM. Subgroups of cancer patients with unique pain and fatigue  
experiences during chemo therapy. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;48(4):558 -568. 
11. Mitchell A, Chan, M,  Bhatti H, Halton M, Grassi L,Johansen C, Meader, N. Prevalence of 
depression,  anxiety  and adjustment disorder in oncological, hematological  and palliative -care settings: 
a metanal ysis 
of 94 i nterview -based studies. Lancet Oncol ogy. 2011(12):160 -174. 
12. C leeland CS Zhao F, Chang VT, Sloan JA, O'Mara AM, Gilman PB, Wei ss M, Mendoza TR, Lee 
JW, Fisch MJ. The symptom burden of cancer: Evidence for a core set of cancer -related and treatment 
relate d symptoms from the Eastern Cooperati ve Oncology Group Symptom O utcomes and Practice  
Patterns study. Cancer. 2013;119(24):4333 -4340. 
13. Kim Y, Yen IH, Rabow MW. Comparing Symptom Burden in Patients with Metastatic and  
Nonmetastatic Cancer. J Palliat Med. 2016;19(1):64 -68. 
14. Barsevick AM, S weeney C, Haney E, Chung E.  A systematic qualitative analysis of 
psychoeducational  interven tions for depression in patients with cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum. 
2002;29(1):73 -84; quiz 85 -77. 
15. Derogatis LR, Morr ow GR, Fetti ng J, et al. The prevalence of psychi atric disorders among cance r 
patients. JAMA. 1983;249(6):751 -757. 
16. Ganz PA. Monitoring t he physical health of cancer survivors: a survivorship -focused medical 
history.  Journal of cl inical oncology : offic ial journal of the American Society of Clinical O ncology.  
2006;24(32):5105 -5111. 
17. Rowland JH, Hewitt M, Ganz PA. Cancer survivorship: a n ew challenge in delivering quality cancer  
care. Journal of clinical oncology : official journ al of the American Soci ety of Clini cal Oncology.  
2006;24(32):5101 -5104.  
18. Cuijpers P, Geraedts, A S, van Oppen, P, Andersson, G, Markowitz, JC, & van Straten, A. 
Interpersonal  psychotherapy for depression: A meta -analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry. 
2011;168(6):581 -592. 
19. Misono S, Weiss NS, Fann JR, Redman M, Yueh B. Incidence of suicide in per sons with cancer.  
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2008;26(29):4731 -4738.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 20 
 20. Buntrock C, Berking M, Smit F, Lehr D, Nobis S, Riper H, Cuijpers P, Ebert D. Prev enting 
depression in  adults with su bthreshold depression: Health -Economic evaluation alongside a pr agmatic 
randomized  controlled trial of a web -based intervention.  J Med Internet Research. 2017;19(1):e5.  
21. Given CW. Automated Telephone Monitoring for Sym ptom Management. Fund ed by [CONTACT_6812],  # R01  
CA030724.; 2003 -2009.  
22. Given B, Given C. Family Home C are for Cancer. A Community Based Model. Funded by [CONTACT_6812],  
grant #R01 CA79280 -09; 1997 -2008.  
23. Badger T, Lazenby, M. Depression. In: Brown C, ed. A Guide to Oncology Symptom Ma nagement, 
2nd edition. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA: Oncology Nursing Society; 2015:[ADDRESS_675100] EB, Arora NK, McLaughlin W, Oakley -Girvan I, Hami lton AS, Hesse BW. Health -related  
information needs in a large and diverse sample of adult ca ncer survivors: implic ations for ca ncer care.  
J Cancer Surviv. 2008;2(3):179 -189. 
25. Feuerstein M.  Defining cancer survivorship. J Cancer Surviv. 2007;1(1):[ADDRESS_675101] N, Leadbetter S, Rodriguez JL. Use of Medications f or 
Treating Anxiety an d Depression in Cancer Survivors in the [LOCATION_002]. J Clin Oncol 2017;35(1 ). 
27. Owen JE, O'Carroll Bantum E, Pagano IS, Stanton A. Random ized Trial of a Social Networking  
Intervention for Cancer -Related Distress. Annals of behavio ral medicine : a public ation of the  Society of  
Behavioral Medicine. 2017.  
28. Hewitt M, Greenfield S, Stovall E, eds. From Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Translation.  
[LOCATION_001], NY: The National Academies Press; 2005.  
29. Rowlan d JH, Yancik R. C ancer survivorship: the  interface o f aging, comorbidity, and quality care. J 
Natl Cancer Inst. 2006 ;98(8):[ADDRESS_675102] Adrift: the experience of completing treatment  
among women with early s tage breast cance r. Journal of psychosoc ial oncology . 2000;18(4):73 -90. 
31. Castillo PM, Herrera JL, Fernandez -Monte sinos R, et al. Tiopronin monolayer -protected silver  
nanoparticl es modulate IL -6 secretion mediated by [CONTACT_282550] -like receptor ligands. Nanomedic ine (Lond).  
2008; 3(5):627 -635. 
32. Merca dante S, Cas uccio A, Fulfaro F. The course of symptom frequency and intensit y in advanced  
cancer patients followed at home. J Pain Symptom M anage. 2000;20(2):104 -112. 
33. Kim H, Malone PS, Barsevick AM. Subgroups of cancerp patients with unique pain and fa tigue  
experi ences during chemotherapy. Journal of Pain and Symptom Managemen t. 2014;48(4):[ADDRESS_675103] J, Ivers H. Which Symptoms Come Firs t? Exploration of Temporal  
Relationships Between Cancer -Related Sy mptoms over an 18 -Month  Period. Annals of behavioral  
medicine : a publication of the Society of Beh avioral Medicine. 2013;45(3):329 -337. 
35. Barsevick AM, Whitmer K, Nail LM, Beck SL, Dudley  WN. Symptom cluster research: conceptual,  
design, measurement, an d analysis issues. J Pain Symptom M anage. 2006;31(1):85 -95. 
36. Barsevick A. Defining the Symptom C luster: How Far Have We Come? Semin Oncol Nurs.  
2016;32(4):334 -350. 
37. Given CW, Given B, Sikorskii A, You M, Jeon S, Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] V, McCorkle R. . Deconstructi on of 
nurse  delivered  patient self -management interventions for symptom management: factors related  to 
delivery  enactment and response. . Annals of Behavioral Medi cine. 2010;40(1):[ADDRESS_675104] K, Pas salacqua S, Pasvogel A,  & 
Bishop  M. Psychosocial Interventions to improve quality of life among pro state cancer survivors and 
their partners Quality of life resear ch : an international journa l of quality of life aspects of treatment, 
care and  rehabilitatio n. 2011;20(6):[ADDRESS_675105] cancer and their  
supportive partners. Psycho -oncol ogy. 2013;22(4):[ADDRESS_675106], K, Pas salacqua, S, Pasvogel, A, &  
Bishop, M. Who benefits from a psych osocial counseling vs. educa tional intervention to improve  
psychological quality of life in p rostate cancer surviors . Psychology  & health. 2012;28(3):336 -354. 
41. Marshall CA, Larkey LK, Curra n MA, et al. Considerations of culture and social class for fami lies 
facing  cancer: the need  for a new model for health promotion and psychosocial interventi on. Fam Syst 
Health.  2011;29(2):81 -94. 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675107] cancer survivors and their  
supportive part ners. . Journal of tele medicine and  telecare. 2013;19(5):[ADDRESS_675108] cancer and their  
supportive pa rtners. Psyc ho-oncology. 2013;22(5):1035 -1042. 
44. Foster C, Wright D, Hill H, Hopkinson J, Roffe L. Psychosocial implications of living 5 y ears or more  
following a cancer diagnosis: a systematic review of the research evidence. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl).  
2009;18(3):22 3-247. 
45. SEER Cancer Statistic s Review, 1975 -2008, National Ca ncer Institute. National Cancer Institute; 
2011.  http://seer.can cer.gov/csr/1975_2008/ . 
46. Salz T, Oeffinger KC, McCabe MS, Layne TM, Bach PB. Survivorship care plans in research and 
practice . CA: a cancer journal for clini cians. 2012.  
47. Hudson SV, Mill er SM, Hemler J, et al. Adult cancer survivors discuss follow -up in primary care: 'not  
what i want, but maybe what i need'. Annals of family medicine. 2012;1 0(5):[ADDRESS_675109] improving the quali ty of cancer care: Addressing th e interfaces of  
primary and oncology -related subspecialty care. J Natl Cancer Inst 2010;40:3e10.  
49. Leach CR, Troeschel AN, Wiatrek D, Stanton AL, Diefenbac h M, Stein KD, Sharpe K , Portier K.  
Preparedness and Cancer -Related  Symptom Management among Cancer  Survivors in the First Year  
Post-Treatment. Ann Behav Med. 2017 . 
50. Cleeland CS, Fengmin Z, Chang VT, et al. The symptom burden of cancer: Evidence for a c ore set 
of cancer -related and treat ment -related symptoms from the e astern cooperative oncology grou p 
symptom  outcomes and practice patterns study. Cancer 2013.  
51. Mendoza TR Wang XS, Lu C, Palos GR, Liao, Z, Mobley GM, Kapoor S, Cleeland CS. Measuring 
the symptom burden of lung  cancer the validity and utility of the lung  cancer module of the M.D. 
Ander son Symptom Inventory. Oncologist. 2011;16(2):217 -227. 
52. Stant on AL, Bernaards CA, Ganz PA. The BCPT symptom scales: a measure of physical symptoms 
for wom en diagnosed with or at  risk for br east cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst.  2005;97(6):[ADDRESS_675110] cancer survivors: a systemat ic review. J Natl Cance r 
Inst. 
2012 ;104(5):[ADDRESS_675111] cancer. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the America n 
Society of Clinical O ncology. 2011;29(9):[ADDRESS_675112] cancer: An  
integrative re view. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2016; 25:90 -99. 
56. Kang JH, Kwon JH, Hui D, Yennurajalingam S, Bruera  E. Changes in Symptom Intensity Among 
Cancer Patients Receiving Outpatient Palliative Care. J Pain  Symptom Manage. 2013.  
57. Given CW, Given B, Azzouz F, Kozachik  S, Stommel M. Predictors of pain and fatigue in the year  
following diagnosis among elderly c ancer patients. Journal  of Pain a nd Symptom Management.  
2001;21(6):456 -466. 
58. Dougherty P, Cata J , Cordella J, Burton A, Weng H. Taxol -induced sensory disturbanc e is 
characterized by [CONTACT_520486] . Pain.  
2004;109:[ADDRESS_675113] Cancer Treatm ent. Health psychology : official journal of the Division of  
Health Psychology, American Psyc hological Association. 2013.  
60. Bo wer JE, Ganz PA, Irwin MR, Kwan L, Breen EC, Cole SW. Inflammati on and behavioral 
symptoms  after breast cancer treatment: Do fat igue, depression and sleep disturbance share a 
common  
underlying mechanism? . Journal of Clin ical Oncology. 2011;29( 26):35 17-3522. 
61. Owen JE, O'Carroll Bantum E, Pagano IS, Stanton A. Random ized Trial of a Social Networking  
Intervention for Cancer -Relate d Distress. Ann Behav Medicine 2017.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 22 
 62. Schrepf A, Clevenger L, Christensen D, et al. Cortis ol and inflammatory pro cesses  in ov arian 
cancer  
patients following primary treatment: relationships  with depression, fatigue, and disability. Brain,  
behavior, and immunity. 2013;[ADDRESS_675114]:S126 -134. 
63. Clevenger L, Schrepf A, Christensen D, et al. Sleep dis turbance, cytokines, an d fati gue in  women 
with ovarian cancer. Brain, behavior, and immunity. 2012; 26(7):1037 -1044.  
64. Jacobsen PB, Donovan KA, Swaine ZN, Watson IS. Management of anxiety and depression in 
adult  
cancer patients:Toward an evidence -based ap proach. In: Chang AE, G anz DF , Haly es DF, eds.  
Oncology : an evidence -based approach . [LOCATION_001]: Spr inger -Verlag; 2006:[ADDRESS_675115] had  chemotherapy. Journal of the Natio nal Comprehensive Cancer Network  
(JNCCN). 2008;6(5):448 -455. 
66. Mock V. Evidence -based treatment for cancer -related fatigue. Journal of the National Cancer  
InstituteMonographs. 2004;(32)(32):1 12-118. 
67. Given B. Cancer -related fatigue: a brie f overview o f current nursing perspectives and experiences.  
Clinical Journal  of Oncology Nursing. 2008;12([ADDRESS_675116]):7 -9. 
68. Miaskowski C, Ba rsevick A, Berger A, Casagrande R, Grady PA, Jacobsen P, Kutner J,  Patrick D,  
Zimmerman L, Xi ao C, Matocha M, Marden  S. Advancin g Symptom Science Through Symptom Cluster  
Research: Expert Panel  Proceedings and Recommendations. J Natl Cancer Inst 2017;109(10 9): 
pii:djw253.  
69. Miaskowski C, Dunn L, Ritchie C, Paul SM, Coop er B, Aouizerat BE, Alexand er K, Skerman H, 
Yates  P. Latent Cl ass Analysis Reveals Distinct Subgroups of Patients Based on Sym ptom Occurrence 
and Demographic and Clinical Characteristics. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2015;50(1):28 -37. 
70. Barsevick, A. Defining the Symptom Cluster: How Fa r Have We Come? Semin O ncol Nurs  
2016;32(4):334 -350. 
71. Kwekkeboom, KL. Cancer Symptom Cluster Man agement. Semin Oncol Nurs. 2016;32(4):[ADDRESS_675117] ca ncer survivors: a  
randomize d controlled trial. Cancer. 2012;11 8(15):[ADDRESS_675118] Cancer Survivors. Journal of clinical oncology :  
official journal of the Ame rican Societ y of Clinical Oncology. 2017:JCO2016689497.  
74. Mustian KM Alfan o CM, Heckler C, Kleckner AS, Kleckner IR, Leach CR, Mohr D, Pal esh OG, 
Peppone  LJ, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_520441], Scarpato J, Smith T, Sprod LK, Mille r SM. Comparison of Pharmac eutical, 
Psychological,  and Exercis e Treatments for Cancer -Related Fatigue: A Meta -analysis. JAMA O ncology. 
2017.  
75. Van Den Berg SW Gielissen MFM, Custers JAE, V an Der Graaf WTA, Ottevanger PB, Prins JB  
BREATH: web -based self -management for psychological  adjustment after prima ry breast cancer 
results  
of a multicenter randomized controlled trial Journa l of Clinical Oncology.  2015;33(25):2766e2771.  
76. Ritchie C, Du nn LB, Paul SM, et al. Differences in the symptom experience of old er oncology  
outpatients. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014;47(4):[ADDRESS_675119] cancer sur vivors with lymphedema. Psychol Health. 2017:1 -17. 
78. Bayliss EA, Ellis JL, Steiner JF. Barr iers to self -management  and quality -of-life outcomes in s eniors  
with multimorbidit ies Annals of fam ily medicine. 2007;5(5):395 -402. 
79. Bender CM, Engberg SJ, Dono van HS, et al. Symptom clusters in adults with chronic health 
problems  and cancer as a comorb idity. Oncology Nursing  Forum. 2008 ;35(1 ): E-11. 
80. Das SC, Khurana H, Gupta D, Mishra S, Bhatnaga r S. Comorbidities in a cancer patient: problems 
in 
pain managem ent and palliation. Am J Hosp Palliat Care. 2009;26(1):60 -63. 
81. Gerbershagen HJ, Ozgur E, S traub K, et al. Prevale nce, severit y, and chronicity of p ain and general  
health -related quality of life in patients with localized prostate cancer. European journa l of pain  
(London, England). 2008;12(3):339 -350. 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675120] cancer. J Cancer Surviv. 2009;3(2):[ADDRESS_675121] 
cancer.  
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2008;70(5):[ADDRESS_675122] of age and comorbidities on health -related quality 
of life for patients with prostate cancer: e valuation be fore a curative treatm ent. BMC Cancer. 2009; 
9:[ADDRESS_675123]; 2009.  
86. Cleeland CS. Sym ptom burden: Multiple s ymptoms and their impact as patient -reported outcomes.  
Journal of the Nation al Cancer Institute Monographs. 2007; 37:[ADDRESS_675124] cance r survivors.  Medical care. 2009;47(1 ):73-79. 
88. Aschele C, Bergamo F, Lonar di S. Chemotherapy for operable and advanced colorectal cancer. 
Cancer  treatment reviews. 2009;35(6):509 -516. 
89. Kelly D. Delays in the diagnosis of lung ca ncer occurred because p atients fail ed to recognise 
symptoms  as serious and warranting medical atten tion. Evidence -based nursing. 2006;9(4):127.  
90. Miller AH, Anco li-Israel S, Bower JE, Capuron L, Irwin MR. Neuroendocrine -immune mechanisms 
of behavioral co morbidities in patients  with cancer . Journal of clinical onc ology : official journal of the  
America n Society of Clinical Oncology. 2008;26(6):971 -982. 
91. Mukerji SS, Duffy SA, Fowler KE, Khan M, Ronis DL, Terrell JE. Comorbidities in head and neck  
cancer:  agreement between self -report and chart review. Otolaryngology --head and neck surgery :  
official j ournal of American Academy of Otolaryngology -Head and Neck Surge ry. 2007;136(4):536 -542. 
92. Ozanne EM, Braithwaite D, Sepucha K, Moore D, Esserman L, Belkor a J. Sensitivity to inp ut 
variabili ty of the Adjuvant! Online breast cancer prognostic model. Journ al of clinical oncology : official 
journal of  
the American Socie ty of Clinical Oncology. 2009;27(2):[ADDRESS_675125] KM. Effects of treat ment factors , comorbidities 
and health -related quality of life on self -efficacy for physical activity in cancer survivors. Psycho -
oncology. 2009;18(4):[ADDRESS_675126] cancer in e lderly women: outcome a s 
affected b y age, tumor features, comorbidities, and treatment approach. Clin Breast Cancer.  
2006;7(1):59 -66. 
95. Chochinov HM. Depression in cancer patients. The Lancet Journal. 2001;2:499 -506. 
96. Radloff LS. The CES -D scale: A se lf-report depression sc ale for rese arch in the general population.  
Applied Psychological Measuremen t. 1977;1(3):385 -401. 
97. Sikorskii A, Given C, You M, Jeon S, G iven B. Response analysis for multiple symptoms revealed  
differences between arms of a sympto m management trial. Journal of clin ical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623].  
2009;62(7):[ADDRESS_675127] of comorbidity on chemotherapy use 
and outcomes in solid tumors: a systematic review. Journal of clinical oncology : officia l journal of the  
Americ an Society o f Clinical Oncology. 2011;29(1):106 -117. 
99. Geiss LS, Wang J, C heng YJ, et al. Preval ence and incidence trends for diagnosed di abetes 
among  
adults aged 20 to 79 years, [LOCATION_002], 1980 -2012. JAMA. 2014;312(12):1218 -1226. 
100. Daviglus ML, T alavera GA, Aviles -Santa ML, et al. Prevalence of major cardiovascular risk factors 
and cardiovasc ular diseases among Hispanic/Latino indivi duals of diverse backgrounds in the United  
States. JAMA. 2012;308(17):[ADDRESS_675128] carcinoma. Quality of Life 
Research.  2007;16(3):413 -428. 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675129] cancer e xperience of women: 
a qualitative study of African American, Asi an American, Latina and Caucasian cancer survivors. 
Psychooncolo gy. 2004;13(6):[ADDRESS_675130] cancer survivors. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2005;32(2):250 -256. 
104. Guy GP, Yabroff R, Ekweme DU, Rim SH, Li R , Richardson LC. Exonomic burden of chronic 
conditions  among survivors of cancer in the Unite d States. Journal of Cl inical Oncol ogy. 2017;35:[ADDRESS_675131] cancer follow -up and  
managemen t after primary treatme nt: American  Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline  
update . Journal of Clinical Oncology, 31(7): 961 -965. . Journal of Cli nical Oncology. 2013;31(7):[ADDRESS_675132]. . Follow -up care, surveill ance protocol, and secondary 
prevention  measures for survivors o f colorectal cancer: American Society of Clini cal Oncology clinical 
practice  guideline endors ement. Journal of Clini cal Oncology  2013;31(35):4465 -4470.  
107. Mooney K, Beck S, Friedman R, Rames h F. Telephone -linked care for cancer symptom 
monitoring.  Cancer  Practice. 2002;10(3):147 -154. 
108. Klerman GL , Weissman, MM. New applications of interperson al psychotherapy. Washi ngton, DC:  
American Psychological Association; 1993.  
109. Markowitz J.C. & W eissman MM. Interpersonal psychotherapy: Past, present and futur e. Clinical  
Psychology and Psychotherapy. 2012 ;19:99 -105. 
110. Weissman MM, Markowitz JC. An overview of internperso nal psychoth erapy. In: Markowitz JC, ed.  
Interpersonal psychotherapy . Washin gton,DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1998:[ADDRESS_675133] PD/PI: B ADGER, TERRY A.   
111. Weissman MM, Markowitz JC, Klerman GL. Comprehensive guide to interpers onal psychotherapy.  
[LOCATION_001]: Basic  Books; 2000.  
112. Cuijpers P, Donker T, Weissman MM, Ravitz P, Cristea IA. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for 
Mental  Health Proble ms: A Comprehensive Meta -Analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2016.  
113. Badger T, Segri n C, Pasvogel A, Lopez AM. The effe ct of psychoso cial interventions delivered by  
[CONTACT_520487] -stage breast cancer survivors  and their supportive  
partners. Journal of telemedicine and telecare. 2013;19(5):260 -265. 
114. Schuz N, Walters JA, Cameron -Tuck er H, Scott J,  Wood -Baker R, Walters EH. Patient Anxiety 
and Depression Moderate the Effects of Increased Self -management Knowle dge on Physical Activity: A  
Secondary Analysis of a Randomised Controlled Trial on Health -Mentoring in COPD. COPD.  
2015;12(5):50 2-509. 
115. Wa gner GJ, Ghosh -Dastidar B, Robinson E, et al. Effects of Depression Alleviation on ART 
Adherence  and HIV Clinic At tendance in Uganda, and the Mediating Roles of Self -Efficacy and 
Motivation. AIDS  Behav. 2016 . 
116. Nahum -Shani I, Q ian M, Almir all D, et al. Q-learning: A data analysis method for constructin g 
adaptive  interventions. Psychological methods. 2012;17(4):478.  
117. Nahum -Shani I, Qian M, Almirall D, et al. Experimental design and primary data analysis  methods 
for comparing adaptive int erventions. Psychological methods. 2012;17(4):457.  
118. Report B R. Moonshot Cancer Initiative. 2016.  
119. Chakraborty B, Murphy S. Inference for non -regular parameters in optimal dynamic treatment 
regimes.  Statistical Met hods in Medical Researc h. 2010;19(3 ):317 -343. 
120. Collins L, Murphy S, Bierman K. A conceptual fra mework for adaptive preventive interventions.  
Prevention Science . 2004;5(3):185 -196. 
121. Rush AJ, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, et al. Sequenced treatment alternat ives to relieve depress ion 
(STAR*D) : Rationale an d design. Controlled Clinical Trials. 2003;25(1):1 19-142. 
122. Schneider LS, Tariot PN, Lyketsos CG, et al. Nation al Institute of Mental Health clinical 
antipsychotic  trials of intervention effectiveness (CA TIE): Alzheimer disease  trial metho dology. 
Americ an Journal of  Geriatric Psychiatry. 2001;9(4):346 -360. 
123. Cashion AK, Grady, PA. The National Institutes of Heal th/National Institutes of Nursing Research  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 25 
 intramural research program and the development of  the National Institute s of health Symptom Scienc e 
Model. Nursing Outlook. 2015;63(4):484 -487. 
124. Family Caregiver Alliance. Caregiver Assessment: Principles, Gu idelines and Strategies for 
Change.  San Francisco: Report from a National Consensus Developme nt Conference (Vol. I); 2006.  
125. O wnsworth T, Henderson L, Chambers SK. Social support buffers the  impact of functional 
impairments  on caregiver psychological wel l-being in the context of brain tumo r and other cancers. 
Psychooncology.  2010;19(10):[ADDRESS_675134]  H, Fossella  F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62633], Carmack CL. Longitudinal associations between 
caregiver  burden and patient and spouse distress in couples copi[INVESTIGATOR_520442]. Support Care 
Canc er. 2013;21(9):2371 -2379.  
127. Choi YS, Hwang SW, Hwang I C, et al. Factors assoc iated with q uality of life among family 
caregivers of  terminally ill cancer patients. Psycho -oncology. 2016;25(2):[ADDRESS_675135] year of life: a  
longitudinal study of careg iver quality  of life, distress and unmet needs. Gynecol Oncol.  
2014;132(3):6 90-697. 
129. Badger TA, Segrin C, Figueredo AJ, et al. Psychosoc ial interventions to improve quality  of life in  
prostate cancer survivors and their intimate or family partners. Quality of life  research : an international  
journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. 2011;20(6):833 -844. 
130. Gaugler JE, Linder J, Given CW, Kata ria R, Tucker G, Regine WF. Family cancer caregiving and  
negative outcomes: the direct and m ediational effects of psychosocial resources. Journal of family  
nursing. 2009;15(4):[ADDRESS_675136]  cancer and their partners. Nursing Research. 2007;56 :44-53. 
132. American Cancer Society A. Cancer Facts & Figures for Hispanics /Latinos 2015 -2017. Atlanta, 
GA: American Cancer Society; 2015.  
133. Cooley ME, Short TH, Moriarty H J. Symptom prevalence, distress, and change over time in adults  
receiving treatm ent for lung  cancer. Psycho -oncology. 2003;12(7):[ADDRESS_675137] udying symptoms: sampling and measurement issues. Annals of inte rnal medicine.  
2001;134(9 Pt 2):844 -853. 
135. Sikorskii A, Wyatt G. Using SMART Design to Imp rove Symptom Management  Strategies among  
Cancer Patients. NCI; [ADDRESS_675138] cancer survivorship of Asian Americans. NCI; 2016 -2021.  
137. Sikorski i A, Given C, You M, Jeon S, Given BA. Response analysis for multiple symptoms 
revealed  differences betwe en arms of a  symptom management trial. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623].  
2009;62(7):716 -724. 
138. Sikorskii A, Given C , Given B, Jeon S, Dec ker V, Decker D, Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] V, McCorkle R. Symptom  
management for cancer patients: a trial comp aring two multimodal in terventions.  J Pain Symptom  
Management 2007;34(3):[ADDRESS_675139] cancer during chemotherapy: results of a two-arm 
behavioral  trial. Journal o f Clinical Oncology. 2008;26(36):[ADDRESS_675140] cancer: symptom management and quality of life. Oncology  Nursing Forum.  
2005;32 (2):[ADDRESS_675141]  cance r and their partners. Nursing Research. 2007(56):44 -53. 
142. Rehse B, Pukrop R. Effects of psychosocial interventio ns on quality of life i n adult canc er patients: 
meta  analysis of [ADDRESS_675142] udies. Patient Education and Counseling.  
2003;50(2):[ADDRESS_675143] cancer and their supportive partners. The Open 
Psychology Journal.  2015;8(1):105 -112. 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675144] of a cognitive behavioral intervention on reducing 
symptom  severity during chemoth erapy. Journal of Clini cal Oncology  2004;22(3):[ADDRESS_675145] Cancer Treatment: A Response to American Society of Clinical Oncology and 
European  Society of Medical Oncolog y. Journal o f Oncology Practice. 2016.  
146. Pew. Pew Internet & American Lif e Project: Mobile Access 2010. 2010;  
pewin ternet.org/Reports/201 0/Mobile -access -2010. Accessed May 15, 2012.  
147. Ruskin PE, Silver -Aylaian M, Kling MA, et a l. Treatment outcomes i n depression : comparison of 
remote  treatment through telepsychiatry to in -person treatment. The American Journal of Ps ychiatry.  
2004;161(8): 1471 -1476.  
148. Kornblith AB, Dowell JM, Herndon JE 2nd, Engelman BJ, Bauer -Wu S, Small EJ, M orrison VA, 
Atkins  J, Cohen HJ, Hol land JC. Telephone monitoring of distress in patients aged 65 ye ars or older 
with advanced stage cancer. Cancer. 2006;107(11):27 06-2714.  
149. Sikorskii A, Given C, Given B, Jeon S, You M. Differential symptom reporting by  [CONTACT_520488]: automated voice response system versus a live telephone interview. 
Medical Care  Care. 2009;47(8):[ADDRESS_675146] and 
prostate  cancer patients. Research in nursin g & health. 2010;33(5):[ADDRESS_675147] of dosage on women and their partners' response t o 
telephone counseling. Unpublished manuscript. 2009(Journal Article).  
152. Badger T, Segrin C, Figueredo AJ, et  al. Psychosocia l interventions to improve quality of life in 
prostate  cancer su rvivors and their intimate partners. Quality of Life Research. 2011;20:[ADDRESS_675148] cancer and their partners. Oncology Nursing Forum.  2004;31(5):[ADDRESS_675149] cancer: Who  
responds to a telephone interpersonal counseling interven tion? Journal of  psychosocial oncology.  
2005;23(2 -3):79 -100. 
155. Given B GC, Si korskii A, You M, McCorkle R, Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] V. Analyzing symptom mana gement 
trials: the  value of both intention -to-treat and per -protocol approaches. Oncol Nurs F orum 2009;36(6 ): 
E293-302. 
156. Giv en BA, Given C, Jeon S, Sikorskii A. Effect of neutropenia on th e impact of a cognitive -
behavioral  intervention for symptom mana gement. Cancer. 2005;104(4).  
157. Given C, Bradley CJ, You M, Sikorskii A. Costs of novel sym ptom management inter ventions and 
their impact on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. Journal of Pain & Symptom Manag ement. 2010;39(4):[ADDRESS_675150] Cancer Survivor s. Tucson, Arizona: T he University of Arizona; 2016.  
159. Crane TE, Badger T, Hsu CH, Segrin C, Ros enfeld AG. Trajectories of Anxiety and Depression in  
Latina Brea st Cancer Survivors. Tucson, Az: The University of Arizona; 2016.  
160. Thomson CA, Crane TE, Miller A, Garcia DO, Basen-Engquist  K, Alberts DS. A randomized trial of 
diet and physical activity  in women treated for stage II -IV ovarian cancer: Rationale and design of the  
Lifestyle Intervention for Ovarian Cancer Enhanced Survival (LIVES): An NRG Onc ology/Gynecologic  
Oncol ogy Group (G OG-225) Study. Contemp Clin Trials. 2016; 49:[ADDRESS_675151] R, Shikany JM, Crane TE, Neuhouser ML. A prospecti ve analysis of diet 
quality  and endometrial cancer among 84,415 postmenopausal women in the W omen's Health 
Initiativ e. 
Annals of  epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2015;25(10):788 -793. 
162. Thomson CA, Crane TE, W ertheim BC, et al. Diet quality and survival after ovarian cance r: results 
from the Women’s Health Initiative. Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 2014 ;106(11):dju314.  
163. B utalla AC, C rane TE, Patil B, Wertheim BC, Thompson P, Thomson CA. Effects o f a carrot juice  
intervention on plasma carotenoids, oxidative s tress, and infl ammation in overweight breast cancer  
survivors. Nutrition and cancer. 2012;64( 2):[ADDRESS_675152] JL, Kroggel MA, Wertheim BC, Thomson CA. Increasing the v egetable  
intake dose is associated with a rise in plasma caroten oids without mo difying oxidative stress or  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 27 
 inflammation in overweight or obese postmenopausal  women. The Journal of nutrition.  
2011;141(10):[ADDRESS_675153] -effectiveness of health research 
study  participant recrui tment strategies: a systematic review. Clin Trials. 2014;11(5):[ADDRESS_675154] KE. T esting metho dologies to recruit adult drug -using couples. Addictive  
Behavior s. 2009;34(1):96 -99. 
167. Boult C, Boult LB, Morishita L, Dowd B , Kane RL, Urda ngarin CF. A randomized clinical trial of  
outpatient geriatric evaluation and management. Journal of the American  Geriatrics Society.  
2001;49(4):351 -359. 
168. Yancey AK, Ortega AN, Kumanyika SK. Effective recruitment and retention of minorit y research  
participants. Annual Review of Public Health. 2006;27(Journal Article):1 -28. 
169. Roosa MW, Liu, F.F., To rrez, M., Go nzalez, N.A., Knight, G.P., Saenz, D. Sampling and 
recruitment i n studies of cultural influences on adjustment: A case study wit h Mexican -Ameri cans. 
Journal of Family  Psychology. 2008;22:[ADDRESS_675155], VB. Motivators 
and barriers to Latinas' p articipation in clinical trials: the role of contextual factors.  Contemporary 
Clinical  Trials. 2015;40:74 -80. 
171. Ashing -Giwa KT. Can a culturally responsiv e model for research de sing bring u s closer to 
addressing  participation disparities? Lessons learne d from cancer survivorship studies. Ethnicity & 
disease.  2005;15 :130-137. 
172. Hawkins RP, Kreuter M, Resnicow K, Fishbein M, Dijkstra A. Understanding tailo ring in 
communicating  about health.  Health Education Resea rch. 2008;23(3):454 -466. 
173. Resnicow K,  Baranowski T, Ahluwalia JS, Braithwaite RL. Cultural sensitivit y in public health: 
defined  and demystified. Ethnicity & Disease. 1999;9(1):[ADDRESS_675156] Specific  
Informal Ca regivers to Participate with Them in Psychosocial Interventions.  Journal of Transcultural  
Nursing. 2016:1 -7. 
175. Bayliss EA, Ellis JL, Steiner JF. Seniors’ self-reported multimorb idity captur ed biopsychosocial 
factors not incorporated into two other data -based morbidity measures. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623].  
2009 ;62(5):[ADDRESS_675157]. Minimization: a new method of assigning patients to treatment and control groups. 
Clinical pharma cology and therapeutics . 1974;15(5):443 -453. 
177. Therneau TM. H ow many stratification factors are too many to use in a randomiz ation plan? 
Controlled  Clinical Trials. 1993;14:98 -108. 
178. Farrar JT, Portenoy RK, Berlin J A, Kinman JL, Strom BL.  Defining th e clinically important 
difference in  pain outcome measures. Pain. 2000;88(3):[ADDRESS_675158] C, et al. The use of a responder analysis to identify differences in 
patient  outcomes following a self -care intervention to im prove cancer  pain management. Pain. 
2007;129(1 - 2):55 -63. 
180. Jones PS, Lee , J.W., Phillips, L.R. , Zhang, X.E.. & Jaciedo, K.B. . An adapta tion of Brislin’s 
translation  model for cross cultural research. Nursing Research. 2001;50 (5 ):300 -304. .  
181. Morga n MA. Cancer  survivorship: history, quality -of-life issues, and the evolving  multidisciplinary  
approach to implementation of cancer survivor ship care plans. Oncology Nursing Forum.  
2009;36(4):429 -436. 
182. Ell K, Xie, B., Kapetanovic , S. et al. One -year fo llow-up of c ollaborative depression care for low -
income  predominately Hispan ic patients with cance r. Psychiatric services (Washington, DC). 
2011;62(2):162 - 170. 
183. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelit y in health behavior ch ange 
studies : Best practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Chang e Consortium. Health 
psychology: official  journal of the Divisio n of Health Psychology, American Psychological Association.  
2004;23(5):443 -451. 
184. Badger T A. A nursing perspectiv e of depress ion in cancer survivors and their partners. Nursing 
Science  Quar terly. 2008;21(1):43 -44. 
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/[ADDRESS_675159] cancer 
survivors  and their partners. Psyc hology, health & medici ne. 2014;19( 6):[ADDRESS_675160] cancer and their partners. Journal of Social 
and Persona l Relationships. 2005;2 2(5):673 -689. 
187. Greeno CG, Anderson CM, Shear MK, Mike G. Initial treatme nt engagement in a rural community  
mental health center. Psychia tric Services. 1999;50(12):[ADDRESS_675161] and 
prostate  cancer survivors. Res Nurs Health. 2010;33(5): 450-464. 
189. Correia H. Spanish translations of PROMIS Instrume nts. In: Segrin C, ed. Northwestern 
University:  Dept. of Medical Social Sciences; 2011.  
190. Cella D, Choi S, Garcia  S, et al. S etting standards for severity of common symptoms in oncology 
using the PROMIS item banks and expert judgment. Qual Life Res 2014 ; 12/23(10):2651 -2661.  
191. Badger TA, Segrin C, Meek P. Development and validation of an ins trument for rapi[INVESTIGATOR_520443]: the general symptom distress scale. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2011;41(3):535 -548. 
192. Given B, Given CW, McCorkle M, et al. P ain and fatigue management: results of a nursing 
randomized  clinical trial. Oncology Nursing Forum. 2002;29(6):[ADDRESS_675162] cancer. Journal of Clinic al Oncology. 2008;26(8):1289 -1295.  
194. Cella D, Riley, W., Stone, A., Rothrock, N., Reeve, B ., Yount, S. et al. The  Patient -Reported 
Outcomes  Measurement Information System (PROMIS) developed  and tested its first wave of adult 
self-reported  health outcome  item banks: 2005 -2008. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2010;63:[ADDRESS_675163] testing of the Patient -Reported  
Outcomes M easurement Information System (PROMIS) network: 2005 -2008. Journ al of clinical  
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2010;63:1179 -1194.  
196. PROMIS. Adult Depression  version 1.0 sho rt form: a breif guide to the 8 -item PROMIS Short Form  
v1.0-Depression 8b. 2012; http://assessmentc enter.net . 
197. PROMIS. Adult satisfaction with participation in  social roles profile short forms. 2013;  
Http://assessmentcenter.net . 
198. PR OMIS. Adult phys ical function profile s hort forms. 2013; http://assessmentcenter.net . 
199. Little R, Rubin M. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. [LOCATION_001]: Wiley and Sons; [ADDRESS_675164] udies. Statistics in 
Medicine.  
2004;23( 9):1455 -1497.  
201. Shen C, Weissfeld L. Application of pattern -mixture model s to outcomes that are potentially 
missing not  at random using p seudo maximum likelihood estimation. Biostatistics. 2005;6(2):333 -347. 
202. SA S Soft ware. Version 9 of the S AS Syste m for Windows. Cary, NC: Copyright [ADDRESS_675165] or service names are registered  trademarks  
or trademarks of SAS Institute Inc.; 2002 -2003.  
203. Lee E, Wei L,  Amato  D. Cox-Type regression analysis  for large numbers of small groups of 
correlated  failure time observations. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 1992.  
204. Lin D. Cox regression analysis of multivariate failure time data: The marginal apprach. Statistics in 
Medicine. 1994;13: [ADDRESS_675166] effects.  
Communication Methods a nd Measures. 2012;6:77 -98. 
206. Biesanz JC, Falk CF, Savalei V. Assessing mediational models: T esting  and interval estimation  for 
indirect effects. . Multivariate Behavioral Research . 2010;45:661 -701. 
207. Given CW, Given BA. Symptom Management and Psychos ocial Outcomes Following Cancer In:  
Oeffinger K, ed. Submitted to Seminars in Oncology, Special  Edition 2013.  
208. Robbins JM . Opt imal structured nested models for the optimal sequen tial decisions. In: Lin DY,  
Heagerty PJ, eds. Proceedings of the Second Se attle Wymposium on Biostatistics . [LOCATION_001], NY:  
Springer; 2004.  
209. Moodie EE, Richardson TS, Stephe ns DA. Demystifying opti mal d ynamic treatment regimes.  
   
 
Protocol Version Da te:  3/3/2022    Page 29 
 Biometrics. 2007;63(2):447 -455. 
210. PROC QLEARN (Version 1.0) 2012; http://methodology.psu.edu/down loads/procqlearn . Accessed 
May 5, 2013.  
211. Murphy SA. Optimal dynamic treatment regimes (with discu ssions). Journal of the Royal  Statistical  
Society, Series B. 2003;65:331 -366. 
212. Murphy SA. A Generalization Error for Q -Learning. Journal of machine lea rning research : JMLR.  
2005;6:1073 -1097.  
213. Sutton RS, Barto AG. Reinforcement learning: An introdu ction. Cambridge, MA: MI T Pre ss; 1998.  
214. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach 
to multiple te sting. J of the Royal Statistical Societ y, Series B. 1995;57(1):289 -300. 
215. Benjamini Y, Yekutieli D. The control of the fa lse d iscovery rate in multiple testing under 
dependency.  Annals of Statistics. 2001;29(4):1165 -1188.  
216. Thissen D, Steinberg L, K uang D. Quick and easy implementation of  the Benjamini -Hochberg  
procedure for controlling the false p ositive rate in multiple  comp arisons. Journal of Educational and  
Behavioral Stati stics. 2002;27(1):[ADDRESS_675167] a participant -friendly 
system.  Journal of the National Cancer Institute. 1995;87(23):1747 -1759.  
218. Lindenstruth KA, Curtis CB, Allen JK. Recruitment of A frican -American and White postmenopausal  
women into clinical trials: The b eneficial effects of soy trial experienc e. Ethn Dis. 2006;16(4):938 -942. 
219. Paskett ED, Katz ML, De Graffinreid CR, Tatum CM . Par ticipation in cancer trials: Recruitment of  
underser ved populations. Clinical Advances in Hematology & Oncology. 2003;1(10):60 7-613.  
14.0 APPENDICES  
 
APPENDIX I – FORMS  
 
• Recruitment Script  
• Contact [CONTACT_23094] (interna l documen t) 
• Telephone survey  (baseline a nd 13 -week follow up ) 
• Debr iefing and sat isfaction  
• Medica l Record Audit Form  (interna l document)  
 
APPENDIX II – STUDY IN FORMATION  
 
• Study Brochure  
• Study F lyer 
• Study we bpage  
  
 
APPENDIX II I – INTERVENTION INFORMATION  
 
• Symptom Manageme nt and Survivorship Handbook  
• Weekly GSDS  script 
• Handbook form (in ternal document ) 
• TIP-C form (i nternal document)  
 
 
 
       
 