Page 1 of 17 
 
Protocol Title: A randomized, double -blind , dose -ranging trial of 
subcutaneous sodium deoxycholate  injections with or without low dose 
triamcinolone and low dose lidocaine for reduction of submental fat with 
reduction of pain and swelling   
 
SPONSOR SITE 1 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :  [INVESTIGATOR_108401] A. Weiss, MD  
    Maryland Dermatology Laser, Skin and Vein Institute  
 
SUB -INVESTIGATORS:  Margaret A. Weiss, MD  
    Karen L. Beasley, MD  
    Christian Halvorson, MD  
    Maryland Dermatology Laser, Skin and Vein Institute    
    [ADDRESS_449167]  
    Hunt Valley, MD [ZIP_CODE]  
    Ph: (410) 469 -6668  
    www.mdlsv.com  
 
SPONSOR SITE 2  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :  [INVESTIGATOR_360337] P. Goldman, MD  
    Dermatology Cosmetic Laser Medical Associates of La Jolla, Inc.  
    A West Dermatology Company  
    [ADDRESS_449168]  
    San Diego, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
    Ph: (858) 657 -1004  
www.clderm.com  
 
SUB -INVESTIGATORS:  Douglas C. Wu, MD  
    Isabela T. Jones, MD  
    Monique J.  Wilson, MD  
    Dermatology Cosmetic Laser Medical Associates of La Jolla, Inc.  
A West Dermatology Company  
    [ADDRESS_449169]  
    San Diego, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
    Ph: (858) 657 -1004  
 
Funding Company :               Allergan, Inc.   
Corporate Campus  
[ADDRESS_449170]  
Irvin e, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
PROTOCOL VERSION:  8-3-2017  
 
The study will be conducted according to the protocol and in compliance with International Conference of 
Harmonization Good Clinical Practice Guidelines and all other applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT  
THE INFORMATION PROV IDED IN THIS STUDY P ROTOCOL IS INTENDED FOR REVIEW BY [CONTACT_360346], ALL RESEARCH REL ATED PERSONNEL, ETHI CS COMMITTEE(S) AND 
HEALTH AUTHORITIES. INFORMATION PROVIDED  AND CAPTURED IN THIS PROTOCOL IS 
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIA L AND WILL ONLY BE D ISCLOSED WITH WRITTE N CONSENT FROM THE 
SPONSORS.  
Page [ADDRESS_449171] patients presenting for a cosmetic 
dermatologic consultation.  Liposu ction was employed previously for aesthetic improvement.  
However, alternative non -invasive techniques such as cryolipolysis , focused ultrasound, 
radiofrequency, and injectable sodium deoxycholate  (SDOC)  have been developed to meet 
the increasing demand for minimal downtime procedures.   Patient experience with SDOC 
has been less than optimal , however,  with approximately only 1in 4 patients returning for 
more than one treatment.  
Subcutaneous pure synthetic  SDOC  (Kybella™ , Allergan) gained FDA approval for 
reduction of submental fat in June 2015.  When inje cted into submental fat, Kybella(TM)  
ultimately results in focal adipocytolysis and focal destruction of fat cells.  An excellent 
pharmacokinetic safety p rofile has been demonstrated, with no measurable increases in 
serum cholesterol, triglycerides, or free fatty acids detected 24 hours following injection [1, 
2].  Furthermore, four large phase III clinical trials to date have demonstrated the efficacy of 
Kybella (TM)  in the reduction of submental fat [3]. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_360338](TM) , many patients experience a 
variable degree of edema and pain following subcutaneous injection which can sometimes 
last for several days to weeks and can be a significant cause for concern.  The mec hanism of 
edema and pain secondary to Kybella(TM)  injection is unknown but thought to be an irritant 
response directly related to deoxycholate and not subsequent adipocyte lysis and death .  This 
edema  and pain is thought to be a major factor contributing t o the relatively small percentage 
of patients returning to complete the full treatment regimen.   This study proposes to answer 
the question of whether immediate swelling and pain can be reduced to increase patient 
tolerance and improve patient experience without reducing the longer term low level 
inflammatory component which results in visible and measurable submental fat reduction.  
A previous study was performed using high doses of a corticosteroid.  This  double -blind, 
randomized study utilized  triamcinol one acetonid e (TMC) , a corticosteroid compound,  in 
conjunction with Kybella(TM)  showed that the addition of TMC reduced the incidence of 
early edema and tenderness, but negatively impacted long term efficacy  and produced 
cutaneous chang es of steroid atroph y in 7  (47%) of the 15 patients treated with TMC  [4]. In 
the study, 2.0 mL of 2 mg/cm2 of Kybella(TM)  was mixed with 0.05 mL of 40 mg/mL of 
TMC, and was  delivered in up to 50 injections spaced 1.0 cm apart at 0.25 mL/injection for a 
total dose of up to 100  mg of Kybella(TM) . As the tolerability of Kybella(TM)  remains a 
significant issue in patient care, perhaps lower concentrations of TMC  would be effective in 
reducing side effects without compromising treatment efficacy  and causing steroid atrophy .  
 
 
 
Page 3 of 17 
 
 
2. Study Objective & Hypothesis  
 
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the efficacy , edema and pain associated with 
Kybella(TM)  injections of the upper neck in the treatment of submental fat with low 
concentrations of  triamcinolone acetonide  plus low doses of lidocaine.   An evaluator blinded to 
the study will grade the level of improvement of the submental fat .  Safety will also be assessed.  
 
The Working  Hypothesis: The combination of Kybella(TM)  and with very low dose 
triamcinolone acetonide  is effective in the reduction of immediate edema associated with 
Kybella(TM)  injections and does not adversely affect the previously demonstrated long term 
reduction of submental fat.  Addition of 0.1% lidocaine will provide immediate pain relief for a 
better patient experience.   As 1% lidocaine is already injected just prior to Kybella injection as 
per current treatment protocol, there is no anticipated effect from low dose 0.1% lidocaine other 
than anesthesia.  
 
3. Study D esign  
 
This is a two-site randomized , double -blind comparison trial of Kybella(TM)  injections with or 
without triamcinolone acetate for th e reduction of submental fat.  30 subjects w ill be enrolled 
into the trial ( 15 subjects per site ).  At each site , 5 will be randomized to receive Kybella(TM)  
injections alone whereas 10 will receive Kybella(TM)  plus differing doses of triamcinolone 
acetate in the following way:  
1. Group 1 (5 patients per site): Kybella(TM)  alone: 2 mg/cm2 of Kybella(TM)  with 0.2 mL 
of 1% lidocaine with no epi[INVESTIGATOR_360339] 0.2cc saline to the non -TMC group to 
maintain equal c oncentrations in each injection so that the final Kybella concentration per 
vial will be 10mg/1.2mls or 1.6mg per 0.2 cc injection point will be delivered in up to 50 
injections spaced 1.0 cm apart at 0.2 mL/injection for a total maximal dose of up to 100 
mg of SDOC.  
2. Group 2  (10 patients per site): Kybella(TM) +TMC at 1.0 mg/mL : 2.0 mL of 2 mg/cm2 of 
Kybella(TM)  will be mixed with 0.2 mL of 10 mg/mL  of triamcinolone acetate , 0.2 mL 
of 1% lidocaine with no epi[INVESTIGATOR_360340] [ADDRESS_449172] ions spaced 
1.0 cm apart at 0.2  mL/injection for a total dose of up to 100 mg of SDOC  using a 30 
gauge (or smaller) 0.5 -inch needle.  The final Kybella conc entration  per vial will be 
10mg/1.2mls or 1.6mg per 0.2 cc injection point  
 
The treatment area will be bounded superiorly by a line 1 cm inferior to the mandibular margin, 
laterally by [CONTACT_113388], and inferiorly by [CONTACT_113389].  The subjects  and 
evaluating investigator will be blinded to the treatment, thus maintaining double -blind status.  By 
[CONTACT_360347], the treating investigator will be unblinded to the 
treatment.  A series of 3 injection  sessions  will be per formed spaced 4 weeks apart.   No lidocaine 
will be injected prior to injections to prevent further dilution of injected Kybella™ as it will be 
Page 4 of 17 
 
premixed with Kybella™.   Chilling with cold will be the method of pain reduction for needle 
insertion.  
Canfield Vectra 3D imaging will be performed at baseline and final visit (Appendix C)  with 
analysis and calculation of volumetric changes performed at baseline and final visit.  Photos will 
also be taken with the Intellistudio at all other visits.  Follow up visi ts will be performed [ADDRESS_449173] weight wil l be recorded a t baseline and at end of study.  
 
 
 
 
4.  STUDY POPULATION  
 
4.1 NUMBER  
Thirty (30) , who satisfy all study inclusion criteria, and do not meet exclusion criteria, will be 
considered for entry into the  study.  
 
4.2 Study Endpoints  
 
a. Investigator Evaluations   (Appendix A)  
 The Clinician -Reported Submental Fat Rating Scale will be completed by a blinded -
investigator on Visit Days 1, 30, 60, 90 and 180.   
 
 The Submental Skin Laxity Grade (SMSLG) will be completed by a blinded -investigator  
on Visit Days 1, 30, 60, 90, and 180.   
 
 A Side Effects Scale will be completed by a blinded -investigator at all follow -up visits.  
The side effects evaluated will include Edema, Erythema, Ten derness, 
Erosion/Ulceration,  Steroid Atrophy , Induration, and Marginal Mandibular Palsy .  
 
b. Subject Evaluations  (Appendix B)  
 The Subject Evaluation of Side Effects Scale will be completed at Visits 2 through 11.  
 
 The Subject Satisfaction Rating Scale will be completed by [CONTACT_360348] 180.  
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_449174]’s inclusion into the study:  
1. Females or Males in good general he alth age [ADDRESS_449175] submental fat graded by [CONTACT_1694] 2 or 3 using the Clinician -
Reported Submental Fat Rating Scale (PR -SMFRS)   
6. Negative urine pregnancy test prior to  each treatment (if applicable)  
Page 5 of 17 
 
7. Female patients will be either of non-childbearing potential  defined as:  
7.[ADDRESS_449176] 12 months.  
 Or; 
(WOCBP)  women of childbearing potential must agree to use an effective method of birth control during 
the course of the study, such as:  
7.3 Oral contraceptive pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382], injection, implant, patch, vaginal ring, intrauterine device  
7.4 Intrauterine coil  
7.5 Bilateral tubal ligati on 
7.6 Barrier method used with an additional form of contraception (e.g.,  sponge, spermicide or 
condom)  
7.7 Abstinence (If practicing abstinence must agree to use barrier method described above 
(7.6) if becomes sexually active)  
7.8 Vasectomized partner  (must agree to  use barrier method described above ( 7.6) if becomes 
sexually active with unvasectomized partner)  
8. Males must be willing to be clean shaven for all study visits  
9. The patient must have had a stable weight (no fluctuation of >15 pounds in a 
year), diet, and ph ysical activity for the previous 6 months  
 
4.4EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
The following are exclusion criteria for subjects in this study:  
1. Pregnancy, current ly breast feeding  or planning pregnancy for the duration of the 
trial 
2. Any UNCONTROLLED  systemic disease -a potential patient in whom therapy for a 
systemic disease is not yet stabilized will not be considered for entry into th e 
study  
3. Treatment with botulinum toxin injections in the neck or chin area within 6 
months before randomization  
4. Any Scars, unshaven hair, tattoos or jewelry on or near  the proposed treatment 
area 
5. Significant history or current evidence of a medical, psychological or other 
disorder that, in the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], would precl ude enrollment into the 
study  
6. An active de rmatitis or open wound i n the proposed treatment area  
7. An active bacterial, fungal, or viral infection  in the proposed treatment area  
8. Pre-existing skin condition to the submental region that may confound evaluation 
or analysis, at investigator discretion  
9. Previously treated with subcutaneous sodium deoxycholate to the submental 
region  
10. Previously treated with focused ultrasound, radiofrequency, cryolipolysis or 
liposuction to the submental region within the previous [ADDRESS_449177] planned significant alterations in diet or physical activity that may 
result in significant fluctuations in weight  
16. Current participation or participation within 30 days prior to the start of this study 
in a drug o r other investigational research study.  
 
 
 
 
 
5. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
5.1 WASHOUT PERIOD  
 A patient must not have been p reviously treated with focused ultrasound, 
radiofrequency, cryolipolysis or liposuction to the submental region within the 
previous 6 months.   
 The patient must not have had any other laser, light, energy device, or chemical peel 
treatment to the submental region within the previous 3 months.   
 The patient must not have participated in a drug or other investigational research 
study involving the proposed treatment area within 30 days prior to the start of this 
study.  
6. STUDY PERIOD  
 
Visit 1 (Day 1, Baseline)  
 Obtain written Informed Consent and HIPPA  
 Record Medical History  and Concomitant Medication  
 Review Inclusion and Exclusion  
 Record Subjects weight  
 Randomization  
 Pregnancy Test (If applicable)  
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Grade (CR-SMFRS)  and (SMSLG)  
 Treatment #1with either Kybella(TM)  alone or varying doses of TMC  
 
Visit 2 (Day 3 [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject Evaluation of Side Effec ts Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Page 7 of 17 
 
Visit 3 (Day 5  [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Review  Con Meds  
 Review  Adverse Events  
 
Visit 4  (Day 30  [+/- 3 days])  
 Pregnancy Test (If applicable)  
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects , CR-SMFRS  and SMSLG  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Treatment #2 with either Kybella(TM)  alone or varying doses of TMC  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 5  (Day 33  [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
 
Visit 6  (Day 35  [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 7  (Day 60 [+/- 3 days])  
 Pregnancy Test (If applicable)  
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects , CR-SMFRS  and SMSLG  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Treatment #3 with either Kybella(TM)  alone or varying doses of TMC  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 8  (Day 63  [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
Page 8 of 17 
 
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 9  (Day 65  [+/- 1 day] ) 
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects  
 Subject E valuation of Side Effects Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 10  (Day 90 [+/- 5 days])  
 Photographs  
 Blinded -Investigator Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects , CR-SMFRS and SMSLG  
 Subject Evaluation of Side Ef fects Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
 
Visit 1 1 (Day 180 [+/- 5 days])  
 Photographs  
 Record Subject  weight  
 Blinded -Investigator  Evaluation of Treatment Side Effects , CR-SMFRS and SMSLG   
 Subject Evaluation of Side Effects Scale  
 Subject Satisfaction  Rating Scale  
 Review Con Meds  
 Review Adverse Events  
An exit form will be completed at the final examination, or whenever the patient completes or 
leaves the study for any reason.  
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_449178] has completed the final visit (Visit 180) of the study, they are considered to have 
completed the study.  
 
    B.   Subject Discontinuation  
Each subject may voluntarily discontinue the study at any time they choose.  Subjects who 
cannot complete the study for administrative reasons (e.g., non -compliance, failure to meet visit 
schedule, etc.) will be discontinued from the study .  These patients will be asked to r eturn for 
completion of visit [ADDRESS_449179] been terminated 
from the study.  
 
 
 
7. Adverse Events  
 
7.1 Potential Risks  
Possible adverse events from Kybella(TM)  Injections  include : 
 Raised  red areas at the treatment  site(s)  
 Bruising  
 Itching  
 Pain/ tenderness  
 Edema  
 Headache  
 Paresthesia  
 Ulcerations   
 Erythema  
 Nausea  
 Infection  
 Induration  
 Skin discoloration  
 Foreign  body granuloma  
 Persistent discoloration   
 Scarring  
 Dysesthesia  
 Post-inflammatory  hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_371]  
 Numbness of treatment  site 
 
The potential risks associated with Triamcinolone acetate , a commercially available injectable, 
include:  
• Nausea  
• Bloating  
• Appetite changes  
• Stomach or side pain  
Page 10 of 17 
 
• Headache  
• Sleep problems (insomnia)  
• Acne or other skin changes  
• Slow -healing  wounds  
• Thinning hair  
• Bruising or swelling  
• Sweating  
• Irregular menstrual periods  
 
The potential risks associated with 0.1% lidocaine , a commercially available injectable, include:  
• drowsiness, dizziness;  
• feeling hot or cold;  
• numbness in places where the m edicine is accidentally applied  
 
 
7.2 Unknown/Unforeseeable Risks  
 
In addition to the risks listed above, there may be some unknown or infrequent and unforeseeable 
risks associated with Triamcinolone and/or Kybella(TM)  injections . Patients will be informed 
both verbally and in writing in a timely manner of any new information, findings or changes to 
the way the research will be performed that might influence their willingness to continue their 
participation in this study.  
 
Pregnancy/Fetal Risks :  The effects of Triamcinolone and/or Kybella(TM)  injections  have not 
been studied in pregnancy and therefore may be hazardous.    
 
If a patient thinks that you may be pregnant or have become pregnant during the study the patient 
is to inform the study doctor immediately. If a patient becomes pregnant or thinks they may be 
pregnant, they will be removed from the study and the study doctor will refer the patient to seek 
obstetric care and may request to track their pregnancy and will report the pregnancy to the IRB.  
 
8.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF T HE INVESTIGATOR  
   8.[ADDRESS_449180], evaluation, and 
documentation of this study, are designed to ensure that the Investigator abides by [CONTACT_360349] E6: “Guideline for Good Clinical Practice.”  Compliance 
with these regulations also constitutes compliance with  the ethical principles described in the 
current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki.  The study will also be carried out in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_360341].  
 
   8.[ADDRESS_449181] ensure th at proper source documentation for all study activities are 
diligently maintained and securely kept.  The Investigator will transfer all relevant data to the 
Page 11 of 17 
 
Case Report Form as stipulated in this Study Protocol and his/her signature [CONTACT_360355].  The Investigator will maintain 
reliable study records and will store study supplies in a secure, locked location.  In addition, t he 
Investigator will ensure that all Case Report Forms will be maintaine d for a period of two years 
after the conclusion of the study.   
 
9.  REGULATORY OBLIGATIONS  
    
9.[ADDRESS_449182]  
 
The study protocol, informed consent forms (all versions), and any specific advertising will be 
submitted to and approved by [CONTACT_360350].  A form must be signed by [CONTACT_117913].  
This notif ication will be provided to Allergan.  
 
   9.[ADDRESS_449183] as the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_360342].  Protocols will be noted as approved by [CONTACT_360351]’s Signature [CONTACT_3490].  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_360343].  
 
 
 
9.3 Informed Consent  
An Informed Consent (IC) that includes all of the relevant elements currently required by [CONTACT_360352].  The type and method of study, any potential or possible hazards, and 
the patient’s right to withdraw from the study at any time will be explained to the patients by [CONTACT_360353].  Once the I nvestigator is assured that an individual candidate 
understands the implications of participating in this study, the patient will be asked to give 
consent by [CONTACT_360354].  The 
Investigator or Des ignee will also sign and date the form.  A copy of the IRB approved IC fo rm 
will also be provided to Allergan.  
 
9.4 Protocol and Informed Consent Changes  
 
Changes to the protocol or Informed Consent form(s) will be implemented as amendments to the 
original  document and approved by [CONTACT_1201].  The approvals will be processed in accordance 
with the established IRB procedures.  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_360344]/revisions, along 
with letters noting IRB app roval, will be submitted to Allergan , as this may a ffect safety.  Any 
addenda, amendment or revision that substantially alters the study design or increases potential 
risk to the patient requires the patient’s consent to continue in the study.  
 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_449184]’s health taken during this study may be used and given to others by 
[CONTACT_58041], the medical staff, the respective study center and by [CONTACT_423]’s doctors 
and their other health care pr oviders (together, they are called “providers”). These providers may 
share health information about the subject with the study coordinator. The study coordinator and 
the providers may share that information with researchers participating in this Study labo ratories 
conducting tests for this Study; a final study report will be shared with the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA); Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies; Other U.S. 
and foreign government agencies that watch over quality, saf ety, and effectiveness of research.  
 
11.  Delegation of Investigator Responsibilities  
 
The Investigator should ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed 
about the protocol,  any amendments to the protocol, the study treatments, and their trial -related 
duties and functions.  The investigator should maintain a list of Co -Investigators and other 
appropriately qualified persons to whom he has delegated significant trial -related d uties.  
 
12.  Direct Access to Source Data/Documents  
 
The Investigator must ensure that institutional regulations, the Informed Consent Form, and the 
HIPAA Authorization clearly permit study -related monitoring, audits, REB review, and 
regulatory inspections  providing direct access to source data and documents . 
 
13. Adverse Events and Reporting  
Serious and/or Adverse Event and Reporting  
 
A serious adverse event  is any untoward medical occurrence, that, at any dose:  
- Results in death;  
-  is life -threatening;  
- requires in -subject hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6929];  
- Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
- is a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
 - is an important medical event.  
An unexpected adverse event  is any treatment -related adverse event, which is not identified in 
nature, severity, or frequency in current literature on the test product.  
 
Any serious adverse event occurring in this study must be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_449185] either returned to normal or are otherwise explained.  If death was the outcome of the event 
on the initial SAE Report, a Follow -up/Final Report, including autopsy report, when performed, 
must be completed.  
 
14.    DATA ANALYSIS  
 
A blinded investigator will grade the side effects on a scale of 0 -4 to assess erythema, edema, 
tenderness, and erosion/ulceration at each follow -up visit and utilize the Clinician -Reported 
Submental Fat Rating Scale of [ADDRESS_449186] Satisfaction 
Rating Scale of 0 -6 on Visit Day 180 (See Appendix B).  The investigator will also evaluate the 
side effects of bruising, pain, swelling, tolerability, and interference in daily function on a scale 
of 0-4 at all follow up visits.  
 
A p value of 0.05 or less will be considered signific ant. 
 
 
15. References  
1. Walker, P., J. Fellmann, and P.F. Lizzul, A phase I safety and pharmacokinetic study of 
ATX-101: injectable, synthetic deoxycholic acid for submental contouring.  J Drugs 
Dermatol, 2015. 14(3): p. 279 -87. 
2. Walker, P. and D. Lee, A phase 1 pharmacokinetic study of ATX -101: serum lipi[INVESTIGATOR_360345].  J Cosmet Dermatol, 2015. 
14(1): p. 33 -9. 
3. Wollina, U. and A. Goldman, ATX-101 for reduction of submental fat.  Expert Opin 
Pharmacother, 2015. 16(5): p. 755 -62. 
4. Goldman, M.P., Vanaman Wilson, M.J., Jones, I.T., Bolton JL, Zaleski -Larsen LA, Wu, 
D.C. A randomized, double -blind comparison trial of subcutaneous sodium deoxycholate 
injections with or without triamcinolone for reduction of submental fat . [In production].  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 17 
 
 
APPENDIX A  
  
Clinician -Reported Submental Fat Rating Scale (CR -SMFRS)  
Score  SMF Description  
0 Absent Submental Convexity:  No localized submental fat evident.  
1 Mild Submental Convexity:  Minimal, localized submental fat.  
2 Moderate Submental Convexity:  Prominent, localized submental fat.  
3 Severe Submental Convexity:  Marked, localized submental fat.  
4 Extreme Submental Convexity.  
 
Clinician Evaluation: Submental Skin Laxity Grade (SMSLG)  
Grade  Laxity Description  
1 
None   No or minimal superficial wrinkling  
 Skin well opposed to deeper neck structures  
 No skin redundancy  
 No skin drapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (vertical folds)  
 No skin sagging (horizontal folds)  
2 
Mild   Mild superficial wrinkling  
 Skin well opposed to deeper neck structures  
 Minimal skin redundancy  
 Slight skin drapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (vertical folds)  
 No skin sagging (horizontal folds)  
Page 15 of 17 
 
3 
Moderate   May have moderate superficial wrinkling  
 Skin has mild to moderate separation from deeper neck structures  
 Moderate skin redundancy  
 Moderate skin drapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (vertical folds)  
 Minimal to mild skin sagging (horizontal folds)  
4 
Severe   Superficial wrinkling present, may be marked  
 Loose skin separated from deeper neck structures  
 Marked skin redundancy  
 Marked skin drapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (vertical folds)  
 Marked skin sagging (horizontal folds)  
 
Assessment Procedures  
The SMSLG is an integration of three features: skin wrinkling, adherence to underlying neck 
structures (bone and muscle) and redundancy (horizontal and vertical folds).  Each grade (none, 
mild, moderate and severe) defines the maximal allowed limit for skin wrinkling, adherence to 
underlying structures and redundancy.  
SMSLG is based on assessor’s clinical evaluation of the subject, including palpation of the chin 
and neck area; anterior, oblique, and profile views of the chin and neck; as well as observation of 
pronation, supi[INVESTIGATOR_20810], and lateral movement of the head.  The score is determined using the 
definitions in the rating scale and representative phot ographs associated with each score.  The 
final determination of the score will be made while the subject’s head is in the Frankfort plane 
posture.  The score will be recorded as a whole number.  
 
Clinician Evaluation of Side Effects  Scale  
 Edema  Erythema  Tenderness  Erosion/  
Ulceration  Steroid 
Atrophy  Induration  Marginal 
Mandibular 
Palsy  
0 None  None  No 
tenderness  No 
erosion/ulcera
tion None  None  Not Present  
1 Very slight 
(barely 
perceptible)  Very slight  Very slight  Very slight 
(barely 
perceptible)  Very slight 
(barely 
perceptible)  Very slight 
(barely 
perceptible)  Present  
2 Slight  Well -
defined  Slight  Slight  Slight  Slight   
3 Moderate (raised 
approximately 
1mm)  Moderate to 
severe  Moderate  Moderate  Moderate  Moderate   
 
4 Severe (raised 
more than 1mm 
and exceeding 
beyond area of 
exposure)  Severe (beet 
red to slight 
eschar 
formation)   
Severe   
Severe   
Severe   
Severe   
Page [ADDRESS_449187]  Evaluation of Side Effects  Scale  
 Swelling  Bruising  Pain  Overall 
Tolerability  Interference in 
Daily  
Function  
0 None  None  None  Very Tolerable  None  
1 Very slight (barely 
perceptible)  Very slight  Very slight  Very Slightly 
Intolerable  Very Slightly 
Interferes  
2 Slight  Slight  Slight  Slight ly 
Intolerable  Slightly Interferes  
3 Moderate (raised 
approximately 
1mm)  Moderate to 
severe  Moderate  Moderately 
Intolerable  Moderately 
Interferes  
 
4 Severe (raised more 
than 1mm and 
exceeding beyond 
area of exposure)   
Severe   
Severe   
Severely 
Intolerable   
Severely 
Interferes  
 
Subject Satisfaction  Rating Scale (SSRS)  
0 -  Extremely dissatisfied  
1 -  Dissatisfied  
2 -  Slightly dissatisfied  
3 -  Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied  
4 -  Slightly satisfied  
5 - Satisfied  
6 -  Extremely satisfied  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 17 
 
Appendix C  
 
Standardized Vectra Photography   
 
Photos will be taken in a standardized fashion:  
*Standard lighting and camera positioning to ensure comparable before and after treatment 
photographs of the face (VECTRA photos are always done in the same room) approximately [ADDRESS_449188] from base of system.  
 
                   
 
Please ensure  the following for consistent before and after photos:  
 
1. Subjects removal of makeup and face washed at least 20 minutes prior to having their 
photograph taken to ensure makeup, lotions and/or sunscreens will not interfere with any 
evaluations (Males must  be clean shaven).  
2. Please ensure that subjects jewelry is removed from ears/neck and hair is pushed back away 
from the face with a black headband (any stray hairs will cause the VECTRA system to crop the 
face). A black drape will be placed around the su bjects neck to ensure photo consistency.  
One (1) photo will be taken with eyes closed one (1) image will allow us to capture (5) views 
(frontal, left oblique, right oblique , left profile and right profile views) . The camera we will be 
using is a Canfield VECTRA. Photos will be captured at ALL visits  (on treatment visits day 1, 
30 and 60 photos will be captured pre -treatment).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
