COVER PAGE  OFFICIAL TITLE: Probiotics, Immune Function, and the Brain in Alcohol Consumers  NCT NUMBER: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  DOCUMENT DATE: October 25, 2022 
v.6/5/2020 Page  5 of 19 THE BLUE TEXT IN THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS IS A GUIDE TO ENSURE ALL RELEVANT 
INFORMATION IS INCLUDED IN YOUR APPLICATION.  YOU  MAY DELETE THE  BLUE  TEXT 
BEFORE SUBMISSION  
If your study ONLY involves the use of identifiable secondary data / biospecimens, 
including  coded  data  from  which  you may be able to ascertain  participant  identity,  skip to 
PART V . Otherwise, please continue to next page.  1.Introduction and Background.  In reviewing  the protocol, the IRB must  consider the rationale for the
study and the importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to result.
Animal  models  and clinical studies  show  preliminary  support  for probiotic  supplementation to ameliorate
negative physiological consequences of heavy drinking, specifically inflammation. However, previous
clinical trials have focused on alcohol -related complications, usually alcoholic liver disease. Suc h
s
tudies have been conducted in controlled settings with supervised abstinence from alcohol. As a
result, it is not known whether probiotics improve alcohol -related inflammation in the absence of liver
disease or in individuals who continue to drink heavily. The latter factor is important, as many
individuals who currently are not seeking to cut down on drinking may nevertheless be willing t o
c
onsume a dietary supplement to improve their health. In summary, probiotic therapy may be  an
ac
ceptable intervention to reduce alcohol -related tissue injury in individuals not seeking to change their
drinking behavior, but no clinical studies to date have addressed this population. This study will
investigate  effects  of probiotics  on inflammation in healthy  heavy  drinkers  who currently  are not seeking
to change their alcohol use (i.e., are non- treatment -seeking).
2.Specific Aims  and Study  Objectives.  The IRB must evaluate the objectives  of the research  in order to
determine whether the risks to participants are reasonable in relation to the importance of the
knowledge that may be gained.
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_486846] a brief, open- label clinical trial of probiotics as an intervention to reduce systemic and 
neural inflammation in heavy drinkers. Heavy drinkers who do not yet show significant signs of liver disease 
also may stand to benefit from probiotics, but no clinical trials to date have addressed this population. This 
study will recruit 15 non -treatment -seeking heavy drinkers to complete an open- label within -subjects trial. Aim 
1 is to demonstrate  proof -of-concept  for beneficial  effects  of probiotic  use on inflammatory  processes. Aim 2 is 
to examine effects of probiotic use on brain metabolites correlated with neuroinflammation using magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Aim 3 is to gather preliminary data on acceptability and feasibility of the probiotic 
intervention in non- treatment -seeking heavy drinkers.  
Ai
m 1: Demonstrate proof -of-concept for beneficial effects of probiotic use on inflammatory processes, as 
reflected  in plasma  markers  of microbial  translocation,  immune  activation,  systemic inflammation,  and liver 
function.  
Ai
m 2: Examine effects  of probiotic  use on brain metabolites  correlated  with inflammation  using  magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI).  
Aim 3: Gather  preliminary  data on acceptability  and feasibility  of the probiotic  intervention in the specific 
population of interest, i.e., non- treatment -seeking heavy drinkers.  PART  III. RESEARCH  DESIGN  & METHODS  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/2022 
v. 6/5/[ADDRESS_1028252] data on demographics, substance use, and medical history. Eligibility will be 
determined using the criteria listed below. Blood samples will be taken by a licensed healthcare provider.  
Eligible participants will complete a one- hou r magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, to occur on a separate 
day due to MRI scheduling constraints. Participants will receive a 30- day supply of the probiotic supplement 
with dosing and storage instructions. Participants will be instructed to take the standard dosage of [ADDRESS_1028253] taken their daily probiotic dose. Visit 2 will be scheduled 15 days (plus or minus 5 days) after the initiation of the probiotic supplement. The research team will collect blood samples and assess alcohol 
consumption since Visit 1, protocol adherence, and potential side effects. Participants will attend Visit 3 upon completion of the probiotic supplement, to occur 30 days (plus or minus 5 days) after initiation. Data will be 
collected as described for Visit 2, plus participants will complete a final one -hour MRI scan. Visit [ADDRESS_1028254] 1- 10 months after completion of the study probiotic as a “washout” time point. A blood sample and 
substance use assessment will be collected at Visit 4.  Appointments will take place at the Center for Alcohol 
and Addiction Studies lab space in the School of Public Health, and MRI scans will be conducted at Brown’s 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Facility (MRF).  
 
Data  to be collected  at each  session is described below.  
• Visit 1 (Baseline Screening & MRI):  Breath alcohol content (BrAC) will be measured using a handheld 
digital sensor to confirm BrAC of .00 g% at the time informed consent is obtained. Age, weight, pregnancy status, urine drug metabolites, recent alcohol use, treatment -seeking status, MRI 
safety/compatibility, safety for blood draw, basic medical history, and medication use will be assessed 
per Eligibility Criteria listed in Section 4. The research team will check the individual’s state -issued 
photo ID to verify age and identity. Height and weight will be measured using a standard scale. Urine 
samples  will be collected  to test for presence  of drug metabolites.  Urine  samples  from participants  who 
are able to become pregnant will be tested for pregnancy hormones. Basic demographic information, social history, and health -related data will be collected on questionnaires. Questionnaires on alcohol 
use and related symptoms (Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test; AUDIT) will be administered. 
Blood samples will be taken for testing of biomarkers per  the research aims. The Timeline Followback 
(TLFB) measure will be used to assess alcohol use in the past 30 days. Current or recent seeking of treatment for alcohol or drug use will be assessed. Participants will be interviewed for history of major 
medical conditions and current medication usage. Because it is necessary to confirm eligibility prior to 
MRI scanning and because advance notice is needed for MRI scheduling, participants will be asked to return on a separate day to complete a one- hour MRI scan of the brain at Brown’s MRI Research 
Facility.  Participants  who are able to become pregnant  will be given  a urine pregnancy  test prior to MRI 
scanning. BrAC of .00 g% will be confirmed prior to the MRI scan. Eligible participants will be given a 
30-day supply  of the probiotic  supplement  with dosing and storage instructions.  The research  team  will 
collect contact [CONTACT_750983]’ 
adherence to the study protocol. 
• Visit 2: Participants  will complete questionnaires  on side effects  and adherence to the study  protocol. 
Blood samples  will be taken  for testing  of biomarkers.  BrAC  of .00 g% will be confirmed prior to study 
procedures.  
• Visit 3 (Day 30 of Probiotic Intervention):  The TLFB will be used to assess alcohol use since Visit [ADDRESS_1028255] prior to MRI scanning. BrAC of .00 g%  will be 
confirmed  prior to the MRI scan. Participants  will complete  a one-hour MRI scan.  They  will be debriefed 
about the study and given the opportunity to ask questions at study completion.  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/2022 
v. 6/5/2020  Page  7 of 19  • Visit 4: A post-assessment  visit will be conducted  [ADDRESS_1028256] 30 days. A blood sample will be  
taken.  
 
Probiotic  Supplement  Storage  and Dispensing:  
• The probiotic product will be stored in a locked cabinet in the PI’s office until the time of dispensing to 
the participant.  Participants eligible for the study will receive a 30- day supply with dosing and storage 
instructions per the manufacturer.  Any unused probiotic products at the end of the study will be 
disposed of by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_750977] a waste  bin, or taken  home by [CONTACT_49124].  This 
product is not a controlled substance or considered hazardous with regard to storage or disposal.  
 
Procedures  for a Positive  Breath Alcohol  Reading  (BrAC):  
In the event that a participant has a positive BrAC reading, the visit will be rescheduled for another date. If a  
participant has a repeated positive BrAC reading, the participant will be withdrawn from the study. If a 
participant’s  BrAC exceeds the legal limit for operating a motor vehicle (>.08%) at any visit, the person will be 
asked  to wait at the research site until the BrAC  reading  is under  .08%.  The person will be offered  a rideshare  
for transportation home at study expense.  
 
4. Participant Population. In order to approve research, the IRB must determine that the selection of 
participants is equitable and reasonably related  to the purpose and aims  of the research.  The IRB must 
also consider whether adequate safeguards are in place to minimize any risks that are unique to vulnerable populations. To make this determination, the IRB must review all methods and materials used to contact [CONTACT_750984], including letters, flyers, emails, etc. 
 
Human participants  will be healthy,  non-treatment -seeking  adult  heavy  drinkers  recruited  from the community. 
Participants will not be asked or encouraged to change their alcohol use as part of the study. Up to [ADDRESS_1028257] udy intended to generate preliminary data for future full -scale work. Full eligibility 
criteria are listed below.  
Inclusion Cr iteria:  
1) 18-64 years  of age; 
2) Able to speak  and read English  well enough to complete study  procedures;  
3) Meets  NIAAA guidelines  for heavy drinking  in the past [ADDRESS_1028258]  one of the 
following:  
A) at least  4 heavy  drinking epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]  (≥4 drinks  for women,  ≥5 drinks  for men on a given  day);  
B) at least  2 heavy  drinking weeks  (>7 drinks  for women,  >14 drinks  for men per week).  
 
Exclusion  Cr iteria:  
4) Chronic  disease requiring  daily use of medication;  
5) Seeking or receiving  treatment  for alcohol/drug  use, with exception of smoking  cessation;  
6) Self-reported  history  of liver disease;  
7) Antibiotic  or probiotic  use in past 1 month,  wherein probiotic  use pertains  only to supplements  and 
not to foods that contain probiotics such as yogurt, kefir, kimchi, etc.;  
8) Positive  urine test for amphetamine,  cocaine,  methamphetamine,  opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438],  or benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651] 
(cannabis use will be assessed but is not an  exclusion criterion);  
9) History  of fainting,  weakness,  infection,  excessive bruising,  or extreme  distress  from blood draw;  
10) Safety  contraindication for MRI (e.g.,  ferromagnetic  implant  in the body,  claustrophobia);  
11) History  of head  trauma  with loss of consciousness  >10 min; 
12) For people able to become  pregnant:  Pregnant,  breastfeeding,  or not using  effective  birth control;  
13) Unable to complete  the study  visits  due to time or scheduling  constraints;  
14) Weight  <110  lbs (due to blood draw  guidelines).  
15) Conditions  of immunodeficiency,  such as HIV infection,  primary  immune deficiency,  or taking 
immune- suppressant medications.  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/2022 
v. 6/5/2020  Page  8 of 19  Vulnerable Populations:  Vulnerable populations  (e.g.,  fetuses,  pregnant  women,  prisoners,  children)  will not be 
included in this study.  
 
5. Recruitment Methods  
Participants will be recruited from the general community using print or online advertisements (Google), 
flyers posted in public venues, listservs (Brown University listservs), postings on social media (Facebook), 
Today@Brown postings, and online bulletin boards (Craigslist). Contact [CONTACT_750985] -up. Interested individuals who contact [CONTACT_750986] a brief (10- minute) telephone pre - 
screening  interview  administered  by [CONTACT_3647].  Individuals  will be prescreened by [CONTACT_750987]. Information collected from the prescreening interview will not be retained for research purposes. Before beginning the interview, staff will confirm that the caller is in a 
private location. Ineligible individuals will be informed of their ineligibility and thanked for their interest.  
Eligible  individuals  will be scheduled for Visit 1. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_750978].  The study  will be advertised 
as not providing treatment or medication, such that the probiotic supplement should not be confused with 
clinical care. 
 
6. Compensation / Reimbursement  
 
Participants will be compensated for their time and effort as follows: $50 for Visit 1 screening (approximately 2.5 hours)  and $50 for Visit 1 MRI (approximately  1.75 hours);  $30 for Visit 2 (approximately  1.5 hours);  $80 for 
Visit 3 (approximately 3 hours); $1 per day for each day the participant responds to emails about adherence (maximum  $30); $40 for Visit 4 (approximately  1.5 hours) . Participants  found not eligible  to complete  the study 
at Visit 1 will be given compensation prorated at $20/hour. Participants will be offered reimbursement for parking and/or  transportation as needed.  Payments  will be made by [CONTACT_750988],  specifically  an Amazon 
gift card. The compensation rate  of approximately $20/hour is appropriate for the time, effort, and activities 
involved in participation. Participants will be paid at the completion of each visit. For the daily response compensation, participants will be paid at the end of the 30 -day period for the total of days that they  
responded.  
 
 
7. Potential Research Risks / Discomforts to Participants. In order to approve the research, the IRB must consider the risks posed to participants by [CONTACT_750989]. The IRB needs to determine that the risks have been both minimized and are reasonable in relation to the 
anticipated benefits to participants, as well as to the importance of the knowledge that may be gained. The IRB will also consider whether  the informed consent process  provides potential participants with an 
accurate and fair description of the risks or discomforts. 
 
1. Risk of side effects  from probiotic  supplementation:  The study  will utilize  a commercially  available probiotic 
supplement product (Seed DS -01 Daily Synbiotic) that has an excellent safety and tolerability profile. The 
most common side effects of probiotics are abdominal bloating and/or gas, which typi[INVESTIGATOR_750979]. The Seed DS -01 Daily Synbiotic undergoes rigorous quality control testing for 
contaminants (e.g., heavy metals, pesticides) and allergens (e.g., nuts, gluten, milk) and is the subject of 
ongoing independent clinical trials for irritable bowel syndrome and post -antibiotic recovery. The product is 
vegan, preservative- free, and free of common allergens (soy, dairy, gluten). Probiotic supplements are not 
regulated by [CONTACT_750990].  
 
 
2. Risks of MRI scan:  MRI has no known side effects and does  not involve radiation. However, there are 
several  contraindications  for MRI scan.  The first is metallic  materials  within  the body,  such as aneurysm  clip, 
bullet  or shrapnel  fragment,  ear implant,  certain  prosthetic  devices,  heart  pacemaker,  or artificial heart  valve. 
Participants will be thoroughly screened, first by [CONTACT_750991], to prevent  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/2022 
v. 6/5/2020  Page  9 of 19  admission of individuals with these contraindications to the MRI suite. The second contraindication is 
pregnancy, as risks to the fetus are unknown. Pregnancy tests will be administered to all participants able to 
become pregnant at the baseline assessment and again on the days of MRI scanning. Aside from medical 
contraindications,  there  is risk of subjective discomfort  from being in a small  space or from noise emitted  by [CONTACT_218864]. Participants will be given a call button to hold during the MRI so that they can communicate distress to the MRI technician and research staff, and procedures can be discontinued if indicated. Participants will be required to wear earplugs to reduce exposure to noise from the scanner.  
 
 
3. Psychological discomfort associated with assessment:  Participants will be advised during the informed 
consent process that they may choose not to answer any particular question, that their verbal and written 
responses  are confidential,  and that they are free to withdraw  from the study  at any time.  All data collection 
procedures will be performed in private rooms reserved for these purposes.  
 
 
4. Breach of confidentiality of personal identifiable information (PII):  Several steps will be taken to protect 
against loss of confidentiality. All data will be collected and stored using technology that employs the highest industry standards for security. Data will be stored in de- identified, password- protected files on Brown 
University’s secure servers. Participant data and samples will be identified using a unique study ID code not 
related to their PII. Participants’ personal identifying information will be kept in a separate location from their 
response data. At the conclusion of the study, the file that contains links of personal identifiers with unique 
study  IDs will be destroyed by [CONTACT_46575]. Biological samples  will be identified with the participant’s  study  ID 
and will not be associated with PII. With these precautions, loss of confidentiality is considered very unlikely; however, participants will be informed of the potential risk at the time they provide consent.  
 
 
5. Risks associated with blood draw procedures.  During the informed consent process, participants will be 
advised of the necessity of obtaining blood samples  throughout  the trial. The study  will exclude individuals  who 
report physical or psychological discomfort caused by [CONTACT_750992], or who report history of 
excessive bruising, fainting, or weakness following standard blood draw procedures. Blood draw procedures 
will follow World Health Organization guidelines for safe and well -tolerated procedures to minimize risk of 
infection or other complications. A licensed research nurse will collect the blood samples. Risk reduction strategies are to use sterile, single- use implements; surface disinfectant; proper hand hygiene; application of 
70% isopropyl  alcohol  to the blood  draw  site; minimal  vein probing;  application of pressure  after drawing  blood; 
and non- latex, vinyl gloves.  
 
 
6. Risk of coercion from compensation received for participation:  The risk of coercion from compensation for 
participation is low, as the total amount  of compensation is modest.  The hourly  compensation rate for the study 
sessions translates to approximately $20/hour, which is consistent with rates offered by [CONTACT_750993]  (i.e., 
daily adherence to the probiotic protocol).  
 
 
7. Risk of adverse reaction to the probiotic  supplement:  In the unlikely  event  that a participant  reports  adverse 
reaction to the probiotic beyond the mild side effects noted in #[ADDRESS_1028259]  of Care : There  is no established “standard of care”  for healthy  heavy  drinkers  who are not seeking 
treatment. The probiotic supplement does not replace or otherwise alter any clinical care that participants would receive. At the conclusion of the study, participants will be given an NIAAA pamphlet on the risks of 
heavy drinking.  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/2022 
v. 6/5/[ADDRESS_1028260]  ensure  the informed  consent  process  clearly 
discloses and facilitates the understanding of all information needed to make an informed decision to 
participate while promoting the voluntariness of participation.  
 
Please use the Brown  consent  / assent  templates  and related  guidance on the HRPP  Forms  & Templates  page 
to develop your consent forms. DSMP/DSMB:  The DSMP  is attached and contains  information on the DSMB.  
 
8. Potential Benefits of the Research. NOTE: Compensation for participation is not a benefit and 
should not be included in this section.  In order to approve this research,  the IRB must  determine that 
the potential benefits to research participants are reasonable in relation to the potential risks. Very 
often, research  at Brown  does not include potential direct  benefits  to participants, but may only benefit  
society as a whole by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_286210]. 
 
Some individuals experience a noticeable benefit in health when using probiotics. Many subjects in this study 
are unlikely  to benefit  directly  from participation.  Benefits  to society  are expected  to accrue through  generation 
of scientific knowledge about effects of probiotics on inflammation in heavy drinkers.  
 
 
 
 
1. Describe the informed  consent  process,  including:  
 
Informed consent will be obtained at Visit 1. BrAC of .00 g% will be confirmed at the time that consent is 
obtained. The nature of the study will be described verbally and in writing. Potential participants will be 
informed that study participation is volu ntary and that they have the right to terminate study procedures at any 
time. Participants will be informed that the alternative is to not participate. Written informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_750980]. The Research Assistan t will receive one -on-one training from 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_750981]. The names and contact [CONTACT_116193] ([CONTACT_750994]) and study staff will be provided on the consent document in case questions arise.  Participants  will receive a copy  of the signed consent 
document, and the original form will be kept in a locked filing cabinet. 
 
 
2. Facilitate Understanding  
 
Participants  will be encouraged  to ask questions to clarify  the nature of the study and  to ensure understanding. 
Participants who decide to withdraw from the study at any point prior to completion will be paid for their participation up to that point. 
 
 
3. Documentation  
 
Participants  will indicate  informed  consent by [CONTACT_17317].  
 
4. Additional  Considerations  
Brown University IRB Original Approval: 10/21/2021 
Brown University IRB Amendment Approval: 10/25/[ADDRESS_1028261] of statistical outliers on the analysis. Regarding undetectable biomarker values, sCD14 had 3.7% missing data (n=2), IL-6 had 35% missing data (n=19), IL-10 had 5.6% missing data (n=3), LBP had 1.8% missing data (n=1), and MCP-1 had 5.6% missing data (n=3). There were no undetectable biomarker values for IL-8, sCD163, or TNF-a. Regarding outlier exclusions, IL-[ADDRESS_1028262] of alcohol use variables (assessed at Visit 1, Visit 3, and Visit 4) as time-varying covariates, specifically, number of heavy drinking days, total number of drinking days in, total number of standard drinks, and days since last drink. Self-reported alcohol use variables were treated as continuous. Self-reported drinking variables were assessed for collinearity and included in the final model if they met an acceptable variance inflation factor (VIF) <10. Total number of standard drinks was dropped from the final model due to high VIF.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_750982], there were too few females to test for this effect, and sex was not included in models. Models were specified to identify participant as the subject variable and visit number (1, 3, and 4) as the repeated measure, and with fixed slope and intercept. An autoregressive variance-covariance structure was selected for optimal model fit based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). In the primary model (Model 1), the trajectory of biomarker concentrations before, during, and after probiotic use were examined, with alcohol variables (number of heavy drinking days, number of drinking days, and days since last drinks) included as time-varying covariates. In Model 1, biomarker 
concentrations below the threshold of detectability were treated as missing data in analyses. Of note, maximum likelihood estimation as applied in the linear mixed model approach is able to handle missing data without excluding cases listwise or imputing data, thus making full use of the available data and minimizing bias in parameter estimates (Baraldi & Enders, 2010). To assess for non-linear changes in biomarker concentrations, a secondary model (Model 2) was tested to include a quadratic effect of time for the biomarker outcomes. Finally, a sensitivity analysis model (Model 3) was tested to assess for the effect of data missing at random. In Model 3, data below the detectability threshold of the assay (i.e., missing) were imputed at half the value of the threshold per the manufacturer. All analyses in this paper were conducted using SAS software, version 9.4 for Windows (SAS Institute, Cary NC.)  