  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not di sclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530]   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A single -center, p hase IV,  randomized, prospective s tudy  investigating the efficacy of 
various w ound closure device s in reducing postoperative wound complications  
 
 
 
 
 
Regulatory Sponsor:  
 
Co-Investigators:  Ran Schwarzkopf, MD  
William Long, MD  
Jonathan Vigdorchik, MD  
 
NYULMC Orthopaedic Surgery  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_508732]  
[ADDRESS_657456]:  Zipper wound closure device , Monocryl + Dermabond, 
Polyester mesh + Dermabond  
Protocol Number:  s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 1/10/17  
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Research Protocol  

A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices 
in reducing postoperative wound complications   Page ii 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as 
authorized in writing by [CONTACT_508738]:  12/15/[ADDRESS_657457] of Abbreviations  
 
 
TJA- Total joint arthroplasty  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 1 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  Study Summary  
Title  A single -center, p hase IV,  randomized, prospective s tudy 
investigating the efficacy of various wound c losure device s in 
reducing postoperative wound complications   
Short Title  Assessing various wound closure techniques; RCT  
Protocol Number  i16-[ZIP_CODE]  
Phase  4 
Methodology  Randomized, contr ol 
Study Duration  7 months  
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  To determine the efficacy of the experimental wound closure device in 
regards to reducing wound complications and costs  
Number of Subjects  [ADDRESS_657458] superficial layer 
of skin following a joint arthroplasty  
Duration of 
administration  Applied one -time to close the wound following joint arthroplasty. This 
device will be applied for up to 2-3 weeks  
Reference therapy  Experimental treatment  will be compared to two groups: 1) Monocryl + 
Dermabond 2) Polyester mesh + Dermabond  
Statistical 
Methodology  Odd ratios will be used to determine which wound closure device is at 
higher risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a wound complication  
 
  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 2 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  Introduction  
1.1 Background  
 
Today’s healthcare climate continues to emphasize the need for high-quality of care while minimizing the financial burdens of the 
patient, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], and payer. This is particularly relevant in total joint arthroplasty (TJA) as payment models are shifting toward 
bundled, pay -for-performance epi[INVESTIGATOR_294337], [1, 2] and away from the current plan of payments for each separate service provided. 
Given that the demands for TJA are projected to increase substantially for decades to come, [3] it is imperative to identify potential 
factors that may improve clinical outcomes, so that ultimately, costs per epi[INVESTIGATOR_508733].  
One such area of improvement involves gaining a better understanding of the optimal  wound closure technique following TJA. 
Specifically, two measures, wound closure times and surgical outcomes, have been the focus of prior studies as they have been  closely 
associated with avoidable healthcare expenditures. Common complications of failed wound closures include infection, dehiscence, 
edema, and arthrofibrosis. [4-15] Not only do these failures lead to exorbitant costs through poorer outcomes (i.e. delayed progress in 
physical therapy, increased length of stay, incr eased readmission, and reduced patient satisfaction), they are also known to have a 
significant impact on the overall long -term health of the patient.   
The three common options for wound closure following TJA include sutures, staples, and skin adhesives. While conventional sutures 
and staples have been the mainstay techniques in TJA for some time, the barbed suture is a newer technique that has emerged a s a 
popular option within the last decade. Reported advantages of this technique include the need for le ss material per incision, lower 
closure costs, shorter length of closure time, and a knotless application of the suture. [8-11, 16] Outcomes in regards to complications 
have bee n variable when compared to conventional sutures in TJA. [8-11] The skin adhesive that is most commonly used today 
includes a 2 -octyl cyanoacrylate (OCA), hi gh-viscosity, flexible glue. [7, 17] This technique has been associated with decreased wound 
closure times, [18] high satisfactory cosmetic results, [17, 19] and surgical outcomes comparable to conventional sutures. [17, 20] Other 
newer techniques such as the zipper technique [21] and variations of the OCA skin adhesives have also been sources of 
experimentation.  
Wound closure techniques have been well -studied in a variety of surgical specialties, however, the level of evidence reported in the 
literature in regards to TJA is scarce. Thus, the current randomized, control trial study aims to investigate the periopera tive outcomes 
and costs of various wound closure techniques including zipper technology , monocryl suture plus Dermabond, and polyester plus 
Dermabond wound closure techniques. The zipper wound technology is a new wound closure device that is an alternative  to the 
commonly used conventional staples and sutures. The device acts like a scaffold to stabilize the adjacent sides of a wound in order to 
minimize forces that can disrupt normal healing of the skin. Monocryl suture plus Dermabond is a commonly used co mbination of 
wound closure techniques today. Finally, the polyester plus Dermabond closure techniques co mbines the OCA topi[INVESTIGATOR_508734] a flexible, self -adhesive polyester mesh that has proven to reduce wound cosure times and have a significant g reater skin holding 
strength than skin staples or subcuticular sutures in one study. Although there have been prior studies measuring the efficac y of these 
closure techniques individually, none have compared these three particular ones following TJA. Furth ermore, in order to provide the 
highest level of evidence as possible for the study, it will be conducted in a randomized fashion.  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 3 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657459] reduction  for the 
zipper technology versus the other two closure techniques.  
 
 
1.3 Clinical Data to Date  
A recent meta -analysis [22] compared this surgical zipper technique to conventional sutures in closing surgical wounds based on [ADDRESS_657460] benef it from agreeing to participa te in this study. It is  hoped that  the knowledge gained will be of benefit  to 
others in the future.  
1.4 Primary and secondary objectives:  
Primary objective : to identify the rate of complications associated with each  
 type of wound closure technique. Some of these complications will include infe ction, abscess formation, dehiscence, prolonged 
drainage, allergic reactions, among others.  
Secondary objective : to determine the cost effectiveness of each of these wound closure techniques, which will be calculated by [CONTACT_508739], total lengths of operation, and postoperative complications.  
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 4 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657461] effective wound closure technique.   
 
2.4 Inclusion Cri teria  
Following IRB approval, all patients who are scheduled for joint arthroplasty at NYULMC will be eligible to take part in this  research 
study. Inclusion criteria includes:  
• All patients ≥18 years of age treated with joint replacement surgery at our in stitution  
• Patients who are willing to participate in post -operative surveys  
2.5 Exclusion Criteria  
• Treatment of total joint replacement surgery at an outside institution  
• Patients younger than 18  
• Pregnant women, prisoners, adults unable to consent.  
Vulnerable Subjects: No vul nerable subj ects will be in cluded within this  study  
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 5 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657462] Recruitment and Screening  
All participants will be initially identified by [CONTACT_508740] a large patient  population scheduled for joint arthroplasty. 
This study will be discussed with eligible patients by [CONTACT_508741] -operative clinic visits. Research assistants 
working for the orthopaedics department will meet with patients during their pre -op visit to explain t he study and obtain written 
informed consent using the IRB -approved consent form . A study log of consented patients will be maintained in a de -identified 
manner.    
 
3 Study Treatment   
3.1 Description  
The zipper wound technology is a new wound closure device that is an alternative to the commonly used conventional staples and 
sutures. The device acts like a scaffold to stabilize the adjacent sides of a wound  in order to minimize forces that can disrupt 
normal healing of the skin.  The other treatment groups include monocryl + Dermabond (conventional sutures and skin 
adhesive glue) and polyester mesh + Dermabond.  All products have been FDA approved.  
3.[ADDRESS_657463] of practice other than the randomization  process will be 
implemented.   
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 6 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657464] system (Epic). 
At this time, surgeon research assistant  will ask the patient if they would like to be involved in the study. If consent to 
participate in the study is given, the surgeon will go ahead with the randomization process, which will dictate what type of 
wound closure device will be used at the time of the surgery. All of the wound devices are currently being used at the 
institution. The study will follow normal standard of care for the applic ation of these devices. The only different will be the 
randomization process that will take place prior to the surgery.  Data will be collected regarding the primary outcomes at the 
time of discharge as well as at their normally scheduled postoperative visi ts. Patients will be followed up to their 3rd 
postoperative visit. Prior to discharge, a plastic surgeon, who will be blinded to the type of wound closure technique that t he 
patient received, will assess the wound for the quality of wound healing. At their  postoperative visits, the physician will 
document whether a complication had occurred. Patients will also be given patient -reported outcome questionnaires, including 
VAS scores and HWES, that will measure the level of satisfaction of their wound healing a t the time of these visits.     
 
The following table shows the visits and procedures/ observational data collection that will occur during the study:  
 
Activity  Pre-
operative 
assessment   Date of 
surgery  Prior to 
discharge  Postop 
visit #1  Postop 
visit #2  Postop visit #[ADDRESS_657465] of   X X X X 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 7 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor   
 
5 Statistical Plan  
5.1 Sample Size Determination  
Based on an 80% power analysis, 
incidence rates reported from past 
studies, and a ratio of 1:1:[ADDRESS_657466] is scheduled 
to take a total of 7 months. It is 
estimated that 50% of all patients 
will be approached to be consented 
from these 700 patients  (a total of 350 patients will b e enrolled to reach the target number of participants) , and an 
estimated 60% of these patients will agree to follow through with the study.   
5.[ADDRESS_657467]  effective wound closure 
technique.   
 complications  
Perioperative 
costs – cost of 
supplies, time 
to wound 
closure, 
operative 
times, length 
of stay, 
readmissions   X X    
Randomization   X     
Study 
treatment 
dispensation   X     
Subject Survey  
– VAS score, 
HWES score    X X X X 
       
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 8 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor   
6 Safety and Adverse Events  
6.1 Definitions  
Unanticipated Problems Involving Risk to Subjects or Others  
Any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
• Unexpected in nature, severity, or frequency   (i.e. not described in study -related documents such as the IRB -approved protocol 
or consent form, the investigators brochure, etc)  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research  (i.e. possibly related means there is a reasonable possibility that the 
incident experience, or outcome may have been caused by [CONTACT_3459])  
• Suggests that the research places subjects or others at greater risk of harm  (including physical, psychological, economic, or 
social harm).  
 
Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity during the course of the study.  
Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as adverse events.  Abnormal results o f diagnostic procedures are considered to be 
adverse events if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by [CONTACT_15369] -serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospi [INVESTIGATOR_4408]  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 9 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657468] adminis tration of study treatment.   
 
Preexisting Condition  
A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting condition should be recorded as an a dverse event 
if the frequency, intensity, or the character of the condition wor sens during the study period.  
 
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality should be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the study,  any new 
clinically significant findings/abnormalities that me et the definition of an adverse event must also be recorded and documented as an 
adverse event.   
 
Post-study Adverse Event  
All unresolved adverse events should be followed by [CONTACT_1374], the subject is lost to fo llow-up, or 
the adverse event is otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled visit, the investigator should instruct each subject t o report any 
subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, believes might reasonably be related to participat ion in this 
study.  The investigator should notify the study sponsor of any death or adverse event occurring at any ti me after a subject has 
discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably be related to this study.  The sponsor should also be noti fied if the 
investigator should become aware of the development of cancer or of a congenital anomaly in a su bsequently conceived offspring of a 
subject that has participated in this study.  
 
Abnormal Laboratory Values  
A clinical laboratory abnormality should be documented as an adverse event if any one of the following  conditions is met:   
• The laboratory abnormal ity is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm the abnormality  
• The abnormality suggests a disease and/or organ toxicity  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 10 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  • The abnormality is of a degree that requires active management; e.g. change of dose, discontinuation of the drug, more freque nt 
follow -up assessments, further diagnostic investigation, etc.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_286541] a serious  adverse 
event unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition responsible for surgery should be documented as an 
adverse event if the condition meets the criteria for and adverse event.   
 
Neither the condition, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], prolonged hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_059], nor surgery are reported as an adverse event in the following 
circumstances:  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14841] a preexisting condition.  Sur gery 
should not be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the purpose of the surgery was elective or diagnostic and the 
outcome was uneventful.  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14842].  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_508735], unless it is a worsening or increase in 
frequency of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14844].  
6.[ADDRESS_657469] seek information on adverse events by [CONTACT_5147], as appropriate, 
by [CONTACT_5148].  Information on all adverse events should be recorded immediately in the source document, and also in the 
appropriate adverse event module of the c ase report form (CRF).  All clearly related signs, symptoms, and abnormal diagnostic 
procedures results should recorded in the source document, though should be grouped under one diagnosis.  
 
All adverse events occurring during the study period must be reco rded.  The clinical course of each event should be followed until 
resolution, stabilization, or until it has been determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.  Serio us adverse 
events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up to determine the final outcome.  Any serious adverse 
event that occurs after the study period and is considered to be possibly related to the study treatment or study participati on should be 
recorded and reported immediately.  
6.[ADDRESS_657470] be reported are those that are:  
• related to study participation,  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 11 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  • unexpected, and  
• serious or involve risks to subjects or others  
   
 
For Narrative Reports of Safety Events  
If the report is supplied as a narrative, the minimum necessary information to be provided at the time of the initial report includes:  
• Study identifier  
• Study Center  
• Subject number  
• A description of the event  
• Date of onset  • Current status  
• Whether study treatment was discontinued  
• The reason why the event is class ified as 
serious  
• Investigator assessment of the association 
between the event and study treatment  
6.3.1 Investigator reporting: notifying the IRB  
Federal regulations require timely reporting by [CONTACT_508742] o r 
others .  The following describes the NYULMC IRB reporting requirements, though  Investigators at participating sites are responsible 
for meeting the specific requirements of their IRB of record.  
 
Report Promptly, but no later than 5 working days:  
Researchers are required to submit reports of the following problems promptly but  no later than  5 working days from the time the 
investigator becomes aware of the event:  
• Unanticipated problems including ad verse events  that are unexpected and related  
– Unexpected : An event is “unexpected” when its specificity and severity are not accurately reflected in the protocol -related 
documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol, any applicable investigator broc hure, and the current IRB -
approved informed consent document and other relevant sources of information, such as product labeling and package 
inserts.  
– Related to the research procedures : An event is related to the research procedures  if in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_508736], the event was more likely than not to be caused by [CONTACT_28821].  
– Harmful : either caused harm to subjects or others, or placed them at increased risk  
 
Other Reportable events:  
The foll owing events also require prompt reporting to the IRB, though  no later than  5 working days : 
• Complaint of a research subject  when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or the complaint cannot be resolved by [CONTACT_5055].  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 12 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  • Protocol deviations or violations  (includes intentional and accidental/ unintentional deviations from the IRB approved protocol) 
for any of the followin g situations:  
– one or more participants were placed at increased risk of harm   
– the event has the potential to occur again  
– the deviation was necessary to protect a subject from immediate harm  
• Breach of confidentiality  
• Incarceration of a participant  when the research was not previously approved under Subpart C and the investigator believes it 
is in the best interest of the subject to remain on the study.  
• New Information indicating a change to the risks or potential benefits  of the research, in terms of severity or frequency. (e.g. 
analysis indicates lower -than-expected response rate or a more severe or frequent side effect; Other research finds arm of study 
has no therapeutic value; FDA labeling change or withdrawal from mar ket) 
 
Reporting Process  
The reportable events noted above will be reported to the IRB using the form: “Reportable Event Form” or as a written report of the 
event (including a description of the event with information regarding its fulfillment of the above criteria, follow -up/resolution and 
need for revision to consent form and/or other study documentation).  
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_17236]’s study fil e. 
 
Data and Safety Monito ring Plan  
[ADDRESS_657471] of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those regulations require a sig ned subject authorization informing the subject 
of the following:  
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 13 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  • What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information   
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by [CONTACT_5151], retains the ability  to use all 
information collected prior to the revocati on of subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use 
PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the en d of their 
scheduled study period.  
7.[ADDRESS_657472] es of these original documents, and 
data records include: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluat ion 
checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copi[INVESTIGATOR_014] o r transcriptions certified after verification 
as being accurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records 
kept at the pharmacy, at the laboratories, and at medico -technical department s involved in the clinical trial.  
7.4 Case Report Forms  
The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for the study.  All data requested on the CRF must  be 
recorded.  All missing data must be explained.  If a space on the CRF is left blank because the procedure was not done or the question 
was not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  All entries should be printe d legibly in 
black ink.  If any entry error has been made, to correct  such an error, draw a single straight line through the incorrect entry and enter 
the correct data above it.  All such changes must be initialed and dated.  DO NOT ERASE OR WHITE OUT ERRORS.  For 
clarification of illegible or uncertain entries, print the c larification above the item, then initial and date it.  
 
7.[ADDRESS_657473] ensure that all Research Data is maintained in accordance with this Pol icy for 
the longer of (i) three (3) years after the final  project close -out or (ii) six (6) years after any reporting, publication, presentation, or use 
in any grant application by [CONTACT_508743], or self -citation of the same in such manner that may be of benefit to 
such researcher . 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 14 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  8 Data an d Safety Monitoring Plan  
8.1 Data and Study Monitoring Plan  
The Investigator will allocate adequate time to monitor the  activities  of the study .  The Investigator will ensure that the monitor or 
other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given access to all the above noted study -related documents and study related 
facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the monitoring visit.  The Investigator is able 
to stop the study whenever they see fit . Howev er, this is not anticipated as the level of safety associated with the study has minimal to 
no differences in risk compared to the normal standard of care.  Written reports will be submitted to the IRB if any concerns regarding 
the monitoring plan arise. To further ensure safety, the other study members will monitor the participants on an ongoing basis. Each 
member will be trained in the definition, monitoring, and reporting of adverse events, as well as both anticipated and  unant icipated 
problems.  
 
Study d ata and safety monitoring will focus on several areas and will be periodically reviewed to ensure that the study is meeting 
study expectations. These areas will be reviewed biweekly:  
- Safety – to assess the mechanisms used to protect the safety and privac y of the study participants as well as the extent and magnitude 
of adverse events.  
 - Performance – to assess performance with respect to participant recruitment, retention, and follow -up, Case Report Form (CRF) 
tracking, protocol adherence, and quality of  data 
- Intervention effects – to assess whether the study should continue based on safety and efficacy data (if applicable).  
 
8.2 Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits  as frequently as necessary , and inspections  by [CONTACT_1201], the sponsor, 
government regulatory bodies, and University compliance and quality assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g. sou rce 
documents, regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator wil l ensure the capability for 
inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  Written reports will be submitted to the 
IRB if any concerns regarding auditing and/or inspection arise.  
 
Participation as an inves tigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by [CONTACT_16137].  
9 Ethical Considerations  
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 15 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657474] (IRB ) in agreement with 
local legal prescriptions, for formal approval of the study conduct.  The decision of the IRB concerning the conduct of the study will 
be made in writing to the investigator and a copy of this decision will be provided to the sponsor befo re commencement of this study.  
The investigator should provide a list of IRB members and their affiliate to the sponsor.  
 
All subjects for this study will be provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient information for su bjects t o 
make an informed decision about their participation in  this study. This consent form will be submitted with the protocol for review and 
approval by [CONTACT_14884].  The formal consent of a subject, using the IRB-approved consent form, must be obta ined before 
that subject undergoes any study procedure.  The consent form must be signed by [CONTACT_17257], and the 
investigator -designated research professional obtaining the consent.  
 
In addition, it will describe who will obtain consent and how the process of informed consent will be structured to be conducive to 
rational and thoughtful decision making by [CONTACT_423]/subject’s legally authorized representative.  If children and/ or cognitively 
impaired adults will be su bjects, include a specific plan to assess comprehension during assent or the subject’s agreement  Individuals 
who are authorized to obtain consent must be listed on the protocol (or FDA form 1572) and consent form document. If necessar y to 
use ‘Auditor/Witn ess’ and/or translator, these roles would be described in this section.  
Include a plan for assessing subject capacity in cognitively impaired subjects. Describe the anticipated degree of impairment  relative 
to their ability to consent and the anticipated d irect benefits to the subjects.  
 
[ADDRESS_657475] with this study (patent ownership, royalties, or financial gain greater than the minimum 
allowable by [CONTACT_1385], etc.) must have th e conflict reviewed by a properly constituted Conflict of Interest Committee with a 
Committee -sanctioned conflict management plan that has been reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_341460].  All NYULMC  investigators will follow the applicable University conflict of interest policies.  
 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 16 
Version: 1/10/[ADDRESS_657476] results an d all data derived 
from the study.  
12 References  
1. Iorio, R., et al., Early Results of Medicare's Bundled Payment Initiative for a 90 -Day Total Joint Arthroplasty Epi[INVESTIGATOR_508737].  
J Arthroplasty, 2016. 31(2): p. 343 -50. 
2. Nichols, C.I. and  J.G. Vose, Clinical Outcomes and Costs Within 90 Days of Primary or Revision Total Joint Arthroplasty.  J 
Arthroplasty, 2016. 31(7): p. 1400 -1406.e3.  
3. Kurtz, S., et al., Projections of primary and revision hip and knee arthroplasty in the [LOCATION_002] f rom 2005 to 2030.  J Bone 
Joint Surg Am, 2007. 89(4): p. 780 -5. 
4. Shetty, A.A., et al., Comparing wound complication rates following closure of hip wounds with metallic skin staples or 
subcuticular vicryl suture: a prospective randomised trial.  J Orthop Su rg (Hong Kong), 2004. 12(2): p. 191 -3. 
5. Livesey, C., et al., Skin closure after total hip replacement: a randomised controlled trial of skin adhesive versus surgical 
staples.  J Bone Joint Surg Br, 2009. 91(6): p. [ADDRESS_657477]: Running Subcuticular Closure Enables the Most Robust Perfusion After 
TKA: A Randomized Clinical Trial.  Clin Orthop Relat Res, 2016. 474(1): p. 47 -56. 
7. Khan, R.J., et al., A comparison of three methods of wound closure following arthro plasty: a prospective, randomised, 
controlled trial.  J Bone Joint Surg Br, 2006. 88(2): p. 238 -42. 
8. Campbell, A.L., et al., Superficial wound closure complications with barbed sutures following knee arthroplasty.  J 
Arthroplasty, 2014. 29(5): p. [ADDRESS_657478] analysis of barbed suture for closure in TKA.  
Clin Orthop Relat Res, 2012. 470(1): p. [ADDRESS_657479] sutures for closure in total knee arthroplasty: a multicenter prospective 
randomized trial.  J Arthroplasty, 2014. 29([ADDRESS_657480]): p. 135 -8. 
A single -center, phase IV, randomized, prospective study investigating the efficacy of various wound closure devices in reducing posto perative wound 
complications   Page 17 
Version: 1/10/17  
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the pro perty of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_3433] e study sponsor  11. Smith, E.L., et al., Barbed versus traditional sutures: closure time, cost, and wound related outcom es in total joint 
arthroplasty.  J Arthroplasty, 2014. 29(2): p. 283 -7. 
12. Sah, A.P., Is There an Advantage to Knotless Barbed Suture in TKA Wound Closure? A Randomized Trial in Simultaneous 
Bilateral TKAs.  Clin Orthop Relat Res, 2015. 473(6): p. 2019 -27. 
13. Ting, N.T., et al., Use of knotless suture for closure of total hip and knee arthroplasties: a prospective, randomized clinical 
trial.  J Arthroplasty, 2012. 27(10): p. 1783 -8. 
14. Eggers, M.D., L. Fang,  and D.R. Lionberger, A comparison of wound closure techniques for total knee arthroplasty.  J 
Arthroplasty, 2011. 26(8): p. 1251 -8.e1-4. 
15. Maheshwari, A.V., et al., Barbed sutures in total knee arthroplasty: are these safe, efficacious, and cost -effectiv e? J Knee 
Surg, 2015. 28(2): p. 151 -6. 
16. Patri, P., et al., V-Loc, a new wound closure device for peritoneal closure --is it safe? A comparative study of different 
peritoneal closure systems.  Surg Innov, 2011. 18(2): p. [ADDRESS_657481] Reconstr Surg, 1998. 
102(6): p. 2209 -19. 
18. Singer, A.J., et al., Closure of lacerations and incisions with octylcyanoacrylate: a multicenter randomized controlled trial.  
Surger y, 2002. 131(3): p. 270 -6. 
19. Gennari, R., et al., A prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial of tissue adhesive (2 -octylcyanoacrylate) versus 
standard wound closure in breast surgery.  Surgery, 2004. 136(3): p. [ADDRESS_657482] Surg, 1999. 1(4): p. 292 -6. 
21. Carcoforo, P., et al., [Atraumatic skin closure with Fasterz ip]. G Chir, 1996. 17(1-2): p. 55 -8. 
22. Chen, D., et al., Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis of Surgical Zipper Technique versus Intracutaneous Sutures for the 
Closing of Surgical Incision.  PLoS One, 2016. 11(9): p. e0162471.  
 
 