Version 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 1 of 11  PROTOCOL TITLE:  
 
Examine the Feasibility and Acceptability of Project Support  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_891872] 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 2 of 11    
1.0 Objectives  / Specific Aims  
• Examine the feasibility and acceptability of delivering Project Support via telehealth.  
Conduct a mixed -methods proof -of-concept pi[INVESTIGATOR_124250] n = 30 families waiting 
for trauma -focused services.  
• Hypothesis (1) Project Support will be feasible and acceptable as evidenced by 
[CONTACT_891881], retention at post assessment, engagement, fidelity, and 
program satisfaction.  
• Hypothesis (2) participants who receive Project Support will report im provements in 
supportive parenting, parenting self -efficacy, hopefulness, and child mental health 
symptoms.  
2.[ADDRESS_1248750] the effects of trauma; 
however, many caregivers lack the self -efficacy and skills to effectively support their child, 
or struggle to apply these skills during the stressful time following trauma. Unfortunately, 
programs designed for caregivers following child trauma are scarce. Existing interventions 
are lengthy (las ting 8 -20 sessions) and result in families placed on long waitlists. This 
proposal asserts the adverse effects of child trauma can be interrupted though a brief 
intervention (the Project Support Positive Parenting Module) that enhances supportive 
parenting  – delivered via telehealth to families on waitlists for trauma -focused services.  
The objective is to examine the telehealth delivery of the Project Support Positive 
Parenting Module  (Project Support)  among families waiting for trauma -focused services. 
Project Support uses didactic instruction to teach caregivers how to listen to and comfort 
their child. In my preliminary work, I found this intervention can be delivered by 
[CONTACT_87060], improve parenting self -efficacy and emotional support, and increa se 
later trauma -focused treatment attendance  (Rancher et al., 2023) . While it shares some 
features of stepped care models, Project Support is the only brief, empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] -supported 
program designed to enhance parenting and engagement following child trauma.  
Long -term, this research will generate an effective intervention that addresses the needs of 
families affected by [CONTACT_278066], which can be scaled up to address other public health 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_891873].  
3.0 Intervent ion to be studied (if applicable)  
 
This research involves a proof -of-concept pi[INVESTIGATOR_891874] -focused services. The Project Support Positive Parenting Module is a subset of a 
longer, efficacious parenting intervention, Project Support, that uses didactic, tailored instruction 
to teach caregivers how to attentively listen to and comfort their child  (Jourile s et al.  2018 , 
Rancher et al., 2021) . The core components of the intervention are outlined in Table 1.  
 
 
 
Version 4; 5/29/[ADDRESS_1248751] Support Positive Parenting Module Components  
Program 
Components  Short -term 
Objectives  Midterm 
Objectives  Long -term 
Goals  
Psychoeducation 
on the importance 
of listening to and 
comforting your 
child Increase 
knowledge about 
parent -child 
communication  Increase 
caregiver’s 
motivation for 
spending time 
listening to 
and 
comforting 
their child  Improve 
caregiver 
emotional 
support  
 
Handouts and 
discussion of 
“Do’s” and 
“Don’ts” for the 
Listening and 
Comforting skills  Increase 
knowledge and 
awareness of 
skills  Increase 
supportive 
and 
responsive 
parenting 
behaviors  Improve 
parenting 
self-
efficacy  
 
Didactic 
instruction and 
role-play practice 
with service 
provider  Increase efficacy 
and ability to use 
listening and 
comforting skills  Increase the 
time and 
frequency the 
caregiver 
spends 
listening to 
and 
comforting 
their child  Decrease 
child 
adjustment 
problems  
After mastery of 
skills is obtained 
with provider, use 
of skill with child  Increase efficacy 
and ability to use 
listening and 
comforting skills 
with child  
   
Caregivers will receive up to four, 60 - to 90 -minute sessions focused on teaching two parenting 
skills – attentive listening and comforting. Attentive listening involves providing accurate and 
timely responses to show interest and keep the child engaged until they are ready to end the 
conversation. This skill involves both verb al and nonverbal listening behaviors including requests 
for clarification, reflecting what the child is saying, reflecting feelings, and simple verbal 
responses to encourage conversation (e.g., “Interesting!”). Comforting involves using the same 
attentive listening skills when the child is upset or distressed. Effective mastery of the listening 
and comforting skills also requires caregivers to withhold any non -listening or non -comforting 
responses, such as interruptions, accusations, judgements, criticisms,  or dismissive gestures.  
 
The program is individually tailored to the caregiver’s parenting abilities: caregivers with stronger 
skills, or those who mastered the skills more quickly, could complete the program in less time 
(i.e., fewer sessions) than those  who need more time to master implementation of the skills. 
Service providers educate caregivers about the skills, using handouts to summarize their purpose 
and correct use; then engage in an iterative process of modeling the skills, engaging the caregiver s 
in behavioral practice using the skills; and provide stepped, tailored, supportive feedback designed 
to help caregivers gain mastery. Most session time is focused on behavioral practice and feedback, 
with caregivers learning and mastering the skills incr ementally through role -plays with the service 
provider (for further refinement and feedback) and the child (for observation and determination of 
mastery). Caregivers are deemed to have met mastery if they can provide at least six appropriate 
listening and/ or comforting responses and refrain from providing any non -listening/non -
comforting responses during a [ADDRESS_1248752] received the full “dosage” of the intervention.  
 
Previous randomized -controlled trials  conducted by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_891875] (Rancher, McDonald, Cook, et al., 2023; Rancher, McDonald, Ostner, et al., 2023).  have 
Version 4; 5/29/[ADDRESS_1248753] for trauma -focused services.  
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  (if ap plicable)  
• N/A 
 
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria / Study Population  
• Participants will be screened for eligibility during an initial phone call from a 
member of the research team.  
• Inclusion Criteria:  
(1) Family is seeking trauma -focused services for their child as measured by [CONTACT_891882];  
(2) Child is between 5 – 12 years old;  
(3) Caregiver agreed to be contact[CONTACT_891883];  
(4) Caregiver and child can communicate in either English ; 
(5) Child has been living with caregiver for at the last 6 months o r longer ; 
(6) Family is able to participate in services delivered via telehealth.  
• Exclusion Criteria:  
(1) Child or caregiver has a diagnosis that would impair their ability to participate 
in or benefit from services (e.g., traumatic brain injury, developmental 
disability, psychosis);  
(2) Child is in Foster Care or Department of Social Services custody;  
(3) The caregiver is unwilling or unable to give informed consent and/or the child 
is unwilling and unable to give assent . 
• We plan to include children in th e present study as we are explicitly interested in 
evaluating a parenting intervention for families of school -aged children on the waitlist 
for trauma -focused services.  
6.0 Number of Subjects  
Total N = 30 child and caregiver pairs  
7.0 Setting  
• All procedures will take place remotely via telehealth.  
8.0 Recruitment Methods  
• Potential participants will be contact[CONTACT_48671] a member of the research team.  
Version 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 5 of 11  • Potential participants will be identified from a review of the waitlist at the trauma 
ment al health clinic (e.g., National Crime Victims Center). The waitlist will provide 
initial information on child age and whether the family was willing to be contact[CONTACT_891884].  
• Research team members will continuously monitor the  waitlist for potential 
participants.  
• Research team members will verbally describe the research study during a phone call 
with potential participants. This recruitment script and phone screen are attached in 
the eIRB application.  
9.0 Consent Process  
We w ill be obtaining informed consent  and assent . 
• We will collect electronic consent and assent remotely (e.g., at the subject’s home or 
another convenient venue) since all study procedures will take place remotely.  
• The consent and assent process will take place in a private setting.  
• Adult subjects will be given the opportunity to read the consent a nd ask questions 
before signing the consent.  
• The study involves children between ages 5 -12 years old, however, consistent with 
HRPP Section 8.5 – Research Involve Children, only c hild subjects aged [ADDRESS_1248754] the 
assent form read aloud to them and will be given the opportunity to ask questions 
before signing the assent form.  
• Parental permission will be obtained by [CONTACT_891885]. Only  for those adult caregivers who provide consent will we ask 
their child to provide assent.  
• Children in the current study will not reach the age of majority during the study, so 
they will not complete any re -consent procedures.   
• Participants will provide a n electronic signature [CONTACT_891891] . 
A member of the research team is a NEXUS Research Coordinator (Emma McLeod) 
at MUSC SCTR and will facilitate accurate use of this eConsent feature.  
• Participants will be provided a copy of the signed  consent via email. Adult caregivers 
will also receive a copy of their child’s assent via email.  
 
10.0 Study Design  / Methods  
• All participants (caregivers and children) will complete a baseline survey assessment 
on demographics, parenting behaviors, and mental health symptoms (surveys are 
attached in the eIRB application.  
• All caregivers will then receive the Project Support inte rvention (described above in 
“Intervention to be Studied”). Briefly this entails up to four 60 -minute live sessions 
focused on teaching caregivers how to listen to and comfort their child. Participants 
will receive one -on-one didactic instruction and feedb ack on their real-time use of the 
skills in role -plays with a treatment provider . The caregiver and provider will meet 
on a videoconferencing platform (e.g., MUSC COM licensed Zoom). In the role -
Version 4; 5/29/[ADDRESS_1248755] demonstrates how to use the skill in  a brief example of typi[INVESTIGATOR_891876]. In these examples the caregiver takes on 
the role of their child and the provider takes on the role of the caregiver. 
Subsequently the caregiver and provider switch roles so the careg iver has an 
opportunity to practice executing the skill.  The provider helps the caregiver process 
their experience of each role -play and provides real -time, targeted feedback to help 
the caregiver develop their ability to use the skills.  
• Project Support s essions will be recorded to facilitate coding of treatment fidelity and 
to provide ongoing training in group supervision.  
• Approximately 4 -6 weeks after the baseline assessment, all participants (caregivers 
and children) will complete a post -test survey ass essment. This will also include 
measures of service satisfaction and acceptability of the Project Support intervention.  
• Both the baseline and post -test survey assessments should take less than 30 minutes 
to complete.  
• We anticipate participation time will  be up to [ADDRESS_1248756].  
• All services and data collection will take place remotely, via telehealth an d a secure 
web-based platform . Specifically, Project Support intervention sessions will be held 
using a HIPAA -compliant videoconferencing platform (e.g., MUSC COM licensed 
Zoom). Surveys will be administered using REDCap survey software.  
• Caregivers will be  invited to complete the survey assessments independently. 
Research staff will be available to read items aloud via video conferencing or phone 
to ensure comprehension and attention. Research staff will read items aloud to child 
participants.  
• Participant f low through the study is described in Figure 1.  
Version 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 7 of 11   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.0 Specimen Collection and Banking  (if applicable)  
N/A 
12.0 Data Management   
• The aim of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_891877]; therefore, 
sample size was determined for pragmatic reasons as advocated by [CONTACT_891886] (2008). 
With 30 participants, I will be able to estimate proportions with a 95% Confidence 
Interval of (.02, .28) and (.14, .46) for values of the true population proportion (p) of 
0.15 and 0.30, respectively (Hertzog, 2008) . I used Kraemer’s guidelines (Kraemer, 
2010) to identify appropriate benchmarks for dissemination feasibility:  
▪ Recruitment: Proportion of caregivers who agree to participate relative 
to the number approached. I will consider it successful if participation  
is > 60% of approached families.  
▪ Retention: Proportion of participants who complete both assessments 
vs. only the baseline assessment. I will consider it successful if > 70% 
of participants are retained for the post -test assessment.  
▪ Engagement: Participa tion in the Project Support treatment sessions. I 
will consider it successful if > 75% of participants attend 1+ treatment 
session.  
• To examine trends in supportive parenting, parenting self -efficacy, hopefulness, and 
child mental health symptoms I will use  multilevel modeling (MLM). Consistent with 
an intent -to-treat approach, MLM includes all participants, regardless of missing data. 
Further MLM can be used in samples as small as 10 participants and still produce 
unbiased coefficient estimates (Maas & Hox,  2005). I will conduct separate analyses 
for each of the outcome variables and examine the effect of time – the change in 
outcome from baseline to post -test – as a preliminary test of intervention effect.  
• All data (Project Support sessions and survey data ) will be stored via a password 
protected secure server maintained by [CONTACT_891887] a minimum of six years, per MUSC 
Baseline Assessment  
Project Suppor t 
Post-test  Assessment  
[ADDRESS_1248757] for  
trauma -focused services  
Begin trauma -focused services  
Version 4; 5/29/[ADDRESS_1248758] access to study 
information.  
 
13.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of Subjects  (if applicable)  
The present study was funded by [CONTACT_133812]. This section is based on the recommendations in 
NICHD’s “Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) Policies for Extramural Clinical Trials and 
Clinical Research.” (https://www.nichd.nih.gov/sites/default/files/inline -
files/NICHD_DSM_Policy_2020.pdf) .  
Overall Summary  
The purpose of this study is to examine the telehealth delivery of a brief parenting 
intervention (Project Support) for caregivers on the waitlist for trauma -focused services for 
their child. I will conduct a proof -of-concept pi[INVESTIGATOR_891878] n = 30 caregivers. The sample will be recruited from 
agencies provid ing services to children exposed to trauma  (e.g., MUSC National Crime 
Victims Center) . 
The Principal Investigator  (PI), [CONTACT_891892], will be responsible for monitoring the safety 
and efficacy of this study, executing the Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM) pl an, and 
complying with the reporting requirements. [CONTACT_891892] will provide a summary of the 
DSM report to NICHD on an annual basis as part of the progress report. The DSM report 
will include the participants’ sociodemographic characteristics, expected ver sus actual 
recruitment rates, study retention rates, any quality assurance or regulatory issues that 
occurred during the past year, summary of adverse events, serious adverse events, 
unanticipated problems, and any actions or changes with respect to the pr otocol. The DSM 
report to NICHD will also include, when available, the results of any data analysis 
conducted.  
Data monitoring plan  
All services and data collection will take place via telehealth and a HIPAA -compliant 
secure web -based platform (i.e., RedCa p). Participant data will only be identified with a 
study ID. The codes that link the name [CONTACT_673479] [CONTACT_141122][INVESTIGATOR_2993]cipal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_2993] a secured cabinet. SPSS software will be used 
to analyze the data. The  quality of the data will be monitored once per month. Data quality 
will be monitored by [CONTACT_891888] a research assistant and any 
problems detected will be discussed with the PI.  
Safety monitoring plan  
Potential participants  will complete a phone screen to determine their eligibility and safety 
of their participation in this study. History of suicidal ideation or suicide attempts, and 
other suicidal risk factors, including suicidal ideation, intent, and plan will be carefully 
assessed and monitored through the study. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_891879] (e.g., hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) as needed and appropriate.  
All adv erse events (AEs) will be reported to the MUSC Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
and NIH within 10 working days. AEs are reportable if they are unexpected AND related 
or possibly related to study participation AND serious or more prevalent than expected. 
The IRB definition of unexpected is that the AE is not identified in nature, severity, or 
frequency in the current proposal, informed consent, or with other current risk information. 
Version 4; 5/29/[ADDRESS_1248759] been caused by [CONTACT_19911], drug, or intervention. Serious adverse events (SAEs) 
will be reported within [ADDRESS_1248760]’s participation in research that meets any of the fol lowing criteria: death, a life -
threatening event, requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], persistent or significant 
disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly or birth defect. Important medial events that 
may not result in death, be life -threat ening or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a 
SAE when, based upon appropriate medi cal judgement, they may jeopardize the subject 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition.  
Any SAE, wh ether or not related to study intervention, will be reported to the MUSC IRB 
and NIH. The initial SAE report will be followed by [CONTACT_63664] a completed SAE 
report to both institutions. In the event that a client either withdraws from the study or the 
investigator decides to discontinue a patient due to SAE, the client will be monitored by 
[CONTACT_289299] 1) a resolution is reached i.e., the 
problem requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_291507] 2) the SAE is determined to be clearly unrelated to the study intervention, or 3) 
the SAE results in death. Outcome of SAEs will be periodically reported to NIH. A 
summary of the SAEs that occurred during the previous year will be included  in the annual 
progress report to NIH.  
All research staff involved with adverse event reporting will receive training including 
identification, evaluation, and documentation and reporting. All research staff will identify 
any potential AEs or Unanticipated  Problems (UPs) during the course of the study from 
self-report and interview data and administration of assessment s and the brief intervention. 
This information will be reported to the PI ([CONTACT_891892]), all mentors and co -investigators, 
the MU SC IRB, the NICHD Program Officer, and the Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
Members.  
Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
We have recruited a  DSMB to monitor overall participant safety, the rate and severity of 
adverse events, the progress of the study, and to re view procedures for maintaining the 
confidentiality of data, the assent and consent process for all participants, the quality of 
data collection, and data management and analyses. Frequency of meetings of the DSMB 
will be determined by [CONTACT_891889] (e.g., after 20% of participants have been 
recruited, etc.), and will follow each SAE report, but meetings will occur no less than once 
per year. The purpose of these meetings will be to review study progress, data quality, and 
participant safety. DSMB members  include an array of disciplinary backgrounds (e.g., 
clinical researchers, statisticians) that are not directly involved in the project.  
Members include:  
◼ [COMPANY_002]lle Hanson , PhD, Professor at the MUSC National Crime Victims Center has 
extensive experi ence with the population of interest and clinical research among 
families who have experienced trauma.  
◼ Rosmary Ros -Demarize,  PhD, Assistant Professor at MUSC Developmental -
Behavioral Pediatrics has expertise in parenting  interventions , telehealth service 
delivery, and implementation science.  
Version 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 10 of 11  ◼ Elizabeth Baumler, PhD, Director of Biostatistics for the Center of Violence 
Prevention and Associate Professor at UT Health has extensive expertise in design 
and analysis of clinical trials.  
Data will be presented in  a blinded manner during the open sessions of the DSMB. At 
DSMB meetings, data and discussion are confidential. Participant identities will not be 
known to the DSMB members.  
Conflict of Interest for DSMB’s  
DSMB members will have no direct involvement with the study investigators or 
intervention (e.g., no portion of their effort will be covered by [CONTACT_1758]). Each DSMB 
member will sign a Conflict of Interest statement which includes current affiliations (if 
any) with pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies (e.g., stockholder, consultant), and 
any other relationship that could be perceived as a conflict of interest related to the study 
and/or associated with commercial interests pertinent to study objectives .  
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  (if applicable)  
• N/A 
15.0 Risks to Subjects  
• Although not a direct component of our study, p articipants may feel distress related 
to the trauma experience and their referral to the trauma mental health clinic.  
• Breaches of confidentiality are a concern with Internet -based components of any 
study. For example, it is possible that other people could overhear the participants’ 
intervention session s with a treatment provider. However, such risks are minimized 
by [CONTACT_891890] a 
more convenient time or telling the participant to take steps to insure their privacy  
(e.g., private location, use of headphones) .  
• Survey assessments of psychological symptoms and history  of traumatic event 
exposure may cause participants to feel small to moderate amounts of distress.  
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  or Others  
• Caregivers and children will directly receive the benefit of an evidence -based 
parenting intervention, Project Support, that has been found to increase emotional 
support, parenting self -efficacy, and reduce child distress. Caregivers will receive 
the intervention at no cost.  
17.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
No study results will be shared with participants or others.  
 
18.0 Drugs or Devices (if applicable)  
• N/A 
References  
Hertzog, M. A. (2008). Considerations in determining sample size for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602].  Research in 
Nursing & Health , 31(2), 180 -191. 
 
Version 4; 5/29/2024  
 Page 11 of 11  Jouriles, E. N., Rosenfield, D., McDonald, R., Vu, N. L., Rancher, C., & Mueller, V. (2018). 
Children exposed to intimate partner violence: Conduct problems, interventions, and partner 
contact [CONTACT_213997]. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psycho logy, 47(3), 397 -409. doi: 
10.1080/15374416.2016.1163706  
 
Kraemer, H. (2010). Randomized clinical trial design: 50 years of learning from mistakes. New 
Research Approaches for Mental Health Interventions, Boca Raton, FL.  
 
Maas, C. J., & Hox , J. J. (2005). Sufficient sample sizes for multilevel 
modeling.  Methodology , 1(3), 86 -92. 
 
Rancher, C., McDonald, R., Cook, K., & Jouriles, E. N. (2023). Randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]: 
Project Support Positive Parenting Module following sexual abuse. Research on Social Work 
Practice, 0(0), 1 -12. doi: 10.1177/10497315231212195  
 
Rancher, C., McDonald, R., Ostner, S. G., & Jouriles E. N. (2023). A randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_891880]. Research on Social Work P ractice, 34(2), 
132-143. doi: 10.1177/10497315231159049  
 
Rancher, C., McDonald, R., Draxler, H., & Jouriles, E. N. (2021). Working with families and 
children exposed to intimate partner violence. In J.L. Allen, D. J. Hawes, & C. J. Essau (Eds.), 
Family -Based Intervention for Child and Adolescent Mental Health: A Core Competencies 
Approach. Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]: Cambridge University Press.  
 
 