Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   1 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025   
 
 
 
 
Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches to  
Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia  
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
Issue date:  07-01-2022  
Protocol amendment number: 04 
Authors: JR, KE  
 
Revision chronology:  
04/29/2021  Original  
06/04/2021 Version 2  
10/29/2021 Version 3  
07/01/2022 Version 4  
11/29/2023 Version 5  
11/27/2024 Version 6  
04-14-2025 Version 7  
 
 
Funding:  Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)  
Contract # I HS-2019C3 -[ADDRESS_974737] any role during its 
execution, analyses, interpretation of the data, or decision to submit results . 
 
  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   2 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  Trial Registration Data  
Data Category  Information  
Primary registry and trial 
identifying number  ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT0486387  
Date of registration in primary 
registry  04-26-2021  
Secondary identifying numbers  Not applicable  
Source(s) of monetary or 
material support  Patient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute  
Primary sponsor  Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute  
Secondary sponsor(s)  Not applicable   
Contact [CONTACT_715657], MD,  MPH; [EMAIL_13694]  
Contact [CONTACT_715658], MD, MPH; [EMAIL_13694]  
Public title  Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia  
Scientific title  Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia  
Countries of recruitment  [LOCATION_002] of America  
Health condition(s) or problem(s) 
studied  Severe hypoglycemia in persons with Type 2 diabetes  
Intervention(s)  Usual care comparator : Proactive care management (nurse outreach with follow up as 
necessary)  
 Active comparator: Proactive care management (nurse outreach with follow up as 
necessary) plus structured MyHC -T2D educational program, designed to improve 
hypoglycemia awareness and reduce severe hypoglycemia  
Key inclusion and exclusion 
criteria  Ages eligible for study: ≥18 years ; Sexes eligible for study: all  
Inclusion criteria: Age ≥ 18 years; d iagnosed with type 2 diabetes; receiving primary care 
at Kaiser Permanente Washington  (KPWA) ; enrolled at KPWA at baseline; planning to 
stay with a KPWA health plan for the next 6 months;  at intermediate to high risk for 
severe hypoglycemia; and with history of severe hypoglycemia in the prior 12 months 
or impaired awareness of hypoglycemia.  
Exclusion criteria: Inability to give informed consent; u nable to speak or read English; 
inability or unwillingness to attend online or telephone educational sessions, follow up 
calls, or to complete outcome assessments ; prior diagnosis of dementia, severe 
psychiatric condition with psychosis, severe cognitive impairment; currently living in 
nursing home or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677] , current use at baseline of Continuous Glucose Monitor, 
pregnant or planning to become pregnant . 
Study type  Interventional  
Allocation: individually  randomized; Interventional model: parallel assignment; Masking: 
single blind (outcome assessors will be blinded; participants will not be blinded)  
Primary purpose: Prevention  
Phase III  
Date of first enrollment  01-26-2022 
Target sample size  256 
Recruitment status  Complete  
Primary outcome(s)  Self-reported severe hypoglycemia  in prior 12 months .  
Secondary outcome(s)  
All secondary outcomes 
assess ed [ADDRESS_974738] 
baseline corresponds to 
approximately 12 months after 
the main component of the 
MyHC -T2D intervention.  Measures using Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGM)   
Hypoglycemia: % time glucose <54mg/dL, % time glucose <70 mg/dL, # of events 
> 15 minutes glucose 54 -69 mg/dL, # events > 15 minutes glucose <54 mg/dL, # of 
events > 15 minutes glucose <70 mg/dL between 12 AM and 6AM  
Hyperglycemia: % time glucose >180 mg/dL, % time glucose > 250 mg/dL  
Time in range: % time between 70 to 180 mg/dL  
Glucose Management Indicator  
Average glucose  
Glucose variation: coefficient of variation, standard deviation  
Self-reported measures: #  of severe hypoglycemic events in prior 4 months : # of 
moderate hypoglycemia events in past 4 weeks; # of nocturnal hypoglycemic events in 
past 6 months; hypoglycemia unawareness; fear of hypoglycemia; diabetes knowledge; 
diabetes self -efficacy   
Hemoglobin A1c  
Hypoglycemia -related healthcare utilization: total number of urgent care , emergency 
department and inpatient visits for hypoglycemia as primary or principal diagnosis 
collected from the  electronic health record  (EHR ) 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   3 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025   
Roles and Responsibilities  
James Ralston, MD, MPH  
Principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_715639]  
• Design and conduct of the study  
• Preparation of protocol and revisions  
• Overseeing and directing the study team and all implementation and data collection  
• Lead ing Stakeholder Advisory Committee meetings  
• Leading analyses and p ublication of study reports  
Study Team:  
Name, degree(s)  Role  
Melissa Anderson, MS  Biostatistician  
Ayat Bashir, MBBS, MRCP ([LOCATION_006])  Consultant  
Kelly Ehrlich, MS  Project Manager  
Laurel Hansell, MA, MPH  Qualitative Research Associate  
Dena Burns -Hunt  Patient partner and Co -Investigator  
Helen Hunt  Family member partner and Co -Investigator  
Clarissa Hsu, PhD  Qualitative Lead and Co -Investigator  
Andrew Karter,  PhD Co-Investigator  
Evette Ludman, PhD  Co-Investigator  
Lawrence Madziwa, MS Programmer Analyst  
Janet Ng, PhD Implementation Lead and Co -Investigator  
Emily Omura, MD  Endocrinologist  
James Shaw, BSc (Hons Biochem), MB ChB, 
PhD, FRCP (Ed)  Consultant  
Susan Shortreed, PhD  Biostatistician and Co -Investigator  
Jane Speight,  PhD CPsychol FBPsS  Consultant  
Katherine Purwin -Tschernisch  Family member partner and Co -Investigator  
Sergei Tschernisch , MFA  Patient partner and Co-Investigator  
Study team responsibilities:  
• Agreement of final Study P rotocol  (All) 
• Adaptation of MyHC -T2D; development and oversight of interventions (EL, JN)  
• Development of data collection instruments  and protocols (All) 
• Development and oversight of allocation procedures (MA, SS)  
• Oversight of study recruitment, implementation of interventions and all data collection (All) 
• Review ing of study progress , as necessary agreeing changes to the protoco l to facilitate the 
smooth running of the study  (All) 
• Data cleaning and analysis  (MA, SS, LM)  
• Presentation  and publication of study r esult s (All) 
• Preparing reports for the Data and Safety Monitoring Board  (MA, SS, JR, KE)  
• Organization and conduct of Stakeholder Advisory Committee meetings  (JR, KE)  
• Develop ing and manag ing timeline , maintaining trial master files (KE) 
• Prepar ing submissions to the Institutional Review Board, registering with  ClinicalTrials.gov (KE) 
• Budget administration and contractual management (KE) 
 
Authors’ contributions  
JR and AK  conceived of the study. JR, AB, CH, DBH, HH, AK, EL, JN, JSh, JSp, KPT, and ST led the 
design of the study  and KE, LH and LM helped with implementation. JR is Lead Investigator on the 
contract . MA and SS provided statistical expertise in clinical trial design and MA is conducting the 
primary statistical analysis. All authors contributed to refinement of the study protocol.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   4 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025   
Protocol Amendment History  
The table below is intended to capture changes of IRB -approved versions of the protocol, including a description 
of the change and rationale.  
Version  Date  Description of Change  Brief Rationale  
02 06/04/2021  New exclusion: use of CGM at 
baseline  Direct and real time feedback of glucose levels to 
participants could 1) impact the study’s outcome 
of severe hypoglycemia and 2) interact in 
uncertain ways in the two comparison 
interventions.  
03 10/29/2021  Revised  inclusion: removed 
requirement for [ADDRESS_974739] s sample pool . 
03 10/29/2021  New exclusion: pregnant or 
planning to become pregnant  Per manufacturer’s instructions, use of the CGM 
(required for study data collection) not 
recommended for women who are pregnant or 
planning to become pregnant.  
03 10/29/[ADDRESS_974740] 3 months. 
Addition of $[ADDRESS_974741].  Added to ensure a 14 -month measure to 
compare to baseline.  
03 10/29/2021  Revised randomization method: 
covariate constrained 
randomization instead of matched 
pair Allows balance on a greater number of cluster 
characteristics than matched pair, allows an odd 
number of clusters.  
03 10/29/[ADDRESS_974742] baseline.  
There will be no web -based 
survey collection.  Changed to keep mode consistent, avoid 
potential mode differences  
03 10/29/2021  Revised consent procedures: 
addition of signed e - or paper 
consent for participation in the 
trial Signed consent required by [CONTACT_715659]  
04 07/01/2022  Change from cluster to individual 
randomization  Changes in h ealth care delivery system  now 
allow individual randomization . Individual 
randomization  yields yields  more assurance of 
comparable balance between study arms and 
higher likelihood of balanced sample size by [INVESTIGATOR_216]  
04 07/01/2022  Revised inclusion: expand age 
from >50 to >18 Expands sample to help meet enrollment targets  
04 07/01/[ADDRESS_974743] 12 months or current 
impaired awareness of hypoglycemia.  
04 07/01/2022  Update to Study Team: 
replacement [CONTACT_715693] 
with [CONTACT_715694] change: [CONTACT_715695] has left Kaiser 
Permanente Washington  
05 11/29/2023  Addition of new secondary 
outcomes  of glycemic control New ou tcomes  consistent with International 
Consensus on Use of Continuous Glucose 
Monitoring.  Will be Important to assess potential 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   5 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  from Continuous Glucose 
Monitoring (CGM) data  intervention effect s on frequency of high blood 
sugars and variability of blood glucose levels  
05 11/29/[ADDRESS_974744] an  updated  
approach  using  the causal mediation framework 
instead of the Baron and Kenney framework  
05 11/29/2023  Revised analysis plan for 
handling missing data  Lowered the threshold for attrition that would 
trigger use of missing data methods to account 
for possible selection bias (from 15% to 10%) . 
Other editorial changes to analysis plan were 
made for clarity, but were not substantive.  
06 11/27/2024  Clarified clustering level for 
analysis  Revised analysis plan to account for patient 
clustering in the intervention arm within group 
training session cohorts rather than within clinic.  
06 11/27/[ADDRESS_974745], not updated per change 
in Protocol Version 04, see below.  Now 
corrected in the Figure as well as the text.  
06 11/27/2024  Changed references to “ my hypo 
compass ” intervention protocol to 
“MyHC -TD2” Name [CONTACT_715690] .  The study intervention is an 
adaptation of  the original  my hypo compass, 
which was developed and tested in persons with 
type 1 diabetes and was adapted in this study for 
use by [CONTACT_715660] 2 diabetes . 
07 04/14/2025  Changed references to “MyHC -
TD2” intervention protocol to 
“MyHC -T2D” (reverse order of 
last two characters ) The reference ending “…TD2” was incorrect.  
The name [CONTACT_715691] -T2D.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   6 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  Table of Contents  
 
Contents  
1. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 7 
1a. Background and rationale  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 7 
1b. Objectives:  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  7 
1c. Trial design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  8 
2. Methods: Participants, interventions and outcomes  ................................ ................................ ..... 8 
2a. Study setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  8 
2b. Eligibility criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  8 
2c. Interventions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  9 
2d. Outcomes  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  11 
2e. Participant timeline  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  13 
2f. Sample size  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  14 
2g. Recruitment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  15 
3. Methods: Assignment of interventions  ................................ ................................ .......................  15 
3a. Allocation  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  15 
3b. Blinding (masking)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  15 
4. Methods: Data collection, management, and analysis  ................................ ...............................  [ADDRESS_974746] -trial care  ................................ ................................ ..............................  24 
5h. Dissemination policy  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  24 
 
 
 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   7 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974747] feared complication  of glucose -lowering medications  used to treat people with 
diabetes . Severe hypoglycemia , defined as a blood sugar  low enough to require assistance,  is associated with  
accidents,1 falls,2,3 motor vehicle accidents,1 poor health -related quality of life ,4,5 emotional and interpersonal 
challenges ,6 chronic and acute cardiovascular disease ,7-12 dementia,13-15 and death.16-19 Older adults with type 2 
diabetes on glucose -lowering medications are particularly vulnerable to the complications of severe 
hypoglycemia .20 Severe hypoglycemia  is also linked to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]: of all emergency hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715640], an estimated 14% implicate insulin and 11% implicate oral hypoglycemic 
agents.21 One in four diabetes -related hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715641].22 Each year, about 11% of 
patients with type [ADDRESS_974748] the hormonal response and 
associated symptoms that would usually alert them to low blood sugar. Impaired awareness of hypoglycemia is 
acquired over time through  repeated  exposure to hypoglycemia. Severe hypoglycemia  is 17 times more 
common in individuals with impaired awareness of hypoglycemia .24 Current type 2 diabetes  self-management 
training does not address impaired awareness of hypoglycemia  and provides limited coaching on when and how 
to avoid severe hypoglycemia . Recently developed interventions can restore hypoglycemia awareness, enabling 
immediate action to reverse hypoglycemia and reduce severe hypoglycemia  in patients with type 1 diabetes.25-29 
We do not know if these interventions work in patients with type 2 diabetes . 
The goal of this study is to compare the effectiveness of two evidence -based approaches for preventing severe 
hypoglycemia  among patients with type 2 diabetes  who are at high risk for severe hypoglycemia, defined as 
experiencing one or more severe hypoglycemic events in prior 12 months or having impaired awareness of 
hypoglycemia . 
 
1b. Objectives : 
1b.[ADDRESS_974749] baseline  through self -report in study survey  (SR),  
continuous glucose monitors (CGMs; study participants will wear CGMs for 10 days ), and electronic health 
records  (EHRs) . 
1.  To determine if proactive care management plus MyHC -T2D is superior to proactive care management 
alone  in adults at high risk for severe hypoglycemia  for the following : 
• Reducing percentage time with biochemical hypoglycemia  (CGM assessed)  
• Reducing biochemical hypoglycemic events  (CGM assessed)  
• Reducing the frequency of high blood sugars  and reducing variability of blood glucose levels 
(CGM assessed)  
• Reducing number of severe hypoglycemic  events in prior 4 months (SR assessed)  
• Reducing hypoglycemia unawareness  (SR assessed)  
• Reducing number of self -reported moderate hypoglycemic events (SR assessed)  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   8 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  • Reducing fear of hypoglycemia  (SR assessed)  
• Reducing frequency of nocturnal hypoglycemia  (SR assessed)  
• Improving diabetes and hypoglycemia knowledge (SR assessed)  
• Improving diabetes self -efficacy (SR assessed)  
• Reducing hypoglycemia related healthcare utilization, including urgent care , Emergency 
Department and inpatient visits related to hypoglycemia  (EHR assessed)  
2. To assess differences in glycemic control, indicated by [CONTACT_299082] A1c, between study participants in 
the proactive care management plus MyHC -T2D group and the  proactive care management alone  group.  
1b.2.b  Other secondary Objective s 
Conduct a  mixed methods  process evaluation to evaluate the fidelity of implementation  of intervention 
components,  and clarify the causal pathway  if intervention effects are found . 
 
1c. Trial design  
This study is a n individually  randomized controlled trial  (RCT) comparing proactive  care   management30,31 to 
proactive care management plus MyHC -T2D.25,32  
 
2. Methods : Participants, interventions and outcomes  
2a. Study setting  
The study will be at K aiser Permanente Washington  (KPWA) , an integrated care and coverage system with [ADDRESS_974750]  meet  all the following  inclusion criteria  at baseline   
• Age ≥ 18 years ; 
• Diagnosed with type 2 diabetes;  
• Receiving primary care at K PWA ; 
• Enrollment at KPWA at baseline ; 
• Planning to stay with a KPWA health plan for the next 6 months ; 
• Current prescription for insulin or a t intermediate to high risk for a severe hypoglycemia  epi[INVESTIGATOR_715642]-stratification tool  developed by [CONTACT_715661] ;33,34 and 
• Have history of a  severe hypoglycemia  epi[INVESTIGATOR_715643] 12 months or impaired awareness of 
hypoglycemia  based on Gold score .35,36 
Exclusion criteria  
Any of  the following  criteria  at baseline  exclude participation in the study :  
• Unable  to give informed consent ; 
• Unable to speak or read English ; 
• Unable  or unwilling to attend online or telephone educational sessions, follow up calls, or to complete 
outcome assessments ; 
• Prior diagnosis of dementia, severe psychiatric conditions with psychosis, severe cognitive impairment ; 
• Currently living in nursing home or under hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677] ; 
• Current use at baseline of Continuous Glucose Monitor;  
• Pregnant or planning to become pregnant . 
 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   9 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974751] study participant. Care for 
this group  will be similar to care usually received from  KPWA  nurses after a recent severe hypoglycemic event.  
Current practices include the following: for participants  with overly aggressive glucose targets or impaired 
awareness of hypoglycemia , nurses work with the participant’s primary care provider to  personalize a care plan 
that may inc lude adjust ing glucose targets, de -intensify ing hypoglycemic medications, enhanc ing self-monitoring 
of blood glucose , provid ing glucagon kits and training, or refer ring for consideration of C ontinuous Glucose 
Monitoring (CGM) .37,[ADDRESS_974752] avoidance of hypoglycemia using four key principles 
around compass points: 1) Never delay appropriate treatment of hypoglycemia; 2) Establish  times of Extra  risk; 
recognize hypoglycemia by 3) Subtle symptoms; and 4) being Watchful  to detect and prevent hypoglycemia , 
particularly  asymptomatic nocturnal hypoglycemia . The MyHC -T2D protocol for this study will consist  of the 
following activities:  
• Baseline outreach  and engagement in structured educational sessions : KPWA  nurses specializing in diabetes 
will call pa rticipants  and coordinate care for severe hypoglycemia  risk factors as in the proactive care group . 
Nurses will elicit and address barriers for attending MyHC -T2D training.41-43 Participants  will be mailed  the 
MyHC -T2D Glucose/Hypo diary and Participant Handbook in preparation for structured educational sessions. 
They  will have the same nurse care manager throughout the intervention.  
• Structured 
Educational Session 
1: Two diabetes 
nurse educators 
trained on the 
MyHC -T2D protocol 
will lead  online 
virtual  group 
sessions  (Figure 1 ). The 
sessions will include 8 pa rticipants  and will be conducted  based on the Facilitator Guide and Participant 
Handbooks  (Appendix B). Educational session #[ADDRESS_974753] on personal hypoglycemia events using the Glucose/Hypo diary. The 
Figure 1:  MyHC -T2D Educatio n Activities  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   10 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974754] rategies.  
• Telephone Review : Approximately [ADDRESS_974755] educational session, n urse  care managers 
will call participants for a 10 - to 15 -minute review. Nurses will discuss progress and review the 
Glucose/Hypo diary. They will encourage reflection on any hypoglycemia events and self -
management strategies.  
• Structured Educational Session 2 : A diabetes nurse educator will lead a n online virtual  follow -up 
session with participants in their original groups. This [ADDRESS_974756] on hypoglycemi a symptoms 
experienced during each event including subtle symptoms with review and discussion of the 
treatments implemented.  
• Telephone Booster : Approximately [ADDRESS_974757] on any hypoglycemia events and review self -
management strategies.  
 
2c.3. Training and monitoring intervention fidelity . 
We will ensure maximum generalizability and relevance to providers and healthcare systems  by [CONTACT_715662].44 
Training  
• Proactive care management :  All intervention nurses will use existing standard training, tools and workflows 
which are already in use at KPWA  to provide the proactive care management part of both interventions. All 
KPWA nurses are trained in these protocols . The study will provide a continuing nurse education training to 
refresh nurses in these standard protocols for all nurses prior to enrolling the first study participant  
• MyHC -T2D protocol :  Study intervention leads will train the diabetes nurse educators in delivery of the 
MyHC -T2D protocol with input and assistance from the program originators.  The diabetes nurse educators 
will conduct all online virtual educational sessions . These  will be recorded for fidelity monitoring, and for 
qualitative assessment per Aim 2. The study intervention leads and the  diabetes nurse educators will train  
the MyHC -T2D intervention nurses  for telephone review and booster follow up calls.  
Fidelity  
We will maintain  and assess fidelity through four proactive strategies : 
• Use of standardized written nurse and participant materials. Study intervention leads  and diabetes nurse 
educators and population care  nurses will meet regularl y to ensure protocol clarity and treatment integrity 
and fidelity.  
• Observation of nurses delivering the proactive care management and MyHC -T2D activities by a supervising 
RN for the first two intervention months.  
• Use of fidelity assurance checklists for protocol integrity and skills to be covered in each educational session. 
After each session, the nurse will check each point that was covered. If a point was not covered, the nurse 
will plan for follow -up. This checklist will also permit calculation of the percentage of points covered. An 
independent Fidelity  Monitoring Research Associate will review completed checklists  using a standard 
protocol  to document adherence and give formative feedback.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   11 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  • Monitoring for potential drift through audio recording sessions. After 2 months of observation, the Fidelity 
Monitoring Research Associate will randomly review 10% of sessions, coding for intervention adherence and 
returning results to be re view ed in weekly supervision meetings. If nurses “drift” from protocols, we will add 
training and supervision and monitor until fidelity is established.  
 
2d. Outcomes  
2d.[ADDRESS_974758] 12 months at baseline and 
14 months after the baseline. We assess the primary outcome  14-months after baseline, to allow 2 months for 
baseline collection of CGM and intervention activities prior to the 12 -month outcome window  (Figure 2 ). This 
timing is consistent with prior studies showing that symptoms of hypoglycemia return after 3 to 4 weeks of 
avoiding hypoglycemia45 and early impacts of the MyHC -T2D intervention  on the percent time with glucose less 
< 54 mg/dL in patients with type 1 diabetes. 25  
• Planned primary outcome: S elf-report of any severe hypoglycemia epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]  (yes/no)  in the prior 12 months 
assessed 14 months after baseline using a validated  question from the Diabetes Care Profile: "In the past 
year, how many times have you had a severe low blood sugar reaction such as passing out or needing help 
to treat the reaction?”46,47. 
• Alternative primary outcome: C ount of the number of self-report severe hypoglycemia epi[INVESTIGATOR_715644] 
12 months assessed 14 months after baseline using the validated question from the Diabetes Care Profile. 
We will evaluate the distribution of number of severe hypoglycemia events in the prior 12 months  assessed 
on all participants at  the baseline survey. If more than 60% of respondents report having had 2 or more 
severe hypoglycemia events in the prior 12 months, we will change our primary outcome to be a count of 
the number of severe hypoglycemia events  in the prior 12 months . 
 
2d.2 Secondary outcome measures  
• Outcomes measured by [CONTACT_715663], over 10 days , at baseline and 14-month  assessment : 
o Percent time with biochemical hypoglycemia (<54 mg/dL) ; 
o Number of Level 2 biochemical hypoglycemic events ( 15 or more minutes <54 mg/dL ). 
o Percent time biochemical hypoglycemia (< 70 mg/dL)  
o Number of level 1 hypoglycemic eventss (≥ 15 minutes at 54 - 69 mg/dL)  
o Number of nocturnal hypoglycemic events (≥ 15 minutes < 70 mg/dL between midnight and 6 am)  
o Percent time 70 to 180 mg/dL  
o Percent time above 180 mg/dL  
o Percent time above 250 mg/dL  
o Average blood glucoses, mg/dL  
o Standard deviation of glucose  
o Coefficient of variation for glucose (%CV)  
o Glucose management indicator  
• Outcomes measured by [CONTACT_6270] -report survey at baseline, 6, 10, and 14 months:  
o Number of severe hypoglycemic  events in prior 4 months ; 
o Hypoglycemia unawareness measured by  [CONTACT_715664] ;35,36 
o Number of  symptomatic48 hypoglycemic events in the prior 4 weeks ;46 
o Fear of hypoglycemia using the Hypoglycemia Fear Survey -II;49 
o Number of nocturnal hypoglycemia  events (defined as “during sleep”) during past 6 months ;[ADDRESS_974759];51 
o Diabetes self -efficacy using the 8-item Diabetes  Self-Efficacy scale.52 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   12 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  • Outcomes defined based on data collected from the EHR: 
o Hemoglobin A1c  (HbA1c) .  The most recent H bA1c measures  in the [ADDRESS_974760] one for the study.  
o Hypoglycemia -related healthcare utilization: total number urgent care , emergency department and 
inpatient visits for hypoglycemia as primary or principal diagnosis . 
Figure [ADDRESS_974761] CGM measures  only  at baseline and at 1 4 months. We will measure all secondary 
outcomes including potential mediators of the intervention, at 6, 10 and 1 4 months after baseline assessment  to 
identify potential early vs. later effects of the intervention.32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Outcome measures and study activities  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   13 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  2e. Participant  timeline  
Figure 3  shows the study flow diagram 
and Figure 4  the schedule of 
enrollment, interventions and 
assessments . Participants in the 
proactive care management group will 
receive one standardized proactive 
outreach call from KPWA  nursing 
staff, with follow up as indicated by 
[CONTACT_2299]’s needs. Participants in 
the proactive care management + 
MyHC -T2D group will receive the  
same standardized proactive outreach 
call in addition the standardized 
MyHC -T2D educational intervention, 
delivered over approximately three 
months . As described above, self -
report data will be collected at 
baseline, 6 - ,10- and 14 months, and 
CGM and EHR data at baseline and 14 
months.  Duration of participation for 
an individual participant will be 14 
months from baseline data collection.  
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 3 : Study  Flow  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   14 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974762] -Enrollment  Close -out 
TIMEPOINT  Pre-
enrollment  Pre-
enrollment  Baseline  6 month  10 months  14 months  
       
ENROLLMENT:        
Identification   X     
Telephone screen    X    
Informed Consent    X    
Individual randomization    X    
INTERVENTIONS:        
Proactive care management        
Proactive care management + 
MyHC -T2D       
ASSESSMENTS:        
Primary Outcome:  
Self-report severe hypoglycemia 
events    X X X X 
Secondary outcomes:       X 
Self report measures    X X X X 
CGM Measures    X   X 
EHR measures    X   X 
Process Measures       X 
Qualitative Assessments   X X X X X 
 
2f. Sample size 
We estimate 256 patients ( 128 randomized to proactive care management, and 128 randomized to MyHC -T2D) 
will consent and complete the baseline survey . To account for loss to follow -up, we assume a n 80% response 
rate for the primary outcome  measured at 14 -months,  for an analytic sample size of 204 (102 per group ). Power 
calculations  for comparing two independent proportions  and assume d a 0.05 type I error rate. Assuming 60% of 
patients in the proactive care management group will self-report having had a severe hypoglycemia  event in 12 -
month look back  (yes/no) , we have 90% power to detect a 2 2.6% absolute difference  between groups (i.e. 
37.4% severe hypoglycemia rate in MyHC -T2D arm) for the primary outcome . We have 80% power to detect a n 
absolute  difference of 19. 7% between groups. Our study has power to detect a meaningful difference ( 30% or 
more reduction in frequency of self -reported severe  hypoglycemia events).[ADDRESS_974763] 
80% power to detect a 1.4% difference and 90% power to detect a 1.6% difference between groups in the 
secondary outcome of the percent time with biochemical hypoglycemia (<54 mg/dL); this difference is 
consistent with the effect seen with  the original  my hypo  compass .25,32 
 
  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   15 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  2g. Recruitment  
We will recruit the study population in two steps . 
Step 1, Automated risk stratification : We will identify a cohort of adult s (≥18 years) with T2D receiv ing primary 
care at KPWA. We will identify all individuals  with either a current prescription for insulin or who have 
intermediate -to-high risk for a SH event  based on our hypoglycemia risk -stratification too l.  
Step 2, Phone screening for verbal consent and to identify patients at highest SH risk : We will mail eligible 
participants  an invitation with study brochure and  notification that staff will call them about the study. KPWHRI 
Survey Research Program (SRP) members will then call the potential participant to explain the study, assess  
eligibility and  interest , and conduct informed verbal consent with those who are eligible and interested.  We 
expect [ADDRESS_974764] 25%  will consent and complete baseline data collection .56 
To retain participants and minimize data loss, we will provide $100 incentive for completing data collection at 
baseline  and 14 months  ($30 for the survey and $70 for CGM at each time point) and $[ADDRESS_974765] for the study at months will 
receive an additional $25.  
 
3. Methods : Assignment of interventions  
3a. Allocation  
After identifying potentially eligible patients based on EHR data, and verify eligibility, document ing verbal 
consent, collect ing baseline data by [CONTACT_648] , and receiving written consent , we will randomize study participants 
to one of our two intervention arms using a 1:[ADDRESS_974766] will use permute d blocks of randomized size 4 or 8.  
Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_654] ( 18-74 versus 75+ years) and risk score for severe hypoglycemia 
(moderate versus high risk), to ensure balance of these important risk factors of SH events across intervention 
arms.  Individuals with low risk but using insulin will be randomized in the moderate risk strata.  Randomization 
assignment will be concealed from the study staff verifying eligibility and will only be revealed after baseline 
data has been collected, and the  next sequential randomization assignment has been requested.  Outcomes will 
be measured and analyzed at the pa rticipan t level.  
 
3b. Blinding (masking)  
Blinding or masking will be maintained for research staff collecting outcomes , including those collecting self -
report and CGM  data . However, p articipants, nurses, and providers engaged in the interventions cannot 
reasonably be masked to the study group s, nor can study staff conducting fidelity monitoring or those collecting 
qualitative data.  
The study programmer and biostatisticians will have access to unblinded data to conduct data summaries by 
[CONTACT_715665]  (DSMB). T he Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_715645] . 
  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   16 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025   
4. Methods: Data collection, management, and analysis  
4a. Data collection methods  
Study data will be collected using self -report  surveys  at baseline, 6 , 10- and 1 4-months ; biochemical measures of 
percent time with hypoglycemia and number of biochemical hypoglycemic events using CGM at baseline and 1 4 
months ; and data extracted from the E HR for Hemoglobin A1c and h ypoglycemia -related healthcare utilization  
at baseline and 14 months . The  outcomes are described in section 2d , above . 
 
4a.1 Self-report measures : 
All self -report instruments are included in Appendix C.  Survey q uestions will be administered at baseline  and all 
follow up time points (6, 10 and 14 months)  by [CONTACT_715666] ( SRP) 
staff. Telephone data collection will be  performed using Sawtooth Ci3 and WinCATI computer -assisted 
telephone interviewing (CATI) software. SRP Interviewers are trained in standardized survey interviewing 
techniques, use of the CATI system, and will be trained in project -specific procedures including item -by-item 
specifications for each questionnaire. Interviewers' phone performance, productivity, and response rates are 
routinely monitored; corre ctive or remedial training is provided if necessary. Interview quality is continuously 
assessed using silent monitors installed on all telephones; completed interviews are edited and coded within 
48 hours, and interviewer feedback occurs on a regular basis . SRP Interviewers are certified in NIH Human 
Subjects Protections.  
 
4a.2. CGM data:  
CGM data will be collected  at baseline and [ADDRESS_974767] glucose 
measurements blinded to the participant; and the ability to store up to [ADDRESS_974768] 10 days of CGM readings. The  readings  will be blinded at the time of data collection but shared  with 
the participant  at the end of the study.  
Baseline C GM data will be collected after collection of baseline self -report data but before beginning any 
intervention activities. CGM data at 1 4-months will be collected at the same time as outreach for 1 4-month 
follow up self -report.  In both cases the process will be the same:  
The study nurse or medical assistant (MA) will telephone the participant and schedule a CGM virtual visit. S/he 
will then mail the sensor -transmitter unit  (programmed to keep glucose readings blinded from the participant ) 
and instructions to the participant, along with postage -paid packaging to return at the end of the 10 -day 
recording period.  At the virtual visit, the nurse or MA will walk the participant through placing the device, will 
answer any questions and will provide a telephone number that the par ticipant can call for questions or issues 
that may come up. The participant will then wear the device for 10 days with readings stored on the unit. The 
study nurse or MA will make one follow up call near the end of the 10 days, to check in, answer questions and 
confirm that the  participant will remove and mail back the  single use sensor -transmitter  on the planned date. At 
the end of the recording period the participant will remove and  mail back the device  using the provided mailing 
materials.   The data will  then be read or downloaded from the sensor -transmitter using the DexCom 6G Pro 
reader/receiver.  
 
4a.3 EHR data:  
The study programmer will extract d ata from the E HR to assess study eligibility for recruitment  and collect  
outcome measures including HbA1c  and hypoglycemia related health care utilization , including  emergency 
department  and u rgent care visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].   If participants are asked to have an HbA1c at [ADDRESS_974769] as other HbA1cs.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   17 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  4a.4 Data collection incentives : 
Participants will be mailed $100 for completion of baseline and 1 4-month follow up study measures  ($30 for the 
survey and $70 for CGM at each time point) . They will be mailed $[ADDRESS_974770] for the study at months 
will be mailed an additional $25.  
 
4a.[ADDRESS_974771] and refine the 
hypothesized causal pathways  (Figure 5). These results will be essential to ensure future implementations of 
severe hypoglycemia prevention are centered on patient needs and are feasible and acceptable for healthcare 
providers and systems . 
We will use qualitative and quantitative methods for assessing the fidelity, dose and mechanism  of the 
intervention.  
Qualitative assessments : To 
assess delivery fidelity and 
dose  to clusters and 
individuals, we  will observe  
nurse care managers and 
diabetes nurse educators  
work ing with participants and 
interview them after 
intervention s.[ADDRESS_974772] on their experiences with the 
Figure 5: Study Model  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   18 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974773] 
representation based on  race /ethnicity, gender,  and educational attainment . For evaluating intervention 
context , we will also interview the healthcare system’s  stakeholders, examples of wh ich may include directors of 
nursing, endocrinology, primary care, quality and health plan  representatives . We will analyze interview and 
observational data using a template analysis approach  based on a code manual from our conceptual  model and 
emergent themes. Atlas.ti will be used to organize and manage the data. model and the intervention.[ADDRESS_974774] quantitative data as follows:  
• Fidelity checklists filled out by [CONTACT_715667]  
• Participant contacts collected from EHR 
data  and 
• Variables for mediation analysis collected 
from combination of self -report and EHR 
data.   
Integrating results:  We will do a concurrent 
triangulation mixed methods design , where 
qualitative and quantitative data will be 
collected at the same time and used to 
validate and/or add detail and depth to the 
data from two data collection approaches.57 
 
4b. D ata management  
Data for this study will be captured from 
telephone surveys, capture by [CONTACT_715668] (baseline and 14 months) and extraction from EHR 
databases.  If a participant is asked to have an HbA1c test at [ADDRESS_974775].  
• Telephone surveys  will be administered by [CONTACT_715669]. Staff will be trained and quality monitored 
as described in Section 2.c.1, Data Collection Methods, Self -Report data, above. Instruments will be 
programmed with skip patterns and range checks. KPWHRI, and specifically SRP, maintain a HIPAA -
compliant environment. Dat a in Dat Stat Illume, which will be used for survey data, is encrypted at all 
times. Other protections include real -time scanning for viruses and malware, and scanning and 
blacklisting of s uspi[INVESTIGATOR_715646]. Multiple real -time systems monitor internal 
activity including movement of data between internal systems.  Data collected through DatStat Illume 
are stored on Microsoft SQL Server systems located behind the Kaiser Permanente firewall. Access to 
both the DatStat web server and the database servers is restricted to IT Operations staff. Access to data 
collected th rough DatStat is limited to Kaiser Permanente Washington employees with a need for 
access.  
• Data collected via CGM : Study staff wil l download  data from each participant’s CGM sen sor transmitter 
unit using the Dexcom receiver. The receiver will transmit this data to the Dexcom CLARITY server  from 
which data and reports will be retrieved. Data for individuals will be identified only by a device ID, which 
will be linked to study ID using crosswalks kept only at KPWHRI . Table 1: Process Assessment: Domains, Question, Methods 60 
Evaluation 
Domain  Research Questions  Research Methods  
Fidelity  Is the intended 
intervention delivered at 
the cluster level? 
individual level?  Qualitative analysis of nurse and 
patient interviews, nurse o bservations  
-Quantitative analysis of fidelity 
checklists and participant contacts  
Dose  Is the intended amount of 
the intervention delivered 
at the cluster level? 
Individual level?  -Qualitative analysis of nurse and 
patient interviews, nurse o bservations  
-Quantitative analysis of fidelity -
checklists and participant contacts  
Mechanism   Why and how did the 
intervention work?   -Quantitative mediation analysis of 
causal pathway  
-Qualitative analysis of patient and 
nurse interviews  
Reach  Did the intended 
populations receive the 
intervention?  Quantitative d escriptive analysis of 
clusters  and individuals using 
administrative and EHR data  
Context  What c linic, institutional, 
state and national factors 
may moderate 
intervention ? -Qualitative analysis of interviews with 
stakeholders  
 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   19 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  • EHR  data  will be extracted by [CONTACT_715670], including  the KPWHRI Data Warehouse , a research -centric repository of datasets maintained by 
[CONTACT_416855]. Data are stored in Teradata, SQL Server, and SAS format and cover  enrollment, 
demographics, diagnoses and procedures, vital signs, pharmacy, lab tests, costs . A rich collection of 
powerful SAS macros can be used in conjunction with the KPWHRI data. KPWHRI data warehouse 
content and usage are documented by a wiki -based system authored by [CONTACT_715671]’s 
architects, managers, and users. Access and security for electronic data sources are described below in 
Section 3. Ethics and Dissemination, Confidentiality.  
 
4c. Statistical methods  
Comparative effectiveness analyses will apply intent -to-treat principles, with study participants analyzed based 
on randomization group, regardless of intervention received. To assess comparability across study groups, we 
will summarize demographic characteristics and responses to baseline surveys in the two comparison groups. 
The preliminary analysis plan defines the primary outcome as a binary indicator for whether or not (yes/no) the 
participant self-reported having had a severe hypoglycemia event in the prior [ADDRESS_974776] for age, sex, risk 
score, and the number of self-report ed severe hypoglycemic events in the 12  months prior to baselin e. 
Models will be fit using generalized estimating equations (GEE) and robust variance estimation to account for 
correlation due to patient clustering in  the intervention arm within group training session cohorts , and the 
misspecified  mean -variance relationship in using Poisson regression for a binary outcome.  
 
Prior to conducting analysis of 14 -month outcomes, we will look at the baseline distribution of the self -reported 
number of severe hypoglycemic events in the prior 12 -months collected at baseline. If more than 60% of 
enrolled patients report [ADDRESS_974777] baseline (a count 
rather than a binary outcome  and fit a Poisson regression model to estimate the rate ratio for severe 
hypoglycemia events for the MyHC -T2D group relative to the care management group.  We will assess model fit, 
and consider zero -inflated models as an alternative, if the number of participants reporting zero events violates 
distributional assumptions of the Poisson model. If primary analyses use the binary outcome measure (i.e. fewer 
than 60% of patients report 2 or more events in the 12 -months prior to baseline), but 40% or more of 
respondents report [ADDRESS_974778] sandwich errors will also be used to 
estimate intervention effects on secondary outcomes, with link function and error distribution appropriate for 
each outcome.  For secondary outcomes measured at multiple follow -up time points ([ADDRESS_974779] -baseline), we will fit a single regression model that includes outcome measures from all follow -up time 
points. Models will include indicator variables for time, intervention group, and int eraction terms between these 
variables, to estimate intervention effects at each time point. Models will adjust for  age, sex, risk score and  the 
baseline measure of the outcome . For hypoglycemia -related health care utilization ( urgent care and emergency 
department visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715647]), w e will follow a similar analytic plan as the primary outcome, including the 
process to determine whether to model these outcomes as binary or count variables.  
Standards for Preventing and Handling Missing Data . Outreach with repeated call s will maximize response rates 
of follow -up phone surveys . Response rates and data collection will be monitored and if attrition is greater than 
10% , statistical methods will account for potential selection bias. We will compare baseline characteristics of 
responders and non -responders and  consider  multiple imputation or inverse probability weighting (IPW)  to 
account for potential bias  due to missing data . 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   20 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  Addressing HTE standards .  
Exploratory analyses will assess  whether  treatment effects vary by [CONTACT_715672]  (under 
75 years vs. 75 years and older) , sex , race/ethnicity,  comorbidities,  insulin use  and/or sulfonylurea use , baseline 
IAH presence, and baseline SH history. We will include interaction terms between randomization group and 
these characteristics in the primary and secondary outcome models to estimate comparative effectiveness by 
[CONTACT_6496] . 
 
We provide a brief description of the power we estimate we will have for some subgroup analyses. For those 
with  minority racial and ethnic backgrounds  (approximately 30% of participants), we  will have 90% power to 
detect a 39% difference and 80% power to detect a 35% difference in the rate of severe hypoglycemia between 
comparators for this subgroup . For females (approximately 50% of participants) and those the 65 years of age or 
older  (approximately 50% of participants) , we will have 90% power to detect a 3 1% difference in the rate of 
severe hypoglycemia  and 80% power to detect 27% difference. A ll of these effect sizes are smaller than those in 
the MyHC -T2D study in patients with type 1 diabetes .34 
 
Process Evaluation : We will use descriptive analysis to assess intervention recruitment, reach and  delivery. If 
significant differences (p<0.05) between intervention groups are found for the primary outcome, we will 
perform m ediation analysis to test the hypothesis that the possible causal pathway for reducing the occurrence 
of severe hypoglycemia is through improvements in hypoglycemia knowledge, hypoglycemia awareness, self -
efficacy of hypoglycemia management, blood glucose testing, and hypoglycemic medication adjustment  and 
other factors in causal pathway in Figure [ADDRESS_974780] (effect 
occurring through the mediator), and a natural direct effect (effect through all other pathways). To estimate 
these effects, we will use either a log -linear or Poisson model f or the outcome model (depending on whether 
the primary outcome is defined as a binary or count variable), and linear regression for the mediator model. The 
effect of each mediator will be estimated in separate models .  
 
4d. Trial monitoring  
4d.[ADDRESS_974781] (DSMB) to ensure safety of research participants. The DSMB 
will include an external researcher with prior DSMB experience (the chair), a nd two  clinician s with expertise in 
type [ADDRESS_974782] 6 months after study funding and prior to patient 
enrollment to review study protocols and plans for study reports (enrollment, completion, and adverse event -
reporting tables by [CONTACT_2060]) and recommend changes. The study team will track participant -reported  
serious adverse events  whether related or not to study participation. The team will provide ongoing reports to 
the DSMB and  the Institutional Review Board . The DSMB will meet twice per year , in person or by [CONTACT_648], as 
directed by [CONTACT_942]. The study Principal Investigator, biostatisticians, and project manager  will attend all 
open portions of DSMB meetings.  
The DSMB will receive ongoing reports to ensure data validity and integrity, including recruitment reports, 
participant characteristics by [CONTACT_715673] , 
participant completion of study visits, and completeness of study data collection. The DSMB may also choose to 
see outcome data, with this data blinded except to the study biostatisticians . If the  DSMB deems it necessary to 
unblind themselves to interim trial reporting this may occur, similarity the D SMB may decide to unblind the 
study Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_715648] a concern . 
We do not propose interim analyses or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_15381] . The  assessment of the primary outcome requires 14 
months of follow -up from baseline ; the study enrollment period is only 8 months long, therefore enrollment 
(and likely study interventions) will be complete for all participants before primary outcome data is available on 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   21 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  any participants.  We cannot feasibly  stop the trial for futility or harms seen on the primary outcome  before the 
end of enrollment.  
 
4d.2 Harms  
Adverse events :  For this study an adverse event will be defined  using the definition from 21 CFR 312.32 (a)  as any 
untoward medical occurrence in a participant  without regard to the possibility of a causal relationship. Adverse  
events will be collected after the participan t has provided consent and enrolled in the study  and through 14-month 
follow up . 
Adverse events will be collected using self -report open -ended survey questions at all follow up data collection 
timepoints , including 6-month, 10-month and 14-month follow ups.  Adverse events will be classified as to whether 
they are:  
1. Expected or unexpected in nature, severity,  or frequency for the population under study ( i.e. not 
mentioned in study documents or consent);  
2. Related or possibly related  to the study procedures or participation in the research; and  
3. Serious adverse events (SAE) or not . 
Expected adverse events  are those which could be anticipated for the population under study . These will be listed 
and discussed as part of informed consent. For this study, severe hypoglycemic events are a risk for this population 
and indeed a planned outcome measure , thus an expected adverse event. However,  we do not anticipate that 
the study intervention will provide additional risk. The intervention is an adjunct to usual care  aimed at 
preventing severe hypoglycemia for this high -risk population. Other expected adverse events could include 
complications of CGM data collection . It is uncommon, but inserting the CGM monitoring sensor could cause 
infection, bleeding, or pain, and wearing the adhesive patch co uld irritate the skin. Only a few patients in the 
CGM G6 clinical studies got slight redness and swelling. No sensor wires broke in the clinical studies; however, 
there is a remote chance a sensor wire could break or detach and remain under the skin. Such s terile broken 
sensor wires do not usually pose a significant medi cal risk. Participants will be fully informed of these risks 
before consenting to the study. If they experience any adverse events with the CGM monitor, participants will 
be instructed to contact [CONTACT_715674] l KPWA patients who use 
continuous glucose monitors and who will provide medically appropriate advice and care as necessary. If the 
participant has blood drawn for an HbA1c test, having blood drawn can be uncomfortable and can cause a 
bruise. Some people m ay feel nervous or get dizzy. In rare cases, it can cause people to faint. Participants can 
choose not to have this test and still participate in the study. The informed consent process will include a 
discussion of risks and the release of information to their medical team and coordination of care as needed.  
Relation to the study intervention or data collection  will be assessed by  [CONTACT_715675]: 
• Definitely related – There is clear evidence to suggest a causal relationship. The clinical event, including 
an abnormal laboratory test result, occurs in a plausible time relationship to study procedures and 
cannot be explained by [CONTACT_715676] . 
• Probably related – There is evidence to suggest a causal relationship, and the influence of other factors 
is unlikely.  
• Possibly  related – There is some evidence to suggest a causal relationship (e.g., the event occurred 
within a reasonable time after administration of study procedures). However, other factors may have 
contributed to the event (e.g., the participant’s clinical condition, ot her concomitant events). Although 
an adverse event m ay rate only as “possibly related” soon after discovery, it can be flagged as requiring 
more information and later be upgraded to “probably related” or “definitely related”, as appropriat e. 
• Unlikely to be related – A clinical event, including an abnormal laboratory test result, whose temporal 
relationship to study procedures or administration makes a causal relationship improbable (e.g., the 
event did not occur within a reasonable time after administration of the study procedures) and in which 
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   22 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  other factors  or underlying disease provides more plausible explanations (e.g., the participant’s clinical 
condition, other concomitant treatments).  
• Not related – The adverse event  is completely independent of study procedures administration, and/or 
evidence exists that the event is definitely related to another etiology.  
A serious adverse event (SAE)  will be defined as harm experienced by [CONTACT_941] s tudy participant  that resulted in any of 
the following:  
• Death ; 
• A life -threatening situation (from the event as it occurred) that placed the participant  at risk of death;  
• Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081];  
• A persistent or significant disability, incapacity, or condition requiring treatment or impairing subject 
ability to carry out normal daily activities;  
• A congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
• Any other adverse event that, based upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s 
health or wellbeing and may require medical or surgical intervention or procedural modifications (that 
are not minor) to prevent one of the other outcomes l isted in the bullets above.  
All adverse events will be reported to our Institutional Review Board (IRB) on at least an annual basis following the 
standard practice of our institution , and to the DSMB at all DSMB meetings and at additional timepoints if 
requested.  
In addition , adverse events will be reported on an expedited basis  that are : (1) unexpected ; and (2) related or 
possibly  related  to study procedures or participation in the research; and (3) suggests that the research places 
subjects or others at a greater risk of harm  than was previously known or  resulted in a serious adverse event 
(SAE) .  Per institutional reporting requirements  these events will be reported wit hin 1 business day of discovery 
if a death  or within 15 days for other serious adverse events.  
If a participant experiences an adverse event after informed consent is completed but before the participant has 
started to receive the study intervention, the event will be reported as not related to the study intervention.  
 
5. Ethics and dissemination  
5a. Research ethics approval  
This protocol and all informed consent scripting and documentation  (sample text included in Appendix A ) will 
be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_715677]. The KPWHRI IRB will also review participant recruitment , intervention and data 
collection materials  and plans , any other requested documents  and any subsequent modifications.  No 
activities involving human subjects will take place unless they have been reviewed and approved.  Subsequent 
to initial review and approval, the KPWHRI IRB  will review a continuation and progress report  at least 
annually. These reports will include t he total number of participants enrolled , a report on study progress, 
summaries of adverse events and summaries DSMB meetings and recommendations.  
 
5b. Protocol amendments  
Any modifications to the protocol which may impact on the conduct of the study, potential benefit for the 
participant  or may affect pa rticipant safety, including changes of study objectives, study design, pa rticipant  
population, sample sizes, study procedures, or significant administrative aspects will require a formal 
amendment to the protocol. Such amendment s will be agreed upon by [CONTACT_715678].  
Administrative changes of the protocol are minor corrections and/or clarifications that have no effect on the way the 
study is to be conducted. These administrative changes will be agreed upon by [CONTACT_715679]:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   23 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974783] information and all required consent elements  (Approved Consent Form  in Appendix 
A). 
After mailing the invitation letter and Consent form , staff from the KPWHRI SRP will call potential participants to 
assess interest, complete telephone screening, and if the respondent is eligible and interested, collect verbal 
consent to collect baseline self -report data .  When the baseline survey is completed, the interviewer will collect 
the participant’s email address for e -Consent, and enter the participant into the study’s REDCap e -Consent 
database.  The study REDCap e -Consent database will send an email to the participant with link to the e -Consent 
form.  Both the email and e -Consent form will have a telephone n umber to call if the participant has questions 
or wants to discuss the consent before signing.  The participant will review, sign and submit the e -Consent form.  
They will be able to print a copy for their own records or can request a copy from the study. The e -Consent 
instructions will clearly state this. If the participant does not return e -Consent , the study will send up to two 
email reminders and finally follow up by [CONTACT_756], to answer any questions and, if the participant is willing, 
walk through cons ent and completion of the e -Consent by [CONTACT_648].  
If the participant does not want to use e -Consent,  the study will mail two hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_715649] a 
business reply envelope and instructions to sign and return one  copy  and keep the other for the participant’s 
records. If the paper consent is not received, the study will make up to two follow up reminder calls, and finally 
do a second mailing with business reply envelope . 
If after follow up, any participants do not return either e - or paper consent, the study will destroy their baseline 
survey data and will not contact [CONTACT_266401].  
Consent for process measures and observations will be included in the signed written e - or paper consent.  For 
nurse and participant interview we will request a waiver of documentation of consent conduct informed verbal 
consent using scripts and materials that have been reviewed and approved prior to each activity and will 
document consent in study records. We will conduct no activities without prior review and approval by [CONTACT_715680].  
 
5d. Confidentiality  
All Kaiser Permanente staff must annually complete confidentiality training and sign a confidentiality agreement. 
All investigators, key personnel, and all those responsible for the design and conduct of research are required to 
receive training in the protection of human subjects. Access to areas where identifiable or protected health 
information is used is restricted and requires use of individualized key cards. Data handling procedures are 
clearly documented. All KPWHRI staff with access to identifiers or protected  health information is required to 
review these procedures. New employees are trained regarding data handling procedures, confidentiality and 
security.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   24 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/[ADDRESS_974784] been specifically 
granted rights by [CONTACT_715681]. All Kaiser Permanente data are protected from unauthorized 
access by [CONTACT_715682] -blocking software. Limiting access to only 
authorized individuals who are within the Kaiser Permanente firewall protects servers within KPWHRI. Servers 
are located in a locked room, accessible only to Kaiser Permanente comput er support staff. Patient identifiers 
and demographic data are kept in separate files from protected health information.  
All research data collected from participants will be labeled with a unique study identification number and not 
the participant’s name [CONTACT_715692].  Only the code number will 
appear on data records and compu ter files. The participant’s contact [CONTACT_715683] . 
 
5e. Declaration of interests  
The independence of this study from any actual or perceived influence is critical. Therefore, any actual conflict 
of interest of persons who have a role in the design, conduct, analysis,  or publication of this trial will be 
disclosed and managed. Furth er, persons who have a perceived conflict of interest will be required to have such 
conflicts managed in a way that is appropriate to their participation in the design and conduct of this trial.  
KPWHRI and its sub -contract , the Division of Research, Kaiser Foundation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715650] a mechanism for the 
management of all reported dualities of interest.  
 
5f. Access to data 
All study data will be collected and retained by [CONTACT_715684].  No data with identifying information will be shared 
outside the institution.  Aggregate data and de -identified data sets may be shared as allowed by [CONTACT_715685].  
 
5g. Ancillary and post-trial care 
This study does not have provisions for ancillary or post -trial care. However, all participants enrolled in the study 
will be current members of Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington and r eceiving care at KPWA . The 
proposed study interventions will be delivered by [CONTACT_715686]’  primary care 
health provider s and their teams. Ancillary and post -trial care will thus be provided by [CONTACT_3038]’ primary 
care provider and KPWA as covered by [CONTACT_715687].  The study wi ll not provide compensation for those 
who may suffer harm from the trial.  
 
5h. Dissemination policy  
We will share study results with all participants in this stud y.  We will send  a mailed study results letter or 
summary  to all patient participants  at the end of the study after analyses for our primary outcomes are 
complete.  We will share results with nurses and providers in the KPWA healthcare delivery system by [CONTACT_715688].  For patient 
participants we  will also share their blinded baseline and [ADDRESS_974785] materials on 
publicly available websites as feasible and sharing tools and methods (e.g. manuals and guides, interview 
instruments, participant materials) as appropriate upon request.  
 
  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   25 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  6. References  
 
1. Signorovitch JE, Macaulay D, Diener M, et al. Hypoglycaemia and accident risk in people with type 2 
diabetes mellitus treated with non -insulin antidiabetes drugs. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013;15(4):335 -
341.  
2. Schwartz AV, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE, et al. Diabetes -related complications, glycemic control, and 
falls in older adults. Diabetes Care. 2008;31(3):[ADDRESS_974786] J. Association between hypoglycaemic events and 
fall-related fractures in Medicare -covered patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Obes Metab. 
2012;14(7):[ADDRESS_974787]. 2012;96(3):313 -
318.  
5. Laiteerapong N, Karter AJ, Liu JY, et al. Correlates of quality of life in older adults with diabetes: The 
Diabetes & Aging Study. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(8):1749 -1753.  
6. Trief PM, Sandberg JG, Dimmock JA, Forken PJ, Weinstock RS. Personal and relationship challenges of 
adults with type 1 diabetes: a qualitative focus group study. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(9):2483 -2488.  
7. Stahn A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_341592] F, Ganz X, et al. Relationship between hypoglycemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_715651] 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases: silent hypoglycemias and silent 
arrhythmias. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(2):516 -520.  
8. Tsujimoto T, Yamamoto -Honda R, Kajio H, et al. Vital signs, QT prolongation, and newly diagnosed 
cardiovascular disease during severe hypoglycemia in type 1 and type 2 diabetic patients. Diabetes Care. 
2014;37(1):217 -225.  
9. Yun JS, Kim JH, Song KH, et al. Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction predicts severe hypoglycemia in 
patients with type 2 diabetes: a 10 -year follow -up study. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(1):[ADDRESS_974788] J, Brett J. Evidence linking hypoglycemic events 
to an increased risk of acute cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2011;34(5):1164 -1170.  
11. Desouza C, Salazar H, Cheong B, Murgo J, Fonseca V. Association of hypoglycemia and cardiac ischemia: 
a study based on continuous monitoring. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(5):1485 -1489.  
12. Goto A, Arah OA, Goto M, Terauchi Y, Noda M. Severe hypoglycaemia and cardiovascular disease: 
systematic review and meta -analysis with bias analysis. BMJ. 2013;347:f4533.  
13. Whitmer RA, Karter AJ, Yaffe K, Quesenberry CP, Jr., Selby [CONTACT_9715]. Hypoglycemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_715652] 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA. 2009;301(15):1565 -1572.  
14. Yaffe K, Falvey C, Hamilton N, et al. Hypoglycemia and dementia: A reciprocal relationship? Alzheimers 
Dement. 8(4):P254 -P255.  
15. Feinkohl I, Aung PP, Keller M, et al. Severe hypoglycemia and cognitive decline in older people with type 
2 diabetes: the Edinburgh type 2 diabetes study. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(2):507 -515.  
16. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Ziegenfuss JY, Shah ND, Wermers RA, Smith SA. Increased mortality of 
patients with diabetes reporting severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 2012;35(9):1897 -1901.  
17. Zoungas S, Patel A, Chalmers J, et al. Severe hypoglycemia and risks of vascular events and death. N Engl 
J Med. 2010;363(15):1410 -1418.  
18. Bonds DE, Miller ME, Bergenstal RM, et al. The association between symptomatic, severe hypoglycaemia 
and mortality in type 2 diabetes: retrospective epi[INVESTIGATOR_258611]. BMJ. 
2010;340:b4909.  
19. Hsu PF, Sung SH, Cheng HM, et al. Association of clinical symptomatic hypoglycemia with cardiovascular 
events and total mortality in type 2 diabetes: a nationwide population -based study. Diabetes Care. 
2013;36(4):894 -900.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   26 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  20. Abdelhafiz AH, Rodriguez -Manas L, Morley JE, Sinclair AJ. Hypoglycemia in older people - a less well 
recognized risk factor for frailty. Aging Dis. 2015;6(2):156 -167.  
21. Budnitz DS, Lovegrove MC, Shehab N, Richards CL. Emergency hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715653]. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(21):2002 -2012.  
22. Fu H, Curtis BH, Xie W, Festa A, Schuster DP, Kendall DM. Frequency and causes of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715654] 2 diabetes in the [LOCATION_002]: a retrospective, claims -
based analysis. J Diabetes Complications. 2014;28(4):477 -481.  
23. Lipska KJ, Warton EM, Huang ES, et al. HbA1c and risk of severe hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes: the 
Diabetes and Aging Study. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(11):[ADDRESS_974789]. 2010;87(1):64 -68. 
25. Little SA, Leelarathna L, Walkinshaw E, et al. Recovery of hypoglycemia awareness in long -standing type 
1 diabetes: a multicenter 2 x 2 factorial randomized controlled trial comparing insulin pump with 
multiple daily injections and continuous with conv entional glucose self -monitoring (HypoCOMPaSS). 
Diabetes Care. 2014;37(8):2114 -2122.  
26. Speight J, Amiel SA, Bradley C, et al. Long -term biomedical and psychosocial outcomes following DAFNE 
(Dose Adjustment For Normal Eating) structured education to promote intensive insulin therapy in 
adults with sub -optimally controlled Type [ADDRESS_974790]. 2010;89(1):22 -29. 
27. Cox DJ, Gonder -Frederick L, Julian DM, Clarke W. Long -term follow -up evaluation of blood glucose 
awareness training. Diabetes Care. 1994;17(1):1 -5. 
28. Yeoh E, Choudhary P, Nwokolo M, Ayis S, Amiel SA. Interventions that Restore Awareness of 
Hypoglycemia in Adults with Type 1 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. Diabetes Care. 
2015;38(8):1592 -1609.  
29. Cox DJ, Gonder -Frederick L, Polonsky W, Schlundt D, Kovatchev B, Clarke W. Blood glucose awareness 
training (BGAT -2): long -term benefits. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(4):637 -642.  
30. American Diabetes Association. 6. Glycemic Targets: Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes -2018. 
Diabetes Care. 2018;41(Suppl 1):S55 -S64.  
31. Kaiser Permanente: Clinical Improvement and Prevention Diabetes Program. Chronic Disease Case 
Management - Diabetes Determination of Complexity and RN Interventions 2018; 
http://incontext.ghc.org/nursing_ops/clinical/diabetes/documents/diabetes -case -mgmt.pdf . Accessed 
January 15, 2019.  
32. Little SA, Speight J, Leelarathna L, et al. Sustained Reduction in Severe Hypoglycemia in Adults With Type 
1 Diabetes Complicated by [CONTACT_715689]: Two -Year Follow -up in the 
HypoCOMPaSS Randomized Clinical Trial. Diabetes Care. 2018;41(8):1600 -1607.  
33. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Lipska KJ, et al. Development and Validation of a Tool to Identify Patients With 
Type 2 Diabetes at High Risk of Hypoglycemia -Related Emergency Department or Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_715655]. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2017;177(10):1461 -1470.  
34. Karter AJ, Warton EM, Moffet HH, et al. Revalidation of the Hypoglycemia Risk Stratification Tool Using 
ICD-10 Codes. Diabetes Care. 2019.  
35. Gold AE, MacLeod KM, Frier BM. Frequency of severe hypoglycemia in patients with type I diabetes with 
impaired awareness of hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 1994;17(7):697 -703.  
36. Geddes J, Wright RJ, Zammitt NN, Deary IJ, Frier BM. An evaluation of methods of assessing impaired 
awareness of hypoglycemia in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2007;30(7):1868 -1870.  
37. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes -- 2017. Diabetes Care. 2017;[ADDRESS_974791] 1.  
38. Chico A, Vidal -Rios P, Subira M, Novials A. The continuous glucose monitoring system is useful for 
detecting unrecognized hypoglycemias in patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes but is not better than 
frequent capi[INVESTIGATOR_715656]. Diabetes Care. 
2003;26(4):1153 -1157.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   27 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  39. Cotton M. Teaching Self -Blood Glucose Monitoring: Education Guide. 2014; 
http://incontext.ghc.org/nursing_ops/clinical/diabetes/documents/teaching -blood -glucose.pdf . 
Accessed January 15, 2019.  
40. Silbert R, Salcido -Montenegro A, Rodriguez -Gutierrez R, Katabi A, McCoy RG. Hypoglycemia Among 
Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], Risk Factors, and Prevention Strategies. Curr Diab Rep. 
2018;18(8):53.  
41. Graziani C, Rosenthal MP, Diamond JJ. Diabetes education program use and patient -perceived barriers 
to attendance. Fam Med. 1999;31(5):358 -363.  
42. Harris S, Miller A, Amiel S, Mulnier H. Characterization of Adults With Type 1 Diabetes Not Attending 
Self-Management Education Courses: The Barriers to Uptake of Type 1 Diabetes Education (BUD1E) 
Study. Qual Health Res. 2019:1049732318823718.  
43. Testerman J, Chase D. Influences on Diabetes Self -Management Education Participation in a Low -
Income, Spanish -Speaking, Latino Population. Diabetes Spectr. 2018;31(1):47 -57. 
44. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: best 
practices and recommendations from the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. Health Psychol. 
2004;23(5):443 -451.  
45. Dagogo -Jack S, Rattarasarn C, Cryer PE. Reversal of hypoglycemia unawareness, but not defective 
glucose counterregulation, in IDDM. Diabetes. 1994;43(12):1426 -1434.  
46. Stargardt T, Gonder -Frederick L, Krobot KJ, Alexander CM. Fear of hypoglycaemia: defining a minimum 
clinically important difference in patients with type 2 diabetes. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2009;7:91.  
47. Sarkar U, Karter AJ, Liu JY, Moffet HH, Adler NE, Schillinger D. Hypoglycemia is more common among 
type 2 diabetes patients with limited health literacy: the Diabetes Study of Northern [LOCATION_004] 
(DISTANCE). J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25(9):962 -968.  
48. International Hypoglycaemia Study Group. Glucose concentrations of less than 3.0 mmol/l (54 mg/dl) 
should be reported in clinical trials: a joint position statement of the American Diabetes Association and 
the European Association for the Study of Diab etes. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(1):155 -157.  
49. Gonder -Frederick LA, Schmidt KM, Vajda KA, et al. Psychometric properties of the hypoglycemia fear 
survey -ii for adults with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(4):801 -806.  
50. Speight J, Barendse SM, Singh H, et al. Characterizing problematic hypoglycaemia: iterative design and 
preliminary psychometric validation of the Hypoglycaemia Awareness Questionnaire (HypoA -Q). Diabet 
Med. 2016;33(3):[ADDRESS_974792] (DKT2). Diabetes Educ. 2016;42(2):[ADDRESS_974793], Lorig K, Laurent DD. Characteristics of the Spanish - and English -Language Self -Efficacy to 
Manage Diabetes Scales. Diabetes Educ. 2016;42(2):167 -177.  
53. Littenberg B, MacLean CD. Intra -cluster correlation coefficients in adults with diabetes in primary care 
practices: The Vermont Diabetes Information System Field Survey. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2006;6:20.  
54. Workgroup on Hypoglycemia, American Diabetes Association. Defining and reporting hypoglycemia in 
diabetes: a report from the American Diabetes Association Workgroup on Hypoglycemia. Diabetes Care. 
2005;28(5):1245 -1249.  
55. Lyles CR, Harris LT, Jordan L, et al. Patient race/ethnicity and shared medical record use among diabetes 
patients. Med Care. 2012;50(5):434 -440.  
56. Glasgow RE, Eakin EG, Toobert DJ. How generalizable are the results of diabetes self -management 
research? The impact of participation and attrition. Diabetes Educ. 1996;22(6):573 -574, 581 -572, 584 -
575.  
57. Creswell JW. Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design : Choosing among Five Approaches.  Second ed: Sage 
Publications; 2007.  
58. Crabtree BF, Miller WL. Doing qualitative research.  (2nd) ed. Thousand Oaks, Calif; London: SAGE; 1999.  
Protocol:  ClinicalTrials.gov # NCT0486387 , Comparing the Effectiveness of Two Approaches   28 | P a g e  
to Preventing Severe Hypoglycemia in Type 2 Diabetes (PHT2), Version 7, 04/14/2025  59. King N. Doing Template Analysis. In: Symon G, Cassel C, eds. Qualitative Organizational Research: Core 
methods and current challenges . London: Sage Publications; 2012.  
60. Grant A, Treweek S, Dreischulte T, Foy R, Guthrie B. Process evaluations for cluster -randomised trials of 
complex interventions: a proposed framework for design and reporting. Trials. 2013;14:15.  
61. Heisler M, Smith DM, Hayward RA, Krein SL, Kerr EA. Racial disparities in diabetes care processes, 
outcomes, and treatment intensity. Med Care. 2003;41(11):1221 -1232.  
62. Rossi MC, Cristofaro MR, Gentile S, et al. Sex disparities in the quality of diabetes care: biological and 
cultural factors may play a different role for different outcomes: a cross -sectional observational study 
from the AMD Annals initiative. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(10):3162 -3168.  
63. Ralston JD, Cook AJ, Anderson ML, et al. Home blood pressure monitoring, secure electronic messaging 
and medication intensification for improving hypertension control: a mediation analysis. Applied clinical 
informatics. 2014;5(1):[ADDRESS_974794] Moderation in 
Mobile Health. J Am Stat Assoc. 2018;113(523):1112 -1121.  
 