 
Page [ADDRESS_463972] , Suite A  
Holliston, MA  [ZIP_CODE]  
(508) [ADDRESS_463973], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
  
Sponsor  U.S. ARMY MEDICAL RESEARCH ACQUISITION ACTIVITY ([LOCATION_003]MRAA)  
Sponsor Protocol #  E00572.1a  
Solutions IRB #  2020/01/[ADDRESS_463974] of a prosthetic liner that rolls onto the limb and traps heat and occasional extra 
prosthetic socks.   Studies found increases in socket temperature after the prosthesis was donned (0.8oC) [1] and after 30 
minutes of walking (2.5oC) [2].  Temperatures were found to remain elevated long after activi ty cessation and even a rest 
period of double the duration of the preceding activity period is insufficient to return the limb to its initial temperature 
[3].  Peery, et al . [1] suggested that a modest temperature increase of only 2oC may be responsible fo r reports of thermal 
discomfort by [CONTACT_370840] .  Therefore, a small amount of activity can cause the socket temperature to elevate and remain 
at an uncomfortable level for an extended period of time, which can lead to decreased wear times .  In summary, an 
uncomfortable socket/residual limb interface decreases prosthesis use among amputees who want to remain active in 
their lives.  
 
To address this, Vivonics, Inc . and Liberating Technologies, Inc . (LTI) have  developed a  silicone liner approach to wick sweat 
from  the skin and out of the socket through specially designed microchannels and to passively conduct heat from the skin 
using thermally conductive elastomers .  This liner has been develop ed to work alongside  a thermo -electric cooling (TEC) -
based module  called  the Intrasocket Cooling Element (ICE)  developed in a parallel project by [CONTACT_370841] .  The ICE 
device  can be embedded into the prosthesis in order to cool the residual limb .  A technology that can provide thermal 
control while retaining adequate susp ension, weight , and other prosthetic characteristics would benefit many prosthesis 
wearers.  
 
 
Page 2 of 10 
This document contains confidential information.  
 
2.  Study Rationale  
This study will focus on investigating the efficacy of this novel moisture  and thermal  management  (experimental)  liner .   
 
The rationale for this study is to determine how well the new technology can  regulate the residual limb temperature , 
reduce the moisture generation , and remove excess moisture  in a control led laboratory environment . 
 
3.  Objectives  
The primary objective of thi s study is to measure the effects experimental techniques of moisture  and thermal  
management  has on moisture  and temperature  in the socket .  Moisture  and thermal  management of the  residual limb 
inside the prosthetic socket could result in greater comfort w hile wearing the prosthesis, and ultimately could result in 
greater function and better quality of life  (QoL) . 
 
4.  Study Design  
A repeated measures study will be conducted to analyze the temperature and moisture generation of the residual limb 
with and without the experimental  liner and active cooling system  within a standard prosthetic socket.  
 
Both able -bodied research subjects, and lower limb amputee research subjects who use transfemoral or transtibial 
prostheses will be  recruited for testing .  Liners for able -bodies subjects will have the distal end  removed  to allow for 
donning .  All subjects will visit Liberating Technologies, Inc . to be consented and to complete study testing .   
 
Test conditions include:  
- Control condition.   This would be a non -modified control liner  (such as 
commercially off the shelf ( COTS ) liners  or ones made without any additives ) 
for able -bodied subjects and , for amputees , a check socket (with or without an 
unmodified control liner, de pending on whether the amputee typi[INVESTIGATOR_370825] a 
liner or not) .   
- Experimental liner condition .  This would be a prototype liner designed to 
reduce  and/or remove moisture and heat that build s up on the limb.  
- Active cooling condition .  This would integrate the TEC module (see Figure  1) 
into the socket for amputees (with the experimental  liner  or with a control 
liner ), or the TEC module with the experimental or control  liner for able -bodied 
subjects.   
 
Passive cooling and moisture management will be  achieved from an experimental liner 
made of standard silicone used in COTS liner with bio -compatible thermally conductive 
additives .  A standard check socket will be fabricated for each amputee subject if 
necessary to fit the experimental liner.   Addition al modifications , such as channels  in a 
liner and socket , may be used to remove moisture  such as ones developed under New England IRB (NEIRB) protocol NEIRB 
# 14-232/HRPO Log A -[ADDRESS_463975] prosthetic socket and liner .  The TEC assembly 
is comprised of a thermoelectric cooling unit (TEC), h eat sink, fan and heat spreader  and has previously been tested under 
New England IRB (NEIRB)  protocol NEIRB # 120160413 /HRPO Log A -[ZIP_CODE].[ADDRESS_463976]’s office  
Figure 1. TEC  Module embedded into 
standard prosthetic socket for active 
cooling condition.  
 
Page 3 of 10 
This document contains confidential information.  
 
or LTI’s in -house prosthetist  for measurements and the new socket will be fabricated . The subjects may return for 
alignment and adjustment  on the new socket . 
 
Testing will measure the temperature, humidity,  socket suspension  and moisture  accumulation  of the limb when active  
cooling , moisture /thermal  management,  and no cooling is applied in order to determine the effectiveness of the proposed 
technology .   
 
Walking will be used to increa se the temperature of the limb in order to measure the system’s ability to cool it as well as 
to determine subject perception of heat and comfort with the  experimental liner and  active cooling system as compared 
to the control liners and sockets . 
 
Research  participants will have socket temperature and moisture data collected while walking on a treadmill in  the 
different conditions throughout different site visits .  The active cooling from the ICE module will be completed with the 
experimental liner as well as with the control liner .  The order of conditions with the experimental  and control  liner s and 
the active cooling on or off  will be randomized for each subject.  
 
5.  Study Population  
Both able -bodied persons  and persons with transfemoral and transtibial limb loss  who are able to walk with a prosthesis 
will be recruited for this study .  Able -bodied subjects will be recruited via word of mouth .  LTI will enlist the aid of its 
current in -house prosthetist, Michael Amrich, CPO and its network of prosthetists including Next Step B&P, Cornell O&P, 
and several others, to assist in subject recruitment  and will be given flyers to hand out to their patients .  Additionally, 
flyers will be distributed online  (i.e. LTI’s website: L iberating Tech.com/research -studies ) and in person by [CONTACT_370842].   If subjects are interested in participating, they can call the number on the flyer 
and schedule a time to discuss the study with  the investigators .   
 
A maximum of 10 able -bodied and 20 lower -limb amputee subjects will be recruited for this study .  This is increased from 
a target 12 subjects  to account for any drop -outs , etc . 
 
6.  Participant Eligibility  
Lower limb a mputees will be identified who meet th e following inclusion criteria: must be [ADDRESS_463977] 6 months on a definitive prosthesis,  fits within an experimental liner , and 
can understand English  in order to be properly consented and provide their feedback to the study personnel .  Subjects 
can be excluded at the discretion of the investigator for other unforeseen disqualifying criteria (such as specific cognitive  
issues, etc.).  
 
Subjects in this s tudy will not be discriminated by [CONTACT_38881].  
 
The risks to pregnant women and fetuses are unknown and therefore pregnant women should not participate in the study  
and will be screened by [CONTACT_6270] -disclosure . 
 
7.  Study Methodology  
Visit 1:   During the first visit, the subject will be consented and enrolled in the study .  Measurements and molds will be 
taken of the residual limb so an experimental socket can be fabricated .  For the purposes of this study, the prosthetic liner 
is being standardized and all subj ects will be provided with a  prosthetic liner  of the proper  size, such as an Iceross Comfort 
Liner by [CONTACT_370843] , that has been deemed appropriate by a certified prosthetist  
 
Page [ADDRESS_463978] may be asked to wear the liner without a prosthesis while at home before the second visit to 
acclimat e to the liner(s)  as is standard care.  During this visit the subject will be asked to completed standard 
questionnaires regarding their quality of life with their current liner.  These will include questionnaires commonly used  
such as the Dermatology Life  Quality Index  [4,5], the Residual Limb Health section of the Prosthesis Evaluation 
Questionnaire (PEQ)  [6], and the EuroQol -5D. 
 
The experimental socket would be created  to fit the subject while wearing the gel sock (if applicable) and appropriate  liner 
using standard  clinical socket fabrication techniques .  As part of the standard of care when fabricating a new prosthetic 
socket, the prosthetist first creates a check socket with which to test the fit on the subject b efore fabricating the definitive 
socket.  Check sockets are structurally sound to walk on and use but may be a littler bulkier and heavier than a definitive 
socket.  Because all testing will be completed in -lab, the check socket will be used for all resear ch activities.   LTI will 
fabricat e the prosthetic sockets and install the ICE units in them . 
 
At the same time the prosthetist fabricates the socket, s/he may also create a clear, limb “template” similar to the check 
socket that matches the limb without ac commodating any liner or socks (skin fit).  This template allows the location of the 
sensors on the limb to be marked on the template so that the sensors can be placed in the same location on the limb for 
each lab test visit.   
 
This visit will take up to 2 hours.  
 
Visit 2:   When the experimental socket has been fabricated  and instrumented , the subject will return to the lab for a 
second visit .  The subject will be asked to meet with the prosthetist to try on the check socket for fit and alignment with 
the control  and experimental liners.   
 
The subject will then perform in -laboratory testing to determine the effectiveness  of an experimental liner to keep the 
limb cooler and dryer as compared to the control  prosthetic liner .  The order of conditions (Experimental Liner versus 
Control  Liner , with or without the active cooling ICE unit ) will be randomized .   
 
Similar to what was d one in a prior protocol under a previous effort  (NEIRB # 120160413 /HRPO Log A -[ZIP_CODE].2 ), an array 
of temperature sensors  will be attached to the subject’s residual limb before donning the socket and/or liner t o give a 
more complete pi[INVESTIGATOR_370826] .  Baseline readings will be taken of 
the residual limb temperature, the body’s core temperature via an oral thermometer , and the ambient temperature . 
   
In addition, we will measure the amount of persp iration  produced during each condition .  The limb will be dried with a 
towel, so pre - and post -activity weight of the liner and towel will be measured and the difference in weight is attributed 
to the sweat p roduced during that condition as described by [CONTACT_370844] . [7].  Testing may also be performed in a thermal 
chamber that regulates the temperature of the testing area, such as that used by [CONTACT_370845] . [8], to ensure that the subject 
will perspi[INVESTIGATOR_1312].  
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_463979]’s residual limb before donning the socket and/or liner similar 
to work completed by [CONTACT_370846] . [9].  These will allow a more complete pi[INVESTIGATOR_370827].  
 
In addition,  mark s will be made with a skin safe marker on the leg where the top of liner rests  before the subject begins 
the testing activity (such as walking on a treadmill). Once the testing activity has ended, the same mark will be made on 
the leg where the top of the liner  rests. The distance between these lines will show any slippage that occurred during the 
activity which may be due to a lack of suspension.  
 
The subject will be asked to  do the following tasks, similar to Klute  et al . [3]:  (1) an initial seated rest  for up to 6 0 minutes 
to obtain basel ine in -socket temperature data; (2) an activity to incre ase their body temperature , such as walking on a 
treadmill [ 2, 3] for up to 30 minutes; (3) a seated rest for up to 60 minutes ; and (4) t he liner and perspi[INVESTIGATOR_370828] (with a towel) and weighed for changes .  The second condition will begin once baseline temperatures 
have been reached and the test procedure repeated in the other condition  
 
Throughout the in -lab tes t sessions, photos and/or videos may be taken to document such things as the location of the 
sensors on the limb, the temperature gradients across the limb (with a thermal camera), etc .  At the end of each condition, 
subjective feedback on the comfort and temperature regulation of each condition will be obtained via a questionnaire 
developed during this effort .  The participants would fill out the questionnaire  rating parameters such as perceived 
comfort, intra -socket temperature, potential loss of suspensi on, etc. 
 
This visit will take up to [ADDRESS_463980]’s volition, if more data is required or if re -testing is needed.  
 
Visit 3:   The same tasks as described in Visit 2 will be completed using the same data collection process.  The order of 
conditions (Experimental Liner versus Control Liner, with or without the active cooling ICE unit) will be randomized.  The 
subject will perform in -laboratory testing to  determine the  effectiveness the ICE unit to cool and reduce moisture 
generation of a residual limb with  an experimental liner as compared to  with  a standard control  prosthetic liner .   
 
We expect to demonstrate that even if the socket doesn’t reduce the temperature dur ing walking, it can cool the socket 
immediately  upon cessation of walking, unlike the standard socket that produces the sustained high temperatures 
observed by [INVESTIGATOR_229602], et al . [3] and Huff, et al . [2].  This benefit is expected to increase with the addition of the experimental 
thermally conductive liner.  
 
This visit will take up to [ADDRESS_463981]’s volition, if more data is required or if re -testing is needed.  
 
Once all testing is completed , the research participant will complete a questionnaire to describe their opi[INVESTIGATOR_370829], look, and functionality of the experimental liner and ICE unit.   
 
8.  Study Conduct  
Subjects will be consented and screened for eligibility criteria .  If the y decide to participate,  an experimental liner will be 
made that fits the size and shape of their limb and  an experimental socket  to fit the experimental liner  will be fabricated 
using standard prosthetic techniques . 
 
Page [ADDRESS_463982] with 
the subjects.  
 
Subjects wi ll be compensated $[ADDRESS_463983] visits  for a n estimated  total 
of $400 (10 hours ) per subject .  Travel will also be reimbursed per mile at the current IRS federal rate.  
 
9.  Study Treatment  
This is not a treatment study .  The purpose of the study is to evaluate the effectiveness of a moisture removal and 
thermally conductive liner .   
 
10.  Evaluation of Adverse Events  
Based on past testing and data collection, no adverse events are expected .  Adverse  events could include : discomfort  or 
dermatological reaction to  experimental liner materials or  sensors in the socket, trippi[INVESTIGATOR_370830], 
overheating or overcooling due to controller, sensor, or battery malfunction  of the ICE  unit.  These risks have been 
mitigated by [CONTACT_370847]/or hypoallergenic tape with the sensors, using a spotter during walking 
tasks for in -lab testing, and standard thermal and electrical management techniques including thermal battery 
manage ment, voltage/current limiting, and monitoring temperature during testing.  
 
All unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, serious adverse events related to participation in the study  
and subject deaths related to participation in the stu dy will be promptly reported to the Solutions IRB  and HRPO .  A written 
description of the adverse event will be stored in the study file maintained by [CONTACT_079] .  Also, the protocol 
will be reviewed in light of  the adverse event to determine if modifications need to be made to prevent the event from 
occurring again .  Major modifications to the research protocol and any modifications that could potentially increase risk 
to human subjects must be submitted to the Solutions IRB  and HRPO  for approval prior to implementation.  
 
11.  Ethical Considerations  
There is no direct benefit to the user .  Participating in this study may potentially advance the scientific community’s 
understanding o n the ability of reducing intra -socket moisture generation  and cooling intra -socket temperatures  to 
improve  comfort and quality of life f or lower limb amputees .   
 
The protocol, consent form, and recruitment flyer will require IRB review and approval .  The principal invest igator will be 
in continuous communication with the IRBs and HRPO  and will forward information to the co -investigators .  Subjects’ 
participation is voluntary,  and they may withdraw from participation in the study at any time by [CONTACT_370848] .  The investigators may choose to terminate a subject’s participation if he or she 
experiences discomfort or injury .  In addition, participants will be given any new information which is discovered during 
the course o f the study which may influence participants’ willingness to continue the study .  If they desire to do so, 
 
Page 7 of 10 
This document contains confidential information.  
 
subjects’ will also have the option to discuss any concerns regarding the study activities or the investigators with an 
impartial staff member of the  site IRB, whose duty it is to hear and review such concerns and provide advice or take  any 
other appropriate actions.  
 
The investigators will ensure the anonymity of all participants in this study .  After completing the consenting process, 
subjects will be assigned a random identification number .  The number will be used on all test data associated with the 
subject .  No personal identifiers will be associated with the data collected from the subjects during the various tests .  The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_370831] a master document linking the subject name [CONTACT_370858], and it will be stored on a password protected 
computer, with only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_370832] .  All collected t est data will be kept 
at Liberating Technologi es, Inc . and stored in a secure manner depending on the media: either a password protected 
computer with access limited to the co -investigator s, or in a locked filing cabinet in the investigator’s office .  A copy of the 
test data will also be retained by t he PI [INVESTIGATOR_370833], also stored in a secured manner.  Deidentified test data may  
also be stored at Vivonics, Inc. using the random identification numbers assigned to subjects.  
 
12.  Study Monitoring and Oversight  
The oversight of the study falls o n the PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254]-investigators .  They will be responsible for ensuring the study follows the 
approved protocol and for reporting any deviations or adverse events that occur during the study to Solutions  IRB and 
HRPO .  De-identified data, photos, and videos will be kept indefinitely to show in scientific presentations and publications .  
Photos will not contain any identifying information about the subject .  The photographs will not include the subject’s face 
or any identifying marks such as tattoos .  If ident ifying photographs happen to be received from a subject, they will be de -
identified by [CONTACT_370849][INVESTIGATOR_370834] g using photo -editing software.  
 
Additionally, representatives of the [LOCATION_002] Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity  ([LOCATION_003]MRAA)  are el igible to 
review research records as a function of their responsibility to protect subjects in research.  
 
13.  Investigational Product Management  
The experimental liners tested in this study are modified to increase the thermal conductivity and remove moisture from 
the limb to regulate intra -socket temperature and reduce moisture accumulation .  The ICE technology  tested in this study 
is a cooling device for the residual limb that is an add -on system  to a standard prosthetic socket .  Additionally , 
commercially -available temperature and humidity sensors may also be used in the instrumented sockets.  
 
EXPERIMENTAL LINER  
The e xperimental liner is a product of mixing thermally conductive additive to a base silicone material. The base material 
is a medi cal grade room temperature curing silicone rubber (RTV -2) from Wacker Chemie AG with characteristics of 
biocompatibility, low surface tension, thermal and chemical stability. This silicone can be sterilized easily for single as w ell 
as repeated use. The na ture of the silicone is hydrophobic which prevents microbial growth. Additives such as boron 
nitride, carbon and graphene nanoparticles are added to enhance the thermal conductivity of the liner. These 
nanomaterials are skin safe and are currently being us ed in other skin contact[CONTACT_370850] [ 10, 11, 12, 13 ].  
The experimental liner will be manufactured and packaged at a manufacturing facility that makes COTS liners using the 
standard procedures.  
 
INTRASOCKET COOLING ELEMENT  
The ICE active cooling module is comprised of a combination of: 1) an inner Heat Spreader (isothermal) layer designed to 
maintain approximately constant temperature along a section of the inner wall of the socket and 2) a Heat E xtractor 
 
Page [ADDRESS_463984] utilizing: a) a Thermo -Electric Cooling (TEC) module, b) a heat radiator (heat sink) 
structure and c) an air circulating system (fan) to discharge the heat to the surrounding air .   
 
The heat spreader functions to collect heat from around the circumference of the limb and then route it to a much smaller 
and more focal point where it is expelled from the socket by [CONTACT_370851] .  Additionally, the system has been 
developed to work in conjunction with commerci ally-available prosthetic liners where the heat spreader is in contact [CONTACT_370852], not the skin, and pulls the excess heat through the liner to extract it.  
 
The active heat pumpi[INVESTIGATOR_370835] a thermoelectric cooler (TEC ).  TECs are semiconductor 
devices that use electrical current to pump heat from one side of the device to the other based on the Peltier effect .  As 
an active system, a TEC can chill the heat source (residual limb) to a temperature lower than its surround ings.  In the ICE 
system, the TEC is used to pump heat from the heat spreader to a heat sink acting as a radiator .  The TEC raises the heat 
sink to a temperature above ambient .  A fan then facilitates removal of heat from the heat sink .  The TEC heat pumpi [INVESTIGATOR_370836].  
 
The ICE unit is powered by a standard, commercially -available [ADDRESS_463985] damage .  This battery has protection circuitry, 
including over -charge, over -discharge  and short -circuit protection, and is being charged with the  recommended charger 
externally,  off the subjects .  Control  of the device is based on a push button where the user engages the button when 
he/she feels that c ooling in necessary  and turns off the system when he/she no longer needs cool ing.    When the device 
is on, the system will to regulate cooling to the limb based on  feedback from  multiple sensors in the device, including the 
hot and cold side  temperature s of the TEC .  As long as the cold side of the TEC is above th e minimum thresho ld, the TEC 
will be powered  to reduce the limb temperature while taking into account battery life .  As the cold side temperature 
approaches the threshold  temperature , the voltage to the TEC will be reduced to maintain a TEC cold side temperature 
above the threshold .  Prior studies have shown that applying cooling at a temperature of 22oC (72oF) is the lowest 
temperature that is uniformly well -tolerated [ 5].  Because we will have a prosthetic liner between the ICE cooling element 
and the skin, we will use a cold side threshold temperature that takes into account the thermal properties of the 
standardized liner to ensure a residual limb temperature of no less th an 22oC.  Our testing has shown that the cold side 
threshold can be as low as 11.5oC (53oF) and still maintain a skin temperature of greater than 22oC.  Therefore, based on 
this data , we will use 1 1.5oC as our minimum cold side temperature threshold ; howev er, we may iterate the control 
algorithm and adjust the threshold as needed as more data is collected that can inform the algorithm .   
 
SOCKETS  
The prosthetic interface used in this study will be fabricated by a Board -Certified  Prosthetist, following conve ntional 
standardized methods .  The “ICE System” is to be incorporated into the socket design with manufacturing techniques 
similar to those used to integrate commercially -available prosthetic components and add -ons, such as suction valves, 
shuttle locks, e levated vacuum systems (e.g .  Ohio Willow Wood ONE system), etc  and used in a prior approved protocol 
(NEIRB # 120160413 / HRPO Log A -[ZIP_CODE].2 ).  The inclusion of the “ICE System” will be such that the structural integrity 
and functionality of the socket wil l not be compromised .  The socket characteristics will be similar to the subject’s usual 
socket, monitoring and maintaining acceptable  mobility and comfort throughout the testing procedure .   
 
CONTROL  LINERS  
The control  liners tested in this study will either be commercial -off-the-shelf (COTS) products that  are approved for the 
general population  or made with only the  base silicone of the experimental liners .  We have standardized the control  liner  
used  for this study in  order to eliminate confounding factor s of liner  material and  thickness .   
 
Page 9 of 10 
This document contains confidential information.  
 
 
PROSTHETIC SOCKS  
The prosthetic socks in this study will be commercial -off-the-shelf (COTS)  products that have been identified to work well 
with the ICE system , for example, the Si losheath gel sock by [CONTACT_370853] . 
 
TEMPERATURE SENSORS  
Commercially available temperature sensors, such as thermistors, thermocouples and iButtons, may be used to monitor 
the temperature of the ICE device as well as the temperature of the residual limb inside the prosthetic socket .  The 
thermistors and thermocouples have been used in the approved protocols for the previous and current studies ( NEIRB # 
120160413 / HRPO Log A -[ZIP_CODE].2 ).  The iButton has been used in O&P clinical practice and research studies  to monitor 
temperatures within O&P devices [15]. 
 
HUMIDITY SENSORS  
Commercially available humidity sensors, such Sensirion SHT21S, may be used to monitor the humidity of the residual 
limb inside the prosthetic socket .  This humidity sensor has been used i n another research study on prosthetic sockets  
following a similar protocol by  [CONTACT_370846].  [9]. 
 
14.  Data Analysis  
The data collected in the laboratory will include limb temperature, ambient temperature,  limb humidity , ambient 
humidity, and moisture generation on the limb .  Standard outcomes measures will include :  Dermatology Life Quality 
Index,  Modified Dermatology Life Quality Index,  the Residual Limb Health section of the Prosthesis Evaluation 
Questionnaire (PEQ), a nd the EuroQol -5D).  Custom questionnaires  that were developed to assess the experimental liner 
and ICE system  will also be used .   
 
The primary outcome of this study will assess the effect of the experimental liners  on the temperature of the residual 
limb ; however secondary measures include  moisture generation and humidity on the residual limb as well as satisfaction 
with the prosthesis using the above measures .  Measures during the experimental liner condition s will be compared to 
the control condition s both with and without the ICE system being active.  
 
15.  References  
 
[1] J. T. Peery, W. R. Ledoux, and G. K. Klute, “Residual -limb skin temperature in transtibial sockets,” The Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research and Development, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 147–154, 2005.  
[2] E. A. Huff, W. R. Ledoux, J. S. Berge, and G. K. Klute, “Measuring Residual Limb Skin Temperatures at the Skin -
Prosthesis Interface,” JPO Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 170 –173, Oct. 2008.  
[3] G. K. Klute, E. H uff, and W. R. Ledoux, “Does Activity Affect Residual Limb Skin Temperatures?,” Clinical Orthopaedics 
and Related Research®, vol. 472, no. 10, pp. 3062 –3067, Jun. 2014.  
[4] A. Finlay and G. Khan, “Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) -a simple practical measure for routine clinical use,” 
Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 210 –216, 1994.  
[5] H. Meulenbelt, J. Geertzen, M. Jonkman, and P. Dijkstra, “Skin Problems of the Stump in Lower -limb Amputees: 2. 
Influence on Function ing in Daily Life,” Acta Dermato Venereologica, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 178 –182, 2011.  
[6] D. A. Boone and K. L. Coleman, “Use of the Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire (PEQ),” JPO Journal of Prosthetics 
and Orthotics, vol. 18, no. Proceedings, 2006.  
 
Page 10 of 10 
This document contains confidential information.  
 
[7] M. M . Wernke, R. M. Schroeder, C. T. Kelley, J. A. Denune, and J. M. Colvin, “SmartTemp Prosthetic Liner Significantly 
Reduces Residual Limb Temperature and Perspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516],” Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 
134–139, Oct. 2015.  
[8] G. K. Klute, J. S. Berge, and C. undefined King, “Perspi[INVESTIGATOR_370837],” in American Academy of Orthotists & Prosthetists 43rd Academy Annual Meeting & 
Scientific Symposium Journal of Proceedings, 2 017.  
[9] A. Cutti, P. Perego, M. Fusca, R. Sacchetti, and G. Andreoni, “Assessment of Lower Limb Prosthesis through Wearable 
Sensors and Thermography,” Sensors, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 5041 –5055, Mar. 2014.  
[10] Song Y, Huang W, Mu C, et al. Carbon Nanotube‐Mo dified Fabric for Wearable Smart Electronic‐skin with Exclusive 
Normal‐Tangential Force Sensing Ability. Advanced Materials Technologies. 2019;4(5):N.PAG.  
[11] Son D, Koo JH, Song J -K, et al. Stretchable carbon nanotube charge -trap floating -gate memory and  logic devices for 
wearable electronics. ACS Nano. 2015;9(5):5585 -5593 . 
[12] Türkez H, Arslan ME, Sönmez E, Açikyildiz M, Tatar A, Geyikoğlu F. Synthesis, characterization and cytotoxicity of 
boron nitride nanoparticles: emphasis on toxicogenomics. Cytotec hnology. 2019;71(1):351.  
[13] Fiume MM, Bergfeld WF, Belsito DV, et al. Safety Assessment of Boron Nitride as Used in Cosmetics. International 
Journal Of Toxicology. 2015;34([ADDRESS_463986]):53S -60S.  
[14] A. Bandla, R. Sundar, L. -D. Liao, S. S. H. Tan, S. -C. Lee, N. V. Thakor, and E. P. V. Wilder -Smith, “Hypothermia for 
preventing chemotherapy -induced neuropathy – a pi[INVESTIGATOR_370838],” 
Acta Oncologica, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 430 –436, Sep. 2015.  
[15] K. M. Felton, S. Savage, and L. Karol, “Patient Adherence to Instructions of Weaning into Scoliosis Orthosis Wear,” 
Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics, vol. 27,  no. 1, pp. 23 –26, Jan. 2015.
 
 APPENDIX A – QUESTIONNAIRES EXPLANATION  
 
Surveys  and Questionnaires  
During the human subjects testing we will be collecting subjective feedback on the comfort and temperature of the 
experimental liner as well as quality of life with their current liner. These will include the Dermatology Life Quality Index , 
the Residual Li mb Health section of the Prosthesis Evaluation  Questionnaire (PEQ), the EuroQol -5D, and  custom 
questionnaire s specific to the experimental liner. Some will be administered before any testing, such as the quality of life 
surveys regarding their current liner, others will be administered immediately upon the conclusion of each test session 
such as the custom questionnaires.  
Visit #1 – Part #1 – Dermatology Life Quality Index  
The Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) is a simple, self -administered,  validated questionnaire developed by [CONTACT_370854] [1] that is designed to measure the health -related quality of life of patients suffering from skin issues.  
Visit #1 – Part #2 – Modified  Dermatology Life Quality Index  
Meulenbelt et. al. [2] has modifie d the DLQI (mDLQI) to apply on a monthly basis and applied it to amputees. The results 
of this questionnaire will be compared to the validated DLQI. The questionnaire was modified slightly from Meulenbelt 
et al. for grammatical errors and to change “amputa tion stump” to “residual limb” to use more commonly accepted 
terminology.  
Visit #1 – Part #3 – EuroQoL -5D 
Another questionnaire we will be using is the EuroQoL -5D (EQ -5D) survey. The EQ -5D is a well -known and widely used 
health status instrument that was d eveloped by [CONTACT_370855] 1990s.  The number of studies using the EQ -5D suite of instruments, registered with the EuroQol 
Group, totaled over 17,000 by 2015.  EQ-5D is designed for self-completion by [CONTACT_370856], in clinics, and in face -to-face interviews. It is cognitively undemanding and takes only a few minutes to 
complete.  We will be using the EQ -5D as a validated measure of quality of li fe. 
Visit #1 – Part #4 – Residual Limb Health Scale  
The fourth measure we will be using is a subscale of the validated Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire (PEQ) [3]. The 
PEQ consists of [ADDRESS_463987] of prosthesis wear (pain, 
satisfaction, comfort, etc.).  The PEQ scales are not dependent on each other, so it is reasonable to use only those scales 
of interest. We will be using the Residual Limb Health section which rates qualities such as in -socket perspi[INVESTIGATOR_370839]. For each scale used, all of the individual questions that make up that scale must be 
included.  The questions refer to the  prior  4 weeks and are scored using a visu al analog scale (100mm line). There is no 
total score. A guide gives coding instructions for all questions and groups the questions under different subscales. Each 
subscale score is computed by [CONTACT_370857].   
Visit #2 & Visit #3 – Part #1 & Part #2 – Individual Liner Questionnaire  
The custom individual liner questionnaire was developed to rate the different aspects of the experimental and control 
liner. This questionnaire will be completed immediately after each activity to rat e the liner that was used during that 
activity.  
Visit #2 & Visit #3 – Part #3 – Liner Comparison Questionnaire  
The custom liner comparison questionnaire was developed to measure the subject’s preference for different criteria 
between the experimental and s tandard liner. This questionnaire will be completed at the end of Visit #2 and Visit #[ADDRESS_463988] has completed both sets of activities.  
  
 
 References  
[1] A. Finlay and G. Khan, “Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) -a simple practical measure for r outine clinical use,” 
Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 210 –216, 1994.  
[2] H. Meulenbelt, J. Geertzen, M. Jonkman , and P. Dijkstra, “Skin Problems of the Stump in Lower -limb Amputees: 2. 
Influence on Functioning in Daily Life,” Acta Dermato Venereologica, vol. 91, no. 2, pp. 178 –182, 2011.  
[3] D. A. Boone and K. L. Coleman, “Use of the Prosthesis Evaluation Questionn aire (PEQ),” JPO Journal of Prosthetics 
and Orthotics, vol. 18, no. Proceedings, 2006.  
 
 APPENDIX B – QUESTIONNAIRES  
 
