STUDY PROTOCOL  
 Using Question Prompt Lists during Pediatric Asthma Visits to 
Increase Adolescent Involvement  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
April 27, 2015  
 
 
 
  
Study Design/ Approach  
Study overview : This study is a randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of an asthma 
question prompt list with short video intervention compared to usual care to increase adolescent involvement 
during visits and improve asthma outcomes. We conducted the study at four pediatric clinics in rural and 
suburban North Carolina.  Forty providers and 359 English - or Spanish -speaking adolescents and their 
caregivers participated. Adolescents were randomized to the intervention or usual care.  Their visits were 
audio -recorded.  Adolescents were interviewed after  their visits and their caregivers completed questionnaires. 
Participants were followed for 12 months.  
Study design : This study is a randomized controlled trial testing the effectiveness of an asthma 
question prompt list with short video intervention compared to usual care to increase adolescent involvement 
during visits and improve asthma outcomes (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], protocol ID 14 –2628) .  
Figure  1 contains our study protocol.  
 
Figure 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study setting : Participants were recruited from four pediatric clinics in suburban and rural areas in 
North Carolina. Three clinics were private practices and one was an academic practice. Clinics were chosen 
because they served large numbers of adolescents with persistent asthma from diverse racial/ethnic 
backgrounds.  
Participants : Our target population was adolescents with persistent asthma because we wanted to 
examine whether we could improve ado lescent involvement during visits and asthma outcomes.  Our target 
sample size was 360 adolescents ages 11 -17. Research assistants were hired and placed at each clinic.  
Clinic staff referred potentially eligible patients who were interested in learning mor e about the study to 
a research assistant.  During pre -visit wait time, the research assistant explained the study, obtained written 
caregiver consent and adolescent assent, and administered an eligibility screener. Children were eligible if they 
were: age s 11 to 17 years; spoke and read English or Spanish; had persistent asthma; were present for an 
acute or follow -up asthma visit or a well -child visit; and had previously visited the clinic at least once for 
asthma.  Adolescents’  caregivers were eligible if  they were at least [ADDRESS_1156090] to complete before their visits.  Providers 
were blinded to the adolescent’s group assignment.  All adolescents’ visits were a udio-tape recorded.  All 
adolescents were interviewed at baseline after their medical visits by a research assistant while their 
caregivers completed questionnaires.  Research assistants reviewed the caregiver questionnaires before Recruit 
adolescents 
and parents  Before office visit:  
 Determine 
eligibility  
 Obtain consent 
and assent  Randomly 
assign  Usual care:  
no intervention  
Intervention:  
adolescent 
watches brief 
educational 
video, receives 
asthma prompt 
list and marks 
questions they 
want to ask  
 Audio tape 
office visit  After office 
visit: 
 Parent  
survey  
 Interview 
adolescent  
 6- & 12-month 
follow -up:  
 Give prompt 
list 
(intervention
group only)  
 Audiotape 
office visit  
 Parent 
survey  
 Interview 
adolescent  
families left the clinic s to ensure data quality. The project manager traveled to the clinics regularly to pi[INVESTIGATOR_832730]. Adolescents and caregivers each received $25 for their time.  
Interventions and comparators or controls :  Our goal was to increase adolescent involvement 
during pediatric asthma visits. Adolescents in the intervention group received the asthma question prompt list 
with video intervention in the clinic before their medical visits. The video was eleven minutes in length and had 
six them es (asthma triggers, staying active with asthma, how to get mom off your back, tracking asthma 
symptoms, how to talk to your doctor, and having confidence with asthma).  Each theme had its own video that 
ranged in length from one to two minutes. The final one-page asthma question prompt list had [ADDRESS_1156091] took adolescents in the intervention grou p less 
than four minutes to complete.   
The control intervention was usual care, meaning that the adolescent received no intervention before 
their medical visits.  All adolescent visits were audio -taped and transcribed so we could examine 
communication dur ing visits.  
All audiotapes of the medical visits were transcribed verbatim.  Three research assistants were trained 
to code the transcripts using a detailed coding tool developed and used in prior asthma communication 
studies.   The three coders coded thirt y-four of the same transcripts throughout the study period to assess inter -
rater reliability.  
Study outcomes :   Our primary outcomes were (a) asthma control, (b) adolescent asthma 
management self -efficacy, and (c) asthma quality -of-life at [ADDRESS_1156092] which is a valid and reliable measure of asthma control .  Using a 5 -point Likert 
scale, responses are summed to indicate a score ranging from 5 (poor asthma control) to 25 (complete asthma 
contro l). Scores above 19 are considered “well controlled”, 16 to 19 are considered not well controlled, and 
scores 15 or below are considered “very poorly controlled.”  Studies have  shown the Asthma Control Test to be 
reliable, valid, and responsive to temporal changes in asthma control.    We measured asthma as being 
controlled if adolescents scored above [ADDRESS_1156093] a reliability of 
0.87. Prior work in asthma has found asthma management self -efficacy to change in response to an 
intervention.   Adolescent quality -of-life was measured as a mean score on t he standardized version of the 
Juniper pediatric asthma quality -of-life questionnaire. The questionnaire contains 23 items organized in three 
domains: symptoms, activities, and emotional impact of asthma, and has a reliability of 0.84.   
 
Data col lection and sources:   After enrollment at baseline, caregivers completed a contact [CONTACT_832731], the caregiver’s name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_3031], including 
postal address, home/cell number, email  address and alternative contact [CONTACT_3031].  The research assistant 
kept in contact [CONTACT_832732] [ADDRESS_1156094]; if the research assistant could not speak to t he caregiver directly she would 
leave a voice message (caregiver was always asked for permission to leave voice messages during initial 
meeting). If the research assistant did not hear back from the caregiver within a couple of days she would 
proceed to te xt, send an email and/or mail a letter. The research assistant would reach out to the alternative 
contact [CONTACT_832733].  
When an adolescent came back to the clinic at the [ADDRESS_1156095] a clinic visit at the 12 -month data collection point, the research assistant met the family for a follow -up 
visit at the location of their choice. If a family withdrew from th e study at 12 months, the research assistant 
recorded the reason why. Adolescents and caregivers each received $25 at 6 and 12 -month follow -up. The 
adolescent’s medical records were reviewed for the period of 12 months before and after the intervention.  
 
 
 
Analytical and statistical approaches  
Sample Size Calculations: Our planned enrollment was 360 adolescents.  We expected a 20% attrition rate 
over 12 months based on our prior work.  Assuming the same attrition rate, 288 patients, or about 144 patients 
each in the experimental and usual care groups, would complete the study. We expected to go from 50% of 
the adolescents in the intervention group being well controlled according to the Asthma Control Test at 
baseline to 70% of adolescents in the intervention group being well controlled at [ADDRESS_1156096] from 50% to 65% over a [ADDRESS_1156097] studies, 
we expected an average self -efficacy score of around 3.7 to 3.8 and average quality of life scores of 5.7 to 5.8 
for the adolescents. With 143 families in each group and an expected increase of 20% in asthma control, as 
well as an expect ed increase in adolescent self -efficacy and adolescent’s quality of life by [CONTACT_832734] a 
point, which equates to effect sizes of 0.45 to 0.6, the study is powered at 80% with a type I error rate of 5% for 
each of the between -group differences for  these outcome variables. Our estimates for the control group come 
from our prior work.   
Analytical Approach:   All analyses were  performed using SPSS. Generalized estimating equations, (i.e., the 
GEE method) were used to analyze the data, which allowed families to be nested within providers. The GEE 
method was used to detect clinically significant differences in our primary outcome variables: asthma control, 
adolescent self -efficacy in asthma management, and adolescent quality -of-life. Primary analysis u sed the 12 -
month follow -up data.  Our multivariable models for the primary outcomes were nested by [CONTACT_832735]. For all of our models, we examined relevant interaction terms. For scale items that 
were missing, we imputed missing  scale items using overall sample mean scores.  
 