1 
  
  
 
  
Trial: Virtual Patient Behavioral Response 
Training for Family Caregivers 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
 
 
   
 
    
 
    
Date:   05/13/2022 (updated) 
 
 Investigator: Bruno Kajiyama   Research Site:     Photozig, Inc.    NASA Research Park    PO Box [ADDRESS_180379] Summary 
 
The main cause of behavioral symptoms in patients wit h Alzheimer's disease (AD)  is the deterioration 
of brain cells which causes a decline in the individual's ability to ma ke sense of the world. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_155959], and it is associat ed with many distressful 
situations.   The stress of dementia caregiving is  influenced by [CONTACT_71411], such as severity of dementia 
symptoms, how challenging distre ssful situations are perceived by [CONTACT_50633], and available 
resources. Although information and programs about dementia are available to the public, an 
essential missing tool is how to deal with difficult  behaviors of dementia patients in an effective 
manner, as they are very common and demanding.  The goal of this project is to develop the Virt ual Patient Behavioral Response (VPBR) training to 
improve skills on how to respond to dementia behavioral problems and enhance caregiver copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. We will implement this training in a mobile app (C aring Response App, CRA). The expected benefits 
include improved psychological health in car egivers and reduced stress related to behavioral 
disturbances of AD patients.     
3 
 Protocol 
 
Overview: 
1. Recruit subjects: caregivers of individuals with Alzheimer’s Dis ease or other dementia will be 
recruited. 
2. Randomize subjects: participants will be assigned to the study group or the control group. 
3. Collect pre-data: Before interv ention, we will collect pre-data to establish the baseline status of 
participants. 
4. Deploy treatments: For both study and control groups, we will send instructions and materials. 
5. Collect post-data: We  will collect post-treatm ent data after 3 months. 
 Research Participants: 150 dementia family ca regivers (planned enrollment) will be recruited: 
 
Inclusion Criteria: 
 Care for an individual with Alzh eimer's Disease or other dementia. 
 Own a smartphone or tablet and have Internet access. 
 Minimum age of 18 years old. 
 Spend at least 8 hours/week ca ring for a person with dementia. 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Severe psychological or physical illness. 
 Inability to read and follow English instructions. 
 High level of depressive symptoms. 
 Unwillingness to participate in all aspects of the study. 
 Informed consent will be obtained,  and participants will receive a st ipend for their participation. 
 Methods: The effectiveness investi gation of the Caring Response App (CRA) will be implemented 
with a pre-post randomized tria l of [ADDRESS_180380] two levels: the CRA 
treatment package; and a control condition compris ed of existing educational programs, information 
for caregivers, and other resources. Outcome measur es of both groups will be recorded at baseline 
and after 3 months.  
 
 CRA Condition (75 subjects):  Participants will receive the Caring Response mobile app 
containing the copi[INVESTIGATOR_25125]. 
 
 Control Condition (75 subjects): Participants  will receive a traditional educational/resources 
program, containing a work book and online resources. 
 Procedures: Participants will receive and complete  informed consent. After initial assessment, 
subjects will be randomized to eit her CRA or the control condition, instructions will be distributed. 
After [ADDRESS_180381]-int ervention assessment. 
 
4 
 Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Main study hypothesis: “CRA will contribute to lowe r burden of care (RMBPC), alleviate depression 
(measured by [CONTACT_63447]-D), and decreas e stress (measured by [CONTACT_69974]).” 
 
Main Outcome Measures: 
 Burden of care: level of bother or stress due to  disruptive behaviors: we will apply the Revised 
Memory and Behavior Problems Checklist (RMBPC),  with [ADDRESS_180382] (bother and stress) on caregiver. 
 Depression: level of Depressive Symptoms: t heir presence and strength will be assessed using the 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_155960] l Studies Depression scale (CES-D); This  is a 20-item measure that asks 
about the frequency of depressive symptoms (affecti ve, psychological, and somatic) within the past 
week. 
 Overall Perceived Psychological Stress: the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) measures 
overall appraisals of st ress in the past month. 
 Analysis: Our hypotheses will be tested by [CONTACT_155961] (subtracting the baseline 
scores from the value obtained at  3 months) for the outcome me asures (RMBPC, CES-D, and PSS), 
and comparing the results of CRA wit h the control condition in order to determine the efficacy of the 
intervention. We will determine if subjects in CRA  had a significant decrease in level of burden, 
reduced depression, and decreased stre ss, when compared to the contro l group. We’ll use univariate 
ANOVA (analysis of variance) to determine the level of significance for these measures.  
 