Restoration of Spectral Resolution with Hearing-aid Ampliﬁcation  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Study Protocol and Analysis Plan  March 13, 2019    
Brief Summary   The objective of this study protocol is to determine the e6icacy of using aided measures of spectral resolution to set the dynamic range of hearing with hearing-aid ampliﬁcation. Measures of spectral resolution will be obtained, as will measures of speech recognition.   Signiﬁcance/Purpose:  Adults with hearing loss are more vulnerable to interference from background noise than adults with normal hearing. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_685642]6erences in level across frequency (spectral information), few studies have addressed the extent to which we can provide spectral information to listeners with hearing loss. This fundamental gap in our knowledge prevents us from e6ectively addressing the systemic e6ects of hearing loss on communication, income, and ability to socialize with others. This work is a new application of established methods of characterizing spectral resolution to that of the most common device for rehabilitation of hearing loss—hearing-aid ampliﬁcation. The proposed experiments will examine the degree to which access to spectral information can be restored to adults with hearing loss and the feasibility of utilizing this information to decrease interference from background noise. Aim [ADDRESS_929459] restore access to spectral information will di6er across individuals and that these di6erences across individuals can be partially accounted for by [CONTACT_685644]. Aim 2 will determine the extent to which restoring access to spectral information supports speech recognition in background noise, under the guiding hypothesis that improving spectral resolution increases speech understanding. If it can be demonstrated that measures of spectral resolution with the provision of ampliﬁcation are useful at delineating those who stand to beneﬁt from di6erent technology options, the knowledge gained could then be applied to the clinic to allow for clinicians to more successfully choose among di6erent rehabilitation options.    Study Design  Data Collection Procedures:  This study can be divided into [ADDRESS_929460] will complete a questionnaire that asks relevant questions about their medical and developmental history and educational level. Participants will be screened for a potential cognitive impairment using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Basic (MOCA-B). The MOCA-B is a 10-minute cognitive screening tool to detect mild cognitive impairment. Participants are asked to perform tasks including connecting numbers and patterns on a sheet of paper, recalling words, naming of items, and simple math calculations. Participants with a score less than [ADDRESS_929461] results and counseled to consult with their primary care physician. A screening for potential cognitive impairment is being implement to limit the possible inﬂuence (i.e. confound) of cognitive impairment on our perceptual results.   Section [ADDRESS_929462]'s task is to indicate when he or she heard a beep. From this test we can determine the softest sounds that the subject can hear. This will be completed using an audiometer (sound presentation device) and earphones. The earphones will be attached to the subject. Each subject will be ﬁtted for testing with hearing aids or a computer based hearing aid simulator. Tympanometry, a routine audiological test, will be completed.   Section [ADDRESS_929463] Time:  The audiological test and hearing aid ﬁtting is anticipated to take 1 hour to complete. Section two is anticipated to take approximately 3 hours and section three approximately 2 hours. Participants with NH require less time; they are not ﬁt with hearing aids and undergo fewer conditions. In addition to hearing status, the duration will depend on how quickly each subject completes the study and on whether a current audiological test can be used, thereby [CONTACT_685645]. Consequently, we anticipate the study will take approximately 3-[ADDRESS_929464]. Generally subjects complete the study in 2-3 sessions scheduled over the course of a couple weeks.   Recruitment:  Recruitment will occur at the Barkley Speech, Language, and Hearing Clinic, Lincoln and surrounding community facilities that provide audiological or ear nose throat services, and through organizations with older individuals (e.g. OLLI at UNL). Participation will take place at the ampliﬁcation and perception laboratory.    Statistical Analysis:  We plan to enroll 20 subjects with normal hearing and 40 subjects with sensorineural hearing loss (per experiment). While we plan to recruit the same subjects for each experiment, additional subjects will be recruited as needed. Additional subjects will be recruited for pi[INVESTIGATOR_685643]. We expect an e6ect size of 0.37 (ηp2) or greater. Using G*Power (v3.1) we estimated sample sizes necessary to detect an e6ect size of over 0.23 (power = 80%, α = 0.05). For Aim 1, planned comparisons to examine the e6ect of prescriptive procedure, compression speed, and number of compression channels on the sharpness of tuning measured will be conducted using an ANOVA or, if we ﬁnd that the assumptions of the ANOVA to be violated, a linear mixed e6ect model. For Aim 2, planned comparisons to examine the e6ect of dynamic range of hearing (small, large) and tuning status (poor tuning, sharp tuning) on proportion correct will be conducted using an ANOVA or, if we ﬁnd that the assumptions of the ANOVA to be violated, a linear mixed e6ect model. While results are not expected to di6er by [CONTACT_4321], di6erences by [CONTACT_685646]. Other variables, such as age, degree of hearing loss, and working memory likely play a role in spectral resolution and speech recognition and will be considered as variables in our statistical models.  