 
Version 3.12.2018 1  
Research Summary  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
1. Protocol Title  – Very Low Birth Weight (VLBW) Preterm Infant Health Outcomes with 
Bundled Care  in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: A RCT 
 
2. Purpose of the Study  – Explore the impact of bundling nursing care activities on the overall 
health of VLBW preterm infants who receive bundled care in a Level IV Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Specific study aims include: 
 
Aim 1. Evaluate differences in infant health when diaper changes occur at 3- versus 6-hours 
during 3-hour bundled care.  
RQ1.  What caregiving activities other than diaper changes are included in bundled care 
events  and do they differ when diaper changes are bundled every 3 versus 6 hours.  
RQ2.  Does infant physiological stability ( ∆ heart rate, ∆ respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], ∆ oxygen 
saturation, # apnea # bradycardias, # desaturations, feeding tolerance) differ between 
3- and 6-hour bundled care diapering ?  
RQ3.  Does infant weight gain over time differ between 3- and 6-hour bundled care 
diapering? RQ4.  Within the 6-hour bundled diaper care group , does infant physiological stability 
(∆ heart rate, ∆ respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], ∆ oxygen saturation) differ between bundled care with 
and without a diaper change (3 versus 6-hours)?  
 
Aim 2. Evaluate differences in infant skin health between 3- and 6-hour bundled care 
diapering at two sites (buttocks and chest).  
RQ1.  Does skin transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL) differ over time and at the end of [ADDRESS_917140] and buttocks? 
RQ2. Do neonatal skin condition scores differ over time and at the end of 6 weeks 
between 3- and 6-hour bundled care diapering? RQ3.  Does skin pH differ over time and at the end of 6 weeks between 3- and 6-hour 
bundled care diapering? RQ4.  Does the skin microbiota differ over time and at the end of 6 weeks between 3- 
and 6-hour bundled care diapering? 
 
Aim 3. Evaluate the acceptability and feasibility of conducting a bundled care intervention 
where the frequency of one care activity, diaper care, is standardized.  
 RQ1.  What are the perceptions of parents and providers about the criteria necessary for 
conducting a diaper change in the NICU? 
RQ2.  What are the perceived barriers of parents and providers to longer timeframes 
between diaper changes? 
 Exploratory health outcomes  will examine the incidence of late onset sepsis and urinary 
tract infections in both bundled care groups.  
3. Background & Significance  –  
Progress in perinatal medicine has resulted in an increased survival rate of very preterm 
infants (typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] ≤ 1500 grams and < 34 weeks). However, preterm infants’ growth and 
developmental outcomes vary with illness severity and degree of neurological insult (Boyle et al., 2012; Ge et al., 2013) and unpredictable variations in outcomes exist even among healthy 
preterm infants (Schneider et al., 2014; Vohr, 2014).  Preterm infants also have poorer 
 
Version 3.12.2018 2 orientation, self-regulation, and reflexes and more excitability, hypotonia, and hypertonia at 40 
weeks postmenstrual age (PMA) when compared to term infants (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_677934]., 2013). The 
variations in preterm infants’ outcomes have led to the supposition that the NICU environment 
may negatively impact the health and development of these infants and significant research has been devoted to examination of light, noise, and caregiving interventions (Boo et al., 2002; Brandon et al., 2017; Brandon et al., 2002; Morag & Ohlsson; 2013).  
In addition, individualized developmental care has become the norm in most NICUs since 
developmental care was first promoted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Heidelise Als in the 1980s (1982). A body of 
literature has emerged to support the observation of infant behavioral organization (infant cues) 
in response to the stress of the NICU environment to guide caregiving to minimize infant stress and optimize infant outcomes. The overall goal of individualized developmental care is to 
promote the short- and long-term health and development of high risk infants including 
interventions that promote the well-being of  an infant’s family (Macho, 2017). Consequently, 
many NICUs have implemented neuroprotective stra tegies to reduce over simulation, promote 
sleep and facilitate brain development in all high-risk infants (Gressens et al., 2002; Lucas-Thompson et al., 2008).   
One neuroprotective strategy includes the groupi[INVESTIGATOR_677935] a single 
caregiving event described as “clustering”  or “bundling care” . Individualized developmental care 
dictates that a bundled care event  is halted if an infant displays significant behavioral stress 
cues. Yet, the number and type of caregiving activities that are included in bundled care  and the 
timeframe between bundled care events  has not been systematically studied. While painful and 
intrusive interventions like heel sticks are often described as a source of infant stress (Lucas-Thompson et al., 2008) routine interventions like diaper changes can also be a high stress event 
(Mörelius et al., 2006). Current bundled care typi[INVESTIGATOR_232826] a diaper change, but the 
timeframes between bundled care events differ based upon infant illness severity, 
postmenstrual age, and individual NICU practice standards.  Currently no operational definition exits around the expected length of time that categorizes a bundled care event  from a non-
bundled care event . In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_677936] (ELBW) infants we 
identified a caregiving event as including at least two nursing care activities and lasting at least 
five minutes. Over the first 14 days of life in the NICU, 161 bundled care events were identified, 
averaging 4.7 events per day per infant.  The average duration for bundled care events greater 
than 5 minutes was 10.8 minutes. The time between bundled care events was 2.9 hours.  
The inclusion and exclusion of certain care activities in any individual care event is often 
dictated by [CONTACT_58076]’s treatment plan or needs, but some activities like diapering may be optional. Understanding the impact of when to include optional, yet stress provoking 
interventions, will allow us to minimize overall environmental stress in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_677937].  It is unclear how the different times used in bundled care affect overall infant health including skin health in the diapered area.  Therefore, given the lack of data around bundled care, we aim to explore the impact of bundling diaper care activities on overall health of VLBW preterm infants. We will include a focus on skin health because it is important to understand the 
benefits of decreased infant stress and any potential skin health trade-offs associated with 
longer versus shorter time between diapering care. Findings from this study will allow us to better understand the relationship between neonatal skin health while providing developmentally appropriate bundled care.  
 
4. Design & Procedures  
 
a. Design and Setting.  A randomized controlled designed will be used to evaluate the 
effect of bundled diaper care  on overall infant and skin health. Infants will be recruited from the 
Level IV Intensive Care Nursery (ICN) at Duke University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  The ICN is a Level IV, 67-
bed nursery and one of the area’s leading referral centers for infants born prematurely. The 
 
Version 3.12.2018 3 Duke ICN has an average daily census of 90% and annually admits [ADDRESS_917141] bundled care intervals that vary 
based upon an infant’s birth weight and feeding status (every 3, 4, or 6 hours).  Infants who are 
admitted or transferred to one of the ICN three stepdown units will also be considered if eligible and will continue to receive the intervention when transferred including the Special Care Nursery at Durham Regional Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_245852] a clinical nurse specialist affiliated with the ICN since [ADDRESS_917142] 25 
infants in each study group with complete data.  Ten parents of infant participants (5 in each study group) and [ADDRESS_917143] little missing data or participant 
attrition. 
 
Infant Inclusion criteria are : 
1. Must be participating in the ICN standard 3-hour bundled care 2. Must wear a breathable diaper 3. Must be ≤ [ADDRESS_917144] 4 weeks 
Infant Exclusion criteria are : 
1. Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome  2. Humidified incubator 3. Diaper rash 
4. Pre-existing or genetic skin conditions  
5. Severe illness requiring 1:1 nursing care: e.g. minimal stimulation protocol, high 
frequency ventilation, vasopressor drug support, or body cooling. 
 Infants will be recruited and enrolled as soon as they meet study criteria ( see Figure 1. 
Study Schemata ). Data collection will begin following study enrollment and will continue until 6 
weeks following randomization ( see Table 1 ). 
 
Figure 1. Study Schemata  
 
c. Intervention: Infants will be 
randomly assigned and stratified by [CONTACT_65591] (≤ 800 grams, >800 grams to 1150 
grams, > 1150 grams) to either 3- or 6- hour 
bundled diaper care. All infants will receive 
bundled care per unit standards until they are eligible for 3-hour bundled care . Infants 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_677938] 3-hour bundled care  
once they are receiving interval feedings 
every three hours. This transition usually 
occurs before 3 weeks chronological age in infants >[ADDRESS_917145] bundled 
care infants 
Randomized to: 
6-hour Bundled 
Diaper Care group 
3-hour Bundled  
Diaper Care group 
 
Version 3.12.2018 4 for infants ≤ [ADDRESS_917146] of care, this is a clinical environment in which caregiving cannot be expected to occur exactly every three hours 
to the minute, therefore both expected and actual times for the bundled care events will be collected to include in data analysis as needed. Infants who are receiving the 6-hour bundled diaper care will continue to receive 3-hour care interventions for all other interventions or as 
dictated by [CONTACT_677945]. At the 3-hour caregiving interval in which the 6-hour bundled care 
infants are not due for a diaper change, the nurse will peek into the diaper to ensure there are no stool present.  If stool is present, a diaper change should occur and the deviation from the protocol noted in the bedside documentation. 
 
d. Procedures:  A neonatal provider will give approval for participation in the study.  
Parents will be approached for consent after eligibility screening is completed ( ≤ 32 weeks 
gestation).  The principal investigator [CONTACT_832] a clinical nurse specialist and nurse scientist who has been affiliated in the Intensive Care Nursery since 1993. Study personnel will explain the study, allow time for questions, have a parent sign the consent form, and a copy will be given to the 
parent.  Parents will provide consent for their infant’s participation in the study and will give 
permission for themselves to participate in an interview about the study, if selected. Five parents from each group will purposively selected to participate in an interview.  Parents will be selected to include parents with infants < 1000 grams at birth and parents with infant ≥ [ADDRESS_917147] to describe the sample and for needed covariate data, physiologic data (e.g. heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], oxygen saturation), and biomarkers of skin health (pH, transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044], NSCS, microbiome).  See Figure [ADDRESS_917148] Data: Participant participation is documented in the electronic medical 
record and data extraction from the electronic medical record can be accessed through 
the Duke Health System EPIC or through a Virtual Pin Network.  Flow sheets, lab results and provider notes will be reviewed for the required data.  
 
Table 1. Data Collection 
Construct Measure/ 
Instrument Variable Time frame 
 Descriptive data to describe the sample 
Maternal history EMR
1 Age, medical hx. of skin disease, Enrollment 
Infant 
characteristics EMR GA2, birth weight, diagnoses, antibiotics, delivery 
mode, lab values as required to describe skin health 
(e.g. albumin, protein, bilirubin) 
All bundled care event time frames from study entry 
to study discharge (expected vs. actual bundled 
times) 
During bundled care—respi[INVESTIGATOR_1413], changes in 
support, FiO 2 changes , average Daily FiO 2, caffeine 
 Enrollment, 3x/week, or as 
available 
 Aim 1. Infant Health 
Bundled care Observation, 
videotape 
& EMR Specific interventions (e.g. suctioning, positioning, 
offering pacifier, diapering) 
Length of bundled care events 
Time between bundled care events 
 Observer 3x/week for the 
3-hour diaper group and 
4s/week for the 6-hour 
group to allow for one 
within group comparison; 
Videotaped 1x/week 
Daily; retrieved 3x/week 
Physiologic 
stability GE monitor 1-minute values of heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_677939] 15 minutes before and after each 
observed bundled care event 3x/week for the 3-hour 
diaper group and 4s/week 
for the 6-hour group to 
allow for one within group comparison 
 EMR # bradycardia events daily Daily; retrieved 3x/week 
 EMR # apneic events daily Daily retrieved 3x/week 
 EMR # desaturation events daily Daily retrieved 3x/week 
 EMR Feeding tolerance (emesis, gastric residual volume-
ml, feeding interruptions) Daily retrieved 3x/week 
Weight gain EMR Daily weight in grams Daily retrieved 3x/week 
 Aim 1. Covariates 
Development EMR Postmenstrual age (PMA)  
Severity of 
illness Technology 
Burden Total Score 0-100 Retrieved 3x/week to 
coincide with observation 
 EMR Time in minutes since the end of the last bundled 
event With each observation 

 
Version 3.12.2018 6  Aim 2. Skin Health (buttocks and chest) 
Acid mantle 
development pH 0.00 to 14.00. 3x/week with observation 
Water loss TEWL 
Dermalab TEWL3  3x/week with observation 
Skin status NSCS4 NSCS-range 3-9 Twice daily retrieved 
3x/week 
Microbiome  Microbiota pattern 3x/week with observation 
 Aim 2. Covariates 
 EMR PMA  
 EMR Delivery mode  
 EMR Time since last bath 3x/week with observation 
 EMR Daily urine output 3x/week with observation 
 EMR Time in minutes since the last bundled event  
 EMR Stool pattern (categorical) 3x/week with observation 
 EMR Feeding type (formula vs. breast and route; enteral 
vs. nipple) 3x/week with observation 
 Bedside 
checklist Diaper size and brand 3x/week with observation 
 Stool Scavenged  1x/week as available 
 Aim 3. Feasibility  
Intervention 
acceptability 
and feasibility Interviews 
 Parent perceptions 
 
Provider perceptions End of infant data 
collection; 
At study end 
 Exploratory Health Outcomes 
Late onset 
sepsis EMR Presence or absence Two weeks after end of the 
study 
Urinary tract 
infection EMR Presence or absence Two weeks after end of the 
study 
1EMR=electronic medical record; 2GA=gestational age at birth; 3TEWL=transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044]; 
4NSCS=neonatal skin condition score. 
 
ii. Physiologic measures: Heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and pulse oximetry will be 
measured  continuously  with a GE Cardiopulmonary monitor (standard monitor at DUH) 
with acquisition from the server, sent to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_677940] a data 
secured zip file. 1-minute values for each 24-hour observation in which a bundled care data collection occurred will be extracted and th e required time frames will be extracted 
for analysis.   
iii. Bundled Care:  The content of bundled care will be determined through the 
observational coding of all caregiving activities during weekly observations (3 
times/week for 3-hour diapered and 4 times/week for the 4-hour diapered intervention group; see intervention section above) and 12-hour videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (1 time per week for each group) of bundled care events. The length of time for each bundled care event will be operationally defined as beginning when the nurse’s hands enter the incubator and 
will end when the nurse’s hands leave the incubator following caregiving.  
 
iv. Microbiome : One microbiome sample will be taken from the buttocks immediately after 
the diaper is removed and before the skin is cleaned, if there is NO stool present.  A second swab will be collected from the chest at the same time. The following procedure will be used for all microbiome samples.  Needed supplies will include a tube of sterile 
solution of PBS + 0.1%Tween 20 and a Nova Biostorage FLOQ swab with cuvette.  
a. Remove the swab from the package b. Insert the tip of the swab into the sterile PBS + 0.1% Tween [ADDRESS_917149] swabs into a -20°C (±5°C) freezer and store until end of study. 
 
v. pH: The Extech PH100 meter will be used to measure skin pH in the range of 0.00 to 
14.00. The small flat surface electrode provides a non-intrusive accurate measure of pH. The instrument’s probe will be placed at the center of the test site (either chest or diaper) and measurements will be taken. Each meas urement will be performed by [CONTACT_677946]. The measurement is taken instantly and will be 
recorded into RedCap via iPad. 
 vi. Trans Epi[INVESTIGATOR_7024] : TEWL values will be collected using the Dermalab.  We 
will use non-invasive skin probes to perform each assessment of transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL). TEWL will be measured using the DermaLab® TEWL probe (Cortex 
Technology, Hadsund, Dermark), which consists of an open probe with paired sensors 
placed at different distances from the skin. Humidity and temperature are measured in each sensor to calculate vapor pressure gradients. The difference between two vapor pressure gradient measures is representative of TEWL at that point on the skin (Grove, Grove, Zerwick, & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], 1999).  Environment al humidity levels will also be measured 
using the DermaLab® before obtaining the TEWL measures. The average humidity 
readings from the two sensors will be recorded as environmental humidity. Individual 
probe covers will be used for each infant to prevent any cross contamination between patients. Each measurement will be perform ed by [CONTACT_677947] (60) seconds and the average value (in g/m2*hr) will be recorded. Probe covers are used to prevent cross contamination between patients, in 
addition, the probe will be thoroughly cleaned with 70% ethanol prior to and between 
participants to minimize cross-contamination or microbial transmission. The ethanol will be allowed to air dry prior to use of the probe.   
vii. Neonatal Skin Condition Score (see Figure 2): The NSCS will be collected twice daily 
(day and night shift by [CONTACT_677948]) while infants are participating in the study. The 
NSCS is a reliable and valid measure of skin condition (Lund & Osborne, 2004)  
 
Figure 2. NEONATAL SKIN CONDITION SCORE (NSCS)  
Dryness  
1 = Normal, no sign of dry skin  
2 = Dry skin, visible scaling  
3 = Very dry skin, cracking/fissures  
Erythema  
1 = No evidence of erythema  
2 = Visible erythema, <50% body surface  
3 = Visible erythema, ≥50% body surface  
Breakdown  
1 = None evident  
2 = Small, localized areas  
3 = Extensive  
Note: perfect score = 3, worst score = 9.  
 
Version 3.12.2018 8  
 
 
     
 
    
 
   
 
viii. Parent and Provider Interviews:  Parents will be asked to participate in an interview 
about the acceptability of the intervention after their infant completes the study.  Ten parents (5 in each study group) will be interviewed.  The interview is not expected to last more than 30 minutes, but will largely be under the direction of the parent (see Appendix A for the interview guide).   Ten providers to include at least two 
neonatologists, two neonatal nurse practitioners and six bedside nurses, will be asked 
to participate in an individual interview at the time of study completion about the 
acceptability and feasibility of the intervention (see Appendix B for the interview guide).    
 
5. Selection of Infant Subjects  
 
Infant Inclusion criteria are : 
a. Must be participating in the ICN standard 3-hour bundled care 
b. Must wear a breathable diaper 
c. Must be ≤ [ADDRESS_917150] 2 weeks 
Infant Exclusion criteria are : 
1. Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome  
2. Humidified incubator 
3. Diaper rash 
4. Pre-existing or genetic skin conditions  
5. Severe illness requiring 1:1 nursing care: e.g. minimal stimulation protocol, high 
frequency ventilation, vasopressor drug support, or body cooling. 
 
6. Subject Recruitment and Compensation 
Study personnel will check the daily admission log for eligible patients. Clinical staff 
known to the parent/guardian of the potential subject will introduce the research study to the infant’s family. If the parent/guardian expresses interest in the study, the research staff will 
approach him/her to explain the study and request consent.  There will be no compensation for 
study participation, however infants will be giv en a developmental toy at the end of the study.  
 
7. Consent Process   
 For any score of [ADDRESS_917151]’s Capacity to Give Legally Effective Consent 
For infants, consent will be obtained from the parent or guardian following approval of the 
infant’s provider using see Section 14 of the e-IRB submission form and complete the questions 
in that section.  The PI, research coordinator or other study personnel (who is either an RN or has a PhD (or both) and is trained in study and consent procedures) will conduct the consent process in the study as outlined by [CONTACT_412908].  
Parents will be approached for pre-consent if their infant is ≤ 32 weeks gestation. The 
infants’ medical provider, or a member of the Neonatal Perinatal Research Unit will seek 
permission from the mother or father for the research staff to discuss the study with them. Then, 
research staff (i.e. PI, study coordinator or research assistant) will contact [CONTACT_677949]. If contact [CONTACT_677950], parents will be contact[CONTACT_65312]. Parents will be approached at the bedside of their infant. Parents will be offered the option to discuss the study at their infant's bedside or in an available conference 
or meeting room on the unit.  If others are present, the parent is asked whether she would prefer 
for the research member to discuss the study in front of her visitors or at another location (e.g. unit conference room behind a closed door). We estimate that the consent process will take about 30-60 minutes. Parents will be allowed as much time as needed to decide whether or not to enroll the infant in the study.  Parents will 
be encouraged to ask questions at any time before their infant’s participation in the trial. The 
study team will present the consent form in its entirety, with special emphasis on the voluntary 
nature of research, and the ability of subjects to withdraw from the study at any time. No one who is obtaining consent is directly involved in  the supervision of the providers who are being 
asked to participate in the study or involved in the direct care of the infants whose parents are being asked to participate in the study. The research staff will closely follow the IRB and GCF 
guidelines..  
Spanish speaking parents/guardians of eligible infants will be consented using two translators that are not involved in the study, one to present the consent form in Spanish and one to assure that what is presented is correct. The translator will translate the entire English consent form verbally to the potential study subject. The transla tor will relay questions to the study coordinator 
from the subject and the subject will have questions answered prior to signing the consent 
document. For Spanish speaking parents/guardians, the parent/guardian and witness will be asked to sign the Spanish short form. The witness and the person obtaining consent must sign the English consent form. 
 Providers will be consented using the same IRB and GCF guidelines described above. 
Provider consent should take 15-30 minutes. 
 
8. Risk/Benefit Assessment  
Risks associated with the intervention and data collection will be minimal. All of the study 
interventions including a less frequent diaper change are considered acceptable standard of 
care.  The skin condition will be monitored twice daily  to identify any potential change in the skin 
of the diapered area and if the NSCS is ≥ 5 due to dryness, erythema or skin breakdown in the 
diapered are, the intervention will be discontinued, the infant’s provider will be consulted regarding the need for treatment and the infant will be monitored until resolution of the problem. The infant stress associated with stimulation due to data collection should be minimal.  Data collection processes for the biomarkers should not cause discomfort and handling will be kept to 
a minimum.  However, all research staff will have neonatal experience and be trained in 
developmentally appropriated infant handling and positioning. 
The small risk of loss of confidentiality will be reduced by [CONTACT_677951].  The key linking the identity of the subject to the code number will be separately maintained in the Research Office, under lock and key. 
 
Version 3.12.[ADDRESS_917152] descriptive analyses, including examination of means and proportions 
and the measures of variability for each variable overall and by [CONTACT_677952]. The descriptive analyses will be followed by [CONTACT_677953]. Tests of statistical significance will be two-sided and the threshold for statistical significance will be P < 0.05. 
 
Aim 1. Evaluate differences in infant health when diaper changes occur at 3- versus 6-
hours?  
 
RQ1.  What caregiving activities other than diaper changes are included in bundled care events 
and do they differ when diaper changes are bundled every 3 versus 6 hours  
Analysis:  Each day bundled care is observed, a list of activities will be marked as occurred (1) 
or did not occur (0).  Each infant will have 18 days of data denoting whether an activity occurred or did not occur.  Hierarchical clustering of repeated data with an appropriate algorithm that producing stable and accurate clusters will be used will be to determine the groupi[INVESTIGATOR_677941].  The frequency of the clusters between the intervention 
groups will be compared. 
 RQ2.  Does infant physiological stability ( ∆ heart rate, ∆ respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], ∆ oxygen saturation, # 
apnea # bradycardias, # desaturations, feeding tolerance) differ between 3- and 6-hour bundled 
care diapering? 
Analysis:  Heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_677942] a minute apart for 
each observed bundled care with a diaper change will be graphically displayed in various constructions to be able to compare the general trends of change in these outcomes between intervention groups, among periods of the bundled care (before, during and after) and over weeks.  Further, we will create a daily average of each outcome by [CONTACT_6278] (before, during, and after).  Using a repeated measures analysis, we will test for difference among the periods and 
intervention group and all pairwise period comparisons between groups.  PMA and infant illness 
severity (Technology Burden Score) will be used as a covariate. We will control for multiple comparisons. 
 
A Poisson Generalized linear model for repeated measure will be use to estimate the daily 
number of apnea, bradycardias, and desaturatio ns events over the 18 days of bundled care 
observations with a diaper change.  The need for a random intercept or slope will be assessed.   
 
Log(# of Apnea Events
ij) = b 0 + b 1[I(6HrBC i)] + b 2(Day ij) + b 3[(I(6HrBC i))×(Day ij) + b 4(PMA ij) + 
b5(TechBur ij), 
where Log((# of Apnea Events ij) is the logarithm of the number of apnea events for individual i at 
day j.  b0 is the mean log of apnea events for parti cipants who receive 3-hour diaper changes 
 
Version 3.12.2018 11and are mean postmenstrual age and with mean technology scores at the start of the study; b1 
is the change in log number of apnea events for those receiving 6-hour diaper changes; 
I(6HrBC i) is an indicator for participants receiving bundled care and 6-hour diaper changes; b2 is 
the change in log of the number of apnea events for each day of bundled care; Day ij is the 
indicator of the day the number of apnea events was recorded; b3 is the additional change in log 
of the number of apnea events over days for those receiving bundled care and 6-hour diaper 
changes; PMA ij is the difference from the baseline mean postmenstrual age of the ith participant 
at the jth day; TechBur ij is the difference from the baseline mean technology burden score for 
the ith participant at the jth day; b4 and b5 are the expected changes in log number of events for 
postmenstrual age and technology burden scores, respectively .  The estimate of interest is b 3.  
The feeding tolerance outcome will be estimated in a similar manner using the appropriate distribution of the outcome and link function for the model.  
 
RQ3.  Does infant weight gain over time differ between 3- and 6-hour bundled care diapering? 
Analysis:  The trajectories of weight measured across the [ADDRESS_917153] an appropriate trend for the data a model similar to the one described below will be estimated. 
 
Weight
ij = b 0 + b i0 + b 1[I(6HrBC i)] + b 2(Day ij) + b 3[(I(6HrBC i))×(Day ij) + b 4(PMA ij) + b 5(TechBur ij) + 
Ɛij, 
where Weight ij is the weight for individual i at day j.  b0 is the mean weight of participants who 
receive 3-hour diaper changes and are mean postmenstrual age and with mean technology 
scores at the start of the study; bi0 is the individual baseline weights;  b1 is the change in weight 
for those receiving 6-hour diaper changes; I(6HrBC i) is an indicator for participants receiving 
bundled care and 6-hour diaper changes; b2 is the change in weight for each day of bundled 
care; Day ij is the indicator of the day the weight was recorded; b3 is the additional change in 
weight over days for those receiving bundled care and 6-hour diaper changes; PMA ij is the 
difference from the baseline mean postmenstrual age of the ith participant at the jth day; 
TechBur ij is the difference from the baseline mean technology burden score for the ith 
participant at the jth day; b4 and b5 are the expected changes in weight for postmenstrual age 
and technology burden scores, respectively; and Ɛij represents variance components to be 
estimated . The estimate of interest is b 3. 
 RQ4.  Within the 6-hour bundled diaper care group, does infant physiological stability ( ∆ heart 
rate, ∆ respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], ∆ oxygen saturation) differ between with and without a diaper change (3 
versus 6-hours)? 
Analysis:  One day of the week for those individuals assigned to the 6-hour diaper changes will 
be randomly selected to have heart, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], and oxygen rates at 3-hour without a diaper change to compare to the same day’s outcomes at the 6-hour diaper change.  The values captured a minute apart for each observed bundled care will be graphically displayed in various constructions to be able to compare the general trends of change in these outcomes within the 
6-hour diaper change group, among periods of the bundled care (before, during and after) and 
over weeks.  Further, we will create a daily av erage of each outcome by [CONTACT_6278] (before, during, 
and after).  Using these computed values, we will create a weekly average of the 3 outcomes by 
[CONTACT_6278] (before, during, and after).  Using an analysis for repeated measures from a matched sample, we will test for difference among the periods and intervention group and all pairwise period comparisons between treatment groups.  We will control for multiple comparisons. 
 
 
Version 3.12.2018 12Aim 2. Evaluate differences in infant skin health between 3- and 6-hour bundled care 
diapering at two sites (buttocks and chest)? 
 
RQ1. Does skin transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL) differ over time and at the end of [ADDRESS_917154]? 
Analysis:  The trajectories of TEWL measured across the [ADDRESS_917155] bath, urine output, stool pattern, and feeding type indicator. 
 
RQ2. Do neonatal skin condition scores differ over time and at the end of 6 weeks between 3- 
and 6-hour bundled care diapering? 
Analysis:  We will assess the distribution of the neonatal skin condition score.  Based on the 
distribution we will select the most appropriate link function to fit a generalized linear model with repeated measures.  The models to be estimat ed will be similar to the example model we 
presented for number of apnea events, including the appropriate link function and distribution.  
Further, we will remove technology burden scores and add time varying covariates for time 
since last bath, urine output, stool pattern, and feeding type indicator.  RQ3. Does skin pH differ over time and at the end of [ADDRESS_917156]? 
Analysis:  We will assess the distribution of the pH of chest and buttocks.  Based on the 
distribution, we will select the most appropriate link function to fit a generalized linear model with 
repeated measures.  The models to be estimat ed will be similar to the example model we 
presented for number of apnea events, including the appropriate link function and distribution.  Further, we will remove technology burden scores and add time varying covariates for time since last bath, urine output, stool pattern, and feeding type indicator.  Separate models will be 
estimated for pH of the chest and pH of the buttocks. 
 
RQ4. Skin Microbiota 
Analysis:  Mr. DNA in Shallowater, TX will provide the microbiome sample analysis services to 
determine composition of skin microbiome by 16S rRNA pyrosequencing. Funding for the microbiome analyses will come directly from  Kimberly Clark’s budget. Pyrosequencing data will 
be analyzed with a workflow based on QIIME software
1.  Data will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_677943].  Data will also be compi[INVESTIGATOR_677944].  Significance differences in relative abundance of  specific taxa between the intervention groups 
will be calculated using the Kruskal Wallis test.  
 
To assess the extent to which taxonomic diversity at the family and genus level can be used to distinguish microbial communities associated with skin swab samples; Principal Component Analysis (PCoA) will be used.  Rarefaction, Chaol, Ace and Shannon indexes will be performed on the data to evaluate if diversity and richness of populations are different among subjects within the different intervention and over time. Demographic and other clinical data will be 
evaluated for basic correlation with any observed microbiome changes.   
 
Exploratory Health outcomes 
The time to the occurrence of urinary tract infections and late onset sepsis will be measured 
from the start of the study to two weeks after study completion.  Because of the small 
 
Version 3.12.[ADDRESS_917157].  
 
Aim 3. Analysis of interview transcripts will entail the review of transcripts to develop codes and 
the subsequent application of codes to all transcripts. Coded data will be reviewed to identify themes that characterize parents’ and providers’ of the acceptability and feasibility of the intervention. Data analysis activities will be supported by [CONTACT_677954].ti, a software program that supports the systematic coding and review of data. Rigor throughout the coding process will 
be maintained through a memo writing to recording thoughts, decisions, progression of code list, 
and identification of categories, and verifying coding results and interpretation with members of the research team.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
There will be minimal risk associated with the study. The only study intervention is the timing 
of the diaper change. A record of study data for each subject will be maintained in the Research Office. Study records will be labeled with a code number. The key linking the identity of the subject to the code number will be separately maintained in the Research Office, under lock and key. No data that includes subjects’ names, addresses, medical record number or other 
identifiers will leave Duke.  Based upon the ex ecuted DTA with Kimberly Clark, microbiome 
samples will be sent via secure transfer for data analysis.  The DTA will be uploaded under the full protocol section of the IRB.  
 
Privacy, Data Storage, and Confidentiality   
Study records (hard copy and electronic) and biologic samples will be labeled with a code 
number to reduce the small risk of loss of confidentiality.  The key linking the identity of the 
subject to the code number will be separately maintained in the School of Nursing Research Office, under lock and key. No data that includes subjects’ names, addresses, medical record number or other identifiers will leave Duke.  All data will be collected and de-identified for data analysis. Data will be downloaded into a secure file and de-identified and stored on a secure 
server for analyses at Duke School of Nursing. All completed study documents will be stored in 
the study office within Duke School of Nursing in a locked cabinet. 
 
Microbiome samples will be processed fo r total genomic DNA using standardized 
procedures by [CONTACT_125699]. DNA in Shallowater, TX. All samples send to Mr. DNA will be de-identified. 
Processed samples will be destroyed by [CONTACT_125699]. DNA within two years of completed analysis. 
Unused and unprocessed samples will be stored long-term at -80 °C in a locked room at in Julia 
Walker ’s lab.  
 
  
  
 
Version 3.12.2018 14References 
Als H. ([ZIP_CODE]. Towards a synactive theory of development: promise for the assessment and 
support of infant individuality. Infant Mental Health J. 3(4)  229–234. 
Boo, N. Y., Chee, S. C., & Rohana, J. (2002). Randomized controlled study of the effects of 
different durations of light exposure on weight gain by [CONTACT_677955] a neonatal intensive care unit. Acta Paediatrica, 91 (6), 674-679.  
Boyle, E. M., Poulsen, G., Field, D. J., Kurinczuk, J. J., Wolke, D., Alfirevic, Z., & Quigley, M. A. 
(2012). Effects of gestational age at birth on health outcomes at 3 and 5 years of age: 
population based cohort study. BMJ, 344 , e896. doi:10.1136/bmj.e896 
Brandon, D.H., Silva, S., Park, J., Malcolm, W. H., Kamhawy, H. & Holditch-Davis, D. (2017 Apr 
21). Timing for introduction of cycled light in NICU. Research in Nursing and Health.  
PMID:28431191 [ePub ahead of print]  DOI: 10.1002/nur.[ZIP_CODE] 
Brandon, D. H., Holditch-Davis, D., & Belyea, M. (2002). Preterm infants born at less than 31 
weeks' gestation have improved growth in cy cled light compared with continuous near 
darkness.[see comment]. Journal of Pediatrics, 140 (2), 192-199.  
Ge, W. J., Mirea, L., Yang, J., Bassil, K. L., Lee, S. K., & Shah, P. S. (2013). Prediction of 
neonatal outcomes in extremely preterm neonates. Pediatrics, 132 (4), e876-885. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2013-0702 
Gressens, P., Rogido, M., Paindaveine, B., & Sola, A. (2002). The impact of neonatal intensive 
care practices on the developi[INVESTIGATOR_38866]. Journal of Pediatrics, 140 (6), 646-653. 
doi:10.1067/mpd.2002.123214 
Grove, G.L., Grove M.J., Zerweck, C. & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835]  E., (1999). Computerized evaporimety using the 
DermaLab®. Skin Research & Technology, 5(1), 9-13. 
Lucas-Thompson, R., Townsend, E.L., Gunnar MR, et al. Developmental changes in the 
responses of preterm infants to a painful stressor. Infant Behav Dev. 2008;31(4):614-
623. 
Lund, C.H. and J.W. Osborne (2004). Validity and reliability of the neonatal skin condition score. 
J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs ING, 33(3)  320-327. 
Macho, P (2017). Individualized Developmental Care In the NICU: A Concept Analysis Adv 
Neonatal Care. 2017;17(3): 
Mörelius E, Hellström-Westas L, Carlén C, Norman E, Nelson N. (2006). Is a nappy change 
stressful to neonates? Early Human Dev. 82, 669-676. 
Morag, I., & Ohlsson, A. (2013). Cycled light in the intensive care unit for preterm and low birth 
weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 8 , Cd006982. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006982.pub3 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_34025], R. G., Tjoeng, T. H., Vavasseur, C., Kidokoro, H., Neil, J. J., & Inder, T. (2013). 
Patterns of altered neurobehavior in preterm infants within the neonatal intensive care unit. Journal of Pediatrics, 162 (3), 470-476.e471. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2012.08.011 
Schneider, L. A., Burns, N. R., Giles, L. C., Higgins, R. D., Nettelbeck, T. J., Ridding, M. C., & 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_39179], J. B. (2014). Cognitive abilities in preterm and term-born adolescents. Journal of 
Pediatrics, 165 (1), 170-177. doi:10.1016/j.jpeds.2014.03.030 
Vohr, B. R. (2014). Neurodevelopmental outcomes of extremely preterm infants. Clinics in 
Perinatology, 41 (1), 241-255. doi:10.1016/j.clp.2013.09.003 
 
  
 
  