 
"Poised for Parkinson's"  
 
Study Protocol  for Participation in a Study of Online Alexander Technique Classes  
for People Living with Parkinson's Disease and their Care Partners  
 
Contact [CONTACT_566009]:  
Monika Gross, Executive Director of the Poise Project  
[PHONE_11734] [EMAIL_10783]  
 
Document Date: May 13, 2020  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Principal Investigator: R ajal G. Cohen, [EMAIL_10784]  
Lighten Up! Synchronous online delivery of a dyad -based program to improve motor symptoms in rural adults with PD  
 
 1 4. Research Strategy  
4.1 Significance  
Parkinson’s disease (PD)  is the second -most common neurodegenerative disease globally, with a prevalence 
expected to double  in the next [ADDRESS_743457] rural 
populations , in part because of demographics and also beca use of its association with chemicals used in 
farming and found in well water2–4. PD symptoms , including g ait impairment, falls, depression,  anxiety, and 
chronic pain , are only partially ameliorated by [CONTACT_108674].  These symptoms cause tremendous 
disability and suffering for individuals with PD and their care -partners5,6.   
The care dyad  is particularly important in the context of interventions for neurodegenerative disorders such as  
PD. A care partnership involves a bond between the person receiving care and the person providing it. This 
partnership takes place in a psychosocial context b uilt on pi[INVESTIGATOR_566006], equality and shared experience. Care 
provision helps the person with the condition achieve their optimal level of function. The progressive and 
complex nature of Parkinson’s -related syndromes involving motor, psychiatric and cogni tive symptoms 
diminishes an individual’s ability to conduct everyday activities and manage self -care. This increases the need 
for a care partner, without whom the rate of admissions to institutional care, as well as the cost of care, would 
increase signifi cantly. However, the impact of a neurodegenerative condition on spousal and other family care 
partner relationships is multifaceted and progressive and includes social, financial, physical, emotional, mental 
and cognitive aspects7,8.  
Rigor of prior research that serves as key support for proposed project . A randomized controlled trial  
found that Alexander technique, a somatic education practice targeting distribution and regulation of postural 
tone, can help PWP manage their motor symptoms.  Stallibrass et al . compared Alexander technique to 
massage and found substantial benefits to motor symptoms, depression, and attitudes to self  only in the 
Alexander group ; benefits were retained at 6 months9,10. These are promising results ; however , the traditional 
way of delivering Alexander technique , via one -to-one in -person sessions  with a trained  Alexander  specialist , is 
neither available nor affordable for a large percentage of PWP in the rural Western US. It was prev iously 
thought that the benefits of Alexander technique depended  mostly  on manual  guidance . However, I have 
shown that even without manual contact, simple A lexander -based instructions can lead to improved balance, 
posture, and mobility, both in PWP and in healthy older adults11,12.Therefore, online group delivery of 
Alexander training may be a way for PWP who do not live in a major urban center to gain greater agency and 
independence in their symptom management.  
We have designed and begun testing an  in-person A lexander -based group course  for PWP and their care 
partners . In a small  controlled  study,  our Alexander -based  group  intervention led to  objective improvement 
relative to control s in balance (brief BESTest) and coordination (Physical Performance Test). In addition, 75 -
100% of care partners reported improvement in their care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]’s  fatigue, anxiety, posture, rigidity, rolling 
over, bradykinesia, vocal volume, self -awareness, ba lance, and overall confidence in ability to manage living 
with Parkinson’s disease. P WP reported reduced shuffling, freezing, and anxiety; increased upright posture; 
and improved ability to roll over . They also indicated  that they learned practical tools for self -management, 
encountered new ideas that they are likely to use in daily life, and would recommend this class to a friend.  At [ADDRESS_743458] widespread 
benefits for the motor system and anxiety  would  lend support to the continuation of basic research on the 
relation of postural tone to the motor  system14–18. From a clinical practice perspective, having this online 
Lighten Up! Synchronous online delivery of a dyad -based program to improve motor symptoms in rural adults with PD  
 
 [ADDRESS_743459] potential for reducing the health risks of social isolation for rural PWP and their care 
partners19,20. 
4.2 Innovation  
Our course  is an innovative biopsychosocial approach that bridges the gap between exercise approaches like  
dance or fitness classes , psycho -social approaches like support groups and psychotherapy , and informational 
approaches like educational symposiums  and meditati on classes . It is based on  Alexander technique,  a non -
exercise somatic education  process  that accesses the motor system via postural tone, body schema, and 
executive function12,21 –25. Once learned , the skills  can be applied during any activity . Thus, A lexander  principles 
can be applied d uring PT, OT, SLP, psychotherapy, or exercise sessions, facilitating  greater gains through 
increased self -awareness  and control of reactions. The skills can also be put into use during normal daily 
activities , without setting time aside to practice or requiring a  particular set of movements . This is especially 
beneficial f or individuals who can’t (or won’t ) exercise.  Self-efficacy is not limited by [CONTACT_566010]. There can 
be personal  growth as a human being no matter what physical limitations are imposed by [CONTACT_566011]. 
While PD may be out of a person's control, how PWP choose to respond to moment -to-moment stimuli is 
within their control.  It follows that with greater agency and control of physical and emotional responses, overall 
confidence and self -esteem will increase , especially for  PWP  who may be experiencing  high levels of despair 
or helplessness.  
The care dyad approach is also innovative.  Inclusion of care partners means that  if disease  progression leads 
to cognitive decline, the care partner’s reminders will help keep PWP  active longer. Care partners  also learn 
how to give physical assistance with  less risk of  injury  to themselves , and they will gain self -care skills that can 
reduce tensions in what can be v ery challenging relationships.   
4.3 Approach  
Intervention . Our “Poised for Parkinson’s” course is designed for PWP in early stages of PD  and their care 
partners. The targeted impacts for our program are: 1) Practical education  of PWP to promote  more 
independent self -management of motor symptoms during activities of daily life, with additional non -motor 
symptom benefits; and 2) Practical education  of care partners to  enable them to  facilitate  care receivers' 
retention of skills and to help care p artners manage their own physical and emotional stress.  
Our study focuses on early stages of PD, when both partners are often experiencing a significant period of 
transition and changing roles that can include negative feelings, depression, diminished well -being, social 
isolation, and loss of autonomy. Our program aims to ease that transition through enhancing partnered 
communication and understanding of one another's experiences through the lens of group interactions with 
other care dyads.  
The course meets  twice per week, for two hours per class session , over 8 weeks, for a total of 32 “contact 
[CONTACT_164212].” Each class  includes some time for participants to connect with each other  to review what they learned 
last time , and to share  how they have applied the knowledge and what problems they encountered. We have 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_566007] “breakout rooms” to simulate the smaller breakout groups used in an in -person class, and 
we found them to be effective.    
Participants are taught principle s and methods to allow them to attend to unproductive habits of muscle tension 
and to become aware of their ability to make different choices.  These practices develop body awareness, 
intentionality, and inhibitory control, which are used to improve the acc uracy of the body schema and the 
distribution and regulation of postural tone, leading to cascading benefits through the motor system.  
Research Methods  
Design:  We will use  a single -group design with a primary focus on course development and feasibility tes ting. 
We will include  5 dyads, each comprising a PWP and their care partner . Experience suggests that this is an 
ideal group size to create a feeling of cohesion and connection.  
Inclusion criteria: To be included in the proposed study, the PWP needs to be : over 5 0 years of age; 
diagnosed with PD by [CONTACT_34358] ; ambulatory without assistance from another person, a walker, or a 
Lighten Up! Synchronous online delivery of a dyad -based program to improve motor symptoms in rural adults with PD  
 
 3 wheelchair; cognitively sound enough to follow instructions and retain information; and not a t high risk for falls. 
They also need a willing care partner, a good Internet connection, and a decent computer moni tor with 
speakers and microphone. Screening  will include administration of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment26. 
Participants will be excluded if they score below nineteen, which is the  standard  cutoff for  dementia for white 
non-Hispanic Americans27. Information regarding f all history of  the PWP will be collected from the PWP and 
their care partner.  If the PWP  had any falls in the past [ADDRESS_743460] five seconds (best of 
three tries)28 AND if they score less than 55 on the ABC -6 (a brief survey of balance confidence that has been 
validated for PWP)29, we will exclude them from the study.    
Recruitment:  There are support groups both in Moscow (where the University of Idaho is located) and 
Pullman ([ADDRESS_743461]). We have previously reached out to local PD support groups  and found members 
willing to participate in studies.  Depending on the status of the pandemic, we can do  support group 
presentations  either in person or online. Other recruitment strategies we've employed include: announcements 
in regional Parkinson's orga nizations' monthly email newsletters and social media platforms; announcements 
on The Poise Project website , Facebook page , and Twitter  account ; emails to the larger PD community from 
email lists; referrals from medical and allied health professionals and fitness trainers; distribution of flyers to 
local community sites, including retirement communities, community organizations, and places of worship ; and 
distributing press releases to regional news sources.  
Retention:  Our previous courses have had very hig h retention . In our in -person courses, average course 
attendance was 89% for those who completed the course, and course participants reported they had learned 
practical self -management tools, enjoyed the social interaction of the group setting, and were li kely to 
remember and use what they had learned in their daily lives. Retention strategies include: enhancing 
participant engagement in the research process and in the meaning and purpose of study outcomes for the 
larger PD community; specialized training f or instructors in group dynamics and bonding; individualized 
instructor attention within the group setting; incremental learning and capacity building through carefully 
designed curriculum; field notes from instructor and follow up supervision and mentorin g; access to review 
handouts and videos;  and establishing a buddy system to keep participants updated if they miss a class . 
Outcome measures:  Our primary outcome measures are class attendance and study retention.  Our 
secondary measures include self -reports of symptom management, anonymous course evaluations, and 
objective assessments of balance and motor performance. For our in -person classes, we used the Brief 
BESTest to assess  balance30 and the [ADDRESS_743462] Timed Up and Go that involves standing up from a chair, 
walking 10 meters, turning around, walking back to the starting location, and sitting back down. The 
instrumented version includes wearable iner tial sensors (APDM) and automatically computed metrics such as 
step cadence, arm swing, and gait asymmetry . If it is not safe to travel, we will choose a subset of these 
objective measures that can be administered online, with the assistance of the care pa rtner.  
Protocol:  Consent.  Participants will be sent a copy of the informed consent to read in advance. At the 
screening session, a researcher will go over it with them, answer any questions, and observe them signing the 
form. The form will be returned , either  by [CONTACT_566012] , before the first testing session. All surveys and 
testing will take place at the same time of day, in the morning when PWP are typi[INVESTIGATOR_566008].  
Analysis and interpretation : Class attendance  will be compa red to attendance at our in -person group 
courses, as well as to other PD -focused courses described in the literature. Study retention  will provide 
information about how many participants we will need to recruit in our next study. Qualitative course 
evaluat ions will be used along with instructor notes and video to improve the course. We will also look at 
balance and motor symptoms, but these will not be subject to inferential statistics due to the small sample size 
and absence of a control group  
Potential pi[INVESTIGATOR_30207] : Recruitment : If we don’t find enough willing volunteers who qualify for the study in  Moscow 
or Pullman , we will expand our recruitment efforts to other towns within an hour’s drive . Scheduling : we will 
Lighten Up! Synchronous online delivery of a dyad -based program to improve motor symptoms in rural adults with PD  
 
 [ADDRESS_743463] three different possible time s of day that we could offer the class, to maximize our ability to find 
participants who can do it . This flexibility is made possible by [CONTACT_12204] a need to reserve a teaching 
space.  Technical problems : If the Internet connection is not as good as ant icipated for some of the participants, 
they can switch to using telephone for audio and only streaming video live.  PD is a neurodegenerative disease , 
so balance and motor symptoms may not improve even if the course is successful. Sometimes slower disease 
progression and decline  is the best one can hope for. However, this will not affect our primary outcomes.  
4.3.[ADDRESS_743464]  practices to deliver remote symptom -management courses.  For instance, PAR-20-154 solicits 
investigator -initiated clinical trials (R01) of complementary and integrative interventions delivered remotely.  
4.3.[ADDRESS_743465] (TPP) will take the lead on content development and revision, 
using the PI’s  expertise and background as needed. TPP will develop the course manual and training 
materials, train the instructor, and supervis e the delivery of the course. T PP has  previously done al l these 
steps for several different in -person courses according to specified timelines. The P I will be responsible for 
recruiting, screening and testing participants, analyzing data,  disseminating the results, and writing subsequent 
grant(s) . 
4.3.[ADDRESS_743466] timeline  (The Poise Project in red , Mind in Movement Lab in blue ; TPP & MML  in purple ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the course of this project, we plan to submit for publication the results of our recent study testing in -
person Alexander courses  for PWP/care partner  dyads . We will also  continue conversation  with our NCC IH 
program officer contact [CONTACT_566013], 
such as whether it would be wise to apply for an R01 next or to apply for an intermediate mechanism such as 
R34 (described above in 4.3.2). Suc h an application could potentially be generated in summer 2021, 
depending on the results of the proposed work.  For this extramural proposal, we will work with MW CTR -IN’s 
appointed biostatistician at the U of I on the project’s study design and analysis st rategy.  
Impact. “Poised for Parkin son's ” has great potential as  an impactful, scalable, sustainable, and measurable 
program . This innovative , dyad -centered,  Alexander technique -based approach to the care of individuals with 
Parkinson’s disease has the capacity to significantly improve  management  of several refractory PD symptoms.   Sept-Oct Nov-Dec Jan-Feb Mar-Apr May-Jun 
Aim 1  
Develop Content       
Develop Training Materials       
Train Instructor       
Aim 2  
Recruit, Screen, & Pretest       
Deliver Course       
Posttest       
Aim 3  
Analyze Data       
Create & Present Poster       
Revise Course       