 
Official Title:  NAtalizumab for Prevention of Post -partum Relapses in 
patients with Multiple Sclerosis (NAPPREMS)  
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Type:  Study Protocol  
Date of the 
Document:  05/15/[ADDRESS_1013390] ( UBIRB)  
Office of Research Compliance | Clinical and Translational Research Center Room [ADDRESS_1013391]. | Buffalo, NY 142 03 
UB Federalwide Assurance ID#: FWA00008824  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  NAtalizumab for Prevention of Post -partum 
Relapses in patients with Multiple Sclerosis (NAPPREMS)  
Page 1 of 36 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS:  Complete Research Protocol  (HRP -503) 
• Depending on the nature of what you are doing , some sections may 
not be applicable  to your research .  If so, you must provide the 
reason why the section is not applicable  for the response .  For 
example , most behavioral studies would answer all questions in 
section [ADDRESS_1013392] of “drugs and medical devices 
are not used in this study.”  
• When you write a protocol, keep an electronic copy. You will need 
to modify this  copy when making changes . 
• Do not remove the italics instructions or headings.  
• If you are pasting information from other documents be sure to use 
the “Merge Formatting” paste option so that the formatting of the 
response boxes is not lost.  If information is presented outside of 
the response boxes , it will not be accepted .  
• If this study involves multiple participant groups who participate 
in different research procedures, consent processes, etc., be 
certain to provide information in each applicable section for each 
participant group and clearly label each participant group w ithin 
a section or subsection.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : 
Include the full protocol title.  
Response:  
NAtalizumab for Prevention of Post -partum Relapses in patients 
with Multiple Sclerosis (NAPPREMS)  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_10677]:  
Bianca Weinstock -Guttman  
UBMD Neurology  
[PHONE_15471]  
[EMAIL_14160]  
 Page 2 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  VERSION NUMBER:  
Include the version number of this protocol.  
Response:  
Version 5 
DATE:  
Include the date of submission or revision . 
Response:  
05/15/2019  
Grant Applicability:  
Describe whether or not this protocol is funded by a grant or contract and if so, 
what portions of the grant this study covers.  
Response:  
Study specific procedures (Physical and neurological 
examinations, completion of QOL questionnaires) are covered 
by [CONTACT_10729].  Subjects may receive medication that is 
standard of care. Treatment related testing (that related to 
medication) required during the study is standard of care.  
 
 Page 3 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  4 
2.0 Background  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ..............  9 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  ............................  11 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods (Multisite/Multicenter Only) ..........................  11 
6.0 Multi -Site Research (Multisite/Multicenter Only) ................................ .................  11 
7.0 Study Timelines  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 12 
8.0 Study Endpoints  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 13 
9.0 Procedures Involved ................................ ................  Error! Bookmark not defined.  
10.[ADDRESS_1013393] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  30 
26.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  30 
27.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  31 
28.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 31 
29.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ ..............................  35 
30.0  Drugs or Devices ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 35 
 
 Page 4 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  1.0 Objectives  
1.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives.  
Response:  
The primar y objective  of the trial is to assess the efficacy of IV 
administered natalizumab, monthly for 1 year, in preventing 
relapses during the postpartum period.  
The secondary  objectives of the trial are to assess the efficacy 
of natalizumab in decreasing the risk for disability progression 
during the postpartum period and to prevent the appearance of 
new and/or enlarging brain MRI lesions as measured by 
[CONTACT_741217].  
The tertiary objective  is to assess  the association  of the clinical 
outcomes with subject evaluations including patient reported 
outcomes (QOL, satisfaction) . 
1.2 State the hypotheses to be tested.  
Response:  
Natalizumab therapy instituted shortly after delivery will 
decrease the risk of relapses and /or MRI activity in the 
immediate postpartum period . 
2.0 Background  
2.1 Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps in current 
knowledge.  
Response:  
Multiple sclerosis (MS) has a higher prevalence in women than 
men and recent literature suggests that the gender gap is 
widening .[ADDRESS_1013394] three trimesters, after which a sharp 
increase can be observed three months postpartu m.4 While not 
all women experience a rebound in relapse rates, there are 
indications that an increased relapse rate in the year prior to 
pregnancy, an increased relapse rate during pregnancy, and a 
higher Kurtzke’s Disability Status Scale at pregnancy onset a re 
important indicators of an increased likelihood of postpartum 
exacerbations.5 Other results indicate that there are no effects 
 Page 5 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013395] been tried in order to prevent a rebound 
of relapses, which included treatment with IV steroids 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg),7-[ADDRESS_1013396] looked 
at both (re)starting tr eatment during the postpartum period, as 
well as continuing medication use throughout the pregnancy 
and postpartum period. Women who were treated throughout 
their pregnancy, and those who were treated postpartum 
showed significantly fewer relapses compared  to women who 
did not receive treatment.[ADDRESS_1013397] -partum period. The primary concern 
 Page 6 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  related to the use of natalizumab is the risk to develop 
progressive multifocal encephalopathy (PML). The risk for 
development PML in patients treated with natalizumab is 
primarily linked to prolonged therapy (over 2 years), previous 
exposure to chemothera py and being anti J CV antibody 
positive (STRATIFY JCV). As the risk for relapses in post -
partum period is in general limited to 1 year we propose to 
evaluate the efficacy of natalizumab therapy for this period. 
Continuing natalizumab vs. switching to another disease 
modifying therapy after 1 year should b e re-assessed in case to 
case bases.  
2.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data.  
Response:  
A recent retrospective small French study18  reports  the 
benefit of natalizumab use in postpartum period in 6 
previously very active MS patients. The annualized relapse 
rate (ARR) between natalizumab withdrawal and onset of 
pregnancy was 1.8 ±0.7. Six relapses occurred before onset of 
pregnancy and seven du ring pregnancy. Natalizumab was 
restarted 7.8 days after delivery (between day 2 and 8 for five 
patients and on day 23 for one). Only one patient, who had 
restarted natalizumab 2 days after delivery, had a relapse 2 
weeks later. The others five patients we re relapse free after a 
mean of 14.2 ±9.1 months of follow -up. The conclusion of the 
study: “Despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a known high risk of post -partum relapses, 
early redosing of natalizumab led to a complete disappearance 
of disease activity in all but one patient. These data suggest 
that natalizumab could be a good candidate for preventing 
early post -partum relapses”.  
2.3 Provide the scientific or scholarly background  for, rational e for, and 
significance  of the research  based on the existing literature  and how 
will it add to existing knowledge.  
Response:  
As presented in the background section the post -partum period 
(especially the first 3 months) is characterized by [CONTACT_741218]. Although many disease -
modifying drugs  (DMT s) have come to market in the past two 
decades, when used during pregnancy and lactation, their 
beneficial effects on the course of MS have to be balanced with 
fears concerning potential risks to the fetus or child. Therefore 
the general recommendation is to discontinue therapy during 
pregnancy and often even at the time of considering 
conception. As for the post -delivery period, breastfeeding and 
treatment options after delivery should be discussed to outline 
 Page 7 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  the options for prevention of postpartum relapses, and the 
possible resumption of disease -modifying drugs Multiple 
interventions were considered in the postpartum period 
including: Immunoglobulins (IVIG), steroids9, estrogens10, none 
of which were able to show a significant positive effect in 
preventing the postpartum relapses as compared to no 
intervention.  
Based on the well -established natalizumab efficacy, especially 
seen in high risk patients, we expect that initiation of this 
therapy shortly after delivery can prevent relapses in a more 
effective manner than any other interventions.  
2.4 Include complete specific citations /references.  
Response:  
1. Orton S -M, Herrera BM, Yee IM, et al. Sex ratio of multiple 
sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study. Lancet neurology. 
2006;5:932 -936. 
2. D'hooghe M. Long -term effects of childbirth in MS. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery& Psychiatry. 2010;81(1):38 -41.  
3. Teter B, Kavak K, Kolb -Sobieraj C, Coyle P, Weinstock -Guttman 
B. Parity Associated with Long -Term Disease Progression in 
Women with Multiple Sclerosis. Journal of Multiple Sclerosis. 
2014;1(101):doi: 10.4172/jmso.1000101.  
4. Confavreux C, Hutchinson M, Hours MM, Cortinovis -Tourniaire 
P, Moreau T. Rate of pregnancy -related relapse in multiple 
sclerosis. Pregnancy in Multiple Sclerosis Group. N Engl J 
Med. 1998;339:285 -291. 
5. Vukusic S, Hutchinson M, Hours M, et al. Pregnancy and 
multiple sclerosis (the PRIMS study): clinical predictors of 
post-partum relapse. Brain. 2004;127:1353 -1360.  
6. Vukusic S, Confavreux C. Pregnancy and multiple sclerosis: the 
children of PRIMS. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2006;108:266 -
270. 
7. Haas J, Hommes OR. A dose comparison study of IVIG in 
postpartum relapsing -remitting multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 
Aug 2007;13(7):[ADDRESS_1013398]. Jan 2009;2(1):7 -11. 
9. de Seze J, Chapelotte M, Delalande S, Ferriby D, Stojkovic T, 
Vermersch P. Intravenous corticosteroids in the postpartum 
 Page 8 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013399] 2004;10(5):[ADDRESS_1013400] -
Partum Relapses with Progestin and Estradiol in Multiple 
Sclerosis (POPART'MUS) trial: rationale, objectives and 
state of advancement. J Neurol Sci. Nov 15 2009;286(1 -
2):114 -118. 
11. Langer -Gould A, Huang SM, Gupta R, et al. Exclusive 
breastfeeding and the risk of postpartum relapses in women 
with multiple sclerosis. Arch Neurol. Aug 2009;66(8):[ADDRESS_1013401] of intravenous 
immunoglobulin treatment on pregnancy and postpartum -
related relapses in multiple sclerosis. J Neurol. 
2004;251:[ADDRESS_1013402] -
feeding, postpartum and prepregnancy disease activity in 
multiple sclerosis. Neurology. Aug 3 2010;75(5):474 -476. 
14. Portaccio E, Ghezzi A, Hakiki B, et al. Breastfeeding is not 
related to postpartum relapses in multiple sclerosis. 
Neurology. Jul 12 2011;77(2):145 -150. 
15. Hughes SE, Spelman T, Gray OM, et al. Predictors and 
dynamics of postpartum relapses in women with multiple 
sclerosis. Mult Scler. May 2014;20(6):739 -746. 
16. Hellwig, K., Haghikia , A. & Gold, R. Pregnancy and 
natalizumab: results of an observational study in 35 
accidental pregnancies during natalizumab treatment. Mult 
Scler 17, 958 -963 (2011).  
17. Fagius, J. & Burman, J. Normal outcome of pregnancy with 
ongoing treatment with natalizumab. Acta Neurol Scand 129, 
e27-29 (2014).  
18. Vukusic, S., et al. Natalizumab for the prevention of post -
partum relapses in women with multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler 
21, 953 -955 (2015).  
19. Horakova, D., et al. Environmental factors associated with 
disease progression after the first demyelinating event: 
results from the multi -center SET study. PLoS One 8, 
e53996 (2013).  
20. Weinstock -Guttman, B., et al. Lipid profiles are associated with 
lesion formation over [ADDRESS_1013403] demyelinating event. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 84, 1186 -1191 (2013).  
 Page 9 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  21. Browne, R.W., et al. Apolipoproteins are associated with new 
MRI lesions and deep grey matter atrophy in clinically 
isolated syndromes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 85, 859 -
864 (2014).  
22. Messina, S., et al. Increased leptin and A -FABP levels in 
relapsing and progressive forms of MS. BMC Neurol 13, 172 
(2013).  
3.0 Inclusion and Excl usion Criteria  
3.1 Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in 
your final study sample.   
Response:  
Subjects meeting all of the inclusion and none of the exclusion 
criteria provided below are eligible for enrollment in the 
natalizumab group.  
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Female subjects postpartum, 0 -30 days postpartum at the 
time of informed consent.  
2. Diagnosis of relapsing form of MS.  
3. Willing to initiating natalizumab and enroll in the TOUCH 
system.  
4. Willing and able to comply with the study procedures for the 
duration of the trial.  
5. Signed informed consent and HIPAA authorization.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Diagnosis of primary progressive MS.  
2. Breastfeeding  
3. Use of IVIG in Tysabri treated subjects.  
4. Significant renal or hepatic impairment (in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1070]) or other significant disease (e.g., cognitive 
impairment) that would compromise adherence and completion 
of the trial.  
5. History of hypersensitivity to previous exposure or presence 
of antibodies to natalizumab.  
6. Any other factor that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], would 
make the subject unsuitable for participation in this study.  
7. Patients that experience relapses and/or initiated DMT’s 
during pregnancy  
 Page 10 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013404] delivery or remain on no therapy 
while breastfeeding.  
3.2 Describe how individuals will be screen ed for eligibility.  
Response:  
During routine clinical visits patients who fulfill the inclusion 
criteria may be identified as potential candidates . 
Women are routinely seen in clinic for evaluation postpartum to 
discuss treatment options.  Clinic staff may identify potential 
candidates during routine clinic visits and offer the opportunity 
to enroll in this study . 
3.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations:  (You may not include members of 
these populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate 
this in your inclusion criteria.)  
• Adults unable to consent  
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners  
Response:  
Vulnerable population s (adults unable to consent, individuals 
who are not yet adults, pregnant women, and prisoner s) will not 
participate in this research.  
3.4 Indicate whether you will include non -English speaking individuals .  
Provide justification if you will exclude non -English speaking 
individuals.  
(In order to meet one of the primary ethical principles of equitable 
selection of subjects, n on-English speaking individuals may not be 
routinely excluded from research.  In cases where the research is of 
therapeutic intent or is designed to investigate areas that would 
necessarily require certain populations who may not speak English, 
the researc her is required t o make efforts to recruit and include non -
English speaking individuals.  However, there are studies in which it 
would be reasonable to limit subj ects to those who speak English: 
e.g., pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], small unfunded studies with validated instruments 
 Page 11 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013405] benefit.)  
 
Response:   
As this study will require patient reported outcomes  in the form 
of Quality of Life questionnaires that are in the English 
language,  we will enroll only patients who are fluent in English. 
It is not feasible to have the patient reported outcomes tools 
translated for this small study.  
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects  (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
4.1 If this is a multicenter study, indicate the total number of subjects to 
be accrued across all sites.  
Response:  
30 subjects will be enrolled study wide.  
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods  (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
If this is a multicenter study and subjects will be recruited by [CONTACT_73167] (e.g., call centers, national advertisements) describe 
those methods.   Local recruitment methods are described later in the protocol.  
5.1 Describe when, where, and how potential subjects will be recruited.  
Response:  
Patients will be identified during routine  clinical visits . 
5.2 Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects.  
Response:  
MS patients enrolled at one of the 2 participating ce nters .  
Women are routinely seen in clinic for evaluation postpartum to 
discuss treatment options.  C linic staff will identify potential 
candidates during routine clinic visits and offer the opportunity 
to enroll in this study . 
5.3 Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects. (Attach 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_52963]. For advertisements, 
attach the final copy of printed advertisements. When advertisements 
are taped for broadcast, attach the final audio/video tape. You may 
submit the wording of the advertisement pri or to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_73153]-tapi[INVESTIGATOR_47223], provided the IRB 
reviews the final audio/video tape.)  
Response:  
No advertisement will be used  for this study.  
6.0 Multi -Site Research  (Multisite/Multicenter Only)  
 Page 12 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  6.1 If this is a multi -site study where you are the lead investigator, 
describe the processes to ensure communication among sites, such 
as: 
• All sites have the most current version of the protocol, consent 
document, and HIPAA authorization.  
• All required approvals have been obtained at each site 
(including approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record).  
• All modifications have been communicated to sites, and 
approved (including approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of record) 
before the modification is implemented.  
• All engaged participating sites will safeguard data as required 
by [CONTACT_28584].  
• All local site investigators conduct the study appropriately.  
• All non -compliance with the study protocol or applicable 
requirements will reported in accordance with local policy.  
Response:  
The coordinating center wi ll provide the protocol  (including 
source and questionnaires)  to the participating sites.   Any 
amendments to the protocol will be communicated to the sites 
to be implemented appropriately.  The sites will provide proof 
of their local IRB approval prior to beginning research activity 
with subjects  and any amendments will require approval prior 
to implementation .  IRB approvals for participating sites will be 
provided to the UBIRB as they are submitted to the coordinating 
center at UBMD Neurology . 
Each site will follow its own local regulatory requirements . 
6.2 Describe the method for communicating to engaged participating 
sites:  
• Problems.  
• Interim results.  
• The closure of a study  
Response:  
Site will receive status reports.  We do not anticipate problems 
with the conduct of the study, if any arise , communication with 
sites will be made as needed via email or telephone . 
If difficulty with enrollment within year 1 (less than 50% of 
expected enrollment) is encountered, consideration will be 
given to adding additional sites . 
7.0 Study Timelines  
 Page 13 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013406]’s participation in the 
study.  
Response:  
Subjects  will be followed for 1 year  after enrollment.  
7.2 Describe t he duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects.  
Response:  
Approximately 18 months  after all sites are approved to begin 
enrollment.  
7.3 Describe t he estimated date for the investigators to complete this 
study (complete primary analyses)  
Response:  
Approximately [ADDRESS_1013407] completes the study . 
8.0 Study Endpoints  
8.1 Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints.  
Response:  
The primary endpoint is the proportion of patients who 
experience a relapse postpartum (proportion of patients 
relapsed, PPR)  during [ADDRESS_1013408] -delivery in patients treated 
with natalizumab.  This will be compared to the PPR in the 
parallel control group.  
The secondary  endpoints are:  
1. If appropriate, annualized relapse rate (ARR) between the 
natalizumab -treated group and the control group (who may 
remain off treatment or be on other DMTs) . 
2. Confirmed (12 week) EDSS change of 1 point or more for a 
baseline EDSS > 1, or a confirmed increase of 1.5 points for an 
EDSS of 0 -1, at Week 48 as compared to baseline between the 2 
groups.  
3. Change in MRI: MRI at Week  48 for: new or enlarging T2, and 
T1 gadolinium -enhancing (GdE) lesions counts  compared  to the 
change in MRI control group.  
4. Percent of patients that discontinued the primary therapy 
initiated post -partum (efficacy/tolerability)  
Tertiary endpoints:  
Change in QOL measures that will include: SF12v2, FSMC, and 
MSIS -29 v2 from baseline to week 24 and 48 as compared to the 
control group.  
 Page 14 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  8.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints  
Response: All serious adverse  events  (SAEs) , will be collected 
and summarized descriptively in the clinical study report 
and appropriate aggregate safety report.  
9.0 Procedures Involved  
9.1 Describe and explain the study design.  
Response:  
This is a Phase  IV, prospective,  open -label,  multicenter trial. 
Postpartum patients with a diagnosis of MS will be invited to 
enroll in this study that will evaluate the efficacy of IV 
natalizumab 300 mg to prevent postpartum relapses. 
Natalizumab, administered q 4 weeks, will be initiated 
postpartum  (0-30) days post -delivery. Breastfeeding will be 
permitted up to 30 days postpartum in subjects opting to initiate 
Natalizumab  (breastfeeding must be discontinued at 
natalizumab initiation). Patients who decline natalizumab 
treatment postpartum will be invited to enroll in the study in the 
control group. The control group will have similar inclusion, 
exclusion criteria, scheduled  visit and study procedures as the 
active natalizumab treatment group. Th is group will be 
permitted to continue breastfeeding if they will remain off DMT . 
Approximately  30 subjects will be enrolled study wide . 
9.2 Provide a description of all research procedures being performed 
and when they are performed, including procedures being performed 
to monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks.  
Response:  
At Visit  1 (Screenin g/Baselin e: 0-[ADDRESS_1013409] -delivery),  
patients provide informed consent /Health Insurance  Portability 
and Accountability A ct (HIPAA) then undergo evaluation  of 
inclusion/exclusion  eligibility criteria, provide  a complete  
medical  history including  relapse histor y (1 year before 
pregnancy and during pregnancy) , undergo  full physical  and 
neurological examinations (including EDSS).  Recording of 
concomitant medications/procedures  and laborator y testing  
will also be performed at  screening/baseline (lab testing if 
applicable as part of standard of care). An MRI evaluation after 
delivery represents a routine clinical accepted requirement.  
Laboratory testing includes: CBC/diff, CMP, JCV antibody 
status (STRATIFY JCV), urinalysis with culture at screening and 
q [ADDRESS_1013410] of care for those on natalizumab 
treatment.   
 Page 15 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013411] dose 
of natalizumab  will be administered after the MRI and baseline 
lab testing are obtained.  Breastfeeding, if initiated, should be 
discontinued if patient is assigned to start natalizumab therapy.  
Subjects  will visit  the clinic for  assessments  on Visit 2  (Week  
12), Visit 3  (Week 24), Visit 4 (Week 36) and Visit 5 (week 48) for 
monitoring of their  status,  well-being, EDSS, and completion 
of PROs. SAEs will be monitored on an on -going basis 
throughout the study. An additional standard of care MRI will be 
performed at week 48, final visit of the study. Additional non -
scheduled visits during possible relapses will be scheduled 
within 72 hours from development of new symptoms 
suggesting of a relapse.  
The control group will be evaluated at same time points and can 
consider different intervention (including any FDA approved 
DMTs or breastfeeding only).  
Patients who experience relapses will be treated with 3 -5 days 
IV Methylprednisolone. They will continue to be followed as per 
study visits schedule. Steroid therapy will be allowed if new 
symptoms or activity on baseline MRI will be identified before 
enro lling in the study. The control group patients will be 
maintained in the study while continuing on their same DMT 
initiated postpartum. As the treating physician  and/or patient 
will consider a switch to any other DMT (including natalizumab). 
Patients who switched to rescue therapy will be discontinued 
from the study.  The percent of patient that require 
discontinuation (i.e. related to efficacy vs. tolerability) will be 
also assessed and compared between the groups.   
9.3 Describe p rocedures performed to lessen the probability or 
magnitude of risks.  
Response:  
This is not an interventional study.  The risks associated with 
participation are limited to potential loss of confidentiality.  
The management of this r isk is described in Section 11. 
9.4 Describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research and the purpose 
of their use, and their regulatory approval status.  
Response:  
There are no drugs or devices used for research purposes in 
this study.  
All treatments mentioned are FDA approved therapi[INVESTIGATOR_741213] . 
 Page 16 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013412] data about 
subjects. (Attach all surveys, scripts, and data collection forms.)  
Response:  
Data will be collected on paper source documents . Subjects 
will complete hardcopy questionnaires. Source forms and 
Quality of Life questionnaires are provided as part of 
submission.  
9.6 What data will be collected including long -term follow -up? 
Response:  
An overview of the data that will be collected includes  
demographics, med ical history, MS history, MS treatment 
history , physical exam , neurological exam , and vitals . Subjects 
also complete questionnaires.  The source documents  with the 
exact data to be collected  at study visits and the questionnaires  
are provided as part of submission.  
In addition, MRI data will be obtained for subjects and a 
counting of new and/or enlarging T2 lesions as well the number 
of T1 Gd enhancing lesions present at baseline and at the 1 -year 
repeat brain MRI.  MRI data will be obtained electronically.  
Hardcopy MRI reports will be provided by [CONTACT_741219].  
9.7 For HUD uses provide a description of the device, a summary of 
how you propose to use the device, including a description of any 
screening procedures, the HUD procedure, and any patient follow -
up visits, tests or procedures.  
Response:  
No device will be evaluated and/or included in the study  
10.0 Data and Specimen Banking  
10.1 If data or specimens will be banked for future use, describe where 
the data/ specimens will be stored, how long they will be stored, how 
the data/ specimens will be accessed, and who will have access to the 
data/ specimens.  
Response:  
No data or specimen will be banked for future use.  
10.[ADDRESS_1013413] the data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
10.3 Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including: the 
process to request a release, approvals required for release, who 
 Page 17 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  can obtain data or specimens, and the data to be provided with 
specimens.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
11.0 Data Management  
11.1 Describe the data analysis plan, including any statistical 
procedures.  
Response:  
General Methods  
All collecte d data will be displa yed in patien t data listings . 
Statistical ana lyses will be performed using SPSS  for 
Windows. All  analyses will  be performed  on the Full Analysis  
Set (FAS ) defined as the set of all enrolled  patients who 
received at least one dose of study  drug.  
Descriptive  statistics  (n, mean,  standard  deviation  [SD], 
median,  Q1, Q3, minimum,  maximum) will  be calculated for all 
patients in  the FAS. Frequencies and percentages  will be 
presented for categorical and ordinal variables. Where 
appropriate, 95% confidence intervals (CIs) will be presented.  
As no randomization will be considered in this study the 
statistical analysis will control for demographic and clinical 
identified significant differences (see above the subanalysis 
metrics). Additional analysis will be considered using the 
propensity scor es method.  
A block enrollment of 20 per group (natalizumab vs controls) 
will be required to provide an even enrollment between the 2 
groups and prevent a possible overenrollment in the control 
group before the natalizumab will be completed.  
Baseline Analyses  
Demographics and baseline characteristics will be ana lyzed 
descriptive ly. 
Baseline analyses will also include descriptive analyses of 
medical histor y, physical exam, neurological exam, baseline 
QoL assessment, and concomitant medications.  
11.2 Provide a power analysis.  
Response:  
A sample size of thirty (30) patients will be sufficient to provide 
evidence of a statistical trend in the difference in PPR between 
 Page 18 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  participants who utilize natalizumab postpartum and the 
control group.  
11.3 Describe the steps that will be taken secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical 
controls, certificates of confidentiality, and separation of identifiers 
and data) during storage, use, and transmissi on. 
Response:  
All research staff is train ed in proper data handle procedures.  
Files are maintained in locked cabinets in locked rooms in the 
offices of the department of Neurology (UBMB Neurology) 
located at [ADDRESS_1013414] 
of the research, including data entry and analysis.  
11.4 Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of 
collected data.  
Response:  
Data is subjected to quality review by [CONTACT_741220]. The data is cleaned using a logic check system to 
ensure accuracy.  Data that does not pass logic check criteria is 
queried for clarification.  
11.5 Describe how data and specimens will be handled study -wide:  
Response:  
A unique subject number will be assigned to each subject at 
inclusion, immediately after informed  consent  has been 
obtained . This numbe r will serve as the subject’ s identifie r in 
the trial as well as in the clinical trial database. The  subject’s  
data collected  in the trial will be store d under  this number.  Only 
the Site Investigator will  be able  to link the subject’s  trial data 
to the subject via  an identification list  kept at the site. 
CRFs will be provided by [CONTACT_5081] (CC) that will 
be located in Buffalo at UBMD Neurology. The completed forms 
required for a visit will be sent to the CC via fax or email within 
[ADDRESS_1013415] receipt of the data transmittal on a log all the 
CRFs contained in that transmittal. CRFs will be reviewed for 
clarity and completeness. Incomplete or incorrectly completed 
forms will generate queries which will be faxed or e -mailed to 
the originating site on a Data Clarification Form (DCF). The DCF 
will identify the subject, visit number, and CRF in question, and 
the data elements that have been flagged for review. The 
originating site investigate the discrepancy. The DCF must be 
 Page 19 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  completed showing what corrections need to be made (or 
indicating why no changes are necessary) and returned to the 
CC within 7 days of receipt. Data entry staff at the CC will make 
the appropriate changes to the database. The original DCF will 
be filed by  [CONTACT_741221]. The CC will keep a copy of the corrected DCF as 
well, attached to the corresponding CRF.  
The data will be entered  into a validated  database.  The CC will 
be responsible  for data processing.  Database  lock will occu r 
once  qualit y control  procedure,  and quality  assurance  
procedures  (if applicable)  have  been completed.  
Files are maintained in locked cabinets in locked rooms in the 
offices of the department of Neurology (UBMB Neurology) 
located at [ADDRESS_1013416] 
of the research, including data entry and analysis.  
11.6 What information will be included in that data or associated with the 
specimens?  
Response:  
The data described in Sections 9.5 and 9.6 will be included in 
database.   
No specimens are being collected.  
11.7 Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
Response:  
Files are maintained in locked cabinets in locked rooms in the 
offices of the department of Neurology (UBMB Neurology) 
located at [ADDRESS_1013417] 
of the research, including data entry and analysis.  
No specimens are being collected.  
11.8 How long the data or specimens will be stored?  
Response:  
Data may be stored for up to [ADDRESS_1013418] access to the data or specimens?  
Response:  
 Page 20 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013419] 
access to data as necessary for data entry, data clarification and 
analysis.  
No specimens are being collected.  
11.10 Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
Response:  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_741214] s 
will be responsible for the transmission of the data for entry into 
the database.  
11.11 How data and specimens will be transported?  
Response:  
Data will be transmitted from external sites via fax or email . 
No specimens are being collected.   
12.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data and Ensure the Safety  of Subjects  
12.1 Describe t he plan to periodically evaluate the data collected 
regarding both harms and benefits to determine whether subjects 
remain safe.    
Response:  
This is not an interventional study.  It is an observational study.  
Subject safety is not the primary outcome being evaluated.  The 
data being obtained is subjected to database logic check 
system to ensure accuracy.  
12.[ADDRESS_1013420] 
events, and efficacy data.  
Response:  
This is not an interventional trial. The data will include patient 
reported quality of life as related to the ongoing use of therapy 
or no therapy. In addition clinical data including vitals, relapses, 
and disability score will be obtained.  
12.3 Describe how the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case 
report forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_10774]).  
Response:  
Subject data will be collected at study visits.  Data will be 
recorded on case report forms by [CONTACT_3647].  Quality of 
Life questionnaires are completed by [CONTACT_1766].  If a subject 
experiences a relapse between regularly scheduled study 
visits she may c ontact the office by [CONTACT_741222] 21 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013421] initial data and 
schedule and “unscheduled study visit” as necessary.  
12.4 Describe the frequency of data collection, including when safety 
data collection starts.  
Response:  
Subjects are evaluation at 5 visits.  After enrollment (baseline 
visit), all visits occur at [ADDRESS_1013422] of care every 4 weeks . 
12.5 Describe w ho will review the data.  
Response:  
Research staff will review data at the time of collection.  Data is 
subjected to quality review by [CONTACT_741223].  The investigator may review the subject data at any time 
throughout the subject’s participation as necessary.  
12.6 Describe the frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
Response:  
Data will be reviewed and analyzed at the end of the study .  No 
interim analysis is planned.  
12.7 Describe the statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine 
whether harm is occurring.  
Response:  
This study is not using new therapeutic intervention or non FDA 
approved drugs. The study will evaluate demographics, patient -
reported outcome and usual routine clinical measurements.  
12.8 Describe any conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research.  
Response:  
This is not an interventional study.  As such there are no 
anticipated safety concerns that would warrant an immediate 
suspension of the research.  
13.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
13.1 Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent.  
Response:  
 Page 22 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013423] be withdrawn in the event of any of the 
following:  
• Participation in any  other interventional trial during the 
duration of this trial  
• Occurrence  of an exclusion  criterion  which  is clinically  
relevant  and affects  the subject’s safety, if 
discontinuation is considered necessary  by [CONTACT_3786]  
• Occurrence of pregnancy  
• Non-compliance with study  procedures (in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_13046])  
• Discontinuation of the stud y drug for  any reason 
(including but not limited: therapeutic failure requiring 
urgent additional drug, occurrence  of adverse  events  
(AEs ), if discontinuation  of trial drug is desired  or 
considered necessary  by [CONTACT_11219]/or the 
subject)*  
*Patients may opt to continue to be followed for the 
remainder of the [ADDRESS_1013424] DMT will be considered 
treatment failure and will be discontinued from the study. A 
subanalysis wi ll be performed based on the reason for DMT 
change related to efficacy vs. tolerability.  
13.2 Describe any procedures for orderly termination.  
Response:  
If a subject is to be withdrawn, either self -withdrawn or by [CONTACT_98225], the subject may be immediately withdrawn, no 
procedures need to be performed other than to document the 
reason for withdrawal, if provided by [CONTACT_423].  
13.3 Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw 
from the research, including partial withdrawal from procedures 
with continued data collection.  
Response:  
In case of premature  withdrawal from  the trial,  the 
investigations scheduled  for the last visit should  be performed,  
if possible.  In any case, the appropriate  Case  Report  Form  
(CRF)  section must be completed capturing the reason for 
discontinuation.   
 Page 23 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013425] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in 
the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, a 
description of the probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility 
of the risks. Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and 
economic risks.  
Response:  
No discomfort is expected as pati ents will have to complete only  
questionnaires  and undergo examinations which are routine 
and noninvasive in nature.  
14.[ADDRESS_1013426] risks to the 
subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
Response:  
No procedures should be unforeseeable . 
14.[ADDRESS_1013427] be or become pregnant.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
14.4 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
15.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
15.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may 
experience from taking part in the research. Include as may be 
useful for the IRB’s consideration, the probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits.  
Response:  
There is no clear immediate benefit to the individual patient. 
However, if the results of the study are positive, it will clearly 
provide significant general therapeutic information: To 
consider initiating natalizumab therapy immediately post -
partum.  
15.[ADDRESS_1013428] benefit. Do not include benefits to 
society or others.  
Response:  
 Page 24 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013429] their rights and welfare.  
• If the research involves pregnant women, review 
“CHECKLIST: Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information.  
• If the research involves neonates of uncertain viability or non -
viable neonates, review “CHECKLIST: Neonates (HRP -413)” 
or “HRP -414 – CHECKLIST: Neonates of Uncertain Viability 
(HRP -414)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient 
information.  
• If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: 
Prisoners (HRP -415)” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information.  
• If the research involves persons who have not attained the 
legal age for consent to treatments or procedures involved in 
the research (“children”), review the “CHECKLIST: Children 
(HRP -416)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient 
information.  
• If the research involves cogniti vely impaired adults, review  
“CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults  (HRP -417)” to 
ensure that you have provided sufficient information.  
• Consider  if other specifically targeted populations such as 
students , employees of a specific firm  or 
educationally/economically disadvantaged persons  are 
vulnerable to coercion or undue influence.  The checklists 
listed above for other populations should be used as a guide to 
ensure that you have provided sufficient information.  
Response:  
Not applicable.  The study will not include vulnerable 
populations . 
17.[ADDRESS_1013430] of 
the research.  
Response:  
This study will not involve community based participants  in its 
design and conduct of the research  
Note: “Community -based Participatory Research” is a collaborative 
approach to research that equitably involves all partners in the 
research process and recognizes the unique strengths that each 
 Page 25 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  brings. Community -based Participatory Research begins with a 
research topic of importance to the community, has the aim of 
combining knowledge with action and achieving social change to 
improve health outcomes and eliminate health disparities.  
18.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
18.1 Describe whether  or not  results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic 
tests, or incidental findings) will be shared with subjects or others 
(e.g., the subject’s primary care physicians) and if so, describe how 
it will be shared.  
Response:  
No genetic testing is performed . 
If abnormal findings are identified during testing (i.e. MRI) 
these will be comm unicated to the patient and PMD as 
applicable.   
19.[ADDRESS_1013431]  the research .  
Response:  
The research will be conducted in the Conventus building ([ADDRESS_1013432], Buffalo, NY [ZIP_CODE]) at the Buffalo Niagara Medical 
Campus  in the department of neurology outpatient offices  
(UBMD Neurology) .  Study visits will occur in private exam 
rooms.  
19.2 Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential 
subjects . 
Response:  
Recruitment will be performed during the routine clinical visits  
as described in Section 22 .  
19.3 Identify where research procedures will be performed.  
Response:  
The research will be conducted in the Conventus building ([ADDRESS_1013433], Buffalo, NY [ZIP_CODE]) at the Buffalo Niagara Medical 
Campus  in the department of neurology outpatient offices  
(UBMD Neurology) .  Study visits will occur in private exam 
rooms.  
19.[ADDRESS_1013434].  
Response:  
 Page 26 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013435] will be involved.  
19.5 For research conducted outside of the organization and its affiliates  
describe : 
• Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research for 
research outside the organization.  
• Local scientific and ethical review structure  outside the 
organization . 
Response:  
All centers will develop an updated protocol and consent form 
as per their local IRB requirements . 
20.0 Resources Available  
20.1 Describe the qualifications (e.g., training, experience, oversight) of 
you and your staff as required to perform their  role. When 
applicable describe their knowledge of the local study sites, culture, 
and society. Provide enough information to convince the IRB that 
you have qualified staff for the proposed research.  Note - If you 
specify a person by [CONTACT_2300], a change to that person will require prior 
approval by [CONTACT_1201]. If you specify people by [CONTACT_10757] (e.g., coordinator, 
research assistant, co -investigator, or p harmacist), a change to that 
person will not usually require prior approval by [CONTACT_1201], provided 
that person meets the qualifications described to fulfill their roles.  
Response:  
All local research staff has completed CITI training and the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_741215].  
All research staff has extensive experience conducting clinical 
trials.  The physicians conducting the research specialize in 
treating the disease under study.  
Describe other  resources available to conduct the research: For example, 
as appropriate:  
20.[ADDRESS_1013436] access to? What percentage of 
those potential subjects do you need to recruit?  
Response:  
It is estimated that the site may have approximately [ADDRESS_1013437] ing and complet ing 
the research . 
 Page 27 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  Response:  
10% of PI [CONTACT_473628]  
20.4 Describe your facilities.  
Response:  
The department of neurology outpatient offices  (UBMD 
Neurology) in the Conventus building ([ADDRESS_1013438], 
Buffalo, NY [ZIP_CODE]) at the Buffalo Niagara Medical Campus  
consist of private exam rooms in which patients are seen for all 
procedures.  Study procedures are performed in private areas 
after subjects check in with at the reception area.   Study 
documents are maintained in a locked staff office that is only 
accessed by [CONTACT_70877].  
20.[ADDRESS_1013439] s might need as a result of an anticipated consequences  of the 
human research.  
Response:  
No unexpected or anticipated consequences are foreseen 
during this study that require only questionnaire completion . 
In the event  it becomes necessary, r eferrals to appropriate 
medical facilities and/or specialists will be provided in the event 
a subjects experiences an adverse event du ring participation 
the research.  
20.6 Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the 
research  are adequately informed about the protocol, the research 
procedures , and their duties and functions.  
Response:  
All study staff is trained on the study protocol by [CONTACT_741224].  T he PI [INVESTIGATOR_741216] a training session 
to ensure research team understand  the protocol and each 
individuals’ responsibility. A major focus of training for an 
observation al study for is to ensure the confidentiality 
measures are in place and will be followed . 
21.0 Prior Approvals  
21.1 Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing 
the research. (E.g., school, external site. funding agency, laboratory, 
radiation safety, or biosafety approval.)  
Response:  
IRB approval and executed contract with funding agency.   Prior 
to other sites initiating research activity, proof of IRB approval 
must be provided.  
 Page 28 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013440] s will be recruited.  
Response:  
Subjects will be identified during routine clinic evaluation (the 
neurologists who see MS patients in the UBMD Neurology 
private practice are all investigators on the study therefore 
familiar with the requirements of the protocol) and approached 
for intere st in participation in the study.  A neurologist will 
identify that a subject meets basic eligibility criteria 
(diagnosis, age, postpartum status) during routine clinical 
evaluation and inquire if the subject has interest in 
participating in research in ge neral (if no interest, then no 
further action is taken). If the subject has interest, then the 
research coordinator is called and the potential subject is 
provided with an informed consent form as a means to provide 
her with additional information about th e study.  If the subject 
is interested, a study visit is scheduled.  
The site is not utilized posters, flyers or any other site specific 
advertisement.  
22.[ADDRESS_1013441] s. 
Response:  
Subjects may be identified from the UBMD Neurology practice 
as described in 22.1.  
22.[ADDRESS_1013442] s. 
Response:  
Subjects may be identified from the UBMD Neurology practice 
as described in 22.[ADDRESS_1013443] s. (Attach  
copi[INVESTIGATOR_52963]. For advertisements, 
attach  the final copy of printed advertisements. When advertisements 
are taped for broadcast, attach the final audio/video tape. You may 
submit the wording of the advertisement prior to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_73153]-tapi[INVESTIGATOR_47223], provided the IRB 
reviews the final audio/video tape.)  
Response:  
No advertisement will be necessary  
22.[ADDRESS_1013444] s. 
Response:  
Subjects will not be compensated for participation.  
 Page 29 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  23.0 Local Number of Subjects  
23.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally.  
Response:  
Approximately 25-28 
23.2 If applicable, distinguish between the number of subjects who are 
expected to be enrolled and screen ed, and the number of subjects 
needed to complete the research procedures (i.e., numbers of 
subjects excluding screen failures.)  
Response:  
There are no screening procedures for the study.  It is expected 
that subjects who agree to participate will enroll in the study.   
24.0 Confidentiality  
Describe the local procedures for maintenance of confidentiality.  
24.1 Where and how data or specimens will be stored locally?  
Response:  
Files are maintained in locked cabinets in locked rooms in the 
offices of the department of Neurology (UBMB Neurology) 
located at [ADDRESS_1013445] of the research, 
including data entry and analysis.  
No specimens are being collected.  
24.2 How long the data or specimens will be stored locally?  
Response:  
Data may be stored for up to [ADDRESS_1013446] access to the data or specimens locally?  
Response:  
The investigators and designated staff will have access to the 
data. 
No specimens are being collected . 
24.4 Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens locally?  
Response:  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_70863].  
24.5 How data and specimens will be transported locally?  
 Page 30 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  Response:  
Completed forms are maintained internally, no transportation is 
required.  
25.[ADDRESS_1013447] s’ privacy 
interests. “Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desir e to place 
limits on whom they interact or whom they provide personal 
information . 
Response:  
Study procedures are performed in private exam areas.  Study 
procedures are performed only by [CONTACT_464].  Study 
documents are maintained in a locked staff office that is only 
accessed by [CONTACT_70877].  
25.2 Describe what steps you will take to make the subjects feel at ease 
with the research situation in terms of the questions being asked and 
the procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to 
physical discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might 
experience in response to questions, examinations, and procedures.  
Response:  
Subjects are made to feel at ease by [CONTACT_741225].  Study visits 
occur in a comfortable environment, with which subjects are 
familiar.  They are familiar with the research staff and are made 
to feel comfortable and confident in their situation.  
25.3 Indicate how the research team is permitted to access any sources of 
information about the subjects.  
Response:  
Study procedures are performed in private exam areas. Study 
procedures are performed only by [CONTACT_464].  Study 
documents are maintained in a locked staff office that is only 
accessed by [CONTACT_70877].  
26.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
26.1 If the research involves more than Minimal Risk  to subjects, describe 
the available compensation in the event of research related injury.  
Response:  
The research do es not involve any more than minimal risk 
procedure . 
26.[ADDRESS_1013448] language, if any, relevant to 
compensation for research -related injury.  
 Page 31 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  Response:  
No injury is foreseen during questionnaire completion  or during 
the conduct of physical or neurological examinations . 
27.[ADDRESS_1013449] s may be responsible for  because of  
participation in the research . 
Response:  
No additional cost for subjects is foreseen. The study is 
observational in nature, all procedures that are strictly study 
related are paid for by [CONTACT_1758].  Other costs are standard of 
care that the subject would incur regardless of participation.  
28.0 Consent Process  
28.1 Indicate whether you will be obtaining consent  
Response:  
Informed consent will be obtained from subjects.  
28.[ADDRESS_1013450]  
Response:  
Informed consent will be obtained in the Conventus building 
([ADDRESS_1013451], Buffalo, NY [ZIP_CODE]) at the Buffalo Niagara 
Medical Campus  in the department o f neurology outpatient 
offices (UBMD Neurology).   The process itself will occur in a 
private exam room.  
28.[ADDRESS_1013452] and obtaining the consent.  
Response:  
Subjects may take as much time as they wish to consider 
participation.  
28.4 Describe a ny process to ensure ongoing consent.  
Response:  
It is regularly reinforced with subjects that they are participating 
in a research study and that participation is voluntary and that 
they may ask questions at any time.  In addition, at any time new 
or updated information is available the informed consent  form 
will be updated and subjects will be reconsented.  
28.5 Describe w hether you will be following “SOP: Informed Consent 
Process for Research (HRP -090).” If not , describe : 
 Page 32 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  • The role of the individuals listed in the application as being 
involved in the consent process.  
• The time that will be devoted to the consent discussion.  
• Steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion 
or undue influence.  
• Steps that will be taken to ensure the subjects’ understanding.  
Response:  
Informed consent will be obtained following SOP HRP -090.  
Non-English Speaking Subjects   
28.6 Indicate what language(s) other than English are  likely to be 
spoken/understood by [CONTACT_73185].  
Response:  
Only subjects who speak English will be enrolled in the study.  
The purpose of the study is patient reported outcomes which 
are in English and it is not feasible to have the study documents 
translated into other languages for this small study. Therefore 
we will  not obtain consent from subject who do not speak 
English.  
28.7 If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the 
process to ensure that the oral and written information provided to 
those subjects will be in that language.  Indicate the language that 
will be used by [CONTACT_53030].  
Response:  
Not applicable  
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves 
deception)  
28.8 Review the “ CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  
(HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations . Provide any additional 
information necessary here:  
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.9 If the research  involves a waiver the consent process for planned 
emergency research, please review the “CHECKLIST:  Waiver of 
Consent for Emergency Research  (HRP -419)” to ensure you have 
provided sufficient information for the IRB to make these 
determinations.  Provide any additional information necessary here:  
 Page 33 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  Response:  
Not applicable  
Subjects who are not yet adults  (infants, children , teenagers ) 
28.[ADDRESS_1013453] has not attained the legal age for consent to 
treatments or procedures involved in the research  under the 
applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research  will be 
conducted. (E.g., individuals under the age of 18 years.)  For 
research conducted in NY state, review “ SOP: Legally Authorized 
Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013)” to be aware 
of which individuals in the state meet the definition of “children.”  
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.[ADDRESS_1013454]  a 
legal counsel or authority  review your protocol along the definition 
of “children” in “SOP: Legally Authorized Representatives, 
Children, and Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.12 Describe whether parental permission will be obtained from:  
• Both parents unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only one 
parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the 
child.  
• One parent even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, 
reasonably available, and shares legal responsibility for the 
care and custody of the child.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.13 Describe whether permission will be obtained from individuals other 
than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provide permission. 
Describe the process used to determine these individuals’ authority 
to consent to each child’s general medical care.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
 Page 34 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, 2017  28.14 Indicate whether assent will be obtained from all, some, or none of 
the children. If assent will be obtained from some children, indicate 
which children will be required to assent.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.15 When assent of children is obtained describe whether and how it will 
be documented.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
28.16 Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable 
of consent.  The IRB  sometimes  allows the person obtaining assent to 
document assent on the consent document and does not 
automatically require assent documents  to be used.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
Adults Unable to Consent  
When a person is not capable of consent  due to cognitive impairment , a 
legally authorized representative should be used to provide consent and, 
where possible, assent of the individual should also be solicited.  
28.[ADDRESS_1013455] the individuals from whom permission will be obtained in order 
of priority. ( e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court 
appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and adult 
child.)   For research conducted in NY state, review “ SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children, and Guardians (HRP -013)” 
to be aware of which individuals in the state meet the definition of 
“legally authorized representative.”   The list in the consent template 
signature [CONTACT_741226].   
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.[ADDRESS_1013456] to their participation in 
the procedure(s) involved in this research. One method of obtaining 
this information is to  have  a legal counsel or authority  review your 
protocol along the definition of “legally authorized representative” 
in “SOP: Legally Authorized Representatives, Children, and 
Guardians (HRP -013). ” 
Response:  
 Page 35 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013457] s. Indicate whether:  
• Assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subject s. If 
some, indicated, which subject s will be required to assent and 
which will not.  
• If assent will not be obtained from some or all subject s, an 
explanation of why not.  
• Describe whether assent of the subject s will be documented 
and the process to document assent.  The IRB allows the person 
obtaining assent to document assent on the consent document 
and does not routinely require assent documents and does not 
routinely require subjects to sign assent documents.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
28.20 For HUD uses provide a description of how the patient will be 
informed of the potential risks and benefits of the HUD and any 
procedures associated with its use.  
Response:  
Not applicable  
29.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
 
If your research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and 
involves no procedures for which written documentation of consent is normally 
required outside of the research context, the IRB will generally waive the 
requirement to obtain writt en documentation of consent.  
(If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document. If you will 
obtain consent, but not document consent in writing, attach a consent script. 
Review “CHECKLIST: Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” 
to ensure that you have provided sufficient information. You may use 
“TEMPLATE CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent 
document or script.)  
29.1 Describe whether you will be following “ SOP: Written 
Documentation of Consent (HRP -091).” If not, describe whether and 
how consent of the subject  will be obtained including whether or not 
it will be documented in writing.  
Response:  
Documentation of consent in writing will be performed 
following SOP HRP -091.  
30.0 Drugs or Devices  
 Page 36 of 36 Revis ed: March 6, [ADDRESS_1013458] s and be used only by [CONTACT_10733].  
Response:  
The study will not involve drugs or devices .  Subjects will be 
utilizing medications as part of standard of care.  
If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an ID E or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device) , include the 
following information : 
30.2 Identify the hold er of the IND/IDE/Abbreviated IDE.  
Response:  
The study will not use investigational drugs or devices  
30.[ADDRESS_1013459] y with FDA sponsor 
requirements for the following : 
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
Response:  
Not applicable  