 
  
 
 
Sustaining Skeletal Health in Frail Elderly  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
21 AUG 2024  
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol PROUD  
 
Overall summary : We  propose to conduct  a 2-year,  randomized,  double -blind, calcium -
vitamin -D controlled trial to test the efficacy of the antiresorptive RANK  ligand inhibitor,  
denosumab,  among a cohort  of 201 institutionalized, overlooked, under -served, frail men 
and women ≥65 years old in long- term care (LTC) . 
Our co-primary outcomes  are percent changes in bone  mineral  density  (BMD)  of the total 
hip and spi[INVESTIGATOR_238285] 24 months.  
 
Informed consent: All participants or their responsible party will provide written informed 
consent for screening and then randomized if eligible.  
 
Inclusion /Exclusion  Criteria : Ambulatory  male and female residents  with osteoporosis  or 
low bone  mass  (at risk for fracture) age 65 and older will be considered if:  
 
1) They reside in long- term care (LTC) including Managed Senior Communities . 
 
2) They  have a) osteoporosis  by [CONTACT_886417]  (spi[INVESTIGATOR_050],  hip or forearm  BMD  T-score  ≤ 
-2.5 SD) (108,109), b) a previous adult fragility fracture of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_69648], or c) 
would be treated based  on FRAX  and the NOF  treatment  thresholds  of a 10-year 
risk of ≥ 20% for a major  fracture or ≥ 3% for hip fracture using femoral  neck BMD  
 
We will exclude institutionalized residents with subacute illnesses who are not expected to 
survive or who will be discharged in < 2 years. Non- ambulatory residents (those who 
cannot stand and pi[INVESTIGATOR_886414]) will be 
excluded. We will exclude those currently on therapy (including a bisphosphonate, denosumab or teriparatide) or who have been on a bisphosphonate for greater than 1 year 
during the previous 2 years because some bisphosphonates are long acting We will 
exclude subjects with a history of hypocalcemia  or contraindication for treatment.  
 
Intervention:  Participants will receive denosumab 60 mg subcutaneous injection or 
matching placebo every 6 months for 2 years . Participants, study personnel and 
investigators are blinded to the treatment assignments. All participants will receive 
appropriate calcium and vitamin D supplementation based on the Bone Health 
Osteoporosis Foundation guidelines.  
  
Assessments:  The visits will be conducted in the participant’s LTC facility and participants 
will be assessed every 6 months for 2 years.  
Primary outcomes:   The 24-month percent change in bone mineral density (BMD) of the 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_35632].  
 
Randomization and Masking:  We will use the high quality pseudo -random deviate generator 
in SAS® (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North Carolina) to randomize women and men separately to 
the two treatment groups in a 1:1 ratio. Within each gender, ambulatory status may play a role 
in a participant’s bone integrity, and confound the comparison between groups. Therefore, we 
will further stratify the randomization scheme for each gender with respect to the level of 
assistance required for ambulation (with/without as sistance except cane) to force a balance, by 
[CONTACT_8345], between the arms. Those non- ambulatory will be excluded. We will use a blocked 
randomization scheme to force a within- stratum balance between the numbers of subjects in 
each arm at any point during the r ecruitment period, and employ a blocking strategy with 
random block sizes. Study statistician will create schedules which link the gender -specific 
randomization sequence number, and treatment arm, and the study research nurses will call in 
all prescriptions thereafter by [CONTACT_886418]. The independent research 
pharmacist at the institutional Investigational Drug Service will package drugs/placebos to be 
similar in  appearance effectively keepi[INVESTIGATOR_886415] .  
 
Statistical analysis plan:  
 
Main  Analysis:  
All analyses will be conducted separately for men and women based on intention- to-treat. 
First,  we will perform  a true multivariate Hotelling t-test to simultaneously compare baseline 
to 24-month percent  change in two primary  outcomes  (spi[INVESTIGATOR_439398])  between the 
arms  to protect  the type I error  rate from outcome multiplicity. If significant, subsequent 
analyses will be performed without further adjustment for multiplicity.  If not, primary  
outcomes  at the primary  endpoint  will be compared with a conservative Bonferroni 
correction at α=0.05/2=0.025 level. Second, we will fit a series of linear mixed models 
(SAS® MIXED procedure) with ( percent ) change from baseline in each of the continuous 
outcomes as the dependent variable; treatment  arm, follow- up time point  (6-/12-/18-/24-
month or as applicable)  and their interaction as the fixed effects of interest; baseline value of 
the outcome as the sole and a catch- all covariate as an additional fixed effect to preserve 
the predictability of the primary analytic  strategy;  and a subject  random  effect  to account  for 
multiple measures  from the same patients over time and resulting stochastic non-
independence of observations. We will construct contrasts to make between- arm 
comparisons at each time point . Statistical significance of between arm difference in 24-
month change in spi[INVESTIGATOR_886416].  
Multiple imputation will be used to handle missing data.  