1 Mindfulness-based Intervention to Address PTSD in Trauma-exposed, Homeless Women
STUDY PROTOCOL 
K01 MD013910-0 1 
National Institute of Health (Institute of Minority Health and Health Disparities) 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_460692], PhD 
Updated: July 2022
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 
2 Table  of Contents  
SECTION 1A. RESEARCH STUDY OVERVIEW  4 
Subsection 1A.1 - Overview & Introduction  [ADDRESS_589006] (2/21)  6 
Subsection 1A.5 - Phase II Timeline  1 
6 - Basic Definitions  1 
SECTION 1B. INTRODUCTION TO PTSD AND MBSR  2 
Subsection 1B.1 - PTSD Basics  2 
Subsection 1B.2 - MBSR Basics  4 
SECTION 2. INTERVENTION DELIVERY  6 
Subsection 2.1 - Phase II Overview  6 
Subsection 2.2 - Phase II Scope of Work & Participant Flow Diagram  7 
Subsection 2.3 - Phase II Recruitment & Treatment Overview  9 
Subsection 2.4 - Phase II Recruitment & Screening  9 
Subsection 2.5 - Phase II Eligibility Criteria  10 
Subsection 2.6 - Phase II Laboratory Tests/Sample Collection  11 
Subsection 2.7 - Phase II Intervention Program Description  11 
Subsection 2.8 - Phase II Pre -intervention Assessments  12 
Subsection 2.9 - Phase II Brief Stress Task (Trauma Imagery Task)  [ADDRESS_589007]-Assessment  17 
Subsection 2.15 - Phase II Team Management of Biospecimen Collection Refusal  17 
Subsection 2.16 - Phase II Dea ling with Intervention Program Attrition  17 
Subsection 2.17 - Phase II Follow -Up Focus Groups  18 
Subsection 2.18 - Phase II Comp ensation  18 
Subsection 2.19 - Program Fidelity  18 
Subsection 2.20 - Research Staff Competencies and Mock Sessions  18 
Subsection 2.21 - Data Entry, Management & Confidentiality  19 
 
3 Subsection 2.22 – Using REDCap  [ADDRESS_589008] Data Collection  21 
Subsection 2.25 - End of Study  21 
SECTION 4. RECRUITMENT  22 
Subsection 4.1 - Phase II Flyer  22 
Subsection 4.2 - Phase II MBSR – Script for Introduction at Recruitment Site: For Non -
Research Staff Member  23 
SECTION 5. SCREENING, INFORMED CONSENT, AND ENROLLMENT  24 
Subsection 5.1 Screening Protocol  24 
Instructions:  24 
Subsection 5.2 Informed Consent  24 
Subsection 5.3 Baseline Protocol  24 
APPENDIX I: What to bring to site  25 
APPENDIX II: Trauma Imagery Script (Brief Stress Task)  26 
APPENDIX III: Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  [ADDRESS_589009] (DSMB)  31 
Training in Red Flag Procedures  31 
RED FLAG – SUICIDE  31 
Harm to others  33 
APPENDIX IV: Citations for Study Measures  35 
APPENDIX VII: RECap for Screener (Section 1) and Baseline, Immediate -follow -up, and 6 -
months (Section 2)  40 
 
 
4 SECTION 1A. RESEARCH STUDY OVERVIEW  
Subsection 1A.1 - Overview & Introduction  
This study aims to determine the effectiveness  of a mind fulness -based intervention  (MBI) on the 
reduction of posttraumatic stress disorder (P TSD) symptoms  (primary outcome)  and depression 
substance use disorder (SUD), inflammation, and cortisol reactivity (secondary outcomes) in 
homeles s women with PTSD. B iolog ical markers (i.e., cortisol reactivity, C -reactive protein [CRP]) 
of the stress response will be evaluated as correlate s of MBI treatment -response will help clarify 
mixed findings regarding dysregulation  of the H PA-axis as a function of amount, type, and timing 
of trauma exposure. It will advance theory regarding the use of MBIs for PTSD  while exploring 
biological markers that might maintain PTSD symptoms over time. The project has the potential 
to bolster the capacity of service providers  to offer feasibl e and acceptable MBI intervention s to 
homeless women and ot her vulnerable populations. If the proposed aims are achieved, they  may 
provide several valuable insights. T hey will  examine the efficacy of MBI to address PTSD in 
homeless women (inform & improve services, interventions, treatmen ts); improve on 
methodological limitations of prior research on MBIs for PTSD  (including  small sample sizes, lack 
of attention control  group, incomplete trauma history); and explore biological markers that 
correlate with PT SD-symptom maintenance or reduction post -MBI (expand concepts). 
Importantly, the MBI that will be used in the intervention was the product of a rigorous preliminary 
mixed -methods inquiry that including a Community Advisory Board (consisting of site staff, 
clinicians, and homeless women) and focus groups with women from the community (i.e., 
homeless women currently residing at a residential drug treatment facility). The results of these 
formative activities resulted in the modification of an evidenced -based MBI – Mindfulness -based 
Stress Reduction (MBSR) for cultural sensitive and appropriateness, increasing acceptability and 
feasibility. Importantly, findings from this proposal may provide a low -cost method to improve 
services for homeless women a s they  begin to answer key theoretical questions regarding the 
relationship between biological markers of stress re gulation and reactivity, the inflammatory 
response, PTSD  and related comorbidities (SUD, depression), and MBIs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Subsection 1A.2 - Overa ll Structure of Study Team   
 
 
 

 
6 Subsection 1A.3 - Research Team and Responsibilities  
Principal Investigator (PI) : Dana Rose Garfin, PhD.  
Makes  executive decisions regarding the implementation of the study, data entry and data 
analysis approaches, and inter pretation of study findings. She  will train the research staff and 
assistants to perform content. [CONTACT_460766] will develop all questionnaires and oversee the design 
and implementation of the MBI and the health promotion attention control.  
 
K01 Mentor : Adeline M. Nyamathi, ANP, PhD, FAAN  
[CONTACT_460767] will advise [CONTACT_460766] on conducting mix -methods research including qualitative 
focus groups and clinical trials with vulnerable populations.  
 
K01 Mentor : Douglas Granger, PhD, Chancellors Professor of Psycholo gy and Social Behavior 
and Director of the Institute for Interdisciplinary Salivary Bioscience Research (IISBR  
[CONTACT_460768] will advise on all aspects of the project related to saliva collection and analysis and 
the theoretical and statistical integration o f salivary measures into psychosocial research.  
 
Secondary K01 co -mentors : Drs. Cameron  Neece, E. Alison Holman, & Sanghyuk Shin 
provide guidance on K01, but do not interact with any human subjects participants, will not 
engage with the data, and thus are  not included on the IRB forms.  
 
Lab Manager and Lab Coordinator : First line contact [CONTACT_460724], responsible for RA scheduling, 
delegates lab responsibilities to other RAs, drafts lab meeting agenda, keeps track of 
conference submission deadlines, ensures st udy supplies are available, oversees budget 
expense tracking and reimbursements.  
 
Biosalivary coordinator : Ensures that cortisol collection is done according to all protocols, 
ensures that collection tubes are labeled ISBBR.  
 
REDCap coordinator :  Ensures  all updated to REDCap are entered accurately. Tracks 
participant payments for cash advances and payment reconciliation.  
Subsection 1A.[ADDRESS_589010]  (2/21)  
Name  [CONTACT_460762], PhD  PI [CONTACT_14574] (415)40 7-9498   dgarfin @ucla.edu  
 
Adey Nyamathi  K01 Mentor  UCI   [EMAIL_8826]  
Doug Granger  K01 Mentor  UCI   [EMAIL_8827]  
Michelle  Zernick  Lab Manager  UCI  [EMAIL_8828]  
 
1 Subsection 1A.5 - Phase II Timeline  
YEAR 1  (2020)  
 19-May 19-Jun 19-Jul 19-Aug 19-Sep 19-Oct 19-Nov 19-Dec 20-Jan 20-Oct 20-Nov 21-Dec 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  SITE START UP & VISIT  
  Community Advisory 
Board  
  Focus Groups  Finalize Intervention & 
Qualitative Analysis  Recruit 
Cohort1  HP Cohort1  
Space/time 
needed  
   1 meeting per wee k 
(1-2 hours)  Four meetings total, 
each 2 hours  1 weekly meeting (1 -2 
hours) for 4 weeks  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 
1 X per week at each 
site for 1 -2 hours 
(same time each 
week)  
YEAR 2  (2021)  
 21-Jan 21-Feb 21-Mar 21-Apr 21-May 21-June  21-July 21-Aug 21-Sept  21-Oct 21-Nov 21-Ded 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  Recruit 
Cohort 2  MBI & HP C2   Recruit 
Cohort 3  MBI & HP Cohort 3   Recruit 
Cohort 4  MBI & BP Cohort 4   
Space/time 
needed  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for interv ention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)   
Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same time 
each week)   Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1  
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)   
Follow -up 
   Cohort 
1 follow -
up    Cohort 2 
follow -up 
   Cohort 3 
follow -up 
YEAR 3  (2022)  
 22-Jan 22-Feb 22-Mar 22-Apr 22-May 22-June  22-July 22-Aug 22-Sept  22-Oct 22-Nov 22-Dec 
23 Jan -
Feb 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  Recruit 
Cohort 5  MBI & HP Cohort 5    Recruit 
Cohort 6-7 MBI Cohort s 6-7     
Space/time 
needed  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)    Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)      
Follow -up    Cohort 
4 follow 
up   Cohort 5 
follow up     Cohorts 6 -7 follow 
ups 
 
1 6 - Basic Definitions  
Mindfulness:  The process of focusing one’s attention on the present moment (including thoughts, 
feelings, and sensations) without judgement  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990; Lang, 2017) .  
 
Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) : MBSR is an 8-week, [ADDRESS_589011] -traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) : PTSD is a psychological pathology characterized by 
[INVESTIGATOR_1312]-experiencing, avoidance, negative thoughts or cognitions, hyperarousal after experiencing a 
traumatic event.  
 
Trauma : According to the DSM -5, must involve actual or thre atened death, serious injury, or 
sexual violence.   
 
Arm:  The different groups of the intervention. In this study, Arm 1 is the health promotion 
attention control and Arm 2 is the MBSR. Participants at a given site are a ssigned to one Arm or 
the other, by [CONTACT_9084]).  
 
Cohort : The group of people that are doing the interventions at the same time.  
 
Cortisol: The body’s main stress hormone, triggered by [CONTACT_234127]. Cortisol is a 
glucocorticoid and is  released in the body about 20 minutes after a stresso r. The immediate 
stress response hormones (adrenaline and epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]) are released within seconds or 
minutes; if the brain continues to perceive something as stressful, then cortisol is released.  
 
C-Reactive Protein (CRP) : This is a protein made in the l iver. CRP tends to increase when 
there is inflammation occurring in the body , (Lindqvist et al., 2014, 2017)  induced by [CONTACT_460725]  (Eklund, 2009) . These heightened inflammatory responses can lead to health 
impairments including atherosclerosis  (Wong et al., 2012)  and cardiovascular disea se (Coughlin, 2011)  
compounding health disparities in disadvantaged populations; CRP, in particular, has been linked with 
obesity  (Visser et al., 2011)  metabolic syndrome  (Ridker et al., 2003)  and CVD. (Ridker et al., 1998)   
Thus CRP can be used as marker for general inflammation  and risk for inflammatory -related 
problems.  
 
Other acronyms used in this protocol:  
 
IISBR  – Institute for Interdisciplinary Salivary Bioscience Research - https://iisbr.uci.edu/  
- IISBR is a shared resource and scientific hub; researchers can gain practical 
experience/knowledge in salivary bioscience through the training programs (e.g., Spit 
 
2 Camp). IISBR also p rovides the storage and analyses of the salivary samples collected in 
this study.  
SECTION 1B. INTRODUCTION TO PTSD AND MBSR  
Subsection 1B.[ADDRESS_589012] exposure to experiencing, witnessing, or learning  of an 
event that involves actual or threatened death or serious injury or harm to self of others 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) . For a diagnosis of PTSD, symptoms must be present 
for at least one month prior to diagnosis and must include at least one re -experiencing 
symptom, one avoidance symptom, two arousal and reactivity symptoms and two cognition and 
mood symptoms. Re -experiencing symptoms can include flashbacks, nightmares, and invasive 
thoughts. Avoidance symptoms are related to an individual actively avoiding locations, thoughts, 
events, or objects that are reminiscent of the trauma. Arousal and reactivity symptoms inc lude 
feeling easily frightened, tense, increased anger, and having issues sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Cognitive and 
mood symptoms include but are not limited to having trouble remembering key features of the 
trauma, distorted feelings, and loss of interest in previously enj oyable activities. PTSD must be 
diagnosed by a mental health professional, but a variety of measures have been validated for 
use as screens or by [CONTACT_105] -clinical for research purposes. In our study, we use the Posttraumatic 
Stress Disor der Checklist, Civilian  (PCL - C) (Bovin et al., 2016; Wortmann et al., 2016) .   
 
DSM -5 Criteria for PTSD  
The following text summarizes the diagnostic criteria  for PTSD and was obtained from the 
ptsd.va.gov website.  
 
Criterion A (one required):  The person was exposed to: death, threatened death, actual or 
threatened serious injury, or actual or threa tened sexual violence, in the following way(s):  
• Direct exposure  
• Witnessing the trauma  
• Learning that a relative or close friend was exposed to a trauma  
• Indirect exposure to aversive details of the trauma, usually in the course of professional 
duties (e.g., first responders, medics)  
 
Criterion B (one required):  The traumatic event is persistently re -experienced, in the following 
way(s):  
• Unwanted upsetting memories  
• Nightmares  
• Flashbacks  
• Emotional distress after exposure to traumatic reminders  
• Physical reactivi ty after exposure to traumatic reminders  
 
 
3 Criterion C (one required):  Avoidance of trauma -related stimuli after the trauma, in the 
following way(s):  
• Trauma -related thoughts or feelings  
• Trauma -related reminders  
 
Criterion D (two required):  Negative thoughts  or feelings that began or worsened after the 
trauma, in the following way(s):  
• Inability to recall key features of the trauma  
• Overly negative thoughts and assumptions about oneself or the world  
• Exaggerated blame of self or others for causing the trauma  
• Negative affect  
• Decreased interest in activities  
• Feeling isolated  
• Difficulty experiencing positive affect  
 
Criterion E (two required):  Trauma -related arousal and reactivity that began or worsened after 
the trauma, in the following way(s):  
• Irritability or aggr ession  
• Risky or destructive behavior  
• Hypervigilance  
• Heightened startle reaction  
• Difficulty concentrating  
• Difficulty sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_460693] F (required):  Symptoms last for more than 1 month.  
 
Criterion G (required):  Symptoms create distress or functional impai rment (e.g., social, 
occupational).  
 
Criterion H (required):  Symptoms are not due to medication, substance use, or other illness.  
 
Two specifications : 
1. Dissociative Specification . In addition to meeting criteria for diagnosis, an individual 
experiences high levels of either of the following in reaction to trauma -related stimuli:  
• Depersonalization. Experience of being an outside obs erver of or detached from 
oneself (e.g., feeling as if "this is not happening to me" or one were in a dream).  
• Derealization. Experience of unreality, distance, or distortion (e.g., "things are not 
real").  
2. Delayed Specification.  Full diagnostic criteria are  not met until at least six months after 
the trauma(s), although onset of symptoms may occur immediately . 
 
 
 
 
 
4 How is PTSD Typi[INVESTIGATOR_460694]?  
CBT, cognitive processing therapy, prolonged exposure therapy (PE), eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), stress inoculation training, psychopharmalogical 
treatments are all common treatments for PTSD. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) often 
occurs once a week and works with the client to reframe thoughts surrounding the event (i.e. 
feelings of guilt) . Similarly, in cognitive processing therapy the client recounts the event and 
related thoughts to a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_460695]. PE takes place in eight to fifteen ninety minute sessions in  which the 
client is taught breathing techniques to combat anxiety before making a list of avoidances and 
learning to face them. EMDR asks the client to watch or listen to something, such as a light 
flashing or sound, while concentrating on the traumatic e vent so that over time, the client can 
think about something positive while remember the trauma. Stress inoculation training focuses 
on how the client responds to the stress of the trauma and works to teach them methods to 
cope such as breathing techniques  and thought stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Medications frequently prescribed to 
individuals with PTSD are SSRIs and SNRIs such as Prozac and Zoloft. We are testing whether 
MBSR is an effective complementary treatment for PTSD. Complementary means that it will be 
used in addit ion to any other interventions used in standard treatment of PTSD.  
 
Subsection 1B.[ADDRESS_589013] to teach mindfulness, or the process of focusing one’s attention on the present 
moment without judgement  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990 ). It has  have shown promise for reducing 
symptoms of PTSD  (Khusid & Vythilingam, 2016; Polusny et al., 2015)  and associated 
biological markers of the stress response  (Black & Slavich, 2017; Bower et al., 2017)  by 
[CONTACT_460726] 
(Lang et al., 2012) . MBSR is relatively low cost and has  demonstrated acceptability and 
feasibility in trauma -exposed,  low-SES, high -minority samples  (Dutton et al., 2014) . An RCT of 
MBSR for PTSD in a sample of veterans demonstrated improved PTS D symptoms at immediate 
follow -up with clinic ally significant improvement sustained  2-months later (Polusny et al., 2015) . 
Congruent findings were indicated in veterans using a one -armed -repeated -measures design 
(Kearney et al., 2012) . MBIs have also been linked with statistically significant reductions in 
markers of inflammation  (Bower et al., 2017; Rosenkranz et al., 2013) . that are associated with 
PTSD, including CRP  (Creswell & Irwin, 2012; Ma larkey et al., 2013) . In relation to stress 
reactivity, in repeated measures analyses, an MBI significantly reduced cortisol reactivity to a 
stress task  (Rosenkranz et al., 2013) . Participation in an MBI compared to a treatment -as-usual 
condition in veterans with PTSD was associated with reduced cortisol, suggesting a brief MBI 
might have b eneficial responses on stress physiology  (Bergen -Cico et al., 2014) . Data  suggests 
that biological dysregulation may precede the development of – and at a minimum m utually 
maintain – PTSD symptoms  (van Zuiden et al., 2013) . This me ans that the physiological 
response may actually occur prior to the psychological symptoms, but more research is needed.  
Moreover, participation in MBIs have been associated with effective relapse prevention in those 
with SUD  (Bowen et al., 2006)  and lower depression in a sample of economically disadvantaged 
women  (Burnett -Zeigler et al., 2016) . As such, MBIs, which concurrently target regulation of the 
physiological stress responses, emotional cognitive symptoms of  PTSD, and related 
 
[ADDRESS_589014]. Jon Kabat -Zinn at the University of 
[LOCATION_005] Medical Center  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990) . MBSR uses many practices that have been 
around for thousands of years, but manualized these practices into an [ADDRESS_589015] to other psychiatric and physical healthcare, not as a supplement.  
 
The general flow of the eight -week  program is as follows:  
 
Week 1: Introductory Material. This includes an overview of the course, building trust within the 
group, introduction to mindful eating, some standing yoga stretches, mindful breathing and body 
scan meditation (Homework: Body Scan recording using MP3 player; ea ting one meal mindfully; 
optional informal meditation practice.)  
 
Week 2: Understanding Perceptions. This session focuses on self -responsibility and short and 
long-term changes for health enhancing behaviors; how you see things determines how you 
react or  respond. (Homework: Body Scan recording using MP3; fill out Pleasant Events 
Calendar; select one activity to bring full awareness to).  
 
Week 3: Hatha Yoga, Sitting Meditation, Walking Meditation. The theme is the pleasure and 
power of being present; this  week teaches how to investigate the mind and body through yoga 
and meditation. (Homework: Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; fill out Unpleasant Events Calendar; sitting meditation).  
 
Week 4: Concentration and Awareness. This theme relates to how conditioning and perception 
influence one’s experience and new ways to relate to stress. (Homework: Alternate Body Scan 
recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 player; be aware of being stuck, sitting meditation).  
 
Week 5: Unheal thy Patterns and Getting Unstuck. This week examines conditioned patterns 
and the passive ways that people cope (e.g., numbing, denial, passive -aggressiveness, 
suppression of feelings, substance dependency). (Homework: Fill out Difficult Communications 
Calendar; Sitting Meditation and Standing Yoga Sequence).  
 
Week 6: Transformational Copi[INVESTIGATOR_254560]. This for this week include how to deal with 
stressful communication and knowing and expressing your feelings. (Homework: Alternate 
Sitting Meditation recor ding with Body Scan and/or Standing or Lying down Yoga recording).  
 
Week 7: Retreat. This will be a silent class, with sitting and walking practice. Guided meditations 
will include loving -kindness meditation.  
 
 
6 Week 8: Maintaining Discipline and Flexibilit y. This class focus on how to more fully integrate 
mindfulness into daily life. Instructors and participants discuss lifestyle choices and limiting 
patterns. (Homework: no recordings; try to practice formal sitting meditation; recordings can be 
used if nec essary.)  
 
Week 9: Course Review. In this session, students will reflect on the course, the instructor 
provides additional resources, participants discuss their experiences with the group.  
    
Common Uses:  
MBSR is  used as a complementary treatment for  anxiety, panic, depression, eating disorders, 
pain, sleep issues , and a growing number of additional maladies. MBSR is also used increase 
productivity, performance, emotion regulation, and general wellbeing.  
 
  
SECTION 2. INTERVENTION DELIVERY  
Subsection 2.1  - Phase II Overview  
In Phase II, we will assess the potential benefit of MBSR to reduce PTSD (primary outcomes) 
and secondary outcomes (e.g., depression, SUD, CRP, cortisol reactivity), among 130 eligible 
homeless women who exhibit likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD living at one of two 
residential drug treatment facilities. MBSR will be compared to an attention -control group 
(Health Promotion Wellness Classes ; HP). There originally intended to be  five cohorts of 
women, each with 12 -15 women (total of 2 4-30 women per cohort). However, due to COVID -[ADDRESS_589016] been made in terms of the class size and randomization procedure. At each 
cohort, sites will be randomized to receive either the MBSR or the HP. Although sites will 
alternate between MBSR an d HP by [CONTACT_9084], each participant will receive either the MBSR or the 
HP. Randomization will occur using RedCAP. The women participate in either MBSR or HP for 
9 weeks. Psychosocial data will be collected at baseline, immediately following final interventio n 
session, and at 6 -month follow -up via tablet questionnaires. After psychosocial data collection, a 
stress task (Trauma Imagery Task) will be conducted at each time point, with saliva collected 
both before and after the task to assay cortisol and CRP. Thi s proposal will improve on the 
methodological rigor of prior research on MBIs for PTSD in disadvantaged populations by [CONTACT_2329]: 
randomization procedures that account for cross -contamination; blind evaluators; longitudinal 
follow -up; an attention control grou p equal to the MBI intervention in both contact [CONTACT_460727]; increased demographic diversity; comprehensive lifetime trauma assessment; and 
inclusion of objective indices of stress responses to accurately evaluate the effectiveness of 
MBIs in treating  trauma -related symptoms.  
 
 
Confidentiality and Ethical Issues  
 
All program staff must follow confidentiality and ethical procedures throughout this program to 
ensure that everybody is treated with respect and dignity.  
 
1. Communication with study participa nts must remain confidential. To maintain confidentiality 
for participants, any personal information provided, such as participants' name, age, etc., will 
 
[ADDRESS_589017] access. An exception to this rule is the clinic provide r and site staff 
who work directly with the women onsite.  
 
Program Team  
 
The Lab Manager a nd Lab Coordinator will help the PI ([CONTACT_460766]) in organizing all aspects of 
the study. These individuals will be current or former students from the Department of 
Psychological Science ’s Postbaccalaureate Program. They will be responsible for tracking 
recruitment, scheduling research assistants , and ensuring that the site is well -stocked with 
necessary supplies. Weekly,  the Lab Manager and Lab Coordinator will meet with [CONTACT_460766] to 
review all aspects of the study , troubleshoot any problems, and create s chedule for the other 
Research Assistants (RAs). The RAs will be highly trained Postbaccalaureate, graduate, or 
undergraduate students from the University of [LOCATION_004], Irvine.  
 
 
Safety of Program Staff  
 
While we believe that conducting this study is hig hly important for public health, it is critical that 
the program staff prioritize their own safety first.  If you feel that you are in danger (physically, 
emotionally, psychologically) in any way, end the study activities and inform the research 
coordinato r or the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_460696].  This is particularly important during 
COVID -19. Please report any lapses in COVID -[ADDRESS_589018] been exposed, it is imperative that you do 
not come to site . The study leadership ([CONTACT_460766] and the Lab Manager / Lab Coordinator)  
 
Subsection 2.2 - Phase II Scope of Work & Participant Flow Diagram  
1. General Recruitment  
a. We will recruit [ADDRESS_589019]. Garfin or 
the Lab Manager/Lab Coordinator available to answer any questions.  
i. A key inclusion criteria is subthreshold current PTSD. Thus, the women will 
be given a PTSD screener for the trauma that is bothering them most right 
now. There may be multiple traumas the women have experienced – they 
should  be prompted to pi[INVESTIGATOR_460697].  
c. Tablets will be programmed by [CONTACT_460728], electronically scored. All participants who  complete 
the screener will receive $3.  
i. Note: those who complete the screener must complete the consent to screen, 
but are not assigned a participant ID at this time as they have not completed 
the Informed Consent . As such it is imperative that accurate in formation be 
obtained with respect to the individual ’s name [CONTACT_460763].  
 
 
8 2. Group Assignment and Intervention Procedure  (may chance due to evolving 
circumstances due to COVID -19) 
a. Prior to recruitment, the Residen tial Treatment Sites (RTS; Pomona and Escondido) 
will be randomized to receive the MBI  or serve as the attention -control ( HP); 
recruitment and research procedures (MB I or attention -control) will occur at both sites 
simultaneously. Women will live at sites prior to recruitment.  
b. Informed consent – there are TWO versions of the Informed Consent documents. 
One is for the MBSR course; the other is for the HP course. Women will complete 
ONE of the Informed Consent forms, depending on which group they are in. It i s 
imperative that the correct form is filled out and uploaded onto REDCap.  
c. Baseline questionnaire administered:  
i. After informed consent, participants will complete a baseline questionnaire . In 
addition to the traumas indicated in the PCL -5, participants w ill report lifetime  
history of trauma (including whether events occurred in adulthood, childhood, 
or both).  
ii. Questionnaire data will be collected via tablet and transferred to RedCap.  
iii. Participants will provide a urine sample for a drug test to validate self -report. 
Then participants will complete the brief stress (Trauma task providing saliva 
samples both before and after the task.  
d. Locator guide: this is a critical part of maintaining contact [CONTACT_460729]. 
However, they may not be inclined to provid e all the information on the first or second 
meeting. PLEASE TAKE THE PI[INVESTIGATOR_460698].  The rest of the locator guide can be filled out over the course 
of the study. Given issues with COVID -19, we will start completing the Locator Guide 
after session 2 or 3. Please see PI [INVESTIGATOR_460699] .  
e. Intervention  
i. Participants will begin MBSR/HP activities within one month of baseline 
assessment, dependent on the time of their baseline assessment within 
recruitment schedule  
ii. Both groups (MBSR and HP) will consist of nine sessions, each 
approximately 2 hours in length.  
b. Immediate follow -up  
i. After the 9th session, participants will complete a questionnaire via tablet that 
will assess PTSD (primary outcome), se condary outcomes (e.g., depression, 
substance use), and traumatic events that occurred since first assessment, 
as well as key covariates (e.g., fidelity to intervention)  and additional 
outcomes (e.g., mindfulness, emotion regulation).  
ii.  Women will provide urine for drug test and repeat the Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task, providing saliva samples before and after the task .  
c. 6-month follow -up 
i. Primary and secondary outcomes and covariates (e.g., fidelity to intervention) 
will be reassessed via tablet  
ii. Women will pr ovide urine for a drug test and repeat the Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task , providing saliva samples before and after  the stress task.  
 
3.  Phase II Reimbursement  
d. Women will receive $15 for the baseline assessment, $10 per MBSR /HP session, $[ADDRESS_589020] -intervention assessment, and $[ADDRESS_589021] sign on the iPad (via REDCap) that they 
have received the payment. This must also be initialed , signed, and dated by 
[CONTACT_460730] .  
 
 
Subsection 2.3 - Phase II Recruitment & Treatment Overview  
 
 
Subsection 2.4 - Phase II Recruitment & Screening  
The study was designed so that  recruitment at Pomona w ould be paced to match that at the 
Escondido site so that all procedures across sites h appen in tandem, thus avoiding history 
effects; recruitment data will be evaluated weekly to inform pacing. Site staff at Prototypes will 
assist with participant recruitment, informing Prototypes residents of the opportunity during 
formal announcements dur ing programing. Recruitment flyers will also be posted around the 
RTS. RAs will help recruit women and conduct the initial screening in a private room after 
obtaining informed consent; progress will be monitored closely by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Garfin the Lab 
Management tea m. Modifications will be made to allow for the study to continue during the 
COVID -[ADDRESS_589022] approximately 26 - 28 women in 
each group/site (n=13 -14 MBSR; n=13 -14 attention control); recruitment proceeds for one 
month, the intervention runs for approximately 2 months (9 weeks), then there is one month 
break. However, this schedule may vary due to COVID -[ADDRESS_589023]. Garfin will explain the study during an initial meeting  with potential participants and answer 
any questions. Then women will be scr eened for eligibility. Prior to obtaining any data, the 
women will provide a “consent to screen”. This is because we need to obtain data from the 
women to determine if they are eligible, but they are not officially enrolled as human subjects. 
By [CONTACT_460731] “consent to screen”, we are obtaining verbal consent/permission to ask them 
questions. Their data will not be used by [CONTACT_460732].  
 
The RA will read the consent to screen script on REDCap. Potential participants are fr ee to stop 
at any time – remind them that all procedures are completely voluntary. [CONTACT_460766] and/or 
someone from the Lab Management team will always be onsite to help answer questions .  

 
[ADDRESS_589024] for DSM -5 (PCL -5) for  the worst event in their life . We will assess PTSD to 
their most recent event (in the past year) during the baseline and follow -up assessments . The 
standard PCL -5 initially starts with the identification of the presence of exposure to a DSM -5 
traumatic ev ent and then assesses whether it involved actual or threatened death, serious injury 
or sexual violence. The RA may need to prompt the potential participant with examples to keep 
them on track and to ensure that the participant is responding to an actual D SM-5 traumatic 
event. The next 20 items on the PCL -5 assess all four B -E PTSD criterion (re -experiencing, 
avoidance, negative thoughts or cognitions, hyperarousal), assessed on a Likert -type scale 0 
“not at all”, 1 “a little bit”, 2 “moderately”, 3 “quite a bit”, 4 “extremely”. Subthreshold PTSD will 
be defined as endorsing “moderately” or more to at least 2 B -E criteria; probable -PTSD will be 
measured by [CONTACT_460733] A -G for PTSD.  
 
 
Data collection method : All data will be collected via encrypted tabl ets will be programmed by 
[CONTACT_460734], 
electronically scored. Data is not stored on the tablets. It is automatically transferred to the All 
participants who complete the screener will  receive $3.  
 
Subsection 2.5 - Phase II Eligibility Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria : 
1) Homeless women (N=134 ; 67 in each group ) 
a. Women over [ADDRESS_589025] 6 months: a homeless person is defined as anyone who 
spent the  previous night in a public or private shelter, or on the street.  
d. Lifetime exposure to trauma as defined by [CONTACT_460735], 5th Edition (DSM -5). 
e. Likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD, as measured by [CONTACT_77514] -5. 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
The following will not be eligible for participating:  
1) Persons who are:  
a. Not able to speak English  
b. Judged to be cognitively impaired , as indicated by [INVESTIGATOR_32005] > 10 on the Short -
Blessed Screener  
 
 
11 Subsection 2.6 - Phase II Laboratory Tests/S ample Collection  
Saliva Sampling and Results  
 
Saliva Collection  
- Pre-task, saliva will be collected. All saliva collection w ill occur between 10am -2pm to 
minimize diurnal fluctuation effects . (Study procedures may start before 10, but first 
saliva sample mu st be collected after 10:00am; the second sample must be collected 
before 2pm – participants must be scheduled according to these specifications).  
- Two whole saliva samples will be collected using an unstimulated passive drool 
technique.  
- Women will be ins tructed to avoid eating, brushing teeth,  or smoking for one hour prior 
to the assessment and will be asked to wait to begin the task if they have.  
- Participants will rinse their mouths thoroughly with water for 10 minutes before samples 
are collected. Parti cipants will then passively drool into a collection vial for three minutes 
or until 0.80 milliliters of fluid is collected.  
- Saliva samples will be immediately placed in the on -site freezer (or ice cooler) and be 
taken to IISBR within 36 hours to be frozen  at -80°C until assayed.  
- All samples will be assayed for salivary cortisol and CRP using a highly sensitive 
enzyme immunoassay (Salimetrics, IISBR).  
- Twenty minutes after task completion , saliva samples will be collected again in an 
identical manner to tha t described above.  
- Participants will then be offered snacks and a drink and be debriefed to ensure they are 
not experiencing severe task -related psychological distress. In the unlikely event of 
participant distress, an immediate referral will be made to o n-site professional staff.  
 
Subsection 2.7 - Phase II Intervention Program Description  
General Description:  Among [ADDRESS_589026] of the MBSR intervention program PTSD symptoms  (primary outcomes) , and substance  
abuse, depression, cortisol reactivity, and inflammation  (secondary outcomes) . 
Data Collection Time points: Baseline, 2 months , and 6 months  
Total Duration:  6 months  
The following sections will outline the intervention process:  
● Pre-intervention Assessment s 
● Brief Stress Task  (Trauma Imagery Stress Task)  
● Biospecimen Collection  
● Biospecimen Analysis  
● MBSR Intervention  
● Health Promotion Intervention  
● Post-Assessment  
● Team Management of Biospecimen Collection Refusal  
● Dealing with Program Attrition  
 
[ADDRESS_589027] the response on the tablet. At the end of each measure, the RA will “lock” 
the measure. There will be a prompt if any items have been missed. Please check that there is 
no missing data. The participant may take a break at any time. However, the participant should 
refrain from eating , drinking (except for water ~ 10 minutes prior t o stress task) , or smoking until 
after the second saliva collection to ensure the accuracy of the saliva sample.  
Order of assessments  
1. Drug test (urine)  
2. TCU Drug Screen (self -report)  
3. Self -compassion scale – short form  
4. General self -efficacy sc ale  
5. Mindful Attention Awareness Scale  
6. Difficulties I Emotion Regulation Scale  
7. Satisfaction with Life Scale  
8. Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire  
 9. MOS Social Support  
10. Perceived Stress Scale  
11. Dimensions of Anger R eactions  
12. PROMIS – Anxiety  
13. PROMIS – Depression  
 
*NOTE: For time constraints, the urine test can be administered during the waiting period prior 
to the second cortisol sample.  
 
AT THIS POINT, THE FIRST SALIVARY SAMPLE IS COLLECTED  
 
14. Negative Life Events Inventory  
15. PCL [ADDRESS_589028] life event  (this is the event that bothers them the most, from their entire life)  
16. PCL 5 – Recent (past year)  this is a traumatic event that has happened to them recently (in 
the past year) – it may or may not be the same as #16  
17. Trauma Imagery Stress Task (the Negative Life Events Inventory and the PCL build up to 
this) 
Subsection 2.9 - Phase II Brief Stress Task  (Trauma Imagery Task)  
After completing the PROMIS Depression, the participant will  provide a saliva  sample . They will 
then complete the negative life events inventory and the PCL 5 (for worst event in their life and 
a recent event). The reason that the saliva sample is taken before these measures and not 
directly before the Trauma Imagery Task is becaus e in pi[INVESTIGATOR_460700] 
 
13 become distressed when recounting their traumas during the Negative Life Events Inventory 
and the PCL; thus, the “baseline” for cortisol is now taken PRIOR to these items.  
After completing the PCL for worst event and recent event, the participant will complete a a 
modified script -driven imagery task (Seo et al., 2013) , derived from prior research with women 
with PTSD . Participants will be asked to recount a traumatic event via written response. The RA 
will provide a paper and pen and instruct the participant to recall the event exactly as  it 
happened. The RA can offer prompts to recall sight, smell, and sound. The participant will then 
recount the event to the RA. Script driven imagery tasks have been effectively and safely used 
to assess traumatic -stress responses in individuals with PTSD . However, RAs will be highly 
trained to assess any severe distress that may arise and will immediately notify the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460701]. Responses will be subsequently destroyed.   AFTER THE 
COMPLETION OF THE TRAUMA IMAGERY TASK THE [ADDRESS_589029] -SALIVA SAMPLE 
TIMER STARTS!  When the timer starts, the RA will not interact with the participant. They 
should sit quietly or may read.  
Subsection 2.10 - Phase II Biospecimen Collection  
Urine Collection: Participants will provide a urine sample to  validate self -report drug use. A [ADDRESS_589030] cup will be used in this study. The participant will be instructed to 
urinate in the cup, close the cup, and then bring it back to the RA to read. Gloves will be used at 
all times and the RA  should read the cup without touching it if possible. The participant will then 
be instructed to dispose of their urine in the restroom.  
 
Saliva Collection:  Before and twenty minutes after the brief stress task  (Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task) , women will be asked to provide a salivary sample. Women will be instructed to 
avoid eating, brushing teeth or smoking for one hour prior to the collection of saliva and will be 
asked to wait to begin the task if they have. Participants will passively drool into a collec tion vial 
for three minutes or until 0.[ADDRESS_589031]. Garfin’s research lab for storage. Saliva samples will be transferred t o IISBR within 36 
hours to be frozen at -80°C until assayed. After the second and final collection, participants will 
be offered snacks and a drink and be debriefed using an IRB -approved script  (see below).  
 
Debriefing script:  
Thanks so much for your par ticipation. I know that might have been difficult for you to 
recall this event. I want to thank you and let you know that we think your participation in 
this task will help other women who have experienced adversity. While feeling a little 
distressed might  be expected, we want to make sure you are not experiencing a lot of 
distress. Right now are you are experiencing a lot of distress?  
 
 
14 If yes, ask if they want you to get a site staff from Prototypes/Serenity House  AND 
contact [CONTACT_079], Dr . Dana Rose Garfin  immediately  AND provide [CONTACT_460769]'s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
 
If no, thank them for their time and remind them if anything comes up they can call the 
Principal Investigator, [CONTACT_460770] and/or talk to any of the Prototypes /Serenity 
House site staff. (Provide [CONTACT_460766]'s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
 
Provide water and snacks at this time and pay close attention to any noticeable changes 
in mood until they are released to the care of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staf f. 
Immediately inform [CONTACT_460766] AND Prototypes/Serenity House site staff of any potential 
issues.  
 
Subsection 2.11 - Phase II Biospecimen Analysis  
 
Urine Sample: The [ADDRESS_589032] cup screens for metabolites of the 
following drugs of ab use at the established cut -off levels and is used for qualitative purposes: 
Amphetamines (1000 ng/mL), Cocaine (300 ng/mL), Methamphetamines/ MDMA (500 
ng/mL), Opi[INVESTIGATOR_858] (2000 ng/mL), and THC (50 ng/mL). Urine sample validity checks will be 
provided by [CONTACT_460737]. Participants 
whose urine does not pass validity checks will be counted as positive for drugs.  Results will 
be coded qualitatively (above or below threshold). All positive results will be int erpreted as 
positive, regardless of self -report.  
 
Saliva Sample:  The saliva sample is collected to determine resting cortisol, cortisol reactivity, 
and C -RP (a marker of inflammation). A ll saliva will be assayed in duplicate using standard 
manufacturer's p rotocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of CRP in saliva will be determined 
using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. The standard 
curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The replicates mus t 
have a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference <0.[ADDRESS_589033] MBSR is a n eight -week long mindfulness -based intervention (MBI) with one 1.5 -2.5 
hour session per week (the seventh week has two sessions as one is a mini -retreat). The 
intervention  will be run by a highly experienced instructor with prior experience conducting 
MBS R with individuals exposed to trauma with PTSD.  
 
 
15 During  MBSR, participants are trained in mindfulness meditation and the applicability of 
mindfulness to daily life. During MBSR programing, teachers will lecture about key topi[INVESTIGATOR_460702] s discussions. Participants are given opportunities to ask the 
instructor questions and to share their experiences with each other. Snacks and drinks will be 
provided.  Important  to note,  the intervention in this study is not true MBSR. It has been 
modified  to fit the specific needs of the target population. This includes shorter sessions and 
shorter meditations, and additional flexibility on the part of the trainer. Although many of the 
same tools and procedures in traditional MBSR will be utilized, given t hese critical differences 
the intervention administered in this study is not true MBSR.  
  
Each week in the MBSR program focuses on a different theme and has specific short 
homework assignments that students are asked to complete. The sessions are as follo ws: 
● Week 1 : Introductory Material. This includes an overview of the course, building trust 
within the group, introduction to mindful eating, some standing yoga stretches, mindful 
breathing and body scan meditation  
○ Homework : Body Scan recording using MP3 pl ayer; eating one meal 
mindfully; optional informal meditation practice. Participants will also complete 
a trauma -informed safety plan to ensure that, although MBSR is given in a 
group format, the MBSR trainer is responsive to the unique needs of the 
indivi dual.  
● Week 2 : Understanding Perceptions. This session focuses on self -responsibility and 
short and long -term changes for health enhancing behaviors; how you see things 
determines how you react or respond.  
○ Homework : Body Scan recording using MP3; fill out Pleasant Events 
Calendar; select one activity to bring full awareness to.  
● Week 3 : Hatha Yoga, Sitting Meditation, Walking Meditation. The theme is the 
pleasure and power of being present; this week teaches how to investigate the mind 
and body through yoga  and meditation.  
○ Homework : Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; fill out Unpleasant Events Calendar; sitting meditation.  
● Week 4 : Concentration and Awareness. This theme relates to how conditioning and 
perception influence o ne’s experience and new ways to relate to stress.  
○ Homework : Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; be aware of being stuck, sitting meditation.  
● Week 5 : Unhealthy Patterns and Getting Unstuck. This week examines conditioned 
patterns and the passive ways that people cope (e.g., numbing, denial, passive -
aggressiveness, suppression of feelings, substance dependency).  
○ Homework : Fill out Difficult Communications Calendar; Sitting Meditation and 
Standing Yoga Sequence.  
● Week 6 : Transf ormational Copi[INVESTIGATOR_254560]. This week includes how to deal with 
stressful communication and knowing and expressing your feelings.  
 
16 ○ Homework : Alternate Sitting Meditation recording with Body Scan and/or 
Standing or Lying down Yoga recording.  
● Week 7a : Retr eat. This will be a silent class, with sitting and walking practice. Guided 
meditations will include loving -kindness meditation.  
● Week 7b : Maintaining Discipline and Flexibility. This class focuses on how to more 
fully integrate mindfulness into daily life.  Instructors and participants discuss lifestyle 
choices and limiting patterns.  
○ Homework : no recordings; try to practice formal sitting meditation; recordings 
can be used if necessary.  
● Week 8 : Course Review. In this session, students will reflect on the cou rse, the 
instructor will provide additional resources, and participants will discuss their 
experiences with the group.   
Subsection 2.13 - Phase II Health Promotion Intervention  
The Health Promotion program is eight weeks long with one 1.5 -2 hour session pe r week (the 
seventh week has two sessions to ensure the same number of contact [CONTACT_460738] “mini -
retreat” in the MBSR course). The Health Promotion Classes were designed to be analogous to 
the MBSR classes in terms of length and contact [CONTACT_164212]. This is bec ause the effect of being in a 
group and participating in a study could help participants, without the benefit having much – if 
anything – to do with the actual intervention.  
 
The program will be run by a UCI graduate or postbac student with a BA or higher . The SMART 
(Specific Measurable Achievable Relevant Time-based) framework will be used for goal setting. 
In this framework, specific, achievable goals are outlined by [CONTACT_460739]. This helps with information retention and hel ps reinforce concepts and positive behaviors. 
Snacks and drinks will be provided.  
 
Each week in the Health Promotion program focuses on a different theme . The sessions are as 
follows:  
1. Introduction & overview  
2. Envisioning Health through Art  
3. Chronic Disease I – Heart Health  
4. Chronic Disease II – Diabetes  
5. Nutrition and Hydration  
6. Infectious Disease Prevention  
7. Skin Care  
8. Oral Health  
9. Promoting Social Integration & Course Graduation  
 
 
[ADDRESS_589034] -Assessment  
After the ninth session (of either M BSR or Health Promotion), a post -assessment will be 
administered via tablet. Urine will again be collected to validate self -report drug use. 
Participants will repeat the brief stress task (Trauma Imagery Task) using an identical strategy 
and provide saliva  samples before and after. The Lead Researcher or a postbac student 
researcher will be on site to answer any questions or clarify any items. Urine and saliva 
samples will both be stored in a freezer on -site or at Dr. G arin’s research office and then 
transf erred to UCI for analysis within [ADDRESS_589035] the right to refuse the collection of urine or saliva and it is important to 
understand that an individual may want t o refuse due to the following:  
 
Step 1:  Assess reasons why participant does not want to have their sample collected.  
● May experience concern that their friends, acquaintances, or shelter staff will be 
informed of the results of their surveys or urine.  
● Other  possible reasons?  
 
In the event a participant refuses the sample collection, inquire about the following:  
  
Step 2: Respond to their reasons why they do not want to give urine or saliva samples.  
 
We encourage our participants to complete as many of the pr ocedures as they are comfortable 
with. Please offer to have [CONTACT_460766] or Lab Management answer any questions the participant 
may have regarding the measures. However, participation is completely voluntary,  and the 
participant may skip any aspect of the pr ocedure that they chose without penalty and still be in 
the study.   
Subsection 2.16 - Phase II Dealing with Intervention Program Attrition  
Attrition is conservatively estimated at 10% for first follow -up and 20% for 6 month follow -up. 
To account for an es timated 30% of women to be screened with subthreshold or threshold 
PTSD, [ADDRESS_589036] to ensure retention of participants during  the study. The 
Locator Guide is key to maintaining effective follow -up.  
● Completion of the intervention program is defined by [CONTACT_9159] [ADDRESS_589037] appearances.  
○ The minimum amount o f time required for the regimen is [ADDRESS_589038] the women with assistance from the site supervisor or 
by [CONTACT_460740]  (see Appendix ). Research Staff will travel to the participant’s 
location, as they may not be available to return to site due to COVID -19 restrictions  or other 
factors. If participant moved out of state, the follow -ups may be conducted over Zoom or 
phone.   
Subsection 2.18 - Phase II Compensation  
The Phase II compensation is listed below. Each participant will receive a to tal of up to $153 
over the course of the study.  
 
$3 – screener (after completing screener)  
$15 – baseline measures (after completing)  
$10 – per class (at the end of each class; for a total of 9 classes)  
$15 – immediate post -intervention follow -up measures (after the 9th class)  
$30 – 6-month follow -up (after completion)  
 
Participants who complete [ADDRESS_589039] 
Attendanc e (see Appendix).  
Subsection 2.[ADDRESS_589040] complete the Coll aborative Institutional Training Initiative Human Research Curriculum 
(CITI program), with the confirmation of completion of the trainings on file. The following courses 
should be completed by [CONTACT_460741].  
● Human Research  - Social & Behavioral Researchers & Staff  
 
19 ● Good Clinical Practices (GCP) courses  
● Refresher courses are also available on CITI website 
https://about.citiprogram.org/en/homepage/ ) as needed.  
 
Further, all research staff will be highly trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_460703]:  
• Trained in specific protocols for dealing with emotional and mental distress (e.g., 
remaining calm, immediately finding appropriate onsite clinical staff).  
● Trained in observatio nal and communication skills, and in providing psychosocial 
support, particularly as it relates to emotional and information support  
● Trained in the [LOCATION_004] Mandatory Reporting Laws governing reporting of child abuse, 
domestic violence, and elder/depende nt abuse. Protocols governing reports to the 
[LOCATION_004] Department of Family and Child Protective Services, or (in the case of 
domestic violence) local police, will be carefully followed. Study participants will receive 
full disclosure regarding mandatory reporting laws during the informed consent process 
and discussion of confidentiality.  In terms of current or recent abuse experience, 
research staff will refer the participants to the onsite Prototypes clinical staff.  
 
During research study training, Research Staff will be evaluated using the competency grid and 
mock session review. Research Staff will also complete a quiz to be reviewed with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460704].  
Subsection 2.21 - Data Entry, Management & Confidentiality  
In Phase 2, secure and encrypted platforms will be used :  
● REDCap: Interview data will be captured electronically using REDCap (Research 
Electronic Data Capture; http://project -redcap.org/), a secure, web -based application 
designed to support data entry and st orage for research studies. Participants will answer 
surveys via an electronic tablet and the data will be uploaded in real -time. Possible 
errors, including incomplete responses, logic checks, and data range checks will be 
flagged by [CONTACT_460742]. 
Laboratory data will be entered in REDCap electronic forms.  
● [CONTACT_460766] will routinely check to ensure data is accurately entered. The Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) will also meet after the enr ollment of every 30 participants to 
review/  
 
Procedures to safeguard confidentiality  
Confidentiality of data will be protected by [CONTACT_460743]. 
Any forms that link participant with their codes will be stored electroni cally on UCI’s secure 
server and  only senior research staff and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460705]. All self -report data will be 
immediately uploaded onto UCI’s secure server via RedCAP. Saliva samples will use the 
subject code number and will not be labeled with the  participant’s name.  
 
20 ● Participants will be reminded that their interview questions will be provided over a tablet 
that will immediately transfer the data to the UCI secure server and site staff will not see 
their data.  
● We will minimize the risk by [CONTACT_460744] y adhering to confidentiality procedures. All study staff 
will be rigorously trained in methods to promote confidentiality. The staff will also be 
taught to treat participants in a non -judgmental, professional and confidential manner.   
● A Data Safety and M onitoring Board will be put in place for monitoring of the data 
collected.  
● Confidentiality of data will be protected by [CONTACT_460745]. Data including subject identifiable information (eg: locator form etc) will 
be linke d to a code on RED Cap for access in real time to track participants  and only 
research staff will have access. REDCap also allows for participant’s names and IDs to 
be viewed without access to their responses to the other items in the survey. Tracking of 
participants for their follow -ups will be based upon the information the participant reveals 
on their Locator Guide. When contact[CONTACT_460746], we will use their 
preferred method and the research staff will identify themselves per participants’ w ishes.  
● To protect confidentiality and reassure subjects, the research staff will be providing 
explicit explanations in the beginning of the program that they will share no confidential 
information. The trained research staff will administer the questionnai res individually to 
the participants.  
● Subject identifiable data will be destroyed upon completion of the study. All the data will 
be stripped off any identifiable information and only de -identified database will be kept 
for analysis and dissemination.  
Subsection 2.22 – Using REDCap  
● For electronic data entry, log onto RedCap ( https://redcap.med.upenn.edu/ ) with your 
user ID and password.  
● RedCap also incorporates suitable validity checks at the point of data e ntry to prevent 
“out of range,” “missing” or other checkable data entry errors.  
 Subsection 2.23 - Data Security  
● All CRFs and questionnaires must be identified by a code number (Study ID) only and 
patient identifier information will also be linked on REDC ap through this code.  
● The informed consent with the participants’ names and signature [CONTACT_460764] 
a digital copy should be printed out of REDCap and stored in a local hard drive not 
connected to server.  
● All databases are accessible only to key investigators  and senior leadership of the 
project.  
● The electronic data files are stored on the secure, password -protected UCI Health 
Science server.  
 
21 ● This data is available for analyses on the UCI server to authorized users through a web 
VPN application.  
●  Authorized users can export the data into Excel or other statistical software sheets for 
further analyses.  
● The de -identified database will be archived for future analyses and all other identifying 
data will be destroyed at the end of the study as per NIH  policy.  
Subsection 2.[ADDRESS_589041] Data Collection  
● Validity checks on REDCap should be done right after any interview or other data 
collection is completed.  
● Routine statistical validity checks should identify missing or suspect entries at agreed 
defined inte rvals (twice per month or as needed) by [CONTACT_123388], so that correct 
data can be obtained from the research staff, participants or their records if needed.  
● Thorough data cleaning should be performed before any data analysis.  
  
Subsection 2.25 - End of Study  
● De-identified electronic data will be maintained for the period agreed in the study 
protocol (indefinitely).  
● Final cleaned electronic data will be used for all statistical analyses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 SECTION 4. RECRUITMENT  
Subsection 4.1 - Phase II Fly er 
 

 
23 Subsection 4.2 - Phase II MBSR – Script for Introduction at 
Recruitment Site: For Non -Research Staff Member   
Introduction:   Hello, my name [CONTACT_832]__________________________. I’m a staff member from 
Prototypes/Serenity House Residential Treatment Center. I  would like to inform you about a 
research study by [CONTACT_460747] a flyer with you.  This study is conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Dana Rose Garfin of 
the UCI, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing.  
  
Question:         Would you like to receive a flyer?  
❏ Yes, I would like to rece ive more information.  
❏ No, not at this time. [If not interested, thank person for their time]  
  
Directions:      If interested, hand flyer and say: The research study being conducted at 
Prototypes/Serenity House and is a separate activity from the services offered by [CONTACT_460748]. If you 
decide to participate, your decision to participate in the research will not affect your relationship 
with Prototypes/Serenity House.  
  
Directions:      If you are interested, an information session will be held at ________ [DA TE] at 
__________ [TIME] for you to learn more.  
  
Question:        Would you like to attend an information session and be screened to see if you 
are eligible to participate in this study?  
❏ Yes [If yes, refer participant to Project Director]  
❏ No  [If no, tha nk person for their time]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 SECTION 5. SCREENING, INFORMED CONSENT, AND 
ENROLLMENT  
 
Subsection 5.1 Screening  Protocol  
Instructions:  
1. Read participant consent to screen document  (listed in Appendix)   
2. If they agree to consent to screen, you w ill open the Screening Module in REDCap.  
1. Age? (Must be 18 or older)  
2. Able to speak English (infer, don’t ask)  
3. Homeless in the last [ADDRESS_589042] meet (Normal Cognition 0 -4) 
5. Meet likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD as measured by [CONTACT_88806] -5 (see 
Appendix).  
6. Subthreshold PTSD  
i. Must meet Criteria A (exposure to a traumatic event) .  
ii. Must endorse “moderately” or more to at least [ADDRESS_589043]. Garfin and the IRB.   
ii. Download a copy of informed consent (save in downloads). Have them  
sign. Then re -upload and delete from downloads.  
2. START  locator guide.  
i. Make sure you get their FULL LEGAL NAME!  
ii. TAKE PI[INVESTIGATOR_460706] “ADD DOCUMENT” ITEM, DO NOT SAVE 
TO CAMERA AND THEN UPLOAD.  
Subsection 5. [ADDRESS_589044]. They can take it before or after interview (their 
choice). You will hand them a cup. They will return the cup and you will record 
their urine results in REDCap. Use gloves. It is not considered a biohazard  so 
can be thrown in trash (or urine po ured in toilet).  
 
 
25 APPENDIX I: What to bring to site  
 
Screening  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in 1 dollar bills, as participants will be paid $3 per screening  
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clo rox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
Baseline, immediate follow -up, and 6 -month follow -up 
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $10 - and $5 -dollar bills, as participants will be paid $15 each (Note: for 
6-month follow -up please bring $10 doll ar bills as participants will be paid $30.)  
o Light snacks  
o Bottles of water  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Color coded and labeled vials for saliva collection  
o White boxes to store sal iva samples  
o Cooler with ice  
o Drug test kits   
o Paper and pens for stress task (trauma imagery task)  
Weekly – Health Promotion class  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $ 5 or $10 dollar bills, as participants will be paid $1 0 each   
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Teacher manual  
o Extra participant book  
o Materials for each week – please see teacher manual for weekly supply list  
Weekly – MBSR  class  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $ 5 or 10 bills, as participants will be paid $1 0 each   
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Extra participant book  
o Extra MP3 players  
o Extra yoga mat or two  
 
 
26 APPENDIX II: Trauma Imagery Script (Brief Stress Task)  
 
 
TRAUMA IMAGERY SCRIPT  
 
NOTE TO RA : Make sure the participant has not had anything to eat or drink for one hour  and 
that they had some water to drink at least 10 minutes before starti ng the task.   
RA: Thank you for your participation in this part of the project. We are going to be asking you to 
recall and describe a stressful or traumatic event. We want to remind you that you can stop at any 
time if you are uncomfortable, although your  participation will help us understand more about 
the stress process in women who have experienced adversity. The general overview of this 
procedure is that we are going to take a saliva sample to assess your stress hormones; have you 
participate in a shor t stress task; and then take another saliva sample to assess your stress 
hormones after the task. If this gets to be too intense for you, you can stop at any time. If you 
experience any severe distress, let me know and we will stop the task and immediately  contact 
[CONTACT_460749]/therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. I want to remind you that this is completely voluntary and you can 
stop at any time and can still be in the study. Are you ready to begin? Do you have any 
questions?  
NOTE TO RA:  Participants will then passively dr ool into a collection vial for three minutes or 
until 0.[ADDRESS_589045] collected roughly 1 teaspoon of saliva.  Immediately put 
saliva in cooler ! 
RA: First, I am going to ask you to recall a stressful or traumatic event for a few minutes. Some 
examples are a serious accident, fire, disast er, physical assault, abuse, war, homicide or suicide. 
Then, you will write about it and then read or describe it aloud. I can also take notes for you if 
you prefer to do it that way. You can face whatever direction you want and you can have your 
eyes open  or closed. However, I ask that you try to recall each part of the event in as much detail 
as you can in your mind’s eye. Think of the actions, events, thoughts, feelings, smells, and 
sensations. Try to remember how you felt and what was happening in your body. Do you have 
any questions?  
I am going to give you a few minutes to imagine the event and write some notes. Here is a pen 
and some paper. Anything you write will be destroyed after the task.  
NOTE TO RA : Give the participant some time to write . Re-iterate any of the instructions if they 
ask or seem stuck . Stop the procedure if the participant is extremely distressed and contact a 
Prototypes site staff and [CONTACT_460766] . Remind them they can still be in the study if they don’t want 
to co mplete this part of  the procedures.  
RA: Now please read what you wrote aloud and vividly imagine it in your mind’s eye. ( Time ~ 5 
minutes ).  
 
27 NOTE TO RA : [ADDRESS_589046] collected roughly 1 teaspoon of saliva.  Immediately put 
saliva in cooler ! 
 
POST -TASK DEBRIEFING  
Thanks so much for your participation. I know that might have been difficult for you to recall 
this event. I wa nt to thank you and let you know that we think your participation in this task will 
help other women who have experienced adversity. While feeling a little distressed might be 
expected, we want to make sure you are not experiencing a lot of distress. Right  now are you are 
experiencing a lot of distress?  
If yes , ask if they want you to get a site staff from Prototypes/Serenity House AND  contact [CONTACT_1268], [CONTACT_460770]  immediately  AND  provide [CONTACT_460766]’s contact 
[CONTACT_460736]) .  
If no , thank them for their time and remind them if anything comes up they can call the Principal 
Investigator, [CONTACT_460770] and/or talk to any of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staff. 
(Provide [CONTACT_460766]’s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
Provide water and snacks at this time and pay close attention to any noticeable changes in mood 
until they are released to the care of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staff. Immediately 
inform [CONTACT_460766] AND Prototypes/Serenity House site staff of any pote ntial issues .  
 
 
 
NOTE TO RA : Please provide the following to the participant (note: can also remind the 
participant this is also included in the informed consent).  
 
CONTACT [CONTACT_460750], Dr . Dana Rose Garfin at 
[EMAIL_8829]  or (657) [ADDRESS_589047] at Human Research Protections unit in the Office of Research by 
[CONTACT_3379] (949) 824 -6068 or (949) 824 -2125 Monday – Friday, 8 am – 5 pm; or by e -mail at 
[EMAIL_8523]; or by [CONTACT_460751] [ADDRESS_589048], Irvine, CA [ZIP_CODE].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 APPENDIX I II: Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
 Institutional Review Board  
Human Research Protections  
Appendix S – DESCRI PTION OF DATA 
SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (DSMP)  
FOR CLINICAL/ BIOMEDICAL 
RESEARCH  
 
Version 09-19-2018 
Researchers:  
 
• All studies involving greater than minimal risk to participants are, 
at a minimum, required to develop a detailed plan to ensure that 
there i s appropriate safety oversight.  
• For clinical studies involving a test article, it is common to have an 
independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
• Please read the applicable HRP webpage  for further guidance.  
 HS#:   
(to be completed by [CONTACT_1201])  
 
 
 
 
Lead Researcher/Investigator Name:  [CONTACT_460765] S from the following sources , as applicable .   
Please remember to submit the following documents with your IRB APP : 
 
• For NIH-sponsored clinical trials , the DSMP should be part of the grant application .  
• For industry sponsor -initiated clinical trials , a FDA -approv ed DSMP should be part of the Master 
Protocol or the Data Safety Monitoring Committee/Board Charter.  
• For studies conducted at the Institute for Clinical and Translational Science (ICTS) or Cancer 
Center (PRMC) , the DSMP information approved by [CONTACT_460752].  
 
Please answer all of the following:  
 
1. Provide details of those individuals who will be responsible for the safety oversight of your study, 
including the relevant experience/expertise of each individual (fo r UCI investigator initiated 
studies conducted only at UCI, provide the names and titles as well).  
 
The study will have a Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
1. Dana Rose Garfin, PhD  (Assistant Adjunct Professor and Lead Investigator, Sue & Bill Gross 
School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460766] has over 12 years of experience researching stress and trauma 
in both epi[INVESTIGATOR_460707] -based samples. She has conducted prior studies with 
vulnerable populations (e.g., homeless women, trauma -exposed children; post -disaster 
survivors, demographically diverse samples).  [CONTACT_460766]’s recent work has explored the 
efficacy of community -based interventions on high risk samples (i.e., HIV -positive women in 
India). [CONTACT_460766] has recently completed a qualitative study explor ing the acceptability and 
feasibility of a mindfulness -based intervention for trauma -exposed, homeless women.  [CONTACT_460769] has an MA in Social Ecology and a PhD in Psychology.  
2. Adeline M. Nyamathi, PhD, ANP, FAAN  (Founding Dean and Distinguished Professor, S ue 
& Bill Gross School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460767] has been Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_460708] 

 
[ADDRESS_589049] resulted in 
significant reductions in drug and/or alcohol use and risky sexual behaviors , high rates of HBV 
vaccine completion, latent TB treatment completion, and improvement in emotional heal th and 
substance use outcomes . She has worked with ho meless adults for over 32 years as well as 
other vulnerable populations both domestically and inte rnationally.   
3. E. Alison Holman, PhD , FNP (Associate Professor,  Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing).) 
[CONTACT_460771] is a health psychologist and family nurse practitioner with over [ADDRESS_589050] 20 years, she has served as Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_460709] (e.g., 
9/11, incest, war, and natural disaster). She has also serv ed as the data manager and 
analyst for several studies including her prospective longitudinal study of copi[INVESTIGATOR_460710] 11th terrorist attacks. She is PI [INVESTIGATOR_460711]’s responses to traumatic events and an NIH -funded R01 studying the acute 
stress response in stroke survivors.  
4. Sanghuk S. Shin, PhD  (Assistant Professo r, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing ) [CONTACT_281290] is 
an epi[INVESTIGATOR_460712], biostatistics, and 
protoco l development and adherence. He has been PI [INVESTIGATOR_5768] -I and lead statistician for 
numerous NIH-funded intervention studies with high risk samples including homeless 
individuals and those with infectious diseases including TB and HIV.  
5. Jung -Ah Lee, PhD , BSM, MN  (Associate Professor , Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing ) [CONTACT_460772]’s expertise is in healthcare systems and how the structure and processes of a healthcare 
system affect s patient safety and clinical and organizational outcomes. She has investigated 
quality  improvement techniques, patient safety issues, effective healthcare delivery models, 
and cost -effectiveness of care.  She has expertise working with vulnerable populations 
including older adults and those with chronic diseases. [CONTACT_6321] is is not a member o f the 
research team and will provide independent oversight.  
6. Yuqing Guo, PhD, MN  (Associate Professor, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460773] 
has expertise in women’s health and health disparities. She has run numerous family -
centered interventions i n community settings. She is PI [CONTACT_4007] a study examining maternal care 
for underserved communities and is well equipped to provide consult and oversight on 
potential problems with the population of interest. [CONTACT_460773] is not a member of the research 
team and wil l provide independent oversight.  
 
 
2. Indicate how frequently accumulated study data will be reviewed and evaluated for participant 
safety, study conduct and progress, and, when appropriate, efficacy.  
 
They will meet  face-to-face at least once a year and ma intain and approve minutes of meetings.   
Every 30 participants.  
 
 
 
3. Describe the events that would trigger an unscheduled review. Also include stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] g uidelines 
and un -blinding rules  if applicable.  
 
Events where the participant became extremely distress ed as part of the research procedure or 
expressed suicidality or if they were a harm/threat to self or others.  The Data Safety and 
Monitoring Plan (attached, submitted in the NIH grant that funded this application), we provide 
specific guidelines to asses s suicidality or harm to others. The research staff would follow all 
 
[ADDRESS_589051] who will be  locally  monitoring and collecting information on adverse events and/or 
unanticipated problems (e.g., UCI Lead Researcher, Research Coordinator, etc.). Include the 
name, title and experience of the individual(s) and further describe each individual’s role in the 
oversight of subject participating in the study.  
 
The Principal Investigator ([CONTACT_460774] R ose Garfin) will be responsible for locally monitoring and 
collecting information on adverse events and unanticipated problems. [CONTACT_460766] will be onsite 
during participant recruitment and during the administration of intervention procedures. In the 
event that [CONTACT_460766] is not able to be onsite, a senior staff will be in contact [CONTACT_460753]. 
Garfin should any problems arise. Moreover, when [CONTACT_460766] is not onsite, staff will report daily 
on study progress and any potential issues. [CONTACT_460766] will mon itor all data weekly.  
 
5. Describe the plan for annual reporting of the participants’ safety, and the study’s conduct, 
progress, and efficacy, when appropriate. Note: At the Continuing Review, please provide all 
relevant documentation related to the review o f the accumulated data for safety. For the case 
your submission includes a DSMB charged with the oversight of data safety, include all available 
DSMB reports as part of your submission.  
 
Annual reporting will occur at the DSMB meeting. The Principal Inves tigator will keep detailed 
notes from the meeting and evaluate the study’s conduct (e.g., any unanticipated problems), 
progress (e.g., recruitment, retention), and efficacy (e.g., results of any preliminary data 
analyses).  
 
 
DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING PLA N 
 
Possible Serious Adverse Events or Adverse Events  
 
Serious adverse events  
 
• Suicide attempt, severe violence to another person  
   
Other adverse events  
 
• Inadvertent disclosure of illegal immigrant status  
• Adverse reaction to stress task  
 
Risk Management P rotocols in Place to Deal with Adverse Events  
 
• Date Safety and Monitoring (DSM) issues are raised at quarterly meetings with all research staff  
• Events will be reported as they occur  
• A certificate of confidentiality will be secured.  
• Research staff will admi nister the questionnaires individually.  
• Participants will be cautioned not to disclose any confidential information within the group sessions.  
• Unique identifiers are used on all data.   Access to identifiers is restricted to the study PI, lead mentors 
and d ata manager by a combination lock.  
 
31  
Data and Safety Monitoring Procedures  
 
• Serious adverse events (SAE) must be reported to the NIH Project Officer (PO) by [CONTACT_460754] [ADDRESS_589052] occur within 
72 hours of the event.    
• All adverse events will be reported by [CONTACT_460755] a year: six months after the Notice of 
Grant Award (NGA) and at the end of the budget year.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
 
The board wi ll be composed of six members, including the PI, mentors (Nyamathi, Shin, Holman) and two 
mid-level to senior investigators from our institution with psychological expertise ([CONTACT_460775] and [CONTACT_460776]-Ah Lee). They will meet  face-to-face at least once a year and maintain and approve minutes of 
meetings. The NIH PO will be kept informed regarding changes to the membership of the DSM board. 
Data will be reviewed as every 30 participants enter the study.  
 
Training for all staff  
 
During the orientation prior to start of the grant, all research staff and research assistants will be trained on 
recognizing all types of potential crises, how to make a thorough assessment, and role play protocols that 
are featured below and in the DSMB section. During these meeting s, in services that address mental 
health crises and associated symptomatology will be provided to enhance the staffs’ ability to confidently 
engage in the protocols for participants who may be experience psychiatric or psychologic al distress. All 
research  assistants will also meet weekly with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460713], circumstances, or 
situations that may have arisen with the participants.  Discussions will focus on how the incident could 
have been handled differently and what the ideal ou tcome for that situation might have been.  
 
Training in Red Flag Procedures  
 
 Research staff will be trained to assess and react as follows:  
 
 
RED FLAG – SUICIDE  
 
During your work as a research staff, you may encounter a respondent who expresses suicidal in tentions, 
or you may suspect that a respondent may be suicidal. Be sure to document all the information in sections 
I and II as you will need to provide that information to the treatment program counselor or on -call clinician.  
 
I. Is this person a suicide risk? 
 
  ____  The individual is currently thinking about suicide.  
  ____  The individual has a plan and the means to commit suicide.  
  ____  The individual has attempted suicide in the past.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_589053] the client is suicidal, also n ote if:  
  ____  The individual is currently exhibiting serious depression/anxiety.  
  ____  The individual is experiencing stressful life events.  
 
II. Assessment of support system:  
 
a) Is the individual under professional care (i.e., psychologist, psychiatrist, counselo r)? 
 
b) Does the individual have a social support network (i.e., friends, family, sponsor)?  
 
c) Has the individual talked with any of the members of his or her social support network in 
the last 30 days?  
 
d) Is the individual able to talk about this issue with his or her support system?  
 
e) Is the individual aware of available social service programs?  
 
III. If the person appears to be suicidal or has attempted suicide since the last interview:  
 
a) Let the respondent know that you are concerned , and that you need to inform  a clinician 
and your supervisor.   
 
b) If you are not  at a treatment program, have the client wait with you or hold on the line while 
you take the following steps:   
1) If the client has indicated that he/she is under professional care, ask the client for 
permi ssion to contact [CONTACT_5657]/her clinician and, if permission is granted, obtain the clinician’s 
contact [CONTACT_3031]. Be sure to document the client’s permission and clinician contact 
[CONTACT_3031], you will need to provide it to the on -call clinician who will confi rm client 
permission and make the contact.  
2) Contact [CONTACT_21639] -call clinician at the Los Angeles County Mobile Crisis Response Team 
(MCRT);  _____________. A clinician is on call [ADDRESS_589054] between 
your client and the MCRT clinicians. The clinician will make the decision about what 
steps to take with this client. Document the details of the clinician call.  
 
d) Report back to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_97318] .  
 
• Your Principa l Investigator Dana Rose Garfin Ph.D., 415 -407-9498 
 
The situation will be evaluated by [CONTACT_403776] a decision will be made if it should be 
reported to the LAC MCRT; they will advise us on how we need to proceed.  
 
e) If the person attempts to harm himself o r herself in your presence, contact [CONTACT_396423] (911).  
The police may place the person in a psychiatric facility for a 72 -hour observational hold.  
Get the police report number.  
 
f) Complete an Incident Report detailing the problem and action taken.  Be sure that the 
Incident Report is placed in the respondent’s file.  
 
33  
g) Make arrangements to follow -up on your client’s status with the treatment program 
counselor, supervising counselor, or on -call clinician  within the next seven days.  
 
If the MCRT is called, an as sessment will be done by [CONTACT_460756]. Based on the assessment of the MCRT, the participant may be transported to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_460714]. If it is determined that the person does not need to be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057],  the participant will 
be referred to the outpatient services at the neighborhood clinic. If the participant is at the same location 
as the staff, the staff will find out if the participant has taken any active steps such as already having taken 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], etc.  If the participant is not in immediate danger, the staff will find out the following: history of drug and 
alcohol abuse; history of familial suicide; history of familial mental illness. The staff will find out if the 
participant has a plan for how he woul d commit suicide. If she does have a plan, the staff will find out if 
she/he has any weapons, pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], etc, and remove all weapons from her possession, and explore the nature 
of her various plans. The PI, once they have arrived, will continue to focus on the  reasons the participant 
wants to live and build on his support system. The staff will get phone numbers from the participant of 
those of his outside support system with whom he wishes to be in contact, for future use in case of another 
emergency. The rese arch staff will collaborate with the treating psychiatrist to facilitate referral and follow 
through with a counseling psychiatrist/psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_460715]. The staff/PC will 
document each step of this process.  
 
If it is determine d that the person does not need to be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057], any additional treatment will 
be facilitated with Prototypes staff. To facilitate communication the participant will be asked to sign a 
Release of Information. If the participant provides a Release of Inf ormation, the PC will follow -up to ensure 
that the participant is receiving the necessary treatment. Depending on the outcome of the event, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_460716]. The staff/PC will document each 
step of  this process in an adverse event log.  
 
 In addition, the DSMB will be informed of reports of suicidal ideation and current or recent abuse, 
reported by [CONTACT_460757]. Further, the DSMB will monitor that these reports are made 
expedit iously and with the full knowledge of the respondent. Monitoring information is also provided in the 
HSPC segment of this application.   
 
Harm to others  
 
I. Is this respondent dangerous to others?  
The individual expressed intent to harm or kill a specifie d person.  
The individual has the means (gun, knife, etc.) to harm that person.  
The individual has a thought -out plan.  
 
II. If you feel that the person is dangerous to others, and is likely to follow through with his/her 
plans:  
 
Assess the situation.  If it is safe , complete the study protocol is the participant desires.  Report 
the information to your supervisor, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460717].  If you 
 
34 feel unsafe or are not sure about it , complete the research procedures; only if possible .  But if 
the situation is volatile, terminate immediately.  Try to be as graceful and subtle as possible.  
For example, complete the specific task you are on or make up some reason for leaving, and 
say you will have to reschedule the rest of the p rocedures.  Pay the subject in full, or leave 
immediately if you don’t feel safe to do so.  Trust your sense of the situation, and act 
accordingly.  
 
Report back to your supervisor or call in immediately .  If something takes place outside of the 
work hours , call your supervisor at home.  The supervisor should then immediately contact [CONTACT_235039]’s PI. Supervisors are:  
 
Your Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_460692], Ph.D., 415 -407-9498  
 
The situation will be evaluated quickly by [CONTACT_403776] a decision will be made if the LAC 
MCRT needs to be called; they will advise us on how we need to proceed. If the situation is 
reported to the police, get the report number from the police.  
 
III. Complete an Incident Report.  Be sure to put a copy of the Incident Report i n the 
respondent’s file so that those working with the file in the future know an incident occurred.  
Aside from the DSMB, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460718].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
35 APPENDIX IV: Citations for Study Measures  
Primary Outcome:  
 
PTSD Check list for DSM -5 (PCL -5; Weathers, Litz, Keane, Palmieri, Marx, & Schnurr, 
2013). Responses will be scored continuously and according to diagnostic criteria as 
implemented in previous research.(143) The PCL -5 initially starts with the identification of the 
presence of exposure to a DSM -V traumatic event (i.e., “Briefly identify the worst event (if you 
feel comfortable doing so)”) and then assesses whether it involved actual or threatened 
death, serious injury or sexual violence; whether the person directly ex perienced it (through 
direct exposure, witness to the event, occurred to a close friend or family member, or exposed 
as part of job). There are then twenty -items that assess all four B -E criterion (re -experiencing, 
avoidance, negative thoughts or cognition s, hyperarousal), assessed on a Likert -type scale 0 
“not at all”, 1 “a little bit”, 2 “moderately”, 3 “quite a bit”, 4 “extremely”.  
 
Secondary outcomes:  
 
Substance use :  
Self-report drug use : [LOCATION_007] Christian University (TCU) Screen at Baseline and 6 -month  follow 
up. Yes/No to each drug will be assessed for use vs dependency.  The total score ranges 
from 0 - 9; higher scores (> 3) correspond to the DSM drug dependence diagnosis.  This will 
be assessed at baseline, immediately following 9th/final interventio n session, and 6 -month 
follow -u (Institute of Behavioral Research, 2017).  
 
Objective drug use assessment : A 5-panel FDA -approved urine test cup will be used in this 
study.  The test cup screens for metabolites of the following drugs of abuse at the establ ished 
cut-off levels and is used for qualitative purposes: Amphetamines (1000 ng/mL), Cocaine 
(300 ng/mL), Methamphetamines/ MDMA (500 ng/mL), Opi[INVESTIGATOR_858] (2000 ng/mL), and THC (50 
ng/mL). Urine sample validity checks will be provided by [CONTACT_460758]. Participants whose urine does not pass validity checks 
will be counted as positive for drugs.  Results will be coded qualitatively (above or below 
threshold). All positive results will be interpreted as posit ive, regardless of self -report.  
 
Depression:  will be assessed using the PROMIS measure for depression (Emotional 
Distress). The 8 -tem form will be used. It assesses negative mood, views of self (e.g., 
worthlessness), decreased positive affect and anhedonia . In self -report when all participants 
are given the same questions, it is desirable to use the 8 -item short form, which has reliability 
and validity comparable to the 28 -item computer adaptive form (PROMIS Health 
Organization, 2019).  
 
Cortisol reactivity : Saliva samples will be collected via passive drool before and after a 
modified script driven imagery task. Saliva All saliva will be assayed in duplicate using 
standard manufacturers protocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of CRP in saliva will be 
determined using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. 
The standard curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The 
 
[ADDRESS_589055] a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference <0.030 between the replica tes. 
The mean values across saliva duplicates will be computed for each sample and used in the 
statistical analyses.  
 
C-reactive protein (CRP)  All saliva will be assayed in duplicate using standard 
manufacturers protocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of  CRP in saliva will be determined 
using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. The standard 
curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The replicates must 
have a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference  <0.030 between the replicates. The mean values 
across saliva duplicates will be computed for each sample and used in the statistical 
analyses.  
 
Perceived stress scale : 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) will be used to measure 
participant's perception o f stress (Cohen, 1993).  
 
Quality of life : will be measured using the [ADDRESS_589056] week on a scale of 0 (very unsatisfied) to 3 (very 
satisfied) (Endicottt, Nee, Harrison, & Blumenthal, 1993).  
 
Satisfaction with life scale : A 5-item scale designed to measure global cognitive judgments 
of one’s life satisfaction (not a measure of either positive or negative affect) (Diener, Emmons, 
Larsen, & Griffin, 1985).  
 
Mindful awareness attention scale (MAAS) : is a [ADDRESS_589057] (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Carlson & Brown, 2005).  
 
Five facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ)  is a 39 item questionnaire that assesses five 
independent sub -scale s: observing, describing, acting with awareness, non -judging of inner 
experience, and non -reactivity to inner experience (Baer et al., 2008).  
 
Life event history: Life events history will be assessed by [CONTACT_460759] h of 40 specific negative life events (NLEs; will include both trauma and 
stressors), and, if so, at what age(s) this occurred. This will also be updated with respect to 
recent events upon immediate completion of the 9 week courses as well as at the 6 -mont h 
follow up. The measure was modified from the Diagnostic Interview Schedule trauma section 
(Robins, Helzer,  
Croughan, & Ratcliff, 1981) by [CONTACT_460760] (Holman, Silver, & Waitzkin, 2000)  and has provided rates of events 
comparable to other community -based studies (e.g., Seery et al., 2010).  
 
 
37 Emotion regulation:  will be assessed with the Difficulties in Emotion -Regulation Scale 
(DERS; Gratz & Roemer, 2004; Kaufman et al., 2016), short form .  DERS is a 18 - item 
questionnaire that aims to measure how much one is able to regulate/deregulate their 
emotions. The 41 questions are based off of six factors including acceptance of emotions, 
impulsiveness, ability to work towards goals, awareness of own emotions, clarity of emotions, 
and accessibility to emotion -regulation strategies  
 
Social support will be assessed using the MOS Social Support scale (Sherbourne & 
Stewart, 1993) This 19 item measure assesses social support.  
 
Anxiety:  will be assessed  using the PROMIS measure for anxiety (Emotional Distress). The 
8-tem form will be used. It assesses symptoms of Generalized Anxiety Disorder. it is desirable 
to use the 8 -item short form, which has reliability and validity comparable to the 28 -item 
comput er adaptive form (PROMIS Health Organization, 2019).  
 
General Self -efficacy scale: This 10 -item scale was created to assess a general sense of 
perceived self -efficacy (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1995).  
 
Demographics : Age, ethnicity, sexual orientation, incarc eration history, religion, income, 
education, number of children, pregnancy status, mental health history (previous diagnosis) 
employment history.  
 
Prior Doctor -diagnosed Health Conditions . This survey, modified from the CDC’s National 
Center for Health St atistics Annual National Health Interview Survey, asks respondents to 
report doctor diagnosed health ailments. This will be assessed at baseline, immediately 
following 9th/final intervention session, and 6 -month follow -up. 
 
Adherence . Measured by [CONTACT_460761] -reported time in mindfulness meditation 
and doing at -home assignment.  
 
Short self -compassion scale. This 12 -item scale assesses self -compassion (Raes, 
Pommier, Neff, & Van Gucht, 2011).  
 
Free Response: Participants will be given the oppor tunity to provide written feedback 
regarding their experiences that may not have been captured with these quantitative 
measures. Prompt will include: We will ask: “Do you have any other thoughts and/or feelings 
about your participation in this program? Is there anything that you wish to share with us 
regarding your experience?”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 APPENDIX V: Salivary Data Collection During COVID -19 
 
 
Collection Procedure*  
*Please keep a roster of all samples collected from October 2019 onwards. Samples may 
contain SARS - CoV-2, and this will ensure safe handling in the future as labs may take extra 
precautions when handling samples collected during this time.  
 
1. Participants wash hands for 20 seconds prior to collecting the saliva  sample(s).  
2. Collect saliva sample as normal (follow typi[INVESTIGATOR_460719]). Tubes should be labeled prior to providing them to  participants.  
3. Sample tubes should be immediately capped and sealed. Outsides of tubes should be 
disinfected following  collection.  Disinfectants  are listed  on the CDC  website  
(https://www.epa.gov/pesticide - registration/list -n-disinfectants -use-against -sars-cov-
2). Ensure no disinfectants leak into the tube via an unsealed or partially sealed  tube.  
4. Samples should be placed in a secondary container (sealed plastic bag with absor bent 
material, freezer box, etc.) that is labeled, then placed in a freezer ( -20°C) as soon as 
possible. See below for more  guidelines.  
5. Participants should wash hands for at least 20 seconds after collecting the saliva  
sample(s).  
 
Sample Storage and Shippi [INVESTIGATOR_460720]/or shippi[INVESTIGATOR_460721]/regulations. Additionally, please refer to the following link  for CDC guidelines prior to 
shippi[INVESTIGATOR_128876]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/lab/biosafety -faqs.html  
 
Sample storage:  
 
1. Once collected, samples should be stored  in a freezer between -20°C (home freezer) 
or -80°C (ultra -cold lab grade freezer) when  possible  
2. Samples should be placed inside sample storage boxes (or biohazard Ziploc bags + 
absorbent material for home  collections)  
3. The sample  storage  box should  be placed inside  a large  biohazard  Ziploc  bag (or 
Ziploc  bag with a biohazard sticker on  it) 
4. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_460722]  (paper  towel,  etc.) should  be placed  inside  the Ziploc  bag to 
absorb any potential  spi[INVESTIGATOR_460723]/Shippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]:  
 

 
39 1. Samples in bags or boxes  should be placed inside cooler or in a bioshipper on dry  ice. 
2. Bioshipper should be labeled with the  following:  
a. Hazard labeled with UN Identification Number already on label – UN [ADDRESS_589058] Labeled with UN Identification N umber - UN 1845  
d. Dry Ice along with the net weight (kg) of the dry  ice 
e. Shipper’s name [CONTACT_62687]  
f. Receiver’s name [CONTACT_62687]  
g. Name [CONTACT_244052] a responsible  person.  
 
Receiving samples:  
 
1. Lab personnel receiving samples should wear appropriate PPE befo re handling  
samples.  
2. Ensure samples are labelled, are frozen, and tubes are in good condition (no cracks or  
leaks).  
3. Sample collection tubes should be disinfected once received by [CONTACT_38768]. Disinfectants 
are listed on  the CDC  website  (https://www.epa.gov/pesticide -registration/list -n-
disinfectants -use-against - sars-cov-2). 
4. Boxes with samples can be marked with date received, and a label noting if the samples 
were collected during the COVID -[ADDRESS_589059] as an indicator to use extra 
safety precautions  while  handling  those  samples  in the future. Samples  should  be stored  
in -80°C  as soon as  possible.  
5. Sample processing should be performed in a biological safety  cabinet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 APPENDIX VII: RECap for Screener (Section 1) and Baseline, 
Immediate -follow -up, and 6 -months  (Section 2)  
 
1 MINDFULNESS -BASED INTERVENTION FOR 
TRAUMA -EXPOSED, HOMELESS WOMEN  
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
K01 MD013910 -01 
National Institute of Health (Institute of Minority Health and Health Disparities)  
 
 Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_460692], PhD  
Updated: July 2022  
  
 
2 Table  of Contents  
SECTION 1A. RESEARCH STUDY OVERVIEW  4 
Subsection 1A.1 - Overview & Introduction  [ADDRESS_589060] (2/21)  6 
Subsection 1A.5 - Phase II Timeline  1 
6 - Basic Definitions  1 
SECTION 1B. INTRODUCTION TO PTSD AND MBSR  2 
Subsection 1B.1 - PTSD Basics  2 
Subsection 1B.2 - MBSR Basics  4 
SECTION 2. INTERVENTION DELIVERY  6 
Subsection 2.1 - Phase II Overview  6 
Subsection 2.2 - Phase II Scope of Work & Participant Flow Diagram  7 
Subsection 2.3 - Phase II Recruitment & Treatment Overview  9 
Subsection 2.4 - Phase II Recruitment & Screening  9 
Subsection 2.5 - Phase II Eligibility Criteria  10 
Subsection 2.6 - Phase II Laboratory Tests/Sample Collection  11 
Subsection 2.7 - Phase II Intervention Program Description  11 
Subsection 2.8 - Phase II Pre -intervention Assessments  12 
Subsection 2.9 - Phase II Brief Stress Task (Trauma Imagery Task)  [ADDRESS_589061]-Assessment  17 
Subsection 2.15 - Phase II Team Management of Biospecimen Collection Refusal  17 
Subsection 2.16 - Phase II Dea ling with Intervention Program Attrition  17 
Subsection 2.17 - Phase II Follow -Up Focus Groups  18 
Subsection 2.18 - Phase II Comp ensation  18 
Subsection 2.19 - Program Fidelity  18 
Subsection 2.20 - Research Staff Competencies and Mock Sessions  18 
Subsection 2.21 - Data Entry, Management & Confidentiality  19 
 
3 Subsection 2.22 – Using REDCap  [ADDRESS_589062] Data Collection  21 
Subsection 2.25 - End of Study  21 
SECTION 4. RECRUITMENT  22 
Subsection 4.1 - Phase II Flyer  22 
Subsection 4.2 - Phase II MBSR – Script for Introduction at Recruitment Site: For Non -
Research Staff Member  23 
SECTION 5. SCREENING, INFORMED CONSENT, AND ENROLLMENT  24 
Subsection 5.1 Screening Protocol  24 
Instructions:  24 
Subsection 5.2 Informed Consent  24 
Subsection 5.3 Baseline Protocol  24 
APPENDIX I: What to bring to site  25 
APPENDIX II: Trauma Imagery Script (Brief Stress Task)  26 
APPENDIX III: Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  [ADDRESS_589063] (DSMB)  31 
Training in Red Flag Procedures  31 
RED FLAG – SUICIDE  31 
Harm to others  33 
APPENDIX IV: Citations for Study Measures  35 
APPENDIX VII: RECap for Screener (Section 1) and Baseline, Immediate -follow -up, and 6 -
months (Section 2)  40 
 
 
4 SECTION 1A. RESEARCH STUDY OVERVIEW  
Subsection 1A.1 - Overview & Introduction  
This study aims to determine the effectiveness  of a mind fulness -based intervention  (MBI) on the 
reduction of posttraumatic stress disorder (P TSD) symptoms  (primary outcome)  and depression 
substance use disorder (SUD), inflammation, and cortisol reactivity (secondary outcomes) in 
homeles s women with PTSD. B iolog ical markers (i.e., cortisol reactivity, C -reactive protein [CRP]) 
of the stress response will be evaluated as correlate s of MBI treatment -response will help clarify 
mixed findings regarding dysregulation  of the H PA-axis as a function of amount, type, and timing 
of trauma exposure. It will advance theory regarding the use of MBIs for PTSD  while exploring 
biological markers that might maintain PTSD symptoms over time. The project has the potential 
to bolster the capacity of service providers  to offer feasibl e and acceptable MBI intervention s to 
homeless women and ot her vulnerable populations. If the proposed aims are achieved, they  may 
provide several valuable insights. T hey will  examine the efficacy of MBI to address PTSD in 
homeless women (inform & improve services, interventions, treatmen ts); improve on 
methodological limitations of prior research on MBIs for PTSD  (including  small sample sizes, lack 
of attention control  group, incomplete trauma history); and explore biological markers that 
correlate with PT SD-symptom maintenance or reduction post -MBI (expand concepts). 
Importantly, the MBI that will be used in the intervention was the product of a rigorous preliminary 
mixed -methods inquiry that including a Community Advisory Board (consisting of site staff, 
clinicians, and homeless women) and focus groups with women from the community (i.e., 
homeless women currently residing at a residential drug treatment facility). The results of these 
formative activities resulted in the modification of an evidenced -based MBI – Mindfulness -based 
Stress Reduction (MBSR) for cultural sensitive and appropriateness, increasing acceptability and 
feasibility. Importantly, findings from this proposal may provide a low -cost method to improve 
services for homeless women a s they  begin to answer key theoretical questions regarding the 
relationship between biological markers of stress re gulation and reactivity, the inflammatory 
response, PTSD  and related comorbidities (SUD, depression), and MBIs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 Subsection 1A.2 - Overa ll Structure of Study Team   
 
 
 

 
6 Subsection 1A.3 - Research Team and Responsibilities  
Principal Investigator (PI) : Dana Rose Garfin, PhD.  
Makes  executive decisions regarding the implementation of the study, data entry and data 
analysis approaches, and inter pretation of study findings. She  will train the research staff and 
assistants to perform content. [CONTACT_460766] will develop all questionnaires and oversee the design 
and implementation of the MBI and the health promotion attention control.  
 
K01 Mentor : Adeline M. Nyamathi, ANP, PhD, FAAN  
[CONTACT_460767] will advise [CONTACT_460766] on conducting mix -methods research including qualitative 
focus groups and clinical trials with vulnerable populations.  
 
K01 Mentor : Douglas Granger, PhD, Chancellors Professor of Psycholo gy and Social Behavior 
and Director of the Institute for Interdisciplinary Salivary Bioscience Research (IISBR  
[CONTACT_460768] will advise on all aspects of the project related to saliva collection and analysis and 
the theoretical and statistical integration o f salivary measures into psychosocial research.  
 
Secondary K01 co -mentors : Drs. Cameron  Neece, E. Alison Holman, & Sanghyuk Shin 
provide guidance on K01, but do not interact with any human subjects participants, will not 
engage with the data, and thus are  not included on the IRB forms.  
 
Lab Manager and Lab Coordinator : First line contact [CONTACT_460724], responsible for RA scheduling, 
delegates lab responsibilities to other RAs, drafts lab meeting agenda, keeps track of 
conference submission deadlines, ensures st udy supplies are available, oversees budget 
expense tracking and reimbursements.  
 
Biosalivary coordinator : Ensures that cortisol collection is done according to all protocols, 
ensures that collection tubes are labeled ISBBR.  
 
REDCap coordinator :  Ensures  all updated to REDCap are entered accurately. Tracks 
participant payments for cash advances and payment reconciliation.  
Subsection 1A.[ADDRESS_589064]  (2/21)  
Name  [CONTACT_460762], PhD  PI [CONTACT_14574] (415)40 7-9498   dgarfin @ucla.edu  
 
Adey Nyamathi  K01 Mentor  UCI   [EMAIL_8826]  
Doug Granger  K01 Mentor  UCI   [EMAIL_8827]  
Michelle  Zernick  Lab Manager  UCI  [EMAIL_8828]  
 
1 Subsection 1A.5 - Phase II Timeline  
YEAR 1  (2020)  
 19-May 19-Jun 19-Jul 19-Aug 19-Sep 19-Oct 19-Nov 19-Dec 20-Jan 20-Oct 20-Nov 21-Dec 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  SITE START UP & VISIT  
  Community Advisory 
Board  
  Focus Groups  Finalize Intervention & 
Qualitative Analysis  Recruit 
Cohort1  HP Cohort1  
Space/time 
needed  
   1 meeting per wee k 
(1-2 hours)  Four meetings total, 
each 2 hours  1 weekly meeting (1 -2 
hours) for 4 weeks  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 
1 X per week at each 
site for 1 -2 hours 
(same time each 
week)  
YEAR 2  (2021)  
 21-Jan 21-Feb 21-Mar 21-Apr 21-May 21-June  21-July 21-Aug 21-Sept  21-Oct 21-Nov 21-Ded 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  Recruit 
Cohort 2  MBI & HP C2   Recruit 
Cohort 3  MBI & HP Cohort 3   Recruit 
Cohort 4  MBI & BP Cohort 4   
Space/time 
needed  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for interv ention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)   
Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same time 
each week)   Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1  
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)   
Follow -up 
   Cohort 
1 follow -
up    Cohort 2 
follow -up 
   Cohort 3 
follow -up 
YEAR 3  (2022)  
 22-Jan 22-Feb 22-Mar 22-Apr 22-May 22-June  22-July 22-Aug 22-Sept  22-Oct 22-Nov 22-Dec 
23 Jan -
Feb 
PRIMARY 
ACTIVITIES  Recruit 
Cohort 5  MBI & HP Cohort 5    Recruit 
Cohort 6-7 MBI Cohort s 6-7     
Space/time 
needed  Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)    Screening 
space 1 -2 
days/week 
per site  Room for intervention 1 
X per week at each site 
for 1-2 hours (same 
time each week)      
Follow -up    Cohort 
4 follow 
up   Cohort 5 
follow up     Cohorts 6 -7 follow 
ups 
 
1 6 - Basic Definitions  
Mindfulness:  The process of focusing one’s attention on the present moment (including thoughts, 
feelings, and sensations) without judgement  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990; Lang, 2017) .  
 
Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) : MBSR is an 8-week, [ADDRESS_589065] -traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) : PTSD is a psychological pathology characterized by 
[INVESTIGATOR_1312]-experiencing, avoidance, negative thoughts or cognitions, hyperarousal after experiencing a 
traumatic event.  
 
Trauma : According to the DSM -5, must involve actual or thre atened death, serious injury, or 
sexual violence.   
 
Arm:  The different groups of the intervention. In this study, Arm 1 is the health promotion 
attention control and Arm 2 is the MBSR. Participants at a given site are a ssigned to one Arm or 
the other, by [CONTACT_9084]).  
 
Cohort : The group of people that are doing the interventions at the same time.  
 
Cortisol: The body’s main stress hormone, triggered by [CONTACT_234127]. Cortisol is a 
glucocorticoid and is  released in the body about 20 minutes after a stresso r. The immediate 
stress response hormones (adrenaline and epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]) are released within seconds or 
minutes; if the brain continues to perceive something as stressful, then cortisol is released.  
 
C-Reactive Protein (CRP) : This is a protein made in the l iver. CRP tends to increase when 
there is inflammation occurring in the body , (Lindqvist et al., 2014, 2017)  induced by [CONTACT_460725]  (Eklund, 2009) . These heightened inflammatory responses can lead to health 
impairments including atherosclerosis  (Wong et al., 2012)  and cardiovascular disea se (Coughlin, 2011)  
compounding health disparities in disadvantaged populations; CRP, in particular, has been linked with 
obesity  (Visser et al., 2011)  metabolic syndrome  (Ridker et al., 2003)  and CVD. (Ridker et al., 1998)   
Thus CRP can be used as marker for general inflammation  and risk for inflammatory -related 
problems.  
 
Other acronyms used in this protocol:  
 
IISBR  – Institute for Interdisciplinary Salivary Bioscience Research - https://iisbr.uci.edu/  
- IISBR is a shared resource and scientific hub; researchers can gain practical 
experience/knowledge in salivary bioscience through the training programs (e.g., Spit 
 
2 Camp). IISBR also p rovides the storage and analyses of the salivary samples collected in 
this study.  
SECTION 1B. INTRODUCTION TO PTSD AND MBSR  
Subsection 1B.[ADDRESS_589066] exposure to experiencing, witnessing, or learning  of an 
event that involves actual or threatened death or serious injury or harm to self of others 
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013) . For a diagnosis of PTSD, symptoms must be present 
for at least one month prior to diagnosis and must include at least one re -experiencing 
symptom, one avoidance symptom, two arousal and reactivity symptoms and two cognition and 
mood symptoms. Re -experiencing symptoms can include flashbacks, nightmares, and invasive 
thoughts. Avoidance symptoms are related to an individual actively avoiding locations, thoughts, 
events, or objects that are reminiscent of the trauma. Arousal and reactivity symptoms inc lude 
feeling easily frightened, tense, increased anger, and having issues sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Cognitive and 
mood symptoms include but are not limited to having trouble remembering key features of the 
trauma, distorted feelings, and loss of interest in previously enj oyable activities. PTSD must be 
diagnosed by a mental health professional, but a variety of measures have been validated for 
use as screens or by [CONTACT_105] -clinical for research purposes. In our study, we use the Posttraumatic 
Stress Disor der Checklist, Civilian  (PCL - C) (Bovin et al., 2016; Wortmann et al., 2016) .   
 
DSM -5 Criteria for PTSD  
The following text summarizes the diagnostic criteria  for PTSD and was obtained from the 
ptsd.va.gov website.  
 
Criterion A (one required):  The person was exposed to: death, threatened death, actual or 
threatened serious injury, or actual or threa tened sexual violence, in the following way(s):  
• Direct exposure  
• Witnessing the trauma  
• Learning that a relative or close friend was exposed to a trauma  
• Indirect exposure to aversive details of the trauma, usually in the course of professional 
duties (e.g., first responders, medics)  
 
Criterion B (one required):  The traumatic event is persistently re -experienced, in the following 
way(s):  
• Unwanted upsetting memories  
• Nightmares  
• Flashbacks  
• Emotional distress after exposure to traumatic reminders  
• Physical reactivi ty after exposure to traumatic reminders  
 
 
3 Criterion C (one required):  Avoidance of trauma -related stimuli after the trauma, in the 
following way(s):  
• Trauma -related thoughts or feelings  
• Trauma -related reminders  
 
Criterion D (two required):  Negative thoughts  or feelings that began or worsened after the 
trauma, in the following way(s):  
• Inability to recall key features of the trauma  
• Overly negative thoughts and assumptions about oneself or the world  
• Exaggerated blame of self or others for causing the trauma  
• Negative affect  
• Decreased interest in activities  
• Feeling isolated  
• Difficulty experiencing positive affect  
 
Criterion E (two required):  Trauma -related arousal and reactivity that began or worsened after 
the trauma, in the following way(s):  
• Irritability or aggr ession  
• Risky or destructive behavior  
• Hypervigilance  
• Heightened startle reaction  
• Difficulty concentrating  
• Difficulty sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_460693] F (required):  Symptoms last for more than 1 month.  
 
Criterion G (required):  Symptoms create distress or functional impai rment (e.g., social, 
occupational).  
 
Criterion H (required):  Symptoms are not due to medication, substance use, or other illness.  
 
Two specifications : 
1. Dissociative Specification . In addition to meeting criteria for diagnosis, an individual 
experiences high levels of either of the following in reaction to trauma -related stimuli:  
• Depersonalization. Experience of being an outside obs erver of or detached from 
oneself (e.g., feeling as if "this is not happening to me" or one were in a dream).  
• Derealization. Experience of unreality, distance, or distortion (e.g., "things are not 
real").  
2. Delayed Specification.  Full diagnostic criteria are  not met until at least six months after 
the trauma(s), although onset of symptoms may occur immediately . 
 
 
 
 
 
4 How is PTSD Typi[INVESTIGATOR_460694]?  
CBT, cognitive processing therapy, prolonged exposure therapy (PE), eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), stress inoculation training, psychopharmalogical 
treatments are all common treatments for PTSD. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) often 
occurs once a week and works with the client to reframe thoughts surrounding the event (i.e. 
feelings of guilt) . Similarly, in cognitive processing therapy the client recounts the event and 
related thoughts to a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_460695]. PE takes place in eight to fifteen ninety minute sessions in  which the 
client is taught breathing techniques to combat anxiety before making a list of avoidances and 
learning to face them. EMDR asks the client to watch or listen to something, such as a light 
flashing or sound, while concentrating on the traumatic e vent so that over time, the client can 
think about something positive while remember the trauma. Stress inoculation training focuses 
on how the client responds to the stress of the trauma and works to teach them methods to 
cope such as breathing techniques  and thought stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Medications frequently prescribed to 
individuals with PTSD are SSRIs and SNRIs such as Prozac and Zoloft. We are testing whether 
MBSR is an effective complementary treatment for PTSD. Complementary means that it will be 
used in addit ion to any other interventions used in standard treatment of PTSD.  
 
Subsection 1B.[ADDRESS_589067] to teach mindfulness, or the process of focusing one’s attention on the present 
moment without judgement  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990 ). It has  have shown promise for reducing 
symptoms of PTSD  (Khusid & Vythilingam, 2016; Polusny et al., 2015)  and associated 
biological markers of the stress response  (Black & Slavich, 2017; Bower et al., 2017)  by 
[CONTACT_460726] 
(Lang et al., 2012) . MBSR is relatively low cost and has  demonstrated acceptability and 
feasibility in trauma -exposed,  low-SES, high -minority samples  (Dutton et al., 2014) . An RCT of 
MBSR for PTSD in a sample of veterans demonstrated improved PTS D symptoms at immediate 
follow -up with clinic ally significant improvement sustained  2-months later (Polusny et al., 2015) . 
Congruent findings were indicated in veterans using a one -armed -repeated -measures design 
(Kearney et al., 2012) . MBIs have also been linked with statistically significant reductions in 
markers of inflammation  (Bower et al., 2017; Rosenkranz et al., 2013) . that are associated with 
PTSD, including CRP  (Creswell & Irwin, 2012; Ma larkey et al., 2013) . In relation to stress 
reactivity, in repeated measures analyses, an MBI significantly reduced cortisol reactivity to a 
stress task  (Rosenkranz et al., 2013) . Participation in an MBI compared to a treatment -as-usual 
condition in veterans with PTSD was associated with reduced cortisol, suggesting a brief MBI 
might have b eneficial responses on stress physiology  (Bergen -Cico et al., 2014) . Data  suggests 
that biological dysregulation may precede the development of – and at a minimum m utually 
maintain – PTSD symptoms  (van Zuiden et al., 2013) . This me ans that the physiological 
response may actually occur prior to the psychological symptoms, but more research is needed.  
Moreover, participation in MBIs have been associated with effective relapse prevention in those 
with SUD  (Bowen et al., 2006)  and lower depression in a sample of economically disadvantaged 
women  (Burnett -Zeigler et al., 2016) . As such, MBIs, which concurrently target regulation of the 
physiological stress responses, emotional cognitive symptoms of  PTSD, and related 
 
[ADDRESS_589068]. Jon Kabat -Zinn at the University of 
[LOCATION_005] Medical Center  (Kabat -Zinn, 1990) . MBSR uses many practices that have been 
around for thousands of years, but manualized these practices into an [ADDRESS_589069] to other psychiatric and physical healthcare, not as a supplement.  
 
The general flow of the eight -week  program is as follows:  
 
Week 1: Introductory Material. This includes an overview of the course, building trust within the 
group, introduction to mindful eating, some standing yoga stretches, mindful breathing and body 
scan meditation (Homework: Body Scan recording using MP3 player; ea ting one meal mindfully; 
optional informal meditation practice.)  
 
Week 2: Understanding Perceptions. This session focuses on self -responsibility and short and 
long-term changes for health enhancing behaviors; how you see things determines how you 
react or  respond. (Homework: Body Scan recording using MP3; fill out Pleasant Events 
Calendar; select one activity to bring full awareness to).  
 
Week 3: Hatha Yoga, Sitting Meditation, Walking Meditation. The theme is the pleasure and 
power of being present; this  week teaches how to investigate the mind and body through yoga 
and meditation. (Homework: Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; fill out Unpleasant Events Calendar; sitting meditation).  
 
Week 4: Concentration and Awareness. This theme relates to how conditioning and perception 
influence one’s experience and new ways to relate to stress. (Homework: Alternate Body Scan 
recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 player; be aware of being stuck, sitting meditation).  
 
Week 5: Unheal thy Patterns and Getting Unstuck. This week examines conditioned patterns 
and the passive ways that people cope (e.g., numbing, denial, passive -aggressiveness, 
suppression of feelings, substance dependency). (Homework: Fill out Difficult Communications 
Calendar; Sitting Meditation and Standing Yoga Sequence).  
 
Week 6: Transformational Copi[INVESTIGATOR_254560]. This for this week include how to deal with 
stressful communication and knowing and expressing your feelings. (Homework: Alternate 
Sitting Meditation recor ding with Body Scan and/or Standing or Lying down Yoga recording).  
 
Week 7: Retreat. This will be a silent class, with sitting and walking practice. Guided meditations 
will include loving -kindness meditation.  
 
 
6 Week 8: Maintaining Discipline and Flexibilit y. This class focus on how to more fully integrate 
mindfulness into daily life. Instructors and participants discuss lifestyle choices and limiting 
patterns. (Homework: no recordings; try to practice formal sitting meditation; recordings can be 
used if nec essary.)  
 
Week 9: Course Review. In this session, students will reflect on the course, the instructor 
provides additional resources, participants discuss their experiences with the group.  
    
Common Uses:  
MBSR is  used as a complementary treatment for  anxiety, panic, depression, eating disorders, 
pain, sleep issues , and a growing number of additional maladies. MBSR is also used increase 
productivity, performance, emotion regulation, and general wellbeing.  
 
  
SECTION 2. INTERVENTION DELIVERY  
Subsection 2.1  - Phase II Overview  
In Phase II, we will assess the potential benefit of MBSR to reduce PTSD (primary outcomes) 
and secondary outcomes (e.g., depression, SUD, CRP, cortisol reactivity), among 130 eligible 
homeless women who exhibit likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD living at one of two 
residential drug treatment facilities. MBSR will be compared to an attention -control group 
(Health Promotion Wellness Classes ; HP). There originally intended to be  five cohorts of 
women, each with 12 -15 women (total of 2 4-30 women per cohort). However, due to COVID -[ADDRESS_589070] been made in terms of the class size and randomization procedure. At each 
cohort, sites will be randomized to receive either the MBSR or the HP. Although sites will 
alternate between MBSR an d HP by [CONTACT_9084], each participant will receive either the MBSR or the 
HP. Randomization will occur using RedCAP. The women participate in either MBSR or HP for 
9 weeks. Psychosocial data will be collected at baseline, immediately following final interventio n 
session, and at 6 -month follow -up via tablet questionnaires. After psychosocial data collection, a 
stress task (Trauma Imagery Task) will be conducted at each time point, with saliva collected 
both before and after the task to assay cortisol and CRP. Thi s proposal will improve on the 
methodological rigor of prior research on MBIs for PTSD in disadvantaged populations by [CONTACT_2329]: 
randomization procedures that account for cross -contamination; blind evaluators; longitudinal 
follow -up; an attention control grou p equal to the MBI intervention in both contact [CONTACT_460727]; increased demographic diversity; comprehensive lifetime trauma assessment; and 
inclusion of objective indices of stress responses to accurately evaluate the effectiveness of 
MBIs in treating  trauma -related symptoms.  
 
 
Confidentiality and Ethical Issues  
 
All program staff must follow confidentiality and ethical procedures throughout this program to 
ensure that everybody is treated with respect and dignity.  
 
1. Communication with study participa nts must remain confidential. To maintain confidentiality 
for participants, any personal information provided, such as participants' name, age, etc., will 
 
[ADDRESS_589071] access. An exception to this rule is the clinic provide r and site staff 
who work directly with the women onsite.  
 
Program Team  
 
The Lab Manager a nd Lab Coordinator will help the PI ([CONTACT_460766]) in organizing all aspects of 
the study. These individuals will be current or former students from the Department of 
Psychological Science ’s Postbaccalaureate Program. They will be responsible for tracking 
recruitment, scheduling research assistants , and ensuring that the site is well -stocked with 
necessary supplies. Weekly,  the Lab Manager and Lab Coordinator will meet with [CONTACT_460766] to 
review all aspects of the study , troubleshoot any problems, and create s chedule for the other 
Research Assistants (RAs). The RAs will be highly trained Postbaccalaureate, graduate, or 
undergraduate students from the University of [LOCATION_004], Irvine.  
 
 
Safety of Program Staff  
 
While we believe that conducting this study is hig hly important for public health, it is critical that 
the program staff prioritize their own safety first.  If you feel that you are in danger (physically, 
emotionally, psychologically) in any way, end the study activities and inform the research 
coordinato r or the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_460696].  This is particularly important during 
COVID -19. Please report any lapses in COVID -[ADDRESS_589072] been exposed, it is imperative that you do 
not come to site . The study leadership ([CONTACT_460766] and the Lab Manager / Lab Coordinator)  
 
Subsection 2.2 - Phase II Scope of Work & Participant Flow Diagram  
1. General Recruitment  
a. We will recruit [ADDRESS_589073]. Garfin or 
the Lab Manager/Lab Coordinator available to answer any questions.  
i. A key inclusion criteria is subthreshold current PTSD. Thus, the women will 
be given a PTSD screener for the trauma that is bothering them most right 
now. There may be multiple traumas the women have experienced – they 
should  be prompted to pi[INVESTIGATOR_460697].  
c. Tablets will be programmed by [CONTACT_460728], electronically scored. All participants who  complete 
the screener will receive $3.  
i. Note: those who complete the screener must complete the consent to screen, 
but are not assigned a participant ID at this time as they have not completed 
the Informed Consent . As such it is imperative that accurate in formation be 
obtained with respect to the individual ’s name [CONTACT_460763].  
 
 
8 2. Group Assignment and Intervention Procedure  (may chance due to evolving 
circumstances due to COVID -19) 
a. Prior to recruitment, the Residen tial Treatment Sites (RTS; Pomona and Escondido) 
will be randomized to receive the MBI  or serve as the attention -control ( HP); 
recruitment and research procedures (MB I or attention -control) will occur at both sites 
simultaneously. Women will live at sites prior to recruitment.  
b. Informed consent – there are TWO versions of the Informed Consent documents. 
One is for the MBSR course; the other is for the HP course. Women will complete 
ONE of the Informed Consent forms, depending on which group they are in. It i s 
imperative that the correct form is filled out and uploaded onto REDCap.  
c. Baseline questionnaire administered:  
i. After informed consent, participants will complete a baseline questionnaire . In 
addition to the traumas indicated in the PCL -5, participants w ill report lifetime  
history of trauma (including whether events occurred in adulthood, childhood, 
or both).  
ii. Questionnaire data will be collected via tablet and transferred to RedCap.  
iii. Participants will provide a urine sample for a drug test to validate self -report. 
Then participants will complete the brief stress (Trauma task providing saliva 
samples both before and after the task.  
d. Locator guide: this is a critical part of maintaining contact [CONTACT_460729]. 
However, they may not be inclined to provid e all the information on the first or second 
meeting. PLEASE TAKE THE PI[INVESTIGATOR_460698].  The rest of the locator guide can be filled out over the course 
of the study. Given issues with COVID -19, we will start completing the Locator Guide 
after session 2 or 3. Please see PI [INVESTIGATOR_460699] .  
e. Intervention  
i. Participants will begin MBSR/HP activities within one month of baseline 
assessment, dependent on the time of their baseline assessment within 
recruitment schedule  
ii. Both groups (MBSR and HP) will consist of nine sessions, each 
approximately 2 hours in length.  
b. Immediate follow -up  
i. After the 9th session, participants will complete a questionnaire via tablet that 
will assess PTSD (primary outcome), se condary outcomes (e.g., depression, 
substance use), and traumatic events that occurred since first assessment, 
as well as key covariates (e.g., fidelity to intervention)  and additional 
outcomes (e.g., mindfulness, emotion regulation).  
ii.  Women will provide urine for drug test and repeat the Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task, providing saliva samples before and after the task .  
c. 6-month follow -up 
i. Primary and secondary outcomes and covariates (e.g., fidelity to intervention) 
will be reassessed via tablet  
ii. Women will pr ovide urine for a drug test and repeat the Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task , providing saliva samples before and after  the stress task.  
 
3.  Phase II Reimbursement  
d. Women will receive $15 for the baseline assessment, $10 per MBSR /HP session, $[ADDRESS_589074] -intervention assessment, and $[ADDRESS_589075] sign on the iPad (via REDCap) that they 
have received the payment. This must also be initialed , signed, and dated by 
[CONTACT_460730] .  
 
 
Subsection 2.3 - Phase II Recruitment & Treatment Overview  
 
 
Subsection 2.4 - Phase II Recruitment & Screening  
The study was designed so that  recruitment at Pomona w ould be paced to match that at the 
Escondido site so that all procedures across sites h appen in tandem, thus avoiding history 
effects; recruitment data will be evaluated weekly to inform pacing. Site staff at Prototypes will 
assist with participant recruitment, informing Prototypes residents of the opportunity during 
formal announcements dur ing programing. Recruitment flyers will also be posted around the 
RTS. RAs will help recruit women and conduct the initial screening in a private room after 
obtaining informed consent; progress will be monitored closely by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Garfin the Lab 
Management tea m. Modifications will be made to allow for the study to continue during the 
COVID -[ADDRESS_589076] approximately 26 - 28 women in 
each group/site (n=13 -14 MBSR; n=13 -14 attention control); recruitment proceeds for one 
month, the intervention runs for approximately 2 months (9 weeks), then there is one month 
break. However, this schedule may vary due to COVID -[ADDRESS_589077]. Garfin will explain the study during an initial meeting  with potential participants and answer 
any questions. Then women will be scr eened for eligibility. Prior to obtaining any data, the 
women will provide a “consent to screen”. This is because we need to obtain data from the 
women to determine if they are eligible, but they are not officially enrolled as human subjects. 
By [CONTACT_460731] “consent to screen”, we are obtaining verbal consent/permission to ask them 
questions. Their data will not be used by [CONTACT_460732].  
 
The RA will read the consent to screen script on REDCap. Potential participants are fr ee to stop 
at any time – remind them that all procedures are completely voluntary. [CONTACT_460766] and/or 
someone from the Lab Management team will always be onsite to help answer questions .  

 
[ADDRESS_589078] for DSM -5 (PCL -5) for  the worst event in their life . We will assess PTSD to 
their most recent event (in the past year) during the baseline and follow -up assessments . The 
standard PCL -5 initially starts with the identification of the presence of exposure to a DSM -5 
traumatic ev ent and then assesses whether it involved actual or threatened death, serious injury 
or sexual violence. The RA may need to prompt the potential participant with examples to keep 
them on track and to ensure that the participant is responding to an actual D SM-5 traumatic 
event. The next 20 items on the PCL -5 assess all four B -E PTSD criterion (re -experiencing, 
avoidance, negative thoughts or cognitions, hyperarousal), assessed on a Likert -type scale 0 
“not at all”, 1 “a little bit”, 2 “moderately”, 3 “quite a bit”, 4 “extremely”. Subthreshold PTSD will 
be defined as endorsing “moderately” or more to at least 2 B -E criteria; probable -PTSD will be 
measured by [CONTACT_460733] A -G for PTSD.  
 
 
Data collection method : All data will be collected via encrypted tabl ets will be programmed by 
[CONTACT_460734], 
electronically scored. Data is not stored on the tablets. It is automatically transferred to the All 
participants who complete the screener will  receive $3.  
 
Subsection 2.5 - Phase II Eligibility Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria : 
1) Homeless women (N=134 ; 67 in each group ) 
a. Women over [ADDRESS_589079] 6 months: a homeless person is defined as anyone who 
spent the  previous night in a public or private shelter, or on the street.  
d. Lifetime exposure to trauma as defined by [CONTACT_460735], 5th Edition (DSM -5). 
e. Likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD, as measured by [CONTACT_77514] -5. 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 
The following will not be eligible for participating:  
1) Persons who are:  
a. Not able to speak English  
b. Judged to be cognitively impaired , as indicated by [INVESTIGATOR_32005] > 10 on the Short -
Blessed Screener  
 
 
11 Subsection 2.6 - Phase II Laboratory Tests/S ample Collection  
Saliva Sampling and Results  
 
Saliva Collection  
- Pre-task, saliva will be collected. All saliva collection w ill occur between 10am -2pm to 
minimize diurnal fluctuation effects . (Study procedures may start before 10, but first 
saliva sample mu st be collected after 10:00am; the second sample must be collected 
before 2pm – participants must be scheduled according to these specifications).  
- Two whole saliva samples will be collected using an unstimulated passive drool 
technique.  
- Women will be ins tructed to avoid eating, brushing teeth,  or smoking for one hour prior 
to the assessment and will be asked to wait to begin the task if they have.  
- Participants will rinse their mouths thoroughly with water for 10 minutes before samples 
are collected. Parti cipants will then passively drool into a collection vial for three minutes 
or until 0.80 milliliters of fluid is collected.  
- Saliva samples will be immediately placed in the on -site freezer (or ice cooler) and be 
taken to IISBR within 36 hours to be frozen  at -80°C until assayed.  
- All samples will be assayed for salivary cortisol and CRP using a highly sensitive 
enzyme immunoassay (Salimetrics, IISBR).  
- Twenty minutes after task completion , saliva samples will be collected again in an 
identical manner to tha t described above.  
- Participants will then be offered snacks and a drink and be debriefed to ensure they are 
not experiencing severe task -related psychological distress. In the unlikely event of 
participant distress, an immediate referral will be made to o n-site professional staff.  
 
Subsection 2.7 - Phase II Intervention Program Description  
General Description:  Among [ADDRESS_589080] of the MBSR intervention program PTSD symptoms  (primary outcomes) , and substance  
abuse, depression, cortisol reactivity, and inflammation  (secondary outcomes) . 
Data Collection Time points: Baseline, 2 months , and 6 months  
Total Duration:  6 months  
The following sections will outline the intervention process:  
● Pre-intervention Assessment s 
● Brief Stress Task  (Trauma Imagery Stress Task)  
● Biospecimen Collection  
● Biospecimen Analysis  
● MBSR Intervention  
● Health Promotion Intervention  
● Post-Assessment  
● Team Management of Biospecimen Collection Refusal  
● Dealing with Program Attrition  
 
[ADDRESS_589081] the response on the tablet. At the end of each measure, the RA will “lock” 
the measure. There will be a prompt if any items have been missed. Please check that there is 
no missing data. The participant may take a break at any time. However, the participant should 
refrain from eating , drinking (except for water ~ 10 minutes prior t o stress task) , or smoking until 
after the second saliva collection to ensure the accuracy of the saliva sample.  
Order of assessments  
1. Drug test (urine)  
2. TCU Drug Screen (self -report)  
3. Self -compassion scale – short form  
4. General self -efficacy sc ale  
5. Mindful Attention Awareness Scale  
6. Difficulties I Emotion Regulation Scale  
7. Satisfaction with Life Scale  
8. Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire  
 9. MOS Social Support  
10. Perceived Stress Scale  
11. Dimensions of Anger R eactions  
12. PROMIS – Anxiety  
13. PROMIS – Depression  
 
*NOTE: For time constraints, the urine test can be administered during the waiting period prior 
to the second cortisol sample.  
 
AT THIS POINT, THE FIRST SALIVARY SAMPLE IS COLLECTED  
 
14. Negative Life Events Inventory  
15. PCL [ADDRESS_589082] life event  (this is the event that bothers them the most, from their entire life)  
16. PCL 5 – Recent (past year)  this is a traumatic event that has happened to them recently (in 
the past year) – it may or may not be the same as #16  
17. Trauma Imagery Stress Task (the Negative Life Events Inventory and the PCL build up to 
this) 
Subsection 2.9 - Phase II Brief Stress Task  (Trauma Imagery Task)  
After completing the PROMIS Depression, the participant will  provide a saliva  sample . They will 
then complete the negative life events inventory and the PCL 5 (for worst event in their life and 
a recent event). The reason that the saliva sample is taken before these measures and not 
directly before the Trauma Imagery Task is becaus e in pi[INVESTIGATOR_460700] 
 
13 become distressed when recounting their traumas during the Negative Life Events Inventory 
and the PCL; thus, the “baseline” for cortisol is now taken PRIOR to these items.  
After completing the PCL for worst event and recent event, the participant will complete a a 
modified script -driven imagery task (Seo et al., 2013) , derived from prior research with women 
with PTSD . Participants will be asked to recount a traumatic event via written response. The RA 
will provide a paper and pen and instruct the participant to recall the event exactly as  it 
happened. The RA can offer prompts to recall sight, smell, and sound. The participant will then 
recount the event to the RA. Script driven imagery tasks have been effectively and safely used 
to assess traumatic -stress responses in individuals with PTSD . However, RAs will be highly 
trained to assess any severe distress that may arise and will immediately notify the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460701]. Responses will be subsequently destroyed.   AFTER THE 
COMPLETION OF THE TRAUMA IMAGERY TASK THE [ADDRESS_589083] -SALIVA SAMPLE 
TIMER STARTS!  When the timer starts, the RA will not interact with the participant. They 
should sit quietly or may read.  
Subsection 2.10 - Phase II Biospecimen Collection  
Urine Collection: Participants will provide a urine sample to  validate self -report drug use. A [ADDRESS_589084] cup will be used in this study. The participant will be instructed to 
urinate in the cup, close the cup, and then bring it back to the RA to read. Gloves will be used at 
all times and the RA  should read the cup without touching it if possible. The participant will then 
be instructed to dispose of their urine in the restroom.  
 
Saliva Collection:  Before and twenty minutes after the brief stress task  (Trauma Imagery 
Stress Task) , women will be asked to provide a salivary sample. Women will be instructed to 
avoid eating, brushing teeth or smoking for one hour prior to the collection of saliva and will be 
asked to wait to begin the task if they have. Participants will passively drool into a collec tion vial 
for three minutes or until 0.[ADDRESS_589085]. Garfin’s research lab for storage. Saliva samples will be transferred t o IISBR within 36 
hours to be frozen at -80°C until assayed. After the second and final collection, participants will 
be offered snacks and a drink and be debriefed using an IRB -approved script  (see below).  
 
Debriefing script:  
Thanks so much for your par ticipation. I know that might have been difficult for you to 
recall this event. I want to thank you and let you know that we think your participation in 
this task will help other women who have experienced adversity. While feeling a little 
distressed might  be expected, we want to make sure you are not experiencing a lot of 
distress. Right now are you are experiencing a lot of distress?  
 
 
14 If yes, ask if they want you to get a site staff from Prototypes/Serenity House  AND 
contact [CONTACT_079], Dr . Dana Rose Garfin  immediately  AND provide [CONTACT_460769]'s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
 
If no, thank them for their time and remind them if anything comes up they can call the 
Principal Investigator, [CONTACT_460770] and/or talk to any of the Prototypes /Serenity 
House site staff. (Provide [CONTACT_460766]'s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
 
Provide water and snacks at this time and pay close attention to any noticeable changes 
in mood until they are released to the care of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staf f. 
Immediately inform [CONTACT_460766] AND Prototypes/Serenity House site staff of any potential 
issues.  
 
Subsection 2.11 - Phase II Biospecimen Analysis  
 
Urine Sample: The [ADDRESS_589086] cup screens for metabolites of the 
following drugs of ab use at the established cut -off levels and is used for qualitative purposes: 
Amphetamines (1000 ng/mL), Cocaine (300 ng/mL), Methamphetamines/ MDMA (500 
ng/mL), Opi[INVESTIGATOR_858] (2000 ng/mL), and THC (50 ng/mL). Urine sample validity checks will be 
provided by [CONTACT_460737]. Participants 
whose urine does not pass validity checks will be counted as positive for drugs.  Results will 
be coded qualitatively (above or below threshold). All positive results will be int erpreted as 
positive, regardless of self -report.  
 
Saliva Sample:  The saliva sample is collected to determine resting cortisol, cortisol reactivity, 
and C -RP (a marker of inflammation). A ll saliva will be assayed in duplicate using standard 
manufacturer's p rotocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of CRP in saliva will be determined 
using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. The standard 
curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The replicates mus t 
have a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference <0.[ADDRESS_589087] MBSR is a n eight -week long mindfulness -based intervention (MBI) with one 1.5 -2.5 
hour session per week (the seventh week has two sessions as one is a mini -retreat). The 
intervention  will be run by a highly experienced instructor with prior experience conducting 
MBS R with individuals exposed to trauma with PTSD.  
 
 
15 During  MBSR, participants are trained in mindfulness meditation and the applicability of 
mindfulness to daily life. During MBSR programing, teachers will lecture about key topi[INVESTIGATOR_460702] s discussions. Participants are given opportunities to ask the 
instructor questions and to share their experiences with each other. Snacks and drinks will be 
provided.  Important  to note,  the intervention in this study is not true MBSR. It has been 
modified  to fit the specific needs of the target population. This includes shorter sessions and 
shorter meditations, and additional flexibility on the part of the trainer. Although many of the 
same tools and procedures in traditional MBSR will be utilized, given t hese critical differences 
the intervention administered in this study is not true MBSR.  
  
Each week in the MBSR program focuses on a different theme and has specific short 
homework assignments that students are asked to complete. The sessions are as follo ws: 
● Week 1 : Introductory Material. This includes an overview of the course, building trust 
within the group, introduction to mindful eating, some standing yoga stretches, mindful 
breathing and body scan meditation  
○ Homework : Body Scan recording using MP3 pl ayer; eating one meal 
mindfully; optional informal meditation practice. Participants will also complete 
a trauma -informed safety plan to ensure that, although MBSR is given in a 
group format, the MBSR trainer is responsive to the unique needs of the 
indivi dual.  
● Week 2 : Understanding Perceptions. This session focuses on self -responsibility and 
short and long -term changes for health enhancing behaviors; how you see things 
determines how you react or respond.  
○ Homework : Body Scan recording using MP3; fill out Pleasant Events 
Calendar; select one activity to bring full awareness to.  
● Week 3 : Hatha Yoga, Sitting Meditation, Walking Meditation. The theme is the 
pleasure and power of being present; this week teaches how to investigate the mind 
and body through yoga  and meditation.  
○ Homework : Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; fill out Unpleasant Events Calendar; sitting meditation.  
● Week 4 : Concentration and Awareness. This theme relates to how conditioning and 
perception influence o ne’s experience and new ways to relate to stress.  
○ Homework : Alternate Body Scan recording with Lying -down Yoga using MP3 
player; be aware of being stuck, sitting meditation.  
● Week 5 : Unhealthy Patterns and Getting Unstuck. This week examines conditioned 
patterns and the passive ways that people cope (e.g., numbing, denial, passive -
aggressiveness, suppression of feelings, substance dependency).  
○ Homework : Fill out Difficult Communications Calendar; Sitting Meditation and 
Standing Yoga Sequence.  
● Week 6 : Transf ormational Copi[INVESTIGATOR_254560]. This week includes how to deal with 
stressful communication and knowing and expressing your feelings.  
 
16 ○ Homework : Alternate Sitting Meditation recording with Body Scan and/or 
Standing or Lying down Yoga recording.  
● Week 7a : Retr eat. This will be a silent class, with sitting and walking practice. Guided 
meditations will include loving -kindness meditation.  
● Week 7b : Maintaining Discipline and Flexibility. This class focuses on how to more 
fully integrate mindfulness into daily life.  Instructors and participants discuss lifestyle 
choices and limiting patterns.  
○ Homework : no recordings; try to practice formal sitting meditation; recordings 
can be used if necessary.  
● Week 8 : Course Review. In this session, students will reflect on the cou rse, the 
instructor will provide additional resources, and participants will discuss their 
experiences with the group.   
Subsection 2.13 - Phase II Health Promotion Intervention  
The Health Promotion program is eight weeks long with one 1.5 -2 hour session pe r week (the 
seventh week has two sessions to ensure the same number of contact [CONTACT_460738] “mini -
retreat” in the MBSR course). The Health Promotion Classes were designed to be analogous to 
the MBSR classes in terms of length and contact [CONTACT_164212]. This is bec ause the effect of being in a 
group and participating in a study could help participants, without the benefit having much – if 
anything – to do with the actual intervention.  
 
The program will be run by a UCI graduate or postbac student with a BA or higher . The SMART 
(Specific Measurable Achievable Relevant Time-based) framework will be used for goal setting. 
In this framework, specific, achievable goals are outlined by [CONTACT_460739]. This helps with information retention and hel ps reinforce concepts and positive behaviors. 
Snacks and drinks will be provided.  
 
Each week in the Health Promotion program focuses on a different theme . The sessions are as 
follows:  
1. Introduction & overview  
2. Envisioning Health through Art  
3. Chronic Disease I – Heart Health  
4. Chronic Disease II – Diabetes  
5. Nutrition and Hydration  
6. Infectious Disease Prevention  
7. Skin Care  
8. Oral Health  
9. Promoting Social Integration & Course Graduation  
 
 
[ADDRESS_589088] -Assessment  
After the ninth session (of either M BSR or Health Promotion), a post -assessment will be 
administered via tablet. Urine will again be collected to validate self -report drug use. 
Participants will repeat the brief stress task (Trauma Imagery Task) using an identical strategy 
and provide saliva  samples before and after. The Lead Researcher or a postbac student 
researcher will be on site to answer any questions or clarify any items. Urine and saliva 
samples will both be stored in a freezer on -site or at Dr. G arin’s research office and then 
transf erred to UCI for analysis within [ADDRESS_589089] the right to refuse the collection of urine or saliva and it is important to 
understand that an individual may want t o refuse due to the following:  
 
Step 1:  Assess reasons why participant does not want to have their sample collected.  
● May experience concern that their friends, acquaintances, or shelter staff will be 
informed of the results of their surveys or urine.  
● Other  possible reasons?  
 
In the event a participant refuses the sample collection, inquire about the following:  
  
Step 2: Respond to their reasons why they do not want to give urine or saliva samples.  
 
We encourage our participants to complete as many of the pr ocedures as they are comfortable 
with. Please offer to have [CONTACT_460766] or Lab Management answer any questions the participant 
may have regarding the measures. However, participation is completely voluntary,  and the 
participant may skip any aspect of the pr ocedure that they chose without penalty and still be in 
the study.   
Subsection 2.16 - Phase II Dealing with Intervention Program Attrition  
Attrition is conservatively estimated at 10% for first follow -up and 20% for 6 month follow -up. 
To account for an es timated 30% of women to be screened with subthreshold or threshold 
PTSD, [ADDRESS_589090] to ensure retention of participants during  the study. The 
Locator Guide is key to maintaining effective follow -up.  
● Completion of the intervention program is defined by [CONTACT_9159] [ADDRESS_589091] appearances.  
○ The minimum amount o f time required for the regimen is [ADDRESS_589092] the women with assistance from the site supervisor or 
by [CONTACT_460740]  (see Appendix ). Research Staff will travel to the participant’s 
location, as they may not be available to return to site due to COVID -19 restrictions  or other 
factors. If participant moved out of state, the follow -ups may be conducted over Zoom or 
phone.   
Subsection 2.18 - Phase II Compensation  
The Phase II compensation is listed below. Each participant will receive a to tal of up to $153 
over the course of the study.  
 
$3 – screener (after completing screener)  
$15 – baseline measures (after completing)  
$10 – per class (at the end of each class; for a total of 9 classes)  
$15 – immediate post -intervention follow -up measures (after the 9th class)  
$30 – 6-month follow -up (after completion)  
 
Participants who complete [ADDRESS_589093] 
Attendanc e (see Appendix).  
Subsection 2.[ADDRESS_589094] complete the Coll aborative Institutional Training Initiative Human Research Curriculum 
(CITI program), with the confirmation of completion of the trainings on file. The following courses 
should be completed by [CONTACT_460741].  
● Human Research  - Social & Behavioral Researchers & Staff  
 
19 ● Good Clinical Practices (GCP) courses  
● Refresher courses are also available on CITI website 
https://about.citiprogram.org/en/homepage/ ) as needed.  
 
Further, all research staff will be highly trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_460703]:  
• Trained in specific protocols for dealing with emotional and mental distress (e.g., 
remaining calm, immediately finding appropriate onsite clinical staff).  
● Trained in observatio nal and communication skills, and in providing psychosocial 
support, particularly as it relates to emotional and information support  
● Trained in the [LOCATION_004] Mandatory Reporting Laws governing reporting of child abuse, 
domestic violence, and elder/depende nt abuse. Protocols governing reports to the 
[LOCATION_004] Department of Family and Child Protective Services, or (in the case of 
domestic violence) local police, will be carefully followed. Study participants will receive 
full disclosure regarding mandatory reporting laws during the informed consent process 
and discussion of confidentiality.  In terms of current or recent abuse experience, 
research staff will refer the participants to the onsite Prototypes clinical staff.  
 
During research study training, Research Staff will be evaluated using the competency grid and 
mock session review. Research Staff will also complete a quiz to be reviewed with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460704].  
Subsection 2.21 - Data Entry, Management & Confidentiality  
In Phase 2, secure and encrypted platforms will be used :  
● REDCap: Interview data will be captured electronically using REDCap (Research 
Electronic Data Capture; http://project -redcap.org/), a secure, web -based application 
designed to support data entry and st orage for research studies. Participants will answer 
surveys via an electronic tablet and the data will be uploaded in real -time. Possible 
errors, including incomplete responses, logic checks, and data range checks will be 
flagged by [CONTACT_460742]. 
Laboratory data will be entered in REDCap electronic forms.  
● [CONTACT_460766] will routinely check to ensure data is accurately entered. The Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board (DSMB) will also meet after the enr ollment of every 30 participants to 
review/  
 
Procedures to safeguard confidentiality  
Confidentiality of data will be protected by [CONTACT_460743]. 
Any forms that link participant with their codes will be stored electroni cally on UCI’s secure 
server and  only senior research staff and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460705]. All self -report data will be 
immediately uploaded onto UCI’s secure server via RedCAP. Saliva samples will use the 
subject code number and will not be labeled with the  participant’s name.  
 
20 ● Participants will be reminded that their interview questions will be provided over a tablet 
that will immediately transfer the data to the UCI secure server and site staff will not see 
their data.  
● We will minimize the risk by [CONTACT_460744] y adhering to confidentiality procedures. All study staff 
will be rigorously trained in methods to promote confidentiality. The staff will also be 
taught to treat participants in a non -judgmental, professional and confidential manner.   
● A Data Safety and M onitoring Board will be put in place for monitoring of the data 
collected.  
● Confidentiality of data will be protected by [CONTACT_460745]. Data including subject identifiable information (eg: locator form etc) will 
be linke d to a code on RED Cap for access in real time to track participants  and only 
research staff will have access. REDCap also allows for participant’s names and IDs to 
be viewed without access to their responses to the other items in the survey. Tracking of 
participants for their follow -ups will be based upon the information the participant reveals 
on their Locator Guide. When contact[CONTACT_460746], we will use their 
preferred method and the research staff will identify themselves per participants’ w ishes.  
● To protect confidentiality and reassure subjects, the research staff will be providing 
explicit explanations in the beginning of the program that they will share no confidential 
information. The trained research staff will administer the questionnai res individually to 
the participants.  
● Subject identifiable data will be destroyed upon completion of the study. All the data will 
be stripped off any identifiable information and only de -identified database will be kept 
for analysis and dissemination.  
Subsection 2.22 – Using REDCap  
● For electronic data entry, log onto RedCap ( https://redcap.med.upenn.edu/ ) with your 
user ID and password.  
● RedCap also incorporates suitable validity checks at the point of data e ntry to prevent 
“out of range,” “missing” or other checkable data entry errors.  
 Subsection 2.23 - Data Security  
● All CRFs and questionnaires must be identified by a code number (Study ID) only and 
patient identifier information will also be linked on REDC ap through this code.  
● The informed consent with the participants’ names and signature [CONTACT_460764] 
a digital copy should be printed out of REDCap and stored in a local hard drive not 
connected to server.  
● All databases are accessible only to key investigators  and senior leadership of the 
project.  
● The electronic data files are stored on the secure, password -protected UCI Health 
Science server.  
 
21 ● This data is available for analyses on the UCI server to authorized users through a web 
VPN application.  
●  Authorized users can export the data into Excel or other statistical software sheets for 
further analyses.  
● The de -identified database will be archived for future analyses and all other identifying 
data will be destroyed at the end of the study as per NIH  policy.  
Subsection 2.[ADDRESS_589095] Data Collection  
● Validity checks on REDCap should be done right after any interview or other data 
collection is completed.  
● Routine statistical validity checks should identify missing or suspect entries at agreed 
defined inte rvals (twice per month or as needed) by [CONTACT_123388], so that correct 
data can be obtained from the research staff, participants or their records if needed.  
● Thorough data cleaning should be performed before any data analysis.  
  
Subsection 2.25 - End of Study  
● De-identified electronic data will be maintained for the period agreed in the study 
protocol (indefinitely).  
● Final cleaned electronic data will be used for all statistical analyses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 SECTION 4. RECRUITMENT  
Subsection 4.1 - Phase II Fly er 
 

 
23 Subsection 4.2 - Phase II MBSR – Script for Introduction at 
Recruitment Site: For Non -Research Staff Member   
Introduction:   Hello, my name [CONTACT_832]__________________________. I’m a staff member from 
Prototypes/Serenity House Residential Treatment Center. I  would like to inform you about a 
research study by [CONTACT_460747] a flyer with you.  This study is conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Dana Rose Garfin of 
the UCI, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing.  
  
Question:         Would you like to receive a flyer?  
❏ Yes, I would like to rece ive more information.  
❏ No, not at this time. [If not interested, thank person for their time]  
  
Directions:      If interested, hand flyer and say: The research study being conducted at 
Prototypes/Serenity House and is a separate activity from the services offered by [CONTACT_460748]. If you 
decide to participate, your decision to participate in the research will not affect your relationship 
with Prototypes/Serenity House.  
  
Directions:      If you are interested, an information session will be held at ________ [DA TE] at 
__________ [TIME] for you to learn more.  
  
Question:        Would you like to attend an information session and be screened to see if you 
are eligible to participate in this study?  
❏ Yes [If yes, refer participant to Project Director]  
❏ No  [If no, tha nk person for their time]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 SECTION 5. SCREENING, INFORMED CONSENT, AND 
ENROLLMENT  
 
Subsection 5.1 Screening  Protocol  
Instructions:  
1. Read participant consent to screen document  (listed in Appendix)   
2. If they agree to consent to screen, you w ill open the Screening Module in REDCap.  
1. Age? (Must be 18 or older)  
2. Able to speak English (infer, don’t ask)  
3. Homeless in the last [ADDRESS_589096] meet (Normal Cognition 0 -4) 
5. Meet likely subthreshold or threshold PTSD as measured by [CONTACT_88806] -5 (see 
Appendix).  
6. Subthreshold PTSD  
i. Must meet Criteria A (exposure to a traumatic event) .  
ii. Must endorse “moderately” or more to at least [ADDRESS_589097]. Garfin and the IRB.   
ii. Download a copy of informed consent (save in downloads). Have them  
sign. Then re -upload and delete from downloads.  
2. START  locator guide.  
i. Make sure you get their FULL LEGAL NAME!  
ii. TAKE PI[INVESTIGATOR_460706] “ADD DOCUMENT” ITEM, DO NOT SAVE 
TO CAMERA AND THEN UPLOAD.  
Subsection 5. [ADDRESS_589098]. They can take it before or after interview (their 
choice). You will hand them a cup. They will return the cup and you will record 
their urine results in REDCap. Use gloves. It is not considered a biohazard  so 
can be thrown in trash (or urine po ured in toilet).  
 
 
25 APPENDIX I: What to bring to site  
 
Screening  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in 1 dollar bills, as participants will be paid $3 per screening  
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clo rox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
Baseline, immediate follow -up, and 6 -month follow -up 
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $10 - and $5 -dollar bills, as participants will be paid $15 each (Note: for 
6-month follow -up please bring $10 doll ar bills as participants will be paid $30.)  
o Light snacks  
o Bottles of water  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Color coded and labeled vials for saliva collection  
o White boxes to store sal iva samples  
o Cooler with ice  
o Drug test kits   
o Paper and pens for stress task (trauma imagery task)  
Weekly – Health Promotion class  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $ 5 or $10 dollar bills, as participants will be paid $1 0 each   
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Teacher manual  
o Extra participant book  
o Materials for each week – please see teacher manual for weekly supply list  
Weekly – MBSR  class  
o Charged iPads  
o Charged iPencils   
o Compensation in $ 5 or 10 bills, as participants will be paid $1 0 each   
o Light snacks  
o PPE for COVID -19, including face masks, face shields, tissues, Clorox wipes, hand 
sanitizer, and gloves.  
o Extra participant book  
o Extra MP3 players  
o Extra yoga mat or two  
 
 
26 APPENDIX II: Trauma Imagery Script (Brief Stress Task)  
 
 
TRAUMA IMAGERY SCRIPT  
 
NOTE TO RA : Make sure the participant has not had anything to eat or drink for one hour  and 
that they had some water to drink at least 10 minutes before starti ng the task.   
RA: Thank you for your participation in this part of the project. We are going to be asking you to 
recall and describe a stressful or traumatic event. We want to remind you that you can stop at any 
time if you are uncomfortable, although your  participation will help us understand more about 
the stress process in women who have experienced adversity. The general overview of this 
procedure is that we are going to take a saliva sample to assess your stress hormones; have you 
participate in a shor t stress task; and then take another saliva sample to assess your stress 
hormones after the task. If this gets to be too intense for you, you can stop at any time. If you 
experience any severe distress, let me know and we will stop the task and immediately  contact 
[CONTACT_460749]/therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. I want to remind you that this is completely voluntary and you can 
stop at any time and can still be in the study. Are you ready to begin? Do you have any 
questions?  
NOTE TO RA:  Participants will then passively dr ool into a collection vial for three minutes or 
until 0.[ADDRESS_589099] collected roughly 1 teaspoon of saliva.  Immediately put 
saliva in cooler ! 
RA: First, I am going to ask you to recall a stressful or traumatic event for a few minutes. Some 
examples are a serious accident, fire, disast er, physical assault, abuse, war, homicide or suicide. 
Then, you will write about it and then read or describe it aloud. I can also take notes for you if 
you prefer to do it that way. You can face whatever direction you want and you can have your 
eyes open  or closed. However, I ask that you try to recall each part of the event in as much detail 
as you can in your mind’s eye. Think of the actions, events, thoughts, feelings, smells, and 
sensations. Try to remember how you felt and what was happening in your body. Do you have 
any questions?  
I am going to give you a few minutes to imagine the event and write some notes. Here is a pen 
and some paper. Anything you write will be destroyed after the task.  
NOTE TO RA : Give the participant some time to write . Re-iterate any of the instructions if they 
ask or seem stuck . Stop the procedure if the participant is extremely distressed and contact a 
Prototypes site staff and [CONTACT_460766] . Remind them they can still be in the study if they don’t want 
to co mplete this part of  the procedures.  
RA: Now please read what you wrote aloud and vividly imagine it in your mind’s eye. ( Time ~ 5 
minutes ).  
 
27 NOTE TO RA : [ADDRESS_589100] collected roughly 1 teaspoon of saliva.  Immediately put 
saliva in cooler ! 
 
POST -TASK DEBRIEFING  
Thanks so much for your participation. I know that might have been difficult for you to recall 
this event. I wa nt to thank you and let you know that we think your participation in this task will 
help other women who have experienced adversity. While feeling a little distressed might be 
expected, we want to make sure you are not experiencing a lot of distress. Right  now are you are 
experiencing a lot of distress?  
If yes , ask if they want you to get a site staff from Prototypes/Serenity House AND  contact [CONTACT_1268], [CONTACT_460770]  immediately  AND  provide [CONTACT_460766]’s contact 
[CONTACT_460736]) .  
If no , thank them for their time and remind them if anything comes up they can call the Principal 
Investigator, [CONTACT_460770] and/or talk to any of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staff. 
(Provide [CONTACT_460766]’s contact [CONTACT_460736]).  
Provide water and snacks at this time and pay close attention to any noticeable changes in mood 
until they are released to the care of the Prototypes/Serenity House site staff. Immediately 
inform [CONTACT_460766] AND Prototypes/Serenity House site staff of any pote ntial issues .  
 
 
 
NOTE TO RA : Please provide the following to the participant (note: can also remind the 
participant this is also included in the informed consent).  
 
CONTACT [CONTACT_460750], Dr . Dana Rose Garfin at 
[EMAIL_8829]  or (657) [ADDRESS_589101] at Human Research Protections unit in the Office of Research by 
[CONTACT_3379] (949) 824 -6068 or (949) 824 -2125 Monday – Friday, 8 am – 5 pm; or by e -mail at 
[EMAIL_8523]; or by [CONTACT_460751] [ADDRESS_589102], Irvine, CA [ZIP_CODE].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 APPENDIX I II: Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
 Institutional Review Board  
Human Research Protections  
Appendix S – DESCRI PTION OF DATA 
SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (DSMP)  
FOR CLINICAL/ BIOMEDICAL 
RESEARCH  
 
Version 09-19-2018 
Researchers:  
 
• All studies involving greater than minimal risk to participants are, 
at a minimum, required to develop a detailed plan to ensure that 
there i s appropriate safety oversight.  
• For clinical studies involving a test article, it is common to have an 
independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
• Please read the applicable HRP webpage  for further guidance.  
 HS#:   
(to be completed by [CONTACT_1201])  
 
 
 
 
Lead Researcher/Investigator Name:  [CONTACT_460765] S from the following sources , as applicable .   
Please remember to submit the following documents with your IRB APP : 
 
• For NIH-sponsored clinical trials , the DSMP should be part of the grant application .  
• For industry sponsor -initiated clinical trials , a FDA -approv ed DSMP should be part of the Master 
Protocol or the Data Safety Monitoring Committee/Board Charter.  
• For studies conducted at the Institute for Clinical and Translational Science (ICTS) or Cancer 
Center (PRMC) , the DSMP information approved by [CONTACT_460752].  
 
Please answer all of the following:  
 
1. Provide details of those individuals who will be responsible for the safety oversight of your study, 
including the relevant experience/expertise of each individual (fo r UCI investigator initiated 
studies conducted only at UCI, provide the names and titles as well).  
 
The study will have a Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
1. Dana Rose Garfin, PhD  (Assistant Adjunct Professor and Lead Investigator, Sue & Bill Gross 
School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460766] has over 12 years of experience researching stress and trauma 
in both epi[INVESTIGATOR_460707] -based samples. She has conducted prior studies with 
vulnerable populations (e.g., homeless women, trauma -exposed children; post -disaster 
survivors, demographically diverse samples).  [CONTACT_460766]’s recent work has explored the 
efficacy of community -based interventions on high risk samples (i.e., HIV -positive women in 
India). [CONTACT_460766] has recently completed a qualitative study explor ing the acceptability and 
feasibility of a mindfulness -based intervention for trauma -exposed, homeless women.  [CONTACT_460769] has an MA in Social Ecology and a PhD in Psychology.  
2. Adeline M. Nyamathi, PhD, ANP, FAAN  (Founding Dean and Distinguished Professor, S ue 
& Bill Gross School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460767] has been Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_460708] 

 
[ADDRESS_589103] resulted in 
significant reductions in drug and/or alcohol use and risky sexual behaviors , high rates of HBV 
vaccine completion, latent TB treatment completion, and improvement in emotional heal th and 
substance use outcomes . She has worked with ho meless adults for over 32 years as well as 
other vulnerable populations both domestically and inte rnationally.   
3. E. Alison Holman, PhD , FNP (Associate Professor,  Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing).) 
[CONTACT_460771] is a health psychologist and family nurse practitioner with over [ADDRESS_589104] 20 years, she has served as Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_460709] (e.g., 
9/11, incest, war, and natural disaster). She has also serv ed as the data manager and 
analyst for several studies including her prospective longitudinal study of copi[INVESTIGATOR_460710] 11th terrorist attacks. She is PI [INVESTIGATOR_460711]’s responses to traumatic events and an NIH -funded R01 studying the acute 
stress response in stroke survivors.  
4. Sanghuk S. Shin, PhD  (Assistant Professo r, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing ) [CONTACT_281290] is 
an epi[INVESTIGATOR_460712], biostatistics, and 
protoco l development and adherence. He has been PI [INVESTIGATOR_5768] -I and lead statistician for 
numerous NIH-funded intervention studies with high risk samples including homeless 
individuals and those with infectious diseases including TB and HIV.  
5. Jung -Ah Lee, PhD , BSM, MN  (Associate Professor , Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing ) [CONTACT_460772]’s expertise is in healthcare systems and how the structure and processes of a healthcare 
system affect s patient safety and clinical and organizational outcomes. She has investigated 
quality  improvement techniques, patient safety issues, effective healthcare delivery models, 
and cost -effectiveness of care.  She has expertise working with vulnerable populations 
including older adults and those with chronic diseases. [CONTACT_6321] is is not a member o f the 
research team and will provide independent oversight.  
6. Yuqing Guo, PhD, MN  (Associate Professor, Sue & Bill Gross School of Nursing). [CONTACT_460773] 
has expertise in women’s health and health disparities. She has run numerous family -
centered interventions i n community settings. She is PI [CONTACT_4007] a study examining maternal care 
for underserved communities and is well equipped to provide consult and oversight on 
potential problems with the population of interest. [CONTACT_460773] is not a member of the research 
team and wil l provide independent oversight.  
 
 
2. Indicate how frequently accumulated study data will be reviewed and evaluated for participant 
safety, study conduct and progress, and, when appropriate, efficacy.  
 
They will meet  face-to-face at least once a year and ma intain and approve minutes of meetings.   
Every 30 participants.  
 
 
 
3. Describe the events that would trigger an unscheduled review. Also include stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] g uidelines 
and un -blinding rules  if applicable.  
 
Events where the participant became extremely distress ed as part of the research procedure or 
expressed suicidality or if they were a harm/threat to self or others.  The Data Safety and 
Monitoring Plan (attached, submitted in the NIH grant that funded this application), we provide 
specific guidelines to asses s suicidality or harm to others. The research staff would follow all 
 
[ADDRESS_589105] who will be  locally  monitoring and collecting information on adverse events and/or 
unanticipated problems (e.g., UCI Lead Researcher, Research Coordinator, etc.). Include the 
name, title and experience of the individual(s) and further describe each individual’s role in the 
oversight of subject participating in the study.  
 
The Principal Investigator ([CONTACT_460774] R ose Garfin) will be responsible for locally monitoring and 
collecting information on adverse events and unanticipated problems. [CONTACT_460766] will be onsite 
during participant recruitment and during the administration of intervention procedures. In the 
event that [CONTACT_460766] is not able to be onsite, a senior staff will be in contact [CONTACT_460753]. 
Garfin should any problems arise. Moreover, when [CONTACT_460766] is not onsite, staff will report daily 
on study progress and any potential issues. [CONTACT_460766] will mon itor all data weekly.  
 
5. Describe the plan for annual reporting of the participants’ safety, and the study’s conduct, 
progress, and efficacy, when appropriate. Note: At the Continuing Review, please provide all 
relevant documentation related to the review o f the accumulated data for safety. For the case 
your submission includes a DSMB charged with the oversight of data safety, include all available 
DSMB reports as part of your submission.  
 
Annual reporting will occur at the DSMB meeting. The Principal Inves tigator will keep detailed 
notes from the meeting and evaluate the study’s conduct (e.g., any unanticipated problems), 
progress (e.g., recruitment, retention), and efficacy (e.g., results of any preliminary data 
analyses).  
 
 
DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING PLA N 
 
Possible Serious Adverse Events or Adverse Events  
 
Serious adverse events  
 
• Suicide attempt, severe violence to another person  
   
Other adverse events  
 
• Inadvertent disclosure of illegal immigrant status  
• Adverse reaction to stress task  
 
Risk Management P rotocols in Place to Deal with Adverse Events  
 
• Date Safety and Monitoring (DSM) issues are raised at quarterly meetings with all research staff  
• Events will be reported as they occur  
• A certificate of confidentiality will be secured.  
• Research staff will admi nister the questionnaires individually.  
• Participants will be cautioned not to disclose any confidential information within the group sessions.  
• Unique identifiers are used on all data.   Access to identifiers is restricted to the study PI, lead mentors 
and d ata manager by a combination lock.  
 
31  
Data and Safety Monitoring Procedures  
 
• Serious adverse events (SAE) must be reported to the NIH Project Officer (PO) by [CONTACT_460754] [ADDRESS_589106] occur within 
72 hours of the event.    
• All adverse events will be reported by [CONTACT_460755] a year: six months after the Notice of 
Grant Award (NGA) and at the end of the budget year.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB)  
 
The board wi ll be composed of six members, including the PI, mentors (Nyamathi, Shin, Holman) and two 
mid-level to senior investigators from our institution with psychological expertise ([CONTACT_460775] and [CONTACT_460776]-Ah Lee). They will meet  face-to-face at least once a year and maintain and approve minutes of 
meetings. The NIH PO will be kept informed regarding changes to the membership of the DSM board. 
Data will be reviewed as every 30 participants enter the study.  
 
Training for all staff  
 
During the orientation prior to start of the grant, all research staff and research assistants will be trained on 
recognizing all types of potential crises, how to make a thorough assessment, and role play protocols that 
are featured below and in the DSMB section. During these meeting s, in services that address mental 
health crises and associated symptomatology will be provided to enhance the staffs’ ability to confidently 
engage in the protocols for participants who may be experience psychiatric or psychologic al distress. All 
research  assistants will also meet weekly with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460713], circumstances, or 
situations that may have arisen with the participants.  Discussions will focus on how the incident could 
have been handled differently and what the ideal ou tcome for that situation might have been.  
 
Training in Red Flag Procedures  
 
 Research staff will be trained to assess and react as follows:  
 
 
RED FLAG – SUICIDE  
 
During your work as a research staff, you may encounter a respondent who expresses suicidal in tentions, 
or you may suspect that a respondent may be suicidal. Be sure to document all the information in sections 
I and II as you will need to provide that information to the treatment program counselor or on -call clinician.  
 
I. Is this person a suicide risk? 
 
  ____  The individual is currently thinking about suicide.  
  ____  The individual has a plan and the means to commit suicide.  
  ____  The individual has attempted suicide in the past.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_589107] the client is suicidal, also n ote if:  
  ____  The individual is currently exhibiting serious depression/anxiety.  
  ____  The individual is experiencing stressful life events.  
 
II. Assessment of support system:  
 
a) Is the individual under professional care (i.e., psychologist, psychiatrist, counselo r)? 
 
b) Does the individual have a social support network (i.e., friends, family, sponsor)?  
 
c) Has the individual talked with any of the members of his or her social support network in 
the last 30 days?  
 
d) Is the individual able to talk about this issue with his or her support system?  
 
e) Is the individual aware of available social service programs?  
 
III. If the person appears to be suicidal or has attempted suicide since the last interview:  
 
a) Let the respondent know that you are concerned , and that you need to inform  a clinician 
and your supervisor.   
 
b) If you are not  at a treatment program, have the client wait with you or hold on the line while 
you take the following steps:   
1) If the client has indicated that he/she is under professional care, ask the client for 
permi ssion to contact [CONTACT_5657]/her clinician and, if permission is granted, obtain the clinician’s 
contact [CONTACT_3031]. Be sure to document the client’s permission and clinician contact 
[CONTACT_3031], you will need to provide it to the on -call clinician who will confi rm client 
permission and make the contact.  
2) Contact [CONTACT_21639] -call clinician at the Los Angeles County Mobile Crisis Response Team 
(MCRT);  _____________. A clinician is on call [ADDRESS_589108] between 
your client and the MCRT clinicians. The clinician will make the decision about what 
steps to take with this client. Document the details of the clinician call.  
 
d) Report back to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_97318] .  
 
• Your Principa l Investigator Dana Rose Garfin Ph.D., 415 -407-9498 
 
The situation will be evaluated by [CONTACT_403776] a decision will be made if it should be 
reported to the LAC MCRT; they will advise us on how we need to proceed.  
 
e) If the person attempts to harm himself o r herself in your presence, contact [CONTACT_396423] (911).  
The police may place the person in a psychiatric facility for a 72 -hour observational hold.  
Get the police report number.  
 
f) Complete an Incident Report detailing the problem and action taken.  Be sure that the 
Incident Report is placed in the respondent’s file.  
 
33  
g) Make arrangements to follow -up on your client’s status with the treatment program 
counselor, supervising counselor, or on -call clinician  within the next seven days.  
 
If the MCRT is called, an as sessment will be done by [CONTACT_460756]. Based on the assessment of the MCRT, the participant may be transported to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_460714]. If it is determined that the person does not need to be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057],  the participant will 
be referred to the outpatient services at the neighborhood clinic. If the participant is at the same location 
as the staff, the staff will find out if the participant has taken any active steps such as already having taken 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], etc.  If the participant is not in immediate danger, the staff will find out the following: history of drug and 
alcohol abuse; history of familial suicide; history of familial mental illness. The staff will find out if the 
participant has a plan for how he woul d commit suicide. If she does have a plan, the staff will find out if 
she/he has any weapons, pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], etc, and remove all weapons from her possession, and explore the nature 
of her various plans. The PI, once they have arrived, will continue to focus on the  reasons the participant 
wants to live and build on his support system. The staff will get phone numbers from the participant of 
those of his outside support system with whom he wishes to be in contact, for future use in case of another 
emergency. The rese arch staff will collaborate with the treating psychiatrist to facilitate referral and follow 
through with a counseling psychiatrist/psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_460715]. The staff/PC will 
document each step of this process.  
 
If it is determine d that the person does not need to be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057], any additional treatment will 
be facilitated with Prototypes staff. To facilitate communication the participant will be asked to sign a 
Release of Information. If the participant provides a Release of Inf ormation, the PC will follow -up to ensure 
that the participant is receiving the necessary treatment. Depending on the outcome of the event, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_460716]. The staff/PC will document each 
step of  this process in an adverse event log.  
 
 In addition, the DSMB will be informed of reports of suicidal ideation and current or recent abuse, 
reported by [CONTACT_460757]. Further, the DSMB will monitor that these reports are made 
expedit iously and with the full knowledge of the respondent. Monitoring information is also provided in the 
HSPC segment of this application.   
 
Harm to others  
 
I. Is this respondent dangerous to others?  
The individual expressed intent to harm or kill a specifie d person.  
The individual has the means (gun, knife, etc.) to harm that person.  
The individual has a thought -out plan.  
 
II. If you feel that the person is dangerous to others, and is likely to follow through with his/her 
plans:  
 
Assess the situation.  If it is safe , complete the study protocol is the participant desires.  Report 
the information to your supervisor, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460717].  If you 
 
34 feel unsafe or are not sure about it , complete the research procedures; only if possible .  But if 
the situation is volatile, terminate immediately.  Try to be as graceful and subtle as possible.  
For example, complete the specific task you are on or make up some reason for leaving, and 
say you will have to reschedule the rest of the p rocedures.  Pay the subject in full, or leave 
immediately if you don’t feel safe to do so.  Trust your sense of the situation, and act 
accordingly.  
 
Report back to your supervisor or call in immediately .  If something takes place outside of the 
work hours , call your supervisor at home.  The supervisor should then immediately contact [CONTACT_235039]’s PI. Supervisors are:  
 
Your Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_460692], Ph.D., 415 -407-9498  
 
The situation will be evaluated quickly by [CONTACT_403776] a decision will be made if the LAC 
MCRT needs to be called; they will advise us on how we need to proceed. If the situation is 
reported to the police, get the report number from the police.  
 
III. Complete an Incident Report.  Be sure to put a copy of the Incident Report i n the 
respondent’s file so that those working with the file in the future know an incident occurred.  
Aside from the DSMB, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_460718].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
35 APPENDIX IV: Citations for Study Measures  
Primary Outcome:  
 
PTSD Check list for DSM -5 (PCL -5; Weathers, Litz, Keane, Palmieri, Marx, & Schnurr, 
2013). Responses will be scored continuously and according to diagnostic criteria as 
implemented in previous research.(143) The PCL -5 initially starts with the identification of the 
presence of exposure to a DSM -V traumatic event (i.e., “Briefly identify the worst event (if you 
feel comfortable doing so)”) and then assesses whether it involved actual or threatened 
death, serious injury or sexual violence; whether the person directly ex perienced it (through 
direct exposure, witness to the event, occurred to a close friend or family member, or exposed 
as part of job). There are then twenty -items that assess all four B -E criterion (re -experiencing, 
avoidance, negative thoughts or cognition s, hyperarousal), assessed on a Likert -type scale 0 
“not at all”, 1 “a little bit”, 2 “moderately”, 3 “quite a bit”, 4 “extremely”.  
 
Secondary outcomes:  
 
Substance use :  
Self-report drug use : [LOCATION_007] Christian University (TCU) Screen at Baseline and 6 -month  follow 
up. Yes/No to each drug will be assessed for use vs dependency.  The total score ranges 
from 0 - 9; higher scores (> 3) correspond to the DSM drug dependence diagnosis.  This will 
be assessed at baseline, immediately following 9th/final interventio n session, and 6 -month 
follow -u (Institute of Behavioral Research, 2017).  
 
Objective drug use assessment : A 5-panel FDA -approved urine test cup will be used in this 
study.  The test cup screens for metabolites of the following drugs of abuse at the establ ished 
cut-off levels and is used for qualitative purposes: Amphetamines (1000 ng/mL), Cocaine 
(300 ng/mL), Methamphetamines/ MDMA (500 ng/mL), Opi[INVESTIGATOR_858] (2000 ng/mL), and THC (50 
ng/mL). Urine sample validity checks will be provided by [CONTACT_460758]. Participants whose urine does not pass validity checks 
will be counted as positive for drugs.  Results will be coded qualitatively (above or below 
threshold). All positive results will be interpreted as posit ive, regardless of self -report.  
 
Depression:  will be assessed using the PROMIS measure for depression (Emotional 
Distress). The 8 -tem form will be used. It assesses negative mood, views of self (e.g., 
worthlessness), decreased positive affect and anhedonia . In self -report when all participants 
are given the same questions, it is desirable to use the 8 -item short form, which has reliability 
and validity comparable to the 28 -item computer adaptive form (PROMIS Health 
Organization, 2019).  
 
Cortisol reactivity : Saliva samples will be collected via passive drool before and after a 
modified script driven imagery task. Saliva All saliva will be assayed in duplicate using 
standard manufacturers protocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of CRP in saliva will be 
determined using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. 
The standard curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The 
 
[ADDRESS_589109] a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference <0.030 between the replica tes. 
The mean values across saliva duplicates will be computed for each sample and used in the 
statistical analyses.  
 
C-reactive protein (CRP)  All saliva will be assayed in duplicate using standard 
manufacturers protocol (Salimetrics). The concentration of  CRP in saliva will be determined 
using a Salivary C -Reactive Protein ELISA kit, an enzyme -linked immunoassay. The standard 
curve is run on every assay plate and must have an R2 value of > 0.99. The replicates must 
have a %CV < 15 or an absolute difference  <0.030 between the replicates. The mean values 
across saliva duplicates will be computed for each sample and used in the statistical 
analyses.  
 
Perceived stress scale : 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) will be used to measure 
participant's perception o f stress (Cohen, 1993).  
 
Quality of life : will be measured using the [ADDRESS_589110] week on a scale of 0 (very unsatisfied) to 3 (very 
satisfied) (Endicottt, Nee, Harrison, & Blumenthal, 1993).  
 
Satisfaction with life scale : A 5-item scale designed to measure global cognitive judgments 
of one’s life satisfaction (not a measure of either positive or negative affect) (Diener, Emmons, 
Larsen, & Griffin, 1985).  
 
Mindful awareness attention scale (MAAS) : is a [ADDRESS_589111] (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Carlson & Brown, 2005).  
 
Five facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ)  is a 39 item questionnaire that assesses five 
independent sub -scale s: observing, describing, acting with awareness, non -judging of inner 
experience, and non -reactivity to inner experience (Baer et al., 2008).  
 
Life event history: Life events history will be assessed by [CONTACT_460759] h of 40 specific negative life events (NLEs; will include both trauma and 
stressors), and, if so, at what age(s) this occurred. This will also be updated with respect to 
recent events upon immediate completion of the 9 week courses as well as at the 6 -mont h 
follow up. The measure was modified from the Diagnostic Interview Schedule trauma section 
(Robins, Helzer,  
Croughan, & Ratcliff, 1981) by [CONTACT_460760] (Holman, Silver, & Waitzkin, 2000)  and has provided rates of events 
comparable to other community -based studies (e.g., Seery et al., 2010).  
 
 
37 Emotion regulation:  will be assessed with the Difficulties in Emotion -Regulation Scale 
(DERS; Gratz & Roemer, 2004; Kaufman et al., 2016), short form .  DERS is a 18 - item 
questionnaire that aims to measure how much one is able to regulate/deregulate their 
emotions. The 41 questions are based off of six factors including acceptance of emotions, 
impulsiveness, ability to work towards goals, awareness of own emotions, clarity of emotions, 
and accessibility to emotion -regulation strategies  
 
Social support will be assessed using the MOS Social Support scale (Sherbourne & 
Stewart, 1993) This 19 item measure assesses social support.  
 
Anxiety:  will be assessed  using the PROMIS measure for anxiety (Emotional Distress). The 
8-tem form will be used. It assesses symptoms of Generalized Anxiety Disorder. it is desirable 
to use the 8 -item short form, which has reliability and validity comparable to the 28 -item 
comput er adaptive form (PROMIS Health Organization, 2019).  
 
General Self -efficacy scale: This 10 -item scale was created to assess a general sense of 
perceived self -efficacy (Schwarzer & Jerusalem, 1995).  
 
Demographics : Age, ethnicity, sexual orientation, incarc eration history, religion, income, 
education, number of children, pregnancy status, mental health history (previous diagnosis) 
employment history.  
 
Prior Doctor -diagnosed Health Conditions . This survey, modified from the CDC’s National 
Center for Health St atistics Annual National Health Interview Survey, asks respondents to 
report doctor diagnosed health ailments. This will be assessed at baseline, immediately 
following 9th/final intervention session, and 6 -month follow -up. 
 
Adherence . Measured by [CONTACT_460761] -reported time in mindfulness meditation 
and doing at -home assignment.  
 
Short self -compassion scale. This 12 -item scale assesses self -compassion (Raes, 
Pommier, Neff, & Van Gucht, 2011).  
 
Free Response: Participants will be given the oppor tunity to provide written feedback 
regarding their experiences that may not have been captured with these quantitative 
measures. Prompt will include: We will ask: “Do you have any other thoughts and/or feelings 
about your participation in this program? Is there anything that you wish to share with us 
regarding your experience?”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 APPENDIX V: Salivary Data Collection During COVID -19 
 
 
Collection Procedure*  
*Please keep a roster of all samples collected from October 2019 onwards. Samples may 
contain SARS - CoV-2, and this will ensure safe handling in the future as labs may take extra 
precautions when handling samples collected during this time.  
 
1. Participants wash hands for 20 seconds prior to collecting the saliva  sample(s).  
2. Collect saliva sample as normal (follow typi[INVESTIGATOR_460719]). Tubes should be labeled prior to providing them to  participants.  
3. Sample tubes should be immediately capped and sealed. Outsides of tubes should be 
disinfected following  collection.  Disinfectants  are listed  on the CDC  website  
(https://www.epa.gov/pesticide - registration/list -n-disinfectants -use-against -sars-cov-
2). Ensure no disinfectants leak into the tube via an unsealed or partially sealed  tube.  
4. Samples should be placed in a secondary container (sealed plastic bag with absor bent 
material, freezer box, etc.) that is labeled, then placed in a freezer ( -20°C) as soon as 
possible. See below for more  guidelines.  
5. Participants should wash hands for at least 20 seconds after collecting the saliva  
sample(s).  
 
Sample Storage and Shippi [INVESTIGATOR_460720]/or shippi[INVESTIGATOR_460721]/regulations. Additionally, please refer to the following link  for CDC guidelines prior to 
shippi[INVESTIGATOR_128876]: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019 -ncov/lab/biosafety -faqs.html  
 
Sample storage:  
 
1. Once collected, samples should be stored  in a freezer between -20°C (home freezer) 
or -80°C (ultra -cold lab grade freezer) when  possible  
2. Samples should be placed inside sample storage boxes (or biohazard Ziploc bags + 
absorbent material for home  collections)  
3. The sample  storage  box should  be placed inside  a large  biohazard  Ziploc  bag (or 
Ziploc  bag with a biohazard sticker on  it) 
4. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_460722]  (paper  towel,  etc.) should  be placed  inside  the Ziploc  bag to 
absorb any potential  spi[INVESTIGATOR_460723]/Shippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]:  
 

 
39 1. Samples in bags or boxes  should be placed inside cooler or in a bioshipper on dry  ice. 
2. Bioshipper should be labeled with the  following:  
a. Hazard labeled with UN Identification Number already on label – UN [ADDRESS_589112] Labeled with UN Identification N umber - UN 1845  
d. Dry Ice along with the net weight (kg) of the dry  ice 
e. Shipper’s name [CONTACT_62687]  
f. Receiver’s name [CONTACT_62687]  
g. Name [CONTACT_244052] a responsible  person.  
 
Receiving samples:  
 
1. Lab personnel receiving samples should wear appropriate PPE befo re handling  
samples.  
2. Ensure samples are labelled, are frozen, and tubes are in good condition (no cracks or  
leaks).  
3. Sample collection tubes should be disinfected once received by [CONTACT_38768]. Disinfectants 
are listed on  the CDC  website  (https://www.epa.gov/pesticide -registration/list -n-
disinfectants -use-against - sars-cov-2). 
4. Boxes with samples can be marked with date received, and a label noting if the samples 
were collected during the COVID -[ADDRESS_589113] as an indicator to use extra 
safety precautions  while  handling  those  samples  in the future. Samples  should  be stored  
in -80°C  as soon as  possible.  
5. Sample processing should be performed in a biological safety  cabinet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 APPENDIX VII: RECap for Screener (Section 1) and Baseline, 
Immediate -follow -up, and 6 -months  (Section 2)  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
All analyses were conducted using STATA 18. First, descriptive statistics were calculated for the 
total sample. Next, a series of multilevel models were conducted for each primary and 
secondary outcomes using a multilevel, random -intercept mixed. Participants were entered as 
random effects to nest observations  within participants , allowing for correlations within each 
individual over time. G roup assignment (i.e., MBSR vs. HP  Control ), time (i.e., T1, T2, and T3) , 
and group-by -time interactions  were entered as fixed effects . Site was also included as a fixed-
effect, given the low number (i.e., two) of sites1. Covariates were screened for inclusion in 
bivariate analyses and included if statistically significant and theoretically meaningful. An 
independent covariance pattern was specified as our final models were random -intercept 
(nested within participant) only2. Results are presented using restricted maximum likelihood for 
optimal control of T ype 1 error3. An intention-to-treat analysis was conducted, where every 
participant was included in the final analyses, regardless of whether they completed all of the 
sessions.  
Bibliography  
1.  Feaster DJ, Mikulich-Gilbertson S, Brincks AM. Modeling site effects in the design and 
analysis of multi -site trials. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse. 2011;37(5):383-391. 
doi:10.3109/00952990.2011.[ADDRESS_589114] ed. Springer; 2005. 
3.  Luke SG. Evaluating significance in linear mixed- effects models in R. Behav Res 
Methods . 2017;49(4):1494-1502. doi:10.3758/s13428-016-0809-y  
 
 