Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 1 Official Title:   Pediatric Parenting Connections Young Moms Program 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB-Approved Date:  3/7/22  
 
    
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 2 Study Title : Pediatric Parenting Connections Young Moms Program 
 
Principal Investigator , Co-investigator(s) : Anna Miller -Fitzwater, Claudia Barrett, Elizbeth Jensen 
 
Sponsor or funding source: CTSI  
 
Background, Rationale  and Context  
 
According to youth.gov, by [CONTACT_654] 22, only 50% of young moms have received a high school diploma and only 30% have received their GED. Births to young moms carry risks along with perpetuating the generational trend of teen births. Children born to moms less than [ADDRESS_352531].  One, Pediatric Parenting Connections  (PPC) , forms a 
partnership with medical providers by [CONTACT_289180] a certified parent educator into local 
health clinics, Westgate Pediatrics, Downtown Health Plaza, and Winston East 
Pediatrics. This program serves as short term in- office parenting education for 
breastfeeding, behavior, and developmental concerns. It also serves as a referral point for the more intensive, Parents as Teachers  (PAT)  home visitation model. Both model s 
are two-generation model s devoted to addressing health disparities, promoting maternal 
health, and mitigating chronic toxic stress. Providing supports that recognize these challenges help young moms obtain positive outcomes
iv. Intervening early with a two-
generation approach can have positive effects for both young moms and children.  There also are societal benefits in that the lifetime benefits of supporting young moms and promoting healthy birth spacing exceed those of the costs
v, vi, vii, viii.  The benefits of 
providing parenting support to young moms can include mother’s education, use of contraception, healthy birth spacing, child immunization compliance, reduction of child behavior problems (possibly), improvements in the home environment, and parents’ 
realistic expectations for children
ix,x, xi. The application of these services to young 
mothers comprises our Young Moms Program (YMP). As a community we are just beginning to realize the unintended outcome of COVID, one of which appears to be an 
increase in teen births.  
As we continue to recover from the impact of the global pandemic, we must look closely at the significance home visiting programs have on creating authentic relationships with families, which in turn create opportunities for working with young moms to solve problems, achieve personal goals, and access essential resources. According to a Washington State Institute for Public Policy study (2004) Parents as Teachers had the largest benefit per dollar of cost ($1.23) of all pre- kindergarten early education 
programs. Imprints Cares traditional PAT program costs $3,436 per family annually, 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 3 which is a return on investment of $4.70 – 5.[ADDRESS_352532] Medical Center (WFBMC) has documented [ADDRESS_352533] received approximately 400 referrals from pediatricians with more than 320 families being served, 80%.  
Further, as we are considering the intersection of equity with health and social policy, the YMP is an opportunity to directly address disparities in behaviors such as 
breastfeeding, completion of developmental screenings, and enrollment in early intervention that may be correlated with different demographic groupi[INVESTIGATOR_14839].  We  know that 
while COVID- [ADDRESS_352534] of the pandemic and public health precautions (i.e., isolation) is just beginning to emerge. We continue to see increased trends in pregnancy in young moms, toxic stress and child maltreatment, food insecurity, and developmental/ behavioral regression in young children. As we enhance opportunities for young moms based on positive outcomes during the pandemic, we can rapi[INVESTIGATOR_289176].  To the extent that 
some young moms are perpetuating a multi -generational pattern of early births, the 
proposed hybrid program is an opportunity to break a cycle linked to poor outcomes for 
young moms and their children.   
 
Objective s 
The objectives of this study are to assess cost -effectiveness of a Young Moms Program 
that incorporates a traditional Parents as Teachers home visiting parenting program to 
that of a hybrid virtual/home based Parents as Teachers program, against short -term 
outcomes, which in turn will serve as leading indicators of longer -term results.   Specific 
outcomes are outlined in the measures section.   
 
Methods and Measures  
 
This is a community -engaged research collaboration between the non- profit Imprints 
Cares, the WFBMC Birth Center, and WFSOM. Because YMP is a tiered program model, services meet parents where they are through a “warm hand- off” approach that 
uses on one- on-one consultation and assessment -based interventions. The YMP is 
designed to address systemic barriers to the health and stability of young moms and their children such as the lack of coordination of service delivery or logistical barriers within the health system. T he YMP also streamlines the referral pi[INVESTIGATOR_19189], connecting 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.[ADDRESS_352535] be >= [ADDRESS_352536] speak English or Spanish given our parent educators and other group participants are limited 
to those languages.   Males are excluded as participants, the intervention and many of 
the outcome measures are only applicable to female participants.    
 Participants will be randomly assigned to one of  the two variants of the Parents as 
Teacher home visitation model, traditional or hybrid. The study’s research coordinator, 
who is not directly involved with the delivery of services, will manage the randomization and assignment process; all consented participants will be given a system -generated 
unique identifier, which cannot be linked to patient identity by [CONTACT_289181].  This information will be securely maintained by [CONTACT_23164].
  The team will complement the treatment groups’ data with population data 
extracted from WFBMC’s Epic system.  Analysts will use rigorous techniques (e.g, Propensity Score Matching) to create a matched control group.  
 
Both formats and all interventions included in the study are the current models of care 
for our existing PAT/YMP services.  The hybrid model was developed in 2020 in response to the need to move services virtually as home visitation was not allowed during COVID -19 lockdown.   
 
Through the traditional PAT  model, participants will be referred through a warm hand- off 
from the Birth Cen ter or one of WFBH community pediatric centers to Imprints Cares. A 
PAT certified family educator will meet with the family focusing on a one- on-one 
consultation and assessment -based interventions. Participants in the traditional PAT 
model will receive two  home visits a month and participate in monthly peer (group) 
connections  throughout the study period.  
 
In the hybrid PAT model, participants will be referred through a warm hand- off to 
Imprints Cares from the Birth Center or one of WFBH community pediatri c centers. A 
PAT certified family educator will meet with the family focusing on a one- on-one 
consultation and assessment -based interventions. Study participants will begin 
receiving services by [CONTACT_289182] “What You Do Matters” program, an evidence- based PAT curriculum. After completion of the virtual program, young moms 
will begin receiving once a month home visits and participate in monthly peer (group) connections.  
 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.[ADDRESS_352537] short -term outcomes, which in turn will 
serve as leading indicators of longer -term results.  At the end of the official study period, 
participants will be eligible to continue in the program until  the child’s school entry into 
kindergarten.  Both models  will be staffed by [CONTACT_289183], the Circle of Security model, and breastfeeding educator certification program. Imprints Cares also has a mental/behavioral health family educator on staff to address emergent mental/behavioral concerns as they arise. These approaches have been documented to nurture parental attachment and secure relationships
xii.   
 
Outcome Measures 
The team will use several published assessments: 
Protective Factors Survey.  The Protective Factors Survey (PFS) is a validated parent survey 
designed that assesses protective factors in five areas: family functioning/resiliency, social 
support, concrete support, nurturing and attachment, and knowledge of parenting/child development.  The PFS will be implemented at week one, week six, and end of study, as it requires parent-child interactions for completion. 
Ages and Stages Questionnaire 3rd edition.  The Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ 3) is a 
validated developmental screening designed for use by [CONTACT_289184]. The ASQ 3 screens for developmental milestones in communication, gross motor, fine motor, problem solving, and personal -social skills.  The ASQ 3 will be implemented at the recommended intervals designed 
by [CONTACT_289185] (2, 4, and 6 months). 
Ages and Stages Questionnaire: Social -Emotional 2nd edition.  Similar to the ASQ 3, the Ages 
and Stages Questionnaire: Social -Emotional (ASQ:SE 2) is a validated screening of social and 
emotional behaviors. The ASQ:SE 2 will be implemented at the recommended intervals designed by [CONTACT_289185]  (2, 4, and 6 months). 
Patient Health Questionnaire.  The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ 9) is a self-administered 
questionnaire that is validated for use in assessing the severity of depression.  The PHQ 9 will be administered as a baseline assessment as well as an end-of-study assessment.  
StimQ2-I.  The StimQ 2-I is a validated, interview -based assessment of home environments for 
use with infants ages five to 12 months.  The StimQ 2-I focuses on cognitive stimulation by [CONTACT_289186]: Availability of Learning Materials, Reading-Verbal, Parental Involvement in Developmental Advance, and Parental Verbal Responsivity.  The StimQ 2-I will be implemented at the end of study, as it requires parent-child interactions for 
completion.  
 In addition to these assessments, the team will use an intake questionnaire to capture parent demographic and health information as well as baseline knowledge about child development 
and parenting and a monthly questionnaire used to assess mother’s status on continuance of secondary education, breastfeeding, and use of contraception.  A monthly questionnaire, whi ch 
will be developed for use in this study, also will assess infant developmental milestones.   
 Further, the team will access health information captured in WFBMC’s Epic system, including completion of Well -Child Visits and recommended immunizations. A WFBMC study team 
member will extract data on participants as well as a matched control group. The study team will conclude the study with participant focus groups, to collect additional qualitative feedback and insights.  Finally, the team will develop and implement Fidelity of Implementation (FOI) quality 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.[ADDRESS_352538] when there are particularly risky or traumatic cases.  In addition, the team will establish short-term benefits (achievable after six -months of services) along with the program 
implementation conditions necessary to achieve them. We will utilize the services of BERD and Q-Pro to assist in advising in areas of study design, data analysis, and data management. 
 
Study Timeline 
Study Milestone  M1 M2 M3 M4 M5 M6 M7 M8 M9 M10 M11 M12 
Achieve IRB approval  ●            
Enrollment of teen moms   ● ● ●         
Baseline data collected   ● ● ●         
Services delivered   ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●  
Week one data collected   ● ● ●         
Week six data collected    ● ● ●        
ASQ/ASQ -SE data 
collected  (2,4, and 6m)     ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● 
Monthly questionnaires and 
FOI checklists completed    ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●  
End of study data collected            ● ● 
Analysis and reporting 
completed             ● 
The project will track numerous milestones, including:  
• Submission of IRB application and receipt of IRB approval.  This milestone is critical as the 
project will not move forward without IRB approval. 
• Enrollment of young moms by [CONTACT_46776]’s four month.  All participants will need to be 
enrolled by [CONTACT_289187].  In the traditional model, home visitation starts immediately upon 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 7 enrollment.  In the hybrid model, home visitation starts at the completion of the six -week 
What You Do Matters virtual class.  
• Collection of all baseline data.  Baseline data will be collected at the time of enrollment and 
will consist of the enrollment form  and the PHQ 9.  
• Collection of week one and week six data.  Data will be collected during the participant’s first and sixth week (at the close of the What You Do Matters course) of services in both models 
(PFS). 
• Collection of monthly questionnaires.  Monthly questionnaires will be implemented with each 
participant, on a schedule developed by [CONTACT_289188]. 
• Collection of ASQ and ASQ:SE data as recommended by [CONTACT_289189] (2, 4, 6m). 
• Collection of end-of-study data (6 months after enrollment).  In the final month of services, 
the team will collect the ASQ, ASQ:SE, PHQ 9, the PFS and the StimQ 2-I. 
• Collection of FOI checklist data.  Project staff and supervisors will complete FOI checklists on a monthly basis.  Each model will have its own checklist.  
• WFBMC data extraction and compi[INVESTIGATOR_289177].  One of the WFBMC team members will work to securely extract health data for treatment and matched control group participants from the Epic system.   
 
Human Subjects Protection 
 
Subject Recruitment Methods  
No additional PHI will be accessed or printed/transcribed above and beyond what is part of 
standard patient care and pre-defined job descriptions.  
 OB Ho me Visiting Staff 
1) Our OB Home Visiting Nursing Staff as part of their standard workflow identify and visit all 
post-partum mothers that reside in Forsyth County, NC. 
2) Of those, they will identify mothers that meet inclusion criteria for the study (14-[ADDRESS_352539] Health Pediatrician).  
3) During their standard meeting, while the mother is still inpatient from her delivery, OB home 
visiting staff per their standard workflow will ask if the mother would like referral to Imprints 
Cares.  If they identify a likely eligible participant, they will introduce study at that time, without 
promising the patient they are eligible.  If the patient is interested in referral for either the study 
or services not provided as part of the study, the team will make a referral to Imprints Cares.  The referral will indicate if the patient appears to be eligible for the study or not. 
 
Imprints Cares  
1) After referral from the PPC primary care physician or the OB Home Visiting Nursing Staff to the Imprints Cares program, intake staff will assess if new mothers meet criteria for participation in the study (14-[ADDRESS_352540] Health Pediatrician).  
2) Imprints Cares intake staff will ask if the mother would like to participate in the study, explain the risks and benefits, and obtain consent/assent from all required parties  This may be done in person if at the time of a clinic or intake home/community visit OR remotely via secure Docusign.  
3) Imprints Cares staff will not directly benefit if a patient does or does not consent to the study, 
and patients are eligible for services  if they do not consent, therefore it is not an undue influence 
to enroll patients.  
 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 8 Informed Consent  
 
Signed informed consent/assent and parental permission to participate will be obtained from 
each subject as defined by [CONTACT_289190].  Informed consent/assent and parently permission to 
participate will either be obtained in person if at the time of a clin ic visit or intake 
home/community  visit OR  remotely via secure Docusign at by [CONTACT_289191]. 
 
 
Confidentiality and Privacy  
Confidentiality will be protected by [CONTACT_21176], minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify subjects, and maintaining all study information in a secure manner .  To help 
ensure subject privacy and confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected patient identifying information corresponding to the unique study identifier will be maintained on a linkage file, store separately from the data.  The linkage file will 
be kept secure, with access limited to designated study personnel.  Following data collection 
subject identifying information will be destroyed at the time the newborn is [ADDRESS_352541] protected.  No reference to any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_289178] m onitoring of the data and safety of 
study participants.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_117657].  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations 
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol 
changes will be promptly reported by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_203493]. 
 References  
i Suellentrop, K. (2010). T he Costs and Consequences of Teen Childbearing.  Presentation for 
the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy.  
ii Hechtman, L. (1989).Teenage mothers and their children: risks and problems: A 
review. Can J Psychiatry. Aug;34(6):569- 75 
iii See, for example, https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/teenpregnancy/index.html  
iv Cox, J.E., Harris, S.K., Conroy, K., Engelhart, T., Vyavaharkar, A., Frederico, A., and Woods, 
E.R. (2019).  A parenting and life skills intervention for teen mothers: A randomized controlled 
trial.  Pediatrics , 143, number 3  
v Willis, Susan Beth, "Cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness of case management for a teen 
pregnancy and parenting program" (1993). Theses  Digitization Project. 630. 
vi Harding, J.F., Knab, J., Zief, S., Kelly, K., and McCallum, D. (2020).  A systematic review of 
programs to xv promote aspects of teen parents’ self-sufficiency: Supporting educational 
outcomes and health birth spacing.  Mater nal and Child Health Journal , 24 (Suppl 2):S84– S104  
vii Brace, A.M., Hall, M., and Hunt, B.P. (2008). Social, economic and health costs of 
unintended teen pregnancy: The Circle of Care intervention program in Troup County, 
Georgia.  Journal of the Georgia Public Health Association, 1, No. 1, 33- 46. 
Protocol version: 
Template updated 9.24.14 9 viii Rosenthal, M.S., Ross, J.S., Bilodeau, R., Richter, R.S., Palley, J.E., and Bradley, E.H. 
(2009).  Economic evaluation of a comprehensive teenage pregnancy  prevention program: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_278047].  Am J Prev Med . December; 37([ADDRESS_352542] 1): S280– S287 
ix Chrisler, A. and Moore, K. A. (2012). What works for disadvantaged and adolescent parent 
programs: Lessons from e xperimental evaluations of s ocial programs and i nterventions for 
children.  Child Trends Publication #2012-19. 
x Harding, et.al. (2020).  
xi Cox et.al. (2019).  
xii See, for example, https://parentsasteachers.org/research-and -quality -improvement-
index#res earch -results  and https://www.circleofsecurityinternational.com/circle-of- security -
model/research/.  
xiii Rubio, D.M., Schoenbaum, E.E., Lee, L.S., Schteingart, D.E., Marantz, P.R., Anderson, K.E., 
Platt, L.D., Baez, A., and Esposito, K. (2010).  Defining translational research: Implications for 
training.  Acad Med. March ; 85(3): 470– 475  
xiv Linton, J.M., Stockton, M.P., Andrade, B., and Daniel, S. (nd).  Integrating parenting support 
within and beyond the pediatric medical home .  
xv Washington State Institute for Public Policy, 2004 report. 
http://www.wsipp.wa.gov/pub.asp?docid=04 -07-3901 
 Appendix  (see relev ant sections of IRB application)  
1. Data collection form  
2. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_289179]  
3. Consent form  if one will be used  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 