Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 1 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Combination Entecavir and Peginterferon alfa -2a Therapy in HBeAg- Positive Immune 
Tolerant Adults with Chronic Hepatitis B  
Synopsis  
 
Study aims:  
• To determine the safety and efficacy of treatment with 8 weeks of entecavir followed by 40 weeks of both entecavir and peginterferon alfa -2a in the treatment of chronic hepatitis 
B in HBeAg positive adults who are in the immune tolerant phase.  
• To evaluate “off treatment” sustained responses after treatment with entecavir and 
peginterferon alfa -2a in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B in HBeAg positive adults who 
are in the immune tolerant phase.  
 
Type of study  
• Single arm treatment study  
 
Clinical trial  
A  single arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 8 weeks of entecavir followed by 40 weeks of both entecavir and 
peginterferon alfa -2a in adults with HBeAg -positive chronic hepatitis B with normal or near 
normal ALT levels and high serum levels of HBV DNA (“immune tolerant” HBeAg -positive 
chronic hepatitis B). All pa rticipants  will be followed until week 96 (48 weeks after 
discontinuati on of therapy) at which time the primary outcome will be measured.  
  1. Background   
1.1. “Immune tolerant” HBV in adults  
Chronic hepatitis B virus infection (CHB) affects 360 million people worldwide, including approximately 2.0 million in North America. Chronic hepatitis B may result in progressive liver 
disease that leads to cirrhosis, end -stage liver disease and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 
Indications and approaches to therapy of hepatitis B are based upon knowledge of the features of its natural history. The natural history of chronic hepatitis B, particularly if acquired in early 
childhood, runs through several stages or phases that have different clinical manifestations and implications for long -term hepatic injury (1, 2). The initial “immune tolerant” phase is variable in 
duration, but typi[INVESTIGATOR_583450] “immune clearance” phase, marked by [CONTACT_583460] (ALT) and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST), increased inflammation and hepatocellular necrosis on liver biopsy, 
and an increase in cytoplasmic hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) expression. As the term ‘immune tolerant’ (IT) suggests this is a state where the host appears to exert no overt immune 
response to a chronic infection with Hepatitis B. The state is characterized by [CONTACT_583461] B e antigen (HBeAg) and high levels of hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA (typi[INVESTIGATOR_583451] ≥10
8 IU/mL), but minimal or no elevations in serum ALT and AST levels and minimal 
activity or injury on liver biopsy. Most but not all individuals with ‘Immune Tolerant’ CHB are 
children or young adults, with a mean age of transition to the immune clearance phase of ~[ADDRESS_766957] variable histologic findings, largely dependent 
upon the definition of ALT used to define the population.  For studies using the more stringent 
ALT criteria of ≤30 U/L for males and ≤19 U/L for females, histologic disease is minimal 
(majority fibrosis <2/4 and necroinflammation 0 -1/4) (3- 5). Natural history studies of adults in the 
immune tolerant phase have shown that the ALT levels were signific antly higher in patients with 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 2 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
subsequent loss of tolerance. For inclusion criterion, we propose to use ALT upper limit s of 30 
U/L for females and 45 U/L for males , and avoid the need for liver biopsy . 
  
It has been hypothesized that the mother -to-child HBV transmission leads to transplacental 
transfer of maternal HBeAg that may induce a specific unresponsiveness of helper T cells to HBeAg in neonates. Because HBeAg and HBcAg are highly cross -reactive at the T -cell level, 
deletion of the helper T- cell response to HBeAg results in an ineffective cytotoxic T- lymphocyte 
response to HBcAg (6). During the immune tolerant phase of chronic infection, the continued secretion of HBeAg (the tolerogen) is necessary to maintain the tolerant state. Little is known 
about the mechanisms that regulate the loss of immune tolerance in chronic HBV infection. 
Recent studies have emphasized the importance of low expression of transporter associated 
with antigen processing (TAP1) and low molecular weight  protein 2 (LMP2) compared wi th CHB 
patients in the immune clearance phase, suggesting a deficiency in antigen processing and transport to major histocompatibility complex class I molecules in IT adults (7). Point mutations and deletions in HBV epi[INVESTIGATOR_583452] a significant decrease in 
both viral replicative competence and HBV -specific CD8(+) T cell responses, and in turn, lead to 
maintenance o f viral persistence (8).  The proposed study will provide an opportunity to study 
the immunologic features and correlates of immune tolerant HBV infection in adults as well as the immune markers associated with breaking of tolerance in the context of antiviral therapy.  
 
1.2 Treatment  of CHB in adults  
The known natural history of chronic hepatitis B underlies the current criteria for therapy and the 
endpoints of treatment. Treatment of adults with CHB targets those with active disease, characterized by [CONTACT_583462]/or evidence of significant inflammatory activity or 
fibrosis on biopsy in conjunction with elevated HBV DNA levels. Treatment of adults in the 
immune tolerant phase of infection is not recommended (9). Reasons for not recommending 
treatment include the low frequency of histologic disease and complications and the lack of 
established effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Serum HBV DNA level has been found to be directly correlated with the development of HCC and cirrhosis independent of serum ALT level, HBV genotype, 
and HBeAg status  (10,11). This has led to promotion of the use of serum HBV DNA 
concentration as an indicator for treatment regardless of serum ALT level, and even patients with normal serum ALT levels are to be treated with antiviral therapy with the primary aim of 
suppr essing HBV DNA.  In this context, the risks and benefits of treatment of immune tolerant 
adults is an important issue – not addressed by [CONTACT_583463].  
 Currently, there are two broad categories of HBV therapi[INVESTIGATOR_55328]: pegylated interferon 
(peginterferon) and nucleos(t)ide analogues, The advantages of nucleos(t)ide analogue therapy is the ease of administration, the lack of significant side effects and the consistent suppression 
of HBV DNA that can be achieved, particularly with the newer ag ents such as tenofovir and 
entecavir. While emergence of drug resistance can limit the efficacy of oral agents, entecavir 
and tenofovir are characterized by [CONTACT_583464] a low rate of antiviral resistance (1% or less even with prolonged therapy for 4 to 5 
years). As a consequence, 80- 90% of patients treated long- term with these agents achieve 
rates of marked suppression of HBV DNA levels and normal ALT levels. The advantage of peginterferon therapy is that it is administered for a limited period (6 to 12 months) and results in loss of HBsAg in a significant proportion of patients. The latter feature may be particularl y 
relevant in the treatment of immune tolerant adults, the target population for this study. Previous studies have shown that a one- year course of combination therapy of peginterferon and 
nucleos(t)ide analogue does not yield a higher response rate than a one- year course of either 
agent alone.  However, these studies have been limited by [CONTACT_2224] a nucleos(t)ide analogue 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 3 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
with high risk of resistance (e.g. lamivudine)  and may have been affected by [CONTACT_583465](t)ide anal ogue rather than sequential use.  
 1.3 Considerations in the treatment of immune- tolerant adults  
There are no prior studies of treatment of immune tolerant adults.  Data from the pediatric 
literature indicated that treatment with IFN alone during the immune tolerant phase of infection 
is rarely effective and loss of HBV DNA or anti- HBe seroconversion, with less than 10% of 
treated children achieving this outcome (12).  However, the combination of a nucleoside 
analogue and IFN was examined in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 23 children and appears encouraging (13). 
Lamivudine was given for 8 weeks and then combined IFN and lamivudine therapy for a further 
44 weeks.  HBV DNA by [CONTACT_583466] 48% at end of treatment, and 5 (22%) children 
seroconverted to anti -HBe.  Four (17%) children cleared HBsAg and seroconverted to anti -HBs.  
Six months after treatment, HBV DNA was again positive in all but the children who had seroconverted to anti -HBe and (presumably) anti -HBs.  
 
Based upon these stimulating results, we propose to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a short 
lead- in course (8 weeks) of entecavir followed by [CONTACT_583467]-2a for 40 weeks. We hypothesize that using a potent nucleos(t)ide analogue will provide a 
higher rate of HBeAg loss and suppression of HBV DNA. The primary measure of outcome will 
be HBeAg loss and suppression of HBV DNA to ≤1000 IU/mL in serum 48 weeks after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_583453] (sustained off -treatment response) . 
 
2. Study objectives 
2.1 Primary objectives  
• To determine the safety and efficacy of treatment with 8 weeks of entecavir followed by 
40 weeks of both entecavir and peginterferon alfa -2a in the treatment of chronic hepatitis 
B in HBeAg positive adults who are in the immune tolerant phase. 
• To evaluate “off treatment” safety and sustained responses after treatment with 
entecavir and peginterferon alfa -2a in the treatment of chronic hepatitis B in HBeAg 
positive adults who are in the immune tolerant phase.  
2.2. Primary endpoint  
2.2.1 Safety : Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events  through the end of treatment and 
through the end of follow- up 
 
2.2.2 Efficacy : HBeAg loss (lack of detectable HBeAg) AND HBV DNA ≤1 ,000 IU/mL 48 weeks 
after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_7374].  
 2.3. Secondary endpoints  
2.3.1.  At the end of treatment : 
a. Cumulative HBsAg loss  
b. HBeAg loss  
c. HBeAg seroconversion 
d. HBsAg seroconversion  
e. ALT < 45 U/L for men, <30 U/L for women (approximately 1.[ADDRESS_766958])  
f. ALT normalization (men <30 U/L, women <20 U/L) 
g. HBV DNA ≤1 ,000 IU/mL  
h. HBV DNA <20 IU/mL (LLOQ of COBAS Ampliprep/COBAS TaqMan HBV v2.[ADDRESS_766959])  
i. Absence of detectable antiviral drug- resistance HBV mutati ons  
 
2.3.2.   Sustained end of follow -up responses  48 weeks after end- of-treatment (week 96)  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 4 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
a. Cumulative HBsAg loss  
b. HBeAg loss  
c. HBeAg seroconversion  
d. HBsAg seroconversion  
e. ALT < 45 U/L for men, <30 U/L for women (approximately 1.[ADDRESS_766960])  
f. ALT normalization (men <30 U/L, women <20 U/L) 
g. HBV DNA ≤1000 IU/mL  
h. HBV DNA <20 IU/mL (LLOQ of COBAS Ampliprep/COBAS TaqMan HBV v2.[ADDRESS_766961])  
 
3. Study design  
A single arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 8 weeks of entecavir followed by 40 weeks of both entecavir and 
peginterferon alfa -2a in adults with HBeAg -positive chronic hepatitis B with normal or near 
normal ALT levels and high serum levels of HBV DNA (“immune tolerant” HBeAg -positive 
chronic hepatitis B). Participants will be followed until week 96 (48 weeks after discontinuation of therapy). Screening can include historical values up to [ADDRESS_766962] be a screening visit within 6 weeks of the baseline visit . 
 4. Study population  
4.1. Inclusion criteria  
2. 1. Enrolled in the Hepatitis B Research Network (HBRN) Cohort Study  or compl eted 
the necessary components of the Cohort baseline evaluation by [CONTACT_583468] >18 years of age at the baseline visit  (day 0). Patients >[ADDRESS_766963] of care w ith 
HAI ≤3 and Ishak fibrosis score ≤1 within 96 weeks prior to the baseline visit . 
3. Documented chronic HBV infection as evidenced by [CONTACT_583469] ≥[ADDRESS_766964] one positive HBsAg 
and two positive HBV DNA  over a period of ≥[ADDRESS_766965] screening visit within 6 weeks of the baseline 
visit . 
5. Serum HBV DNA level >10
7 IU/mL on at least two occasions at least [ADDRESS_766966] be 
within 6 weeks of the baseline visit . 
6.   ALT levels persistently ≤45 U/L in males, ≤ 30 U/L in females (approximately   
      1.5 times the upper limit of normal [ULN] range) as documented by [CONTACT_204536]  
7.  values: one taken 28-52 weeks before the baseline visit , one taken 6 to 28 weeks 
before the baseline visit, and the final value within 6 weeks prior to the baseline visit . 
No evidence of HCC based upon alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) ≤20 ng/mL at the screening visit (up to 6 weeks prior to the baseline visit ): 
a. Participants who meet AASLD criteria for HCC surveillance must have negative liver imaging as shown by [CONTACT_2207] (US), computerized tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) within [ADDRESS_766967] of care.  
b. Participants with AFP >20 ng/mL must be evaluated clinically with additional 
imaging and shown not to have HCC on CT or MRI before they can be enrolled. 
8. Provide informed consent and agree to adhere to the requirements of the study.  
 4.2. Exclusion criteria  
1. History of hepatic decompensation, including but not limited to ascites, variceal bleeding, or hepatic encephalopathy.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 5 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/[ADDRESS_766968] 
bilirubin >0.5 mg/dL, INR >1.5, or serum albumin <3.5 g/dL.  
3. Platelet count <120,000/mm3, hemoglobin <13 g/ dL (males) or <12 g/ dL (females), 
absolute neutrophil count < 1500 /mm3 (<1000/mm3 for African- Americans) at the last 
screening visit.  
4. Previous treatment with medications that have established activity against HBV 
including, but not limited to, interferon and nucleos(t)ide analogs ≥24 weeks. Patients with <24 weeks of prior HBV treatment and a wash- out period >24 weeks are not 
excluded. Brief and epi[INVESTIGATOR_583454].  
5. Known allergy or intolerance to any of the study medications.  
6. Females who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  
7. Females of childbearing potential unable or unwilling to use a reliable method of 
contraception during the treatment period.  
8. Renal insufficiency with calculated creatinine clearance <50 mL/min at the last screening 
visit.  
9. History of alcohol or drug abuse within 48 weeks of the baseline visit . 
10. Previous liver or other organ transplantation including engrafted bone marrow transplant.  
11. Any other concomitant liver disease, including hepatitis C or D. Non -alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) with steatosis and/or mild to moderate steatohepatitis is acceptable but NALFD with severe steatohepatitis is exclusionary.  
12. Presence of anti -HDV or anti -HCV (unless HCV RNA negative) in serum on any 
occasion in the 144 weeks prior to the baseline visit . 
13. Presence of anti -HIV (test to be completed within 6 weeks prior to the basel ine visit ). 
14. Pre-existing psychiatric condition(s), including, but not limited to:  
a. Current moderate or severe depression as determined by [CONTACT_5989] 
b. History of depression requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_583455] [ADDRESS_766969] 10 years  
d. History of severe psychiatric disorders including, but not limited to schizophrenia, 
psychosis, bipolar disorder as determined by a study physician.  
15. History of immune -mediated or cerebrovascular disease, chronic pulmonary or cardiac 
disease associated with functional limitation, retinopathy, uncontrolled thyroid disease, 
poorly controlled diabetes or uncontrolled seizure disorder, as determined by a study 
physician.  
16. Any medical condition that would, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1101] a study physician, be predicted to be exacerbated by [CONTACT_583470].  
17. Any medical condition requiring, or likely to require, chronic systemic administration of 
corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medications during the course of this study.  
18. Evidence of active or suspected malignancy, or a history of malignancy within the 144 weeks prior to the baseline visit (except adequately treated carcinoma in situ or basal 
cell carcinoma of  the skin).  
19. Expected need for ongoing use of  any antivirals with activity against HBV during the 
course of the study.  
20. Concomitant use of complementary or alternative medications purported to have antiviral activity.  
21. Participation in any other clinical trial involving investigational drugs within 30 days of the 
baseline visit or intention to participate in another clinical trial involving investigational drugs during participation in this study.  
22. Any other condition or situation that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1101] a study physician would make the 
participant unsuitable for enrollment or could interfere with the participant participating in 
and completing the study.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 6 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
 
5. Study drugs and drug management  
5.1 Dosage and administration  
 
 Treatment Entecavir 0.5 mg daily orally for 48 weeks plus peginterferon alfa -2a 180 µg 
subcutaneously (sq) weekly during weeks [ADDRESS_766970] the peginterferon 
alfa-2a on the same day each week.  
 
 
5.2 Entecavir  
5.2.1 Mechanism of acti on 
Entecavir is a novel carbocyclic 2’ -deoxyguanosine analogue with potent and selective anti HBV 
activity.  Entecavir blocks three phases of HBV replication: (1) priming of the HBV polymerase, 
(2) reverse transcription of the negative strand DNA synthesis , and (3) D NA polymerase activity 
responsible for positive strand DNA synthesis. Entecavir functionally inhibits epi[INVESTIGATOR_583456]. 
Entecavir is converted to the triphosphate, which then acts as an inhibitor of hepadnaviral 
polymerase.  Entecavir is not recognized by [CONTACT_583471] (human) DNA or inhibit a polymerase assay system even when tested at very high doses (14).  EC
50 falls by 50%  with wild type HBV DNA but there is a reduction 8- [ADDRESS_766971].  
 5.2.2 Metabolism  
The intracellular half -life is about 15 hrs.  Oral entecavir given to subjects with CHB in doses 
ranging from 0.05 to 1mg daily over 28 days lead to a mean log fall in HBV DNA of 2.8.  Absorption appears to be rapid – oral bioavailability estimated to be >70%.  Entecavir is not 
affected by [CONTACT_22888] -administration of agents that are metabolized by [CONTACT_583472]450 
system.  5.2.[ADDRESS_766972]  rise to an increased incidence of lung 
tumors when given at low multiples of human exposure and more with high exposure multiples.  These tumors may be species specific and not relevant to humans. Clinical experience from 1755 patients treated with enteca vir is available and does not indicate an increased risk of 
malignancies. There is no evidence in animal models for either genotoxicity or carcinogenicity.  
 
Studies in rats and rabbits given in high dose during pregnancy indicated no embryotoxicity or 
mate rnal toxicity.  
 5.2.4 Entecavir resistant mutations   
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 7 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Entecavir has a very high genetic barrier when given in treatment naïve patients in a dose of 
0.5mg/d.  Resistance to entecavir after 5 yrs of therapy is reported to be 1.5%.  When given to patients with lamivudine- resistance, a higher dose of 1mg/day is recommended and the 
cumulative probability of entecavir resistance is detailed below:  
 
 1 yr 2 yr 3 yr 4 yr 5 yr 
Naïve to entecavir  0.2%  0.5%  1.2%  1.2%  1.2%  
Previous lamivudine 
resistance  6% 15% 36% 47% 52% 
 5.3 Peginterferon alfa- 2a 
5.3.1 General description 
Peginterferon alfa -2a is a covalent conjugate of recombinant alfa- 2a interferon with a single 
branched molecule of polyethylene glycol with a molecular weight of approximately 40,000 
daltons. Peginterferon alfa- 2a is produced using recombinant DNA technology and contains 180 
µg/1.[ADDRESS_766973] be 
kept refrigerated at +4C until use.   
 Interferon inhibits viral replication by [CONTACT_96493].  Interferon does not 
enter the hepatocyte, but rather binds to specific receptors on the cell surface, which initiates intracellular signaling that leads to rapid activation of multiple “interferon -stimulated genes 
(ISGs); the encoded proteins of these genes inhibit viral replication in infected hepatocytes by 
[CONTACT_16000] (including inhibition of viral protein synthesis and breakdown of viral RNA).  
Peginterferon alfa -2a also has immunomodulatory activity that is  thought to be important in 
obtaining a virological response. Steady -state serum concentrations of peginterferon alfa -2a are 
reached within [ADDRESS_766974], non- peginterferon alfa -2a. 
 
5.3.2 Pharmacokinetic considerations  
In patients with end- stage -renal -disease undergoing hemodialysis, there is a 25% to 45% 
reduction in clearance of peginterferon alfa-2a. The effect of milder renal impairment has not been studied but it is advised that in patients with impaired renal function, signs and symptoms of interferon toxicity should be closely monitored.  It is also recommended that peginterferon 
alfa-2a be used with caution in patients with creatinine clearance < 50 mL/min.  
 There is no known effect of peginterferon alfa -2a on the pharmacokinetics of drugs metabolized 
by [CONTACT_35233] P -450 system. There are no known clinically significant interactions with 
nucleos(t)ide analogue therapy, but a phase IV registration trial of peginterferon alfa -2a and 
telbivudine was prematurely discontinued due to a higher than anticipated incidence of 
peripheral neuropathy.   5.3.3. Safety  
As with standard alpha interferon, treatment with peginterferon alfa -2a is associated with many 
troublesome and occasionally serious, or even life -threatening, side effects. Dose 
discontinuation has been reported in 6% to 9% and dose modification in 31% to 47% of patients 
treated in the peginterferon alfa- 2a registration tr ials for hepatitis B.  The most frequent causes 
of dose adjustment were laboratory abnormalities such as thrombocytopenia or leucopenia.  
These side effects are particularly common in patients with advanced liver disease and 
hypersplenism. Peginterferon al fa-2a is absolutely contraindicated in patients with 
decompensated cirrhosis due to the possibility of serious infections, flares of disease and worsening decompensation.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 8 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
 
The majority of clinical experience in the use of peginterferon alfa -2a has been in chronic 
hepatitis C in which peginterferon alfa- 2a is combined with ribavirin. In the few studies of 
peginterferon in chronic hepatitis B it has appeared that side effects are less frequent than in chronic hepatitis C. The overall incidence of serious adverse events was less in studies in 
hepatitis B (4% -5%) than in those with hepatitis C (7% to 16%), and fewer drug withdrawals 
were reported (6% to 8% versus 17% to 33%, respectively) despi[INVESTIGATOR_583457]. Depression was also less frequently reported in studies done in hepatitis B (4%) 
than hepatitis C (22%, p < 0.001).  
 Peginterferon alfa -2a should be avoided in patients with other serious co -morbid illnesses, 
including, but not limited to, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, serious autoimmune conditions and severe depression.  
 
Pregnancy: Peginterferon alfa- 2a is a Pregnancy Category C drug that has not been 
adequately evaluated in humans for its teratogenic effect. Standard interferon has been shown 
to increase the r ate of abortion in Rhesus monkeys when given approximately [ADDRESS_766975] been no adequate and well -controlled studies of peginterferon alfa -2a in pregnant women. Therefore, in 
this study, women of childbearing potential will be enrolled only if they agree to use effective contraception during therapy and pregnancy testing will occur at every visit during the treatment 
phase.  
 
5.4. Administration and drug accountability  
Study drugs (peginterferon alfa- 2a and entecavir) will be shipped to study sites from a drug 
distribution center. Staff at each site will be responsible for dru g accountability.  This will include 
the documentation of drugs received from the drug distribution center, of study drug dispensed 
to study participants, of used and unused study drug returned, and an accounting of any drug destroyed by [CONTACT_779]. An accurate and up- to-date accountability log will be maintained by [CONTACT_204816].    
 5.5. Concomitant medications    
All concomitant medications (prescription and non- prescription) being taken by [CONTACT_583473].   
 5.6. Prohibited medications  
Use of the following medications is prohibited while participants are on study drugs:  
1. Antivirals with activity against HBV, including valacyclovir.  The need for ongoing use of 
these antivirals would be exclusionary at study entry, but would be recorded as a 
concomitant medication if medically indicated and prescribed during the course of the study.   
2. Systemic chemotherapeutic agents (i.e., cancer treatment medications).  
3. Systemic corticosteroids. The need for ongoing use of systemic corticosteroids would be 
exclusionary at study entry, but would be recorded as a concomitant medication if 
medically indicated and prescribed during the course of the study.   
4. Any investigational agents. 
5. Growth factors such as GCSF or epotein alfa.  
 6. Study procedures  
6.1. Study enrollment  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 9 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Participants thought to be eligible for participation in this trial will be asked to give their consent 
to participate after discussions with study investigators and by [CONTACT_2960] a consent form appr oved 
by [CONTACT_1201]/REB at that institution. Patients who are not enrolled in the HBRN Cohort study may 
be enrolled concurrent ly with the screening visit for this trial, or if they choose not to enroll into 
the Cohort Study the necessary  components of the Cohort baseline evaluation will be 
completed prior to enrolling in this study  at the screening or baseline visit . They will then 
undergo the screening procedures, including medical history, physical examination and blood tests as summarized in the Schedule of Events (Appendix I).   
 6.2.  Screening assessment  
The following assessments must be obtained within 6 weeks (42 days) prior to the baseline visit 
(start of treatment)   
1. Written informed consent  
2. Detailed medical history  
3. Physical examination  
4. Depression ass essment  
5. Blood tests: CBC with differential, routine biochemical tests (including ALT, AST, total 
bilirubin, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, glucose, total protein, creatinine, [including 
estimated creatinine clearance], TSH, PT/INR, alphafetoprotein (AFP),  HBsAg, HBeAg, 
quantitative HBV DNA, and anti- HIV  (see Appendix I).   
6. Anti-HCV and anti- HDV are to be tested unless results within [ADDRESS_766976] in women with reproductive potential (urine or bl ood) 
9. Abdominal imaging as necessary  
10. Plasma and serum samples will be stored at each visit.  
11. Anti-HBs/HBe will be done at the next testing time point if HBsAg/HBeAg becomes 
negative  
  
 6.3. Baseline visit Baseline assessments (day 0) must be obtained prior to the initiation of 
study drugs. Participants will have a limited clinical evaluation and have blood drawn for 
complete blood count, hepatic panel, renal panel, PT/INR and HBV DNA.  Urine for urinalysis 
will be obtained. A sample of blood will be stored for eventual assessment of HBeAg and 
HBsAg concentration, anti- HBs, anti -HBe, full HBV DNA sequence and presence of pre -core 
and core mutations as well as polymerase gene antiviral resistance mutations , and DNA 
extraction (if sample not already obtained as part of Cohort Study, and sample may be obtained 
at future visit if not obtained at baseline) (See Schedule of Events, Appendix 1).  QOL and 
health behaviors will be assessed. A pregnancy test will be performed in women with reproductive potential prior to start of treatment. At the end of the baseline visit, study drug 
(Entecavir) will be provided to the participant with instructions on its use.  
  
6.4. On-treatment assessments  
After starting treatment, visits will occur at weeks 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 30, 36, 42, and 48. Each visit 
will include assessment of compliance, adverse events reporting, vital signs, weight, symptoms 
evaluation, record of concomitant medications, and blood testing as detailed in Schedule of 
Events (Appendix I).  Participants  will be dis pensed study medications.  
1. At the Week [ADDRESS_766977] a limited 
clinical evaluation as well as blood and ur ine tests.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 10 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/[ADDRESS_766978] will be done in women with reproductive potential  at each visit until the 
end of treatment.  
3. Depression assessment will occur at weeks 8, 12, 24, 36 and 48.  
4. QOL assessments will occur at day 0, weeks 8 and 48.  Health behaviors wi ll be 
included at day 0 and week 48. 
5. Fatigue questionnaire will occur at day 0. 
6. CBC (with differential), hepatic panel (ALT, AST, total bilirubin), renal panel (Cr, CrCl) 
and HBV DNA quantitation at each visit. 
7. TSH at week 12, 24, 36 and 48. 
8. Albumin, alkaline phosphatase, glucose and total protein will be obtained at week 48  
9. HBeAg at weeks 8, 12, 24, 36 and 48. 
10. HBsAg at week 48.  
11. Blood samples for serum/plasma at each visit. 
12. HBsAg and HBeAg quantification at each visit.  
13. Anti-HBs/HBe will be done at day 0 and week 48. Also at the next visit if HBsAg/HBeAg 
becomes negative.  
 6.[ADDRESS_766979] -treatment assessments  
1. Visits will occur at weeks 52, 60, 72, and 96  .  
2. Depression assessment will occur at weeks 60 and 96.  
3. QOL and health behaviors assessments will occur at week 96. 
4. Fatigue questionnaire will be obtained at week 96.  
5. CBC (without differential), hepatic panel (ALT, AST, total bilirubin), renal panel (Cr, CrCl), and HBV DNA quantitation at each visit.  
6. TSH at week 60. 
7.  Albumin, alkaline phosphatase, total protein, glucose, INR/PT, and urinalysis at week 
96. 
8. HBeAg at weeks 60, 72, and 96.  
9. HBsAg at weeks 72 and 96.  
10. HBsAg and HBeAg quantification every visit.  
11. Blood samples for serum/plasma at each visit. 
12. Anti-HBs/HBe will be done at week 96. Also at the next visit if HBsAg/HBeAg becomes 
negative.  
 6.[ADDRESS_766980] opped for the following indications:  
• Grade IV toxicity (except hematologic, see appendix III.)  
• Death 
• Pregnancy  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 11 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
• Non-response per section 6.9.  
• Virologic breakthrough per section 6.10.   
• Hepatic decompensation defined by:  
o Total bilirubin ≥2.0 mg/dL and direct bilirubin ≥1.0 mg/dL  
o Any clinical measure of decompensation 
• Participant refusal to continue treatment  
 
Participants who discontinue treatment due to grade IV toxicity or hepatic decompensation will 
continue to be followed until these events are resolved or stabilized, according to the post -
treatment follow -up schedule. Managing these participants including more frequent 
assessments and alternative treatment will be at the discretion of the investigator.  
 
Participants who become pregnant while receiving treatment will stop treatment and subsequent 
management will be at the discretion of the investigator. The outcome of the pregnancy will be recorded.   
 
6.9. Management of non- response  
Definition: Primary non -response is defined as a failure to achieve at least >1- log
10 IU/mL 
decline in HBV DNA after the first 24 weeks of treatment by [CONTACT_583474], 
which will be confirmed on re- testing 4 weeks later. Compliance with study medications will be 
assessed and documented. Primary non- response is considered treatment failure. In the event 
of non -response, the following will be implemented:  
 
6.9.1. Reinforce compliance upon initial determination of non- response.  
6.9.2. Treatment (both entecavir and peginterferon alfa-2a) will be discontinued if non- response 
is confirmed on re -testing [ADDRESS_766981]-discontinuation . 
 
6.10. Management of virological breakthrough  
Definition:  Virological breakthrough is defined as a > 1- log 10 IU/mL increase in HBV DNA level 
from nadir in a participant with an initial virological response or redetection of HBV DNA after 
becoming undetectable, and will be confirmed on re- testing 4 weeks later in a participant with 
either an initial or partial virological response and who has been compliant with study medications.  
• Virologic breakthrough is considered a treatment failure.  
 Management algorithm if virological breakthrough6.10.1. Reinforce compliance. The 
importance of compliance with study medication will be reinforced with study participants at 
each visit.  
6.10.2 . Resistance testing will be performed but will not be used to guide decisions (as results 
will not be available in real -time). Participants meeting the definition for virologic breakthrough 
on repeat testing will stop all treatment.   
6.10.[ADDRESS_766982] -discontinuation. 
 6.11 Management algorithm for participants with ALT flare during the treatment phase  
6.11.1 . If ALT values increase to ≥300 U/L for males and ≥200 U/L for females, retest the 
hepatic panel within 4 weeks. Continue testing of hepatic panel every 4 weeks as long as the ALT remains >300 U/L for males and >200 U/L for females.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 12 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
6.11.2 . If ALT values decline below these levels,  the frequency of testing the hepatic panel can 
return to the usual schedule.  
6.11. 3. Participants will remain  on treatment  until week 48 unless:  
i. there are signs of clinical decompensation or  
ii. total bilirubin ≥2.0 mg/dL and direct bilirubin ≥1.0 mg/dL or  
iii. A LT >450 U/L for males or >300 U/L for females for more than 12 weeks  
Participants meeting any of these criteria will continue to be followed in the study but with any 
subsequent management at the discretion of the study physician.  
 
6.12. Management algor ithm for participants with ALT elevation during the follow -up 
phase (weeks 48 -96) 
6.12.1 . If ALT increases to >300 U/L for males and >200 U/L for females, retest the hepatic 
panel in 4 weeks. Continue testing of hepatic panel every 4 weeks as long as the ALT >300 U/L 
for males and >200 U/L for females.  
6.12.2 . If ALT decline below these levels, the frequency of testing the hepatic panel can return 
to the usual schedule.  
6.12.3 . For participants with ALT persistently >150 U/L in males and >100 U/L in females  for 
≥24 weeks and HBV DNA ≥10,000 IU/mL, they are eligible for  retreatment with entecavir (up to 
one year or by [CONTACT_466] 31, 2015 (whichever comes first), or peginterferon alfa -2a or both 
drugs for one year if desired by [CONTACT_583475].   
 
6.13.  Participants previously randomized to control group 
Participants enrolled in this trial prior to amendment 7.0 of this protocol  who were randomized to 
the control (no treatment) group will be offered treatment if they still meet the entry criteria for this trial (i.e.  HBV DNA and ALT results from the most recent IT trial visit  meet the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria listed in sections 4.1 and 4.2),  and are willing to  receiv e treatment. These 
participants will be reconsented prior to starting treatment and follow the visit schedule and 
assessment beginning with baseline ( Day 0) visit.  
 
Participants who no longer meet entry criteria for this trial or are not interested in receiving 
treatment will complete a Termination Visit at the next scheduled visit  for the control (no 
treatment) group. The procedures to be followed for this Termination Visit will be those specified for the Week [ADDRESS_766983] few injections, fatigue, neuropsychiatric symptoms such as depression and reduction in white blood cell counts and platelet counts.  Hyper - or hypothyroidism has been noted to occur 
in up to 5% of patients receiving peginterferon alfa- 2a. 
 Some rare but potentially serious side effects include:  
• neuropsychiatric complications, which may include suicide, suicidal ideation and severe depression  
• serious and severe bacterial infections, some fatal have been reported during treatment with peginterferon alfa- 2a 
• pancreatitis  
• interstitial pneumonitis, fatal cases have been reported with peginterferon alfa 2a use  
 
Other possible but uncommon adverse events associated with peginterferon alfa -2a include:  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 13 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
• development or exacerbation of existing autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, systemic lupus erythematous, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, psoriasis 
etc 
• other pulmonary disorders including dyspnea, pulmonary infiltrates, and sarcoidosis  
• exacerbations of inflammatory bowel disease  
• eye disorders, including decrease or loss of vision, retinal hemorrhages  
• hypersensitivity including sometimes severe skin reactions in the spectrum of Stevens 
Johnson syndrome  
 
7.1.1. Managing  depression  
When possible, the CES -D will be used along with the investigators judgment, to screen 
participants for depression at the screening visit (within 6 weeks of the baseline visit) and to 
monitor for onset or worsening of symptoms during the treat ment and follow -up phases visits in 
all participants (See Schedule of Events). If a participant has a CES -D score >15 at the 
screening visit (with in 6 weeks of the baseline visit ), evaluation by a mental health provider 
should be considered before enrollme nt (start of treatment). During the treatment phase, if a 
participant has a CES -D score >15, the investigator will determine whether referral to a mental 
health provider is indicated.  
 
If the management of the depression is not successful after eight weeks or if the participant 
develops suicidal or homicidal ideation, the peginterferon alfa- 2a will be stopped but entecavir 
continued until the end of the treatment period (see section 7.5.4) and the participant will be 
referred to a mental health provider.  
 7.2. Peginterferon alfa -2a dose reduction guidelines  
Factors that may lead to a reduction in the dose of peginterferon alfa- 2a include:  
1. Disabling symptoms, which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], are related to 
Peginterferon alfa -2a treatment and prevent the participant from performing 
his/her occupation or daily tasks. 
2. A rash consistent with allergic reaction or vasculitis.  
3. Reductions in the platelet count according to the guidelines in Appendix III.  
4. A reduction in neutrophil count according to the guidelines in Appendix III.  
5. Any adverse reaction, which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_9764], places the participant 
at increased risk.  
 
The dose of study medications may be decreased due to adverse events or laboratory 
abnormalities.  In most instances the dose of peginterferon alfa -2a will be reduced in graduated 
steps as follows:  
• Level 1 decrease from 180 µg to 135 µg  
• Level 2 decrease from 135 µg to 90 µg 
• Level [ADDRESS_766984] dose adjustment for neutropenia or thrombocytopenia, 
laboratory values should be repeated, if practical, prior to the next dose of peginterferon alfa- 2a 
to confirm the result and dictate the course of action.  Participants who remain with a neutrophil count below 500/mm
3 (but above 250/mm3) or a platelet count below 50,000/mm3 (but above 
25,000/mm3) should receive stepwise dose reductions until levels of neutrophils and platelets 
are ≥500/mm3 or ≥50,000/mm3, respectively, or until a dose of 45 µg of peginterferon alfa- 2a is 
reached.  
 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 14 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
7.2.1. Guidelines for subsequent peginterferon dose adjustments  
Once a participant’s dose has been decreased for laboratory abnormalities or adverse events, 
the study physician may attempt to increase the dose back to or toward the previous stable l evel 
according to the following guidelines:  
1. The event or circumstance responsible for the dosage adjustment has resolved or 
improved;  
2.   The participant has been at the lo wer dose for ≤4 consecutive doses;  
3. The participants had ≤6 total doses administered at the lower level during the entirety of the treatment period.  
 
If four or more consecutive doses of peginterferon alfa- 2a are held or otherwise not 
administered (i.e., t he participant has not received test medication for more than 28 days), the 
participant will be considered intolerant of the test medication or non- compliant, whichever is 
more appropriate to the clinical situation. In such cases, the study physician will discontinue 
peginterferon alfa -2a but entecavir treatment will continue (see section 7.5.4).  
 
Every attempt will be made to keep participants on treatment with peginterferon alfa -2a on 
therapy by [CONTACT_29874].  The use of hematological growth factors during the study will not be allowed.  
7.2.2. Peginterferon alfa- 2a dosing and creatinine clearance (CrCL)  
Creatinine clearance will be calculated in all participants  prior to initiating therapy and at each 
study visit. The peginterferon alfa -2a dose does not require adjustment unless the patient is on 
dialysis. However, in this study, peginterferon alfa- 2a will be discontinued if CrCl is ≤30 ml/min 
to be consistent with criteria for entecavir discontinuation (see below).  
 7.3. Managing adverse effects of entecavir  
7.3.1. Adverse effects of entecavir  
• Headache, fatigue, dizziness, nausea, upper abdominal pain, upset stomach, diarrhea, 
vomiting, trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_583458], changes to liver and pancreas enzymes.  
These side effects were generally mild to moderate in severity.  
• Lactic Acidosis:  Patients taking drugs similar to entecavir have experienced lactic 
acidosis.  Symptoms of lactic acidosis include weakness/tiredness, muscle pain, trouble breathing, stomach pain with nausea and vomiting, feeling cold (particularly in 
extremities), dizzin ess/lightheadedness, and increased heart rate.   
• Hepatitis “flares”:  In patients with chronic hepatitis B, liver enzyme changes are common.   
• Laboratory studies have shown that entecavir does not interact with the enzymes in the liver that are responsible for most drug interactions.  However, because the body gets rid 
of entecavir in the urine, it is possible that drugs which affect kidney function could increase the levels of entecavir when a patient uses both drugs.  These types of drugs 
are not allowed in this study.  
• When mice and rats were given entecavir for their entire adult life, these animals 
developed more tumors, including cancerous tumors, than are normally expected. Male 
mice developed non- cancerous lung tumors when they were exposed to entecav ir at 
levels greater than or equal to [ADDRESS_766985] that the lung findings 
in mice are unique for mice. The lung findings in mice did not occur in rats, dogs or 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 15 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
monkeys. It is not known whether these tumor findings in animals are relevant to 
humans who are treated with Entecavir. 
 7.3.2. Entecavir and renal function  
Entecavir dosing is based upon CrCL: Creatinine clearance will be calculated for all participants 
prior to initiating therapy and at each study visit to determine Entecavir  dose.  
• Participants whose calculated creatinine clearance decreases to <50 ml/min should have this value confirmed within 72 hrs.   
• Entecavir may be continued if the CrCL is ≥30- 50 ml/min at the adjusted dose of 0.5 mg 
every 48 hours.  
• Entecavir will be discontinued if the CrCL is <30 ml/min.  
 
7.4. Pregnancy  
Participants will be asked to practice effective birth control while they are taking antiviral agents 
in this study.  Additionally, following precautions will be taken:  
• All female participants with reproductive potential will undergo pregnancy test on enrollment and will have pregnancy tests performed at each visit during treatment.  
• If a participant on entecavir or peginterferon alfa -2a becomes pregnant, the study 
physician should be notified immediately and treatment will be discontinued immediately. 
Subsequent management will be at the discretion of the study physician. The study will 
collect data on the outcomes of any pregnancies that occur in women who conceived 
while taking study medication.  
 
7.5. Adverse events – definition and management  
7.5.1. Definitions  
An adverse event (AE) is any adverse change from the participant’s baseline (pre- treatment) 
condition, including intercurrent illness which occurs during the course of the trial, after the consent form has been signed, whether the event is considered related to treatment or not.  
 
The modified World Health Organization (WHO) grading system will be used for grading severity 
of AEs.  For AEs not outlined in the modified WHO grading system, study s pecific definitions will 
be identified in the Manual of Operation (MOP).  
 
A serious adverse event is an untoward medical occurrence that results in any  
of the following:  
1. Death  
2. Is life threatening (risk of death at the time of the event)  
3. Requires in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] 
4. Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
5. Congenital abnormality or birth defect  
 Important medical events that do not result in one of the events listed above may be considered 
a serious adverse event when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize 
the participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
 A serious  adverse event which is unexpected and is related will require expedited reporting to 
the DCC and the NIDDK and appropriate oversight committees or entities.  
 
Disease related outcomes, such as the following, will not be considered to be serious adverse 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 16 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
events:  
1. Development of HCC  
2. Hepatic decompensation 
 
Although pregnancy, overdose, cancer (excluding HCC), and potential drug induced liver injury 
(DILI) are not always serious by [CONTACT_8661], these events must be handled as SAEs.   
 
7.5.2. Data collection procedures for adverse events 
Participants will be interviewed regarding medical conditions, medication changes, and 
symptoms that have occurred at each study visit. An Adverse Event form will be completed if 
any adverse event is reported. If the study coordinator or a study physician learns of any 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_583459], an Adverse Event form will be 
completed. All adverse events and Serious Adverse Events from time of study entry (consent) 
up to the end of follow -up (week 96) will be reported to the DCC.  
 
A Serious Adverse Event form will be completed for all adverse events rated as 
serious.  
 Participants will be followed for all ongoing unresolved adverse events until they are either resolved, or in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_9764], the participant is medically stable.  
 A study physician will assess the relationship of each adverse event to the use of study drug, 
based on available information, using guidelines outlined in the MOP.  
 
7.5.3 Reporting procedures 
All serious adverse events that are unexpected and related to study drug(s) will be reported to 
the DCC within [ADDRESS_766986] also be reported in accordance with local 
law and regulations. 
 
The HBRN will comply with Genentech/[COMPANY_002] and Bristol -Myers Squibb SAE reporting 
requirements (see Manual of Operations).  
  
7.5.4. Management if either entecavir or peginterferon alfa- 2a is discontinued due to 
adverse events  
If entecavir is discontinued due to adverse event, then peginterferon alfa -2a will be continued 
until the end of the treatment period. If peginterferon alfa -2a is discontinued due to adverse 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 17 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
event, then entecavir will be continued until the end of the treatment period.  
 
8. Statistical considerations  
8.1. Statistical analysis  
Summary statistics will be generated to describe the study sample at baseline.  Descriptive 
statistics, including measures of central tendency (e.g. means, medians ) and estimates of 
spread (e.g., standard deviations, quartiles) will be used for continuous variables such as age 
and baseline HBV DNA and HBsAg levels.  Frequency distributions will be used for categorical 
variables such as HBV genotype and HBeAg status.   Ninety -five percent confidence intervals 
will be calculated for all point estimates of continuous data.  Graphical displays (e.g. histograms, box plots) will also be used to describe the data.  
 
8.1.1. Analysis of primary endpoint s 
The primary endpoint s include safety , measured by [CONTACT_583476], and efficacy, defined as loss of HBeAg and HBV DNA ≤1 ,000 IU/mL at the end of 
follow -up (week 96). That is, only participants  achieving HBeAg loss and having HBV DNA 
≤1000 IU/mL at  the end of follow -up will be considered as achieving the primary efficacy 
endpoint.   
Safety  
 
Summaries of adverse events (number of adverse events, number and percentage of 
participant s with at least one adverse event, and for each adverse event , rate per person- years) 
will be provided. Events will be summarized based on the date of onset for the event. A 
treatment emergent adverse event will be defined as an adverse event that begins on or after the date of first dose of study drug.  
Summaries of the fol lowing are planned:  
• all adverse events recorded between screening and first dose of study medication,  
• all treatment emergent adverse events,  
• all emergent and related adverse events,  
• all treatment emergent renal adverse events,  
• all treatment emergent and related renal adverse events  
• combined Grade 2, 3 and 4 treatment emergent adverse events,  
• combined Grade 2, 3 and 4 related treatment and emergent adverse events,  
• combined Grade 3 and 4 treatment emergent adverse events,  
• combined Grade 3 and 4 related  treatment and emergent adverse events,  
• all adverse events that caused permanent discontinuation of study drug,  
• all adverse events that caused temporary interruption of study drug,  
• all serious adverse events, and  
• all serious and related adverse events.   
 We will provide 95% confidence interval s for the rate of adverse and serious adverse events.  
 Efficacy  
The p ercentage  of participants achieving the primary efficacy endpoint will be summarized with 
the point estimate and 95% confidence interval.  
8.1.2. Analysis of secondary endpoints  
[IP_ADDRESS].  Analysis of secondary endpoint listed in 2.3.1.: Estimate  the cumulative proportion of 
HBsAg loss over time during and after treatment  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 18 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/[ADDRESS_766987] limit 
(Kaplan- Meier) method  and presented with point- wise 95% confidence interval .  
 [IP_ADDRESS]. Analyses of other secondary endpoints  
For all of the secondary endpoints  listed in sections 2.3.1. – 2.3.4, we will provide frequencies 
and percentages with corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Time to such events may also be of interest (e.g. cumulative HBeAg loss). For time- to event analysis, Kaplan- Meier curves will 
be used to plot the cumulative proportion of events over time.  
The second group of endpoints is continuous variables such as changes in ALT, HBV DNA levels from baseline at designated treatment or follow -up time points. Descriptive statistics, 
including measures of central tendency (e.g. means, medians) and estimates of spread (e.g., standard deviations, quartiles) will be used to characterize such changes.  . 
 
8.2. Missing data  
Primary analyses will be performed using all enrolled participants (intention -to-treat analysis). 
Participants who do not have primary endpoint data due to drop -out or other reasons  at the end 
of follow -up will be considered as treatment failures. Since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_48505] a small 
sample size, formal procedures for handling missing data such as inverse- weighting and 
multiple imputation will not have enough power, nevertheless, we will apply the following 
methods to assess the sensitivity of our primary analysis results to different missing data 
assumptions:  
1. Single LOCF Imputation: In this case the primary endpoint analysis will be repeated by [CONTACT_583477] -up using data from prior visits.  
2. Inverse- probability -weighting: This analysis will be carried out in two stages. In the first stage, 
for each subject we will estimate the probability of having complete data at week [ADDRESS_766988] stage.  
3. Multiple Imputations: The missing values at week [ADDRESS_766989] calculated precision estimates based on various rates of primary endpoint 
of efficacy [ loss of HBeAg and HBV DNA ≤1, 000 IU/mL at the end of follow -up (week 96) ]. For 
example, if the expected proportion achieving primary efficacy endpoint is 25%, then we would 
be able to estimate it with 95% Clopper -Pearson confidence to ensure that the expected width 
of the interval does not exceed 29% (or equivalently, the estimated 95% confidence limits will be within ± 15% of the estimate). Below are some further precision estimates: 
 
Table:  Precision (Width) Estimates for 95% Confidence Intervals under  Different Primary 
Endpoint Proportions   
 
Expected proportion  with 
primary efficacy endpoint  95% 
lower  95% 
upper  Width  
0.15 0.057  0.298  0.24 
0.20 0.091  0.356  0.27 
0.25 0.127  0.412  0.29 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 19 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/[ADDRESS_766990]  
Data and safety will be monitored by [CONTACT_583478] (NIDDK) in conjunction with an NIDDK -appointed Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB).  This board serves in a consultative capacity to inform the NIDDK decisions regarding conduct of the study.  The description of DSMB activities is included in the DSMB Charter.  
 
9.1. Data and Safety Monitoring  
This trial aims to examine the safety and efficacy of treatment with 8 weeks of entecavi r 
followed by 40 weeks of both entecavir and peginterferon alfa- 2a  in the treatment of chronic 
hepatitis B in HBeAg positive adults who are in the immune tolerant phase . The individual drugs 
(peginterferon alfa- 2a and entecavir) are FDA -approved and have been well -studied except in 
the immune tolerant participants. The risks to participants are outlined in sections 5.2.3 and 
5.3.3 of this p rotocol.  Section 7 of the protocol defines the toxicities associated with these drugs 
and outlines dose adjustment and discontinuation guidelines due to toxicity. The data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP) for this study focuses on close monitoring by [CONTACT_54852] 
(PI) and prompt reporting of excessive adverse events and all serious adverse events to the 
DCC and the appropriate oversight committees or entities such as the NIDDK, the Data and 
Safety Monitoring Board and to the participating centers’ IRBs.  
 The Data Coordinating Center (DCC) will monitor clinical center performance (e.g., recruitment, 
retenti on, data completeness, timeliness of data collection and submission) and protocol 
compliance.  These reports, with summaries of adverse event data, will be provided to the DSMB for their quarterly reports and biannual calls or meetings, and to the Steering Committee 
at its annual meeting.   
 The DCC will work with the HBRN Safety Officer and the Steering Committee to maintain a 
cumulative summary of adverse events (overall and stratified by [CONTACT_96514]/non- serious status) that 
will be forwarded to the DSMB every three months.  Safety reports will also be sent to the 
Principal Investigators and the NIDDK Project Officers.  The Project Coordinator will be responsible for distributing these reports and assuring that all parties obtain copi[INVESTIGATOR_502603].  
 The f requency of data review for this study differs according to the type of data and can be 
summarized in the following table:  
 
Data type  Frequency of review  
Recruitment  
Retention  
Protocol adherence(e.g., meeting inclusion/exclusion criteria, treatment 
compliance)  
Pregnancy in female subjects receiving 
treatment  Quarterly reports for NIDDK and the 
appropriate oversight committees  
Adverse events and Serious Adverse Events 
(SAE) that do not meet expedited reporting Quarterly reports for NIDDK and the 
appropriate oversight committees  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 20 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
criteria  
Serious Adverse Events that meet expedited 
reporting criteria  As they occur for NIDDK, DSMB, 
appropriate industry partner(s), and 
cumulative reports quarterly  
Laboratory data  Yearly for DSMB  
 
Definitions of adverse and serious adverse events and their management guidelines are provided in section 7.5 of this protocol along with the reporting procedures and in the MOP. No 
interim analysis for efficacy is planned.  
 
9.2 Participant confidentiality  
The central database of the study is on a server at the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_96466] (EDC) in the 
Graduate School of Public Health at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96467].  Backups are performed daily to guard against data loss due to an equipment or power failure.  Scheduled 
backups and archives at the EDC protect central and local information from hard disk failures.  Tape backup volumes and CD -ROM copi[INVESTIGATOR_96468] a secured off -
site storage area to prevent data loss due to catastrophic events.  Routine virus detection is also enforced for all EDC computers involved in the study.  All critical information regarding database transactions is logged and stored in journal files.  In the event of accidental corruption of the 
project database, a previous database state may be restored from backup volumes or journal 
files.  All servers used for this project are connected to uninterrupted power supplies to protect 
equipment against electrical surges and outages.  A secured, computer room in an area with a 
burglar alarm houses all project server equipment.   
 Participant confidentiality is preserved by [CONTACT_583479].  Data sent to the DCC are identified by [CONTACT_583480]. No reports of this 
study will use names or other identifying information such as social security numbers or 
addresses.  Data, with alphanumeric ID only, will be stored at the DCC indefinitely.  In addition, following the completion of the study data and information, with alphanumeric ID only, will be 
submitted in the NIDDK repository by a suitable date agreed upon by [CONTACT_583481].   
 
 
 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 21 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
References  
 
1. Hoofnagle JH, Doo E, Liang TJ, Fleischer R, Lok AS. Management of hepatitis B: summary 
of a clinical research workshop. Hepatology 2007;45(4):1056- 75. 
2. Yim HJ, Lok AS. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B virus infection: what we knew in 1981 
and what we know in 2005. Hepatology 2006;43([ADDRESS_766991] 1):S173- 81. 
3. Wang C, Lim L, Deubner H, et al. Factors predictive of significant hepatic fibrosis in adults 
with chronic hepatitis B and normal serum ALT. J Clin Gastroenterol 2008;42(7):820- 6. 
4. Lai M, Hyatt BJ, Nasser I, Curry M, Afdhal NH . The clinical significance of persistently 
normal ALT in chronic hepatitis B infection. J Hepatol 2007;47(6):760- 7. 
5. Andreani T, Serfaty L, Mohand D, et al. Chronic hepatitis B virus carriers in the 
immunotolerant phase of infection: histologic findings  and outcome. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2007;5(5):636 -41. 
6. Milich D, Liang T. Exploring the biological basis of hepatitis B e antigen in hepatitis B virus 
infection. Hepatology 2003;38(5):1075 -86. 
7. Sukriti S, Pati N, Bose S, Hissar S, Sarin S. Impaire d antigen processing and presentation 
machinery is associated with immunotolerant state in chronic hepatitis B virus infection. J Clin 
Immunol 2010;30(3):419 -25. 
8. Ohkawa K, Takehara T, Tatsumi T, et al. Alterations in hepatitis B virus nucleotide 
sequenc es in a chronic virus carrier from immunotolerant to immunoactive phase. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun 2010;394(3):574 -80. 
9. Lok A, McMahon B. Chronic hepatitis B: update 2009. Hepatology 2009;50(3):661- 2. 
10. Chen CJ, Yang HI, Su J, et al. Risk of hepatocellular carcinoma across a biological gradient 
of serum hepatitis B virus DNA level. Jama 2006;295(1):65- 73. 
11. Iloeje UH, Yang HI, Su J, Jen CL, You SL, Chen CJ. Predicting cirrhosis risk based on the 
level of circulating hepatitis B viral load. Gastroenterology 2 006;130(3):678- 86. 
12. Lok A, McMahon B. Chronic hepatitis B. AASLD Practice Guidelines. Hepatology 
2001;34:1225 -41. 
13. D'Antiga L, Aw M, Atkins M, Moorat A, Vergani D, Mieli -Vergani G. Combined 
lamivudine/interferon- alpha treatment in "immunotolerant" children perinatally infected with 
hepatitis B: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Pediatr 2006;148(2):228- 33. 
14. Mazzucco CE, Hamatake RK, Colonno RJ, Tenney DJ. Entecavir for treatment of hepatitis 
B virus displays no in vitro mitochondrial toxicity or DNA polymerase gamma inhibition. 
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2008; 52:598- 605 
15. Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials; National Research Council ISBN. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials  
(http://www.nap.edu/catalog/[ZIP_CODE].htm l). 
16. Marcellin P, Lau GKK, Zeusem S, et al.  Comparing the safety, tolerability and quality of life 
in patients with chronic hepatitis B vs chronic hepatitis C treated with peginterferon alpha- 2a. 
Liver Int 2008;28:477- 85. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 22 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Appendix I:   Schedule of events for treated participants  
 
 
Phase of Study  Screening  Treatment  Follow -up 
Weeks of Study  -28 to 
-52 -6 to      
-28 up to 
-6 0
1 8 1
2 1
6 2
0 2
4 3
0 3
6 4
2 4
8 5
2 6
0 7
2 9
6 
Informed consent    X               
Medical history    X               
Physical exam    X X X X X X X X X X X    X 
Drug dispensing     X X X X X X X X X      
Adherence assessment/ Clinical evaluation including AEs, concomitant meds     X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Anthropometric measures     X         X    X 
Questionnaires ( QOL)    X X        X    X 
Health behaviors     X         X    X 
Depression assessment    X  X X   X  X  X  X  X 
Symptom questionnaire     X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Fatigue questionnaire     X             X 
CBC, including platelets and differential2   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Hepatic tests (AST, ALT, and bilirubin; albumin 
and ALKP day 0 and weeks 48 and 96 only)3 X4 X4 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Other chemistries (glucose, total protein)    X          X    X 
TSH   X    X   X  X  X  X   
Renal tests (Creatinine and CrCl calculated 
MDRD)    X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Urinalysis    X X X        X    X 
PT/INR    X X         X    X 
AFP   X               
Pregnancy test (urine or blood)5   X X X
 X
 X
 X X X X X X     
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 23 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
 
Phase of Study  Screening  Treatment  Follow -up 
Weeks of Study  -24 to  
-52 -6 to      
-24 up to 
-6 0
1 8 1
2 1
6 2
0 2
4 3
0 3
6 4
2 4
8 5
2 6
0 7
2 9
6 
HBsAg    X          X   X X 
HBsAg quant     X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
HBeAg    X X X X   X  X  X  X X X 
HBeAg quant     X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Anti-HBe6    X         X    X 
Quant HBV DNA  X4  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Anti-HBs6    X         X    X 
HBV genotype and subtype7    X              
HBV precore/BCP     X             X 
Antiviral drug resistance mutation testing98    X         X     
Anti-HCV9   X               
Anti-HDV9   X               
Anti-HIV   X          X     
Abdominal imaging10   X      X    X   X X 
Plasma/serum banking11   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
DNA Banking12    X              
 
1. Day [ADDRESS_766992] bilirubin at next blood draw.  
4. Historical data acceptable– ALT (2 values, one 28-52 weeks before screening, one 6-28 weeks before screening) and HBV DNA (1 value, within 12-52 
weeks before screening).  
5. .   
5. All women with reproductive potential prior to baseline visit ; women on treatment with reproductive potential after  start of treatment . 
6. Anti-HBe/Anti-HBs to be done at next visit if HBeAg/HBsAg becomes negative.  
7. For those who did not have genotype performed for the cohort study  
8. Also if meets criteria for virologic breakthrough (results not available in real -time).  
9. Anti-HCV and anti-HDV, if results within 144 weeks of baselin e visit  are avai lable, tests do not need to be repeated.  
10. Patients with AFP >20 should be further evaluated by [CONTACT_9661] (US/CT/MRI) as clinically needed to rule out HCC before entry into the study. Patients 
meeting AASLD criteria for HCC surveillance should have follow -up imaging per standard of care.  
11. 24mL of whole blood (for serum) and 8mL of whole blood (for plasma) at screening visit, day 0, 8, 48 and 96, and 8mL of whole blood (for serum) and 8mL 
of whole blood (for plasma) at other time points. These volumes include blood that will be collected for central testing.  Patients who will be enrolled in HBRN 
Cohort Study concurrent with screening visit for this trial will have an additional 8 mL serum and 8 mL plasma at the baseline visit for future research.  
12. 5 mL of whole blood if DNA sample  (with consent)  not previously collected.  May be collected at any study visit if not at baseline.  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 24 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Appendix II: Dosing of peginterferon if missed doses  
 
Dose delayed 1 or 2 days: administer on usual dosing day of the week (e.g., if 
Monda y is the usual dosing day and the dose is delayed until Wednesday, the next 
dose may be administered as usual on Monday).  
Dose delayed 3- 5 days:  administer subsequent doses every 5th or 6th day until the 
participant is back to his or her original schedule (e.g., if Monday is the usual dosing 
day and the dose is delayed until Saturday, the next dose should be administered on 
Thursday, the following dose on Tuesday, then the dose after that as usual on 
Monday).  
Dose delayed 6 days:  hold the dose for that week then continue on the usual 
schedule the following week (e.g., if Monday is the usual dosing day but the 
participant is not ready to be dosed until the following Sunday, the dose is 
considered to have been held and the next injection should be for the following weeks; dose on Monday).  
Dose delayed 7 or more days: the investigator may reintroduce study drug at any 
time and, if necessary, dose the participant every 5th or 6th day until the participant 
resumes weekly dosing on their usual scheduled day.  
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 25 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Appendix III: Peg -Interferon Dose Reduction   
 
Peginterferon alfa- 2a dose adjustment guidelines 
Specific dose adjustment guidelines for peginterferon alfa- 2a are provided in the tables 
below for neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. For other adverse effects considered to 
be possibly related to peginterferon, including laboratory abnormalities, adverse events, 
and vital signs changes, investigators should utilize the table below labeled “General 
Dose Reduction Guidelines.” When practicable, abnormal laboratory results should be 
confirmed as soon as possible following notification of the investigator. If appropriate, 
downward adjustments in one level reductions should be considered. The lowest dose of 
peginterferon alfa 2a that should be administered is 45 µg weekly. It should be kept in 
mind that whereas these guidelines should be generally followed to promote consistency across centers, other responses by [CONTACT_583482].  
 
a. General dose  reduction guidelines  
 For Peginterferon alfa -2a, 1 dose reduction = 135 µg; 2 dose = 90 µg; 3 dose = [ADDRESS_766993] Dose Adjustment or Delay in Dosing  
ANC (cells/mm3)  
≥500  No change  
250-499 I step initially; potentially up to 3 steps  
<250  Stop drug  
Platelet Count 
(cells/mm3)  
>50,000  No change  
25,000 -50,000  1 step initially; potentially up to 3 steps  
<25,000  Stop drug  
Adult Immune Tolerant Protocol    Page 26 of 26 
Version 7.0 08/15/2013   
 
Appendix IV:  Participating centers  
 
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health (NIH) Clinical Center  
 [LOCATION_011], MA:  Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_96474], CA:  UCLA, Cedars Sinai Medical Center  
 
Michigan Consortium:  University of Michigan, Queen’s Medical Center, Honolulu, HI  
 Minnesota:  Mayo Clinic [COMPANY_002]ster, University of Minnesota 
 
North Carolina: University of North Carolina, Duke University Medical Center  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA: University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96475] (DCC)  
 San Francisco, CA:  UCSF, [LOCATION_004] Pacific Medical Center  
 St. Louis, MO:  Saint Louis University, Washington University School of Medicine  
 
[LOCATION_007]:  University of [LOCATION_007] Southwestern, Baylor University Medical Center  
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada:  University of Toronto  
 
Virginia:  Virginia Commonwealth University  
 Washington: University of Washington Medical Center, Virginia Mason Medical Center  
 