Manual of Operations for  
 
Intervention Comparative Effectiveness for Adult 
Cognitive Training (ICE -ACT) 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Posted 11/20/2020    
1  
MANUAL OF OPERATIONS  
Comparative Effectiveness Study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

2 Table of Contents  
 
STUDY BACKGROUND 4 
Description of study background & design 4 
Timeline & Project Flowchart  6 
CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSORS AND INTERVENTIONISTS  7 
All assessors and interventionists who obtain informed consent and/or administer 
study protocols have already completed CITI training course. In addition, undergraduate and post­bachelor's research assistants have been taught proper 
procedure s and will be directly supervised by [CONTACT_9154]'s or someone listed as a 
co­investigator of research staff in FSU IRB.  7 
SAMPLE RECRUITMENT & RETENTION  7 
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria  [ADDRESS_1240634]  13 
Handle your computer with care  13 
Prevent your computer from getting wet  13 
Charging your Computer: [ADDRESS_1240635] yourself from the heat that your  computer generates: [ADDRESS_1240636] yourself from the heat generated by [CONTACT_886551] : [ADDRESS_1240637] the cables from being damaged : [ADDRESS_1240638] your data and software : 17 
How to open your computer:  17 
Plugging in your Mouse: 20 
Turning your computer on: 22 
Logging into your computer: 24 
Passwo rds and sleep mode: 26 

3 Connecting to the network: 27 
Turning your computer off: 32 
Adjusting the volume on your computer:  33 
If you are using a MIFI Unit: 35 
Brain -HQ 38 
About this Quick Guide  43 
What is the CREATE Study?  43 
Logging on to BrainHQ  43 
Completing a Training session  45 
Diary after training session  52 
Second training session of the day  55 
Description of Double Decision  56 
Description of Freeze Frame  58 
Description of Target Tracker  60 
Rise of Nations  63 
IADL Training (Fraud + AARP)  63 
Cont rol training (Crosswords, Sudoku, Word Search)  63 
PROTOCOLS  64 
Pre-screening 64 
Computer setup  64 
Laptop description, and description of data logging protocol  64 
Laptop setup protocol  64 
Randomization Procedures  64 
Training on Tasks  64 
Hardware Script  64 
Brain -HQ 67 
IADL Training (Fraud + AARP)  98 
Control training (Crosswords, Sudoku, Word Searc h) [ADDRESS_1240639]  109 
Setup appointment -  FOLLOW UP  110 
Support  110 
4 ADVERSE EVENTS  110 
 
 
 
 
STUDY BACKGROUND  
Description of study background & design 
Goals of study  
Age-related perceptual and cognitive declines are associated with difficulties performing 
everyday tasks requi red to remain independent [1]. Encouraging improvements in cognitive 
abilities have been shown for a variety of short -term interventions such as group and individual 
training on abilities (e.g., the ACTIVE trial; [46]), digital games [6, 23], aerobic exerc ise [26], and 
combined treatments [5]). The rationale for these interventions is that they can be expected to 
support the maintenance of functional independence in older adulthood given the relatively 
strong relationship between Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs) performance and 
cognitive abilities [1], and the range of IADLs required for independence.  
There are, however, several limitations to the design and interpretation of broad ability -level 
cognitive training described above [43].  First,  over a century of research on skill acquisition has 
shown relatively narrow transfer and strong domain specificity for acquired skills [20]. In fact, sometimes a narrow training package may be more effective than training of general abilities, namely broad training, depending on the type of task and target outcome [33].  Given the range 
of interventions that have shown some efficacy, application of this knowledge to deploying cost -
effective population -level interventions requires assessing their comparativ e effectiveness .  
Second, relatively few intervention studies have assessed independence using metrics other 
than cognitive ability measure proxies. For example, many studies have used laboratory task 
outcomes such as the Useful Field of View (UFOV) test -  as a predictor of driving crashes [22] - 
rather than using performance data from real or simulated driving. Third, practice effects on 
cognitive measures that are repeated from baseline to post -training test can make it difficult to 
estimate true change, although increased participant age tends to minimize practice effects and 
alternate form use can almost eliminate practice effects for some tests [11], though not for all tasks during relatively long periods of intervention [e.g., 37, 38, 39]. Finally, placebo effects, 
particularly expectation effects, are a serious threat to interpreting intervention studies [8].  
This randomized trial was designed to compare the effectiveness of broad and directed (narrow) 
technology -based training on basic perceptual and cognitive abilities in older adults and on the 
performance of simulated tasks of daily living.  Participants were randomly assigned to four 
training conditions: (1) a brain game; (2) a video game; (3) IADL training for both fraud 
avoidance and driving; or  (4) an active control condition, involving puzzle solving.  This trial 
seeks to provide guidance not just about what works, but also what works best for a given 
investment (i.e., time, money) in older adults.  The current trial was specifically designed t o 
5 address the several methodological limitations mentioned above, including: (1) the development 
of direct measures of IADL performance, targeting areas related to risks for catastrophic failure 
(e.g., crashes in driving, losing financial resources to fraud); (2) the use of alternate forms to 
provide more precise estimates of treatment effects (for both cognitive and IADL measures); (3) 
inclusion of an active control condition; and (4) measurement of expectation effects (as 
recommended in [43]). In this paper, we provide a primer to the design of this trial and describe 
the baseline characteristics of our sample.  
 
Overall design  
This trial is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov  (Identifier#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). The trial is a 
single -site randomized controlled trial (RCT), conducted at [LOCATION_012] State University (FSU; 
Tallahassee, FL), one of four funded sites of the National Institute of Aging Center for Research 
and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement (CREATE).  Following a telephone 
screening and baseline a ssessments, eligible participants were randomized into one of four 
conditions: (1) Posit Science’s BrainHQ; (2) Rise of Nations, a PC -based video game; (3) 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) training, on both AARP’s Driver Safety Course, and 
a Financial Fraud training course developed for this intervention; (4) active control group, 
playing a suite of three tasks (i.e., Sudoku, crossword puzzles, and word search).  Once 
participants were assigned to a condition, they received a laptop with speci alized software for 
their condition. Participants received in- lab training designed to encourage familiarity with how 
to operate a laptop, and the necessary components for their task.  Participants were asked to 
train on their assigned condition for four w eeks at home, and return for two scheduled days of 
post-training assessments, as well as a follow -up assessment at [ADDRESS_1240640] schedule is summarized in Figure 1. The trial had highly standardized 
protocols for recruitment, screening, assessment, intervention administration (including manuals 
sent home with participants), and data transfer from intervention devices. The Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) at [LOCATION_012] State University, approved the protocol for this trial.  
 
. 
6 Timeline & Project Flowchart 
 
 
  

7 CERTIFICATION OF ASSESSORS AND 
INTERVENTIONISTS  
All assessors and interventionists who obtain informed consent and/or 
administer study protocols have already completed CITI training course. In 
addition, undergraduate and post­bachelor's research assistants have been taught proper procedures and will be directly supervised by [CONTACT_9154]'s or someone 
listed as a co­investigator of research staff in FSU IRB.  
 
SAMPLE RECRUITMENT & RETENTION  
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion  
Participants were considered eligible for the study if they: (1) were 65 years of age or 
older; (2) planned to stay in the Tallahassee, Leon County Area ([LOCATION_012], [LOCATION_003]) for the next 12 
months; (3) had a valid driver’s license and drove at least once a month; (4) had adequate cognitive ability, assessed via a phone interview using the Wechsler Memory Scale III (story A 
score of  ≥ 6 or story B score of  ≥ 4 if they failed story A). Participants were also required to 
speak English.  
 Exclusion  
 Participants were ineligible if they: (1) reported terminal illness with life expectancy less 
than 12 months; (2) reported or exhibited a disabling visual condition assessed as the inability to 
read printed material; (3) reported or exhibited a disabling speech hearing and comprehension 
condition assessed by [CONTACT_886552]'s instructions; (4) reported or exhibited a disabling speech production condition assessed as the inability to respond with 
comprehensible English speech to the screener's queries; (5) reported or exhibited a disabling 
psychomotor condition assessed as the inability to use a keyboard and pointing device.  
Participants were also ineligible if they had ever: (1) completed the AARP Driver Safety 
course (https://www.aarp.org/auto/driver -safety); (2) played the Rise of Nations video game 
(https://en.wi kipedia.org/wiki/Rise_of_Nations); (3) trained with Posit Science’s Brain HQ 
platform (https://www.brainhq.com); or (4) trained with Aptima’s Mind Frontiers video game, as 
part of a previous intervention [44].  
[ADDRESS_1240641] recruitment protocols such as 
advertisement in newspapers, radio, and TV ; placement of flyers in community organizations ; 
attendance at senior functions in community agencies and churches ; and contacts with our 
community partner s; volunteers registered in a subject pool at Institute for Successful Longevity 
(ISL) at FSU ( https://apps.psy.fsu.edu/isl/account/participant.php ). 
Telephone script for recruitment  
 
If no answer, voicemail:  "Hi, my name [CONTACT_832] _____________, I am calling from [LOCATION_012] State 
University. We are looking for volunteers over the age of 65 to help with our paid research 
projects.  If you are potentially interested, please give us a call back at (850) [ADDRESS_1240642] a great day!  
  
 ________________________________________________________________________ 
  
If pi[INVESTIGATOR_9107]: "Hi, my name [CONTACT_832] _____________, I am calling from the [LOCATION_012] State University 
CREATE Lab. Is _______ there? We are looking for volunteers over the age of [ADDRESS_1240643] a few minutes for us to talk?"  
  
If busy:  "When would be a good time for me to call you back?"  
-  write the day/time in the call back section.  
-If they change to not  interested, read not interested section below.  
 
  
If not interested:  "Ok, may we keep you on our list for future studies?"  
-If no, change status to “don’t call”  
-If yes, change status to “not interested”  
  
If interested:  
  
"Let me take the next few minutes to tell you about our study. The purpose of this research 
project is to better understand how training programs are related to cognition. Compensation for this study is [ADDRESS_1240644] any questions so far?  
 
[ADDRESS_1240645] any other questions I can answer for you?  
  
Are you interested in participating?"  
  
  
  
If not interested:  Thank you for your time, may we call you for future studies? 
-If yes: change status to not interested.  
-If no:  change status to “don’t call”  
  
If interested:  Great, do you have about 10 minutes for me to ask some questions to determine 
your eligibility?  
  
If no:  When would be a good time to call you back? 
- write the date and time to call back
  
         If yes:  Before I begin, I want to let you know:  
1. All the information that you will be giving me in the next few minutes will be kept confidential.  
2. There are no right or wrong answers.  
3. If you don't know, can't answer or feel uncomfortable in answering any questions, please let 
me know.  
 
  
[ADDRESS_1240646]  2 
Handle your computer with care : 2 
Prevent your computer from getting wet : 2 
Charging your Computer:  [ADDRESS_1240647] yourself from the heat that your  computer generates: [ADDRESS_1240648] yourself from the heat generated by [CONTACT_886551] : [ADDRESS_1240649] the cables from being damaged : [ADDRESS_1240650] your data and software : 7 
How to open your computer:  8 
Plugging in your Mouse  11 
Turning your computer on:  13 
Logging into your computer:  15 
Passwords and sleep mode: 17 
Connecting to the network  18 
Turning your computer off:  22 
Adjusting the volume on your computer:  23 
If you are using a MIFI Unit:  [ADDRESS_1240651] from your computer. 
 
 
Charging your Computer:  
In this study, it is recommended that you keep your computer connected 
to the power adapter and plugged into an electrical outlet. While the 
power adapter is plugged into the computer the computer will remain 
charged and ready for use at any time. Find an area where you can use 
your computer and mouse on a table, connect your power adapter, and 
have the cables out of the way.  If it is storming outside, please disconnect your laptop from the wall outlet.  

14  
Be sure to take these steps in the order in which they are given here: 
1. Find the ac power adapter that was provided for the computer 
shown in Figure 1.1.  
  
 
 
 
 

[ADDRESS_1240652] yourself from the heat that your  
computer generates:  
When your computer is turned on or the battery is charging, the base, the 
palm rest, and some other parts may become hot.  
Extended contact [CONTACT_827341], even through clothing, could cause discomfort or even a skin burn.  
Avoid keepin g your hands, your lap, or any other part of your body in 
contact [CONTACT_4490] a hot section of the computer for any extended time.  

[ADDRESS_1240653] yourself from the heat generated by 
[CONTACT_886551] : 
When the ac power adapter is connected to an electrical outlet and your 
computer, it generates heat.  
 Do not place the ac power adapter in contact [CONTACT_886553].  
 
Protect the cables from being damaged : 
Applying strong force to cables may damage or break them.  
Route the power adapter  and mouse so that they cannot be walked on, 
tripped over, pi[INVESTIGATOR_886550], or in any way 
subjected to treatment that could interfere with the operation of your 
computer. 
 
Protect your data and software : 
Do not delete, change, or modify any of the files, hardware, or software 
on the computer; otherwise, your computer might fail to work.  
 
How to open your computer:  
 
When carrying the computer home, the top and bottom lid of the 
computer will be closed. The latch on the computer will lock and not 

18 open. To open the computer, find the security latch at the front of the 
computer shown in Figure 2.1.  
 
 
Be sure to take these steps in the order in which they are given here:   
 
1. While your computer is closed find the security latch on the front of 
the computer located on the bottom -right lid. The security latch will be 
in the locked position as shown in Figure 2.2.  

19  
 2.  Unlock the security latch by [CONTACT_886554] 2.3.  
 
3.  Now that the security latch is unlocked, open the top lid of the computer as shown in Figure 2.4.
   
 
 

20  
 
Plugging in your Mouse:  
In this study it is recommended that you keep your mouse connected to 
and plugged into the computer. The mouse will be used to click and 
navigate to various components in your training.   
 
1. Find the mouse that was provided for the computer shown in figure 3.1.
  

21  
 
 
 
 2. Find the USB port at the right side and the front of the computer as 
shown in Figure 3.2 and 3.3.   
3. Plug the mouse into the USB port of the computer as shown in Figure 
3.4. 

22  
 
  
Turning your computer on:  
Your computer should now be placed on a table with the ac power 
adapter and mouse plugged into their proper ports. Make sure you have 
enough space to move the mouse around safely and that your cables are 
safely out of your way. Your computer can now be powered on.  
Be sure to take these steps in the order in which they are given here:   
1. With the computer open, find the power button at the center of the 
keyboard as shown in Figure 4.1.   
 

23  
 
    
2. Press and hold the power button shown in Figure 4.2 to turn on the 
computer.  
 

24  
 
3. After pressing the power button, the computer will turn on and 
display the background screen shown in Figure 4.3.  
 
 
 
Logging into your computer:  
 
Now that your computer is turned on you will need to login to the 
computer to access your training software. Your computer uses a 
password to help prevent your computer from being used by [CONTACT_2312]. A 
prompt is displayed on the screen each time you need to lo gin to your 
computer. Your computer should display the image shown in Figure 4.2.  

25  
 
Be sure to take these steps in the order in which they are given here: 
1. Press the Enter button as shown in Figure 5.[ADDRESS_1240654].  
 
Note: If the computer was shut down properly a passwor d is not 
required to login.   
3. In the password prompt, you will use the spacebar shown in Figure 
5.[ADDRESS_1240655].  
  
Passwords and sleep mode:  
If your computer enters into sleep mode after either being idle for five minutes, or by [CONTACT_886555], You can resume use of the computer by [CONTACT_886556]. The screen will turn on and you will reenter y our 
password. Please follow the instructions for “Logging into your computer”. 

27  
    
 
 
 
     
Connecting to the network:  
Your computer comes with a built- in wireless network card.   There is a 
configuration utility to help you make wireless connections and monitor 
the status of your connection, so that you can stay connected to your 
network while you are at home, with no need for a wired connection.  
[ADDRESS_1240656] prompt as 
shown in Figure 6.5. Click the OK button.  
 
Note: If you entered your username [CONTACT_886577].  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
32 Turning your computer off:  
There are two ways you can turn off the computer.  
 
1. To turn off the computer you can press the power button shown in 
Figure 7.1. Press and hold the power button for a few seconds and the 
computer will turn off.  
2. You can also access the start menu to turn off the computer.  
A. Use the mouse to click the Start  button at the bottom left of 
your screen. 
B.   Click on the Power b utton.   
C. Move the mouse to the option labeled Shut down  and 
click Shut down.  
D. The computer will automatically turn off once you click the    
Shutdown option.  
 

33 Adjusting the volume on your computer:  
There are two ways you can adjust the volume of your computer.  
 
1. To adjust the volume of your computer you can press the mute, 
volume down, or volume up buttons shown in Figure 8.1. Press the left volume button to mute the sound of your computer. Press and hold the 
middle volume down button to turn down the volume. Press and hold the 
right volume up button to turn up the volume.  
 
2. You can also access the volume menu on the computer.  
A. Use the mouse to click the volume  button at the bottom 
right of your screen.  
B.  This will pull up a slider bar m enu for the volume.  
C. Click on the white bar and hold the left mouse button to drag 
the volume slider left or right.   

34 D. Slide the bar to the left to turn the volume down. Slide the bar 
to the right to turn the volume up.  
 
     
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 If you are using a MIFI Unit:  
 
In this study, it is recommended that you keep your MIFI connected to 
the power adapter and plugged into an electrical outlet. While the power 
adapter is plugged into the MIFI, the MIFI will remain charged and 
ready for use at any time. Find an area where you can use your computer 
and mouse on a table, connect your power adapter, and have the cables out of the way.  You will want the MIFI near your computer.
  
 
Be sure to take these steps in the order in which they are given her e: 

[ADDRESS_1240657] it near the computer.  
 
8. Follow the Instructions for “Connecting to the network” to connect 
your computer to the MIFI.  
 
 
 
38 Brain -HQ 
 
 
Return Date: ______________ @ ______  
 
● The objective of the study is for you to play Brain HQ for 1 hour 
each day, 5 days a week. 
● The hour should consist of 2 training sessions lasting 30 minutes.  
● [ADDRESS_1240658] you by [CONTACT_886557]’t having difficulties.  
● In roughly [ADDRESS_1240659] testing.  
 
 

39 122570  
Brain HQ Schedule (Example 1 - Weekend Breaks)  
 Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat 
Week [ADDRESS_1240660] 1  
(complete)  Baseline  
Test 2  
(complete)  Laptop 
Training  
(complete)  Day 1  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 2  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest 
Week [ADDRESS_1240661] Day 3  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 4  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 5  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 6  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 7  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Rest 
Week [ADDRESS_1240662] Day 8  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 9  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 10  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 11  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 12  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest 
Week [ADDRESS_1240663] Day 13  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 14  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 15  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 16  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 17  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest 
Week [ADDRESS_1240664] Day 18  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 19  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 20  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Post  
Test 1  
(May Differ)  Post  
Test 2  
(May Differ)   
Note: You may take rest days on different days, as long as you play 5 days a week for 1 hour.  
Brain HQ Schedule (Example 2 - Random Breaks)  
 Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat 
Week 
[ADDRESS_1240665] 1  
(complete)  Baseline  
Test 2  
(complete)  Laptop 
Training  
(complete)  Day 1  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 2  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest 
Week 
1 Day 3  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 4  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 5  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest Day 6  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 7  
Brain HQ  
 (1 hour)  Day 8  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  
Week 
[ADDRESS_1240666] Day 9  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 10  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 11  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest Day 12  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest 
Week 
3 Day 13  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 14  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest Rest Day 15  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 16  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 17  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  
Week 
4 Day 18  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 19  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Day 20  
Brain HQ  
(1 hour)  Rest Post  
Test 1  
(May Differ)  Post  
Test 2  
(May Differ)   
Note: You may take rest days on different days, as long as  you play 5 days a week for 1 hour.  
40  
 
 
For technical support,  
please call the Boot/CREATE Lab.  
([PHONE_18350]  
 (9-5 Mon- Fri) 
 
or email  
 
[EMAIL_16860]  
 
     
 
 
[ADDRESS_1240667] 
Tallahassee, FL [ZIP_CODE] -4301  
(850) 800- 6339  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 Table of Contents  
ABOUT THIS QUICK GUIDE  3 
WHAT IS THE CREATE  STUDY ? 3 
LOGGING ON TO BRAIN HQ 4 
COMPLETING A TRAINING SESSION  6 
DIARY AFTER TRAINING SESSION  13 
SECOND TRAINING SESSION OF THE DAY  14 
DESCRIPTION OF DOUBLE DECISION  15 
DESCRIPTION OF FREEZE FRAME  17 
DESCRIPTION OF TARGET TRACKER  19 
 
 
 
 
43 About this Quick Guide  
 
The BrainHQ Quick Guide is intended to provide answers to questions 
about using the BrainHQ software package and about the training 
schedule we would like you to follow. Should questions arise that are 
not answered here, please call: (850) -800-6339.      
 
What is the CREATE Study?  
 
The Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology 
Enhancement (CREATE) is conducting a study on cognitive training.  This study seeks to measure the possible benefits of brain training games 
and other types of training on older adults’ performance on cognitive 
tests and everyday tasks such as driving and finance management. The 
BrainHQ software features a number of games meant to exercise 
different abilities. These abilities include visual processing speed, 
alertness and visual discrimination, and the ability to divide one’s 
attention and ignore irrelevant distractors.  
 
Over the course of this study you will be asked complete 2 training 
sessions a day, for 5 days a week for a total of one month (4 weeks).  
Each training session should last [ADDRESS_1240668].
 
 
    
 
    
Completing a Training session 

46 When you log into the BrainHQ website you will be shown a summary 
of your training session as seen in Figure 2.1. This will provide 
information on what tasks you need to complete during your training 
session and will also s how you the order of tasks you will complete.   
1. This is your training schedule for each training session. Complete 2 
training sessions a day, 5 days a week, for a total of one month (4 
weeks).  Each training session should last [ADDRESS_1240669] task Double Decision .  
a. To refresh your knowledge of the task, you can click the i button at the bottom right of the screen to 
complete the tutorial again.  
 
b. Click start to start the level.
  
 
c.  Once the level is completed 
you will receive a message with your score and level 
status.  
d. If, at the end of a level the message states “Replay to train for the recommended time in this exercise” click the Replay 
button and you will complete another level of the Double 
Decision  task. You will repeat 
this task until [ADDRESS_1240670] passed.  
  
e. If at the end of a level the message states “Move up to keep to your 30- minute schedule” click the Move up button and 
you will be finished with the task Double Decision  for this 
training session. The move up message will appear once you 

[ADDRESS_1240671] finished a level and completed the 10 minutes of your 
training task.  
 
f. Clicking the Move up button will take you to an updated 
training summary page. Figure 2.2 shows an updated 
summary page with Double Decision  now complete.  
 
g. A check mark will appear underneath the task that was 
completed. Try to perform well and get a high er star 
ranking with every task.   
 
h. Click the CONTINUE button to go to the second task, Freeze Frame . 
 
7. After clicking the CONTINUE button you will be brought to the 
second task: Freeze Frame.  
a. To refresh your knowledge of the task, you can click the i 
button at the bottom right of the screen to complete 
the tutorial again.  
 
b. Click start to start the level.
  
 
 
 
 
 

49  
c. Once the level is completed 
you will receive a message 
with your score and level 
status.  
 
d. If at the end of a level the message states “Replay to train for the recommended time in this exercise” click the Replay 
button and you will complete 
another level of the Freeze 
Frame  task. You will repeat this 
task until [ADDRESS_1240672] passed. 
 
e. If at th e end of a level the message states “Move up to keep 
to your 30- minute schedule” click the Move up button and 
you will be finished with the task Freeze Frame for this 
training session. The move up message will appear once you 
have finished a level and 
comp leted the 10 minutes of 
your training task.  
 

50 f. Clicking the Move up button will take you to an updated 
training summary page.  Figure 2.3 shows an updated 
summary page with Freeze Frame now complete.  
 
g. A check mark will appear underneath the task that was completed. Try to perform well and get a higher star 
ranking with every task.
  
 
h. Click the CONTINUE button to go to the final task, Target Tracker . 
 
 
8. After clicking the CONTINUE button you will be brought to the final task Target Tracker .  
a. To refresh your knowledge of the task, you can click the i button at the bottom right of the screen to complete 
the tutorial again.  
 
b. Click start to start the level.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 c. Once the level is 
completed you will 
receive a message with 
your score and level 
status.  
 
d. If at the end of a level the message states “Replay to train for the recommended time in this exercise” click the Replay 
button and you will 
complete another level 
of the Target Tracker  
task. You will repeat this task until [ADDRESS_1240673] passed.  
 
e. If at the end of a level the message states “Move up to keep 
to your 30- minute schedule” click the Move up button and 
you will be finished with 
the task Target Tracker  
for this training session. The move up message 
will appear once you have finished a level and completed the 
[ADDRESS_1240674] your thoughts and feelings on the 
previous training session. You will complete a diary after every training 
session. Do not close TASK 1 until the training session is complete. 
Shown below in Figure 3.1 is a screen of the diary.   
         
 
2. Answer the questions on enjoyability, challenge, frustration, and motivation by [CONTACT_886558].
  
3. For the question “ During  today’s session, for how many minutes, did 
you stop to complete another task” please click on the white box beneath the question and enter a number. Enter [ADDRESS_1240675] any other comments use the white space beneath the 
question “ Do you have any comments about today’s session” to provide 
feedback on the training session. If you have  no additional comments 
type NO in the comment box.  
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_1240676] visual information from the periphery.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
58 Description of Freeze Frame  
1. The second task in your training schedule is Freeze Frame. Figure 
6.1 shows the start screen of your task.  
 
 
 
2. In the task Freeze Frame , you will be 
presented with a target image before you start 
the level.  
 
3. Memorize this image and once you are ready 
click start.  
 
4. You will be shown an image briefly.  
 
5. If the image shown is not the target image, you will press the �  
arrow key on the keyboard. 
 
6. If the image is the target image, “Freeze”, DO NOT press any key.  
 
 
 
 
 

[ADDRESS_1240677] target bubbles you were 
shown.  
 
4. Ignore the movement of the other bubbles.  
 
5. After the bubbles stop moving you will click on the bubbles that were the initial targets that you were tracking.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 7. Target Tracker  practices your ability to divide your attention and 
ignore irrelevant distractors.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 PARTICIPANT SUPPORT LINE  
 
 
If you require any assistance please call our help/support line 
between the hours of 9am –  5pm Monday through Friday at :  
([PHONE_18350]  
Complete 2 training sessions a day, 5 
days a week, for a total of one month 
(4 weeks).  Each training session 
should last 30 minutes, for a total of 1 
hour each day.   
 
 
63 Rise of Nations  
IADL Training (Fraud + AARP)  
Control training (Crosswords, Sudoku, Wor d Search)  
 
  
64 PROTOCOLS  
Pre-screening  
Computer setup  
Laptop description, and description of data logging protocol  
Laptop setup protocol  
Randomization Procedures  
Training on Tasks  
Hardware Script  
Hardware Training  
  
SPEAKING: Before we introduce you to the training program, we will first go through brief 
computer hardware training.  Today we are going to begin training on how to use your laptop 
computer.  You may have used computers before, but this training is designed to make sure 
that everyone is fami liar with the specific equipment for this study.  
  
ASK : Do you use a computer regularly?  
●      If the answer is yes:  Great!  While you may be familiar with using a computer we will give 
you a little extra information on the best way to set up your computer for this study, how to login 
to the computer and your training, the controls you will use during your training, and how to 
engage in training.  
●      If the answer is no:  Don’t worry!  We will teach you everything you need to know.  This 
includes the bas ics of using a computer, the best way to set up your computer for this study, 
how to login to the computer.  
65   
Charging the Computer  
DEMONSTRATE: In this study, it is recommended that you keep your computer plugged in.  
(Blue means participant trys actions while you instruct.)  
  
1.    Now, connect the power adapter to the laptop. (point out where)  
2.    Next, plug the other end of the power cord int o an electrical outlet. ( show where to plug in 
the wall outlet)  
  
While the power adapter is plugged into the computer, the computer will remain charged and 
ready for use. We recommend finding an area where you can keep your computer and mouse 
on a table, while having your power adaptor plugged in.  
  
Using the Mouse  
DEMONSTRATE: In this study, it is recommended that you keep your mouse connected to and 
plugged into the computer to complete all the exercises.  
1. Connect the mouse to the USB port of the computer. (show where to plug in the USB 
cord. ) 
  
During the study, the mouse should always be used to click and navigate components in your 
training software.  
Powering On  
DEMONSTRATE: Now that we have the computer and mouse plugged in let’s turn on the 
comput er.  
1.    First, find the security latch and slide it to the right, then open the computer.  (show where)  
[ADDRESS_1240678] to login. You will be 
taken directly to the desktop.  
  
Sleep & Logging In  
DEMONSTRATE: If your computer is put into standby [INVESTIGATOR_1660] “sleep mode” by [CONTACT_886559], you will need to t ype in a password. A password is requested 
each time the computer screen shuts off. I’m going to demonstrate this now.  
1. (Wait 1 minute to let the computer go to sleep.)  
2.  Please tap the spacebar once to reveal the password textbox.  
3.  The password 4 spacebar presses.  
4.    Press the spacebar 4 times, then hit enter to unlock the laptop.  
Volume Control  
Demonstrate: If you need to turn the volume of the computer up, down, or off, you can press 
the volume buttons on the keyboard. The volume buttons are located here.  (point out button. ) 
1. Turn up to volume.  
2. Turn down the volume.  
3. Mute and unmute the volume.  
4. (When finished make sure the volume is on halfway. ) 
  
Power Off  
Demonstrate: You may want to power off the computer after completing a daily training session, however you don’t have to. Lets talk about powering down.  
1. One way, which we won’t try now, is to hold the power button down for a few seconds.  
2. However, the easiest way to power down the laptop is to close the lid.  
[ADDRESS_1240679] ease close the lid now to power off the laptop.  
4. (wait a few seconds)  
5.    Now open the lid and power the laptop back on and finish up hardware training.  
6. (move on while laptop is powering up)  
  
Conclusion  
ASK:  Do you have any questions?  
SPEAKING : This gives you a basic explanation on how use your computer. If you need extra 
information on it will be provided in your take home manual. We will discuss more about the 
manual towards the end of your session.  
 
Brain -HQ 
 
Brain HQ (BHQ)  
Training Protocol  
  
SPEAKING: The Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement 
(CREATE) is conducting a study on cognitive training.  This study seeks to measure the 
possible benefits of brain training might have on older adults’ performanc e on cognitive tests 
and everyday tasks.  The BrainHQ software features many games meant to exercise different 
abilities.  These abilities include visual processing speed, alertness and visual discrimination, 
and the ability to divide one’s attention and i gnore irrelevant distractors.  
  
Over the course of this study you will be asked to train 1 hour a day, 5 days a week for a total of one month.  
  
Wifi Setup  
68 DEMONSTRATE: In this study, you will need to be able to connect to a wireless network. We 
will show you how to connect to a wireless network here, and you will need to follow these same 
steps at home.  If you already have a wireless network at home, that’s great.  If not, we will 
provide you with a device that will provide you with wireless network for the length of the study.  
*If participant does not have internet please refer to MiFi Device Instructions on page 4.  
1. First click on the wireless network icon in the bot tom right corner of the 
desktop. This will pull up a list of wireless networks. (show where to click to pull 
up network list. ) 
2. For your training session, we will use the network FSU_SECURE  to train 
you on how to login to a wireless network.  
3. Click FSU_SECURE  from the list of wireless networks.  
4. Click the connect button.  
5. In the password prompt enter the password CREATE2017.  
6. Click the OK button.  
7. The computer will now connect to the wireless network.  
8. This is how you will connect to your wireless network at home or to your 
Mifi device.  
9. An alternative option to plug an ethernet cable into your computer and the 
wireless router in your house. This allows you to connect to your WIFI through a 
wired connection and maybe more stable than using the WIFI connection.  
10. Now, plug the Ethernet cord into the laptop. The other end goes into the wifi 
router in your home.  (Help participant)  
11. All of this information is available in the “HOW -TO-Connect” video on your 
desktop. Let’s play a little bit of that video now.  
12. (Play first minute of HOW -TO-Connect video on participant computer if 
participant is unsure of ability to connect)  
[ADDRESS_1240680] to the wireless network of 
[LOCATION_012] State University.  
  
BEFORE CONTINUING CLICK ON THE FSU SECURE NETWORK, enter your credentials 
to login to the FSU network and continue.  
  
MiFi Device Instructions: Go grab a Mifi device from Thomas.  
1. First click on the wireless network icon in the bottom right corner of the 
desktop. This will pull up a list of wireless networks. (show where to click to pull 
up network list. ) 
2. We will use the network CREATE_ #X to train you on how to login to the 
Mifi device.  
3. Click CREATE_ #X from the list of wireless networks.  
4. Click the connect button.  
5. In the password prompt enter the password CREATE2017.  
6. Click the OK button.  
  
Introduction to Brain HQ  
SPEAKING:  Now I am going to give you a demonstration of how to access the Brain HQ 
software and the features of the software. Please feel free to ask any questions at any time 
during the demonstration.  Please also let me know any time you would like to take a break.  
  
Open Task 1  
DEMONSTRATE: Now let’s access  the task, Brain HQ, and start learning it. First, you will need 
to: 
1.    Click once (do not double click) on the “Task 1” icon at the top left of your desktop.  
[ADDRESS_1240681] your window  in full screen while you complete the course.  
4.    Click on the maximize button at the top right corner of the browser.  
  
Logging In  
SPEAKING: You have been preassigned a login and password for this course.  Your login 
information allows you to access and complete the course, and monitor how much of the 
training you have completed. Let’s login to the course now and get started. (Pause between 
instructions and wait for participant to attempt each step on their own. Only help if participant 
needs it. ) 
1.    First click on the log in button at the top right of the Brain HQ website.  
2.    This is the login window.  Here you will enter the email addres s and password that we setup 
when we purchased the Brain HQ account for you.  
3.    The email address and password is located on the laptop, right here.  
4.    Now enter that email and password into the website to login.  
5.    Then click the “Log In” button.  
  
Today’s Schedule Page 
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: This is your training summary for this training session. You will be 
asked to complete three tasks in each training session: Double Decision, Freeze Frame , and 
Target Tracker .  Each task lasts about 10 minutes. W e will show you how to complete each 
training task and how to complete your training sessions.  Over the course of this study you will be asked complete 2 training sessions a day, this totals 1 hour of work. You will do these 2 sessions 5 days a week for all 4 weeks.  
  
Get Started  
71 GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Let’s start the training now and go over it together.  
1. To start you training you always just click “GET STARTED”, but don’t click it yet.  
2. When you hit this button, it will bring you into the first exercise, DOUBLE DECISION.  
3. After completing DOUBLE DECISION, you will then automatically go into FREEZE 
FRAME and then after that TARGET TRACKER.  
4. So again, to train with all [ADDRESS_1240682] click “GET STARTED”  
5. Click the GET STARTED button to start the first task of the training session.   
  
Explaining Double Decision  
Now let’s start by [CONTACT_886560]. This exercise is called Double 
Decision . Let’s go through the instructions now before starting the tutorial.  
1. First, you will be shown a vehicle at the center of the screen. (Point to center)  
2. At the same time, you will also be shown a Route 66 sign, around the outside of the 
screen.  (Point to outside area)  
3. These will just be shown for a split second, and then they disappear.  
4. Afterwards you asked two things:   
a.  Which type of vehicle appeared at the center of the screen. (a car or truck)  
b.    And also the location of the Route 66 sign on the screen.  
ASK:  Do you have any questions before we start? 
  
Start  Tutorial for Double Decision  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Now let start the tutorial together for this first exercise.  
1. Click START when you are ready.  
2. (Let the participant complete the tutorial and help wherever the participant gets 
confused.)  
  
[ADDRESS_1240683] Level  
AFTER TUTORIAL:  Congratulations on completing the tutorial, when you click the start button 
again, the first level of the training task will begin.  
1.    Click the start button to begin the exercise.  
2.    (Let the participant try the task and hel p if the participant gets confused.)  
3.    If you ever need to refresh your knowledge of the exercise you can click the “I” button (point 
to “I” button ) at the bottom right of the screen to complete the tutorial again or refer to the 
information in your take home manual.  
4.    (If the participant really struggled, have them press “I” button to retry tutorial.)  
5.    If you do get either the car or the sign wrong, the correct car and sign placement will be 
flashed on the screen for you to see. Then the new round will start immediately, so make sure 
you are watching so you’re able to catch the new car and new sign placement you’re supposed to memorize.  
Basel ine Score & Next Level  
(Once the first level completes it will show participants the baseline score.)  
AFTER COMPLETING FIRST LEVEL: After completing the level your baseline score is shown. It’s based on your performance and will help to determine the speed  of the next level. Note the 
following:  
1.    Your speed in milliseconds shows how quickly you could take in and accurately respond to 
what you saw.  
2.    Your star rating representing your performance, try to improve over time.  
3.    The button at the bot tom right will let you know if you need to continue training on the same 
exercise or start the next exercise.  
a.     “Move Up”  means you can move on to the next exercise.  
b.    “ Replay”  means you will have to train on the same exercise again. You may have to 
complete the exercise multiple times until the 10 minutes of training for the exercise is complete.  
73 4. Click “Replay” to complete your 10 minutes of training for the exercise.  
5. (have the participant play until see move up button. ) 
  
Move Up & Training Summary  
SPEAKING:  Congratulations, you are now ready to move on to the next exercise! Let’s do it 
now.  
1. Click the “move up” button to see your training summary page.  
2.     You should now see your star level scoring performance on top of the DOUBLE DECISION 
exercise.  
3.    And a check mark below the exercise. ( Interventionist should have the participant click on 
move up button to move onto the next task or replay button repeat the sa me task. ) 
  
Introducing Freeze Frame  
SPEAKING:  The second exercise is called Freeze Frame. First we will complete a tutorial 
before starting the actual exercise. Remember if you are ever having trouble you can always get to the tutorial by [CONTACT_17325] “i " button at the bottom right of the screen. You can also refer to 
your take home manual.  
1.    Click “Continue” to begin the Tutorial.  
2.    The second task in your training schedule is Freeze Frame .  
3.    Before you start the exercise, you will be shown an image you must memorize.  
4.    This is called your target image. Memorize this target image.  
5.    When you start the task, images will be shown sequentially on the screen.  
6.    If the image on the screen is not the target image you will press the rig ht arrow key.  
7.    If the image shown on the screen is the target image you must “Freeze” and DO NOT  push 
anything.  
  
74 ASK:  Do you have any questions?  
  
Start Tutorial for Freeze Frame  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Now let start the tutorial together for this first exercise.  
1. Click START when you are ready.  
2. (Let the participant complete the tutorial and help wherever the participant gets 
confused.)  
  
After Completion, Continue Playing  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Congratulations on completing the tutorial, once you will click the start 
button , the first level of the training task will begin. Remember you may have to complete this 
task multiple times until the 10 minutes are completed.  
  
The Baseline Score  
(Once the first level completes it will show participants the baseline score.)  
SPEAKING: This is your baseline score based on your performance and will help to determine 
the speed of the next level. Remember you may have to complete this task multiple times until 
the 10 minutes of training in the task is complete.  
  
SPEAKING: At the end of a level, you will receive a message saying replay or move up. This 
message will let you know if you will need to continue training on the same task or if you will be 
starting the next training task.  
If the message box says “replay to train for the recommended time in this exercise” then clicking 
on the replay button means you will train on this task again.  
  
75 SPEAKING:  After training on your current task for about [ADDRESS_1240684] completed your current training task and can 
move up to your next task.  Congratulations! Once you click on the move up button, you will be 
shown your training summary page, and should now have check mark and star levels scoring 
your performance next to the task you just completed. Try to perform well on each training session to increase your star score. ( Interventionist should have the participant cl ick on move up 
button to move onto the next task or replay button repeat the same task. )  
  
Training in Target Tracker  
SPEAKING:   The first time you start your training it will give you a tutorial on how to complete 
the task. If you need to refresh your knowledge of the task, you can click the “i” button at the bottom right of the screen to complete the tutorial again or refer to your take home manual.  
  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Click start to begin the Tutorial  
SPEAKING:  The third task in your training schedule is Target Tracker .  In the task Target 
Tracker,  you will be shown a set of targets that you must follow as they move around the 
screen. Other similar objects will appear to distract you, but only follow the movement  of the 
targets you were first shown while ignoring the new objects. After the objects stop moving you 
will click on the initial target objects you were tracking.  
ASK:  Do you have any questions?  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Congratulations on completing the tutorial , once you will click the start 
button , the first level of the training task will begin. Remember you may have to complete this 
task multiple times until the 10 minutes are completed.  
  
The Baseline score  
76 (Once the first level completes it will show participants the baseline score.)  
SPEAKING: This is your baseline score based on your performance and will help to determine 
the speed of the next level. Remember you may have to complete this task multiple times until 
the 10 minutes of training in the tas k is complete.  
SPEAKING: At the end of a level, you will receive a message saying replay or Move up. This 
message will let you know if you will need to continue training on the same task or if you will be 
starting the next training task.  
If the message box says, replay to train for the recommended time in this exercise, clicking on the replay button means you will train on this task again.  
SPEAKING:  After training on your current task for about [ADDRESS_1240685] completed your current training task and can 
move up to your next task.  Congratulations! Once you click on the move up button, you will be shown your training summary page, and should now have check mark and star levels scoring 
your performance next to the task you just completed. Try to perform well on each training 
session to increase your star score.  
  
End of the First Session 
The Home Page  
  
DEMONSTRATE: Now that you have completed all three tasks you should click the finished 
button . Once you have clicked finished it will load the training summary again. Once the training 
summary is loaded move your mouse to the top right corner and click  on the Red X on the top 
right of the screen.  This will close the Brain HQ page and pull up your diary.  
  
Filling out Diary  
77 DEMONSTRATE: The diary allows you to record your thoughts and feelings after each training 
session. With this diary, you will answer the following questions.  
1.    How enjoyable, challenging, frustrating  you found the training that 
day. 
2.    And how motivated  you were in the training that day.  
3.    Go ahead and answer those questions now for the introduction training 
you just completed.  
4.    The next question asks “During today’s session, for how many minutes, 
did you stop to complete another task”. If you were interrupted or had to take 
a break from task, you would enter the number of minutes you stopped the 
task 
5.    .If yo u were not interrupted during your training session please click on 
the white box beneath the question and enter 0.  
6.    Enter the of number minutes you stopped to complete task. (Help 
participant decide number)  
7.    If you have any other comments on the task please write it in the 
comments section or enter “none”  
8.    Enter your comments now.  
9.    Once you have finished filling out your diary click the Save diary and 
Exit button.  
  
SPEAKING: You will complete a diary after each training session. You co mplete [ADDRESS_1240686] 1 hour. You will do this for 5 days a week, for 4 weeks. Remember to only click on the Task 1 icon once , if you double click the icon it will pull up 2 
BHQ windows and 2 diary pages.  
  
78 Start of the Second Session  
SPEAKING: This time you will try to complete the second training session based on what you 
just learned. I will be here to answer any questions you may have and help guide you through 
your training.  (help participants and try to follow what the participants are doing. If they look 
confused, give them help and remind them of any information they will need.  You can remind 
them of the previous information but try to let them complete these task off their own knowledge. If you have any questions  refer to the sections starting with accessing the homepage. 
Participants will do the exact same thing they did in the first session. This second session they will not receive any tutorials, so if they have any questions have them click on the tutorial 
button.) 
  
End of the Second Session  
ASK: Do you have any questions? Or anything that needs clarification before we end our 
training? 
  
 Rise of Nations  
Rise of Nations (RON)  
Training Protocol  
  
SPEAKING: The Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement 
(CREATE) is conducting a study on cognitive training.  This study seeks to measure the 
possible benefits of Video games and other types of training on older adults’ performance on cognitive tests and everyday tasks such as driving and finance management.  The Rise of 
Nations software features real -time strategic gameplay meant to exercise different abilities. 
79 These abilities include visual processing speed, alertness and visual discri mination, and the 
ability to divide one’s attention and ignore irrelevant distractors.  
  
Over the course of this study you will be asked complete roughly an hour of training a 
day, [ADDRESS_1240687] 30 minutes, for a 
total of 1 hour each day.  Each session will be completed on this computer and using this 
mouse. You will take the computer home to complete training and you will be provided with help 
and instructional materials to refer to when you are at home.  
   
Accessing Main Menu  
  
SPEAKING : To access your training suite and complete your tasks you will need to click on the 
TASK 1. Please make sure you only click once.  (have participants click on the create task 1 icon 
once, no double clicking)  
  
SPEAKING: This will bring you to your Rise of Nations software. The game should 
automatically load at full screen.  
1.    You can skip the cinematics shown before each game by [CONTACT_886561], 
please do that now.  
Once at the Main Menu, you can create new games and load old saved games.  
  
Start a New Game  
SHOW PARTICIPANT: To start your training we will first learn how to create a new game. 
Every time you complete a game, you will have to create a new one. (point out each of the 
buttons for the participants w hile explaining the features ) 
1. Click the Solo game button to start a new game for this training session.  
2. Click Quick Battle.  
3.    We will be playing this game on the easiest setting.  
80 4. Click on the blue arrow below difficulty, then click “Easiest.” Confirm difficulty is at 
easiest.  
5. The difficulty is the only setting you will need to change during your month of at home 
training.  
6.  Now click “Start” to start a new game.  
(after starting a new game starts, the tip menu will pop up, do not click anything until after the 
next few sections and explain how to pause the game)  
  
SPEAKING: This is how you start a new game in Rise of Nations. You will need to start a new 
game every time you complete a game in either a victory or defeat.  
  
Start Playing R ise of Nations  
(you will need to pause multiple times while explaining game mechanics and new functions to 
participants ; such as explaining the drag box, have the game paused until they can complete 
the task themselves, then let them un- pause the game)   
   
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Rise of Nations may seem intimidating at first but with practice the 
game will get easier and become a fun experience. The point of the game is to grow your small 
town into a thriving nation. Your opponent, the computer, will also build their nation. You must 
defeat the computer opponent by [CONTACT_886562]. There are many ways to win, like a military or 
diplomacy victory, we will discuss this more later.  
  
First I will teach you how to pause the game, which will come in handy while you play.  
·    First close the Tips popup, then click the pause button in the lower left hand corner.  
  
[ADDRESS_1240688] the game paused, let me explain a few of the different items that are on your screen. (show them each section and part as you explain it)      
1.    In the top left corner, you will see your resour ces. This will show you what resources you 
currently have and the rate at which you are collecting them.  
2.    In the top center screen, it will show you at what stage your civilization is at and the 
advancement of their research paths.  
3.    In the top ri ght, you will be shown population and number of cities you currently have.  
4.    In the middle bottom of the screen you will have a minimap of the entire game area, it is 
darkened right now because of the unexplored areas of the map.  
5.    A minimap is a s mall version of the whole map, and you can click on various parts of the 
minimap to adjust the area you are viewing currently.  
6.    At the bottom left you will have varied information and actions that can be taken by [CONTACT_886563].  
  
Scout & Exploring Maps 
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: When you start a new game, you will not be able to see areas of the 
map where your units have yet to explore. By [CONTACT_886564], you can see if there are rare 
resources, lakes, rivers, or potential enemies. The best unit for exploring the map is the scout, you have one here (point) . Scouts are fast, but unarmed units used to explore the map and 
search for enemy locations.  
 (show them how to click on the scout while paused and then click the auto expl ore button)         
1. Send your scout to explore the map now.  
82 Citizens Intro  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Citizens in the game are used for many tasks like resource gathering. 
They can also construct buildings. You can create citizens by [CONTACT_886565], and then clicking on the citizen. (show them how to click on the city while paused 
and then where the citizen button is)      
  
Citizens can work at farms, mines, woodcutter’s camps, and other resources that unlock over 
time. The more Citizens you have working on constructing a building or collecting resources, the faster they will build the building or harvest the resource. Two of the first resources required 
when starting the game are lumber and food, collected from Woodcutter’s camps and Farms.  
  
Woodcutter’s Camps  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Woodcutter’s Camps are built near trees to gather timber. Hovering 
your mouse over the woodcutter’s camp allows you to see how many citizens you need for 
maximum timber production. Build more citizens for your woodcutter’s camp.  
1.    Hover over wood cutter’s camp to see how many citizens you need.  
2. Click your city.  
3. Click on the citizen button enough times to fill camp.  
  
The more citizens working at a camp, the faster you collect Timber. Place new citizens in 
woodcutter’s camp to maximize timber production.  
Sometimes if left alone your citizens may automatically start working at the nearest woodcutter’s camp or resource gathering site until the number of citizens per resource is full.  
1. (If citizens didn’t auto move)  Select all three of your new citizens by [CONTACT_886566] a box over all three citizens.  
83 2. (If citizens didn’t auto move)  Right click on woodcutter’s camp to send citizens to work 
there.  
You will notice how your lumber production increases by +10 each time a new worker joins the 
camp.   (interventionist point at the resource screen on the top left corner)      
  
Farms  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Farms are built to gather the food resource. Each city can only have [ADDRESS_1240689] your farm.  
7. The square will turn green when it is in a viable location.  
  
Notice how your food production increases each time you build a farm.  
●   Build another farm  (help them repeating previous steps)  
  
Extra Citizens for Building  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Try to have extra citizens for fast expanse of cities and to build new 
buildings. Build two more citizens just for creating buildings  
1. Click your city.  
2. Click on the citizen button twice.  
84   
Research 
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Researching different technologies allows for different perks and 
advancements in your civilization. We will now research written word to unlock the temple 
building. Temples expand the influence your city has and expands the national border, 
expanding territory helps you advance towards a territory victory. A territory victory is where your borders and city take up 70% of the map. Temples allow you to research technologies to increase your wealth and territory. It also i ncreases the health and attack range of your city. 
Build a temple. (i have participants research written word and build a temple)  
1. Click on library  
2. Click on the yellow science level 1 (written word).  
3. Click on the idle citizen button to select a ci tizen not working on another task.  
4. Click the buildings button.  
5. Click temple button.  
6. Place on a green area.  
  
Taxation & Wealth  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Taxation allows you to tax your territory based on the amount of 
territory you control for more wealth. Research civic to unlock taxation for research in the 
temple.  
1. Click your Library.  
2. Click Civic Level 1 (City State) button.  
 In the temple, research taxation to produce more wealth. In the game, there are buildings 
besides the Library where you can research areas related to that building.  
1. Click on your Temple.  
2. Click the Research Taxation button.  
[ADDRESS_1240690], the more taxes will increase your 
wealth.  
Research Commerce  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Increased research in commerce can increase your commerce limit, 
expand caravan limits and allows access to new buildings. Research Commerce to unlock the market building.  
1. Click Library  
2. Click commerce level 1  
Build Market  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Markets are used to create Caravans who collect Wealth by [CONTACT_886567]. Markets also create Merchants who can control rare resources. Let’s build a market to further increase wealth. ( have participants create a market 
and then send merchants to the rare resource)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click buildings  
3. Click market  
4. Place on a green area  
  
Create Merchant  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Now create a merchant and have him set up at a resource rare 
resource, it may show up as a white dot on the mini map.  
1. Click on market  
2. Click merchant  
3. Right click on a resource on map to send merchant there.  
4. Notice how your wealth  increases after the merchant sets up shop.  
5. Look for other resources on the map, if you find one repeat steps #1- 3. 
86   
Population Limit - Research Military  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: As you progress further in the game you may start reaching a 
population limit, where our city can no longer create units. By [CONTACT_886568], it increases 
your population, reduces the cost of units, and allows access to new buildings. Research 
Military Level 1 (Art of War) to unlock the barracks building. ( interventionist have participants 
research art of war and explain perks)  
1. Locate the population limit at top right.  
2. Click on the library.  
3. Click on research military level 1 (Art of War).  
  
The green bar will show the progress of the research. When completed, military l evel 1 will turn 
red.  Notice how your population limit doubled from 25 to 50.  
  
  
Build an Army  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT : Now we can start creating an army. An army allows you to attack other 
cities, defend your cities from attack and is used towards the militar y victory. Let’s build a 
Barracks to Build foot soldiers to attack the enemy. (interventionist have participants create a 
barracks and explain the soldiers)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click the Military Buildings button.  
3. Click the Barracks button.  
4. Drag your mouse to where you want to build. The square must be green to build.   
  
87 GUIDE PARTICIPANT: You will want multiple types of troops in your army. In this game, some 
units are stronger against certain types of units. Different units also deal various kinds of 
damage. You will want to test various kinds of units to make an effective army.  Slingers are 
cheap and fast short ranged military units, light infantry with a high attack.  Hoplites are strong 
melee units which are quite powerful against cavalry units. Foot Archers are medium ranged foot infantry unit. Build each of the 3 military units. (interventionist have participants create each 
of the three foot units)  
1. Click your ne w barracks.  
2. Click on the three military units shown to create one of each.  
  
Extra Scout  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: In your barracks, you can also build more scouts to explore your map. This can help you explore the map faster, or  replace a scout that was killed by [CONTACT_886569]. 
(interventionist have participants create a new scout)  
1. Click your new barracks if not selected already.  
2. Click on the scout button.  
3. Once created, click your new scout.  
4. Click the auto -explore button.   
  
Advance to New Age  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Advancing to a new age gives you various upgrades. Classical Age 
gives different resources, technologies, buildings, and units. Research the Classical Age to advance your civilization and unlock new buildings and units. ( interventionist have participants 
research classical age)  
1. Click Library  
2. Click Classical Age  
88   
Mines  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Mines are built near mountains and cliffs to gather the new resource 
metal. Make a mine to produce metal. ( interven tionist have participants create a mine and 
explain that as they advance through ages new units will require different resources)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click buildings  
3. Click mine  
4. Place on a green area at the side of a mountain near your city.  
  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  The more citizens working at a Mine, the faster you collect Metal. 
Create enough citizens to fill the spots in your mine. (interventionist have participants create 5 
workers  to fill the mine)  
1. Hover over mine to determine how many citizens you need.  
2. Click your city.  
3. Click on the citizen multiple times to create the number of citizens you need.  
 Your citizens should automatically go find work, but if they don’t:  
1. (If citizens didn’t auto move)  Select all three of your new citizens by [CONTACT_886566] a box over all three citizens.  
2. (If citizens didn’t auto move)  Right click near the mine to send citizens to work there.  
   
University  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: The University allows the creation of scholars who gather the new 
resource, Knowledge. Build a university to increase knowledge for future research.  
(interventionist have participants create university, explain that knowledge is a that can only be 
collected in the university)  
[ADDRESS_1240691] on a green area  
  
Scholars in University  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Notice how your knowledge production increases each after you build 
the university. The more scholars studying here, the faster you collect Knowledge. Let’s create 4 
scholars in your univer sity. 
1. Click on university  
2. Click scholar 4 times  
3. Notice how your knowledge production increases each time creating a scholar is 
completed.    
The Senate  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: The Senate allows you to research various governmental policies. 
These pol icies can give different bonuses to various aspects of the game. Build a Senate 
building in your capi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. ( interventionist have participants a senate)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click buildings  
3. Click senate building  
4. Place on green area  
  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: We will research despotism for now. Despotism reduces the cost of 
your units in the barracks. Research despotism using your senate building to change the government of your civilization. ( interventionist have participants research despotism)  
1. Click senate building  
90 2. Click despotism  
  
Building a New City  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Building more cities allows you to expand your nation’s territory 
borders. It also allows you to create more buildings to research faster, collect more resources, 
build more wonders, and help towards a territory victory. Build a new city. Note the number of cities you can build the top right of the screen.  In this case you have built one but are allowed two cities. Military research will increase your allowed cities. ( have participants create a new city 
and explain that art of war increases population and city amount)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click the buildings button.  
3. Click city button.  
4. Locate an area for your new city. It must be within in your territory boundaries and 
should be near trees and a mountain.  
5. Place on green area that expands your borders (scroll over)  
6.   
New Workers  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Let’s build three more citizens for a farm, woodcutters camp and mine. 
(interventionist have participants create more citizens fo r their new city resource collection)  
1. Click your new city.   
2. Click on the citizen button three times.  
  
New Farms, Woodcutter’s Camps & Mine  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Now let’s build a farm, woodcutter’s camp and mine for our new city 
with our new citizens . 
91 1. To Build Farm: Click on the idle citizen button or click one of the new citizens you just 
made.  
2. Click on buildings.  
3. Click on the farm button.  
4. Drag your mouse to an area where you want to place your farm. The square will turn 
green when it i s in a viable location.  
5. Notice how your food production increases each time you build a farm.  
6. To Build Woodcutter’s Camp: Click on the idle citizen button or click one of the new 
citizens you just made.  
7. Click on buildings.  
8. Click on the woodc utter’s camp button.  
9. Drag your mouse to an area where you want to place your farm. The square will turn 
green when it is in a viable location.  
10. Notice how your timber production increased.  
11.To Build Mine: Click on the idle citizen button or clic k one of the new citizens you just made.  
12.Click on buildings.  
13.Click on the mine button.  
14. Drag your mouse to an area where you want to place your mine. The square will turn green when it is in a viable location.  
15. Notice how your metal production increased.  
  
Caravans 
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Caravans increase your wealth by [CONTACT_886570]. Make a caravan to create trade between cities. (interventionist have participants create a 
caravan to increase wealth)  
1. Click on market in your first city  
92 2. Click caravan  
SAY:  Watch as the caravan connects the two cities. With this your wealth will increase. When 
you create more cities, create more caravans to connect them.  
  
Military Level 2  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Research Military Level 2 to unlock mounted units. New ranks in 
military research increases population camps and allows access to new buildings and units. 
(interventionist have participants research new military technology level 2)  
1. Click on library in your first city  
2. Click on Military Level 2  
  
Stable & Mounted Uni ts 
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Horse Archers are fast mobile archers. The Cataphract is a melee unit 
useful against formations of ranged foot troops. Light Horses are fast and melee troops. Build a 
stable and all 3 mounted units . (interventionist have participants create mounted units from a 
stable)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click military buildings button.   
3. Click the stable button.  
4. Place on green area.  
5. Click on your new Stable.  
6. Click on a ll three unit buttons four times, to create a total of 12 mounted units.  
  
Seige Factory & Catapults  
93 GUIDE PARTICIPANT: The siege factory creates units that are better suited for attacking 
enemy buildings. Make siege factory ( interventionist have participants create siege factory for 
siege weapons)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not working on another task.  
2. Click the military buildings button.  
3. Click siege factory button.  
4. Place on green area to build.  
  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: Your Goal in making a variety of units is to Create an invasion army 
that will help achieve a military victory. First, build [ADDRESS_1240692] buildings. ( interventionist have 
participants create catapults)  
1. Click on the siege factory you just created.  
2. Click on the catapult button four times to make four catapults.   
  
Unit Upgrades  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: By [CONTACT_886571]. As you advance through the ages you will need to update your troops with that age’s technology. Update Infantry ( interventionist have 
participants upgrade unit)  
1. Click your barracks.  
2. Click the Javelineer, Phalanx, and Archer buttons to upgrade your infantry units.  
  
Second, create 5 of each of the 3 infantry units we created before, 15 units total.  
1. Click your barracks.  
2. Click on each of the three military units five times to create a total of 15 units.  
94   
Attack Enemy City  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: When you destroy an enemy city, you can take over their city and their 
buildings. It will expand your territory while reducing the enemy’s territory. Take over an enemy 
city. (interventionist have participants move army to attack and take over a city)  
1. Select all the units you just created. There should be [ADDRESS_1240693] reduce its health bar to 0.  
5. After this, there will be a short wait period before the city becomes yours and your 
territory increases.  
  
Wonders  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Wonders are another path that you can follow for victory. Wonders are 
rare buildings that can be built  in different ages. Only one player may have the wonder at a time 
and it provides wonder points. Build a wonder. You need 8 wonder points to win. (interventionist 
have participants build a wonder)  
1. Click on the idle citizen button to select a citizen not  working on another task.  
2. Click the wonders button.  
3. Click one of the available wonder buttons.   
4. Drag your mouse to a green area where you wish to place the wonder.  
  
Game Completion  
95 GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Congratulations, you have now learned the basics on how to play Rise 
of Nations. These are just a few of the basic strategies to get started in the game. As you get 
more practice you can try for any of the victory paths or strategies that interest you. We  will now 
teach you how to save the game, exit the game, and load the game for when you need to 
continue a game later. Games in rise of nations may take a while to complete so knowing how 
to save and load a game so that you can continue playing it till com pletion is very important 
(interventionist have participants build a wonder)  
  
  
Saving Games  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  In Rise of Nations it is important to save your game. Saving your game 
allows you to continue your game at another point in time. Some games may take longer than the 60 -minute training session. Saving your game lets you continue playing the game at the 
point that it was saved. This allows you to keep playing that game until you reach the conclusion 
of the current game. (have participant save)  
1. Hit the esc key until you see the game menu.  
2. Click on the Text box at the beginning of the new save game. Add the number of the 
current game you are playing to the front of the save name. For your first Game please put a [ADDRESS_1240694].  
   
Exiting Games  
96 GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Exiting the game allows  you to quit the program properly. It closes the 
application and returns your computer to the desktop screen. Exiting the game properly assures 
you that the game is not running while you have finished your sessions for the day or while you 
have left your c omputer. (interventionist have participants exit game)  
1. Hit the esc key until you see the game menu.  
2. Click quit game.  
3. Click ok to exit to the main menu.  
1. Click Exit to return to your desktop (diary should pop up)   
Filling out Diary  
DEMONSTRATE: The diary allows you to record your thoughts and feelings after each training 
session. With this diary, you will answer the following questions.  
1.    How enjoyable, challenging, frustrating  you found the training that 
day. 
2.    And how motivated  you were in the training that day.  
3.    Go ahead and answer those questions now for the introduction training you just completed.  
4.    The next question asks  “During today’s session, for how many minutes, 
did you stop to complete another task”. If you were interrupted or had to take a break from task, you would enter the number of minutes you stopped the 
task 
5.    If you were not interrupted during your training session please click on 
the white box beneath the question and enter 0.  
6.    Enter the of number minutes you stopped to complete task. (Help 
participant decide number)  
[ADDRESS_1240695] any other comments on the task please write it in the 
comments section or enter “none”  
8.    Enter your comments now.  
9.    Once you have finished filling out your diary click the Save diary and 
Exit button.  
10. You will complete a diary after each training session.  
  
Load Saved Game  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  The ability to load your saved games allows you to continue your game 
from a previous saved game. Some games may take multiple sessions to complete and being able to return to your previous saved location is valuable. Loading a previously saved game will allow you to start your game from the exact moment that you saved the game. This allows you 
to continue your strategy and advance towards victory in your previous game. ( have participants 
start and load previous game, then exit)  
1.    To start Rise of Nati ons move your mouse to the Task 1 icon on your desktop. Remember 
to only click on the Task 1 icon once, if you double click the icon it will pull up 2 diary pages at 
the end of your session.  
o   Click anywhere to skip the intro videos if desired.  
o   Click  Solo Game.  
2. Click on the Load Saved Game. A menu screen will be displayed afterwards  
3. Click on the name [CONTACT_886578], such as 1 new game 2016.10.25 14’53’40 (Tue) 
or the save from the game you did not complete.  
4. It will load your previous game and you may complete it with either a victory or defeat.  
  
*If participant has not  gone through the full 2 hours please continue with the script*  
98 GUIDE PARTICIPANT: We will now exit the game again and create a new game. We will go 
through this guide again to try to help you understand the basics of the game. Try to follow the 
guide and if you have any questions we will be here to help you. ( have participants create a new 
game. You will go back to the beginning of the guide for the second training session if there is 
time. Try to be a little more hands off but still give explanations. Let the participant use the manual to help in case they are confused.)  
  
IADL Training (Fraud + AARP)  
IADL1   
Training Protocol   
  
SPEAKING: The Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement 
(CREATE) is conducting a study on cognitive training.  This study seeks to measure the possible 
benefits of brain training games and other types of training on the performance of cognitive tests 
and everyday tasks such as driving and finance management.  For this study, we want you to complete the two different online education courses:   
1.) AARP driver safety course   
2) And the finances and fraud online education.    
The AARP Driver  Safety Course is designed to refresh your driving skills and your knowledge of 
the rules and hazards of the road. The finances and fraud online education is designed to help you learn how to manage your finances and protect yourself from financial fraud. You need to 
complete each course one at a time at your own pace and we want you to complete each course 
twice  within the next 4 weeks (before the second lab visit).   
[ADDRESS_1240696] that you will be able to complete each course twice within the next 4 weeks if you 
spend around 30- 60 mins per day, for 4- 5 days a week.  The detailed training schedule will be 
provided at the end of today with take- home manual.   
  
Wifi Setup  
DEMONSTRATE: In this study, you will need to be able to connect to a wireless network. We 
will show you how to connect to a wireless network here, and you will need to follow these same steps at home.  If you already have a wireless network at home, that’s great.  If not, we will provide you with a device that will provide you with wireless network for the length of the study.   
*If participant does not have internet please refer to MiFi Device Instructions on page 4.   
1. First click on the wireless network ic on in the bottom right corner of the 
desktop. This will pull up a list of wireless networks. (show where to click to 
pull up network list. )   
1. For your training session, we will use the network FSU_SECURE  to train you 
on how to login to a wireless network.  
1. Click FSU_SECURE  from the list of wireless networks.   
1. Click the connect button.   
1. In the password prompt enter the password CREATE2017.   
1. Click the OK button.   
1. The computer will now connect to the wireless network.  
1. This is how you will connect to your wireless network at home or to your Mifi device.   
1. An alternative option to plug an ethernet cable into your computer and the wireless router in your house. This allows you to connect to your WIFI through a wired connection and maybe more stable than using the WIFI 
connection.   
[ADDRESS_1240697] into the laptop. The other end goes into the wifi 
router in your home.  (Help participant)   
1.  All of this inform ation is available in the “HOW -TO-Connect” video on your 
desktop. Let’s play a little bit of that video now.   
1.  (Play first minute of HOW -TO-Connect video on participant computer if 
participant is unsure of ability to connect)   
1. For this training session, w e will need to connect to the wireless network of 
[LOCATION_012] State University.   
  
BEFORE CONTINUING CLICK ON THE FSU SECURE NETWORK, enter your credentials to 
login to the FSU network and continue.   
  
MiFi Device Instructions: Go grab a Mifi  device from Thomas.   
1. First click on the wireless network icon in the bottom right corner of the 
desktop. This will pull up a list of wireless networks. (show where to click to 
pull up network list. )   
1. We will use the network CREATE_ #X to train you on how  to login to the Mifi 
device.  
1. Click CREATE_ #X from the list of wireless networks.   
1. Click the connect button.   
1. In the password prompt enter the password CREATE2017.   
1. Click the OK button.   
  
AARP Driver Safety Course  
SPEAKING:  We want you to complete the AARP driver safety course first. So, now I am going 
to give you a demonstration of how to access and start the AARP driver safety course. Please 
101 feel free to ask any questions at any time during the demonstration.  Please also let me know 
any time you would like to take a break.    
  
Open Task 1  
DEMONSTRATE: Now let’s access the first task, AARP Driver Training, and start learning your 
daily tasks. First, you will need to:  
1. Single click on the Task [ADDRESS_1240698] your window in full screen while you complete the course.  
1. Click on the maximize button at the top right corner of the browser.   
  
Logging In  
SPEAKING: You have been preassigned a login and password for this course.  Your login 
information allows you to access and complete the course, and monitor how much of the training 
you have completed. Let’s login to the course now and get started. ( Pause between ins tructions 
and wait for participant to attempt each step on their own. Only help if participant needs it. )   
1. First click on the log in button at the top right of the AARP website.   
1. This is the login window.  Here you will enter the email address and 
password that we setup when we purchased the AARP account for you.   
1. The email address and password is located on the laptop, right here.   
1. Now enter that login and password into the webs ite to login.   
1. Then click the “Log In” button.   
  
Participant Complete Acct Info   
SPEAKING: Before you start the course, you will need to create your own account by [CONTACT_886572]. Let’s do that together now.   
102 1. Please fill out information requested on the screen. You will need your 
driver’s license number.   
1. (Make sure the default email address is not changed)   
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: You won’t be asked to enter the information again the next time you log 
in. From now on you will just need to t ype the email address and password to start training and 
click “Log in.”  
  
ASK:  Do you have any questions before we continue?   
  
My Account Page  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: This is your training summary for the course. This will provide 
information on how much of the training you have completed. It will also tell you that how many 
days left to complete, but please disregard that information (Days Left to Complete). Regardless  
of that information, as mentioned above, you just need to complete both courses twice (AARP 
Driver Safety Course and Finances & Fraud Education) within 4 weeks. This driver safety course will take around 6 hours to complete.   
  
Start Course & Menu   
GUIDE  PARTICIPANT: Let’s start the course now and go over it together.  
1. Click the “CONTINUE TO COURSE” button to start the training session.   
1. A new popup window will appear and the course will automatically start, but I 
am going to manually pause the video .   
1. The course consists of several different units shown here in the menu. (point 
at the Menu section).   
1. Starting with the “Introduction” and ending with a final overview and 
assessment in “Unit 6: What Have We Learned”.    
[ADDRESS_1240699] always complete the units i n order.  
  
Navigating the Course   
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Now let’s get into how to navigate the course.  
1. You can pause or resume the course by [CONTACT_886573].    
1. Click the “play” button at the bottom to resume the slide and then “pause” 
to stop the course.   
1. You can move forward through the tutorial by [CONTACT_17325] “NEXT” button 
in the lower right corner after each slide ( point at the NEXT button ).   
1. You will also find a “BACK” button ( point at the Back button)  Use the 
“BACK” butto n if you want or need to go back one slide that you have 
already visited. Slides you have already visited will be indicated in a light 
grey.  
  
  
Complete the “Introduction” Section  
The Introduction section of the course ( point at Introduction in the Many  bar) presents a brief 
overview of the tutorial and more detailed instruction about how to navigate through the tutorial.   
1. Now please go through the Introduction carefully, I will be here to help if 
you need it. You will learn how to use all the different  buttons during the 
tutorial.    
1.  (have participants go through the whole introduction. Don’t leave while 
they complete the introduction –  and when they finish, ask them to stop 
the course by [CONTACT_886574] ).     
AFTER COMPLETING INTRODUCTION: All right great. During your 4 weeks of at home 
training, we want you to spend roughly 30- 60 minutes per day on this course. Never complete 
104 more than 2 units per day or train more than 5 days a week. It’s best to complete units as shown 
on page [ADDRESS_1240700] any 
questions?   
  
Exiting the Course   
SPEAKING:  Now I want to show you how to close the course after you finish your session for 
the day. When you want to exit the course do the following:  
1. Click on the “X” at the top right of the screen to close the course popup.   
1. Then click on the “X” again to exit the browser completely.   
1. This will close the AARP driver safety course page and pull up your diary.   
  
Filling out Diary   
DEMONSTRATE: The diary allows you to record your thoughts and feelings after each training 
session. With this diary, you will answer the following questions.   
1. How enjoyable , challenging, frustrating  you found the training that 
day.  
1. And how motivated  you were in the training that day.  
1. Go ahead and answer those questions now for the introduction training 
you just completed.   
1. The next question asks “During today’s session, for how many minutes, did you stop to complete another task”. If you were interrupted  or had to 
take a break from task, you would enter the number of minutes you stopped the task  
1. .If you were not interrupted during your training session please click on the white box beneath the question and enter 0.   
105 1. Enter the of number minutes you stopped to complete task. (Help 
participant decide number)   
1. If you have any other comments on the task please write it in the 
comments section or enter “none”  
1. Enter your comments now.   
1. Once you have finished filling out your diary click the Save diary and Exi t 
button.   
1. You will complete a diary after each training session.   
  
Finances & Fraud Education   
SPEAKING: Now I am going to give you a demonstration of how to access and start the second 
training course, the finances and fraud education. This course is structured very similar to the 
AARP driver’s safety course we just went over.  
  
Open Task 2  
DEMONSTRATE: The finances and fraud education is accessed by [CONTACT_886575]. 
First, you will need to:  
1. Click on the task [ADDRESS_1240701] your window in full  screen while you complete the course.  
1. Click on the maximize button at the top right corner of the browser.   
This finances and fraud education course will also take about or less than 5- 6 hours to complete. 
As you would do for the AARP driver’s safety cou rse, we want you to spend roughly 30 -60 
minutes per day on this course. Never complete more than 2 units per day or train more than 5 days a week. It’s best to complete units as shown on page [ADDRESS_1240702] any questions?  
106 Also please remember to only click on the Task 1 and Task 2 icons once, if you double click the 
icon it will pull up 2 windows and 2 diary pages.  
  
Logging In  
GUIDE PARTICIPANT: To access this course all you have to do is enter the password. The 
password is located on your laptop, it’s “CREATE2017.”  
1. Enter CREATE2017 into the box designated password.   
1. Click “Login” to continue to the course .  
1. The course will automatically start, but I am going to manually pause the 
video.   
1. The course consists of several different units shown here in the menu. (point 
at the Menu section).   
1. Starting with the “Home” and ending with a final overview and assessment in 
“Unit 8”.    
1. You must always complete the units in order.  
  
  
Navigating the Course   
GUIDE PARTICIPANT:  Now let’s get into how to navigate the course.  
1. You can pause or resume the course by [CONTACT_886573].    
1. Click the “play” button  at the bottom to resume the slide and then “pause” 
to stop the course.   
1. You can move forward through the tutorial by [CONTACT_17325] “NEXT” button in the lower right corner after each slide ( point at the NEXT button ).   
1. You will also find a “BACK” button ( point at the Back button)  Use the 
“BACK” button if you want or need to go back one slide that you have 
[ADDRESS_1240703] already 
visited by [CONTACT_886576]. The slides that you 
haven’t viewed yet will remain black. You are not able to jump to them via 
the menu.  ( point at the menu section).    
  
  
Complete the “Home” Section  
The “Home” section of the course ( point at “Home” in the Manu bar ) presents a brief overview of 
the tutorial and more detailed instruction about how to navigate through the course. In order to complete the course, you just listen to the instructions from the course carefully and simply 
follow them during the course.  
1. Now please go through the “Home” section carefully, I will be here to help 
if you need it. You will learn how to use all the different buttons during the 
tutorial.    
1.  (have participants go through the whole introduction. Don’t leave while 
they complete the “home” section –  and when they finish, ask them to 
stop the course by [CONTACT_886574]).     
SPEAKING:  We won’t go further on this training today because you need to complete the 
AARP driver’s safety course first.    
  
Exiting the Course   
SPEAKING:   Like the AARP course, after each of the daily sessions, when you want to close the 
session:  
108 1. Click on the “X” at the top right of the screen to close the course and 
browser.   
1. This will close the Fraud Training course and pull up your diary.   
  
Filling o ut Diary   
SPEAKING:  Please fill out the diary after each training session.  
1. Go ahead and fill out the diary now, just like before.   
1. (Make sure “stop to complete another task” is entered correctly.)   
1. (Explain diary to participant only if struggling.)   
  
After Course Completion  
SPEAKING:  After you complete this Finances and Fraud course for the first time, you will be 
asked to repeat both courses again.  Please refer to the training schedule attached  in the take-
home manual and follow the schedule. Do you have any questions?   
  
Resuming AARP Driver’s Safety Course  
DEMONSTRATE: For the rest of today’s lab training session, we want you to resume the AARP 
driver’s safety course and complete Unit [ADDRESS_1240704] a question that the manual 
could answer. Let’s start the course when you’re ready.    
(Watch if the participant can figure out how to get back to AARP and start Unit 1. Remind 
participants of that all the necessar y information needed is described in the take -home manual 
and encourage them to use the manual from this point if they have questions, so that they can 
[ADDRESS_1240705] any questions, you can also refer to the 
take- home manual to guide participants.   
  
(Once they finish the unit 1, ask them to stop the course and fill out the diary)   
End of Lab Training Session  
AFTER COMPLETING AARP UNIT 1 & Diary: Do you have any questions or anything that 
needs clarification before we end our training?  
  
 (Interventionist should answer any questions. Also please emphasize that we want them to 
complete each course twice and follow the training schedule attached in the manual. Especially, 
tell them they don’t go to the last unit of each course –  unit 6 for the AARP driver’s course and 
unit 8 for Finances and Fraud course if it is “the first time”.  Please show them the training 
schedule!!! )  
 
Control training (Crosswo rds, Sudoku, Word Search)  
 
 
Call Scripts  
One week call - CHECK IN  
Hi, this is [your name]  from the CREATE lab at FSU. Is __________ there? So, it’s been a week 
since you were given a the laptop as part of your participation in the CE study and I’m just 
calling to check in and make sure you’re not having any problems with [the condition]  or wi th 
the laptop in general.  
Setup appointment - POST  
Hi, this is [your name]  from the CREATE lab at FSU. Is __________ there? I was just calling to 
remind you of your two post testing days are [post testing days], and we ask that you bring in the 
[ADDRESS_1240706] any 
questions please call 850 -800-6339. Thank you.  
Setup appointment - FOLLOW UP  
Hi, this is [your name]  from the CREATE lab at FSU. Is __________ there? Last [ date of Post 
Testing ] you completed your Post Testing for the Comparative Effectiveness project and we are 
coming up on the date for your Year Follow Up appointments. I was wondering if you had a couple minutes for us to schedule those two appointments to our lab? These appoi ntments would 
need to be scheduled after [ Post 1 month/day].  (Each appointment is an hour and a half to 2 
hours and they will be given the remaining $40 in compensation)  
Alright, great so you’re all scheduled. Our address is [ADDRESS_1240707] up to the roundabout and someone will be there to meet you. Can you tell me the color 
and model of your car so we can recognize you?  
If you have any questions please call 850- 800-6339. Thank you.  
 
Support  
 
ADVERSE EVENTS 