 
Institutional Review Board for Baylor College of Medicine and Affiliated 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_159137]:     H-[ZIP_CODE]  
Status:                         Approved  
Initial Submit Date:   10/30/2017  
Approval Period:        1/18/2018 - 11/14/2018  
 
  
Section Aa:   Title & PI  
A1.  Main Title  
 
      IMPROVING VETERAN FUNCTIONING WITH INTENSIVE TRANSDIAGNOSTIC CBT FOR ANXIETY  
 
 
A2.  Principal Investigator  
  
      [CONTACT_5627]:    ELLEN TENG  Phone:    [PHONE_3964]  
      Id:   138684  Fax:    
      Department:    PSYCHIATRY & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES  Email:     [EMAIL_3631]  
      Center:     Mail Stn:    BCM350  
 
 
A3.  Administrative Contact  
      [CONTACT_186015]  
 
 
A3a.   Financial Conflict of Interest  
Does any member of study personnel (Investigator (including investigator’s spouse and/or dependent children)) 
that are involved in the design, conduct, or reporting of the research have a Significant Financial Interest (SFI) that 
would reasonably appear to be affected by [CONTACT_53774]/or associated with an 
entity/business that would reasonably appear to be affected by [CONTACT_53775]?  
           No 
 
 
  
Section Ab:   General Information     
A4.  Co-Investigators  
  
      Name:    [CONTACT_186027]:    [PHONE_3965]  
 Id:   168362  Fax:    
 Department:     PSYCHIATRY & BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES  Email:     [EMAIL_3632]   Center:      Mail Stn:     BCM350  
 
  
      Name:    [CONTACT_186028]:    [PHONE_3966]  
 Id:   970104  Fax:   [PHONE_3526]   Department:     MEDICINE: HEALTH SRVCS RESEARCH  Email:     [EMAIL_3633]   Center:      Mail Stn:     BCM288  
 
  
      Name:    [CONTACT_186029]:     
 Id:   Non-Baylor  Fax:    
 Institution:     University of Arkansas Medical School  Email:     [EMAIL_3634]   Address:        
 
 
 
A5.  Funding Source:  
 
      Organization:   VA CENTRAL OFFICE, RR&D  
 
 
A6a.   Institution(s) where work will be performed:  
 
      Michael E. DeBakey  Veterans Affairs Medical Center  
 
 
A6b.   Research conducted outside of the [LOCATION_002]:  
 
      Country:    
Facility/Institution:    
Contact/Investigator:    
Phone Number:    
 
If documentation of assurances has not been sent to the Office of Research, please explain:  
 
 
A7.  Research Category:  
 
       
 
 
A8. Therapeutic Intent  
Does this trial have therapeutic intent?  
      Yes 
 
 
  
Section B:   Exempt Request  
B.  Exempt From IRB Review  
 
      Not Applicable  
 
 
  
Section C:  Background Information  
 
      The process of recovery and community reintegration across the lifespan for Veterans with posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) and anxiety disorders (henceforth referred to as anxiety -based disorders) is a significant 
problem. Resuming and participating in major social life roles within the community is challenging due to the 
debilitating nature of anxiety, which often results in avoidance of everyday activities and social withdrawal. 
Consequences of untreat ed anxiety -based disorders range from substantial impairment in social, vocational, 
emotional and physical functioning to high rates of suicide.  
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_185999] -based CBT for anxiety based disorders, a significant proportion of 
Veter ans do not initiate treatment. Nationwide data indicate that less than 10% of recently deployed Veterans 
receive an adequate course of psychotherapy within the first year of being diagnosed with a mental health 
disorder. Avoidance associated with anxiety a nd fear -based disorders (e.g., PTSD) lead to low rates of 
treatment engagement and high rates of treatment dropout. For instance, attrition rates in PTSD treatment (20 -
40%) are similar to attrition rates (25%) for treatment of other disorders such as panic  disorder and social 
anxiety disorder. Furthermore, length of time required to deliver evidence -based psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_186000] (family, work, school) activities and necessitate arranging time off work, scheduling around school 
schedules, and t raveling to multiple appointments.  
 
Novel and innovative approaches capable of improving community reintegration, quality of life, and clinical 
outcomes, while also keepi[INVESTIGATOR_186001]. Given the impact PTSD and 
related a nxiety disorders can have on family members, it is also important to learn about their perspectives 
regarding the advantages and disadvantages of new treatment approaches.  
 
 
   
Section D:   Purpose and Objectives  
 
      The overall objective of the proposed study is to improve reintegration across the lifespan and quality of life in 
Veterans with anxiety -based disorders including co-occurring depression. A randomized controlled trial will test 
the effectiveness of transdiagnostic group CBT delive red in an intensive weekend format. This transdiagnostic 
protocol addresses multiple anxiety -based disorders in a single protocol by [CONTACT_186016] -based modules that can be flexibly tailored to any anxi ety disorder. 
Intensive CBT (iCBT) is an innovative and promising method of treatment delivery with the potential to produce 
rapid improvement in functional and clinical outcomes. The compressed format (e.g., weekend) of iCBT 
increases the likelihood that Veterans will engage in and complete treatment. During the course of the study, we 
will also gather qualitative data from Veterans who participated in the weekend treatment (and their family 
members) to obtain a deeper understanding of how iCBT and environ mental barriers and facilitators have 
impacted their overall functioning and quality of life.  
 
 
  
Section E:   Protocol Risks/Subjects  
E1.  Risk Category  
 
      Category 1: Research not involving greater than minimum risk.  
 
 
E2.  Subjects  
Gender:  
      Both 
 
 
Age: 
      Adult (18 -64 yrs), Geriatric (65+ yrs)  
 
 
Ethnicity:  
      All Ethnicities  
 
 
Primary Language:  
      English  
 
 
Groups to be recruited will include:  
      Patients  
 
 
Which if any of the following vulnerable populations will be recruited as subjects?  
      Mentally ill  
 
 
Vulnerable populations require special protections.   How will you obtain informed consent, protect subject 
confidentiality, and prevent undue coercion?  
      Project staff will review the consent form with the patient, including the study procedure, patient’s rights, risks 
and benefits of participation, and the methods that will be taken to protect the patient’s confidentiality. The 
patient will have the opport unity to ask questions throughout the process. Each patient will be given his/her own 
copy of the informed consent form to follow along by [CONTACT_186017]. Patients will be asked to reiterate their understanding of the important points of the consent form to 
ensure that full informed consent is obtained. Study staff will clarify any necessary points and answer questions. 
Participants will not require a Legally Authorized Representative for this study.  
 
 
E3.  Pregnant woman/fetus  
Will pregnant women and/or fetuses (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the research?  
      No 
 
 
E4.  Neonates  
Will neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable neonates (as described in 45 CFR 46 Subpart B) be enrolled in the 
research?  
      No 
 
 
E5.  Children  
Will children be enrolled in the research?  
      No 
 
 
  
Section F:   Design/Procedure  
F1.  Design  
Select one category that most adequately describes your research:  
      c) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_159141]: probability of group assignment, potential 
for subject to be randomized to placebo group, use of control subjects, etc.   
      The clinical trial will compare the effectiveness of iCBT to standard CBT (sCBT) and treatment as usual (TAU). 
A total of [ADDRESS_219662] one of the following disorders: 
PTSD, panic disorder (PD), social a nxiety disorder (SAD) and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Veterans 
with or without co -occurring depression will be included. Participants will be randomized to iCBT, sCBT, or TAU. 
The study design uses unequal randomization to the active intervention a rms and to treatment as usual to 
reduce unnecessary recruitment. Thus, the percent chance that participants will be randomized to one of the 
three conditions are: 37% iCBT, 37% sCBT, and 24%TAU. Participants in iCBT will receive treatment over one 
weekend (16 total session hours); those in sCBT will receive the same treatment weekly, over 12 weeks (16 
total session hours); and those assigned to TAU will receive routine clinical care. Assessments will be 
completed at four time points: baseline, [ADDRESS_219663] the 
benefit of having trained therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186002]. The workshop 
is similar to other classes and seminars people may attend in daily life. The room is set up as a classroom with 
individual desks and chairs for participants. Breaks are scheduled throughout the day,  and participants are 
informed that they may take a break whenever they need.  
 
It is important to note that the content of the treatment protocol is not new; cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is 
a well -established, empi[INVESTIGATOR_186003]. In fact, it is the gold-
standard treatment and recommended by [CONTACT_186018] a first line intervention for anxiety and mood disorders. The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_186004] [ADDRESS_219664] weekly sessions (Teng et al, 2015, Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 33, 1- 7). All 
of these factors support the rationale that the protocol should be considered minimal risk.  
 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
      (1) Veteran at least 18 years old; (2) current diagnosis of at least one anxiety -based disorder: PTSD, PD, SAD, 
or GAD (based on ADIS -5); (3) moderate-to -poor life enjoyment and satisfaction as indicated by a score of 42 or 
lower on the Q -LES-Q -SF (4) stab le on psychotropic medication for 4 weeks before study participation; and (5) 
willing to be randomized to treatment condition. Inclusion criteria for family members of Veterans randomized to 
the weekend intervention who wish to participate in the qualitati ve interview: (1) at least 18 years old and (2) has 
regular contact [CONTACT_186019] (e.g., sees or talks with Veteran several days/week).  
 
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
      (1) Active symptoms of mania or psychosis at baseline (based on ADIS -5); (2) depression with active suicidal 
ideation/intent that would preclude treatment (based on ADIS -5 & BDI -II); (3) moderate -to-severe cognitive 
impairment as indicated by a score below 20 on the SLUMS; (4) active drug/alcohol abuse during the initial 3 -
months o f study enrollment (otherwise Veterans with comorbid substance/alcohol dependence are study 
eligible); and (5) undergoing concurrent transdiagnostic CBT for anxiety.  
 
 
 
F2.  Procedure  
 
      Recruitment  
 
Several methods of recruitment will be used in the study. Letters will be sent to Veterans enrolled for care at the 
MEDVAMC, including those scheduled for appointments in outpatient clinics (e.g., General Mental Health, 
Primary Care, Post Deployment, PTSD) . In addition, flyers advertising the study will be posted throughout 
MEDVAMC, community based outpatient clinics affiliated with MEDVAMC, and Vet centers located in Houston. 
We will also recruit from non -profit organizations serving Veterans in the Houston community (e.g., U.S. Vets). 
The study will also be advertised through electronic messaging boards throughout the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Veterans 
newsletters such as the “VA Star,” and via free list -serves that Veterans subscribe to such as the “Houston 
Military Affa irs” mail group.  
 
Assessments  
 
Participants will undergo a total of four in -person assessments. A pre-screening will be conducted using the Q -
LES-Q-SF to determine a moderate level of impairment in general functioning. Veterans obtaining an 
impairment sc ore of 42 or lower will be study eligible and complete a full baseline evaluation. Data obtained 
from the Q -LES-Q -SF at the pre-screen will not be used for research purposes. If the Veteran meets inclusion 
criteria and agrees to participate, s/he will be c onsented and re-administered this measure, which takes 
approximately 5 -10 minutes to complete. The baseline evaluation will occur approximately 1-2 weeks before 
treatment. The baseline evaluation will include a structured diagnostic interview (ADIS -5) and psychological 
screening measures to determine general emotional functioning and the presence of specific psychiatric 
disorders. During the pre -treatment appointment, it will be explained to the patient that that all assessment and 
treatment sessions will b e supervised by a licensed psychologist (PI). Patients will also be informed that study 
staff will need to access their medical records periodically to track relevant psychiatric and medical information. 
Protected health information that will be collected from Veterans in this study include: name, address, telephone 
numbers, dates of appointments related to the study, last four digits of social security number, and voice 
recordings. Demographic information, medications prescribed, and dates of mental health  treatment 
appointments will also be collected. VA Quality Assurance and BCM IRB personnel responsible for providing 
general oversight of this study (e.g., patient enrollment and consent forms) may also have access to research 
data. Specific data that may be accessed include symptom measures collected during the course of the study. 
Study data regarding individual information that is not in the patient's medical record will remain confidential and 
inaccessible to other agencies. Health records of participan ts in this study will be flagged since they are 
participating in an intervention for a psychiatric disorder.  
 
Assessments at four time points (baseline, 1 -month, 3- month, and 6-month follow -up) will be conducted for all 
three conditions. Diagnostic assess ments will be conducted by [CONTACT_186020] [INVESTIGATOR_186005]. All assessments will be conducted in individual sessions that will occur either at 
the MEDVAMC or over the telephone (no social security numbers wi ll be requested from subjects or potential 
subjects via phone). Veterans will be provided opportunities for breaks during in -person assessments and two 
phone appointments will be scheduled to reduce fatigue effects. Should a participant need immediate atte ntion 
(e.g., expresses active suicidal intent or psychosis) during the assessment, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186006] a provider through the walk -in clinic at the MEDVAMC that same day. Follow -up assessments will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_186021].  
 
Participants will receive a modest amount of monetary compensation for study participation, as detailed in 
Section L.  
 
Assessment Battery  
 
The assessment battery will consist of the following: (1) Community Reintegration of  Injured Service members – 
Computer -Adaptive Test (CRIS -CAT), a commonly used measure of community reintegration following 
deployment; (2) Short -Form 12 Health Survey (SF -12), measures eight domains related to physical and mental 
health, health perceptions , and the impact of physical or emotional problems on general functioning via self -
report; (3) Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) assesses the severity of anxiety symptoms, minimizing those that 
overlap with depression; (4) Beck Depression Inventory - Second Edi tion (BDI –II) assesses severity of 
depressive symptoms; (5) Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire - Short Form (Q -LES-Q -SF) 
is a brief, 16 -item measure of subjective functioning and satisfaction across a range of life domains including 
work, leisure activities, social relationships, and physical health; (6) Saint Louis University Mental Status Exam 
(SLUMS) is an 11 -item clinician -administered screening measure of cognitive impairment; (7) Anxiety Disorders 
Interview Schedule DSM -5 (ADIS –5) is a gold -standard semi -structured clinician interview used to assess for 
the presence of all anxiety disorders including PTSD. Modules examining the presence of psychosis, mood and 
substance abuse disorders are also included; (8) Demographic and Military  Survey is a brief questionnaire we 
have used in previous studies that inquires about general demographic and military information. Veterans are 
asked about their periods of service, deployment dates, whether they seek healthcare outside of VA, and other 
information pertaining to their education and employment history; (9) Perceived Barriers to Seeking Mental 
Health Services (PB -SMHS) assesses concerns specific to Veterans that are related to seeking mental health 
counseling and related services; and (10) C lient Satisfaction Questionnaire-8 (CSQ -8) is a brief 8-item measure 
used to assess overall treatment satisfaction. All measures will be administered at each assessment period, 
except the ADIS -5, Q -LES-Q -SF, SLUMS, Demographic Questionnaire, and PB -SMHS, w hich will only be 
administered at baseline. The CSQ will only be administered at 1 -month and 3-month follow -up periods. The 
complete battery of assessments can be administered in 2 -3 hours.  
 
Treatments  
 
Participants will be randomly assigned to one of thr ee treatment arms (iCBT, sCBT, TAU), described in detail 
below. Both iCBT and sCBT treatments are identical except for delivery format. Persons delivering the treatment 
will include a masters -level and doctoral -level interventionist who will be trained to deliver treatments in both 
intervention conditions under the supervision of [CONTACT_186030], a licensed psychologist and co -investigator on 
this project. [CONTACT_186031] is experienced in transdiagnostic treatment for anxiety and in the delivery of exposure -
based treatments for anxiety disorders with Veterans. She will work closely with the interventionists to ensure 
that all patients are closely monitored, with their safety taking priority above the needs of the study. Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_186007] a safe mode of treatment delivery. However, as an added level of precaution, the 
MEDVAMC has an emergency department with an on -call psychiatrist available [ADDRESS_219665] Cognitive Behavioral Treatment: The sCBT condition consists of [ADDRESS_219666]. A maximum of 6 Veterans may be enrolled per group cycle. The transdiagnostic treatment 
protocol consists of (1) psychoeducation about the general treatment structure, the nature of anxiety disorders 
and co -occurring symp toms such as depression, and physiology underlying the fight/flight response; (2) 
cognitive restructuring, a method of challenging maladaptive thoughts that maintain negative affect and fears by 
[CONTACT_186022]; and (3) exposure to feared 
stimuli through imaginal, interoceptive, or in -vivo exercises. Treatment concludes with relapse prevention 
planning. Homework is completed regularly over the course of treatment. Patients will be asked to mon itor and 
record their anxiety and mood symptoms, complete thought records, and engage in exposure exercises.  
 
Intensive Cognitive Behavioral Treatment: The iCBT condition will contain the same treatment components as 
sCBT, but the intervention will be del ivered over one weekend, lasting 8 hours each day (see weekend itinerary 
in Section S: file named "H42354 Study Measures). A maximum of [ADDRESS_219667] their anxiety and mood outside of treatment.  
 
Treatment As Usual: The TAU condition consists of routine clinical care patients would typi[INVESTIGATOR_186008]. This may include me dication management alone (visits once every 4 months, on average) or in 
conjunction with other forms of individual or group therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186009] -based classes (e.g., anger management, PTSD Recovery 101, et c.). These time -limited classes 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_186010] a total of 8 – [ADDRESS_219668] of routine care in VA. Information on 
participants’ engagement in these and all other forms of mental health treatment during the study will be 
collected via self -report and chart review. This i nformation will be examined and if needed, will be controlled for 
in subsequent analyses. Upon completing the 6 -month follow -up, patients in this condition will be offered iCBT 
or sCBT.  
 
 
 
Interviews  
 
A maximum of 40 Veterans who completed iCBT and their f amily members will be invited to participate in a 
qualitative interview. The purpose of the interview is to obtain Veteran perspectives on the iCBT format. Using 
an interview guide (see Section S file named "H42354 Study Measures," the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186011] -person interviews at the MEDVAMC approximately 1-month after completing treatment. The 
inclusion of up to [ADDRESS_219669] of iCBT on 
the recovery process. Vetera ns will provide written informed consent (and sign a release of information form for 
family members present) before interviews begin and be compensated $[ADDRESS_219670]: Research -
Data/Teng Lab/H42354 Transdiagnostic.  
 
 
  
Section G:   Sample Size/Data Analysis   
G1.  Sample Size  
How many subjects (or specimens, or charts) will be used in this study?  
      Local: 335               Worldwide: 335  
 
 
Please indicate why you chose the sample size proposed:   
      A total of 335 participants will be recruited for this study: [ADDRESS_219671]; 
40 Veterans who participated in iCBT and their family members (up to 40) will be invited to participate in the 
qualitative interview.  
 
For the RCT, a total of 252 patients will be randomized across the 3 arms (95 to iCBT, 95 to sCBT, and 62 to 
TAU) to have 80% power to detect differences among groups in the primary outcomes. A recent meta -analysis 
of transdiagnostic treatment for anxiety demonstrated a medium effect size (g=.69) on quality of life outcomes. 
Based on these findings, we are using a more conservative effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_219672] be recruited for the study. The recruited sample size of 95 for iCBT and 95 for sCBT, 
assuming 20% attrition at [ADDRESS_219673] 80% power to detect a 
medium effect size of .[ADDRESS_219674] with á=.05 two -sided significance level.    
 
G2.  Data Analysis  
Provide a description of your plan for data analysis. State the types of comparisons you plan (e.g. comparison of 
means, comparison of proportions, regressions, analysis of variance). Which is the PRIMARY 
comparison/analysis? How will the analyses proposed relate to the primary purposes of your stud y?  
      For our primary analyses, we will compare changes between the iCBT, sCBT, and TAU groups at all time 
periods in a single regression using a hierarchical mixed -model analysis. Because the number of patients 
randomized to the [ADDRESS_219675] -hoc using multiple comparisons procedures 
(e.g., Bonferroni) as recommended in the literature. For secondary analyses, we will run hierarchical linear 
regression models for each outcome usi ng the baseline and [ADDRESS_219676] differences in treatment engagement across 
conditions.  
 
 
  
Section H:   Potential Risks/Discomforts  
H1.  Potential Risks/Discomforts  
Describe and assess any potential risks/discomforts; (physical, psychological, social, legal, or other) and assess 
the likelihood and seriousness of such risks:  
      The anticipated risks of participating in this study a re minimal. However, as with any type of treatment for 
anxiety -based disorders, there is a chance that patients will not experience noticeable improvement in their 
anxiety symptoms; and some may find their symptoms worsen during treatment. At times, some p atients may 
experience discomfort or embarrassment in disclosing personal information or in discussing issues typi[INVESTIGATOR_186012]. While engaging in various cognitive and behavioral exercises, patients may experience 
momentary discomfort (e.g., talking about traumatic event, tensing parts of the body). Patients will be monitored 
closely by a trained clinician and will not be asked to engage in potentially anxiety -provoking exercises for 
prolonged periods of time or do more than they are willing. In the event that a patient remains distressed or 
upset after a therapy or evaluation session, that individual will be encouraged to speak to the 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]/interviewer or another mental healthcare professional. All patients will have access to study person nel 
during regular business hours and access to emergency services [ADDRESS_219677]. Barrera, are experienced in the delivery of 
exposure -based treatments for anxiet y disorders and will ensure that all patients are closely monitored, with 
their safety taking priority above the needs of the study.  
 
 
H2.  Data and safety monitoring plan  
     Do the study activities impart greater than minimal risk to subjects?  
           No 
 
 
H3.  Coordination of information among sites for multi -site research  
Is the BCM Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_53770] -INVESTIGATOR for this multi -site research?  
           No or Not Applicable  
 
 
Is BCM the COORDINATING CENTER for this multi -site research?  
           No or Not Applicable  
 
 
  
Section I:   Potential Benefits  
Describe potential benefit(s) to be gained by [CONTACT_30435] a result of participating in the planned work.  
      Patients who participate in the study may experience functional and symptom improvement related to their 
anxiety.  
 
 
Describe potential benefit(s) to society of the planned work.  
      Information obtained from this study will be used to make the treatment more available to other Veterans 
experiencing similar problems. Based on findings from this study, the next project  will evaluate broader 
dissemination of the treatment. Thus, potentially many more Veterans may benefit from this study.  
 
 
Do anticipated benefits outweigh potential risks? Discuss the risk -to-benefit ratio.  
      This protocol has a favorable risk -benefit ratio because CBT is an empi[INVESTIGATOR_186013] -based disorders. Patients in this study have the added benefit of receiving close monitoring through 
regular assessment periods. Finally, the potential risk s of the intervention are minimal and typi[INVESTIGATOR_186014].  
 
 
  
Section J:   Consent Procedures  
J1.  Waiver of Consent  
Will any portion of this research require a waiver of consent and authorization?  
      No 
 
 
  
J1a.  Waiver of requirement for written documentation of Consent  
Will this research require a waiver of the requirement for written documentation of informed consent?  
      No 
 
 
J2.  Consent Procedures  
Who will recruit subjects for this study?  
      [CONTACT_976] 
[CONTACT_976]'s staff 
  
 
 
Describe how research population will be identified, recruitment procedures, any waiting period between informing 
the prospective participant and obtaining consent, steps taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue 
influence and consent procedures in detail.   
      Any member of the study staff may obtain consent from study participants. This study will include Veterans from 
all war eras recruited from Houston and surrounding areas. Veterans may be referred from the ir healthcare 
providers at the MEDVAMC, community -based outpatient clinics, or Veterans Centers. Participants may also 
self-refer to the study through posted advertisements in Veteran newsletters or Veteran list -serves. People who 
self-refer to the study w ill be asked to confirm Veteran status and if they are enrolled as a patient at the 
MEDVAMC. If they are, a study appointment will be scheduled; if they are not currently enrolled at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
they will be provided with the phone number for patient enr ollment and invited to contact [CONTACT_186023]. During the study appointment, a member of the study staff will describe the 
study and review the informed consent form, explaining the risks and benefits of participation . Patients 
interested in participating in the study will sign VA Form 10 -1086, Consent to Participate in VA Sponsored 
Research (see Section Q: Consent Form).  
 
Veterans who participate in the weekend intervention (iCBT) will be invited to participate in an  interview with 
study staff members to obtain their perspectives of this treatment format. From each weekend cohort, 1 - 2 
Veterans will be randomly selected to participate in the interview. At the time of setting up an appointment for 
the interview, Vetera ns will be informed that they may bring along a family member to the interview to share 
their perspectives with the study team. When participants arrive for the interview, a member of the study staff 
will describe the purpose of the interview and review th e informed consent form, explaining the risks and 
benefits of participation. Veterans and family members who participate in the study will each sign a separate 
consent form (VA Form 10 -1086, Consent to Participate in VA Sponsored Research ).  
 
 
Are foreign language consent forms required for this protocol?  
      No 
 
 
J3.  Privacy and Intrusiveness  
Will the research involve observation or intrusion in situations where the subjects would normally have an 
expectation of privacy?  
      No 
  
 
 
J4.  Children  
Will children be enrolled in the research?  
      No 
 
 
J5.  Neonates  
Will non -viable neonates or neonates of uncertain viability be involved in research?  
      No 
 
 
J6.  Consent Capacity - Adults who lack capacity  
Will Adult subjects who lack the capacity to give informed consent be enrolled in the research?  
      No 
 
 
J7.  Prisoners  
Will Prisoners be enrolled in the research?  
      No 
 
 
  
Section K:   Research Related Health Information and Confidentiality  
Will research data include identifiable subject information?  
      Yes 
 
 
Information from health records such as diagnoses, progress notes, medications, lab or radiology findings, etc.  
      Yes 
 
 
Specific information concerning alcohol abuse:  
      No 
 
 
Specific information concerning drug abuse:  
      No 
 
 
Specific information concerning sickle cell anemia:  
      No 
 
 
Specific information concerning HIV:  
      No 
 
 
Specific information concerning psychiatry notes:  
      Yes 
 
 
Demographic information (name, D.O.B., age, gender, race, etc.):  
      Yes 
 
 
Full Social Security #:  
      No 
 
 
Partial Social Security # (Last four digits):  
      Yes 
 
 
Billing or financial records:  
      No 
 
 
Photographs, videotapes, and/or audiotapes of you:  
      Yes 
 
 
Other:  
      No 
 
 
At what institution will the physical research data be kept?  
      All paper forms of original data collected from this study will be stored in a locked cabinet in a secured office at 
the Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, [LOCATION_007]. (MEDVAMC) (Room 6C -119) Paper data (aside 
from the consent and HIPAA forms) will not contain any HIPAA identifiers or other sensitive information. Each 
participant will be assigned a participant study number, which will be used on paper data. Paper data will not 
leave the MEDVAMC.  
 
The purpose of collecting information covered under [ADDRESS_219678] in any report of 
such research.  
 
Research records, including identifiers will be destroyed 6 yea rs after cutoff (at the end of the fiscal year) after 
completion of the research project, but may be retained longer if required by [CONTACT_186024].  
 
 
How will such physical research data be secured?  
      Data will be stored at the MEDVAMC in building 100. Data will be kept in a locked file cabinet in room 6C -119. 
 
 
At what institution will the electronic research data be kept?  
      All research data in electronic form will be kept on a secure server of the MEDVAMC ([ADDRESS_219679], 
Houston, TX), which meets VA and BCM security requirements. The server is password -protected and access 
is limited to IT personal. During business and non -business hours, access to the server is behind locked door s. 
The server is backed up automatically each night. Data will be stored in folders on the S drive (S:Reseach -
Data/Teng lab) and only the research staff will be given permission (requiring a logon and password) to access 
these folders. All paper forms of d ata collected from this study will be stored at the MEDVAMC in Building 100 in 
a locked cabinet in a secured office (Room 6C -119). Paper data (aside from the consent and HIPAA forms) will 
not contain any HIPAA identifiers or other sensitive information. Ea ch participant will be assigned a participant 
study number, which will be used on paper data. Paper data will not leave the MEDVAMC. Results that are 
presented for publication will be reported in aggregate form, and therefore will not contain individual id entifying 
information.  
 
 
Such electronic research data will be secured via BCM IT Services - provided secured network storage of electronic 
research data (Non -Portable devices only):  
      No 
 
 
Such electronic research data will be secured via Other:  
      Yes, (describe below):  
Yes, (describe below): Electronic data will be stored on a VA secure server under the main "Research -Data" 
folder on the S drive. The pathway is: S Drive: Research -Data/Teng Lab/H42354 Transdiagnostic.  
 
 
Will there be anyone besides the PI, the study staff, the IRB and the sponsor, who will have access to identifiable 
research data?  
      Yes, identify the classes of the persons:  
People who ensure quality from the institutions where the research is being done, federal and other regulatory 
agencies will have access to all of the research data.  
 
 
Please describe the methods of transmission of any research data (including PHI, sens itive, and non -sensitive 
data) to sponsors and/or collaborators.  
      No PHI will be transmitted to sponsors or collaborators. De -identified transcripts of interviews will be sent via 
overnight mail to co -investigator, [CONTACT_186032].  
 
 
  
Will you obtain a Certificate of Confidentiality for this study?  
      No 
 
 
Please further discuss any potential confidentiality issues related to this study.  
      Participants in the study will authorize digital audio recording of clinician administered interviews, treatment 
sessions, and qualitative interviews conducted during the study by [CONTACT_17317]. Audio recordings 
will be recorded using a microphone directly connected to a VA networked computer and the recording will be 
saved in a password- protected, encrypted file on the secure VA server, the S drive (S: Research-Data/Teng 
Lab/H42354 Transdiagnostic), that is accessible only by [CONTACT_186025].  The only individually identifiable information contained on the 
audio recording is the voice print. All recordings will be labeled with participant numbers.  
 
Transcriptions of the qualitative interviews will be sent via overnight mail to [CONTACT_186033] d at [ADDRESS_219680]. Little Rock, AR [ZIP_CODE] with a tracking number. Transcriptions will not contain sensitive information or any of 
the 18 HIPAA identifiers  
 
 
   
 
  
Section L:   Cost/Payment  
Delineate clinical procedures from research procedures. Will subject's insurance (or subject) be responsible for 
research related costs? If so state for which items subject's insurance (or subject) will be responsible (surgery, 
device, drugs, etc). If appr opriate, discuss the availability of financial counseling.  
      Patients who participate in this study will be engaging in research and will not be billed for services provided 
within this protocol.  
 
 
If subjects will be paid (money, gift certificates, coupons, etc.) to participate in this research project, please note the 
total dollar amount (or dollar value amount) and distribution plan (one payment, pro-rated payment, paid upon 
completion, etc) of th e payment.  
 
Dollar Amount:  
      225 
 
 
Distribution Plan:  
      Patients will receive a payment voucher in the amount of $50 for completion of each assessment period 
(baseline, 1 -month, 3- month, & 6 month follow ups). The total amount they may receive is $200.  
 
A subset of participants who complete treatment and participate in the qualitative interview will receive an 
additional $25. The total amount they may receive is $225.  
 
 
  
Section M:   Genetics  
How would you classify your genetic study?  
       
 
 
Discuss the potential for psychological, social, and/or physical harm subsequent to  participation in this research. 
Please discuss, considering the following areas: risks to privacy, confidentiality, insurability, employability, 
immigration status, paternity status, educational opportunities, or social stigma.  
       
 
 
Will subjects be offered any type of genetic education or counseling, and if so, who will provide the education or 
counseling and under what conditions will it be provided? If there is the possibility that a family's pedigree will be 
presented or published, please descr ibe how you will protect family member's confidentiality?  
       
 
  
Section N:   Sample Collection  
None  
 
  
Section O:   Drug Studies  
Does the research involve the use of ANY drug* or biologic? (*A drug is defined as any substance that is used to 
elicit a pharmacologic or physiologic response whether it is for treatment or diagnostic purposes)  
      No 
 
 
Does the research involve the use of ANY gene transfer agent for human gene transfer research?  
      No 
 
 
O1.  Current Drugs  
  
Is this study placebo -controlled?  
      No 
 
 
Will the research involve a radioactive drug that is not approved by [CONTACT_1622]?  
      No 
 
 
  
Section P:   Device Studies  
     Does this research study involve the use of ANY device?  
           No 
 
 
  
Section Q:   Consent Form(s)  
Transdiagnostic Treatment for Anxiety  
 
Transdiagnostic Treatment for Anxiety Interviews  
 
  
Section R:   Advertisements  
Mode of Advertising:   Other: Flyers, Electronic Messaging Boards, Newsletters  
Exact language of Advertisement:  
      VETERANS: ARE YOU STRUGGLING WITH ANXIETY?  
 
Symptoms of anxiety may include: constant nervousness, uncontrollable worry, panic attacks, fear or avoidance 
of situations, people, places, to name a few.  
 
The MEDVAMC is conducting research on a new brief treatment for Veterans with anxiety and related 
symptoms. The treatment is offered over one weekend or in weekly sessions and includes three follow -up visits. 
If you are eligible, you may receive this treatment for free and receive compensation for completing 
assessments over the course of the study.  
 
If you have some of the symptoms listed above and would like more information, please contact [CONTACT_186026] (713) 791 -1414 ext. [ZIP_CODE].  
 
 
  
 