Verson	2,	Page	1	of	5	May 30, 2017 	The	University	of	[LOCATION_007]	Medical	Branch	Galveston	Research	Protocol		Continuous	Non-Invasive	Measurement	of	Hemoglobin	During	Parturition					[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  Date:	May	30,	2017		
Verson	2,	Page	2	of	5	May 30, 2017 			Principal	Investigator:	[INVESTIGATOR_368487]	F	Saad,	MD	/	Katherine	H	Jelliffe,	MD	Funding:	Departmental		1. Introduction/Background/Purpose:	Obstetric	hemorrhage	remains	the	leading	cause	of	maternal	death	worldwide	(2).	The	most	common	culprits	are	uterine	atony,	placental	disorders,	and	delivery	trauma.	Current	detection	and	management	of	hemorrhage	is	heavily	based	on	clinical	judgment	and	laboratory	results.	Interventions	such	as	fluid	resuscitation	and	blood	transfusion	are	often	initiated	after	a	significant	hemorrhage	has	already	taken	place.	Early	detection	and	treatment	of	this	potentially	life	threatening	obstetric	complication	is	of	upmost	importance	in	the	field	of	obstetrics.	Traditional	methods	for	assessing	hemoglobin	levels	involve	collecting	the	patient’s	blood	and	sending	it	to	the	laboratory	for	analysis	via	complete	blood	count	(CBC).	This	involves	a	delay	and	often	patients	are	continuing	to	hemorrhage	while	the	CBC	is	being	processed.	Novel	technology	has	recently	been	approved	by	[CONTACT_514554],	which	can	continuously	assess	hemoglobin	levels	via	a	non-invasive	monitor.	This	device	works	as	a	pulse	oximeter,	which	is	placed	on	the	index	finger	and	uses	infrared	technology	to	estimate	hemoglobin	levels	(1).	Despi[INVESTIGATOR_514553],	neurosurgery	and	orthopedic	surgery,	data	is	lacking	in	an	obstetric	population.	Our	hypothesis	is	that	this	device	will	enable	clinicians	detect	hemorrhage	early	and	initiate	resuscitation	such	as	fluid	and/or	blood	transfusion	before	significant	hemorrhage	has	taken	place.	This	study	will	be	a	proof	of	concept	prospective	cohort	study,	in	which	we	will	attempt	to	detect	the	association	between	intra-operative	and	postoperative	continuous	non-invasive	hemoglobin	monitoring	and	postpartum	decrease	in	hemoglobin.		2. Concise	summary	of	project:	This	study	will	be	a	‘proof	of	concept’	prospective	cohort	study.	Patients	who	are	in	labor	who	meet	criteria	for	inclusion	in	the	study	will	be	approached	for	participation.	Written	informed	consent	will	be	obtained	from	the	patients	by	[CONTACT_514555]	(PI),	study	coordinator,	or	collaborator.	If	patients	agree	to	participate,	a	CBC	(complete	blood	count)	will	be	obtained	via	venous	puncture.	If	the	patient	has	a	central	line,	blood	may	be	drawn	from	it.	If	the	patient	does	not	have	a	central	line,	the	blood	draw	will	be	via	a	new	venous	puncture.	The	amount	of	blood	to	be	drawn	will	be	one	lavender	top	tube,	which	is	about	6mL	or	1.[ADDRESS_666864]	number	(MRN).	During	data	analysis	all	patient	identifiers	will	be	deleted.		3. Study	procedures:	• 3.1	Screening,	Recruitment	and	Consenting:	when	a	patient	meets	inclusion	criteria	for	participation	in	our	study,	the	obstetrical	team	will	contact	[CONTACT_514556].	Written	informed	consent	will	be	obtained	from	the	patient	by	[CONTACT_97758],	study	coordinator,	or	collaborator.	Study	participation	will	be	complete	when	the	patient	is	discharged	from	the	recovery	room.	The	data	collected	will	be	kept	on	a	password	secured	UTMB	computer.	An	encrypted	USB	flash	drive	will	be	used	to	transfer	data.	The	data	will	be	linked	via	MRN,	which	is	needed	to	access	the	demographic	data	and	will	be	deleted	when	the	data	is	analyzed.	Our	target	sample	size	is	100	patients.		• 3.2.	Baseline	Procedures:	there	will	be	no	baseline	procedures	aside	from	placing	the	monitor	on	the	patient’s	finger	and	recording	the	hemoglobin	value.	A	CBC	will	be	obtained	after	consent	is	signed.	Funding	from	the	Ob/Gyn	department	will	cover	the	cost	of	this	test.	Neither	the	subject’s	insurance	nor	the	subject	will	be	responsible	for	any	charges.	Please	see	attached	budget	and	departmental	letter	of	support.		• 3.3.	Study	visits/Follow-up:	No	study	visits	or	follow	up	will	be	needed	for	this	study.	The	subject	participation	will	be	considered	complete	when	the	subject	is	discharged	from	the	recovery	room.		• 3.6.	Withdrawals:	subjects	who	withdraw	from	the	study	after	randomization	will	be	excluded	from	further	follow-up.	Data	collected	until	the	time	of	withdrawal	will	be	analyzed.		• 3.7	Outcomes	
Verson	2,	Page	4	of	5	May 30, 2017 	i. Primary	outcome:	pattern	differences	in	hemoglobin	tracing	between	cases	and	controls	ii. Secondary	outcomes:	transfusion	requirements,	post	partum	hemorrhage	or	hemorrhagic	shock		4. Criteria	for	inclusion	of	subjects:	a. Pregnant	women	between	the	ages	of	18-50	b. Planned	cesarean	delivery	after	failed	attempt	of	vaginal	delivery	(failure	to	progress	or	failed	induction	of	labor)	c. Planned	cesarean	delivery	after	failed	TOLAC		5. Criteria	for	exclusion	of	subjects:	a. Patients	unwilling	or	unable	to	provide	consent	b. Patients	under	the	age	of	18	c. Patients	who	are	prisoners		6. Sources	of	research	material:	Electronic	medical	records		7. Recruitment	Methods	and	Consenting	Process:	see	3.1	above		8. Potential	risks	• 8.1	Loss	of	confidentiality:	Any	time	information	is	collected,	there	is	a	potential	risk	for	loss	of	confidentiality.	Every	effort	will	be	made	to	keep	the	subject’s	information	confidential;	however,	this	cannot	be	guaranteed.		9. Potential	benefits:	with	continuous	non-invasive	monitoring	of	hemoglobin	during	cesarean	section,	there	are	many	potential	benefits,	including:	decrease	in	the	delay	in	diagnosis	of	hemorrhagic	shock,	decrease	in	delay	of	arrival	of	blood	products.	If	the	study	shows	that	the	non-invasive	measurement	is	accurate,	decrease	in	need	for	invasive	monitoring	of	hemoglobin	would	result	in	less	blood	draws,	higher	patient	satisfaction	and	lower	health	care	costs.	In	addition,	this	data	will	be	useful	in	designing	a	level	1	trial	to	measure	outcomes	such	as	transfusion	rates,	transfusion	complications,	hemorrhage	and	maternal	death.		10. Data	Monitoring:	The	PI,	research	coordinator,	and	collaborators	will	ensure	that	all	aspects	of	data	quality	adhere	to	the	study	design.	This	will	include	monitoring	for	adherence	to	consent	procedures,	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria,	valid	abstraction,	correct	entry,	timeliness	and	responsiveness	to	data	queries.	Data	will	be	collected	and	stored	with	the	participant	ID	code	only.	The	master	enrollment	log	linking	patient	identifiers	with	study	ID	numbers	will	be	kept	in	a	password	protected	database	on	the	Ob/Gyn	department’s	internal	server.	Several	data	collection	forms	will	be	used.	Data	on	these	forms	will	be	devoid	of	personal	identifiers	and	will	be	securely	stored	at	the	perinatal	research	division	offices.	The	
Verson	2,	Page	[ADDRESS_666865]	any	discrepancies	based	on	source	documents	if	needed.		11. Procedures	to	Maintain	Confidentiality:	Each	subject	will	be	assigned	a	study	number	with	personally	identifiable	information	deleted	or	removed.	If	needed,	charts	will	be	reviewed	in	the	medical	records	area.	Subjects'	information	will	be	de-identified	and	tagged	with	a	number.	Data	will	be	collected	and	stored	on	a	UTMB	password-protected	computer.		12. Statistical	approach:	we	are	defining	cases	and	controls	based	on	a	quartile	system	of	pre	and	post	operative	hemoglobin	levels,	with	cases	having	the	highest	quartile	hemoglobin	drop	and	controls	the	other	quartiles.	We	will	use	univariable	and	multivariable	analysis	to	check	for	associated	between	continuous	hemoglobin	tracings	from	the	non-invasive	monitor.	Nadir	hemoglobin	levels	and	percent	change	in	the	continuous	hemoglobin	tracings	will	be	compared	between	cases	and	controls.	
Verson	2,	Page	6	of	5	May 30, 2017 	References		1. Colquhoun,	D.A.,	et	al.	“Ability	of	the	Masimo	pulse	CO-Oximeter	to	detect	changes	in	hemoglobin.”	Journal	of	Clinical	Monitoring	and	Computing.	2012.	26:	69-73.		2. Cunningham,	FG,	et	al.	Williams	Obstetrics,	24th	edition.	Chapter	56:	Hematological	Disorders.	1101-1120.		2. Frasca,	D.,	et	al.	“Continuous	monitoring	of	haemoglobin	concentration	after	in-vivo	adjustment	in	patients	undergoing	surgery	with	blood	loss.”	Anaethesia,	2015,	70,	803-809.		3. Ehrenfeld,	J.,	et	al.	“Continuous	Non-invasive	Hemoglobin	Monitoring	during	Orthopedic	Surgery:	A	Randomized	Trial.”	Journal	of	Blood	Disorders	and	Transfusion,	2014,	5:9.		4. Awanda,	W.,	et	al.	“Continuous	and	noninvasive	hemoglobin	monitoring	reduces	red	blood	cell	transfusion	during	neurosurgery:	a	prospective	cohort	study.”	Journal	of	Clinical	Monitoring	and	Computing.	2015,	29:	733-740.		5. Galvagno,	S.,	et	al.	“Accuracy	of	continuous	noninvasive	hemoglobin	monitoring	for	the	prediction	of	blood	transfusions	in	trauma	patients.”	Journal	of	Clinical	Monitoring	and	Computing.	2015,	29:	815-821.	