         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 1 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Application for Review of Human Research : IRB Protocol Summary  
Biomedical Research  Version 17, 06/23 /2017  
  
Names of I nvestigators:  
Name  [INVESTIGATOR_31242]  (all at UPenn)  
Rebecca Ashare , Ph.D., Principal Investigator  
[ADDRESS_979288],  
Philadelphia, PA [ZIP_CODE]     
[PHONE_10141]  
[EMAIL_13741]  Psychiatry  
Caryn Lerman , Ph.D., Co -I Psychiatry  
Andrew Strasser , Ph.D., Co -I Psychiatry  
Frank Leone, MD, Study Physician  Psychiatry  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE  
1.  Full Title  
Repurposing cholinesterase inhibitors for smoking cessation.  
 
2.  Brief Title  
Effect of galantamine on short -term abstinence 
 
STUDY SPONSORSHIP 
1.  Funding Sponsor  
National Cancer Institute P50 Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Nicotine Addiction CA143187 
National Institute on Drug Abuse (K23 DA035295)  
 
2.  Primary Sponsor  
Caryn Lerman, Ph.D. , Director, CIRNA  
 
PROTOCOL ABSTRACT  
Nicotine dependence is a major  public health problem and current ly availa ble treatment s are ineffective for the 
majority of smokers. Thus , there is an urgent  need to develop and test new medications to aid in  smoking  
cessation. Recent evidence from a genetic study of prospective smoking cessation conducted at the CIRNA  
suggests  that smoking cessation may be influenced by [CONTACT_717931] . The proposed proof -of-
concept  study is a randomized, double- blind , placebo- controlled, parallel arm  pi[INVESTIGATOR_717915],  galantamine (vs. placebo) , on short -term abstinence  among 80 treatment -seeking 
smokers. The primary outcome  is the number of days abstinent  during a 7 -day quit attempt . Secondary outcomes 
include:  smoking rate  during the run -up and monitored abstinence phase, medication adherence, side effects, 
cognition , and smoking urges and other withdrawal symptoms . The data generated will be used to  support an NIH 
grant application by a new investigator to evaluate whether acetylcholinesterase inhibitors could be effective 
smoking cessation medications.     
 
OBJECTIVES  
1.  Overall Objectives  
The objective of this proof -of-concept pi[INVESTIGATOR_717916]- release (ER) 
as a potential smoking cessation aid in treatment -seeking smokers.  
 
2.  Primary Outcome Variable(s)   
The primary outcome is the total number of days abstinent  (biochemically verified) during a 7 -day quit attempt.   
 
3.  Secondary Outcome Variable(s)   
a. Smoking rate (cigarettes /day) during the 2 -week drug run -up phase  and during the monitored abstinence 
period.  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 2 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
 
b. Self-report symptoms of withdrawal, craving, subjective effects of smoking,  and objectively measured cognitive 
function ( e.g., working memory and attention) .  
 
BACKGROUND 
There is a critical need for novel smoking cessation treatments. Cigarette smoking continues to be the greatest 
preventable cause of morbidity and mortality in the U.S. and worldwide. Aside from nicotine replacement therapy 
(NRT), there are only two FDA -approved non- nicotine pharmacological  treatments for smoking cessation. Clearly, 
there is a need to identify novel medications to help more smokers maintain abstinence. Repurposing medications 
that have been “de -risked” through phase I -III testing and target nicotine withdrawal symptoms provi des a 
practical approach by [CONTACT_717932]  (Collins, 2011; 
Oprea et al.,  2011 ).  
Most sm okers relapse during the first week of abstinence. Of the 40% of smokers who try to quit each year, 50-
75% relapse within the first week  (Garvey, Bliss, Hitchcock, Heinold, & Rosner, 1992 ; Hughes, Keely, & Naud, 
2004) . Thus, it is essential to identify the factors that contribut e to relapse during this early withdrawal period. 
Human laboratory paradigms of short -term smoking abstinence provide a clinically valid mechanism for 
understanding the processes that underlie relapse during this vulnerable period and for screening new smoking 
cessation medications  (Perkins et al., 2010 ; Perkins et al., 2008 ).  
Cognitive impairment during abstinence is a promising therapeutic target. Cognitive impairment is a common 
nicotine withdrawal symptom, reported by [CONTACT_47071] 50% of smokers  (Hughes, 2007b) . These deficits peak during 
the first week of a quit attempt  (Shiffman & Jarvik, 1980 ) and encompass a range of cognitive processes in 
animals and humans including attention (Myers, Taylor, Moolchan, & Heishman, 2008 ; Shoaib & Bizarro, 2005) , 
working memory  (Jacobsen et al., 2005; Levin et al., 1990) , and response inhibition (Ashare & Hawk, 2012; 
Harrison, Coppola, & McKee, 2009) . Critically, withdrawal- related cognitive impairment predicts relapse to 
smoking  (Krishnan- Sarin et al., 2007; Patterson et al., 2010 ; Rukstalis, Jepson, Patterson, & Lerman, 2005 ).  
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (ACHEIs) represent a potential therapeutic target. The neurotransmitter 
acetylcholine (ACh) contributes to the rewarding effects of nicotine by [CONTACT_717933] (nAChR) in 
the brain and stimulating dopamine release (Schilstrom, Ivanov, Wiker, & Svensson, 2006) . ACh is synthesized 
by [CONTACT_717934] (ChAT) enzyme and polymorphisms on the ChAT gene demonstrated significant 
associations with smoking cessation and nicotine dependence in a recent study in our lab (Ray et al., 2010)  and 
in an independent follow -up study  (Wei et al., 2010 ), highlighting the importance of the endo genous cholinergic 
system in smoking behavior. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (ACHEIs), which increase ACh levels  (Delrieu, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_219360], 
Caillaud, Voisin, & Vellas, 2011) , are FDA -approved treatments for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is marked by 
[CONTACT_258559], loss of cholinergic neurons, and decreased ACh levels  (Foldi, White, & Schaefer, 2005 ; 
Koontz & Baskys, 2005 ; Terry & Buccafusco, 2003) . Unlike other ACHEIs, galantamine acts as a positive 
allosteric modulator of α7 and α4β2 nAChRs, which may partially account for its cognitive enhancing effects  (Ago, 
Koda, Takuma, & Matsuda, 2011 ; Kuryatov, Onk sen, & Lindstrom, 2008 ; Pandya & Yakel, 2011) .   
A few recent studies have begun to explore the effects of ACHEIs on smoking behavior. However, none have 
focused on the general population of smokers  (Diehl et al., 2006; Diehl, Nakovics, Mutschler, Hermann, & Kiefer, 
2009; Kelly et al., 2008 ). In our recent pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 18 non- treatment seeking smokers (IRB #  812346), 4 weeks 
of treatment with the ACHEI, donepezil, modestly improved cognition (e.g., working memory and attention) and 
was well -tolerated, but had no effect on smo king behavior. Because smokers in the prior study were not 
interested in quitting, the question remains: Will ACHEIs increase abstinence among tr eatment -seeking smokers? 
Using this  proof -of-concept study, we propose to examine whether galantamine can enhan ce a smoker’s ability to 
maintain short -term abstinence and whether it does so by [CONTACT_717935] -related cognitive deficits.  
The primary objective of the  proposed proof -of-concept study is to test the effects of galantamine, compared to 
placebo, on ability to quit smoking . Specifically, we will utilize a validated procedure for medication screening to 
test the effects of galantamine on short -term abstinence in 80 treatment -seeking smokers  during a 23-day human 
laboratory study. As in  prior studies ( Scharre, Shiovitz, Zhu, & Amatniek, 2008; Sofuoglu & Carroll, 2011) , 
following an initial 1 -week drug run -up phase (8mg q.d galantamine) , medication dose will be increased to 16 mg 
q.d. galantamine for the remainder of the medication period (through Day 23). On Day 16, smokers will undergo a 
mandatory 24-h abstinence period, which will be followed by a programmed smoking lapse. Smokers will then be 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 3 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
instructed to abstain for the following 7 days (observed abstinence), with small monetary  incentives for abstinence 
and biochemical verification. The primary outcome is the total number of days abstinent out of seven.  We will 
obtain self-report measures  of side effects  and smoking behavior , as well as objective measures  of cognitive 
performance  at regular intervals through the study.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION 
1. Target Population  
Eighty  adult, treatment -seeking smokers, between the ages of 18- 60, reporting consumption of at least [ADDRESS_979289] 80 smokers (40 per group) complete all sessions , 
accounting conservatively for 25% attrition. Participants will first be  screened over the phone and then complete 
an in- person Intake  to ensure final  eligibility. Enrolled participants will complete a B aseline session and be 
randomized to receive galantamine or placebo. Participants will be told that this is a practice quit attempt with an 
FDA-approved medication that is being tested as a possible new treatment for smoking cessation.  
 
3.  Key Inclusion Criteria  
Smokers ages 18- 60, who have smoked at least [ADDRESS_979290] rate their confidence that they will make a quit attempt in the 
next 6 months a 50 or hig her.  Following the current study, participants will be referred to a free smoking 
cessation program in our Center.  Those who wish to quit sooner can be referred directly to another program.  
 
4.  Key Exclusion Criteria  
Subjects who self -report and/or pres ent with the following criteria will not be eligible to participate in the study.  
 
Smoking Behavior : 
1. Daily u se of chewing tobacco, snuff, and/or snus.  
2. Current enrollment in a smoking cessation program, or use of other smoking cessation medications in the 
last month  or plans to do either in the next month .  
3. Provide a carbon monoxide ( CO) breath sample reading less than  10 parts per million (ppm) at Intake.  
 
Alcohol/Drugs :   
1. History of substance abuse in the past 6 months and/or currently receiving treatment  for substance abuse 
(e.g., alcohol, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], cocaine, marijuana, or stimulants) as determined by [CONTACT_6270] -report during the phone 
screen and/or through the MINI during the Intake.  Subjects reporting a history of substance abuse must be 
in remission at least [ADDRESS_979291] drinks/week  over the past 6 months . 
3. Providing a breath alcohol concentration (B rAC) reading of greater than or equal to  0.[ADDRESS_979292] ug screen for cocaine, amphetamines, methamphetamines, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], PCP, 
methadone, barbiturates, and opi[INVESTIGATOR_717917] , Baseline, or Testing days.  
 
Medical :   
1. Women who are pregnant, planning a pregnancy  in the next 3 months , or lactating; all female subjects 
shall undergo a urine pregnancy test at the Intake and must agree in writing to use an approved method of 
contraception.  Following enrollment, pregnancy test s will be conducted at the Baseline and Testing days  
for all fe male subjects of child- bearing potential . 
2. Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s Disease or dementia.  
3. Current treatment of cancer or diagnosed with cancer (except basal cell carcinoma) in the past 6 months .  
4. Liver/kidney failure, peptic ulcer disease, benign prostate hy pertrophy . 
5. Asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD ).    
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 4 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
6. History (last 6 months) of abnormal heart rhythms, tachycardia and/or cardiovascular disease (stroke, 
angina, heart attack) . These conditions will be evaluated on a case by [CONTACT_717936]/Health Care Provider.  
7. Serious or unstable disease within the past 6 months , as determined by [CONTACT_38234]/Health Care 
Provider . 
8. Clinically significant abnormalities within physical examination and vital signs at Intake . Abnormalities will 
be assessed by [CONTACT_38234]/Health Care Provider  and eligibility will be determined on a case- by-
case basis.  
9. Any impairment (physical and/ or neurological) including visual or other impairment preventing cognitive 
task performance.  
10. Uncontrolled high blood pressure (SBP> 160 or DBP> 100). 
11. Hearing impairment, significant hearing loss (more than 20% in either ear), cochlear implants, or bi -lateral  
hearing aids.  
12. History of brain injury.  
13. History of epi[INVESTIGATOR_34868] a seizure disorder.  
14. Color Blindness.  
15. Low or borderline intellectual functioning –  determined by [CONTACT_26777] a score of less than 90 on the Shipley 
Institute of Living Scale (SILS) which correlat es with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale- Revised 
(WAIS -R) Estimated IQ Test (administered at Intake).  
 
Psychiatric Exclusion ( as determined by [CONTACT_6270] -report on phone screen and/ or through MINI  during Intake) : 
1. Current diagnosis of major depression. Persons with a history of major depression, in remission for 6 
months or longer, are eligible, provided they are not excluded based on medications (below).  
2. Suicide risk score on MINI greater than 1 . 
3. History or current diagnosis of schizophrenia, psychosis, and/ or bipolar disorder.  
4. Current or past hypomanic/manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865].  
5. Current or history of a diagnosis of Attention- Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).  
 
Medication:   
1. Current use , recent discontinuation (within the last month ) of any form of smoking cessation medications 
(i.e., Zyban, Wellbutrin, Wellbutrin SR, Chantix, nicotine replacement therapy);  
2. Current use or recent discontinuation (within the last 60 days ) of: 
a. Anti-anxiety or panic disorder medications.  
b. Anti-psychotic medications.  
c. Mood- stabilizers ( e.g., Lithium, Lamictal/lamotrigine, Neurontin/gabapentin, Topamax/topi[INVESTIGATOR_052], 
valproic acid, Tegretol/carbamazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050]) . 
d. Anti-depressants  (e.g., Wellbutrin, MAOIs, SSRIs, tricyclic antidepressants).  
e. Prescription stimulants (e.g., Provigil, Ritalin, Adderall).  
f. Systemic Steroids  (e.g., Prednisone) . 
g. Alzheimer's disease medications (e.g., Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (ACIs), Aricept/donepezil, 
Exelon/rivastigmine, Tacrine, or memantine) .  
h. Parkinson's disease medications  (e.g., Cogentin/benztropi[INVESTIGATOR_050]) .      
i. Irritable bowel syndrome medication ( e.g., Dicylomine/Bentyl ).      
j. Heart medications ( e.g., quinidine or Procardia/nifedipi[INVESTIGATOR_050]) .       
k. Peptic ulcer disease medicati on (e.g, Zantac/ranitidine) .   
l. Muscle relaxants ( e.g., Soma/carisoprodol, Anectine/succiny lcholine ).    
m. Anti-fungal medication (e.g., Nizoral/ketoconazole) .        
n. Anti-seizure medications ( e.g., Ativan, Banzel, Carbatrol, Dilantin, Lamictal, Gabitril , Lyrica, 
Neurontin, Tegretol, Topomax) .        
o. COPD medication (e.g., Atrovent/Ipratropi[INVESTIGATOR_195352]) .  
p. Urinary retention medications ( e.g., Duvoid/bethanechol, Proscar/finasteride, Avodart/dutasteride, 
Dibenzyline/phenoxybenzamine,  Regitine/phentolamine) .  
q. Eye medication (e.g., Atropi[INVESTIGATOR_050]) .        
3. Daily use of:  
a. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573]- containing medications for chronic pain  (Duragesic/fentanyl patches, Percocet, Oxycontin) . 
b. Medication for asthma (albuterol, Serevent, Combivent, Advair, Flovent, Azmacort, Symbicort) . 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 5 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
4. Known allergy to study medication.  
 
Subjects will be instructed to refrain from using any study prohibited drugs/medications (both recreational and 
prescription) throughout their participation in the study.  After final eligibility is confirmed, subjects who report 
taking contraindicated medication(s) over the course of the study period may only remain eligible if the Study 
Physician and/or Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_485877](s) do/did not impact the 
study design, data quality, and/or subject safety/welfare. Subjects are permitted to take necessary prescription 
medications not included within the exclusion list during the study.  
 
General Exclusion:  
1. Current, anticipated, or pending enrollment in another research program over the next 2- [ADDRESS_979293] safety and/or the study data/design as determined by [CONTACT_9532] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or Study Physician.  
2. Not planning to live in the area for the next two months.  
3. Any medical condition, illness, disorder , or concomitant medication that could compromise participant 
safety or treatment, as determined by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or Study Physician.  
4. Inability to provide informed consent or complete any of the study tasks as determined by [CONTACT_9532].  
5. Completion of neurocognitive assessments and/or use of study medication(s) at the CIRNA in the past 
month that could influence performance on study tasks as determined by [CONTACT_079].  
6. Not able to effectively communicate in Engl ish (reading, writing, speaking) . 
7. Missing 2 or more consecutive sessions, or 3 or more sessions during the medication period.   
8. Missing 2 or more consecutive doses during the medication period.  
9. Missing 3 or more doses throughout the medication period.  
 
5.  Vulnerable Populations  
No c hildren under the age of 18, pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or prisoners are included in this research 
study.    
 
6.  Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion  
Educationally or economically disadvantaged persons o r cognitively impaired persons will be not be targeted for 
recruitment ; however , they may be included in the current study. Because recruitment efforts for this study will be 
targeted to the greater Philadelphia area, University of Pennsylvania employees and students may be exposed to 
these advertisements and choose to respond. Status of participation in the current study will be independent of 
the participant’s work or school activities.  
 
7.  Subject Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited from two sources.  Participants who have previously completed studies at our center 
and have agreed to be re- contact[CONTACT_717937]. 
Additional recruitment via advertising (i.e., Craigslist,  flyers, newspaper , social media,  or radio ads) will be used to 
invite smokers from the general population.     
 
STUDY DESIGN  
1.  Phase  
Phase: II Randomized, double- blind , placebo- controlled trial  
 
2. Design  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 6 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: [ADDRESS_979294] , randomized, double- blind , placebo- controlled trial  to assess smoking 
behavior, adherence, side effects, and cogniti on among treatment -seeking smokers (n= [ADDRESS_979295] n =80 
complete) following 3 weeks of treatment with galantamine (Figure 1).  
 
3. Study Duration  
Estimated length of time to enroll all subjects and complete the study  
Enrollment will start in July 2012 (after IRB approval is received).  We estimate that we will need to telephone 
screen 1000 smokers to enroll 250 smokers into the study (accounting for 20% eligibility). We expect  
approximately 50% of those who attend Intake to be eligible and a drop- out rate of 25% based on prior 
experience and expect to have 80 (40 per group)  participants complete the study.  We est imate enrolling 2-[ADDRESS_979296]’s participation time in study  
We estimate it will take a minimum  of 5 weeks for a participant to complete the entire study. However, this time 
period may be longer to accommodate participant schedules or scheduling difficulties between the Intake and 
start of medication (Day 1 ), or dosing modification. Thus , although the maximum period of time that participants 
will take study medication is 4 .5 weeks ( 30 days  for those who follow the “Extended Dosing” schedule; 23 days for 
those who follow the “Standard Dosing” schedule; See Figure 1 ), the maximum duration a participant can be in 
the study is [ADDRESS_979297] completed the study by [CONTACT_11712] 2018 , and that analyses and reporting will be 
complete by [CONTACT_933] 2018 . 
 
DRUGS OR DEVICES  
The study will be performed using the 8mg and 16mg doses of galantamine hydrobromide- ER, which is currently 
marketed for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease.  The dosing regimen  will be an initial [ADDRESS_979298] 8mg q.d. dose ( see Figure 1)  followed by [CONTACT_717938] 1. Unless there are 
moderate to severe adver se events (see definitions below), the dose will be increased to 16mg q.d. (“Standard 
Dosing”; see Figure 1) . If moderate to severe adverse events are reported, participants will remain at the 8mg 
dose for one more week before titrating to 16mg  (“Extended Dosing”) . All participants will begin the 24- H 
abstinence period after one week on 16mg (end of week [ADDRESS_979299] Dosing and end of week 3 for Extended 
Dosing). All participants will continue to take the 16mg q.d . during the mandatory 24-h quit period, programmed 
lapse day, and 7 -day quit week .   
 
The dos ing regimen  is documented to be safe and well tolerated in prior clinical studies (Scharre, et al., 2008 ; 
Sofuoglu & C arroll, 2011 ).  There does not appear to be a significant decrease in medi cation efficacy compared to 
the 24 mg dose, thus decreasing the risk  for participants in our study  (Aronson, Van Baelen, Kavanagh, &  

         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 7 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Schwalen, 2009) . Galantamine will be purchased and packaged into blister packs by [CONTACT_717939]. Participants will be instructed to take one 8mg or 16mg pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] 
(galantamine- ER) every morning, preferably with food,  for 23 days.  Those following the Extended Dosing 
schedule will take study medication for 30 days. However, based on initial data, we anticipate that this will be rare.  
 
Though galantamine has been administered to non- Alzhe imer’s healthy volunteers in multiple studies ( Beglinger 
et al., 2004; Chuah & Chee, 2008; Chuah et al., 2009; Gron, Kirstein, Thielscher, Riepe, & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], 2005; Nathan 
et al., 2001 ; Silver, Shenhav, & D'Esposito, 2008) , our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (I RB#814947) was the first study to administer 
galantamine- ER to a population of treatment -seeking smokers. Therefore, an Investigational New Drug (IND) 
exemption has been submitted to  OHR for this protocol.   Such an exemption was received in our prior study  of the 
ACI donepezil and galantamine in smokers (IRB # s 812346 and 814947).  
 
Supply, Preparation, Storage, Packaging and Dispensing of Study Medication 
Galantamine- ER will be purchased and supplied via the University of Pennsylvania Investigational Drug S ervice 
(IDS number pending ). Matched placebo will be made in- house using sucrose filler in gel capsules. The IDS will 
store the medication as per the manufacturer guidelines. Specifically, medication will be stored at room 
temperature (20 –  25 degrees centigrade) and in airtight containers. Galantamine  and the matching placebo  will 
be packaged in blister packs .  IDS will oversee the labeling of all study medication, and will as sign each kit, which 
contains medication for one subject, a unique Pharmacy Randomization Number (PRN).  
 
Kits will be ordered as needed by [CONTACT_651811] a locked cabinet at our center. Once the Study 
Physician ([CONTACT_484489])  signs the prescription and a subject is assigned to treatment, medication kits will be 
ordered and pi[INVESTIGATOR_485879] a member of the research staff. Once a new subject is enrolled and eligible, 
the research staff will assign the subject the next avail able PRN. Blister packs will then be labeled with the 
subject’s study ID number.  Each medication kit will consist of one week of 8mg galantamine (or placebo) and 16 
days of 16mg (or placebo). In case moderate or severe adverse events are reported at the end of the first week, 
all medication kits will include one extra week of 8mg galantamine (or placebo) , which will be labeled as the 
alternat e blister pack  for the Extended Dosing schedule. If no moderate or severe adverse events are reported at 
the end of t he first week, we will proceed with the default blister pack (see Figure 1) . If moderate or severe 
adverse events are reported during the first week, the study physician will be consulted and a decision will be 
made as to whether to proceed with the defaul t or provide the alternative blister pack , in which case participants 
will remain in the study for one extra week . The PRN and study ID number must match for each blister pack a 
subject receives.  Medication will be stored at CIRNA as per manufacturer’s gui delines.  
 
Regular study drug reconciliation will be performed to document drug assigned, drug consumed, and drug 
remaining. This reconciliation will be logged on the drug reconciliation form, and signed by [CONTACT_717940].  
 
At the completion of the study, there will be a final reconciliation of drug shipped, drug consumed, and drug 
remaining.  This reconciliation will be logged on the drug reconciliation form, signed and dated by [CONTACT_237766]. Any discrepanci es noted will be investigated, resolved, and documented prior to return or destruction of 
unused study drug.  Drug destroyed on site will be documented in the study files.  
 
SUICIDAL IDEATION AND BEHAVIOR 
Suicide risk is assessed via MINI during the Intake Visit. Participants with a suicide risk score greater than 0 will 
be deemed ineligible at the Intake Visit.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
1.  Procedures  
This is a randomized placebo- controlled study  of the effects of galantamine, compared to placebo,  on ability to 
quit smoking. Participants will complete an  Intake  at the Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Nicotine 
Addiction (CIRNA) before being enrolled into the study. Fifty four  will be randomized to receive galantamine and 
[ADDRESS_979300] 80 smokers (40 per group) complete the study. All study visits 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 8 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
will be completed at the CIRNA. P articipants will complete a Baseline, 2 Observation Days, and a  Pre-quit 
(counseling)  Testing Day (Day 14). Beginning on Day 15, smokers will undergo a mandatory 24-h abstinence 
period. On Day 16 (part 1), following confirmation of abstinence, abstinence- induced cognitive deficits will be 
tested and subjective assessments will be collected in- Center. Subsequently, there will be a pr ogrammed 
smoking lapse, after which the subjective rewarding value of the programmed lapse cigarette will be assessed 
(Day 16 part 2). Smokers will  receive another 20- minute coaching session and be instructed to try to  remain 
abstinent from 10 P.M. that ev ening until after the final Observation Visit  (7 days observed abstinence) , with small 
monetary incentives for abstinence and biochemical verification.  During the 7- day quit attempt, participants will 
complete 4 Observation Days (Days 17, 19, 21, and 23) (Figure 1). NOTE: Days refer to the Standard Dosing 
schedule. Please see Figure 1 for Extended Dosing schedule.  
 
2. Study Visits  
• Telephone Screening.  Individuals interested in participating will be screened by [CONTACT_50210] r esearch 
technician to determine initial study eligibility. If the subject meets preliminary phone eligibility and is interested 
in participating, he/she will be invited to attend a 2.5-hour Intake visit. Subjects will be contact[CONTACT_485907], text message,  e-mail,  and/or postal mail to remind them about their scheduled visit s dates’  and times . 
Method of preference will be collected over the phone.  
 
• Intake  (Day -5).  In this [ADDRESS_979301] their eligibility confirmed (using the previously 
detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria listed above). A schedule of activities for the day include:  
1. Arrive at the CIRNA  and hear detailed description of the study and have any questions answered by a 
staff member from the CIRNA  
2. Complete combined study consent/HIPAA form  
3. Provide urine specimens for drug and (if applicable) pregnancy tests . Participants who test positive for 
either the urine drug screen and/or pregnancy test will be ineligible.  
4. Provide CO breath sample . Participants must have  CO readings greater than or equal to 10ppm in 
order  to be eligible for the study  
5. Provide BrAC measurements. Participants must  have readings less than 0.01  in order to be eligible 
for the  study   
6. Provide a blood pressure reading (See Blood Pressure Procedures  under Screening/ Covariate 
Measures)  
7. Complete routine medical history and a psychological interview  (MINI) (Description under 
Screening/Covariate Measures)  
8. Receive a physical examination by [CONTACT_327263]  
9. Have height and weight measured (led by [CONTACT_464])  
10. Complete the Shipley Institute of Living Scale. Participants with a Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-
Revised (WAIS -R) Estimated IQ Test  score less than 90 will be i neligible to participate  
 
If a participant is ineligible due to any of the above criteria during the Intake , he/she will only be 
compensated $10 for travel.  However, if a participant tests positive for study prohibited drugs, he/she will 
not receive any compensation.  
 
Otherwise, if a participant meets the above eligibility criteria at the Intake , he/she will be asked to complete 
the following:  
 
11. Complete questionnaires (demographics, nicotine dependence, smoking rate, withdrawal, and 
smoking urges)  
12. Provide one [ADDRESS_979302] for cotinine.  
13. Finalize their study schedule and their B aseline Session 
  
Participants will be asked to refrain from using any study prohibited drugs (note –  participants are allowed 
to take prescription medications not in the exclusion list) throughout their participation in the study. Female 
participants will also be asked to use an approved method of contraception through the study.  
   
  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 9 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Once final eligibility is confirmed, the Study Physician ([CONTACT_484489])  will sign the prescription blank to assign 
the participant to a treatment group.  
 
• Baseline Session (Day 0) .  Participants will complete a 1 .5 hour Baseline session before starting study 
medication.  The Baseline session can be scheduled within 2 days of the Intake but no more than 30 days can 
elapse between Intake  and Baseline.   At the Baseline session participants will:  
1. Arrive at CIRNA and provide a CO and BrAC sampl e (Participants must  have BrAC readings less than 
0.01 in order to be eligible for the study).  
2. Provide urine specimens for drug and (if applicable) pregnancy tests .  Participants who test positive for 
either the urine drug screen and/or pregnancy test will be withdrawn from the study . 
3. Provide a blood pressure sample (See Blood Pressure Procedures  under Screening/covariate 
measures)  
4. Provide 2ml saliva sample for DNA collection and genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Oragene™)  (note - collection of saliva 
for DNA is optional)  
5. Complete questionnaires (smoking rate, concomitant medication review, withdrawal, smoking urges, 
mood, attention, subjective effects, and side effects)  
6. Complete a 60-minute battery of cognitive tasks assessing working memory (n -back) , attention 
(continuous performance task ; XO reaction time task ), response inhibition (stop -signal task, Stroop 
test)  
7. Receive their study medication and be given instructions as when to start taking study medication 
 
This session ca n be scheduled any time of day . However the timing of this session will influence when the 
Day 14 and Day 16 testing appoint ments are scheduled.  Ideally, t he subsequent testing sessions would 
be at the same time of day , but can be scheduled up to 1 hour earlier or later than the Baseline s ession. 
However, the sessions may go beyond 1 hour as determined by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_9106].  
 
• Observation Day 7 . Participants will be asked to bring thei r study medication to this visit to verify medication 
adherence/pi[INVESTIGATOR_10685] . During this session , which will last approximately 20 minutes , participants will complete 
measures of : 
 
• Blood pressure  (See Blood Pressure Procedures  under Screening/covariate measures)  
• CO breath  sample   
• BrAC sample  
• Smoking rate  (timeline followback; TLFB)   
• Medication adherence/pi[INVESTIGATOR_692]  
• Side effects  and concomitant medication review  
• If no moderate to severe adverse events are reported, participants w ill be given the default 
blister pack for week 2 (i.e., 16mg galantamine or placebo)  
• If moderate to severe adverse events are reported, the PI/Study Physician will be consulted 
and a decision will be made as to whether to proceed with the default or provide the alternative 
blister pack (i.e., 8mg or placebo) for one more week before titrating to 16mg. Thus, 
participants who follow this schedule will remain in the study for one extra week (i.e., 30 days 
instead of 23 days).  
• Mood, smoking urges, withdrawal sy mptoms , attention, subjective effects  
 
This visit can be scheduled any time during the day  and can be moved by [CONTACT_717941] 1  day to 
accommodate for participant ’s schedule.  
 
• Pre-Quit Testing Day (Day 14) . Participants will be asked to bring their study medication to this visit.  During 
this 2 -hour visit, participants will complete the same activities they completed at  the Baseline Session except 
that they will complete additional measures of pi[INVESTIGATOR_717918]- target quit date ( TQD ) counseling . 
TQD counseling will involve meet ing with a smoking cessation counselor and tak ing part in a brief 2 0-minute 
coaching session to prepare them for the 24-h abstinence period. This session will focus on mana gement of 
smoking triggers and a plan to prevent and manage smoking relapse.     
 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 10 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: [ADDRESS_979303] occur on the target date.   
 
• Mandatory 24-h Abstinence Period ( Day 15/Day 16 Part 1 ). On Day [ADDRESS_979304] 
remain abstinent during this 24 period . 
 
• 24-H Testing Day (Day 16). The 24- h Testing Day occurs  after approximately 24 hours of abstinence from 
nicotine. The Testing Day Visit takes  about 2 hours to complete and is split into two parts. Ideally, this session 
will be scheduled at the same time the Pre -Quit Testing Session was achieved but it can be scheduled for up 
to 1 hour earlier or later than the Pre-Quit Testing session time. However, the sessions may go beyond 1 hour 
as determined by  [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_9106].  The procedures participants will complete within each part of the Testing Day 
Visit are as follows:  
 
• 24-H Testing Day Part 1  
On Day 16 part 1 , participants  will provide:  
1. A CO sample to verify abstinence. Mandatory abstinence will be biochemically confirmed by a 
CO reading of less than 10 ppm. If the CO reading is not less than  10 ppm, but there is a 50 % 
reduction from the CO collected at the Baseline Visit, this will be considered sufficient and the 
participant may continue as schedul ed. If a participant  smoke s (self -reported or biochemically 
confirmed)  during the mandatory abstinence period, they may be withdrawn from the study.  
2. A breath alcohol (BrAC) sample. Participants with a BrAC greater than 0.[ADDRESS_979305] is positive, participants will be withdrawn from the study.  
4. Blood pressure ( See Blood Pressure Procedures  under Screening/covariate measures)  
5. Medication adher ence/pi[INVESTIGATOR_692]  
6. Side effects  and concomitant medication review  
7. Mood, smoking urges, attention, and withdrawal symptoms  
8. Complete a 60- minute battery of cognitive tasks assessing working memory (n -back), attention 
(continuous performance task ; XO reaction ti me task ), response inhibition (stop -signal task, 
Stroop test)  
 
• 24-H Testing Day Part 2 (Programmed Lapse)  
1. Participants will be instructed to smoke one of their own cigarettes in the CIRNA Smoking 
Laboratory .  
2. Following the programmed lapse, participants will complete the assessments of the subjective 
and rewarding effects of the ‘programmed lapse’ cigarette (Table 1).  
3. Participants will complete a brief smoking cessation counseling session (~15 minutes) during 
which they will review strategies to try to remain abstinent during the 7- day monitored 
abstinence/observation phase.  Participants will be permitted to return to their normal smoking 
practices  after they leave the Center until 10 P.M. that evening.  
 
• 7-Day Quit Attempt  (Days 17-23).  During this 7 -day period, participants  will be given instructions to remain 
abstinent from smoking  from 10 P.M. the evening of Day 16 until after they complete their final Observation 
Visit. On Days 17, 19, 21, and 23,  all participants will be asked to come to the CIRNA for brief 20- minute visit s 
to complete the following:  
• Complete CO, smoking rate (TLFB), and concomitant medication assessment.  
• To increase abstinence motivation, participants will receive $15/day (in cash) for each day for 
self-reported abstinence that is biochemically -confirmed . On Day 17, a  CO reading of less than  
10ppm or less than 50% of CO breath sample taken at Baseline visit will be sufficient as 
biochemically -confirmed abstinence. On Days 19, 21, and 23 , a CO reading less than 8 ppm 
will be considered as biochemically -confirmed abstinence.   
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 11 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Table 1. Study Measures  
State  Intake Baseline  Smoking as 
Usual*  Abstain  
24 hr  Programmed 
Lapse 7-Day Quit 
Attempt  
Study Visit Days  -5 0 7, 14  16 Part 1  16 Part 2  17, 19, 21, 23  
Screening Variables/Covariates        
Demographics  X      
Nicotine Dependence (FTND /Cigarette Brand ) X      
Smoking/ETOH History  X      
Medical History, Height/Weight  X      
Blood Pressure  X X X X  X 
Psychiatric History ( MINI ) X      
Saliva for DNA   X     
Shipley Institute of Living Scale  X      
Urine Drug Screen /Pregnancy  X X X (Day 14)  X    
Breath Alcohol Content  (BrAC)  X X X X  X 
Carbon  Monoxide  (CO)  X X X X  X 
Brief Counseling    X (Day 14)   X  
Primary Outcome s        
Cigarette Consumption (TLFB)   X X X  X 
Saliva Cotinine   X      X (Day 23)  
Neurocognitive Test Battery   X X (Day 14)  X    
Secondary Outcomes        
Craving (QSU -B); Withdrawal (MNWS -R)  X  X (week)  X  (24hr)  X (now)  X  
Current ADHD Symptoms (BAARS -IV)  X X(week)  X (24hr)   X (24hr)  
Mood (PANAS)   X X (week)  X  (24hr)  X (now)  X 
Subjective Effects, Cigarette Ratings (CES, SQ)   X X  X  
Medication Measures        
Concomitant Medication Review   X X X  X 
Medication Side Effects   X X X  X 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38950]    X X  X 
* Participants on the Extended Dosing Schedule will have one additional observation visit. The 24 -H/Lapse visit will occur on Day 23.  
 • Take scheduled dose of study medication under supervision of the research staff.  
• Provide a blood pressure sample.  
• Complete measures of side effects, pi[INVESTIGATOR_692], smo king urges,  attention,  withdrawal, and mood (Table 
1).  
• On Day 23:  
• Participants will return any unused study medication.  
• Participants reporting not smoking  (which was biochemically confirmed) for 7 days will also 
provide a saliva  sample to assess cotinine levels.  
• Participants will be offered information (i.e. flyer, brochure, etc.) about a smoking cessation 
research program. The participant’s decision whether or not to receive this information will be 
documented.  
 
3. Description of Measures and Variables   
 
3.1 Screening/Covariate  Measures  
History  and Physical Examination.  A medical history and a physical examination will be conducted at the Intake 
visit to review for any contraindications listed previously. The medical history  (including height and weight) will be 
completed by a research staff member  and the physical examination will be conducted by [CONTACT_717942] /Health Care Provider .  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 12 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: [ADDRESS_979306]  has recently  taken 
any exclusionary  drugs  (cocaine, PCP, amphetamines, methamphetamines, tricyclic antidepressants, ecstasy, 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], methadone, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], and barbiturates). Participants with a positive urine drug screen for any 
substance listed above other than THC will be deemed ineligible. In an effort to remain CLIA -compliant, results 
from urine drug screening will not be shared with participants. Participants will be informed that the testing is for 
research purposes only and that they will be informed of their eligibility status, but no t of the specific testing 
results.  
 
Urine Pregnancy Test .  At the Intake, Intake, Baseline, Day 14, and Day [ADDRESS_979307] administered 
the pregnancy screen. Participants will be informed that there is no penalty for discontinuing participation at this 
point in the visit and that they will still receive travel reimbursement for the visit.  
 
Breath Alcohol Concentration/ETOH History .  The breath alcohol  concentration (BrAC)  assessment will be 
administered at the Intake  visit and all subsequent study visits. The breath alcohol monitor assesses expi[INVESTIGATOR_717919]. A reading greater than or equal to 0.01 at the Intake, Baseline, and/or Testing Days  
(Day 14, Day 16) indicat es alcohol consumption within the l ast [ADDRESS_979308] 7 days.  
 
Blood Pressure . At the Intake , participants presenting with elevated blood pressure (i.e., systolic blood pressure 
greater than 160 and/or diastolic blood pressure greater than 100) will have a second blood pressure reading 
taken after a ten minute period in which the participants wil l be instructed to sit comfortably.  If, after the second 
reading, s ystolic blood pressure remains greater than 160 and/or diastolic remains greater than 100, the 
participant will be ineligible for the study.  
 
Blood pressure will be measured at all subsequent in- person visits.   If participants present with elevated blood 
pressure (i.e., s ystolic blood pressure greater than 1 60 and/or diastolic blood pressure greater than 100) at any 
subsequent visit , the staff will follow the same steps listed above.  If, after the second reading , systolic blood 
pressure remains greater than 160 and/or diastolic remains greater than 100, t he subject will be told to not take 
the next dose of study medication. The research staff will notify the Study Physician/Health Car e Provider  who will 
review the blood pressure reading and determine whether it is safe for the subject to continue. Research staff will 
follow up with the participant accordingly.  
 
Psychiatric History . Current major depression, l ifetime prevalence of psychosis, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, 
hypomanic/manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], ADHD, and substance abuse will be determined via self -report during the phone 
screen and via semi -structured interview using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI).  The MIN I 
is a 10 -15 minute structured interview developed by [CONTACT_329026] -IV Axis 
1 psychiatric diagnoses. This instrument permits both current (past 30 days) and lifetime assessments of 
psychiatric illness, and recent data support its reliability and validity (Sheehan et al., 1998 ). The MINI will be 
administered by a trained research staff member  at the Intake visit.  There will be 100% review of paper MINIs by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hole, a clinical psychologist with relevant train ing, to maintain quality control.  
 
Shipley Institute of Living Scale . All participants will complete the Shipley Institute of Living Scale (SILS) at the 
Intake  visit.  The SILS is a self -administered test designed to assess general intellectual functioning in adults and 
adolescents and to aid in identifying cognitive impairments (Zachary, 2000 ).  The scale consists of two subtests, a 
40-item vocabulary test and a 20- item test of abstract thinking.  The total administration time is 20 minutes ([ADDRESS_979309]).  A trained member of the study staff will score the test.  The SILS correlates with the 
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale- Revised (WAIS -R) Estimated IQ Test; those participants earning less than an 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 13 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
estimated WAIS -R IQ of 90 will be ineligible.  The SILS is considered a hi ghly reliable assessment tool; with a 
good total score internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha= .92).  
 
Demographics and Smoking History . Standard questionnaires will be self -administered at the Intake visit to collect 
the following data: demographics (age, gender, marital status, education), age at smoking initiation, cigarette brand, 
length of prior abstinence periods and current smoking rate.  The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND) 
will also be administered.  The FTND is a 6- item, self -report m easure of nicotine dependence derived from the 
Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire (Heatherton, Kozlowski, Frecker, & Fagerstrom, 1991) .  The FTND scale has 
satisfactory internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha=. 64) and high test -retest reliability (r=. 88) ( Pomerleau, Carton, 
Lutzke, Flessland, & Pomerleau, 1994) .   
 
Carbon Monoxide.   Carbon monoxide (CO) measures will be made using a Vitalograph Breath CO Analyzer 
(McNeil International, Inc., Lenexa, KS).  The manufacturer will have calibrated this device within the past year.  A 
new, disposable cardboard mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_485885].  The device has a digital screen 
which reports CO levels in parts per million (ppm).  Participants will be asked to provide a CO breath sample by 
[CONTACT_41680] a large breath, holding their breath for two seconds, releasing the breath, then taking another deep breath 
and holding  their breath for [ADDRESS_979310] CO readings greater than or equal to 10ppm in order to be 
eligible for the study.   
 
Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  The 2ml saliva sample, via the Oragene™ collection kit  will be used to conduct exploratory analyses 
of associations of genes related to nicotine addiction and cognitive function.  Because all genetic analyses are 
exploratory, participants will not be informed of their genetic test results. All s amples and results will be kept 
confidential and secure.  The saliva Oragene™ sample will be  collected at the Intake. Participants who do not 
consent to providing a saliva sample for DNA testing will still be eligible to participate.  
 
Brief counseling . These 20-minute session s will occur during the 2- hour visit on Testing Day 14 and following the 
Programmed Lapse (Day 16 Part 2 ). This counseling session will be similar to prev ious studies in our center 
(IRB# 811325). Specifi cally, a  trained smoking cessation counselor will review reasons for smoking and common 
withdrawal symptoms. Counselors will work with participants to develop plans to manage triggers, avoid 
cigarettes, and gather social support. Participants will also be taught a breathing relaxation tec hnique for handling 
stressful situations.  
 
3.2 Medication Measures 
 
Concomitant Medication Review .  Subjects  will be asked about their use of medications (over the counter and 
prescription) and substances that may alter subjects ’ response to the study medication.  The Study 
Physician /Health Care Provider  will advise as to whether other medications being taken are contraindicated and 
prescribe appropriate action from there (i.e., discontinuation of the study medication). The conco mitant medication 
review will be completed at every study visit  following the Intake . 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38950]/Adherence.  Medication adherence will be assessed by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_717920] B aseline visit ( Ray et al., 2009) .  
 
Side Effects . A checklis t of side effects based on the product insert will be administered to participants at all study 
visits  after the Intake . An open- ended side effects question will also be included.  Furthermore, participants will 
receive written instructions to call the Health Care Provider/Study Physician  should they experience any severe side 
effects or adverse events betw een study visits.    
 
3.3 Outcome Variables  
 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 14 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Smoking Rate (TLFB) .  We will assess cigarettes smoked during the B aseline session (dating back to the Intake 
visit), and throughout the medication period. A standard timeline follow -back (TLFB) method will be used ( Brown, 
Burgess, Sales, & Whiteley, 1998) , as we have done previously ( Lerman et al., 2004 ) to assess self -reported 
smoking rate.  
 
Saliva  samples.   All participants will provide saliva samples during the Intake visit. For participants reporting 
abstinence (which is biochemically confirmed) during the 7- day quit week, a second saliva sample will be 
collected at the final study visit (Quit Observation 4)  to test cotinine levels.   
 
Withdrawal Symptoms . The “Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Scale -  Revised version”(MNWS_R) (Hughes, 
2007c ) captures the current state of nicotine withdrawal ( Hughes, 2007a ; Hughes & Hatsukami, 1986) . The scale 
assesses eight DSM -IV items of nicotine withdrawal including : dysphoria or depressed mood, insomnia, 
irritability/frustration/anger, anxiety, decreased heart rate, difficulty concentrating, restlessness, and increased 
appetite/weight gain.  Participants will rate the intensity of their symptoms on the following scale: 0 = none, 1 = 
slight, 2 = mild, 3 = moderate, 4 = severe and a summary score will be calculated. This will be administered at all 
study visits (except the Intake ). Withdrawal will be assessed using a one- week time reference for the Baseline visit, 
all Pre-Quit Observation Days, and the Pre- Quit Testing Day. During the 24- h Abstinence Period and the 7- Day Quit 
Attempt, the reference point will be 24 hours. The afternoon visit of the Programmed Lapse will assess current 
withdrawal symptoms.   
 
Smoking Urges . The 10 -item brief QSU questionnaire on smoking urges (Cox, Tiffany, & Christen, 2001 ) will be 
used to assess craving for cigarettes during the medication run -up period.  The QSU -B contains 2 subscales 
(anticipation of reward, relief from negative affect).  Craving has also been related to long -term cessation outcome 
in many, but not all, clinical studies ( Killen & Fortmann, 1997 ). This will be administered at all study visits  (except 
the Intake ). Similar to withdrawal symptoms, craving will be assessed using a one- week time reference for the 
Baseline visit, all Pre -Quit Observation Days, and the Pre- Quit Testing Day. During the 24-h Abstinence Period and 
the 7- Day Quit Attempt, the reference point will be 24 hours.  
 
Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale -IV (BAARS- IV): The BAARS- IV will be used to assess current attention- deficit 
and hyperactive symptoms. The 27 -item scale is divided into symptoms pertaining to inattention (e.g. “don’t listen 
when spoken to directly”) and hyperactive- impulse symptoms (e.g., “shift around excessively or feel restless”). 
Participants will rate the intensity of their symptoms using the following scale:  1= never or rarely, 2 = sometimes, 
3 = often, or 4 = very often. ADHD s ymptoms have been associated with smoking behavior and likelihood to 
relapse in prior studies (Lerman et al., 2001 ; Rukstalis, et al., 2005 ). The BAARS- IV with a [ADDRESS_979311] 24 -hour frame of reference will be assessed on Day 16 part 1, and the 7 -Day Quit Attempt 
Observation Visits . 
 
Mood: Positive and Negative Affect .  The Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) ( Watson , Clark, & 
Tellegen, 1988 ), a 20- item Likert -format self -report measure, will be used to assess Positive Affect (PA; 10 items, 
e.g., enthusiastic, strong) and Negative Affect (NA; 10 items, e.g., distressed, upset), two dominant and generally 
orthogonal dimensions of affect. PA and NA (PANAS) will be assessed at all study visits  (except the Intake).  PA 
and NA will be assessed using a one- week time reference for the Baseline visit, all Pre- Quit Observation Days, and 
the Pre- Quit Testing Day. During the 24- h Abstinence Period and the 7 -Day Quit Attempt, the reference point will be 
“today” .  
 
Cigarette Ratings and Subjective Effects .  The Cigarette Evaluation Scale (CES), developed to assess subjective 
effects of smoking (Westman, Levin, & Rose, 1992) , is an 11- item Likert -format measure. Questions include items 
for nausea and dizziness, craving relief, and enjoyment of airway sensations. The Rose Sensory Questionnaire 
(SQ), a [ADDRESS_979312] 
and asks participants to rate the strength of the cigarette puffs on their tongue, nose, back of mouth and throat, 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 15 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: [ADDRESS_979313].  The CES and SQ will be administered at the Baseline,  Pre-Quit Observation Day 7, Testing 
Day 14, and following the programmed lapse cigarette (Day 16 part 2 ).  
 
Neurocognitive Measures . Neuropsychological tests will be administered in a quiet laboratory testing room on a 
Dell® desktop computer running on Windows XP® at the CIRNA. Unless otherwise noted, all tasks will be 
administered via E -Prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.).  The computerized battery is administered in a 
random order using clickable icons.  Total administration time is ~ 1 hour . The tasks are : 
• Visual/Spatial -N-Back: 3 -back version (VS NB3).  The n -back is one of the most commonly used paradigms in 
neuroimaging studies investigating the neurological underpi[INVESTIGATOR_717921] ( Owen, McMillan, Laird, & Bullmore, 2005) . The current study employs a 
visuo -spatial working memory task that is based on the visuo- spatial n -back paradigms used in prior research 
(Ehlis, Bahne, Jacob, Herrmann, & Fallgatter, 2008; Green et al., 2005; Owen, et al., 2005 ). During the n-
back, participants are instructed to remember the location of a stim ulus, a grey circle that is approximately 5 
cm in diameter, as it appears randomly in 8 possible locations around the perimeter of a computer screen. 
The stimulus will appear for 200 ms, followed by [CONTACT_717943] (ISI) of 2800 ms. A cross hair will 
remain visible during the stimulus presentation to cue participants to look at the center of the screen so that all 
stimuli appearing around the perimeter of the screen can be seen clearly.  The n -back task includes 4 
conditions of varying difficulty levels: the 0 -back, 1- back, 2 -back, and 3 -back. Participants respond only to 
targets (30% of stimuli) by [CONTACT_717944]. They are instructed to do nothing on other trials.  
 
Each of the task conditions (0- , 1-, 2- & 3-back) will be administered in a pseudorandomized counterbalanced 
order. Each difficulty level will consist of 1 block of 50 trials, preceded by a practice block of 20 trials. During 
the 0 -back, participants are instructed to press the SPACEBAR if the stimulus appears in a predetermined 
location (designated as the upper left corner of the computer screen. The [ADDRESS_979314] responses and reaction time. Time: 
approximately 16 min.  
 
• Word Recognition Memory (WRM ). This task is a computerized version of WRM tasks used in prior work 
(Peterson & Peterson, 1959) . Ten target words are presented on a computer monitor via E -Prime 2.0 
software. After a 16- min delay period (e.g., while participants are completing the n -back task), 10 words are 
presented on the monitor: [ADDRESS_979315] on the 
screen appeared earlier in the session. The target words and distractor words are equated for frequency, 
length, concreteness and low imageability. Time (learning and recall combined): 5 min.  
 
• Penn Continuous Performance Test -  Number/Letter Version (PCPT -nl).  The PCPT -nl is a measure of visual 
attention and vigilance based on the Penn CPT (Kurtz et al., 2001).  In this task, a series of red vertical and 
horizontal lines (7 -segment displays) flash in a digital numeric frame (resembling a digital clock).  The 
participant must press the spacebar whenever these lines form complete numbers or complete letters.  The 
task is divided in two parts, each lasting three minutes: in the first part the participant is requested to respond 
to numbers and in the second part the response is  to letters.  The participant practices both sets of trials 
before the task begins.  Time: approximately 10 min with practice . 
 
• Stop Signal Task . The Stop Signal Task (SST) is a measure of response inhibition, or the ability to inhibit a 
prepotent  response and has been used in previous work with smokers ( Ashare & Hawk, 2012) . In this task,  
participants are instructed to press labeled keyboard key s as quickly and as accurately as possible to indicate 
the direction the arrow faced (“z” for left; “/” for right). Following a 32- trial practice, stop signals (an 800- Hz, 
100-ms, 70 -dB tone) are presented on 25% of trials for a 32 -trial practice and three task blocks of 64 trials 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 16 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
each. The initial stop delay in each block is 250 ms and adjusts by 50 ms increments depending on whether 
the participant is able to successfully inhibit a response (Logan, Schachar, & Tannock, 1997) . The adjusting 
stop delay allows the determination of the delay at which inhibition occurs on approximately 50% of trials. All 
trials consist of a 500 -ms warning sti mulus followed by a 1,000 -ms go signal (left - and right -facing arrows) and 
1,000- ms blank screen intertrial interval.  
 
Mean RT for each block is calculated based on valid responses (i.e., RT > 200 ms), and only blocks with 20–
80% inhibition and at least 80% accuracy are included in analyses. Stop signal reaction time (SSRT) is the 
primary dependent variable and is calculated by [CONTACT_717945] -
trials.  Time: approximately 10 min. 
 
• Stroop test . The Stroop test is a measure of interference control, or the ability to screen out distracting stimuli 
(Stroop, 1935 ). In this task, participants vi ew a series of words on a computer monitor and using the keyboard, 
are asked to press the key associated with the color of the word rather than the word itself. Congruent trials 
are trials in which the word and color match (e.g., the word “green” appears i n the color green). Incongruent 
trials are trials in which, the words are printed in colors that do not match the colors of the words (e.g., the 
word "red" might appear in green). The primary outcomes will be the number of correct trials and reaction time 
(RT) for congruent and incongruent trials. An interference score is also calculated (e.g., RT incongruent –  RT 
congruent), which measures the ability to suppress a habitual response in favor of an unusual one, taking into 
account overall speed of naming.  Time: approximately 5 min. 
 
• XO Reaction Time Task . The XO reaction time task is a simple computerized letter discrimination task to 
assess intra -individual response distributions.  Participants are asked to discriminate between an X and an O 
that appear on the screen by [CONTACT_717946].  The task consists of [ADDRESS_979316] time a button is pressed 
during each trial.  Task duration: ~[ADDRESS_979317] sizes were derived from our previous work on the effects of the 
smoking cessation drug, varenicline, on days of abstinence; significance levels set at 0.[ADDRESS_979318]. In our prior varenicline study, there was a difference of 2.31 days of abstinence 
between varenicline and PLA [2]. With [ADDRESS_979319] >80% power to detect an effect size d=1.7 
(2-tailed, α=0.05), which is a difference of 2.3 days of abstinence between GAL and PLA (using an SD of 1.32 
drawn from a binomial sample of 7 days).  
 
For Aim 2a, the effects of GAL on working memory correct RT, we calculated change from baseline on n -back 
median correct RT from our prior study [2]. With [ADDRESS_979320] 80% power to detect an effect 
size of d=0.[ADDRESS_979321] (GAL vs PLA)  ANOVA model using 
SPSS GLM in SPSS will test the hypothesis for medication effects on number of days abstinent (out of 7).  
 
The secondary outcome, medication effects on the primary cognitive outcome, n- back correct reaction time, will 
be tested with a repeated measures ANOVA with drug (GAL vs PLA) as a between- subjects factor and time 
(session) and n -back load level (0 -, 1-, 2-, and 3- back)  as within -subjects factors.  Similar repeated measures 
ANOVAs will be used to conduct exploratory analyses for additional tasks including: the PCPT  (d', correct RT), n -
back  # correct , WRM  # correct, SST (stop signal reaction time), Stroop reaction time, and XO (deviation from the 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 17 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
mode. Covariates  (e.g., nicotine dependence, gender, and age)  will be included in all models . Since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_717922] a future grant submission none of the outcome variables  will be adjusted for 
multiple comparisons.  
 
3.  Confidentiality  
All participant information will be kept in a secure filing cabinet that is accessible only to authorized study 
personnel.  A ll study databases containing participant information will be password protected, and accessible only 
to authorized study personnel.  A ny study communications made by e- mail will use ID numbers and not include 
names or other personal information. All data sets  will use ID numbers  only.  
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
 Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in the 
study.  
 Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
 Prior to access to any study -related information, CIRNA personnel will be required to sign statements 
agreeing to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
 Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employ ability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between the subject and 
the study would be the consent document and the pri mary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is not an 
option for FDA -regulated research.)  
 Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by [CONTACT_717947], because the 
research involves web- based surveys.   
 Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible identification of 
subjects .  
 Other (specify):     
 
All research personnel associated with this study have completed the CITI -Protection of Human Subjects 
Research Training as well as HIPAA Compliance Training.  Trained staff will assess eligibility, introduce the study 
rationale, procedures, study risks, and collect  combined informed consent / HIPAA authorization form.  
 
5. Privacy 
The following protected health information will be collected as part of this study:  
• Name  
• Street address, city, county, zip code  
• Telephone numbers  
• Date of birth  
• Medical and drug use history  
• E-mail address  • Last 4 digits of Social Security Number  
• Results from all questionnaires, tests, or procedures  
• Urine for drug screening/pregnancy test  
• Saliva  sample for testing nicotine metabolites   
• Genetic information from saliva sample  
 
6.  Tissue Specimens  
Urine . A urine sample will be required at the Intake , Baseline visits , and Testing days  (Day 14 and 16) for the drug 
and pregnancy screening. Participants who test positive for study prohibited drugs use will be deemed ineligible, 
as will women who have a positive pregnancy test.  All female participants will complete a pregnancy test at the 
Intake  visit. Only females of child-bearing potential will complete urine pregnancy tests  at the Baseline visits  and 
Testing days  to exclude pregnancy and ensure compliance with contraception through the study.  
 
Saliva . A 2ml saliva sample will be collected for DNA extraction using the Oragene™ kit at the Intake  visit for 
genetic analyses.  Participants will provide a 5mL saliva sample at the Intake visit as a baseline measure of 
cotinine levels. If a  participant reports not  smoking (not even a puff of a cigarette) during the  7-day quit attempt  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 18 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
s/he will be asked to provide a 5ml saliva sample at the final study visit (Quit Observation 4) to assess cotinine 
levels  and biochemically verify 7- day point p revalence abstinence.   
 
7.  Genetic Testing  
All genetic information (as with all study information) will be kept strictly confidential using the procedures outlined 
in section 4, above.  Results will not be revealed to study participants.   
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
1.  Potential Study Risks 
Potential Risks of the Medication: The following are the common side effects that have been reported with 
galantamine treatment :  nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, weight decrease, anorexia, and skin rash. All of these side 
effects have been mild and transient in nature. The incidence of side effects is lower with the 8mg and 16mg 
doses (as compared to the 24mg dose) which are the doses that have been selected in the proposed project.  
  
In addition to the side effects mentioned above,  other rare side effects reported with  galantamine ER treatment 
are: headache, body pain (various locations), syncope, bradycardia, insomnia, somnolence, anemia, rhinitis, 
urinary tract infection, hematuria, constipation, agitation, confus ion, anxiety, hallucination, injury, back pain, 
peripheral edema, asthenia, chest pain, urinary incontinence, upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092], bronchitis, 
coughing, hypertension, fall, and purpura . All of these side effects shall be queried using a side effects checklist at 
the Baseline visit (to obtain a baseline estimate of any side effects prior to starting medication ) as well as  all 
subsequent visits (up to 9 times throughout the study).  
 
Stringent exclusion criteria are in place to limit the chance of these side effects. Additionally, participants will be 
informed about these possible side effects and be made aware to watch for any of these symptoms and report 
them as soon as possible to the research staff. All side effects will be closely monitored and the study physician 
consulted should moderate or severe side effects be reported. In case any participant experiences severe side 
effects or an adverse event they will be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_626172]/Study Physician 
immediately for appropriate intervention. The Study Physician’s  emergency contact [CONTACT_6227] s shall be on the 
medication blister pack, the study consent  form, as well on an emergency card all participants will be provided 
with once they enroll into the study.   
 
Pregnancy : In a study in which pregnant rats were dosed from the beginning of  organogenesis through day [ADDRESS_979322]-partum pup weights were decreased at 8 and 16 mg/kg/day, but no adverse effects on other  postnatal 
developmental parameters were seen. The do ses causing the above effects in rats produced slight maternal 
toxicity. No major  malformations were caused in rats given up to 16 mg/kg/day. No drug related teratogenic 
effects were observed in rabbits given up to 40 mg/kg/day (32 times the MRHD on a mg/m2 basis) during the 
period of organogenesis.  There are no adequate and well -controlled studies of galantamine hydrobromide ER in 
pregnant women.  Thus, galantamine hydrobromide must not be used during pregnancy . All female participants of 
child bearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test at the Intake  session , Baseline session, and Testing 
days ; and must agree in writing to use an approved method of contraception through the study.  
 
Genetic Testing : All genetic information (as with all study information) will be kept strictly confidential using the 
procedures outlined in section 4, above.  Results will not be revealed to study participants.  
 
Confidentiality and Loss of Privacy : Protection of privacy of subjects in research studies is of utmost  importance, 
particularly when health history information is collected.  Information will never be recorded with identifiers other 
than study ID.  A separate list of names with ID numbers will be accessible only by [CONTACT_253977].  All 
records will be kept in locked filing cabinets to maintain confidentiality.  Results will not be communicated to other 
personnel or to the subjects.  All analyses will be conducted on de -identified data.  
 
2.  Potential Study Benefits  
All participants who enroll in this study will receive brief behavioral counseling prior to  the 7 -day quit period to aid 
them in their effort to quit smoking . And, lastly, this study may eventually help better understand whether 
modulating the endogenous cholinergic tone affects smoking behavior and whether ACIs can be potential 
smoking cessation medications . 
 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 19 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
3.  Alternatives to Participation  
At any point in the study participants may decide not to continue in their participation. As an alternative to 
enrolling in this study, participant s may choose to continue to smoke or to seek assistance with quitting smoking 
through other treatment programs located in the area, other quit -smoking studies at our Center, or contact[CONTACT_485911] -line.   
 
4.  Data and Safety Monitoring  
Who will monitor this study? Check all that apply.  
 Principal Investigator  
 [INVESTIGATOR_717923] (if mandated by [CONTACT_71995])  
 Medical monitor  
 Safety monitoring committee 
 Data and safety monitoring board 
 
4.1 Data and Safety Monitoring Committee 
Data and Safety Monitoring will be conducted by  [CONTACT_941] P rincipal Investigators and the Study Physician. They  will 
review all possible Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse Events (SAEs). They will ensure that this 
information is captured in a comprehensive manner and reported according to Good Clinical Pract ice (GCP ). The 
Principal Investigators, Study Physician,  Project Manager,  and the research staff will oversee and complete the 
monitoring process.  Monitoring will be performed on an ongoing basis i n accordance with the University of 
Pennsylvania Sponsor -Investigator Standard Operating Procedure PM 504.  
 
The Principal Investigators are responsible for : 
1. Obtaining IRB review and approval of a clinical investigation before the investigation is  initiated and 
ensur ing continuing review of the study by t he IRB in acco rdance with 21 CFR Part 56;  
2. Obtaining  informed consent in accordance with 21 CFR Part 50; and  
3. Assuring that all staff and subjects  understand and accept the obligations incurred in undertaking this 
double- blind placebo- controlled study in acc ordance with [ADDRESS_979323] for the data on the Case Report Forms  (CRFs) , ensuring all fields are completed 
appropriately, and all corrections are done accor ding to GCPs .  Any inconsistencies/deviations will be 
documented on the CRFs and such findings will be reviewed at the weekly study meetings.  
 
The Project Manag er will oversee staff training.  Training will include a review of the study protocol, informed 
consent, telephone screen, CRFs and the procedures that are in place regarding session check -in, data 
collection, data entry and quality control.   A ll applicab le regulations  will be reviewed and the roles/responsibilities 
of each staff member will be explained.   All questions will be answered  and the training will be documented in a 
training log, which will be initialed by [CONTACT_329051].  The Project Manager w ill also confirm all appropriate 
documentation of informed consent and storage of consents in a separate consent binder, and will maintain the 
study regulatory binder.  
 
The Project Manager, PI ([CONTACT_329069]), Nurse Practitioner , and Study Physician will work together to confirm 
eligibility criteria. The Study Physician and PI ([CONTACT_329069]) , will review charts for each subject  on an ongoing basis 
and will document reviews by [CONTACT_485913] , case report forms that contain blood pressu re and 
heart rate measurements, and the medical history and physical form .  
 
The research staff and P roject Manager will ensure all medication is properly ordered and received from IDS, 
stored at the center, labeled, and distributed to subjects.   
 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 20 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Anita Hole, Ph.D. will review all completed MINIs on an ongoing basis and train and supervise smoking cessation 
counselors.  
 
The data managers will be responsible for creating all CRFs and ensuring that all data will be entered and stored 
in a manner consistent with the design of the approved CRFs. They will also be responsible for developi[INVESTIGATOR_485888]/quality control producers for this study.  
 
Enrollment will be complete when [ADDRESS_979324] is entered.  
 
4.2 Adverse Event  Reporting and Monitoring  
 
Adverse Event (AE)  
An Adverse Event (AE) is a subcategory of the broader category of "Unanticipated Problems Posing Risk to 
Subject  or Others ." An adverse event is defined as:  
 
• Any unfavorable or unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom, or disease occurring  
at any stage of the study  
• Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be adverse events if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by [CONTACT_1372]  
• May include an exacerbation of  a pre -existing condition, intercurrent illness  or injury , drug interaction, drug 
overdose, failure of expected action or significant worsening of the disease under study  
• An event that may compromise the rights, safety, or welfare of research subjects  
 
Any event that could be characterized by [CONTACT_717948].  
 
Serious Adverse Event  (SAE)  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE that is :  
• fatal 
• life-threatening 
• requires or prolongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly of  major clinical 
significance. They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to prevent one of the other  serious 
outcomes noted above. For example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did not result in in- patient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or intensive treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency department would typi[INVESTIGATOR_48517].  
 
All adverse events that do not meet any of the criteria for serious will be regarded as non-serious adverse 
events.  
 
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 21 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: [ADDRESS_979325] administration of study treatment.   
 
Preexisting Condition  
A preexisting condition is one that is present at the start of the study.  A preexisting condition will  be recorded as 
an adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or the charac ter of the condition worsens during the study period.  
 
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinically significant abnormality will be recorded as a preexisting condition.  At the end of the 
study, any new clinically significant findings /abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also 
be recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
 
Post -study Adverse Event  
All unresolved adverse events will be followed by [CONTACT_093] s until the events are resolved, the subject is lost 
to follow -up, or the adverse event is otherwise explained.  At the last scheduled visit, a research team member 
will instruct each subject to report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal physician, 
believes might reasonably be related to participation in this study.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717924] 
a serious adverse event unless specifi cally instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition responsible for 
surgery should be documented as an adverse event if the condition meets the criteria for and adverse event.   
 
Neither the condition, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], nor  surgery are reported as an adverse event in 
the following circumstances:  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14841] a preexisting 
condition.  Surgery will not be reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the purpose of the surgery 
was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful.  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14842].  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717925] t arget disease of the study, unless it is a 
worsening or increase in frequency of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14844].  
 
Medical and scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether expedited reporting is appropriate in 
other situations, such as important medical events that may not be immediately life- threatening or result in death 
or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_717926]. These should also usually be considered serious.  Other kinds of events can be 
labeled “serious adverse events” at the discretion of the investigator.   
 
To ensure no confusion or misunderstanding of the difference between the terms "serious" and "severe," which 
are not synonymous, the following note of clarification is provided: The term "severe" is often used to describe the 
intensity (severity) of a spec ific event (as in mild, moderate, or severe myocardial infarction); the event itself, 
however, may be of relatively minor medical significance (such as severe headache). This is not the same as 
"serious," which is based on patient/event outcome or action c riteria usually associated with events that pose a 
threat to a patient's life or functioning. Seriousness (not severity) serves as a guide for defining regulatory 
reporting obligations.  
 
Severity Grading Scale for Adverse Events  
Many disease specific groups have developed toxicity grading scales. For example, most cancer clinical trials use 
the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) developed by [CONTACT_6812]. The CTCAE provides a 
descriptive terminology which is utilized for adverse event repor ting. A grading (severity) scale is provided for 
each adverse event term (http://ctep.info.nih.gov ). If no guidelines exist, then the following scale can be used:  
• Mild:  Noticeable to the subject, does not interfere with the subject’s daily activities,  usually does not require 
additional therapy, dose reduction, or discontinuation of the study.  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 22 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
• Moderate:  Interferes with the subject’s daily activities, possibly requires additional therapy, but does not require 
discontinuation of the study.   
• Severe:  Severely limits the subject’s daily activities and may require discontinuation of the study.   This would 
include all adverse events defined as “serious adverse events”.  
 
Attribution/Association with the Drug or Intervention:   
An assessment of the rel ationship between the adverse event and the drug/intervention will be made for each 
occurrence by [CONTACT_079].   
 
Adverse Event Attribution Categories:  
• Unrelated-  The AE is clearly NOT related to the intervention  
• Unlikely - The AE is doubtfully related to the intervention  
• Possible-  The AE may be related to the intervention  
• Probable-  The AE is likely related to the intervention  
• Definite - The AE is clearly related to the intervention 
 
4.[ADDRESS_979326] (SEC) at 
each study visit after the Intake  reporting with a frame of reference since their last study visit . The SEC will assess 
the frequency and severity of common side- effects associat ed with galantamine- ER treatment (e.g., nausea, 
vomiting ).  These items will be rated by [CONTACT_112503] a 0 (none) to 3 (severe) scale, and can be summed to 
provide an overall side effects index.    
 
Second, trained staff will ask participants a non- struct ured, open- ended question (SEC Open -ended)  at each 
study visit with a one week frame of reference  to assess if participants are experiencing any additional symptoms 
or medical concerns that may be related to their participation in the study.  
 
Research staf f are trained to inquire (time of onset, nature of issue reported, possible relation to galantamine  
treatment, review of previously reported side effects or concerns, etc.) about any notable side effects or medical 
concern reported by [CONTACT_4317].  Any severe (or a pattern of moderate) side effects or notable medical concern 
will be reported to the Project Manager, Research Nurse/Study Physician, and Principal Investigator [CONTACT_156869] 
a course of action (e.g. continue to monitor, reduce medication, stop m edication).  This consult, including all 
relevant information, will be documented via email. The Study Physician is knowledgeable of side effects related 
to galantamine and is qualified to manage possible side effects.  
 
Based on published reports using the 8mg and 16mg galantamine- ER doses we expect some side effects with 
galantamine- ER treatment; however we expect these side effects to be mild and transient in nature. However, in 
the unlikely event of an adverse event (A E) the study physician ([CONTACT_484489]) will determine the severity of the AE, 
the relationship of the event to the study drug and decide the course of action for the study subject.  [CONTACT_484489]  will 
determine the relationship of toxicity of the study medication ( galantamine- ER) as not related, possibly related, 
probably related, or definitely related using standard criteria.   
 
All adverse events occurring during the study period will be recorded.  The clinical course of each event will be 
followed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been determined that the study treatment or participation is 
not the cause.  Serious adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the study period must be followed up to 
determine the final outcome.  Any serious adverse event that occurs after the study period and is considered to 
be possibly related to the study treatment or study participation will be recorded and reported immediately.  
 
4.4 Reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems 
The following information about adverse events will be reported:   
• Study identifier  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 23 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
• Study Center  
• Subject number  
• A description of the event  
• Date of onset  
• Current status  
• Whether study treatment was discontinued 
• The reason why the event is classified as serious  
• Investigator assessment of the association between the event and study treatment  
•  Welfare of subjects.  
 
4.5 Investigator reporting: notifying the Penn IRB  
This section describes the requirements for safety reporting by [CONTACT_145181], a ffiliated with a 
Penn research site, or otherwise responsible for safety reporting to the Penn IRB. The University of Pennsylvania 
IRB (Penn IRB) and the CTSRMC DSMC require expedited reporting of those events related to study participation 
that are unforeseen and indicate that participants or others are at increased risk of harm.  The Penn IRB will not 
acknowledge safety reports or bulk adverse event submissions that do not meet the criteria outlined below.  The 
Penn IRB requires researchers to submit reports of the following problems within 10 working days from the time 
the investigator becomes aware of the event:  
• Any adverse event  (regardless of whether the event is serious or non -serious, on -site or off -site) that 
occurs any time during or after the research study, which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_58812]:  
Unexpected (An event is “unexpected” when its specificity and severity are not accurately reflected in the 
protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol, any applicable investigator 
brochure, and the current IRB -approved informed consent document and other relevant sources of 
information, suc h as product labeling and package inserts.)  
AND  
Related to the research procedures (An event is “related to the research procedures” if in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_328989], the event was more likely than not to be caused by [CONTACT_485915].)  
 
Reporting Process  
Unanticipated problems  posing risks to subjects or others as noted above will be reported to the Penn IRB using 
the form: “Unanticipated Problems Posing Risks to Subjects or Others Including Reportable Adverse Events” or 
as a written report of the event (including a description of the event with information regarding its fulfillment of the 
above criteria, follow -up/resolution and need for revision to consent form and/or other study documentation).  
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_717927] k ept in the Clinical Investigator’s 
study file.  
 
Reporting Deaths:  more rapid reporting requirements  
Concerning deaths that occur during the course of a research study, the following describes the more rapid 
reporting requirement of the Penn IRB for specif ic situations:  
• Report the event within 24 hours  when the death is unforeseen (unexpected) and indicates participants or 
others are at increased risk of harm.  
• Report the event within 72 hours,  for all other deaths, regardless of whether the death is related  to study 
participation.  
 
For reportable deaths, the initial submission to the Penn IRB may be made by [CONTACT_116627]. The AE/Unanticipated Problem Form is required as a follow up to the initial submission.  
 
Reporting SAE s to the DSMC  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 24 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
• Penn Subjects (including subjects at networks, affiliates or investigator -initiated sites) ;   
All on -site grade [ADDRESS_979327] received study treatment/therapy or was exposed to an inv estigational device.   All unexpected 
deaths or deaths related to the study agent(s)/device(s) must be reported within 24 hours.  All other deaths should 
be reported within 30 days.   
 
• IND Safety Updates/Alerts  
IND Safety Updates/Alerts (sent by [CONTACT_109270]), that are specifically for the protocol open in the ACC,  with a grade 
3 or higher, regardless of attribution or expectedness will be submitted to the DSMC within 30 days.  Events for 
studies using a novel agent , on any protocol in the Cancer Center, not specifically the protocol open in the ACC, 
shall be sent within 30 days.  All other IND Safety Updates/Alerts s hall be sent within [ADDRESS_979328] was treated. Events for studies using a novel agent or agents manufactured on campus will be sent until 
the protocol terminates.  
 
Reporting Events  
All events will  be entered into the ACC Cli nical Trials Management System (CTMS) AE/SAE form.   
   
 
Other Reportable events:  
- For clinical drug trials, the following events are also reportable to the Penn IRB:  
- Any adverse experience that, even without detailed analysis, represents a serious unexpected adverse 
event that is rare in the absence of drug exposure (such as agranulocytosis, hepatic necrosis, Stevens -
Johnson syndrome).  
- Any adverse event that would cause the sponsor to modify the inv estigators brochure, protocol or  
informed consent f orm, or would prompt other action by [CONTACT_116628].  
- Information that indicates a change to the risks or potential benefits of the research, in terms of severity or 
frequency. For example:  
- An interim analysis indicates that  participants have a lower rate of response to treatment than initially 
expected.  
- Safety monitoring indicates that a particular side effect is more severe, or more frequent than initially 
expected.  
- A paper is published from another study that shows that an arm of your research study is of no therapeutic 
value.  
- Change in FDA safety labeling or withdrawal from marketing of a drug, device, or biologic used in a 
research protocol.  
- Breach of confidentiality  
- Change to the protocol taken without prior IRB review t o eliminate apparent immediate hazard to a 
research participant.  
- Incarceration of a participant when the research was not previously approved under Subpart C and the 
investigator believes it is in the best interest of the subject to remain on the study.  
- Complaint of a participant when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or the complaint cannot be 
resolved by [CONTACT_5051].  
- Exception: A one time, intentional action or process that departs from the IRB and CTSRMC approved 
study protocol, intended for  one occurrence. If the action disrupts the study progress, such that the study 
design or outcome (endpoints) may be compromised, or the action compromises the safety and welfare of 
study subjects, advanc e documented IRB and DSMC approval is required.  
- For exceptions on Industry or Cooperative group sponsored protocols, written approval must be obtained 
from the Sponsor prior to submitting your  exception request to the DSMC.  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 25 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
- For in- house studies with a Medical Monitor or Safety Monitoring Committee (not DSMB ), approval must 
be obtained from the Medical Monitor or Safety Monitoring Committee prior to submitting your exception 
request to the DSMC.  
- Deviation:  A one time, unintentional action or proces s that departs from the IRB and DSMC approved 
study protocol, involving one incident and identified retrospectively, after the event occurred. If the impact 
on the protocol disrupts the study design, m ay affect the outcome (endpoints) or compromises the safety 
and welfare of the subjects, the deviation must be report ed to the DSMC within [ADDRESS_979329] 
completed the CITI -Protection of Human Sub jects Research Training  as well as HIPAA Compliance Training.  
 
5. Management of Information for Multi -center Research where a Penn Investigator is the Lead 
Investigator of a multi - center study, or Penn is the lead site in a multi -site study.  
Not applicable  
 
6.  Risk/Benefit Assessment  
There is minimal risk for serious adverse events. The treatments and procedures used in this study have been 
shown to be relatively safe. Numerous clinical trials have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, including galantamine in Alzheimer’s disease patients, alcohol -dependent 
patients, and patients with schizophrenia. Research staff will monitor subjects closely during their participation. 
Data from this project will serve as preliminary data to formally test and develop an ACI as a potential smoking 
cessation medication for treatment -seeking smokers. Thus, the importance of this research outweighs the risks to 
subjects, which are minor.  
 
SUBJECT COMPENSATION 
 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 26 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Study Visit  Visit Compensation  Travel  Quit Incentive  Total  
Intake*  $20  $10    $30  
Baseline Session  $30  $10    $40  
Pre-Quit/Run -up period          
     Observation Day 7  $20  $10    $30  
     Testing Day 14 $40  $10    $50  
24-h Abstinence Period      
     Day 16 Part 1 and 2  $60  $10    $70  
7-day Quit Period          
     Observation Day 17 $20  $10  $15+ 
  $45  
     Observation Day 19 $20  $10  $15+ (Day 18,19 )  $60  
     Observation Day 21 $20  $10  $15+ (Day 20, 21)  $60  
     Observation Day 23 $20  $10  $15+ (Day 22, 23)  
 $60  
TOTAL  $250  $90  $105    
Grand Total:  $445a  
* Participants who test positive for study prohibited drugs will not be eligible to receive visit or travel 
compensation.  
+ Participants will receive $15/day (in cash) for each day of self -reported abstinence that is biochemically -
confirmed.  
a Participants following the Extended Dosing schedule will be able to earn up to $475 for attending one extra 
Observation Day visit ($20 visit compensation + $10 travel).  
 
 
  
  Participants will receive compensation at each session they attend and can receive up to $4 45 for completing all 
study requirements  (including travel reimbursement) .  Compensation distribution is shown in the table below.  
  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 27 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
INFORMED CONSENT  
1. Consent Process  
At th e Intake  (Day -5), participants will provide written study consent and HIPAA documents  (combined)  before 
completing additional survey measures and undergoing any study related activities. A member of the research 
staff will explain the study procedures befor e the start of the Intake  visit and ask each participant if they have any 
further questions and provide answers or any clarifications and written consent will be obtained. All individuals 
obtaining consent will have completed the University of Pennsylvania human subject certification and will be fully 
trained in the informed consent process.  Individuals can elect not to participate and may withdraw at any time 
without penalty. Participants will receive a copy of the combined consent/HIPAA form. Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_717928] a copy of the signed combined consent/HIPAA forms will be stored in a subject’s study folder. The original 
signed combined consents/HIPAA will be centrally stored in Regulatory Consent Binders.  
 
2.  Waiver of Authorization  
Not applicabl e as we will be operating under FDA regulations.  
 
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION 
1. Research Staff  
The following research staff will be directly involved with the implementation and execution of the current study.   
• Rebecca Ashare , Ph.D., Principal Investigator  
• Caryn Lerman , Ph.D., Faculty Sponsor  
• Andrew Strasser, Ph.D., Co- Investigator  
• Paul Wileyto, Ph.D., Statistician  
• Frank Leone, MD, Study Physician  
• Susan Ware, B.S. Database Manager  
• Anita Hole , Ph.D. MINI review  
• Leah Bernardo , B.A., Study Support Staff   
• Dominique Spence , Research Staff  
• Janice Biddle, CRNP, Study Support Staff  
• Chan To, Study Support Staff  
• Erin Logue, Study Support Staff  
• Victoria McLaughlin, Study Support Staff  
• Zoe Rosoff -Verbit, Study Support Staff  
• Jonnie Handschin, St udy Support Staff  
 
 
2. Staff Training  
Drs. Lerman and Ashare will oversee the development of protocols for laboratory related tasks (e.g., cognitive  
tasks) and training of staff in these protocols. [CONTACT_329069] will be responsible for the development of procedures 
pertaining to all other study visits and implementing and monitoring ongoing staff training procedures accordingly. 
An initial, intensive training period will be implemented followed by [CONTACT_485916]- service trainings that will be 
coordinated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Ashare. [CONTACT_592942] will also oversee study progress as part of regular study meeting s.   
 
3. Study Facilities  
This project will be conducted at and through the PENN Center for Interdisciplinary Research on Nicoti ne 
Addiction (CIRNA ), which has numerous similar protocols and well -developed procedures for staff training, data 
collection and storage, and study completion.  The facilities available for this project include a large conference 
room, individual consulting rooms  with computer/internet access , storage rooms, smoking lab, sample collection 
rooms, office space for study personnel , and data management facilities .  
 
The Translational Core Laboratory (TCL) will process and store blood samples for nicotine metabol ite analysis .  
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 28 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
References  
Ago, Y., Koda, K., Takuma, K., & Matsuda, T. (2011). Pharmacological aspects of the acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitor galantamine. Journal of Pharmacological Sciences, 116(1), 6 -17. 
Aronson, S., Van Baelen, B., Kav anagh, S., & Schwalen, S. (2009). Optimal dosing of galantamine in patients 
with mild or moderate Alzheimer's disease: post Hoc analysis of a randomized, double- blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Drugs and Aging, 26 (3), 231 -239. 
Ashare, R. L., & Hawk, L. W.,  Jr. (2012). Effects of smoking abstinence on impulsive behavior among smokers 
high and low in ADHD -like symptoms. Psychopharmacology, 219 (2), 537 -547. 
Beglinger, L. J., Gaydos, B. L., Kareken, D. A., Tangphao -Daniels, O., Siemers, E. R., & Mohs, R. C. (2004). 
Neuropsychological test performance in healthy volunteers before and after donepezil administration. J 
Psychopharmacol, 18 (1), 102- 108. 
Brown, R., Burgess, E., Sales, S., & Whiteley, J. (1998). Reliability and validity of a smoking timeline follow -back 
interview. Addict Behav (12), 101- 112. 
Chuah, L. Y., & Chee, M. W. (2008). Cholinergic augmentation modulates visual task performance in sleep-
deprived young adults. J Neurosci, 28 (44), [ADDRESS_979330], Tan, J. C., Zheng, H., et al. (2009). Donepezil 
improves epi[INVESTIGATOR_717929]. Sleep, 32 (8), 
999-1010.  
Collins, F. S. (2011). Mining for therapeutic gold. Nat Rev Drug Discov, 10 (6), 397 -397. 
Cox, L. S., Tiffany, S. T., & Christen, A. G. (2001). Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (QSU -
brief) in laboratory and clinical  settings. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 3 (1), 7 -16. 
Delrieu, J., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_219360], A., Caillaud, C., Voisin, T., & Vellas, B. (2011). Managing cognitive dysfunction through the 
continuum of Alzheimer's disease: role of pharmacotherapy. CNS Drugs, 25 (3), 213 -226. 
Diehl, A., Nakovics, H., Croissant, B., Smolka, M. N., Batra, A., & Mann, K. (2006). Galantamine reduces smoking 
in alcohol -dependent patients: a randomized, placebo- controlled trial. International Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 44(12), 614- 622. 
Diehl, A., Nakovics, H., Mutschler, J., Hermann, D., & Kiefer, F. (2009). Rivastigmine reduces tobacco craving in 
alcohol -dependent smokers. Pharmacopsychiatry, 42 (3), 89 -94. 
Ehlis, A. C., Bahne, C. G., Jacob, C. P., Herrmann, M. J., & Fallgatter, A. J. (2008). Reduced lateral prefrontal 
activation in adult patients with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) during a working memory 
task: a functional near -infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 42(13), 
1060- 1067.  
Foldi, N. S., White, R. E. C., & Schaefer, L. A. (2005). Detecting effects of donepezil on visual selective attention 
using signal detection parameters in Alzheimer's disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 
20(5), 485 -488. 
Garvey, A. J., B liss, R. E., Hitchcock, J. L., Heinold, J. W., & Rosner, B. (1992). Predictors of smoking relapse 
among self -quitters: a report from the Normative Aging Study. Addictive Behaviors, 17(4), 367- 377. 
Green, A., Ellis, K. A., Ellis, J., Bartholomeusz, C. F., I lic, S., Croft, R. J., et al. (2005). Muscarinic and nicotinic 
receptor modulation of object and spatial n -back working memory in humans. Pharmacology Biochemistry 
and Behavior, 81(3), 575 -584. 
Gron, G., Kirstein, M., Thielscher, A., Riepe, M. W., & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], M. (2005). Cholinergic enhancement of epi[INVESTIGATOR_717930]. Psychopharmacology (Berl), 182(1), 170 -179. 
Harrison, E. L., Coppola, S., & McKee, S. A. (2009). Nicotine depriv ation and trait impulsivity affect smokers' 
performance on cognitive tasks of inhibition and attention. Experimental and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology, 17(2), 91 -98. 
Heatherton, T. F., Kozlowski, L. T., Frecker, R. C., & Fagerstrom, K. O. (1991). The Fagerst rom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict, 86 (9), 1119 -1127.  
Hughes, J. R. (2007a). Effects of abstinence from tobacco: Etiology, animal models, epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], and 
significance: A subjective review. Nicotine Tob Res, 9 (3), 329 -339. 
Hughes, J. R. (2007b). Effects of abstinence from tobacco: valid symptoms and time course. Nicotine & tobacco 
research, 9 (3), 315 -327. 
Hughes, J. R. (2007c). Measurement of the effects of abstinence from tobacco: a qualitat ive review. Psychol 
Addict Behav, 21(2), 127 -137. 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 29 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Hughes, J. R., & Hatsukami, D. (1986). Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 43 (3), 289 -294. 
Hughes, J. R., Keely, J., & Naud, S. (2004). Shape of the relapse curve and l ong-term abstinence among 
untreated smokers. Addiction, 99 (1), [ADDRESS_979331], S. J., & Pugh, K. R. (2005). Effects of 
smoking and smoking abstinence on cognition in adolescent tobacco smokers. Biol Psychiatry, 57 (1), 56 -
66. 
Kelly, D. L., McMahon, R. P., Weiner, E., Boggs, D. L., Dickinson, D., Conley, R. R., et al. (2008). Lack of 
beneficial galantamine effect for smoking behavior: a double- blind randomized trial in people with 
schizophrenia. Schizophr Res, 103 (1-3), 161- 168. 
Killen, J. D., & Fortmann, S. P. (1997). Craving is associated with smoking relapse: findings from three 
prospective studies. Experimental and clinical psychopharmacology, 5(2), 137- 142. 
Koontz, J., & Baskys, A. (2005). Effects of galantamine on working memory and global functioning in patients with 
mild cognitive impairment: A double- blind placebo- controlled study. American Journal of Alzheimer's 
Disease and Other Dementias, 20 (5), 295- 302. 
Krishnan- Sarin, S., Reynolds, B., Duhig, A. M., Smith, A., Liss, T., McFetridge, A., et al. (2007). Behavioral 
impulsivity predicts treatment outcome in a smoking cessation program for adolescent smokers. Drug 
Alcohol Depend, 88(1), 79 -  82. 
Kuryatov, A., Onksen, J., & Lindstrom, J. (2008) . Roles of accessory subunits in α4β2* nicotinic receptors. 
Molecular pharmacology, 74 (1), 132.  
Lerman, C., Audrain, J., Tercyak, K., Hawk, L. W., Jr., Bush, A., Crystal -Mansour, S., et al. (2001). Attention-
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) symptoms a nd smoking patterns among participants in a smoking-
cessation program. Nicotine Tob Res, 3(4), 353- 359. 
Lerman, C., Kaufmann, V., Rukstalis, M., Patterson, F., Perkins, K., Audrain- McGovern, J., et al. (2004). 
Individualizing nicotine replacement therapy f or the treatment of tobacco dependence: a randomized trial. 
Ann Intern Med, 140 (6), 426- 433. 
Levin, E. D., Lee, C., Rose, J. E., Reyes, A., Ellison, G., Jarvik, M., et al. (1990). Chronic nicotine and withdrawal 
effects on radial -arm maze performance in ra ts. Behavioral and Neural Biology, 53(2), 269- 276. 
Logan, G. D., Schachar, R. J., & Tannock, R. (1997). Impulsivity and inhibitory control. Psychological Science, 
8(1), 60 -66. 
Myers, C., Taylor, R., Moolchan, E., & Heishman, S. (2008). Dose- related enhancement of mood and cognition in 
smokers administered nicotine nasal spray. Neuropsychopharmacology, 33(3), 588 -598. 
Nathan, P. J., Baker, A., Carr, E., Earle, J., Jones, M., Nieciecki, M., et al. (2001). Cholinergic modulation of 
cognitive function in healthy subjects: acute effects of donepezil, a cholinesterase inhibitor. Hum 
Psychopharmacol, 16 (6), 481- 483. 
Oprea, T. I., Bauman, J. E., Bologa, C. G., Buranda, T., Chigaev, A., Edwards, B. S., et al. (2011). Drug 
repurposing from an academic perspective. Dru g Discovery Today: Therapeutic Strategies, 8 (3–4), [ADDRESS_979332], A. R., & Bullmore, E. (2005). N -back working memory paradigm: a meta-
analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies. Human Brain Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 25(1), 46 -59. 
Pandya, A., & Yakel, J. L. (2011). Allosteric modulators of the [alpha] 4 [beta] 2 subtype of neuronal nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology, 82 (8), 952 -958. 
Patterson, F., Jepson, C., Loughead, J., Perkins, K., Strasser, A., Siegel, S. , et al. (2010). Working memory 
deficits predict short -term smoking resumption following brief abstinence. Drug and alcohol dependence, 
106(1), 61 -64. 
Perkins, K. A., Lerman, C., Fonte, C. A., Mercincavage, M., Stitzer, M. L., Chengappa, K. N., et al. (2010). Cross -
validation of a new procedure for early screening of smoking cessation medications in humans. Clinical 
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 88(1), 109- 114. 
Perkins, K. A., Lerman, C., Stitzer, M., Fonte, C. A., Briski, J. L., Scott, J. A., et al. (2008 ). Development of 
procedures for early screening of smoking cessation medications in humans. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 84(2), 
216-221. 
Peterson, L. R., & Peterson, M. J. (1959). Short -term retention of individiual verbal items. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 58 , 193 -198. 
         University of Pennsylvania    Institutional Review Board  
 
page 30 of 30 IRB APPLICATION  Template Version: 23 April 2010  
Pomerleau, C. S., Carton, S. M., Lutzke, M. L., Flessland, K. A., & Pomerleau, O. F. (1994). Reliability of the 
Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire and the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence. Addict Behav, 
19(1), 33 -39. 
Ray, R., Mitra, N., Baldwin, D., Guo, M., Patterson, F., Heitjan, D., et al. (2010). Convergent evidence that choline 
acetyltransferase gene variation is associated with prospective smoking cessation and nicotine 
dependence. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35 (6), 1374.  
Ray, R., Rukstalis, M., Jepson, C., Strasser, A., Patterson, F., Lynch, K., et al. (2009). Effects of atomoxetine on 
subjective and neurocognitive symptoms of nicotine abstinence. J Psychopharmacol, 23 (2), 168 -176. 
Rukstalis, M., Jepson, C., Patterson, F., & Lerman, C. (2005). Increases in hyperactive– impulsive symptoms 
predict relapse among smokers in nicotine replacement therapy. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 
28(4), 297 -304. 
Scharre, D. W., Shiovitz, T., Zhu, Y., & Amatniek, J. (2008). One -week dose titration of extended release 
galantamine in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's and Dementia, 4 (1), 30 -37. 
Schilstrom, B., Ivanov, V. B., Wiker, C., & Svensson, T. H. (2006). Galantamine Enhances Dopaminergic 
Neurotransmission In Vivo Via Allosteric Potentiation of Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptors. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 32 (1), 43 -53. 
Sheehan, D. V., Lecrubier, Y., Sheehan, K. H., Amorim, P., Janavs, J., Weiller, E., et al. (1998). The Mini -
Internat ional Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured 
diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry, [ADDRESS_979333] 20 , 22-33;quiz 34- 57. 
Shiffman, S., & Jarvik, M. (1980). Withdrawal symptoms: fi rst week is hardest. World Smoking Health, 5(1), 16 -21. 
Shoaib, M., & Bizarro, L. (2005). Deficits in a sustained attention task following nicotine withdrawal in rats. 
Psychopharmacology, 178(2 -3), 211- 222. 
Silver, M. A., Shenhav, A., & D'Esposito, M. (2008). Cholinergic enhancement reduces spatial spread of visual 
responses in human early visual cortex. Neuron, 60(5), 904 -914. 
Sofuoglu, M., & Carroll, K. M. (2011). Effects of Galantamine on Cocaine Use in Chronic Cocaine Users. 
American Journal on Addictions, 20 (3), 302 -303. 
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18 (6), 
643-662. 
Terry, A. V., & Buccafusco, J. J. (2003). The cholinergic hypothesis of age and Alzheimer's disease- related 
cognitive deficits: recent challenges and their implications for novel drug development. Journal of 
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 306(3), 821.  
Watson , D., Clark, L., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positi ve and 
negative affect:  The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology., 54, 1063- 1070.  
Wei, J., Ma, J. Z., Payne, T. J., Cui, W., Ray, R., Mitra, N., et al. (2010). Replication and extension of association 
of choline acetyltransferase wit h nicotine dependence in European and African American smokers. Human 
Genetics, 127 (6), 691 -698. 
Westman, E., Levin, E., & Rose, J. (1992). Smoking while wearing the nicotine patch: Is smoking satisfying or 
harmful? Clinical Research, 40 , 871A.  
Zachary, R.  S. (2000). Shipley Institute of Living Scale - Revised Manual : Western Psychological Services.  
 
 