Study title:  Cognitive Interviewing of Survey Items for a Computer Adaptive Test of Parent Knowledge 
and Beliefs  
Document Dated: 12/8 /[ADDRESS_617694] Number: NCT0497126 [ADDRESS_617695] of Parent Knowledge 
and Beliefs  
TMW Center for Early Learning + Public Health  
Protocol Narrative  
Background  
A child’s early language exposure is pi[INVESTIGATOR_480655] (Bruner, 1981; Chapman, 2000; Gallaway & Richards, 1994; Hart & Risley, 
1995; Huttenlocher, Haight, Bryk, Selzer, & Lyons, 1991; R owe, 2008). Hart and Risley’s landmark study 
demonstrated the tremendous impact of a child’s early language milieu on future learning by [CONTACT_354134] a 
significant correlation between the number of words a child is exposed to between ages 0 -3 and his or 
her u ltimate IQ and academic success (Hart & Risley, 1992; 1995). Their findings were both significant 
and alarming, demonstrating the critical and time -sensitive role that early language exposure plays in a 
child’s life.  
The concern for children born into pove rty is the overwhelming inequity in their early language 
experience. Hart and Risley’s study revealed a steep socioeconomic gradient in early exposure to words 
and language. At the end of their third year, children from high socioeconomic status (SES) fami lies 
heard approximately forty -five million words; children from economically impoverished backgrounds 
heard only approximately thirteen million. Hart and Risley found that more parental talk equated to 
faster vocabulary growth and higher IQ test scores at  three years and older. Their follow -up with these 
children at 9 -10 years of age confirmed that preschool/school interventions came too late to alter these 
trajectories; the reverberations of early linguistic shortfall were likely to follow these children 
throughout their lives.  
However, the challenges these children face is not unalterable. It is neither genetics nor a lack of 
potential that lie at the heart of this inequity, but rather parental knowledge. In 2008, Rowe 
demonstrated that the relationship between socioeconomic status and parental communication ability 
is mediated by [CONTACT_480659] (Rowe 2008). Other studies have corroborated these findings, 
demonstrating that the effect of socioeconomic status on a child’s vocabulary was primarily dicta ted by 
[CONTACT_480660] (Hoff 2003). Additionally, a recent study by [CONTACT_480661] -emotional and cognitive growt h, as well as respond to their infants ’ cues at 
the age of 9 -months (Leung & Suskind, 2020). Encouragingly, studies have also demonstrated that a 
well-planned, parent -directed language intervention in low -income populations may positively affect 
parental s peech behaviors by [CONTACT_480662] (Oneil -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_125415], 
2009).   
Given the pi[INVESTIGATOR_480656] —and in particular, the interactions they share 
with children and the quality of language input the y provide —play in shapi[INVESTIGATOR_480657]’s cognitive 
and language development, it is necessary to assess what they know and believe about that process. 
Prior to the development of the SPEAK, however, this critical need was unmet in the early childhood 
field. Since 2013, [CONTACT_480674] and her research group have developed and refined the Survey of 
Parent/Provider Education and Knowledge (SPEAK). The SPEAK is a clinical and research tool to assess 
parents' and providers’ expectations and knowledge of early chil dhood cognitive and language 
development.  
Two versions of the SPEAK survey, the [ADDRESS_617696] 
undergone rigorous item testing and evaluation to create a reliable and valid measure of parental 
knowledge  (Suskind et. al, 2017) . As the next phase of SPEAK development, the TMW Center is designing 
a computer adaptive test, call ed the SPEAK CAT, to streamline the assessment of an individual’s 
knowledge and beli efs about child development. The computer adaptive test adjusts, in real  time, the 
questions that it asks to tailor to a specific individual’s knowledge level. This will allow researchers and 
clinicians to have a more precise measure that can be completed in a shorter amount of time.  This data -
driven approach can then support parents through targeted delivery of educational interventions or 
other support services dependent on the results of their SPEAK assessment.     
Purpose :  
Having a reliable and valid self -report measure, such as the SPEAK, is critical for researchers and 
clinicians to be able to correctly assess a parent’s knowledge and beliefs about a child’s early cognitive 
development. Too often, self -report surveys are developed without consideration of their psychometric 
properties, leading to low -quality results. The p urpose of this research protocol is to conduct cognitive 
interviews with survey respondents. Cognitive interviewing is a technique used in survey development 
through which interviewees are asked to respond to survey questions and, through guided questions 
from the researcher, explain their rationale behind the answer they chose. Cognitive interviewing can 
increase validity of a measure to ensure that researchers and survey respondents derive the same 
meaning from questions and answer choices. The TMW Center  propos es using cognitive interviews as 
part of the SPEAK CAT development process to ensure that : 
 Survey questions and  answer choices  are free of jargon and at an appropriate reading level for 
the target audience  (i.e. parents and providers working with ch ildren ages 0 -6). 
 Survey respondents are responding to the questions in a manner that is in concordance with 
their understanding of the question meaning  
 Survey questions intended to measure the same construct are responded to similarly by [CONTACT_480663], and to gauge whether some phrasing variations of the same content are easier to 
understand than others.  
 To brainstorm wording and format revisions that could make the survey more acceptable to the 
target audience.  
Responses from the cognitive interview s will allow the TMW Center to finalize an item bank of questions 
that will be used in the SPEAK CAT tool.  
Procedures  
 The TMW Center will conduct cognitive interviews with enrolled participants to guide the 
development of new SPEAK CAT survey items. In -person interviews will take place in a private room at 
the University of Chicago Medical Center or another community location (such as a local library). Virtual 
interviews will take place over a video calling p rogram, such as Zoom. Each interview will last 
approximately 1 hour  and will be audio or video recorded so that the participant’s responses may be 
reviewed and analyzed . 
 At the start of the first interview , right after consent is obtained,  the participant  will be asked to 
complete  a brief survey ( The Family Supports and Beliefs Survey) , which will measure their existing 
beliefs about the role of societal resources in supporting families and young children. Participants will 
randomly see one of four  fiction al scenarios and then be asked questions related to that scenario as well 
as items related to stress and self -efficacy. We hypothesize that the type of scenario a participant is 
presented with before taking a survey may  affect how they answer subsequent qu estions. We may also 
use these survey responses as a way to cross -check that the way participants are responding to the 
SPEAK CAT items during the interview is congruous to other measures of their beliefs.  
We will then begin the cognitive interview. Durin g each session, the participant will complete SPEAK 
survey items and then will answer interviewer questions related to these items. Survey items may be 
completed on paper o r via REDCap. The interviewer will ask questions related to the items that the 
parti cipant answered. These questions are meant to probe the design and readability of the question, 
and not the participant’s knowledge about the subject. For example,  
 What does the word ‘math subjects’ mean to you when you read this question?  
 Can you please r ephrase this question in a different way?  
 When you were answering this question, how did you interpret the difference between the 
answer choice “ definitely true ” and the answer choice “ probably true ”? 
An interview guide will be uploaded with this protocol submission. However, this will be used as a 
starting point for the interviewer. Some questions may be skipped and other questions may be asked 
based on how the respondent answers previous questions.  Additionally, as additional SPEAK CAT items 
are developed  or refined as part of the cognitive interviewing process, the interviewer may ask 
questions that are not in the guide to measure those items.  Due to variations in participant speed and 
length of interview response, some participants may be asked more inte rview questions than others 
during the one -hour session.  
 At the end of the interview, the participant will be asked to fill out an optional demographics 
form to help researchers to understand any trends in survey responses. No identifying information will  
be recorded on this survey, which will be collected on paper or through REDCap. It will be linked to their 
survey responses and interview transcripts by a study ID.  
 Participants who are interested in completing more than one interview will give verbal 
permission to keep their contact [CONTACT_480664] . There is no requirement that participants come back for more than one 
session, and they may continue to come back for as many  sessions as they’d like, or until they have been 
interviewed about all items currently under development. No participant will complete more than 5 
interviews under this protocol.  Participants who complete more than one interview will take the 
Demographics  and Family Supports and Beliefs survey only once.  
Compensation  
 For each interview a participant completes (lasting approximately 1 hour), they will receive $[ADDRESS_617697]. The maximum amount any single participant will receive in this study is 
$100 (if they choose to complete the maximum of 5 interviews). Participants who complete their 
interview in-person at the University of Chicago campus will be offered a parking voucher  or bus pass to 
cover transportation costs.  
Study Population and Recruitment  
 Approximately [ADDRESS_617698] of mouth referrals to expand 
our reach . The research team will work with the University of Chicago Cente r for Decision Research 
(CDR), who maintains a recruitment listserv of individuals interested in being contact[CONTACT_480665] a walk -in survey center . This center connects interested participants with 
available survey and interview -based studies. CDR staff will  post information about the study on their 
website , include information in their email newsletter s, and offer the study to individuals who come to 
the walk -in center. CDR staff  will not consent participants or a dminister any study procedures.  
 Interested participants will be asked to share their first name [CONTACT_480671]/or email 
address via a R EDCap survey so that the research staff can schedule and confirm their interview time 
with them. This contact [CONTACT_480666].  They will also 
be asked to complete a short screening questionnaire in REDCap pr oviding basic demographics 
information. This will allow the researchers to know basic characteristics about gender, education level, 
and parent status in advance of the first interview session, which is important in selecting what items 
that participant wi ll be asked to review. Because not all participants will have time to see each item that 
is under development, asking these screening questions is necessary to ensure that a representative 
sample sees each interview item. Participants will not be excluded from participation based on their 
responses to the screening questions except for those items that specifically ask about the exclusion 
criteria listed above.  This survey will also capture the user’s IP address, using a built in functionality in 
REDCap. We  will use this information as an additional method of detecting potential duplicates in the 
screener results. Participants will be informed  in writing  at the start of the screener that by [CONTACT_480667], their IP address will be stored.  
After compl eting the screening questionnaire, participants will be giving instructions on how to 
sign-up for an interview timeslot using calendly.com. Calendly (which has received approval to operate 
from BSD ISO) is a platform that will allow the SPEAK CAT researche rs to post their availability for 
interviews. Participants can then sign up for a time that works best for them. Time slots that are claimed 
will be automatically removed from the calendar; thereby, streamlining the sign up process.  Interested 
participants  will receive an email from the research team with a link to the Calendly page and 
instructions on how to sign up for an interview timeslot. This will include entering their name [CONTACT_480672]. Once they have selected a timeslot, they will receive a co nfirmation email with information 
about their scheduled session from the research teams BSD email address.  Calendly will be also be used 
in the same manner for participants who have given us permission to store their contact [CONTACT_480668], as 
described in the Procedures section above.  
In both instances, participants will be given the alternative option to schedule interview sessions 
with the research team dire ctly, via email or phone conversation. While we will encourage participants 
to use Calendly for ease of scheduling, maintaining this option will allow individuals to participate even if 
they are not comfortable sharing their information to the external web site of Calendly.  
Potential Risks  
Anticipated risks are minimal. Some participants may feel discomfort describing their opi[INVESTIGATOR_480658]. To mitigate this risk, we will remind participants that our questions are 
optional and are de signed to test the survey item s themselves, not the participant. Interviewers will be 
trained on cognitive interviewing techniques to limit the potential discomfort. Because the sessions will 
be audio/video recorded, there is some risk of privacy loss. How ever, all data will be saved on secure 
BSD servers and only approved research personnel will have access. Names and other identifying 
information will not be associated with the recordings.  
Potential Benefits  
We do not expect participants to benefit direct ly from their participation in this research. There may be 
a benefit to society because parents and providers can find ways to increase their knowledge and 
encourage positive behaviors to support a child’s cognitive development using the resulting SPEAK CA T 
tool.  
Data Storage and Usage  
 Survey data, including SPEAK questions answered as part of the interviews , the Family Supports 
and Beliefs Survey,  and the demographics questionnaire, will be collected on paper or electronically, via 
REDCap . If data is collected on paper, a research assistant will enter the data into the REDCap project 
and then dispose of the paper copy. Survey data responses will be stored indefinitely , and will contain 
no identifying information . Audio/video recordings of the interview sessions will be saved under an ID 
number on BSD servers and will only accessible by [CONTACT_480669]. The TMW Center  
will primarily use these recordings to qualitatively analyze interview responses. These recordings will 
also b e used to train a speech recognition algorithm that TMW Center researchers are building. The 
algorithm takes audio/video clips as an input, and conducts speaker identification i.e. predicting 
whether the speaker is male or female or child etc. and runs ana lyses to track conversational turns 
between speakers. Members of the TMW Center team may listen to segments of the audio/video files 
to validate accuracy of the algorithm.  
Audio/video files will be deleted within  14 years after the date they are collected . These recordings may 
be coded or transcribed. Transcriptions of the audio /video  file and any resulting coded data will be kept 
indefinitely.  Transcripts will be de -identified and not able to be linked back to a specific individual.  
 
Consent  
 At the start  of the first  interviewing session, the interviewer (who will be a member of research 
team , as listed on the study protocol) will read a consent script aloud to the participant, describing the 
study procedures and explaining the risks and benefits of parti cipating. The interviewer will remind the 
participant that the interview is voluntary and that they may discontinue at any time. Participants will be 
asked to verbally acknowledge whether they would like to continue with the interview. We request a 
waiver of documentation of consent, because the study is minimal risk and the consent form would be 
the only document linking the participant’s name [CONTACT_480673].  
 If a participant chooses to complete more than one interview session, they will not complete  the 
verbal consent process at each session. The interviewer will remind them of key details at the start of 
each session and let them know about any changes to procedures or risks/benefits that may have 
occurred since their last meeting.  
Statistical and Publication Plan  
 Qualitative results from the cognitive interviews will be used by [CONTACT_480670]. Non -identifiable quotes from the interviews may be used in 
publications or presentations about the SPEAK sur vey. Responses to SPEAK and demographic data may 
be used in aggregate to validate the SPEAK measure.  Responses to the Family Supports and Beliefs 
Survey will be used in aggregate to study people’s beliefs  about the role of family support s for the 
success o f children  and the relation between these beliefs and stress and self -efficacy perceptions.  TMW 
Center may publish results in scientific journals . No individually identifying information will be published 
or used in presentations without separate written c onsent from the participants.  
References  
Bruner, J. S. (1981). The social context of language acquisition. Language & Communication, 1, 
155–178 
 
Chapman, R. (2000). Children’s language learning: An interactionist perspective. Journal of 
Child Psychology a nd Psychiatry, 41, 33 –[ADDRESS_617699], C. & Richards, B. J. (1994). Input and interaction in language acquisition. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press  
 
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in the everyday experience of young 
American children.  Baltimore, MD: Brookes  
 
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1992). American parenting of language learning children: Persisting 
differences in family child interaction observed in natural home environments. Developmental 
Pyschology, 28, 1096 –1105 
 
Hoff, E. (2003), The specificity of environmental influence: Socioeconomic status affects early 
vocabulary development via maternal speech, Child Development, September/October 2003, 
74(5), 1368 -1678  
 
Huttenlocher, J., Haight, W., Bryk, A., Selzer, M., & Lyons, T. (1991). Early vocabulary growth: 
Relation to language input and gender. Development Psychology, 27, 236 –248 
 
Leung, C. Y.Y., Hernandez, M., Suskind, D.L., Enriching home language environment among 
families from low -SES backgrounds: A randomized  controlled trial of a home visiting 
curriculum, Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 2018  
 
Leung, C.Y.Y. & Suskind, D.L., What parents know matters: Parental knowledge at birth 
predicts caregiving behaviors at 9 months, Journal of Pediatrics, 2020.  
 
O'Neil -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_125415], T. M. (2009). Feasibility and benefit of parent participation in a program 
emphasizing preschool child language development while homeless. American Journal of 
Speech -Language Pathology, 18(3), 252 -263 
 
Rowe, R. L. (2008). Child -directed speech: relation to socioeconomic status, knowledge of child 
development and child vocabulary skill. Journal of Child Language, 35, 185 –205 
 
Suskind, D. L., Y., C. Y., Webber, R. J., Hundertmark, A. C., Leffel, K. R., Fuenmayor Rivas, I. 
E., & Grobman, W. A. (2018 ). Educating Parents About Infant Language Development: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. Clinical Pediatrics, 57(8), 945 –953 
 
Suskind, D., Leffel, K., Graf, E., Hernandez, M., Gunderson, E., Sapolich, S., Suskind, E., 
Leininger, L. Goldin -Meadow, S., Levine,  S. C. (2016). A parent -directed language intervention 
for children of low socioeconomic status: A randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Journal of Child 
Language, 43(2), 366 -406 
 
Suskind, D., Leffel, K. R., Hernandez, M. W., Sapolich, S. G., Suskind, E., Kirkham, E., & 
Meehan, P. (2013) An exploratory study of “Quantitative Linguistic Feedback”: Effect of LENA 
Feedback on Adult Language Production. Communication Disorders Quarterly. 34(4) 199 -209 
 