FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 1 COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : Case selection and treatment protocol for immediate dental 
implants in the esthetic zone: a controlled clinical trial.  
 
NCT number : NCT 0215458 1 
 
IRB Approval Date : 06-06-2014  
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC20130085H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 [ADDRESS_199314], indicate that the question is " not applicable ” – do not leave sections 
blank  
 
For Sections: 1. “Purpose and Objectives”; 3. “Study Design”; and 4. “Study Population,” and 5 – 12, you may copy 
and paste the relevant passages from the sponsor’s full protocol or grant application ( citing the page number and 
section is  unacceptable ). 
Section 2, “Background” is the only part of this form  where you may cite the relevant passages (page number and 
section) from the sponsor’s full protocol or grant application.  This section may be used to also describe local 
standards of practice or add information pertinent to the local IRB review of a mult icenter study.  
 
Click once on the highlighted entry in each box to provide your response.   Click the item number/letter or word, if 
hyperlinked, for detailed instructions for that question.  If your response requires inserting a table, pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103], etc, you ma y 
need to first delete the box that surrounds the answer and then insert your table or other special document.  
 
 
Title of Project :   
Case selection and treatment protocol for immediate dental implants in the esthetic zone: a controlled clinical 
trial. 
 
 
1.  Purpose and objectives.           List the purpose and objectives:  
 
1. To objectively evaluate the esthetic outcomes of Type [ADDRESS_199315] experimental and/or clinical findings leading to the formulation of your study.   
For research involving investigational drugs, describe the previously conducted animal and human studies.   
For research that involves FDA approved drugs or dev ices, describe the FDA approved uses of this drug/device in 
relation to your protocol.   
Attach a copy of the approved labeling as a product package insert or from the Physician’s Desk Reference.   
You may reference sponsor’s full protocol or grant applica tion (page number and section) or if none, ensure 
background includes references.  
 
 
 
a. Background  
 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 3 Immediate placement of implants into extraction sockets was termed “Type 1” implant installation at the 3rd ITI 
consensus conference, Gstaad, Switzerland (Hämmerle et al. 2004). Immediate implant placement (Type 1) has been 
documented as a predictable, safe and effective approach to replace extracted teeth, with success rates comparable 
to the ones reported for conventional delayed implant placement in hea led sites (Lang et al. 1994, Br ägger e t al.1996,  
Wilson et al.1998, Paolantonio et al. 2001, Covani et al. 2 003 & 2004, Chen et al.  2009, Cornelini et al., 2004 & 2005, 
Schropp et al. 2005, Ferrara et al. 2006, Juodzbalys & Wang 2007). The 4th ITI consens us conference (Stuttgart, 
[LOCATION_013], 2008) pointed out that although efforts have been made to document the esthetic outcomes of immediately 
placed implants, relatively few studies used objective parameters to evaluate esthetic results (Chen & Buser 2009).  
One of the major esthetic concerns following immediate implant placement is the recession of the facial peri -implant 
mucosa, which has been reported with variable extent and incidence rate (W öhrle 1998, Grunder 2000, Kan et al. 
2003, Cangini & Cornelini 2 005, Cornelini et al. 2005, Lindeboom et al. 2006, Wagenberg & Froum 2006, Chen et al. 
2007, Judozbalys & Wang 2007, Kan et al. 2007, Evans & Chen 2008, Palatella et al. 2008). According to these 
studies, the incidence of peri -implant mucosal recession (up  to 1mm) ranges between 8 and 40%. Moreover, studies 
reported that up to 2mm of peri -implant mucosal recession can follow immediate implant placement. There is little 
discussion that discrepancies between the positions of soft tissue margins around a tooth  and its contralateral 
counterpart in the esthetic zone can lead to an asymmetric smile and results in suboptimal esthetic outcomes, which 
may not meet patients’ expectations. Several risk indicators for peri -implant mucosal recession following immediate 
implant placement have been identified, including a thin gingival biotype (Kan et al. 2003, Chen et al. 2007, Evans & 
Chen 2008), a facial malposition of the implant (Chen et al. 2007, Evans & Chen 2008, Chen et al. 2009), and a thin 
or non -intact facial bo ne wall (Kan et al. 2007, Chen et al. 2005, 2007). Based on the recognition of these risk 
indicators, it has been suggested that immediate implant placement should only be considered as a valid treatment 
option after careful risk analysis and case selectio n are performed (Kan et al. 2003, Chen et al. 2007, 2009).  
Connective tissue grafts have been used to improve esthetic outcomes of implant therapy in esthetic sites (Grunder et 
al. 1996, Price & Price 1999, Khoury & Happe 2000, Kan et al. 2005). The most compelling evidence supporting the 
use of connective tissue grafts in conjunction with immediately placed implants derives from a prospective controlled 
clinical trial with a follow -up of up to 9 years (Bianchi & Sanfilipo 2004). In this clinical trial, si tes treated with 
subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170346]. More specifically, over 95% of the sites treated with subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170347] 
1mm or less with the free gingival margins of adjacent teeth, compared to only 80% of the sites receiving solely 
immediate implants.  
Experimental and clinical studies have shown that the void formed between the immediately placed implant and the 
bony walls of the fresh extraction socket is filled with new bone when left to heal spontaneously without any 
regenerative procedure. However, this is obtai ned at the cost of horizontal and, to a lesser extent, vertical ridge 
resorption (Paolantonio et al. 2001, Covani et al. 2003, Botticelli et al. 2004a, 2004b, Araujo et al. 2006, Chen et al. 
2007, Ferrus et al. 2010). Recent evidence from experimental and clinical studies showed that grafting marginal 
defects around immediately placed implants can limit these resorptive events (Cornelini et al. 2004, Chen et al. 2007, 
Araujo et al. 2011). This in turn, may prevent unfavorable soft tissue remodeling at impla nts placed in esthetic areas 
(Cornelini et al. 2004).  
Taken together, immediate implant placement results in similar implant survival rates as conventional delayed 
placement in healed sites. However, the occurrence of mid -facial peri -implant mucosal reces sion is a common finding 
following immediate implant placement and results in significant esthetic shortcomings. Numerous risk factors leading 
to this undesirable outcome have been identified and clinical treatment protocols have been suggested to countera ct 
their potential negative effect. Even though most authors acknowledge that risk analysis and careful case selection 
are key to achieving successful esthetic outcomes in immediately placed implants, no study has been identified in 
which parameters associ ated with development of peri -implant mucosal recession were controlled for and the esthetic 
outcomes assessed by [CONTACT_170378]. Consequently, objective guidelines for case selection and 
treatment protocols for immediate implant placement in the esthetic area remain to be established.  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 4 References:  
 
Araujo, M. G., Linder, E. & Lindhe, J. (2011) Bio -Oss collagen in the buccal gap at immediate implants: a 6 - month 
study in the dog. Clin Oral Implants Res 22, 1 -8. 
Araujo, M. G., Sukekava, F., Wenn strom, J. L. & Lindhe, J. (2006) Tissue modeling following implant placement in 
fresh extraction sockets. Clin Oral Implants Res 17, 615 -624. Belser, U. C., Grutter, L., Vailati, F., Bornstein, M. M., 
Weber, H. P. & Buser, D. (2009) Outcome evaluation of e arly placed maxillary anterior single -tooth implants using 
objective esthetic criteria: a cross -sectional, retrospective study in 45 patients with a 2 - to 4-year follow -up using pi[INVESTIGATOR_170348]. J Periodontol 80, 140 -151. 
Bianchi, A. E. & Sa nfilippo, F. (2004) Single -tooth replacement by [CONTACT_170379]: a 1 -
9-year clinical evaluation. Clin Oral Implants Res 15, 269 -277.  
Botticelli, D., Berglundh, T. & Lindhe, J. (2004) Hard -tissue alterations following immediat e implant placement in 
extraction sites. J Clin Periodontol 31, 820 -828. 
Botticelli, D., Berglundh, T. & Lindhe, J. (2004) Resolution of bone defects of varying dimension and configuration in 
the marginal portion of the peri -implant bone. An experimental study in the dog. J Clin Periodontol 31, 309 -317.  
Bragger, U., Hammerle, C. H. & Lang, N. P. (1996) Immediate transmucosal implants using the principle of guided 
tissue regeneration (II). A cross -sectional study comparing the clinical outcome [ADDRESS_199316] 
implant placement. Clin Oral Implants Res 7, 268 -276. 
Cangini, F. & Cornelini, R. (2005) A comparison between enamel matrix derivative and a bioabsorbable membrane to 
enhance healing around transmucosal immediate post -extraction impl ants. J Periodontol 76, 1785 -1792.  
Chen, S. T. & Buser, D. (2009) Clinical and esthetic outcomes of implants placed in postextraction sites. Int J Oral 
Maxillofac Implants [ADDRESS_199317], 186 -217. 
Chen, S. T., Darby, I. B., Adams, G. G. & Reynolds, E. C. (2005) A prospective clinical study of bone augmentation 
techniques at immediate implants. Clin  Oral Implants Res 16, 176 -184. 
Chen, S. T., Darby, I. B. & Reynolds, E. C. (2007) A prospective clinical study of non -submerged immediate implants: 
clinical outcomes a nd esthetic results. Clin  Oral Implants Res 18, 552 -562. 
Chen, S. T., Darby, I. B., Reynolds, E. C. & Clement, J. G. (2009) Immediate implant placement postextraction 
without flap elevation. J Periodontol 80, 163 -172.  
Cook, D. R., Mealey, B. L., Verrett, R. G., Mills, M. P., Noujeim, M. E., Lasho, D. J. & Cronin, R. J., Jr. (2011) 
Relationship between clinical periodontal biotype and labial plate thickness: An in vivo study. Int J Periodontic s 
Restorative Dent 31: 345 -354. 
Cornelini, R., Cangini, F., Covan i, U. & Wilson, T. G., Jr. (2005) Immediate restoration of implants placed into fresh 
extraction sockets for single -tooth replacement: a prospective clinical study. Int J Periodontic s Restorative Dent 25, 
439-447. 
Cornelini, R., Cangini, F., Martuscelli, G . & Wennstrom, J. (2004) Deproteinized bovine bone and biodegradable 
barrier membranes to support healing following immediate placement of transmucosal implants: a short -term 
controlled clinical trial. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 24 , 555 -563. 
Covan i, U., Barone, A., Cornelini, R. & Crespi, R. (2004) Soft tissue healing around implants placed immediately after 
tooth extraction without incision: a clinical report. Int J Oral Ma xillofac Implants 19, 549 - 553. 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 5 Covani, U., Cornelini, R. & Barone, A. (200 3) Bucco -lingual bone remodeling around implants placed into immediate 
extraction sockets: a case series. J Periodontol 74, 268 -273.  
De Rouck, T., Eghbali, R., Collys, K., De Bruyn, H. & Cosyn, J. (2009) The gingival biotype revisited: transparency of 
the periodontal probe through the gingival margin as a method to discriminate thin from thick gingiva. J Clin 
Periodontol 36, 428 -433. 
Evans, C. D. & Chen, S. T. (2008) Esthetic outcomes of immediate implant placements. Clin Oral Implants R es 19, 
73-80. 
Ferra ra, A., Galli, C., Mauro, G. & Macaluso, G. M. (2006) Immediate provisional restoration of postextraction 
implants for maxillary single -tooth replacement. Int J Periodontic s Restorative Dent 26, 371 -377. 
Ferrus, J., Cecchinato, D., Pjetursson, E. B., Lang,  N. P., Sanz, M. & Lindhe, J. (2010) Factors influencing ridge 
alterations following immediate implant placement into extraction sockets. Cl in Oral Implants Res 21, 22 -29. 
Grunder, U. (2000) Stability of the mucosal topography around single -tooth implants and adjacent teeth: 1 - year 
results. Int J Periodont ics Restorative Dent 20, 11 -17. 
Grunder, U., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_067], H. P. & Gaberthuel, T. (1996) Implant -supported single tooth replacement in the aesthetic 
region: a complex challenge. Pract Periodontics Aes thet Den t 8, 835 -842, quiz 844.  
Hammerle, C. H., Chen, S. T. & Wilson, T. G., Jr. (2004) Consensus statements and recommended clinical 
procedures regarding the placement of implants in extraction sockets. International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial 
Implants [ADDRESS_199318], 26 -28. 
Juodzbalys, G. & Wang, H. L. (2007) Soft and hard tissue assessment of immediate implant placement: a case 
series. Clin  Oral Implants Res 18, 237 -243. 
Kan, J. Y., Rungcharassaeng, K. & Lozada, J. (2003) Immediate placement and provisionaliza tion of maxillary 
anterior single implants: 1 -year prospective study. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 18, 31 -39. 
Kan, J. Y., Rungcharassaeng, K. & Lozada, J. L. (2005) Bilaminar subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170349]. J Calif Dent Assoc 33, 865 -871.  
Kan, J. Y., Rungcharassaeng, K., Sclar, A. & Lozada, J. L. (2007) Effects of the facial osseous defect morphology on 
gingival dynamics after immediate tooth replacement and guided bone r egeneration: 1 -year results. J Oral Maxillofac 
Surg 65, 13 -19. 
Khoury, F. & Happe, A. (2000) The palatal subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170350]: a clinical report. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 15 , 415 -418.  
Lang, N. P., Bragger, U., Hammerle, C. H. & Sutter, F. (1994) Immediate transmucosal implants using the principle of 
guided tissue regeneration. I. Rationale, clinical procedures and 30 -month results. Clin Oral Implants Res 5, 154 -163. 
Lindeboo m, J. A., Tjiook, Y. & Kroon, F. H. (2006) Immediate placement of implants in periapi[INVESTIGATOR_170351]: a 
prospective randomized study in 50 patients. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 101, 705 -710. 
Palattella, P., Torsello, F. & Cordaro, L . (2008) Two -year prospective clinical comparison of immediate replacement 
vs. immediate restoration of single tooth in the esthetic zone. Clin Oral Implants Res 19, 1148 - 1153.  
Paolantonio, M., Dolci, M., Scarano, A., d'Archivio, D., di Placido, G., Tumini, V. & Pi[INVESTIGATOR_69029], A. (2001) Immediate 
implantation in fresh extraction sockets. A controlled clinical and histological study in ma n. J Periodontol 72, 1560 -
1571.  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 6 Price, R. B. & Price, D. E. (1999) Esthetic restoration of a single -tooth dental implant  using a subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170352]: a case report with 3 -year follow -up. Int J Periodontics Restorative Dent 19, 92 -101.  
Schropp, L., Isidor, F., Kostopoulos, L. & Wenzel, A. (2005) Interproximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_170353] -tooth implants: a controlled clinical trial. Int J Oral Ma xillofac Implants 20, 753 - 761. 
Wagenberg, B. & Froum, S. J. (2006) A retrospective study of 1925 consecutively placed immediate implants from 
1988 to 2004. Int J Oral  Maxillofac Implants 21, 71 -80. 
Wilson, T. G., Jr., Schenk, R., Buser, D. & Cochran, D. (1998) Implants placed in immediate extraction sites: a report 
of histologic and histometric analyses of human biopsies. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 13, 333 -341.  
Wohrle, P. S. (1998) Single -tooth replacement in the aesthetic zone with immediate provisionalization: fourteen 
consecutive case reports. Pract Periodontics Aesthet Dent 10, 1107 -1114; quiz 1116.  
 
 
 
b. Current practice  
Type [ADDRESS_199319] care 
procedure.    
 
                  
3.  Study Design.  
Describe the study design (e.g., single/double blind, parallel, crossover, etc.)  Consider inserting a scheme to visually 
present the study design.  
 
This controlled, randomized clinical trial (RCT) is designed to achieve optimal esthetic and clinical outcomes in 
implants placed immediately following tooth extraction (Type 1 implant placement) in combination with guided bone 
regeneration .  Sites with a thin per iodontal biotype will also recei ve a subepi[INVESTIGATOR_68987] , while sites 
with thick tissue biotype will not receive any connective tissue graft.  The results of the proposed clinical trial will 
provide clinicians with guidelines for case selection and treatment protocols for immediate implant placement in the 
esthetic zone.    
This study will evaluate esthetics objectively using calibrated, blinded examiners to determine the api[CONTACT_3252] -coronal 
position of the mid -facial and proximal soft tissue margins and by [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_170354] (PES/WES) 
described by [CONTACT_170380]. (2009). Secondary treatment outcomes will include: probing pocket depth ([COMPANY_003] ), modified 
plaque index (mPI), modified sulcus bleeding index (mSBI), early and late failures, survival rate, success rate, and 
radiographic bone level changes.  
Extraction sites for the study will include maxillary first premolars and anterior teeth with intact adjacent teeth. Implants 
placed for this study will be SLActive surface, bone level design, Straumann BL RC (Bone Level Regular Cross -fit) 
4.1mm or BL NC (Bone Level Narrow Cross -fit) 3.3mm diameter implants at 8, 10, 12 or 14mm in length.  
Immediate  implant placement (Type 1) resulting in a horizontal defect dimension (HDD) (gap) will receive freeze -dried 
bone allograft (FDBA) (Straumann Allograft GC®). Moreover, the site will be slightly overcontoured with FDBA (FDBA 
will be applied on the external side of the socket) and will be covered by a resorbable membrane (BioGide®).  
Additionally, in sites with a thin tissue biotype, a subepi[INVESTIGATOR_170355] p. The harvested connective tissue grafts will be 
10x15x1mm  (length x width x thickness)  in size. Flap adaptation and closure will allow for a partially submerged 
transmucosal healing.  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 7  
 
                    
4.  Study Population(s).  
You will be drawing subjects from one or more populations.  In medical research, for example, a population can be individuals with 
type 2 diabetes controlled with diet, or a population of healthy individuals.  In social behavioral research, a population ca n be 
individ uals attending an education program, etc.  
4.a.  How many different populations  are you enrolling in this study?   One 
4.b.  For each different population , provide a short descriptive label :   
               (e.g., normal -healthy, diabetics, parents, children, etc.)  
Copy and paste additional labels as needed  1. Normal healthy  
 
 
                   
4.c.   For each specific population  identified in 4b, provide the following information in the table provided below.  
                                          (For studies with more than one  population, copy all of table 4.c. and paste to insert additional tables.)  
Population # 1  Population Descriptive Label:   Normal healthy  
(1) Identify the criteria for inclusion : 
1. The patient is 18 years or older.  
2. Ability to understand and provide informed consent before starting the study.  
3. Ability and willingness to comply with all study requirements.  
4. The patient, if of child -bearing potential, has a negative urine pregnancy tes t.  
5. Adequate oral hygiene to allow for implant therapy consistent with standards of care.  
6. Adequate bone volume to accommodate the planned endosseous dental implant placement according to immediate 
placement protocols utilizing Straumann Bone Level implant s RC 4.1mm or Bone Level Implant NC 3.3 mm at 8, 
10,12  or 14mm in length.  
7.  One tooth in the anterior maxilla (first pre -molar to first pre -molar) requiring extraction resulting in a single - tooth gap 
planned to be restored with a dental implant as determin ed by [CONTACT_102]’s dental provider.  
8. The site to be treated is surrounded by [CONTACT_170381].  
9. Except the site to be treated, none of the maxillary incisors, canines and first pre -molars display marginal soft tissue 
recession.  
10. Following extraction, intact extraction socket bony walls are present.  
11. Primary stability of implant consistent with standards of care is achieved at the time of implant placement.  
12. Patient must be able to pay for fees related to the surgical i mplant placement  related to extraction, grafting of the 
implant site,  and half of the cost of the crown at the time of implant placement.  
 
(2) Identify the criteria for exclusion : 
1. Patient reports tobacco use within the last five years.  Tobacco use for this study is defined as a current 
smoking habit with moderate or heavy smoking (more than 10 cigarettes per day) or tobacco chewing use . 
2. History of alcoholism or drug abuse within the past 5 years.  
3. Severe wear with an  etiology of bruxism or clenching habits.  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 8 4. Patient has significant untreated periodontal disease (grade III or IV), caries, or clinical or radiographic signs of 
infection within two adjacent tooth positions of implant area.  
5. History of H IV infection, Hepatitis B or C.  
6. Patients with a history of systemic disease that precludes standard dental implant therapy or alters daily 
activities to a level consistent with ASA III classification (including cardiovascular, hepatic, renal, 
gastrointest inal, metabolic, neurologic, pulmonary, endocrine, autoimmune, or psychiatric disorders).  
7. Presence of local inflammation or mucosal diseases such as lichen planus.  
8. Patient history consistent with high risk for subacute bacterial endocarditis.  
9. Current hematological disorder or warfarin  (or similar) therapy.  
10. Patient has a disease that affects bone metabolism, such as, but not limited to, osteoporosis, hyperthyroidism, 
hyperparathyroidism, congenital connective tissue disorders (e.g., osteogenesi s imperfecta), or Paget’s 
disease.  
11. Patient is taking medications or having treatments known to have an effect on bone turnover, including: 
thiazide diuretics, calcitonin, systemic steroids, bisphosphonates, vitamin D (>800 IU/day), estrogen or 
progesterone  therapy.  
12. Current steroid treatment: defined as any person who within the last two years has received for two weeks a 
dose equivalent to 20 mg hydrocortisone.  
13. Patient currently undergoing chemotherapy.  
14. Patient history of radiation treatment to the head or  neck.  
15. Physical or mental handicaps that would interfere with patient’s ability to exercise good oral hygiene on a 
regular basis.  
16. Use of any investigational drug or device within the 30 day period immediately prior to implant surgery.  
17. Patient is pregnant .  
18. Extraction sites having anatomic conditions that preclude immediate implant placement.  
 
(3) Recruitment  Process – identifying potential subjects  
Describe plans about how the population will be identified  for the purpose of recruiting.  
(e.g., database search, personal contacts, referrals, patients under the care of the research team, etc.)  
 
Subje cts will be drawn from both new and existing patients of the UTHSCSA  Graduate Periodontics Clinic. No other 
means of identifying subjects will be used.  No chart review or retrospective search for patients will be performed.  
Subjects will be those referred  for periodontal treatment and dental implant therapy.  
 Who will access PHI to identify  potential participants?  Select one   
  
 Only t hose with existing legitimate access to PHI will use it to identify potential subjects  
  
 There is a n eed to allow those without existing legitimate access to PHI to use it to identify potential subjects  
         (submit Form J,  HIPAA Waiver)  

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 9 (4) Recruitment  Process – first contact  
[CONTACT_170382]  
(e.g., researchers w ill contact [CONTACT_170383]).   
Describe how those making initial contact [INVESTIGATOR_27799] a legitimate access to the subjects’ identity and the subjects’ infor mation. 
(Consider whether a HIPAA Waiver is  needed to disclose PHI to member of the research team  who do not have legitimate 
access.)  
Initial patient contact [CONTACT_170384]. Patients meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be informed of all 
procedures and responsibilities of this study. All the treating dentists, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -PI [INVESTIGATOR_170356].  
(5) Recruitment  process – setting  
Describe the setting  in whi ch an individual will be initially approached.   
(e.g., private room, inpatient unit, waiting area, group setting, over internet, over phone, in public).  Also, describe all 
interaction between the research staff and the potential subject between the time they contact [CONTACT_170385] a consent form (including pre -screening activities -see instructions for detailed guidance)  
The patient will be initially approached by [CONTACT_170386] a semi -private operatory (three  
floor to ceiling walls and one area open to a central walkway). All advantages, disadvantages,  and risks wi ll be 
identified. Patients who agree to participate will be asked to read, discuss with the treating doctor, and sign an 
informed consent document. The informed consent will be obtained prior to performing any study -related procedures.  If 
interested  and if the inclusion and exclusion criteria are met at the time of tooth extraction the patient will be enrolled in 
the study.  
(6) Recruitment  process - advertisements  
Will any advertising  be used?   
 Yes 
(attach)   
 No  
 Pending (will submit an 
amendment after approval)  
If yes, please see Section 4, Form L for instructions on attaching copi[INVESTIGATOR_170357].  Advertisements must be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_70647].  
(7) Consent Process  
Describe the consent/assent procedures  that will be used by [CONTACT_5051].   
• Include how:  information is provided; the consent interview is conducted; the consent is signed.  
• Identify t he study staff who wi ll conduct the consent interview by [CONTACT_170387] (e.g., investigator, research nurse).  
* If the consent process of a single subject will involve more than one member of the research team, describe how this 
process will be coordinated from start to finish.  
** If you expect this population will have individuals likely  to have diminished decisio n-making capacity  
(not including incompetent  or impaired decision making capacity ), describe the assessment process for determining whether 
the individual is capable of giving informed consent (i.e., eval uation criteria, time intervals)  
Once it is determined that the inclusion and exclusion criteria are both met, the patient will be informed of all risks, 
advantages, and disadvantages of the study treatment with [CONTACT_170401] -Ba (PI) or Dr DeGroot (Resi dent in periodontics 
for whom this research is his Master’s project) in the afor ementioned clinical set ting. The consent form will be signed 
by [CONTACT_11275] , one of the dentists from the graduate periodontics clinic on the research team  completing the 
consent process, and a witness.  
 
(8) Consent Process  – time between initial contact [CONTACT_170388] g informed consent, whether there is any waiting period between informing the prospective 
subject and obtaining consent.  (e.g., take consent home, waiting period of X hours, after consulting with family members, 
etc.) 
Following an informational discussion with the prospective subject , consent will be obtained before surgery (visit 
2).Time to think about the study and allow for the patients to read over the consent form outside of the clinical setting 
will be offered.  If the patient would like to become a subject for entry into the study, he or she can do so immediately or 
following a waiting period of up to the surgery (visit 2), typi[INVESTIGATOR_158430] 2 weeks. This is up to the discretion of the 
patient . 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 10 (9) Describe measures taken to minimize  the p ossibility of coercion  or undue influence  during consent.   
The patient will be presented with the option of enrolling in the study only if inclusion and exclusion criteria are met. 
After the purpose of the research project has been explained to the patient by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Huynh -Ba (PI) or Dr DeGroot 
(Resident in periodontics for whom this research is his Master’s project) , the consent process will be completed by [CONTACT_170389]. The patient will have at least 2 weeks  if he/she desires to do so, to consider whether or not they wish 
to participate in the study  (refer to point (8) on the previous page) . Potential research subjects will be reminded that the 
participation in the research is only done a t their own discretion .  
(10) Will subjects from this population  be assigned to different research groups?   (e.g., treatment and control group)  
 
 Yes  
 No 
If yes , list the groups by [CONTACT_4859] a short descriptive title for each group.             
  E.g., experimental group A , B, etc., control group, etc. -  these labels are needed for the Risk: Benefit Analysis section   
Test group: Thin periodontal biotype  
Control group: Thick periodontal biotype  
 
                   
5.  Informed Consent for Research Involving Non -English Speaking Subjects  – choose either A, B or C 
A.  
  N/A.  The primary investigator for this study will request a waiver of consent for all subjects in this study. (go to #6 ) 
  N/A   This study does not involve  interaction with living in dividuals; (limited to use of identifiable information) . (go to #6 ) 
 
OR 
B.   
 Only individuals who speak English will be enrolled .  (if checked select one of the two statements below)  
  
 There is no expected direct benefit for those participating. (go to #6 ) 
  
 There is an expected direct benefit for those participating.  Excluding non -English speaking individuals is 
acceptable because: (insert the rationale for excluding  this population below  -- then go to #6 ) 
  [Insert rationale here]  
 
OR 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 11 C.   
 Individuals who do not speak English will be enrolled .    
The translated consent will be submitted to the IRB:         
Select one                                                                                                    Form B, item 12 should be checked  
 
 
 Immediately following approval of the English consent.   
(go to c(1) and c(2) below ) 
 
 
 Only after a potential non -English speaking participant is identified.  Since this plan will delay enrollment 
pending IRB approval of a translated consent, provide justification that prospective non -English speaking 
subjects will not be excluded from benef icial research.   
Choose one of the choices below : 
 
  
 There is no expected direct benefit for those participating.    (go to  c(1) and c(2) below ) 
 
  
 There is an expected direct benefit for those participating.   
Provide justification why the delay is acceptable below , then  (go to c(1) and c(2)below ) 
 
  The treatments provided in this study are elective in nature and any delay in treatment required 
for a translation into Spanish would be acceptable because they would not have any adverse 
effect on patient health.  
 C (1)  If you are recruiting non -English speaking subjects, Describe the process for obtaining informed consent from 
prospective subjects in their respective language (or the legally authorized representative’s respective language).  
 
 It is expected that any non -English speaking subject would be a subject speaking Spanish as a primary language. Informed 
consent would be obtained using a Spanish translation of the informed consent document. In addition, [ADDRESS_199320].  
 C (2)   In order to ensure that individuals are appropriately informed about the study when English is their second -language, 
describe a plan for evaluating the level of English comprehension, and the threshold for providing a translation, or explain 
why an evaluation would not be necessary.  
 
 Each subject for whom English is a second language will be evaluated for comprehension of English by [CONTACT_5978] a simple 
half-page patient treatment authorization form that we use in our clinic for all patients (which has English on one side and 
Spanish on the other).  If the subject has any difficulty in comprehending this form, he/she will interact with one of our 
Spanish speaking clinic st aff members to determine how comfortable the subject feels with the English document.  If the 
subject expresses any reservation about his/her comprehension, a Spanish informed consent document will be provided.  
 
                   
6.  Research Plan / Description of the Research Methods:   
6.a.  Provide a comprehensive narrative  describing the research methods .   
     Provide the order in which tests/procedures will be performed ,  
         the setting  for these events and a description of the methods used to protect privacy  during the study.   
     Provide the plan for data analysis  (include as applicable the sample size calculation ) 
Below is a schematic illustration of the stu dy design.  
 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 12  
 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 13 • Visit 1: Screening Examination  
Part of standard care, a  complete medical and dental history of each patient will be obtained and reviewed with 
the patient. The overall health of the periodontium will be assessed.  All patients will be informed of any disease 
findings from the examination and will undergo a hygiene phase of therapy that will include oral hygiene 
instructions, scaling, root planing, and an occlusal adjustment (if needed), provided patients have not had this 
treatment in the last three months. The initial treatment of scaling and root planing, oral hygiene instructions, and 
maintenance of good plaque control pre -surgically are identical whether the patients are involved in this study or 
not. All the aforementioned steps will be carried out by [CONTACT_170390]. This part of the treatment is 
called the hygienic phase or phase one therapy.  
 
If the patient presents with a situation that might fit the indication of the study, i.e. the patient needs one tooth to 
be extracted (including maxillary  first premolars, canines or incisors) and replaced with a dental implant, the 
treating dentist will get [CONTACT_170402] -Ba, or [CONTACT_170403] DeGroot  to perform the following steps:  
• Explanation to the patient of the purposes of the study and the planned procedur es related to the study.  
• Explanation to the patient of the risks and possible complications of participation in the study.   
• The patient shall be notified that inclusion in the study is conditional upon satisfying the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria.  
• Patient will be given the opportunity during the appointment to ask any question that he/she may have. The 
consent form will be given to the patient for r eview and time, until visit 2 (but not shorter than 2 weeks), will 
be given to the patient to  sign the Implant Study Consent form if he/she decided to participate in the study.  
The patient may sign the consent immediately if he/she would like to do so.  
 
As part of standard care for dental implant placement, the patient will have cone beam computed tomograp hy 
(CT) taken in the UTHSCSA radiology department. All the diagnostic work pertaining to the dental implant 
placement, as per standard care, will be performed and/or coordinated by [CONTACT_170391].  
 
Impressions will be m ade prior to the surgical visit and poured in stone to obtain initial study casts  
 
Once the patient has successfully gone through phase one therapy, the patient will be given an appointment for 
the extraction of the tooth, i.e. visit 2.  
 
• Visit 2: Extracti on, Final enrollment and Implant placement  
• If the patient has agreed to sign the consent form it will be obtained from him/her. If not, standard care will 
be provided and the patient will not be included in the study.  
• At the day of the planned extraction, the medical history will be updated.  
• Female patients of child -bearing potential will complete a urine pregnancy  test provided free -of-charge (a 
negative result is required to enter the study).  
• Patient’s periodontal biotype will be determined by [CONTACT_170392]. This will be done by 
[CONTACT_170393][INVESTIGATOR_170358] . Additionally, a periodontal probe will be placed in the gingival sulcus and jud ged as 
either visible (thin tissue) or not visible (thick tissue) in order to confirm the finding. Patients will then be 
assigned to either the treatment group (thin tissue biotype) or the control group (thick tissue biotype)  
• Photographs will all be taken perpendicular to the  facial surface  of the site of interest surrounded by 1 tooth 
and a half on each side . Photographs at all subsequent visits will be taken in a similar fashion.  
Assessment of soft tissue dimensions  including mid -buccal mucosa, proximal p api[INVESTIGATOR_170359], at baseline, i.e. at the time of i mplant placement;  at [ADDRESS_199321] implant 
placement;  and immediately , 3, 6, and 12 months after implant loading . Measurements will be made on the 
photographs taken from the  casts. Photographs  will be taken intraorally with a periodontal probe as a 
calibration reference . Measurements  will be performed on the digital photographs of the casts and intra -
orally using software ( Gingival Status Software ). Mid -buccal and pro ximal measurements of mucosal tissues 
will be based on linear references from adjacent incisal edges . 
• A patient customized bite -block film holder will be made. Duralay resin ( Reliance Dental Mfg Co .) will be 
fitted around a stock plastic film holder and al lowed to set in the patient’s mouth while he/she will be biting 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 14 down. The impression of the patient’s occlusion in the Duralay resin will allow reproducing accurately the 
positioning of the film in the patient’s mouth, thus allowing the recording of reprod ucible periapi[INVESTIGATOR_170360], i.e. the site of extraction and the prospective implant placement site. This 
patient individualized film -holder will be used for every periapi[INVESTIGATOR_170361] (includ ing visit 2 , 6, 9, 10, 11, and 12 ). A pre -operative periapi[INVESTIGATOR_170362].  
• Prior to surgery, the patient will be instructed to rinse with an 0.12% chlorh exidine solution for one minute as 
per standard care.  
• At the time of surgery, local anesthesia and, at the patient’s request, conscious sedation will be 
administered according to patient need and investigator preference. Patients may be attached, at the 
investigator’s discretion, to an automated vital signs monitor for continuous monitoring of blood pressure, 
pulse rate, electrocardiogram, blood oxygen saturation, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_1520].  
• Extraction will be performed with a  minimal  flap elevation , if needed, to al low evaluation of the socket walls.  
• Following tooth extraction, a final determination of enrollment into the study will be conducted based on 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• The thickness of the buccal wall  plate of the socket will be measured using a caliper  [ADDRESS_199322]  
• If meeting study criteria, the full mucoperiosteal flap will be extended with releasing incisions as needed and 
the subject will have the implant placed according to the following guidelines:  
In the sagittal plane (Mesio -Distal): The implant will be placed at least 1mm away from the adjacent root  
surfaces.   
In the vertical plane (Corono -Api[INVESTIGATOR_2855]): The mid -facial implant shoulder will be placed approximately [ADDRESS_199323] (Buccal -Lingual): The mid -facial implant shoulder will be placed approximately 2mm  
lingually to the internal border of the buccal socket wall as suggested by [CONTACT_33336]. 2007.  
• Following immediate implant placement, the void between th e implant and bone walls socket , i.e. the 
horizontal defect dimension (HDD), will be filled using FDBA (Straumann Allograft GC®). The implant site 
will be overcontoured with FDBA on the external aspect of the  extraction site and will be covered by a 
resorbable collagen membrane (BioGide®).  
• A 2mm high healing abutment will be placed on the implant before being submerged.  
• Intraoral photographs will be taken after implant installation and before GBR.  
• For sites w ith a thin periodontal biotype , a connective tissue graft taken from the palate will be secured to 
the buccal flap.  
• Flap adaptation and suturing will be performed, leaving the implant to heal in a partially submerged fashion.  
• A standardized radiograph (u sing a bite -block) will be taken from the implant site.  
• Post-operative measures will include antibiotics coverage , possibly methylprednisolone  (Medrol Dosepack)  
and prescription of a  0.12% Chlorhexidine mouthrinse to be used twice daily for one minute over  the course 
of two weeks.  All these medications are used as part of standard care procedures.  
 
• Visit 3: Suture removal  
• Patients will return 7 -14 days after surgery for suture removal and observation of wound healing  
 
• Visits 4 : Post -operative visit at 1 month after implant placement   
• The patients will return one month (± 1 4 days) after placement for observation of wound healing  
 
• Visit 5: Post -operative visit at 2 months  after implant placement  
• The patients will return at two months (± 14  days) after implant placement for asse ssment of soft tissue 
contours  
 
• Visit 6: Post -operative visit at 3  months after implant placement  
• The patients will return at 3  months (± 14 days) after implant placement for assessment of soft tissue 
dimensions as described under Visit 2.  
• Intraoral photographs will be taken.  
• Impression will be taken  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 15 • Second stage uncovery of the implant will be performed  
 
• Visit 7: Post -operative visit at 2 weeks after second stage surgery  
• The patients will return at 2 weeks ( ± 7 days)  after second stage surgery for the observation of wound healing  
• The patient will be referred back to his/her dental practitioner for the completion of the prosthetic  procedure.  
 
• Visit 8 and 9: Post loading control visits  
• As soon as the patient has received his/her temporary crown (visit 8) and/or his definitive crown (visit 9), 
these visits will allow the examiners to assess the contour, contact [CONTACT_170394] o f the prostheses 
and appropriate feedback will be provided to the restorative dentist.  
• Evaluation will be performed after delivery of the definitive crown for assessment of soft tissue dimensions 
(mid-buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257]) (visit 9 only).  
• Intraoral  photographs will be taken  (Visits 8 and 9)  
• Impressions will  be taken  for assessment of soft tissue dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_9387]) (visit 9 
only)  
• A standardized radiograph  (using a bite block)  will be taken of the implant site  (visit 9 only)  
• Clinical parameters including [COMPANY_003], mPI, and mSBI will be recorded (visit  9 only)  
Clinical parameters including probing pocket depth ([COMPANY_003]), modified plaque index (mPI), modified sulcus 
bleeding index (mSBI) will be recorded using a periodontal probe at 6 si tes around the implant.  
Probing pocket depth will be measured using a periodontal probe inserted in the peri -implant sulcus with a light 
force (approximately 15N) to the nearest millimeter. The mPI [INVESTIGATOR_170363]. (1984). Hence, using a periodontal probe, the different values recorded are 
described thereafter:  
Modified plaque index: 0: No detection of plaque  
                                   1: Plaque only recognized by [CONTACT_170395]-implant mucosal margin  
                                   2: Plaque can be seen by [CONTACT_170396]  
                                   3: Abundance of soft matter  
Modified sulcus bleeding index:  
                                   0 No bleeding when a periodontal probe is passed along the peri -implant mucosal                                                       
margin  
                                   1 Isolated bleeding spot visible  
                                   2 Blood forms confluent red line along the margin  
                                   3 Heavy or profuse bleeding  
 
• PES/WES scores will be determined (visit 9 only)  
 
• Visit 10: Po st-operative visit at 3 months after implant loading   
• Evaluation will be performed at 3 months (± 14  days) after implant loading for assessment of soft tissue 
dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257]).  
• Intraoral photographs will be taken.  
• Impression will be taken for assessment of soft tissue dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257]).  
• Clinical parameters including [COMPANY_003], mPI [INVESTIGATOR_170364].  
• A standardized radiograph (using a bite -block) will be taken from the implant site.  
• PES/WES scores will be determined.  
 
• Visit 11: Post -operative visit at 6 months after implant loading  
• Evaluation  will be performed at 6 months (± 21 days) after implant loading for assessment of soft tissue 
dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257]).  
• Intraoral photographs will be taken.  
• Impression will be taken for assessment of soft tissue dimensions (mid -bucca l and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257]).  
• Clinical parameters including [COMPANY_003], mPI [INVESTIGATOR_170364].  
• A standardized radiograph (using a bite -block) will be taken from the implant site.  
• PES/WES scores will be determined.  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 16  
• Visit 12: Post -operative visit at 12 mon ths after implant loading  
• Final evaluation will be perfo rmed at 12 months (± 30  days) after implant loading  for assessment of soft 
tissue dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257])  
• Intraoral photographs will be taken  
• Impression will be taken for assessment of soft tissue dimensions (mid -buccal and proximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_1257])  
• Clinical parameters including [COMPANY_003], mPI [INVESTIGATOR_170364]  
• A standardized radiograph (using bite -block) will be taken from the implant site  
• PES/WES scored will be determined  
 
The following section described how the PES/WES scores are recorded. This section and is reproduced from 
the original article by [CONTACT_170380]. 2009 (Belser UC, Grütter L, Vailati F, Bornstein MM, Weber HP, Buser D. 
Outcome evaluation of early placed maxillary  anterior single -tooth implants using objective esthetic criteria: a 
cross -sectional, retrospective study in 45 patients with a 2 - to 4-year follow -up using pi[INVESTIGATOR_170365]. J Periodontol. 2009 Jan;80(1):140 -51.): 
“PES: In contrast to the original proposal, the PES comprises the following five variables: mesial papi[INVESTIGATOR_9387], 
distal papi[INVESTIGATOR_9387], curvature of the facial mucosa, level of the facial mucosa, and root convexity/soft tissue color 
and texture at the facial aspect of the implant site.  
A scor e of 2, 1, or 0 is assigned to all five PES parameters. The two papi[INVESTIGATOR_170366] (mesial and distal) are 
assessed for the complete presence (score 2), incomplete presence, (score 1), or absence (score 0) of 
papi[INVESTIGATOR_170367]. The curvature of the facial sof t tissue line, also defined as the line of emergence of the 
implant restoration from the soft tissues, is evaluated as being identical (score 2), slightly different (score 1), 
or markedly different (score 0) compared to the natural control tooth and, thus,  provides a natural 
symmetrical or disharmonious appearance. The level of the facial peri -implant mucosa is scored by  
[CONTACT_170397] (score 2), a slight (≤1 mm) 
discrepancy (score 1), or a maj or (≥1 mm) discrepancy (score 0).Finally, the proposed index combines three 
additional specific soft tissue parameters as one variable: the presence, partial presence, or absence of a 
convex profile (in analogy to a root eminence) on the facial aspect, as well as the related mucosal color and 
surface texture. The latter two elements basically reflect the presence or absence of an inflammatory 
process, which, in turn,  may adversely affect the appearance of an anterior single -tooth implant restoration.   
To at tain a score of  2 for this combination variable, all three parameters are more or less identical compared 
to the control tooth. A value of 1 is assigned if two criteria are fulfilled, whereas a score of 0 is assigned if 
none or only one parameter matches t he control site.  
The five described parameters (5 x 2) add up, under optimum conditions, to a score of 10.  
WES:  The WES specifically focuses on the visible part of the implant restoration itself (i.e., the part of the 
implant crown that emerges from the pe ri-implant mucosa) and is based on the five following parameters: 
general tooth form; outline and volume of the clinical crown; color, which includes the assessment of the 
dimension’s hue and value; surface texture; and translucency and characterization.  
A score of 2, 1, or [ADDRESS_199324] possible combined PES/WES score is 20, which represents a close match of the peri -
implant soft tissue conditions and the clinical single - tooth implant crown compared to the respective features 
present at the contralateral natural tooth site. To facilitate the objective appreciation of some of the 
parameters, the fabrication of study casts, in addition to standardized clinical photographs, is indispensable. 
The clinical photographs are primarily used to assess general tooth/crown form, tooth/crown color, incisal 
translucency and characterization, as w ell as soft tissue color, curvature, and level. The study cast evaluation 
completes the PES/WES assessment, facilitating the objective appreciation of crown outline, volume, and 
surface texture, in addition to root convexity and soft tissue texture.”  
L) Patient Withdrawal Criteria:  
Patients will be discontinued from the study prematurely if:  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 17 - The patient is non -compliant with the study protocol.  
- An adverse event occurs, whether or not Study Device related, which precludes continued treatment.  
- The pat ient requests to be withdrawn from the study.  
- The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_170368]’s best interest.  
If a patient withdraws from the study at any time either at his request or at the Principal Investigator’s discretion, 
the reason(s) for withdrawal will be recorded by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_170369] . The patient will be entitled to be treated according to the standard care irrespective of his/her study 
participation status.  
 
• Data Analysi s: 
 
After definitive crown delivery and at 3, 6, and 12 months after implant loading, the PES/WES score will be 
recorded for all implant supported crowns.   
Additional outcome measures will include position of the peri -implant mucosal margins, clinical parameters 
([COMPANY_003], mPI, mSBI), evaluation of radiographic bone level changes, frequency of implant failure, clinical 
complications such as infections, or study -related adverse events. Implant failure will include clinical lateral 
mobility of the implant, per i- implant radiolucency with clinical signs of infection associated with the implant to 
include suppuration, pain, and swelling. These parameters will be measured over the [ADDRESS_199325] with 
p<0.05. Difference of mid facial gingival height and interproximal papi[INVESTIGATOR_170370] t 
test with a p<0.05.  
• Sample size:  
The objective of this study is to characterize the mucosal healing patterns following tooth extraction, and 
immediate implant placement procedures. Ultimately, it is the resultant soft tissue position that will determine 
esthetic success. As such, a clinic ally significant treatment difference > 1.0mm in buccal soft tissue margin 
position in an api[INVESTIGATOR_170371]. Based on previous studies of soft tissue 
changes associated with implant therapy in which standard deviations  ranged from 0.[ADDRESS_199326] differences 
between the thin and thick periodontal biotype groups, 13 patients per treatment group will be required using a 
two-sample comparison of means with 80% power and p=0.05 considered statistically significant. Given the 
potential for several patients to withdraw from the study protocol, we anticipate enrolling 34  patients  for each 
treatment group in order to obtain 13  patients completing the study protocol.  
• Risks:  
 
The treatment modalities  evaluated in the present study are well -documented and accepted treatment 
modalities. Accordingly, the risks associated are not specific to the study but are related to any kind of 
implant/periodontal surgical procedure.  
Risks to a patient participating in this study include those associated with any periodontal surgery. The most 
frequently stated risks are excessive bleeding, nerve damage, damage to the surrounding soft tissue, and 
infection, plus dehiscence or migration of the graft materials. Additional risks are associated with the use of 
general or local anesthesia and, at the patient’s request, conscious sedation. The potential risk for any of the 
above adverse side effects is le ss than 1% (Curtis, et al. 1985). Post -surgical pain ranging from mild to severe 
occurs virtually 100% of the time.   
As with any dental implant placement and as per standard care it will be explained to the patient that  there are 
certain inherent and potential risks in any procedure that include, but are not limited to: swelling; pain; bruising;  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 18 recession of the gums,  increased tooth sensitivity; temporary or perm anent increased tooth mobility,  unaesthetic 
exposure of cr own margins; stretching of the corners of the mouth which may result in cracking and bruising; 
restricted opening or discomfort in the jaw muscles or joint(s); possible nerve injury with change in sensation 
and/or numbness to the lip, chin, gingiva (gums, including palate), teeth and/or tongue which may be temporary 
or permanent; infection; damage to adjacent teeth, nasal cavity, and sinuses; premature exposure of barrier 
membrane; loss or migration of bone graft out of defect; sloughing of tissue graft; gu m recession (shrinkage); 
failure of implants to heal/integrate with surrounding bone ; medical emergencies requiring life saving procedures 
and/or admission to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
Bone and soft tissue grafting materials are attained in many ways, often from cows, p igs, or human cadavers.  
The donors have no positive history of known systemic disease, and blood tests are negative for any infec tions. 
The tissues are tested for bacterial contaminants, and processed under strict laboratory conditions known to kill 
all bacteria and viruses,  under experimental conditions.  Material is placed in a vacuum -sealed sterile container 
until it is ready to be opened during surgery . While infection via an implanted biological material can never ruled 
out completely, this material is  considered to be extremely safe due to the processing involved and from the fact 
that no case of disease transmission has ever been found with the materials.  
All these risks are part of any surgical implant placement and are not specific to the study.  
 
 
 
                  
6.b.  List of the study intervention (s) being tested or evaluated under this protocol  
 N/A -  this study does not test or evaluate an intervention.    Skip to item 6.d.  
# Study intervention(s) being tested or evaluated under the protocol  
 
 
 
Add or delete rows as needed  Local Standard 
Practice   
Indicate whether the 
intervention is 
considered acceptable 
practice locally   
1 Type 1 implant placement : immediate implant placement following tooth extraction  with CT graft (thin biotype)   
2 Type 1 Implant placement: Immediate implant placement following tooth extraction without CT graft (thick biotype)   
3 Insert study intervention 3 here   
 
                  
6.c.  Risk:Benefit Analysis  of study interventions being tested or evaluated under this protocol  
For each study intervention identified in section 6b above, complete a risk:benefit analysis table . 
 
(Two tables are provided, copy & paste additional tables as needed or delete both tables if this study does not test an inter vention)  
 
 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 19 6.c. 
Study Intervention #1  
Type 1 implant placement: immediate implant placement following 
tooth extraction with CT graft (thin biotype)  
List each group exposed to this 
intervention on a separate line.  
(e.g., experimental, control, Arm A, Arm B, 
etc 
Or state All Groups/Subjects  For each group, list the benefits  of this intervention.  (Benefits can be directly from 
the intervention or from a mon itoring procedure likely to contribute to the subject’s 
well being).  If there are no benefits, state “none”.  
Experimental  Benefits:  
Increased soft tissue volume at time of surgery which could lead to better esthetic 
outcomes  
  
For this intervention,  list the reasonably foreseeable risks  
List the risks according to the probability (likely, less likely or rare) and magnitu de (serious or not serious).  
(include: 1) expected adverse events; 2) rare and serious adverse events; 3) all other psychological, social, legal harms)  
Do not delete frequency.  The need to know what to report promptly later = a requirement to estimate  frequency ( Instructions ).  
 Not serious  Serious   
Likely  
These risks are expected to occur in 
more than 20 out of 100 subjects.  • Risk related to surgical 
procedu res: Swelling, 
pain, bleeding.  • None  
 Not serious  Serious  
Less likely   
These risks are expected to occur in 5-
20  subjects or less out of 100 
subjects.  • Risk related to surgical 
procedures: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners 
of the mouth  • None  
  Serious  
Rare   
These risks are expected to occur in 
less than 5 subjects out of 100  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▪ Rare   
▪ Less than [ADDRESS_199327] in 1000000  
 
  • Risk related to surgical procedures:  
Nerve damage, infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of gums, migration 
of the graft material, increased tooth sensitivity, 
increased tooth mobility, unaesthetic exposure of the 
crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, nasal cavity, 
sinuses, medical emergencies.  
• Risk related to pain medication s and antibiotics : 
Allergic reactions such as hives, rash and even -life 
threatening reactions called anaphylaxis  
 
 
 
• Transmission of infectious disease to subject, such as 
hepatitis or nerve diseases, which may not show up 
for many years after infection (this risk is greatly 
reduced by [CONTACT_170398]). So far, no report of any 
incidence related to the use of Straumann Allograft 
GC® bone graft and Bio -Gide® membrane is known.  
 
 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 20 6.c. 
Study Intervention  #2 
Type 1 Implant placement: Immediate implant placement following 
tooth extraction without CT graft (thick biotype)  
List each group exposed to this 
intervention on a separate line.  
(e.g., experimental, control, Arm A, Arm B, 
etc 
Or state All Groups/Subj ects For each group, list the benefits  of this intervention.  (Benefits can be directly from 
the intervention or from a monitoring procedure likely to contribute to the subject’s 
well being).  If there are no benefits, state “none”.  
Control  Benefits:  
none  
  
For this intervention,  list the reasonably foreseeable risks  
List the risks according to the probability (likely, less likely or rare) and magnitude (serious or not serious).  
(inclu de: 1) expected adverse events; 2) rare and serious adverse events; 3) all other psychological, social, legal harms)  
Do not delete frequency.  The need to know what to report promptly later = a requirement to estimate  frequency ( Instructions ).  
 Not serious  Serious   
Likely  
These risks are expected to occur in 
more than 20 out of 100 subjects.  • Risk related to surgical 
procedures: Swelling, 
pain, bleeding..  • None  
 Not serious  Serious  
Less likely   
These risks are expected to occur in 5-
20 subjects  or less out of 100 subjects.  • Risk related to surgical 
procedures: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners 
of the mouth  • None  
  Serious  
Rare   
These risks are expected to occur in 
less than 5 subjects out of 100  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
▪ Rare   
▪ Less than [ADDRESS_199328] in 1000000  
 
  • Risk related to surgical procedures:  
Nerve damage, infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of gums, migration 
of the graft material, increased tooth sensitivity, 
increased tooth mobility, unaesthetic exposure of the 
crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, nasal cavity, 
sinuses, medical emergencies.  
• Risk related to pain medications and antibiotics : 
Allergic reactions such as hives, rash and even -life 
threatening reactions called anaphylaxis  
 
 
 
• Transmission of  infectious disease to subject, such 
as hepatitis or nerve diseases, which may not show 
up for many years after infection (this risk is greatly 
reduced by [CONTACT_170398]). So far, no report of any 
incidence related to the use of Straumann Allograft 
GC® bone graft and Bio -Gide® membrane is known  
 
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 [ADDRESS_199329] = safety assessments)   
(Click here for example ) 
 
# Research component  
• individual procedures  
 
example:  
Eligibility Assessments  
• History and physical  
• Questionnaire  
• Laboratory tests  
Add or delete rows as needed  Column A  
Local Standard Practice  
Indicate the number of 
times each procedure will 
be performed as 
stipulated in the research 
plan that wou ld be done 
as part of standard 
practice.  Column B  
Research Only   
Indicate the number of 
times each procedure will 
be performed solely for 
research  purposes (any 
performed outside 
frequency or timing for 
acceptable local practice)  Column C 
Risks  
List the reasonably expected risks  
under the following categories as 
appropriate : 
• Serious and likely;  
• Serious and less likely;  
• Serious and rare;  
• Not serious and likely;  
• Not serious and less likely  
Summary for the whole study  Visit1 to 1 2 Medical/Dental history  1  No risk  
Phase one therapy  1  No risk  
Information about implant placement 
procedure  1  No risk  
Information about study   1 No risk  
Cone Beam Computed Tomography 
(CBCT)  [ADDRESS_199330]   1 No risk  
Impression   6 for both groups  No risk  
Periodontal biotype determination   1 No risk  
Photographs  2 6 for both groups  No risk  
Soft tissue assessment (on 
photographs and casts)   6 for both groups  No risk  
Fabrication of individualized bite -
block   1 for both groups  No risk  
Radiograph  6  No risk  
Local Anesthesia  2 for both groups   No risk  
I.V Sedation  2 for both groups   No risk  
Chlorhexidine rinse  2 for both groups   Not serious and less likely : transient 
change in taste, staining (reversible) of 
teeth and soft tissues  
Extraction  1  Not serious and likely : Swelling, pain, 
bleeding.  
Final determination of enrollment in 
the study   1 No risk  
Implant  placement  1  Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners of the mouth  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 22 Serious and rare: Nerve damage, 
infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of 
gums, migration of the graft material, 
increased tooth sensitivity, increased 
tooth mobility, unaesthetic exposure of 
the crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, 
nasal cavity, sinuses, medical 
emergencies.  
Osseous measurements   1 No risk  
Bone Grafting  1 
  Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners of the mouth  
Serious and rare: Nerve damage, 
infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of 
gums, migration of the  graft material, 
increased tooth sensitivity, increased 
tooth mobility, unaesthetic exposure of 
the crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, 
nasal cavity, sinuses, medical 
emergencies.  
Connective tissue Grafting  1 (test group)  
0 (control)   Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not Serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of corners of the mouth  
Serious and rare:  Nerve damage, 
infection, damage to surrounding 
palatal tissue, increased sensitivity, 
unaesthetic exposure of the crowns,  
severe bleeding, medical emergencies.  
Prescription of methylprednis olone 1  Serious and rare: hypersensitivity 
reaction  
Prescription of Antibiotic  1  Serious and rare: hy persensitivity 
reaction  
Suture removal  [ADDRESS_199331]  2  No risk  
Recording of clinical parameters 
([COMPANY_003], MPI, mSBI)  4  No risk  
PES/WES score determination  4  No risk  
     
     
Detailed procedures for each study visit  
1 Visit 1: Screening Examination     
 Medical/Dental history  1  No risk  
 Phase one therapy  1  No risk  
 Information about implant placement 
procedure  1  No risk  
 Information about study   1 No risk  
 Cone Beam Computed Tomography 
(CBCT)  1  No risk  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 23  Diagnostic work pertaining dental 
implant placement  1  No risk  
Impressions   1 No risk  
2 Visit 2: Extraction /implant 
Placement     
 Informed consent   [ADDRESS_199332]   1 No risk  
 Photographs   1 No risk  
 Soft tissue assessment (On 
photographs and casts)   1 No risk  
Periodontal Biotype Determination   1 No risk  
 Fabrication of the individualized Bite -
block   1 No risk  
 Radiograph  1  No risk  
 Local anesthesia  1  No risk  
 I.V. sedation  1  No risk  
 Chlorhexidine rinse  1  No risk  
 Extraction  1  Not serious and likely : Swelling, pain, 
bleeding.  
 Final determination of enrollment in 
the study   1 No risk  
 Implant placement  1  Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners of the mouth  
Serious and rare: Nerve damage, 
infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of 
gums, migration of the graft material, 
increased tooth sensitivity, in creased 
tooth mobility, unaesthetic exposure of 
the crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, 
nasal cavity, sinuses, medical 
emergencies.  
 Osseous measurements   1 No risk  
 Bone Grafting  1  Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of the corners of the mouth  
Serious and rare: Nerve damage, 
infection, damage to the surrounding 
soft tissue, recession (shrinkage) of 
gums, migration of the graft material, 
increased tooth sensitivity, increased 
tooth mobility , unaesthetic exposure of 
the crowns, damage to adjacent teeth, 
nasal cavity, sinuses, medical 
emergencies.  
Connective Tissue Grafting  1 (test group)  
0 (control group)   Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
Not Serious and less likely: Bruising, 
stretching of corners of the mouth ,  
Serious and rare:  Nerve damage, 
infection, severe bleeding, medical 
emergencies.  
 Radiograph (standardized)  1  No risk  
 Prescription of Antibiotic  1  Serious and rare: hy persensitivity 
reaction  
Prescription of methylpredis olone 1  Serious and rare: hypersensitivity 
reaction  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 24  Prescription of Chlorhexidine rinse  1  Not serious and less likely : transient 
change in taste, staining (reversible) of 
teeth and soft tissues  
3 Visit 3 : Suture removal     
 Suture Removal  1  No risk  
 Wound healing evaluation  1  No risk  
4 Visit 4 : Post -op 1 month after 
implant placement     
 Wound healing evaluation  1  No risk  
5 Visit 5 : Post -op 2 months after 
implant placement     
 Wound healing evaluation  1  No risk  
6 Visit 6 : Post -op 3 months after 
implant placement and uncovery     
 Impression   1 No risk  
 Photographs   1 No risk  
 Radiograph  1  No risk  
 Soft tissue assessment (On 
photographs and casts)   1 No risk  
 Local anesthesia  1  No risk  
 I.V. sedation  1  No risk 
 Second stage uncovery  1  Not serious and likely: Swelling, pain, 
bleeding  
 Chlorhexidine rinse  1  No risk  
7 Visit 7 : Post -op [ADDRESS_199333]  1  No risk  
8-9 Visit 8 and 9 : Post -loading visit s    
 Photographs  1  No risk  
 Radiograph (standardized)  [ADDRESS_199334]  2  No risk  
10 Visit 11: [ADDRESS_199335] -loading 
evaluation     
 Impression   1 No risk  
 Photographs   1 No risk  
 Soft tissue assessment (On 
photographs and casts)   1 No risk  
 Recording of clinical parameters 
([COMPANY_003], MPI, mSBI)  1  No risk  
 Radiograph (standardized)  1  No risk  
 PES/WES score determination   1 No risk  
11 Visit 11: [ADDRESS_199336] -loading 
evaluation     
 Impression   1 No risk  
 Photographs   1 No risk  
 Soft tissue assessment (On 
photographs and casts)   1 No risk  
 Recording of clinical parameters 
([COMPANY_003], MPI, mSBI)  1  No risk  
 Radiograph (standardized)  1  No risk  
 PES/WES score determination   1 No risk  
 12 Visit 12: [ADDRESS_199337] -loading 
evaluation     
 Impression   1 No risk  
Photographs   1 No risk  
Soft tissue assessment (On  1 No risk  
FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 25 photographs and casts)  
Recording of clinical parameters 
([COMPANY_003], MPI, mSBI)  1  No risk  
Radiograph (standardized)  1  No risk  
PES/WES score determination   1 No risk  
 
 
                  
7.  Safety Precautions.  (Describe safeguards to address the serious risks listed above.)  
a.  Describe the procedures for protecting against or minimizing any potential risks  for each of the more than minimal risk research 
procedures  listed above.  
The present study involves two procedures that have been extensively documented in the literature and are considered as well -
accepted treatment modalities. The purpose of this study is to compare  the outcomes of these two well -acce pted treatment 
modalities. The risks involved with these procedures are the ones related to any implant surgery and are not specific to the present 
research project. Accordingly, as per standard care the patient will be treated in such way to minimize infe ction including the careful 
preparation and drapi[INVESTIGATOR_144652], use of gentle and clean surgical technique, use of pre -sterilized package components, 
prescription of antibiotic , methyl -prednisolone  and a chlorhexidine 0.12% antiseptic rinse following the surgery.  
b.  Where appropriate, discuss provisions for ensuring necessary medical or professional intervention in the event of adverse 
events, or unanticipated problems involving subjects.  
Any adverse events will be managed directly by [CONTACT_102]’s operators and the attending periodontal faculty. All the operators a re 
dentists trained to manage medical and dental emergencies that may occur during treatment.  
c.  Will the safeguards be different  between/among groups?   
 
 Yes  
 No 
If yes, describe here  
 
                  
8.  Confidentiality of the Research Information  
a.  Specify where  the data and/or specimens will be stored and how the researcher will protect the confidentiality  of subject 
information.  
 
Data will be stored in a cabinet in the PI’s office which will be locked at all times unless the PI [INVESTIGATOR_170372]. Protected health 
information will only be accessed by [CONTACT_170399].  
Describe specimen storage - where and how protected?  
b.  Will all electronic data be stored in accordance with the institution’s information security policy and encryption standards?   
 
 Yes  
 No, if no explain below  
The data will be kept on the PI [INVESTIGATOR_170373].  
 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 26                 
9.  Payment.                                                                            (payment of subjects should be included in the consent form)   
a.  Describe the incentives (e.g., inducements) being offered to subjects for their time during participatio n in the research study.  
 
Subjects will receive parts of study related treatment at no cost . The  materials free of charge for the patient will include the implant  
and the bone graft material . Also the patient will not be charged for the implant placement  (both groups) nor for the connective 
tissue graft (test group). However, the patient will be charged the bone grafting procedure and the resorbable collagen membrane. 
Moreover, patients will be financially responsible for subsequent implant provisional an d/or definitive restorations.  
b.  If monetary compensation is offered, indicate how much the subjects will be paid and describe the terms and schedule of 
payment.   
IRB policy requires a provision for providing partial payment to subjects who withdraw before the completion of the research.  For VA 
research, payment to human subjects participating in research is prohibited when the research is integrated with the patien t’s 
medical care and when the research makes no special demands on the patient beyond those of standard medical care.  Payment 
may be permitted, with IRB approval, under certain circumstances.  Consult with the VA R&D Office to discuss payment of subjects . 
Subjects will not be compensated for their participation in the study.  
 
                   
10.  Costs to Subjects.                                                                   (costs to the  subject should be included in the consent form)  
a.  Describe any costs for care associated with research (including a breakdown of standard of care procedures versus research 
procedures), costs of test drugs or devices, and research procedure costs that are the subject’s responsibility as a conseque nce of  
participating in the research.  
 
Costs associated with transportation resulting as a consequence of participating in the research will be the subject’s respon sibility. 
With the exception of the incentives described under 9.a. all the other costs will be t he patient’s responsibility.  
b.  Describe any offer for reimbursement of costs by [CONTACT_170400].  (Attach a copy of the section  of 
the clinical trial agreement or contract describing research related injury care – the information in this section must match the injury 
section of the consent form ). 
 
If a subject is injured as a result of the research procedures, the injury will be treated. No compensation will be given to the subject 
as a result of the injury and he/she will be responsible for any charges related or unrelated to the injury.    
 
                  
11.  PI-Sponsored FDA -Regulated Research   
If the PI [INVESTIGATOR_170374]/IDE holder, or has agreed to perform any of the IND/IDE holder’s sponsor obligations, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_170375] a 
sponsor ( sponsor investigator ) and must meet additional requirements.   (Form O, O -1 and P provide details)  
                                                                                                                                             [see Office o f Clinical Research  policies]  
 
 N/A.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_170376], or has not agreed to perform sponsor obligations  
a.  Has the PI [INVESTIGATOR_170377]:  Conducting Investigator -Initiated Studies According to FDA Regulati ons and Good 
Clinical Practices?   
 
 Yes  
 No.  If no, complete the training prior to submitting this protocol  
b.  Describe the PI's experience/knowledge/training related to serving as a sponsor -investigator.  
 
 
  
 
 
 

FORM C  
IRB #  HSC20 130085H  
 
 27   
 
 
 