MDACC# 2018 -1182  Page 1 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
Confidential  
 SPON
SOR:  Michael Overman, MD Anderson Cancer Center  
TITLE:  
Neoadjuvant Pembrolizumab for Patients with Mismatch Repair Deficient Locally 
Advanced Solid Cancers  
IND 
exempt  
NCT n
umber:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Co
ordinating Center:  University of [LOCATION_007] MD Anderson Cancer Center  
PI
: [INVESTIGATOR_535676] ([EMAIL_10251]) 
Co-PI: [INVESTIGATOR_535677]# 2018 -1182          Page 2 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 1.[ADDRESS_697141] 6 cycles of pembrolizumab.  
Duration of Participation  Until disease progression, drug intolerance, or 24 months of 
pembrolizumab therapy.  
Estimated average length of 
treatment per patient  One year  
 
 
 
 
2.0 TRIAL DESIGN 
2.1 Trial Design  
This study is a Phase II open -label, single center trial assessing the safety and efficacy of pembrolizumab 
given pre -operatively for 6 months in patients with  locally advanced (unresectable primary cancer or a 
resectable primary cancer with a high chance of recurrence)  dMMR solid organ tumors. High risk will be 
defined by [CONTACT_535693] 20%. Given the variety of cancer types and variety of factors within each tumor type this decision will 
be based on an expert treating physician estimation for that specific disease type.  As an example, for colon cancer, clinoco -radiographic  factors have been incorporated into risk recurrence estimation include : 
age, CEA level , MRI identified perineural or lymphovascular invasion, radiographic T stage, presence of 
enlarged  lymph nodes on radiographic imaging, and involvement of neighboring structures
34.  
Unresectable versus resectable status will be defined at the time of study enrollment, as patients with resectable cancers will be monitored to ensure an adequate rate of surgical resection.  All tumor types are 
eligible and prior radiation or chemotherapy is allowed. Based on epi[INVESTIGATOR_535678] 70% of tumors will be colorectal, endometrial, gastric and adrenocortical carcinomas.   
To ensure safety , interim safety monitoring will be conducted to ensure the consequent resection in 
resectable patients who do not respond to therapy.  In addition, Bayesian t oxicity stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_535679], Simon, Estey (1995, 1996) for the total of 35 patients  throughout 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 3 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 the study.  In addition early use of ctDNA will be utilized in addition to radiographic RECIST v1.[ADDRESS_697142] pre -treatment 
and cycle 2 day 1 (3weeks) ctDNA sampling via an MD Anderson CLIA certified 70 gene li quid biopsy 
panel.  After two cycles of pembrolizumab (6weeks) patients will be assessed for a benefit from therapy.  
Patients with clinical benefit will continue therapy on clinical trial and those that are not benefiting will 
discontinue the clinical trial.  Clinical benefit will be defined if a patient meets any of th e following 
criteria : 
(i) Patients with PR/CR per RECIST  v1.1 
(ii) SD per RECIST v1.1 with either a decrease in total tumor m easurement ( -1% to - 19%), or  a 
stable or decreases in ctDNA tumor mutation from baseline.  If there are no mutations on 
baseline ctDNA then elevated tumor marker can be utilized, such  as CEA, CA 19 -9, or PSA 
for example. 
(iii) Patients who are felt to have clinical benefit (such as improvement in pain, reduction in 
bleeding, improved bowel function…).   
 
Patients meeting these criteria will continue therapy with per protocol restaging imaging studies.  Stable or decrease in ctDNA tumor mutation will be defined as ctDNA that is declinin g or the same 
as pretreatment and i f multiple mutations exist the n dominant clone  will be utilized.  Patients with 
PR/CR/SD will continue therapy for a total of 6 months . At the 6 -month time point all participants are 
recommended to proceed to surgery. However, due to the potential for extremely high risk surgeries to be neede d on this clinical trial (for example brain resection for dMMR glioblastoma multiforme) 
the patient and physician can opt  to forego surgery and continue pembrolizumab for a total of one 
year. Post-operatively after surgical resection following pembrolizuma b patients will be monitored for 
complications (Clavien -Dindo classification for severity
1) for up to [ADDRESS_697143] measurable maybe allow ed after discussions with study PI [INVESTIGATOR_535680]/ctDNA is measurable.  
2.2 Trial Diagram 
     
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 4 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
  
 
 OBJECTIVES & ENDPOINTS  & HYPOTHESISES  
2.3 Primary Ob jective & Endpoints & Hypothesis  
(1) Hypothesis 
We hypothesize that neoadjuvant pembrolizumab will be safe and result in a high pathological complete 
response rate.  
(2) Primary Objectives  
(i) To assess the safety of neo -adjuvant pembrolizumab in patients with locally advanced 
(unresectable primary can cer or  resectable primary cancer with a high chance of recurrence)) 
dMMR solid organ tumors  by [CONTACT_535694] -surgical complication 
assessment by [CONTACT_105469] -Dindo classification
1 
(ii)  To assess the rate of complete pathological response for patients who undergo surgical 
resection following at least 3 doses of neoadjuvant pembrolizumab. The primary endpoint is 
pCR after 3 doses.  
 

MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 5 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 2.4 Secondary Objective  
(i) To quantify the rate of organ sparing at 1 year for  all patients treated with one dose of 
pembrolizumab (intent to treat) and  those patients who receive at least 3 doses of neoadjuvant 
pembrolizumab and decline to undergo surgical resection and opt to continue receiving 
pembrolizumab for a total of 1 year.  
(ii) To assess radiographic tumor response to neoadjuvant pembrolizumab  
(iii) To estimate the relapse -free survival and overall survival in all enrolled participants  
(iv) To determine the overall rates of pathological response to neoadjuvant pembrolizumab 
(v) To assess the rate of complete pathological response (intent to treat) for patients who undergo surgical resection following at least 1 dose of neoadjuvant pembrolizumab. 
2.5 Exploratory Objective: 
(i) To explore the predictive ability of changes in ctDNA for efficacy endpoints.  
(ii) To determine if total mutational burden correlate with response and extent of benefit from  
pembrolizumab 
(iii) To correlate pre -treatment tumor samples tumor-immune microenvironment (for example T-
effector cell populations; CD4 subsets; T -regulatory populations; B cell populations; 
dendritic and macrophage populations) with efficacy endpoints.  
(iv) To compare targeted gene expression profiles of immune related genes and genes pertaining 
to common cancer signaling pathways in pre- treatment samples and also the change in these 
factors for cases with bot h pre and on -treatment (i.e. at time of resection) tumor samples of 
responders (stable disease or radiographic response prior to resection) versus non- responders 
(progression prior to resection). 
 
3.0 BACKGROUND & RATIONALE  
3.1 Background 
PEMBROLIZUMAB  
Pembrolizumab  is a potent humanized immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) monoclonal antibody (mAb) with 
high specificity of binding to the programmed cell death 1 ( PD-1) receptor, thus inhibiting its interaction 
with programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and programm ed cell death ligand  2 (PD -L2).  Based on 
preclinical in vitro data, pembrolizumab has high affinity and potent receptor blocking activity for PD-1.  
Pembrolizumab has an acceptable preclinical safety profile and is in clinical development as an intravenous (IV) immunotherapy for advanced malignancies.  Keytruda
® (pembrolizumab) is indicated 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 6 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 for the treatment of patients across a number of indications because of its mechanism of action to bind 
the PD -1 receptor on the T cell.  For more details on specific i ndications refer to the Investigator 
brochure. 
MSI -HIGH CANCER  
Microsatellites are short tracts of DNA in which there are multiple repeats (on the order of 5 -50) of 1 to 5 
base pair motifs. They occur at thousands of locations within the genome. Many microsatellites are located 
in non- coding DNA regions and thus are biologically silent. Others are located in regulatory or coding 
DNA – which can affect biological activity and lead to disease.  The mismatch repair (MMR) system is 
one of several cellular DNA repair mechanisms that functions to maintain the count and integrity of 
microsatellites during cell division . Deficiencies in the MMR system lead to cells being unable to regulate 
the length of their microsatellites during cell division, a term called microsatellite instability (MSI). This leads to hypermutability and disease states such as cancers
2. Mismatch re pair deficiencies typi[INVESTIGATOR_535681]1. The most common tumor types harboring defects in MMR and thus MSI are colorectal, endometrial and gastric adenocarcinomas. MSI is routinely tested in all colorectal cancer patients in accordance with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines and in selected patients with endometrial and gas tric tumors. Little is known 
about the true prevalence in other cancer types. In order to perform a more comprehensive surveillance of the landscape of MSI across a wide range of tumors, Bonneville and Crook et al
3 examined paired whole -
exome sequencing da ta primarily from the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database in [ADDRESS_697144] tumor types with approximately 
30% prevalence in endometria l 
carcinomas and just over 15% in colon and gastric adenocarcinomas consistent with previously published data by [CONTACT_535695]
[ADDRESS_697145] tumor 
types. Interestingly, this study by [CONTACT_535696].3 showed significant MSI rep resentation in 
other tumor types not previously associated with 
microsatellite instability including 
adrenocortical carcinoma (~4%), uterine carcino -sarcoma cervical squamous cell carcinoma, Wilms 
tumor and mesothelioma. MSI status has been shown to be pre dictive of response to chemotherapy and 
immuno therapy in colorectal cancers in addition to having p rognostic value. Less is  known about its 
predictive and prognostic value in non- colorectal cancers.  
LIMITATION OF STANDARD CHEMOTHERAPY IN dMMR  CANCER  
 
Figure 1. Prevalence of microsatellite 
instability (MSI) across 39 human cancer 
types. (A) MSI prevalence was detected 
across 39 tumor types  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 7 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 In colorectal cancer (CRC) the standard treatment for Stage III and high risk Stage II disease is adjuvant 
5-fluorouracil (5 -FU) based chemotherapy which confers survival advantage of 10%5. However, pre -
clinical and clinical studies have demonstrated th at this advantage does not apply to patients whose tumors 
express microsatellite instability (MSI- H). Several in vitro studies have shown that MSI -H tumors are 
resistant to many commonly used chemotherapeutic agents including 5 -FU6-8. Meyers et al8 found t hat 
MSI-H CRC cell lines with mismatch repair (MMR) deficiency secondary to hMLH1 dysfunction were 
two-fold more resistant to 5 -FU compared to the same cell line with a mismatch repair (MMR) proficient 
system (restored by [CONTACT_535697] 3 transfer) as shown in  figure 2 below. 5- FU is cytotoxic to cancer cells 
via its active metabolites: fluorodeoxyuridine triphosphate (FdUTP) and fluoridine triphosphate (FUTP) 
which disrupt DNA and RNA synthesis and disrupt the action of thymidylate synthase leading to nucleotide pool imbalance. The mechanism of 5- FU resistance in MSI -H tumors is thought to be 
secondary to inability of MMR deficient genes to bind DNA modified by [CONTACT_137485] 5- FU and its metabolites and by [CONTACT_535698] -H tumor s
9-10. Similarly, clinical 
studies have shown that the clinical benefit derived from adjuvant 5-FU based therapi[INVESTIGATOR_535682] -H 
patients
11-12. In an analysis of 570 tissue specimens of patients with 
Stage II and III CRC from pooled randomized control trials in which patients were randomized either to adjuvant 5 -FU or no 5- FU, Ribic 
et al
11  highlighted two important findings: 1) there was a trend 
towards reduced survival in patients with MSI- H CRCs receiving 5 -
FU chemotherapy compared to patients with MSI -H CRCs who did 
not and 2)  patients with MSI- H tumors who did not receive 5- FU had 
increased [ADDRESS_697146] limited role 
in the adjuvant treatment of resectable MSI -H tumors, there is a need to explore alternative therapeutic 
options.   
 
 IMMUNO THERAPY IN METASTATIC dMMR  CANCER  
Mismatch -repair deficiency (dMMR) occurs in a number of solid cancers including colorectal, 
endome trial, gastric, uterine, biliary tract, pancreatic, ovarian and small intestinal cancer, with 70% of 
cases occurring among the first three. Key studies have shown that mismatch -repair status predicts clinical 
Figure 2 . Cytotoxicity of MMR -
deficient HCT116 (circle) and MMR-
proficient HCT116 3 -6 (square) colon 
cell lines caused by 5 -FU. The cell lines 
were treated with various concentrations of 5- FU continuously for 10 days and 
colony forming ability was assessed.   
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 8 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 benefit of immune checkpoint blockade. In a landmark trial to assess the clinical activity of 
pembrolizumab in patients with progressive metastatic carcinoma with and without mismatch -repair 
deficiency, Le et al14 showed immune -related objective response rate and immune- related progression free 
surviva l rate of 71% and 67% in patients with mismatch -repair deficient non- colorectal cancers. The 
immune -related objective response rate and immune- related progression free survival rates for mismatch 
deficient colorectal cancers were 40% and 78% respectively compared to 0% and 11% respectively for mismatch -repair proficient colorectal cancers (see figures 2 and 3 below )
 14-15.  
 
 
 
          Our group has similarly shown high response rates of 31% and progression free survival of 69% at 12 
weeks or more in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer with dMMR, treated with nivolumab. Median duration of response was not yet reached at median follow up of one year
16.. 
This activity level has also been demonstrated by [CONTACT_535699]14 as the pembrolizumab study for dMMR solid 
tumors provided therapy for a maximum of 2 years.  At the time of the publication 18 patients had reached 2 years and stopped therapy.  At a median follow -up of 8 months, none of these 18 patients has had disease 
progression/recurrence. 
 
NEOADJUVANT AND ADJUVANT IMMUNO HERAPY 
 
Figure 3. Radiographic responses to 
treatment with pembrolizumab based 
on RECIST criteria.  
Figure 4. Overall survival among 
patients with patients with mismatch 
repair deficient and proficient CRC 
after pembrolizumab. 

MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 9 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 Treatment with PD1 inhibitors represents a major advancement in the treatment of Stage IV MSI -H 
colorectal and non- colorectal cancers. For patients with resectable MSI -H colorectal cancer, surgical 
resection ± chemotherapy is the standard of care. Desp ite treatment with curative intent many patients 
subsequently relapse and develop distant disease. Given that immune checkpoint blockade against 
programmed cell death -1 (PD -1) is associated with significant improvement in progression free survival 
in stage  IV disease and given that MSI -H tumors do not respond well to standard chemotherapy, there is 
a need to evaluate PD1 inhibitors in earlier -stage disease. Neoadjuvant immunotherapy is appealing since 
the primary tumor can serve as a source of antigens agai nst which expanded and activated tumor -specific 
T-cells are produced by [CONTACT_535700]. In addition, 
neoadjuvant utilization of PD1 blockade offers the opportunity to investigate the in vivo effects of  PD1 inhibition on the tumor micro environment and how that correlates with the periphery such as release of 
ctDNA.  
Recently presented data from the NICHE trial at ESMO  2018
35 highlights the impressive response 
neoadjuvant immune checkpoint inhibition can elicit  in early stage dMMR colon adenocarcinomas. In this 
study, combination checkpoint inhibition with ipi[INVESTIGATOR_125] 1mg/kg (day 1) and nivolumab 3mg/kg (days 1 and 15) was administered neoadjuvantly to a cohort of 19 patients stages I -III colon adenocarcinoma, 
15 of whom were evaluated for response. Of those, 7 patients had dMMR while 8 harbored pMMR tumors. 
4 of the 7 patients with dMMR tumors has complete pathological response at time of definitive resection after 1 cycle of combination checkpoint inhibition. The remaining 3 had 1- 2% viable residual tumor. In 
contrast, among the 8 patients with pMMR, 2 had 100% viable residual tumor at resection and the 
remaining 6 had 85- 95% viable residual tumor. Importantly, there were only 5 cases of grade 3 toxicity 
and these did not result in delays in surgery.This data confirms that neoadjuvant immune checkpoint 
inhibition can be safely given and significantly, can generate complete pathological response  in early stage 
dMMR colon cancers.  
Likelwise, p reliminary data from o ngoing trials in other checkpoint sensitive tumor types such as non-
small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) have demonstrated that the integration of checkpoint blockage into the 
treatment of early -stage and locally advanced NSCLC is safe, tolerable, and has the po tential to improve 
outcomes without adding substantial toxicity
17. As an example, Forde et al18 performed a pi[INVESTIGATOR_535683] 21 Stage I -IIIA resectable 
NSCLC. The study was designed such that treatment would not be considered feasible if the probability that surgery would be delayed was 90% or more for more than 25% of the patient. Of [ADDRESS_697147] -operative day 2, mice in the observation group were 
treated with 3 doses of anti -PD1, anti -CTLA -4 or both and survival and subsequent lung metastases 
quant ified.  Notably, combined therapy in the neoadjuvant setting significantly prolonged survival 
compared to adjuvant combined treatment with more profound reduction in lung metastases compared to adjuvant combined treatment.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 10 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 Anecdotally at MD Anderson Cancer  Center, we have treated two patients with locally advanced dMMR 
colon adenocarcinoma with anti -PD1 therapy prior to surgical resection of the primary and observed near 
pathological response in 1 and complete pathological response in the other. As an example patient YH is 
a 34- year-old man with dMMR locally advanced colorectal adenocarcinoma with abdominal 
lymphadenopathy who was treated initially with capecitabine/oxliplatin/bevacizumab with stable disease. He subsequently received 3 cycles of pembrolizumab followed by [CONTACT_535701]. Pathology of the surgical specimen revealed near pathological complete re sponse with “residual 
adenocarcinoma almost exclusively acellular mucin with rare cluster of well -differentiated 
adenocarcinoma cells”. Eighty of eighty resected lymph nodes were negative for adenocarcinoma. The 
second patient, a 71- year-old woman with dMMR locally advanced cecal adenocarcinoma with invasion 
of right lower quadrant mesentery and abdominal lymphadenopathy received [ADDRESS_697148] of care treatment: surgery followed by [CONTACT_72625]. The results demonstrated that neoadjuvant chemotherapy resulted in significant TNM downstaging, reduction in resection margin involvement and reduction in tumor regression grading. The Phase III trial to assess long term oncological outcome is ongoing. Retrospective analysis of 921 patients,  3% of adult patients with non- metastatic T3 or T4 colon canc er identified in the 
National Cancer Database between 2006 and 2014, who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to surgical resection of their colon cancer showed patients with T4b colon cancer treated with neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy had a 23% lower risk of  death at [ADDRESS_697149] immune surveillance function in controlling outgrowth of neoplastic 
transformations has been known for decades22.  Accumulating evidence shows a correlation between 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in cancer tissue and favorable prognosis in various malignancies.  In particular, the presence of CD8+ T -cells and the ratio of CD8+ effector T -cells/FoxP3+ regulatory T -
cells (T -regs) correlates with improved prognosis and long- term survival in solid malignancies, such as 
ovarian, colorectal, and pancreatic cancer; hepatocellular carcinoma; malignant melanoma; and renal 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 11 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 cell carcinoma.  Tumor -infiltrating lymphocytes can be expanded ex vivo and reinfused, inducing 
durable objective tumor responses in cancers such as melanoma 23-24. 
The PD -[ADDRESS_697150] hijacked by [CONTACT_13207].  The normal function of PD-1, expressed on the cell surfac e of activated T -cells under healthy 
conditions, is to down-modulate unwanted or excessive immune responses, including autoimmune 
reactions. PD-1 (encoded by [CONTACT_13228]1) is an immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily member related to cluster of differentiation  28 (CD28) and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 ( CTLA -4) that has 
been shown to negatively regulate antigen receptor signaling upon engagement of its ligands (PD -L1 
and/or PD- L2) 
25-26. 
The structure of murine PD- 1 has been resolved27.  PD -1 and its family members are type I 
transmembrane glycoproteins containing an Ig- variable –type (IgV -type) domain responsible for ligand 
binding and a cytoplasmic tail responsible for the binding of signaling molecules.  The cytoplasmic tail of PD -1 contains 2 tyrosine-based signaling motifs, an immunoreceptor tyrosine- based inhibition motif, 
and an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif.  Following T- cell stimulation, PD -1 recruits the 
tyrosine phosphatases, SHP-1 and SHP-2, to the immunoreceptor tyrosine-ba sed switch motif within its 
cytoplasmic tail, leading to the dephosphorylation of effector molecules such as CD3 zeta (CD3ζ), protein kinase C- theta (PKCθ), and zeta -chain -associated protein kinase (ZAP70),  which are involved in 
the CD3 T -cell signaling cascade
26,28- 30. The  mechanism by [CONTACT_13209]-[ADDRESS_697151] from, that of CTLA -4, because both molecules regulate an 
overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_77971]31-32. As a consequence, the PD -1/PD -L1 pathway is an attra ctive 
target for therapeutic intervention in mismatch repair deficient solid organ tumors.   
3.1.2 Preclinical and Clinical Trial Data  for Pembrolizumab  
Refer to the Investigator’s Brochure for Preclinical and Clinical data.  
3.[ADDRESS_697152] resection of involved organ and ultimately leading to the possibility of organ sparing. As these examples, highlight this study has the potential to bring about a paradigm shift in the treatment of patients with dMMR solid organ tumor through harnessing the immune response through checkpoint blockade in the frontline curative intent setting. This could possibly obviate the need for adjuvant therapy as well as potentiate the possibility of organ sparing while maintaining curative intent.   
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 12 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
  
3.2.2 Justificatio n for Dose   
The planned dose of pembrolizumab for this study is 200 mg every 3 weeks (Q3W).  Based on the 
totality of data generated in the Keytruda development program, 200 mg Q3W is the appropriate dose of pembrolizumab for adults across all indications and regardless of tumor type.  As outli ned below, this 
dose is justified by: 
• Clinical data from 8 randomized studies demonstrating flat dose - and exposure- efficacy 
relationships from 2 mg/kg Q3W to 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks (Q2W),  
• Clinical data showing meaningful improvement in benefit- risk inclu ding overall survival at 200 
mg Q3W across multiple indications, and 
• Pharmacology data showing full target saturation in both systemic circulation (inferred from pharmacokinetic [PK] data) and tumor (inferred from physiologically- based PK [PBPK] 
analysis) at 200 mg Q3W  
Among the 8 randomized dose-comparison studies, a total of 2262 participants were enrolled with melanoma and non- small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), covering different disease settings (treatment naïve, 
previously treated, PD- L1 enriched, and all-comers) and different treatment settings (monotherapy and 
in combination with chemotherapy).  Five studies compared 2 mg/kg Q3W versus 10 mg/kg Q2W (KN001 Cohort B2, KN001 Cohort D, KN002, KN010, and KN021), and 3 studies compared 10 mg/kg Q3W versus 1 0 mg/kg Q2W (KN001 Cohort B3, KN001 Cohort F2 and KN006).  All of these studies 
demonstrated flat dose- and exposure- response relationships across the doses studied representing an 
approximate 5- to 7.5-fold difference in exposure.  The 2 mg/kg (or 200 mg fixed -dose) Q3W provided 
similar responses to the highest doses studied.  Subsequently, flat dose-exposure- response relationships 
were also observed in other tumor types including head and neck cancer, bladder cancer, gastric cancer and classical Hodgkin Lymphoma, confirming [ADDRESS_697153], PK data in 
KN001 evaluating target -mediated drug disposition (TMDD) conclusively demonstrated saturation of 
PD-[ADDRESS_697154] tumor PD-1 saturation over a wide range of tumor penetration and PD-1 expression.  This evaluation concluded that pembrolizumab at 200 mg Q3W achieves full PD-1 saturation in both blood and tumor. 
Finally,  population PK analysis of pembrolizumab, which characterized the influence of body weight 
and other participant covariates on exposure, has shown that the fixed-dosing provides similar control of 
PK variability as weight based dosing, with considerable overlap in the distribution of exposures from 
the 200 mg Q3W fixed dose and 2 mg/kg Q3W dose.  Supported by [CONTACT_131877], and given that fixed -dose has advantages of reduced dosing complexity and reduced potential of dosing errors, the 
200 mg Q3W fixed -dose was selected for evaluation across all pembrolizumab protocols.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 13 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 To date, pembrolizumab (2 mg/kg Q3W) has been evaluated in 85 pediatric participants (aged 1 to 18 
years) with advanced melanoma, PD -L1 positive advanced, relapsed, or refractory solid tumors, or 
lymphoma.  The exposures in pediatric participants following the 2 mg/kg Q3W regimen were found to be similar to that observed in adult participants.  Pediatric data has also been incorporated in an integrated population PK analysis, which confirmed that a pembrolizumab dose of 2 mg/kg Q3W (up to a maximum of 200 mg Q3W) in pediatric participants renders exposures similar to adults.  Based on these results, the pediatric dose for evaluation in this trial is 2 mg/kg Q3W (up to a maximum of 200 mg Q3W).  
 
 
4.0 METHODOLOGY  
4.1 Study Population  
4.1.1 Participant  Inclusion Criteria  
Participants are eligible to be included in the study only if all of the following criteria apply:  
1. Male/female par ticipants who are at least 1 8 year s of age on the day of signing informed consent 
with histolo gically confirmed diagnosis of solid cancer  
 
2.  Solid cancer that is deficient in mismatch repair  (dMMR) or microsatellite instability high (MSI -
H) as determined by [CONTACT_535702]: 
a.  Immunohistochemistry determined dMMR by [CONTACT_535703]1, PMS2, MSH2 or 
MSH6  
b. PCR determined microsatellite instability at >30% of tested microsatellites  
c. Next -generation determined MSI- H based upon instability at multiple microsatellites as 
determined by [CONTACT_535704] 
3. Locally advanced cancer defined as either an unresectable primary cancer or a resectable primary cancer with a high chance of recurrence (defined as an estimated greater or equal to 2 0% chance 
of recurrence by [CONTACT_1963]).  A resectable primary may include locoregional disease, as long as all disease is felt by [CONTACT_535705] a resectable distribution.   
4. The participant (or legally acceptable representative if applicable) provides writte n informed 
consent for the trial.    
5. Have measurable disease based on RECIST v1.1 (unless discussed and approved by [CONTACT_115158]).  
6. Have available archival tumor tissue.  Availability will be met as long as a request to obtain formalin -fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks  (preferred) or slides has been made  
(unless discussed and approved by [CONTACT_115158]). 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 14 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
  
 
7. Have an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0 to 1. Evaluation 
of ECOG is to be performed within 7 days prior to the date of signing study consent.   
 
8. A female participant is eligible to participate if she is not pregnant (see Appendix 3), not breastfeeding, and at least one of the following conditions applies:  a.) Not a woman of childbearing potential (WOCBP) as defined in Appendix 3  OR  
b.) A WOCBP who agrees to follow the contraceptive guidance in Appendix [ADDRESS_697155] [120 days (corresponding to time needed to eliminate any study treatment(s) plus 30 days (a menstruation cycle) for risk of genotoxicity]  after the last dose of study treatment. 
9. Have adequate organ function as defined in the following table (Table  1).  Specimens must be 
collected within 14 days prior to the start of study treatment.  
 
Table 1  Adequate Organ Function Laboratory Values  
System  Laboratory Value  
Hematological   
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)  ≥1500/µL 
Platelets  ≥100 000/µL  
Hemoglobin ≥ 8.0 g/dL or ≥5.6 mmol/La 
Renal   
Creatinine OR 
Measured or calculatedb creatinine clearance  
(GFR can also be used in place of creatinine or 
CrCl) ≤1.5 × ULN OR  
≥30 mL/min for participant with creatinine levels >1.5  × institutional ULN  
Hepatic   
Total bilirubin ≤1.5 ×ULN OR direct bilirubin ≤ULN for 
participants with total bilirubin levels 
>1.5 × ULN  
AST (SGOT) and ALT (SGPT)  ≤2.5 × ULN (≤5  × ULN for participants with 
liver metastases)  
Coagulation   
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 15 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
  
      
 
4.1.2 Participant  Exclusion Criteria  
Participants are excluded from the study if any of the following criteria apply:  
1. A WOCBP who has a positive urine pregnancy test within 72 hours prior to enrollment (see 
Appendix 3).  If the urine test is positive or cannot be confirmed as negative, a serum pregnancy 
test will be required.  Note: in the event that [ADDRESS_697156] (urine or serum) must be performed and must be negative in order for subject to start receiving study medication. 
2. Has received prior therapy with an anti- PD-1, anti- PD-L1, or anti- PD-L2 agent or with an agent 
directed to another stimulatory or co -inhibitory T- cell receptor ( e.g., CTLA -4, OX-40, CD137). 
 
3. Has received prior systemic anti -cancer therapy including  investigational agents within 2  weeks 
of study treatment.  Note: Participants must have recovered from all AEs due to previous 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_24305] ≤Grade 1 or baseline. Participants with ≤Grade [ADDRESS_697157] recovered adequately from the toxi city 
and/or complications from the intervention prior to starting study treatment.  
 
5. Has received prior radiotherapy within [ADDRESS_697158] had 
radiation pneumonitis.  A 1- week washout is permitted for palliative radiation (≤2 weeks of 
radiotherapy) to non- CNS disease.  
 
6. Has received a live vaccine within [ADDRESS_697159] dose of study drug.  Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, the following:  measles, mumps, rubella, varicella/zoster (chicken pox), yellow fever, rabies, Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG), and typhoid vaccine.  Seasonal influenza vaccines for injection are generally killed virus vaccines and are allowed; International normalized ratio (INR) OR 
prothrombin time (PT)  
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)  ≤1.5 × ULN unless participant is receiving 
anticoagulant therapy as long as PT or aPTT is 
within therapeutic range of intended use of anticoagulants  
ALT (SGPT ) =alanine aminotransferase (serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase); AST  (SGOT ) =aspartate 
aminotransferase (serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase); GFR=glomerular filtration rate; ULN=upper 
limit of normal.  
a Criteria must be met without erythropoietin dependency and without packed red blood cell (pRBC) 
transfusion within last 2 weeks.   
b Creatinine clearance (CrCl) should be calculated per institutional standard.  
Note: This table includes eligibility -defining laboratory value requirements for treatment; laboratory value 
requirements should be adapted according to local regulations and guidelines for the administration of specific chemotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 16 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 however, intranasal influenza vaccines ( e.g., FluMist®) are live attenuated vaccines and are not 
allowed. 
 
7. Is currently participating in or has participated in a study of an investigational agent or has used 
an investigat ional device within [ADDRESS_697160] dose of study treatment.  
Note:  Participants who have entered the follow-up phase of an investigational study may participate as long as it has been [ADDRESS_697161] dose of the previous investigational agent.  
 
8. Has a diagnosis of immunodeficiency or is receiving chronic systemic steroid therapy (in dosing 
exceeding 10 mg daily of prednisone equivalent) or any other form of immunosuppressive therapy 
within [ADDRESS_697162] 1 year.  Note:  Participants with basal cell carcinoma of the skin, squamous cell carcinoma of 
the skin, or carcinoma in situ (e.g. breast carcinoma, cervical cancer in situ) or other similar good prognosis cancer with recurrence rates expected to be <10% that have undergone potentially curative therapy are not excluded.  
10. Known metastatic sites of disease. Note: locoregional lymph nodes or tumor deposits ar e not 
considered metastatic disease.  
11. Has severe hypersensitivity (≥Grade 3) to pembrolizumab and/or any of its excipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. 
 
12. Has active autoimmune disease that has required systemic treatment in the past 2 years (i.e. with use of disease modifying agents, corticosteroids or immunosuppressive drugs). Replacement therapy ( e.g.., thyroxine, insulin, or physiologic corticosteroid replacement therapy for adrenal or 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_13002], etc.) is not considered a form of systemic treatment.  
13. Has a history of (n on-infectious) pneumonitis that required steroids or has current pneumonitis.  
14. Has an active infection requiring systemic therapy.  
15. Has a known history of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).   
16. Has a known history of Hepatitis B (defined as Hepatitis B surface antigen [HBsAg] reactive) or known active Hepatitis C virus (defined as HCV  RNA [ qualitative]  is detected) infection. Note: 
no testing for Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C is required unless mandated by [CONTACT_14306].  
17. Has a history or current eviden ce of any condition, therapy, or laboratory abnormality that might 
confound the results of the study, interfere with the subject’s participation for the full duration of the study, or is not in the best interest of the subject to participate, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_80021].   
18. Has known psychiatric or substance abuse disorders that would interfere with cooperation with the requirements of the trial.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 17 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 19. Is pregnant or breastfeeding, or expecting to conceive or father children within the projected 
duration of the study, starting with the screening visit through [ADDRESS_697163] dose of trial treatment.  
 
4.1.3 Lifestyle Restrictions  
[IP_ADDRESS] Meals and Dietary Restrictions  
Participants should maintain a normal diet unless modifications are required to manage an  AE such as 
diarrhea, nausea or vomiting. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Contraception 
Pembrolizumab may have adverse effects on a fetus in utero.  Refer to A ppendix [ADDRESS_697164] 
azoospermia (whether due to having had a vasectomy or due to an underlying medical condition).   
4.1.[ADDRESS_697165] monthly and document the participant’s status until the pregnancy has been completed or terminated.  The outcome of the pregnancy will be reported to [COMPANY_006] within 2 working days if the outcome is a serious adverse experience ( e.g., death, abortion, congenital anomaly, or other disabling or life-
threatening complication to the mother or newborn).  The study Investigator will make every effort to obtain permission to follow the outcome of the pregnancy and report the condition of the fetus or newborn to [COMPANY_006].  If a male participant impregnates his female partner, the study personnel at the site must be informed immediately and the pregnancy must be reported to [COMPANY_006] and followed as described in Section 7.2.2. 
4.1.[ADDRESS_697166] -feeding are not eligible for enrollment.  
4.2 Trial Treatments  
The treatment to be used in this trial is outlined below in Table 2 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 18 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Confidential  
 Table 2  Trial Treatment 
Drug  Dose/Potency  Dose 
Frequency  Route of 
Administration  Regimen/Treatment 
Period  Use 
Pembrolizumab  200 mg  Q3W  IV infusion  Day 1 of each 3 week 
cycle Experimental  
 
 
Trial treatment should begin as close as possible to signing study consent considering appropriate time for 
screening procedures to be completed.  
4.2.1 Timing of Dose Administration 
Trial treatment should be administered on Day 1 of each cycle after all procedures/assessments have been 
completed as detailed on the Trial Flow Chart (Section 6.0).  Trial treatment may be administered up to 3 days before or after the scheduled Day 1 of each cycle due to administrative reasons.  
All trial treatments will be administered on an outpatient basis.  
Pembrolizumab 200 mg will be administered as a 30 minute IV infusion every 3 weeks.  Sites should make every effort to target infusion timing to be as close to 30 minutes as possible.  However, given the variability of infusion pumps from site to site, a window of - 5 minutes and +10 minut es is permitted (i.e., 
infusion time is 30 minutes: -5 min/+10 min). 
The current label for pembrolizumab contains specific instructions for the preparation of the 
pembrolizumab infusion fluid and administration of infusion solution. 
4.2.2 Dose Modification and t oxicity management for immune -related AEs associated with 
pembrolizumab  
AEs associated with pembrolizumab exposure may represent an immunologic etiology. These immune-
related AEs (irAEs) may occur shortly after the first dose or several months after the last dose of pembrolizumab treatment and may affect more than on body system simultaneously. Therefore, early recognition and initiation of treatment is critical to reduce complications.  Based on existing clinical study data, most irAEs were reversible and could be managed with interruptions of pembrolizumab, administration of corticosteroids and/ or other supportive care. For suspected irAEs, ensure adequate 
evaluation to confirm etiology or exclude other causes. Additional procedures or tests such as bronchoscopy, endoscopy, skin biopsy may be included as part of the evaluation. Based on the sever ity 
of irAEs, withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab and administer corticosteroids. Dose modification and toxicity management guidelines for irAEs associated with pembroli zumab are 
provided in Table 3. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 19 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
  
Table 3  Dose modification and toxicity m anagement guidelines for immune -related AEs associated with pembrolizumab  
General instructions:  
1. Corticosteroid taper should be initiated upon AE improving to Grade [ADDRESS_697167] dose or 
corticosteroids cannot be reduced to ≤[ADDRESS_697168] followed by [CONTACT_44874]. Other immunosuppressive treatment 
should be initiated if irAEs cannot be controlled by [CONTACT_13216].  
 
Immune -related 
AEs Toxicity grade or 
conditions 
(CTCAEv4.0)  Action taken to 
pembrolizumab  irAE management with 
corticosteroid and/or other 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_44790] -up  
Pneumonitis  Grade  2 Withhold  • Administer corticosteroids (initial 
dose of 1 -2 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent) followed by [CONTACT_13217]  
 • Monitor participants for signs and 
symptoms of pneumonitis  
• Evaluate participants with suspected 
pneumonitis with radiographic imaging and 
initia te corticosteroid treatment  
• Add prophylactic antibiotics for 
opportunistic infections  Grade 3 or 4, or 
recurrent Grade 2  Permanently 
discontinue  
Diarrhea / Colitis  Grade 2 or 3  Withhold  • Administer corticosteroids (initial 
dose of 1 -2 mg/kg prednisone  or 
equivalent) followed by [CONTACT_13217]  
 • Monitor participants for signs and symptoms 
of enterocolitis ( i.e., diarrhea, abdominal 
pain, blood or mucus in stool with or without fever) and of bowel perforation (i.e., peritoneal signs and ileus).  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 20 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
 Grade 4  Permanently 
discontinue  • Participants with ≥  Grade 2 diarrhea 
suspecting colitis should consider GI consultation and performing endoscopy to rule out colitis.  
• Participants with diarrhea/colitis should be advised to drink liberal quantities of clear fluids.  If sufficient oral fluid intake is not 
feasible, fluid and electrolytes should be 
substituted via IV infusion.  
AST / ALT 
elevation or Increased 
bilirubin  Grade 2  Withhold  • Administer corticosteroids (initial 
dose of 0.5 - 1 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent) followed by [CONTACT_13217]  • Monitor with liver function tests (consider 
weekly or more frequently until liver 
enzyme value returned to baseline or is 
stable  Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  • Administer corticosteroids (initial 
dose of 1 -2 mg/kg prednisone or 
equivalent) followed by [CONTACT_44878] 1 diabetes 
mellitus (T1DM) 
or 
Hyperglycemia  
 Newly onset 
T1DM or  
Grade 3 or 4 hyperglycemia associated with 
evidence of β-cell 
failure  Withhold  • Initiate insulin replacement 
therapy for participants with 
T1DM  
• Administer anti- hyperglycemic in 
participants with hyperglycemia  
 • Monitor participants for hyperglycemia or 
other signs and symptoms of diabetes.  
Hypophysitis  Grade 2  Withhold  • Administer corticosteroids and 
initiate hormonal replacements as clinically indicated.   
 • Monitor for signs and symptoms of 
hypophysitis (including hypopi[INVESTIGATOR_77975])   
Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or 
permanently 
discontinue1  
Hyperthyroidism  Grade 2  Continue  • Treat with non -selective beta -
blockers ( e.g., propranolol) or 
thionamides as appropriate  • Monitor for signs and symptoms of thyroid 
disorders.  
 
Grade 3 or 4  Withhold or  
permanently 
discontinue1 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 21 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
 Hypothyroidism  Grade 2 -4 Continue  • Initiate thyroid replacement 
hormones ( e.g., levothyroxine or 
liothyroinine) per standard of care  • Monitor for signs and symptoms of thyroid 
disorders.  
 
Nephritis and 
Renal 
dysfunction  Grade 2  Withhold  • Administer corticosteroids 
(prednisone 1 -2 mg/kg or 
equivalent) followed by [CONTACT_13217].  • Monitor changes of renal function  
 
Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  
Myocarditis  Grade 1 or 2  Withhold  • Based on severity of AE 
administer corticosteroids  • Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm  
etiology and/or exclude other causes  
 Grade 3 or 4  Permanently 
discontinue  
All other 
immune -related 
AEs Intolerable/ 
persistent Grade 2  Withhold  • Based on type and severity of AE 
administer corticosteroids  • Ensure adequate evaluation to confirm 
etiology and/or exclude other causes  
 Grade 3  Withhold or 
discontinue based on the type of 
event.  Events that require 
discontinuation 
include and not limited to:  
Gullain -Barre 
Syndrome, 
encephalitis  
Grade 4 or 
recurrent Grade 3  Permanently 
discontinue  
1. Withhold or permanently discontinue pembrolizumab is at the discretion of the investigator or treating physician.   
NOTE:  
For participants with Grade 3 or 4 immune -related endocrinopathy where withhold of pembrolizumab is required, pembrolizumab may be resumed 
when AE resolves to ≤ Grade 2 and is controlled with hormonal replacement therapy or achieved metabolic control (in c ase of T1DM).   
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 22 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
  
 
  
Dose modification and toxicity management of infusion -reactions related to pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab may cause severe or life threatening infusion -reactions including severe hypersensitivity or anaphylaxis. Signs and 
symptoms usually develop during or shortly after drug infusion and generally resolve completely within 24 hours of completion of 
infusion. Dose modification and toxicity management guidelines on pembrolizumab associated infusion reaction are provided in Table 4.   
Table 4 Pembrolizumab  Infusion Reaction Dose modification and Treatment Guidelines  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 23 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
 NCI CTCAE Grade  Treatment  Premedication at Subsequent Dosing  
Grade 1  
Mild reaction; infusion 
interruption not indicated; 
intervention not indicated  Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the 
participant is deemed medically stable in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871].  None  
Grade 2  
Requires therapy or infusion 
interruption but responds promptly to symptomatic 
treatment (e.g., antihistamines, 
NSAIDs, narcotics, IV fluids); prophylactic medications 
indicated for ≤24 hrs  Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to:  
IV fluids  
Antihistamines  
NSAIDs  
Acetaminophen  
Narcotics  
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the 
participant is deemed medically stable in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871].  
If sym ptoms resolve within 1 hour of stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_13056], the infusion 
may be restarted at 50% of the original infusion rate (e.g. from 100 mL/hr to 50 mL/hr).  Otherwise dosing will be held until symptoms resolve and the participant should be premedicated for the next scheduled dose.  
Participants who develop Grade 2 toxicity despi[INVESTIGATOR_535684] 1.5h 
(± 30 min utes) prior to infusion of 
pembrolizumab with:  
Diphenhydramine 50 mg po (or 
equivalent dose of antihistamine).  
Acetaminophen 500 -1000 mg po (or 
equivalent dose of analgesic).  
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 24 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
Confidential  
 Grades 3 or 4  
Grade 3:  
Prolonged (i.e., not rapi[INVESTIGATOR_13081]/or brief 
interruption of infusion); 
recurrence of symptoms 
following initial improvement; 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14138] (e.g., 
renal impairment, pulmonary 
infiltrates)  
Grade 4:  
Life-threatening; pressor or 
ventilatory support indicated  Stop Infusion.  
Additional appropriate medical therapy may include but is not limited to: 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]**  
IV fluids  
Antihistamines  
NSAIDs  
Acetaminophen  
Narcotics  
Oxygen  
Pressors  
Corticosteroids  
Increase monitoring of vital signs as medically indicated until the 
participant is deemed medically stable in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871].  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_13021].  
**In cases of anaphylaxis, epi[INVESTIGATOR_13079].  
Participant is permanently discontinued from further study drug 
treatment.  No subsequent dosing  
Appropriate resuscitation equipment should be available at the bedside and a physician readily available during the period of  drug administration.  
For further information, please refer to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0 (CTCAE) at  http://ctep.cancer.gov  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 25 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
Other allowed dose interruption for pembrolizumab  
Pembrolizumab may be interrupted for situations other than treatment- related AEs such as 
medical / surgical events or logistical reasons not related to study therapy. Participants should be placed back on study therapy within 3 weeks of the scheduled interruption, unless otherwise discussed with the Sponsor. The reason for interruption should be documented in the patient's study record.  
 
4.2.3 Second Course * 
4.3 Participants who stop study treatment with SD or better will not be eligible for a 
second course of pembrolizumab. The intent of the study is to treat with maximum of 1 year of pembrolizumab. Concomitant Medications/Vaccinations (allowed & prohibited)  
Medications or vaccinations specifically prohibited in the exclusion criteria are not allowed during the ongoing trial.  If there is a clinical indication for one of these or other medications or vaccinations specifically prohibited during the trial, discontinuation from trial therapy or vaccination may be required.  The final decision on any supportive therapy or vaccination rests with the  investigator and/or the participants’  primary physician.  
4.3.1 Acceptable Concomitant Medications 
All treatments that the investigator considers necessary for a participant’s welfare may be administered at the discretion of the investigator in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_12983].  All concomitant medication will be recorded on the case report form (CRF) 
including all prescription, over -the- counter (OTC), herbal supplements, and IV medications 
and fluids.  If changes occur during the trial period, documentation of drug dosage, frequency, route, and date may also be included on the CRF. 
All concomitant medications received within [ADDRESS_697169] dose of trial treatment should be recorded for SAEs and ECIs as defined in Section 7.2. 
4.3.2 Prohibited Concomitant Medications  
Participants  are prohibited from receiving the  following therapi[INVESTIGATOR_80025] (including retreatment for post- complete response relapse) of this trial:  
• Antineoplastic systemic chemotherapy or biological therapy  
• Immunotherapy not specified in this protocol 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 26 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
 • Chemotherapy not specified in this protocol 
• Investigational agents other than pembrolizumab 
• Radiation therapy   
o Note:  Radiation therapy to a symptomatic solitary lesion or to the brain may be allowed at the investigator’s discretion .   
• Live vaccines within [ADDRESS_697170] dose of study treatment and while participating in the study.   Examples of live vaccines include, but are not limited to, the 
following: measles, mumps, rubella, varicella/zoster, yellow fever, rabies, BCG, and typhoid vaccine. Seasonal influe nza vaccines for injection are generally killed virus 
vaccines and are allowed; however, intranasal influenza vaccines ( e.g., FluMist®) are 
live attenuated vaccines and are not allowed.  
• Systemic glucocorticoids for any purpose other than to modulate sympt oms from an 
event of clinical interest of suspected immunologic etiology.  The use of physiologic doses of corticosteroids may be approved after consultation with the Sponsor. 
Participants  who, in the assessment by [CONTACT_093], require the use of any of the 
aforementioned treatments for clinical management should be removed from the study.  All treatments that the Investigator considers necessary for a participant’s welfare may be admi nistered at the discretion of the Investigator in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_12983].   
Medications or vaccinations specifically prohibited in the exclusion criteria are not allowed 
during the ongoing study.  If there is a clinical indica tion for any medication or vaccination 
specifically prohibited during the study, discontinuation from study therapy or vaccination may be required.  The final decision on any supportive therapy or vaccination rests with the investigator and/or the particip ant's primary physician.  However, the decision to continue 
the participant on study treatment requires the mutual agreement of the investigator, the Sponsor and the participant. 
There are no prohibited therapi[INVESTIGATOR_3927]- Treatment Follow -up Phase.  
4.3.3 Rescue Medications & Supportive Care 
Participants should receive appropriate supportive care measures as deemed necessary by [CONTACT_78017].  Suggested supportive care measures for the management of AEs with potential immunologic etiology are outlined along with the dose modification guidelines in Section 5.2.2 , [Table 3 ].  Where appropriate, these guidelines include the use of oral or IV 
treatment with corticosteroids, as well as additional anti-inflammatory agents if symptoms do not improve wit h administration of corticosteroids.  Note that several courses of steroid 
tapering may be necessary as symptoms may worsen when the steroid dose is decreased.  For each disorder, attempts should be made to rule out other causes such as metastatic disease or bacterial or viral infection, which might require additional supportive care.  The treatment 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 27 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
 guidelines are intended to be applied when the Investigator determines the events to be related to pembrolizumab.  
Note: If after the evaluation of the event, i t is determined not to be related to pembrolizumab, 
the Investigator does not need to follow the treatment guidance.  Refer to [Table 3] in Section 
5.2.2 for guidelines regarding dose modification and supportive care.  
It may be necessary to perform condit ional procedures such as bronchoscopy, endoscopy, or 
skin photography as part of evaluation of the event.  
4.4 Participant  Withdrawal/Discontinuation Criteria  
Participants  may discontinue study treatment  at any time for any reason or be dropped from 
the study treatment at the discretion of the investigator should any untoward effect occur.  In 
addition, a participant  may be discontinued from study treatment  by [CONTACT_246103], the trial plan is violated, or fo r administrative 
and/or other safety reasons.  Specific details regarding procedures to be performed at study 
treatment discontinuation  are provided in Section 7.1.4 – Other Procedures.  
A participant must be discontinued from study treatment but continue to be monitored in the study for any of the following reasons: 
• The participant  or participant’s legal ly acceptable representative requests to 
discontinue study treatment  
• Confirmed radiographic disease progression  outlined in Section [IP_ADDRESS] 
• Any progression or recurrence of any malignancy, or any occurrence of another 
malignancy that requires active treatment  
• Unacceptable adverse experiences as described in Section 5.2.2. 
• The participant has a medical condition or personal circumstance which, in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_11922]/or sponsor, placed the participant at unnecessary risk from continued administration of study treatment.  
• The participant  has a confirmed positive serum pregnancy test  
• Noncompliance with study  treatment or procedure requirements  
• Recurrent Grade 2 pneumonitis 
• Discontinuation of treatment  may be considered  for participants  who have attained  a 
confirmed complete response (C R) and have been  treated  for at least 6 cy cles (at 
least 24  weeks), receiving at  least 2 doses of pembrolizumab beyond the date when  
the initial CR was declared. These participants may be eligible for second course 
treatment described in Section 5.2.3. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 28 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
 • The participant  is lost to follow -up 
• Completion of 17 treatments (approximately 1 year) with pembrolizumab  
• Note: The number of treatments is calculated starting with the first dose.  Participants who stop pembrolizumab after receiving 17 doses are not  eligible for retreatment if 
they progress after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_262].  Administrative reasons  
4.5 Participant  Replacement Strategy  
A participant that discontinues from the study after receiving a dose of pembrolizumab will not be replac ed.  Clinical Criteria for Early Trial Termination  
Early trial termination will be the result of the criteria specified below:  
1. Qual ity or quantity of data recording is inaccurate or incomplete  
2. Poor adherence to protocol and regulatory requirements 
3. Incidence or severity of adverse drug reaction in this or other studies indicates a po tential 
health hazard to participant s 
4. Plans to modify or discontinue the development of the study drug 
In the event of [COMPANY_006] decision to no longer supply study drug, ample notification will be 
provided so that appropriate adjustments to participant treatment can be made.  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182             Page 29 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
 
 5.0 TRIAL FLOW CHART 
5.1 Study Flow Chart  
Trial Period:  Screening Phase Treatment Cycles  End of 
Treatment Post-Treatment 
Treatment Cycle/Title : Pre-
screening 
(Visit  1) Main 
Study 
Screening 
(Visit 2)  1 a 2  3 4 To be repeated beyond 8 
cycles  (max 16  cycles, 
[1yr]) 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) Safety 
Follow-up Follow Up 
Visitsb Survival 
Follow-
Up 5 6 7 8 
Scheduling Window  (Days):   -14 to  
C1D1 ± 2 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) [ADDRESS_697171] +/- 
7d Every  4 
months +/- 
31d Every 
24 
weeks  
+/-56d  
Administrative Procedures  
Informed Consent  x              
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  x              
Demographics and Medical History  x              
Prior and Concomitant Medication Review  x x             
Trial Treatment Administration    x x x x x x x x     
Post-study anticancer therapy status             x x  
Survival Status             x x x 
Clinical Procedures/Assessments  
Review Adverse Events    x x x x x x x x x x   
Full Physical Examination  x x             
Directed Physical Examination    x x x x x x x x     
Vital Signs and Weight  x x x x x x x x x x     
ECOG Performance Status  x x x            
Laboratory Procedures/Assessments: analysis performed by [CONTACT_131002] – Urine or Serum β-HCG   x x            
PT/INR and aPTT , HIV, hepatitis*   x             
CBC with Differential   x x x x x x x x x     
MDACC# 2018 -1182             Page 30 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
 
 Trial Period:  Screening Phase Treatment Cycles  End of 
Treatment Post-Treatment 
Treatment Cycle/Title : Pre-
screening 
(Visit  1) Main 
Study 
Screening 
(Visit 2)  1 a 2  3 4 To be repeated beyond 8 
cycles  (max 16  cycles, 
[1yr]) 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) Safety 
Follow-up Follow Up 
Visitsb Survival 
Follow-
Up 5 6 7 8 
Scheduling Window  (Days):   -14 to  
C1D1 ± 2 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) [ADDRESS_697172] +/- 
7d Every  4 
months +/- 
31d Every 
24 
weeks  
+/-56d  
Comprehensive Serum Chemistry Panel   x x x x x x x x x     
Urinalysis   x             
FT4 and TSH   x  x  x  x  x     
Tumor marker (e.g. CEA, PSA…)**   x  x x   x  x   x  
ctDNA --MD Anderson CLIA validated 70 -
Gene Liquid Biopsy Panel (LBP -70)  x  x           
Optional tumor biopsies   X  X (may 
be done 
betwee
n 
weeks 
3-9)           
Efficacy Measurements  
Tumor Imaging (on-tx +/ -14 days)***  x   x   
x  X**
**   x  
Archival Tissue Collection/Correlative Studies Blood  
Archival Tissue Collection  x          x    
Correlative Studies Blood Collection   x  x x   x  x x    
MDACC# 2018 -1182             Page 31 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
  
 
 Trial Period:  Screening Phase Treatment Cycles  End of 
Treatment Post-Treatment 
Treatment Cycle/Title : Pre-
screening 
(Visit  1) Main 
Study 
Screening 
(Visit 2)  1 a 2  3 4 To be repeated beyond 8 
cycles  (max 16  cycles, 
[1yr]) 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) Safety 
Follow-up Follow Up 
Visitsb Survival 
Follow-
Up 5 6 7 8 
Scheduling Window  (Days):   -14 to  
C1D1 ± 2 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 ± 3 6m 
(surgery) 
or 12m (no 
surgery) [ADDRESS_697173] +/- 
7d Every  4 
months +/- 
31d Every 
24 
weeks  
+/-56d  
*can be up to 28days prior to first dose  
**if standard of care for that tumor type  
***baseline tumor imaging may be up to 28d prior (required imaging based on standard of care  for that tumor type)  
**** = Cycle 9, 12, and 15. Imaging is not needed on Cycle 8.  
a If screening labs are done within [ADDRESS_697174] of care approach for each tumor type.  
Note: For luminal tumors, endoscopic evaluation prior to and at approximately [ADDRESS_697175] restaging should be considered to he lp guide disease response 
assessment.  
 
   
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 32 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 6.0 TRIAL PROCEDURES  
6.1 Trial Procedures 
The Trial Flow Chart - Section 6.0 summarizes the trial procedures to be performed at each 
visit.  Individual trial procedures are described in detail below.  It may be necessary to perform these procedures at unscheduled time points if deemed clinically necessary by [CONTACT_093]. 
Furthermore, additional evaluations/testing  may be deemed necessary by [CONTACT_112102]/ or 
[COMPANY_006] for reasons related to participant safety. In some cases, such evaluation/testing may be 
potentially sensitive in nature (e.g., HIV, Hepatitis C, etc.), and thus local regulations may 
require that additi onal informed consent be obtained from the participant .  In these cases, such 
evaluations/testing will be performed in accordance with those regulations. 
6.1.1 Administrative Procedures 
[IP_ADDRESS] Informed Consent  
The Investigator must obtain documented consent from each potential participant prior to 
participating in a clinical trial. 
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697176] be documented by [CONTACT_2299] ’s dated signature [INVESTIGATOR_4388] [CONTACT_2299]’s legally 
acceptable representative’s dated signature [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a consent form along with the dated signature 
[CONTACT_63564].  
A copy of the signed and dated consent form should be given to the participant  before 
participation in  the trial.  
The initial informed consent form, any subsequent revised written informed consent form and 
any written inf ormation provided to the participant  must receive the IRB/ERC’s 
approval/favorable opi[INVESTIGATOR_19349].  The participant  or his/her legally acceptable 
representative should be informed in a timely manner if new information becomes available that may be relevant to the participant ’s willingness to continue participation in the trial.  The 
communication of this information will be provided and documented via a revised consent form or addendum to the original consent form that captures the participant ’s dated signature 
[INVESTIGATOR_4388] [CONTACT_2299] ’s legally acceptable representative’s dated signature.  
Specifics about a trial and the trial popula tion will be added to the consent form template at 
the protocol level.   
The informed consent will adhere to IRB/ERC requirements, applicable laws and regulations 
and Sponsor requirements. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 33 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
  
[IP_ADDRESS] Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
All inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed by [CONTACT_131884].  
[IP_ADDRESS] Medical History  
A medical history will be obtained by [CONTACT_27404].  Medical history 
will include all active conditions, and any condition diagnosed within the prior 10 years that are considered to be clinically significant by [CONTACT_737].  Details regarding the disease for which the participant  has enrolled in this study will be recorded separately and not listed as 
medical history.   
[IP_ADDRESS] Prior and Concomitant Medications Review  
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697177] prior medication taken by [CONTACT_246106] 28 days before starting the trial.  Treatment for the disease for which the participant  has 
enrolled in this study will be recorded separately and not listed as a prior medication.  
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697178] medication, if any, taken by [CONTACT_171586].  All medications related to reportable SAEs and ECIs should be recorded as defined in Section 7.2. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Disease Details and Treatments  
[IP_ADDRESS].1 Disease Details  
The investigator or qualified designee will obtain prior and current details regarding disease 
status.  
[IP_ADDRESS].2 Prior Treatment Details 
The investigator or qualified designee will review all prior cancer treatments including systemic treatments, radiation and surgeries.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 34 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 [IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697179] dose of the new therapy.  Once new  anti- cancer  therap y has been initiated the 
participant  will move into survival follow -up.  
6.1.2 Clinical Procedures/Assessments  
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Event (AE) Monitoring  
The investigator or qualified designee will assess each participant  to evaluate for potential new 
or worsening AEs as specified in the Trial Flow Chart and more frequently if clinically indica ted.  Adverse experiences will be graded and recorded throughout the study and during 
the follow -up period according to NCI CTCAE Version 4.0 (see Appendix 2).  Toxicities will 
be characterized in terms regarding seriousness, causality, toxicity grading, and action taken with regard to trial treatment.  
Please refer to section 7.2 for detailed information regarding the assessment and recording of AEs.   
[IP_ADDRESS] Full Physical Exam 
The investigator or qualified designee will perform a complete physical exam during the 
screening period.  Clinically significant abnormal findings should be recorded as medical history.  A full physical exam should be performed during screening,  
[IP_ADDRESS] Directed Physical Exam  
For cycles that do not require a full physical exam per the Trial Flow Chart, the investigator or 
qualified designee will perform a directed physical exam as clinically indicated prior to trial treatment administration.   
[IP_ADDRESS] Vital Signs  
The investigator or qualified designee will take vital signs at screening, prior to the 
admin istration of each dose of trial treatment and at treatment discontinuation as specified in 
the Trial Flow Chart (Section 6.0).  Vital signs should include temperature, pulse, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], weight and blood pressure.  Height will be measured at screenin g only. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 35 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 [IP_ADDRESS] Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Scale 
The investigator or qualified designee will assess ECOG status (see Appendix 1 ) at 
screening, prior to the administration of each dose of trial treatment and discontinuation of trial treatment as specified in the Trial Flow Chart.   
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Tumor Imaging and Assessment of Disease  
This trial will utilize iRECIST upon initial progression at any time point after the first 
restaging study at 6weeks.  At this initial restaging study , iRECIST will not be utilized but 
the criteria specified in the protocol will be used to guide subsequent treatment at this time point. 
Tumor imaging is strongly pre ferred to be acquired by [CONTACT_20420] (CT).  For the 
abdomen and pelvis, contrast- enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be used 
when CT with iodinated contrast is contraindicated, or when local practice mandates it.  MRI 
is the strongly pref erred modality for imaging the brain.  The same imaging technique 
regarding modality, ideally the same scanner, and the use of contrast should be used in a participant throughout the study to optimize the reproducibility of the assessment of existing and new tumor burden and improve the accuracy of the assessment of response or progression based on imaging. For participants with primary brain tumor, brain imaging is required at screening. MRI is preferred; however CT imaging will be acceptable, if MRI is medically contraindicated. For luminal tumors, endoscopic evaluation prior to and at first 
restaging should be considered to help guide disease response assessment.  Expedited 
confirmation of measurable disease based on RECIST 1.1 at screening should be used to determine participant eligibility.  Confirmation that the participant’s imaging shows at least [ADDRESS_697180] 1.1 is highly recommended prior to participant allocation. Participant eligibility will be determined using local assessment (Investigator assessment) based on RECIST 1.1.  In addition, images (including via other modalities) that are obtained at an unscheduled time point to determine disease progression, as well as imaging obtained for ot her reasons, but which demonstrate 
radiologic progression, should also be used to determine progression. 
When the Investigator identifies radiographic progression per RECIST 1.1, efforts should be 
made to verify radiologic PD. Treatment should continue unt il PD has been verified.  
Regardless of whether PD is verified, if the Investigator considers the participant has progressed, but elects to implement iRECIST, the Investigator will assess for confirmation of progression by [CONTACT_19434].   
Expedited confirmation of measurable disease based on RECIST 1.1 at Screening should be 
used to determine participant eligibility.  Confirmation that the participant’s imaging shows at least [ADDRESS_697181] 1.1 is highly 
recommended  prior to participant enrollment   
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 36 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 [IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697182] be performed within [28 ] days prior to the date of 
pembrolizumab. The site study team must review screening images to confirm the participant has measurable disease per RECIST 1.1. Tumor imaging performed as part of routine clinical management is acceptable for use as screening tumor imaging if they are of diagnostic quality and performed within [ADDRESS_697183] of care imaging performed for that tumor type. 
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697184] on -study imaging assessment should be performed at approximately  6 weeks (42 
days ±7  days]) from the date of first pembrolizumab.  Subsequent tumor imaging should be 
performed every 9 weeks (63 days ±7 days) or more frequently if clinically indicated.  .  It is 
highly recommended that imaging timing should follow calendar days and should not be adjusted for delays in cycle starts.  Imaging should continue to be performed until disease progression is identified by [CONTACT_535706].  
Objective response should be confirmed by a repeat imaging assessment.  Tumor imaging to 
confirm PR or CR should be performed at least [ADDRESS_697185] in dication of a 
response is observed.  Participants will then return to regular scheduled imaging every 9 weeks, starting with the next scheduled imaging time point.  Participants who receive 
additional imaging for confirmation do not need to undergo the next scheduled tumor 
imaging if it is less than 4 weeks later; tumor imaging may resume at the subsequent scheduled imaging time point.   
Per iRECIST (Section [IP_ADDRESS]), disease progression should be confirmed [ADDRESS_697186] met the conditions detailed in Section [IP_ADDRESS].  Participants who receive confirmatory imaging do not need to undergo the next scheduled tumor imaging if it is less than 4 weeks later; tumor imaging may resume at the subsequent scheduled imaging time point, if clinically stable.  Participants w ho 
have confirmed disease progression by [CONTACT_19393], as assessed by [CONTACT_779], will discontinue study treatment.  Exceptions are detailed in Section [IP_ADDRESS]. 
[IP_ADDRESS].2 End of Treatment and Follow -up Tumor Imaging  
In participants who discontinue study treatment, tumor im aging should be performed at the 
time of treatment discontinuation (±4 week window).  If previous imaging was obtained 
within 4  weeks prior to the date of discontinuation, then imaging at treatment discontinuation 
is not mandatory.  In participants who discontinue study treatment due to documented disease 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 37 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 progression and the Investigator elects not to implement iRECIST, this is the final required tumor imaging. 
In participants who discontinue study treatment without documented disease progression, 
every eff ort should be made to continue monitoring their disease status by [CONTACT_193425] (every 9 weeks in Year 1 or every 16 weeks after Year 1) to monitor disease status until the start of a new anticancer t reatment, 
disease progression, pregnancy, death, withdrawal of consent, or the end of the study, whichever occurs first.  
[IP_ADDRESS].3 Second Course (Retreatment) Tumor Imaging  
Tumor imaging must be performed within 28 days prior to restarting treatment with pembrolizum ab.  Local reading (Investigator assessment with site radiology reading) will be  
used to determine eligibility. 
The first on -study imaging assessment should be performed at 6 weeks ( 24 days ±7  days) 
after the restart of treatment.  Subsequent tumor imaging should be performed every 9 weeks 
(63 days ±7 days) or more frequently, if clinically indicated. 
Per RECIST 1.1 (Section [IP_ADDRESS]), if tumor imaging shows initial PD, tumor assessment 
should be repeated [ADDRESS_697187], in clinically stable participants. 
In participants who discontinue study treatmen t, tumor imaging should be performed at the 
time of treatment discontinuation (±4 week window).  If previous imaging was obtained 
within 4  weeks prior to the date of discontinuation, then imaging at treatment discontinuation 
is not mandatory.  In participants who discontinue study treatment due to documented disease progression, this is the final required tumor imaging. 
In participants who discontinue study treatment without documented disease progression, 
every effort should be made to continue monitoring their disease status by [CONTACT_70706] 9 weeks ( 63 days ±7 days) until either the start of a new anticancer treatment, disease 
progression, pregnancy, death, or the end of the study, whichever occurs first. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 38 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
  
  
 
 [IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697188]  1.1 will be used as the primary measure for assessment of tumor response, date of 
disease progression, and as a basis for all protocol guidelines related to disease status ( e.g., 
discontinuation of study treatment).  Although RECIST 1.1 references a maxim um of 5  target 
lesions in total and 2 per organ, the Sponsor allows a maximum of 10 target lesions in total and 5 per organ, if clinically relevant to enable a broader sampling of tumor burden.  
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697189] publication [Seymour et al, 2017].  iRECIST will be used by [CONTACT_246110], and make treatment decisions.   
 
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182          Page 39 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
 Table [ADDRESS_697190] Radiologic Evidence of Progressive Disease (first restaging evaluation at approximately 
6weeks excluded) 
 Clinically Stable  Clinically Unstable  
Imaging Treatment  Imaging Treatment  
First radiologic evidence of 
PD by [CONTACT_393] 1.1  Repeat imaging at 4 to 8 weeks to confirm PD.  May continue study treatment at the Investigator’s discretion while 
awaiting confirmatory tumor 
imaging by [CONTACT_246111].  Repeat imaging at 4 to 8 weeks to confirm PD per 
Investigator’s discretion only. Discontinue treatment  
Repeat tumor imaging 
confirms PD (iCPD) by 
[CONTACT_535707]. Discontinue treatment (exception is possible upon consultation with 
Sponsor). No additional imaging 
required. Not applicable  
Repeat tumor imaging shows iUPD by [CONTACT_535708] 4 to 
8 weeks to confirm PD.  May 
occur at next regularly scheduled imaging visit.  Continue study treatment at the Investigator’s discretion.  Repeat imaging at 4 to 8 weeks to confirm PD per 
Investigator’s discretion only. Discont inue treatment  
Repeat tumor imaging shows iSD, iPR, or iCR by [CONTACT_246114].  Continue regularly scheduled 
imaging assessments.  Continue study treatment at the Investigator’s discretion.  Continue regularly scheduled imaging assessments.  May restart study treatment if condition has improved and/or 
clinically stable per Investigator’s 
discretion.  Next tumor image should 
occur according to the regular imaging 
schedule. 
iCPD = iRECIST confirmed progressive disease; iCR = iRECIS T complete response; iRECIST = modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 for immune -based 
therapeutics; iSD = iRECIST stable disease; iUPD = iRECIST unconfirmed progressive disease; PD = progressive disease; RECIST 1.1 = Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors 1.1..  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 40 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 Figure 5: Imaging and Treatment for Clinically Stable Participants after First Radiologic 
Evidence of PD Assessed by [CONTACT_535709]# 2018 -1182         Page 41 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 [IP_ADDRESS] Tumor Tissue Collection and Correlative Studies Blood Sampling  
Submit at least one formalin fixed paraffin -embedded (FFPE) archived  tumor tissue block from 
biopsy of the primary cancer  at time of enrollment and from the resected surgical specimen at 
the time of primary tumor resection . A corresponding H&E slide from the submitted block 
must be provided to permit quality assessment (QA) of tissue block. If patient has tissue 
collected for reasons other than the protocol, study will also acquire surplus t issue remaining. 
The FFPE tissue block is preferred; however, if unable to provide a tissue block, cut 20 five -
micron unstained slides and mount on charged glass slides and 10 ten- micron unstained slides 
mounted on uncharged slides. Label the slides with the patient ID number, accession number, 
and order of sections (i.e., 1- 11).  H&E stain the first cut slide (i.e., slide labeled 1). Please do 
not re -label over the original label.  For samples containing less than [ADDRESS_697191] a minimum of 75% tumor tissue on the slide to be deemed adequate for study. Do not bake or place cover slips on the slides.  
The following materials below are mandatory (unless indicated otherwise), though: 
• Paraffin embedded tissue blocks with c orresponding H&E (or 30 slides), if limited 
tissue is available exceptions to the amount of tissue will be made.  
• Surg ical Pathology Report 
Correlative blood sampling will be performed at screening, prior to second cycle of  
pembrolizumab and subsequently corresponding to restaging frequency  
6.1.3 Laboratory Procedures/Assessments  
Details regarding specific laboratory procedures/assessments to be performed in this trial are 
provided below.  
Laboratory tests for hematology, chemistry, urinalysis, and others are specified in Table 6 .    
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 42 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 Table 6 Laboratory Tests 
Hematology  Chemistry  Urinalysis  Other  
Hematocrit  Albumin  Blood  Serum β -human chorionic gonadotropin † 
Hemoglobin  Alkaline phosphatase  Glucose    (β-hCG) † 
Platelet count  Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  Protein  PT (INR)  
WBC (total and differential)  Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  Specific gravity  aPTT  
Red Blood Cell Count  Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  Microscopic exam (If abnormal)   Free thyroxine  (T4) 
Absolute Neutrophil Count  Carbon Dioxide ‡ results are noted  Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)  
Absolute Lymphocyte Count    (CO 2 or bicarbonate ) Urine pregnancy test † Blood for correlative studies  
 Uric Acid   Tumor markers (per tumor type)  
 Calcium    
 Chloride    
 Glucose     
 Phosphorus *    
 Potassium      
 Sodium     
 Magnesium     
 Total Bilirubin     
 Direct Bilirubin (If total bilirubin is 
elevated above the upper limit of 
normal)    
 Total protein    
 Blood Urea Nitrogen    
† Perform on women of childbearing potential only. If urine pregnancy results cannot be confirmed as negative, a serum pregnanc y test will be required.   
‡ If considered standard of care in your region.  
* Not performed during screening.  
 
  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 43 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 Laboratory tests for screening or entry into the Second Course Phase should be performed 
within [ADDRESS_697192] be reviewed by [CONTACT_79436].  
 
6.1.4 Other Procedures 
[IP_ADDRESS] Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
When a participant  discontinues/withdraws prior to trial completion, all applicable activities 
scheduled for the final trial visit should be performed at the time of discontinuation.  Any 
adverse events which are present at the time of discontinuation/withdrawal should be f ollowed 
in accordance with the safety requirements outlined in Section 7.2 - Assessing and Recording 
Adverse Events.  Participant s who a) attain a CR or b) complete [ADDRESS_697193] arting treatment if they meet 
the crit eria specified in Section 5.2.3.  After discontinuing treatment following assessment of 
CR, these participant s should return to the site for a Safety Follow -up Visit (described in 
Section [IP_ADDRESS].1) and then proceed to the Follow -Up Period of the study (described in Section 
[IP_ADDRESS].2).  
[IP_ADDRESS] Blinding/Unblinding  
This is an open -label unblinded study 
6.1.5 Visit Requirements  
Visit requirements are outlined in Section 6.0 - Trial Flow Chart.   Specific procedure -related 
details are pr ovided above in Section 7.1 - Trial Procedures.  
[IP_ADDRESS] Screening  
[IP_ADDRESS].1 Screening Period  
If a patient is thought to be a potential candidate for the trial then he/she can be offered 
participation and, if agreeable, will undergo screening procedure outlined below from D- 14 
to C1D1 .  Previously conducted HIV, PT/PTT, and hepatitis testing within 30 days does not 
need to be repeated and will be acceptable for screening purposes (results performed at 
outside laboratories as standard of care testing will be accepted).  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 44 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 Table [IP_ADDRESS]-1: Screening Procedural Outline  
Procedure  Screening  
Visit  
From D -14 
to C1D1* Notes  
 
Eligibility 
Assessments   
Informed Consent X Original IC in screening for protocol participation;  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  X All inclusion/exclusion criteria should be assessed at 
screening and confirmed prior to first dose.  
Determination of resectable or unresectable X  
Medical History  X  
Tumor Tissue Sample  X Confirm diagnosis of solid organ cancer  
Paraffin Tissue  X Determine availability and order prior collected 
tumor tissue   
Prior Medications  X Prior exposure to checkpoint inhibitor therapy 
excluded  
ECOG Performance Status X Within [ADDRESS_697194] dose  
Safety Assessments    
Physical Examination  X  
Vital Signs & Oxygen Saturation  X Including BP, HR, temperature and oxygen saturation 
by [CONTACT_406] (at rest). Obtain vital signs at the 
screening  
 visit and within [ADDRESS_697195] dose  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 45 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 Table [IP_ADDRESS]-1: Screening Procedural Outline  
Procedure  Screening  
Visit  
From D -14 
to C1D1* Notes  
 
Laboratory Tests  X CBC w/differential and platelet count, 
Chemistry panel including: LDH, AST, ALT, ALP, T.Bili, 
BUN or serum urea level, creatinine, Ca, Mg, Na, K, 
Cl, Glucose, CEA, amylase, lipase, TSH, Free T4 , 
appropriate tumor markers per primary site  (for 
example  CEA, PSA, CA19- 9, CA125 …),within [ADDRESS_697196]  x correlative blood sample (60ml of  blood: 
approximately [ADDRESS_697197] 
gold/black top tubes) within [ADDRESS_697198] 
dose. (for full details related to blood collection 
please see laboratory collection manual and note 
exact tube types may be adjusted during study ) 
HIV, hepatitis, PT/PTT 
laboratory tests  X HIV Ab, Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBV sAg), and 
hepatitis C antibody (HCV Ab) or Hepatitis C RN A 
(HCV RNA)  or PT/PTT within [ADDRESS_697199] 
(WOCBP only)  X Serum or urine to be done at screening visit and 
repeated within 72hours of first dose of study 
therapy 
Efficacy Assessment    
Baseline Tumor 
Imaging Assessment  X CT of the C/A/P or or PET/CT or MRI brain  or 
appropriate standard of care imaging per that 
disease type  as indicated  within [ADDRESS_697200] 
treatment dose . 
* If screening labs are done within 3 days of Cycle 1, labs for C1D1 do not need to be 
repeated.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Treatment Period  
Once enrolled on trial, each participant will have the visits/events outlined in the study flow 
chart in section 5.1.  Treatment will not commence until at least 2 weeks from prior systemic 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 46 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 chemotherapy or radiation therapy.  Patients may undergo screening during this time or after 
two weeks.  There is no maximum time from prior chemotherapy until pembrolizumab 
treatment.  Any resectable patient confirmed to have disease progression on restaging visit 
should be evaluated for and proceed to surgical resection. Each clinic visit  while on active 
therapy will includ e targeted physical examination, vital signs , adverse events assessment and 
routine labs. Thyroid function testing should be done every [ADDRESS_697201] dose 
of drug. 
[IP_ADDRESS].[ADDRESS_697202].  All AEs that occur prior to the Safety Follow -Up Visit sh ould be recorded.  
Participants with an AE of Grade > [ADDRESS_697203].  SAEs that 
occur within 90 days of the end of treatment or before initiation of a new anti -cancer  treatment 
should also be followed and recorded.  Participant s who are eligible for retreatment with 
pembrolizumab (as described in Section 5.2.3) may have up to two safety follow -up visits, one 
after the Initial Treatmen t Period and one after the Second Course Treatment . 
[IP_ADDRESS].2 Follow- up Visits  
Participant s who discontinue study treatment for a reason other than disease progression will 
move into the Follow -Up Phase and should be assessed every 6 weeks ( 42 ± 7 days) by  
[CONTACT_110531].  After 1 year, the imaging time point will occur 
every 9 weeks (± 7 days).  Every effort should be made to collect information regarding disease 
status until the start of new anti -cancer therapy, disease progression, death, end of the study or 
if the participant begins retreatment with pembrolizumab as detailed in Section 5.2.3.  
Information regarding post -study anti -cancer  treatment will be collected if new treatment is 
initiated.  
Participant s who are eligible to receive retreatment with pembrolizumab according to the 
criteria in Section 5.2.3 will move from the follow -up phase to the Second Course Phase when 
they experience disease progression.   
[IP_ADDRESS].3 Survival Follow- up 
Participant s who experience confirmed disease progression or start a new anticancer therapy, 
will move into the Survival Follow -Up Phase and should be contact[CONTACT_535710]# 2018 -1182         Page 47 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 [ADDRESS_697204] a causal relationship with this treatment. An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory finding, 
for example), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the use of a medicinal product or protocol -specified procedure, whether or not considered related to the medicinal product or 
protocol- specified procedure.  Any worsening (i.e., any clinically significant adverse change 
in frequency and/or intensity) of a preexisting condition that is temporally associated with the use of the [COMPANY_006]’s product, is also an adverse event.  
Changes resulting from normal growth and development that do not vary significantly in frequency or severity from expected levels are not to be considered adverse events.  Examples of this may include, but are not limited to, teething, typi[INVESTIGATOR_121254] a physiologically appropriate tim e. 
[COMPANY_006]  product includes any pharmaceutical product, biological product, device, diagnostic 
agent or protocol -specified procedure, whether investigational (including placebo or active 
comparator medication) or marketed, manufactured by, licensed by, provided by [CONTACT_199954]. 
Adverse events may occur during the course of the use of [COMPANY_006] product in clinical trials, or 
as prescribed in clinical practice, from overdose (whether accidental or intentional), from abuse 
and from withdrawa l. 
All AEs, SAEs and other reportable safety events that occur after the consent form is signed 
but before treatment allocation must be reported by [CONTACT_19449]- in or other run -in treatment, if the event cause the participant to be 
excluded from the study, or is the result of a protocol-specified intervention, including but not limited to washout or discontinuation of usual therapy, diet, or a procedure.  
● All AEs from the time of treatment allocation through  [ADDRESS_697205] be reported by [CONTACT_093].  
● All AEs meeting serious criteria, from the time of treatment allocation through [ADDRESS_697206] be reported by [CONTACT_093].  
● All pregnancies and exposure during breastfeeding, from the time of treatment allocation 
through 120 days following cessation of study treatment, or 30 days following cessation of 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 48 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 study treatment if the participant initiates new anticancer therapy  must be reported by [CONTACT_1275].  
● Additionally, any SAE brought to the attention of an investigator at any time outside of the 
time period specified above must be reported immediately by [CONTACT_191235]- related.  
Investigators are not obligated to actively seek AE or SAE or other reportable safety events in former study participants. However, if the investigator learns of any SAE, including a death, at any time after a participant has been discharged from the study, and he/she considers the event to be reasonably related to the study treatment or study participation, the investigator must promptly notify [COMPANY_006]. 
6.2.1 Definition of an Overdose for This Protocol and Reporting of Overdose to t he 
Sponsor and to [COMPANY_006] 
For purposes of this study , an overdose of pembrolizumab will be defined as any dose of 1,000 
mg or greater (≥5 times the indicated dose).  No specific information is available on the 
treatment of overdose of pembrolizumab. In the event of overdose, the participant  should be 
observed closely for signs of toxicity.  Appropriate supportive treatment should be provided if 
clinically indicated.  
 
If an adverse event(s)  is associated with (“results from”) the overdose of a [COMPANY_006]  product , the 
adverse event(s) is reported as a serious adverse event, even if no other seriousness criteria are 
met. 
If a dose of [COMPANY_006] ’s product meeting the protocol definition of overdose is taken without any 
associated clinical symptoms or abnormal laboratory results, the overdose is reported as a non-serious Event of Clinical Interest (ECI), using the terminology “accidental or intentional overdose without adverse effect.” 
All reports of overdose with and without an adverse event must be reported within 24 hours to 
the Sponsor and within 2 working days  hours to [COMPANY_006]  Global Safety . (Attn: Worldwide 
Product Safety; FAX [PHONE_1209]) 
6.2.[ADDRESS_697207] feeding are not considered adverse 
events, it is the responsibility of investigators or their designees to report any pregnancy or 
lactation in a participant (spontaneously reported to them) that occurs during the study . 
Pregnancies and infant exposures during br eastfeeding that occur after the consent form is 
signed but before treatment allocation must be reported by [CONTACT_535711], or are the result of a protocol -specified intervention, 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 49 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 including but not limited to washout or discontinuation of usual therapy, diet, placebo 
treatment or a procedure.   
Pregnancies and infant exposures during breastfeeding that occur from the time of treatment 
allocation through 120 days following cessation of Sponsor’s product, or [ADDRESS_697208] be followed to the completion/termination of the pregnancy. Pregnancy outcomes of spontaneous abortion, missed abortion, benign hydatidiform mole, blighted ovum, fetal death, intrauterine death, miscarriage and stillbirth must be reported as serious events (Important Medical Events). If the pregnancy continues to term, the outcome (health of infant) must also be reported. 
Such events must be reported within 24 hours to the Sponsor and within 2 working days to 
[COMPANY_006] Global Safety. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; FAX 215- 661- 6229) 
6.2.3 Immediate Reporting of Adverse Events to the Sponsor and to [COMPANY_006] 
[IP_ADDRESS] Serious Adverse Events 
A serious adverse event is any adverse event occurring at any dose or during any use of 
[COMPANY_006] ’s product that: 
• Results in death;  
• Is life threatening;  
• Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
• Results in or prolongs an existing inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]; 
• Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect;  
• Is another important medical event  
• Note:  In addition to the above criteria, adverse events meeting either of the below 
criteria, although not serious per ICH definition, are reportable to the [COMPANY_006] in the same timeframe as SAEs to meet certain local requirements. Therefore, these events are considered serious by [CONTACT_131892]. 
• Is a new cancer (that is not a condition of the study);  
• Is associated with an overdose.  
 
Refer to Table [ADDRESS_697209] be reported within 24 hours to the Sponsor and within 2 
working days to [COMPANY_006] Global Safety if it causes the participant to be excluded from the trial, or is the result of a protocol -specified intervention, including but not limited to washout or 
discontinuation of usual therapy, diet, placebo treatment or a procedure. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 50 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 For the time period beginning at treatment allocation through [ADDRESS_697210] be followed up for outcome. 
SAE reports and any other relevant safety information are to be forwarded to the [COMPANY_006] 
Global Safety facsimile number:  +1 -[PHONE_1209]  
A copy of all 15 Day Reports and Annual Progress Reports is submitted as required by [CONTACT_8415], European Union (EU), Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices agency (PMDA) or other local regulators. Investigators will cross reference this submission according to local  regulations to 
the [COMPANY_006] Investigational Compound Number (IND, CSA, etc.) at the time of submission.  Additionally investigators will submit a copy of these reports to [COMPANY_006] & Co., Inc. (Attn: Worldwide Product Safety; FAX [PHONE_1209]) at the time of submission to FDA. 
[IP_ADDRESS] Events of Clinical Interest  
Selected non -serious and serious adverse events are also known as Events of Clinical Interest 
(ECI) and must be reported within 2 working days to [COMPANY_006] Global Safety. (Attn: Worldwide 
Product Safety; FAX [PHONE_1209]). 
For the time period beginning when the consent form is signed until treatment allocation, any 
ECI, or follow up to an ECI, that occurs to any participant  must be reported within [ADDRESS_697211] for this trial include:  
1.  An  overdose of [COMPANY_006] product, as defined in Section 7.2.1 - Definition of an Overdose for 
This Protocol and Reporting of Overdose to the Sponsor, that is  not associated with clinical 
symptoms or abnormal laboratory results.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 51 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020  
  
 
 2.  an elevated AST or ALT lab value that is greater than or equal to 3X the upper limit of 
normal and an elevated total bilirubin lab value that is greater than or equal to 2X the upper limit of normal and, at the same time, an alkaline phosphatase lab value that is less than 2X the upper limit of normal, as determined by [CONTACT_13149] -specified laboratory testing or 
unscheduled laboratory testing.*  
*Note:   These criteria are based upon available regulatory guidance documents. The 
purpose of the criteria is to specify a threshold of abnormal hepatic tests that may require an additional evaluation for an underlying etiology.  
 
6.2.4 Evaluating Adverse Events 
An investigator who is a qualified physician will evaluate all adverse events according to the NCI Common Terminology for Adverse Events (CTCAE), version 4.0. Any adverse event which changes CTCAE grade over the course of a given epi[INVESTIGATOR_535685] a dverse event case report forms/worksheets.  
All adverse events regardless of CTCAE grade must also be evaluated for seriousness.  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 52 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Table 7 Evaluating Adverse Events 
An investigator who is a qualified physician, will evaluate all adverse events as to:  
V4.0 CTCAE 
Grading Grade 1  Mild; asymptomatic or mid symptoms; clinical or diagnostic observations only; intervention not indicated.  
 
Grade 2  Moderate; minimal, local or noninvasive intervention indicated; limiting age -appropriate instrumental ADL.  
 Grade 3  Severe or medically significant but not immediately life -threatening; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77991]; disabling; 
limiting self -care ADL.  
 Grade 4  Life threatening consequences; urgent intervention indicated.  
 Grade [ADDRESS_697212] that:  
 †Results in death ; or 
 †Is life threatening; or  places the participant , in the view of the investigator, at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred (Note: This does not include an 
adverse event that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.); or  
 †Results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  (substantial disr uption of one’s ability to conduct normal life functions); or  
 †Results in or prolongs an existing inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_19357], regardless of length of stay, even if the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2138] a precautionary measure for continued observation. (Note: Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_19358] a pre- existing condition that has not 
worsened is not a serious adverse event.  A pre- existing condition is a clinical condition that is diagnosed prior to the use of a [COMPANY_006] product and is documented in the 
patient’s medical history.); or  
 †Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  (in offspring of participant  taking the product regardless of time to diagnosis);or  
 Is a new cancer  (that is not a condition of the stu dy) (although not serious per ICH definition, is reportable to the Sponsor within 24 hours and to [COMPANY_006] within 2 
working days to meet certain local requirements); or 
 Is an overdose  (whether accidental or intentional).  Any adverse event associated with an overdose is considered a serious adverse event for  collection purposes. An 
overdose that is not associated with an adverse event is considered a non- serious event of clinical interest and must be reported within 24 hours  to the Sponsor and to 
[COMPANY_006] within 2 working days. . 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 53 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
  Other important medical events  that may not result in death, not be life threatening, or not require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious adverse eve nt wh en, 
based upon appropriate medical judgment, the event may jeopardize the participant and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes 
listed previously (designated above by a †).  
Duration  Record the start and stop dates of the adverse event. If less than [ADDRESS_697213] to be discontinued?  
Relationship to 
[COMPANY_006] Product  Did [COMPANY_006]  product cause the adverse event? The determinati on of the likelihood that [COMPANY_006]  product caused the adverse event will be provided by [CONTACT_75368] a qualified physician. The investigator’s signed/dated initials on the source document or worksheet that supports the causality noted on the AE form, ensures that a 
medically qualified assessment of causality was done. This initialed document must be retained for the required regulatory time frame. The criteria below are intended 
as reference guidelines to assist the investigator in assessing the likelihood of a relationship between the test drug and the adverse event based upon the available information. 
The following components are to be used to assess the relationship between [COMPANY_006]  product and the AE ; the greater the correlation with the components  and their 
respective elements (in number and/or intensity), the more likely [COMPANY_006] product caused the adverse event (AE):  
 Exposure  Is there evidence that the participant was a ctually exposed to [COMPANY_006]  product such as: reliable history, acceptable compliance assessment (pi[INVESTIGATOR_692], 
diary, etc.), expected pharmacologic effect, or measurement of drug/metabolite in bodily specimen? 
 Time Course  Did the AE follow in a reasonable temporal sequence from  admi nistration of [COMPANY_006]  product?  
Is the time of onset of the AE compatible with a drug- induced effect (applies to trials with investigational medicinal product)?  
 Likely Cause  Is the AE not reasonably explained by [CONTACT_26369],  other drug(s)/vaccine(s), or other host or environmental factors  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 54 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Relationship  The following components are to be used to assess the relationship between the test drug and the AE: (continued)  
to [COMPANY_006]  
Product 
(continued)  Dechallenge  Was [COMPANY_006]  product discontinued or dose/exposure/frequency reduced?  
If yes, did the AE resolve or improve?  
If yes, this is a positive dechallenge. If no, this is a negative dechallenge.  
(Note: This criterion is not applicable if: (1) the AE resulted in death or permanent disability; (2) the AE resolved/improved despi[INVESTIGATOR_77992]’s product; or (3) the trial is a single- dose drug trial); or (4) Sponsor’s product(s) is/are only used one time.)  
 Rechallenge  Was the participant  re-exposed to [COMPANY_006]  product in this study?  
If yes, did the AE recur or worsen? 
If yes, this is a positive rechallenge. If no, this is a negative rechallenge.  
(Note: This criterion is not applicable if: (1) the initial AE resulted in death or permanent disability, or (2) the trial is a single -dose drug trial); or (3) 
Sponsor’s product(s) is/are used only one time).  
NOTE: IF A RECHALLENGE IS PLANNED FOR AN ADVERSE EVENT WHICH WAS SERIOUS AND WHICH MAY H AVE BEEN 
CAUSED BY [CONTACT_180751], O R IF REEXPOSURE TO MERCK  PRODUCT  POSES AD DITIONAL POTENTIAL  SIGNIFICANT RISK 
TO THE PARTICIPANT, THEN THE RECHALLENGE MUST BE APPROVED IN ADVANCE BY [CONTACT_131890].  
 Consistency 
with Trial Treatment Profile  Is the clinical/pathological presentation of the AE consistent with previous k nowledge regarding [COMPANY_006]  product or drug class pharmacology or 
toxicology? 
The assessment of relationship will be reported on the case report forms /worksheets by [CONTACT_19427] a qualified ph ysicia n according to his/her best clinical judgment, including 
consideration of the above elements.  
Record one of the following  Use the following scale of criteria as guidance (not all criteria must be present  to be indicative of [COMPANY_006]  product relationship).  
Yes, there is a rea sonable 
possibility of [COMPANY_006]  product 
relationship. There is evide nce of exposure to [COMPANY_006]  product.  The temporal sequence of the AE onset relative to the  administration of [COMPANY_006]  product is reasonable.  
The AE is more likely explained by [CONTACT_78034].  
No, there is not a rea sonable 
possibility of [COMPANY_006]  product 
relationship Participant  did not receive the [COMPANY_006] product  OR temporal sequence of the AE onset relative to administration of [COMPANY_006]  product is not reasonable 
OR the AE is more likely explained by [CONTACT_535712].  (Also entered for a participant with overdose without an associated 
AE.)  
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 55 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
  
 
6.2.5 Sponsor Responsibility for Reporting Adverse Events 
All Adverse Events will be reported to regulatory authorities, IRB/IECs and investigators in 
accordance with all applicable global laws and regulations.  
7.0 STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  PLAN  
7.1 Statistical Analysis Plan Summary  
Statistical Consideration: 
Efficacy:  
1) The primary endpoint is Pathological complete response ( pCR) after [ADDRESS_697214] 1 
dose of pembrolizumab (intent to treat). Those who do not undergo surgical resection  will be 
classified as non -pCR for the intention to treat analysis . We will estimate the pCR rate among 
the group of patients who receive at least 3 doses of pembrolizumab and undergo surgical 
resection  (the primary endpoint).  Assuming the pCR is 80%, wit h 20 patients, the 95% 
confidence interval is (0.56, 0.94).  
 2) Rate of organ sparing at 1 year (primary tumor control and no metastatic disease ) will  
be assessed for all patients who receive at least [ADDRESS_697215] 3 doses of neoadjuvant pembrolizumab and do not 
undergo surgical resection. Assuming the organ sparing rate of 0.7, with 10 patients, the 95 % 
confidence interval is (0. 35, 0.93) . 
 
Safety monitoring: Toxicity will be monitored using the Bayesian approach of Thall, Simon, Estey (1995, 1996) 
and the extension by [CONTACT_210872] (1998). Multc Lean Desktop (version 2.1) was used to generate the stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_535686]. Toxicity monitoring will be performed (n=35 patients) throughout the study. Unacceptable toxicities are defined as any Grade [ADDRESS_697216] 6 months of therapy. Denote the probability of toxicity by [CONTACT_6214]. We 
assume as a priori, PT ~ beta (0.5, 1.5). Our stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_195441]:  
Pr (PT > 0.25 | data)>0.85. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 56 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 That is, we will stop the trial for new patient enrollment if at any time during the stu dy, we 
determine that there is more than 85% chance that the unacceptable toxicity rate is more than 
25%. This toxicity monitoring rule will be applied after the first [ADDRESS_697217] been enrolled and evaluated, and then will be monitored by [CONTACT_535713] 5. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_535687] 8.  
Table 8.  Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_433432] # of patients (in  cohort size of 5, starting from the 5th patient) Stop this cohort if there 
are this many patients with toxicities:  
# of patients ( in cohort size of 
5, starting from the 5th  patient)  Stop this cohort if there are this 
many patients with toxicities:  
5 3-5 
10 5-10 
15 6-15 
20 8-20 
25 9-25 
30 11-30 
35 Always  stop with this many 
patients  
  Table 9. Operating characteristic for toxicity monitoring  
True toxicity rate  Prob(stop the 
trial early)  Average number 
of patients treated  
0.[ADDRESS_697218] that 80% of these patients  
with resectable tumors  would undergo surgery.   After 5 patients  falling into this category, the 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 57 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Bayesian stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1877]: Pr (surgery rate> 0.8|data) < 0.01 will be  continuously implemented  
assuming the surgery rate follows a Beta prior (0.8,0.2) . That is, if at any time after enrolling 
[ADDRESS_697219]  resectable tumor and don’t respond to  pembrolizumab, we determine that  
there is a less than 1% chance that the surgery rate is more than 80% , we will stop enrollment 
of the study. Assuming ther e are [ADDRESS_697220] been enrolled and evaluated, and then will be monitored by [CONTACT_535714] 5. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_535687] 10 (oper ating 
characteristic in table 11) . For example, if there is none or only [ADDRESS_697221] 5 patie nts 
undergo surgery, the study will be stopped. Table 10.  Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_535688]  
# of patients ( in cohort size of 
5, starting from the 5th  patient)  Stop the study  if there are this 
many patients with surgery  
5 0-1 
10 0-4 
15 0-7 
20                        0-11 
 
Table 11. Operating characteristic for surgery rate monitoring  for patients who do not respond 
to pembrolizumab but with resectable tumor  
 
True surgery rate  Prob(stop the 
trial early)  
0.5 0.56 
0.6 0.27 
0.7 0.08 
0.8 0.01 
 
7.2 Statistical Analysis Plan  
Analysis Plan: 
All patients who received any dose of the study agent, pembrolizumab, will be included in the 
analysis for efficacy and safety.  Demographic/clinical characteristics and safety data of the 
patients will be summarized using descriptive statistics such as frequency, mean, standard 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 58 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 deviation, median and range. We will follow standard reporting guidelines for adverse events. 
Safety data will be summarized by [CONTACT_17203], severity and frequency.  
Safety will be recorded according to CTCAE toxicity and also post -operati ve complications 
will be classified according to Clavien -Dindo classification1. 
For the efficacy analysis, we will estimate the pathological  complete response and rate of organ 
sparing at 1 year along with the 95% confidence interval.   
For each subject, relapse- free survival  and overall survival will be calculated. Relapse- free 
survival is defined as the number of days from the date of response to  the date of documented 
treatment failure, relapses or death from any cause, whichever occurs first, and will b e 
calculated for all patients. The overall survival is defined as the time from treatment start till 
death or last follow -up.  The distribution  of time -to-event endpoints including overall survival 
(OS)  and event free survival  (RFS) will be estimated using  the method of Kaplan and Meier. 
Comparisons of time -to-event endpoints by [CONTACT_525300]-
rank tests.  The association between response (e.g. pathological complete  response) and 
patient’s clinical characteristics, such as changes in ct DNA, mutation burden, T- effector cell 
populations , gene expression profiles, etc.  will be examined by [CONTACT_195463]’s rank sum test or 
Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate.  
 
8.0 TRANSLATIONAL PLAN  
The following are part of efforts to further exploratory objectives:  
Patient ctDNA levels may be tracked at various time- points during the study to identify 
patterns of change and it association to treatment benefit for patients.  
Optional paired tumor bi opsies may be performed at baseline and while on treatment. 
Biomarkers evaluated from the biopsies will include the following: pre -treatment indel 
mutation score, which is potentially predictive of MSI -H cancer outcomes (Mandal et al., 
Science. 2019); corr elation of CD8 infiltration changes with efficacy; and relationship of 
protein and RNA expression of immune resistance with tumor response and progression. 
9.[ADDRESS_697222] in accordance with the protocol and any applicable laws and regulations. 
Pembrolizumab  will be provided by [CONTACT_176758] 8 . 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 59 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Table [ADDRESS_697223] Name & Potency  Dosage Form  
Pembrolizumab  100 mg/ 4mL  Solution for Injection  
 
9.2 Packaging and Labeling Information 
Supplies will be labeled in accordance with regulatory requirements.  
9.3 Clinical Supplies Disclosure  
This trial is open -label; therefore, the participant, the trial site personnel, the Sponsor and/or 
designee are not blinded to treatment. Drug identity (name, strength) is included in the label 
text; random code/disclosure envelopes or lists are not provided. 
9.[ADDRESS_697224] be recorded by [CONTACT_78044].  
Clinical supplies may not be used for any purpose other than that stated in the protocol. 
9.5 Returns and Reconciliation  
The investigator is responsible for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_80039], the amount dispensed to and returned by [CONTACT_2299] s and the 
amount remaining at the conclusion of the trial.  
Upon completion  or termination  of the study, all unused and/or partially used investigational 
product will be destroyed at the site per institutional policy. It is the Investigator ’s 
respons ibility  to arrange for disposal of all empty containers, provided that procedures for 
proper disposal have been established according to applicable  federal, state, local and 
institutional guidelines and procedures, and provided that appropriate records of disposal are 
kept. 
10.0 ADMINISTRATIVE AND R EGULATORY DETAILS  
The investigator’s or site’s designated investigational product manager is required to maintain 
accurate investigational product accountability records. Upon completion of the study, copi[INVESTIGATOR_535689]. All unused investigational product will be returned to [COMPANY_006]- authorized depot or disposed of upon 
authorization by [CONTACT_44873]. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 60 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 10.[ADDRESS_697225] participants’ privacy by [CONTACT_535715][INVESTIGATOR_535690].   Patient 
data will be kept on secure computers and Samples will be kept in freezers in locked laboratories and buildings.  Additionally in some other cases, samples may be provided from 
outside collaborators or institutions for discovery and research purpos es. In such cases, the 
samples should be obtained under IRB -approved protocols at these outside collaborators and 
institutions to allow them for participation in this protocol and under a specific grant/ contract or Material Transfer Agreement (MTA) with M D Anderson Cancer Center.  
 
11.0 REFERENCES  
1. Dindo D, Demartines N, Clavien PA. Classification of surgical complications: a new 
proposal with evaluation in a cohort of 6336 patients and results of a survey. Ann Surg. 2004 Aug;240(2):205-13 
2. Ellegren H. Microsatell ites: simple sequences with complex evolution. Nat Rev 
Genet. 2004 Jun; 5 (6):435-45. 
3. Bonneville R, Krook MA, Kautto EA, Miya J, Wing MR, Chen HZ, Reeser JW, Yu L, Roychowdhury S. Landscape of Microsatellite Instability Across 39 Cancer Types. JCO Precis On col. 2017; 2017. 
4. Hause RJ, Pritchard CC, Shendure J, Salipante SJ. Classification and characterization 
of microsatellite instability across 18 cancer types. Nat Med. 2016 Nov ; 22(11):1342-
1350. 
5. Cascinu S, Georgoulias V, Kerr D, Maughan T, Labianca R, Ychou M. Colorectal 
cancer in the adjuvant setting: perspectives on treatment and the role of prognostic factors. Ann Oncol. 2003; [ADDRESS_697226] 2:ii25 -9. 
6. Carethers JM, Chauhan DP, Fink D, Nebel S, Bresalier RS, Howell SB, Boland CR. Mismatch repair proficiency and in vitro response to 5-fluorouracil. Gastroenterology. 1999 Jul; 117(1):123-31. 
7. Jo WS, Carethers JM. Chemotherapeutic implications in microsatellite unstable colorectal cancer. Cancer Biomark. 2006;2(1- 2):51 -60 
8. Meyers M, Wagner MW, Hwang HS, Kinsella TJ, B oothman DA. Role of the 
hMLH1 DNA mismatch repair protein in fluoropyrimidine- mediated cell death and 
cell cycle responses. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 1 ; 61(13):5193-201.  
9. van Triest B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_535691], Blaauwgeers JL, van Diest PJ, Schoenmakers PS, Voorn DA, Smid K, Hoekman K, Hoitsma HF, Peters GJ. Prognostic role of thymidylate synthase, thymidine phosphorylase/platelet -derived endothelial cell growth factor, 
and proliferation markers in colorectal cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Mar ; 
6(3):1063- 72. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 61 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 10. Peters GJ, van der Wilt CL, van Groeningen CJ, Smid K, Meijer S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_535691]. 
Thymidylate synthase inhibition after administration of fluorouracil with or without leucovorin in colon cancer patients: implications for treatment with fluorouracil. J 
Clin Oncol. [ADDRESS_697227] ; 12(10):2035-42. 
11. Ribic CM, Sargent DJ, Moore MJ, Thibodeau SN, French AJ, Goldberg RM, 
Hamilton SR, Laurent-Puig P, Gryfe R, Shepherd LE, Tu D, Redston M, Gallinger S. Tumor microsatellite -instability status as a predictor of benefit from fluorouracil-
based adjuvant chemotherapy for colon cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jul 17 ; 
349(3):247-57. 
12. Carethers JM, Smith EJ, Behling CA, Nguyen L, Tajima A, Doctolero RT, Cabrera BL, Goel A, Arnold CA, Miyai K, Boland CR. Use of 5-fluorouracil and survival in patients with microsa tellite -unstable colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology. 2004 Feb; 
126(2):394-401. 
13. Warusavitarne J, Schnitzler M. The role of chemotherapy in microsatellite unstable (MSI -H) colorectal cancer. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2007 Jul ; 22(7):739-48. 
14. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang  H, Bartlett BR, Kemberling H, Eyring AD, Skora AD, Luber 
BS, Azad NS, Laheru D, Biedrzycki B, Donehower RC, Zaheer A, Fisher GA, Crocenzi TS, Lee JJ, Duffy SM, Goldberg RM, de la Chapelle A, Koshiji M, Bhaijee 
F, Huebner T, Hruban RH, Wood LD, Cuka N, Pardoll DM, Papadopoulos N, Kinzler 
KW, Zhou S, Cornish TC, Taube JM, Anders RA, Eshleman JR, Vogelstein B, Diaz LA Jr. PD -1 Blockade in Tumors with Mismatch -Repair Deficiency. N Engl J Med. 
2015 Jun 25;372(26):2509-20 
15. Le DT, Durham JN, Smith KN, Wang H, Bartlett BR, Aulakh LK, Lu S, Kemberling H, Wilt C, Luber BS, Wong F, Azad NS, Rucki AA, Laheru D, Donehower R, Zaheer 
A, Fisher GA, Crocenzi TS, Lee JJ, Greten TF, Duffy AG, Ciombor KK, Eyring AD, 
Lam BH, Joe A, Kang SP, Holdhoff M, Danilova L, Cope L, Meyer C, Zhou S, Goldberg RM, Armstrong DK, Bever KM, Fader AN, Taube J, Housseau F, Spetzler D, Xiao N, Pardoll DM, Papadopoulos N, Kinzler KW, Eshleman JR, Vogelstein B, Anders RA, Diaz LA Jr. Mismatch repair deficiency predicts response of solid tumors 
to PD -1 blockade. Science. 2017 Jul 28;357(6349):409-413 
16. Overman MJ, McDermott R, Leach JL, Lonardi S, Lenz HJ, Morse MA, Desai J, Hill 
A, Axelson M, Moss RA, Goldberg MV, Cao ZA, Ledeine JM, Maglinte GA, Kopetz S, André T. Nivolumab in patients with metastatic DNA mismatch repair -deficient or 
microsatellite instability -high colorectal cancer (CheckMate 142): an open -label, 
multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2017 Sep; 18(9):1182-1191. 
17. Puri S, Shafique M, Gray JE. Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Early- Stage  and 
Locally Advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2018 Jun 21; 19(8):39. 
18. Forde PM, Chaft JE, Smith KN, Anagnostou V, Cottrell TR, Hellmann MD, Zahurak M, Yang SC, Jones DR, Broderick S, Battafarano RJ, Velez MJ, Rekhtman N, Olah 
Z, Naidoo J, Marrone KA, Verde F, Guo H, Zhang J, Caushi JX, Chan HY, Sidhom 
JW, Scharpf RB, White J, Gabrielson E, Wang H, Rosner GL, Rusch V, Wolchok JD, 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 62 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Merghoub T, Taube JM, Velculescu VE, Topalian SL, Brahmer JR, Pardoll DM. 
Neoadjuvant PD-1 Blockade in Resectable Lung Cancer. N Engl J Med. 2018 May 24; 378(21):1976-1986.  
19. Tina Cascone, Haifa Hamdi, Fahao Zhang, Alissa Poteete, Lerong Li, Courtney W. Hudgens, Leila J. Williams, Qiuyu Wu, Jayanthi Gudikote, Weiyi Peng, Patrick Hwu, Jing Wang, Michael Tetzlaff, William N. William, and John V. Heymach. Superior efficacy of neoadjuvant compared to adjuvant immune checkpoint blockade in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Res July  1 2018 ( 78) (13 Supplement) 1719. 
20. Foxtrot Collaborative Group. Feasibility of preoperative chemotherapy for locally advanced, operable colon cancer: the pi[INVESTIGATOR_133747] a randomized controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2012 Nov;13(11):1152-60. 
21. Dehal A, Graff -Baker AN, Vuong B, Fischer T, Klempner SJ, Chang SC, 
Grunkemeier GL, Bilchik AJ, Goldfarb M. Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy Improves 
Survival in Patients with Clinical T4b Colon Cancer. J Gastrointest Surg. 2018 Feb; 
22(2):242-249. 
22. Disis ML. Immune regulation of cancer. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28 (29):4531-8. 
23. Dudley ME, Wunderlich JR, Yang JC, Sherry RM, Topalian SL, Restifo NP, et al. Adoptive cell transfer therapy following non-myeloablative but lymphodepleting 
chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with refractory metastatic melanoma. J 
Clin Oncol 2005;23(10):2346-57. 
24. Hunder NN, Wallen H,  Cao J, Hendricks DW, Reilly JZ, Rodmyre R, et al. Treatment 
of metastatic melanoma with autologous CD4+ T cells against NY -ESO -1. N Engl J 
Med 2008; 358 (25):2698-703. 
25. Greenwald RJ, Freeman GJ, Sharpe AH. The B7 family revisited. Annu Rev 
Immunol 2005; 23:515-48. 
26. Okazaki T, Maeda A, Nishimura H, Kurosaki T, Honjo T. PD-1 immunoreceptor 
inhibits B cell receptor-mediated signaling by [CONTACT_13223] 2-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 to phosphot yrosine. Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 2001; 
98(24):[ZIP_CODE]-71. 
27. Zhang X, Schwartz J-CD, Guo X, Bhatia S, Cao E, Chen L, et al. Structural and functional analysis of the costimulatory receptor programmed death- 1. Immunity 
2004; 20:337-47. 
28. Chemnitz JM, Parry RV, Nichols KE, June CH, Riley JL. SHP-1 and SHP- 2 associate 
with immunoreceptor tyrosine -based switch motif of programmed death 1 upon 
primary human T cell stimulation, but only receptor ligation prevents T cell activation. J Immunol 2004; 173:945-54. 
29. Sheppard K- A, Fitz LJ, Lee JM, Benander C, George JA, Wooters J, et al. PD-1 
inhibits T-cell receptor induced phosphorylation of the ZAP70/CD3zeta signalosome and downstream signaling to PKCtheta. FEBS Lett. 2004; 574:37-41. 
30. Riley JL. PD-1 signaling in primary T cells. Immunol Rev 2009; 229:114-25. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 63 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 31. Parry R V, Chemnitz JM, Frauwirth KA, Lanfranco AR, Braunstein I, Kobayashi SV, 
et al. CTLA -[ADDRESS_697228] mechanisms. 
Mol Cell Biol 2005; 25(21):9543- 53. 
32. Francisco LM, Sage PT, Sharpe AH. The PD -[ADDRESS_697229] in tolerance and 
autoimmunity. Immunol Rev 2010; 236:219-42. 
33. Robert C, Ribas A, Hamid O, Daud A, Wolchok JD, Joshua AM, Hwu WJ, Weber JS, 
Gangadhar TC, Joseph RW, Dronca R, Patnaik A, Zarour H, Kefford R, Hersey P, Zhang J, Anderson J, Diede SJ, Ebbinghaus S, Hodi FS. D urable Complete Response 
After Discontinuation of Pembrolizumab in Patients With Metastatic Melanoma. J Clin Oncol. 2018 Jun 10; 36(17):1668-1674. 
34. Weiser MR, Landmann RG, Kattan MW, Gonen M, Shia J, Chou J, Paty PB, Guillem JG, Temple LK, Schrag D, Saltz LB, Wong WD. Individualized prediction of colon cancer recurrence using a nomogram. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Jan 20; 26(3):380-5. 
35. Chalabi M, Fanchi, L, van den Berg J, Beets G, Aalbers A, Snaebjornsson P, Grootscholten C, Mertz M, Lopez M, Nuijtn E, Kuiper M, Kok M, can Leerdam M, Shumacher T, Voest E, Hannen J. Neoadjuvant ipi[INVESTIGATOR_535692]. ESMO. 2018. Abstract number: LBA37_PR. 
36. Thall PF, Simon RM, Estey EH. Bayesian sequential monitoring designs for single -
arm clinical trials  with multiple outcomes. Statistics in medicine. 1995;14(4):357-379. 
37.  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 64 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 12.0 APPENDICES  
Appendix 1: ECOG Performance Status  
Grade  Description  
0 Normal activity. Fully active, able to carry on all pre -disease 
performance without restriction.  
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restricted in physically strenuous 
activity, but ambulatory and able to carry out work of a light or 
sedentary nature (e.g., light housework, office work).  
2 In bed <50% of the time. Ambulatory and capable of all self -care, but 
unable to carry out any work activities. Up and about more than 50% 
of waking hours.  
3 In bed >50% of the time. Capable of only limited self -care, confined 
to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours.  
4 100% bedridden. Completely disabled. Cannot carry on any self -care. 
Totally confined to bed or chair.  
5 Dead.  
* As published in Am. J. Clin. Oncol.:  Oken, M.M., Creech, R.H., Tormey, D.C., Horton, J., Davis, T.E., 
McFadden, E.T., Carbone, P.P.: Toxicity And Response Criteria Of The Eastern Cooperative Oncology 
Group. Am J Clin Oncol 5:649 -655, 1982. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, Robert Comis 
M.D., Group Chair.  
 
         
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 65 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Appendix 2: Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events V4.0 (CTCAE) 
The descriptions and grading scales found in the revised NCI Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 will be utilized for adverse event reporting. (http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting/ctc.html
) 
 
                    
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 66 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Appendix 3 : Contraceptive Guidance and Pregnancy Testing  
Woman of Childbearing Potential (WOCBP) 
A woman is considered fertile following menarche and until becoming post-menopausal 
unless permanently sterile (see below)  
Women in the following categories are not considered WOCBP: ● Premenarchal  
● Premenopausal female with 1 of the following: 
○ Documented hysterectomy  
○ Documented bilateral salpi[INVESTIGATOR_1656] 
○ Documented bilateral oophorectomy 
Note:  Documentation can come from the site personnel’s review of the participant’s 
medical records, medical examination, or medical history interview.  
● Postm enopausal female 
○ A postmenopausal state is defined as no menses for 12 months without an alternative 
medical cause.  ▪ A high follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) level in the postmenopausal range may 
be used to confirm a postmenopausal state in women not using hormonal contraception or hormonal replacement therapy (HRT). However, in the absence of 12 months of amenorrhea, confirmation with two FSH measurements in the postmenopausal range is required.  
○ Females on HRT and whose menopausal status is in doubt will be required to use one 
of the non-hormonal highly effective contraception methods if they wish to continue their HRT during the study. Otherwise, they must discontinue HRT to allow confirmation of postmenopausal status before study enrollment. 
Contr aception Requirements  
 
Female Participants: 
Female participants of childbearing potential are eligible to participate if they  agree to use 
one of the contraception methods described in Table 11 consistently and correctly during the 
protocol-defined time frame  in Section X. 
 
Table 11 Contraceptive Methods 
 
Acceptable Contraceptive Methods   
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 67 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Failure rate of >1% per year when used consistently and correctly.   
● Male or female condom with or without spermicide  
● Cervical cap, diaphragm or sponge with spermicide  
Highly Effective Contraceptive Methods That Are User Dependent a  
Failure rate of <1% per year when used consistently and correctly.  
● Combined (estrogen - and progestogen - containing ) hormonal contraception b 
○ Oral  
○ Intravaginal  
○ Transdermal  
○ Injectable  
● Progestogen -only hormonal contraception b 
○ Oral  
○ Injectable  
Highly Effective Methods That Have Low User Dependency  
Failure rate of <1% per year when used consistently and correctly.  
● Progestogen - only contraceptive implant b, c  
● Intrauterine hormone -releasing system (IUS)  b  
● Intrauterine device (IUD)  
● Bilateral tubal occlusion  
 
● Vasectomized partner  
A vasectomized partner is a highly effective contraception method provided that the partner is the sole 
male sexual partner of the WOCBP and the absence of sperm has been confirmed. If not, an additional 
highly effective method of contraception should be u sed.  
● Sexual abstinence  
Sexual abstinence is considered a highly effective method only if defined as refraining from heterosexual intercourse during the entire period of risk associated with the study treatment. The reliability of sexual abstinence needs to be evaluated in relation to the duration of the study and the 
preferred and usual lifestyle of the participant.)  
Notes:  
Use should be consistent with local regulations regarding the use of contraceptive methods for 
participants of clinical studies. 
 
a) Typi[INVESTIGATOR_122955]-use failure rates (i.e. when used consistently and correctly).  
b) If hormonal contraception efficacy is potentially decreased due to interaction with study treatment, 
condoms must be used in addition to the hormonal contraception during the treatment period and for at least [X days, corresponding to time needed to eliminate study treatment plus 30 days for study 
treatments with genotoxic potential]  after the last dose of study treatment .  
c) If locally required, in accordance with Clinical Trial Facilitation Group (CTFG) guidelines, 
acceptable hormonal contraceptives are limited to those which inhibit ovulation .  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 68 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Pregnancy Testing  
WOCBP should only be included after a negative highly sensitive urine or serum pregnancy 
test. 
Pregnancy testing will be performed whenever an expected menstrual cycle is missed or when pregnancy is otherwise suspected.  
 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 69 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 Appendix 4 :  Description of the iRECIST Process for Assessment of Disease 
Progression  
Assessment at Screening and Prior to RECIST 1.[ADDRESS_697230] 1.1 the Investigator will 
decide whether to continue a participant on study treatment until repeat imaging is obtained (using iRECIST for participant management (see Table 5  and Figures 1 and 3).  This decision 
by [CONTACT_535716]’s overall clinical condition.  
Clinical stability is defined as the following:  
• Absence of symptoms and signs indicating clinically significant progression of disease  
• No decline in ECOG performance status  
• No requirements for intensified management , including increased analgesia, 
radiation, or other palliative care  
Any participant deemed clinically unstable should be discontinued from study treatment at site-assessed first radiologic evidence of PD, and is not required to have repeat tumor 
imaging for confirmation of PD by [CONTACT_19393]. 
If the Investigator decides to continue treatment, the participant may continue to receive 
study treatment and the tumor assessment should be repeated [ADDRESS_697231] 1.1, including: 
• Increase in the sum of diameters of target lesion(s) identified at baseline to ≥  20% and 
≥ 5 mm from nadir 
o Please note: the iRECIST publication uses th e terminology “sum of 
measurements”, but “sum of diameters” will be used in this protocol, consistent with the original RECIST 1.1 terminology.  
• Unequivocal progression of non- target lesion(s) identified at baseline  
• Development of new lesion(s) 
iRECIST defi nes new response categories, including iUPD (unconfirmed progressive 
disease) and iCPD (confirmed progressive disease).  For purposes of iRECIST assessment, 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 70 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 the first visit showing progression according to RECIST 1.1 will be assigned a visit (overall) 
response of iUPD, regardless of which factors caused the progression.  
At this visit, target and non -target lesions identified at baseline by [CONTACT_393] 1.[ADDRESS_697232] 1.1.  From measurable new lesions, up to 5 lesions total (up to 2 per organ), may be selected as New Lesions – Target.  The sum of diameters of these lesions will be calculated, and kept d istinct from the sum of 
diameters for target lesions at baseline.  All other new lesions will be followed qualitatively as New Lesions – Non -target.  
Assessment at the Confirmatory Imaging  
On the confirmatory imaging, the participant will be classified as progression confirmed (with an overall response of iCPD), or as showing persistent unconfirmed progression (with an overall response of iUPD), or as showing disease stability or response (iSD/iPR/iCR).  
Confirmation of Progression 
Progression is considered confirmed, and the overall response will be iCPD, if ANY of the 
following occurs: 
• Any of the factors that were the basis for the initial iUPD show worsening  
o For target lesions, worsening is a further increase in the sum of diameters of 
≥ 5 mm, compared to any prior iUPD time point 
o For non-target lesions, worsening is any significant growth in lesions overall, compared to a prior iUPD time point; this does not have to meet the “unequivocal” standard of RECIST 1.1 
o For new lesions, worsening is any of these: 
 An increase in the new lesion sum of diameters by ≥  5 mm from a prior iUPD 
time point  
 Visible growth of new non- target lesions  
 The appearance of additional new lesions 
• Any new factor appears that would have triggered PD by [CONTACT_393] 1.1 
Persistent iUPD  
Progression is considered not confirmed, and the overall response remains iUPD, if: 
• None of the progression-confirming factors identified above occurs AND 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 71 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 • The target lesion sum of diameters (initial target lesions) remains above the initial PD 
threshold (by [CONTACT_307418] 1.1)  
Additional imaging for confirmation should be scheduled 4 to 8 weeks from the scan on which iUPD is seen.  This may correspond to the next visit in the original visit schedule.  The assessment of the subsequent confirmation scan proceeds in an identical manner, with possible outcomes of iCPD, iUPD, and iSD/iPR/iCR. 
Resolution of iUPD 
Progression is considered not confirmed, and the overall response becomes iSD/iPR/iCR, if: 
• None of the progression-confirming factors identified above occurs, AND 
• The target lesion sum of diameters (initial target lesions) is not above the initial PD 
threshold.  
The response is classified as iSD or iPR (depending on the sum of diameters of the target lesions), or iCR if all lesions resolve.  
In this case, the initial  iUPD is considered to be pseudo-progression, and the level of 
suspi[INVESTIGATOR_19367] “reset”.  This means that the next visit that shows radiographic progression, whenever it occurs, is again classified as iUPD by [CONTACT_19393], and the confirmation proce ss is repeated before a response of iCPD can be assigned.  
Management Following the Confirmatory Imaging 
If repeat imaging does not confirm PD per iRECIST, as assessed by [CONTACT_737], and the 
participant continues to be clinically stable, study treatme nt may continue and follow the 
regular imaging schedule.  If PD is confirmed, participants will be discontinued from study treatment.  
NOTE: If a participant has confirmed radiographic progression (iCPD) as defined above, but the participant is achieving a clinically meaningful benefit, an exception to continue study treatment may be considered.  In this case, if study treatment is continued, tumor imaging should continue to be performed following the in tervals as outlined in Section 6 . 
Detection of Progression at Visits After Pseudo -progression Resolves  
After resolution of pseudo-progression (i.e., achievement of iSD/iPR/iCR), iUPD is indicated by [CONTACT_19518]: 
• Target lesions 
o Sum of diameters reaches the PD threshold (≥  20% and ≥  5 mm increase  from 
nadir) either for the first time, or after resolution of previous pseudo -progression.  
The nadir is always the smallest sum of diameters seen during the entire trial, 
either before or after an instance of pseudo -progression. 
MDACC# 2018 -1182         Page 72 
Pembrolizumab MISP Protocol  
Version 2.1: 24SEP2020 
 
   
 
 • Non-target lesions  
o If non-target lesions have never shown unequivocal progression, their doing so for 
the first time results in iUPD.  
o If non-target lesions had shown previous unequivocal progression, and this progression has not resolved, iUPD results from any significant further growth of non-target lesions, taken as a whole.  
• New lesions  
o New lesions appear for the first time  
o Additional new lesions appear 
o Previously identified new target lesions show an increase of ≥  5 mm in the new 
lesion sum of diameters, from the nadir value of that sum 
o Previously identified non-target lesions show any significant growth 
If any of the events above occur, the overall response for that visit is iUPD, and the iUPD evaluation process (see Assessment at the Confirmatory Imaging above) is repeated.  Progression must be confirmed before iCPD can occur. 
The decision process is identical to the iUPD confirmation process for the initial PD, except 
in one respect. If new lesions occurred at a prior instance of iUPD, and at the confirmatory 
scan the burden of new lesions has increased from its smallest value (for new target lesions, their sum of diameters is ≥5 mm increased from its nadir), then iUPD cannot resolve to iSD or iPR. It will remain iUPD until either a decrease in the new lesion burden allows res olution 
to iSD or iPR, or until a confirmatory factor causes iCPD.  
Additional details about iRECIST are provided in the iRECIST publication [Seymour et al, 2017].  
 