PROTOCOL NAME  
[CONTACT_805770] a direct gloving strategy to improve compliance with infection prevention practice s:  A 
cluster -randomized trial (Aim 1)  
 
CICERO protocol number: HP-[ZIP_CODE]  
 
Modification #:  0 
 
PROTOCOL VERSION DATE: 10/13/2015  
 
Commonly Used Abbreviations  
HH HH  
HCW  Healthcare Worker  
UMMC  University of Maryland Medical Center  
STC R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center  
UIH University of Iowa Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_805747]:  
 
Kerri A. Thom, M.D., M.S.  
Associate  [CONTACT_77527] of Genomic Epi[INVESTIGATOR_805748]  
[ADDRESS_1112288], MSTF 334B  
Baltimore, MD, [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone    (410) 706 -6124  
Fax    ([PHONE_13913]  
E-mail    [EMAIL_15323]  
    
UMB Research team  
Gwen Robinson (Point of Contact)  
Shirley Goodman  
Jennifer Johnson  
Lisa Pi[INVESTIGATOR_805749] y sites and/or other institutions involved in the study:  
Clinical Sites -  
University of Maryland Medical Center  
[ADDRESS_1112289]  Initial IRB Approval  IRB renewal  
UMB  Thom, K  Robinson, G  Pending  N/A  
UI  Perencevich, E  Cobb, S  Pending  N/A 
JHU  Maragakis, L  Rock, C  Pending  N/A 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
SUMMARY ………………………………………………………………………………. 4 
 
1. BACKG ROUND INFORMATION AND RATIONALE ……… .…………………5  
 
1.1. BACKG ROUND INFORMATION …………………………………… ….…….…...…………….. .5 
1.2. RATIONALE ………………………………… ……………… ……………………………..………....... 5 
1.3. RISKS……………………………………… ……………….. ………………………………………..…... 6 
1.4. BENEFITS ………………………………………………………… ……………… ………..………..….. 6 
1.5. RISK BENEFITS RATIO ……………………………………………….… ……………… ……….. 6 
 
2. STUDY OBJECTIVES ……………………………………………………………… 6 
 
3. STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES …………………………………………… 6 
 
4. SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL OF PARTICIPANTS …………… .……….. 8 
 
4.1. SELECTION OF STUDY POPULATION …………………………… ………….. .….………….. 8 
4.2. INCLUSION CRITERIA …………………………………………… …………… …….………… …..8 
4.3. EXCLUSION CRITERIA ………………………………………………… ……………..…. …….….. 8 
4.4. PARTICIPANT WITHDRAWAL ……………………………………… …………..… …..………..8 
 
5. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS …………………………… ……………….. …8 
 
5.1. RECRUITMENT ………………………………………………………… ………………… ………….. 8 
5.2. ALTERATION OF CONSENT …………………………………..…… …..…..……...…………….. 9 
5.3. WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION ……………………… …………… ……...… ..……… 9 
5.4. INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS ………………………….…… …………... …,,…… ..……….. 9 
 
6. STATISTICAL PLAN ……………………………………………………………….. 10 
 
6.1. ANALYSIS PLAN ………………………… …………………... ………………… ..………………… 10 
6.2. SAMPLE SIZE ESTIMATES …………….… ...……………... ………………… ….……………… 11 
 
7. DATA COLLECTION, HANDLING, AND STORAGE ………………………….. 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary  
This study seeks to investigate alternative strategies to hand hygiene (HH)  and glove use in situations 
where glove use is required to perform health care activities in an effort to increase compliance with 
infection prevention efforts.   
 
HH is the cornerstone of infection prevention. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_805750], 
compliance remains low in healthcare settings (40% on average in a large meta -analysis). Insufficient 
time, high workload and under staffing are important barr iers. Glove use, which is common and 
increasing, is another major barrier. New strategies are needed that improve time and efficiency 
particularly in settings where glove use is required (e.g. Contact [CONTACT_307595]). One area for further study 
is the require ment for HH prior to non -sterile glove use. This is a recommended practice with poor 
compliance that may be unnecessary. Furthermore, it may lead to reduced compliance with other 
recommended infection prevention practices, such as glove use. In this propos al we identify a novel 
strategy of directly gloving without performing HH prior to non -sterile glove use as a potential solution.   
 
In this study we aim to perform a multicenter, cluster -randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of direct 
gloving to improv e compliance with infection prevention practices (i.e. HH and glove use).  Herein, we 
will evaluate the safety and efficacy of directly gloving (compared to performing HH prior to glove use) 
and assess whether this strategy will lead to increased complianc e with both HH and glove use. We 
previously demonstrated the safety of this strategy in a single -center randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_805751] -sterile gloves. Thus, with potentially no added 
benefit and in a setting where we know that HH compliance is the lowest (i.e. prior to glove use), 
mandating HH  prior to donning gloves as recommended in current guidelines could actually reduce 
both HH  and glove compliance, placing patients at increased risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_5904].  
 
Hypothesis 1: When compared to the standard practice of performing HH and then donning gloves, 
directly gloving when non -sterile gloves are indicated will increase compliance with HH and glove use 
and will have no effect on bacterial contamination of gloves (i.e. total bacterial colony counts).  
Aim 1a: Perform a multicenter, cluster -randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of a direct gloving 
strategy to improve compliance with infection prevention practices (i.e. HH and glove use).  
Aim 1b:   Perform a nested multicenter validation study, where gloved hands of healthcare providers w ill 
be randomly sampled to determine bacterial contamination of non -sterile gloves after donning.  
 
 
1 Background Information and Rationale  
1.1 Background Information  
 
HH is the cornerstone of infection prevention. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_805752], compliance remains low in healthcare settings (40% on average in a large meta -analysis). 
Insufficient time, high workload and under staffing are important barr iers. Glove use, which is 
common and increasing, is another major barrier. New strategies are needed that improve time and 
efficiency particularly in settings where glove use is required (e.g. Contact [CONTACT_307595]).  
 
One area for further study is the requi rement for HH prior to non -sterile glove use. This is a 
recommended practice with poor compliance that may be unnecessary.  Furthermore, because of the 
additional time required to cleanse hands and then don gloves, as well as the cumbersome nature of 
applyi ng gloves to recently cleansed hands, this practice leads to non -compliance with both HH  
and glove use – placing patients at risk. A recent randomized trial of 230 health care workers and 
demonstrated no difference in total bacterial colony counts or iden tification of pathogenic bacteria 
from the gloves of persons who either performed HH  or did not perform HH  prior to putting on 
non-sterile gloves (Thom, PI, senior author). If unnecessary, HH before non -sterile glove use wastes 
valuable time, which might  otherwise be spent engaged in direct patient care. And removing this 
unnecessary step may lead to increased compliance with infection prevention measures.  
 
Existing guidelines are confusing and in some places contradictory and all support the need for 
further research to determine if HH before donning non -sterile gloves is a necessary step.  The CDC 
supports the 2009 WHO HH Guidelines outlining expectations for appropriate HH. In general, the 
WHO teaches “Five Moments” of HH and uses this model to educate  health care workers (HCW)  
on when HH should occur. This model is also used in surveillance when monitoring and reporting 
compliance with HH. The WHO Glove Use Information Leaflet  (2009) under Part II, Section 7 - 
‘Glove use and the need for HH ’ states: “When an indication for HH  precedes a contact [CONTACT_805761], hand rubbing or hand washing should be performed before donning gloves ”. 
Yet later in  Section 23.1.3, it says: “Whether HH should be performed before donning non -sterile 
gloves is an unresolved issue  and therefore this moment should not be recommended as an 
indication for HH ”. Furthermore, the question “should HH be recommended before donning non -
sterile gloves?” is highlighted within the WHO ‘ HH Research Agenda’ Secti on.  
1.2 Rationale  
The necessity of HH before donning non -sterile gloves is unknown. Furthermore, because of the 
additional time required to cleanse hands and then don gloves, as well as the cumbersome nature of 
applying gloves to recently washed hands, this practice leads to non -compliance with both HH and 
glove use – placing patients at risk. As part of our pi[INVESTIGATOR_805753], we performed a 
randomized trial of [ADDRESS_1112290]. Thom (PI) et al. demonstrating no 
difference  in total bacterial colony counts or identification of pathogenic bacteria from the gloves 
of persons who either performed HH or did not perform HH prior to putting on non -sterile glov es. 
Although the findings from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_805754], these 
findings need to be replicated across multiple facilities and varying patient care areas (e.g. 
pediatrics, emergency departments). Further validation of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_61620], as well as results of 
Aim 1 a, will demonstrate generalizability and support guideline/policy change and implementation.  
 
REFERENCES:   
 1.  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Health -Care 
Settings: Recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee 
and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. . MMWR. Oct 25 2002;51(RR -
16):1 -45. 
 2.  WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care. 2009; 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/[ZIP_CODE]/[ZIP_CODE]/1/9789241597906_eng.pdf . 
 3.  Rock C, Harri s AD, Reich NG, Johnson JK, Thom KA. Is hand hygiene before putting on 
nonsterile gloves in the intensive care unit a waste of health care worker time? --a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Infect Control. Nov 2013;41(11):994 -996. 
 
1.3 Risks  
 
Aim 1 A: The resear ch risks for this study are minimal. In this study, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7011]/wards will be 
recruited and randomized to either usual care or intervention; no individual patients or HCWs will 
be enrolled in this study. Preliminary data has demonstrated the safety of a  direct gloving strategy 
(intervention). We hypothesize that by [CONTACT_805762] -based strategy of directly gloving 
when hand hygiene is indicated will result in an overall improved compliance with infection 
prevention strategies of hand hygiene an d glove use, thus minimizing risks and maximizing 
benefits. There is a possibility that hand hygiene may decrease in other situations, thus we will 
measure and monitor hand hygiene compliance at room entry and exit regardless of glove use.  All 
data collec ted will be for the unit in aggregate and no HCW or patient identifying information will 
be collected.  
 
Aim 1 B: The risks for this  aim of  study will be minimal for study participants. Study participants 
are being asked to imprint their gloved hand on an agar plate  after donning gloves during routine 
room entry . The predominant risk to participants in this study is the time required to participate, 
which will be less than [ADDRESS_1112291] benefit to the HCW participants  involved . They will benefit 
indirectly by [CONTACT_805763] a topic that affects them . The proposed study 
could lead to changes in policy regarding hand hygiene expectations, monitoring and feedback.  
1.5 Risk Benefit Ratio  
The potential benefits of this study outweigh the minimal risks to participants.  
2 Study O bjectives , Aims and Hypothesis  
 
Aim 1A:   Perform a multicenter, cluster randomized trial to evaluate the efficacy of a direct gloving 
strategy to improve compliance with infection prevention practices (i.e. HH and glove use).  
Hypothesis:   When compared to the standard practice of performing HH and then donning gloves, 
directly gloving when gloves are indicated will increase compliance with HH and glove use.  
 
Aim 1B : Perform a nested multicenter validation study, where gloved hands of HCWs will be 
randomly sampled to determine bacterial contamination of non -sterile gloves after donning.  
Hypothesis : When compared to the standard practice directly gloving when gloves are indicated will 
have no effect on bacterial contamination of gloves.  
3 Study Design  and Procedure  
 
Aim 1A :  
 
Study Design:   We will perform  a cluster -randomized trial to include 14 patient  care areas (i.e. 
units) at the University of Maryland Medical Center  (UMMC),  the R Adams Cow ley Shock Trauma 
Center (STC), University of Iowa Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (UIH), and Johns Hopkins Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (JHH) . Each unit 
will be randomly assigned to the intervention or usual care group. Randomization will be stratified 
by [CONTACT_805764]: adult intensive care, general pediatric wards, emergency departments and inpatient 
hemodialysis units. One unit from each of the f our types at UMMC , UIH, and JHH  will be selected 
for study participation and will be randomized; and two units ( one Adult ICU and the Trauma 
Resuscitation Unit (comparable to the Adult ED )) will be selected and randomized from Shock 
Trauma. We have specifically chosen these diverse areas to avoid any potential crossover of effect 
from one study unit to another as units have very different personnel with very little crossover of 
care.  
 
In or der to account for differences in baseline compliance with infection control practices including 
HH and glove use, baseline rates of compliance will be observed across all available units (this 
includes 4 adult ICUs, 3 general pediatric wards units, 1 ED a nd 1 inpatient HD unit at UMMC and 
4 adult ICUs and 1 ED at Shock Trauma). In the study period prior to randomization; the final units  
will be selected based on similar baseline compliance. For example, there are [ADDRESS_1112292] baseline composite HH and glove compliance rates 
will be selected. Thus we are matching 3 general pediatric wards (one from each si te) based on pre -
intervention outcomes of interest to improve power and minimize the impact of measured and 
unmeasured confounders. Once selected, the units will be randomized to the intervention or usual 
care group. This process will be done for each unit  type (e.g. adult ICU).   
 
The study will begin with a 6 -month period of baseline data collection in which HH and infection 
prevention compliance will be recorded in all units that are potentially available for inclusion as 
described above. During that tim e period the investigative team will develop and refine educational, 
training and data collection tools. Following this baseline period, a short “wash -in” period of [ADDRESS_1112293] ed 
infection prevention practices of HH and glove use. The intervention period will be a full 12 
months. This will allow the intervention to be tested over a full calendar year accounting for 
differences in seasonality as well as different levels of traini ng across an academic year.   
 
All participating units regardless of intervention status will receive education regarding policies and 
procedures for compliance with infection prevention strategies including HH and glove/gown use.  
This education will be i dentical in both groups (intervention and usual care) and will be consistent 
with published guidelines (WHO/CDC) with the exception of HH prior to donning non -sterile 
gloves - which according to existing guidelines is an uncertain area where research is ne eded.  
HCW s from units randomized to the usual care group will receive education that states that they 
should perform HH prior to donning non -sterile gloves.  HCW s from units randomized to the 
intervention group will receive education that states that HH is not necessary prior to unsterile glove 
use.  Both units will receive education around other necessary moments for HH and as stated this 
education will be identical for both groups.  
 
Data collection in both the baseline and intervention phases will be as  follows:  
 
Primary Outcome:  
Composite Compliance with  expected  infection prevention practices upon entry to Contact 
[CONTACT_805765] -patient rooms.  HCW s in the usual care group will be recorded as compliant if HH AND 
glove use is observed at room entry; HCW s in the intervention group only need to have glove use 
observed to be considered compliant.  
 
Secondary Outcomes:  
1.  Compliance with glove use upon entry to Contact [CONTACT_805765] -patient rooms for both groups  
2.  Compliance with HH upon entry to ALL patient  rooms  
3.  Compliance with HH upon exit to ALL patient rooms  
Additional Information collected will include:  date, time and location (i.e. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/unit) of 
observation and the role of the HCW observed (e.g. MD, RN, other).  
 
Note that all data collected is completely anonymous and no HCW  identifying information will be 
collected nor reported  
 
Aim 1B:   
 
We will perform a nested, multicenter validation study in which we will randomly samp le the 
gloved hands of HCW s entering Contact [CONTACT_805765] -patient rooms  in both the intervention and 
usual care units . Sampling will occur at random and HCWs will not be told in advance that 
sampling will be performed . A research team member will approach po tential participants 
immediately after gloves are donned and just prior to entering a Contact [CONTACT_805765] -patient room. 
HCWs will be asked if they have participated in this study previously and those that answer yes will 
be excluded from participation. Glov ed hands of willing HCW s will be sampled  via direct imprint 
of the non -dominant gloved hand onto an agar plate.  In addition to sampling of gloved hand, 
additional data will be collected regarding the date, time and location of the observation, whether 
the unit was allocated to intervention of usual care, whether the HCW performed HH prior to 
donning non -sterile gloves, the HCW role (e.g. RN, MD, etc…), when the HCW had started their 
shift and the time since last performing HH.  Each sample will be given a unique number, however, 
there will be no link to HCW participants and no identifying information will be collected.  After 
sampling, agar plates will be assessed for microbial content  including total colony counts and 
identification of specific pathogenic bacteria including  Staphylococcus aureus , Enterococcus , 
Enterobacteriaceae , Pseudomonas aeruginosa  and Acinetobacter baumannii . 
4 Selection and Withdrawal of Participants  
4.1 Selection of Study population  
 
Aim 1A .  No individual HCW or patient participants will be enrolled in this study. In this cluster -
randomized trial, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_805755] (direct gloving) or usual care strategies. Potential units for participation will include 
Adult ICU, General Pediatrics, Adult Emergency Department and Inpatient Hemodialysis Units at 
the four participating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (University of Maryland Medical Center, RA Cowely Shock Trauma 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], University of Iowa Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_805756]).  As outlined above, 
among the [ADDRESS_1112294] ed for 
study inclusion and will be randomized to either intervention or usual care.  In each case, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_805757], unit leadership and the department of infection prevention will assent to unit 
participation. HCWs in each unit will be observed regardi ng compliance with hand hygiene and 
glove use; this data will be collected in aggregate for each unit and no individual healthcare worker 
data will be collected. This data is currently being collected at each facility as part of standard 
infection preventi on practice.  
 
Aim 1B .  Individual HCWs from the above participating units will be randomly selected for 
participation. Individuals who consent will have samples taken of gloved hands after donning as 
outlined above.  
4.2 Inclusion Criteria  
 
Aim 1B :  
• Adults > 18 years  
• HCWs  at one of the study sites  
• HCW donned non -sterile gloves upon entry to a Contact [CONTACT_805765] -patient room   
4.3 Exclusion Criteria  
• Informed Consent not obtained  
• Food services employee  
• Environmental services (housekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) employee  
4.[ADDRESS_1112295]/units will be recruited for participation in th is study.  This study aims to recruit from 
the following unit types at the UMMC :  Adult ICUs, General Pediatric Wards, Emergency 
Departments (ED, TRU) and Inpatient Hemodialysis units. Consideration for a unit/wards 
participation in this study will be review ed with the UMMC Department of Infection Prevention 
and Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_424817].  In addition, decisions for participation will be made in concert with 
Infection Prevention AND the individual unit leadership (e.g. Medical and Nursing directors).  In 
the base line period (previously described), compliance with HH and gown/glove use will be 
collected and units w ith similar rates of compliance (across all three sites, U Maryland, Iowa and 
Hopkins) will be included as study participants and will be randomized to r eceive the intervention 
or usual care. Interactions with the participating units will include education and data collection 
regarding compliance with infection prevention practices.  
 
Aim 1B . The investigators will station  themselves outside the rooms of p atients on Contact 
[CONTACT_805766] ; these rooms will be identified by [CONTACT_5035][INVESTIGATOR_805758] .  As HCWs  approach the room with intent to enter; the 
investigators will introduce themselve s, briefly describe the study, study procedures, and will ask 
HCWs  if they would consent  to participate.  It will be made clear that participation is voluntary and 
that there are no repercussions for declining participation.  The investigators will give ve rbal 
information about the study and have written information also available.  HCWs  will have gloves 
sampled by [CONTACT_805767].  
5.2 Alteration of Consent  
Aim 1A :  
We have requested an exemption of consent since no individuals (i.e. no human subj ects) are being 
enrolled in the study and data collection is occurring at the aggregate (unit) level - we are not 
collecting data regarding individual patients or HCWs.  
 
Aim1B :  
We are requesting a waiver of written documentation of informed consent  for pa rticipants in this 
study.  HCWs  will be approached regarding participation upon entry to patient rooms. Trained 
research staff will verbally describe the study procedures, requirements, benefits and risks to the 
subject. The subject will have ample time to ask questions and consider if they want to participate in 
the study. The subject will provide verbal consent before any procedures are done specifically for 
the study. The subject may withdraw consent at any point in the study. We are requesting a waiver 
of written documentation of inf ormed consent - as this might result in greater risk to the participant 
because it would require that we collect identifying information that we otherwise do not need.  
5.3 Waiver of HIPAA Authorization  
We are not collecting PHI . 
5.4 Informed Consent Process  
Aim 1A:  
We have requested an exemption of consent since no individuals (i.e. no human subjects) are being 
enrolled in the study and data collection is occurring at the aggregate (unit) level - we are not 
collecting data regarding individual patients or HCWs.  
 
 
Aim1B :  
This minimal risk study involves direct observation of HH and in randomly selected interactions 
culturing of gloves by [CONTACT_805768].  It is not scientifically necessary for the study to 
collect any identifying information about t he HCW .  By [CONTACT_805769].  A waiver of written documentation of informed consent has 
been re commended previously from the IRB on prior similar protocols (ie - culturing skin or attire of 
HCW s) 
6 Statistical Plan  
6.1 Analysis Plan  
Aim 1A:  
We will assess whether primary and secondary outcomes are significantly different in the 
experimental and usual care groups using the generalized estimating equations (GEE) approach 
with an unstructured working correlation matrix to adjust for clustering. We will perform 
multivariate analyses using GEE adjusting for covariates such as baseline compliance with HH and 
frequency of Contact [CONTACT_307595]. Analyses will be conducted at the level of the participating unit 
and will follow the intention to treat appr oach.  
 
Aim 1B :  
The primary analysis will be an intention -to-treat analysis where the gloved hands of HCWs 
sampled in the usual care group will be compared to those in the Intervention group regardless of 
HH activity. A secondary, as -treated analysis will  be performed where HCWs who were observed 
to perform HH and then don gloves will be compared to those in which gloves were directly applied 
without performing HH. The primary, intention -to-treat analysis will provide great insight into the 
effectiveness o f this intervention while the secondary, as -treated analysis will validate efficacy.  
 
The primary outcome, total bacterial colony forming units (CFUs) > 30 of gloved hands, will be 
compared between the two groups using a comparison of proportions. In this  case a one -sided p 
<0.025 will be statistically significant for noninferiority. We will also compute a two -sided 95% 
confidence interval for the relative risk of CFUs > [ADDRESS_1112296] gloving to HH + gloving, 
where the upper bound of the confidence i nterval  < delta will be considered statistically significant. 
In this analysis, we define the non -inferiority margin, or delta, equal to 1.15. We feel ( in 
consultation with microbiologists and HH experts) that if glove reuse (intervention) were found 
non-interior to usual care by a 1.15 margin (i.e. a difference of 15%) that this would be enough to 
lead to change in practice. Robust empi[INVESTIGATOR_805759] -site 
clustering for sample proportions. A secondary analysis will compare groups using CFUs as a count 
outcome. We will compute a two -sided 95% confidence interval for the relative mean of CFUs on 
gloved hands comparing the int ervention to the usual care group. The upper bound of the 
confidence interval < delta will be considered statistically significant, where delta is 1.15. The 
secondary outcomes, presence of pathogenic bacteria and total number of pathogenic and non -
pathogen ic bacteria present, will be analyzed like the primary outcome.  
6.2 Sample Size Estimates  
Aim 1A:  
How many participants (or specimens, or charts) will be used in this study?  
UMMC : 6 units     Worldwide: [ADDRESS_1112297] a minimum of 7000 total observations (14 units across the systems x 500 observations). Each 
system will have a research coordinator perform observations 3 hours per day four days per week . 
We estimate an average of 5 observations per hour19 (15 per day and 60 per week) and thus over 
2500 observations per year per research coordinator are feasible (we expect to require fewer to 
achieve desired power). Average HH compliance is consistently at 40 -50% and are often lower 
when glove use is indica ted1,15, we believe the compliance with infection prevention practices (i.e. 
primary outcome, composite compliance with HH AND glove use) in the usual care group will be ~ 
40%. Recent studies have shown compliance with gloves when indicated to be  approximately 70 -
80%15. Thus for the primary outcome, we expect a difference in compliance with infection 
prevention practice to be ~ 30%. If we assume 500 observations per area, an alpha level of 0.05, an 
interclass coeffici ent of 0.[ZIP_CODE] we will require inclusion of 4 patient care areas (2 experimental and 
2 usual care) to achieve a power greater than 90% power to detect an effect size of 30% (i.e. the 
primary outcome). If we vary the interclass coefficient to 0.[ADDRESS_1112298] greater than 90% 
power under the same conditions.  Relative to the secondary outcome, in which we will compare 
compliance with gloving only in both the direct gloving (i.e. experimental group) and the usual care 
group, we believe it is rea sonable to expect that removing the cumbersome and time -consuming 
requirement of HH prior to glove use may increase compliance with glove use when indicated by 
[CONTACT_3450] 10%. Using the same assumptions as the primary aim with an interclass coefficient 
of 0.001, we need to recruit and randomize 4 participating units to achieve > 90% power to detect 
this effect size of 10%. If we use the higher interclass coefficient of 0.01, we need 8 participating 
units to achieve > 85% power.  So in short, we have ampl e power to see an effect in both primary 
and secondary outcomes including the sub -populations of adult ICU, dialysis and emergency 
department.  
 
Aim 1B:  
How many participants (or specimens, or charts) will be used in this study?  
Local: 866   Worldwide: 2600 
 
Based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], we anticipate 5% of HCWs in the usual care group (hand -hygiene plus gloves) 
and 3.5% in the experimental group (direct gloving) to have > 30 CFUs. We define non -inferiority 
as a relative risk < 1.15 of having > 30 CFUs, comparing the  experimental group to the usual care 
group. That is, delta equal to 1.15. Under these assumptions, 1280 samples (per group) are 
sufficient for a one -sided test with alpha=0.[ADDRESS_1112299] 80% power to detect noninferiority 231280 
samples in both groups will result in a total of 2560 samples for the 12 -month study period. Spread 
across the 14 proposed participating units at the 3 healthcare systems (UMMC and STC will share a 
Research Associate), this is approximately [ADDRESS_1112300].  Data from University of Iowa 
and Johns Hopkins Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_805760] – data from Aim 1A is aggregate unit level data and not -human subjects data; and data 
from Aim 1B is completely de -identified.  
 