 
 Reducing Cardio vascular Risk in Adults with Serious Mental Illness  
NCT # [ADDRESS_1029398] Narrative 
People with serious mental illness  (SMI; schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or bipolar disorder) die an 
average of 25 years earlier than their peers, and c ardiovascular (CV) disease is the leading cause of death. 
Primary care providers are not adequately aware of the significantly increased CV risk in patients with SMI, 
and, even when CV risk factors are identified, of ten do not take appropriate clinical actions. This project will 
test the ability of an electronic medical record -based clinical decision support system to help primary care 
providers identify, provide more appropriate care for, and control CV risk factors for patients with SMI.    
 
 Project Summary  
People with serious mental illness (SMI) (schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder) die 25 years 
earlier than their peers , and c ardiovascular (CV) disease is the leading cause of death. Primary care providers 
(PCPs) often are not aware of the significantly increased CV risk in patients with SMI and, even when CV risk 
factors are identified, appropriate clinical actions often are not provided.  Electronic medical record (EMR) -
based clinical decision support (CDS) delivered at a clinical encounter may be a powerful tool to help primary 
care providers ( PCPs ) identify and control CV risk factors in patients with SMI.   
This proposal wil l adapt a point -of-care EMR -based CDS system  (CV Wizard) to help PCPs identify, provide 
appropriate care for, and control CV risk factors for patients with SMI.  CV Wizard is designed to educate PCPs 
about the increased risk of CV disease and mortality in people with SMI, identify elevated CV risk factors in 
patients with SMI, prioritize these CV risks based on how much improvement in CV risk a patient would 
experience if the CV risk factor was adequately addressed, recommend specific medications and other 
interventions to decrease each elevated CV risk factor, and provide this information in an easy -to-understand 
format for both patients with SMI and their PCPs.  For those patients who are on the SMI medications most associated with weight gain, they will be able to work with a psychiatric care manager who, under the 
supervision of the patient’s treating psychiatrist and with the consent of the patient, will switch the SMI 
medication to one less associated with weight gain.  T he effectiveness of this intervention will be  assessed in a 
clinic -randomized trial with [ADDRESS_1029399] (a)  reduced total modifiable CV risk; (b) better control of six individual modifiable CV risk factors, 
including blood pressure, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], tobacco use, aspir in use, overweight/obesity, and, for those with diabetes, 
glucose control, and (c) lower rates of prescr iptions of SMI medications that are most associated with weight 
gain.  In secondary analyses, we wil l also explore the impact of CV Wizard and care management on CV risk 
factor  identification, treatment initiation and intensification; medication adherence;  outpatient and inpatient 
utilization; risky prescribing events; and CV events.    
This study  targets an important area of research that is a priority for the National Institute of Mental Health, our 
health system partners, and our external stakeholder adv isory board; leverages  previous infrastructure 
investments  in the Mental Health Research Network; and capi[INVESTIGATOR_751883] .  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_751884] -driven point -of-care CDS strategy that identifies and prior itizes available 
treatment options to better address uncontrolled CV risk  factors in adults with SMI is a critical next step to 
improv ing the health and reduc ing the CV risk  of this medically underserved population.   
 
 A Randomized Clinical Trial to Reduce Cardiovascular Risk in Adults with SMI  
Specific Aims 
People with serious mental illness (SMI) (schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder) die, on 
average, 25 years earlier than their peers . Cardiovascular (CV) disease is the predominant cause.1 Primary 
care providers (PCPs) are not adequately aware of the significantly increased CV risk in patients with SMI and, 
even when they do identify elevated CV risk factors, often do not take appropri ate clinical actions .2-[ADDRESS_1029400] (EMR) -based clinical decision support (CDS) can identify at-risk patients with SMI and 
systematically prompt more effective treatment of their CV risk factors, but its potential has been largely 
untapped. The objectives of this p roject are to improve CV risk factor  care in patients with SMI through a 
pragmatic trial of a point -of-care EMR -based CDS (referred to as “CV Wizard”) and a nurse care manager.  
The trial will be conducted in over 50 “real world” primary care clinics in three large healthcare systems.   
In Phase [ADDRESS_1029401], we will : (a) extend our EMR CDS algorithms , which were successfully used in a 
population of adults with diabetes,5 including a small subset of those with modifiable CV risk and SMI, to (i) 
identify  people with SMI and (ii) identify elevated CV risk and available treatment options ; (b) develop 
algorithms prioritizing these options for a speci fic patient at each clinic visit (including possible referral to a 
psychiatric nurse care manager to assist wi th changing the antipsychotic regimen); ( c) develop an effective 
interface to communicate this information to patients and PCPs , including specific “what drug, what dose” 
recommendations;  (d) train nurse care managers to act liaisons between primary care and behavioral health, 
and assist patients in switching their obesogenic SMI medications to those with less risk, when appropriate; (e) 
tailor the CV Wizard to interface correctly with the EMR at each study site; and ( f) develop office systems that 
orchestr ate nurse and PCP actions to reinforce consistent ongoing use of this novel intervention.  
In Phase 2, primary care clinics will be randomly assigned t o receive or not receive the intervention with 
staggered fashion, allowing each site to learn lessons from the site(s) implementing before it and increasing 
efficiency.  This randomized trial will test the hypothesis that compared with usual care, the intervention will 
significantly reduce CV risk  and improve care and control of specific CV risk  components (blood pressure, lipid 
levels, g lycosylated hemoglobin, smoking, obesity, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34308]) in adults with SMI.     
Phase [ADDRESS_1029402] includes (a) analysis of clinical effectiveness, (b) secondary analyses to identify 
mediators and modifiers of the impact of the intervention, and (c) disseminat ion and spread of the most 
successful aspects of the intervention model. To achieve these objectives, we propose these specific aims : 
Primary  Aim.  To assess the impact of CV Wizard and psy chiatric nurse care management on CV risk  factor  
control and appropriate SMI medication use in adults with SMI.   
Hypothesis 1. Adults with SMI receiving care in intervention clinics will have lower total modifiable CV risk  
[ADDRESS_1029403] and psychiat ric nurse care management on CV risk 
factor identification, treatment initiation and intensification; medication adherence; outpatient and inpatient 
utilization; risky prescribing events; and CV events.    
This project  targets an important clinical domain that is a priority of NIMH, our health system partners, and our 
external stakeholder advisory board, leverages  previous MHRN infrastructure investments , and capi[INVESTIGATOR_751885] .  It also builds on a decade of our team’s NIH -funded work in CV disease, 
diabetes, mental illness, and CDS development and implementation. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_751884] -driven 
point -of-care CDS strategy that identifies and prior itizes available treatment options to better address 
uncontrolled CV risk  factors in adults with SMI is a critical next step to improv ing the health and reduc ing the 
CV risk  of this medically underserved population. In addition to data from the EMR and claims, we will interview 
adults with SMI about other potential contributors to C V risk and their experiences with the intervention.  
Therefore, regardless of the specific results of the project, we will collect crucial information to improve the CV 
health and inform future interventions in this area of immense importance to the health of adults with SMI. 
 
  
Research Strategy  
SIGNIFICANCE  
People with serious mental illness ( SMI) die, on average,  25 years younger than age - and gender -matched 
patients without SMI .1 Medical illness accounts for 60% of premature death in SMI, while suicide and injury 
account for 30% to 40%.1 Cardiovascular (CV) disease is the leading cause of deat h in adults with SMI .1 
People with schizophrenia die of  CV disease at 2.3 times the rate in the general population, and more than 
two-thirds of people with schizophrenia die of coronary heart disease.6, 7 The relative risk for individual CV risk 
factors in patients with SMI compared with the general population is 1.5- 2 for obesity, 2 -3 for smoking, 2 for 
diabetes, and up to 5 for dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035].8, 9 Druss et al found that the presence of a mental disorder was 
associated with a 19% increase in 1 -year risk of mortality (HR 1.19 ; 95% CI,1.04-1.36), and  that this excess 
mortality was accounted for in large part by [CONTACT_751903] .10 In a study of 
patients enrolled in Minnesota health care programs from 2003 to 2007, women with SMI died at a median age 
of 63 years , compared with 85 years  for controls; m en with SMI died at a median age of 53 years , compared 
with 74 years  for controls.11 Examining the 387 people in this cohort who died of  CV disease, patients with SMI 
died at a median age of 56 years , compared with 83 years  in controls —an average of [ADDRESS_1029404].11  
Complex combinations of behavioral, pathophysiologic,  care-delivery  system, provider, and medication- related 
factors are likely involved in the association between SMI and CV  disease . Behavioral factors include 
significantly increased rates of obesity, metabolic syndrome, sedentary lifestyle, poor diet, smoking , treatment 
nonadherence, and decreased likelihood of seeking or obtaining preventive or medical care in those with SMI .1, 
4, 12- 20  Pathophy siological factors  include increased platelet reactivity, endothelial dysfunction, autonomic 
dysfunction, hypercortisolemia, abnormal immune system activation, and increased QT- interval variability  in 
adults with SMI , and elevated systolic blood pressure ( SBP) in patients with bipolar disorder who are manic, all 
of which may promote heart disease via pro- atherogenic, pro -ischemic, or pro -arrhythmic processes.21-[ADDRESS_1029405] also been associated with QT -interval prolongation, orthostatic hypotension 
and, rarely, torsade de pointes.31 Despi[INVESTIGATOR_751886], non- suicide and CV mortality rates appear to 
be lower in patients with SMI who take these medications long- term.32, 33 This may be in part related to SMI 
medications’  normalization of autonomic tone, which could decrease the risk of  myocardial infarction.34, 35    
In summary, those with SMI bear a huge excess risk of CV events and mortality that is multifactorial in origin. The problem deserves attention, and EMR -based CDS is a promising strategy to remedy several of the 
caus es.  Given the combination of behavioral and biomedical mechanisms linking SMI and CV risk, targets for 
interventions to reduce CV risk include both changing health behaviors (diet, physical activity, smoking) and 
improving medical control of modifiable ri sk factors ( hyperglycemia, hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], hypertension , aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34308]).  
Recent research  demonstrates that intensive behavioral interventions proven effective in the general 
population
36, 37 are also effective in people living with SMI.38  The trial proposed here addresses a parallel 
question: Can a clinical decision support intervention proven effective in people with diabetes help to control 
cardiovascular risk factors in people living with SMI?  
INNOVATION  
Innovation in Adult SMI Care. Patients with SMI have exceedingly high CV event rates , which contribute to a 
shortened life expectancy. However, health care systems have only recently become aware of this and are now prioritizing doing something about it. However, they aren’t sure what to do. The proposed EMR -based 
CDS (CV Wizard) represents a novel and innovative way to allow care systems to systematically address 
 
 uncontrolled CV risk  factors  in patients with SMI, who have multiple barriers to the receipt of standard 
recommended care for their medical illnesses . CV Wizard has potential to reduce disparities in care by 
[CONTACT_751904], providing timely identification and prioritized evidence- based 
treatment recommendations to control CV risk factors, and facilitate actively engaging patients in their care .   
Innovations  in Decreasing Use of Antipsychotics with Increased Cardiometabolic Risks. SMI 
medications contribute unequally to cardiometabolic risk. Certain SMI medications (most notably valproic acid, 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], thioridazine and chlorpromazine) can cause significant weight gain, often with 
associated changes in insulin resistance and lipid metabolism.13, [ADDRESS_1029406] amount of weight 
gain in adults with SMI.40-42 In the CAFÉ trial, patients w ho received olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_751887] 11.0 kg 
in 4 months, while those who received risperidone gained 6.4 kg, and those with quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_751888] 5.5 kg.43 
Similarly, in the CATIE trial, 30% of patients randomized to olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_751888] > 7% of their body  weight over 
18 months or time of discontinuation, compared to 16% for quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 14% for risperidone, and 7% for 
ziprasidone.35 Given these differences between SMI medications, our innovative intervention 1) uses existing 
EMR data to identify patients wi th SMI taking obesogenic SMI medications who have (a) increased their body 
weight >7% in the previous 12 months (similar to what was used in an HMORN pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080],44 allowing us to 
use these developed tools), or (b) who have a BMI >35 kg/m2;  and 2) refers  such patients to a psychiatric 
nurse care manager who will act as a liaison between the patient’s primary care and behavioral health providers, implementing protocol -based medication transitions.   
Innovative Model for Protocolized Pharmacotherapy .  Traditional research models for delivering 
protocolized pharmacotherapy rely on specialized clinicians working in research clinics.  The high cost and 
limited reach of this approach make it impractical f or large -scale pragmatic trials, and such a model i s certainly 
not viable for widespread dissemination or implementation.  The proposed trial will implement and evaluate an 
alternative model for delivery of protocolized pharmacotherapy supported by a psychiatric nurse care manager  
and by [CONTACT_751905] i n the primary care clinic to support treatment recommendations .    
Technical Innovations.  The potential for EMR technology to improve clinical care and accelerate translation 
of evidence into practice has been widely recognized, but few studies of EMR -based CDS have shown positive 
results with respect to mental health care. Most previous EMR -based CDS interventions have failed for two 
principal reasons: (a) PCPs have not accessed the CDS information in a timely fashion, and (b) the CDS has been limited to s imple prompts or reminders.
45, [ADDRESS_1029407] addresses these limitations by [CONTACT_751906]: 1) The CDS goes beyond simple computer prompts and reminders to provide more sophisticated, patient -specific CDS, considering previous CV risk  factor values, diagnoses, and medications 
and making guideline- standardized yet personalized recommendations for a range of clinical actions at the 
point of care ; 2) The CDS is provided to both the patient and primary care physician ( PCP) early in the 
encounter  and supported by [CONTACT_751907] e the likelihood that PCPs will use the CDS in a timely and sustained fashion;
47 3) The CDS algorithms 
are implemented in a Web service  linked to the EMR, simplifying clinical updates over time and increasing 
scalability of the intervention to other medical groups  with other types of EMRs and additional mental health 
conditions  in the future;  4) The CDS includes intuitive provider and pat ient interfaces  developed to clearly 
identify high- benefit clinical or lifestyle actions that can substantively reduce CV risk and efficiently elicit patient 
treatment preferences . 5) The intervention is also novel in systematically recognizing patients wi th SMI  and 
efficiently  triggering the CDS tool.  
Innovations Related to Future Research and Implementation . Finally, the prioritization and treatment  
algorithms and Web site  developed in this project can support many other applications  (e.g.,  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_751889] y of 
care for people with SMI at the provider or  clinic  level, support ing “patient -direct” applications to inform patient 
selection of treatment options, or reaching patients through the Internet). This project builds on our team’s  
previous successful efforts to use CDS to support goal -based guidelines47 and extends that technology —
already proven to improve blood pressure ( BP) and glucose control in people with diabetes —to a new target 
population: people with SMI.  
APPROACH  
 
 Preliminary Studies 
Previous Experience : Our multidisciplinary research team has extensive experience and expertise in chronic 
disease, cardiology, primary care, mental health, CDS system  design and implementation,  and best -practices 
dissemination and implementation. The PI, [CONTACT_751927] m, is an experienced psychiatrist who has led studies of 
the mortality associated with antipsychotics in elderly patients with dementia is an investigator on National 
Institutes of Health -sponsored studies of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor use and suicide behaviors , a 
statewide initiative to implement best -practice models for depression care, a pragmatic trial to prevent suicide, 
the association between suicidal ideation and behavior, predictors of high -value treatments for mood disorders, 
and the association between chronic kidney disease and cognitive impairment ( 3U19CA079689, 
1U19MH092201, 1UH2AT007755 , 3U19M092201, 5R01MH080692, R01AG037551).  She is also an 
investigator for a CMS -funded program involving care management of depression, diabetes, heart disease, 
and substance abuse across seven states ( 1C1CMS331048). Drs. O’Connor and Crain are conducting several 
federally funded randomized clinical trials of CDS tools for adults with major CV risk  factors (HL102144, 
DK068314). [CONTACT_715695] has research experience in primary care of mental illness, dementia, and rural 
healthcare, and is currently involved in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_751890] a CDS  system to improve primary care of 
dementia.48-[ADDRESS_1029408] with experience in the 
evaluation and treatment of patients with SMI  and a nationally recognized expert in the medical care of patients 
with mental illness.10, 18,  60-66 Our team’s previous and ongoing work  in both mental health and cardiometabolic 
conditions (we have collectively written more than 500 articles and dozens of clinical guidelines) makes us uniquely well qualified to successfully conduct the proposed p roject.  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46476] : To assess the likelihood that the proposed intervention would be effective for adults with SMI, we 
examined the effect of an earlier CDS tool used with adults with diabetes  at HealthPartners.47 To provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_751891], we identified the subset of patients with diabetes and bipolar disorder (N=41) or 
schizophrenia (N=43). Due to the diabetes requirement, these patients had a mean age of 59 years , and 61% 
were female. In patients wi th bipolar disorder randomly assigned  to the intervention group, A1c values declined 
by [CONTACT_15734] 0.8%, SBP by 9.4 mm Hg, diastolic BP (DBP)  by 7.3 mm  Hg, and low -density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol  by 6.2 mg/dL at 18- months . Likewise, in patients with schizophrenia random ly assigned  to the 
intervention group, A1c values declined by 0.7%, SBP by 11.8 mm Hg,  DBP by 8.8 mm Hg, and LDL by 20.1 
mg/d L. Patients with SMI  in the control group started from different baseline values and had much smaller 
improvem ents in these CV risk factors (for control patients with bipolar disorder, A1c values increased by 
0.2%, while SBP decreased by 3.3 mm Hg, DBP by 1.9 mm Hg, and LDL by 9.1 mg/dl  at 18- month follow up; 
for control patients with schizophrenia, A1c values wer e unchanged, while S BP decreased by 3.9 mm Hg, DBP 
by 3.5 mm Hg, and LDL by 10.3 mg/d L over the same period). The notable improvement in CV risk measures 
in this small group of SMI patients with diabetes suggests that PCPs we re able to use such CDS tools in the 
care of adults with SMI, that the patients with SMI were able to respond to this intervention in the desired way, 
and that this type of intervention may be strong enough to effect clinically significant improvements in the 
identification and control  of key CV risk factors in adults with SMI.   
Preliminary Assessment of Study Population : Preliminary  data (Table 1) were collected  at HealthPartners 
over [ADDRESS_1029409] BP<130/80 and LDL<130 mg/dL, about two- thirds have 
uncontrolled CV risk factors (especially smoking, hyperglycemia, and overweight/obesity) at any point.  
Table 1. Description  of Adults Age 18  and Older with SMI  at HealthPartners Medical Group, 2009 -2010.  
Condition  N Mean  
Age Mean Weight 
(lbs) Smoker 
(%) Hyper glycemia 
(%)2 Dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] 
(mg/dL)3 Elevated BP 
(%)4 
Bipolar disorder  1,871  43.3 196 39.5 15.4 2.9 7.7 
Schizophrenia  469 50.4 193 45.6 25.4 3.2 10.5 
Schizoaffective  570 48.2 206 40.3 27.4 3.7 8.4 
Total  2,825  45.3 198 40.5 19.3 3.1 8.2 
1Patients with missing data are not included in denominator.  2Defined as A1c >= 6% or fasting glucose>=100 mg/dL on most 
recent observation. 3Defined as LDL  >130 mg/dL.  4Defined as SBP  >[ADDRESS_1029410]  
Intervention Group  
Control Group  
52 Primary Care Clinics  
Figure 1. Study Design for Group -Randomized Trial.  METHODS  
Study Overview : In this cluster -randomized clinical trial, at least 52 primary care clinics at 3 Mental Health 
Research Network (MHRN) organizations will be blocked within organization on size and characteristics of 
patients with SMI and then randomly assigned 1:[ADDRESS_1029411] or control clinics ( Figure 1). All consenting 
PCPs will be allocated to the same study arm 
as their clinic, and the estimated 15 eligible 
adults with SMI under the care of each PCP 
will be allocated to the same study arm as 
their PCP.  
Study Sites : This study will be conducted at 
the primary care clinics of 3  organizations:  
HealthPartners Medical Group (HPMG)  is a 
large multispecialty group that provides care to 
300,[ADDRESS_1029412] . 
Kaiser Permanente  of Georgia (KPGA ) 
provides care to 244,[ADDRESS_1029413].  
Essentia Health (EH)  is a multispecialty integrated healthcare provider with clinics across Wisconsin, 
Minnesota, North Dakota, and Idaho.  EH serves a primarily rural population of over 900,000, including 5,[ADDRESS_1029414].  Like HPMG and KP GA, 
EH uses Epi[INVESTIGATOR_751892].   
Study Participants: PCPs and Patients : To participate, PCPs  must practice at a randomized primary care 
clinic and: (a) be a general internist, family physician, or adult -care non -obstetric  nurse practitioner, (b) provide 
ongoing primary care for six or more adults with SMI in 2012 , and (c) provide written informed consent to 
participate in the study. About 385 eligible PCPs practice at the clinics.  We anticipate, based on experienc e, 
that we will successfully recruit 150 PCPs (75 per arm). This feasible recruitment target ensures that subgroup 
analyses (eg,  based on gender , age) will be adequately powered and that the intervention strategy is suitable 
for use by a large, representat ive segment of PCP s. 
To be included in the primary aim analysis , patients must meet the study criteria for diagnosed SMI (one 
inpatient or two outpatient ICD -9 codes for schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder or bipolar disorder and : (a) 
be >17 years and < 80 years, (b ) have a Charlson comorbidity score of 3 or less, (c) be linked  to a consented 
PCP, and (d) have at least one primary care visit with a consented PCP in the 12 months prior to clinic 
randomization .  Based on preliminary HPMG data ( Table 1), we  estimate that 75% of adult patients with SMI 
visit a PCP at a participating clinic each year. We estimate that 95% of adults  with SMI have Charlson scores 
<3, and 95% are <80. We anticipate up to 10% to 20% per year disenrollment  and a 1% to 2 % per year death 
rate of adults with SMI . Few patients with SMI at our study sites switch clinic s, and our algorithms accurately 
match over 95% of patients to a regular PCP. Ultimately, after accounting for all exclusions, we anticipate about 
N≈2,100/140≈15 adults  with SMI per eligible PCP will be study -eligible at HPMG.  In the 52 randomized clinics, 
we anticipate including data from about N ≈150 PCPs * 15 adults per PCP ≈2,[ADDRESS_1029415], the IRB has waived consent in similar circumstances.  Moreover, the 
CDS algorithms identify potentially risky treatment strategies (eg, use of a diuretic with lithium; full list to be 
developed in Phase 1), further reducing risks to patients with SMI.  We describe in detail below how the 
proposed research sa tisfies criteria in [ADDRESS_1029416]  is rooted in a series of antecedent 
 
 
Lab Data 
 Vital Sign 
Data 
Pharmacy 
Data 
Comorbidity & Clinical 
Data 
CDS Algorithms identify patients 
with uncontrolled CV risk factors 
and all appropriate treatment 
options 
EMR applies standardized CV risk equations to 
quantify potential CV risk reduction of each 
treatment option and rank by [CONTACT_751908] (what drug, what 
dose)  
Identify any current inappropriate or 
risky treatments  
Suggest follow -up interval and safety 
lab testing  
PCPs get short -term incentives to 
use CV Wizard  
Print patient version of CDS with 
treatment options prioritized by [CONTACT_751909] -up visit as needed  
Take printed sheet home as decision 
aid and reconsider new set of priorities at next visit  
Include advice on weight management and physical activity, including referral 
to nurse practiti oner for smoking 
cessation and weight management
 
Patient indicates preference for one or more treatment options and 
PCP responds. Process is iterative over the intervention period.  
Figure 2. Schematic Representation of Prioritized Clinical Decision Sup port ( CV 
Wizard ) Intervention Showing How Open Treatment Options are Identified, 
Prioritized, and Presented to Patients and Primary Care Physicians (PCPs)  studies that have developed more limited but successful forms of CDS.5, [ADDRESS_1029417] phase, w e will develop 
detailed algorithm s that will operate in both the EMR and Web site to provide the necessary CDS ( Figure 2 ).  
Step 1: Identify Eligible 
SMI Patients  and their CV 
Risk Factors and Prioritize 
Management of Any that 
are Uncontrolled: Web-
based CDS algorithms  
estimate the patient’s 10-
year CV risk and quantify 
decreases in CV risk with appropriate management of 
out-of-control CV risk 
factors . CV risk is calculated 
based on the Framingham 
10-year CV Disease Risk 
Equation .
68, [ADDRESS_1029418] prompts PCPs to 
obtain them. CV risk  will be 
conceptualized as a vector 
with two components: (a) an 
irreversible CV risk vector related to age and gender  
(and their interaction) , and 
(b) a modifiable CV risk 
vector related to 
uncontrolled CV risk  factors 
(potentially reversible if these risk factors were controlled).  Component (b), modifiable CV risk , is composed of 
a vector for each uncontrolled CV risk  factor of interest: BP, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] , smoking, BMI, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34308], and glucose. The  
magnitude of the vectors determines its  priority, with prior ity 1 ( Figure 3 ) assigned to the risk factor with the 
greatest potential reduction in CV risk, and so forth for all uncontrolled CV risk factors .   
Appendix Figures  1 & [ADDRESS_1029419] 
(HL102144).  The drug 
effects expected from clinical actions f or 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_751893], lipid, and 
glucose drugs,  have 
been previously 
quantified (HL102144) 
and are adjusted 
downward for patients 
already on intensive 
multidrug regimens for 
BP or glucose control.
70, 
[ADDRESS_1029420] gained >7% of their body weight in the previous  [ADDRESS_1029421] a BMI > 35.  The PCP, 
psychiatric nurse care manager, and treating psychiatrist (if in the same medical group) also receive the CDS 
information related to SMI medications and other CV risk factors. The PCP is prompted to inform the patient 
that a discussion of SMI medications with the nurse care manager and the treating psychiatrist may be 
indicated, and a referral to the nurse care manager is made. The nurse care manager facilitates 
communication among the patient, PCP, and behavioral health provider and, guided by  [CONTACT_751910], schizophrenia, and schizophrenia, convey concerns about the SMI medication and 
possible alternatives to the treating psychiatrist. PCPs will not recommend changes in SMI medications.    
Step 3: Identify Available Treatment Options for Each Uncontrolled Modifiable CV Risk Factor:  A second 
set of Web-based algorithms (example prototypes in Appendix Figures 1 and 2 ) identify evidence- based 
treatment options to address each  uncontrolled CV risk  factor. These algorithms have been tested in two 
previous  research projects and are maintained on the Wizard Web service and updated (and revalidated) as 
needed to reflect changes in recommended treatments based on modifications in guidelines, evidence, and/or 
changes i n FDA-indicated uses of certain drugs or classes of drugs.   
Pharmacologic treatment recommendations in CV Wizard  are directed at  CV risk  factor control and based on 
(a) all current prescriptions for BP, lipid, and glucose- control medications  and aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] , smoking cessation 
medications , and obesogenic SMI medications, (b) available information on the patient’s renal or liver function, 
creat ine kinase level, and established diagnoses of diabetes,  congestive heart failure, or coronary heart 
disease, (c) personally assigned BP, A1c, and lipid goals based on comorbidity and other factors  (risk of 
hypoglycemia, intensity of current glucose , BP or lipid regimen), and (d) medication allergies listed in the EMR. 
Medication recommendations are specific (what drug, what dose) and are based on evidence- based clinical 
protocols and decision rules developed by [CONTACT_751911]. These protocols and rules 
are derived from the evidence- based national and regional (Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement) clinical 
guidelines for glucose, BP, and lipid control, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34308], smoking cessation and obesity management.72-80   
If inappropriate , CV-related pharmacotherapy or risky prescribing events (including those related to SMI 
medications, such as concomit ant use of lithium carbonate and a diuretic) are identified, CV Wizard  will flag 
them and suggest alternative clinical actions  (in the example, substitute a safer BP -lowering agent for the 
diuretic). A list of prescribing events and a protocol of pharmacot herapy intensification advice given for several 
hundred clinical scenarios has been tested in a previous project and reported by [CONTACT_27156],81-[ADDRESS_1029422] of risky prescribing events  specific to the SMI population in phase 1 of this study.   
Lifestyle treatment recommendations are also provided, when appropriate. If lifestyle interventions are 
indicated for smoking or body mass index (BMI) management , and the patient indicates interest, the PCP uses 
a link in the C V Wizard to refer the patient directly to existing services  at each site . Research shows that 
standard interventions for weight loss or smoking cessation are not often offered to patients with SMI, but that 
when they are, they can successfully make signifi cant life changes.38, [ADDRESS_1029423], the nurse care manager 
will receive training in weight management and tobacco cessation and reinforce them as indicated.     
Step 4: Present Prioritized CV R isk Reduction Options and SMI Treatment Review Recommendations 
to PCPs and Patients . Prioritized CDS is provided to PCPs and patients  using tested interface formats and a 
sequence of office staff steps successfully implemented in previous studies. P articipating PCPs and all 
rooming nurses in intervention clinics are trained to use the PCP and patient interfaces of CV Wizard,  and will 
take the following steps at each visit: (i) After entering vital sign  data, CV Wizard automatically presents the 
interface screen to the nurse (with no prompts or trigger needed). T he rooming nurse prints the patient and 
PCP versions  of the CDS  sheet . (ii) If a patient’s mental and physical status appears stable, the nurse hands 
the patient sheet ( Figure 4 ) and says, “This sheet shows how you can reduce your danger of a stroke or heart 
attack. Circle any of the things you might want to work on, and let the doctor know during your visit today.” (iii) 
A printed version of the PCP CDS ( Figure 3) is placed in the basket outside the exam room for rapid review by 
[CONTACT_751912]. I f preferred, the PCP CDS interface is displayed on the EMR screen 
 
 
when the PCP enters the room and can be view ed by [CONTACT_7326]  a button on the EMR navigator bar. ( iv) The 
PCP assesses patient preference for the prioritized CV risk -reduction options. If the patient wants to act on one 
or more, the PCP can address  them  immediately or schedul e another visit.  
PCP Version.  CDS  provided to the PCP is very specific and identif ies and prioritizes  treatment options t hat 
will, if imp lemented successfully,  reduce CV risk (Figure 3).  If CV risk -reduction opportunities are identified,  the 
CDS algorithms will specify either initiation or titration of specific drugs based on current medications, distance 
from goal, and other clinical and comorbidity considerations outlined above. The new interface developed for 
this project will include a special section reserved for SMI medication review, if indicated. The PCP views this  
interface before entering the exam room and uses it as  a powerful visit -planning tool.  
Patient Version.  The patient version 
has a visual display of risk  derived 
from Framingham risk equations and other risk -estimation tools ( Figure 
4).
68, 85, 86 This has been used on a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_751894], has been well -received by [CONTACT_751913] , does not heavily  
depend on numeracy, and has been 
shown to be strong ly motivational.
87-
89,90, 91  One display panel (not 
shown) is reserved to indicate 
whether a review of SMI medications 
may be beneficial. If so, the text will 
read “You may benefit from reviewing 
your psychiatric m edication(s) with 
your psychiatrist. A nurse care manager will communicate with you 
in the next 2 weeks to discuss this.”  
Incorporating Patient Preference.  
A key design feature of the patient interface is the presentation of  several prioritized treatment options  directly 
to the patient for consideration.  Patient preference is elicited simply by [CONTACT_751914]. Because patient readiness to take health -related actions varies with  
specific actions, offering several options improves the chance that a given patient may be interested in 
addressing at least one of them . Moreover, patient readiness to act is a key predictor of subsequent adherence 
and success of treatment, as we and others have s hown.92-97  
Step 5: Nurse -Supported Medication Switch Protocol.  In the subset of patients for whom the Wizard 
recommends a change in antipsychotic or mood stabilizer medication, a copy of the PCP and patient interfaces 
are sent automatically to the psychi atric nurse care manager.  The psychiatric nurse care manager will (under 
supervis ion by [CONTACT_751915] ) implement a 
step-wise medication transition protocol (developed in Phase 1) involving  weekly standardized telephone 
assessments of potential adverse effects or indications of symptom breakthrough.  In the subset of patients 
identified for psychiatric medication review, special attention will be given to SMI medication adherence and 
persistence, trajectory of CV risk factors, and frequency of mental health hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. However, substantial 
literature has documented the safety and effectiveness of psychiatric nurse care managers in the care of 
patients with depression and SMI .98-100 
Step 6: Strategies to Ensure High Use of  CV Wizard . We will implement three strategies to ensure high use 
rates for CV Wizard: (A) The Wizard  screen includes a v isit-resolution form that invites  the PCP to click, before 
closing the encounter, one of three boxes: (1 ) action taken based on Wizard recommendations, (2 ) other CV 
risk-reduction action taken, or (3) no CV risk -reduction action taken. If box (3) is clicked , another  box must be 
clicked to indicate why no action was taken. This tool serves multiple purposes: it incentiv izes the PCP to take 
actio n to avoid additional clicks , allows us to track the percentage of visits each intervention group PCP is 
using  Wizard, and gives  feedback to PCPs and clinic  leaders  on comparative use of CV Wizard. (B) Figure 4.  Prototype Patient Version of CV Wizard.  
 
 Benchmar king feedback is given to PCPs on their use of CV Wizard, and medical group leaders at each site 
will communicate this feedback to each PCP by [CONTACT_751916].  (C) Intervention clinics will modify nurse 
rooming procedures —a change authorized and supported by [CONTACT_751917]. (D) The rooming 
nurses at each clinic will receive one- time compensation of $[ADDRESS_1029424] interface sheets for the PCP and patient  are printed at 
>80% of the visits of patients with SMI. In addition, each site will approve an explicit protocol for psychiatric 
nurse care manager communication with treating psychiatrists, PCPs, and patients.  These strategies are 
designed to reinforce office nurse, PCP, and psychiatric nurse care manager adherence to study protocols .  
Step 7: Interactive Use of the CV Wizard C DS over a Series of Visits. PCPs will use CV Wizard repeatedly 
at all visits of eligible patients  over the intervention period of [ADDRESS_1029425] a PCP (75% do) make a n average of > [ADDRESS_1029426] shown that there is substantial relapse to uncontrolled risk -factor status (BP , 
lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], smoking, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_34308], and glucose control) over time. In diabetes patients, for example, about 30% of 
those with adequate glucose control relapse to elevated levels of glucose within [ADDRESS_1029427] and refine the intervention protocol . Once the initial programming is complete, we will 
create a se ries of “dummy” patients with varying CV risk  profiles  (eg, elevated BP, smoking, candidates for 
change in psychotropic medications). Clinical  investigators (Rossom, Druss, Luepker, and O’Connor) will test 
the functionality of our algorithms and assess the appropriateness of the CDS. After several rounds  of testing 
and modifications, we will recruit three  HealthPartners clinics  not included in the study  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -test CV Wizard 
at each clinic f or [ADDRESS_1029428] surv eys with a subset of subjects referred to the nurse care manager for 
medication review to determine: 1) satisfaction with the intervention; 2) their decision to continue current 
medications or switch medications, and why; 3) whether they felt included in m edication and care decisions; 4) 
whether they perceived benefit from the intervention; 5) level of activity and quality of their diet; 6) what they 
identify as the most significant contributors to their weight gain; 7) whether they experienced adverse outcomes ( eg, psychiatric destabilization and/or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]); 8) perceived barriers in obtaining primary and 
mental health care; 9) suggestions for improving the EMR patient interface  or the care manager intervention.    
Measurement of Dependent  Variables  
CV Risk (Hypothesis 1) . The Framingham 10 -year CV Disease Risk  Equation will be used to estimate the 10 -
year CV risk  for each adult patient with SMI102 and calculated every time a constituent modifiable risk factor is 
recorded in the EMR during the intervention period. A n index  CV risk score will be calculated from data 
 
 elements valid at each patient’s first primary care visit after randomization of his/her primary care clinic. All 
patients who meet the study inclusion criteria and have an index modi fiable CV risk score >[ADDRESS_1029429] recent data elements for 
computing CV risk , looking back over a period appropriate for each risk component (ie, 12 months for A1c, BP , 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], smoking, BMI; 48  months for lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] ). Risk factors that are unavailable and prevent CV risk  calculation 
will be multiply imputed from a congenial  imputation model (see “Missing Data” for details ) so that CV risk  
scores may be calculated for all p atients from updated valid and imputed risk factors . The series of CV risk 
scores will enable person- specific CV risk trajectories to be estimated and compared among patients treated in 
CV Wizard clinics relative to control  clinics. A comparison of model -predicted [ADDRESS_1029430] relative to control  clinics will 
support the primary efficacy of H ypothesis  1. 
Modifiable CV Risk factors (Hypothesis 2) . Each modifiable CV risk factor recorded in the EMR from those 
included in the index CV risk estimation through the end of the intervention period will be retained.  Person -
specific trajectories for each risk factor will be estimated from EMR -recorded risk factor s (ie, no imputed 
values) and compared across clinic -randomized treatment groups.   
Obesogenic SMI Medications . Each patient will be classified as having an open prescription for an 
obesogenic SMI medication at baseline if there was a combination of fill date and days’ supply for a defined set 
of obesogenic atypi[INVESTIGATOR_751895]’s 
first primary care visit after randomization of his/her primary care clinic. A comparable 12 -month meas ure will 
be calculated. The obesogenic agents included in these calculations are  valproic acid, olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], clozapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 
thioridazine, chlorpromazine, lithium, quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_050],  and risperidone . The proportion of patients with an open 
prescription for an obesogeni c SMI medication will be compared across clinic -randomized treatment groups.  
Dependent Variables: Secondary Analyses. A detailed description of dependent variables that will be 
included in secondary analyses , some of which will pi[INVESTIGATOR_751896] 1. We postulate that the benefits of CV Wizard w ill be mediated in part by [CONTACT_751918] (a) BP, glucose, 
and lipid treatment ; and (b) BP, glucose, and lipid treatment intensification at visits with uncontrolled BP, 
glucose, or lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]. Additional mediating factors include (c) adherence to antipsychotics and mood stabilizers ; 
and (d) number of outpatient and inpatient  encounters  (total and related to SMI) , if CV Wizard increases 
number of outpatient visits, email visits, emergency department visits, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] . CV Wizard  might 
increase the frequency of inappropriate or risky drug prescr ibing ; therefore, we will quantify occurrence of (e) 
potentially risky prescribing events  using methods similar to those we previously published.81-83  Finally, EMR 
and claims data will quantify the occurrence and date of (f) major CV events  (including fatal and nonfatal heart 
attack or stroke, total mortality, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_688832], and revascularization procedures) so that 
the occurrence and time to event can be assessed. It is unlikely that the study has power to detect changes in 
CV events, but we will assess available data in secondary analysis . 
Measurement of Independent Variables . (Detailed table found in Appendix Table 1)  
Primary Predictors . The primary predictor of CV risk trajectories is a binary indicator for whether the clinic in 
which the patient is seen was randomly assigned to the CV Wizard or control  study arm. To test Hypotheses 1 
and 2, a second predictor will quantify the time elapsed from the patient’s first post -randomization clinic visit, at 
which time the index  CV risk score was calculated, to each point -in-time CV risk score. For Hypothesis 3,  a 
binary indicator will denote whether outcomes  were assessed at index  or 12 months later.  
Patient and Provider Characteristics. Patient and provider characteristics will be document ed so we can 
assess the extent to which results apply to subgroups of pat ients or whether patient or provider characteristics 
modify intervention efficacy. Also, clinic randomization may induce random and  selection -induced patient 
covariate imbalance, necessitating adjustment . Patient characteristics from the EMR (for patients)  and health 
plan data sources  (for member -patients) include: health plan enrollment  and pharmacy coverage dates , 
demographics, pre-intervention comorbidities (derived from dated ICD -9 codes ), vital signs, height, BMI, 
laboratory values, and prescribed and filled medications. Furthermore, primary care visit dates will link patients 
and PCPs.  We will have complete data for a set of provider characteristics, including age, years since 
graduation, gender, full -time or part-time status, physic ian or allied provider (ie, nurse practitioner), specialty 
board certification status, years with HPMG/KPGA/Essentia,  and number and proportion of patients  with SMI.  
 
 We will also collect data on the percentage of applicable encounters where CV Wizard was printed and/or 
viewed, and the percentage of encounters with an opened CV Wizard where CV risk factors were addressed.  
Analysis Plan.  
Hypotheses [ADDRESS_1029431] in  improving CV risk and individual risk - 
factor trajec tories. H1 and H2 will be tested using a random coefficients model in which estimated CV risk 
scores (H1) or factors (H2) will be predicted from clinic -randomized treatment group (WIZARD), time elapsed 
since index  CV risk score ( YEAR ), and treatment -by-time interaction. The most basic form of the H1 and H2 
models will be:  CV risk kjit = γ0000 + γ1000WIZARD k + γ0001YEAR t + γ1001WIZARD k*YEAR t + 
γ2000KPGA k + γ3000EH k + [w k000 + v kj00 + u kji0 + u kji1*YEAR t + e kjit], 
where there are fixed effects for MHRN site; CV risk varies randomly across clinics (w k000), providers (v kjoo), 
patients (u kji0), and time (e kjit), and the relationship between time and CV risk varies randomly across patients 
(ukji1*YEAR t). These outcomes are expected to be normally or binomially distributed, although the suitability of 
alternate distributions (eg, negative binomial) and link functions (eg, log) will be assessed should they depart 
from their expected distributions. YEAR will be coded on a linear scale [(days since index)/365.25] so 0=index 
and 1=12 months, which should be sufficient to model change in CV risk over time. Quadratic or cubic terms 
will be tested and added if CV risk trajectories are nonlinear. Parameter γ0001 is expected to be near zero, 
indicating that, among control patients, CV risk did not change over time. Parameter γ1001 quantifies the change 
in CV risk expected at 12  months  (when YEAR=1) among WIZARD versus control  patients. If γ1001 is 
significant, a planned contrast will test the difference in CV risk outcomes  in WIZARD relative to control 
patients at [ADDRESS_1029432] the presence of an open prescription for an obesogenic SMI 
medication in patients w ith a 7 % or more weight gain in the previous [ADDRESS_1029433] recent BMI >= 
35 kg/m2. Each patient will be included in the analysis for t he time points at which they met either criteri on. The 
likelihood of an obesogenic SMI medication will be predicted from clinic -randomized treatment group 
(WIZARD), assessment point (12m) , and the treatment by [CONTACT_751919]. The H3 model,  
Prob(obesogenic SMI medication) kjit = γ0000 + γ1000WIZARD k + γ000112m t + γ1001WIZARD k*12m t + 
γ2000KPGA k + γ3000EH k + γ0010BMI>35 i + [w k000 + v kj00 + u kji0 + e kjit], 
will specify a binomial error distribution and logit link function, and account for whether the patient BMI >= 35  
kg/m2, in addition to the H1 and H2 model parameters. Due to clinic randomization, the likelihood of a patient 
taking  one of these medications should be similar across treatment groups at index  (non- significant γ1000) and,  
without  intervention,  be stable over time (nonsignificant γ0001). Parameter γ1001 is expected to be significant and 
negative, implying that CV Wizard patients are less likely than  control  patients to have an open prescription for 
an obesogenic SMI medication [ADDRESS_1029434]  (MDSE) could be calculated. The H1 and H2 data will consist of about 
four CV risk observations per person per year (using Table 1 preliminary data)  in each of about 2, 250 patients 
with SMI receiving primary care in one of 52 randomly assigned clinics. The correlated sample size of N≈2, [ADDRESS_1029435] introduced by 
[CONTACT_751920] (Neff = N / [1 + (n clus – 1)ρ]. The effective sample size Neff≈1 ,219 to 
1,582 (when ρ=.01- .02), expected number of observations per person, and assumptions regarding the within-
person covariance matrix, the residual variance in CV risk (97.5% residual), and the random covariance matrix 
(proportion of residual variance in CV risk at person level, residual slope variance, intercept -slope covariance) 
formed the basis of power analyses for each CV risk factor. We assumed that the analytic model would explain 
2.5% of the variance in each outcome, and the proportion of variance at person and time levels of the model 
were based on preliminary data (eg, person- level ICC DBP = .35 through ICC weight = .88). The estimated standard 
errors of γ1001 were .028 to .039, which implies MDSEs of d≈.047- .068 (power=.80, α 2=.05). These estimates 
were consistent in a range of assumptions of patient sample size, person- level residual variance, slope 
variance, and intercept -slope covariance. Therefore, we anticipate the H1 and H2 analyses will be sufficiently 
powered to detect small differences (d<.10) in CV risk and CV risk factors among CV Wizard versus control 
patients 12 months after exposure to the intervention.  
 
 For H3, we  anticipate that 50% of adul t patients with SMI wil l have experienced a 7 % weight gain over [ADDRESS_1029436] BMI >= 35 kg/m2 at any point. In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], about 70% of patients with SMI were on an 
antipsychotic or a mood stabilizer,  and about 40% of them  were obesogenic. We expect, then, that  without  
intervention,  about 70%*40%≈30% of patients will have an open prescription for an obesogenic SMI 
medication at one  point.  Assuming that the clinic -level ICC weight = .01 - .02 among the N≈2250*.50≈1, 125 
patients eligible for inclusion at each point, Neff = 796- 933. Comparison of CV Wizard to control patients will be 
powered to detect an absolute 8.0 %-8.7% reduction (eg, 21.3% -22.0% CV Wizard vs. 30% control ) in the 
proportion of patients with an open prescription for an obesogenic medication at 12 months.   
Missing data. Because all data elements will be drawn from EMR and health plan records, they will be high -
quality and available for virtually all patients.  Missing data will be rare and can be assumed to be missing at 
random. The absence of measured risk factors necessary for computing 10- year CV risk will result from its lack 
of measurement. One concern regarding absent risk -factor measures (eg, LDL values) is that tests are more 
likely to be perform ed for patients with known or suspected medical conditions, creating an upward bias in CV 
risk estimates. There was no evidence of such bias in the central tendency or dispersion of the risk -factor 
distributions in the preliminary data. However, should the CV Wizard increase CV risk  factor monitoring , we 
may conduct a secondary analysis on data from CV Wizard and control  patients , propensity -matched on 
characteristics that assess primary care involvement primary care (eg, numbers of visits, tests, medications ). 
Because 10-year CV risk will be calculated from risk factors measured in variable- specific timeframes, lack of 
measurement of a single risk factor could prevent CV risk calculation. To prevent this, we will multiply impute 
missing risk factor s necessary for computing CV risk from all variables in the primary analytic model ,104, 105 
including random effects (ie, congenial imputation model with  random effects106), and other risk factors  and 
patient characteristics that may improve the precision of the imputations using fully conditional specification.   
Secondary analyses.  The primary analytic model is sufficiently flexible to accommodate non -Gaussian data 
by [CONTACT_497809]. As such, secondary efficacy outcomes (eg, 
medication adherence, safety outcomes, risky prescribing events) will be analyzed using comparable 
approaches  as for the primary analyses , with distributional accommodations as needed . Sub -analyses using 
the same analytic approach but limited to a) intervention patients whose providers acted  based on CV Wizard  
recommendations or took other CV action, and b) propensity -matched patients, will estimate the maximum 
effect of the CV Wizard  intervention.  Medi cation will be assessed via a product  of coefficients approach107, [ADDRESS_1029437] effects  will be calculated from model -derived coefficients and its significance 
tested by [CONTACT_751921] 95% confidence intervals109, [ADDRESS_1029438]. Rossom will lead weekly meetings with the research team (Drs. Owen- Smith, 
Waring, O’Connor , and Crain, EMR programmers from each site, Web programmer s, and p roject manager s) to 
ensure that all necessary tasks  are completed in a timely fashion and strictly according to study protocol. In 
addition, [CONTACT_751928]  will conduct data meetings with the EMR and Web pr ogrammers weekly in the first [ADDRESS_1029439] and biweekly thereafter to deal with operational i ssues related to development and 
implementation of the intervention tool (in Phase 1) and with data and analysis issues throughout the project. 
Additional clinicians and consultants, including Drs. Trangle, Druss, Luepker, and O’Connor will join the 
resear ch team meetings to give clinical input and other guidance as needed at certain stages of the project.  
In Phase 1 (Months 0- 18), we will develop , pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and revise the EMR -based CDS intervention, including the 
EMR -based algorithms  that identify and extract data in real time and the Web service algorithms that process 
this information and return it to the EM R for retention and display. In Phase 2 (Months 18 to 48), clinics are 
randomly assigned and providers trained to use intervention t ools in a staggered implementation design to 
allow each site to learn lessons from the site(s) implementing the intervention previous and increase efficiency.  To that end, HealthPartners clinics will implement CV Wizard in month 18, Kaiser Georgia in mont h 24, and 
Essentia in month 30. The impact of the intervention on clinical actions, the possible maintenance or decay of intervention effects, and post -intervention PCP satisfaction are monitored over the entirety of the intervention 
period for a mean of 2 4 months study -wide. Phase 3 (Months  48 to 60 ) involves  final data collection, including 
all clinical outcomes, data analysis, reporting of key study results, and implementation of the intervention in 
non-intervention clinics , if care partners reques t (as expected) . Throughout the study, data will be analyzed as 
 
 they become available,  and preliminary reports on the study’s conceptual models, intervention strategies, and 
preliminary results will be reported  at meetings and  in peer-reviewed articles.  
Strengths and Limitations of the Study  
A few limitations to this proposal should be noted : (1) T he completeness of EMR -derived data is a challenge. 
However, study subjects have a single EMR used by [CONTACT_751922], and most receive nearly all their 
care at that site. We  have worked extensively with EMR -derived data in patients  with depression, diabetes, and 
heart disease in previous research, and this experience informs our approach to missing data and accurate  
identification of those with SMI. (2) A lthough the patient population is large and diverse, it does not include the 
uninsured;  some may argue that this may exclude patients with more severe SMI  who are more likely to be 
uninsured or inconsistently insured. (3) No CV risk -estimation equation is perfectly suited to the needs of 
patients with SMI, and the Framingham equations may overestimate index risk and underestimate risk 
reduction catalyzed by [CONTACT_751923][INVESTIGATOR_751897]. However, we compensate for this by [CONTACT_751924] 2, which is a very highly powered analysis, using the [LOCATION_006]PDS risk equation for changes in A1c 
control and the USPSTF aspi[INVESTIGATOR_751898], which rely on the Framingh am 10- year CVD Risk Equation.111, 112 
(4) Including preferences of patients with SMI may be a challenge. However, w e have substantial experience in 
this area ,92, 113, 94,[ADDRESS_1029440]  that shared decision making can improve clinical outcomes in 
patients with chronic conditions.115 (5) The effectiveness of our recommended lifestyle interventions remains 
uncertain. Some regard l ifestyle interventions as ineffective, but a growing body of evidence suggests  
commonly available lifestyle interventions and support may positively  affect weight, physical activity, and 
tobacco use in adults, including those with SMI.116-[ADDRESS_1029441] when appropriate, including the development of switching algorithms to 
guide providers, and  incorporate patient preference in the process .  
Dissemination and Future Applications  
The Dissemination Team will meet regularly in the second half of the grant, and will be tasked with ensuring 
widespread dissemination of our findings.  There are many venues readily available to us for useful 
dissemination; for example, our consultants, Dr s. Druss, Luepker, and Trangle, are national leaders in mental 
health and cardiology and will help ensure regional  and national dissemination of results. Additionally, MHRN is 
an active network whose member organizations have regional and national connecti ons to organizations and 
collaboratives across the country, including the National Alliance on Mental Illness, the Depression and Bipolar 
Support Alliance, and the Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement, and these connections will be utilized to 
widely  disseminate our results and spread of our intervention, if successful.  In addition to these efforts, we will 
make good use of the peer -reviewed literature for more traditional dissemination of scientific information.  [CONTACT_751929] will lead a Publications Committee as part of the Dissemination Team, which will develop and facilitate 
the development of many manuscripts keyed to the specific aims so as to ensure prompt and complete 
publication of as much important knowledge as possible.   
Regarding future applications, the intervention strategy  developed here can be extended to other mental health 
domains and care -delivery venues. Moreover,  the Web- based CDS tools  could be easily adapted for other 
purposes, including mappi[INVESTIGATOR_751899], improving coordination of medical 
care of patients with SMI , providing a framework for “patient -direct” applications delivered through  the Internet, 
and using the CV Wizard in simulation mode to train a wide range of providers to deliver care  that is 
simultaneously personalized and standardized to those with SMI.   
 
 1. Parks J, Svendsen D, Singer P, Foti M. Morbidity and Mortality in people with serious mental illness. 
Alexandria, VA2006. Available from: 
http://www.nasmhpd.org/general_files/publ ications/med_directors_pubs/Technical%20Report%20on%20Morbi
dity%20and%20Mortaility%20- %20Final%2011- 06.pdf . 
2. Weiner M, Warren L, Fiedorowicz JG. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in bipolar disorder. Ann 
Clin Psychiatry. 2011;23(1):40 -7. Epub 2011/02/15. doi: acp_2301f [pii]. PubMed PMID: 21318195; PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC3190964.  
3. Osborn DP, Levy G, Nazareth I, Petersen I, Islam A, King MB. Relative risk of cardiovascular and 
cancer mortality in people with severe mental illness from the United K ingdom's General Practice Rsearch 
Database. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007;64(2):242 -9. Epub 2007/02/07. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.2.242. 
PubMed PMID: 17283292.  
4. De Hert M, Dekker JM, Wood D, Kahl KG, Holt RI, Moller HJ. Cardiovascular disease and diabetes in 
people with severe mental illness position statement from the European Psychiatric Association (EPA), 
supported by [CONTACT_751925] (EASD) and the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). Eur Psychiatry. 2009;24(6):412- 24. Epub 2009/08/18. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2009.01.005. 
PubMed PMID: 19682863.  
5. O'Connor PJ, Crain AL, Rush WA, Sperl -Hillen JM, Gutenkauf JJ, Duncan JE. Impact of an electronic 
medical record on diabetes quality of care. Ann Fam Med. 2005;3(4):300 -6. Epub 2005/07/28. doi: 3/4/300 [pii]  
10.1370/afm.327. PubMed PMID: 16046561; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1466905.  
6. Osby U, Correia N, Brandt L, Ekbom A, Sparen P. Mortality and causes of death in schizophrenia in 
Stockholm county, Sweden. Schizophr Res. 2000;45(1 -2):21-8. Epub 2000/09/09. doi: S0920- 9964(99)[ZIP_CODE] -
7 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 10978869.  
7. Hennekens CH, Hennekens AR, Hollar D, Casey DE. Schizophrenia and increased risks of 
cardiovascular disease. Am Heart J. 2005;150(6):1115- 21. Epub 2005/12/13. doi: S0002- 8703(05)[ZIP_CODE]- 0 [pii]  
10.1016/j.ahj.2005.02.007. PubMed PMID: 16338246.  
8. Dixon L, Postrado L, Delahanty J, Fischer PJ, Lehman A. The association of medical comorbidity in 
schizophrenia with poor physical and mental health. J Nerv Ment Dis. 1999;187(8):496 -502. Epub 1999/08/27. 
PubMed PMID: 10463067.  
9. Davidson S, Judd F, Jolley D, Hocking B, Thompson S, Hyland B. Cardiovascular risk factors for 
people with mental illness. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2001;35(2):196- 202. Epub 2001/04/04. doi: anp877 [pii]. 
PubMed PMID: 11284901.  
10. Druss BG, Bradford WD, Rosenheck RA, Radford MJ, Krumholz HM. Quality of medical care and 
excess mortality in older patients with mental disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58(6):565- 72. Epub 
2001/06/29. doi: yoa20211 [pii]. PubMed PM ID: 11386985.  
11. Trangle M, Gary M, Paul G, Christensen R. Minnesota 10 by 10. Reducing morbidity and mortality in 
people with serious mental illnesses. Minn Med. 2010;93(6):38 -41. Epub 2010/09/11. PubMed PMID: 
20827954.  
12. Goff DC, Sullivan LM, McEvoy J P, Meyer JM, Nasrallah HA, Daumit GL, et al. A comparison of ten -year 
cardiac risk estimates in schizophrenia patients from the CATIE study and matched controls. Schizophr Res. 
2005;80(1):45 -53. Epub 2005/10/04. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2005.08.010. PubMed PM ID: 16198088.  
13. Newcomer JW. Medical risk in patients with bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. J Clin Psychiatry. 
2006;[ADDRESS_1029442] 9:25- 30; discussion 6- 42. Epub 2006/09/13. PubMed PMID: 16965186.  
14. Kilbourne AM, Cornelius JR, Han X, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62113], Shad M, Salloum I, et al. Burden of general medical 
conditions among individuals with bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord. 2004;6(5):368 -73. Epub 2004/09/24. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399 -5618.2004.[ZIP_CODE].x. PubMed PMID: 15383128.  
15. Birkenaes AB, Opjordsmoen S, Brunborg C, En gh JA, Jonsdottir H, Ringen PA, et al. The level of 
cardiovascular risk factors in bipolar disorder equals that of schizophrenia: a comparative study. J Clin 
Psychiatry. 2007;68(6):917- 23. Epub 2007/06/27. PubMed PMID: 17592917.  
16. Singer PWM, L.H. Modifi able risk factors: environmental, individual behaviors and lifestyle.  
Presentation. May 2006.  
17. Wong CK, Tang EW, Herbison P, Birmingham B, Barclay L, Fu SY. Pre- existent depression in the 2 
weeks before an acute coronary syndrome can be associated with delayed presentation of the heart attack. 
QJM. 2008;101(2):137- 44. Epub 2008/01/12. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcm153. PubMed PMID: 18187481.  
 
 18. Druss BG. Improving medical care for persons with serious mental illness: challenges and solutions. J 
Clin Psychiatry . 2007;[ADDRESS_1029443] 4:40- 4. Epub 2007/08/19. PubMed PMID: 17539699.  
19. Laursen TM, Munk -Olsen T, Agerbo E, Gasse C, Mortensen PB. Somatic hospi[INVESTIGATOR_476998], invasive 
cardiac procedures, and mortality from heart disease in patients with severe mental disorder.  Arch Gen 
Psychiatry. 2009;66(7):713- 20. Epub 2009/07/08. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.61. PubMed PMID: 
19581562.  
20. Mackin P, Bishop DR, Watkinson HM. A prospective study of monitoring practices for metabolic 
disease in antipsychotic -treated community psychiatric patients. BMC Psychiatry. 2007;7:28. Epub 2007/06/27. 
doi: 10.1186/1471- 244X -7-28. PubMed PMID: 17592636; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1913512.  
21. Shah SU, White A, White S, Littler WA. Heart and mind: (1) relationship between cardiovascular and 
psychiatric conditions. Postgrad Med J. 2004;80(950):683 -9. Epub 2004/12/08. doi: 80/950/683 [pii]  
10.1136/pgmj.2003.014662. PubMed PMID: 15579605; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC1743159.  
22. Sowden GL, Huffman JC. The impact of mental illness on cardiac out comes: a review for the 
cardiologist. Int J Cardiol. 2009;132(1):30 -7. Epub 2008/11/14. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2008.10.002. PubMed 
PMID: 19004512.  
23. Taylor V, MacQueen G. Associations between bipolar disorder and metabolic syndrome: A review. J 
Clin Psych iatry. 2006;67(7):1034 -41. Epub 2006/08/08. PubMed PMID: 16889445.  
24. Klumpers UM, Boom K, Janssen FM, Tulen JH, Loonen AJ. Cardiovascular risk factors in outpatients 
with bipolar disorder. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2004;37(5):211- 6. Epub 2004/10/09. PubMed PMI D: 15470799.  
25. Consensus development conference on antipsychotic drugs and obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Care. 
2004;27(2):596 -601. Epub 2004/01/30. PubMed PMID: 14747245.  
26. Druss BG, Bradford DW, Rosenheck RA, Radford MJ, Krumholz HM. Mental disorders  and use of 
cardiovascular procedures after myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2000;283(4):506 -11. Epub 2000/02/05. doi: 
joc90746 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 10659877.  
27. Frayne SM, Halanych JH, Miller DR, Wang F, Lin H, Pogach L, et al. Disparities in diabetes care: 
impact of mental illness. Arch Intern Med. 2005;165(22):2631- 8. Epub 2005/12/14. doi: 
10.1001/archinte.165.22.2631. PubMed PMID: 16344421.  
28. Desai MM, Rosenheck RA, Druss BG, Perlin JB. Mental disorders and quality of diabetes care in the 
veterans health administration. Am J Psychiatry. 2002;159(9):1584 -90. Epub 2002/08/31. PubMed PMID: 
12202281.  
29. Fagiolini A, Chengappa KN, Soreca I, Chang J. Bipolar disorder and the metabolic syndrome: causal 
factors, psychiatric outcomes and economic burden. CNS Drugs . 2008;22(8):655- 69. Epub 2008/07/08. 
PubMed PMID: 18601304.  
30. Mitchell JE, Mackenzie TB. Cardiac effects of lithium therapy in man: a review. J Clin Psychiatry. 
1982;43(2):47 -51. Epub 1982/02/01. PubMed PMID: 7056703.  
31. Glassman AH, Bigger JT, Jr. Ant ipsychotic drugs: prolonged QTc interval, torsade de pointes, and 
sudden death. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158(11):1774- 82. Epub 2001/11/03. PubMed PMID: 11691681.  
32. Morriss R, Mohammed FA. Metabolism, lifestyle and bipolar affective disorder. J Psychopharmac ol. 
2005;19([ADDRESS_1029444]):94 -101. Epub 2005/11/11. doi: 10.1177/0269881105058678. PubMed PMID: 16280342.  
33. Angst F, Stassen HH, Clayton PJ, Angst J. Mortality of patients with mood disorders: follow -up over 34-
[ADDRESS_1029445]. 2002;68(2 -3):167- 81. E pub 2002/06/14. doi: S0165032701003779 [pii]. PubMed 
PMID: 12063145.  
34. Ryan MC, Thakore JH. Physical consequences of schizophrenia and its treatment: the metabolic 
syndrome. Life Sci. 2002;71(3):239 -57. Epub 2002/05/30. doi: S0024320502016466 [pii]. PubM ed PMID: 
12034344.  
35. Lieberman JA, Stroup TS, McEvoy JP, Swartz MS, Rosenheck RA, Perkins DO, et al. Effectiveness of 
antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(12):1209 -23. Epub 
2005/09/21. doi: NEJMoa051688 [pii]  
10.1056/NEJMoa051688. PubMed PMID: 16172203.  
36. Elmer PJ, Obarzanek E, Vollmer WM, Simons -Morton D, Stevens VJ, Young DR, et al. Effects of 
comprehensive lifestyle modification on diet, weight, physical fitness, and blood pressure control: 18- month 
resul ts of a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(7):485 -95. Epub 2006/04/06. PubMed PMID: 
16585662.  
 
 37. Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Espeland MA, Applegate WB, Ettinger WH, Jr., Kostis JB, et al. Sodium 
reduction and weight loss in the treatment of hypertension in older persons: a randomized controlled trial of 
nonpharmacologic interventions in the elderly (TONE). TONE Collaborative Research Group. JAMA. 
1998;279(11):839 -46. Epub 1998/03/27. PubMed PMID: 9515998.  
38. Daumit GL, Dickerson FB, Wang NY, Dalcin A, J erome GJ, Anderson CA, et al. A behavioral weight -
loss intervention in persons with serious mental illness. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(17):1594 -602. Epub 
2013/03/23. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1214530. PubMed PMID: 23517118.  
39. Pylvanen V, Knip M, Pakarinen A, Kotila M, Turkka J, Isojarvi JI. Serum insulin and leptin levels in 
valproate- associated obesity. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330]. 2002;43(5):514- 7. Epub 2002/05/25. PubMed PMID: 12027912.  
40. Sachs G, Bowden C, Calabrese JR, Ketter T, Thompson T, White R, et al. Effects of lamotrigi ne and 
lithium on body weight during maintenance treatment of bipolar I disorder. Bipolar Disord. 2006;8(2):175 -81. 
Epub 2006/03/18. doi: 10.1111/j.1399 -5618.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x. PubMed PMID: 16542188.  
41. Allison DB, Mentore JL, Heo M, Chandler LP, Cappelleri JC , Infante MC, et al. Antipsychotic -induced 
weight gain: a comprehensive research synthesis. Am J Psychiatry. 1999;156(11):1686- 96. Epub 1999/11/30. 
PubMed PMID: 10553730.  
42. Komossa K, Rummel -Kluge C, Schmid F, Hunger H, Schwarz S, El -Sayeh HG, et al. Ari pi[INVESTIGATOR_751900]. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2009(4):CD006569. Epub 2009/10/13. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006569.pub3. PubMed PMID: 19821375.  
43. Patel JK, Buckley PF, Woolson S, Hamer RM, McEvoy JP, Perkins D O, et al. Metabolic profiles of 
second- generation antipsychotics in early psychosis: findings from the CAFE study. Schizophr Res. 
2009;111(1 -3):9-16. Epub 2009/04/29. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2009.03.025. PubMed PMID: 19398192.  
44. Hemmes M AD, Gerhard G, McC arty C, Nakasato C, Pawloski P, Rukstalis M, Schmelzer J, Yale S, 
Davis R. PS1 -18: A Feasibility Pi[INVESTIGATOR_751901]- Induced Serious Adverse Events. Clin Med Res. 2011;9(3- 4):2. 
45. O'Connor P. Opportunities to increase the effectiveness of EHR -based diabetes clinical decision 
support. Appl Clin Inf. 2011;2:350 -4. 
46. Sittig DF, Wright A, Osheroff JA, Middleton B, Teich JM, Ash JS, et al. Grand challenges in clinical 
decision support. J Biomed Inform. 2008;41(2):387- 92. Epub 2007/11/22. doi: S1532- 0464(07)[ZIP_CODE]- 9 [pii]  
10.1016/j.jbi.2007.09.003. PubMed PMID: 18029232; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2660274.  
47. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen JM, Rush WA, Johnson PE, Amundson GH, Asche SE , et al. Impact of 
electronic health record clinical decision support on diabetes care: a randomized trial. Ann Fam Med. 
2011;9(1):12 -21. Epub 2011/01/19. doi: 10.1370/afm.1196. PubMed PMID: 21242556; PubMed Central 
PMCID: PMC3022040.  
48. Leibson C, Owens T, O'Brien P, Waring S, Tangalos E, Hanson V, et al. Use of physician and acute 
care services by [CONTACT_751926]'s disease: a population- based comparison. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 1999;47(7):864 -9. Epub 1999/07/15. PubMed PMID: 10404933.  
49. O’Bryant SE HJ, Waring SC, Humphreys JD, Schiffer RB. The Relationship Between Cardiovascular 
Disease and Alzheimer’s Disease. [LOCATION_007] Public Health Journal. 2008;60(3):3.  
50. O'Bryant SE, Waring SC, Cullum CM, Hall J, Lacritz L, Massman PJ, et al. Staging dem entia using 
Clinical Dementia Rating Scale Sum of Boxes scores: a [LOCATION_007] Alzheimer's research consortium study. Arch 
Neurol. 2008;65(8):1091 -5. Epub 2008/08/13. doi: 10.1001/archneur.65.8.1091. PubMed PMID: 18695059; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3409562.  
51. Rummans TA, Smith GE, Lin SC, Waring SC, Kokmen E. Comorbidity of dementia and psychiatric 
disorders in older persons. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1997;5(3):261 -7. Epub 1997/07/01. PubMed PMID: 
9209569.  
52. Waring SC, Doody RS, Pavlik VN, Massman PJ, Chan W. Su rvival among patients with dementia from 
a large multi -ethnic population. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2005;19(4):178- 83. Epub 2005/12/06. PubMed 
PMID: 16327343.  
53. Bryant MD, Schoenberg ED, Johnson TV, Goodman M, Owen- Smith A, Master VA. Multimedia version 
of a standard medical questionnaire improves patient understanding across all literacy levels. J Urol. 2009;182(3):1120 -5. Epub 2009/07/25. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2009.05.027. PubMed PMID: 19625036.  
54. Johnson TV, Abbasi A, Ehrlich SS, Kleris RS, Chi rumamilla SL, Schoenberg ED, et al. Major 
depression drives severity of American Urological Association Symptom Index. Urology. 2010;76(6):1317- 20. 
Epub 2010/12/07. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2010.01.069. PubMed PMID: 21130246.  
 
 55. Master VA, Johnson TV, Abbas i A, Ehrlich SS, Kleris RS, Abbasi S, et al. Poorly numerate patients in 
an inner city hospi[INVESTIGATOR_751902]. Urology. 
2010;75(1):148 -52. Epub 2009/10/13. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2009.06.060. PubMed PMID: 19819537.  
56. Johnson TV, Abbasi A, Ehrlich SS, Kleris RS, Owen- Smith A, Raison CL, et al. IPSS quality of life 
question: a possible indicator of depression among patients with lower urinary tract symptoms. The Canadian 
journal of urology. 2012;19(1):6100- 4. Epub 2012/02/10. PubMed PMID: 22316511.  
57. Filion KB, Steffen LM, Duval S, Jacobs DR, Jr., Blackburn H, Luepker RV. Trends in smoking among 
adults from 1980 to 2009: the Minnesota heart survey. Am J Public Health. 2012;102(4):705 -13. Epub 
2011/08/20. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2011.300162. PubMed PMID: 21852651.  
58. Luepker RV, Steffen LM, Jacobs DR, Jr., Zhou X, Blackburn H. Trends in blood pressure and 
hypertension detection, treatment, and control 1980 to 2009: the Minnesota Heart Survey. Circulation. 2012;126(15):1852 -7. Epub 2012/09/11. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.098517. PubMed PMID: 
22962433; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3482957.  
59. McGovern PG, Pankow JS, Shahar E, Doliszny KM, Folsom AR, Blackburn H, et al. Recent trends in 
acute coronary heart disease-- mortality, morbidity, medical care, and risk factors. The Minnesota Heart Survey 
Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1996;334(14):884 -90. Epub 1996/04/04. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199604043341403. 
PubMed PMID: 8596571.  
60. Druss BG, Rohrbaugh RM, Levinson CM, Rosenheck R A. Integrated medical care for patients with 
serious psychiatric illness: a randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58(9):861- 8. Epub 2001/09/26. doi: 
yoa20292 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 11545670.  
61. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA. Improving general medical care for persons with mental and addictive 
disorders: systematic review. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2006;28(2):145 -53. Epub 2006/03/07. doi: 
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2005.10.006. PubMed PMID: 16516065.  
62. Simon GE. Depression in medical patients. J Gen Intern Med. 1988;3(2):208. Epub 1988/03/01. 
PubMed PMID: 3258635.  
63. Simon GE, Katon WJ, Lin EH, Ludman E, VonKorff M, Ciechanowski P, et al. Diabetes complications 
and depression as predictors of health service costs. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2005;27(5):344 -51. Epub 
2005/09/20. doi: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2005.04.008. PubMed PMID: 16168795.  
64. Simon GE, Ludman EJ, Bauer MS, Unutzer J, Operskalski B. Long -term effectiveness and cost of a 
systematic care program for bipolar disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63(5):500- 8. Ep ub 2006/05/03. doi: 
10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.500. PubMed PMID: 16651507.  
65. Simon GE, VonKorff M, Barlow W. Health care costs of primary care patients with recognized 
depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1995;52(10):850- 6. Epub 1995/10/01. PubMed PMID: 7575105.  
66. Simon GE, VonKorff M, Heiligenstein JH, Revicki DA, Grothaus L, Katon W, et al. Initial antidepressant 
choice in primary care. Effectiveness and cost of fluoxetine vs tricyclic antidepressants. JAMA. 
1996;275(24):1897 -902. Epub 1996/06/26. PubMed PMID:  8648870.  
67. O'Connor PJ, Desai JR, Butler JC, Kharbanda EO, Sperl -Hillen JM. Current status and future prospects 
for electronic point -of-care clinical decision support in diabetes care. Current diabetes reports. 2013;13(2):172 -
6. Epub 2012/12/12. doi: 10.1007/s11892- 012-0350- z. PubMed PMID: 23225213; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC3595375.  
68. D'Agostino RB, Sr., Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, Wolf PA, Cobain M, Massaro JM, et al. General 
cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart Study. C irculation. 2008;117(6):743-
53. Epub 2008/01/24. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.699579. PubMed PMID: 18212285.  
69. Wilson PW, D'Agostino RB, Levy D, Belanger AM, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB. Prediction of coronary 
heart disease using risk factor categories. Circulation. 1998;97(18):1837- 47. Epub 1998/05/29. PubMed PMID: 
9603539.  
70. Vijan S, Hayward RA. Treatment of hypertension in type 2 diabetes mellitus: blood pressure goals, 
choice of agents, and setting priorities in diabetes care. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138(7):593 -602. Epub 
2003/04/02. doi: 200304010- [ZIP_CODE] [pii]. PubMed PMID: 12667032.  
71. Bennett WL, Maruthur NM, Singh S, Segal JB, Wilson LM, Chatterjee R, et al. Comparative 
effectiveness and safety of medications for type 2 diabetes: an update including new drugs and 2 -drug 
combinations. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154(9):602 -13. Epub 2011/03/16. doi: 10.7326/0003- 4819 -154-9-
201105030- [ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 21403054.  
 
 72. ICSI. Diabetes Mellitus in Adults, Type 2; Diagnosis and Management of (Guideline). 2008 [April  18, 
2012]. Available from: 
http://www.icsi.org/guidelines_and_more/gl_os_prot/other_health_care_conditions/diabetes_mellitus__type_2/
diabetes_mellitus__type_2__management_of___6.html . 
73. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen, J. Treatment of Type [ADDRESS_1029446] Report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, 
Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III) final report. 
Circulation. 2002;106(25):3143 -421. Epub 2002/12/18. PubMed PMID: 12485966.  
75. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black  HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, Izzo JL, Jr., et al. The Seventh Report 
of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: 
the JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560 -72. Epub 2003/05/16. doi: 10.1001/jama. 289.19.2560. PubMed 
PMID: 12748199.  
76. Summary of revisions for the 2009 Clinical Practice Recommendations. Diabetes Care. 2009;[ADDRESS_1029447] 
1:S3-5. Epub 2009/01/06. doi: 10.2337/dc09 -S003. PubMed PMID: 19118287; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC2613585.  
77. ICSI. Ch ronic Disease Risk Factors, Primary Prevention of (Guideline): ICSI (Institute for Chronic 
Systems Improvement). 2008.  
78. O'Connor PJ, Quiter ES, Rush WA, Wiest M, Meland JT, Ryu S. Impact of hypertension guideline 
implementation on blood pressure control  and drug use in primary care clinics. Jt Comm J Qual Improv. 
1999;25(2):68 -77. Epub 1999/02/23. PubMed PMID: 10027112.  
79. Hypertension Diagnosis and Treatment (Guideline). [Internet]. November 2008 [cited May 29, 2011.]. 
Available from: 
http://www.icsi.o rg/guidelines_and_more/gl_os_prot/cardiovascular/hypertension_4/hypertension_diagnosis_a
nd_treatment__11.html . . 
80. 2008 PHS Guideline Update Panel L, and Staff. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update 
U.S.Public Health Service Clinical Practice Guideline executive summary. Respir Care. 2008;53(9):6. PubMed 
Central PMCID: PMC18807274.  
81. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen JM, Johnson PE, Rush WA, Asche SE, Dutta P, et al. Simulated physician 
learning intervention to improve safety and quality of diabetes care: a randomized trial. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(4):585 -90. Epub 2009/01/28. doi: dc08- 0944 [pii]  
10.2337/dc08 -0944. PubMed PMID: 19171723; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2660457.  
82. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen JM, Johnson PE, Rush WA, Biltz G. Clinical Inertia a nd Outpatient Medical 
Errors. In: Henriksen KB, J.; Lewin, D.; Marks, E., editor. Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to 
Implementation. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ); 2005. p. 293- 308. 
83. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen  JM, Johnson PE, Rush WA. Identification, Classification, and Frequency of 
Medical Errors in Outpatient Diabetes Care. In: Henriksen KB, J.; Lewin, D.; Marks, E., editor. Advances in Patient Safety: From Research to Implementation. Rockville, MD2005. p. [ADDRESS_1029448] Rev. 2013;2:CD007253. Epub 2013/03/02. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD007253.pub3. PubMed PMID: 23450574.  
85. Wilson PW. Risk scores for prediction of coronary heart disease: an update. Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am. 2009;38(1):33 -44. Epub 2009/02/17. doi: 10.1016/j.ecl.2008.11.001. PubMed PMID: 19217511.  
86. Wilson PW, Castelli WP, Kannel WB. Coronary risk prediction in adults (the Framingham Heart Study). 
Am J Cardiol. 1987;59(14):91G -4G. Epub 1987/05/29. PubMed PMID: 3591674.  
87. Powell LH, Calvin JE, Jr., Mendes de Leon CF, Richardson D, Grady KL, Flynn KJ, et al. The Heart 
Failure Adherence and Retention Trial (H ART): design and rationale. Am Heart J. 2008;156(3):452- 60. Epub 
2008/09/02. doi: 10.1016/j.ahj.2008.05.011. PubMed PMID: 18760125; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC3609705.  
88. van der Wal MH, Jaarsma T. Adherence in heart failure in the elderly: problem and possible solutions. 
Int J Cardiol. 2008;125(2):203 -8. Epub 2007/11/23. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.10.011. PubMed PMID: 
18031843.  
 
 89. Flynn KJ, Powell LH, Mendes de Leon CF, Munoz R, Eaton CB, Downs DL, et al. Increasing self -
management skills in heart fail ure patients: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Congest Heart Fail. 2005;11(6):297 -302. Epub 
2005/12/07. PubMed PMID: 16330904.  
90. Baker DW, Williams MV, Parker RM, Gazmararian JA, Nurss J. Development of a brief test to measure 
functional health literacy. Patient Educ Couns. 1999;38(1):33 -42. Epub 2003/10/08. doi: S0738-
3991(98)[ZIP_CODE] -5 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 14528569.  
91. Paulos JA. Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences. . [LOCATION_001]: Hill and Wang; 
2001.  
92. Boyle RG, O'Connor PJ, Pronk NP, Tan A. Stages of c hange for physical activity, diet, and smoking 
among HMO members with chronic conditions. Am J Health Promot. 1998;12(3):170 -5. Epub 1997/12/08. 
PubMed PMID: 10176091.  
93. Peterson KA, Hughes M. Readiness to change and clinical success in a diabetes educat ional program. 
J Am Board Fam Pract. 2002;15(4):266 -71. Epub 2002/08/02. PubMed PMID: 12150458.  
94. O'Connor PJ, Asche SE, Crain AL, Rush WA, Whitebird RR, Solberg LI, et al. Is patient readiness to 
change a predictor of improved glycemic control? Diabetes  Care. 2004;27(10):2325- 9. Epub 2004/09/29. doi: 
27/10/2325 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 15451895.  
95. Prochaska JO, Velicer WF, Rossi JS, Goldstein MG, Marcus BH, Rakowski W, et al. Stages of change 
and decisional balance for 12 problem behaviors. Health Psychol. 1994;13(1):39- 46. Epub 1994/01/01. 
PubMed PMID: 8168470.  
96. Ruggiero L, Rossi JS, Prochaska JO, Glasgow RE, de Groot M, Dryfoos JM, et al. Smoking and 
diabetes: readiness for change and provider advice. Addict Behav. 1999;24(4):573- 8. Epub 1999/08/31. doi : 
S0306- 4603(98)[ZIP_CODE]- 0 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 10466853.  
97. Ruggiero LP, J.O. Readiness for change: application of the transtheoretical model to diabetes. . 
Diabetes Spectrum. 1993;6(1):21 -60. 
98. Katon W, Guico- Pabia CJ. Improving quality of depression care using organized systems of care: a 
review of the literature. The primary care companion to CNS disorders. 2011;13(1). Epub 2011/07/07. doi: 
10.4088/PCC.10r01019blu. PubMed PMID: 21731829; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3121215.  
99. Druss BG, von Esenwein SA, Co mpton MT, Rask KJ, Zhao L, Parker RM. A randomized trial of medical 
care management for community mental health settings: the Primary Care Access, Referral, and Evaluation (PCARE) study. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167(2):151- 9. Epub 2009/12/17. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.09050691. 
PubMed PMID: 20008945.  
100. Rubenstein LV, Chaney EF, Ober S, Felker B, Sherman SE, Lanto A, et al. Using evidence- based 
quality improvement methods for translating depression collaborative care research into practice. Families, 
system s & health : the journal of collaborative family healthcare. 2010;28(2):91- 113. Epub 2010/08/11. doi: 
10.1037/a0020302. PubMed PMID: 20695669.  
101. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen J. Clinical and public health implications of glycemic relapse in type [ADDRESS_1029449] Endocrinol Metab. 2007;3(1):10- 1. Epub 2006/12/21. doi: 10.1038/ncpendmet0354. 
PubMed PMID: 17179924.  
102. Lloyd- Jones DM, Wilson PW, Larson MG, Beiser A, Leip EP, D'Agostino RB, et al. Framingham risk 
score and prediction of lifetime risk for coronary heart disease. Am J Cardiol. 2004;94(1):20- 4. Epub 
2004/06/29. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2004.03.023. PubMed PMID: 15219502.  
103. Snijders TAB, R.J. Standard errors and sample sizes in two- level research. . Journal of Educational 
Statistics. 1993 ;18(3):237- 60. 
104. Little RJAR, D.B. Statistical Anslysis with Missing Data. [LOCATION_001]: Wiley.; 1987.  
105. Rubin DB. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. [LOCATION_001]: Wiley; 1987.  
106. Andridge RR. Quantifying the impact of fixed effects modeling o f clusters in multiple imputation for 
cluster randomized trials. Biom J. 2011;53(1):57- 74. Epub 2011/01/25. doi: 10.1002/bimj.201000140. PubMed 
PMID: 21259309; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3124925.  
107. Sobel ME. Asymptotic intervals for indirect effects in st ructural equation models. In: Leinhart, editor. 
Sociological Methodology. San Francisco: Jossey -Bass  
1982. p. [ADDRESS_1029450] Measures. Multivariate 
Behav Res. 1995;30(1):41. Epub 1995/01 /01. doi: 10.1207/s15327906mbr3001_3. PubMed PMID: 20157641; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2821114.  
 
 109. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V. A comparison of methods to test 
mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychol Methods.  2002;7(1):83- 104. Epub 2002/04/04. 
PubMed PMID: 11928892; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2819363.  
110. MacKinnon DP. Introduction to Statistical Mediation Analysis. [LOCATION_001]: Erlbaum; 2008.  
111. Stevens RJ, Kothari V, Adler AI, Stratton IM. The [LOCATION_006]PDS risk engine: a model for the risk of coronary 
heart disease in Type II diabetes ([LOCATION_006]PDS 56). Clin Sci (Lond). 2001;101(6):671 -9. Epub 2001/11/29. PubMed 
PMID: 11724655.  
112. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_542249]: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150(6):396 -404. Epub 2009/03/19. doi: 150/6/396 [pii]. 
PubMed PMID: 19293072.  
113. O'Connor PJ, Sperl -Hillen J, Johnson PE, Rush WA, Crain AL. Customized feedback to patients and 
providers failed to improve safet y or quality of diabetes care: a randomized trial. Diabetes Care. 
2009;32(7):1158 -63. Epub 2009/04/16. doi: dc08- 2247 [pii]  
10.2337/dc08 -2247. PubMed PMID: 19366977; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2699722.  
114. O'Connor PJ, Rush WA, Prochaska JO, Pronk NP, Boyle RG. Professional advice and readiness to 
change behavioral risk factors among members of a managed care organization. Am J Manag Care. 
2001;7(2):125 -30. Epub 2001/02/24. doi: 651 [pii]. PubMed PMID: 11216330.  
115. Greenfield S, Kaplan SH, Ware JE, Jr., Yano EM, Frank HJ. Patients' participation in medical care: 
effects on blood sugar control and quality of life in diabetes. J Gen Intern Med. 1988;3(5):448- 57. Epub 
1988/09/01. PubMed PMID: 3049968.  
116. Wing RR. Long- term effects of a lifestyle intervention  on weight and cardiovascular risk factors in 
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus: four -year results of the Look AHEAD trial. Arch Intern Med. 
2010;170(17):1566 -75. Epub 2010/09/30. doi: 170/17/1566 [pii]  
10.1001/archinternmed.2010.334. PubMed PMID: 20876408; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3084497.  
117. Epstein LH, Wing RR, Penner BC, Kress MJ. Effect of diet and controlled exercise on weight loss in 
obese children. J Pediatr. 1985;107(3):358 -61. Epub 1985/09/01. PubMed PMID: 4032130.  
118. Li G, Zhang P, Wa ng J, Gregg EW, Yang W, Gong Q, et al. The long- term effect of lifestyle 
interventions to prevent diabetes in the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study: a 20- year follow -up study. 
Lancet. 2008;371(9626):1783- 9. Epub 2008/05/27. doi: S0140- 6736(08)[ZIP_CODE]- 7 [pii] 
10.1016/S0140 -6736(08)[ZIP_CODE]- 7. PubMed PMID: 18502303.  
119. Lindstrom J, Ilanne- Parikka P, Peltonen M, Aunola S, Eriksson JG, Hemio K, et al. Sustained reduction 
in the incidence of type 2 diabetes by [CONTACT_279278]: follow -up of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. 
Lancet. 2006;368(9548):1673- 9. Epub 2006/11/14. doi: S0140- 6736(06)[ZIP_CODE]- 8 [pii]  
10.1016/S0140 -6736(06)[ZIP_CODE]- 8. PubMed PMID: 17098085.  
120. Knowler WC, Fowler SE, Hamman RF, Christophi CA, Hoffman HJ, Brenneman AT, et al. 10- year 
follow -up of diabetes incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 
2009;374(9702):1677 -86. Epub 2009/11/03. doi: S0140- 6736(09)[ZIP_CODE]- 4 [pii]  
10.1016/S0140 -6736(09)[ZIP_CODE]- 4. PubMed PMID: 19878986; PubMed Central PMCID : PMC3135022.  
121. O'Connor PJ. Electronic medical records and diabetes care improvement: Are we waiting for Godot? 
Diabetes Care. 2003;26(3):942 -3. PubMed PMID: 12610062.  
122. Meigs JB, Cagliero E, Dubey A, Murphy -Sheehy P, Gildesgame C, Chueh H, et al. A  controlled trial of 
web-based diabetes disease management: the MGH diabetes primary care improvement project. Diabetes 
Care. 2003;26(3):750- 7. 
123. Montori VM, Dinneen SF, Gorman CA, Zimmerman BR, Rizza RA, Bjornsen SS, et al. The impact of 
planned care and a diabetes electronic management system on community -based diabetes care: the Mayo 
Health System Diabetes Translation Project. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(11):1952- 7. PubMed PMID: 12401738.  
124. Tierney WM, Overhage JM, Murray MD, Harris LE, Zhou XH, Eckert GJ, et al. Effects of computerized 
guidelines for managing heart disease in primary care. J Gen Intern Med. 2003;18(12):967 -76. PubMed PMID: 
14687254.  
125. Murray MD, Harris LE, Overhage JM, Zhou XH, Eckert GJ, Smith FE, et al. Failure of computerized 
treatment suggestions to improve health outcomes of outpatients with uncomplicated hypertension: results of a 
randomized controlled trial. Pharmacotherapy. 2004;24(3):324 -37. PubMed PMID: 15040645.  
 
 126. Lobach DS, G.D; Bright, T.J.; Wong, A.; Dhurjati, R.; Bristow, E.; Bastian, L.; Coeytaux, R.; Samsa, 
G.;Hasselblad, V.; Williams, J.W..; Wing, L.; Musty, M.l; Kendrick, A.S. Enabling Health Care Decisionmaking 
Through Clinical Decision Support and Knowledge 
Management. Evidence Report No. 203. Rockville, MD:  AHRQ Publication No. 12 -E001- EF. ; April 2012.  