IRB Approved Protocol
Title:  Faith-Based African American cancer Survivorship Storytelling: A culturally
relevant intervention to alleviate psychological stress
Study ID: [REMOVED]
Date: 12/06/2021
Version date: 12/06/2021Emory IRB Protocol
Title:   Faith-Based African American cancer Survivorship Storytelling: A culturally 
relevant intervention to alleviate psychological stress. Short Title:  Faith-Based African 
American Cancer Survivorship Storytelling
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_105517] B. Hamilton, PhD, RN, FAAN
Title: Associate [CONTACT_29190]: School of Nursing
Protocol Version Number and Date: December 6, 2021; Version 7 External (non-Emory) 
Collaborators:
Keerthi Gogineni, MD
Charles E. Moore, MD
B. Significance.  African Americans continue to experience the highest overall cancer mortality 
rates, more advanced staged cancers 1, and higher levels of psychological distress from cancer 
than non-Hispanic Whites 2 3.  Additionally, cancer patients and family caregivers (FCGs) also 
experience high levels of psychological distress which has been linked to unmet needs for 
support and information from health care providers 4. African American patients and FCGs 
attribute the root cause of their psychological distress to overwhelming anxieties and concerns 
that cancer will lead to suffering, death, and isolation for their family member diagnosed with 
cancer 5-7.  When interviewed, patients and FCGs recall images and horror stories of African 
American cancer patients who “suffered and died,” after a period of “wasting away” and in 
excruciating pain 7. The stories available to patients and FCGs are often replete with memories 
of a family member who waited too late and subsequently died from a cancer that spread to the 
point where treatment would not be effective 6,7. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_829905], 
African American patients and FCGs are not likely to seek mental health services [ADDRESS_1151583] religiously affiliated 
population and likely to conceptualize their spi[INVESTIGATOR_742472] a certainty that a Higher Power (God) 
Version date: 12/06/2021exists [ADDRESS_1151584] yet to fully embrace and incorporate 
this copi[INVESTIGATOR_829906]. 
Theoretical Framework.  The development of the Faith-Based African American Cancer 
Survivorship Stories Intervention will be guided by [CONTACT_829935][INVESTIGATOR_334387] 28 and 
Transportation Theory (TT) 29,30. Stress and Copi[INVESTIGATOR_829907] 31,32. According to this 
theory, when an event is perceived as stressful, individuals use strategies to affect the stressor 
or to change the perception of the stressor 28.  Among African Americans, spi[INVESTIGATOR_829908] a 
dominant strategy to change the perceived threat of cancer as an emotion focused strategy 33,34. 
Transportaton Theory (TT) has been useful in examining the influences of narratives on health 
promoting behavior change among African Americans 18,29,35, to promote cancer screening 
behaviors 12,36,37 and adherence to cancer follow-up care 38. TT posits that a change in attitudes 
and behaviors is enhanced through the identification and emotional engagement of a viewer 
with the narrative. Therefore, the selection of stories incorporated into this intervention 
considers: 1) similarity to and identification with narrators in the recordings; and, 2) the 
emotional engagement of participants with selected recordings.  Using this combined 
framework, the final selection of recordings for the intervention will consist of those most likely to 
influence positive affective (decrease psychological distress) and behavioral changes (engage 
in supportive social networks) among the targeted population. 
C. Goals/Aims:  The proposed study addresses a need to integrate spi[INVESTIGATOR_829909]’s previous research 1,20. In the PI’s research 
with African Americans, a dominant mental health promoting strategy used in response to a 
cancer diagnosis is the use of religious stories and songs 8,12. African Americans have a strong 
cultural history of relying on religious stories and songs to overcome oppression and mental 
suffering encountered in their lived experience 9,25,26.  If successful, the findings from this 
preliminary study will contribute to the evidence that spi[INVESTIGATOR_829910]. More 
importantly, the infusion of spi[INVESTIGATOR_829911]’s 21,22; to enable 
them to become more engaged in their cancer care 20 and in supportive family relationships 23; 
and, ultimately to improve the overall quality of life for African American cancer patients and 
their FCGs 24. 
To achieve our overall goal of improving health outcomes for African American 
cancer patient/FCG, the following aims will be achieved: 
Version date: 12/06/2021Aim 1: Develop a series of professionally edited narrative video recordings of African 
American cancer patient and FCG survivorship narratives that are grounded in the strong 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_829912]. The recordings will be professionally edited to capture the 
essence of patient/FCGs describing the psychological stressors encountered, and spi[INVESTIGATOR_139965]-
based strategies used to in response to the psychological distress experienced, and mental 
health outcomes. 
Aim 2:  Evaluate the usability and acceptability of this intervention. Usability is evaluated 
through clarity, persuasiveness, and ease of use. Acceptability will be evaluated through 
enrollment, participation, and concepts of Transportation Theory (identification, engagement, 
and emotional response). 
The work in Aim [ADDRESS_1151585] the African American cancer patient and FCG to engage in supportive relationships 
during the diagnosis and treatment for cancer.  
1.Study Design: The proposed feasibility study uses a quasi-experimental (pre-post test,
repeated measures) design and qualitative methods to: 1) determine feasibility and
acceptability, and 2) estimate effect sizes for outcomes of (psychological distress (primary
outcome), spi[INVESTIGATOR_176315]-being, patient-physician communication, supportive family
relationships, and quality of life (secondary outcomes) of the Faith-Based African American
Cancer Survivorship Storytelling Intervention among African American cancer patients and
their FCGs. Qualitative methods will allow us to explore the influences of concepts from SCT
and Transportation Theory on acceptability and satisfaction with the intervention.
Specifically, we will use open-ended interviews to explore influences of identification,
engagement, and emotional response to components of the intervention. A qualitative
descriptive design 36 including content analysis 37 will be used to analyze data obtained from
open-ended interviews.
2.Study setting and sample.
a.Setting. The study will be implemented in partnership with the outpatient oncology unit at
the Grady Cancer Center for Excellence (GCCE). The GCCE is located within the Grady 
Healthcare System which is a public hospi[INVESTIGATOR_829913] 600,000 patient visits each 
year. The majority of revenues generated through Medicare and Medicaid 
reimbursement. The Georgia Cancer Center for Excellence (GCCE) at Grady was 
established by [CONTACT_829936] a statewide 
network of people and organizations to provide exceptional cancer treatment for all 
Georgians. In 2015, GCCE provided care to 1308 cancer patients (674 men/630 
women).  
b.Population to be studied: For this feasibility study, we will recruit a total of 40 dyads with
Version date: 12/06/2021a recent cancer diagnosis. Patient inclusion criteria captures patients (age 30-89 years) 
with 1) newly diagnosed with any stage cancer; 2) treatment plans to include weekly 
outpatient chemotherapy; 3) previously screened and with greater than 0 level of 
psychological distress; and, 4) willingness to participate in all study activities including 
data collection;  6) willing to identify a FCG (immediate or extended family member) to 
participate. Participants will be excluded if they have completed surgery with no plans for 
chemotherapy; if they find conversations around religion or spi[INVESTIGATOR_829914]; if completed more than half of prescribed chemotherapy treatments; or, in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677]. We will also exclude participants not able to provide informed consent.  
FCG (immediate or extended family member) Inclusion Criteria are: 1) 18 years or 
older; 2) able to provide informed consent; and, 3) willingness to participate in study 
activities including data collection. FCG’s will be excluded if they find conversations 
around religion or spi[INVESTIGATOR_829915].   
c.Sample size justification: Since this is a feasibility study, our aim will be to compute 
effect sizes that will guide power calculation for testing intervention effectiveness in a 
future RCT. Preliminary power calculation indicated that group sizes of 40 dyads (total 
sample 80) will achieve 80% power to detect a minimum difference of 0.6 in a repeated 
measurements design having a Compound symmetry covariance structure (standard 
deviation of 1, within subject correlation of 0.2, and an alpha level of 0.05 assumed).
d.Recruitment efforts:  The success of our recruiting efforts will be dependent on 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_829916]. The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_829917], Deputy Director, Social 
Worker, and Administrator. In addition, during the start-up phase of the study, we will 
make informal presentations about the study to center clinicians and also presentations 
at formal protocol start-up meetings with clinic personnel. These steps are important to 
introduce the study, make clinicians and staff more knowledgeable about the objectives, 
eligibility criteria, and logistics of the study and gain their support.[ADDRESS_1151586] with identifying patients diagosed with a recently diagnosis of cancer.  
We will also review charts to confirm type cancer, stage of cancer, type and duration of 
planned treatment, and psychological distress screening scores. 
e.Field Methods:  Research participants will be required to participate in intervention 
activities and 5 data collection interviews (1 optional open-ended interview). Interviews 
to complete both open-ended interviews and quantitative measures will take 
approximately 45 minutes. The actual administration of the intervention (viewing of video 
recordings) will take approximately 30 minutes with all sessions to occur over a 3-week 
period. 
Participants will be asked to complete interviews at baseline (time of enrollment into 
study), after each intervention session, and at 6 weeks. These time intervals will allow us 
Version date: 12/06/2021to identify the factors and strategies that affect health outcomes over time and serve to 
provide preliminary data to support a larger test of the intervention. These points will also 
allow for comparisons with other long-term investigations of psychological distress 
among cancer patients.135-[ADDRESS_1151587] data on 
psychological distress levels (the NCCN Distress score 45 from patient records and the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_829918], Depression Scale (HADS) 46,47), type and staging of cancer, and type of cancer 
treatment by [CONTACT_829937]-report. For patients and FCGs we will collect information 
on age, gender, education level, health status, religious affiliation, religiosity, insured status, 
income, and geographic residence. The religiosity scale measures frequency of using spi[INVESTIGATOR_829919], reading religious materials, and, attending church. 
Collection of data for demographic and clinical characteristics will occur immediately after 
obtaining informed consent and before viewing the video narratives.  
NCCN Distress Scale (National Comprehensive Cancer Network) is a well-known 
screening tool for distress 45. In the GCC, this tool is administered to all newly diagnosed cancer 
patients. This screening tool is a thermometer on which patients rate their distress on a level of 
0-10 with 10=extreme distress and 0=no distress.  The NCCN-DT will be obtained from patient 
records to determine eligibility for this study.  We will only recruit patients with a NCCN-DT 
score of  4 which is likely indicative of high levels of distress 48,49.
Psychological distress levels for cancer patients will be measured with the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_829918], Depression Scale (HADS) 47. The HADS is a 14-item self-report scale for anxiety and 
depressive states for patients 47,50-52. Internal consistency with African American oncology 
patients has ranged from .77 (Anxiety) and .78 (Depression)53. The HADS is sensitive to change 
after integrative therapy interventions with scores for Anxiety (8.20±4.34 to 5.79±3.64); 
Depression (5.97±4.00 to 3.96±3.23) 54. Scoring for the Anxiety and Depression Subscales of 
the HADS is (0-21); Normal (0-7); Borderline Abnormal Case (8-10); and Abnormal Case (11-
21). Patients and family caregivers will be asked to complete this evaluation at baseline and 
after all of the intervention sessions. 
Quantitative Assessment of narrative quality (narrative characteristics, identification, 
transportation). Assessment of narrative quality (narrative characteristics, identification, and 
transportation) will be examined using the Narrative Quality Assessment Tool 55. Narrative 
characteristics will be examined using a 9 item scale that measures perceived likability of 
characters in the story, emotional relevance of the storyline, and cultural elements of the stories 
55. Identification will be examined using a 8-item scale that measures the degree to which
participants are able to relate to the characters in the video recordings or perceive their story to 
be similar to their own 55. Transportation (engagement) will be examined using a 6-item scale 
Version date: 12/06/2021that measures participants emotional connections to the stories in the video recordings55. 
Response options will be on a 5-pt scale and similar to that in other questionnaires in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] 
(1=not at all to 5=quite a bit). Internal consistency for the three scales range from .92 - .95 
respectively 55. Validity was determined through hypothesized factor structures (CFA) 55. 
Patients and family caregivers will be asked to complete these evaluations after each 
intervention session. 
Qualitative exploration of usability and transportation will occur after each weekly intervention 
session. During the qualitative assessments, participants will be asked to express their 
thoughts, feelings, and opi[INVESTIGATOR_829920], 
identification with narrators in the recordings, and, transportation (engagement) of participants 
to selected recordings. Participants and FCG’s will also be asked to describe ways in which they 
might use the strategies from the video recordings to cope with their own cancer experience.  
Guided by [CONTACT_829938] [ADDRESS_1151588] of those with 
higher levels of narrative quality. These stories from actual patients and FCG’s and used in this 
intervention are hypothesized to be relatable and acceptable in content and context. In previous 
storytelling interventions among African American and Latino populations, listening to culturally 
relevant stories resulted in changes in attitudes and behavior change 56 13. We will qualitatively 
assess usability through perceived navigation (ease of use); content (video length, topi[INVESTIGATOR_202259], presentation); persuasiveness (mood, encouragement); and, value (time spent, future 
use, potential recommendations to others. Description of Intervention:  The intervention will 
consist of participants viewing a selection of video recorded vignettes during 3 weekly sessions. 
There will be 5 vignettes included in each session with each vignette edited to a real time of 3-4 
minutes (each session is 30 minutes).  Since the intervention is designed to be self-
administered, there will be a video recorded introduction and instructions for use narrated by [CONTACT_1600]. The vignettes are of actual African American cancer survivors narrating stories of ways in 
which hymns can be used to overcome their anxieties and depressed moods through the use of 
a hymn. The hymns included represent exemplars from the 5 themes prevalent in the PI’s 
previous research (see Table 2).  
Intervention Group. In this preliminary study, the intervention will consist of 3 weekly sessions 
(each session occurs over 30 minutes duration) delivered to the patient and FCG during an 
outpatient chemo infusion visit. In the first step, the RA/PI [INVESTIGATOR_829921]-up data collection. In step two, the patient and FCG will be given a link 
and password to Vimeo video sharing platform to view preselected video recordings 
representing the 5 categories of hymns. Immediately after each session, the RA/PI [INVESTIGATOR_48112] 
a short open-ended interview with participants to determine participant identification, 
engagement, and emotional response to the recordings. We will also explore experiences with 
use of hymns as a copi[INVESTIGATOR_63966]. This data will assist with the further refinement of the 
intervention for a future RCT.  In step three, we will schedule times for subsequent intervention 
and data collection sessions. 
Informed Consent Process: The PI [INVESTIGATOR_829922]/himself.  Participants will be permitted to 
discuss the study with family or friends and ask the PI [INVESTIGATOR_101331]. Once the verbal consent form 
has been reviewed (or read to participants) the research participant will be asked to express 
their understanding of the consent form. Participants will be asked to describe their 
understanding of the study to ensure comprehension of the study. Research subjects will be 
given a copy of the verbal consent form for their records.  
Version date: 12/06/[ZIP_CODE]. Potential Risks/Discomforts to Study Participants and measures to prevent 
occurrence: 
a. The risks for injury or bodily harm are minimal since the topi[INVESTIGATOR_829923] (faith-based) groups.  A similar study in a southern population has 
been previously conducted with no known medical risks. Some participants were 
tearful during their interviews when talking about their illness experience and the 
support that gave them strength and comfort when anxious or sad but they did not 
want to stop the interview.  Many participants reported that the interview permitted 
them to discuss a stressful life event they had previously not shared with anyone 
else. 
b. A select number of participants will be asked to contribute their stories to be included 
in the larger test of the intervention.  Participants that agree to share their stories will 
be informed of the nature of any disclosure of their illness and other aspects of their 
stories. Stories from interviews with participants concerned about employment/future 
employment, reputation, or financial standing will be kept confidential. 
c. Risks that would be associated with loss of privacy or breach of confidentiality. 
Participants will be informed that it may be possible for others to identify them should 
their stories be used in a future research study.  However, any names, addresses or 
statements to identify third parties mentioned will be deleted. 
d. Steps taken to minimize the risks. This research consists of a preliminary study to 
test the feasibility and acceptability of an intervention using hymns to alleviate 
psychological distress.  Discussions of favorite hymn used in response to stressful 
life events are a frequent part of public conversations among African Americans.  
Persons who become increasingly distressed or emotionally upset during the 
interviews will be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_829939].  Efforts will be made to minimize respondent burden during the interview.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_829924], 
looking around, gazing out the window or simply stating they are too tired to finish. 
Participants who say they are too tired or are otherwise not able to complete the 
interview once started, will be given the option of withdrawing or rescheduling their 
appointment. 
7. Benefits: One potential benefit to individuals participating in the study is that 
respondents may receive comfort and/or spi[INVESTIGATOR_829925]. No other 
direct benefits to individual participants are likely.  The benefit to health services 
practitioners, on the other hand, is great.  Acknowledging, documenting, and describing 
the nature of religious based songs that help comfort older African Americans through 
times of adversity will facilitate the development of intervention strategies specific to 
African Americans but also likely in other cancer populations attempting to cope with 
chronic illness and/or life-threatening disease.  Effective intervention strategies, in turn, 
will improve the overall well-being of individuals living with such illnesses.
8. Compensation for time and effort: Participants will be given $30 for each completed 
interview not to exceed $180. 
9. Data Analysis: Data Management and Monitoring:
a. To maintain confidentiality of the data, each participant will be assigned a subject 
identification number.  The subject identification number will be used to keep track of 
recorded interviews and transcribed data.  Identifying information associated with the 
Version date: 12/06/2021subject identification numbers will be kept separate from the data at all times.  Digitally – 
recorded interviews and hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_829926] a password 
protected computer.  Data files of transcribed interviews and a database with the 
research participants’ information will be kept on a secure server that can only be 
accessed by [CONTACT_829940].   
b.The PI [INVESTIGATOR_829927] (RCR)
using the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI). Data and back-up data
(study and PHI) will be maintained in separate databases on the team’s password-
protected database and server as described above. Data will be entered via (Research
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)), a secure web-based application that supports data
capture and management for research studies. REDCap data entry also assists in
efficient project management and data analysis. Demographic data will also be entered
into the Winship Oncore System. Data collected from open-ended interviews will be
audio recorded and transcribed and checked for accuracy.  All audio-recorded interviews
will be immediately uploaded onto a password protected computer for later transcription
and analysis. Interviews will be deleted from audio recording devices once data is
uploaded onto password protected computers. Interview data will be maintained on
password protected computers.
10. Plans for analysis, statistical and/or otherwise:
a. Data analysis will occur on a password protected computer and data stored on servers
provided by [CONTACT_172115].  
b. Specifically, we will use structured and unstructured interviews to explore influences of
identification, engagement, and emotional response to the intervention. We will also explore 
qualitatively participant experiences with the use of hymns as a copi[INVESTIGATOR_63966]. 
Statistical software: SAS v9.3 will be used for all quantitative statistical analyses. 
Quantitative descriptive analyses will be used to describe the baseline characteristics, interrater 
reliability, and frequencies and rankings of evaluations of video recorded narratives among 
study participants.  The chi-square and Fisher’s exact tests (cells smaller than five) will be used 
to determine differences in the participant responses to the video-recorded narratives according 
to gender (male vs. female) and patient vs. family caregiver.  
Atlas.ti will be used to manage and analyze qualitative data. A qualitative descriptive 
design 59,60 using open-ended semi-structured interviews and qualitative content analysis 61 will 
be used to elicit and analyze patient and FCG response to transportation. 
Aim 1: Develop a series of professionally edited narrative video recordings of 
African American cancer patient and FCG survivorship narratives that are grounded in the 
strong spi[INVESTIGATOR_829912]. The recordings will be professionally edited to 
capture concepts of Stress and Copi[INVESTIGATOR_829928]/FCGs describing 
the psychological stressors encountered, and faith-based strategies used to in response to the 
psychological distress experienced, and health outcomes. The selection of video recorded 
narratives for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_829929] a complete story (stressful cancer 
experience, faith-based copi[INVESTIGATOR_829930], and health outcome) and deemed to have 
appropriate sound and visual quality. We will also review the final selection to ensure characters 
in the video recordings vary by [CONTACT_654], gender, and type cancer. 
Aim 2:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_829931]. A combined 
quantitative and qualitative methodology will be used to examine transportation of the video 
Version date: 12/06/2021recorded narratives. For evaluation of transportation, we examine means and frequencies to 
scales responses for narrative quality assessment: similarity to and identification; narrative 
engagement; and, the emotional engagement. We will use percentiles to rank the selected 
video recorded narratives. Narratives with higher levels of rankings (top 50%) will be retained for 
future feasibility testing. 
Qualitatively, data from the open-ended interview questions related to usability and 
evaluation of transportation identity, engagement, and emotional response will be transcribed 
verbatim and uploaded into Atlas.ti for analysis. Guided by [CONTACT_829941] 61, each participants’ responses to the open-ended interviews will be organized 
according to categories that emerge from the data. Specifically, we will analyze interview data 
for usability:  participant responses to perceived navigation (ease of use), content (video length, 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_33722], presentation), persuasiveness (mood, encouragement), and value (time spent, 
future use, potential recommendations to others. We will also qualitatively explore interviews for 
transportation: similarity to and identification; narrative engagement; and, the emotional 
engagement of participants to selected recordings. We will use interrater reliability to validate 
themes emerging from the data 62.
Guided by [CONTACT_829942] 61, each participants’ responses to 
the open-ended interviews will be organized according to categories that emerge from the data. 
Codes will be assigned to words or text followed by [CONTACT_63790][INVESTIGATOR_829932]. Finally, we will develop definitions for each category/theme with a table 
representing the definition and an exemplar for themes from the data. We anticipate that these 
categories will capture the characters/narrators they more frequently identify with, find similar to 
themselves, perceive as engaging, and elicit positive emotional response. We will also explore 
data for participant explanations for ranking of recordings. We will use this data to further edit 
the video recordings for a future feasibility test . 
10. Training of study team:
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_829933].
11. Plans for monitoring the study for safety:
This study is no more than minimal risk.
12. Confidentiality:
All interviews will be conducted by [CONTACT_829943]. To
maintain confidentiality of the data, each participant will be assigned a subject
identification number.  The subject identification number will be used to keep track of
recorded interviews and transcribed data.  Identifying information associated with the
subject identification numbers will be kept separate from the data at all times.  Digitally –
recorded interviews and hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_829926] a password
protected computer.  Data files of transcribed interviews and a database with the
research participants’ information will be kept on a secure server that can only be
accessed by [CONTACT_829940].  Identifiers to the
data will be destroyed once data is analyzed, published.  However, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_829934].