Official Title: Development and Preliminary Examination of Two Brief Personalized Feedback Interventions 
Focused on Lab -based and EMA Alcohol Cues to Reduce Hazardous Young Adult Alcohol Use  
Brief Title: Testing Brief Personalized Feedback Integrating Lab -based  Alcohol  Cue Information (Project ACE)  
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: February 15, [ADDRESS_248359] s a novel intervention strategy that may ultimately increase the strength of 
Personalized Feedback Intervention (PFI) effects to reduce young adult alcohol misuse. We developed a novel 
Cue Reactivity PFI based on an in vivo  cue reactivity session that includes  personalized feedback regarding 
the extent to which young adults’  desire  to drink varie d in response to an alcohol  cue (i.e., alcoholic beverage 
of their choice) presented du ring a lab session . We anticipate that this fe edback will increase young adults’ 
awareness of their drinking, consequences, and cues that may increase their desire to drink . The intervention 
aims to equip young adults with strategies for reducing exposure to factors that increase their desire to drink, 
how to cope with an increased desire to drink, and how to reduce potential harms from drinking.    
 
The study design is a randomized clinical trial that includes an in -person in vivo  cue reactivity session at the 
study office  and online baseline, 2 -week, and 3 -month surveys . Participants are randomized to either a PFI 
condition or an assessment -only condition. The study tests initial development of the PFI intervention, which is 
in the form of personalized feedback and is delivered online to the intervention group. All parti cipants complete 
the cue reactivity session  and baseline, 2 -week and 3 -month surveys.  
 
Individuals  who agreed to participate in the screening survey (Information Statement presented) and who were 
eligible based on the screening survey were  contact[CONTACT_208060] (e.g., name, date 
of birth) . Participants were  then sent a link to complete the informed consent process (Consent Form) and 
baseline survey. In the baseline survey, participants identified their preferred beverage from a list of alcoholic 
beverages that are commonly consumed by [CONTACT_208061]  a range of alcohol types (e.g., beer, 
wine). After particip ants complete d the baseline survey, they were  scheduled for an in -person in vivo  cue 
reactivity session with a research staff member.  
 
All participants complete the lab -based cue reactivity protocol that involves an  in vivo  alcohol cue exposure 
task. At the start of the lab session, participants were  randomized to either a cue reactivity PFI condition or 
assessment -only condition.  In the lab session, participants first confirm ed their identity by [CONTACT_208062] a 
drivers license or ID card. To enhance the personalization of the cues, the cue reactivity protocol for each 
participant involve s exposure to their preferred alcoholic beverage. During the lab session,  participants 
complete  a series of questionnaires, both b efore and after the cue exposure.  Participants undergo a 3 -minute 
block in which they are instructed  (by [CONTACT_208063])  to hold and smell a glass of their 
preferred alcoholic beverage. Participants follow the audio -taped instructions about pi[INVESTIGATOR_208059].  
 
After the cue reactivity protocol , participants in the control  condition complete several additional questionnaires 
to increase comparability of session time. P articipants in the PFI condition view the online personalized 
feedback and complete a brief survey to assess reactions to their feedback.  Intervention p artici pants are also 
emailed a link to their personalized feedback so the participant can view it again  after the lab session . The 
personalized feedback consists of pre -programmed content viewable on either a computer or mobile phone. 
The personalized feedback us es participants' responses from the baseline survey and from the lab-based cue 
reactivity protocol. The aim of the intervention is to incre ase young adults' awareness of how alcohol cues may 
affect their desire to drink, mood, willingness to drink, and alcohol demand both in relation to lab -based 
exposure to an alcohol beverage of their choice and also more broadly in everyday life.  