STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_141048] a 
Treatment  for Male  and Female  Facial  Acne  Scarring   
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
[ADDRESS_160164]-treatment  visits  in order  to assess  the efficacy  of fat grafting  when  used 
by [CONTACT_141072].  
 
1.2 Primary  Objectives  
Objective  1:  To assess  the efficacy  and tolerability  of the autologous  fat grafting  when  used on 
men and women  with acne scars  on the face.   Overall  assessment  of clinical  outcome  and safety  
will be based  on clinic  visits,  Mirapex  imaging,  VISIA  measurements,  and clinical  evaluation  of 
pre- and post-treatment  photos.   The subject’s  assessment  of satisfaction  will also be verbally  
evaluated  at each follow -up period.   Finally,  both the clinician’s  and subject’s  assessment  will be 
characterized  using  a clinician  assessme nt scale  at the 3-month s and 6-month  post-treatment  
visits.   
  
Standard, close -up, 3D, cross -polarized, and/or UV light photography will be utilized for 
evaluation for improvement in skin tone, texture, pore size, actinic sun damage, porphyrins, and/or 
skin age.  High -resolution ultrasound (HRUS) will be utilized for assessment of skin thickness and 
density. Transepi[INVESTIGATOR_141049]. Optical coherence 
tomography will be used to noninvasively gather topographical and histologic images of pre - and 
post-treated skin. The BTC [ADDRESS_160165] 2 decades, and has been shown to 
result in scar improvement, as assessed by [CONTACT_141073] a quantitative scale (1).  
Histologically, collagen  types I, III, and VIII, as well as total elastin levels were found to be 
increased when analyzing biopsy samples (2).  Additionally, microneedling has been combined 
with platelet -rich plasma for the treatment of acne scars.  Laser resurfacing has also bee n found to 
be an effective treatment for both active acne and acne scarring.  A variety of lasers have been 
utilized, including both CO2 and Erbium:YAG lasers.  Chemical peels using active ingredients 
such as tretinoin, glycolic acid, and trichloroacetic a cid, have been investigated for the treatment 
of several conditions, including acne and acne scarring.  The theory behind these treatments is that 
these agents destroy the epi[INVESTIGATOR_135092]/or dermis, leading to skin exfoliation and remodeling (3).  
Finally, d ermal fillers are used in increase volume in depressed scars.  Options include human 
collagen derivatives, hyaluronic acid, and autologous fat (3).   Autologous fat has gained increasing 
popularity, as there is no risk of allergic reaction, since the fat is  derived directly from the patient.  
 
 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    This is a single -site, pi[INVESTIGATOR_141050]. T he Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_141051], qualifications 
(credentials, training, and medical specialty), subject access, previous clinical research, facilities, 
and interest in this particular field of research.    
 
2. Concise Summar y of Project:  
3.[ADDRESS_160166] and 
close -up photography, we will also be using 3D imaging, cross -polarized imaging, UV imaging, 
high-resolution ultrasonography, optical coherence tomography, transepi[INVESTIGATOR_141052], and/or BTC [ADDRESS_160167]’s assessment of satisfaction will be ch aracterized using a non -
parametric assessment scale at each follow -up period.    
 
3.[ADDRESS_160168] fifteen  (15) 
qualified  and consenting  subjects  receiving  [ADDRESS_160169] igator’s  experience  with previous  studies.   These  patients  
will receive  one treatment,  followed  by [CONTACT_141074] -up visits  at 3-month s and 6-months  post-
treatment.   The acute  effects  of autologous  fat grafting  will be determined  by [CONTACT_141075],  close -up, 3D, cross -polarized,  and UV photography,  high 
resolution  ultrasound,  optical  coherence  tomography,  transepi[INVESTIGATOR_141053],  
BTC  2000  measurements,  and/or  skin biopsies .  Additionally,  the effects  of this treatment  will be 
analyzed  at 3-month s and 6-month s post-treatment  through  clinician  and subject  assessments.  
 
This is a single -site study  at UT Southwestern  Medical  Center  at Dallas  in the Department  of 
Plastic  Surgery.  The Principal  Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_141054],  qualifications  
(credentials,  training,  and medical  specialty),  subject  access , previous  clinical  research,  facilities,  
and interest  in this particular  field of research.    Subjects  will be identified  from  [CONTACT_141089]’s  clinical  practice  at the University  of [LOCATION_007]  Southwestern  Medical  Center.   Subjects  will 
be numbered  sequen tially  in the order  in which  they qualify  for entry  into the study.  
 
At each follow -up visit, the treated areas will be clinically evaluated and photographed. Miravex 
3D photography may be used to take a 3D image of the skin .  The study will utilize the VISIA 
Skin Analysis  system to obtain standard, cross -polarized, and UV images to analyze skin tone, 
texture, pore size, actinic sun damage, porphyrins, and/or skin age; the standard time for VISIA 
imaging should take approximate [ADDRESS_160170].  High resolution ultrasound will be 
used to assess skin thickness and density ; the standard  time for use of high -resolution  ultrasound 
should take approximately  5 minutes.   Transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL) measurements will be 
used to evaluate barrier functio n of the skin epi[INVESTIGATOR_141055]2020 -0310,  ct.gov    healing after treatment. The standard time for TEWL measurements should take approximately 5 
minutes. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) will be used to noninvasively gather topographical 
and histologic images of pre - and post -treated skin. The standard time for OCT should take 
approximately [ADDRESS_160171]’s global aesthetic improvement assessment will be completed at the two 
follow -up visits, as well as b linded evaluations of pre - and post -treatment standard photographs  
and the Clinician’s Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (CGAIS).  
 
Follow -up for any identified adverse events will be reported to the IRB . 
 
3. Subject  Enrollment  
4.1 Informed  Consent  Form  
An IRB-approved  informed  consent  form  (ICF),  consistent  with the requirements  in 21 Code  of 
Federal  Regulations  (CFR)  50.25,  will be given  to each candidate  subject  before  participation  in 
any study  procedures.   The candidate  subject  will be given  as much  time as needed  to read the ICF 
and will have  the opportunity  to have  any study  related  questions  answered  to their satisfaction  
prior  to signing  the ICF.  If further  questions  exist,  the candidate  subject  will be given  sufficient  
time during  the first visit to clarify  open  questions  and concerns  regarding  the study  and/or  the ICF 
with the Investigator,  Sub-Investigator  or the study  coordinator  prior  to signing.   An original  
signed  copy  for each subject  participating  in the study  will be retained  in the study  file and each 
subject  will receive  a signed  copy.   The candidate  subject  will be ineligible  to participate  in this 
study  without  a signed  ICF.   
 
4.[ADDRESS_160172]  Identification  
Subjects  will be assigned  AS (acne  scar)  followed  by a a 2-digit number  (ex. AS01)   which,  when  
used in conjunction  with the clinical  study  number,  will uniquely  identify  every  subject  on the 
study.   This number  will remain  with the subject  throughout  the study  and should  be used in all 
references  to the individual  in this study.  No numbe r will be reassigned  once  the study  begins.   
 
4.[ADDRESS_160173]  results  by [CONTACT_737]  (e.g. soft tissue  fillers  and/or  any 
resurfacing  procedures,  botulinum  toxin,  injectable  fillers,  microdermabrasion,  IPL 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    (intense  pulsed  light),  peels,  laser  treatments,  and tightening  treatments,  etc.) for the 
duration  of the study.  Waxing  and threading  is allowed  but no laser  treatments  outside  of 
the study.  
 
4. Indiv iduals  that are willing  to provide  written  informed  consent  and are able to read,  speak,  
write,  and understand  English.   
 
5. Individuals  willing  to sign a photography  release.  
 
6. Willingness  to cooperate  and participate  by [CONTACT_141076],  adverse  event  
symptoms,  or reactions  immediately.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  
1. Individuals  diagnosed  with known  allergies  to general  skin care products.  
 
2. Individuals  who have  presence  of an active  systemic  or local  skin disease  that may affect  
wound  healing.  
 
3. Individuals  with sensitivity  to topi[INVESTIGATOR_141056].  
 
4. Individuals  who have  physical  or psychological  conditions  unacceptable  to the 
Investigator.  
 
5. Individuals  who have  a recent  histo ry of significant  trauma  to the areas  to be treated  (< 6 
months).  
 
6. Individuals  who have  severe  or cystic  active  and clinically  significant  acne on the area(s)  
to be treated.   Clinically  significant  acne is defined  as a subject  whom  has > 5 active  
inflammat ory acne lesions  (including  acne conglobate,  nodules,  or cysts)  in either  the right  
or left treatment  area.   
 
7. Individuals  who have  a recent  or current  history  of inflammatory  skin disease,  infection,  
unhealed  wound  or clinically  significant  acne in the proposed  treatment  areas.   
 
8. Individuals  who have  a history  of systemic  granulomatous  diseases,  active  or inactive,  (e.g. 
Sarcoid,  Wegeners,  TB, etc.) or connective  tissue  diseases  (e.g. lupus,  dermatomyositis,  
etc.).  
 
9. Individuals  who currently  have  or have  a history  of hypertrophic  scars,  or keloid  scars.   
 
10. Individuals  who currently  have  cancerous  or pre-cancerous  lesions  in the areas  to be treated  
and/or  with a history  of skin cancer.  
 
11. Individuals  who have  the inability  to understand  instructions  or to give informed  consent.  
 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    12. Individuals  who have  had microdermabrasion  or glycolic  acid treatment  to the treatment  
area(s)  within  one month  prior  to study  participation  or who will have  this treatment  during  
the study.  
 
13. Individuals  who have  a history  of chronic  drug or alcohol  abuse.  
 
14. Individuals  undergoing  concurrent  therapy  that, in the Investigator’s  opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649],  would  
interfere  with the evaluation  of the safety  or efficacy  of the study  device.  
 
15. Individuals  who,  in the Investigator’s  opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649],  have  a history  of poor cooperation,  
noncompliance  with medical  treatment,  or unreliability.   
 
16. Individuals  who have  a history  of the following  cosmetic  treatments  in the area(s)  to be 
treated:  
 Skin tightening  procedure  within  the past year;  
 Injectable  filler  of any type within  the past:  
o 12 months  for Hyaluronic  acid fillers  (e.g. Restylane)  
o 12 months  for Ca Hydroxyapatite  fillers  (e.g. Radiesse)  
o 24 months  for Poly-L-Lactic  acid fillers  (e.g. Sculptra)  
o Ever  for permanent  fillers  (e.g. Silicone,  ArteFill)  
 Neurotoxins  within  the past three  months;  
 Ablative  resurfacing  laser  treatment;  
 Non-ablative,  rejuvenative  laser  or light treatment  within  the past six months;  
 Surgical  dermabrasion;  
 Had a chemical  peel or dermab rasion,  of the dorsum  of the hand  within  four weeks  
 
17. Individuals  with a history  of using  the following  prescription  medications:  
 Accutane  or other  systemic  retinoids  within  the past six months;  
 Topi[INVESTIGATOR_141057];  
 Prescription  strength  skin lightening  devices  (e.g. hydroquinone,  tretinoin,  AHA,  
BHA  and polyhydroxy  acids,  4-hydroxyanisole  alone  or in combination  with 
tretinoin,  etc.) within  four months;  
 Any anti-wrinkle,  skin lightening  devices,  or any other  device  or topi[INVESTIGATOR_141058]  (devices  containing  
alpha/beta/poly -hydroxy  acids,  vitamin  C, soy, Q-10, hydroquinone;  systemic  or 
licorice  extract  (topi[INVESTIGATOR_897]),  Tego®  Cosmo  C250,  gigawhite,  lemon  juice  extract  
(topi[INVESTIGATOR_897]),  embl ica extract,  etc.) within  two weeks;   
 Antiplatelet  agents/Anticoagulants  (Coumadin,  Heparin,  Plavix,  chronic  NSAID  
use);  and/or  
 Psychiatric  drugs  that in the Investigator’s  opi[INVESTIGATOR_141059].  
 
18. Individuals  who are nursing,  pregnant,  or planning  to become  pregnant  during  the study  
according  to subject  self-report.  
 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    19. Individuals  having  a health  condition  and/or  pre-existing  or dormant  dermatologic  disease  
on the body  (e.g.,  psoriasis,  rosacea,  eczema,  seborrheic  dermatitis,  vitiligo,  hyper  or hypo -
skin pi[INVESTIGATOR_141060])  that the 
Investigator  or designee  deems  inappropriate  for participation  or could  interfere  with the 
outcome  of the study.  
 
20. Individuals  with a history  of immunosuppression/immune  deficiency  disorders  (including  
HIV infection  or AIDS)  or currently  using  immunosuppressive  medications  (e.g.,  
azathioprine,  belimumab,  cyclophosphamide,  Enbr el, Imuran,  Humira,  mycophenolate  
mofetil,  methotrexate,  prednisone,  Remicade,  Stelara.)  and/or  radiation  as determined  by 
[CONTACT_141077].  
 
21. Individuals  with an uncontrolled  disease  such as asthma,  diabetes,  hyperthyroidism,  
medically  significant  hyper tension  or hypothyroidism.  Individuals  having  multiple  health  
conditions  may be excluded  from  participation  even  if the conditions  are controlled  by [CONTACT_17977], 
medication,  etc. 
 
22. Individuals  with any planned  surgeries,  overnight  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  and/or  invasive  medical  
procedures  during  the course  of the study.  
 
23. Individuals  who have  observable  suntan,  nevi,  excessive  hair, etc. or other  dermal  
conditions  on the back  of the hand  that might  influence  the test results  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_141061].  
 
24. Individuals  who have  any condition,  which  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_141062]  (e.g. patients  not likely  to avoid  other  
cosmetic  treatments  to the treatment  area;  patients  not likely  to stay in the study  for its 
duration  because  of other  commitments,  concomitant  conditions,  or past history;  patients  
anticipated  to be unreliable,  or patients  who have  a concomitant  condition  that may develop  
symptoms  that might  confuse  or confound  study  treatments  or assessments).  
 
4.[ADDRESS_160174]  Instructions  
 Wash  off all facial  make -up and skincare  products  at least [ADDRESS_160175] 20 minutes  prior  to 
procedures.   
 Blistering,  bleeding,  oozing,  strong pain,  persisting  for more  than 24 hours,  or signs  of 
infection  (e.g.,  pus, drainage,  fever)  are cause  for immediate  concern  and the subject  
will be instructed  to contact  [CONTACT_54075]/or  his designee,  to be evaluated  and 
potentially  treated  if they notice  these  symptoms.   
 Avoid  extended  periods  of sun exposure  and all use of tanning  beds for the duration  of 
the study.  Extra  care should  be taken  to wear  protective  clothing  and avoid  sun 
exposure  from  10 AM to 4 PM.  
 Individuals  must  refrain  from  using any anti-aging,  acne,  and acne scar products  or 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    devices  and beginning  the use of any new skincare  products  or devices  other  than the 
assigned  test material  for the duration  of the study.  
 Following  treatment,  subjects  may experience  bruising  and swelli ng and the harvest  
and treatment  sites in the weeks  following  treatment.   Subjects  may be sore in the days 
following  treatment  and should  refrain  from  physical  activity  for at least one week.  
 
Study  Design  
5.1 Outline  of Procedures  
Procedures/Time  Points : Visit  1 Visit  2 Visit  3 Visit  4 
Screeni
ng/Base
line  
(-14 to 0 
day[s])  Day 1 
 (± 3 
days)  3-month s  
post-
treatment  
(± 3 days)  6-months   
post-
treatment   
(± 3 days)  
ICF, and qualification/enrollment  
paperwork  X    
Urine  pregnancy  test X    
Physical  Examination  of Acne  
Scarring  X    
Treatment  of facial  acne scars   X   
Non-Invasive  Procedures  (Aquaflux,  
BTC -2000,  DUB,  OCT)   X X X 
Biopsies   X X X 
Error!  Reference  source  not 
found.  (Miravex,  VISIA,  and 
Standard  Photography)   X X X 
Error!  Reference  source  not 
found.    X X 
Error!  Reference  source  not 
found.  Evaluation  and CGAIS    X X 
 
5.2 Pre-Study  Procedures  
1. Prior  to the start of the study,  potential  subjects  will be screened  for eligibility  
requirements  by [CONTACT_141078] e-mail.    
2. Prospective  subjects  will be informed  of the study  visit instructions,  as detailed  in 4.4.   
3. An appointment  time to visit the clinic  will also be scheduled.  
 
5.3 Screening:  Visit 1 (-14 to 0 day[s])  
1. Candidate  subjects  will be given  an IRB-approved  Informed  Consent  Form  (ICF),  as 
detailed  in section  4.1, with adequate  time for review.  The Investigator  and/or  his designee  
will address  questions  and concerns  raised  by [CONTACT_423].   If the subject  agrees,  they will 
sign one copy  of the ICF.  They  will receive  a copy,  and the original  will be kept in the 
study  file. 
 
2. Candidate  subjects  will be screened  to ensure  that they meet  all of the study  criteria.   A 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    brief  medical  history  will be taken,  and the subject  will be questioned  about  the inclusion  
and exclusion  criteria.  
 
3. If the subject  is of child -bearing  potential,  a pregnancy  test will be performed.  
 
4. Candidate  subjects  that sign the initial  paperwork  will be assigned  a screening  number.  
 
5. The treatment  area will be assessed  by a member  of the research  team.  
 
This visit will take 30-[ADDRESS_160176] treatment.  
 
5.4 Treatment  Visit:  Visits  2 (Day  1) 
 
1. A clinician  will record  concomitant  medications  and will ask subjects  if they have  
experienced  any change s in their health  since  the previous  visit.  If an adverse  event  (AE)  
is reported  then the Investigator  will be informed  and an AE form  will be completed.   
 
2. Subjects  will acclimate  to ambient  temperature  and humidity  conditions  for [ADDRESS_160177],  high frequency  ultrasound,  and BTC -2000  measurements  will be obtained.  
 
4. Patients will undergo two 0.33mm biopsies using WellTech Rapid -Core 0.33mm Biopsy 
Punch  pre-treatment. The biopsy site will be chosen by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_141063]’s 
file, to keep consistency at the follow -up visits. One biopsy will be used for histological 
studies and the other for gene expression studies.  
 
5. The procedure will be perfo rmed in clinic under a local anesthetic.   
a. The harvest site will be anesthetized using a local numbing agent, 1/4% xylocaine 
with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238].  We will inject the acne scar sites with a local anesthetic as well, 
½-1% xylocaine with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238].   
b. After [ADDRESS_160178]-Treatment  Visits:  Visit 3 (3-Month s Post-Treatment)  and Visit 4 (6-Months  Post-
Treatment)  
1. A clinician  will record  concomitant  medications  and will ask subjects  if they have  
experienced  any changes  in their health  since  the previous  visit.  If an adverse  event  (AE)  
is reported  then the Investigator  will be informed  and an AE form  will be completed.   
 
2. A clinician  will perform  a physical  examination  to ensure  that the wound  sites are still 
healing  properly.  
 
3. After  a 15-minute  acclimation  to ambient  temperature  and humidity  conditions,  subjects  
will participate  in the following  procedures:   
 
 Photography  procedures  as described  in section  6.2. 
 Subject’s  self-assessment  on improvement  as described  in section  6.1. 
 TEWL,  OCT,  high frequency  ultrasound,  DUB  measurements  
 Two 0.33mm  microbiopsies  at the same  site as those  obtained  pre-treatment  
 
These  visits  will take about  [ADDRESS_160179].gov     
 
 
5.6 Event Follow -up Visits (Investigator or designee)  
If a potential adverse event is reported by [CONTACT_141079], the Investigator 
will contact [CONTACT_141080] -up Visit.  At this visit the Investiga tor or their 
designee will:  
 
a.  Obtain a complete history of the event in question as well as conduct an examination of 
the subject and determine if the reported event qualifies as an Adverse Event.  If the event 
is determined to be an Adverse Event, an A dverse Event (AE) case report form and Event 
Follow -up (EF) Visit case report form must be completed.  One AE case report form 
should be used to track the history of an individual AE throughout the period of the study.   
b. Collect an updated medical and s urgical history along with recording of concomitant 
medications or treatments.  
c. Take photographs of the subject with attention to the area in question.  
d. Render treatment for the event, if any, as determined by [CONTACT_141081].   
 
6. Assessments  
6.1 Global  Aesthetic  Improvement  Assessments  
6.1.1 Clinician ’s Global  Aesthetic  Improvement  Scale  (CGAIS)  
Rating  Description  
1 Very  Much  Improved:  Optimal  cosmetic  result  in this subject.  
2 Much  Improved:  Marked  improvement  in appearance  from  the initial  Biopsy  Month  [ADDRESS_160180].  
3 Improved:  Obvious  improvement  in appearance  from  initial  condition,  
but a re-treatment  is indicated.  
4 No Change:  The appearance  is essentially  the same  as the original  
condition.  
5 Worse:  The appearance  is worse  than the original  condition.  
  
 6.1.[ADDRESS_160181] Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (SGAIS)  
Rating  Description  
1 Very  Much  Improved:  Optimal  cosmetic  result.  
2 Much  Improved:  Marked  improvement  in appearance  from  the initial  
condition,  but not completely  optimal.  
3 Improved:  Obvious  improvement  in appearance  from  initial  condition.  
4 No Change:  The appearance  is essentially  the same  as the original  
condition.  
5 Worse:  The appearance  is worse  than the original  condition.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_160182] a clean face and 
neck with no makeup as described in the study procedures. Subjects will remove any jewelry from 
the area(s) to be photographed and equilibrate for at least [ADDRESS_160183]  and close -up photography  will be taken  in the Department  of Plastic  Surgery’s  
clinical  photography  studio.   These  photos  will be utilized  for evaluation  of the fat 
grafting  treatment  for acne scarring.  These  photographs  will be taken  utilizing  the 
Nikon  D7200  at baseline,  3-month  post-treatment,  and 6-months  post-treatment.  
 
2. VISIA  Complexion  Analysis  
Digital  images  will be taken  using  the VISIA  Complexion  Analysis  System  at 
baseline,  3-month s post-treatment,  and [ADDRESS_160184]-treatment.   Subjects  will be 
instructed  to adopt  neutral,  non-smiling  expressions  with their eyes gently  closed  for 
VISIA.  Subjects  will be carefully  positioned  for each photograph,  directly  facing  the 
camera  for the center  view  and turned  at a 45° angle  for the right  and left side views.   
The scan will objectively  measure  spots,  wrinkles,  texture,  pores,  UV spots,  brown  
spots,  red areas  and porphyrins.    
 
Standard  lighting  1: visible  (bright)  
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    Standard  lighting  2: visible  (flat)  
Cross -polarized : UV-NF 
 
3.        Miravex  3D Imaging  
Miravex  3D Imaging  will be performed  in the Department  of Plastic  Surgery  clinic  to 
assess  changes  in volume  of the subjects’  facial  acne scars.   Images  will be taken  at 
baseline,  [ADDRESS_160185]-treatment.   Image  acquisition  and analysis  take 
less than 90 seconds.  
 
 
6.3 Blinded  Evaluation  
Two trained  blinded  raters  will be asked  to presented  randomized  photos  of subjects  taken  prior  
to treatment  (day 1) and [ADDRESS_160186]  answers  on a worksheet  distributed  
by [CONTACT_827].  
 
7. Sources  of Research  Material  
Medical  history  (age,  sex, skin type,  recent  sun exposure,  allergies,  current  medications,  major  
illnesses),  standard  photography,  VISIA  images,  Miravex  images,  OCT  images,  high frequency  
ultrasound  images,  TEWL  measurements,  BTC  [ADDRESS_160187].   If the subjects  decline  permission  to be photographed,  they may not participate  in 
the study  since  the photographic  documentation  of treatment  outcome  is an important  measure  of 
evaluation.   
 
Subjects  will also be paid $25 per research  visit,  and $35 for research  visits  with a biopsy.   
Subjects  will receive  $130  if all four research  visits  are completed.   Additionally,  subjects  will be 
compensated  $5 for each wound  check  for which  they return , for an additional  compensation  of 
up to $10.  A Clincard  will be used for payment.  
 
9. Potential  Risks  
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    Bruising  and Infection:  (Rare  < 1%)  
As with any superficial  wound,  there  is a risk of infection.   This risk will be minimized  by [CONTACT_141082].   Furthermore,  obtaining  a detailed  patient  
history  prior  to treatment  will guide  patient  care.  
 
Transient  edema  and/or  erythema : (Occasionally  < 3%) 
Swelling  is the most  common  complication  of fat injection  and can last up to 2 weeks.   Head  
elevation  and ice packs  on the grafted  areas  may alleviate  these  symptoms.  
 
Undercorrection/overcorrection/contour  Irregularities:  (Rare  < 1%) 
Injecting  inadequate  or excessive  amount  of fat can lead to undercorrection  or overcorrection  of 
depressed  areas,  respectively.   The treatment  will be performed  by [CONTACT_978], who has extensive  
experience  with fat grafting.  
 
Scarring:  (Rare  < 1%) 
There is a small risk of scarring. However, this is minimized by [CONTACT_141083].  
 
Allergic Rea ction: (Rare < 1%)  
There is a possibility of an allergic or toxic reaction to anesthesia used to numb the areas. Subjects 
will be questioned with regard to any history of allergies and carefully monitored for signs of 
allergic reaction.  
 
Biopsy  
Risks  associated  with biopsy  include:  1) scarring  - a small  risk of scarring,  which  can be 
minimized  by [CONTACT_141084];  2) allergic  reaction  - there  is a possibility  of an 
allergic  or toxic  reaction  to anesthesia  used to numb  the areas.  Subjects  will be questioned  with 
regard  to any history  of allergies  and carefully  monitored  for signs  of allergic  reaction . 
 
Photography  
Subjects could be slightly uncomfortable during the photographic sessions when asked to 
position her body to take the pho tograph of th eir face . The subject may be uncomfortable with 
standing still for an extended period of time or from turning her head in various positions. 
Subjects may be sensitive to the bright and repeating flashes from the camera, which can 
sometimes cau se headaches, irritation of the eyes, discomfort, after effects such as seeing spots, 
and in rare cases, could stimulate a migraine headache or epi[INVESTIGATOR_141064].  
 
Photographs include a risk of identification. Privacy will be protected to the greatest exte nt 
possible. Photos will only be identified by a unique subject identification number that contains 
no personal identifying information. For research purposes photos may be used in scientific 
publications  
 
 10. Adverse  Events  
 10.1 Definition  of an Adverse  Event  
 An adverse  event  (AE)  is any untoward  medical  occurrence  in a clinical  investigation  where  a 
subject  is administered  a pharmaceutical  product/biologic  (at any dose),  OTC,  cosmetic  product  
or medical  device  and which  does not necessarily  require  a causal  relationship  with a test article.  
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    An AE can therefore  be any unfavorable  and unintended  sign (including  an abnormal  laboratory  
finding,  for example),  symptom  or disease  temporally  associated  with the use of a medicinal  
product  whether  or not consider ed related  to the medicinal  product.  The AEs will be recorded  on 
the appropriate  case report  forms  and source  documents.   The Investigator  or medical  staff will 
evaluate  all AEs as to their severity  and relation  to the test article.  
 
The severity  of an AE will be graded  as follows:  
 Mild:  Awareness  of a sign or symptom  but easily  tolerated  
 Moderate:  Discomfort  sufficient  to cause  interference  with usual  activity  or to affect   
  clinical  status  
 Severe:  Incapacitating  with inability  to do usual  activity  or to significantly  affect   
  clinical  status  
 
The relationship  of an AE to the use of the study  article  will be assessed  using  the following  
guidelines,  based  upon  available  information:  
Unlikely  No temporal  association,  or the cause  of the event  has been  identified,  or the  
 test article  cannot  be implicated  
Possible  Temporal  association,  but other  etiologies  are likely  to be the cause;   
 however,  involvement  of the test article  cannot  be excluded  
Probable  Temporal  association,  other  etiologies  are possible,  but not likely  
Definite  Clear -cut temporal  association  
Unknown  
 
 10.2 Definition  of a Serious  Adverse  Event   
A serious  adverse  event  (SAE)  is any experience  or reaction  occurring  at any dose that results  in 
any of the following  outcomes:  
 death,  
 is life threatening,  
 inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141065],  
 a persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity,  or 
 a congenital  anomaly/birth  defect.  
 
Important  medical  events  that may not result  in death,  be life-threatening,  or require  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_40089]  a serious  adverse  event  when,  based  upon  appropriate  medical  
judgment,  they may jeopardize  the patient  or subject  and may require  medical  or surgical  
intervention  to prevent  one of the outcomes  listed  in this definition.  [Note:   The term “life-
threatening”  refers  to an event  in which  the subject  was at risk of death  at the time of event;  it 
does not refer  to an event  that hypothetically  might  have  caused  death  if it was more  severe.]  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141066],  even  if related  to an AE, elective  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141067],  and admission  to a day-care facility  may not themselves  constitute  sufficient  
grounds  to be considered  a SAE.  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141068] a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141069]-patient  for greater  than [ADDRESS_160188]’s  answer  (e.g. “Have  you noticed  any 
change  in your health  since  the last visit?”).  
 
Directed  questioning  and examination  will be performed  when  appropriate.  All reported  AEs 
will be documented  on the appropriate  forms  without  omitting  any requested  and known  
information.  Every  time a concomitant  therapy  is reported  during  the study,  an AE form  will be 
completed  if appropriate  and the reason  for the treatment  noted.  
 
When  an AE persis ts at the end of the study,  the Investigator  will ensure  a follow -up of the 
subject  until the event  is satisfactorily  resolved.  
 
Photographs  will be taken  to document  any AEs if possible.  
 
 10.[ADDRESS_160189]-study  medical  treatment  
(except  for any study -related  treatment  that is due to the negligence  of UT Southwest ern) 
reimbursement  will be offered.  
 
 10.5 Unanticipated  Adverse  Reactions  
Unanticipated  adverse  reactions  are defined  as any adverse  reactions  not listed  as one of the 
anticipated  reactions  listed  in the protocol  and was not previously  identified  in natur e, severity,  
or degree  of incidence.  
 
 10.6 Anticipated  Reactions  
Expected  side effects:   After  the procedure,  the skin will be red and swollen  in appearance.   The 
patient  many  also experience  skin tightness  and mild sensitivity  to touch  on certain  areas.   This 
will diminish  significantly  within  a few hours  following  the procedure.   Swelling  and bruising  
may should  resolve  within  one to two weeks  post-treatment.    
 
Symptoms  of mild irritation,  including  the redness,  bruising,  and swelling  listed  above,  will not 
be treated  as adverse  reactions  if they are mild in nature.  These  conditions  may or may not 
resolve  over time.  Symptoms  that are persistent  and moderate  to severe  in nature,  or that involve  
elevation  (e.g. edema,  papules,  vesicles,  spreading)  will be considered  AEs.  
 
Unanticipated  Reactions:   In rare cases,  it is possible  for a subject  to develop  allergic  reactions  to 
the test material(s).  Rare  allergic  reactions  can consist  of severe  contact  [CONTACT_8748],  granuloma(s)  
or systemic  hypersensitivity.  This risk is increased  for individuals  with a history  of allergies,  and 
individuals  with asthma  and/or  a history  of hives  may also be affected.  Subjects  will be 
instructed  to notify  the clinic  immediately  if they experience  an allergic  reaction  including  rash,  
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    hives,  and itchin g. Also,  hyperpi[INVESTIGATOR_371],  hypertrophic  skin scarring,  and scarring  is a rare 
potential.  
 
The Investigator  will have  the final authorization  to determine  if a reaction  will be considered  an 
AE. 
 
 11. Attrition  
Clinical  studies  may experience  attrition.  Subjects  will be made  aware  that they are free to 
withdraw  from  the study  at any time for any reason,  without  prejudice.  Otherwise,  every  effort  
will be made  to have  subjects  complete  the study  as stated  in this protocol,  ensuring  subject  
safety  and followin g the provisions  of the informed  consent  form.  Reasons  for subject  
withdrawal  may include  an adverse  event,  subject’s  request,  protocol  violation,  lost to follow -up, 
or other  reasons.  Subjects  lost from  the study  will be documented  on a screening/enrollmen t log. 
 
If a subject  fails to return  for a scheduled  examination,  a representative  of UT Southwestern  will 
attempt  to contact  [CONTACT_141085].  If so, then the subject  will be 
processed  as soon  as possible  (± 3 days for rescheduled  visit).  Changes  to the study  schedule  
under  these  circumstances  will be noted  in the Screening  and Enrollment  Log. If a subject  is 
unable  to reschedule  the visit within  the appropriate  window  as indicated  above,  they will be 
dropped  from  study  participation.  
 
12. Procedures  to Maintain  Confidentiality:  
This study  will follow  all applicable  guidelines  for the protection  of human  subjects  for research  
as outline d in 21 CFR  50, in accordance  with the accepted  standards  for Good  Clinical  Practice  
(GCP),  International  Conference  on Harmonization  (ICH),  and the standard  practices  of UT 
Southwestern.  
 
All study  records  and information  will be identified  by [CONTACT_141086].  All subject  identifiers  
will be removed  from  all documents.  The link between  subject  name  [CONTACT_141088] -protected  files.  Documents  containing  identifying  information  will be 
kept in locked  files in the resea rch staffs’  locked  office.  All electronic  study  data will be password  
protected  with access  limited  to members  of the research  team.   No direct  identifying  information  
will be shared  with any outside  entities.   Electronic  data (electronic  data entry  - Case  Report  
Forms)  will be password  protected.    
 
Photographs  of subject's faces  will be taken at enrollment, treatment and f ollow -up visits. These 
photographs will be identified by [CONTACT_141087] 
[such as tattoos].   Subject confidentiality will be protected to the greatest extent possible.  
 
This study will be performed in accordance with  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act.  These guidelines will be followed specifically with regard to the privacy an d confidentiality 
of patient care and study records.  Personnel associated with Investigator’s office, the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) and the governing Institutional Review Board, have the right to 
review the data, including photographs, colle cted during this study.    
 
 
STU2020 -0310,  ct.gov    14. Biostatistics:   
This initial  study  will include  descriptive  statistics  from  baseline  analysis.  
 
Mean  change  from  baseline  will be used to calculate  data obtained  from  transepi[INVESTIGATOR_141070], high resolution  ultrasonograph y, 3D photography,  optical  coherence  tomography,  and/or  
BTC  2000  measurements,  and biopsies.  
 
The primary  outcome  measure  of effectiveness  will be a paired  comparison  of baseline  to 
immediate,  3-month,  and 6-month  follow -up ratings  for improvement  in skin tone,  texture,  and 
pore size using  VISIA,  depression  using  Miravex  3D imaging,  as well as data obtained  from  high 
resolution  ultrasonography,  3D photography,  optical  coherence  tomography,  and/or  BTC  2000  
measurements,  and biopsy.   The “downtime”  will be measured  by a trans -epi[INVESTIGATOR_141071]-epi[INVESTIGATOR_118854].  Safety  will be defined  as an absence  of adverse  events  related  
to the procedure.   Photographs  of treated  skin at follow -up visits  will be compared  to baseline  to 
document  the healin g time course  and may be used for blinded  scoring  evaluations  of skin tone,  
skin texture  and pore size, as well as for subject  self-assessment.   
 
15. References  
1. Goodman GJ, Baron JA. Postacne scarring —a quantitative global scarring grading 
system. J Cosmet  Dermatol. 2006;5:48 -52. 
2. El-Domyati M, Barakat M, Awad S, et al. Microneedling therapy for atrophic acne scars: 
an objective evaluation. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2015;8:36 -42. 
3. Soliman, Y. S., Horowitz, R., Hashim, P. W., Nia, J. K., Farberg, A. S., & Goldenberg, 
G. (2018). Update on acne scar treatment.  Cutis , 102(1), 21.  
4. Joseph, Max. "Handbuch der kosmetik." (1912).  
5. Miller, Charles Conrad.  Connula Implants and Review of Implatation Technics in 
Esthetic Surgery . Oak Press, 1926.  
6. Coleman, Sydney R. "Str uctural fat grafting: more than a permanent filler."  Plastic and 
reconstructive surgery  118, no. 3S (2006): 108S -120S.  
7. Azzam, O. A., Atta, A. T., Sobhi, R. M., & Mostafa, P. I. (2013). Fractional CO (2) laser 
treatment vs autologous fat transfer in the tre atment of acne scars: a comparative 
study.  Journal of drugs in dermatology: JDD , 12(1), e7 -e13. 
8. Tenna, S., A. Cogliandro, M. Barone, Vincenzo Panasiti, M. Tirindelli, Carolina Nobile, 
and Paolo Persichetti. "Comparative study using autologous fat grafts pl us platelet -rich 
plasma with or without fractional CO 2 laser resurfacing in treatment of acne scars: 
analysis of outcomes and satisfaction with FACE -Q." Aesthetic plastic surgery  41, no. 3 
(2017): 661 -666. 
 
 