Emotion Regulation Interventions for Alcohol -Related Sexual Aggression  
NCT
: STUDY00 002103  
D
ate: May 16, 2019  
S
tudy Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Study Protocol  
The obj ective of this protocol was t o evaluate the efficacy  of two brief onl ine emotion regulation 
interventions (compared t o control) for r educing alcohol -related se xual aggr ession i n heavy 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_80111] m en with a sexual a ggression history. The study involve d a proximal 
change experiment asse ssing the e ffects o f two brief onl ine interventions – cognitive 
restructuri ng and m indfulness  – on m en’s sexual aggr ession during an sexual ag gression-
related analogue. 
Recruitment . Participants w ere recruit ed from t he co mmunity t hrough advertisements 
placed in online classifieds,  social net working websites,  community new spapers,  and local 
venues t hat target t he young adult popul ation. A ds state d that single men 21- [ADDRESS_87443] eted t he study in the same visit. As  such, longitudinal retention 
efforts were not required.   
Study D esign. After providing informed consent, par ticipants completed questionnaires 
assessi ng information about se xual r isk behav ior, drinking behavior, se xual a ggression, and 
emotion regulati on skills.  They w ere then randomized to receive one of the t hree intervention 
arms  (cognitive restructuring, mindfulness, o r control). A random ized block  desi gn was  used to 
assign par ticipants to experimental co nditions  based on their sexual aggr ession history so that 
aggression backgrounds w ere evenly distribut ed across  the ce lls. After th e intervention, 
participants received either no al cohol ( control be verage) or a high alcohol dose  (target pea k 
BAC = . 08%), read a sexual aggression analogue , and rate d their se xual aggression intentions . 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
Sexual Aggression Intentions. For the sexual r isk intentions ou tcome, w e enrolled [ADDRESS_87444] the m oderation of bev erage 
condition (sober v s. alcohol) on the association between t he interventions (cognitive 
restructuring , mindfu lness, control) and sexual aggression- related intentions . Using G*Power 
3.1, we used an alpha of .[ADDRESS_87445] size f = . 21, this  
would require a sample size of 222, whereas f = .22 required 203 participants.  As such, we 
obtained a sample of 209 participants.  