P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Cognitive Behavioral Intervention to Reduce  
Fear of Hypoglycemia in Young Adults with Type 1 Diabetes  
Document Date: 5/12/[ADDRESS_761265]  
 
In persons with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), hypoglycemia is the major limiting factor in achieving optimal blood 
glycemic control. All persons with T1DM are at risk for hypoglycemia (blood glucose level < 70 mg/dl), which is 
life-threatening a nd accompanied by [CONTACT_579505], resulting in a profound fear 
of hypoglycemia (FOH) and reduced quality o f life. Young adults with T1DM are at greater risk for FOH and 
have worse glycemic control and self -management behavior t han other age groups with T1DM. In our 
preliminary work, we found that 77% of young adults with T1DM reported FOH, and FOH resulted in increased 
glycemic variability. Glycemic variability (GV) is the minute -to-minute fluctuation in blood glucose that can b e 
missed if looking only at A1C, a longer -term measure. Increased GV is dangerous because it is associated 
with cardiovascular events a nd diabetes complications. Cardiovascular disease remains the primary cause of 
mortality in T1DM; therefore, strategies t o reduce it are necessary. A major gap exists in how to manage FOH 
as a component of diabetes self -management. Our overall objective is  to reduce FOH and improve diabetes 
self-management, glycemic control, and GV in young adults with T1DM to reduce or dela y diabetes 
complications and improve quality of life. We specifically aim to: (1) determine the feasibility and acceptability 
of a fear  reduction program in young adults with T1DM, who experience FOH; and (2) determine the impact of 
an 8-week cognitive beh avioral therapy (CBT) -based intervention on the outcomes: FOH, self -management 
behavior, glycemic control, and GV. To achieve these aim s, we propose a randomized controlled trial in 50 
young adults aged 18 to 35 years with T1DM. Participants will be screen ed for FOH levels. Eligible subjects 
will be randomized to the intervention program (Fear Reduction Efficacy Evaluation [FREE]) or atte ntion control 
group. A one -week run -in phase is planned, with baseline measures of FOH, self -management behavior, A1C, 
and 24-hour real -time continuous glucose monitoring recordings (RT -CGM) to calculate GV for both  groups.  
The intervention group will part icipate in eight weekly individual one -hour sessions using CBT and exposure 
treatment for specific fears. RT -CGM and a da ily FOH diary will be used as feedback cues as part of the FREE 
program. The attention control group will participate in eight weekly i ndividual one -hour diabetes self - 
management education (DSME) sessions and wear a 24 -hour RT -CGM device (to measure GV on ly) during 
the same eight -week period. At completion, FOH will be measured, and RT -CGM recordings will be analyzed 
to determine differe nces between the FREE and control groups. Findings from this proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_579478] a larg er clinical trial to reduce FOH and improve self -management, glycemic 
control, and GV. This program of research promises to reduce the development of diabetes complications and 
improve quality of life for young adults with T1DM.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
3 Specific Aims  
In persons w ith type 1 diabetes (T1DM), iatrogenic hypoglycemia is the major limiting factor in achieving 
optimal blood glucose control.1 All persons with T1DM are at risk for hypoglycemia (blood glucose level < 70 
mg/dl2), which is life -threateni ng3 and has serious physical and psychological sequelae, resulting in fear of 
hypoglycemia (FOH).4,5 FOH can be incapacitating,  causing panic,4 anxiety,6 phobic disorders,7 and greatly 
diminished quality of life.8 FOH also results in greater glucose variability9,10 (GV; the intra -day fluctuations in 
blood glucose) and poor glycemic control due to under - or overcompensation of food intake, insulin dosing, or 
physical activity.11,[ADDRESS_761266] a program to decrease FOH and examine its 
association with GV.  
Our preliminary data using real -time measures demonstrated that 77% of young adults with T1DM reported 
FOH; FOH resulted in increased GV, with GV occurring after FOH.[ADDRESS_761267] poorer glycemic control compared to middle - 
aged and older adults.18 Self-reported hypoglycemia occurs on average twice weekly, but for some individuals 
it may occur nearly daily.19 Fear management interventions using cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) with 
exposure therapy and feedback have been effective in reducing anxiety in other populations ,[ADDRESS_761268] developed and manualized a CBT -based program tailored to FOH in young T1DM adults, 
developed with input from the target  population.  
Responding to PA -15-176: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_579479], the main objective of this R21 is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_579480] a CBT program for FOH on 
the outcomes: FOH,  self-management, glycemic control (A1C), and GV in young adults with T1DM who 
experience FOH. Fifty young adults with T1DM will be randomized to an intervention or attention control group. 
The intervention group will participate in eight weekly, individua l one -hour sessions using principles of CBT  and 
exposure therapy, using real -time continuous glucose monitoring (RT -CGM) and a daily FOH diary as 
feedback cues. The attention control group will participate in eight weekly, individual one -hour diabetes self - 
management education (DSME) sessions and use  RT-CGM.  
Specific aims for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_56096]:  
In 50 young adults with T1DM (18 -35 years)22 who experience FOH, we will:  
1. Determine the feasibility and acceptability of an eight -week CBT-based Fear Reduction Efficacy 
Evaluation (FREE). Feasibility will be determined through analysis of recruitment (number recruited, 
screened, eligible, and consented) and retention (% session attendance, program completion rates). 
Acceptability wil l be determined through participant evaluation (written evaluation and interview at 
program completion, and a convened advisory group of previous  participants).  
2. Determine the impact of the FREE intervention, compared to an attention control group, on the 
outcom es: FOH (Hypoglycemia Fear Scale score), self -management (Self -Management Scale score), 
glycemic control (A1C), and glycemic variability (RT -CGM  recordings).  
Primary hypothesis: Young adults with T1DM participating in the FREE program will demons trate 
improvement in FOH compared to the attention control group.  
Secondary hypothesis: Young adults with T1DM participating in the FREE program will have improved 
self-management, glycemic control, and glycemic variability (GV) compared to the attention c ontrol 
group. 
This study will generate information for a larger clinical trial to test the effectiveness of the FREE 
intervention to reduce FOH, improve self -management behavior, and improve glycemic control and GV. If 
effective, this intervention will ser ve as an i mportant adjunct to diabetes care in young adults with T1DM, 
reduce the development of diabetes complications, and improve quality of life.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
4 Research  Strategy  
1. Significance  
Why fear of hypoglycemia (FOH) in young adults? Young adultho od is the developmental  period from 
age [ADDRESS_761269] on future health.23 Despi[INVESTIGATOR_579481] -sensing technology, FOH remains a critical deterrent to type 1 diabetes (T1DM) s elf- 
management, psycho logical well -being, and quality of life (QOL).17 Fear is conceptualized as an emotion 
arising from a cognitive appraisal of a specific threat or danger .24 Normal fear is a daptive, stimulating mo re 
vigilance and improved performance; heightened fear leads to increased anxiety and may result in a delay to 
action or inappropriate action.21,24,25 Fear may mim ic the symptoms of hypoglycemia and impair its detection, 
exacerbating the problem.5,26 At the extreme, fears can develop into anxiety disorders and p hobias.7,21,27 
Previous negative experiences of hypoglycemia influence diabetes self -management behaviors.11,17,28-32 
Diabetes self -management is defined as the knowledge, skills, and behaviors needed for diabetes self -care.33 
Insulin doses may be inappropriately reduced and diet may be modified  to avoid hypoglycemia. Dietary 
modifications  may include excessive eating, particularly more carbohydrates12,34 or snacking at night.31,35 
These modifications lead to increased  GV and poor glycemic control. Registry data from the T1D Exchange 
Clinic Registry revealed that only 13% of young adults achieved glycemic targets ,36 and, in a survey of self - 
management practices, 45% of young adults report ed they did not reach their glycemic goals due to FOH.[ADDRESS_761270] been designed to help patients with diabetes manage 
their treatment re gimens, including continuous glucose monitori ng (CGM) systems, insulin pumps, sensor - 
augmented pump therapy with insulin suspend features, and insulin bolus calculators. While these have 
improved glucose control (i.e., A1C), improved A1C has not consisten tly translated into reduced FOH.38-44 
What has been used to address FOH? Diabetes education programs typi[INVESTIGATOR_579482].[ADDRESS_761271] include methods to cope with the fear that lower blood glucose 
levels could lead to hypoglycemia.54 A fear reduction program, informed by [CONTACT_272778], may provide a 
more comprehensive approach to diabetes care that reduces anxiety and  improves glycemic control and GV.  
Why is glycemic  variability (GV) important? GV has been associated with more frequent epi[INVESTIGATOR_30344]16 and fluctuations between glucose extremes (i.e., hypo - to hyperglycemic), whi ch may occur 
with overtreatment of a hypoglycemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]. Evidence supports the role that GV (daily fluctuation) plays in  
generation of oxidative stress,[ADDRESS_761272] an optimal A1C yet 
high GV (Figure 1).[ADDRESS_761273] diabetes self -management.  
Why a cognitive behavioral approach (FREE) to reduce FOH?  
Heightened fear develops from memories of previous n egative 
hypoglycemic events that create a conditioned negative response to  
future fear triggers.21,59 CBT has been used to reduce fear in other populations .60 The FREE program will be 
based on the Beck Cognitive Behavioral Model.61 The conditioned fear response is reframed through cognitive 
restructuring of negative thoughts, regulation of emotions (FOH), and cha nging maladaptive behaviors (self - 

P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
5 management behavior). Exposure therapy will be used to reduce FOH that is out -of-proportion to the thre at 
through habituation to previously fearful situations (Figure 2).[ADDRESS_761274] reported temporal associations between 
FOH and increased GV10 (see 3.1b ), with strong justification for a n intervention specifically targeting FOH. We  
will provide a CBT and exposure -based therapy intervention unique to diabetes care that has been effective in 
reducing fear and anxiety in other populations .64 Along with state -of-the-art real -time CGM technology, this will 
provide feedback on FOH reduction through weekly diary and RT -CGM cues. The combination of real -time 
feedback and CBT is innovative. Because exposure -based CBT has been effective for fear reduction in other 
disorders, success is likely. This intervention d iffers from programs developed to improve glycemic control 
because the emphasis is on FOH. NIH emphasizes treatment of young adults with T1DM; this innovative CBT 
program could facilitate prevention or delay of diabetes complications if it is found that GV  is less by [CONTACT_579506]. If effective, this could be developed into a web -based application and tailored to other groups.  
3. Approach  
3.1. Preliminary  Studies  
3.1a. Research Team Expertise. This application brings toge ther an interdisciplinary team with shared 
(T1DM, FOH, CGM technology for GV measurement, chronic illness, and clinical practice) and complementary 
(CBT, feedback, intervention studies, and Certified Diabetes Educator [CDE®]) expertise. Collectively, the 
team’s research strengths span conceptual, met hodological, clinical, statistical, and research abilities in the 
areas of self -management and chronic disease.  
3.1 b. Preliminary Work and Findings. This grant application builds on our previous studies. (1) First,  we 
reported the association of GV with daily  fear (using a prospective repeated -measures design) in 35 young 
adults with T1DM.10 The presence of FOH was not an inclusionary criterion; however, findings revealed: (a) 
FOH was h ighly prevalent, reported by 77% of the sampl e. (To our knowledge, there are no documented 
reports of FOH prevalence.) Daily diary comments related to FOH included: “I worry every day,” “It is a chronic 
fear,” “I live with it constantly, and it is never go ne.” (b) FOH was linked to GV. Significant te mporal 
relationships emerged: same -day fear levels were associated with same -day GV ( r = .263, p < .001), and 
previous -day fear levels were associated with next-day GV (r = .218, p = .005). (3) A1C levels were n ot 
consistently associated with lower GV; 53% of those with optimal A1C levels (< 7% recommended target) had 
high GV (> [ADDRESS_761275] deviation). (d) No significant sex differences were observed in the 
association of FOH and GV.10 (2) To examine the challenges o f hypoglycemia and FOH further, focus groups 
were conducted. FOH emerged as a major stressor (unpublished data). As part of the study, participants 
provided suggestions on strategies to address FOH. They were ve ry interested in a fear reduction program and  
favored individual, face -to-face meetings. ( 3) Lastly, based on this feedback, we developed, manualized, and 
carried out the FREE program in five young adults. All subjects completed the program. They provided 
feedback on program length, content, and appr oach, evaluating the program very positively. Stigma of 
participation in CBT therapy was not an issue. Participant suggestions have been  incorporated.  
3.2. Design and  Methods  
3.2 a. Overview. Young adults aged 18 to 35 y ears with T1DM (≥ 1 year) who experience FOH will be 
randomized to an intervention or attention control group. Following a one -week run -in phase, in which baseline 
RT-CGM recordings will be obtained and subjects adjust to wearing a RT -CGM, subjects will be  randomized  to 

P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
6 the intervention or attention control group. Both groups will be blinded to the study hypothesis. The intervention  
group will participate in eight weekly individual one -hour sessions  
Figure 3. Study Design  
 
between -group differences (Figu re 3).  using a CBT -based approach (FREE), wear a RT -CGM device, 
and keep a daily fear diary. The attention control group will 
participate in eight weekly individual one -hour sessions on 
diabetes self -management education (DSME)62 and wear a RT - 
CGM device for eight weeks (for GV measurement only, no 
diary ). Data is collected: (1) at the beginning of a one -week run - 
in period (Week 0); (2) at Week 4; (3) completion of the 
intervention (Week 8); and (4) post -program at (We ek 12 ). FOH, 
self-management, and A1C will be measured, and RT -CGM 
recordings will be analyzed to determine within -group and  
3.2b. Setting and Sample. The study will take place remotely at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC)  
Medical Center and College of Nursing (CON) and in the participant’s living environment. Inclusion criteria : (1) 
18- 35 years old, (2) diagnosis of T1DM ≥ 1 year confirmed by [CONTACT_6270] -report and insulin dependence since 
diagnosis, (3) receive medical care fro m an endocrinologist, (4) us e insulin pump or multiple daily injection 
(MDI) therapy, (5) have FOH (screening questionnaire)65, and (6) attended a basic diabetes educational 
program to control for baseline knowledge, (6) has a mobile device, computer or  phone to use to connect for 
weekly sessions, (7) has a private area for weekly sessions. Exclusion criteria:  (1) pregnant or breastfeeding;  
(2) receiving psychotherapy for depression or anxiety disorders, (e.g., panic, obsessiv e compulsive disorder), 
or have received therapy specifically for FOH; (3) have a co -existing chronic illness or receiving medications 
(excluding insulin) that may influence diabetes self -management or GV. We anticipate few comorbidities that 
will influenc e diabetes management and GV , due to the age of the target population. Our preliminary data 
revealed no co -existing cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other major organ diseases.  
3.2c. Recruitment. Subjects will be recruited through the UIC medical center and d iabetes websites and 
organiz ations, and Research Match using flyers, e -announcements, and recruitment letters  and emails . We will 
identify potentially eligible subjects through the electronic medical record system and send recruitment letters  
and emails . The total number of annual cl inic visits for young adult patients with T1DM was 832. The number of 
patients using insulin pumps is not available through the EMR classification system; however, we estimate 
56%-73% will use pumps, based on our preliminary dat a and data from the T1D Exch ange Clinic Registry for 
this age group.[ADDRESS_761276] sizes to power a 
future larger study. To determine the sample size to meet these go als, the mean, SD, and mean/ SD of FOH 
levels from our first study were used to re -estimate the expected effect size. The expected estimated effect 
size was 0.72. Twenty -five subjects will be required in each group (treatment and control; n = 50 total). A 2 0% 
attrition rate is expecte d, based on previous psychoeducational interventions in T1DM,49,51,53 Thus, we will 
accrue 30 subjects per group, to achieve a final sample size of 25 subjects per  group ( n = 50 total ). 
3.2e. Procedures. 1.) Study staff will screen subjects for inclusion/exclusion criteria by [CONTACT_648]. Worry item 
scores of 3 or 4 (4 -point Likert), indicating that worry occurs often or very often, on any item on the worry scale 
of the H ypoglycemia Fear Scale -II (HFS -II)65 will be used to determine the presence of FOH. This method has 
been validated for this scale.66 2.) Those who meet study criteria will be invited to particip ate in the study. All 
study procedures will be explained and questions answered. If in agreement to participate, a link to complete 
the consent form in REDCap will be sent by [CONTACT_6968]. 3.) Once the consent is completed, an appointment for a 
video -or telephone  meeting will be scheduled and supplies and materials will be mailed to the participant’s 
home. At the first video - or telephone meeting study procedures will be reviewed and the study participant will 
be instructed on h ow to complete the baseline data col lection tasks: one -time urine pregnancy (women to 
confirm eligibility), one -time waist circumference measure, questionnaires in REDCap through a URL link,  

P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.[ADDRESS_761277] for A1C (average blood g lucose), and how to place and care for the cont inuous 
glucose monitor. This will be the start of the one -week run -in period to obtain baseline measures (Week 0) and 
allow subjects to become familiar with wearing the RT -CGM sensor. Following the one -week ru n-in period, 
subjects will be randomly assigned  to the FREE intervention or attention control group. Randomization will be 
computer -generated with permuted  
blocks in multiples of two. The use of 
permuted blocks preserves balance in 
the randomization over the course of 
the study (i.e., at any point in time, 
there will be approximately equal 
numbers of patients randomized to the 
FREE group or the attention cont rol 
group). Randomization allocation will 
be concealed from the investigators by 
[CONTACT_579507] (Chang Park) w ho is 
not involved in performing the study 
protocol. During the study period,  
subjects will continue to receiv e their usual diabetes care with their health care provider and be encouraged to 
ask questions regarding blood glucose management of their diabete s health care provider. Subjects will 
continue to care for their diabetes as they normally would.  
3.2e1. FREE Intervention . Subjects randomized to the FREE intervention group will: (1) attend eight 
individual weekly remotely -delivered one -hour sessions ba sed on principles of CBT and exposure treatment 
(Table 1). Program length was based on similar successful CBT p rograms.[ADDRESS_761278] ([CONTACT_141653]) who is a  study co -investigator. The program 
curriculum is adapted from existing programs used for health -related anxiet y using traditional CBT techniques. 
Treatment will target incorrect beliefs about hypoglycemia, hypervigilance to symptoms, fear of symptoms, and  
maladaptive behavioral responses in response to glucose levels. Participants will create a fear and avoidance 
hierarchy and be taught to begin  
approaching previously feared 
situations (e.g., spending time alone, 
reducing snacking, allowing glucose 
reading s to reach lower safe levels, 
etc.) to experience habituation and the 
resulting decrease in anxiety 
(Appendix P 1). Weekly homework will 
be assigned to reinforce the content.  
(2) FREE intervention subjects will 
continue to wear a RT -CGM for the 
eight weeks,  and (3) complete a daily 
FOH diary (Appendix P3). RT -CGM 
readings and daily diaries will serve as 
feedback cue s for glucose and FOH 
levels as part of the FREE program.  
(4) Participants will change their  RT- 
CGM site as instructed by [CONTACT_579508] a registered nurse who will monitor remotely to assure proper placement and care.  
3.2e2. Attention Control Group. Subjects randomized to attention control: (1) attend eight weekly 
remotely -delivered individual one -hour sessions on diabetes self -managem ent. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_579483] (Table 2; Appendix P2)68 and are led by a Certified Diabetes Educator 
(CDE®) and study co -investigator ([CONTACT_32130]). Weekly homework will be assigned. (2) Att ention control 
subjects will continue to wear a RT -CGM for the eight -week session (for GV measurement only) and  will not Table 1. Elements of the FREE Program  Time  
Hypoglycemia and Its Causes 
Fear as a Normal Human Emotion  
Effect of Fear on Health and Health Behaviors 
Safety and Avoidance Behaviors  Week 1  
Blood Glucose Cues 
Introduction to CBT  Week 2  
Cognitive Restructuring, Safety Behaviors 
Introduction to Progressive Relaxation  Week 3  
Exposure Therapy: Develop Fear Hie rarchy 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_579484] 4  
Exposure Practice, Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], Relaxation and Cognitive Restructuring  Weeks 5 -7 
Review Techniques Learned, Develop a Plan to Maintain Gains  Week 8  
 
Table 2. Elements of the Attention Control (DSME) Program  Time  
Living with Diabetes  Week 1  
Using Medications Safely for Therapeutic Effectiveness; Blood 
Glucose Monitoring  Week 2  
Healthy Eating; Incorporating Nutritional Management into Lifestyle 
Self-Assessment: What is your Eating Style?  Week 3  
Being Active: Incorporating Ph ysical Activity into Lifestyle; Barriers 
and Strategies  
Self-Assessment: Activity Patterns/Preferences  Week 4  
Healthy Sleep; Sleep Patterns; Challenges and Strategies for 
Success  
Self-Assessment: Sleep Quality  Week [ADDRESS_761279] 
Balancing Work Stress  Week 6  
Psychosocial Concerns 
Caring for Self  Week 7  
Preventing Complications 
Review and Wrap -Up Week 8  
 
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
8 keep a diary); and (3) will change their RT -CGM site as instructed by [CONTACT_464] (registered nurse) who will 
monitor remotely to assu re proper placement and care of the glucose sensor.  
At the end of the data collection period, part icipants in both groups will return the supplies in a pre -paid 
envelope provided with the study maerials.  
3.2e3. Subject Retention Strategy. Both FREE interve ntion and attention control groups will (1) have 
weekly sessions scheduled at a time convenient for the participants; (2) wear a RT -CGM; (3) receive 
appointment reminders; (4) be compensated at Weeks 4, 8, and 12; and (5) receive a personalized folder with  
copi[INVESTIGATOR_579485]'s end. Weekly sessions for both the FREE and  attention control 
groups will include topi[INVESTIGATOR_579486]. Use of RT -CGM technology is highly 
desirable for many young adults with T1DM a nd served as both an incentive and retention factor in our 
previous study.  
3.2e4. Tre atment Fidelity Strategy. To maintain treatment fidelity, both FREE and attention control DSME 
sessions will follow a manualized protocol.  
3.2f. Measures.  
3.2f1. Baseline and Post -Intervention Measures. Self-report instruments will be used to obtain 
demogr aphic, literacy and health information, previous history of hypoglycemia, diabetes self -management, 
(see Table [ADDRESS_761280] of measures). The scales chosen have s trong psychometric properties and 
have been validated in diabetes populations. The pr imary outcome, FOH, will be measured using the Worry 
Subscale of the Hypoglycemia Fear Scale. This 18 -item, 5 -point Likert scale measures situation -specific 
worries about hypoglycemia and provides one overall score for hypoglycemic worry. The scale has str ong 
psychometric properties (Cronbach's alpha 0.95).65 Self-management will be measured with the Diabetes Self - 
Management Scale (Cronbach’s  alpha 0.84).[ADDRESS_761281] validity are demonstrated for both 
scales.65,69 Glycemic control will be measured with a fingerstick for A1C using previou sly published methods 
(A1C Now®, Chek Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN).70 
3.2f2. Glycemic Variability. Subcutaneous interstitial glucose levels will be monitored using a Dexcom G 
series (San Diego, CA) or Medtronic sensor (Anna heim, CA) Participants will be instructed on the placement 
of the glucose sensor and transmitter and how to change weekly. When CGM supplies are returned, glucose 
data will be downloaded for later an alysis. To analyze GV, the raw data will be downloaded to  an EXCEL 
spreadsheet. Research staff will be trained on cleaning data, confirming regular calibration, identifying errors, 
and reviewing missing data or time -points. The frequency and time spent in hypo - and hyperglycemia will be 
calculated (% and minutes ; < 70 and > 180 mg/dL). GV will be determined by [CONTACT_579509] (GlucSD), continuous net glycemic action (CONGA), coefficient of variation (CV%), and 
interquartile range (IQR). These intra -day measures are recommended for  comprehensive evaluation of  
GV.71,[ADDRESS_761282] 
circumference, Hypoglycemia Patient Questionnaire2 
Health Literacy Screener (Newest Vital Sign)73 Week 0  
Aim 1    
Recruitment 
Retention 
Acceptability  Number recruited, screened, elig ible, consented 
Attendance rate; Completion rate  
Participant evaluation survey and interview (Appendix P4) 
Advisory panel  Weekly 
Weekly 
Week 8  
End of study  
Aim 2    
FOH Hypoglycemia Fear Scale -II (HFS -II65) Weeks 0, 4, 8,12  
Glycemic measures 
Glycemic control 
Glycemic variability   
A1C (A1C Now®)  
RT-CGM (Dexcom® or Medtronic®): daily glucose standard deviation (GlucSD), 
continuous net glycemic action (CONGA), coefficient of variation (CV%), 
interquartile range (IQR), time spen t in hypo - and hyperglycemia ( see 3.2f3 )  
Weeks 0, 8, 12  
Weeks 0 -8, and  
12 
Diabetes self - 
management  Diabetes Self -Management Questionnaire69 Weeks 0, 8, 12  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
9 3.2f3 Related Variables . Self -efficacy, anxiety, diabetes distres s, depressive mood, and quality of life will 
be measured with validated instruments (Self -Efficacy for Diabetes Scale,74 General Anxiety Disorder -7 Item 
[GAD -7],75 Diabetes Distress Scale,76 Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_67905] [CES -D], and 
Diabetes Quality of Life Scale77 respectively, at Weeks 0, 8, and 12). Subjects who score [ADDRESS_761283] of mental health resources (See Mood Score Script, Ver 1, 11 -28-18 and Health 
Resource, Ver 1, 11 -28-18). Subjects who wi thdraw from the study prior to weeks 8 and 12 will be asked to 
complete week 8 and/or week 12 data collection at the appropriat e time. All questionnaire data will be collected 
remotely through REDCap by [CONTACT_5583] a link to the study participant for the appro priate week of data collection.  
3.2g. Data Analysis  
The statistical estimation method for this study is a mixed -effects model w ith repeated measures (SPSS 
24). This is superior to repeated -measures ANOVA because it avoids the limitations of strong assumptions 
such as sphericity and constant variance, and operates in a more general missing -at-random framework.[ADDRESS_761284] a missing data point are not excluded, thus producing unbiased estimation of intent -to- 
treat (ITT) and reducing type [ADDRESS_761285] built -in procedures to minimize missing data, but miss ing data 
cannot be completely eliminated; thus, patterns will be examined, and longitudinal multiple imputation will be 
applied to compare any differences using Multiple Imputation for Chained Estimation  (MICE).80 
Aim 1.  Feas ibility will be evaluated by [CONTACT_579510], retention, and participant evaluation.  Records 
will be kept of the nu mber of recruited, screened, eligible, and consented subjects. Retention will be evaluated 
by [CONTACT_246273] (% session attendance, program completion rates). Acceptability will be determined 
through participant evaluation (written evaluation and interv iew at program completion [Appendix P4]) and a 
convened advisory group of previous participants (Table 4). As part of feasibility, we w ill also track the number 
of RT -CGM sensor failures, placement sites, time to failure, and adverse sensor site  problems.  
Aim 2.  We will evaluate the effects of within -group and between -group differences from baseline (Week 0) 
to program completion (Week 8)  and post program (Week 12) on the outcomes: FOH, self -management, 
glycemic control, and GV, using an intent -to-treat app roach. To address sex as a biologic variable, sex 
differences in primary and secondary outcomes will be explored. Diabetes duration and  depressive mood will 
also be statistically controlled.  
H1: FOH will be reduced. Within -group and between -group differenc es in HFS worry score from baseline to 
study completion and post program will be compared using a mixed -effects model.  
H2a: Diabetes se lf-management will be improved. Within - and between -group differences in the Diabetes 
Self-Management Scale score from ba seline to study completion and post program will be compared using a 
mixed -effects model.  
H2b: Glycemic control. Within - and between -group differences in A1C from baseline to study completion 
and post program will be compared using a mixed -effects model.  
H2c: GV will decrease. GV will be determined through GlucSD, CONGA, CV%, and IQR, as well as daily 
time spent in hypo - or hyperglycemia.  Within - and between -group differences will be calculated from daily RT - 
CGM recordings using a mixed -effects model.  
3.[ADDRESS_761286] Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May --- 
FREE subjects  6   6   6      
Control subjects  6   6   6      
Total subjects  36   48   60      
Convened advisory panel            X  
Data analysis/report findings            X X 
3.3 Strengths, Limitations, and Potential Problems with Alternative  Solutions  
Strengths . (1) This study directly focuses on FOH reduction, lacking in previous interventions. (2)The RCT 
study design is a str ength, as is use of RT -CGM monitoring to measure GV. (3) subjects using both insulin  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
10 pump an d MDI will be eligible to evaluate FOH in this population, differences in GV from different insulin 
delivery methods will be controlled statistically using propens ity score analysis. (4) We chose to conduct FREE 
sessions as individual sessions. Individual sessions will allow provision of a higher intervention dose by 
[CONTACT_579511]’s specific fears and was preferred by [CONTACT_579512]. (5) The eight -week tim e frame 
allows adequate time to measure FREE program effects. It is similar in length to othe r successful CBT 
programs.53,67 (6) The attention control group will receive a program equal in time and attention to the 
intervention group's. The content is distinct from the FREE program. (7)  The post -program evaluation at Week 
12 allows evaluation of treatment sustainability. (8) The study team is a strength, bringing together expertise in 
T1DM manage ment, intervention science, CBT strategies, and GV measurement.  
Limitations Potential Problems and Alternative Solutions. (1) We address recruitment concerns with 
strategies successful in previous studies. We established relationships with clinical sites ( University of Illinois 
Health System, Loyola) that reports high volumes of accessible patients contact[CONTACT_579513]. (2) Our FREE 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_579487]. We plan retention strategies outlined in 3.2e3. (3) To address fidelity concerns, a 
treatment  manual and fidelity checklist will be used for both FREE and at tention control sessions. All future 
videoconference sessions will be recorded and reviewed (telephone sessions will not be recorded).  
Participation for both groups will be reinforced at weekl y meetings, weekly RT -CGM site changes by [CONTACT_38992], and follo w-up reminders at mid -week (via text message). (4) Potential RT -CGM sensor failure is 
addressed by [CONTACT_2329] a RT -CGM device that continuously displays glucose levels. This alerts subjects if the 
device stops recording to contact [CONTACT_464]. To further reduce  the chance of missing data, sensors will be 
replaced weekly by [CONTACT_87755]. This process will be monitored by a trained registered nurse. (5) 
Because RT -CGM may affect GV, both grou ps will wear a RT -CGM during the eight -week intervention and 
able to view their real -time glucose levels. Changes in glycemic control from RT -CGM use are very small.81 
3.4 Future Directions. FREE's effectiveness could be studied in a larger, adequately powered clinical trial. 
FREE has potential for tailoring to other age groups and deploying as a web -based or smartphone app, 
allowing greater dissemination than traditional face -to-face. The long -term goal is the integration of fear - 
reducing strategies in mainstream diabetes education an d care.  
3.5. Focus Group Meeting  
After the completion of the research, we will invite enrolled participants those who were in the FREE 
Intervention group and checked the box and provided their initia ls of the informed consent document  indicating 
they are w illing to be contact[CONTACT_5646],   to a one -hour Zoom meeting to get their feedback on the 
study protocol.  
3.5.a. Recruitmen t. Subjects will be recruited through a recruitment email .  
3.5.b. Procedures. 1.) Subjects who consented to be contact[CONTACT_579514]. 2.) If agreeable to participate, electronic consent will be obtained t hrough a REDCap 
URL link, the focus group meeting inf ormed consent (version 11 , addendum , 5.12.21) will be obt ained. 3.) There 
will be 2 focus group meetings; One focus group meeting is for the subjects who enrolled before COVID 
pandemic and participated in the FREE Intervention  face -to-face. A  second focus  group meeting is for the 
subjects who enrolled during th e COVID pandemic and participated in the  FREE Intervention remotely. 4.) The 
size for each focus group on zoom is 5 -6. Subjects and the principle investigator will meet through the Zoom link 
for approximately 1 hour. During the one -hour Zoom meeting the p rinciple investigator will ask some questions 
(focus group script, version 1, 5.12.21). 5) The focus group s will be audio -recorded and a note -taker will be 
present. 6. ) After the focus group meeting,  compensation ($50) will be provided in cash . 
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_761287] a 
fear reduction intervention in young adults with type 1 diabetes (T1DM). Fear of hypoglycemia (FOH) is a 
critical problem associated with poor glycemic control, greater glucose variability, and diminished quality of life 
(QOL). It affects mo st people with T1DM and is greater among young adult s than adolescents. To our 
knowledge, there have been no programs developed to alleviate this problem in the exact way that we do.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
11 Study population . We plan to recruit 60 subjects for an expected attritio n rate of 20%. This will result in 
a final sample of 50 subjects. Inclusion criteria include:  18 to 35 years of age, diagnosed with T1DM > [ADDRESS_761288], use in sulin pump or multiple daily injection (MDI) therapy, 
experience FOH, and attended a basic diabetes education program (to control for baseline knowledge).  
Exclusion criteria include : pregnancy or breastfeeding; receiving psychotherapy for depression or anx iety 
disorders (e.g. panic, obsessive compulsive disorder ); received therapy specifically for FOH; or have a 
coexisting chronic illness or receiving medications (excluding insulin) that may influence diabetes self - 
management or glycemic variability(GV).  
Sampling plan. Convenience sampling will be used to recrui t subjects. Remote delivery will allow us to 
include study participants beyond the Chicago metropolitan area.  
Procedures. Subjects will be randomized to the intervention group or an attention control  group to 
minimize bias. Randomization will be computer -generated with permuted blocks in multiples of two. All 
subjects in the intervention group  will: (1) receive eight weekly individual remotely -delivered one -hour sessions 
based on principles of cogniti ve behavioral therapy (CBT) with exposure therapy, (2) co mplete a daily fear 
diary, (3) wear a real -time continuous glucose monitor (RT -CGM), (4) complete a post -program assessment of 
study outcomes at 8 weeks, and (5) be instructed on changing and caring for their RT -CGM site by a study 
staff member who is a re gistered nurse who will monitor placement and care. All subjects in the attention  
control group  will: (1) receive eight weekly remotely -delivered one -hour individual diabetes self -management  
education (DSME) sessions, (2) wear a RT -CGM, (3) complete a post -program assessment of study outcomes 
at 8 weeks, and (4) be instructed on changing and caring for their RT -CGM site by [CONTACT_3462] (registered 
nurse) to assure proper plac ement and care of the device. Methods to maintain intervention fidelity in the 
intervention and attention control groups include: (1) treatment manual; (2) fidelity checklist; (3) having all 
FREE intervention sessions conducted by [CONTACT_579515], trained cli nical psychologist who is a member of the 
research team; (4) having all attentio n control group sessions conducted by [CONTACT_579516] a 
Certified Diabetes Educator® and a member of the research team; (5) videotaped sessions with review by 
[CONTACT_579517] a member of the res earch team, who is not 
involved in carrying out the study protocol, for intervention fidelity; (6) weekly RT -CGM site changes; and (7) 
weekly reminders of next appointments. Al l study procedures will take place remotely (by [CONTACT_648], 
vidoconference, REDCap an d by [CONTACT_2319]) by [CONTACT_579518] (UIC 
Medical Center. During the study period, subjects will continue to receive their usual diabet es care with their 
health care provider. Subjects will be encouraged to discuss any questions regarding blood glucose 
management with their diabetes health care provider.  
 
b. Sources of  Materials  
Data will be collected from study subjects only for research pu rposes as follows: (1) self -reported data from 
questionnaires and daily diary (F REE intervention group only); (2) drop of blood from a finger prick for A1C; 
and (3) RT -CGM from a glucose sensor placed under the skin.  
1. Self-reported data will include informa tion collected: (a) during recruitment to establish study  eligibility;  
(b) demog raphic (sex, race, ethnicity, health literacy), health (diabetes duration, hypoglycemic experiences, 
comorbidities), and key study variables (fear of hypoglycemia, diabetes self -management; and related study 
variables (anxiety, depressive mood, diabetes di stress, quality of life) collected from questionnaires; and (c) 
daily FOH diary (FREE intervention group only).  
2. A1C will be determined from a drop of blood from a finger prick. Study participants will be trained using 
standardized procedures by a member of  the study personnel (registered nurse). The A1C result will be 
reported by [CONTACT_579519].  
3. Continuous interstitial glucose levels to calc ulate glycemic variability will be obtained from a  RT-CGM 
sensor placed under the skin using standard procedures by [CONTACT_7355] (registered nurse). The 
sensor transmits the glucose levels to a receiver (the size of a quarter) that the subject  wears.  
4. Program evaluation obtained from questionnaires and interview. At the end of the study,  subjects will 
be invited to a convened advisory group (via videoconference) to provide additional suggestions and  feedback.  
5. Data to evaluate program feasibility w ill include (1) recruitment (number recruited, screened, eligible, 
consented); (2) retention (attendance and completion rate records) maintained by [CONTACT_24355].  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
12  
c. Potential  Risks  
The potential risks to subjects include:  
1. Bleeding, irritation, discomfort,  or infection at the finger prick site (for A1C) and insertion site (for RT - 
CGM). The risk f or these problems is very minor and is minimized by [CONTACT_579520]. Fingerstick procedures are familiar to all per sons with type [ADDRESS_761289] 
of care with approximately 60% of patients with T1D having used a  CGM.  
2. Loss of confidentiality. Standard p rocedures will be used to avoid breaches in confidentiality. We expect 
this risk to be low. W e will require that participants have a private area for weekly intervention  sessions.  
3. Individuals in the FREE group may feel emotional discomfort in discussing fears and memories of 
potentially sensitive thoughts and experiences related to hypoglycemia. W e expect this risk to be low based on 
our experience in previous studies that examined experiences with  hypoglycemia.  
4. It is possible that, in discussi ng fears and reframing thoughts about FOH, blood glucose levels may 
change (either increase or decrease). For example, if fear levels are reduced, it is possible that blood glucose 
may be lower at times, and the subject may experience  hypoglycemia.  
5. Complet ing self -report measures on FOH, depressive mood, and diabetes distress may cause subjects 
some emotional distress.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.[ADDRESS_761290]  Risks  
a. Recruitment and Informed  Consent  
Subjects (18 -35 years) will be recruited from Chicago  metropolitan area university medical centers, 
diabetes websites, and organizations and Research Match, using flyers, e -announcements, and recruitment 
letters. At the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), we will identify subjects through the electronic  medical 
record systems and send recruitment letters. Potentially eligible interested subjects will be screened by [CONTACT_34450] y 
personnel for inclusion and exclusion criteria. Informed consent will be obtained prior to performing any 
research procedures. The info rmed consent process will begin when potential subjects are contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. The 
researcher will explain the study purpose, p rocedures, benefits, risks, confidentiality, and research subject’s 
rights. After all questions have been answered and the subject verbal ly agrees to participate, e-consent  will be 
obtained using REDCap. Study participants will be able to download a copy o f the consent from REDCap 
and/or a copy will be mailed to them.  
 
b. Protections Against Risk  
Methods to minimize risk include:  
1. Minimizati on of bleeding, irritation, discomfort, or infection at the finger prick site (for A1C) and insertion 
site (for RT -CGM) . The risk of for these problems is very minor and is minimized by [CONTACT_579521]. RT -CGM placement and finger pricks will be done using sterile technique and standardized 
procedures. Participants will be trained on these procedures by a  trained registered nurse. In addition, subjects 
will be instructed to observe their RT -CGM insertion site daily and contact [CONTACT_579522], irritation, redness, or  pain.  
2. Loss of confidentiality. Strict procedures wil l be put into place to minimize the risk of breach of 
confidentiality. All study staff will be trained on methods of maintaining subject confidentiality. Subjects will be 
assigned a unique code number. A master  list that links the subject identity to the d ata will be kept by [CONTACT_28824] (PI) and stored in a locked office separately from the data. Data storage : All data will be 
stored and analyzed by [CONTACT_105751]. This consists of coded questionnair es and A1C results in REDCap, 
diary, and RT -CGM recordings. The coded data will be entered into a password -protected computer with a 
secure server for analysis. Hard copy (paper copy) data (diary) will be stored in a locked office. No identifiers 
(except s ubject ID) will be included. Only members of t he research team will be able to access these data. 
Procedures during data collection: Privacy will be provided during recruitment by [CONTACT_579523] a private setting. The screening data that c ontain personal identifiers will be kept separ ate from the 
coded study data and stored in REDCap or HIPAA -protected UIC Box folder. All data collection and study 
procedures will take place in a private location. To insure intervention fidelity, a fidelity checklist will be 
instituted. The first 25 FRE E intervention and attention control program sessions will be audiotaped for review 
(this has been completed). These audiotapes will be stored by [CONTACT_235199]. Only the research staff 
will have access to  the audiotapes. The tapes will be stored in a  HIPAA -protected UIC Box folder and 
destroyed three years following data  analysis.  
3. Individuals in the FREE group may feel emotional discomfort in discussing fears and memories of 
potentially sensitive thoughts and experiences related to hypoglycemia. CBT h as not been shown to cause 
harm. The material discussed during the intervention will be thoughts, feelings, and experiences initiated by [CONTACT_579524]. Subjects will not be probed to discu ss anything that they are not comfortable discussing. 
The FREE sessions will be conducted by a licensed clinical psychologist with extensive experience using CBT 
and exposure interventions. If a subject has questions or concerns about his or her diabetes m anagement, he 
or she will be encouraged to discuss thes e concerns with his or her diabetes health care provider. Should a 
subject identify that she or he would like to seek psychological counseling unrelated to their FOH, a list of 
counseling agencies will  be provided. If the psychologist interventionist deter mines that continuation in the 
FREE program would not be appropriate due to confounding psychological issues that become evident during 
the study, continuation in the study may be stopped and a list of  counseling agencies  provided.  
4. It is possible that, in discussing fears and reframing thoughts about FOH, blood glucose levels may 
change (either higher or lower). For example, if fear levels are reduced, it is possible that blood glucose may 
be lower at t imes, and the subject may experience hypoglycemia. To r educe this risk, subjects will be  reminded  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
14 to measure their capi[INVESTIGATOR_579488], as recommended by [CONTACT_579525], and 
at any time they feel they that their  blood glucose is outside of their target range (high or low). Sub jects will 
also be reminded to carry their glucose testing supplies and fast -acting carbohydrate (glucose) at all times to 
respond to low blood sugar. During the FREE sessions, subjects will  be asked to check their capi[INVESTIGATOR_579489].  
5. Because people with T1DM are always at risk for hypoglycemia, study staff will remind participants to 
have fast -acting carbohydrate available should a subject develo p hypoglycemia during a meeting session 
(either FREE or attention control group). During the course of this study, subjects will have an additional 
measure of glucose through the RT -CGM; however, they will be instructed not to rely on the RT -CGM for blood 
glucose levels for treatment and to verify glucose readings with a  capi[INVESTIGATOR_579490]. Additionally, subjects will 
be under the care of an endocrinologist. This is an inclusionary criterion for study participation, which will 
ensure that subjects have resou rces to assist them with their diabetes  care.  
6. Completing self -report measures on FOH, self -management, anxiety, depressive mood, diabetes 
distress and quality of life may cause subjects some emotional distress. The risk is minimal. In our  previous 
studies with the same population, no subjects reported emotional distress with these measures. However, 
study staff will be aware of the possibility and address any concerns that are  voiced.  
7. Should a subject require medical or other professional intervention due t o an adverse event or illness, 
treatment may be obtained through t he UIC Medical Center, the subject’s regular doctor, or the treatment 
center or clinic of their choice. Subjects will be provided contact [CONTACT_71722] [INVESTIGATOR_579491].  
 
4.1.3. Potential Benefits of th e Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
There may be no direct benefits to participating in the study. However, subjects in the FREE intervention 
group may benefit from discussing t heir concerns about hypoglycemia and may experience a reduction in  fear 
of hypoglycemia and improved glycemic control. The possible risks are no greater than those experienced in 
normal day -to-day life. Most persons with T1DM experience FOH and voice conce rns of how it negatively 
influences their daily lives.  
 
4.1.4  Importance  of Knowledge to be  Gained.  
The risks to the study participants are minimal and no more than those encountered in daily life.  
Knowledge gained from this study may provide an important intervention for reducing fear of hypoglycemia and 
improving diabetes se lf-management and glycemic control in the future in young adults with T1DM. If effective, 
this intervention has important clinical implications for reducing diabetes complica tions and improve quality of 
life in this population.  
 
4.1.5  Data Safety Monitoring Plan  for: A Cognitive Behavioral Intervention to Reduce Fear of 
Hypoglycemia in Young Adults with Type 1  Diabetes  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_579492] -Nemeth  
This study will involve young adults (a ged 18 to 35 years) with T1DM who experience fear of hypoglycemia 
(FOH). We plan t o recruit 60 subjects for an expected attrition rate of 20%. This will result in a final sample 
of [ADDRESS_761291] baseline data, 
including real -time continuous glucose monitoring  (RT-CGM) to calculate baseline glycemic variability.  
Following the run -in period, subjects will be assigned to one of two groups. The attention control group = 8 
weeks of di abetes self -management education sessions and 8 weeks of RT -CGM. The FREE interven tion 
group = [ADDRESS_761292] their RT -CGM sites changed weekly (study 
participants will be trained and monitored by [CONTACT_34450] y staff). The risk associated with this study is minimal for the 
interventions and data collection methods employed by [CONTACT_1758]. The potential for a serious adverse event is  
very low. Pamela Martyn -Nemeth, PhD, RN, will be the primary monitor, and a Safet y Monitoring Committee 
will share the responsibility of monitoring the data.  
 
Monitoring entity or who will monitor the study  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.[ADDRESS_761293]. Pamela Martyn -Nemeth, and a 
Study Monitoring Commi ttee (SMC). A SMC will be appointed to provide oversight and monitoring of our data 
on an annual basis by [CONTACT_579526]. The  SMC will consist of: (1) Eileen 
Collins, PhD, RN, Professor, Department of Biobehavioral Healt h Science, College of Nursing; (2) Terry 
Unterman, MD, Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism; and  
(3) Lisa Sharp, PhD , Psychologist and Associate Professor, Pharmacy Systems, Outcomes and Policy, 
College of Pharm acy, and (4) Chang Park, PhD, study statistician —all at UIC. Drs. Collins, Unterman, and 
Sharp have expertise in reviewing the scientific design, conduct of stud y, intervention fidelity, evaluation of 
safety and risks to subjects, interpretation of data, a nd making recommendations concerning continuation, 
modification, suspension, or termination of the  study.  
[CONTACT_579535] -Nemeth will meet with the SMC annually and provide a written and verbal progress report. The 
report will include a summary of cumulative re cruitment, randomization, cumulative retention and attrition rate, 
study group demographics, adverse events, and data completeness and quality. The  SMC will provide 
oversight of the study, as well as consider factors external to the study that may impact t he safety of the 
participants or the ethics of the study. A written report of the meeting will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_579493] o utcomes, as well as any recommendations with respect to modification of the protocol. The 
report will be subm itted to the UIC IRB and to the NIH.  
 
Procedures for monitoring study safety, minimizing research -associated risk, and protecting the 
confidentiali ty of subject data.  
Study Safety. Study procedures will take place remotely at private locations of research personnel and 
participants. All study personnel involved in conducting the research, including recruitment and screening for 
eligibility, data mana gement, and provision of interventions, will receive training that will address: (1) overview 
of the study ob jectives and procedures, (2) background and training on collecting data free from bias, (3) 
protection of human subjects and confidentiality, (4) t raining and monitoring study participants in performing 
finger pricks for A1C and placing RT -CGM sensors usin g infection control procedures as well as procedures 
specific to measuring A1C and placing RT -CGM sensors (with verbal, written and video instructi on with 
videoconference presence for the first time these procedures are performed and any time thereafter if  needed. 
and (5) data and intervention monitoring.  
[CONTACT_579535] -Nemeth will assure that informed consent is obtained prior to performing any research activities, 
all subjects meet eligibility criteria, and the study is conducted according to the IRB -approved  research plan.  
Compliance of regulatory documents and study data accuracy and completeness will be maintained 
through an internal quality assurance process. Quality control will include annual data verification and protocol 
compliance checks, as well as c hecks for missing data by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pamela Martyn -Nemeth and study personnel.  
Protocol adherence will be monitored by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Martyn -Nemeth by [CONTACT_579527] 50% of the cases for compliance with 
IRB requirements, informed consent requirements, verification of source docum ents, and compliance with the 
study protocol. To ensure reliability of data entry, a random sample of data entries will be reviewed and 
compared with the raw data by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Martyn -Nemeth, and the results will be recorded. An acceptable error rate 
will be < 0. 3%. Results of the audit will be documented. Monthly research meetings will be scheduled to assure 
quality of the conduct of the research a nd promote communication among study team members and good data 
management activities.  
 
Minimizing research -associate d risk  
Potential subjects will be screened to ensure that they meet study inclusion criteria.  
Sources of materials: Data will be collected from study subjects only for research purposes as follows: (1) 
self-reported data from questionnaires; (2) daily diar y (FREE intervention group only); (2) drop of blood from a 
finger prick for A1C; and (3) RT -CGM from a glucose sensor placed under the skin . 
 
Potential risks  
The potential risks to subjects include:  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
16 1. Bleeding, irritation, discomfort, or infection at the fi nger prick site (for A1C) or insertion site (for RT - 
CGM). The risk for these problems is very minor and is minimized by [CONTACT_579528].  
2. Loss of confidentiality. Standard procedures will be used to avoid  breaches in confidentiality. We expect 
this risk to be  low. 
3. Individuals in the FREE group may feel emotional discomfort in discussing fears and memories of 
potentially sensitive thoughts and experiences related to hypoglycemia. We expect this risk to be l ow based on 
our experience in previous studies that have examined experiences with  hypoglycemia.  
4. It is possible that, in discussing fears and reframing thoughts about FOH, blood glucose levels may 
change (either increased or decreased). For example, if fea r levels are reduced, it is possible that blood 
glucose may be lower at times, and the subject may experience  hypoglycemi a. 
5. Completing self -report measures on FOH, depressive mood, and diabetes distress may cause subjects 
some emotional distress.  
 
Protecti on against risk  
1. Minimization of bleeding, irritation, discomfort, or infection at the finger prick site (for A1C) and ins ertion 
site (for RT -CGM). The risk of for these problems is very minor and is minimized by [CONTACT_579521]. Participa nts will be trained on RT -CGM placement and finger pricks using sterile technique and 
standardized procedures. Training a nd monitoring will be performed by a trained registered nurse. In addition, 
subjects will be instructed to observe their RT -CGM site da ily and contact [CONTACT_579529], irritation, redness, or  pain.  
2. Loss of confidential ity. Strict procedures will be put into place to minimize the risk of breach of 
confidentiality. All study staff will be trained on met hods of maintaining subject confidentiality. Subjects will be 
assigned a unique code number. A master list that links the  subject identity to the data will be kept by [CONTACT_28824] (PI) and stored separately from the data in a locked office. Data storage : All data will be 
stored and analyzed by [CONTACT_105751]. This consists of coded questionnaires and diaries, A1C finger prick 
results, and RT -CGM recordings. [RT -CGM data may be downloaded from a secure server over the internet 
(encrypted using AES -256 Encryption) using Dexcom Clarity data management software.  The RT -CGM data 
is de -identified at all times and only a ssociated with the study code number from point of access through 
storage on the College of Nursing secure server.] The coded data will  be entered into REDCap and a 
password -protected computer with a secure server for analysis. A1C results will be stored i n REDCap. Hard 
copy (paper copy) data (diaries) will be stored in a locked office. No identifiers (except subject ID) will be 
included in the download. Only members of the research team will be able to access these data. Procedures 
during data collection: Privacy will be provided during recruitment by [CONTACT_579530] a private 
setting. The screening data that contain perso nal identifiers will be kept separate from the coded study data 
and stored in a locked office, REDCap or HIPAA -protected UIC Box folder. All data collection and study 
procedures will take place in a private location. To insure intervention fidelity, a fide lity checklist will be 
developed. The first 25 FREE intervention and attention control program sessions will be audiotape d for review 
(already completed). These audiotapes will be stored by [CONTACT_235199]. Only the research staff will have 
access to t he audiotapes. The tapes will be stored in HIPAA -protected UIC Box folder and destroyed three 
years following data  analys is. 
3. Individuals in the FREE group may feel emotional discomfort in discussing fears and memories of 
potentially sensitive thoughts and experiences related to hypoglycemia. CBT has not been shown to cause 
harm. The material discussed during the intervention will be thoughts, feelings, and experiences initiated by [CONTACT_579524]. Subjects will not be probed to discuss anything t hat they are not comfortable discussing. 
The FREE sessions will be conducted by a licensed clinical psycholog ist who has extensive experience using 
CBT and exposure interventions. If a subject has questions or concerns about his or her diabetes 
management,  he or she will be encouraged to discuss these concerns with his or her diabetes health care 
provider. Should  a subject identify that she or he would like to seek psychological counseling unrelated to their 
FOH, a list of counseling agencies will be provid ed. If the psychologist interventionist determines that 
continuation in the FREE program would not be appropr iate due to confounding psychological issues  that 
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.[ADDRESS_761294] of counseli ng agencies 
provided.  
4. It is possible that, in discussing fears and reframing thoughts about FOH,  blood glucose levels may 
change (either higher or lower). For example, if fear levels are reduced, it is possible that blood glucose may 
be lower at times, and  the subject may experience hypoglycemia. To reduce this risk, subjects will be reminded 
to meas ure their capi[INVESTIGATOR_579488], as recommended by [CONTACT_579525], and 
at any time they feel they that their blood glucose is out side of their target range (high or low). Subjects will 
also be reminded to carry their glucose testing supplies and fast -acting carbohydrate (glucose) at all times to 
respond to low blood sugar. During the FREE sessions, subjects will be asked to check th eir capi[INVESTIGATOR_579494].  
5. Because people with T1DM a re always at risk for hypoglycemia, study staff will remind participants to 
have fast -acting carbohydrate available should they develop hypoglycemia during a me eting session (either 
FREE or attention control group). During the course of this study, subject s will have an additional measure of 
glucose through the RT -CGM; however, they will be instructed not to rely on the RT -CGM for blood glucose 
levels for treatme nt and to verify glucose readings with a capi[INVESTIGATOR_579490]. Additionally, subjects will be under  
the care of an endocrinologist. This is an inclusionary criterion for study participation, which will ensure that 
subjects have resources to assist them with t heir diabetes  care.  
6. Completing self -report measures on FOH, self -management, anxiety, depressive  mood, diabetes 
distress, and quality of life may cause subjects some emotional distress. The risk is minimal. In our  previous 
studies with the same population,  no subjects reported emotional distress with these measures. However, 
study staff will be aware  of the possibility and address any concerns that are  voiced.  
7. Should a subject require medical or other professional intervention due to an adverse event or ill ness, 
treatment may be obtained through the UIC Medical Center, the subject’s regular doctor, or  the treatment 
center or clinic of their choice. Subjects will be provided contact [CONTACT_71722] [INVESTIGATOR_579491].  
 
Procedures for identifying, reviewing, and reporting adverse events and unanticipated problems to the 
IRB and NIH.  
Throughout the study, [CONTACT_579535] -Nemeth will monitor the participants for adverse events (AEs). [CONTACT_579536] -Nemeth and study staff w ill review AEs individually in real time and in aggregate on a monthly basis 
and consult with co -investigators as needed. [CONTACT_579535] -Nemeth will review serious adverse events (SAEs) in 
real time. [CONTACT_579535] -Nemeth will ensure that all protocol deviations, AEs, and SAEs are reported to the UIC 
IRB according to applicable IRB requirements, and c orrective actions will be taken as deemed necessary by 
[CONTACT_1201]. Events determined by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_579495] [ADDRESS_761295]. Martyn -Nemeth will provide a report to the NIH of (1) unanticipated 
problems or unexpected SAEs that may be related to the study protocol, (2) IRB -approv ed revisions to the 
study protocol that indicate a change in risk for participants, (3) a  summary of recommendations made by [CONTACT_579531], (4) the action plan for response, and (5) notice of any actions taken by [CONTACT_579532].  
All study staff will b e informed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Martyn -Nemeth about AEs. If any protocol changes are needed, the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_879] a modification request to the UIC IRB. Protocol changes will not be i mplemented prior to IRB 
approval unless necessary to eliminate apparent immediate hazards  to the research subjects. In such a case, 
the IRB will be promptly informed of the change following implementation, according to IRB policy.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
18 References  
1. Davis S, Alon so MD. Hypoglycemia as a barrier to glycemic control. Journal of diabetes an d its  complications.  
2004;18(1):[ADDRESS_761296] ER, Anderson J, Childs B, et al. Hypoglycemia and diabetes: a report of a workgroup of the American 
Diabetes Association and the End ocrine Society. Diabetes care.  2013;36(5):1384 -1395.  
3. Cryer  PE. Death  during  intensive  glycemic  therapy  of diabetes:  mechanisms  and implications.  The American 
Journal of Medicine.  2011;124(11):993 -996.  
4. Lawton  J, Rankin  D, Cooke  DD, Elliott  J, Amiel  S, Helle r S. Self-treating  hypoglycaemia:  a longitudinal  qualitative 
investigation  of the experiences  and views  of people  with  Type  1 diabetes.  Diabet  Med.  2013;30(2):209 -215.  
5. Polonsky  WH,  Davis  CL, Jacobson  AM,  Anderson  BJ. Correlates  of hypoglycemic  fear in type  I and type  II diabetes 
mellitus. Health Psychol.  1992;11(3):199 -202.  
6. Irvine  AA, Cox D, Gonder -Frederick  L. Fear  of hypoglycemia:  relationship  to physical  and psychological  symptoms 
in patients with insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus. Health psychology : official Journal of the Division of Health 
Psychology, American Psychological Association.  1992;11(2):135 -138.  
7. Cox DJ, Gonder -Frederick  L, Antoun  B, Clarke  W, Cryer  P. Psychobehavioral  metabolic  parameters  of severe 
hypoglycemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. Diabetes Care.  1990;13(4):458 -459.  
8. Currie CJ, Morgan CL, Poole CD, Sharplin P, Lammert M, McEwan P. Multivariate models of health -related utility 
and the fear of hypoglycaemia in people with diabetes. Current medical Research and opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]. 2006;22(8):1523 - 
1534.  
9. Gonder -Fred erick LA. Fear of hypoglycemia: A review. Diabetic Hypoglycemia.  2013;5(3):3 -11. 
10. Martyn -Nemeth  P, Quinn  L, Penckofer S,  Park  C, Hofer  V, Burke  L. Fear  of hypoglycemia:  Influence  on glycemic 
variability and self -management behavior in young adults with type  1 diabetes. Journ al of Diabetes and its 
Complications.  2017;31(4):735 -741.  
11. Brazeau  AS, Rabasa -Lhoret,  R., Strychar,  I., Mircescu,  H. Barriers  to physical  activity  among  patients  with  type  1 
diabetes. Diabetes Care.  2008;31(11):2108 -2109.  
12. Richmond  J. Effec ts of hypoglycaemia:  patients'  perceptions  and experiences.  British  Journal  of nursing  (Mark 
Allen Publishing).  1996;5(17):1054 -1059.  
13. Monnier L, Mas, E., Ginet, C. et al. Activation of oxidative stress by [CONTACT_579533] c hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes. JAMA.  2006;295(14):1681 -1687.  
14. Quagliaro L, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_56991] L, Assaloni R, Martinelli L, Motz E, Ceriello  A. Intermittent high glucose enhances apoptosis 
related  to oxidative  stress  in human  umbilical  vein  endo thelial  cells:  the role of protein  kinase  C and NAD(P)H - 
oxidase activation. Diabetes.  2003;52(11):2795 -2804.  
15. Soupal  J, Skrha  J, Jr., Fajmon  M, et al. Glycemic  variability  is higher  in type  1 diabetes  patients  with  microvascular 
complications irrespective of glycemic control. Diabetes Technol Ther.  2014;16(4):198 -203.  
16. Kilpatrick  ES, Rigby  [CONTACT_113879], Goode  K, Atkin  SL. Relating  mean  blood  glucose  and glucose  variability  to the risk of 
multiple epi[INVESTIGATOR_579496] 1 diabetes. Diabetologia.  2007;50(12): 2553 -2561.  
17. Bohme  P, Bertin,  E., Cosson,  E., Chevalier,  N. . Fear  of hypoglycaemia  in patients  with  type  1 diabetes:  do 
patients and diabetologists feel the same way? Diabetes & Metabolism.  2013;39:63 -70. 
18. Miller KM, Foster NC, Beck RW, et al. Current state of type 1 diabetes treatment in the U.S.: updated data from 
the T1D Exchange clinic registry. Diabetes Care.  2015;38(6 ):971 -978.  
19. Giorda  CB, Ozzello  A, Gentile  S, et al. Incidence  and risk factors  for severe  and symptomatic  hypoglycemia  in 
type 1 diabetes. Results of the HYPOS -1 study. Acta diabetologica.  2015;52(5):[ADDRESS_761297]  to exposure  in cognitive 
behavioral therapy hastens the reduction of PTSD symptoms: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Applied psychophysiology and 
biofeedback. 2015;40(1):25 -31. 
21. Green L, Feher M, Catalan J. Fears and phobias in people with  diabetes. Diabetes Metab Res  Rev.  
2000;16(4):287 -293.  
22. Anderson  BJ, Wolpert  HA. A developmental  perspective  on the challenges  of diabetes  education  and care  during 
the young adult period. Patient Education and Counseling.  2004;53(3):347 -352.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
19 23. Garvey  KC, Markowitz  JT, Laffel  LM. Transition  to adult  care  for youth  with  type  1 diabetes.  Current  diabetes 
reports.  2012;12(5):533 -541.  
24. Davis  M, Walker DL, Miles  L, Grillon  C. Phasic  vs sustained  fear in rats and humans:  role of the extended 
amygdala in fear vs anxiety. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology.  2010;35(1):105 -135.  
25. Adolphs R. The  biology of fear. Current biology : CB.  2013;23(2):R79 -93. 
26. Boyle  S, Allan  C, Millar  K. Cognitive -behavioural  interventions  in a patient  with  an anxiety  disorder  related  to 
diabetes. Behaviour Research and therapy.  2004;42(3):357 -366.  
27. Maxmen J W, N. Kilgus,  M. . Essential psychopathology and its treatment. [LOCATION_001] , NY: W.W. Norton  2009.  
28. Leiter  LA, Yale,  J. F., Chiasson,  J. L., Harris,  S., Kleinstiver,  P. & Sauriol,  L. Assessment  of the impact  of fear of 
hypoglycemic epi[INVESTIGATOR_579497]. Canadian Journal of Diabetes. 
2005;29(3):1 -7. 
29. Goebel -Fabbri  AE, Fikkan  J, Franko  DL, Pearson  K, Anderson  BJ, Weinger  K. Insulin  restriction  and associated 
morbidity and mortality in women wi th type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care.  2008;31(3):415 -419.  
30. Hanna KM, Weaver  MT, Stump  TE, Slaven  JE, Fortenberry  JD, DiMeglio  LA. Readiness  for living  independently 
among emerging adults with type 1 diabetes. The Diabetes educator.  2013;39(1):92 -99. 
31. Weiner MF, Skipper FP, Jr. Euglycemia: a psychological study. Inter national Journal of psychiatry in  Medicine.  
1978;9(3 -4):281 -287.  
32. Zander  H, Beneke  J, Veagedes  D, Muller  A, Zwaan  M. Type  1 diabetes  mellitus  and bulimia  nervosa:  insulin 
restriction does not always represent purging of unwanted calories. Practical Diabetes  International. 
2014;31(4):161 -163a.  
33. Gonzalez  JS, Tanenbaum  ML, Commissariat  PV. Psychosocial  factors  in medication  adherence  and diabetes  self- 
management: Implications for research and practice. The American psychologist.  2016;71(7):539 -551.  
34. Anderbro T, Amsberg S, Adamson U, et al. Fear of hypoglycaemia in adults wit h Type 1 diabetes. Diabet  Med.  
2010;27(10):1151 -1158.  
35. Desjardins K, Brazeau AS, Strychar I, Rabasa -Lhoret R. Are bedtime nutritional strategies effective in preventing 
nocturnal  hypoglycaemia  in patients  with  type  1 diabetes?  Diabetes,  Obesity  & metabolism . 2014;16(7):577 -587.  
36. Miller KM, Foster NC, Beck RW, et al. Current state of type 1 diabetes treatment in the U.S.: updated data from 
the T1D Exchange clinic registry. Diabetes Care.  2015;38(6 ):971 -978.  
37. Bohme P, Bertin E, Cosson  E, Chevalier N. Fear of hypoglycaemia in patients with type 1 diabetes: do patients 
and diabetologists feel the same way? Diabetes & Metabolism.  2013;39:[ADDRESS_761298] KD, Parkin C, Young A, Ashraf M. Use of an automate d bolus calculator reduces fear of h ypoglycemia 
and improves  confidence  in dosage  accuracy  in patients  with  type  1 diabetes  mellitus  treated  with  multiple  daily 
insulin injections. Journal of diabetes science and technology.  2012;6(1):[ADDRESS_761299]  KD, Skinner  TC. Cross -sectional  study  into quality  of life issues  surrounding  insulin  pump  use in type  1 
diabetes. Practical Diabetes International.  2008;25(5):[ADDRESS_761300] of short -term use of the Guardian RT  continuous glucose 
monitoring system on fear of hypoglycaemia in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Primary care diabetes. 
2012;6(1):[ADDRESS_761301] K, Bruttomesso D, et al. Sensor -augmented pump therapy lowers HbA(1c) in 
suboptimally  controlled  Type  1 diabetes;  a randomized  controlled  trial.  Diabet  Med.  2011;28(10):1158 -1167.  
42. Nicolucci A, Maione A, Franciosi M, et al. Quality of life and treatment  satisfaction in adults with Type 1 
diabetes:  a comparison  between  continuous  subcutaneous  insulin  infusion  and multiple  daily  injections.  Diabet 
Med.  2008;25(2):213 -220.  
43. Rubin RR, Peyrot M. Health -related quality of life and treatment satisfaction in the Sensor -Augmented Pump 
Therapy for A1C Reduction 3 (STAR 3) trial. Diabetes Technol Ther.  2012;14(2):143 -151.  
44. Schmitz KH, Jacobs, D. R., Hong, C -P., Steinberger, J., Moran, A., Sinaikko , A. R. Association of physical activity 
with insulin sensitivity in children. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders. 
2002;26(10):1310 -1316.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
20 45. Costea  M, Ionescu -Tirgoviste  C, Cheta  D, Mincu  I. Fear  of hypoglycemia  in type  1 (insulin -dependent)  diabetic 
patients.  Romanian  Journal  of internal  Medicine  = Revue  roumaine  de medecine  interne.  1993;31(4):291 -295.  
46. Cox D, Gonder -Frederick  L, Polonsk y W, Schlundt  D, Julian  D, Clarke  W. A multicenter  evaluation  of blood 
glucose awareness training -II. Diabetes Care.  1995;18(4):523 -528.  
47. Cox DJ, Gonder -Frederick  L, Polonsky  W, Schlundt  D, Kovatchev  B, Clarke  W. Blood  glucose  awareness  training 
(BGAT -2): long-term benefits. Diabetes Care.  2001;24(4):637 -642.  
48. Cox DJ, Ritterband L, Magee J, Clarke W, Gonder -Frederick L. Blood glucose awareness training delivered over 
the internet. Diabetes Care.  2008;31(8):1527 -1528.  
49. George JT, Valdovinos AP, Russell I, et al . Clinical effectiveness of a brie f educational intervention in Type 1 
diabetes: results from the BITES (Brief Intervention in Type 1 diabetes, Education for Self -efficacy) trial. Diabet 
Med.  2008;25(12):1447 -1453.  
50. Ismail K, Thomas SM, Maissi  E, et al. Mot ivational enhancement therapy with and without cognitive behavior 
therapy to treat type 1 diabetes: a randomized trial. Annals of internal Medicine.  2008;149(10):708 -719.  
51. Schachinger  H, Hegar  K, Hermanns  N, et al. Randomized  controlled  clinic al trial of Blood Glucose  Awareness 
Training (BGAT III) in Switzerland and [LOCATION_013]. J Behav Med.  2005;28(6):587 -594.  
52. Rondags SM, de Wit M, Twisk JW, Snoek FJ. Effectiveness of HypoAware, a Brief Partly Web -Based 
Psychoeducational Intervention for Adults Wi th Type 1 and Insulin -Treated Type 2 Diabetes and Problematic 
Hypoglycemia: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial. Diabetes Care.  2016;39(12):2190 -2196.  
53. Amsberg S, Anderbro T, Wredling R, et al. A cognitive behavior therapy -based intervention among poorly 
controlled  adult type  1 diabetes  patients --a randomized  controlled  trial.  Patient  Education  and Counseling. 
2009;77(1):72 -80. 
54. Vallis M, Jones A, Pouwer  F. Managing hypoglycemia in diabetes may be more fear management than glucose 
management: a practical guide for diabet es care providers. Current diabetes reviews.  2014;10(6):364 -370.  
55. Ceriello A, Novials  A, Ortega E, et al. Evidence that hyperglycemia after recovery from hypoglycemia worsens 
endothelial  function  and increases  oxidative  stress  and inflammation  in healthy  control  subjects  and subjects 
with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes.  2012;61(11):[ADDRESS_761302] TJ. A Contemporary Estimate of Total 
Mortality  and Cardiovascular  Disease  Risk in Young  Adults  With  Type  1 Diabetes:  The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_579498]. Diabetes Care.  2016; 39(12):[ADDRESS_761303]  J, Christensen  TF, Hejlesen  OK. Sources  of glycemic  variability --what  type  of technology  is needed?  
Journal of diabetes science and technology. 2009;3(4):986 -991.  
59. Hartley CA, Phelps EA. Changing fear: the neurocircuitry of emot ion regulation. Neuropsychopharmacology : 
official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology.  2010;35(1):136 -146.  
60. Wolitzky -Taylor  KB, Horowitz  JD, Powers  MB, Telch  MJ. Psychological  approaches  in the treatment  of specific 
phobias: a me ta-analysis. Clinical psychology review.  2008;28(6):1021 -1037.  
61. Beck JS. Cognitive Behavior Therapy (2nd Ed.). [LOCATION_001]: The Guilford Press;  2011.  
62. Beck J, Greenwood DA, Blanton L, et al. 2017 N ational Standards for Diabetes Self -Management Education and 
Support. Diabetes Care.  2017;40(10):[ADDRESS_761304]  G, Group  ES. Worldwide  childhood  type  1 diabetes  incidence --what  can we 
learn from epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]? Pediatr Diabetes. 2007;[ADDRESS_761305]  6:6-14. 
64. Kaczkurkin  AN, Foa EB. Cognitive -behavior al therapy  for anxiety  disorders:  an update  on the empi[INVESTIGATOR_215104].  
Dialogues in clinical neuroscience. 2015;17(3):337 -346.  
65. Gonder -Frederick  LA, Schmidt  KM, Vajda  KA, et al. Psychometric  properties  of the hypoglycemia  fear survey -ii 
for adults with type  1 diabetes. Diabetes Care.  2011;34(4):[ADDRESS_761306]  defining  a cutoff  score  for elevated  fear 
of hypoglycemia on the hypoglycemia fear survey worry subscale in patients with type 2 diabetes.  Diabetes 
Care.  2014;37(1):102 -108.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
21 67. Penckofer  SM, Ferrans  C, Mumby  P, et al. A psychoeducational  intervention  (SWEEP)  for depressed  women  with 
diabetes. Annals of behavioral Medicine : a publication of the Society of Behavioral Medicine. 2012;44(2):192 - 
206. 
68. Haas L, Maryniuk, M., Beck, J.,Cox,C. Duker, et al. National Standards for Diabetes Self -Management Education 
and Suppo rt. Diabetes Care.  2012;35:2393 -2401.  
69. Schmitt A, Gahr A, Hermanns N, Kulzer B, Huber J, Haak T. The Diabetes Self -Management Question naire 
(DSMQ):  development  and evaluation  of an instrument  to assess  diabetes  self-care  activities  associated  with 
glycaemic  control. Health and quality of life outcomes.  2013;11:138.  
70. Martyn -Nemeth  P, Quinn  L, Penckofer  S, Park  C, Hofer  V, Burke  L. Fear  of Hypoglycemia:  Influence  on Glycemic 
Variability and Self -Management Behavior in Young Adults with Type [ADDRESS_761307]  D. New and improved methods to characterize glycemic variability using continuous glucose 
monitoring. Diabetes Technol Ther.  2009;11(9):551 -565.  
72. Bergenstal RM, Ahmann AJ, Bailey T, et al. Recommendations for standardizing glucose reporting and analysis to  
optimize clinical decision making in diabetes: the Ambulatory Glucose Profile (AGP). Diabe tes Technol Ther. 
2013;15(3):198 -211.  
73. Weiss BD, Mays MZ, Martz W, et al. Quick assessment of literacy in primary care: the newest vital sign. Annals of 
family medici ne. 2005;3(6):514 -522.  
74. Lorig K. Self -Efficacy for Diabetes.  http://patienteducation.stanford.edu/research/sediabetes.html . Accessed 
October 1, 2015,  2015.  
75. Jordan P, Shedden -Mora MC, Lowe B. Psychometric analysis of the Generalized Anxiety Disorder scale (GAD -7) in 
primary care using modern item response theory. PloS one.  2017;12(8):e0182162.  
76. Fisher  L, Polonsky  WH,  Hessler  DM,  et al. Understanding  the sources  of diabetes  distress  in adults  with  type  1 
diabetes. J Diabetes Complications.  2015;29(4):[ADDRESS_761308]. Reliability  and validity  of a diabetes  quality -of-life measure  for the diabetes  control  and 
complications trial (DCCT). The DCCT Research Group. Diabetes Care.  1988;11(9):[ADDRESS_761309] in MMRM. Journal of 
biopharmaceutical statistics.  2013;23(6):1281 -1293.  
79. Siddiqui  O, Hung  HM,  O'Neill  R. MMRM  vs. LOCF:  a comprehensive  comparison  based  on simulation  study  and 
25 NDA datasets. Journal of biopharmaceutical statistics.  2009;19(2):[ADDRESS_761310]. Handling  Missing  Values  in Longitudinal  Panel  Data  With  Multiple  Imputation.  Journal  of 
marriage and the family.  2015;77(1):277 -294.  
81. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_157700], Freeman SC, Sutton AJ. Glycaemic control in type 1 diabetes during real time continu ous glucose 
monitoring  compared  with  self monitoring  of blood  glucose:  meta -analysis  of randomised  controlled  trials  using 
individual patient data. BMJ (Clinical research ed).  2011;343:d3805.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
22 APPENDIX: Trial Protocol  
P1. Outline of FREE Intervention  
 
The FREE intervention will consist of eight weekly individual one -hour sessions with a licensed clinical 
psychologist and will target incorrect beliefs about hypoglycemia, hypervigilance to symptoms, fear of 
symptoms, and maladaptive behavioral responses in re sponse to glucose levels. As is typi[INVESTIGATOR_579499], each session will include a “homework assi gnment” for the participant to practice skills outside of 
the session. The RT -CGM site will be changed weekly. An outline of the session content is prov ided below.  
Week 1: Review of program goals, which are to reduce fear of hypoglycemia while improving aw areness of 
blood glucose cues. Discuss hypoglycemia and its causes, including diet, exercise, stress, and insulin. Discuss 
fear as a normal human emotio n to the perception of a threat. Identify how fear of hypoglycemia affects 
glucose control. Discuss safe ty and avoidance behaviors. Review the RT -CGM and fear diary instructions for 
use. 
Homework: Record fear levels and hypoglycemia events for the week. Ge t comfortable using RT -CGM for 
feedback.  
Week 2: Identify blood glucose cues. Present the cognitive beha vioral model, including the role of 
thoughts, behaviors, and emotions. Discuss how memories of past hypoglycemic events influence diabetes 
care.  
Homewor k: Record daily emotions and emotions associated with hypoglycemia events. Monitor RT -CGM 
glucose levels . Remember to verify any RT -CGM sugars that are out -of-range with a capi[INVESTIGATOR_30135]. 
Also check capi[INVESTIGATOR_579500]/feel y our blood glucose may be out -of-range  regardless 
of the RT -CGM  reading.  
Week 3: Teach cognitive restructuring, including exploring realistic probabilities of hypoglycemic events, 
and identifying catastrophic thought patterns. Identify fear reduction strate gies employed (safety behaviors) 
and examine behavioral responses to probable hypoglycemia. Intr oduce progressive relaxation.  
Homework: Describe safety behaviors employed over the week. Use RT -CGM readings as a cue to blood 
glucose awareness. Practice rela xation and cognitive restructuring.  
Week 4: Introduce exposure and the purpose of exposure. Disc uss own safe ranges for blood glucose.  
Develop fear hierarchy. Begin graded exposure to items on hierarchy by [CONTACT_579534]. Review RT -CGM data.  
Homework: Practice exposure. Practice relaxation.  
Week 5: Review previous week’s exposure practice. Troubleshoot any difficulties. Continue graded 
exposure to items on hierarchy. Review copi[INVESTIGATOR_90359], including relaxation  and cognitive restructuring.  
Homework: Practice exposure. Practice relaxation.  
Week 6: Review p revious week’s exposure practice. Troubleshoot any difficulties. Continue graded 
exposure to items on hierarchy while reinforcing appropriate use of copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Rev iew RT -CGM data.  
Homework: Practice exposure. Practice relaxation.  
Week 7: Review previous week’ s exposure practice. Troubleshoot any difficulties. Continue graded 
exposure to items on hierarchy.  
Homework: Practice exposure. Practice relaxation.  
Week 8: Review previous week’s exposure practice. Review techniques learned and develop a plan to 
maintain  gains.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 12, 5.12.21   
23 P2. Outline of Attention Control: Diabetes Self -Management Program  
 
The attention control condition will consist of eight weekly one -hour sessions. Ses sions will be individual 
diabetes self -management education (DSME) sessions led by a CDE®, based on the National Standards for 
Diabetes Self -Management Education. To be similar in structure and time as the FREE intervention group, 
each session will include  a homework assignment for the participant to complete outside of the session, w hich 
will be reviewed the following week. The RT -CGM site will be changed weekly. An outline of the session 
content is provided below.  
 
 
Week 1 : Introduction to diabetes self -management education program. Living with T1DM, current self - 
management challeng es, and understanding the disease process.  
Homework: Complete diabetes care self -assessments.  
Week 2: Using medications safely for therapeutic effectiveness. Insulin management  and care. Challenges 
with pump and MDI use. Blood glucose awareness and monitor ing. Assessment and treatment of hypo - and 
hyperglycemia.  
Homework: Blood glucose monitoring and glucose awareness self -assessments.  
Week 3: Healthy eating: Incorporating princ iples of a healthy diet into lifestyle. Review of major nutrients. 
Discuss how e ating patterns and styles affect health and diabetes self -management. Diabetes and alcohol.  
Homework: Self -assessment of eating style.  
Week 4: Being active: Incorporating physi cal activity into lifestyle. Barriers encountered and strategies to 
meet activit y goals. Blood glucose management with activity. Principles of healthy activity.  
Homework: Self -assessment of activity patterns and preferences.  
Week 5: Healthy sleep: Sleep pa tterns, challenges, and strategies for success. Sleep hygiene principles. 
Homework: Self -assessment of sleep quality.  
Week 6 : Self -management in the workplace. Balancing work stress; leisure/work balance. Stress 
management strategies. Workplace disclosure.  
Homework: Self -assessment of workplace stressors.  
Week 7 : Psy chosocial concerns: Emotions and diabetes. Navigating relationships. Disclosure/non - 
disclosure. Setting limits. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_579501].  
Homework: Self -assessment of stressors an d copi[INVESTIGATOR_546427]. 
Week 8 : Preventing, detecting, and treating co mplications. 
Summary and Review: Plans to maintain behavior change.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 9, 6 -2-2020   P3. FREE Diary  
 
Fear of  Hypoglycemia  Level  Hypoglycemia  Events  
Morning  
 
Time     Time     Capi[INVESTIGATOR_579502] F ear     High Fear   Treatment:  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  
 
Notes:        
 
 
 
 
Mid-day 
 
Time     Time     
 
 
Treatment:  Capi[INVESTIGATOR_579503] 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9    
 
Notes:     
 
   Time    Capi[INVESTIGATOR_290320]:     
 
Treatment:  
 
Evening  
 
 
 
Time     Low Fear High Fear 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Time:  Capi[INVESTIGATOR_290320]:     
 
Notes:    Treatment:  
 
Directions:  On the left side, circle one number your fear of hypoglycemia at the beginning of your day. Repeat at mid -day and evening but at these time s, 
circle your fear level since the last report. Try to use the range, not just 1, 5, or 9. There is no right answer.  Only you know how you feel each  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 9, 6 -2-2020   time. On the right side, enter the time and capi[INVESTIGATOR_579504] t occur each time and the treatment. If no 
hypoglycemic events occur, enter zero for that day.  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 9, 6 -2-2020   P4. FREE PROGRAM EVALUATION  
 
We value your feedback! Circle one number for each item listed below with [ADDRESS_761311] helpful. There is a spac e for comments at the end. Thank you!  
 
 
Not Helpful  Very Helpful  
 
CONTENT   
Learning signs of anxiety 
& how it affects diabetes  [ADDRESS_761312] unhelpful 
thoughts  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a fear hierarchy  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Setting personal goals  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Homework assignments  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Wearing a RT -CGM  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a daily log  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 9, 6 -2-2020   Go on to the next page . . . .  
 
 
FREE PROGRAM EVALUATION  
 
Not Helpful  Very Helpful  
 
ENVIRONMENT   
Meeting location  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Meeting time  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Meeting room  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 
 
 
 
 
FORMAT   
Initial orientation meeting  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Individual meeting sessions  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Length of each weekly sessio n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Length of program  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 
 
ADDITIONAL COMMENTS (use back side of paper if necessary):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for your feedback!  
P.Martyn, CBT FOH Program, Ver 9, 6 -2-2020   OPEN -ENDED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS:  
 
1. Did you feel that the program was helpful to  you?  
 
 
 
If so, in what w ay? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. What were the program  strengths?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. What suggestions do you have for program  improvement?  