Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251833]  15 
 
1 
  HRPO Protocol  
1) Protocol Title (Version Date  [ADDRESS_251834]  2015 ) 
Effect of peri -intubation apneic oxygenation via nasal cannula on pediatric 
patients’ oxygen saturations during airway management.  
Brief title: Apneic Oxygenation during Airway management in pediatric 
patients.  
2) IRB Review History  
The HRRC reviewed this study  on 2/10/2015, and after requested 
modifications were completed, the HRRC approved it on 4/17/2015.  A 
modification to add research assistants was reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_210731] 5/19/2015.  Post -approval monitoring was conducted by [CONTACT_210732] 10/21/ 2015 . 
3) Objectives  
We hypothesize that apneic oxygenation via nasal cannula during airway 
placement improves oxygen saturation in pediatric patients.  Patients who 
receive this treatment will be compared to patients managed under the 
current standard of care , which does not include apneic oxygenation 
during anesthetic induction and airway management.  
The primary outcome is the elapsed time between anesthetic induction and 
pulse oximetry (SPO 2) falling to 95%, if it happens at all.  
The secondary outcomes are as follows:  
- whether the 95% threshold is met at all  
- whether intervention by [CONTACT_210733]  
- whether pulse oximetry falls to 90%  
- the lowest observed pulse oximetry during airway placement  
    
4) Background  
This obser vational  study aims to investigate the effect of  a planned 
practice change;  instituting oxygenation via nasal cannula during  
induction  of anesthesia .  The use of a nasal cannula during the peri -
intubation period is of minimal risk and is not considered a s tandard of 
care in pediatric anesthesia.  Some providers use it in certain clinical 
situations, but it is not broadly used and has virtually no pediatric 
literature to support or refute its use.  
At our institution, intubation of pediatric patients by [CONTACT_210734] 
(learner) providers under expert supervision is routine.  The attending 
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251835]  15 
 
2 
 physician intervenes if necessary before the patient experiences excessive 
loss of oxygenation.  
There has been increasing  discussion of nasal cannula apneic oxygenation 
in the  adult anesthesia and emergency medicine literature, but there is a 
paucity of pediatric literature to support or refute its  use in the pediatric 
population. Weingart and Levitan 2012, discuss how Apneic oxygenation 
is based on the physiology of the lungs absorbing a greater volume of 
oxygen, 250 ml/min in an adult, than the volume of carbon dioxide, 8 -20 
mL/min, that is released by [CONTACT_210735].   With the imbalanced volumes 
of abso rption and release of gasses in the lungs there is a lower than 
atmospheric pressure in the lungs, creating a passive movement of gases 
from pharynx to alveoli.  If the gas in the pharynx has a significantly 
higher percentage of oxygen instead of room air at 21% oxygen, a higher 
amount of oxygen can be passively delivered to the lungs for absorption 
prolonging the time to hemoglobin desaturation.  
Taha et al 2006, concluded the use of nasal cannula insuf flation after 
preoxygenation can delay the onset of hemoglobin desaturation for a 
prolonged period of time  during the subsequent apneic period in adults.  
Ramachandran et al 2009, demonstrated the ability to prolong oxygen  
saturations >95% and increase the lowest saturation level with use of a 
nasal cannula at 5 L/min during simulated difficult intubations in adult 
obese males.  Weingart and Levitan 2012, recommend that nasal cannula 
apneic oxygenation can extend the safe apnea period after the use of 
sedatives and muscle relaxants in adults .  With a variety of search terms 
only three relevant articles were found in pediatric anesthesia literature.  
Bhagwan 2013 , in Pediatric Anesthesia , commented about Levitan’s 
NoDesat article in EPmonthy 2012, endorsing how her use of the nasal 
cannula adjunct in the peri -intubation period has led to fewer desaturations 
and bradycardic epi[INVESTIGATOR_210724].  Her 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_210725], but no data was gathered or 
presented to support the claims in a form representing a true study.  T.M. 
Cook 1998, wrote a paper discussing blood gas results during pediatric 
apneic oxygenation in intubated pediatric patients undergoing undergoing 
cardiac catheterization.  The findings demonstrated that apneic 
oxygenation was likely safe for up to [ADDRESS_251836] a higher oxygen consumption than adults, 
5-10 mL/kg/min, compared to adults, 3mL/kg/min.  This high metabolic 
rate leaves pediatric patients at higher risk for hemoglobin desaturation in 
the peri -intubation period.  In a Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_210726].  The current 
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251837] compared to adults 
which may make the use of nasal cannula apneic oxygenation less 
beneficial in the pediatric population.  
This minimal risk study would add to the literature extending this concept 
to the pediatric patient population.  If the same  results were to be found as 
in the adult patient population there is the potential for an improved less 
stressful pediatric intubation learning environment and improved patient 
care with fewer and less severe desaturations during the peri -intubation 
perio d. 
 
 
5) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
The study population would be infants and children with adjusted 
gestational age of 40 weeks or greater to  8 years of age , scheduled for 
surgery at UNM.  Patients to be excluded would be premature infants with 
adjusted  gestational age of less than 40 weeks, those undergoing mask 
ventilation , and patients with ASA class 4 -6.  Enrollment would occur for 
up to six months after HRRC approval and study commencement.  
6) Number of Subjects  (Recruitment T arget)  
A sample size estim ate based on prior studies of apneic oxygenation in 
adults indicates that approximately [ADDRESS_251838] during the peri -
intubation period.   
A power analysis (based on formulae in Statistics in Medicine  1982; 
1:121 -9) indicated that if the baseline rate of reaching 95% SPO2 is 15% 
of patients and this procedure reduces that rate by [CONTACT_2016], 80% power at 
α=0.[ADDRESS_251839] with a total of 371 patients.  
Rounding up to 400 patients to accommodate incomplete datasheets would 
provide power of 94%.  
Based on enrollment  rate to date, we estimate that enrollment of [ADDRESS_251840]  15 
 
4 
 may be gathered on more than 200 patients in that group.  In order to 
permit analysis without loss of power, we may need to enroll a highe r total 
sample size in order to achieve an equal sample size in the group with the 
cannula.  To accommodate this reality, we may enroll a maximum of 500 
patients in the entire study.  
This period will also permit education of all relevant provid ers and staff 
on the use of peri -intubation nasal cannula oxygenation.  
7) Recruitment Methods  
Investigators will recruit participants from among their own patients.  All 
patients who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be enrolled.  We are 
requesting w aiver of consent.  
8) Study Timelines  
 Duration of individual patient participation : Patients will 
participate  from the time when they are brought into the OR 
preoperative suite  and it is determined they will have an 
endotrachaeal tube (ET) or laryngeal mask ai rway (LMA) placed.  
The study observation period will end once the airway  has been 
secured.  
 The duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects will be 
sufficient time to enroll the target sample of patients.  
 An interim analysis will be conducted halfway  through enrollment 
of the with -cannula group.  
 The estimated primary analysis will be done by [CONTACT_466] 2016.  
9) Study Endpoints  
As this study is of minimal intervention and minimal risk, we do not 
anticipate early study termination for research -induced adverse outcomes.  
The planned intervention may be suspended or canceled  after the interim 
analysis if it is ineffective, or if we reach statistical significance on the 
primary outcome halfway through collecting our estimated number of 
patients.   “Ineffect iveness” is defined here as a failure to identify one-
tailed superiority of the with -cannula group  with p<0.20 on any of the 
outcomes (primary or secondary) at the interim analysis.  
10) Research Setting  
Data will be collected at the UNM hospi[INVESTIGATOR_210727].  
11) Study Methods  
This is a prospective observational study.  Prospectively -recorded data are 
necessary because data on the outcomes of interest are not available in the 
medical record.  
Participants will be enrolled in the study once they have en tered the pre -
operative area and they are determined by [CONTACT_210736]  [ADDRESS_251841]/resident/midlevel, and 
the type and dose will be recorded.  
Once patients are brought to  the operating room suite and vital signs are 
being monitored, patients will be preoxygenated via mask per standard of 
care, with an expi[INVESTIGATOR_210728] 0.75. Vitals 
will be recorded at the moment prior to removal of the face mask at the 
end of the preoxygenation period.  Anesthetic induction will then be 
performed with agents and dosages as per the provider’s clinical 
judgment.   
Airway management  consisting of  oral endotracheal intubation or 
laryngeal mask airway insertion will ta ke place.  As per usual practice, an 
attending physician who is expert in pediatric airway management will 
supervise the procedure and intervene before the patient experiences 
excessive oxygen desaturation.  The lowest oxygen saturation and the time 
to either successful intubation or intervention by [CONTACT_210737].   
For the with -cannula group , all of the above steps will be maintained.  
The sole difference will be nasal cannula placement after induction.  It 
will be set to deliver 5L of oxygen per minute.   
Airway management consisting of oral endotracheal intubation or 
laryngeal mask airway insertion will take place.  As per usual practice, an 
attending physician who is expert in pediatric airway management will 
supervise the proce dure and intervene before the patient experiences 
excessive oxygen desaturation.  The lowest oxygen saturation and the time 
to either successful intubation or intervention by [CONTACT_210738].  Apneic oxygenation will not be used as a long -term 
oxygenation strategy.  No patient will be allowed to cross any particular 
SPO [ADDRESS_251842]  15 
 
6 
 12) List of Appendices  
Data collection form  
 
13) Data and Specimen Banking  
Deidentified data will be retained indefinitely in electronic format after study 
completion.  This retention will be  only for possible use in preparation for future 
studies involving one or more of the investigators on this study, such as to inform 
power analyses.  While future studies are not currently planned, they may include 
investigations of the optimal use of and indications for pediatric apneic 
oxygenation, for example.  All retained data will be stripped of all [ADDRESS_251843] -protected servers.  The paper data 
collection forms and link to identity will not be retained, but will  be shredded upon 
study completion.   
 
14) Data Management  
Only study investigators will have access to study data.  Study participants will be 
assigned a study number, and this number will be used in all data analyses.  The 
data will be entered into an electronic data base that will be stored on UNMHSC 
password -protected servers.  The electronic data will only have study participant 
numbers and no identifiers that could link specific patients to the data.  All data 
forms that bear identifiers  will be secu rely destroyed (shredded) upon application to 
HRRC for study closure, so that only deidentified data remain when that application 
is made . 
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251844]  15 
 
7 
  
As noted above, data to be gathered include basic demographic data, data about the 
anesthetic induction procedure, a nd data about the patient’s O 2 saturation.  
 
Routine demographic data will be analyzed with t -tests and Wilcoxon rank -sum 
tests, as appropriate depending on normality of data distributions.  Categorical data 
will be analyzed with appropriate analyses, such as chi -square, Fisher’s exact, risk 
ratio, and/or odds ratio.  
 
The primary outcome of time to cross the 95% saturation threshold will be analyzed 
with Kaplan -Meier curves and survival analysis with “censoring” for cases in which 
the threshold was not crossed  because of either successful intubation or intervention 
by [CONTACT_30951] . 
 
Secondary outcomes with continuous data (e.g. the lowest observed O 2 saturation) 
will be analyzed with standard t -tests or Wilcoxon rank -sum tests, as appropriate 
depending on normality of data distributions.  Secondary outcomes with binary data 
(e.g. whether intervention by [CONTACT_210739]) will be analyzed 
with chi -square or Fisher’s Exact tests as appropriate depending on cell counts.  
 
15) Provis ions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
NA; this is a minimal -risk study.   Patients will receive either usual care or 
usual care with additional oxygen.  
16) Withdrawal of Subjects  
As we are requesting waiver of consent and HIPAA authorization , there 
will not be withdrawals from the study.  
17) Risks to Subjects  
This study has minimal anticipated risk beyond the standard medical 
treatment which they are already consented to undergo for reasons outside 
of the study.  The control group is simply an ob servation of the current 
standard of care , documentation of vitals at specific times , and airway 
management success .   
The with-cannula part of the study has minimal risk and an unknown 
likelihood of delivering a very small benefit (see Benefits, section 1 8) to 
the patients .  It is routinely used in other clinical settings.  Some pediatric 
patients wear a nasal cannula chronically in the home environment without 
significant complications.  Other children may wear a nasal cannula for 
days on an inpatient med ical service.  Nasal cannula placement has a very 
low probability of causing harm to the nares, eyes or to interfere with the 
ET or LMA placement process.  
  The risk of a breach of confidentiality is minimal, as no data that are 
usually considered “sensitive” will be gathered  and all identifiable data 
will be destroyed upon study completion .     
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251845]  15 
 
8 
 18) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Subjects in the with -cannula gro up may have a small potential benefit during the 
study as they may experience improved oxygenation during the ET or LMA 
placement period , but it is not known whether the planned intervention is effective 
at all .  This hypothetical benefit is low for the in dividual patient , as it springs from 
any improvement in oxygenation that may result.  This benefit is expected to be low  
for several reasons: 1) even in the no -cannula group (current practice), an attending 
physician who is expert in pediatric airway manag ement is always ready to 
intervene before the patient’s oxygen saturation reaches dangerous levels : therefore 
any temporary reduction in blood O 2 saturation  that may be avoided in the with -
cannula group  is mild ; 2)the rates of mild SpO 2 reduction during in tubation are 
already very low, and 3) rates of complications from any brief mild SpO 2 reduction 
are extremely low.   
 
19) Vulnerable Populations  
The research will involve children from the age of birth to the age of 8 
years.  Permission will not be sought from the parents or assent from the 
children as this study is of a minimal intervention and of minimal risk to 
the participants.  The planned transition to use of routine oxygen 
cannulation during intubation  will not modify the participants’ degree of 
risk to a level above that of standard medical treatment.  The standard of 
care will simply be observed with the participants in the baseline group, 
and during the implementation of the peri -intubation adjunct nasal cannula 
(a device considered standard care i n various other clinical settings and 
that poses no foreseeable significant risk to the patient ) the same readily 
available data will be collected for comparison.   
 
20) Multi -Site Research  
NA.  
21) Community -Based Participatory Research /Field Research  
NA.  
22) Sharin g of Results with Subjects /Incidental Findings  
Study participation periods will be so brief that results analyzed after the 
fact would have no positive or negative effect for the patient.  
23) Resources Available  
This project will be completed at the UNM Childr en’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], which 
serves a large pediatric surgical population.  The investigators include:  
Codruta Soneru, M.D., Assistant Professor,  Faculty Physician, UNM  
Department of Anesthesia  and Critical Care  
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251846] aff to 
perform pediatric surgery and provide intubation of pediatric patients.  
24) Prior Approvals /Attachments Requiring Signatures  
The departmental review form is included with this submission.  
This study has been registered with clinicaltrials.gov, and assig ned record 
number [STUDY_ID_REMOVED].  
25) Confidentiality  
See section 12.  The link to identifiers will only be maintained for the 
duration of this research study.  Only investigators will have access to 
identifiable study data.  The link to identifiers will be destr oyed upon 
application to HRRC for study closure.  
26) Provisions to Protect the Privacy of Subjects  
The transition to routine oxygen cannulation during intubation is planned 
regardless of this project.  This project therefore does not modify patient 
experience in any way, and there is no research -related contact [CONTACT_210740].  
27) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
NA. As this is an observation of the standard of care there is no potential for 
research specific related injuries.  
 
28)  Economic Burden to Subjects  
There will be no economic burden to the study participants or to a 3rd party 
payer.  The cost of the pediatric nasal cannula (NC) is included in the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_210729].  The 
potential cost of the nasal cannulas for the intervention group is negligible 
as it is standard of care to have a NC or face mask available for patients 
during their post operative time to provide oxygen supplementation as the 
anesthetic wears off, and the NC used during the peri -intubation period 
can still be used for that patient after extubation.  
Apneic Oxygenation during  Airway Management in pediatric patients  [ADDRESS_251847]  15 
 
10 
  
29) Consent  Process  (including waiver request for HIPAA, waiver of 
HIPAA for recruitment only, Waiver of Informed Consent, and 
Alteration of Informed Consent)  
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent:   
We are requesting waiver of consent for this study.  This resear ch is not 
FDA -regulated, and does not involve non -viable neonates.  As noted above, 
this project  presents minimal risk to participants.  Similarly, the available 
literature does not clearly indicate whether the planned intervention offers 
any benefit to pa tients  at all .   Patients’ experience and clinical care will not 
be modified by [CONTACT_1639] a level outside of standard medical care in this study.  The 
use of a nasal cannula is standard care in multiple clinical settings and will 
simply be monitored in another as pect of clinical care.  The risk of breach of 
confidentiality presented by [CONTACT_210741][INVESTIGATOR_210730], because normal practice involves the production and 
maintenance of both routine medical records and supplement al Quality 
Assurance datasets.  The information to be recorded is not particularly 
sensitive, and will not pose risks to participant employability or insurability.  
Similarly, waiver of consent for this study will not adversely affect the 
rights and welfare  of the subjects.  This study consists of recording routine 
clinical data during routine medical care.  These data are already recorded 
for both patient -care and healthcare operations purposes.  
This study could not practicably be carried out without the wa iver because 
the validity of observational studies depends on data capture as close to 
100% as possible.  Anything else introduces the possibility of bias, which 
would invalidate the results.  Parents of children of certain ages, or with 
certain types of m edical conditions, may be more or less likely than others 
to provide consent.  Since this study does not modify patient care beyond 
minimal risk, it would not be appropriate to provide participants with 
extraneous information after participation.  
Waiver of  HIPAA authorization:    
The PHI to be used for this study is described above, and includes basic 
demographic data, data about the anesthetic induction procedure, and data 
about the patient’s O [ADDRESS_251848]  15 
 
11 
 identifiable datasheets  will be destroyed upon application to HRRC for 
study closure.  Deidentified data may be retained for use in the preliminary 
stages of future research, but identifiable PHI will not be reused or disclosed 
to any other person or entity, except as required by [CONTACT_2371], or for authorized 
oversight of the research study.  
As noted above for waiver of consent, this research could not practicably be 
conducted without the waiver of HIPAA authorization because study 
validity depends on near -100% data collection.  Attempting to obtain 
authorization would invite bias.  Similarly,  the study could not be conducted 
without access to and use of the PHI because it is a study of medical care.  It 
would not be possible to evaluate the planned intervention without access to 
these data.  
 
30) Drugs or Devices  
 
Medical Devices:   
This study reco rds data on the clinically -indicated use of a nasal cannula for 
delivery of oxygen.  An IDE application has not been submitted to the FDA.  
Nasal cannulas are FDA -approved for marketing, and they are being used in 
accordance with their labeling.  The nasal  cannulas to be used for this study 
will be supplied and maintained as per usual UNMHSC practice   
 
References:  
Weingart SD, Levitan RM. Preoxygenation and prevention of desaturation during 
emerge ncy airway management.  Ann Emerg Med. 2012 Mar;59(3):165 -75.e1. 
doi: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2011.10.002. Epub 2011 Nov 3. Review. PubMed 
PMID: 22050948.  
 
Ramachandran SK, Cosnowski A, Shanks A, Turner CR. Apneic oxygenation 
during prolonged laryngoscopy in obese patients: a randomized, controlled trial 
of nasal oxygen administration.  J Clin Anesth. 2010 May;22(3):164 -8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jclinane.2009.05.006. PubMed PMID: 20400000.  
 
Taha SK, Siddik -Sayyid SM, El -Khatib MF, Dagher CM, Hakki MA, Baraka AS. 
Nasopharyngeal oxygen insufflation following pre -oxygenation using the four 
deep breath technique.  Anaesthesia. 2006 May;61(5):427 -30. PubMed PMID: 
[ADDRESS_251849]  15 
 
12 
 Bhagwan SD. Levitan's no desat with nasal cannula for infants with pyloric 
stenosis requiring intubation.  Paediatr Anaesth. 2013 Mar;23(3):297 -8. doi: 
10.1111/pan.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMI D: 23384304.  
 
Cook TM, Wolf AR, Henderson AJ. Changes in blood -gas tensions during 
apnoeic oxygenation in paediatric patients.  Br J Anaesth. 1998 Sep;81(3):338 -
42. PubMed PMID: 9861115  
 
Kernisan  G, Adler E, Gibbons P, Runions D. Apneic oxygenation in pediatric 
patients. Anesthesiology  1987;3:A521.  
 