 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title of Study: The Effect of Osteopathic Manipulative Treatment (OMT) on Proprioception in Adults: 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_907977]: Thomas Mehner, OMS IV1; Krista Hoevemeyer, OMS IV1; Ryan McMunn, OMS IV1; Kai 
Yuan Teng, OMS IV1; Jose Figueroa, DO1; and Chunfa Jie, PhD2 
Unique Protocol ID: IRB-2019-[ADDRESS_1274390] Purpose 
The purpose of this proposed study is to investigate the mechanism of osteopathic manipulative 
treatment (OMT). Previous studies have shown the effectiveness of OMT on decreasing patient 
symptoms by [CONTACT_907979]. The procedure (OMT) of removing somatic 
dysfunctions has been explained and the mechanism of removing somatic dysfunction by [CONTACT_907980]. It is thought that by [CONTACT_907981], OMT changes 
proprioception. This study seeks to identify if proprioception is the mechanism by [CONTACT_907982]. The investigators will investigate this affect 
globally throughout the body. Proprioception is the body's position sense, meaning, the mind's 
ability to know where the body is in space. The measurement of proprioception will include 
having participants complete standing tests with both legs and single-leg on a force plate. The 
force plate is a measurement of balance and sway of a participant. Balance has input from 
proprioception, the cerebellum, vision, and the vestibular system. While the investigators cannot 
eliminate all of the components, the investigators will test participants with eyes closed to get 
closer to isolating proprioception. The hypothesis is that OMT will improve proprioception 
supporting the thought that OMT removes somatic dysfunction by [CONTACT_907983]. 
Study design and procedures: 
 
Participants will go through an informed consent process, fill out a screening questionnaire and 
will undergo neurological testing. If there are any abnormalities in their neurological testing or 
they meet exclusion criteria, they will not be included in the study. The neurological testing will 
include reflex testing, sensation testing, strength testing, and coordination and balance tests.  
 
Participants will then be randomized into [ADDRESS_1274391] duration will be 30 seconds, as stated 
previously.  
 
Between the two balance tests, the treatment group will receive a full-body osteopathic 
manipulative treatment according to the Common Compensatory Pattern (CCP). CCP is a 
treatment approach developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Zinc that addresses the transition areas of the body. The 
treatment will be given by [CONTACT_907984] a licensed physician and 
last 10-20 minutes. The treatment will include the following body regions: 
Occipi[CONTACT_1639]-atlantal Joint 
Thoracic Inlet 
Thoraco-lumbar shift 
Lumbo-pelvic roll 
Ribs 
Sacrum 
Pelvis 
Upslip 
Upper extremity 
Lower extremity 
 
The fellows will diagnose somatic dysfunctions within these body regions, treat, and reassess to 
make sure the somatic dysfunctions are resolved. The physician will perform a spi[INVESTIGATOR_907978]-to-side height assessments before and after treatment to verify there was improvement in 
somatic dysfunctions.  
 
After the treatment, the treatment group will walk around the perimeter of the OMM lab three 
times before retesting their balance.  
 
The control group will be asked to lay on an OMM treatment for [ADDRESS_1274392]. The investigators will also use the length of time participants were able to stand 
on one leg without losing their balance (without moving their knee or chest outside of their 
midline, their foot leaving the platform, touching their opposite foot to the ground, or letting their 
legs touch).  
Inclusion criteria: 
Participants must be 18-[ADDRESS_1274393] the ability to give consent, and be able to bare weight 
on both feet. 
Exclusion criteria: 
Participants will be excluded from the study if they have had manipulation performed by a D.O., 
physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], or chiropractor in the last two months, have had surgery in the six months, 
had broken or fractured a bone in the last six months, have an abnormal neurological exam, or 
has a cerebellar dysfunction or ataxia, has a condition that impairs balance (including orthostatic 
hypertension, otoneurologic conditions, or arrhythmias). Patient will also be asked about 
dizziness, fainting, previous falls, fever, weight loss, pain that wakes them up at night, morning 
stiffness or localized bone pain and would be evaluated if participants needed to be excluded for 
medical treatment. 
Recruitment: 
Recruitment will occur through advertisements using social media, flyers, word of mouth, and 
class announcements. The advertisement is attached and will also function as a script for the 
class announcements. Email addresses will be collected from participants for appointment 
scheduling and reminders. 
Informed Consent: 
The investigators will schedule the informed consent process to be [ADDRESS_1274394] been answered and will collected by [CONTACT_163739]. The forms will be kept in a locked drawer within a locked office for the 
duration of the study. 
Data analysis: 
According to the project study design, data will be collected at three occasions for six balance 
measurement variables of interest. The six variable include length of pathway of center of mass, 
area covered by [CONTACT_907985], velocity of center of mass, medial-lateral sway, posterior-
anterior sway, and time lapsed during the single leg tests.   Summary descriptive statistics will be 
first obtained for the selected variables and demographics covariates as appropriate.  For a 
particular variable, the change between pre- (or baseline) and post- treatment during the first 
week reflects the immediate treatment effect while the difference between the pre-treatment 
baseline and the last measurement during week [ADDRESS_1274395] model with 
repeated measures design to assess the OMT effects on the balance measurement metrics over 
time.  In the model fitting process, several candidate covariance structures will be selected and 
evaluated according to the experimental design (i.e., unequal spacing of the time points but with 
the same time points across the study participants, within-subject correlation over time and 
convergence of model fitting), out of which one optimal covariance structure will be selected by 
[CONTACT_586779] (AIC) criteria. On the basis of the chosen models for the 
respective variables, statistical contrasts will be set up to compare the mean values of variable 
measurements between time points to assess the immediate and long-term effects of OMT 
treatment.  Tukey procedure for the multiple testing adjustment will be used to compute the 
adjusted p-value in case of need. 
 