 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Investigation of Efficacy of Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid 
(TUDCA) to Enhance Pancreatic Beta Cell Survival In Type 1 
Diabetes by [CONTACT_653628]: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: March 9, 2021  
1. Study Purpose and  Rationale  
Hypothesis: An agent (TUDCA) that reduces ER stress will protect against the 
deterioration of beta -cell function in new -onset T1D.  
Rationale: Abnormalities of ER stress responses contribute to the beta cell failure in 
early -onset T1D. Treatment of pre-diabetic NOD mice with TUDCA preserves beta 
cell mass and insulin secretion (see Background). In mice, TUDCA treatment also 
decreases lymphocytic infiltration of the islets and improves survival and 
morphology of beta - cells. Patients with newly - diagnosed T1D have a residual beta 
cell mass of 30 -50% (c -peptide often >0.2 pmol/mL); beta cell destruction continues 
for at least 12 -24 months after diagnosis until C -peptide is generally low or  
undetectable.  
In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_653626] T1D, we will enroll 20 new -onset (within 
100 days of diagnosis) subjects with measurable stimulated C -peptide (>0.2 pmol/mL).  
2. Study Design and Statistical Procedures Also see Trial Flow Diagram  
Visit -1 -Screening visit (+/ - 3 days)  Each participant must sign a consent form prior 
to screening. The screening visit consists of a medical history, physical exam, 
assessment of other medications that they  may be taking and a review of their insulin 
usage and blood glucose values over the previous three days, blood tests including 
liver function tests, a urine test and a combination [ADDRESS_877092] 
(MMTT) . 
For females only: A sample of their urine will be utilized for a  urine pregnancy test during 
the screening. Only the participant  will be told  the results of this test. If the test is positive, 
then they will not be able to participate. Females who are lactating are also ineligible for this  
study.  
Visit 2 - Screening visit Week 0 (+/ - 14 days)  This visit and all subsequent visits will 
only occur if participants  have been found eligible to continue on the trial. It will 
include a 3 mm punch of skin; discussion about any medications they may be taking, 
a review of home blood glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events and a 
review of insulin usage over 3 days prior to this visit. A urine sample will also be 
tested for pregnancy if the par ticipant is  female and of childbearing potential. The 
participants will be provided with a 3-month supply of the study drug/placebo. You 
will start TUDCA/placebo at a dose of 1750 mg orally  daily.  
Visit 3 - Interim Visit (Month 1) (+/ - 14 days)  This in -person visit will include 
discussion about any medications the particpant  may be taking, review of home blood 
glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a review of insulin usage 
over 3 days prior to this visit. Blood tests will be done including liver function tests 
and a urine sample will also be tested for pregnancy if the participant is  female and of 
childbearing potential. Parti cipants  will continue the study medication.  
Visit 4 - Interim Visit (Month 2) (+/ - 14 days)  This phone visit will include 
discussion about any medications participants  may be taking, review of home blood 
glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a review of insulin usage 
over 3 days prior to this visit. Participants  will continue the study  medication.  
Visit 5 - Interim Visit (Month 3) (+/ - 14 days)  This in -person visit will include a 
physical exam, a discussion about any medications the participant  may be taking, 
review of home blood glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a 
review of insulin usage and blood glucose values over 3 days prior to this visit. The 
particip ant’s blood will be drawn for liver function tests and HbA1c. A urine sample 
will also be tested for pregnancy if the participant  is female and of childbearing 
potential. Participants  will be provided with a 3 -month supply of the study 
drug/placebo. Participants  will continue the study medication.  
Visit 6 - Interim Visit (Month 6) (+/ - 14 days)  This in -person visit will include a 
physical exam, a discussion about any medications the participant  may be taking, 
review of home blood glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a 
review of insulin usag e, and blood glucose values over [ADDRESS_877093] blood drawn 
for a HbA1c and liver function tests. A urine sample will also be tested for 
pregnancy if the parti cipant is  female and of childbearing potential. Participants  will 
be provided with a 3 -month supply of the study medication. Participants  will 
continue the study  medication.  
Visit 7 - Interim Visit (Month 9) (+/ - 14 days)  This in -person visit will include a 
discussion about  any medications participants  may be taking, review of home blood 
glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a review of insulin 
usage over [ADDRESS_877094] blood drawn for a HbA1c 
and liver function tests. Participants  will be provided with a 3 -month supply of the 
study  drug/  placebo.  Participants  will continue  the study  medication.  
Visit 8 - Interim Visit (Month 12) (+/ - 14 days)  This visit will include a physical 
exam, a discussion about any medications participants  may be taking, review of 
home blood glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a review of 
insulin usage and blood glucose values over [ADDRESS_877095] blood drawn for a HbA1c 
and liver function tests. Medication will be stopped at the end of 12 months.  
Visit 9 - Interim Visit (Month 15) (+/ - 1 month)  This phone visit will include  
discussion  about  any medications  participants  may be taking,  review of home blood 
glucose monitoring results, a review of adverse events, and a review of insulin usage 
over [ADDRESS_877096]  blood  drawn  for a HbA1c  and liver function  tests.  
i. Endpoints: The primary endpoints will be the area under the stimulated C -peptide 
curve of a [ADDRESS_877097] (MMTT) conducted at screening, and 
during the [ADDRESS_877098] of periodic review of glucose records and reports 
of hypoglycemia, insulin dose and  HbA1c . 
 
ii. Trial Design: This single -center double -masked, Phase II placebo -controlled study 
will examine the efficacy of TUDCA to arrest beta cell hypofunction/destruction in 20 
subjects with new - onset T1D (ages 18 -45 years), randomized within 100 days of 
diagnosis). All subjects will receive standard intensive diabetes treatment with insulin 
and dietary management, consistent with American Diabetes Association Standards of 
Care. Diabetes management will be done by [CONTACT_653629]. Subjects will be randomly assigned 1:1 to receive either daily TUDCA 
1750 mg/day or placebo for [ADDRESS_877099] in the informed consent so that longer -
term study follow -up is a possibility. Enrollment is expected to occur over 18 months. 
The mean c -peptide responses to MMTT in the TUDCA treatment group will be 
compared to the placebo -treated group at 0, 6, 12 and 18 months. The study will also 
examine the effects of TUDCA treatment on other T1D - related metabolic and 
immunologic outcome  measures.  
iii. Exploratory outcome : If a sign ificant change in c-peptide responses are detected 
in both groups , we will compare the in vivo responses to ER stress relief to in -vitro 
responses to ER stress relief. In these subjects, we will compare the clinical response 
to an agent that reduce ER stress to the response of the iPS -derived beta cells, 
derived from the same subject, when treated with the same experimental agent to 
reduce ER  stress.   
 
iv. Treatment and Dose: Subjects will be treated with either TUDCA  at a dose of 
1750  mg/day  or placebo  for [ADDRESS_877100]  commonly used dose used to treat biliary disease and was used 
in a recent study of human obesity and insulin resistance (39). In this 4 week study, 
an effects on ER stress was not observed on adipose cells; however we plan a longer 
treatment time period and hypothesize that since TUDCA undergoes extensive 
hepatic metabolism, the exposure of pancreatic beta cells to drug at this dose may be 
sufficient to cause an effect on ER stress. In addition,  in vitro studies will enable us 
to manipulate exposure of beta cells  to a range  of TUDCA concentrations, thus 
revealing extent of individual differences in sensitivity to the  agent.  
v. Duration: All subjects will be followed for [ADDRESS_877101] 6 
months of  follow -up. 
vi DSMB: The progress of the study will be monitored by [CONTACT_653630], termination, 
or modification of the study. Based on an [ADDRESS_877102] twice yearly.  
vii The number of subjects who discontinue study treatment will also be included 
in the reports prepared for the  DSMB.  
Statistical analysis: These studies are pi[INVESTIGATOR_653627] -
individual differences in responses to the proposed in vivo  intervention (TUDCA) . 
We will compare the clinical endpoints between treated and control subjects using 
repeated measures ANOVA, treating (if indicated) age, gender and BMI as 
covariates. The  endpoints of the in vitro studies will be analyzed for differences 
between individuals regardless of the experimental group to which they have been 
randomized. These analyses will inform us of the  range of autonomous beta cell 
differences in response to ER stress, and to the mitigation conveyed by [CONTACT_653631]. 
These data will then be related to clinical endpoints, probing for the ability of the in 
vitro  studies to predict (correlate with) clinical course and response to TUDCA. We 
are experienced in all of the relevant analytic techniques and have the software on 
hand. If necessary, we have access to expert statistical consultations through the 
Columbia NIH CTSA.  
3. Study Procedures MMTT and skin  biopsy  
Aim: To assess the performance of canonical ER stress response pathways, including 
the ability of TUDCA to meliorate such stress in vitro  in beta cells of the subjects of 
this study.  
Rationale: As noted, there is growing recognition that ER stress plays an important 
role in beta cell responses to the immunologic and metabolic stresses that are the 
hallmarks of T1D. Pharmacological “relief” of ER stress is beneficial in rodent 
models  of diabetes . Molecules  that have  these  effects  (e.g. TUDCA ) are very well 
tolerated in children and adults to whom they have been administered for other 
indications . 
Hypothesis: In patients with very recent onset of clinical T1D, TUDCA 
administration will slow or prevent the advance of the disease.  
 
Anticipated outcome: Individuals treated with TUDCA will show a trend toward 
preservation of beta cell mass and function as reflected in stimulated C -peptide in 
MMTT at 6 and 12 months of treatment compared to placebo; it is possible that if 
observed, this effect  will still be present  [ADDRESS_877103]: TUDCA  
 
i.Risks and Benefits: The known risks of drug treatment: In a summary of post -
marketing data of 37 trials involving 1283  subjects treated with TUDCA up to 1750 
mg/day for up to [ADDRESS_877104] was 
diarrhea that occurred in .01% subjects. Less frequent adverse events were nausea, 
abdominal pain, pruritis, and  headache.  
 
ii.Study drug and placebo are manufactured and supplied by [CONTACT_484704] (Genoa, Italy) 
and provided at no charge to study participants. The study drug is administered orally 
twice daily.  
iii. Population to be studied: New -onset T1D. We will recruit individuals between 
the ages of 18 and 45 with new - onset T1D (within  100 days of diagnosis).  All 
patients  will be in otherwise  good health. Inclusion criteria will include: at least 
one diabetes - related autoantibody present (insulin autoantibody alone will not be 
sufficient in subjects treated with insulin for > 14 days) and a stimulated C -peptide 
levels > 0.2 pmol/ml measured during a  mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT) 
conducted at least 21 days   from diagnosis of diabetes and within one month (37 
days) of randomization to either TUDCA or placebo. Pregnant women will be 
excluded. Participants of childbearing potential and/or their partners must agree to 
use acceptable methods of birth control beginning at the pre -study visit and 
throughout the  study.  
Examples of acceptable methods of birth control  include  abstinence, or 2 of the following: 
intrauterine device (IUD -with or without local hormone release), diaphragm, spermicides, 
cervical cap, contraceptive sponge, and /or condoms.  
iv. Drug handling/distribution/administration is conducted in accordance with 
the policies of the Research Pharmacy and Columbia University Medical  
Center  
5. Study Instruments (e.g., Questionnaires, Interview Outlines, Focus Group 
Guides) : N/A 
 
6. Study Subjects  
 
I. Subject Inclusion Criteria  
 
1. Be between the ages of 18 and 45 years.  
2. Be within 3 months (100 days) of diagnosis of T1D based on ADA criteria.  
3. Must have at least one diabetes -related autoantibody present.  
4. Must  have stimulated C-peptide levels > 0.2 pmol/ml measured during an  
MMTT conducted  at least  21 days from  diagnosis  of diabetes  and within  one 
month  (37 days) of randomization . 
5. If participant is female with reproductive potential, she must be willing to avoid 
pregnancy and have a negative pregnancy test during the [ADDRESS_877105] (more  than 1.[ADDRESS_877106]) that interfere with study conduct 
or cause increased risk . 
5. Have a history of  malignancy . 
6. Currently using non -insulin drugs that affect glucose  control . 
7. Currently using drugs that may interfere with TUDCA absorption or effect such as bile 
acid sequestering agents (cholestyramine and colestipol), aluminum based antacids, 
estrogens, oral contraceptives and  clofibrate . 
8. Currently participating in another T1D treatment trial or Sensitivity to TUDCA or other 
similar  agent . 
iii. Subject withdrawal criteria : An intent –to-treat approach will be used. Subjects will 
not be replaced. All data acquired prior to termination  for the reasons  outlined  
below  will be included  in the primary analysis unless a participant withdraws 
consent. Every effort will be made to conduct a final study visit with the participant 
and participants will be followed clinically until, if applicable, all adverse events 
resolve. All subjects will be offered clinical follow -up at the Berrie Center for  T1D.  
Reasons for withdrawal and stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]: The drug will be stopped by [CONTACT_653632], safety laboratory 
parameters and/or vital signs. Subject may be withdrawn by [CONTACT_093]; the 
subject my withdraw from the study; there may be an Intercurrent illness or event 
that precludes further to the study site or ability to evaluate disease.  
Treatment of Subjects : Particip ants will be treated with either TUDCA at a dose of 
1750 mg/day or placebo for [ADDRESS_877107] 6 months of follow -up, depending upon time of 
randomization. The study will be stopped based on occurrence of serious and 
unexpected adverse events, safety laboratory parameters and/or abnormal vital signs. 
Subjects will agree to avoid the following drugs during the study: non -insulin drugs 
that affect glucose   control, bile acid sequestering agents (cholestyramine and 
colestipol), aluminum based antacids, estrogens,  oral contraceptives and clofibrate. 
Subjects will be offered option of ongoing clinical care at Berrie Center for T1D as 
well as option for re -contact [CONTACT_653633], providing possibility for longer - term 
follow -up studies to be performed in the future on these subjects.  
Recruitment: Participants will be recruited from patients seen at the Berrie Center. 
Researchers will not directly approach a patient for recruitment until the patient has 
been informed by [CONTACT_653634].  
 
7. Informed consent process: Consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_16125], Dr . 
Robin Goland or by [CONTACT_653635]. Consent will be obtained 
verbally  in-person.  
v. Duration: All subjects will be followed for [ADDRESS_877108] 6 
months of  follow -up. 
vi DSMB: The progress of the study will be monitored by [CONTACT_653630], termination, 
or modification of the study. Based on an [ADDRESS_877109] twice yearly.  
vii The number of subjects who discontinue study treatment will also be included 
in the reports prepared for the  DSMB.  
 
8. Confidentiality of Study Data: Subjects' medical and research records will be 
confidential to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371]. Efforts will be made to keep subjects' 
personal information private. However, there is no guarantee for complete 
confidentiality. Subjects will be identified by a code, and personal information  from 
your records will not be released without the subject's written permission. When 
information from this study is published, subjects will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300]. All 
end-user devices will  be encrypted and all data will be password  protected.  
9. Privacy Protections: Study will be carried out in accordance with all HIPPA  
regulations.  
10. IND Holder  Responsibilities  
a) Ensure proper monitoring : The Sponsor -Investigator will ensure that the study 
protocol is followed, the data is accurate and the research subjects are safe. Safety data 
will be reviewed by [CONTACT_1034] -Investigator or designee as soon as it is received. As 
per  the “AE Reporting” document that was submitted as part of the protocol, events 
that are considered to be serious and unexpected “Suspected Adverse Reactions” or 
SARs, will be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar 
days from notification, and unexpected fatal or life -threatening SARs will be submitted 
no later than 7 calendar days from initial notification. Events that are considered to be 
“Unanticipated Problems” or UPs, will be submitted promptly, but no later than 7 
calendar days following  the occurrence  of the UP or knowledge  of the UP. The 
S-I will also notify the IRB and FDA of any serious deviations  from the protocol and any 
new information indicating added risks to  subjects.  
The S -I will review 100% of all source documentation of data collected including all 
safety data. The regulatory binder, along with other essential study documents, will 
also be reviewed to ensure that it is complete and up to date. The first review will  
occur after the first patient is enrolled and will continue periodically with new 
enrollments. Any discrepancies will be discussed with relevant study personnel for 
clarification and/or correction.  
b) Ensuring the study is conducted in accordance with the protocol: The Sponsor -
Investigator will continually monitor the study to ensure that the study is conducted 
in compliance with the IRB approved study protocol. Research personnel will be 
trained on the protocol, and the S -I will provide oversight to staff to ensure 
compliance. Potential subjects, research subjects, and study progress will be 
discussed at the weekly Type 1 Diabetes Departmental meeting. The performance of 
all aspects of the study, including  the methods  used to obtain  informed  consent,  will 
be conducted in accordance with all applicable state and federal guidelines as well as 
the principles for protection of research subjects as outlined in the declaration of 
Helsinki, ICH Guidelines for Good clinical practice, applicable local health authority 
regulations and US Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations.  
c) Review of ongoing investigations; evaluate safety and efficacy and report to the 
FDA and IRB : The progress of study will be monitored by [CONTACT_66633] (DSMB) which will review safety data and make recommendations 
regarding continuation, termination, or modification of the study. The DSMB will 
formally review the safety data, enrollment, and clinical outcome data at least twice 
yearly. In addition, safety data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_1034] -Investigator or 
designee as soon  as it is received , and will report findings to the FDA and IRB as 
appropriate.  
 
d) Keep and retain records/documentation: Adequate and accurate case histories on 
all subjects’ participation in the trial will be kept. This includes source data, progress 
notes, concomitant medications,  subject  eligibility  and documentation  of consent  as 
well as signature [CONTACT_653636]. A record will be maintained of all 
monitoring activities, findings, conclusions and actions taken to correct deficiencies. 
Submissions to the FDA and other FDA correspondence will also be filed. All data 
collected   from the study will be maintained in charts and password protected 
computers in a locked facility with limited access. Only the S -I and designee(s) will 
have access to the records. Confidentiality of data and protection of privacy of 
subjects will be ensured following the IRB policy and federal regulations 45 CRF 
46.111(a)(7) and 21 CRF  56.111(a)(7).  
 
e) Submit amendments, IND Safety Reports, and Annual reports to the  FDA : 
Protocol and information amendments will be submitted to the  FDA in accordance 
with 21 CFR 312.30 and 21 CFR 312.31, respectively.  
Safety reporting will be submitted to the FDA in accordance with  21 CFR 312.32 and 
as outlined in the “AE Reporting” document. Sponsor -Investigator will submit IND 
Safety Reports for any adverse experiences that are both serious and unexpected and 
associated with the use of the drug. Serious and unexpected suspected adverse 
reactions will be reported to FDA as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar 
days following the S -I’s initial receipt of the information. Unexpected fatal or life - 
threatening suspected adverse reactions will be reported to FDA as soon as possible, 
but no later than 7 calendar days following the S- I’s initial receipt of the information. 
Any relevant information not reported in the initial IND safety report will be submitted 
as a follow -up report no later than [ADDRESS_877110]. Annual reports  include information on the progress of 
the investigation, as well as  a summary of all safety reports submitted.  