Protocol Cover Page with Statistical Analysis Plan 
Version: 16  
Version Date 04 -16-2025  
Protocol Title: The effects of time restricted feeding on AGE -RAGE signaling in women at 
high risk for breast cancer (TREC study: Time Restricted Eating on Cancer risk)  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_410377]: 05038137  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 1 of 24
  
 
    
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
The effects of time restricted feeding on AGE -RAGE signaling in women at high risk for breast 
cancer  (TREC study: Time R estricted Eating on Cancer  risk) 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_410378] #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 2 of 24
  
 
     
1.0 Objectives  / Specific Aims  
 
Pre-diabetes and post -menopausal state are associated with increased breast cancer risk  (1, 2) . 
Prolonged nighttime fasting duration may be associated with reduced breast cancer risk  (3, 4) . The 
underlying mechanistic aspects of prolonged overnight fasting duration and relationship to breast cancer risk is not yet known.  
 Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are reactive metabolites that accumulate in tissues as we grow 
older. RAGE (receptor for AGE) is a cell surface protein that on AGE binding, leads to the transcriptional 
activation of inflammatory cascades and further  RAGE upregulation. This cyclical pathway has been 
associated with the development of cancer  (5, 6) . Soluble RAGE isoforms (sRAGE) of the full -length 
RAGE are a heterogeneous pool of solubilized receptors which act as decoy receptors for AGE to attenuate RAGE signaling. sRAGE thus acts as a host defense mechanism with potential to reduce 
AGE- RAGE toxicity , is impaired by [CONTACT_094]- diabetes (7), and shows an inverse correlation with cancer risk  (8, 
9).  
 Based upon our supporting data  (10), time restricted feeding (TRF) may play a role as a therapeutic 
modality to decrease breast cancer risk by [CONTACT_410390]: to reduce toxic AGE -RAGE axis effects.  
 
The objective of this study is to assess the impact of TRF on AGE -RAGE toxicity in women at higher risk 
of breast cancer . 
 
We hypothesize that time restricted feeding induced increases in soluble receptor for advanced glycation 
endproducts (sRAGE) may represent a cancer risk modification by [CONTACT_410391] -RAGE toxicity in post - 
menopausal women with pre -diabetes.  
 Specific Aim: To conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_6261] (RCT) designed to measure the 
effect of TRF on AGE -RAGE toxicity in postmenopausal women with pre- diabetes.  
 Pre-diabetes is a global problem, but is  particularly prevalent in the [LOCATION_002], with 47.1 million adult 
women affected (31.2%). There is  increasing evidence for pre- diabetes as an independent breast cancer 
risk factor, specifically in  postmenopausal women. This aim will directly address the impact of TRF in this 
high- risk population, over a 3- month period and will evaluate plasma AGE and sRAGE levels, dietary 
AGE intake, and renal clearance of  AGE.  
 
In a proof of concept study, we will examine effect of TRF (n: 22) vs control without TRF (n: 22) in 
postmenopausal women with pre- diabetes ( HbA1C 5.7 -6.4% and/or fasting glucose 100 -125 mg/dL). 
Plasma markers will be collected from each subject and stored for future analysis  
 
Conducting the pi[INVESTIGATOR_410379].  
 
 
2.0 Background 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-[ADDRESS_517720] energy restriction research in cancer has involved continuous energy restriction (11, 12) . However, 
compliance to continuous energy restriction has been difficult to achieve. Alternatives include intermittent  
fasting (IF) regimens including time restricted feeding (TRF).  
 Time restricted feeding is an emerging and popular dietary pattern, provides a consistent daily pattern to feeding and fasting, and increases overnight fasting duration (13, 14) . Studies show erratic eating 
window of > 15 hours per day in > 50% of people (15, 16), thus, a large proportion of individuals have a narrow overnight fasting window. Prior studies have shown that overweight or obese individuals with 
eating window of ≥ 14 hours can safely adopt an 8- 10 hour interval of time restricted eating over several 
weeks and achieve metabolic benefits (16-18).  
 Prolonged nighttime fasting duration may be associated with reduced breast cancer risk (3, 4) . The 
underlying mechanistic aspects of prolonged overnight fasting duration and relationship to breast cancer risk is not yet known.  
 
NIH funded clinical trials are currently recruiting breast cancer patients to investigate the effects of IF 
regimens, with concomitant anticancer treatments  (Study Registry ID: [REMOVED], 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]), and immunologic and metabolic effects in the preoperative and post -operative setting 
([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). A limitation of time restricted feeding studies is that they use controlled settings, include 
provision of meals, lack applicability to real life settings, and have not evaluated breast cancer ris k (18-
20).  
 We are exposed to high levels of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) through the lives we lead and 
the foods we eat. The pathogenic accumulation of AGEs on biological macromolecules is a hallmark of 
the aging process which leads to organ functional decline and chronic disease burden  (21).  
 RAGE (receptor for AGE) is a cell surface protein that on AGE binding, leads to the transcriptional activation of inflammatory cascades and further RAGE upregulation. This cyclical pathway has been 
associated with the development of cancer (5, 6) . Soluble RAGE isoforms (sRAGE) of the full -length 
RAGE are a heterogeneous pool of solubilized receptors which act as decoy receptors for AGE to attenuate RAGE signaling. sRAGE thus acts as a host defense mechanism with potential to reduce 
AGE- RAGE toxicity, is impaired by [CONTACT_094]- diabetes (7) , and shows an inverse correlation with cancer risk (8, 
9).  
 In subjects with type [ADDRESS_517721] (22). 
A high impact finding of our animal studies is that dietary -AGE induced increases in breast tumor growth 
are restricted by [CONTACT_410392], independent of total dietary AGE  (10). Dietary -AGE mediated increases in breast 
tumor growth were dependent upon the stromal expression of the transmembrane receptor for AGE 
(RAGE).  TRF lead to an increase in circulating RAGE, potentially indicating less membrane bound 
RAGE to mediate AGE toxicity.  
 
Based upon our supporting dat a, TRF may play a role as a therapeutic modality to decrease breast 
cancer risk by [CONTACT_410393]: to reduce toxic AGE -RAGE axis effects.  
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 4 of 24
  
 
   Pre-diabetes affects 31.2% of adult women in the U.S. (23). In postmenopausal women, metabolic 
syndrome is associated with 25% higher risk of incident breast cancer (2), and a two- fold higher breast 
cancer mortality (1). Hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance, the hallmark of pre- diabetes, may be a 
better predictor of breast cancer risk compared with BMI (24) . No previous study has investigated the 
role of TRF on AGE -RAGE associated breast cancer risk factors.  
 
The results of this study are expected to directly impact studies of breast cancer risk modification by [CONTACT_410394].  
 Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_410380], including retention rate, 
virtual  visits with psychologist or dietician attended, adherence with food frequency questionnaires  and 
overall adherence to eating pattern assigned (TRF vs control)  and the effect of TRF on measures of 
glycemia measured using the Freestyle Libre Pro  CGM.   
 
Rationale for use of Freestyle Libre Pro Continuous Glucose Monitor ( CGM ): In post -menopausal women 
with pre -diabetes, we are studying the effect of time restricted eating on breast cancer risk biomarkers.  
One of our secondary outcomes is the effect of time restricted eating on measures of glycemia measured through CGM  during baseline and end of study.  
Rationale:  
1. Metabolic syndrome which involves glucose dysregulation/hyperglycemia in pre -diabetes range is a 
marker for risk of breast cancer in post -menopausal women (1, 2) .  
2. Time restricted eating has been shown in studies of subjects with overweight and obesity to decrease 
fasting, mean and nocturnal glucose levels obtained through CGM. Other clinical trials have used 
Freestyle Libre Pro CGM in patients with metabolic syndrome  (25), but not in the context of breast 
cancer risk biomarkers and not in a controlled trial, which our pi[INVESTIGATOR_410381]. Intervention studies in post -menopausal overweight women without diabetes  but at high risk for breast cancer have used 
CGM to guide eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_410382] (26) .  
3. Prolonged overnight fasting which our intervention:  time restricted eating aims to achieve, has 
potential for reduction in breast cancer risk  (4), but mechanisms remain uncertain.  
One of the mechanisms may be improved glycemia from prolonged nighttime fasting  (3). This requires 
study in randomized trials.  
To study potential underlying mechanisms: In addition to advanced glycation end products as primary outcome, we aim to study glycemia as secondary outcome. Glycemia is best measured through 
continuous glucose monitoring rather than fasting glucose measured at Visit [ADDRESS_517722] cancer risk and interventions to reduce this 
risk.  
  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 5 of 24
  
 
   3.0 Intervention  to be studied  
Intervention: Timing of eating intervention, Group 1, TRF (daily eating period of 8 hours, before 8 PM); 
Group 2, Control without TRF (daily eating period ≥ 12 hours) . 
Duration of study: 14 day ru n in period, 3 month study duration.   
 
Time restricted feeding is well tolerated with minimal side effects, from previous studies (17, 20, 27)  and 
PI [CONTACT_123651]. We will use a fasting period of [ADDRESS_517723] people  (20). 
Based on these feasibility and acceptability results, we will use an eating period of [ADDRESS_517724] side effects.  
In a previous early time restricted feeding study, lower desire to eat, lower capacity to eat, and increased 
fullness was reported in the evening, with no differences in the morning, and no increase in hunger at 
any time, in intervention group compared with control  (20).  
 Subjects in our study will be given the following instructions: “If you get sensation of hunger or light 
headedness in the fasting period, this is most likely just dehydration. Drink noncaloric fluids and see if the 
sensation goes away. In most cases, this  sensation only lasts few minutes when you hydrate yourself. 
Your body is getting used to the new pattern of eating and these epi[INVESTIGATOR_410383], 
usually within 7 days. With the new eating pattern, your hunger will be reset to when your body is ready 
to eat or the new eating period, rather than during times of false signals from prior erratic eating 
patterns.”  
 
Subjects in the intervention group may take time to adapt to new time restricted feeding pattern, this  
individualized adaptation will be allowed for in our study, and subjects will be counseled on the same.  
Subjects in both groups will be supported by [CONTACT_410395], through 
established doxy.me  platform  or phone calls, at defined intervals throughout the study: pre- intervention, 
weekly for first month, alternate weeks for second month and once during last month of study. Subjects 
will receive weekly phone calls from research coordinator as needed. Such ongoing contact [CONTACT_410396].  
 
 
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
Primary End Point: Fasting plasma AGE, sRAGE levels ; 
Assess feasibility and adherence to time period of eating recommendation in both study groups . 
Secondary End Points:  
Fasting IGF -1 levels ; 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 6 of 24
  
 
   Fasting insulin levels;  
Glasgow Prognostic Scoring System: cumulative inflammation- based cancer -prognostic marker (CRP 
and albumin concentration) ;  
24 hour urinary AGE levels;  
CGM derived metrics: mean glucose, standard deviation (SD) of mean glucose values, co -efficient of 
variation (CV%) of sensor glucose levels, glucose management indicator (GMI%) from CGM data;  
Adherence to virtual visit with  psychologist or dietician;  
Adherence to time period of eating recommendation in both study groups: self -report during virtual visit s 
and through food photography/annotated entries;  
TRF affected  sleep patterns as assessed using American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2 -week sleep 
diaries . 
 
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria/ Study Population  
 The pi[INVESTIGATOR_410384] a proof of concept study, in postmenopausal women (no menstrual periods in the 
preceding 12 or more months) with pre- diabetes (A1C 5.7 -6.4% and/or fasting glucose 100 -125 mg/dL).  
 
Intervention: Timing of eating intervention, Group 1, TRF (daily eating period of 8 hours, before 8 PM); 
Group  2, Control without TRF (daily eating period ≥ 12 hours) . 
Duration of study: 14 day run  in period, 3 month study duration.  
 Patient Selection: Patients must meet all of the following criteria to be eligible for enrollment . 
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
Age ≥ 40 and ≤ 67; 
Postmenopausal women (no menstrual periods in the preceding 12 or more months) with pre- diabetes  
(A1C 5.7 -6.4% and/or fasting glucose 100 -125 mg/dL).  A1c lab and/or fasting glucose criteria will need to 
be met within 12  months of signing consent form .  Lab results can be obtained from prior lab result or 
study prescreening testing; 
Own a smart phone  with internet connection and capable of receiving and sending text messages and 
taking photographs:  
 Exclusion Criteria:  
Tobacco use (current or within last 2 years);  
Active malignancy or history of cancer;  
History of known liver disease (by [CONTACT_44898] : AST or ALT ≥ 3 times above upper limit of normal 
determined by [CONTACT_410397], imaging or biopsy: determined by [CONTACT_17594] ); 
History of kidney disease  (patient history and/or eGFR less than 45 mL/min/1.73m²)  
History of diabetes mellitus ; 
History of cardiovascular disease (MI, CHF);  
Current prescription medication use for diabetes; 
Medication affecting glucose metabolism or appetite or immunosuppression;  
Dietary restrictions: currently following vegetarian or vegan dietary pattern;  
Currently following intermittent fasting or time restricted feeding pattern or use in the last 3 months;  
Night shift worker (work schedule does not involve any period of work from 10 PM to 5 AM either on a  
regular or rotating basis);  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 7 of 24
  
 
   History of weight loss > 5% in the last 3 months;  
History of weight loss surgery ; 
BMI≥40 kg/m² exclusion;  
After informed consent and run  in period: Insufficient  documented food photography/annotated entries 
(does not log at least two entries a day for 10 of 14 days) during run in period will be excluded from 
randomization into the intervention period . 
 
Exclusion of Men: the research question addressed is relevant to only one gender  
 Exclusion of Children: the condition is rare in children as compared to adults  
 
Inclusion of Individuals Across Lifespan, rationale for age group selection:  
The proposed clinical trial is specific for postmenopausal women as the group of women at high risk for breast cancer and as we are focused on breast cancer prevention, we have excluded Age <40 or >67. 
Minimum age of 40 was chosen to exclude women with premature menopause (primary ovarian 
insufficiency)  who are different in hormonal milieu compared to women with menopause around usual 
age of menopause.  Maximum age of 67 was chosen for the following reasons: 
1. Safety of time restricted feeding in age group above [ADDRESS_517725] cancer rises acutely above age 70  (28) and implementing preventive measures in this 
age group might not have desired impact.  
3. Given the primary outcome of the study is assessment of AGE- RAGE axis, and AGE -RAGE axis  
abnormalities increase with age and glucose dysregulation , a wide age range at inclusion increases  
heterogeneity of the baseline plasma AGE and sRAGE levels with potential for wide confidence interval  
and decreased power to detect differences with intervention, this will likely not be resolved by  
[CONTACT_410398][INVESTIGATOR_410385]. Our future trials will however work to address  this 
limitation, having  gained insight from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
4. Mean age of menopause is 51.[ADDRESS_517726]. O’Neil have long standing experience in working with this age 
group, and this includes clinical and research experience.  
 MUSC SCTR (South Carolina Clinical and  Translational Research Institute) Nexus clinic provides 
facilities that are appropriate for all age groups.  
 
Given the focus of study is on role of time restricted feeding in breast cancer prevention, average age of  
menopause is age [ADDRESS_517727] met criteria for randomization we 
will halt enrollment.   
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 8 of 24
  
 
    
7.0 Setting  
 Single center study: MUSC  
SCTR Nexus clinic at MUSC will be used for study visits, vital signs, blood and urine collection.  
Blood collection and prescreening testing may be done at MUSC facilities  or other prescreen 
locations.  
 8.0 Recruitment Methods  
 We will use TriNetX, a healthcare research network tool through South Carolina Clinical and 
Translational Research Institute (SCTR), and MUSC EPIC recruitment reports to identify potential 
subjects. . We ran a query with our inclusion and exclusion criteria for patients receiving care at MUSC 
and identified [ADDRESS_517728] potential participants by [CONTACT_410399] , MyChart message , SMS text , 
e-mail or letter .  If a potentially eligible patient has a clinic appointment, the study team may notify the 
patient’s  provider and the provider may ask the patient if they are interested in speaking with the study 
team.  
Study team may email MUSC providers informing them of study, use of electronic medical 
record (EMR) alerts  and attach IRB approved study patient recruitment materials. For MUSC 
providers who agree, they will receive EMR alerts for potentially eligible patients .   If a potentially 
eligible patient gives verbal permission to the provider, their information may be provided to the 
study team for contact [CONTACT_74147].  
 
 
Advertising will be used in the form of posters and brochures . Posters may be posted on MUSC 
Facebook pages . Study information may be placed on MUSC digital screens. Recruitment may be done 
through community outreach events. MUSC providers may also give patients cards with study information and  study team contact.  When a potential participant contacts the study team, their MUSC 
medical record will be reviewed for eligibility.  
 
Numbers of potential participants and reasons for non- participation will be tracked throughout the 
recruitment  process to identify areas for improvement. We will evaluate recruitment strategies with 
potential participants and seek feedback on barriers/reason for non- participation in clinical trial. 
Participants can choose to not answer this question.  Screening logs will track reasons for ineligibility or 
non-participation, which will help identify barriers to trial success overall as well as barriers that limit 
enrollment of particular populations (e.g. based on age, race/ethnicity, zip code).  Recruitment and 
adherence will be tracked by [CONTACT_85434].  
  
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 9 of 24
  
 
   9.0 Consent Process  
 
Informed consent will be obtained in- person, remotely using MUSC’s Teleconsent platform or by 
[CONTACT_756].  Only subjects who are able to consent for themselves will be asked to participate.  The HIPPA 
authorization is part of the informed consent document.  
 
If the informed consent is obtained in -person, the consent discussion will take place in a private area and 
the potential participant will be given the opportunity to read the consent and ask questions . The 
participant will be given a signed copy of the consent form.   
 If the consent is obtained using MUSC’s Teleconsent platform using doxy.me, the potential participant will receive a web link which allows study personnel to present the consent form and allows the potential 
participant to ask questions and read the consent form. The consent form is signed by [CONTACT_410400] a copy for their record. 
 
If the consent is obtained via telephone, the consent form will be sent to the potential participant.  Study personnel will speak with the potential participant via a telephone call to discuss the consent form and 
answer any questions.  The participant will then sign the consent form and send the consent form to 
study personnel.   Study personnel will sign the consent form at the time of the phone discussion and attach the participant’s signed consent form when received to have a fully executed consent docu ment.  
 There is no waiting period between informing the prospective subject and obtaining the consent, 
however, the informed consent may be mailed or e- mailed to  a  potential research subject for  review and 
the consent process completed at another time . If the subject no longer wishes to participate , they may 
contact [CONTACT_410401].  All 
signed consent  forms will be kept in a locked office.   
 
A verbal prescreening consent may be obtained for a fingerstick hemoglobin A1C. The participant will be provided a prescreening information sheet.   
 
10.0 Study Design  / Methods  
 Study Design: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] , intervention, proof of concept , RCT, two arm, parallel design, single center  study. 
 
Timing of eating intervention 
 
Potential study subjects will be screened with phone interview.  
 
All efforts will be made to abstract laboratory measurements ( HbA1C, fasting glucose) from previous 
standard of care testing, to evaluate for study eligibility.  If a patient is otherwise eligible but  does  not 
have a Hb A1C or fasting glucose result in the last [ADDRESS_517729] results and 
guided to follow up with primary care provider.  
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 10 of 24
  
 
    
After informed consent of individuals meeting inclusion and exclusion criteria, participants  will undergo 14 
day run in period, and then randomized to intervention or control study arm.  
 
Intervention group : Group 1, TRF (daily eating period of 8 hours, before 8 PM);  
Control:  Group 2, Control without TRF (daily eating period ≥ 12 hours) . 
 Run in period: 2 weeks  
During run in period: Participants will receive automated, daily text messages from Twilio through 
REDCap with the request to upload photos and/or descriptions of each meal or snack. Date/time data will 
be programmatically extracted from the photos and inserted into participant  upload records to ensure the 
photo was taken at the appropriate time  
 
Randomization: at end of run in period.  Up to [ADDRESS_517730]. Hunt will assign a random ID and use this to label envelopes which will contain 
information on what arm of the study the participant will be randomized to. Group allocation will be 
indicated within the envelope.  Participants will be notified of randomized group by [CONTACT_648].  
 D
uration of study: 12 weeks  (+/- 7 days)  
 8-hour time restricted eating in the intervention arm limits daily dietary intake to consistent self -selected 
8-hour window, creating a [ADDRESS_517731].  
 
During both run  in and intervention period, participants will not be instructed to change diet quality, 
quantity or caloric content, or physical activity . 
 
V
isit 1, Week 0: Vital signs, height, weight , waist circumference , blood samples, 24 hour urine collection, 
questionnaires.  
 A Freestyle Libre Pro continuous glucose sensor (CGM) will be inserted on the participant’s  upper arm  to 
measure interstitial glucose.  This sensor will record glucose every [ADDRESS_517732] to upload photos and/or descriptions of each meal or snack.  
Participants  w ill be responsible for  all text message/data rates charged by [CONTACT_410402].  
 Week 0 -2: 14 day run in period will serve as baseline before randomization.  
Run in period will be used to determine whether patient is able to sufficiently log dietary intake via text 
messages . Participants will be discontinued from the study after run in period, if there is insufficient 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 11 of 24
  
 
   logging of dietary intake (does not log at least two entries a day for 10 of 14 days) during run in period 
and will not be randomized into the intervention period.  
 
 
A
t the end of baseline run in period: subjects will be randomized to intervention or control study arm.  
Intervention arm: Subjects will be instructed to self -select daily 8 hour eating window ending before 8 PM  
each day . Subjects in the intervention arm will be allowed to eat outside the 8- hour window up to 2 
days/week , to allow social commitments deemed necessary by [CONTACT_1766].  
 Control arm: Subjects will be asked to continue current daily eating period ≥ 12 hours . 
 
Participants may consume caffeine (without additional nutritional content such as cream, sugar, or 
artificial sweeteners) outside the eating window as needed, and document via text message.   
 
Participants will continue to  receive automated, daily text messages from Twilio through REDCap with 
the request to upload photos and/or descriptions of each meal, snack and beverage consumed.   
 W
eek 12: A CGM sensor kit and instructions will be mailed to participant.  A virtual visit or phone call will 
be done by [CONTACT_410403] 2.  
 
 
Reason for video visit for freestyle libre insertion by [CONTACT_410404] 12 of study: We aim to limit 
participant burden and also limit costs of additional visit.  
Participant will be trained during Visit [ADDRESS_517733] CGM is inserted, Video/phone visit for second CGM insertion will re -educate participants and help support insertion by [CONTACT_4317].   
 The Freestyle Libre was designed to be inserted by [CONTACT_410405].   We have experience with patients  inserting the sensor.   During the pandemic, other studies 
have used virtual  visits to assist participants with CGM sensor insertion (29). 
 Visit 2, Week 14 (+/- 7days)  Vital signs, weight, waist circumference, blood samples, [ADDRESS_517734] or dietician: through phone call or established doxy.me platform: pre -intervention, 
weekly for first month, alternate weeks for second month and once during last month of study, and at end of intervention .  
Week 3 after randomization before start of intervention.  
Week 4  
Week 5  
Week 6  
Week 8  
Week 10  
Week 12  
Week 14  before end of intervention.  
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 12 of 24
  
 
   The study coordinator may make phone calls and send text messages as needed to subjects to 
encourage compliance.   
 
Visit 1 and Visit 2:  Food Frequency Questionnaires 
(FFQ), sleep and exercise questionnaire .  
  
Schedule of Events Table:  
 
 Phone 
call In-
person or 
remote 
contact  [CONTACT_4838] 1,  
Enrollment  End of  
Run in Weeks 
3,4,5,6,8, 
10,12, 14  Visit 2  
Week 14 (+/ - 7 
days)  
Prescreening 
verbal consent, 
if indicated   X     
Inclusion/ 
Exclusion  X      
Informed 
Consent   X     
Dispense urine 
collection 
supplies   X X    
Fasting blood 
draw    X   X 
[ADDRESS_517735] or 
dietician     X X  
Phone call by 
[CONTACT_410406] #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 13 of 24
  
 
   encourage 
compliance  
 
 
Protocol:  
 
Prescreening point of care testing will be done at MUSC facilities  or recruitment outreach events .  Point 
of care testing will be done by [CONTACT_3476].  
 
SCTR Nexus clinic at MUSC will be used for study visits  1 and 2, to obtain vital signs, blood and urine 
collection.  Subjects will be asked to avoid consumption of food, drink or caffeine, except water, for 12 
hours prior to lab collection and avoid alcohol  and exercise for 2 days before lab collection. Fasting blood 
samples (drawn after 12 hours of fasting in both groups to help match fasting duration), 24 hour urine 
collection, and f ood frequency  (FFQ), power of food, food cravings, hunger and satiety, sleep and 
exercise questionnaires will be obtained before start of and at end of intervention. Subjects will be 
instructed to bring completed [ADDRESS_517736] or dietician, through phone call or 
established doxy.me platform, at defined intervals throughout the study: pre- intervention, weekly for first 
month, alternate weeks for second month and once during last month of study. Our  psychologist or 
dietician  will use data on patient self -report  to enhance compliance with study group recommendations 
by [CONTACT_410407]. The study coordinator will make phone calls to subjects as 
needed to encourage compliance. 
 
Blood and urine analysis: Plasma AGE and sRAGE (includes the cRAGE and esRAGE isoforms) will 
be measured by [CONTACT_6428] (as described in SA2). The Glasgow Prognostic Scoring System is a cumulative 
inflammation -based cancer -prognostic marker consisting of an assessment of serum elevation of CRP 
and decrease in albumin concentration by [CONTACT_6428] . 
 
 
Samples for comprehensive metabolic  panel, IGF- 1, lipid panel, fasting insulin, uric acid, hemoglobin 
A1C, C-reactive protein and 
Apolipoprotein B  will be obtained at baseline and at end of study  (visit 1 
and visit 2) . 
24-hour urinary AGE will be measured by [CONTACT_410408].  
 
Urine creatinine will be assessed.  
 
To assess renal handling and clearance, eGFR will be used to calculate AGE fractional excretion, and 
renal  clearance of AGE will be calculated.  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 14 of 24
  
 
    
Dietary AGE analysis: Daily dietary AGE content from food frequency questionnaires will be estimated 
using methods we have published previously  (30).  
 
 
11.0 Specimen Collection and Banking  
 
 
Fasting blood samples (drawn after 12 hours of fasting in both groups to help match fasting duration), [ADDRESS_517737]  and the Department of Public Health Sciences MUSC Server . 
 
The specimens will be stored for a minimum of 2 years (the duration of the study) and or/until the 
samples are depleted on use for analysis.  
  
[CONTACT_410422] will have access to the specimens and associated dat a including data from analysis.  
 
The research coordinator will transport research specimens from SCTR nexus clinic, using a sealed 
container containing biohazard label. The samples will be carried in person to the Hollings Cancer Center Translational Science Laboratory  for processing and storage in -80° C freezer.  
 All specimens are for use by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Karanchi, h is direct collaborators  at MUSC  and collaborators at Virginia 
Commonwealth University. Only [CONTACT_410422] will have the authority to release samples for analysis. All 
samples will be coded . We will use a Materials Transfer Agreement to send samples to collaborators at 
Virginia Commonwealth University. The samples sent to Virginia Commonwealth University will be de-
identified.  
 No samples will be used for genetic analysis.   No samples will be saved from the prescreening point of 
care testing.  
 
 
 12.0 Data Management   
 Statistical Considerations: Sample Size Determination : The sample size justification focuses on the  
primary aim of obtaining effect size and variance estimates required to plan an RCT. Effect sizes will be estimated via 95% confidence intervals within and between groups (primary analyses). For example, for our primary outcome of AGE level, we will estimate mean levels within the intervention and usual care 
arms of the study. For all continuous outcome variables, within each study arm, after accounting for a 
10.0% attrition rate post randomization n1=n2=20 4, we anticipate that within group mean levels can be 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 15 of 24
  
 
   estimated with precision ±0. 47s (s=standard deviation within each group). For between group 
comparisons, precision of effect size estimates is ±0. 64sp  comparing the intervention to usual care arm 
(sp is the pooled standard deviation across groups being compared).  
 
Analysis: Statistical analysis for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_410386]. We focus on our primary intervention outcome measures in this analysis section which are AGE 
and sRAGE levels, [ADDRESS_517738] size estimates of differences in AGE and sRAGE 
levels will be obtained using 95% confidence interval estimates of differences between means. If the 
difference in the magnitude of the mean in the exposure categories is sufficiently large to suggest a 
clinically meaningful effect, the difference along with its standard deviation will provide the necessary 
effect size measure for accurately determining sample size in the subsequent RCT. Similarly, the magnitude in the difference in changes (along with upper and lower 95% CI limits)  
can be used to indicate if the intervention produced a detectable clinically meaningful effect over our 3 -
month follow -up time.  
 Feasibility and adherence to time period of eating recommendation in both study groups will be 
measured by [CONTACT_410409].  
  
Exploratory Analyses: The objective of these exploratory analyses is to determine trends toward 
statistical significance rather than confirm/refute hypotheses with adequate statistical certainty (power). 
Descriptive statistics and frequency distributions will be calculated as appropriate for all demographic 
and baseline clinical variables for the total sample and by [CONTACT_410410]. Data will be transformed, or semi -parametric or nonparametric analysis procedures will be used as needed. Baseline 
values for variables will be compared for imbalance between intervention and control group using one-way analysis of variance (or nonparametric Kruskal -Wallis one -way ANOVA) followed by a pairwise 
multiple comparison procedure (e.g. Tukey's procedure), if indicated.  
Categorical baseline variables will be compared using chi -square analyses.  
 
The primary analyses will use the intent -to-treat (ITT) sample, comprised of all randomized participants. 
The completer sample will comprise subjects who complete the 3- month follow -up. Analyses will be 
carried out separately for the ITT sample and for the completer sample. Missing data for this study 
arising from premature exits (dropouts ) will result if a patient’s particip ation is terminated before the 3 
months study period is  completed. Participants will not be discontinued from the study because of non-
adherence; all will remain in the study unless consent is withdrawn or there are concerns regarding 
patient safety. We will adopt several approaches to dealing with missing data for the ITT analysis set: for 
continuous outcomes requiring a single endpoint  end-of-study value (change from baseline to 3 months), 
we will use multiple imputation methods to impute missing 3 -month values. We will evaluate the 
sensitivity of study conclusions to the presence of missing data by [CONTACT_410411]. We will use information on premature exits/missed 
appointments, food photography and dietary logs as indicators of participation, feasibility and fidelity of 
the treatment modalities being compared. Because thi s is a feasibility study, no adjustment will be made 
for analyses using the primary or secondary outcome measures.  
 Data Security:  
Data confidentiality, Data Acquisition and Management  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 16 of 24
  
 
    
We plan to use REDCap for data capture and management. REDCap (Research Electronic Data 
Capture) is a  software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of 
research and clinical trial data. REDCap  provides secure, web- based flexible applications, including real 
time validation rules with  automated data type and range checks at the time of entry. Exports are made 
available for several statistical  packages including SPSS, SAS, SATA, R and Microsoft Excel.  
 The study recruitment report , will be housed separately from the data capture in REDCap.  Study staff 
will not have access to the recruitment report after recruitment is complete.  
 
Surveys:  
The system allows the research team to create and design online surveys and engage respondents 
using a variety of notification methods.  
 Security, Privacy, and Confidentiality  
The underlying REDCap database is hosted in a secure data center at MUSC, a secure environment for 
data systems and servers on campus, and includes redundancy, failover capability, backups and 
extensive security checks. The system has several layers of protection including, user/group account 
management, "Data Access Groups" which allow data to be entered by [CONTACT_410412], audit trails for all changes, queries and reports, and Secure 
Sockets Laye r (SSL) encryption.  
 The data center in which the REDcap servers are housed has strict access control; only authorized core  
personnel may access the facility un escorted. Only authorized users are allowed to connect to the 
network, and the security of the network is actively monitored. Power and environmental controls have 
several layers of backups, from interruptible power supplies to alternate and redundant feeds to the local 
utility company. The REDcap system administrator contributes to the maintenance of institutional 
disaster recovery and business continuity plans. Load balancers and a highly fault tolerant SAN 
infrastructure contribute to high availability. All transactions are securely delivered to the application 
using SSL (SHA -1 with RSA Encryption; 2048 -bits). It is then transmitted internally (behind the firewall) to 
the database server. All transactions are logged at the server layer (http logging), application layer (REDCap logs activity to a database table), and the database layer (using both query and binary 
logging).  
 
The REDcap system relies upon the institution's identity and access management infrastructure. 
Password complexity, history and expi[INVESTIGATOR_187213]. Access 
to the data is managed by [CONTACT_410413]. All personnel must pass an employment background check before being issued an ID. Access to individual REDCap projects (and their data) is managed by [CONTACT_187268]. 
 
The physical security of the data center is actively monitored 24x7 by [CONTACT_410414]—
circuit video. The institution actively logs and monitors all communication to the application server 
(multiple firewall layers prevent direct external communication to the database server) and the system owner is alerted to any unusual activity. If warranted, the institution will immediately as well as 
automatically  ban offending IP addresses at the perimeter before they reach the application server. The 
application itself also rejects and bans IP addresses of anything it considers abnormal access.  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 17 of 24
  
 
    
Twilio ( https://www.twilio.com/ ) is an IS -S ecurity approved text message platform for research at MUSC 
and is integrated with REDCap. No data are stored when using Twilio; it only acts as a pass -thru. 
Personal health information is not sent via text message; only the phone number is used to send the 
message including a unique link to their web accessible food survey submission.   
 
 
13.
[ADDRESS_517739] (IRB) process 
that has been accredited by [CONTACT_410415]. 
MUSC has an integrated University Compliance Program that is organized via an active compliance 
liaison and committee structure for financial, clinical, academic and research compliance. This involves 
universal employee and professional  training as well as a confidential Compliance Helpline to encourage 
all members of the MUSC community to ask questions or voice concerns about topi[INVESTIGATOR_410387], research integrity, professional ethics, human subjects research, animal care and use, 
biological safety, potential conflicts of interests, patient confidentiality and laws and regulations. 
Institutional research compliances include a training and certification process for all key personnel 
engaged in research involving human subjects, vertebrate animals or biohazardous substances, as well as integration into curricula of appropriate instruction in the Responsible Conduct of Research.  
 Informed consent will be obtained in- person or remotely using MUSC’s Teleconsent platform or by 
[CONTACT_756].  Consent will only be obtained from the participant.  Children and cognitively impaired adults will not be enrolled.   
 
If the informed consent is obtained in -person, the consent discussion will take place in a private area and 
the potential participant will be given the opportunity to read the consent form and ask questions. The participant will be given a signed copy of the consent form.   
 
If the consent is obtained using MUSC’s Teleconsent platform using doxy.me, the potential participant 
will receive a web link which allows study personnel to present the consent form and allows the potential 
participant to ask questions and read the consent form. The consent form is signed by [CONTACT_410400] a copy for their record.  
 
 
 
 
If the consent is obtained via telephone, the consent form will be sent to the potential participant.  Study 
personnel will speak with the potential participant via a telephone call to discuss the consent form and answer any questions.  The participant may then sign the consent form and send the consent form to 
study personnel.  Study personnel will sign the consent form.  A signed copy of the consent form will be 
provided to the participant. . 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 18 of 24
  
 
    
Example 1:  
a. Our data and safety and monitoring plan will monitor all patients to ensure the safety of participants and the validity and integrity of the data. Protection to participants will be in accordance with guidelines 
set forth by [CONTACT_4289]. [CONTACT_410423]  has vast experience in clinical trials and has completed several trials. The 
level of monitoring will be as rigorous as in the prior published clinical trials. All serious, unexpected, 
AND related adverse events  will be reported to the IRB.  
b. Study will be registered in ClinicalTrials.gov before the first subject is enrolled.  
Any change in endpoints or analysis plan that occurs will be amended in ClinicalTrials.gov .  
The reporting of summary results information (including adverse events) will occur no later than 1 year after the completion date.  
 
 
Example 2:  
All adverse events (AE) will be reported and monitored. The AE's will be characterized by: [CONTACT_2236]/severity; expectedness; relatedness; frequency; outcome; treatment or action taken.  
Monitoring will be performed at each study visit by [CONTACT_410416],  adverse events will also 
be monitored during regular ly scheduled visits  (pre-intervention, weekly for first month, alternate weeks 
for second month and once during last month of study) with  the psychologist or dietician and such events 
will be repor ted to PI. All AEs will be recorded on an event form with  physician/nurses/coordinator notes 
attached.  
These will be reviewed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Karanchi and [CONTACT_410423] .  
We will have local study team meetings on a quarterly basis  to address the following areas: 1. Review 
progress of the research study, including participant recruitment, retention and adherence.  2. Review 
adverse events to determine whether there is any change to anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio of study 
particip ation, and whether the study should be continue as originally designed or be changed or 
terminated. 3. Review data forms, data quality and data confidentiality.  Drs. Karanchi and Cornier  will 
arrange for the meetings quarterly, make all materials available for review by [CONTACT_410417].  
All serious, unexpected, AND related adverse events will be reported to the MUSC IRB within 10 working 
days of learning of the event.  
 
Overall, the risks involved in this study are truly minimal and therefore based on the potential personal 
benefit  to the enrolled volunteers and the overall knowledge gained, reasonable.  
  
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects   
 
Participants will be discontinued from the study after informed consent and run  in period, if  there is  
insufficient text message logging(does not log at least two entries a day for 10 of 14 days) during run in 
period and will not be randomized in to the intervention period. 
 
P
articipants will not be discontinued from the study because of non- adherence after randomization ; all 
will remain in the study unless consent is withdrawn or there are concerns regarding patient safety. All such events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_410388].  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 19 of 24
  
 
    
The primary analyses will use the intent -to-treat (ITT) sample, comprised of all randomized participants. 
The completer sample will comprise subjects who complete the 3- month follow -up. Analyses will be 
carried out separately for the ITT sample and for the completer sample. Missing data for this study 
arising from premature exits (dropouts) will result if a patient’s participation is terminated before the 3 months study period is completed.  
 
Subjects may withdraw their consent by [CONTACT_410418] . 
 
 15.0 Risks to Subjects  
 Potential Risks. 
 
Loss of confidentiality :
  Protection of patient confidentiality is essential in human subjects  research. A 
HIPAA compliant de- identification process will be utilized which includes a unique computer -generated 
study ID for each enrolled patient. Study binders will be maintained in locked physical facilities and only 
accessible to authorized study team members to protect patient privacy.   No data are stored when using 
Twilio; it only acts as a pass -thru. PHI is also not sent via text message; only the phone number is used 
to send the message including a unique link to their web accessible food survey submission.    
Risks associated with blood collection i nclude momentary discomfort and/or bruising, in fection, excess 
bleeding, clotting, or fainting is possible, although unlikely.  
 
CGM sensor risk may include mild pain associated with sensor insertion, infection, redness, bleeding and 
reaction to adhesive such as swelling, rash, itching. 
 
R
isks and or discomforts of time restricted feeding may include increased sensation of hunger, 
headache, nausea, dizziness, fatigue. These risks and or discomforts are transient, can be related to 
dehydration and can be minimized by [CONTACT_410419]. There may also be an adaption period to minimize these risks. Time restricted feeding is well tolerated with minimal side effects (17, 20, 31) , from 
previous studies and PI (Karanchi) clinical experience.  
 In our study, subjects in both groups will have virtual visits with our psychologist or dietician, through 
phone call or established doxy.me platform, at defined intervals throughout the study: pre -intervention, 
weekly for first month, alternate weeks for second month and once during last month of study. Our psychologist or dietician will use data on patient self -report to enhance compliance with study group 
recommendations and address any patient concerns by [CONTACT_410420]. The 
study coordinator will make phone calls to subjects to encourage compliance.  Such ongoing contact [CONTACT_410396].  
 To allow for individual subject schedule and personal preference, we will allow patients in intervention group to self -select eating window of 8 hours  to be completed by 8 PM . 
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 20 of 24
  
 
   We will use a fasting period of 16 hours in the intervention group. In a previous controlled study  (20), 
daily fasting for [ADDRESS_517740] or dietician attended, adherence with food 
frequency questionnaires  and overall adherence to eating pattern assigned (TRF vs control). 
This feasibility and adherence data will enable better future study designs and provide insight on ways to  
improve compliance.   
Time restricted feeding has the potential to be a practical population wide cancer prevention strategy.  
Research findings will have limited or unknown external validity unless we answer complex implementation and dissemination questions. Telehealth has great potential  during attempts to 
implement many new research findings.  All the above has potential to mitigate cancer disparities through 
a practical, widely applicable and cost  effective  novel strategy.  
 
 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 21 of 24
  
 
    
Importance of the knowledge to be gained. 
Results from our studies will identify the role of TRF in interrupting AGE -RAGE signaling, provide insight 
into adherence to TRF intervention: in women at high risk of breast cancer.  
Results will provide the basis for larger  intervention studies, investigating sRAGE as a novel modifiable 
cancer risk factor by [CONTACT_410392]. The overarching broad long- term objective is to find a practical population 
wide cancer prevention strategy: Target AGE toxicity through TRF; to reduce breast cancer risk, incidence and recurrence.  
  
17.[ADDRESS_517741]’s completion of study.  Study results will be shared with subjects at the conclusion of study .  
 18.0 Drugs or Devices (if applicable)  
NA 
  
References  
 
1. Dibaba DT, Ogunsina K, Braithwaite D, Akinyemiju T. Metabolic syndrome and 
risk of breast cancer mortality by [CONTACT_410421], obesity, and subtype. Breast cancer research 
and treatment. 2019;174(1):209- 18. 
2. Guo M, Liu T, Li P, Wang T, Zeng C, Yang M, et al. Association Between 
Metabolic Syndrome and Breast Cancer Risk: An Updated Meta -Analysis of Follow -Up 
Studies. Frontiers in oncology. 2019;9:1290.  
3. Marinac CR, Natarajan L, Sears DD, Gallo LC, Hartman SJ, Arredondo E, et al. 
Prolonged Nightly Fasting and Breast Cancer Risk: Findings from NHANES (2009 -2010). 
Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for  Cancer Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_84463]. 2015;24(5):[ADDRESS_517742] Cancer Prognosis. JAMA oncology. 
2016;2(8):1049 -55. 
5. Omofuma OO, Turner DP, Peterson LL, Merchant AT, Zhang J, Steck SE. Dietary 
advanced glycation end- products (AGEs) and risk of breast cancer in the Prostate, Lung, 
Colorectal and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO). Cancer prevention research 
(Philade lphia, Pa). 2020.  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-[ADDRESS_517743] cancer in the 
National Institutes of Health- AARP Diet and Health Study. Cancer. 2020.  
7. Miranda ER, Somal VS, Mey JT, Blackburn BK, Wang E, Farabi S, et al. 
Circulating soluble RAGE isoforms are attenuated in obese, impaired- glucose -tolerant 
individuals and are associated with the development of type 2 diabetes. American journal of physiol ogy Endocrinology and metabolism. 2017;313(6):E631 -e40.  
8. He L, Bao H, Xue J, Zheng L, Zhang Q, Sun L, et al. Circulating soluble advanced 
glycation end product is inversely associated with the significant risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_50876]: evidence from a meta -analysis. Tumour biology : the journal of the Internation al 
Society for Oncodevelopmental Biology and Medicine. 2014;35(9):8749- 55. 
9. Huang Q, Mi J, Wang X, Liu F, Wang D, Yan D, et al. Genetically lowered 
concentrations of circulating sRAGE might cause an increased risk of cancer: Meta-analysis using Mendelian randomization. The Journal of international medical research. 2016;44(2):[ADDRESS_517744] CANCER MOUSE 
MODEL. JOURNAL OF INVESTIGATIVE MEDICINE; 2020: BMJ PUBLISHIN G 
GROUP BRITISH MED ASSOC HOUSE, TAVISTOCK SQUARE, LONDON 
WC1H  …. 
11. Harvie M, Howell A. Energy restriction and the prevention of breast cancer. The 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 2012;71(2):263 -75. 
12. Harvie MN, Howell T. Could Intermittent Energy Restriction and Intermittent 
Fasting Reduce Rates of Cancer in Obese, Overweight, and Normal-Weight Subjects? A Summary of Evidence. Advances in nutrition (Bethesda, Md). 2016;7(4):690- 705. 
13. Panda S. Circadian physiology of metabolism. Science ([LOCATION_001], NY). 
2016;354(6315):1008-15.  
14. Longo VD, Panda S. Fasting, Circadian Rhythms, and Time-Restricted Feeding in 
Healthy Lifespan. Cell Metab. 2016;23(6):1048 -59. 
15. Gupta NJ, Kumar V, Panda S. A camera -phone based study reveals erratic eating 
pattern and disrupted daily eating -fasting cycle among adults in India. PloS one. 
2017;12(3):e0172852.  
16. Gill S, Panda S. A Smartphone App Reveals Erratic Diurnal Eating Patterns in 
Humans that Can Be Modulated for Health Benefits. Cell Metab. 2015;22(5):789- 98. 
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 23 of 24
  
 
   17. Wilkinson MJ, Manoogian ENC, Zadourian A, Lo H, Fakhouri S, Shoghi A, et al. 
Ten-Hour Time -Restricted Eating Reduces Weight, Blood Pressure, and Atherogenic 
Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_154735]. Cell Metab. 2020;31(1):92-104 e5.  
18. Hutchison AT, Regmi P, Manoogian ENC, Fleischer JG, Wittert GA, Panda S, et al. 
Time -Restricted Feeding Improves Glucose Tolerance in Men at Risk for Type 2 Diabetes: 
A Randomized Crossover Trial. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md). 2019;27(5):724- 32. 
19. Kahleova H, Belinova L, Malinska H, Oliyarnyk O, Trnovska J, Skop V, et al. 
Eating two larger meals a day (breakfast and lunch) is more effective than six smaller 
meals in a reduced -energy regimen for patients with type 2 diabetes: a randomised 
crossov er study. Diabetologia. 2014;57(8):1552 -60. 
20. Sutton EF, Beyl R, Early KS, Cefalu WT, Ravussin E, Peterson CM. Early Time-
Restricted Feeding Improves Insulin Sensitivity, Blood Pressure, and Oxidative Stress Even without Weight Loss in Men with Prediabetes. Cell Metab. 2018;27(6):1212 -21.e3.  
21. Uribarri J, del Castillo MD, de la Maza MP, Filip R, Gugliucci A, Luevano-
Contreras C, et al. Dietary advanced glycation end products and their role in health and disease. Advances in nutrition (Bethesda, Md). 2015;6(4):461- 73. 
22. Miranda ER, Fuller KNZ, Perkins RK, Beisswenger PJ, Farabi SS, Quinn L, et al. 
Divergent Changes in Plasma AGEs and sRAGE Isoforms Following an Overnight Fast in T1DM. Nutrients. 2019;11(2).  
23. National Diabetes Statistics Report [Internet]. 2020. Available from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pdfs/data/statistics/national -diabetes -statistics-report.pdf . 
24. Gunter MJ, Xie X, Xue X, Kabat GC, Rohan TE, Wassertheil-Smoller S, et al. 
Breast cancer risk in metabolically healthy but overweight postmenopausal women. 
Cancer research. 2015;75(2):270 -4. 
25. Świątkiewicz I, Mila -Kierzenkowska C, Woźniak A, Szewczyk- Golec K, 
Nuszkiewicz J, Wróblewska J, et al. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_410389] -Restricted Eating in 
Patients with Metabolic Syndrome. Nutrients. 2021;13(2).  
26. Schembre SM, Jospe MR, Bedrick EJ, Li L, Brewster AM, Levy E, et al. Hunger 
Training as a Self -regulation Strategy in a Comprehensive Weight Loss Program for 
Breast Cancer Prevention: A Randomized Feasibility Study. Cancer prevention research (Philadelphia, Pa). 2022;15(3):193 -201. 
27. Jamshed H, Beyl RA, Della Manna DL, Yang ES, Ravussin E, Peterson CM. Early 
Time -Restricted Feeding Improves 24- Hour Glucose Levels and Affects Markers of the 
Circadian Clock, Aging, and Autophagy in Humans. Nutrients. 2019;11(6).  
28. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2020. CA: a cancer journal for 
clinicians. 2020;70(1):7-30.  
Version #16; Version Date 04-16-2025 
 
   
 Page 24 of 24
  
 
   29. Manoogian ENC, Zadourian A, Lo HC, Gutierrez NR, Shoghi A, Rosander A, et al. 
Protocol for a randomised controlled trial on the feasibility and effects of 10- hour time -
restricted eating on cardiometabolic disease risk among career firefighters doing 24- hour 
shift work: the Healthy Heroes Study. BMJ open. 2021;11(6):e045537.  
30. Walter KR, Ford ME, Gregoski MJ, Kramer RM, Knight KD, Spruill L, et al. 
Advanced glycation end products are elevated in estrogen receptor -positive breast cancer 
patients, alter response to therapy, and can be targeted by [CONTACT_279278]. Breast  
cancer research and treatment. 2018.  
31. Gabel K, Hoddy KK, Varady KA. Safety of 8-h time restricted feeding in adults 
with obesity. Applied physiology, nutrition, and metabolism = Physiologie appliquee, 
nutrition et metabolisme. 2019;44(1):107- 9. 
 