The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of                             
Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU Population
                             NCT 02614248
                              June 29, 2017
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of
Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
Co-Principal Investigators:  Sunny Arikat, MD, Stacie Haack, RN and Michelle Martin,
RN
Sub-Investigators:  Jon Lemke, PhD, Stacie Salsbury, PhD, Molly Frazier, RN
and Emma Hendricks
Institution:     Genesis Health System
Location:    Genesis Medical Center, Davenport
[ADDRESS_742532] 
Davenport, IA [ZIP_CODE]
Introduction/Background
Diaper dermatitis is an inflammatory reaction of the skin in the perineal area of infants, and is a 
common pediatric condition. It can have many causes including i nfection (yeast, bacterial or 
viral), friction irritatio n, skin sensitivity to urine an d/or feces, and allergies (perfumes). The 
overall incidence of diaper d ermatitis in infants is estimated to be bet ween 7% and 35% .1,[ADDRESS_742533] with diapered skin raises the skin pH, thus increasing skin 
permeabilit y and activating fecal enzymes, which are known irritants that can caus e skin 
breakdown.2 Skin breakdown encourages secondary skin infections that increases the 
challenge of managing diaper dermatitis. Diaper dermatitis ca n range in severity from 
generalized erythema (redness of the skin) to open wounds, and ca n cause significant pain for 
babies and distress for parents.
Premature infants have been found to be at higher risk for diaper dermatitis due to their age, 
and varying degrees of underdeveloped skin structures and functions.[ADDRESS_742534] a higher risk due to increased incidence of diarrhea, cancer, gastrointestinal 
anomalies, neurological disorders, genetic syndromes and malnutritio n.2 Genesis Neon atal 
Intensive Care Unit (NICU) infants are often on a number of antibiotics that cause diarrhea, 
which significan tly contributes to the challenge s Genesis faces with diaper dermatitis. Genesis 
estimates its incidence of diaper dermatitis in the NICU is approximatel y 50%.
The current practice of preventing and treating diaper d ermatitis is inconsistent and ofte n not 
evidence-based. One comprehensive literature review supports tre atment of diaper dermatitis 
through frequent diaper change s, use of super absorbent diapers and protection of th e perineal 
skin with a product c ontaining petrolat um and/or zinc oxide.[ADDRESS_742535] 
established guidelines for neonatal skin care,2,3,4,5 they often use products that contain 
numerous chemicals. Due to the increasing problem with bioaccumulation of numerous 
chemicals in the environment and increased exposure in infants and children, th e National 
Association of Neonatal Nurses ha s encouraged the remo val of chemicals in th e NICU. 
Following this recomme ndation, Genesi s is interested in examining the s afety and effectiveness 
of using unrefined, organic coconut oil for the prevention and treatment of diaper dermatitis 
among NICU babies at Genesis Medical Center, Davenport.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   1
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
Coconut oil is the fatty oil obtained  from the dried, solid part of the endosperm of Cocos 
Nucifera. It is a mixture of mainly saturated fatty acids (me dium chain triglycerides), with lauric 
acid being the most abundant. In vitro and in vivo research has provided evidence that lauric 
acid is effective at killing a wide variety of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and 
Candida species.[ADDRESS_742536] found 
coconut oil to be an effective treatment for atopic dermatitis in pediatric and adult patients. One 
randomized controlled trial of 117 pediatric patients found topi[INVESTIGATOR_565336] (SCORin g of Atopic 
Dermatitis [SCORAD]) and instrumental (transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] [T EWL], skin capacitance) 
assessments.9 Another double-blind controlled tr ial of 52 adults found virgin coconut oil was 
significantly more effective than virgin oli ve oil at reducing the prevalence of Staphylococcus 
aureus (RR=0.1 0, p=0.0028), indicating cocon ut oil may have an antimi crobial effect .10
Purpose/Objectives
The purpose of the study is to examine the safety and effectiveness of the use of coconut oil for 
the prevention and treatment of diaper dermatiti s among NICU babie s at Genesis Medical 
Center, Davenport.
Primary objectives:
1. To determine and compare the number of days free of diaper dermatitis ( “time to rash ”)
within and between the two treatment groups (i.e., coconut oil and standard of care) 
2. To identify the adverse effects of coconut oil when used a s a barrier cream for the
prevention and treatment of diaper dermatitis
Secondary objectives:
3. To determine and compare the duration of diaper dermatitis within and between the two
treatment groups.
4. To determine and compare changes in diaper dermatitis severity within and bet ween the
two treatment groups.
5. To determine and compare parent satisfaction scores within and bet ween the two
treatment groups at discharge.
Study Design
This is a prospective, randomized controlled trial to examine the effect of coconut oil on the 
prevention and treatment of diaper derm atitis in NICU babies at Genesis Medical Center, 
Davenport. The study will be carried out in the Genesis Medical Center, Davenport NICU. The
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   2
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
Genesis NICU is a Level II Regional Neonatology Center staffed full tim e by [CONTACT_565345]'s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The Genesis NICU provides family-centered 
treatment for babies born as early as 30 weeks gestation.
Participant Selection and Recruitment
The study will include 150 participants. There are no existing studies examining th e time to 
diaper dermatitis for any treatment options (coco nut oil or others), therefore, we conducted the 
simulation belo w to estimate a sample size that will have enough po wer to measure the primary 
outcomes in the study. The simulation generated time to discharge from a Gamma (3,2) and 
time to rash for coconut oil of Gamma (2,2) and standard Gamma (3,2). Patients that were 
discharged before getting diaper dermatitis were censored.
The inclusion/exclusion criteria for th e study is outlined belo w:
1. Inclusion criteria:
a. Babies admitted to the Genesis NICU
b. Anticipated stay in the NICU is ≥ [ADDRESS_742537] of their baby ’s skin condition during the trial
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   3
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
2. Exclusion criteria:
a. Babies with a gestational age <[ADDRESS_742538] a hazelnut or coco nut allergy
f. Babies whose mother is <18 years of age
g. Other severe acute medical conditions that ma y increase the risk associated with
trial participation
3. Recruitment
Participants  will be recruited from the Genesi s NICU. Each da y the nursing staff will 
identify babies and parents that meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria. The nursing staff 
will notify the Genesis Clinical Research Coordinators (CRC) of eligible participants.  The 
CRCs will also be screening the NICU patient list s to identify newly admitted babies.  The 
CRC will approach the  eligible participants to dis cuss the study and informed consent. 
The participants will have up to 2 4 hours to review the informed consent and decide 
whether or not to participate.
Genesis  estimates that approximately 200 – 250 babies are admitted to the NICU 
annually, which sugge sts that it is feasible t o enroll 150 babies in ap proximately 1.5 
years for this study. The estim ated accrual rate is 8 babies  per month. The research 
team will be reviewing the accrual rate on a monthly basis. If recruitment is slower than 
expected, the team will examine the reasons for slow recruitment and make 
adjustments, as needed. Any changes to recruitment procedures will be presented to the 
IRB before implementation.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   4
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
Study Procedure
Participants  that are eligible to participate in the study (those me eting the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria) will review and sign the study consent form. After consenting to participate the 
participants will be randomized into one of two groups.
The schema below illustrates how participants will be randomized.
Participants meeting the inclusion/exclusion
criteria and consent to participate
RANDOMIZATION
Study Arm 1: Coconut OilStudy Arm 2: Standard of Care
No Treatment
Participants meeting the inclusion/exclusion critera that consent to participate in the study will 
be randomized to one of two Study Arms: Coconut Oil or Standard of Care. The Genesis 
Business Intelligence Unit will utilize block randomization (blocks of 5) to create 200 cards (50 
extra to allow for potential participant attrition) that will include the randomi zed study arm and a 
randomly assigned patient number. The se cards will be placed in a sec urity envelope and 
stored in the Research office. Upon receipt of an informed consent, a Clinical Research 
Coordinator will draw an envelope in sequential order and will notify the participant’s parents of 
his/her study arm. The Clinical Research Coordinato r will also place th e correct treatment (i.e., 
coconut oil or standard of care) in the participant’s room and will notify the charge nurse in the 
NICU of the participant ’s study arm. The Clinical Research Coordin ator will use a 
Randomization Log t o record the participant’s name, birthdate, study number, stud y arm and 
coordinator initials. Thi s log will be kept confide ntial and sec ured throughout the study period in 
the locked Research office.
Participants in each  arm will be cleaned with the same Pampers Sensitive brand wipes and will 
receive the same Pampers brand disposable dia per.The Coconut Oil group will receive coconut 
oil at each diaper change. An indi vidual sterili zed container of u nrefined, organic cocon ut oil will 
be placed in the participant’s room. The coconut oil will be obtained  from a large jar and will be 
placed into the individual sterilized container at the time of randomization. The coconut oil will 
be labeled with the participant’s name [CONTACT_18131]. At each diaper ch ange participants will
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   5
Participants that develop diaper
dermatitis
Participants that develop diaper
dermatitis
Continue Coconut Oil
Coconut oil until discharge or primary
safety endpoint (skin eroded and/or
blistered with bleeding)
Continue Standard of Care
ZGuard until discharge or primary 
safety endpoint (skin eroded and/or
blistered with bleeding)
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
be cleaned with Pampers brand wipes and a generous layer of coconut oil will be applied to the 
diaper area, including buttocks and creases between thighs and hips. Participants in the 
Coconut Oil grou p that develop diaper dermatitis will continue to use coc onut oil until they are 
discharged or reach the primary safety endpoint. They will also be s witched from using Pampers 
Sensitive wipes to a dry washcloth and water, per the standard of care.
The Standard of Care group will receive the current standard of care for diaper dermatiti s. The 
standard of care is no treatment until a diaper dermatitis appears. If diaper dermatitis appears, 
participants will receive a generou s layer of Medline Remed y Phytoplex Z-Guard Skin 
Protectant, which is an over-the-counter skin protectant with the following active ingredients: 
white petrolatum 57% and zinc oxide 17%. Th e participants will also be switched from using 
Pampers Sensitive wipes to a dry washcloth and water, per the standard of care.
The primary safety endpoint for this study will be skin that is eroded and/ or blistered in the 
diaper area with bleeding . If a participant reaches the primary safety endpoint their study 
participation will be complete and additional diaper d ermatitis treatment options can be used, 
per currently available treatment options in the Genesis NICU.
The research staff will conduct a quality check each week using a sample of participant rooms 
to ensure the participants continue to receive care based  on the study arm they were assigned 
to and the diaper dermatitis logs are being completed fo r every diaper change.
Study Outcomes
Primary Outcomes:
1. The number of days free from diaper dermatitis, as measured by [CONTACT_565346].
2. The number of participants that develop adverse effects.
Secondary Outcomes:
3. For participants that develop diaper dermatitis, the number of days with diaper dermatitis
(duration of diaper dermatitis).
4. For participants that develop diaper derm atitis, the number of days until the participant
reaches the primary endpoint (skin eroded and/or blistered with bleeding), as measured 
by [CONTACT_565347].
5. The level of parent satisfaction with the diaper  dermatitis tre atment used, as me asured
by [CONTACT_565348].
The study outcomes will be collected for all participants and comparisons will be made between 
the two study arms.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   [ADDRESS_742539] information 
about diaper dermatitis at every diaper change using the diaper dermatitis log. The follo wing 
information will be included in the log:
1. Date
2. Time
3. Presence of pi[INVESTIGATOR_275448]11
4. Presence of pi[INVESTIGATOR_565337].11
5. Presence of eroded and/or blistered skin with bleeding (prim ary safety endpoint )11
Discharge
The Clinical Research Coordinator or nursing staff in the Genesi s NICU will distribute th e Parent 
Satisfaction Survey to the parent(s). The Parent Satisfaction Survey will include the following 
questions:
1. How satisfied were you with your bab y’s participation in this study?
5 - Very satisfied
4 - Satisfied
3 - Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
2 - Dissatisfied
1 - Very Dissatisfied
2. How satisfied were you with the diaper rash treatment your baby [CONTACT_565349]?
5 - Very satisfied
4 - Satisfied
3 - Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied
2 - Dissatisfied
1 - Very Dissatisfied
3. How would you rate the quality of the diaper rash treatment your baby [CONTACT_565350]?
5 - Excellent
4 - Very good
3 - Good
2 - Fair
1 - Poor
4. How effective was the diaper rash treatment at preventing diaper rash for your baby?
5 - Very effective
4 - Somewhat effective
3 - Average
2 - Somewhat ineffective
1 - Very ineffective
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   7
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
5. How effective was the diaper rash tre atment at treating diaper rash f or your baby?
5 - Very effective
4 - Somewhat effective
3 - Average
2 - Somewhat ineffective
1 - Very ineffective
Not applicable – My baby [CONTACT_565351]
6. How likely are you to use the same diaper rash treatment you received at Genesis at
home?
5 - Very likely
4 - Somewhat likely
3 - Undecided
2 - Somewhat unlikely
1 - Very unlikely
7. What did you like a bout your baby’s diaper rash treatment?
8. What could we have done better for your baby’s diaper ras h treatment?
Additional Data Variables
Once the study recruitment goal is met, medical record data will be pulled for each participant. 
The data collected from the medical record will include all data liste d in the table belo w.
Table One: Data Collection Variables
Variable Source Definition
Patient Name [CONTACT_565356]’s first name, middle initial and last name
[CONTACT_565357]/Ethnicity Cerner PowerchartDocumentation of the patients sel f-identified race
and ethnicity
Gender Cerner PowerchartMale or Female
Height Cerner PowerchartHeight in inches at start of study
Weight Cerner PowerchartTotal body weight (kilograms) at start of study
Length of Stay Cerner PowerchartTotal days during inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_565338], reason for admission, allergies, family
history
Major
ComorbiditiesCerner PowerchartDocumentation of the patient ’s major medical
conditions
Infection Cerner PowerchartDiagnosis of infection - Review temp,  WBCs,
S/B/Ls, culture and sensitivity results, and physician 
progress notes; Record as yes or no that infection is 
or is not present and document infection site
Medications Cerner PowerchartList of medications documented in EMR.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   [ADDRESS_742540] been studies examining the risks of other treatment options (i.e., Nystatin, 
Clotrimazole, Micona zole Nitrate) for diaper dermatitis.12,[ADDRESS_742541] for treating diaper dermatitis, this study will be 
using the available evidence from the studies referenced abo ve to track the following potential 
risks: infrequent
Skin around diaper area
• Worsening diaper rash
• Eczema (itchy, red, dry skin)
• Skin inflammation or swelling
Infections
• Yeast (Candida) infection (Dark red patches especially in the folds of skin near the
thighs, may include yellow, fluid-filled spots)
General symptoms
• Cough
• Runny nose
• Watery eyes
• Skin redness
• Discomfort
Stomach and Intestines
• Diarrhea
There may be additional risks that we do not know about with the topi[INVESTIGATOR_565339] Z- 
Guard.
There is also the risk of loss of confidentiality. There is a small chance someone outside of the 
study team could see the participant’s protected health information. Every effort will be mad e to 
protect participant privacy and a strict data management plan has been developed and 
described in the Data Management section of the protocol.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   9
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
Safety Reporting
The following adverse event definition s will be used  for this study:
Term Definition
Adverse 
Event (AE)Any untoward medical occurrence, unintended d isease or inj ury, or any
untoward clinical signs in participants, whether or not related to the use of any 
study treatments. This includes events related to:
•  Coconut oil
•  Usual care (no preventative treatment for diaper rash)
•  Z-Guard (diaper rash treatment)
•  The procedures involved (study-required)
Serious 
Adverse 
Event (SAE)Adverse event that:
•  Led to death
•  Led to a serious deterioration in the health of the subject that either
resulted in:
o  a life-threatening illness or injury, or
o  a permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function,
or
o  in-patient or prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_565340], or
o  medical or surgical intervention to prevent life-threatening
illness or injury or permanent impairment to a body structure or
a body function
Note: Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a pre-existing condition, o r a procedure 
required by [CONTACT_760], without serious deterioration in health, is not 
considered a serious adverse event.
The following classifications will be used to determine whether the AE was related or unrelated 
to the use of coconut oil or Z-Guard:
Classification Description
UnrelatedThe adverse event is determined  to be due to a concurrent illness or effect of 
another drug and is not related to study treatments including usual care, 
coconut oil or Z-Guard.
Related•  The adverse event is determined  to be potentially related to th e usual
care, cocon ut oil or Z-Guard, and an alternative etiology is equally or less
likely compared to the potential relationship to usual care, coconut oil, or
Z-Guard, or
•  There is a strong relationship to usual care, coconut oil, or Z-Guard, or
recurs on re-application, and another etiology is unlikely, or
•  There is no other reasonable medical explanation for the event.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   10
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
The following definitions will be used to determine the severity of the AE (adapted from the 
National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v4.0):14
Term Definition
Mild Clinical or diagnostic observations only; no intervention needed
ModerateMinimal, local or noninvasive intervention needed
SevereMedically significant but not immediately life-threatening; systemic drug
therapy or other treatment needed
Life
ThreateningLife threatening consequences; urgent intervention needed
Fatal Death related to the adverse event
The following definitions will be used to assess whether an adverse event is expected or 
unexpected:[ADDRESS_742542](s).
UnexpectedAny adverse event occurring in one or more subjects participating in the
study, the nature, severity, or frequency of which is not consistent with either:
1. The known or foreseeable risks associated with the study procedures
that are described in the protocol
2. The expected natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder,
or condition of the subject(s) experiencing the adverse event and the
subject’s predisposing risk factor profile for the adverse event.
The Clinical Research Coordinator will assess ad verse events on a weekly basis for this study 
by [CONTACT_565352]. Serious adverse events will also be identified by [CONTACT_565353]. The Clinical 
Research Coordinator will report SAEs to [CONTACT_565358] (Principal In vestigator) to determine the 
need for additional treatment. Adverse events that meet the criteria outlined by [CONTACT_565354] 
(i.e., events that are unanticipated, serious or anticipated that occur with greater frequency or 
severity than expected) will be reported to the Genesis IRB within [ADDRESS_742543] tests for 
comparing binomial characteri stics, stochastic ordering for ordinal distributions (e xact
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   11
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
permutation tests) and Wilcoxon rank sum tests for continuous factors. All will be analyzed with 
Cytel Studio StatXact Analyses.
Initially, data will be presented as a Kaplan-Meier plot of time to rash for the log-rank 
comparison of standard treatment and coconut oil. This will provide the probability of rash by 
[CONTACT_565355].
Cox proportional analyses will be used to control for risk factors to determine whether they are 
effect modifiers or confounders of the treatment effect.
Data Management
Data will be stored i n a locked filing cabinet within the Principal In vestigator’s office in the 
Genesis NICU and with the Clinical Research C oordinator in the Clinical Research office at 
Genesis Medical Center East C ampus. Once all data is transferred to the GHS Biostatistics 
Group for data analysis, it will be coded and stor ed in a secure database. The code li nking the 
participant names and identification numbers will be secured a t the GHS Biostatistic s Group and 
only research team members will have access to  the code. All research team memb ers have 
completed NIH Human Subjects Protection training and are committed to protecting the 
confidentiality of participants and following HIPAA guidelines.
Quality Assurance, Monitoring, & Safety
A Data and Safety Monitoring Board will be convened to oversee this study. The Board will meet 
at the start of the study and at least bi-annually to review adverse e vents and th e study data. All 
adverse events will be reported promptly to the Data and Safety Monitoring Board and the 
Genesis IRB.
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   12
The Use of Coconut Oil for the Prevention and Treatment of Diaper Dermatitis in the NICU population
References
1. Rowe J, McCall E, Kent B. Clinical effectiveness of barrier preparations in the prevention
and treatment of nappy dermatitis in infants and preschool children of nappy age. Int J 
Evid Based Healthc 2008 ; 6: 3–23.
2. Heimall LM, Storey B, Stellar JJ, Davis KF. Beginning at the bottom: evidence-based
care of diaper dermatitis. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs  2012; 37: 10 –6.
3. Lund, C. H., Kulle r, J., Lane, A. T., Lott, J.  W., Raines, D. A., & Thomas, K.K. Neonatal
skin care: Evaluation of the AWHONN/NANN research-based practice project on 
knowledge and skin care practices. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Neonatal 
Nursing 2001; 30(1): 30-40.
4. Santo A.E., Choquette A. Experience of adapting and implementing an evidence-based
nursing quideline for prevention of diaper dermatitis in a paediatric oncology setting. Int J 
Evid Based Healthc.  2013; 11: 121-127.
5. Pasek TA, Geyser A, Sigoni M, Harris P, Warner J, Spenc e A, et al. Skin care team in
the pediatric intensive care unit: a model for excellence. Critical Care Nurse. 2008;
28(2): 125 – 135.
6. Elmore L.K., Nance G, Singleton S and Lorenz L. Treatment of dermal infections with
topi[INVESTIGATOR_565341]. Natural Medicine Journal . 2014; 6(5).
7. Solanki K, Matnani M, Mrudula K, e t al. Transcutaneous absor ption of topi[INVESTIGATOR_565342]. Indian Pediatrics.  2005; 42: 998-1005.
8. Sankaranarayanan K, Mondkar JA, Chauhan MM, et al. Oil massage in neonates: an
open randomized controlled study of coconut versus mineral oil. Indian Pediatrics.  2005; 
42: 877-884.
9. Evangelista MT, Reyes JR, bad-Casintahan F and Lope-Villafu erte L. The effect of
topi[INVESTIGATOR_565343] x, transepi[INVESTIGATOR_565344] s and skin 
capacitance in mild to moderate pediatric atopic dermatitis: a randomized, doubl e-blind, 
clinical trial. Int J Dermatol . 2014; 53(1): 100-108.
10. Verallo-Rowell V, Dillague K, Syah-Tjunda wan B. Novel antibacterial and emollient
effects of coconut and virgin olive oils in adult atopic dermatitis. Dermatitis. 2008; 19(6): 
308-315.
11. Minnich SM, Moeschberg er M, Anderson J. Effect of oxyquinoline ointment on diaper
dermatitis. Dermatol Nurs.  1991; 3:25-8.
12. Hoeger PH, Stark S and Jost G. Efficacy and safety of two different antifungal pastes in
infants with diaper dermatitis; a randomized, controlled stud y. JEADV. 2010; 24: 1094-
1098.
13. Concannon P, Gisoldi E, Phillips S and Grossman R. Diaper dermatitis: a therapeutic
dilemma. Results of a double-blind placebo controlled trial of miconazole nitrate 0.25%. 
Pediatric Dermatology . 2001; 18(2): 149-155.
14. US Department of Health and H uman Services. Common t erminology criteria for
adverse events (CTCAE) Version 4.0.
http://evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/CTCAE_4.03_2010-06-14_QuickReference_5x7.pdf 
15. US Department of Health and H uman Services. Guidance o n reviewing and reporting
unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others and adverse events.
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/advevntguid.html#Q3
Protocol V3.0_29Jun2017   13