Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              1 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  A. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
A1.  Significance:  PTSD  is a debilitating disorder  that is common among veterans returning from 
Iraq and Afghanistan (OIF/OEF) due to the high risk of exposure to combat and other trauma . Recently, 
emerging evidence suggest  a strong  link between PTSD and ADHD . The co -occurr ing ADHD  
symptoms are likely to reflect the impai rment in cognitive function, which often expressed as reduced 
attention span, concentration difficulties, impaired decision -making abilities, and memory problems 
(LaGarde et al, 2010).  Co-occurring ADHD c ognitive impairment s add another layer of complexity to th e 
disease process and pose  more severe impairment s in daily function . While treatment s for the 
avoidance , arousal,  and re -experiencing symptoms associated with  PTSD for military personnel are 
readily  available, substantial gaps exist in the treatment of the cognitive deficit s associated with PTSD . 
Further , ADHD cognitive symptoms are associated with poorer patient attendance to medical 
appointments, poorer medication compliance and increased risk for psychotherapy resistance and 
medication abuse or divers ion (Kolar et al., 2008) . Consistent attendance is the best predictor of patient 
functional recovery from PTSD (Tarrier et al., 2000).  Subsequently, untreated co -occurring ADHD 
cognitive symptoms that increase the risk for problems in patients’ PTSD treatm ent engagement, PTSD 
treatment responses , functional impairment, and quality of life have tremendous negative impact on  
treatment outcome.  However, in so far, studies have no t examined the impact that treating ADHD 
cognitive symptoms have  on PTSD  treatment engagement, outcome, and functional recovery. The 
proposed study directly address es this knowledge gap by [CONTACT_415631] (ATX)  in treatment of  ADHD cognitive symptoms  among those with  comorbid 
ADHD /PTSD. Our research is directly responsive to the mission  of RR&D -SPi[INVESTIGATOR_21392] “to maximize 
functional recovery” of cognitive function in PTSD. The outcome of the proposed research will be 
significant, because it will provide a knowledge base to help determine wh o is at risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_415612], thereby [CONTACT_415632] -out. More importantly, the new knowledge may lead to discovering 
new targets for novel and more effective treatments for PTSD. This novel clinical trial may have 
immediate benefit to Veterans by [CONTACT_415633], reducing ADHD symptom relate d 
disabilities  and further improving quality of  life for veterans with comorbid ADHD /PTSD .  
A2.   Review of the Literatu re Relevant to This Application  
Cognitive I mpairments  in Comorbid ADHD/ PTSD:  Combat Veterans with PTSD often show cog nitive 
impairments in attention, working memory, executive functions, and inhibitory control  (Vasterling, 2007) , 
a cluster of  symptoms  overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_415613] . It has been proposed  that the 
cognitive deficits in PTSD may be related to the  same  disturbance of fronto -temporal system s observed 
in ADHD . This hypothesis has been  supported by [CONTACT_415634] (Nee et al 2007, Shin et 
al 2006). Further, i mpaired response inhibition task, G o-NoGo (GNG) , a measure of executive function 
has been observed both in ADHD and in PTSD patients ( Fisher et al 2011; Swick et al 2012). Finally,  
there is substantially higher rates of PTSD development  in individuals with  ADHD (Hanson et al 2012 ), 
suggesting that both may share common biological risks . Although the exact mechanism s of co-
occurrence of cognitive symptoms in both ADHD and PTSD is  not yet fully known , research has  
suggested that th is cognitive impairment play s an important role in PTSD development, treatment 
response, and prognostic outcomes  (Aupperle et al, 2012) . Cognitive Function and PTSD Treatment 
Outcome: Many cross -sectional studies have documented strong evidence that PTSD is associated 
with significant cognitive impairment, and the presence of cognitive impairment s is related to poorer 
treatment outcome  (Verwoerd et al, 20 09; Wild and Gur, 2008; Walter et al, 2010 ). As a result, the 
DSM -[ADDRESS_523952] been 
developed  for PTSD, but as many as 50% of individuals with PTSD  do not fully respond to the standard 
interventions  and drop -out rates are often cited around 30% . Many of  these standard treatments are 
developed predominantly to address re-experiencing and avoidance symptoms, but not cognitive 
impairment . However, in patients with PTSD, the impairment in occupa tional, academic, and social 
functioning often persists after receiving specialized treatment,  including  successful treatment of PTSD 
symptoms  of avoidance and re-experiencing  (Westphal et al, 2011).  It is well documented that intact 
cognitive function is essential for activities of daily li ving, including self -care. However, problematic 
treatment behaviors commonly associated with impaired cognitive functioning are not targeted as part 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              2 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/[ADDRESS_523953] predictors of outcome for exposure -based 
PTSD treatment  (Tarrier et al., 2000). Given that up  to 50% of patients do not respond well to first line 
treatments  for PTSD , it is imperative to identify potential ri sk factors for poor outcome and seek  novel 
treatment strategies to improvement  rehabilitation . The standard treatments do not directly target 
cognitive deficits, which may account for poor treatment compliance as well as the failure of  functional 
recovery even after successful treatment in PTSD.  Cognitive Deficit and Risk of PTSD: Recent  
prospective  longitudinal studies have started to emerge and have documented evidence tha t pre-
trauma subtle  cognitive  deficits were related to the development of PTSD  (Vasterling et al, 2006) . A 
veteran twin study suggests that lower pre -trauma cognitive function may constitute a risk for the 
development of PTSD after trauma  exposure  (Gilbertson et al, 2006). In summary, the cognitive deficit 
is at least partially respon sible for PTSD susceptibility, treatment resistance, and poor functional 
recovery. The proposed study  will investigate the potential mechanisms of cognitive function in the 
initiation, maintenance, and recovery of combat and other trauma related PTSD , in an effort to  inform  
approaches  to improve  in primary, secondary, and tertiary treatment of  PTSD  in Veterans .  
A3. ATX and T reatment of Cognitive I mpairment in ADHD/PTSD : ATX is a selective 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_26331] (SNRI) . By [CONTACT_415635][INVESTIGATOR_156121] (NET) , ATX 
enhances  noradrenergic and  dopaminergic signaling in the pre-frontal cortex  (PFC) , but not striatum 
(By[CONTACT_415636] 2002). This feature explains  why ATX reduces ADHD symptoms and improves PFC 
cognitive function but has no abuse potential. Therefore , it become s more  preferred therapeutic agent 
in patients  where substance abuse is a problem or concern . Given the increased risk for substance 
abuse do cumented in patients with PTSD (Terriar et al, 2000), the reduced risk for abuse poses a 
substantial benefit to this drug.  Currently,  ATX is the only non -stimulant medication approved  by [CONTACT_415637]. Studies have shown  that ATX is safe, effective, and well tolerated with mild side 
effects profile in acute and long -term treatment of ADHD in children, adolescent, and adult ( reviewed by 
[CONTACT_415638], 2009).  Compared to MPH, ATX showed similar efficacy in the improvement o f ADHD 
symptoms (Wang et al, 2007). In addition, ATX also exhibited beneficial effect on comorbid anxiety and 
depression in ADHD pat ients (Geller et al, 2007; Deviss, 2008) , both of which are highly comorbid with 
PTSD . Further, the ATX may have potential t o improve PTSD as similar SNRI, reboxetine , has shown 
efficacy in reducing PTSD symptoms in motor vehicle accident related PTSD (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_374687] 2006). The 
above literature review provides strong rational for choosing ATX to treat cognitive symptoms in 
Vetera ns with ADHD/PTSD.   
A4. Relevance to Veterans Health : PTSD is a debilitating condition that develops following 
exposure to traumatic events. Exposure  to potentially life threatening events  increases dramatically in 
military service , particular ly for those directly engaged in combat . As such , PTSD is highly prevalent in 
military personnel and Veterans , estimated at between 11 and 18% of those returning  from wars (True 
et al, 1993 ; Hoge et al , 2004). The primary mental health symptoms and secondary  comorbid disorders 
associated with PTSD create a tremendous burden for the Veteran, their families, and for the VA health 
care delivery system, as well as incurring great society burden due to lack of workforce productivity that 
can result from this condi tion. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_415614], many patients 
do not or only partially respond to current treatment  or withdraw from treatment  (Fontana and 
Rosenheck 1997; Johnson et. al.  1999; Prigerson et. al.  2001) . The evidence f rom our research and 
others indicates that  comorbid ADHD  cognitive impairment is a n additional additive  risk for the 
development and maintenance of PTSD symptoms (Aupperle et al, 2012). However, as yet, the 
mechanism for this is unknown. This study serves to be the first to both  address the lack of research on 
both the shared  mechanism  of cognitive dy sfunction and preliminary trial of a treatment for improving  
PTSD  treatment response. T he proposed stud y will conduct a novel clinical trial to assess efficacy of 
ATX to improve treatment outcome and compliance as assessed by [CONTACT_4676] 1) functional impairment 
and quality of life and 2) reduce the cognitive impairment symptoms observed in both ADHD and 
comorb id PTSD . The outcome of this study will improve the understanding how cognitive  deficit 
influence PTSD symptoms after exposure to trauma, and will provide the means to intervene through 
either primary preventive or secondary treatment strategies. The  trial will immediately benefit Veterans 
and military personnel who suffer from comorbid ADHD/ PTSD, since they will provide more direct  
treatment of cognitive symptoms that will improve their occupational and academic function  more 
immediately , improve efficacy of PTSD treatments, and help prevent  long-term disability. A long -term 
benefit of this research is that once an association is established among cognitive function  and 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              3 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  ADHD /PTSD, methods can be developed to target the  early intervention and treatment strat egies  and 
treatment retention enhancements . As a result, the approaches of prevention or early intervention may 
increase individual resilience  to traumatic events, and enhance Veteran’s ability  to continue their 
performance and engagement in the workforce . 
 
B. PRELIMINARY DATA  
B1. Experiences: PI, [CONTACT_62169] and Co -investigator s, [CONTACT_415649], [CONTACT_415650] , and [CONTACT_415651]  have 
extensive experiences in genetic and treatment research in PTSD and ADHD . [CONTACT_62169] has conducted 
numerous candidate gene research studies in various psychiatric disorders. [CONTACT_62169] moved to 
Charleston VA Medical Center in 2007, and that same year he was awarded a Meirt Review Award to 
study monoamine genotypes in Veterans with  and without PTSD. He recruited [ADDRESS_523954] found an association between homozygote short (S) genotype of 5 -HTTLPR 
and PTSD  (Wang et al, 201 1). Recently, [CONTACT_62169]’s research has been focused on identifying 
biomarkers  for various psychiatric disorders (Wang et al, 2006; Gilber t et al, 2006; Wang et al, 2007 ). In 
2011, he  won another Merit Review Award titled “Cortical Excitability: Biomarker and Endophenotype in 
Combat Related PTSD” . The on -going project provided essent ial preliminary data for this application . 
[CONTACT_415652] , co-investigator, has extensive history as co -investigator and  researcher on social 
impact on the etiology and course of  externalizing disorders and modification of interventions to reduce 
barrier s to engagement , will h elp to develop psychological assessments and with statistical analysis. 
[CONTACT_335439] , [CONTACT_415650] , and [CONTACT_415651]  have recently joined this research team as co -
investigators to aid in pharmaceutical trial design, 
cognitive assessm ent, diagnostic assessment , and 
recruitment . Combined, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254] -investigators 
are well prepared to undertake the proposed 
research, as they have the scope, breadth of 
expertise, and resources needed to complete the 
research successfully.  
B2.  Preliminary Data:  
B2.1. PTSD, Cognitive Deficit, and ADHD : In our 
on-going project, we evaluated combat veterans with and without PTSD with Clinician Administered 
PTSD Scale (CAPS), Conners ' Adult ADHD Rating Scales –Self Report: Short Version (CAARS –S:S, 
score > 65 is regarded clinical significant cognitive impairment; Conner et al 1999). We include d [ADDRESS_523955] (13 with CAARS > 65, 45% ) and 18 controls (2 with SAARS > 65, 
11%).The results indicate d PTSD  diagnosis  is associated with si gnificant ly higher  self-reported 
attentional and executive dysfunction  symptoms  (χ2 = 5.81, p = 0.16). Th is was also evident  in the 
significant  correlation s between CAPS and CAARS -S:S scores ( R=0.497 p < 0.01) , and CAPS  PTSD 
symptoms (β=.26, t =1.88, p =.0 5), and PTSD patient cognitive deficit severity  as measured by [CONTACT_415639] -S:S ( β=.59, t=4.81, p<.001, R2 =.34).  These findings further support available literature 
suggesting  that cognitive symptoms associated with  PTSD  diagnosis  are highly corelated with patients’  
functional outcome .                                                                               
B2.2.  MPH Improve s Cognitive Function: Furthe r, we conducted additional preliminary analyses with 
8 PTSD individuals with cognitive symptoms who were treated with MPH . Analyses conducted on 
clinical assessment s of patients’  PTSD and ADHD symptoms  (CAPS and CAARS -S:S) before and after 
MPH  treatment revealed significant  reductions in both  PTSD  and self-reported cognitive deficit 
symptoms (see Fig1 and Fig2 ; F (1, 7) = 22.39, p =.002 ).  
 
C. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS:  
C1. Overview: The proposed project is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], feasibility double -blind crossover study to investigate the 
efficacy and safety of ATX with comorbid PTSD /ADHD patients to  reduc e cognitive symptoms,  improv e 
treatment retention and response, and improve patient’s activities of daily living . A prospective, 10 -
week,  fixed -dose,  randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, and cross -over trial of ATX as an 
adjunctive medication to ot her therapi[INVESTIGATOR_415615]/ADHD.  The short -duration, cro ssover design, and blind enable  the study to be feasible in both 
time and funding level.  The Primary Objective  is to assess  the efficacy of fixed dose of ATX (80mg) 
(compared with placebo) in reducing cognitive symptoms in comorbid ADHD/ PTSD such that functional 

Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              4 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/[ADDRESS_523956] spectrum of 
PTSD symptoms. The proposed study will take 10 weeks and include two phases ( Phase  I: Initial 
Phase, 5 weeks; Phase II : Crossover Phase, 5 weeks). The crossover design was employed to  both 
achieve study objectives while minimizing  costs . Each phase consists two peri ods: Period I  (week1 in 
Phase I  and week6  in phase II)  consist  of psychological and physical assessments and placebo lead-
in/wash -out, in which subjects take 6 days  placebo; Period II  (weeks 2 -5 in Phase I and week7 -10 in 
Phase II)  consist of  treatment with either atomoxetine 80mg daily or placebo daily). This projec t will 
take advantage of established on-going PTSD assessment and treatment clinical trials c urrently  
performed at the Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center (RHJVAMC ) to facilitate recruitment . The 
proposed 50 veterans with ADHD/PTSD will be recruited from these on -going trials  enabling both 
comprehensive assessment and evaluation of patients’ engagement in ongoing PTSD treatments . 
Subjects will be  randomized and assigned by [CONTACT_1704] ([CONTACT_415653])  into crossover 
group 1 (ATX  at Phase I , then placebo  at Phase II ) or 2 ( placebo  at Phase I , then ATX  at Phase II ) with 
both placebo and medication administered through pharmacy . Subjects and other investigators are thus 
able to remain  blinded to the order of treatment assignment throughout the stu dy. The 1 -week interval 
was based on published pharmacokinetic data for 4 week  doses of ATX ( Witcher et al, 2003 ). After 
crossover, patients will be unblinded and data will be cleaned  and analyzed.  Final follow up will be [ADDRESS_523957] visit.  
C2. Investigational Agent : ATX is a non-stimulant , FDA approved agent for treatment of ADHD.  ATX 
80mg is the most common adult dose used in ADHD with and without comorbid condition (Adler et al, 
2009). In this project, 80 mg ATX and placebo will be prepared in capsules with identical appearance 
and similar taste by [CONTACT_105410], Indianapo lis, Indiana .  
Adverse effects  (AE): Typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855] a dverse events reported significantly more frequently  with atomoxetine 
than placebo included dry mouth, insomnia, nausea, decreased appetite, constipation, dizziness, 
sweating, dysuria, sexual problems and palpi [INVESTIGATOR_814]. Modest increases in heart rate and blood pressure 
were well tolerated and gradually decreased on cessation of treatment.  
Contraindications : ATX is contraindicated in patients known to be hypersensitive to the drug  and 
during treatment with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (hypertensive crises may result). Medication will be 
stored and dispensed from the Charleston VAMC investigational drug pharmacy.  Records will be 
maintained of all doses dispensed, and Veterans will be asked to return all unus ed tablets and empty 
prescription vials to the clinic for assessment of treatment compliance.  
C3. Method  
Subject Recruitment:  All the subjects will be recruited through Charleston VAMC  Mental Health 
Service Line . The Charleston VAMC has a large base of pot ential  comorbid  PTSD and ADHD 
participants. Many clinical trials , including pharmaceutical and psychotherapeutic  trials are currently 
conducted  in conjunction with  the Charleston VAMC PTSD Clinical Team (PCT) clinic  and the PCT 
team receives numerous  PTSD evaluation consults from OIF/OEF program  and Primary Care . 
Currently the PCT clinic receives  200 to 250 new referral s yearly of  OIF/OEF Veterans who meet full 
criteria for PTSD  based on a comprehensive initial intake interview  that includes CAPS and functional 
impairment assessments . PI, [CONTACT_62169] currently manage s pharmacological con sults for OIF and OEF 
Veterans.  A HIPAA waiver of authorization will be on file with the IRB giving the research team 
permission to recruit from pr ior study populations.  Veterans wi th PTSD from OIF/OEF  are uniquely 
suited for this study  because statistically they have fewer  confounding variables  for this clinical trial , 
including  medical conditions  such as hypertension or glaucoma  and cognitive impai rments such as 
dementia . Interested veterans who participate in clinical trials  are explained the nature, purpose, and 
procedure of the study and  asked to sign an informed consent that will explain in detail the purpose of 
the study, potential risks and be nefits of pharmacotherapy study participation and alternative treatment s 
that may be available . 
Inclusion Criteria:  1) OIF/OEF Veteran s age 20 to 60 with PTSD and significant ADHD symptoms  
(CAARS -S:S > 6 5); 2) Good physical health.  3) Trauma exposure sufficient to meet Category A of 
PTSD criteria (Breslau and Kessler 2001)  
Exclusion Criteria: 1) Age younger than 20 or greater than 60. 2) Known sensitivity to ATX. 3) 
Presence of disorders t hat could conceivably  be exacerbated by [CONTACT_415640] (specifically, narrow 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              5 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  angle closure glaucoma, urinary outflow obstruction, hypertension, and neurological disorders, 
particularly tics and Tourette's syndrome, or a history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_63798]) . 4) use of concomitant 
medi cation that could potentially interact with atomoxetine including monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOI), antihypertensive medication, or any concomitant medication that was a cytochrome 2D6 
inhibitor (CYP2D6)  as atomoxetine's elimination involves the CYP2D6 system . 5) An active or lifetime 
major mental health diagnosis as determined by [CONTACT_2681] -IV Axis I Disorders, including schizophrenia, 
schizoaffective disorder, psychotic disorder not otherwise specified, bipolar I  disorder, bipolar II 
disorder, bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. The project will allow presence of depressive 
disorders if the depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_415616] . 6) Current substance dependence and 
abuse (within 3 month). 7) Females who a re pregnant  or likely to become pregnant . 8) Active s uicidal 
thoughts and behavior.                                          
Suicide Screen:  A screen for recent or current suicidal thought and/or attempts will be conducted 
before the interview. If a subjec t reports suicidal thought at the time of interview, his physician or 
psychiatrist will be informed and the subject will be escorted to the ER immediately for further 
evaluation  and treatment .         
Screening/Baseline Evaluation :  During this visit subjects will review and  sign the Informed Consent. 
Eligibility to participate in this portion of the study will be determined by a minimum 6 -month duration of 
PTSD illness, CAARS -S:S score of 65 or higher  as well as a positive ADHD score  for the adult section 
of the Conners ADHD interview , a total CAPS severity score of 5 5 or higher at the baseline visit . If the 
subjects qualify, then a medical/psychiatric history will be obtained along with laboratory safety 
measures, including electroca rdiogram ( EKG ), liver and renal panel (SMA -12), complete blood count 
with differential, urine toxicology screen and concomitant med s.  If the veteran is female, urine 
pregnancy test will be obtained.    
PTSD Medication Stabilization:  Those patients meeting inclusion criteria will be asked to maintain 
medications at current dosages where medically possible.  Participants who have not initiated new 
prescription medications in the previous [ADDRESS_523958] -assessment to ensure medication 
stabilization, at which point the assessment battery will be re -administered.  
Efficacy Assessments and Outcome Measurement:   Primary outcome measures will be conducted 
at baseline and all subsequent visits by a qualified research  clinician using the  CAARS -S:S, with the  
Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale -IV (BAARS -IV) and Adult ADHD Quality of Life -29 (AAQoL -29) 
conducted at follow up visits.  Clinical Global Impression Severity (CGI -S, at baseline only) and Clinical 
Global Impression Improvement (CGI -I, at all visits except baseline  and W1 ) will be done as well .  
Additi onal assessments for evaluating secondary outcomes will include the Clinician Administered 
PTSD Scale (CAPS),  Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM -D). Quality of life will be assessed using the 
Veteran’s version of the Medical Outcomes Study 36 -Item Sh ort-Form H ealth Survey (SF36 -V). In 
addition to subjective measures, the response inhibition task Go/NoGo (GNG)  and Stop Signal  (SST) 
will be used as objective assessments to measure ATX treatment outcomes . 
Key Assessment Measures:  
Mini-International Neuropsychiatri c Interview  (MINI, Sheehan et al., 1998): The MINI is an abbreviated 
structured psychiatric interview that takes approximately [ADDRESS_523959] reliability  for screening psychiatric disorders .   
CAADID Part II: Diagnostic Criteria  (CAADID, Epstein et al., 2001) The CAADID is a structured 
interview that assists in the process of diagnosing adult ADHD. This assessment is appropriate for 
those [ADDRESS_523960] effective when used with other types of ADHD measures, such as the 
CAARS™.  
Clinician Administered PTSD scale  (CAPS, Weathers et al., 2000 ): The CAPS is a structured interview 
that assesses both frequency and intensity of PTSD symptoms according to  DSM -IV criteria. It provides 
both a dichotomous index for PTSD diagnoses and a continuous index of PTSD symptom severity.  
Conners’ Adult ADHD Rating Scales -Self-Report: Short Version  (CAARS -S:S, Conner et al, 1999 ):  The 
CAARS -S:S is a 26 -item questionnaire that assesses symptoms of ADHD in persons aged ≥18 years. 
T-scores above 65 indicate a likelihood of moderate to severe ADHD symptoms and impairment .  
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              6 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  The Adult ADHD Quality of Life -29 (AAQOL -29, Brod et al,  2006 ): AAQoL -29 is a participant -reported 
outcome measure used to examine disease  specific  functional impairments and quality of life for adults  
with ADHD. The AAQOL -29 includes Life Productivity, Psychological  Health, Quality of Relationships, 
and Life Outlook  subscales. Higher scores on the AAQOL -29 indicate better  functioning.  
The Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale -IV (BAARS -IV, Barkley, 2011 ): BAARS -IV offers an essential tool 
for assessing current ADHD symptoms and domains of impairment and recollections of childhood 
symptoms . BAARS -IV is empi[INVESTIGATOR_142408], reliable, and valid  for diagnosis and cognitive evaluation of 
adult ADHD.    
Response Inhibition Task:  The Go -NoGo (GNG) and Stop -Signal Task (SST)  are classical paradigm 
to investigate r esponse inhibition and response execution (higher -order motor and attention control) 
processing, and a reliable marker reflecting medial prefrontal functioning (Fallgatter and Str ik, 1999 ). 
Further, ATX has been found to improve GNG  and SST  performance in ADHD patients ( Nandam et al 
2014; Chamberlain  et al, 200 7). GNG/SST require  participants to implement their response to one kind 
of stimuli (Go /Start ) and to withhold the responses to the other kind of stimuli (NoGo /Stop ). Therefore, 
GNG commission errors  SST time  are a reliable marker to examine individual executive function and to 
measure ATX treatment response. GNG and SST will be performed at [CONTACT_62169]’s TMS Laboratory.   
 
Table 1 :  Outline of study procedures and assessments  of the study.  
 
  Initial Assessments  Screening/ 
Baseline  Phase I 
Start  Phase I 
Treatment 
visit Phase I 
Follow up, 
Crossover 
lead in  Phase II  
Start  Phase II 
Treatment 
visit Phase II 
Follow up  Final Follow  
up visit  
visit (week)  1  2 (W1)  3 (W2)  4 (W5)  5 (W6)  6 (W7)  7 (W10)  8 (W14)  
Consent  X               
MINI  X               
CAADID Part II  X               
CES X        
DTS X        
CGI-S X             
CGI-I    X X X X X   
CAARS -S:S X X X X X X X X 
BAARS  X    X     X X 
AAQoL -29 X     X     X   
SF-36-V X     X     X   
CAPS -IV X     X     X   
Ham -D X   X X X X X X 
Ham -A X   X X X X X   
GNG/SST  X   X X   X   
Vital Signs  X X X X X X X   
Labs, EKG  X   X   X    
UDS  X     X         
Dispense med    X X   X X     
Compliance      X X  X X     
Concom meds  X X X   X X     
AEs     X    X     
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              7 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  Safety assessments:   At each study visit, safety will be assessed by [CONTACT_35755]: weight, sitting blood 
pressure, heart rate, adverse events (except baseline), and use of concomitant medications.  
Laboratory and EKG assessments will be performed at baseline, one and seven  weeks. Anxiety, 
depression, and suicidal ideation will be assessed with Ham -A, Ham -D, and suicide screen in each of 
the visits. Compliance will be assessed by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_415617] .  Referrals to the 
Charleston PTSD clinic will be conducte d at the final study visit  for any remaining PTSD symptoms and 
the CBT clinic for remaining ADHD symptoms .                     
Follow -up:   The final visit, [ADDRESS_523961] adequate follow -up care in the Charleston VAMC PTSD 
or Mental Health Outpatient Clinic either with continued medication or psycho therapy. This visit may be 
done over the phone or by [CONTACT_2319].            
Diagnostic Procedures:  After obtaining the informed consent, a trained research assistant will perform 
the initial interview and administer all of the diagnostic scales to the participant s. [CONTACT_415653], [CONTACT_415654] (MD, Co -Investigator) and [CONTACT_415655] (PI) will make the final diagnosis based on 
all the data collected. The DSM -IV diagnostic criteria will be used to ascertain each phenotype.  
Database Management:   All collected clinical, demographic, and geographic data will be stored in 
Research Database Storage in the Charleston VAMC PTSD Program. The genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_415618]. Wang’s laboratory Research Database. For each patient, the clinical database will provide 
information as following: age, gender, ethnic origin, medical and psychiatric diagnosis, family history, 
developmental history, and existence of comorbidity. The genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_415619].   Strict confid entiality is maintained regarding database information, 
which is secured and for research purposes only. All the specimens from the subjects will be labeled by 
[CONTACT_415641]. Names will not appear on specimens, nor will they be available in the labora tory. The 
person conducting the genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_415620]. No names or identifiable 
information will be used in any data presentation.  
Statistic al Analyse s and Power Estimation:  As a pi[INVESTIGATOR_415621] -blind crossover 
design , the design affords greater power and need for enrollment of fewer subjects. Similar design with 
this medication has suggested sample size of [ADDRESS_523962] sizes typi[INVESTIGATOR_415622] (Bain et al 2013). To account for patient dropouts, the study will 
enroll/consent up to 50 patients. This will ensure 40 subjects complete the entire study. This design will  
allow initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_415623] , improved control and tes ting of causation, and greater power  in the 
allotted time -frame and funding level. The primary consideration is difference in outcome between 
baseline and endpoint with ATX treatment  as compared to placebo . The primary outcome measure a 
priori will be the change in total CAARS -S:S scores , AAQoL -[ADDRESS_523963] of ATX treatment (medication × ADHD  TAU) on treatment response 
(pre- and post -treatment measures of  cognitive symptoms of  ADHD  and PTSD , function al impairment 
in daily living domains , and global functioning). A mixed model, repeated -measures multivariate 
analysis of variance with pre - and p ost-ADHD  TAU treatment ADHD  symptoms, functioning, and global 
functioning entered as repeated measures ; and ATX treatment entered as  the between factor s. Pre -
treatment PTSD severity scores ( CAPS ) will also  be entered into the model as a potential explanato ry 
covariate. Simple slopes using repeated measures ANOVA will be used to probe significant interactions  
C4. Expected Results, Potential Problems and Alternative Strategies:  Upon completion of the 
two objectives , we expect to find treatment with ATX enhance s cognitive function , improve quality of life  
and treatment outcome  among Veterans with ADHD/ PTSD. We predict that the GNG and Stop Signal 
correlate with self-reported cognitive function in PTSD and can be used as biomarkers to measure 
treatment re sponse. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_415624], t here is a remote possibility that some of the 
measures might not reach to statistically significance in our small sample  size, short treatment duration 
and slower action of atomoxe tine. The length of treatment has v aried in previous atomoxetine studies 
from [ADDRESS_523964] significant improvement of ADHD symptoms, cognitive fu nction, and quality of 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              8 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  life even at 2 weeks of treatment with ATX  80mg daily compared wi th placebo  (Spencer et al 1998; 
Durell et al 2013; Epperson et al 2011; Tsang et al 2011) . Due to the funding and time -frame limits, 
some of the secondary measure may n ot reach to significance, but we believe the study will provide 
data show ing the improvement and that will provide direction for future studies.  
C5. Future Direction : The current available treatments for PTSD are not fully effective  for cognitive 
symptoms of PTSD and have high drop -out and poor engagement, two factors found to be most 
indicative of overall return to functioning for patients with PTSD.  Successful completion of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_415625] a  platform for future large scale double -blind, placebo -controlled studies using 
either ATX or psycho -stimulants or other cognitive enhancing medications. The response inhibition 
related measurements are sensitive to psychotropic medications. Therefore it i s advantageous for us  to 
use GNG and Stop Signal approaches to investigate individual treatments response in our future 
research. We believe GNG and Stop signal  approaches together with pharmacogenetic approach will 
provide valuable information to direct future individualized medicine.  
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH  
1.  Protection of Human Subjects  
1.1 Risks to Subjects  
a. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics :  
Totally, up to 50  veterans with comorbid ADHD and PTSD will be recruited for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_29833]. All 
subjects will be Veterans from Operation Iraq Freedom / Operation Enduring Freedom (OIF/OEF). Our 
record review showed age range from 20 to 60 in this OIF/OEF group,  and statistically they have fewer 
confounding variables for this clinical trial, including medical conditions such as hypertension or 
glaucoma (described detail in exclusion criteria) and cognitive impairments such as dementia, which 
meet criteria for our  research study. PTSD subjects with and without ADHD cognitive symptoms will be 
recruited from the Charleston VAMC Mental Health Service Line. Examining and treatment of ADHD 
cognitive symptoms among Veterans with PTSD is scientifically and ethically justi fied to further 
understand the mechanism of developi[INVESTIGATOR_415626], and what is the best treatment 
for Veterans with comorbid PTSD and ADHD. Specific inclusion and exclusion criteria are listed below:  
Inclusion Criteria:  1) OIF/OEF Veterans age 20 to 60 with PTSD and significant ADHD symptoms 
(CAARS -S:S > 65); 2) Good physical health. 3) Trauma exposure sufficient to meet Category A of 
PTSD criteria (Breslau and Kessler 2001)  
Exclusion Criteria:  1) Age younger than 20 or greater than 60. 2) Known sensitivity to ATX 3) 
Presence of disorders that could conceivable be exacerbated by [CONTACT_415640] (specifically, narrow 
angle closure glaucoma, urinary outflow obstruction, hypertension, and neurological disorders, 
particularly tics and Tourette' s syndrome, or a history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_63798]). 4) use of concomitant 
medication that could potentially interact with atomoxetine including monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOI), antihypertensive medication, or any concomitant medication that was a cytoch rome 2D6 
inhibitor (CYP2D6), since atomoxetine's elimination involves the CYP2D6 system. 5) An active or 
lifetime major mental health diagnosis as determined by [CONTACT_2681] -IV Axis I Disorders, including 
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, psychotic disorder not otherwise specified, bipolar I disorder, 
bipolar II disorder, bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. The project will allow presence of 
depressive disorders if the depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_415616]. 6) Current substance 
dependence and abuse (within 3 month). 7) Females who are pregnant. 8) Suicidal thoughts and 
behavior.                                          
b. Sources of Material  
c.     Potential Risks  
Therapeutic Risk :  
Pharmaceutical agent:   Atomoxetine (ATX) is a norepi[INVESTIGATOR_415627] e inhibitor that blocks 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_415628] -frontal cortex. ATX is one of the first line treatments for children and adult 
attention deficit hypera ctivity disorder (ADHD). Efficacy and safety of ATX are well established by 
[CONTACT_415642] [ADDRESS_523965] been no trials of ATX for treating 
ADHD cognitive complaints associated with PTSD, possibly because of the less awa reness of high 
comorbid rate of ADHD and PTSD, and concern about the abuse potential of commonly used stimulant 
medications and concern about interventions that increase catecholamine release may exacerbate 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              9 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/[ADDRESS_523966] shown that ATX is safe, effective, and well tolerated with mild side effects 
profile in acute and long -term treatment of ADHD in children, adolescent, and adult (reviewed by 
[CONTACT_415643] e t al, 2009). Unlike psycho -stimulants, ATX does not show abuse potential (By[CONTACT_415644] 
2002). A couple of studies have also shown efficacy of ATX in treatment of ADHD cognitive symptoms 
in patients with comorbid ADHD and anxiety and/or depression. ATX w ere very well tolerated in 
individual with comorbid ADHD and anxiety, or ADHD and depression (Geller et al, 2007; Deviss, 
2008). There is not excessive anxiety or other symptoms among subjects with comorbid anxiety and 
depression, who were taking ATX. Alth ough ATX has not been tested in PTSD, a similar selective 
norepi[INVESTIGATOR_26331], reboxetine has been studied in PTSD and shown safety and efficacy 
in reducing PTSD symptoms in motor vehicle accident related PTSD (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_374687] 2006). The above 
literature review provides strong rational for choosing ATX to treat cognitive symptoms in Veterans with 
ADHD/PTSD.   
 
Adverse Effects:  
Common  
▪ Cardiovascular: Increased diastolic arterial pressure (adult, 4.8% to 12.6%; pediatric, 9.3% to 
21.5% ), Increased systolic arterial pressure (adult, 4.2% to 12.4%; pediatric, 4.9% to 12.5% ), 
Tachycardia (adult, 1.5% to 22.4%; pediatric, 0.3% to 23.4% )  
▪ Endocrine metabolic: Weight decreased (adults, 2%; pediatric, 7.1% to 29.1% )  
▪ Gastrointestinal: Abdominal pain (adult, 7%; pediatric, 17% to 18% ), Constipation (adult, 8%; 
pediatric, 1% to 2% ), Decrease in appetite (adult, 16%; pediatric, 16% ), Nausea (adult, 26%; 
pediatric, 7% to 13% ), Vomiting (adult, 4%; pediatric, 11% ), Xerostomia (adult, 20% )  
▪ Neurologic: Headache (pediatric, 19% ), Insomnia (adult, 15%; pediatric, at least 2% ), 
Somnolence (adult, 8%; pediatric, 11% )  
▪ Renal: Delay when starting to pass urine (adult, 6% )  
▪ Reproductive: Dysmenorrhea (adult, 3% ), Erectile dysfunction (adult, 9% )  
▪ Other: Menopausal flushing (adult, 3% )  
Serious:  
▪ Cardiovascular: Myocardial infarction, Prolonged QT interval, Sudden cardiac death  
▪ Hepatic: Injury of liver (Severe), Liver failure  
▪ Neurologic: Cerebrovascular accident, Dyskinesia, Seizure (adult, 0.1%; pe diatric, 0.2% )  
▪ Psychiatric: Mania, Psychotic disorder, Suicidal thoughts (pediatric, 0.4% )  
▪ Reproductive: Priapi[INVESTIGATOR_8801] (rare )  
▪ Other: Angioedema  
 
Contraindications  
▪ cardiac or vascular disorders, severe; at risk for deterioration with clinically important incr ease of 
blood pressure (15 to 20 mm Hg) or heart rate (20 beats per minute); monitoring recommended.  
▪ hypersensitivity to atomoxetine or to other components of the product.  
▪ MAO inhibitor use; do not administer atomoxetine during therapy with or within 2 w eeks of 
discontinuing an MAO inhibitor; do not administer MAO inhibitor within 2 weeks of discontinuing 
atomoxetine.  
▪ narrow angle glaucoma; increased risk of mydriasis  
▪ pheochromocytoma, current or history of; increased risk for serious reactions, includi ng 
tachyarrhythmia and elevated blood pressure.  
 
Psychological Risks : There is a minor chance that participant will experience anxiety, discomfort or 
embarrassment during the data collection process, the investigational team will make every effort to 
minimize potential psychological risks by [CONTACT_117354] a pleasant and professional manner, conducting 
interviews and physical assessments in a private clinical office, encouraging dialogue regarding the 
research process, and allowing participants to discuss  any reactions or feelings that they may have 
throughout study participation. Additionally, in order to avoid or minimize any further discomfort, the 
participants are allowed to take breaks during the interviews and assessment, or reschedule the 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              10 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/2016  appointmen t for completion at a later time. Participants can refuse to answer any question during an 
interview or on the questionnaire if it makes the participant uncomfortable.  
Legal, Social and Economic Risks : In order to prevent the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_415629] 
“labeled” or “stigmatized”, participants will be ensured that confidentiality safeguards will be strictly 
maintained throughout the study. Such safeguards include the conduction of all interviews and clinical 
visits within private and secure areas o r offices. Additionally, all study documents will be kept in a 
locked office or on a computer located in a secure area, with limited password access. Confidential 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_415630]. 
Additionally, participants’ name [CONTACT_415648], publications, or presentations 
of the research results. A Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorization 
page is included with the informed consent to notify the participants of the use of identifiable personal 
health information.  The informed consent and HIPAA authorization page provide a detailed outline of 
the provisions utilized to protect the confidentiality of research data. The methods  used to obtain 
information about the participants include medical record review and assessments described above.   
In order to minimize any economic risk related to having to miss work or having to pay for transportation 
to and from the research visits, t he study team will coordinate with the participants to schedule 
appointments at the most convenient time, including seeing participant outside working hours and 
limiting the frequency of visits to those necessary to adhere to the protocol.   
1.2.   Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
a.       Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Subjects will be recruited from Charleston VAMC OIF/OEF Screening Clinic.  Additionally, Veterans 
with or without PTSD may be recruited through Savannah CBOC referrals if Charleston VAMC does not 
have a sufficient number of participants.  The study will be open to all Veterans from Iraq Freedom 
Operation and Afghanistan who meet eligibility criteria regardless of ethnicity, gender or socioeconomic 
status.  No charge will be  incurred for the participant for any aspect of this study.  Written consent will 
be obtained for each participant who meets the inclusion criteria prior to assessment.  Veterans will be 
given as much time as needed to make a decision whether to participat e.  All participants will be 
informed that their participation is voluntary, and that reluctance to participate will not compromise 
availability of care, or the eligibility to participate in other studies.  Participants may discontinue 
assessment at any ti me during the study.   
b.     Protection against Risk  
Potential risks involve loss of time at work and the psychological stress involved in assessment 
procedures.  These risks will be minimized in several ways.  Breaks and encouragement will be given 
as ne eded during testing procedures.  There is some flexibility in the on site assessment schedule to 
allow for completion of measures not finished during the scheduled testing time.  In addition, some 
weekend/holiday assessment times will be offered to minimiz e loss of time of participants.  
ATX is a widely used treatment for ADHD. It is generally well tolerated clinically. Subjects who meet the 
contraindications for ATX listed in section “Therapeutic Risk” will be excluded. Common side effects of 
ATX are dry mo uth, insomnia, nausea, decreased appetite, and sweating. Insomnia and sweating are 
of some concern for individuals with PTSD; however, as noted above the ATX has been safely used in 
comorbid ADHD and anxiety. Subjects can also withdraw at any time without penalty.  
The risk of venipuncture is minimal. The mild discomfort of venipuncture and very low possibility of local 
infection will be minimized by [CONTACT_415645]. 
Universal precautions for the handling  of human blood developed by [CONTACT_415646].  
All assessment information will be considered confidential.  Data will be organized in code -labeled 
binders and stored in locked cabinets.  No participant will be identified by [CONTACT_415647].  Identification numbers will code data entered for computer analysis, and the data 
coordinator will keep all names and code numbers.  Findings  will be made available to legitimate 
agents of the participants (parents, schools, treating psychologists, physicians), and only with the 
express, written consent of the participants.  
1.3.   Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
The immediate benefit is the treatment effect on cognitive function enhancement that may improve 
individual occupational, academic performance, and daily quality of life. The other anticipated benefits 
for participating Veterans include individual n europsychological assessments and interpretation of the 
Study Protocol : Atomoxetine in Comorbid ADHD/PTSD              11 
Version 7   Edited Date: 8/25/[ADDRESS_523967] information (including psychoeducational assessment) and written 
feedback will be provided to participants. This information may be shared by [CONTACT_13922], educators, a nd 
other professionals involved with the patients care, as needed.  The importance of the results to the 
fields of PTSD neurophysiology, neuropsychology, and genetics are significant due to the large 
numbers of PTSD participants and even larger number of V eterans returning from the OIF/OEF 
theatres affected with PTSD.  
1.4.    Importance of the Knowledge To Be Gained  
The findings from this proposed study will contribute to the understanding of the neurophysiologic and 
genetic basis of PTSD. The establishmen t of effective treatment will provide an advanced and viable 
approach for further PTSD diagnostic, genetic, and treatment studies. These physiological and genetic 
markers may be useful in pharmacological treatment selection, and can be used in vulnerabilit y 
assessment for risk population. The procedures in the proposed study all involve minimal risk, and are 
therefore reasonable in relation to the importance of the knowledge that is expected to result.  
1.[ADDRESS_523968] Veterans of all races and ethni cities across a range of socioeconomic status.  We had 
approximately 35% African American participants in our previous recruitment, which is proportional to 
our surrounding area. As for male to female ratio, our previous studies have shown a higher inciden ce 
of PTSD in male Veterans because a higher percentage of male soldiers have participated in combat. 
We expect a greater percentage of female Veterans from Iraq Freedom Operation and Afghanistan 
given we have found that more female soldiers have participa ted in the two wars. All possible effort will 
be made to recruit female Veterans.  
3       Inclusion of Children  
The proposed research study will include Veterans from 20 to 60 (NIH definition of children), and will be 
conducted at Charleston VA Medical Center. We expect less than 10% participants will be under the 
age [ADDRESS_523969] the age 
of soldiers in proportion to those who participated in the Iraq Freedom Operation and Afghanistan War.  
 