 
An investigator initiated open label study evaluating the 
efficacy and tolerability of application of Metaderm product for 
the treatment of psoriasis  
 
 
     Study Protocol & Statistical Analysis Plan  
       
            [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
      
        November 5, [ADDRESS_1198945]  for the treatment of psoriasis  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_314256], MD  
Sponsor : Procter & Gamble  
Introduction:  
Psoriasis vulgaris is a common inflammatory condition of the skin that results in well-demarcated , scaly, 
erythematous,  itchy plaques.  In the [LOCATION_002],  psoriasis  remains a common, immune -mediated 
disease, affecting 7.4  million adults . (1) Often topi[INVESTIGATOR_19529] l prescription medications are  used as first line 
treatment for moderate psoriasis. Some topi[INVESTIGATOR_860197], thus not ideal for extensive and indefinite amount of time. Conversely, over - the-counter emollient 
treatments are readily available, safe and potentially efficacious.  This study is design to test the safety 
and efficacy of topi[INVESTIGATOR_860198]. The Metaderm  cream is  non-
prescription, natural product.  
Stud y objectives  
Primary objective  
 The P rimary efficacy and end point will  be the mean percentage change i n the product of sPGA and BSA 
(PGAxBSA)  from baseline to week 12. The PGA x BSA is an assessment tools used to calculating disease 
severity and maybe more likely to differentiate among peopl e with less disease severity ( Walsh)  
Secondary objective  
The secondary efficacy and end point will be th e percentage improvement in DLQI  
 
Study Design  
Study Outline  
This is an open -label pi[INVESTIGATOR_860199] .  The inclusion and excl usion criteria as listed below. Study desig ned into 3 
subgroups:  
1) 5 patients with plaque psoriasis 3-10%  BSA 
2) [ADDRESS_1198946] plaque psoriasis with 3-10% 
BSA  
3) 5 patients with scalp psoriasis   
 
Number of subjects:  
Total of [ADDRESS_1198947] photos taken of 1-3 target lesions at baseline ,  W4 , W8 , and W12 . 
Patient will complete the Itch Severity Scale (ISS, Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)  and Dermatology Quality 
of Li fe Index (DLQI) questionnaires at every visit. Patient will have a Psoriasis Area and Severity Index 
(PASI) , Static Physicians  Global Assessment (sPGA)  and Body Surface Area (BSA) evaluation at  every visit.   
Dosing schedule  
 15 eligible patients will be enrolled . Patient will be treated for 12 weeks.  There will be a total of five 
visits: screening,  baseline, w4, w8 and w12.   Metaderm  cream will be applied topi[INVESTIGATOR_860200] a day to all 
active l esions. The metaderm scalp spray will be applied daily to the affected areas on the scalp. Patients 
will be provided with meta derm cleanser, can be use daily .   For the subgroup for scalp psoriasis, patient 
will use the shampoo Head & Shoulders formula wit h 1% Pyrithione Zinc as the active ingredient  
Discontinuation of the Study  
The study may be discontinued at the discretion of the investigator at any time without replacement  
STUDY ENTRY CRITERIA  
Patients will be recruited from the university hospi[INVESTIGATOR_314257]’s continuity clinics  
Inclusion Criteria  for patients with plaque psoriasis 3-10%  BSA 
Subjects must satisfy the following criteria to be enrolled in the study:  
1. Must be in general good health (except for disease under study) as jud ged by [CONTACT_737], 
based on medical history, physical examination, clinical laboratories, and urinalysis . (NOTE: The 
definition of good health means a subject does not have uncontrolled significant co -morbid 
conditions).   
2. Patients 18 and older  
3.  Give  written informed consent prior to any study procedures being conducted, and candidates 
will authorize the release and use of protected health information (PHI)  
4. Be willing and consent to having photos taken of their skin  
5. Diagnosis of chronic plaque psorias is that has been present for at least [ADDRESS_1198948] 3 -10% of the patient’s body surface area  
7. Must have discontinued all systemic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_860201] 4 wee ks or 5 half -lives, and biologics 6 months) prior to baseline visit  
8. Must have discontinued all topi[INVESTIGATOR_314258] [ADDRESS_1198949] be a documented 
negative pregnancy tests prior to initiating treatment. Approved birth control methods include 
hormonal contraception (oral, injection, implant, transdermal patch, vaginal ring), intrauterine 
device, tubal ligation (tying y our tubes), partners vasectomy, or male or female condoms that are 
not made of natural materials PLUS a diaphragm with spermicide, cervical cap with spermicide, 
or a contraceptive sponge with spermicide. Females not of child bearing potential are defined a s 
being at least 1 year postmenopausal or surgically sterile (bilateral tubal ligation, bilateral 
oophorectomy and/or hysterectomy).  
Inclusion Criteria with stable dose of biologic treatment and have plaque psoriasis 3-10 %BSA  
Subjects must satisfy the fol lowing criteria to be enrolled in the study:  
1. Must be in general good health (except for disease under study) as judged by [CONTACT_737], 
based on medical history, physical examination, clinical laboratories, and urinalysis . (NOTE: The 
definition of good health means a subject does not have uncontrolled significant co -morbid 
conditions).   
2. Patients 18 and older  
3.  Give written informed consent prior to any study procedures being conducted, and candidates 
will authorize the relea se and use of protected health information (PHI)  
4. Be willing and consent to having photos taken of their skin  
5. Diagnosis of chronic plaque psoriasis that has been present for at least [ADDRESS_1198950] 3 -10% of the patient’s body surface area  
8. Must have discontinued all topi[INVESTIGATOR_314258] [ADDRESS_1198951] be a documented 
negative pregnancy tests prior to initiating treatment. Approved birth control methods include 
hormonal contraception (oral, injection, implant, transdermal patch, vaginal ring), intraut erine 
device, tubal ligation (tying your tubes), partners vasectomy, or male or female condoms that are 
not made of natural materials PLUS a diaphragm with spermicide, cervical cap with spermicide, 
or a contraceptive sponge with spermicide. Females not of child bearing potential are defined as 
being at least 1 year postmenopausal or surgically sterile (bilateral tubal ligation, bilateral 
oophorectomy and/or hysterectomy).  
Inclusion Criteria for patients with scalp psoriasis  
Subjects must satisfy the follow ing criteria to be enrolled in the study:  
1. Must be in general good health (except for disease under study) as judged by [CONTACT_737], 
based on medical history, physical examination, clinical laboratories, and urinalysis . (NOTE: The 
definition of good he alth means a subject does not have uncontrolled significant co -morbid 
conditions).   
2. Patients 18 and older  
3.  Give written informed consent prior to any study procedures being conducted, and candidates 
will authorize the release and use of protected health i nformation (PHI)  
4. Be willing and consent to having photos taken of their skin  
5. Diagnosis of chronic plaque psoriasis that has been present for at least 6 months prior to baseline  
6. Plaque psoriasis involving the scalp  
7. Body plaque psoriasis cannot exceed 10 %BSA  
8. Must have discontinued all systemic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_860201] 4 weeks or 5 half -lives, and biologics 6 months) prior to baseline visit  
9. Must have discontinued all to pi[INVESTIGATOR_314258] [ADDRESS_1198952] be a documented 
negative pregnancy tests prior to initiating treatment. Approved birth  control methods include 
hormonal contraception (oral, injection, implant, transdermal patch, vaginal ring), intrauterine 
device, tubal ligation (tying your tubes), partners vasectomy, or male or female condoms that are 
not made of natural materials PLUS a  diaphragm with spermicide, cervical cap with spermicide, 
or a contraceptive sponge with spermicide. Females not of child bearing potential are defined as 
being at least 1 year postmenopausal or surgically sterile (bilateral tubal ligation, bilateral 
oopho rectomy and/or hysterectomy).  
Exclusion Criteria  
The presence of any of the following will exclude a subject from enrollment:  
13. Other than disease under study, any clinically significant (as determined by [CONTACT_737]) 
cardiac, endocrinologic, pulmonary,  neurologic, psychiatric, hepatic, renal, hematologic, 
immunologic disease, or other major disease that is currently uncontrolled.  
14. Any condition, including the presence of laboratory abnormalities, which would place the subject 
at unacceptable risk if he/s he were to participate in the study.  
15. Prior history of suicide attempt at any time in the subject’s life time prior to screening or 
randomization, or major psychiatric illness requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_854] [ADDRESS_1198953] feeding.  
17. Active substance abuse or a history of substance abuse within 6 months prior to Screening.  
18. Use of any investigational drug within 4 weeks prior to randomization, or 
5 pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic half lives, if known (whichever is longer).  
19. Prior treatmen t with th e investigational product  
20. Unable to comply with the protocol (as defined by [CONTACT_737]; i.e. drug or alcohol abuse or 
history of noncompliance)  
21. Any other dermatologic conditions that prohibit or confound the ability of the investigator to 
interpret skin and/or nail exam findings.  
22. Patients who will be unable to avoid the use of systemic steroids, excluding intranasal or inhaled 
steroids that will be permitted, for the duration of the trial  
STUDY PROCEDURES & TREATMENT PLAN GUIDELINES  
Informed Consent:  
A written, signed informed consent form (ICF) and written authorization to release and use PHI, will be 
obtained prior to performing any tests or evaluations under this protocol. Patients will have the option 
to ask questions and will be given at least [ADDRESS_1198954] the 24 hour review to be waived due to work or travel constraints.  
See Protocol Flowchart for detailed timing of tests and evaluations.   
General Concomitant Therapy:  
Subjects should advise the investigator if they start taking any new medications, including over the 
counter and complementary and alternative medications.  
Concomitant Therapy  
Concomitant medications for psoriasis will not be permitted  
SAFETY PLAN  
Clinical Safety Assessme nts 
The following clinical safety assessments will be performed:  (See study flowchart)  
 Physical examinations  
 Vital signs (temperature, heart rate, blood pressure, and weight)  
 Monitoring for adverse events  
 Monitoring for concomitant therapy  
Laboratory Safe ty Assessments  
The following laboratory tests will be performed at screening , baseline : 
 Urine pregnancy test, if applicable.  
 
 
Test / Evaluation  Screening  
 Visit 1  
W k 0   Visit 2  
Wk 4  Visit 3  
Wk 8  Visit 4  
Wk 12   
 
 Informed Consent  X     
 Inclusion/exclusion criteria reviewed  X X    
 Medical History  X         
 Concomitant medications  X X X X X 
 Physical Exam  X        
 Vital Signs  X X X X X 
 Urine pregnancy test  X X 
   
 Adverse Events  X X X X X 
 Photos of Target lesions  x X x x X 
 PASI  x X x x x 
 BSA x X x x x 
 sPGA  x x x x x 
 ISS  X X X X X 
 PSSI X X X X X 
 VAS X X X X X 
 DLQI  X X X X X 
 IP dispensing  
 X X X X 
 IP accountability  
  X X X 
 
SAFETY REPORTING  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) is any noxious, unintended, or untoward medical occurrence occurring at any 
dose that may appear or worsen in a subject during the course of a study. It may be a new intercurrent 
illness, a worsening concomitant illness, an injury, or  any concomitant impairment of the subject’s 
health, including laboratory test values (as specified by [CONTACT_65801]), regardless of etiology. Any 
medical condition that was present prior to study treatment and that remains unchanged or improved 
shoul d not be recorded as an AE. If there is a worsening of that medical condition this should be 
considered an AE. A diagnosis or syndrome should be recorded on the AE page of the Case Report Form 
rather than the individual signs or symptoms of the diagnosis o r syndrome.  
All AEs will be recorded by [CONTACT_737](s) from the time of signing the informed consent through the 
end of the designated follow -up period.  
Serious adverse event  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any AE which:  
 Results in death  
 Is life -thre atening (i.e., in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689](s) the subject is at immediate risk 
of death from the AE)  
 Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
 Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity (a substan tial disruption of the 
subject’s ability to conduct normal life functions)  
 Is a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
 Constitutes an important medical event  
Important medical events are defined as those occurrences that may not be immediately life 
threatening or  result in death, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or disability, but may jeopardize the subject or require 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed above.  Medical and 
scientific judgment should be exercised in deciding whether such an  AE should be considered serious.  
Events not considered to be SAEs are hospi[INVESTIGATOR_65777]: were planned before entry into the clinical 
study; are for elective treatment of a condition unrelated to the studied indication or its treatment; 
occur on an em ergency outpatient basis and do not result in admission (unless fulfilling other criteria 
above); are part of the normal treatment or monitoring of the studied indication and are not associated 
with any deterioration in condition.  
If an AE is considered se rious, both the AE pages of the CRF and the SAE Report Form must be 
completed.  
For each SAE, the Investigator(s) will provide information on severity, start and stop dates, relationship 
to study drug, action taken regarding study drug, and outcome.  
Classif ication of severity  
For both AEs and SAEs, the investigator(s) must assess the severity of the event. The AEs will be 
evaluated for severity according to the following scale:  
Grade 1 = Mild  
Grade 2 = Moderate  
Grade 3 = Severe  
Classification of Relationship /Causality of adverse events (SAE/AE) to study drug  
The Investigator(s) must determine the relationship between the administration of study drug and the 
occurrence of an AE/SAE as Not Suspected or Suspected as defined below:  
Not suspected : The temporal rel ationship of the adverse event to study drug 
administration makes a causal relationship unlikely or remote , or 
other medications, therapeutic interventions, or underlying 
conditions provide a sufficient explanation for the observed event  
Suspected:  The temporal relationship of the adverse event to study drug 
administration makes a causal relationship possible,  and other 
medications, therapeutic interventions, or underlying conditions do 
not provide a sufficient explanation for the observed event.  
Immediate reporting of serious adverse events  
Any AE that meets the any criterion for a SAE requires the completion of an SAE Report Form in addition 
to being recorded on the AE pages of the CRF.  The Investigator(s) is required to ensure that the data on 
these forms is accurate and consistent.  This applies to all SAEs, regardless of relationship to study drug, 
that occur during the study, those made known to the Investigator(s) within [ADDRESS_1198955]’s last 
dose of study drug, and those made known t o the investigator(s) at anytime that are suspected of being 
related to study drug.  
The SAE must be reported immediately (i.e., within 24 hours of the Investigators’ knowledge of the 
event)  
The Investigator(s) is responsible for informing the Institutional Review Board/Ethics Committee 
(IRB/IEC) of the SAE and providing them with all relevant initial and follow -up information about the 
event. The Investigator(s) must keep copi[INVESTIGATOR_65779], including correspondence with 
Celgene and the IRB/IEC, on file.  All SAEs that have not resolved upon discontinuation of the subject’s 
participation in the study must be followed until either the event resolves completely, 
stabilizes/resolves wi th sequelae, or returns to baseline (if a baseline value is available).  
 Citations  
1. Rachakonda, Tara D. et al. Psoriasis prevalence among adults in the [LOCATION_002]. Journal of the 
American Academy of Dermatology , Volume [ADDRESS_1198956] of the Physician Global 
Assessment and body surface area: a simple static measure of psoriasis severity in 
a longitudinal cohort. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2013;69(6):931 -937.  
 