1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aerobic Training to Improve Energy Utilization and Antioxidant Capacity in Stroke  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Version 4/16/2019  
 
  
2 
 Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_530221] C. Serra, PhD  
Sponsor or funding source: Departm ent of Vete rans Affairs  
 
Fifteen to 30% of stroke survivors are disabled permanently, resulting in functional dependence and a 
sedentary lifestyle following stroke. Hemiparetic gait, a common disability after stroke, elevates the energy cost 
of ambulatory act ivity by 1.5 -2 fold, but it is currently unknown how chronic stroke affects total daily energy 
expenditure and dietary intake. Altered energy balance following a stroke (expenditure ≠ intake) may result in 
impaired substrate utilization (fat versus carbohy drate oxidation), the production of oxidative stress and 
ultimately decreased cardiovascular and muscular endurance leading to increased fatigue.  
 
This project will compare  the effects of chronic treadmill training plus “heart healthy” nutrition modification 
versus whole body stretching plus nutrition on energy balance (dietary intake, resting metabolic rate, and 
exercise and non -exercise energy expenditure) and substrate utilization (measured during an acute exercise 
bout) in older chronic stroke survivors. Fu rthermore, to examine mechanisms of change, we measured 
changes in markers of oxidative stress before and after the interventions.  
 
Aim 1 : To assess the effects of six months of TM+N versus ST+N on total daily energy expendi ture (primary 
outcome)  and substrate  oxidation in chr onic stroke survivors.  
Aim 2 : To examine the effects of six months of TM+N versus ST+N on systemic oxida tive stress in chronic 
stroke survivors.  
 
Experimental Design  
Overview:  This project is designed to determine whether treadmill training plus nutrition ( TM+N ) versus  
stretching plus nutrition ( ST+N ) (control ) will 1) improve energy expenditure  and substrate oxidation and 2) 
reduce systemic  oxidative stress.  We will study men and women with chronic stroke and stable neurological 
deficits.   
Eligibility  criteria include :  
• Age >20 years  
• BMI 20 -50 kg/m2 
• History of stroke at least 6 months prior  
• Adequate language and neurocognitive function to safely participate in informed consent, and exercise 
testing and training  
• Completion of all conventional inpatient and outpatient physical therapy   
• Capable of walking 3 consecutive minutes on a treadmill at 0. 1 MPH with handrail support  
• Under the care of a primary care medical provider  
• Written consent from their doctor that it is safe for them to participant in physical activity . 
Exclusions:   Exclusion criteria include:  
• Medical History: a) recent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (less than 3 months prior to study entry) for severe medical 
disease, b) peripheral arterial disease with vascular claudication, c) orthopedic or chronic pain condition 
restricting ex ercise, d) pulmonary or renal failure, e) active cancer, f) untreated poorly controlled hypertension 
measured on at least 2 occasions (greater than 160/100) g) type I diabetes mellitus, untreated and / or poorly 
controlled diabetes with fasting blood gluco se of greater than 200 and HbA1c greater than 10.0, i) currently 
pregnant  
• Neurological history : a) dementia by [CONTACT_41771] b) severe receptive or global aphasia which 
confounds testing and training, operationally defined as unable to follow 2 point  commands, c) neurologic 
disorder restricting exercise, such as Parkinson's Syndrome, d) untreated major depression  
• Increased alcohol consumption defined as greater than 2 oz. liquor or 2 times 4 oz. glasses of wine or 2 
x 12 oz. cans of beer per day  
• Treat ment with hormone replacement therapy  
• Cardiac history of: a) unstable angina, b) recent (less than 3 months prior to study entry) myocardial 
infarction, congestive heart failure (NYHA category II -IV); c) hemodynamically significant valvular dysfunction  
 
3 
 Subjects will be randomized to TM+N  or ST+N (1:1 allocation ).  Groups will be match ed for sex and race.  All 
subjects will be studied at baseline and after 6 months of TM+N  or ST+N . This design will allow us to determine 
total daily energy expenditure, nutritional intake , and substrate oxidation following six months of TM+N and ST+N  
in older stroke survivors.  Further, the design will enable us to determine the effects of TM+N and ST+N on 
systemic oxidative stress.   
 
Metabolic Test by [CONTACT_530223] s 7 phases, completed over 9-10 months ( Table 1).  Phase 
1 involves screening  and enrollment.  Phase 2  involves baseline testing.  Volunteers then will be randomly 
assigned to TM+N  or ST+N (control ) (Phase 3 ).  Phase 4  consists of 2 weeks of weight and dietary stabilization 
prior to baseline research testing .  Phase 5  consists of 2 week testing (post heart healthy).  Phase 6  consists of 
6 months of TM+N or ST+N. After  the intervention , subjects will undergo final research testing ( Phase 7 ).  
 
Subject Screening  and Enrollment (Phase 1)  
a)      Screening Visits:  Eligible volunteers will have the study explained and provide informed consent according 
to the guidelines of the local Institutional Review Board for Human Research.  A fasting blood profile for lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], 
liver, renal and hematological function w ill be drawn.  A 12 -lead resting  electrocardiogram (EKG) will be obtained 
and a medical history and physical examination performed.  Height and weight will be measured using a standard 
physician’s scale .  Seated blood pressure s will be measured in duplicat e.  Information on demographics and 
family medical history will be recorded.  Subjects will complete the Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE)  (60) and 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6328] (CES -D) questionnaires .  Volunteers also will have a 
screening VO 2peak treadmill test  as described below.   
 
Table 1: Research Design  
 Time Duration  Research Activity  
Phase 1  3 weeks  Screening & Enrollment  
Phase 2  1 week  Baseline Testing  
Phase 3  1 day  Randomization  
Phase 4  2 weeks  Weight & Dietary Stabilization  
Phase 5  1-2 months  Metabolic Pre Testing  
Phase 6  6 months  TM+N or ST+N  
Phase [ADDRESS_688625] Testing  
 
Baseline Testing (Phase 2): During this phase, subject will undergo a submaximal treadmill test, blood draw , 
and resting metabolic rate (RMR ), as described below.  
 
Randomization (Phase 3) : Subjects are randomly assigned to either progressive  6 month treadmill aerobic 
exercise training  3 times per week plus nutritional modifi cation or the reference control of education and  stretch 
2 times per week for 6 months  plus nutritional modification .   
 
Weight and Dietary Stabilization (Ph ase 4 ):  Subjects will meet  with a Registered Dietitian 2-3 times weekly 
for 2 weeks  to learn “heart healthy” dietary patterns and ensure  weight stabilization before metabolic testing.  
Details of the diet are described below.   Prior to metabolic testing, subjects are asked to remain  weight stable.   
 
Metabolic Testing (Phase 5 ):  This testing phase w ill occur over a period of 1-[ADDRESS_688626], body composition ( anthropometrics, DXA, CT) tests, questionnaire completion, and 
functional and strength measures will occur during this phase.  Subjects will be weight stabilized th roughout the 
metabolic testing.   
 
Treadmill Training  plus Nutritional Modification  versus  Stretch Control  plus Nutritional Modification  
(Phase 6 ):   
 
Treadmill Training  
4 
 Training programs will be individualized based on each participant’s gait capacity and defined by [CONTACT_530224] 
(HR max) achieved during a baseline treadmill test. Training will be gradually progressed to a target  of 50 minutes 
of exercise at 75-85% of HRR as tolerated by [CONTACT_423]. To assess treatment fidelity, staff will monitor 
progression weekly. A program of home walking equiv alent in intensity and duration (3 days/week) to the current 
treadmill intensity and duration (3 days/week) will be recommended. Safety during treadmill training will be 
assured wit h a parachute style safety harnesses in non -weight bearing mode to support truncal balance, if 
necessary, to reduce the risk of fall. Participants may also use light handrail support. After stroke, the paretic 
arm is often less effective for support.  
 
Stretch Controls : 
Stretch controls will be enrolled in supervised stretching program for 2 days/week for 1 hour sessions. The stretch 
program will focus on  basic mobility skills, including balance, sit -to-stand, we ight shifting, and leg strength . 
Exercises will be performed in standing, seated, and lying positions. The stretching group will serve as an 
attention control.  
 
Nutritional Modification : All participants will undergo up to [ADDRESS_688627] participants how to consume an isocaloric, “heart healthy” diet with 
adequate  protein (<30% of calories as fat, <10% as saturated fat, <2,400 mg sodium, 25 g/d of fiber, and 1.0 -
1.2 g/kg/d of lean protein)  with a  register ed dietitian (RD). The RD will collect [ADDRESS_688628] caloric intake if weight fluctuates ±2%. 
 
Post Interve ntion Met abolic Testing (Phase 7 ):  Body weight must be stable  0.[ADDRESS_688629] -testing .  Subjects will repeat tests outlined in Phase 5.   Metabolic assessments will be 
performed ~[ADDRESS_688630] -testing period , respectively .  
 
Study Procedures  
1. Screening and Baseline Evaluations: Questionnaires to screen for depression and dementia will be 
administered to determine eligibility. Credentialed study staff evaluate  all participants to determ ine whether their 
basic rehabilitation needs  have been addressed before study entry. Participants will undergo standard medical 
and neurological examinations to establish medical eligibility and to characterize neurological deficits. Structured 
neurologica l evaluations may include range of motion tests, manual motor testing, and sensory examinations.  
 
2. Blood and Urine Analyses: We will measure heart disease risk factors, CBC, comprehensive metabolic panel, 
lipid profile, glucose, insulin,  free fatty acids, cytokines, oxidative stress, antioxidant capacity, trigly cerides, 
lipoprotein lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], leptin , and adiponectin . A urine pregnancy test is perf ormed prior to the DXA and CT scans, if 
the participant is a woman with child bearing potential.   
 
3. Mobility Function and Motor Control:  
These tests will be administered in Phase 5 and Phase 7 . 
30 meter walks : Self -selected and fastest -comfortable floor walking velocity will be determined from 30 meter 
walks with subjects using the same assistive device and/or orthosis as normally used to "walk across the room 
at home." For the [ADDRESS_688631] comfortable paces.  
6 min walk : Subjects will use the same assistive device and/or orthoses typi[INVESTIGATOR_530222] a flat wal king surface.   
Timed Up and Go (TUG) : Subjects are observed and timed while they rise from a chair, walk 3 meters, turn 
around, walk back, and sit down. A series of 3 TUGs will be performed to assess economy of this simulated 
ADL. An assistive device and/o r orthoses may be used.  
5 
  
4. Treadmill Tests:  
Peak: Treadmill tests will start at a self -selected pace, and will be advanced by [CONTACT_530225], perceived exertion, and medically credentialed clinician rating of gait stability . This clinically 
supervised test will determine treadmill gait safety, functional eligibility to participate (must walk 3 minutes at 0.1  
MPH with handrail support), cardiopulmonary response to strenuous exertion defining exercise tolerance and 
safety, and  allow us to pre -select testing parameters for subsequent constant velocity peak effort graded 
treadmill testing. Belt safety harness will be worn with a spotter behind the subject, and handrail support will be 
used at all times. Peak exercise tests will e valuate the cardiopulmonary response to exertion, under clinician 
supervision with continuous vital signs and E KG monitoring. Tests will be terminated at the subject’s  request, 
and based on American College of Sports Medicine criterion . Baseline peak test is reviewed by a cardiologist as 
part of our quality assurance program.  The peak f itness test will be completed during Phase [ADDRESS_688632]: After a [ADDRESS_688633] constant load submaximal effort treadmill walking task at a pre -established gait 
velocity ( 60-80% of self -selected floor walking velocity). This slower walking velocity is selected because 
untrained  subjects with stroke usually cannot maintain their self -selected walking pace, precluding steady state 
measures of oxygen consumption that defines gait economy. The mean rate of VO [ADDRESS_688634] will be completed before (Phase 3) and after (Phase 5) the 
Dietary Education (Phase  4), as well as in Phase 7 after the 6 -month exercise or stretching interventions.  
 
5. Energy Expenditure  
Resting Metabolic Rate (RMR) will be measured using the ventilated hood technique while subjects lie quietly in 
bed for [ADDRESS_688635] valve (Weir JB deV. 
RMR will be measured at rest in Phase 3 , 5 and 7.  
 
Activity Monitoring: Su bjects will answer activity questionnaires. They will wear an accelerometer activity monitor 
on their belt for [ADDRESS_688636] ivities in Phase 5 and Phase 7 .  
 
6. Dietary Intake Assessment: A R egistered Dietitian will instruct subjects on how to complete a [ADDRESS_688637] 24 hour dietary recalls that will be analyzed and used as measures of dietary habits. Dietary 
assessment will occur in at the beginning and end of Phase 4, as well as in Phase 7 following the 6 -month 
interventions.  
 
Statistical Analysis and Ex pected Results : Data from the study will be entered into a data set and validated 
by [CONTACT_9154] . Initially, analyses  will be adjusted  for site to determine whether site is a significant covariate to 
our outcomes of interest; however, if site is not significant, it will be dropped from further analyses.   Descriptive 
statistics will be calculated for all  variables using SAS version 9.3  (SAS Institute, Cary, N.C.)  and the R statistical 
package.  Exploratory data analyses will be performed to check the data for extreme values and to determine 
the distribution of values.  Extreme values will be verified against original source documents.  Whe n necessary, 
data will be transformed to normality using appropriate transforms.   A two -tailed P <0.05 will considered indicative 
of a significant result.  In addition to P values, 95% confidence intervals will be reported. The primary variable  of 
interes t to test the main hypotheses include s: 1) total daily energy expenditure  measured by [CONTACT_530226] (indirect 
calorimetry) + energy expenditure during activity (accelerometry) . Secondary variables  include  substrate 
oxidation measured as fat and glucose oxidation during submaximal exercise , systemic (plasma) oxidative 
stress , VO 2peak . 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Primary Aim : To assess the effects of six months of TM+N versus ST+N on total daily energy expenditure 
(primar y outcome)  and substrate oxidation in chronic stroke survivors.   
6 
  Expected R esults : We anticipate that TM+N will result in significant changes in RMR and energy 
expenditure during activity, as well as greater reliance on fat at resting and an improved ability to switch from fat 
to carbohydrate utilization during submaximal exercise and after a mixed meal challenge.   
 
Aim 2 : To examine the effects of six months of TM+N versus ST+N on systemic and tissue inflammation and 
oxidative stress and antioxidant capacity in chronic stroke survivors.   
 Expected Results : We expect that TM+N will result in decreased oxidative stress in the circulation .   
 
The change (post -pre) value of the energy expenditure and substrate oxidation outcomes, along with measures 
of oxidative stress and antioxidant capac ity will be the dependent (outcome) variables in a series of ANOVAs 
(one for each outcome variable).  Independent variables will include the initial value of the outcome variable, 
group assignment, along with the subject’s age and BMI, and if needed (i.e. if there are differences between the 
exercise and stretching subjects) medications and medical conditions other than presence of stroke.  Baseline 
dietary intake will be treated as covariates.  These analyses will tell us if there is a differential effect of exercise 
versus stretch control with nutritional modification on the outcome measures.   
  
7 
 References:  
(60) Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. "Mini -mental state". A practical method for grading the cognitive 
state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res. 1975;12:189 -98. 
(61) Luft AR, Macko RF, Forrester LW, et a l. Treadmill exercise activates subcortical neural networks and 
improves walking after stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 
2008;39:3341 -50. 
(62) Shaughnessy M, Michael K, Resnick B. Impact of treadmill exercise  on efficacy expectations, physical 
activity, and stroke recovery. J Neurosci Nurs. 2012;44:27 -35. 
(63) Beck BR, Norling TL. The effect of 8 mos of twice -weekly low - or higher intensity whole body vibration on 
risk factors for postmenopausal hip fracture. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2010;89:997 -1009.  
(64) Mogil RJ, Kaste SC, Ferry RJ, Jr., et al. Effect of Low -Magnitude, High -Frequency Mechanical Stimulation 
on BMD Among Young Childhood Cancer Survivors: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Oncol. 2016;2:908 -14. 
(65) Brooke MH, Kaiser KK. Three "myosin adenosine triphosphatase" systems: the nature of their pH lability 
and sulfhydryl dependence. J Histochem Cytochem. 1970;18:670 -2. 
 