Cover Page  
Official Title of the Study: Teleoperation Experimental Comparison With Able -bodied Subjects  
Document Date: July 19, 202 2 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Protocol  Templa te 
CF-146, Effective  7/10/[ADDRESS_624211] 
CAMPUS BOX F-490   TELEPHONE:  [PHONE_1622] Fax: [PHONE_1623]  
 
Protocol  #: 14-[ADDRESS_624212] Titl e: Biomech atronics De velopment Lab  Myoelectric Co ntroller p rotocol  
 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_485919] D ate:   07/19/22  
 
I. Hypothes es and Specific Aims :  The purp ose of this protocol is to provide guidelines for research  
and develop ment of more i ntuitively co ntrolled m yoelectric  prosthesis.  Sel f‐iden tified adult  
volunteers will be used for convenience sam plin g for the population s erved.  
 
 
II. Backgro und and Significan ce: Currently a vailable multi‐joint prostheses  cannot 
be fully u tilized bec ause there are fewer con trol inputs than the number  of joint s that 
need t o be controlled.  Based o n the wor k in the field o f neuros cience, it has been 
shown that graspin g is a ‘low dimension al’ task (i.e. – only 2‐3 co ntrol inpu ts are 
necessary).  We will  develop control paradigms and upper limb prostheses 
compone nts to control a multi‐jo int pr osthetic  hand using curr ently available clin ical 
practices and inves tigate which dimens ions are most impo rtant for prosthetic devices.  
 
III. Prelimin ary 
Studies/Progre ss Re port: 
IV. Research  Metho ds 
A.  Outcome Measur e(s): 
Outcome m easures include  complet ion rate, time to comple tion and pa th efficiency 
metrics as well as posi tion of the arm, wrist, an d hand during these  tasks.  
Additional outcome measures may include time of use, types of actions performed, 
location information (GPS), and/or power consumption. Th ese m etrics help  define  
the perfo rmance of the postural control paradigm for EM G control and design of 
advanced prosthetic hands.  
 
B.  Description  of Populati on to be Enro lled: 
The subject  popula tion will cons ist of a convenien t sample  of adult volunteers, both 
able bodied and lim b deficient. The subjec ts will have various  ethnici ty, age, and 
gender. An estimated total of [ADDRESS_624213] been invited.  
 
Protocol  Templa te 
CF-146, Effective  7/10/[ADDRESS_624214] more than one researcher travel at a time.  In order to ensure the safety of a 
single resear cher traveling to a participant’s location, we will enforce the following 
safety procedures:  
 
When traveling to off -site locations, researchers only a licensed and insured driver 
in a well -maintained vehicle with appropriate equipment for conditions will drive. 
Driver has AAA membership which will be used in case of emergency. 
Experimentation will only take place during normal business hours when other 
research staff can be reached in case of unanticipated emergency.  
 
We will keep a log in the lab describing where we are traveling and with whom we 
are meeting. We will only travel to participants with whom we have previous contact 
[CONTACT_485920]. Traveling researcher will keep a cell phone with 
them and c heck in with other researchers in the lab at least every [ADDRESS_624215] en’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] o n Ansch utz cam pus, the University of Boulder Campus,  and/or during normal at -home 
use.  The participant will co me up to [ADDRESS_624216] for up to 6 months.  Durin g this s ession the p articipa nt will be aske d to 
control a virtua l hand (a 3D i mage of  a hand on the compu ter screen) and/or a prosthesi s by 
[CONTACT_485921] o n the table. The only 
devices comi ng into contact [CONTACT_57999] h the participant will be stan dard of care m yoelectric  control a nd 
motion captur e equipment incl uding su rface a nd intram uscular electromyographic  (EM G) sensors.  
Other equipment to be used in the laboratory include  a data glov e (Cyberglove II by [CONTACT_485922], LL C), vibrating m otors, reflective m arkers (Op toTra k, Northern Digital I nc), and 
elec trogoniome ters (Biome trics Goniome ter, Mot ion Lab Sy stems , Inc.). During at -home use, 
subjects will use standard of care surface EMG sensors installed into a prosthetic socket.  Standard 
of care proc edures i nvolving palpation of the subject 's arm will  be used to l ocate the best positio n 
on the arm  for the surface and Intramu scula r EMG and motion capture sensors. The EM G sensors 
measure m uscle activa tion levels and se nd the information to the compu ter to en able the con trol of 
the virtual hand or  prosthesis. The m otion capture  sensors  and goniome ters give us a measurement  
of the position of the arm. A training pe riod will be followed by [CONTACT_485923]. Different versio ns of the 
controller will be presen ted to the subject  in a r andom ized order. The subject  will be expect ed to 
try and acquire  target hand postures  displayed on the screen using this  control interface. Subjects 
will likewise be given a training period to  practice moving  the physical  objects.  
 
Additionally, we may travel to the subject’s preferred location ( e.g. home or office) to conduct  
testing with surface EMG, motion capture, goniometers, or video. This will allow us to maximize 
recruitment and include subjects who live too far from the Anschutz campus to participate.  
 
Video will be taken from behind and will not include identifying information such as the subject’s 
face. Video will be used to record arm and shoulder motion during the experiment to be analyzed 
later. This allows us to determine whether compensatory motio n is affected by [CONTACT_485924].  
 
An optional home -use period may take place.  A prosthetic limb system using surface EMG sensors 
and a prosthetic hand will be sent home with the subject.  It will be used during everyday activities.  
The surface EMG sensor will be permanently installed int o the prosthetic limb system and will not 
need to be replaced.  The subject will be asked to use the prosthetic limb system as their primary 
prosthetic limb (daily use) unless it is not appropriate due to the task/environment.  The home -use 
period will las t up to 6 months.  
 
Protocol  Templa te 
CF-146, Effective  7/10/11  Page  3  
 D.  Descri ption, Risks a nd Justifi cation of Proce dures and  Data Collection  Tools:  
We will  be acquiring  musc le activity  data for  the control of a prosthesis using Electromyo graphy 
(EMG) in  conjunction  with  mot ion capturing devices  and finger mounted force sensors . Surface 
EMG allows us to create pattern recogn ition  of a composite muscle s ignal, and intramuscular E MG 
allows us to foc us on  particu lar muscles, or muscle slips. Risks  of Su rface EMG a nd motion capture 
are possible minor skin dis comfort from the  medi cal tape/adhesi ve used  to attach senso rs to the 
skin  and/or from pr eparation of skin for attachmen t. The intramuscular  EMG electrodes introd uce a 
minimal risk  of infection,  and nerve inju ry as well as minimal bleeding.  Any injury to nerves is tempora ry 
and may involve num bness or pain.  When  the proc edure is finished,  the el ectrodes will be removed. All 
equipm ent and insertion sites will be sterilized  in accord ance to st andard of care  proc edures.  The 
Intramuscu lar EMG elec trodes m ay be us ed in conjunction with surface  EMG  or as an alternative to 
surface E MG. If you  feel t hat you have been h armed wh ile participating in this study, you s hould 
inform  Rich ard Weir  at 847 ‐912‐ 1032  immedia tely. 
 
E.   Potential  Scientific Problems:  
Potential scien tific problems include  a lack of subjects with upp er‐limb a mputation and the 
inability of subjec ts to learn the postural  cont rol paradigm to  a high level.  
 
F.  Data  Analysis Plan:  
Data will be proce ssed with  stand ard techniques  in MATLAB  (Ma thworks, Inc.)  in order to produce 
the m etrics described pr eviously (completion rate, time to completion, and path efficiency).  
 
G. Summar ize Kn owledge to be Gained:  
The development  of more  intuitive and functio nal prosthesis controllers will aug ment the q uality 
of life  for pe ople with  upp er‐limb amputation.  
 
H. Re feren ces: 
N/A 