Protocol Template Page 1 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/[ADDRESS_1228302]  
CAMPUS BOX F -490    TELEPHONE:  303- 724-1055  Fax:  
[PHONE_1623]   
 
 
Protocol #:  17-[ADDRESS_1228303] Title:  Randomized interventi On of B iventricular pacemaker function on ventr Icular function 
amon g patients with mechaN ical circulatory support devices: “ROBIN”    
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_236502] K. Cornwell III, MD  
Version Date:  4/24/2019     
 
I. Hypotheses and Specific Aims:   
Specific Aim  1: Determine how cardiac- resynchronization therapy (CRT) inf luences ventricular 
performance at rest and during activity/exercise in patients with CF- LVADs .  Hypothesis 1 : Cardiac 
output ( Qc) and functional capacity are higher with CRT- pacing enabled, as opposed to conventional 
treatment with CRT- pacing disabled.   
Specific Aim 2: Determine how the right ventricle (RV) functions at rest and during exercise among 
patients with CF- LVADs.   Hypothesis 2A :  During resting conditions, adjustments of the CF- LVAD pump 
speed will alter venous return of blood to the heart, causing RV workload to increase and decrease in 
response to increases and decreases in pump speed, respectively.  Hypothesis 2B :  During exercise, 
progressive increases in venous return will increase RV workload and limit the patient’s ability to exercise.   
 
II. Background and Significance:  
Heart failure (HF) is a devastating disease that affects 6 million people in the [LOCATION_002] alone.1  
Overall 5- year survival  of patients with HF is only 50%1-3 and there are significant reductions in quality of life 
(QOL).4  While beta -blockers and angiotensin- converting- enzyme inhibitors (medications considered “standard 
of care”) have led to improvements in outcomes5-12, many patients progress to end- stage, advanced HF, which 
has an even higher  5-year mortality rate of 80%.[ADDRESS_1228304] 
treatment for advanced HF, only ~2,000 donor organs are available per year.14  As such, demand f or a 
definitive treatment of advanced HF far outweighs supply of available donor organs.15  To remedy this 
disparity, continuous -flow (CF) left ventricular assist devices (LVADs), so called “mechanical hearts”, have 
emerged as an attractive alternative.[ADDRESS_1228305] 2,500 implanted in 2013 alone.16  CF-LVADs 
restore cardiac output (Qc) to normal levels through a rotating impellar that propels blood from the left ventricle 
into the ascending aorta .  Total Qc therefore is determined by: 1) the CF- LVAD, which provides the bulk of flow 
to the body, at least during resting conditions; and 2) the heart, which can still provide small amounts of flow to the body by [CONTACT_879215], HF -related symptoms and functional impairments persist after insertion of a CF- LVAD.  
While survival and QOL generally improve following CF- LVAD implantation
17,18, functional limitations and 
impairments in exercise capacity persist despi[INVESTIGATOR_879208].[ADDRESS_1228306] half of 
patient s reporting significant limitations in function 6- 12 months after device insertion.19-21 The average six -
minute hall walk score (6MHW, ~350m)19 and peak oxygen uptake (VO2, 12ml/kg/min)22 remain low 6 -12 
months following device implantation compared to normal levels in healthy individuals (normal 6MHW 
~600±90m23, average age- matched peak VO2 ~25- 30ml/kg/ min24).  Importantly, cardiovascular -related 
mortality rises exponentially for patients with 6MHW less than 345m25 and VO2 less than 14ml/kg/min26. 
Finally, despi[INVESTIGATOR_040] a [ADDRESS_1228307] -implantation survival rate of ~80%, survival at four years remains low at less than 
50%.16  Thus, despi[INVESTIGATOR_879209], relief from HF- related symptoms is 
incomplete, which increases the risk of morbidity and mortality  over time and is a major limitation of these 
devices .27  
 
Protocol Template Page 2 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/[ADDRESS_1228308] characterized by [CONTACT_879216]- volume (PV) loops , which characterize ventricular performance during all phases of the cardiac cycle  
(figure 1) .28  Based on animal models, the RV has been found to be a highly compliant, low -pressure chamber 
(especially compared to the muscular left ventricle (LV).28-31  In humans, noninvasive methods  (e.g. echo) have 
been used to estimate  how the RV responds to increases in venous return among healthy individuals that 
occur with exercise.32 Using h igh-fidelity conductance (Millar) catheters , it has been shown that diastolic 
stiffness increases among patients with coronary artery disease and/or hypertension) , possib ly as a result of 
ischemia or pericardial constraint .33  However, RV performance – throughout the entirety  of the cardiac cycle , 
during exercise among healthy individuals  – has not been fully characterized.  However, this information can 
be obtained through use  of these high- fidelity conductance catheters (Millar).  Thus, there is a need (and the 
ability) for further investigation of the body’s response to changes in loading conditions (such as occurs during 
exercise), in this population.  This information is us eful to further understand how the body responds to the 
hemodynamic demands of exercise, and also will serve as a platform for future investigations to define 
“normal” responses that diseased populations can be compared to.   
 
CF-LVAD implantation may compromise RV function.  The LVAD functions by [CONTACT_879217] a 
rotor, which creates a suction effect and pulls oxygenated blood into the device, which is then propelled 
forward to the body.[ADDRESS_1228309] (wall stress is proportional to the radius of the ventricle).
30,34  With the onset of activity, there is increased venous return of 
blood to the RV, and a compromised RV may be unable to accommodate this increase in bloodflow.  As such, 
RV function may impair exercise capacity.  It is unclear why VO2 and 6MWD scores (as detailed above) 
remain so low, and t he primary determinants of exercise capacity among CF- LVAD patients are not clearly 
defined.   
 
Following CF -LVAD implantation, there is little data available to guide clinicians with respect to cardiac 
resynchronization therapy pacemaker -defibrillator (CRT- D) settings.  In the setting of advanced HF, CRT-
D devices are implanted into individuals with underlying left bundle branch block (LBBB) conduction 
abnormalities .4  A LBBB causes “dyssynchrony” between the right (RV) and left ventricles (LV), meaning that 
they no longer contract at the same time.  A CRT- D device is implanted in these patients and includes a 
coronary sinus (CS) lead on the left side of the heart, in addition to standard pacing/defibrillator leads , which 
are positioned on the right side of the heart.  With pacing leads positioned on both sides of the heart, the CRT-
D can pace both ventricles simultaneously, effectively resolving the LBBB conduction abnormality.  However, 
following CF- LVAD implantation, the CRT -D device is left in place, but optimal device settings are unknown – 
specifically, it is un clear  whether the CS lead should remain activated or deactivated.  In the absence of 
definitive data, conventional management is to deactivate the CS -lead.  This strategy 
theoretically allows the interventricular 
septum to contribute to RV function at the 
expense of the LV (ie, the septum contributes more to RV function  and less to 
LV function; since the LV is supported by [CONTACT_879218], this strategy theoretically should 
not compromise systemic perfusion) .  
However, my preliminary data suggest the 
opposi te – namely, that cardiac output (Qc), 
improves with the CS -lead enabled .  
Confirmation of these findings, along with a 
comprehensive analysis of the impact of CRT pacing on ventricular function and 
cardiac performance at rest and 
activity/exercise, will fill current gaps in 
knowledge about the interaction between 
Ventricular Pressure
Ventricular VolumeAA. MV closure
B. Isovolemic Contraction 
C
BC. AV opens
GE
FD. Systolic EjectionE. AV closes
F. Isovolemic Relaxation
G. MV opens
H. Diastolic FillingD
HFigure 1: Pressure-Volume loop describes 
ventricular performance throughout the cardiac 
cycle  
AV: aortic valve; MV: mitral valve 
Protocol Template Page 3 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/[ADDRESS_1228310] -practices to optimize 
cardiovascular function and improve exercise capacity in these patients.     
 
III. Preliminary  Studies/Progress Report:   
This protocol is designed to test hypotheses that are based on the following observations:  
1. Concerning CRT- D pacing strategies : because there is uncertainty about optimal CRT- D pacemaker 
settings (ie, whether the CS -lead should be ON or OFF in CF- LVAD patients), CRT- D pacemaker 
settings were adjusted as part of routine clinical care in two CF- LVAD patients with CRT -D devices and 
Qc was found to increase by 0.6L/min with the CS -lead ON, v. compared to CS -lead pacing OFF  (ie, 
pacing both ventricles, compared to only pacing the RV).  The hypothesis for this study (that enabling 
the CS -lead leads to an increase in Qc with subsequent increase in exercise capacity) is based off 
these clinical observations.   
2. Regarding RV function in  the setting of CF- LVAD support: CF- LVAD patients frequently under go 
exercise testing as part of routine clinical care if they have unexplained shortness -of-breath or fatigue 
with activity.  Based on these clinical observations, we have observed that right sided filling pressures 
may appear normal at rest, but increase dramatically with exercise (e.g. one patient had a right atrial 
pressure of 4mmHg at rest, but increased to 19mmHg at a workload of 50 Watts on a stationary 
bicycle).  This supports the hypothesis  that the LVAD may be compromising RV function by [CONTACT_879219], which makes it difficult for the RV to 
accommodate the increase in venous return that occurs with onset of exercise.   
 IV. Research Methods :  
A.  Outcome  Measure(s):   
For specific Aim 1 : The primary outcome will be the difference in Qc (inert rebreathing) and peak VO2 
between CS -lead ON v. OFF.  Secondary measures include vital signs including HR and BP, as well as 6-
minute hall walk test, [ADDRESS_1228311], and quality of life measures (Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire and Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire), all compared between CS -lead ON v. 
OFF.     
For Specific Aim 2 : The primary outcome will be the pressure -volume (PV) area as measured by [CONTACT_879220] – this data variable is a direct marker of “how hard” the RV must work in the face of changes in 
preload (venous return).  Secondary outcomes include: end- systolic pressure volume relationship (ESPV R), 
which assesses changes in contractility, end- diastolic pressure volume relationship (EDPVR), which assesses 
ventricular compliance during the diastolic portion of the cardiac cycle, dp/dt (increase in ventricular pressure 
during isovolemic contraction period), and tau (measure of isovolemic relaxation of the ventricle).  All of these 
variables will be assessed during changes in LVAD pump speed, and during exercise testing (on visits 1- 2, see 
figure 2 below) with CS -lead ON v. OFF.     
 
B. Description of Population to be Enrolled  for completion of specific aims 1-2 :   
1. [ADDRESS_1228312] already undergone CF- LVAD implantation.  In clusion 
criteria :  1) advanced HF patients who have already received CF- LVADs and are clinically stable, 
ambulat ory outpatients and are fully recovered (at least 3 months) from LVAD implantation Exclusion 
criteria : 1) individuals with clinical RV failure under resting conditions, defined as moderate- severely 
reduced RV systolic function on echocardiography, or clinic al evidence of RV failure (elevated jugular 
venous pressures, 3 or 4+ [significant] peripheral edema) ; 2) disorders that adversely influence 
exercise ability (e.g. arthritis, peripheral vascular disease, pulmonary disease)  
2. [ADDRESS_1228313] medical history of cardiovascular disease or related disease (e.g. hypertension, diabetes, peripheral vascular disease, arrhyt hmias, 
stroke/transient ischemic attack) and are not taking any cardiac -related medications (e.g. 
antihypertensive medications).  Potential subjects will be recruited by [CONTACT_879221].  Individuals requiring systemic anticoagulation with vitamin-K 
antagonists or new/direct oral anticoagulants (“NOAC”/”DOAC”) will not be considered for study.   
Exclusion cr iteria  for this control group includes: 1)  individuals requiring systemic anticoagulation with 
Protocol Template Page 4 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 vitam in-K antagonists or new/direct oral anticoagulants (“NOAC”/”DOAC”); 2) disorders that adversely 
influence exercise ability (e.g. arthritis, peripheral vascular disease).   
 
Power Analysis: 
For specific aim 1 -2, based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], assuming a n increase in resting Qc of 0.6Lmin following activation of 
CRT (coronary -sinus [CS] lead enabled [CS -ON], with a standard deviation of 0.2L /min, a sample size of 15 
patients will provide greater than 90% power to detect a difference in Qc using an alpha of 0.05.  Assum ing an 
increase in right atrial pressure of ~15mmHg from rest to peak exercise (based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]), a sample size of 
15 patients will provide greater than 90% p ower to detect a difference in right sided pressures from rest to peak 
exercise, using an alpha =0.05.   
 For healthy controls, based on available data previously described in the literature
33, assuming a reduction in 
RV relaxation time by 50msec  from rest to exercise, a sample size of 10 patients will provide greater than 90% 
power to detect a difference in ventricular performance from rest to peak exercise, assuming a standard 
deviation of ~20msec and an a lpha = 0.05.  
 
Study Design and Research Methods   
An overview of the study protocol is displayed in figure 2.   For completion of aim 1 (testing the effect of the 
coronary sinus [CS] lead on functional capacity, CF- LVAD patients who have a CRT- D device will complete 
visits [ADDRESS_1228314] a CRT -D will complete visit 1 only.  For CF- LVAD patients with CRT- D, the study 
protocol will invol ve a double- blinded randomized crossover design.  Immediately following enrollment, CF-
LVAD subjects will be randomized in a double- blind, 1:1 fashion to car diac pacing with the coronary sinus (CS) 
lead enabled or disabled (CS -ON v. CS- OFF).  The pacing mode will be either VVI -R or DDD- R with a backup 
pacing rate set at 60bpm.  After four weeks, patients will return for visit 1 testing.  On completion of testi ng, 
cardiac pacing will be switched (CS -ON to CS -OFF, or vice- versa) for four weeks, following which patients will 
return for visit 2  testing , which is identical to visit 1 testing.  In this manner, all subjects will complete testing 
with the CS -lead ON and the CS -lead OFF; subjects will serve as their own controls to determine the impact 
that CRT -D pacing has on cardiovascular function and exercise performance.  Following completion of visit 2 
testing, the study will be completed and original CRT- D device settings returned to baseline.  Computerized 
randomization will be performed in a 1:1 ratio to a CS -lead ON v. OFF pacing strategy – this process will be 
completed and recorded by a study coordinator  who does not have access to the data recorded throughout  the 
study ; neither the patient nor the PI [INVESTIGATOR_879210].  Pacemaker settings 
will be adjusted by [CONTACT_879222] (to ensure that blinding is maintained).   
Visits 1-2 will involve a baseline assessment of hemodynamics using a Swan -Ganz catheter, followed by 
[CONTACT_879223] s to provide a detailed analysis of ventricular function during 
exercise .   The Swan- Ganz catheter  is a 7 -French flexible catheter that is routinely used for hemodynamic 
assessment for clinical and research purposes (we are currently using this catheter for COMIRB #16- 1635).  
The purpose of this catheter is to determine baseline hemodynamic parameters (in “layman’s terms”, to 
describe pressures in the right and left sides of the heart, as well as the lungs), including cardiac output and 
pulmonary arterial saturation, which provides an assessment of the integrity of the cardiopulmonary s ystem 
under resting conditions prior to exercise.  The inclusion of Swan- Ganz catheter to determine resting 
hemodynamics will extend the protocol by [INVESTIGATOR_13701] 5 minutes.  NOTE: the Swan- Ganz catheter is quickly inserted 
and removed after pressures, cardiac output and pulmonary arterial saturation are obtained.  The Millar 
catheter  is a high fidelity , pi[INVESTIGATOR_3828] -shaped central -lumen , 7-French flexible catheter with pressure and 
conductance electrodes; the insertion technique is the same as that used for a standard r ight heart 
catheterization (for example, the same procedure used for IRB study #16-1635).  These catheters allow for generation of pressure- volume (PV) loops, as well as several additional measures  of ventricular function, 
including : 1) dp/dt ( increase in ventricular pressure during isovolemic contraction period); 2) tau (measure of 
isovolemic r elaxation of the ventricle); 3) end-systolic pressure volume relationship (ESPVR ), which represents 
contra ctile function of the ventricle; 4) end- diastolic pressure volume relationship (EDPVR), which represents 
ventricular compliance; and 5) pressure- volume area, which represents the amount of mechanical energy 
generated from contraction of the ventricle .  As such, these catheters provide several parameters that are 
Protocol Template Page 5 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/[ADDRESS_1228315] RV function, and also determine how RV function influences 
exercise capacity in these patients.   
 
The testing protocol for visits 1-2 will involve two parts: Part A, and Part B , which will be completed 
following right heart catheterization.  Part A involves LVAD pump speed adjustments at rest in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_12251].  Part B involves submaximal and symptom -limited (maximal) exercise.  Exercise will be performed 
using a stationary cycle ergometer.  For Part A, measurements will include the following: HR, BP by [CONTACT_879224], LVAD parameters (from LVAD monitor), pressure- volume loops from the Millar catheter and Qc (inert 
rebreathing).   Echocardiography will be used during pump speed adjustments to assess parameters s uch as 
LV and RV systolic and end- diastolic volumes, septal position, and mitral/tricuspid regurgitant flow.  For Part B, 
measurements obtained will include the following: HR, BP  by [CONTACT_459055], respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], Qc (inert 
rebreathing), LVAD parameters (flow, rotor speed, pulsatility index and power), echocardiography may be used to estimate flow through the LVAD and left ventricular outflow tract of the native heart), VO2 , VCO2 by [CONTACT_879225], RPE and measurements outlined above from the Millar catheter  (e.g. dp/dt, tau, ESPVR, EDPVR 
and pressure- volume area) .  A complete blood count (CBC) will be obtained at rest, prior to initiation of 
exercise .  A CBC is necessary to obtain hemoglobin/hematocrit levels, which are used to further assess VO2 
and other c ardiac parameters (e.g. cardiac output).  Notably, this blood sample will be obtained from the 
catheter that is placed for invasive hemodynamic monitoring – no additional catheters or peripheral IV’s are 
required.  Blood (venous and/or arterial) oxygen saturation levels will be drawn at rest and during each stage of exercise by [CONTACT_2869] a small amount of blood (approximately 1- 2cc) from the catheters (arterial catheter will 
be used to check arterial oxygen saturation; Millar catheter will be used to check venous oxygen saturation level).  Blood oxygen levels are necessary to determine oxygen consumption by [CONTACT_879226].  Cerebral 
and peripheral (musculoskeletal) oxygen uptake may be monitored noninvasively by [CONTACT_160087].  End- tidal carbon 
dioxide will be monitored by [CONTACT_879227].  Brain blood flow may be measured by [CONTACT_879228].  
On visits 1-2 , additional testing will include: 1) echocardiography to measure parameters such as LV end-
diastolic and systolic volumes, mitral regurgitation severity, and RV strain; 2) 6- minute hall walk  and 10- meter 
walk test ; 3) Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire KCCQ) and Minnesota Living with Heart Failure 
Questionnaire (MLHFQ); 4) CRT- D device interrogation to assess for percentage of time that patients are 
paced by [CONTACT_879229], for ventricular and/or supraventricular arrhythmias, and any “therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]” delivered by [CONTACT_133238], such as anti -tachycardia pacing or shocks for treatment of ventricular arrhythmias: and 5) a 
comprehensive medical histor y and physical exam .   
Note that patients with CF- LVADs will complete two visits (visits 1-2 ); healthy controls will only complete 
one day of testing (visit 1 ) to define normal responses – healthy subjects will only complete part B (exercise 
testing); part  A (pump speed adjustments ) is not applicable to healthy controls, who do not have an LVAD .   
 
The following methods will be utilized for completion of visits 1-2: 
• Medical History and Physical Exam  
• Exercise on stationary bicycle  or arm ergometry  
• Right hear t catheterization 
• Arterial line insertion  
• Assessment of oxygen consumption (VO2) and carbon dioxide production (VCO2) via metabolic cart  
• Assessment of vital signs: h eart rate, blood pressure, SpO2, end- tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2)  
• Lactate measurement  
• Echocardiography  
• 6-minute hall walk  
• 10 meter gait speed  
• KCCQ and MLHFQ  (for LVAD cohort only)  
• CRT-D device interrogation  (for subjects that have an LVAD and a CRT- D device ) 
 Procedures that will occur in the catheterization lab or the inpatient CTRC for visits 1-2:  
• Right heart catheterization: insertion of a Millar  catheter under fluoroscopic guidance  
• Arterial line insertion  
Protocol Template Page 6 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
  
Procedures that may occur in either the catheterization lab or the inpatient unit of the CCTSI  (12th floor 
of the inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] ): 
• LVAD pump speed adjustments: pump speed adjustments will be completed after the Millar catheter 
and arterial line are inserted and will be completed before patients exercise on the stationary 
ergometer .  The location of testing (catheterization laboratory or CCTSI ) will be determined based on 
schedule availability.  If testing is completed in the CCTSI , patients will be transported from the 
catheterization laboratory by [CONTACT_9154] ([CONTACT_294422]), a CCTSI  nurse, a cath lab staff member and 
with telemetr y monitoring (same as already being done for IRB study #16- 1635).   
• Exercise testing: following placement of the Millar catheter and arterial line, exercise testing will either 
be completed in the catheterization laboratory, or the patient may be transport ed to the inpatient CTRC 
unit to complete testing .  Following completion of the study, the Millar catheter will be removed under 
fluoroscopic guidance: if testing is completed in the cath lab, the catheter will be removed there, once 
testing is completed.  If testing is completed in the CTRC, the patient will be brought back to the 
catheterization laboratory for removal of the catheter.   
• Echocardiography  
• 6-minute hall walk  
• 10 meter gait speed  
• KCCQ and MLHFQ  
• CRT-D device interrogation (for subjects that have an LVAD and a CRT- D device)   
Protocol Template Page 7 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Team members that will be present at all times during the study : regardless of the location of the testing 
(CCTSI  v. cardiac catheterization laboratory), the following team members will be present for testing:  
• [CONTACT_294422] (study PI)  
• Study coordinator  
• Cath lab staff member  
• RN from the CCTSI   
 
Short -Term Effects of CS -lead ON v. OFF pacing mode – Sub- Study  
The protocol listed above is intended to determine longterm effects of CS -lead ON v. OFF pacing.  However, 
there is a lack of information regarding the short -term effects – specifically, the possible hemodynamic benefits 
in an acute, or short -term setting.  For example, in one of our patients with advanced heart failure with reduced 
ejection fraction (HFrEF), mean pulmonary arterial pressure was reduced by 6mmHg (from 31 to 25mmHg) 
and cardiac output improved by 1L (from 4.8 to 5.7L/min) when the CS -lead was turned from OFF to ON (this 
was done under close hemodynamic monitoring for clinical purposes).  However, these acute i mprovements in  
hemodynamics observed in a HFrEF patient, suggest that similar improvements may be observed among 
HFrEF patients with CF- LVADs.  To fo rmally investigate, CF- LVAD patients who have completed the study 
protocol above, will be invited to compl ete a non- invasive, short -term (approximately 2 hour) substudy  
during routine clinical outpatient appointments.  The primary objective of this short -term substudy is to 
determine whether there are acute improvements in functional capacity with CS -lead ON v. OFF CRT- D 
pacing.  Enrollment
•Randomization to CS -lead on v. off
•Pacing mode: VVI -R or DDD-R
•Back- up pacing rate:                           
set at 60bpmCS-ONFigure 2: Overview of Testing for Visits 1-2
Part B: Exercise TestingRCS-ON
CS-OFF CS-OFF
Visit 1 Visit 2Study 
Completion Exercise Intensity 
RestMildModerate Max
10 min
break
HR, BP (arterial line)
Gas Exchange (VO2, VCO2)Each stage –assess:
1.Cardiac output
2.Hemodynamics
3.Rate of perceived exertion
4.Echocardiography
5.LVAD parametersStudy
Enrollment 4 weeks 4 weeks
Part A: Pump Speed AdjustmentPump SpeedBaseline 
Speed
8,000 
RPM11,000 
RPM
Pressure -Volume LoopHR, BP (arterial line)
LVAD parameters
Pressure -Volume LoopProtocol for Testing on Visits 1 -2
Protocol Template Page 8 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Recruitment : patients who have completed the study protocol above will be invited to participate in this 
substudy.  Subjects will be recruited either by [CONTACT_879230].  The 
rationale and description of  the substudy will be described.  After subjects have had ample time to 
review the substudy, and all questions are answered, they will be formally enrolled.  
 Outcomes of interest :  
1. Six-minute hall -walk distance  
2. Cardiac output – measured noninvasively by [CONTACT_879231]  
3. Echo parameters: left and right ventricular strain- rate imaging; pulse- wave Doppler of the left 
ventricular and right ventricular outflow tract as well as the LVAD inflow cannula, to 
document changes in relative flow through the LVAD v. aorta; M- mode of the aortic valve to 
assess for aortic valve opening  
4. LVAD parameters: flow, speed, pulsatility index and power  
Protocol : The standard CRT- D pacing mode is CS -lead OFF, so these patients will begin the substudy 
with the ir pacemakers in the CS -lead OFF mode.  Following enrollment, patients will undergo a six -
minute hall -walk as part of the research substudy.  Cardiac output will be assessed noninvasively using 
the Innocor inert rebreathing technique.  Thereafter, a transthoracic echo (TTE) will be completed as 
part of standard- of-care (these patients undergo routine echos during clinic appointments).  The above-
listed parameters will be recorded.  Following c ompletion of the echo, LVAD parameters will be 
recorded and then the pacemaker will be adjusted to the CS -lead ON setting.  Then, patients will 
complete their routine clinic visit, which typi[INVESTIGATOR_34607] ~60 minutes.  Once completed, the patient will 
repeat the six -minute hall -walk, as well as cardiac output by [CONTACT_879232], and the same 
echo images will be repeated.  LVAD parameters will be recorded.  Once completed, the pacemaker will be returned to original settings, with CS -lead OFF.  The procedure will be completed and the patient 
discharged from clini c.   
Compensation : patients will not be provided any further compensation for this substudy.   
Data Analysis: all outcomes of interest will be compared by [CONTACT_54959] t -test to determine differences 
between CS -lead ON v. OFF.  Ll statistical analyses will be paerformed using a computer -based 
analysis system (SAS V9.4, Cary NC, [LOCATION_003]).  A P value of <0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
 
 
D.   Description, Risks and Justification of Procedures and Data Collection Tools:  
Right heart catheterization:  risks involv e pain/bleeding at site of catheter insertion, infection, 
pneumothorax, arrhythmias , and chest discomfort .  Radiation exposure: there is a very small amount of 
radiation exposure that will be experienced during insertion of the catheter.  The typi[INVESTIGATOR_879211] <7mSv.  For comparison, the average amount of radiation exposure per year that results from 
standing outside is around 3- 4mSv .  These risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_290537][INVESTIGATOR_879212] 
(numbing medication) and injecting lidocaine over the sight of catheter insertion.  All procedures will be performed using sterile technique.  Procedures will be performed with use of an ultrasound machine and fluoroscopy – in this manner, all needles, guidewires and catheters will be monitored per standard 
guidelines and practice patterns.  There are no additional risks associated with insertion/removal of a Swan -Ganz catheter prior to insertion of the Millar catheter.  Incorporation of the Swan-Ganz catheter will 
prolong the c urrent study by [CONTACT_159641] 5 minutes.   
Arterial line insertion : risks involve pain/bleeding at site of catheter insertion, infection  
Exercise testing : exercise testing carries a finite risk of adverse cardiovascular events with less than 
1/100,000 in healthy individuals, and approximately 1/10,000 in patients with cardiovascular disease.  
Arrhythmias during exercise: during exercise testing, there is a potential for advanced HF patients to 
develop arrhythmias.  
Fatigue : during exercise testing, subjects will eventually develop fatigue, as they are encouraged to 
exercise at submaximal and peak workloads.  Commented [ 1]: New figure  
Protocol Template Page 9 
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 Pump speed adjustments : as the pump speed is increased or decreased, subjects may theoretically 
feel lightheaded or become short of breath.  
Pacemaker se tting adjustments (turning the CS -lead ON and OFF): while it is not anticipated that 
individuals will have any ventricular arrhythmias that result from enabling or disabling the CS -lead of the 
CRT-D, this is theoretically possible during any adjustment to a pacemaker -defibrillator.  This study does 
not involve adjustment of any “therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]” delivered by [CONTACT_879233]- D, meaning that in the event of an 
arrhythmia, the CRT- D would provide anti -tachycardia pacing or shocks as necessary by [CONTACT_879234].  
Echo/ultrasound:  there are no significant risks associated with echo or ultrasound. It is possible that 
patients may feel slight discomfort from a probe sitting over the skin.  
Loss of confidentiality : there  is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality any time information is collected. 
Every effort will be made to keep participant information confidential.  
Risks to an embryo, fetus or breast -fed infant : this is not anticipated, since advanced HF patients are 
highly discouraged from bearing children, particularly when they are scheduled to undergo CF- LVAD 
implantation. However, any woman of child- bearing age will undergo a pregnancy test prior to being 
studied. If a female participant becomes pregnant during they study, she will tell the PI [INVESTIGATOR_879213].  
    
E.   Potential Scientific Problems:   
1)Recruitment of subjects for testing: The University of Colorado has an active heart failure and LVAD 
program, with approximately 50 CF- LVADs inserted in 2015 and over 70 patients followed in the advanced 
heart failure center .  There are currently 37 CF- LVAD patients with CRT -D devices that are being followed 
clinically by [CONTACT_879235].  
Thus, we do not anticipate any difficulty recruiting subjects for this proposal.  Healthy volunteers will be 
recruited by [CONTACT_879236].  We will plan to enroll  
30 participants with the anticipation that there will be a few dropouts (no more than 5 anticipated) . 
 
F. Safety Oversight:  
The independent Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) that oversees IR study #16- 1635 will also oversee 
all operations of this study , from initiation of the study through completion.  The principal investigator ([CONTACT_879238]) will regularly report to the DSMB, which will be comprised of the following members (who are not 
affiliated with the study):  
 
CHAIR and Statistician: Alex Kaiser , PhD Assistant [CONTACT_3348] of Biostatistics and Informatics  
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus  
 
Andreas Brieke, MD  
Associate Professor of Medicine- Cardiology  
Section of Advanced Heart Failure, LVAD and Cardiac Transplant, Division of Cardiology, Department of 
Medicine  
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus  
Prateeti Khazanie, MD, MPH  
Assistant Professor of Medicine- Cardiology  
Section of Advanced Heart Failure, LVAD and Cardiac Transplant, Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine  
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus  
 
 
Safety Measures: The following safety measures will be in place during the study:  
• Consent: the primary investigator ([CONTACT_294422]) will carefully review study objectives, procedures 
involved, and the risks and benefits of the study with the individual being considered for inclusion.  Consent will be obtained from a study coordinator only after the individual being considered has had 
ample time to carefully r eview the consent form, the coordinator has personally reviewed the c onsent 
Protocol Template Page 10  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/[ADDRESS_1228316] been answered to the individual’s satisfaction.   The 
coordinator will be responsible for finalizing consent (obtaining signatures),  but the primary investigator 
will be available at any time during the consent process to ensure that the individual makes a fully 
informed decision about whether or not to participate.    
• INR goal: Patients with CF- LVADs are managed with blood- thinners (i e, vitamin -K antagonists 
[coumadin]) , with  drug dosages adjusted to an INR goal of 2.0- 3.0.  For the purposes of this study, all 
blood- thinners  prescribed as part of routine care,  will be continued.  However, recognizing that there 
are bleeding risks  assoc iated with procedures (right heart catheterization) on patients who are 
anticoagulated, a right heart catheterization will not be performed on individuals who have an INR > 2.5 
less than one week prior to the time of procedure.  In the event that the INR i s > 2.5, the visit will be 
rescheduled for  another time.   
• Participant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]:  
o Hemodynamic monitoring: individuals’ vital signs will be monitored continuously during all visits 
of the study .  In the event that an individual becomes hemodynamically  unstable during 
exercise, the study will be discontinued.  “Hemodynamic instability” includes, but is not limited 
to: an unexpected reduction in blood pressure; transition from normal to an abnormal rhythm 
(e.g. sustained ventricular tachycardia or recurrent nonsustained ventricular tachycardia)  at any 
point in time; clinical instability as determined by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Cornwell (an advanced heart failure 
cardiologist experienced in conducting studies on these types of patients) or any other team 
member.   
o Patient com fort: a n individual being tested may voluntarily withdraw from the study at any point 
in time, should he/she become uncomfortable or symptomatic (e.g. excessive dyspnea, lightheadedness) at any point in time during exercise.  The primary investigator of the study  ([CONTACT_879238])  recognizes that patient comfort/discomfort may not be reflected by [CONTACT_28045]’s vital 
signs – therefore, the study will be discontinued at any point in time at the patient’s request, 
should the individual become symptomatic desp ite vital signs being normal).  
• A member of the cath lab staff will be present at all times during testing, when a test subject has a heart  
catheter in place.  The cath lab staff member will accompany the patient from the cath lab to the CTRC and remain ther e until testing is completed.  This indivi dual will be responsible for monitoring and serve 
as an “extra set of eyes”, to monitor the well -being of the test subject, while the catheter is in place.  In 
addition, [CONTACT_294422], the primary investigator for the study, will be present at all times, in cluding the 
duration of time when a test subject has a catheter in place. To further safety oversight, a CTRC nurse 
will be present throughout the procedure whether testing is completed in the cath lab or the CTRC.  
• The study PI ([CONTACT_294422]) recognizes t hat there inherent risks involved with invasive procedures and 
exercise testing.  Therefore, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_879214], even if that individual meets all other inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• During CRT -D interrogations on visits 1- 2, if arrhythmias are detected, this information will be 
communicated to the patient and to the patient’s managing cardiologist.   
 
This study will be registered on clinicaltrials.gov prior to study initiation.  This study is similar in design to IRB #16-1635, which is funded in part, through the PI’s NIH/NHLBI K23 award.  However, this study (IRB #17-
1042) is not a written part of the K23 award that was awarded by [CONTACT_18121]/ NHLBI.  As such, while this study 
seeks to address similar objectives (ie, to determine limitations in functional capacity of patients with advanced heart failure with CF- LVADs), this is an independent study with i ts own protocol and consent form s.   
 
G.   Data Analysis Plan:   
For specific aim 1, data across conditions among CF- LVAD patients (ie, CS -lead ON v. OFF) will be 
compared using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni post -hoc tests for multiple 
comparisons.  Linear mixed modeling with  random effects will be used to account for the variability in 
hemodynamics (e.g. heart rate, blood pressure, cardiac output) that occur during pump speed adjustments and 
during progressive stages of exercise (rest, mild, moderate and peak exerc ise).  Comparisons between healthy 
controls and CF- LVAD patients will be compared using the Mann Whitney U test.  All statistical analyses will be 
Protocol Template Page 11  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 performed using a computer -based analysis system (SAS, V9.4, Cary NC, [LOCATION_003]).  A P value < 0.05 will be 
considered statistically significant.  
For specific aim 2, data across conditions among CF- LVAD patients (CS -lead ON v. OFF) will be 
compared using a two -way repeated measures ANOVA, to determine the impact of CS -lead pacing and LVAD 
pump speed on RV performance,  and the impact of CS -lead and exercise on RV performance, with Bonferroni 
post-hoc tests for multiple comparisons.  Linear mixed modeling with random effects will be used to account for 
the variability in parameters of RV function (dp/dt, tau, ESPVR, EDPVR, and PV area).  Comparisons between 
healthy controls and CF- LVAD patients will be compared using the Mann Whitney U test.  All statistical 
analyses will be performed using a computer -based analysis system (SAS, V9.4, Cary NC, [LOCATION_003]).  A P value < 
0.05 will  be considered statistically significant.  
 
H.  Summarize Knowledge to be Gained:   
This proposal will be the first to provide a comprehensive assessment of the impact CRT -D pacing 
strategies on cardiac function for heart failure patients with CF- LVADs .  Currently, there is a lack of 
knowledge about best -practices for management of CRT- D in patients  with CF -LVADs .  In the absence of data, 
practitioners frequently deactivate the CS -lead in an effort to conserve CRT-D battery life and also to allow the 
interv entricular septum to contribute to RV contractility.  However, my preliminary data suggest that this 
strategy is not ideal, and that cardiac function (specifically, Qc) improves with the CS -lead activated.   
This proposal will be the first to provide a detailed analysis (using high- fidelity Millar catheters) of 
CF-LVAD therapy on RV performance at rest and with activity/exercise.  It is likely that a CF -LVAD 
compromises RV function by “pulling” the interventricular septum away from the RV (the septum is “pulled” away from the RV by [CONTACT_879237]), which increases RV diameter and limits the 
ability of the septum to contribute to RV contractility.   
This study will define short -term benefits as it pertains to functional capacity (as determined by [CONTACT_173265] -minute 
hallwalk), as well as hemodynamic parameters (as measured by [CONTACT_307041]) that result from enabling the CS-lead.  Further, acute improvements in cardiovascular performance (determined noninvasively by 
[CONTACT_6751]) will be characterized as well.   
Findings from these studies will inform clinicians on best -practices regarding CRT- D programming to 
optimize cardiac function and exercise capacity, will characterize how CF- LVAD technology in fluences RV 
function and also define the extent to which RV function/dysfunction limits exercise capacity in these patients . 
 
 
REFERENCES :  
 
1. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd- Jones DM, et al. Executive summary: heart disease and stroke statisti cs--2012 update: a 
report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. Jan 3 2012;125(1):188- 197. 
2. Mosterd A, Cost B, Hoes AW, et al. The prognosis of heart failure in the general population: The Rotterdam 
Study. European heart journal. Aug 2001;22( 15):1318- 1327.  
3. Ho KK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_564297], Kannel  WB, Levy D. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_171453]: the Framingham Study. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 1993;22([ADDRESS_1228317] A):6A -13A. 
4. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for t he Management of Heart Failure: A 
Report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240- e327.  
5. Dargie HJ. Effect of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial infarction in patients with left -ventricular dysfunction: 
the CAPRICORN randomised trial. The Lancet. 2001;357(9266):1385- 1390.  
6. Packer M, Bristow MR, Cohn JN, et al. The Effect of Carvedilol on Morbidity and Mortality in Patients with Chronic 
Heart Failure. New England Journal of Medicine. 1996;334:1349- 1355.  
7. MERIT -HF Study Group.  Effect of Metoprolol CR/XL in Chronic Heart Failure: Metoprolol CR/XL Randomized 
Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT -HF). Lancet. 1999;353:[ADDRESS_1228318] of Vasodilator Therapy on Mortality in Chronic Congestive Heart Failure: Results of a Veterans Administration Cooperative Study. New England Journal of Medicine. 
1986;314(24):1547- 1552.  
9. Poole -Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Clel and JGF, et al. Comparison of carvedilol and metoprolol on clinical outcomes 
in patients with chronic heart failure in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trial (COMET): randomised 
controlled trial. The Lancet. 2003;362(9377):7 -13. 
Protocol Template Page 12  
CF-146, Effective 7/10/11  
 10. Effects of Enalapr il on Mortality in Severe Congestive Heart  Failure.  Results of the Cooperative North 
Scandinavian Enalapril Survival Study (CONSENSUS). New England Journal of Medicine. Swedberg, 
K.;316(23):1429 -1435.  
11. Cohn JN, Johnson G, Ziesche S, et al. A Comparison of Enalapril with Hydralazine -Isosorbide Dinitrate in teh 
Treatment of Chronic Congestive Heart Failure. New England Journal of Medicine. 1991;325(5):303- 310. 
12. Yusuf S. Effect of Enalapril on Survival in Patients with Reduced Left Ventricular Ejection Fractions and 
Congestive Heart Failure.  The SOLVD Investigators. New England Journal of Medicine. 1991;325(5):293- 302. 
13. Ammar KA, Jacobsen SJ, Mahoney DW, et al. Prevalence and prognostic significance of heart failure stages: 
application of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association heart failure staging criteria in the 
community. Circulation. Mar 27 2007;115(12):1563- 1570.  
14. Everly MJ. Cardiac transplantation in the [LOCATION_002]: an analysis of the UNOS registry. Clinical Transpla nts. 
2008:35- 43. 
15. Frazier OH. Mechanical Cardiac Assistance: Historical Perspectives. Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular 
surgery. 2000;12(3):207 -219. 
16. Kirklin JK, Naftel DC, Pagani FD, et al. Sixth INTERMACS annual report: a 10,000 -patient database. The Journal 
of heart and lung transplantation : the official publication of the International Society for Heart Transplantation. Jun 
2014;33(6):555- 564. 
17. Miller LW, Pagani FD, Russell SD, et al. Use of a Continuous -Flow Device in Patients Awaiting Heart 
Transplantation. New England Journal  of Medicine. 2007(357):885- 896. 
18. Slaughter M, Rogers J, Milano C, et al. Advanced Heart Failure Treated with Continuous -Flow Left Ventricular 
Assist Device. New England Journal of Medicine. 2009;361:2241- 2251.  
19. Rogers JG, Aaronson KD, Boyle AJ, et al. Continuous flow left ventricular assist device improves functional 
capacity and quality of life of advanced heart failure patients. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Apr 
27 2010;55(17):1826- 1834.  
20. Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, Rogers JG, et al. Clinical management of continuous -flow left ventricular assist devices 
in advanced heart failure. The Journal of heart and lung transplantation : the official publication of the International 
Society for Heart T ransplantation. Apr 2010;29([ADDRESS_1228319]):S1 -39. 
21. Burke MA, Givertz MM. Assessment and management of heart failure after left ventricular assist device 
implantation. Circulation. Mar 11 2014;129(10):1161- 1166.  
22. Leibner ES, Cysyk J, Eleuteri K, El -Banayosy  A, Boehmer JP, Pae WE. Changes in the functional status 
measures of heart failure patients with mechanical assist devices. ASAIO journal. Mar -Apr 2013;59(2):117- 122. 
23. Casanova C, Celli BR, Barria P, et al. The 6- min walk distance in healthy subjects: reference standards from 
seven countries. T he European respi[INVESTIGATOR_108288]. Jan 2011;37(1):150- 156. 
24. Advanced Fitness Assessment and Exercise Prescription.  3rd ed1998.  
25. Ingle L, Rigby [CONTACT_113879], Carroll S, et al. Prognostic value of the [ADDRESS_1228320] and s elf-perceived symptom severity in 
older patients with chronic heart failure. European heart journal. Mar 2007;28(5):560 -568. 
26. Mancini D, Eisen H, Kussmaul W, Mull R, Edmunds LHJ, Wilson JR. Value of Peak Exercise Oxygen 
Consumption for Optimal Timing of  Cardiac Transplantation in Ambulatory Pat ients With Heart Failure. 
Circulation. 1991;83(3):[ADDRESS_1228321] device. The 
Journal of heart and lung transplantation : the official publication of the International Society for Heart Transplantation. Apr 2015;34(4):489- 496. 
28. Tabima D, Hacker T, CHesler N. Measuring right ventricular function in the normal and hypertensive mouse 
hearts using admittance- derived pressu re-volume loops. American Journal of Physiology Heart and Circulatory 
Physiology. 2010;299(6):H2069- 2075.  
29. Bellofiore A, Chesler NC. Methods for measuring right ventricular function and hemodynamic coupling with the pulmonary vasculature. Ann Biomed Eng. Jul 2013;41(7):1384- 1398.  
30. Matthews J C, McLaughlin VV. Acute Right Ventricular Failure in the Setting of Acute Pulmonary Embolism or 
Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension - A Detailed Review of the Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management. 
Current Cardiology Reviews 2008;4:49 -59. 
31. Durando M.M., Reef VB, Birks K. Right ventricular pressure dynamics during exercise - relationship to stress 
echocardiography. Equine Exercise Physiology. 2002;34:472- 477. 
32. Armstrong D, Matangi M. Estimated right ventricular systolic pressure during exercise stress ec hocardiography in 
patients with suspected coronary artery disease. Canadian Journal of Cardiology 2010;26(2):e45- e49. 
33. Heywood J, Grimm J, Hess O, Jakob M, Krayenbuhl H. Right Ventricular Diastolic Function Duri ng Exercise: 
Effect of Ischemia. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 1990;16(3):611 -622. 
34. Neragi -Miandoab S, Goldstein DJ, Bello R, Michler R, D'Alessandro D. Right ventricular dysfunction following 
continuous flow left ventriccular assist de vice placement in 51 patients - predicators  and outcomes. Journal of 
cardiothoracic surgery. 2012;7(60):1 -4.
 