 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMART – A prospective, multicenter registry  assessing 
the embolization of neurovascular lesions using the  
Penumbra SMART C OIL® System 
 
  
Protocol  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B 
 
Release Date  
August 23, 2016 
  
Device Name  
[CONTACT_204538]
® System  
  
Sponsor  
Penumbra, Inc.  
One Penumbra Place  
Alameda, CA [ADDRESS_761054] Manager  Director Clinical Affairs Europe  
Telephone:  + [PHONE_12009]  Telephone:  + [IP_ADDRESS].12  
E-mail:  brooke.lawson @penumbrainc.com  E-mail:  [EMAIL_11028]  
 

 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page [ADDRESS_761055] INFORMATION ..............................................................................................14  
8. ETHICAL REQUIREMENTS  .............................................................................................15  
9. STATISTICAL PROCEDUR ES ..........................................................................................15  
10. PUBLICATION OF INFOR MATION  ..............................................................................16  
11. BIBLIOGRAPHY  ...............................................................................................................17  
  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 3 of 19 
1. PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
CLP [ZIP_CODE]. B Protocol Synopsis  
Registry  Title:  SMART – A prospective, multicenter registry  assessing the embolization 
of neurovascular lesions using the Penumbra SMART COIL® System  
Objective:  The primary objective of this registry  is to gather post market data on the Penumbra 
SMART C OIL® System  (Smart System ) in the treatment of intracranial aneurysms 
and other malformations.  
Registry  Design:  This is a prospective, multi -center registry  of patients treated in accordance with the 
cleared indications for Smart, Penumbra Coil 400TM (PC 400), and Penumbra 
Occlusion Device (POD®). Data for each patient are collected in accordance with the 
standard of care at each participating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_579299] -year follow -up.  
Patient 
Population: Approximately 1,000 patients with intracranial aneurysms or other malformations 
treated by [CONTACT_579308] 100 centers will be enrolled.  
Sample Size 
Justification: Approximately 1,[ADDRESS_761056] market registry. Assuming 
an observed rate of 8.3% for the primary endpoint of re- treatment at follow -up, the 
sample size precision is ± 2% for this endpoint. Assuming an observed rate of 1.7% for the primary endpoint of procedural device -related serious adverse events at 
immediate post- procedure, the sample size precision is ± 1% for this endpoint. These 
precision estimates are based on binomial 95% confidence intervals. The sample size provides an adequate level of precision for these primary endpoints. 
Inclusion 
Criteria:  Patients enrolled in this registry  must sign the Informed Consent Form  and be treated 
according to the cleared indication s for Smart, PC 400, and POD, which include the 
embolization of:  
1. Intracranial aneurysms 
2. Other neurovascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and 
arteriovenous fistulae  
Exclusion 
Criteria:  1. Life expectancy less than one year  
2. Smart, PC 400, or POD account for l ess than 75% of total number of coils 
implanted  
3. Patient previously enrolled in the SMART Registry  
4. Participation in another clinical investigation that could confound the 
evaluation of the registry  device  
Endpoints:  1. Retreatment through  follow -up  
2. Procedural device- related serious adverse events  
3. Ability to achieve adequate occlusion immediate post procedure 
4. Number of times re- access with guidewire was required due to catheter 
kickout  
Registry  Period:  It is anticipated patient enrollment will take [ADDRESS_761057] of care at each participating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_579300] -up.  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 4 of 19 
2. INTRODUCTION 
 
Intracranial aneurysms are a significant health problem in the [LOCATION_002] with 
an estimated 1% to 6% of the adult population harboring cerebral aneurysms.1,[ADDRESS_761058] intracranial aneurysm is estimated to be approximately 1.9%.
2 If an intracranial aneurysm ruptures, blood leaks into the 
highly sensitive subarachnoid space around the brain, resulting in a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). SAH is known to be a major risk factor for a stroke due to the 
irritation of the outer layer of the nearby [CONTACT_579309].  This condition is associated with a high rate of mortality; close to half of ruptured aneurysms result i n death within six months.
2-4 Patients who survived the initial 
SAH are at significant risk of subsequent re-rupture.  Various reports indicate that if left untreated, there is a re-bleeding rate of more than 50% within the first six months from initial pr esentation of a SAH.
4,5 
 Even if an intracranial aneurysm does not rupture, it can lead to severe complications.  As the aneurysm grows, it can press on nerves, put pressure on brain tissue, or interfere with other arteries or veins. Blindness, paralysis, and other morbidities often result.  Thrombus can also form within the aneurysmal sac, 
break off, travel downstream, and cause an ischemic stroke. It has been reported that 2.2% to 23% of patients with unruptured aneurysms may eventual ly 
experience a rupture.
7,8 The International Study of Unruptured Intracranial 
Aneurysms evaluated the natural history of 1,937 unruptured aneurysms in 1,449 patients with a mean follow -up of 8.3 years.
8 It reported that 2.2% of these 
patients had a confir med rupture during follow-up, but 66% of them were fatal.  
Juvela et al. reported on the long term natural history of unruptured intracranial aneurysms in a series of 142 patients.
7 With a median follow-up of 19.7 years, 
23% of the patients experienced a S AH, which corresponds to an annualized rate 
of 1.3%. The cumulative rate of SAH tended to increase with time, with a rupture rate of 10.5% at 10 years, 23% at 20 years, and 30.3% at 30 years after diagnosis. Approximately half of the  SAH patients did not survive. Thus, regardless of the 
rate of occurrence, fatality associated with this event is high in this cohort.
7, 8 
 Prior to 1995, the traditional treatment for intracranial aneurysms was surgical clippi[INVESTIGATOR_007], in which the skull is surgically opened so metal clips can be applied to the aneurysm’s neck to occlude it from the parent artery to prevent a rupture.
1 
This treatment, while effective, is high risk, highly invasive, requires an extended hospi[INVESTIGATOR_579301], and is technically difficult to perform in certain regions of the brain (such as the posterior circulation).  Thus, this treatment modality is not a viable option for a significant number of patients, particularly during the acute phase of SAH, when the presence of cerebral edema and evolving thrombi formation render aneurysm access difficult, if not impossible.   In the early 1990’s, an endovascular treatment technique for intracranial aneurysms was first introduced by [CONTACT_579310], who used electrolytically detachable platinum coils to pack and embolize the aneurysmal sac.
9, 10 The 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 5 of 19 
rationale was to exclude the aneurysm from the circulation and thus reduce the 
risk of a rupture and SAH.  The Guglielmi detachable coil (GDC) was not universally accepted at firs t but gained significant credibility after obtaining 
approval from the FDA for the intracranial aneurysm indication.  Moreover, a few well-conducted, prospective, randomized studies of both ruptured and unruptured 
aneurysms have demonstrated that angiograp hic and clinical outcomes from this 
treatment modality were equivalent, if not better, than those obtained from surgical clippi[INVESTIGATOR_007].
6,8,11,[ADDRESS_761059] important landmark study was the International 
Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) in which a total of 2,143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms were randomized to either neurosurgical clippi[INVESTIGATOR_579302]. The results showed that at one year follow-up, 30.6% of the patients treated by [CONTACT_579311][INVESTIGATOR_579303]. 23.7% of those treated by [CONTACT_579312], which resulted in a risk reduction rate of 22.6%. And thus, embolic coiling has now become the standard of care worldwide for endovascular occlusion for both incidental and ruptured intracranial aneurysms.   
 
In light of the natural history of the disease, the primary focus for management of an intracran ial aneurysm must be to prevent its rupture and sequelae.   
 
The Penumbra S MART  COIL
® System  (Smart  System ), a new generation of 
detachable coils, is the latest in Penumbra’s line of embolization tools .  It has 
recently received 510k clearance in the U.S. and  CE Mark in Europe.  This coil 
system is specifically designed to promote aneurysm embolization . 
 Coil technology has evolved considerably since the initial introduction of the GDC coil over [ADDRESS_761060] for 
the body of the coil, and finishes with a soft proximal end. This progressive 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page [ADDRESS_761061] ultra high  molecular weight polymers for stretch 
resistance, which are 3 times stronger than current stretch resistant materials such 
as polypropylene (found in most 10- system coils).  
 The Penumbra Coil 400
TM (PC400) system received  510k in the U.S. and has CE 
Mark . 
 PC400 fundamentally differs from other embolic products for treatment of brain 
aneurysms by [CONTACT_579313]. PC400 has up to 
four times more volume per unit length than most other embolic coils available while still maintaining a soft and compliant feel.  Together, these characteristics represent the potential to improve the ability to densely fill larger aneurysms  and 
other neurovascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and arteriovenous fistulae , thus triggering the healing process.  
 Penumbra Occlusion Device (POD
®), was developed to address a specific clinical 
need to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_579304] a target vessel. Current options for vessel occlusion are limited. Coils designed for aneurysms are not ideally suited for 
vessel embolization due to their tendency to migr ate with antegrade flow .  Other 
options, such as vascular plug technology for larger vessels , require access with 
large diagnostic catheters or even larger bore sheaths.   POD utilizes technology that delivers both variable sizing and softness to provide a solution for rapid and precise embolization of the target vessel. The technology achieves this range of features through the design of a distal anchoring segment, thereby [CONTACT_579314] a range of vessel diameters. The proximal segment of the POD achieves dense occlusion by [CONTACT_579315] a softer, smaller diameter segment tightly behind the anchored portion.   All three systems  (Smart, PC 400, and POD) above consist of: an implantable 
Coil constructed of 92% Platinum and 8% Tungsten round wi re, an attached 
detachment pusher, and a detachment handle (packaged separately) . The 
detachment pusher is comprised of a shaft with a radiopaque positioning marker, 
a distal detachment tip, and a pull wire. The d etachment handle is used to detach 
the coil  implant from the detachment pusher. All three systems are  designed for 
endovascular embolization of aneurysms and other neurovascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and arteriovenous fistulae.  The i ntended 
users for this device are phy sicians who have received appropriate training in 
interventional neuroradiology.    These devices provide a comprehensive product family for the management of intracranial aneurysms and  other neurovascular abnormalities such as 
arteriovenous malformations and arteriovenous fistulae.  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page [ADDRESS_761062] market registry  examining Smart  and its primary 
objective is to gather real world experience and data on the Smart System in the 
treatment of intracranial aneurysms and oth er neurovascular abnormalities such as 
arteriovenous malformations and arteriovenous fistulae.  
 
3.1 Registry  Design  
 
This is a prospective, multi- center registry  of patients treated in accordance with 
the cleared indications for the Penumbra Smart  System , Penumbra Coil 400™ (PC 
400), and Penumbra Occlusion Device (POD®) for intracranial aneurysms and 
other neurovascular abnormalities. Data for each patient are collected in accordance with the standard of care at each participating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_579299]-
year follow- up. 
 
3.2 Registry  Objectives/Endpoints  
 
This is the first multicenter post market registry  examining the Penumbra Smart 
System .  Its purpose is to gather real world experience on the Smart System in the 
treatment of intracranial aneurysms and other neurovascular abnormalities such as 
arteriovenous malformations and arteriovenous fistulae.  
 Approximately 1,000 patients with intracranial aneurysms or other malformations  
treated by [CONTACT_579316] , PC 400, and/or POD at up to 100 center s 
will be enrolled.  
 
3.2.1 The Endpoints are:  
• Retreatment through follow-up 
• Procedural device- related serious adverse events at immediate post -
procedure 
• Ability to achieve adequate occlusion - based on investigator’s 
adjudication of adequate occlusion given anatomical and other 
considerations immediate post-procedure 
• Number of times re -access with guidewire was required due to catheter 
kickout  
 
3.[ADDRESS_761063] sign the informed consent form  and be 
treated in accordance with the cleared indications outlined in the Instructions for 
Use for Smart, PC 400, and/or POD. Patients will be considered enrolled at the 
time of consent and  procedure has begun with the intent of implanting coils. 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 8 of 19 
Patients  who fail to meet entry criteria pertaining to coil selection will be 
considered a screen fail and monitored through discharge for safety reasons .  
 
3.3.1 Inclusion Criteria  
Embolization  of: 
• Intracranial aneurysms  
• Other neurovascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous 
malformations and arteriovenous fistulae 
3.3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
• Life expectancy less than one year   
• Smart, PC 400, or POD account for less than 75% of total number of 
coils implanted  
• Patient previously enrolled in the SMART Registry  
• Participatio n in another clinical investigation that could confound the 
evaluation of the registry  device  
 
4. REGISTRY PROCEDURES  
 
All registry  procedures are to be conducted in accordance with the cleared 
indications outlined in the Instructions for Use  for Smart, PC 400, and POD. 
 
 SCHEDULE OF ASSESSMENTS  
 
* Single follow -up visit to be conducted i n accordance to the standard of care at the 
participating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Period for which to capture follow-up visit is within one year 
±6 mo nths 
** Only for patients in which mRS would be captured as  standard of care 
+ Required for patients with SAH only  
++Proportion of SMART coils implanted, target location access attempts, radiation 
exposure, coiling start/end time  
  Assessment  Admission 
Evaluation Immediate  
Post-
Procedure  Discharge  One Year 
Follow-
Up* 
History  √    
Modified Rankin 
Scale ** √   √ 
Hunt and Hess+ √    
Aneurysm Occlusion  √  √ 
Procedural Data 
Points++   √   
Adverse Events   √ √ √ 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page [ADDRESS_761064] Approval / Et hics Committee Approval 
 
Prior to enrolling patients into the registry , the investigator will ensure that proper 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) / Ethics Committee (EC)  approval is obtained, 
in accordance with applicable  local state and federal  laws and regulations.  The 
IRB/EC shall approve all registry  documents, including the final protocol, 
amendments to the protocol, and the informed consent.   
 
5.2 Informed Consent  
 The investigator is responsible for ensuring that a signed informed consent is obtained according to national and state requirements prior to inclusion of patients in the registry . For patients being treated in emergent cases (i.e. ruptured 
aneurysm) patients will be allowed to be enrolled if they sign consent no longer 
than 1 calendar day  after the procedure, or if a legally authorized representative 
signs the informed consent on the patient’s behalf .  
 
5.3 Adherence to Protocol/Amendments  and Applicable Law  
 
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that the registry is conducted 
according to this protocol and in accordance with the relevant aspects of EN ISO [ZIP_CODE]:2011, Declaration of Helsinki, along with any conditions imposed by [CONTACT_579317] (IRB) or Ethics Committee (EC), and all 
other applicable regulations.The investigator shall approve and adhere to this protocol and any amendments that arise during the course of the registry . 
It is the investigator's responsibility to ensure that the staff assisting with the registry  have the appropriate qualifications, are fully instructed on the registry  
procedures, and will respect the confidentiality statement.  
 
5.4 Case Report Form Completion  
 The investigator and registry  staff shall complete the electronic case report forms 
(eCRFs) associated with this registry .  Patient numbers shall be used to identify 
individual patients in this registry .  The e CRFs should be a complete and accurate 
record of patient data collected dur ing the registry.  It is the investigator's 
responsibility to ensure the quality of the data collected and recorded.
 
 
5.5 Reports  
 The investigator will be responsible for the following reports:  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 10 of 19 
5.5.1 Protocol Deviation  
Any deviations from the protocol identified during monitoring or through other 
means should be clearly documented. These include but are not limited to: 
• Subject does not meet inclusion/exclusion criteria  
• Incomplete or missing data  
• Failure to sign informed consent 
• Improperly  signed or incomplete informed consent 
• Delayed reporting of serious, device related, or unexpected  adverse 
events  
• Out of window visits or assessments 
 
5.5.[ADDRESS_761065] market registry , we will only be collecting Adverse Events 
(AEs) related to the procedure or device , unanticipated adverse device effects 
(UADE),  and all Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) from the time of consent 
through registry  exit. If an AE  occurs that is not related to the procedure or 
device, it is not reportable under this Protocol.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Definitions  
• Adverse Event (AE)  : An AE is any undesirable clinical event 
occurring to a patient, during a clinical trial, whether or not it is considered related to the device. This includes a change in a patient's co ndition or laboratory results which has or could have a 
deleterious effect on the patient's health or well- being.  
 
• Adverse Device Effect (ADE):  An adverse device effect related to 
registry  device(s).  
 
• Serious Adverse Event (SAE):  A SAE is an event that:  
a. Led to death  
b. Led to a serious deterioration in the health of the patient that: 
− Resulted in life -threatening illness or injury 
− Resulted in permanent impairment of a body structure or a 
body function 
− Required in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4967]  
− Resulted in medical or surgical intervention to arrest permanent impairment to body structure or a body function 
− Led to fetal distress, fetal death or a congenital abnormality or birth defect 
 
• Unanticipated Adverse Device Event (UADE) : An event that has 
an Adverse  Device Effect, the specificity or severity of which is 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 11 of 19 
not consistent with the with the risk information described in the 
Instruction for Use or the clinical protocol.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS] Relationship to the Registry  Device  
An AE is considered to be device- related when it is reasonable to believe 
that the event may have been caused by [CONTACT_204525]. Following definitions will be used to assess the relationship of the adverse event to the use of registry  device. Any g rading for relatedness  
other than ‘unrelated’ will be considered device related.  
• Definite:   The temporal sequence is relevant and the event abates 
upon device application completion/removal, or reappearance of the event on repeat device application  
• Probable:   The temporal sequence is relevant or the AE abates 
upon device application completion/removal or the AE cannot be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_423]’s condition or comorbidities.   The AE is related or most likely associated with the 
device  
• Possib le: The temporal sequence between the device and the AE is 
such that the relationship is not unlikely or there is no contradicting evidence that can reasonably explain the registry  subject’s 
condition.  There is a possibility of a relationship between the AE 
and the device 
• Unrelated:   The AE is not associated with the device.   There is no 
relation between the AE and the device 
Similar grading will be used for assessing the relationship to procedure.  
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Event Severity  
For the purposes of this trial, the investigator will use the following definitions to rate the severity of each adverse event . 
• Mild:  Awareness of a sign or symptom that does not interfere with 
the patient’s usual activity or is transient, resolves without treatment and with no sequelae 
• Moderate:  interferes with routine activity and/or requires 
symptomatic therapy  
• Severe:  Severe discomfort and significant impact on the subject’s 
ability to perform routine activities despi[INVESTIGATOR_579305]: type of event, duration of event (start through end), severity, seriousness, action taken, outcome and, if appropriate, causality.  
 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 12 of 19 
The Investigator is required to report any device or procedure  related AE, UADE 
and/or SAEs  to the Sponsor or its designee as soon as possible, but no later than 
[ADDRESS_761066] be completed and submitted  to the Sponsor or its designee within 
five working days.   
 An event need not be reported as a SAE  if it represents  only a relapse or an 
expected change or progression of the condition that was the cause of treatment without any other symptoms and signs than t hose present before treatment. This 
type of event is considred an AE, and may not be reportable. 
 When appropriate, the IRB /EC shall be informed by [CONTACT_579318] t he use of the product, 
and Penumbra is responsible for informing the Health Authorities and other investigators of such events as appropriate. 
 
5.[ADDRESS_761067] the investigation is withdrawn by [CONTACT_1201] /EC. The report will 
include a complete description of the reason(s) for which approval was withdrawn. The investigator shall submit all reports in a timely manner.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_761068] two years after the date on which the investigation is completed.  These records include the following:  
• Correspondence with the Sponsor or designee, the m edical monitor, and other 
investigators.  
• Patient records, including informed consent f orms, copi[INVESTIGATOR_579306], and supporting documents. 
• Current registry  protocol with dates and details of reasons for any deviations 
from the protocol that could affect the scientific quality of the registry  or the 
rights, safety, or welfare of the patients.  
• Reports of any serious adverse event or adverse device effects.  
• A copy of all approvals related to the clinical investigation.  
• The approved, blank, informed consent form. 
• Certification that the investigational plan has been approved by [CONTACT_1201] /EC. 
• Signed investigator agreements and current signed and dated curriculum vita e 
of the r egistry  investigator and all participating investigators.  
 
  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page [ADDRESS_761069] the following site visits:  
 
6.4.1 Site Initiation Visit  
 
This is conducted on site or remotely to train the registry  staff on registry  
requirements, and other relevant training.  
6.4.2 Interim Monitoring Visit  
 Conducted as needed to ensure the registry  site is operating in compliance 
with this protocol, and completing the e CRFs.  Clinical monitoring will 
include review and resolution of missing or inconsistent data and source document checks to ensure the accuracy of the reported data. eCRFs for 
all enrolled patients will be made available to the Sponsor for review as agreed with the investigator.  The Sponsor will evaluate and summarize the results of each site visit in written reports, identify ing repeated data 
problems with any investigator and specifying recommendations for resolution of noted deficiencies. To facilitate this monitoring, certain source documents may be requested. These may include, but are not limited to, patient informed consent, history and physical, operative report, imaging reports, and discharge summary.   
  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 14 of 19 
6.4.3 Registry  Close -Out Visit  
 
This visit is conducted at the termination of the registry  to resolve any 
outstanding data queries and reconcile trial documents . 
 
6.5 Data Management 
All registry  data will be entered into an electronic data capture (EDC) system 
provided by a vendor. Registry  personnel will have individual login and password 
to access the clinical registry  information based upon each individual’s roles and 
responsibilities. For data security, the system operates within the Secure Socket 
Layer (SSL) 256-bit encryption protocol. This application is designed to support 
compliance with the appropriate regulations and guidance for industry.  
 Data entry will be per formed at the investigational sites. Standardized eCRFs  will 
be provided for use at all investigational sites. Investigators are responsible for completion and timely submission of the data to Penumbra, Inc. This EDC system requires no on- site software ins tallation or specific hardware to operate. 
Investigators, clinical coordinators, data managers, and Penumbra clinical 
personnel access project information and registry  data centrally via a Web 
browser. Incoming data are to be reviewed for quality and consi stency before 
being locked for data export. Questions or problems with submitted data will be 
addressed with the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_579307], or through direct contact.   All hard copy forms and data files will be s ecured to ensure confidentiality. 
Investigators are required to maintain source documents required by [CONTACT_760], including laboratory results, patient report forms, supporting medical records, and Informed Consent Forms. The source documents will be used during the regular monitoring visits to verify information submitted on the e CRFs.   
 7. CONTACT [CONTACT_579319]:  
Penumbra , Inc . 
One Penumbra Place  
Alameda, CA [ZIP_CODE] 
Tel. ([PHONE_4394] 
Fax ([PHONE_4395] 
 
Key contacts for the SMART registry  include:  
Brooke Lawson, MS CCRA  Clinical Project Manager  [PHONE_12010]. 2183  
Melissa Dillman, RN  Director , Clinical Operations  [PHONE_12011]. 4422  
Michaella Corso  Director , Clinical Affairs  [PHONE_12010]. 2079  
Amaëlle Vuillaume  Director , Clinical Affairs Europe  + [IP_ADDRESS].12   
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 15 of 19 
 
8. ETHICAL REQUIREMENTS  
 
8.1 IRB/EC Approval  
 
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that the registry is conducted according to any conditions imposed by [CONTACT_148097] (IRB) or Ethics Committee (EC), and all other applicable regulations. It is the responsibility of th e investigator to obtain approval of the registry  protocol from 
the IRB /EC and to keep the IRB /EC informed of any unexpected serious adverse 
events, serious adverse device effects, and amendments to the protocol , as 
applicable. All correspondence with the IRB/EC should be filed by [CONTACT_579320][INVESTIGATOR_204501].  
8.2 Patient Information and Consent  
 
It is the responsibility of the investigator to give each patient full and adequate verbal and written information regarding the objective and procedure of the registry  and the possible risks involved and to obtain signed informed consent 
from all patients prior to inclusion in the registry  unless the patient's health 
condition does not allow informed consent, in which case the state and national procedures will be applied. For patients being treated in emergent cases (i.e. ruptured aneurysm), patients will be allowed to be enrolled if they sign consent no longer than 1 calendar day after the procedure or if a legally authorized representative signs the informed consent form on the patient’s behalf. The 
original, signed consent is filed with the patient registry  records, and a copy is 
provided to the patient or legally authorized representative.  
8.[ADDRESS_761070] market registry. Assuming an observed rate of 8.3% for the endpoint of re- treatment at follow -up, 
the sample size precision is greater than ± 2% for this endpoint (95% CI: 6.6% to 10.0%).
14-21 Assuming an observed rate of 1.7% for the primary endpoint of 
procedural device- related serious adverse events at immediate post -procedure 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 16 of 19 
(data on file at sponsor), the sample size precision is greater than ± 1% for this 
endpoint (95% CI: 0.93% to 2.5%). These precision e stimates are based on 
binomial 95% confidence intervals. Hence, the sample size provides an adequate level of precision for these primary endpoints.  
9.2 General Statistical Methods  
 
This registry  is a single -treatment design. Hence, descriptive statistics will 
provide a basis for the majority of the analyses with a 95% two- sided confidence 
interval presented. For binary outcomes, the 95% two-sided confidence intervals 
will be calculated using bino mial intervals. For numeric measures, a confidence 
bound for the mean or mean change from admission will be constructed.   Summary tables (descriptive statistics and/or frequency tables) will be provided for all baseline variables, effectiveness variables,  and safety variables, as 
appropriate. Continuous variables will be summarized with descriptive statistics (n, mean, standard deviation, range, and median). Frequency counts and percentage of patients within each category will be provided for categorical data.  
 Results collected at multiple visits will be summarized at each visit for which they are collected. Summaries for all measures will include all observed data for each visit.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_761071] procedure and follow-up visits. Adverse event incidence rates will be summarized by [CONTACT_579321]. Events will also be reported by [CONTACT_579322].   
10. PUBLICATION OF INFORMATION 
 
The results of this registry  may be offered for pu blication and/or presentation. The 
investigators and the Sponsor shall collaborate in the writing o f the registry  to 
ensure accuracy.  The investigator agrees to use this data only in connection with 
this registry  and will not use it for other purposes without written permission from 
the Sponsor.  
  
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 17 of 19 
 
11. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
 
1. Brisman JL, Song JK, Newell DW. Cerebral Aneurysms.  N. Engl J 
Medicine 2006;355:928-939. 
 
2. Rinkel GJE, Djibuti M, Algra A, van Gijn  J.  Prevalence and risk of rupture 
of intracranial aneurysms:  A systematic review.  Stroke 1998;29:251-256. 
 3. Hop JW, Rinkel GJE, Algra A, van Gijn J, Case- fatality rates and functional 
outcome after subarachnoid hemorrhage: A systematic review.  Stroke  
1997;28:660-664. 
 4. Nishioka H, Torner JC, Graf CJ, Kassell NF, Sahs AL, Goettler LC.  Cooperative study of intracranial aneurysms and subarachnoid hemorrhage:  A long term prognostic study.  II. Ruptured intracranial aneurysms managed conservatively.  Arch  Neurol  1984;41(11):1142-1146. 
 5. Jane JA, Kassell NF, Torner JC, Winn HR.  The natural history of aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations.  J. Neurosurg 1985;62(3):321-323. 
 6. Molyneux A, Kerr R, Stratton I, Sandercock P, Clarke M, Shrimpton J, Holman R.  International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) Collaborative Group.  International Subarachnoid Aneurysm Trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clippi[INVESTIGATOR_87887] 2143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms:  A randomized trial.  Lancet  
2002;360:1267-1274. 
 7. Juvela S, Porras M, Poussa K.  Natural history of unruptured intracranial aneurysms:  Probability of and risk factors for aneurysm rupture.  J 
Neurosurg 2000;93:379-387. 
 8. International Study of Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms Investigators.  Unruptured intracranial aneurysms – risk of rupture and risks of surgical intervention.  N. Engl. J. Med 1998;339:1725-1733. 
 
9. Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Sepetka I, Marcellari V.  Electrothrombosis of 
saccular aneurysms via endovascular approach, Par t 1:  Electrochemical 
basis, technique, and experimental results.  J. Neurosurg 1991;75:1-7. 
 10. Guglielmi G, Vinuela F, Dion J, Duckwiler G.  Electrothrombosis of saccular aneurysms via endovascular approach, Part 2:  Preliminary clinical experience.  J Neur osurg 1991;75:8-14. 
 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 18 of 19 
11. Molyneux AJ, Kerr RS, Yu LM et al.  International Subarachnoid Aneurysm 
Trial (ISAT) of neurosurgical clippi[INVESTIGATOR_87887] 2143 patients with ruptured intracranial aneurysms:  a randomized comparison of effects on su rvival, dependency, seizures, rebleeding, subgroups, and 
aneurysm occlusion.  Lancet  2005;366:809-817.   
 
12. Johnston SC, Higashida RT, Barrow DL, Caplan LR, Dion JE, Hademenos G, Hopkins LN, Molyneux A, Rosenwasser RH, Vinuela F, Wilson CB:  Recommendation for the endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms: A statement for healthcare professionals from the Committee on Cerebrovascular Imaging of the American Heart Association Council on cardiovascular radiology.  Stroke  2002;33:2536-2544. 
 13. Roy D, Milot G , Raymond J : Endovascular treatment of unruptured 
aneurysms. Stroke 2001;32;1998-2004. 
 14. Geyik S, Yavuz K, Yurttutan N, Saatci I, Cekirge HS. Stent- assisted coiling 
in endovas cular treatment of 500 consecutive cerebral aneurysms with long -
term follow -up. Am J Neuroradiol . 2013;34(11):2157-2162. 
doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3574.  
15. Kang HS, Han MH, Kwon BJ, et al. Short- term outcome of intracranial 
aneurysms treated with polyglycolic acid/lactide copolymer -coated coils 
compared to historical controls treated with bare platinum coils: a single -
center experience. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol . 2005;26(8):1921-1928. 
doi:10.1007/s00701-014-2157- y. 
 16. Li MH, Gao BL, Fang C, et al. Angiographic follow -up of cerebral 
aneurysms treated with guglielmi detachable coils: An analysis of 162 cases with 173 aneurysms. Am J Neuroradiol . 2006;27(5):1107-1112. 
 17. McDougall CG, Claiborne Johnston S, Gholkar a., et al. Bioactive versus bare platinum coils in the treatment of intracranial aneurysms: The MAPS 
(Matrix and Platinum Science) trial. Am J Neuroradiol . 2014;39(5):935-942. 
doi:10.3174/ajnr.A3857. 
 18. Raymond J, Guilbert F, Weill A, et al. Long- Term Angiographic 
Recurrences After Selective Endovascular Treatment of Aneu rysms With 
Detachable Coils. Stroke . 2003;34(6):1398-1403. 
doi:10.1161/01.STR.[PHONE_8746].[ZIP_CODE].E9. 
 19. Renowden SA, Koumellis P, Benes V, Mukonoweshuro W, Molyneux AJ, McConachie NS. Retreatment of Previously Embolized Cerebral Aneurysms: The Risk of Further Coil Embolization Does Not Negate the Advantage of the Initial Embolization. Am J Neuroradiol . 2008;29(7):1401-
1404. doi:10.3174/ajnr.A1098. 
 
Penumbra SMART COIL® Registry  
CLP [ZIP_CODE].B Confidential     Page 19 of 19 
 
20. Smith MJ, Mascitelli J, Santillan A, et al. Bare platinum vs matrix detachable coils for the endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms: a multivariate logistic regression analysis and review of the literature. Neurosurgery . 2011;69(3):557-564; discussion 565. 
doi:10.1227/NEU.0b013e31821a86da. 
 21. White PM, Lewis SC, Gholkar A, et al. Hydrogel -coated coils versus bare 
platinum coils for the endovascular treatment of intracranial aneurysms (HELPS): A randomised controlled trial. Lancet . 2011;377(9778):1655-
1662. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)[ZIP_CODE]- X. 
  
Disclaimer: “Penumbra SMART Coil
® System, Penumbra Coil 400TM , Penumbra 
Occlusion Device (POD TM) are registered trademarks or trademarks of Penumbra Inc., in 
the U.S.A. and other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.” 