Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  1 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 Advancing V arenicline as a Treatment for Cannabis Use Disorder  
 
A. SIGNIFICANCE  
Overview of the P roblem.  The p revalence of cannabis use in the [LOCATION_002] more than doubled between 
2001  and 2013, from 4.1% to 9.5% of the adult population (Hasin et al., 2015). In 2014, over  one million 
Americans received treatment for cannabis r elated problems (SAMHSA, 2015 ).  Although a high demand for 
effective interventions exists, f ew specific treatments have been developed for cannabis  use disorder (CUD) . 
Further, current evidence -based treatments have  limited efficacy, with few individuals achieving abstinence  
(Compton & Pringle, 2004; Kadden et al., 2007; Nordstrom & Levin, 2007; Vandrey & Haney, 2009 ; Sherman & 
McRae -Clark, in press ). As such, it is critical to explore new strategies to improve treatment outcomes.   
Nicotinic Acetylcholine  Receptors as  Potential  Targets for CUD  Medication Development . Nicotinic 
acetylcholine recep tors (nACHr) are highly expressed in the meso cortico limbic dopamine system ( Dani & 
Bertrand, 2007 ) and also contribute to drug -related reward processes by [CONTACT_217168], and consequently 
dopamine, release (Fu et al., 2000; Kaiser & Wonnacott, 2000 ). As such, these receptors have been identified 
as potential targets for addiction treatment . Varenicline is a selective nACHr partial agonist of the α4β2 subtype 
and a full agonist of the α7 subtype  (Mihalak et al., 2006) , and  is arguably the most effective  first line 
pharmacotherapy for promoting tobacco  cessation  (Aubin et al., 2008; Eisenberg et al., 2008; Gonzales et al., 
2006; Jorenby [CONTACT_2297]., 2006; Nides et al., 2006 ). Given its partial agonist profile, varenicline likely exerts its  effects 
via dual mechanisms. First, it partially activates α4β2  receptor s in the ventral tegmental area ( VTA), resulting in 
increased dopamine levels and a reduction in withdrawal symptoms and craving  (Rollema et al., 2007; Reperant 
et al., 2010). Further , through its antagonist properties, varenicline also blocks the ability of nicotine  to fur ther 
stimulate dopamine release , thereby [CONTACT_217169] ’s reinforcing effects during  smoking  (Coe et al., 2005) .  
Varenicline  reliably reduces reactivity to sm oking -related cues among  tobacco users  via its effects on reward 
and cognitive circuitry ( Brandon et al., 2011; Franklin et al., 2011 ; Hartwell et al., 2013 ). 
Given that th e meso limbic dopamine  system is a key element in the brain reward pathways and that increased 
dopaminergic transmission in these pathways is important for the reinforcing effects of multiple drugs of abuse 
(Roberts et al, 1980; Taylor & Robbins, 1984; Koob & LeMoal, 1997; Tanda et al, 1997 ; Volkow et al., 2016 ), 
varenicline  has been ident ified as  a prime candidate medication for evaluation in other substance use disorders  
(Crunelle et al., 2010) . Positive findings have been reported in regards to varenicline reducing alcohol cue 
reactivity  (Schacht et al., 2014), reducing alcohol self-administration among heavy drinking smokers (McKee et 
al., 2009) , improving drinking outcomes in preliminary clinical trials (Fucito et al., 2011; Mitchell et al., 2012), and 
reducing  alcohol use in a large, placebo -controlled trial (Litten et al., 20 13). A recent case series  also reported 
reductions in amount of enjoyment of cannabis and self -report of cannabis use among cannabis - and nicotine -
dependent individuals receiving varenicline (Newcombe et al., 2015). To date, however, varenicline has not be en 
evaluated in a controlled clinical trial for treatment of CUD . 
Importantly, and particularly relevant to the present proposal , α4β2  nACH Rs in corticothalamic circuitry, which 
are saturated with varenicline dosing ( Lotfipour et al., 2012),  have also been  heavily implicated in prefrontally 
mediat ed attentional and inhibitory control  (IC) (Sarter & Paolone, 2011) . In addition,  α7 nACHRs are involved 
in hippocampal -dependent memory function  (Levin et al., 2006) . nACHr  agonists improve frontally mediated 
executive function among nicotine -naïve animals (Levin et al. , 2006 ) and humans (Froeliger  et al. , 2009 ). 
Varenicline  has been shown to improve  multiple forms of attention (Rhodes  et al. , 2012 ) including inhibitory 
control  (Austin  et al. , 2014 ) among treatment -seeking tobacco users  and in nicotine -naïve animal models 
(Rollema et al.,  2009; Terry et al., 2016) . Given that cannabinoid agonists inhibit cholinergic transmission (Varvel 
et al, 2001; Lichtman et al., 2002 ; Vukadinovic et al., 2013 ), the cholinergic system in particular may play an 
important role in cannabis -induced cognitiv e dysfunction. A s such, varenicline , as a cholinergic modulator in 
prefrontal circuitry , is a promising candidate treatment to  ameliorate  frontal -executive  dysfunction  (Sofuoglu et 
al., 2010) . 
Cognitive Function and Cannabis Use Outcomes . Cognitive impairments may predict poor response to 
behavioral treatments in drug users (Aharonovich et al ., 2008; Caroll et al ., 2011; Verdejo -Garcia et al ., 2012), 
and pharmacotherapy  targeting cognitive function has been proposed as a promising strategy for treatment of 
CUD (Sofuoglu et al ., 2010). Acute and chronic effects of cannabis use on neuropsychological functioning have 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  2 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 been well characterized  (for review, see Crean et al ., 2011 ; Broyd et al., 2016; Curran et  al., 2016 ). Laboratory 
experiments where controlled doses of cannabis have been administered reveal acute effects on attention 
processes (Morrison et al ., 2009; Solowij et al ., 1995). Similar memory impairments have also been 
demonstrated following chroni c cannabis use (Solowij & Battisti, 2008). Of note, greater cognitive deficits are 
associated with number of lifetime cannabis use epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (Medina et al ., 2007)  and with severity of CUD (Filbey 
& Yezhuvath, 2013) . 
Inhibitory Controland Varenicline.  Inhibi tory control (IC) tasks have proven to be an effective probe of 
executive function in individuals with a substance use disorder (Moeller  et al. , 2016 ). Cannabis users (Tapert et 
al., 2007 ) and nicotine dependent smokers (Froeliger et al., 2012; Froeliger et al., 2013 ; Kozink  et al. , 2010 ) 
demonstrate a pattern of dysregulated hyperactivity in lateral prefrontal (i.e. right inferior frontal gyrus: R. IFG) 
BOLD response during attention and inhibitory contr ol tasks, without benefits in task performance, suggestive of 
a compensatory mechanism to perform task demands. This is significant , as the R.IFG is a key node in a 
corticothalamic circuit ry that mediates inhibiting a prepotent motor response in order to e xecute a goal directed 
behavior (Rae et al. , 2015 ; Swann et al., 2012 ). Moreover, hyperactivity in IFG -BOLD response during inhibitory 
control  tasks is associated with worse  cessation outcomes across multiple substance use disorders (see Moeller 
et al., 2016 ). When taken together, those findings are consistent with our pi[INVESTIGATOR_217152] ( N=26) 
performing an IC task which reveals that less task -related IFG BOLD response and st ronger IC task -based 
functional connectivity between R.IFG and thalamus (henceforth  corticothalamic circuit ) is associated with: 
forgoing smoking for a longer period of time, and upon initiation, lighter smoking during ad lib smoking in the lab 
(see Prelim inary D ata). Work in an α7 knockout mouse model implicate s an important role of the α7 receptor in 
mediating IC (Hoyle  et al. , 2006 ), and in tobacco users varenicline impro ves aspects of inhibitory control (Austin 
et al., 2014), posited as a key mechanistic aspect of varenicline’s established efficacy for tobacco cessation . 
Varenicline improves attentional control among healthy non -smokers (Mocking et al., 2013) and smokers in a 
state of nicotine withdrawal ( Patterson et  al., 2009 ). In summary, the extant literature in animal and human 
models of substance use disorders, including CU D, reliably demonstrate s that deficits in executive functionthat 
are associated with the ongoing maintenance of drug use may be amenable to treatment with varenicline.  
Comorbidity of Cannabis and Tobacco  Use Disorders.  Cannabis and tobacco use often co-occur (SAMHSA, 
2015), and approximately half of adults seeking treatment for cannabis use also use  tobacco (Peters et al., 
2012). Individuals using both cannabis and tobacco have been shown to have more psychosocial problems 
(Moore & Budney, 2001) and wors e cannabis use treatment outcomes (de Dios  et al., 2009; Gray et al., 2011 ; 
Moore & Budney, 2001) than individuals using cannabis alone. However, to date , limited research has focused 
on interventions targeting both cannabis and tobacco use. Given its prov en efficacy in tobacco  cessation, it is 
possible that varenicline may improve both cannabis and tobacco use outcomes in co -using individuals. Of note , 
though,  in the work of Litten and colleagues  (2013) , the impact of varenicline on drinking  was similar fo r smokers 
and nonsmokers, suggesting that varenicline’s efficacy in this population was independent of its tobacco  
cessation effects.   
Adherence and Varenicline Treatment Outcomes. An evaluation of varenicline adherence found that of 1,477 
patients prescribed varenicline  for smoking cessation , only 24% were adherent to the three -month course of 
therapy (Liberman et al., 2013). Importantly , adherent individuals were 93% more likely to quit smoking than 
non-adherent or partially adherent individuals.  Similarly, Catz and colleagues (2011) found in the COMPASS 
trial that good adherence to varenicline was associated with a two -fold increase in 6 -month smoking quit rates 
compared with poor adherence (52% vs. 25%). An analysis of factors that influenced adhe rence in the 
COMPASS trial found the most frequently endorsed reasons for premature medication discontinuation were side 
effects and perceived lack of need (Catz et al., 2011). These findings suggest that adherence interventions 
providin g timely side effec t management and  encouraging longer term use of medications are needed to 
maximize treatment effectiveness.   
Summary and Scientific Premise.  There is a critical need to develop safe and effective medications for CUD . 
Impairment in executive function is observed across substance use disorders and is particularly relevant to CUD 
(Cabrera et al., 2016 ; Curran et al., 2016 ). Inhibitory control, a clinically important and measurable component 
of executive function, is (a) impaired in CUD (Filbey & Yezhuvath, 2013; Nicholls et al., 2015; Tapert et al., 2007), 
(b) reliably measured by [CONTACT_2296] (Froeliger et al., 2012, 2013; Preliminary Data), (c) predictive of substance 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  3 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 use disorder cessation outcomes (Moeller et al., 2016), and (d) a known key component of vare nicline’s 
mechanism (Austin et al., 2014; Lotfipour et al., 2012). Varenicline’s application to individuals with CUD 
represents a mechanistically intriguing avenue of research, with potential promise of improving clinical outcomes.  
We thus propose an initi al UG3 proof -of-concept trial focused on functional imaging to evaluate mechanism  as 
well as to collect  preliminary clinical outcome data  on varenicline’s impact of cannabis -related withdrawal and 
cannabi s use.  If warranted by [CONTACT_217170]3 findings, a sub sequent fully -powered UH3 trial will comprehensively 
evaluate safety and efficacy.   The UG3/UH3 mechanism is ideally suited to efficiently yet thoroughly evaluate a 
medication with strong rationale but no prior trials within the target population.   
Even if  the UG3 “proceed -or-not-proceed” hypothesis is refuted, the UG3 would cost - and time -effectively provide 
a wealth of functional imaging and behavioral data important to broadening our understanding of CUD and 
potential pathways for pharmacological treatme nt.  If, instead, the UG3 hypothesis is supported, we would be 
able to efficiently proceed with a fully powered trial to comprehensively evaluate varenicline’s safety and efficacy 
in CUD.   
B. INNOVATION  
The proposed research is innovatively designed to efficiently and strategically evaluate varenicline as a 
promising candidate pharmacotherapy for CUD. The UG3 proof -of-concept trial incorporates advanced 
functional neuroimaging to evaluate varenicline’s  effects on inhibitory control and cannabis cue reactivity,  with 
clear criteria to determine whether or not to proceed with the fully -powered UH3 clinical trial to comprehensively 
evaluate varenicline’s safety and efficacy for CUD.  This innovative approach i s consistent with the field’s 
emerging use of neuroimaging to assess the effectiveness of substance use disorder treatments (Cabrera et al., 
2016).  In both trials, an advanced  medication adherence syst em will be utilized to both accurately measure 
adherenc e as well as enhance medication taking behavior throughout the trial.  
C. RESEARCH DESIGN  
Capacity of Research Team. Completion of the proposed research w ill require experience with recruitment and 
retention of individ uals with CUD , varenicline clinical trial management, administration  of neurocognitive tasks 
and cannabis cue reactivity within functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) paradigms , and adherence 
monitoring . As detailed below, the r esearch team has a proven track record in these research areas. The 
proposed project will be co-directed by [INVESTIGATOR_124] s. Aime e McRae -Clark  and Kevin Gray , productive clinical researcher s 
with NIH -funding primarily focused on clinical trials and human laboratory work with cannabis and tobacco using  
individuals . Co-investigators will also contribute meaningfully to the conceptualization, conduct, and reporting of 
this research. [CONTACT_217187] leads multiple NIH -funded projects  utilizing fMRI techniques to characterize the 
impact of drug use on neurocognition and to predict clinical outcomes. [CONTACT_217188] has expertise in 
cannabis cue reactivity paradigm development  and fMRI modeling of cue induced craving.  
Experience with Recruitment and Retention  of Individuals  with CUD . Dr. McRae -Clark has completed  
multiple NIH -funded studies involving cannabis  using individuals ( McRae -Clark et al, 2009; McRae -Clark et al, 
2010; McRae -Clark et al. 2015 ; McRae -Clark et al., 2016 ). [CONTACT_36058] also has led multiple trials assessing 
medications in individuals  with CUD , including the recently completed NIDA Clinical Trials Network Achieving 
Cannabis Cessation —Evaluating N -Acetylcysteine as a Treatment (ACCENT) protocol  (Gray et al., 2012; 
McClure et al., 2014) . We have an active recruitment network in place, and have been  able to consistently 
surpass recruitment goals.  
Varenicline Clinical Trial Management. Drs. McRae -Clark  and Gray have significant experience in the 
management of individuals receiving varenicline , both clinically and in the context of research protocols (Gray et 
al., 2012; Gray et al., 2015; Hartwell et al., 2013 ; McClure et al., 2015 ). [CONTACT_36058]  is currently conducting a clinical 
trial assessing the safety and efficacy of varenicline in an adolescent population (U01DA031779; PI: [INVESTIGATOR_217153]) as 
well as a trial e xamining the combination of varenicline and N -acetylcysteine for smoking cessation 
(R01DA038700; PIs: Froeliger, Gray, and Kalivas).  
Neurocognitive  Tasks . In an ongoing laboratory study (R01DA033459) , Drs. Froeliger and Gray are examining 
relations between  cortic othalamic neural circuitry mediat ing IC (Rae et al., 2015) and the ability to refrain from 
smoking behavior during a laboratory -based smoking resistance task (SRT ). Sated smokers  (n=26) were first 
fMRI scanned while perfor ming the GoGo/No Go task tha t is proposed herein ( Chikazoe et al., 2009 ), a well -
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  4 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 validated probe of IC  and a 
process posited to be a 
transdiagno stic factor of 
relapse vulnerability 
(Moeller et al., 2016 ).  
Immediately f ollowing the 
fMRI phase, smokers 
performed the SRT in 
which  a mon etary 
contingency is in place to 
refrain from smoking while 
being presented with 
smoking cues in the 
laboratory for up to one 
hour. When smokers 
elect ed to smoke in favor 
of earning money to 
remain abstinent, smoking topography (e.g., # of puffs) was recor ded and relations with fM RI BOLD signal 
examined. We found  that worse task performance (Fig 1, Box A: R=.41, p=.04) and exaggerated BOLD response 
in R. IFG (Fig 1, Box  B: t= 3.54, p<.05 ) predict ed smoking sooner during the SRT ; weaker task -based functional 
connectivity in corticothalamic circuitry (Fig 2, Box  C) predict ed smoking more heavily upon initiation. These 
findings are consistent with the literature demonstrating that dysregulated prefrontal function  during IC is 
predictive of worse treatment outcomes (Moeller et a l., 2016) , yet also extends the literature  by [CONTACT_217171]  (Jahanshah i et al., 2015) to the ability to resist drug use .  
Cannabis Cue Reactivity  (CR) . Drs. McRae -Clark and Gray 
have developed CR paradigms and demonstrated an ability to 
elicit cannabis craving in b oth adult (McRae -Clark et al., 2011) 
and adolescent (Gray et al., 2008) populations , and have 
experience with fMRI evaluation of varenicline’s effects on 
tobacco cue reactivity (Hartwell et al., 2013) . Recently, Drs. 
Squeglia and Gray have developed a cann abis fMRI CR task, 
with cues relevant to US populations,  to investigate cue -elicited 
activation.  Cannabis  and neutral  images were matched on 
factors such as color, complexity, and context. A mix of active 
(e.g., smoking a joint) and passive (e.g., cannabis  plant) pi[INVESTIGATOR_217154]. Data were collect ed in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] 25 regular, 
heavy cannabis users (48% women, mean age = 18.7  0.51; 
using cannabis twice daily on average). Analysis of the fMRI data 
showed significant activation (voxel -level z=3.7, p=.0001; cluster -corrected p<.05) in bilateral medial prefrontal, 
striatum, anterior cingulate, subcallosal, precuneus, and posterior cingulate cortex during the cannabis vs. non -
cannabis neutral cues (see Figure 2). These results are consistent with those found in a Dutch -specific cannabis 
CR task (Cousijn et al., 2013) and a tactile cannabis task (Filbey et al., 2009), suggesting the cannabis cues 
developed for this task were effective at eliciting increased activation in brain regions involved in reward 
processing . Advantageously, this task displays cues relevant to American cannabis users, covers a range of 
cannabis use methods, and does not require a tactile component.  
Adherence Monitoring.   All varenicline and placebo tablets will be dispensed in bottle s equipped with a MEMS 
[ADDRESS_260763] a smartphone, one will be loaned to them during the course of the study, 
as video submissions may only be completed on a smartphone (cannot be completed on a computer).   A survey 
link will be sent to the subject via text message  twice daily.   Video capture will occur as part of the RedCap Figure [ADDRESS_260764] regions including the 
medial prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate 
highlighted below ( n=25).  
 
 
Box A. IC -Behavior - Smoking        Box B. IC -BOLD - Smoking       Box C. tbFC – Smoking  
Behavioral Correlate                                 Functional Correlate                           Corticothalamic correlate  
 
Figure 1. Dysregulated inhibitory control mechanisms subserve drug -use behavior.   Worse task 
performance (Fig x, Box A:  β = 0.08, R2 = .20) and exaggerated BOLD response in right IFG (Fig x, BoxB: 
β= -1.7, R2 = .35) predict smoking sooner during the SRT. Using the functional defined rIFG (Box B) as a 
seed (Box C -red cluster) in a task -based functional connectivity (tbFC) analysis, weaker connectivity with the 
thalamus (Box C -green cluster: -corticothalamic cir cuit) predicted smoking more heavily upon initiation; 
including # puffs (r= -.44, p=.02), total puff volume (r= -.51, p=.008) and total puff duration (r= -.46, p=.018).  
Significance for fMRI statistics was defined at α = .05 ( Monte Carlo : p<.005; ). 
0102030405060708090100
0 20 40 60NoGo Accuracy (% correct)
Time to Smoke (min)

Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  5 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 survey.   Videos are automatically stored on some Android smartphones, and participants will be informed of that 
so they can delete the files, if necessary.   Participants using iPhones (and using  loaner iPhones from our group) 
will not have stored videos on their phone and nothing will need to be deleted.  
Research Design and Methods.  The first phase (UG3) is a proof -of-concept p ilot study to test mechanistic 
hypotheses and preliminarily evaluate safety and initial efficacy of varenicline in cannabis using individuals. 
Clearly defined milestones , focused on varenicline versus placebo reduction in cannabis related outcomes , will 
be met before proceeding to Phase 2 ( UH3) , a fully powered  clinical tria l to assess clinical outcomes to potentially 
advance the FDA approval of varenicline for the treatment of CUD .  
UG3 Overview. As shown in Figure 
3, if there is scanner availability  
within approximately 2 weeks , fMRI -
eligible individuals with CUD will 
complete an initial fMRI paradigm 
including GoGo/No -Go inhibitory 
control  and cannabis cue reactivity  
tasks . Subjects who are not fMRI 
eligible or are unable to be 
scheduled for scanning within 2 weeks of screening will complete these same behavioral scanner tasks via 
computer in the clinic  (pre- and post -varenicline versus placebo treatment ).  All participants will  be randomized 
to a proof -of-concept six-week course of varenicline or placebo treatment , an abbreviated course chosen to 
efficiently dete ct mechanistic and preliminary clinical signals of varenicline’s effects ( Gray et al., 2015; Saladin 
et al., 2015 ). Cannabis use outcomes (urine cannabinoid tests and  self-report) will be measured at twice weekly 
clinic visits , and at a post -treatment foll ow-up safety visit . A repeat  fMRI session will be completed with eligible 
individuals who completed an initial scan at the end of the 6-week treatment period  to evaluate varenicline versus 
placebo differences in inhibitory controland cannabis cue reactivity .  
Participants.  A total of [ADDRESS_260765] in CUD  treatment . Exclusion criteria include women 
who are pregnant, nursing, or planning to become pregnant during the course of the study;  having a history of 
bipolar,  psychotic or medical disorder  that would limit ability to participate ; and meeting  criteria  for any moderate 
or severe non-cannabis substance use disorder . Detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria are in Human Subjects . 
Recruitment.  Recruitment is planned to occur through both clinical re ferral and advertising . This approach has 
been used effectively for years in large -scale CUD  clinical trials at MUSC.  
Procedures.  
Strategies to Ensure a Robust and Unbiased Approach . As detailed throughout this section, the proposed study 
will achieve robust and unbiased results via se veral design features including:  explicit inclusion/exclusion criteria; 
randomization of treatment condition; placebo control; blinding;  use of validated measures and methods; expl icit 
hypotheses and corresponding planned statistical analyses; power estimates; planned handling of 
retention/attrition and missing data; objective adherence monitoring; and careful consideration of potential 
confounds.  
Screening and Eligibility Assessme nt. Individuals  will be screened by [CONTACT_217172]. A n 
initial  pre-screen , focused on inclusion/exclusion psychiatric diagnoses, medical status, current medication 
regimen, and ability and willingness to commit to completion of study  procedures, will be used to initially 
determine potential study eligibility. Interested individuals  will be given a full description of the study procedures 
and asked to read and sign an IRB -approved informed consent form  before participating in a detaile d, 
comprehensive screening and assessment phase .  
Diagnostic/Descriptive Assessment . The MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)  will be used to 
assess psychiatric and substance use diagnoses. A medical history , phys ical exam , laboratory assessment 
(comprehensive metabolic panel and complete blood count)  will be completed.  An fMRI safety screening 
DAY 
 3
 0
 7
 42
0.5 mg qAM  
 0.5 mg BID  
 1 mg BID  
 Varenicline (VAR)/Placebo  
49
Screening/  
Assessment  
Post -
Treatment 
Follow -Up 
fMRI 1  
Twice -weekly clinic visits  
(UDS, self -report, medication management)  
fMRI 2  
Figure 3 . 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  6 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 questionnaire will be conducted to determine if  the individual is eligible to undergo the fMRI scanning portion of 
the study . In the event that an individual is found to be ineligible to participate in this research protocol  completely , 
he or she will be given an appropriate referral for further medical care or to an appropriate treatment program.   
If found eligible, a randomization visit , includi ng fMRI scanning session if eligible , will be scheduled, and ongoing 
cannabis use will be tracked between initial assessment and randomization.  
Treatment Assignment . Eligible individuals  will be randomized to receive  double -blind varenicline  or matching 
placebo . Randomization (stratified on gender  and smoking status ) and dispensing will be performed by [CONTACT_217173], a centralized research pharmacy that compounds and manages clinical trial 
medications. Matching varenicline  and plac ebo tablets  will be provided by [CONTACT_4618] , at the standard recommended 
dose of 0.5mg daily for three days, then 0.5mg twice daily for four days, and then 1mg twice daily for the 
remainder of the six-week treatment period. If necessary, medication dose may be reduced to 0.5mg twice daily 
for tolerability. Medication treatment will be initiated following completion of the fMRI paradigm and/or baseline 
visit.  
Scan session s. If there is scanner availability  within approximatel y 2 weeks , participants who qualify for fMRI 
procedures will undergo  two fMRI  scans (pre - and post -varenicline  versus placebo  treatment) . In order to 
facilitate ease of scanner scheduling,  subjects’ scanning and initial  therapy session visit may be conducted on 
separate days  if needed.   Subjects will be instructed to abstain from cannabis  and alcohol  for a minimum of 12 
hours prior to scanning to avoid acute intoxication during procedures . Breath  (to determine carbon monoxide 
and alcohol levels) and urine toxicology samples will be collected before each  scan . In addition, participants will 
also be asked to provide a saliva sample to verify abstinence from recent cannabis  use through use of 
SalivaConfirm ® testing ( Confirm Biosciences, Inc. ). Pre- and post -fMRI state craving measures will be collected. 
Each imaging session will include a resting -state, inhibitory control , and cannabis cue reactivity  task scan and 
last approximately 60 minutes total.  
T1-weighted structural:  A high -resolution anatomical scan (magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo) will 
be acquired  to allow subsequent registration to functional images and region -of-interest (ROI) definition 
(parameters: re petition/echo time (TR/TE)= 1900/2.26  ms; flip angl e (FA)= 9°; field of view (FOV)= 256 mm2; 
voxel size= 1 mm2; 192  contiguous 1 -mm-thick slices).  
Resting–state functional connectivity (rsFC): The resting -state scan consists of a 6 -minute, eyes -closed 
period.  Similar to our previous work (Froeliger et al.,  2015), rsFC  will be assessed using the conn13 SPM8 
toolbox. First, experimental design variables, pre -processed functional images will be filtered with a 0.01 to 0.08 
Hz band -pass filter and normalized (modulated to preserve volume). [ADDRESS_260766] (ROIs) that include: insula, nucleus accumbens, dACC , rACC  and 
inferior, middle and superior frontal gyri. The conn13 toolbox uses PCA to isolate potentially confounding noise 
from nuisance co variates using default settings. Individuals’ white matter  and CSF templates, in -scanner heart -
rate (HR), respi[INVESTIGATOR_217155]. Connectivity matrix for each 
seed  will be entered into separate  2 (Vareniclin e: Yes, No) x 2 ( Time: Scan1 , Scan2) ANOVA  models . We will 
follow -up with exploratory whole brain analyses.  
GoGo/NoGo Inhibitory C ontrol (IC) Task. During the inhibitory control  task, which will be the main task of 
interest in determining whether or not to proceed from the UG3 mechanistic proof -of-concept project to the fully -
powered UH3 clinical trial, fMRI BOLD response will be collected fr om participants as they perform  a 
“GoGo/NoGo”  task (Chikazoe et al., 2009).  Participants are instructed to press a button in response to common 
(75% of trials) and rare (12.5%) Go stimuli while inhibiting responding to rare NoGo stimuli (12.5%). The task 
provides errors of omission and reaction times  during Go trials, and errors of commission on NoGo trials. 
Behavioral per formance  data will be analyzed in SAS. fMRI task data will be entered into a first -level, whole -
brain analysis using the General Linear Model to examine BOLD response to each of the [ADDRESS_260767]: 
NoGo correct, NoGo incorrect , RareGo correct, RareGo incorrect , and Go incorrect . Each event will be m odeled as a delta 
regressor (onset  dur. = 0) and convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function. Motion will be 
removed through  rigid body rotation and translation and parameters included as covariates. A high -pass filter 
(128 secon ds; .008 Hz) will be applied to remove slow signal drift.  
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  7 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
  
The Cannabis  Cue Reactivity  (CR) Task . During the cannabis  cue reactivity  task, participants are shown 
pseudorandomly interspersed images of cannabis  (i.e., cannabis  plant, cannabis -related para phernalia) and 
neutral (e.g., pi[INVESTIGATOR_217156], trumpet) images, visual control images 
(i.e., blurred images), and a f ixation cross (see Figur e 4). The 
cannabis  stimuli were matched by [CONTACT_68458], hue, and complexity. 
Blurred images and the fixation crossed trials are used as contrasts 
to evaluate attention and non -cannabis  specific effects. Based on 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299] (see above), this task reliably activat es reward regions, 
including bilateral medial prefrontal, striatum, anterior cingulate, 
subcallosal, precuneus, and posterior cingulate cortex in heavy 
cannabis -users. Stimuli are presented in six 120 -s epochs, each 
consisting of four 24 -s blocks of an ima ge type (one block each of 
cannabis , non -cannabis  control, and fixation). Each block is 
followed by a 6 -s washout period, allowing the hemodynamic 
response from the previous block to decline before the next is 
presented. A 12 -m gradient -echo EPI [INVESTIGATOR_79714] w ill be acquired 
(parameters: repetition/echo time (TR/TE)= 2200/35 ms; flip 
angle   (FA)= 90°; field of view (FOV)= 220 x 220 mm; voxel size= 
3.00 x 3.00 mm; 37 contiguous 3 -mm-thick slices). A magnetic fieldmap  will also be acquired to allow geometric 
unwa rpi[INVESTIGATOR_217157] -function masking of EPI [INVESTIGATOR_217158].  
Psychosocial Treatment . All participants will receive brief motivational enhancement therapy  consisting of three 
individual sessions.  The first session will occur   during the first week of medication administration,  and the second 
session will occur appro ximately one week later. S essions will incorporate use of a personalized feedback report 
summarizing the participant ’s problems related to use, reasons for quitting , and high -risk situations for use. The 
major goals of the first session will be to build rapport, identify issues related to health behavior change, and 
goal setting. The second session will focus on assessment/review of goals and barr iers to goal achieve ment . 
The third session will occur at approximately Week [ADDRESS_260768] 
successfully use d a similar intervention in previous cannabis  treatment studies  (McRae -Clark et al, 2009; 
McRae -Clark et al, 2010 ; McRae -Clark  et al. 2015 ) to provide an evidence -based treatment platform for all 
participants .  
Assessments . Table 1  provides an overview of assessments with  a brief description of the instruments below.  
 SCR  fMRI1/  
RAN  Wk1 Wk2 Wk3 Wk4 Wk5 Wk6/ 
fMRI2  FU 
Pre-screen, MINI, H&P, CBC/CMP  ×         
Self-Efficacy, Reasons for Quitting  ×         
Marijuana Problem Scale, CGI -S ×       × × 
Urine Pregnancy Test  × ×    ×  ×  
TLFB, HAM -A, HAM -D, C-SSRS, MCQ, CWS , PSQI  × × × × × × × × × 
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale  ×       ×  
Urine Drug Test, Carbon Monoxide & Alcohol Breathalyzer s × × ×× ×× ×× ×× ×× ×× × 
Saliva Drug Test   ×      ×  
Urine Cotinine   ×  × × × × × × × 
Adverse Events, ConMeds, Medication Management  × × × × × × × × × 
RedCap, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38950]    × × × × × ×  
SCR=Screen, RAN=Randomization, FU=Follow -Up 
 
1.  Screening and Diagnostic Instruments . Pre-Screen: This assessment will be used to determine whether an 
individual is likely to meet  inclusion or exclusion criteria for the study when they first present. The  instrument is 
designed to  assess for substance use disorders  and obvious psychiatric, medical, and logistic exclusions. Mini-
International Neuropsychiatric Interview ( MINI ): The MINI  is a brief structured interview that was designed to 
assess DSM -5 diagnoses using a series of questions in dichotomous format (yes/no) (Sheehan & Lecrubier, Figure 4. Cannabis  cue reactivity paradigm with active and 
passive cues. BOLD response d uring cannabis  (e.g., 
cannabis  plant , joint ) vs. neutral (e.g., pi[INVESTIGATOR_217156] , trumpet ) 
cues will be the main contrast of interest.  

Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  8 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 2003; Sheehan et al, 1998).  
2.  Psychiatric and Functioning Assessments . Clinical Global Impression of Severity Scale (CGI-S): The CGI -
S (Guy, 1976 ) is used to rec ord the severity of illness at time of assessment on a scale of 1 (normal, no illness) 
to 7 (among the most extremely ill patients).  Hamilton Anxiety and Depression Rating Scales (HAM -A & 
HAM -D): These validated scales assess severity of anxiety and depressive symptoms (Hamilton, 1959, 1960).  
Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS -11): This questionnaire is designed to assess the personality/behavioral 
construct of impulsiveness (BIS -11; Patton et al., 1995).   Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI):  The PSQI is 
a standardized measure of sleep quality that assesses a variety of sleep disturbances over the past week or 
month (Buysse  et al. , 1989). Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS):  The C -SSRS (Posner et al., 
2011) is a brief, low -burden suicide assessment scale administered by a clinician . We have successfully used 
this instrument in multiple previous trials, and it is regarded as the gold standard of suicidality assessment in 
clinical trials.   
3. Substance -Related Instruments . Time -Line Follow -Back  (TLFB) : The TLF B (Sobell & Sobell, 1992) is a 
calendar -based instrument designed to assess daily substance consumption. Although initially designed to 
assess alcohol use, we have successfully modified this instrument to assess for other drug use. Cannabis  use 
will be reco rded as times used per day, with each time being defined as cannabis  use separated by [CONTACT_217174].  We will use established methods  to standardize for different types of cannabis  use (joints, bowls, 
blunts, etc.) , as well as determining overall  amount used per day. Tobacco , alcohol,  and other substance use 
will also be assessed. Urine Drug Test ing: The urine drug tests will qualitatively screen  for the presence of 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], cocaine, amphetamines, and benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651]. Urine cannabinoid tests  will be performed using the 
AXSSYM® system from Abbott Laboratories. This assay is semi -quantitative with a detection cut -off value of 
30.00 ng/ml (Abbott AXSSYM® System package insert). Urine creatinine will also be obtained, as creatinine 
normalization has been proposed as a method to differentiate new cannabis  use from residual drug excretion 
(Huestis and Cone, 1998; Schwilke et al, 2011).  Saliva Drug Test ing: In addition to urine testing, participants 
will also be asked to provide a saliva sample prior  to scanning sessions to verify recent abstinence from cannabis 
use through use of SalivaConfirm® testing (Confirm Bioscience, Inc.). This test is able to detect THC in saliva 
for up to 14 hours. Carbon Monoxide Breathalzyer:  This method will be used durin g all study visits to detect 
residual levels of carbon monoxide from recent smoked tobacco or cannabis  use. A “cut-off” of 8 parts per million 
will be used as a biological abstinence confirmation measure (SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical Verification, 
2002 ). Urine Cotinine: Nicotine is metabolized to cotinine by [CONTACT_4852]. Cotinine has a longer half -life than 
nicotine, and thus serves as a more reliable biomarker of cigarette smokin g (Zevin et al., 2000). C onsensus 
guidelines support urine cotinine testing to biologically confirm 7 -day abstinence, with a recommended “cut -off” 
of 50ng/ml (SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical Verification, 2002).  In the UG3 trial urine cotinine will be 
measured at screening as  biological confirmation of smoking status.   Urine coti nine measurement will be 
repeated  weekly for those who are determined to be smokers. Marijuana Craving Questionnaire (MCQ): The 
MCQ (Heishman et al, 2001) is a Likert -based self -assessment of cannabis  craving shown to be a valid and 
reliable instrument for measuring cannabis  craving. The [ADDRESS_260769] within -factor 
reliab ility (Heishman et al, 2009). Cannabis Withdrawal Scale  (CWS) : The Cannabis Withdrawal Scale  (Allsop 
et al, 2011 ) is comprised of 1 9 items for which participants rate severity of symptoms in the previous 24 hours. 
Marijuana Use Summary Sheet/Self -Efficacy Questionnaire/Marijuana Problem Scale/Reasons for 
Quitting Questionnaire: These worksheets, created by [CONTACT_217175] (2000) , will be used to gather 
information from participant s to prepare personalized fee dback reports  for use  in the motivat ional enhancement 
sessions .  
4. Safety Assessment . Medication Management, Concomitant Medications, and Adverse Event 
Evaluation : Using our team’s established procedures, medication management, including tracking of 
concomitant medications, review and encouragement of cannabis  abstinence and study medication adherence, 
and adverse event evaluation, will be led by [CONTACT_217176] n. Adverse events (AEs) will be assessed serially . 
The type of AE, severity of AE, and the relationship to study medication will be recorded. AEs will be coded on 
a weekly basis using Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) rules.   
5. Adheren ce. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_217159]. Adherence  will also be monitored using  MEMS 6 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  [ADDRESS_260770] items of the Cannabis Withdrawal Scale (items 5 [“I felt nervous], 6 [“I had some angry outbursts”], 7 [“I 
had mood swings”], 8 [“I felt de pressed”], 9 [“I was easily irritated”], 15 [“Life seemed an uphill struggle”], 18 [“I 
felt physically tense”], restlessness (item 11, “I felt restless), and/or urge to smoke (items 1 and 10, “The only 
thing I could think about was smoking some cannabis” a nd “I had been imagining being stoned”). These items 
were chosen based on previous trials of varenicline in tobacco smoking cessation trials (Jorenby [CONTACT_2297]., 2006; 
Gonzales et al., 2006).   
Secondary efficacy outcomes will include a) cannabis use quantity (reduction between baseline and end of 
treatment); b) cannabis abstinence (weeks 3 -6 of active treatment, after the initial 2 -week grace period, inclusive 
of medication titration and initial targeted quit date); and c) cannabis craving as measured by [CONTACT_941] M arijuana 
Craving Questionnaire during active treatment. Cannabis abstinence will be defined based on values published 
by [CONTACT_217177]. (2010) in which residual urinary excretion was modeled in chronic cannabis users, with gender 
and racial corrections fo r urinary creatinine excretion (Barr et al., 2005). As such, the criterion for abstinence will 
be set at 300 ng/mg CN -THCCOOH for African American male participants, 350 ng/mg CN -THCCOOH for non -
African American male participants and African American femal e participants, and 500 ng/mg for non -African 
American female participants. In exploratory fashion, we will additionally examine mood (Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale [HAM -D]), anxiety (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale [HAM -A]), concentration (HAM -A item 5 [ difficulty 
in concentration]) and sleep (Cannabis Withdrawal Scale items 12 [“I woke up early”], 14 [“I had nightmares 
and/or strange dreams”], and 17 [“I had trouble getting to sleep at night”]; HAM -D items 4 -6 [initial, middle, and 
delayed insomnia]; HAM -A item 4 [insomnia]; and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]).  
Secondary safety outcomes will be a) the frequency of treatment -emergent adverse events (AEs), an approach 
similar to those of varenicline phase III smoking cessation studies (Gonzales et al., 2006 ; Jorenby [CONTACT_2297]., 2006); 
b) treatment -emergent adverse events leading to medication discontinuation and c) the occurrence of treatment -
related serious adverse events (SAEs). Adverse events will be assessed by [CONTACT_217178]. All AEs will be evaluated for potential causality to study drug 
treatment. Depression and anxiety will be reflected by [CONTACT_97491] -D and HAM -A scales ratings, suicidality will be 
reflected via C -SSRS ratings.   
The explorator y mechanistic outcomes will include a) corticothalamic pathway BOLD response signal change 
from baseline during the fMRI inhibitory control Go -No Go task, b) corticolimbic negative affect pathway BOLD 
response signal change from baseline during the fMRI ne gative emotional cue reactivity task, c) 
mesocorticolimbic reward pathway BOLD response signal change from baseline during the fMRI cannabis cue 
reactivity task, and d) strength of resting state functional connectivity in relation to phenotypic differences  (e.g., 
impulsivity as measured by [CONTACT_217179], cannabis use disorder severity as measured by [CONTACT_2681] -
[ADDRESS_260771] as measured by [CONTACT_51664] -A and 
HAM -D). 
 
Statistical Analysis  
Data Management Plan . All data will be entered into a standard software package. Macro programs will be 
written to check the data for logical consistency and values out of possible range. Quarterly database 
management and data integri ty audits will be conducted.  
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  10 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
  
Efficacy: Primary Analysis   
Categorical clinical and demographic variables will be assessed by [CONTACT_60679] -square tests of independence, while 
continuous variables will be assessed using Student’s t -test.  In addition to baseline grou p differences, 
preliminary analysis of baseline characteristics with negative affect/withdrawal and cannabis use outcomes of 
interest will examine significant correlates of abstinence functional deficits.  Characteristics significantly 
associated with thes e outcomes will be included as covariates in the initial stages of model development.  
Cannabis specific withdrawal and negative affect (Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale [HAM -A], Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale [HAM -D], negative affect component of Cannabis Withdrawal Scale [CWS]) will be measured at 
weekly visits during the treatment portion of the study. General linear mixed effects models will be developed to 
test the efficacy of treatment with varenicline as compared to placebo in reduction of measured wi thdrawal and 
negative affect during weeks 3 -6.  Model assumptions will be verified using analysis of residual and appropriate 
transformations will be employed when necessary.  
Safety: Primary Analysis   
Similar to varenicline phase III tobacco cessation stud ies (Gonzales et al., 2006; Jorenby [CONTACT_2297]., 2006), we define 
a treatment -emergent adverse event as any adverse event occurring between treatment initiation and one week 
following treatment conclusion.  Non -inferiority analysis will be utilized to compare a dverse event rates between 
varenicline and placebo groups (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_217160]., 2006).  
Secondary Outcomes Analyses   
Secondarily, we plan to preliminarily investigate the efficacy of varenicline, compared to placebo, in reducing 
cannabis use quantity (Timeline F ollow -Back) and increasing the proportion of cannabis -abstinent participants 
(urine cannabinoid test, Weeks 3 -6; abstinent definition provided above). A combination of self -reported cannabis 
use as well as negative urine cannabinoid tests (UCTs) during Wee ks 3 through 6 will be sufficient to estimate 
cannabis use quantity changes and assign abstinence (yes/no) and assess the treatment effect on clinical 
outcomes.  General linear mixed effects models will be used to estimate changes in cannabis use and diffe rential 
effects of treatment on the use patterns.  Logistic regression models will be used to assess continuous 
abstinence proportions across treatment assignments. Analysis models will be reported both unadjusted and 
adjusted for significant clinical cova riates (determined as associated with abstinence from the baseline analysis 
as well as known clinical confounders). Additionally, we plan to analyze the effect of varenicline on weekly 
abstinence from cannabis across the full treatment course.  Generalized  linear mixed effects models will be 
constructed to estimate treatment group differences in abstinence across the entire time course using the 
methods of generalized estimating equations (GEE).  Additionally, data on cannabis craving (MCQ) will be 
collecte d from all participants at weekly visits.  Generalized linear mixed effects models will be constructed to 
estimate treatment group differences in craving scores during the treatment phase of the study . 
 
To evaluate the impact of varenicline on inhibitory c ontrol, hypothesis testing will be conducted by (a) entering 
NoGocorrect -RareGocorrect contrast images into a 2 (Group: varenicline, placebo) x 2 (Time: Pre, Post) 
rmANOVA and examining within an IC mask that includes right inferior frontal gyrus, preSMA,  thalamus and 
primary motor cortex, and (b) entering memory -load contrast images (1 -0; 2-0) into a 2 (Group: varenicline, 
placebo) x 2 (Time: Pre, Post) rmANOVA. To evaluate the impact of varenicline on negative emotional cue 
reactivity, BOLD response duri ng the negative emotional vs. neutral trials will be the primary contrast of interest 
to test hypotheses that varenicline reduces negative affect and BOLD response in the corticolimbic negative 
affect pathway [e.g. rostral anterior cingulate, amygdala]. To  evaluate the impact of varenicline on cannabis cue 
reactivity, BOLD response during the cannabis vs. non -cannabis trials will be the primary contrast of interest to 
test hypotheses that varencline reduces marijuana craving and BOLD response in mesocortico limbic reward 
pathway [e.g. dorsal anterior cingulate (dACC), ventral striatum]. Similar to Froeliger et al. (2015), fMRI 
functional -connectivity data analyses will be performed with conn14 toolbox for SPM12, and hypothesis testing 
will be conducted using ROI-ROI explorer to characterize mean rZ values between ROIs of interest (e.g., R. IFG 
and thalamus). Where significant differences are observed, parameter estimates (from task -based models) and 
mean rZ values (from connectivity models) from each ROI will be extracted and relations with clinical endpoints 
examined.  Additionally, parameter estimates and rZ values from each model will be evaluated as a potential 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  [ADDRESS_260772] between varenicline and abstinence. Since the outcome var iable 
(abstinence) in the mediation analysis is binary, we will rescale each coefficient according to the standard 
deviations of the predictor and outcome variables (MacKinnon et al., 1993). Small sample mediation has been 
shown to be unstable and thus we will resample with replacement [ADDRESS_260773] (Bollen & Stine, 1990; Shrout & Bolger, 2002). When the indirect 
effect confidence interval does not contain zero, we will be able to state, w ith some certainty, that BOLD signal 
changes partially mediate the causal pathway between varenicline and cannabis abstinence.   
Gender and smoking status will be explored as a potential moderators of study outcomes (i.e., clinical and fMRI) 
through model interactions. Medication adherence (MEMS cap, RedCap video , and self -report) will be assessed 
across treatment assignment as well as included as an additional variable in the primary efficacy and secondary 
craving/withdrawal models to examine any potential  impact adherence may have on study outcomes. RedCap 
and MEMS cap data will be utilized as the primary (most stringent) markers of medication adherence, and we 
will secondarily conduct analyses of concordance between these data and self -report adherence.   
Secondary Safety Analysis   
Of particular interest will be adverse events leading to medication discontinuation and the occurrence of 
treatment -related serious adverse events (SAEs).  We will specifically compare neuropsychiatric adverse events 
(assessed through psychiatric interview) using non -inferiority testing, as well as depression/anxiety (H amilton 
Anxiety Scale [HAM -A] and Hamilton Depression Scale [HAM -D]) and suicidality (Columbia —Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale [C -SSRS]) ratings using one -sided [ADDRESS_260774], while the number of days retained will be assessed using Cox Proportional Hazards r egression models.  
Missing Data and Attrition . Missing data in longitudinal studies can be a problematic feature but can be mitigated 
through study design considerations. In order to minimize missing data and study attrition, design  simplification 
and enhan ced communication between study staff and participants will be emphasized.   We will make every 
effort to pr event attrition (e.g., phone/text visit reminders , participation compensation,  reinforcing adherence to 
the study protocol at each visit ).  In addit ion, in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_217161] -to-Treat Principle, we will make every 
effort to continue assessments for the entire course of randomized treatment, even among those who fail to 
adhere to randomized assignment or stop participating in the study assigned in tervention.  
Continuation Milestone Criteria . The decision on whether or not to proceed with the subsequent UH3 fully -
powered clinical trial will rest upon findings specific to the effect of varenicline, relative to placebo, on a number 
of key markers of ef ficacy. Specifically, we hypothesize that participants receiving varenicline, compared to those 
receiving placebo, will demonstrate attenuated levels of reported withdrawal -related negative affect at the end 
of the treatment portion of the study.   This wil l provide evidence to support or refute our hypothesis regarding 
varenicline’s mechanistic role in CUD. In randomized clinical trials assessing the efficacy of varenicline as 
compared to placebo for the reduction in smoking behavior, withdrawal and craving , Gonzales et al (2006) and 
Jorenby [CONTACT_2297] (2006) found that varenicline was superior to placebo in the reduction of withdrawal (as well as use 
and craving).  Specific to withdrawal symptoms, those treated with varenicline as compared to placebo reported 
significantly less negative affect [Gonzales: Δ= -0.19; SEM=0.04; effect size (ES)= -0.30 and Jorenby: Δ= -0.13; 
SEM=0.04; ES= -0.21], less restlessness [Gonzales: Δ= -0.14; SEM=0.05; ES= -0.16 and Jorenby: Δ= -0.10; 
SEM=0.05; ES= -0.12], and reduced urges to smoke [Gonzales: Δ= -0.54; SEM=0.06; ES= -0.67 and Jorenby: 
Δ=-0.48; SEM=0.06; ES= -0.63] during study treatment. A) In keepi[INVESTIGATOR_217162], 
we anticipate seeing effects equal to or greater than the more conservative of the two result s (Gonzalez) in a 
CUD  population.  Thus, meeting or exceeding these criteria will be used as the threshold for clinically relevant 
evidence that would trigger justification to proceed with the UH3 trial.   In addition to the primary outcomes, 
secondary clin ical outcomes include both a reduction in cannabis use quantity and cannabis use abstinence at 
the end of the treatment portion of the study.   We hypothesize a greater reduction in cannabis use quantity and 
greater cannabis abstinence will be recorded in t he group randomized to varenicline as compared to placebo.    B) 
A Cohen’s d effect size of ≥0.4 in the secondary outcome of cannabis use reduction and/or an Odds Ratio of 
abstinence ≥1.5 in the varenicline group as compared to the placebo group will be use d as an additional threshold 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  12 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 for clinically relevant evidence that would trigger justification to proceed with the UH3 trial.   Meeting or exceeding 
the thresholds stated in A) and/or B) would provide the necessary clinical evidence justifying a fully power ed 
efficacy clinical trial of varenicline as compared to placebo in the treatment of cannabis use disorder.  
Power Calculation and Sample Size  
The primary focus of the UG3 study is to assess whether varenicline, compared to placebo, will evidence equal 
or greater reductions in cannabis withdrawal -related negative affect during the final 4 weeks of treatment (after 
initial 2 -week grace period, inclusive of medication titration and initial targeted quit date).   Assuming a strong 
correlation between withdrawal and negative affect measures taken weekly within each subject (rho=0.8), a 
sample of  n=68 participants (34 in each treatment group) will have adequate power (80%) to detect a clinically 
relevant effect size  of d=0.60 between the two groups.  With the stated sample size, similar between group 
differences (d=0.60) in weekly cannabis use quantity will be detectible between groups.  
 For the secondary abstinence analysis, the necessary sample size sufficient to estimate 50% of a fully -powered 
Phase [ADDRESS_260775] 20% greater than placebo at the end of study treatment under the most 
cons ervative conditions, at a 15% placebo abstinence rate, a sample size of n=72 participants  (n=36 per 
group ) in each treatment assignment will provide 80% power with a type 1 error of 5% to detect this difference 
at the end of a fully -powered study.  Thus, 5 0% of the study sample would require [ADDRESS_260776] of 
varenicline  on drinking outcomes regardless of tobacco use status (Litten et al.,  2013), it is possible that a 
differential effect of varenicline will be found among tobacco and non -tobacco using individuals with CUD. 
Therefore, in the initial UG3 trial, smoking status will be explored as a potential moderator of treatment response  
Consideration of gender as a biological variable . In contrast to findings for stimulant drugs, there does not appear 
to be a strong e ffect of menstrual cycle phase o n response to cannab is (for review, see Terner and de Wit, 2006).  
However, our recent work revealed a significant gender by [CONTACT_217180] , with 
women randomized to buspi[INVESTIGATOR_217163] t o 
placebo (p=0.007), and men randomized to buspi[INVESTIGATOR_217164] (p=0.023) (McRae -Clark et al., 2015 ). These findings support 
the need to consider gender as a critical variable in treatment investigations ; as such, gender will be explored 
as a potential moderator of treatment response .  
Inclusion of neuroimaging . Normalization of inhibitory control as well as reduction in cannabis cue reactivity may 
reflect  key underlying mechanism s of varenicline’s effect on  CUD. Further, findings may help establish which 
individuals may respond optimally to varenicline treatment.   
Timeline. The first three months will be used fo r staff training and preparing for study init iation. Eighteen m onths 
will be needed for participant  recruitment and data collection. The final three months will be used for data 
analysis, determination of milestone accomplishment, and discussion with NIDA staff regarding progression to 
the UH3 phase.  At a recruitment rate of approximately four participant s per month  (a rate consistently achieved 
in our prior studies) , we anticipate no difficulty compl eting the study in this timeframe.  
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
RISKS TO THE SUBJECTS  
a. Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  13 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 Admission into the study is open to men and women and to all racial and ethnic groups, age 18 -65. Seventy -two 
individuals with cannabis use disorder will be recruited primarily through clinical referrals and interne t and 
newspaper advertisements. Inclusion/exclusion criteria that apply to all participants are listed below:  
 
General Inclusion Criteria   
       •   Must meet DSM -[ADDRESS_260777] 30 days.  
• Must be between the ages of 18 and 65 years.  
• If female and of childbearing potential, must agree to use acceptable methods of birth control for the 
duration of the trial.  
• Must consent to random assignment, and be willing to commit to medication ingestion.  
• Must be able to read and provide informed consent.  
• Must have body weight >110lbs  (50kg) and have BMI between 18 and 35kg /m2 
• Must function at an intellectual level and have knowledge of the English language to sufficient ly  allow for 
accurate completion of assessments.  
Additional Inclusion Criteria for fMRI Eligibility  
       •   Must be right -handed . 
General Exclusion Criteria  
• Women who are pregnant, nursing, or plan to become pregnant during the course of the study.  
• Individuals with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance less than 30 mL per minute).  
• Lifetime history of DSM -5 Bipolar I or II Disorder, Schizophrenia or other psychotic disorder.   Stably treated 
MDD, Dysthymia, GAD, Social Phobia, and Specific Phobia diagnoses are acceptable (i.e. same dose of 
medication  has been prescribed for at least 2 months prior to screening and no changes in current 
medication expected during course of the trial).  
• Suicidal ideation or behavior within the past 6 months.  Subjects who are b elieved to be at suicidal or 
homicidal risk (answers ‘yes’ on questions 4 or 5 of C -SSRS) will be referred for assessment by a qualified 
mental health professional.  
• Concomitant use of psychotropic medications, with the exception of stable doses (defined as  no dosing 
adjustments in the past two months) of non -MAO -I antidepressants, non -benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_143452], and 
ADHD medications.  
• Current use of medications prescribed for mania or psychosis.  
• Current use of buproprion or nortryptiline.  
• Moderate or severe non-cannabis substance use disorders within the past 60 days  with the exception of 
tobacco use disorder . 
• Individuals taking an investigational agent within the last 30 days before baseline visit.  
• Individuals with clinically significant medical disorders or  lab abnormalities.  
• Any individual at screening with SGOT (AST) or SGPT (ALT) greater than 3 times the upper limit of normal 
and/or total bilirubin greater than two times the upper limit of normal.  
• Individuals with clinically significant cardiovascular dis ease in the past 6 months (e.g., myocardial 
infarction, CABG, PTCA, severe or unstable angina, serious arrhythmia, or any clinically significant ECG 
conduction abnormality.  
• Individuals with clinically significant cerebrovascular disease in the past 6 month s such as TIA, CVA, or 
stroke.  
• Hypersensitivity to varenicline .  
• Individuals who have participated in the clinical trial of any investigative compound within the last 60 days.  
 
 
 
 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  14 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 Additional Exclusion Criteria for fMRI Eligibility  
• Any psychiatric or  medical issues, including claustrophobia, ferrous metal implants,  pacemakers, or other 
electronic devices  that would interfere with ability to participate in and successfully complete scanning 
procedures.  
• Any person unable to lie still within the fMRI scan ner for the required period of time to obtaine useful 
images (use of anxiolytics will not be permitted for anxiety/claustrophobia related to scanning procedures).  
b. Sources of Materials  
Research material obtained from individual participants includes ques tionnaires and interviews with study 
personnel, and breath, blood, and urine samples. To ensure confidentiality, all participant data will be 
letter/number coded, and only the investigators will have access to the master lists of codes. The research 
materi al will be obtained specifically for research purposes.  Written research material obtained will be stored in 
the Addiction Sciences Division, in an office that is locked when not in use. Blood and urine samples will be 
stored in the Clinical Neurobiology Laboratory.  
c. Potential Risks  
The varenicline package insert details adverse events associated with the medication. Specifically, it reports that 
“the most common adverse reactions (>5% and twice the rate seen in placebo -treated patients) were nausea, 
abnormal (e.g., vivid, unusual, or strange) dreams, constipation, flatulence, and vomiting.” Meta -analyses of the 
four main adverse events in varenicline versus placebo groups in adult trials yielded relative risks (RRs) of 3.21 
(95% CI 2.71, 3.80) for nause a, 1.50 (95% CI 1.26, 1.79) for insomnia, 2.79 (95% CI 2.09, 3.72) for abnormal 
dreams, and 1.20 (95% CI 1.00, 1.45) for headache (Cahill et al., 2009). While post -marketing anecdotal reports 
of psychiatric adverse events led to an FDA “black box” warning for varenicline, a reanalysis of controlled trials 
revealed no evidence that varenicline is associated with neuropsychiatric adverse events (Thomas et al., 2015). 
There is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality. Exposure to cannabis cues and completion of the neurocognitive 
tasks may produce some craving for cannabis or other discomfort. However, this discomfort is usually brief and 
participants will be in the cannabis -free safety of a clinic environment. There is  a chance that some of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_217165].  Since the scanner requires participants to 
be motionless in an enclosed environment, there is the possibility of a claustrophobic reaction or anxiety or  
discomfort secondary to being stationary for approximately 60 minutes per scan. Ferrous objects that are 
undetected could move during scans. This could lead to tissue damage and hemorrhage.  
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINSTS RISKS  
a. Recruitment and Informed Consent  
Participants will primarily be recruited through clinical referrals and the use of advertisements (internet, 
newspaper). Participants may also be recruited from the Ralph H. Johnson VAMC  and the College of Charleston . 
Medical records will not be reviewed to identify potential study participants unless patients have requested to be 
contact[CONTACT_47605] a research permissions registry.  A study PI, Co -I, or other qualified study staff will obtain 
informed consent. The informed consent form inclu des a detailed description of the study procedures, along with 
statements regarding participants’ rights to withdraw from the procedure at any time without consequences. The 
informed consent form will be explained to participants in easy -to-understand lang uage, and participants will be 
instructed to read the form carefully prior to signing it.  Consent will be documented by [CONTACT_217181], accompanied by [CONTACT_217182] t. 
b. Protections Against Risks  
All study participants will be closely monitored for psychiatric and medical stability. All study procedures will be 
conducted under the supervision of experienced personnel. If crisis intervention is necessary  during screen ing 
or study enrollment , senior staff will be available to evaluate the subject and provide an intervention or referral.  
In regards to suicidality, any participant endorsing suicidality on the C -SSRS (either during screening or at a 
subsequent study visit)  will be assessed for safety by a psychiatrist.  If hospi[INVESTIGATOR_89648], the patient 
Program Director/Principal Investigator (Last, First, Middle):  McRae -Clark, Aimee                                                                                  15 
 
Version date 3.12.2018  
 will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_217166]. All participants will be fully informed 
that they may withdraw from the study at any ti me without penalty.  
To ensure confidentiality, all participant data will be coded by [CONTACT_217183]/or numbers, and only the investigators 
will have access to the master lists of codes.  All participant records will be kept in a locked cabinet in an office 
that will be locked at times when not in use. The research staff understands the importance of maintaining 
confidentiality, and this method of maintaining confidentiality has been used for several years by [CONTACT_217184]. All elec tronic databases are stored on HIPAA -compliant servers with restricted 
access. RedCap video clips will only be viewed by [CONTACT_217185].  All co -investigators and study personnel have completed (or will 
complete upon hiring) training in Good Research Practices as mandated by [CONTACT_165469].   
Participants will be taught about potential side effects of varenicline and will be closely followed by [CONTACT_140332], 
a PharmD, and o ther members of the research team. Pregnancy tests will be performed prior to medication 
initiation and monthly during the study. Participants will be excluded if they have a known hypersensitivity to 
varenicline . Adverse events will be assessed at each cl inic visit, and all participants will be provided with an after -
hours emergency contact [CONTACT_217186].  
If abnormalities in the brain images are found, a participant will be immediately referred to an appropriate clinical 
care provider. A careful metal screening history will be taken from each participant to assess the possibility of 
metal devices. Individuals will be screened with a metal detector for the possibility of implanted metal objects 
since magnetic movement of a metal device or metal injury could result in injury or risk to life. Prior exposure to 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_217167], getting into the scanner, and seeing others in the scanner often reduces psychological 
discomfort or identifies peopl e for whom scanning is not appropriate. Subjects are able to ask study staff to stop 
the negative affect scanning task at any time if they feel too upset by [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_499].  
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO THE SUBJECT AND OTHERS  
Possible risks  to study participants include adverse reactions to varenicline and risks associated with fMRI 
scanning. Benefits include detailed assessment of cannabis use and receipt of an evidence -based psychosocial 
treatment for cannabis use disorder. The minimal ris ks are reasonable in relation to the potential benefits to be 
gained from the investigation.     
IMPORTANCE OF THE KNOWLEDGE TO BE GAINED  
This study may help accelerate approval of varenicline for treatment of cannabis use disorder. Presently, there 
are no FDA-approved medications for cannabis use disorder. The moderate risks of the investigation are 
considered reasonable in relation to the expected knowledge to be gained.   
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV REQUIREMENTS  
In accordance with Public Law [ADDRESS_260778] will be registered at the ClinicalTrials.gov Protocol 
Registration System Information Website prior to study initiation.  