1 
 Title: Does a Patient Education Video Augment Pelvic Floor Physical Therapy 
Compliance? 
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_811122], MD  
 
Team:  Colleen Fitzgerald, MD, Elizabeth Mueller, MD, Linda Brubaker, MD, Megan 
Brady, MD , William Adams, Ph.D. , Neelam Balasubramanian, B.A., Elizabeth Billquest , 
B.S., Sana Iqbal, B.A., and Ketelynn Braggs, R.N.  
 
Department  of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Division of Female Pelvic Medicine and 
Reconstructive Surgery, Loyola University Medical Center  
 
Version 2 
 
11.01.2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
  
1. Protocol Synopsis  
1.1. Study Premise  
 
Pelvic floor physical therapy (PFPT) is a widely accepted treatment for many 
urogynecologic diagnoses, such as stress and urge urinary incontinence, pelvic organ 
prolapse, and myofascial pain of the levator ani muscles1. This conservative treatment 
modality has virtually no risk, unlike medications or surgery2. It is especially useful for 
patients who are otherwise poor surgical candidates. This treatment consists of weekly 
one hour long physical therapy ses sions with therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811123]. Treatment length depends on severity of symptoms and patient 
progress, but is usually anywhere from five to fifteen visits at our practice.  
 
Many investigators worldwide have studied what factors influence patient compliance 
with this therapy1,3,4. Some barriers that have been identified including being too busy 
with work, being afraid of vaginal palpation,  feeling ashamed, feeling too old to engage 
in such therapy, or having symptoms that are minor .[ADDRESS_1122009] recently performed an IRB -approved retrospective chart review to determine 
PFPT  compliance within our practice. We found that 66% of patients attended at least 
one therapy session. Of these women, 73% attended at l east half of the recommended 
visits.  
 
Our practice wants to develop an educational tool to improve PFPT compliance. We 
designed and created a four minute patient education video with assistance of the 
marketing department . This video includes physicians, pelvic floor physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], 
and one of our patients speaking to the most common questions and concerns patients 
have.  Now we aim  to assess if patients who use this education tool will have improved 
compliance to therapy.  
 
1.2. Specific Research Question 
Does viewing an educational video augment patient compliance with PFPT compared to 
standard counseling?  
 
1.3. Study Objectives and Hypotheses  
Objective: To determine the impact on PFPT compliance in patients who view an 
educational compared to standard counsel ing 
 
Hypothesis:  Compared to patients receiving standard counseling, those who receive 
both the standard counseling and educational video intervention will   
3 
 1) Be more likely to complete at least half of their recommended PT visits  
2) Be more likely to initiate PF PT 
3) Will have a shorter t ime to initiation of PFPT  
4) Be more likely to discharge from PFPT  
5) Will have greater improvement in urogenital distress following PFPT 
 
1.4. Summary of Study Design 
 
Study Design: Randomized controlled trial  
 
Population: Clinic -based patients seen at the Loyola University Medical Center 
Urogynecology outpatient clinic who have been prescribed PFPT as a treatment for 
their condition and agree to such therapy.  
 
Control group: Will read s tandard PFPT handout  (see Appendix 4.1)  
 
Intervention group:  Will read  standard PFPT handout  plus watch education video (see 
Appendix 4.2)  
 
Study Length: At least three months after the initial PFPT referral for each patient, 
medical record review will be performed to record therapy attendance,  including date of 
first visit, number of visits recommended by [CONTACT_38802][INVESTIGATOR_541], number of completed visits, 
and whether the patient was discharged from PFPT.   
 
Power -calculation: One goal of the proposed study is to test the null hypothes is that the rate 
of women attending at least half of their required PT visits is identical in the two populations:  
Those assigned to handout only and those assigned to handout and video intervention.  With 
proposed sample sizes of [ADDRESS_1122010] power of 80% to yield a statistically significant result.  
This computation assumes that the difference in proportions of compliance is 20% (specifically, 
70% versus 50% compliance for the intervention and control groups, respectively).  It also 
assumes that the criterion for significance (alpha) will be set at 0.[ADDRESS_1122011] been interviewed, examined, and a plan has been made by [CONTACT_811134] & Reconstructive Surgery practice will 
be invited to participate at the end of the visit if the patient and physician mutually agree 
that PFPT is the treatment modality to pursue.  
 
If she agrees to participate, she will be consented and randomized. If she is randomized 
to standard counseling, she will be given the standard handout to read. If she is 
randomized to the intervention, she will be both given t he standard handout and then 
view the [ADDRESS_1122012] any additional 
questions, and these will be recorded and answered. The patient will also fill out a visual 
analog scale about how informed she feels . (See appendix 4.3 & 4.4 ) 
 
Follow -up: Patient chart will be monitored following enrollment in the study to measure 
time to PFPT attendance and PFPT compliance (See appendix 4.5) .  
 
2.1. Eligibility criteria  
Inclusion criter ia 
Patients who have prescribed PFPT by a treati ng physician in the Female Pelvic 
Medicine & Reconstructive Surgery practice  
 
Exclusion criteria  
Patients < 18 years old  
 
2.2. Consent Process  
Patients will be identified when they present to the Loyola Urogynecology out -patient 
clinic for management of their pessary.  Consent form will be read to them describing 
the nature of the trial and potential associated risks and benefits.  They will be informed 
that neither participation nor refusal will influence the care received at either Loyola 
University Medical Center. A copy of the consent form will be given to them.  
Participation is completely voluntary and they may discontinue participation in the study 
at any time.  
 
2.3. Trial Design 
Randomized controlled clinical trial  
 
2.4. Randomization 
Block r andomization strategy will be developed based on a 1:[ADDRESS_1122013] each 
patient’s identity.  A unique identification number will  be assigned to designate each 
subject, and all identification numbers identifying information will be removed from the 
database and stored separately on a secure password- protected network drive in the 
office of the PI.   
Here is an overview of the securi ty of the infrastructure:  
Physical  
- Servers kept in locked cage 
- Entry requires a passcard and biometric recognition  
- Digital surveillance equipment  
- Controls for temperature, humidity and smoke/fire detection 
- Staffed 24/7 
Network  
- Multiple independ ent connections to Tier 1 Internet access providers  
- Fully redundant OC -48 SONET Rings  
- Uptime monitored every 5 minutes, with escalation to SurveyMonkey staff  
- Firewall restricts access to all ports except 80 (http) and 443 (https)  
- QualysGuard networ k security audits performed quarterly  
Hardware  
- Servers have redundant internal power supplies  
- Data is on RAID 10, operating system on RAID [ADDRESS_1122014] 
logistic regression models will be used when these values are sparse.  We will also 
6 
 stratify the comparison of PFPT initiation by [CONTACT_4317]’ primary language.  Because 
few patients will have Spanish as their primary language, we will make an a-priori 
decision to use an exact binary logistic regression model to compare the two treatment 
groups among Spanish speaking participants.  Subsequently, a Breslow -day test may 
be used to compare the stratified English and Spanish speaking odds ratios for 
homogeneity.  
A binary logistic regression model will also be used to estimate the odds of being 
discharged from PFPT as a function of the number of completed visits , and a Kaplan-
Meier curve will be used to estimate the probability of not attending a PFPT visit 
following date of referral for those in the experimental and control cohorts.  Using this 
approach, elapsed time will be measured in days from referral date to date of first visit 
for those who attended PFPT.  Individuals who never attended PFPT will be censored 
at the last date they were known to be absent from therapy.  
For each patient, the change in UDI -[ADDRESS_1122015] will also be 
used to make this comparison as a sensitivity analysis among those who attend PFPT.  
All analyses will be completed using SAS version 9.4 (Cary, NC).  
[ADDRESS_1122016] compensation.  
 
3. References 
1. Dumoulin C, Alewijnse D, Bo K, et al. Pelvic -floor-muscle training adherence: Tools, 
measurements and strategies -2011 ICS state- of-the-science seminar research paper II 
of IV. Neurourol Urodyn. 2015;34(7):615- 621. 
2. Fitzgerald MP, Anderson RU, Potts J, et al. Randomized multicenter feasibility trial of 
myofascial physical therapy for the treatment of urological chronic pelvic pain 
syndromes. J Urol. 2013;189([ADDRESS_1122017]):S75- 85. 
3. Brown HW, Barnes HC, Giles D, McAchra n S. Abstract: Compliance with prescribed 
pelvic floor physical therapy when patients consult with a physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811124]. Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive Surgery . 
2015;21(5):S52.  
4. Farahani F, Calloway E , Gibson R, et al. Abstract: Patient compliance to pelvic floor 
physical therapy for urinary incontinence. Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive 
Surgery . 2015;21(5):S52.  
5. Alewijnse D, Mesters I, Metsemakers J, Adriaans J, van den Borne B. Predictors of 
intention to adhere to physiotherapy among women with urinary incontinence. Health 
Educ Res . 2001;16(2):173- 186. 
8 
 6. Tibaek S, Dehlendorff C. Do women with pelvic floor dysfunction referred by 
[CONTACT_811135][INVESTIGATOR_811125] a pelvic floor muscle training 
programme? A retrospective study, 1992- 2008. Int Urogynecol J . 2013;24(8):1361-
1369.   
4. Appendix  
4.1. Standard care handout  
The Role of Physical Therapy in the Treatment of Pelvic Floor Dysfunction:  
 
Physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811126], muscles, 
nerves and scar.  Physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811127], bladder and bowel 
difficulties and develop a treat ment plan specific to the individual suffering from this 
difficulties.   
 
What to expect at your first physical therapy appointment:   
Your first visit will include an initial evaluation in a comfortable, private room by a 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811128]. The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_412704] a detailed history of 
your health, pain and activity limitations. She will also ask you about any bowel, bladder 
and sexual difficulties as t hese are in part controlled by [CONTACT_811136].  The 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811129] a look at your posture, mobility of your spi[INVESTIGATOR_811130].  She will examine any scar tissue and 
trigger points in the musc les of your pelvic region.   
 
The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811131]. Your pelvic floor 
consists of a group of muscles that attach behind the pubic bone in the front to the tail 
bone in the back. They are responsible for prov iding support to the pelvic joints and 
organs, relaxing to allow the passage of urine, stool and gas and contracting to prevent 
the loss of urine, stool and gas as appropriate.  In order to best examine these muscles 
you will be asked to undress from the w aist down and be covered with a sheet.  The 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811132] a lubricated, gloved finger to identify painful muscles around and in 
your vagina or rectum then instruct you to contract and relax these muscles in order to 
determine how the muscles are funct ioning.  Care is taken to make you as comfortable 
as possible with the exam.   
 
Your therapi[INVESTIGATOR_811133].  She will 
9 
 answer al l of your questions and will work with you to establish a treatment plan based 
on the results of the evaluation and your goals for therapy.  
 
PAC can schedule for any of the locations and the phone number is 708- 216-5300.  
 
Loyola Rehabilitation Services pr ovides pelvic floor rehabilitation at the following 
locations:  
 
Loyola Outpatient Center Urogynecology at Loyola University Medical Center (708) 216-
2180  
 
Loyola Center for Rehabilitation on Roosevelt in Maywood (708) 216- 5300  
 
Loyola Center for Health at  Burr Ridge (708) 327- 1050  
 
Loyola Center for Rehabilitation at Hickory Hills (708) 233- 5395 (No PT at this location 
for now)  
 
Loyola Oak Brook and Oakbrook Terrace, 630- 953-6778  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2. English Intervention video link: https://youtu.be/mDMVUQ- 2wvY , and 
Spanish Intervention video link: https://youtu.be/R0x4ixhFCqo  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.3. Patient information collected (in clinic)  
Circle one:    Control     Intervention (video)  
Age ______   Vaginal Parity  _____________   BMI     
Insurance type :  Private   Government sponsored   Combined  Other  
Race      Caucasian  Black   Asian       Eastern European     Hispanic  Other   
Urogynecologic diagnoses (circle) :  SUI UUI MUI  Urgency -frequency Syndrome   
Weak pelvic floor   Defecatory dysfunction    POP   Myofascial pain   Other  
Stage of Prolapse  [ADDRESS_1122018] any further questions?  No/Yes         
              
1) After your visit today, how well informed  do you feel about the role of pelvic floor 
physical therapy in treating pelvic floor symptoms?  
              
No change           Very Informed 
 
2) How do you rate the ease of understanding  of information about pelvic floor physical 
therapy?  
              
Very  difficult           Very easy  
 
3) How do you rate the amount of information  about pelvic floor physical therapy that was 
presented to you?  
              
Not enough information                 Too much information 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.5 Patient information collected (from EMR < nine months later)  
 
Time to first PFPT visit from day of referral:     days  
 
Physician who referred:  Fitzgerald  Brubaker  Mueller   Brincat  
 
Number of recommended visits:     
 
Number of completed visits :     
 
Dischar ged from PFPT practice (circle): yes  no 
 
 