 
 
Food Additives Effects on EEG Profiles in College Students With ADH D 
NCT0334246 9 
Submitted 7/15/2019, Edited 7/23/[ADDRESS_936172] of mouth. Inclusion criteria are 1) 
currently enrolled at the university, 2) 18 -24 years old, 3) following a stable medication dose and 
frequency (ADHD medication or otherwise) for at least 3 months. If in the ADHD group, 
additional inclusion criteria are 1) diagnosed with ADHD by a primary care doctor, psychiatrist, 
or psychologist a nd 2) willingness to suspend ADHD medication for 24 -48 hours before testing 
days. Exclusion criteria are 1) seizure disorder, 2) past hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7010], or 3) any 
comorbid disorder requiring an anti -psychotic medication.  
The research study was ap proved by [CONTACT_2374]’s IRB (IRB -2017 -151) and written informed 
consent will be provided by [CONTACT_20908]. Baseline assessments for ADHD and control 
participants included collection of demographic and anthropometric data, completion of 
cognitive test ing using CNS Vital Signs ® (CNSVS) software, completion of the Adult ADHD 
Self-Report Scale (ASRS), and 4 minutes of eyes closed resting -state EEG recording. To avoid 
medication effects, ADHD medication use will be suspended for 24 -48 hours before testing , as 
appropriate for the half -life of the medication.  
After baseline testing, ADHD participants and a small subset of control participants will 
complete in -person dietary training to learn how to identify and avoid AFC in the diet. Dietary 
training will i nclude reviewing the FDA approved AFC names, identifying such names on food 
labels, reviewing common foods containing AFC and their AFC -free alternatives, and talking 
through their average diet to identify foods containing AFC. Participants will be given a  paper 
copy of the dietary training and emailed a PDF version.  
Participants will avoid AFC in the diet for the remaining 4 weeks of the study: participants 
followed the diet for 2 weeks before beginning the 2 -week crossover challenge. After 2 weeks on 
the diet, participants will complete an AFC specific Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) to 
measure dietary compliance and then will be randomized to a double -blind placebo -controlled 
crossover challenge for 3 days each, of 2 consecutive weeks. The challenge m aterials are either 
225mg of mixed powder AFC (i.e., Red No. 40, Red No. 3, Yellow No. 5, Yellow No. 6, Blue 
No. 1, Blue No. 2) disguised in chocolate cookies, or placebo chocolate cookies with no AFC.  
Chocolate cookies work well for blinding since when t hese colors are mixed together, they are 
close to brown in color. The mixture of AFC was chosen to incorporate the colors most often 
consumed in the diet, and the amount of each AFC used was half of the Estimated Daily Intake 
(EDI) of a high -consumer, as d etermined by [CONTACT_1622]. Powdered AFC will be used to avoid any 
possible confounding effects from propylene glycol or sodium benzoate which are commonly 
used in liquid food coloring. A 4 -day washout period was implemented to avoid carry -over 
effects. The CNSV S cognitive testing, ASRS, and EEG recordings will be repeated at the end of 
each 3 -day exposure.  
 
Adult ADHD Self -Report Scale (ASRS)  
The ASRS -v1.[ADDRESS_936173] predictive of adult ADHD and 12 questions in Part B that further probe at 
specific symptom profiles. Scoring is based on the frequency of symptoms asked in each 
question, rangin g from 0 for “never” to 4 for “very often”, with a higher score indicating a higher 
likelihood of ADHD. The ASRS is a screener for adult ADHD and asks about symptoms over  
the last 6 months, however participants were asked to answer questions based on the week 
leading up to the testing to capture potential short -term effects of AFC. Additionally, ASRS 
questions were broken up into “inattentive” or “hyperactive” sub -classifications based on 
CNSVS protocol for adult ADHD testing, resulting in 9 inattentive qu estions and 9 hyperactive 
questions, and then these were scored. Thus, each participant will receive an inattentive, 
hyperactive, and total ASRS score.  
CNSVS Cognitive Testing for Attention  
CNS Vital Signs ® (CNSVS) software will be used to test simple a nd complex attention. Simple 
attention is measured using a Continuous Performance Test (CPT) to analyze the correct 
response rate and to assess whether the correct responses are more frequent than commission 
errors. Complex attention is a composite score c reated from performance on a Stroop task, CPT, 
and Shifting Attention Task.  
Quantitative Electroencephalography (EEG)  
Participants will sit in a comfortable chair facing a computer monitor in an air -conditioned, 
sound attenuated room. Four minutes of eye s-closed resting -state data will be collected at 
baseline and at the end of each challenge period. Participants will be instructed to remain as still 
as possible while being relaxed, but awake.  
EEG recording will be completed using g.tec equipment (http:/ /www.gtec.at). Twenty -five 
Ag/AgCL g.SCARABEO Z electrodes (16x10x5 mm, 125 cm lead) will be used with an adult 
size cap (g.GAMMAcap2) according to the International 10 -20 System (FP1, FP2, , F3, F4, F5, 
F6, F7, F8, Fz, AF3, AF4, C3, C4, Cz, T7, T8, , P3, P4, P7, P8, P9, P10, Pz, O1, O2) with the 
reference on the right earlobe and the ground electrode placed at Fpz. Impedance remained  
below 5 kOhm for all electrodes. A sampling rate of 256 Hz, input signal filter of 0.5 -60 Hz, and 
a 60 Hz notch filter were  applied online.  
EEG recordings will be analyzed in EEGLab and The Batch Electroencephalography Automated 
Processing Platform (BEAPP). In BEAPP, a bandpass filter will be applied (1 Hz -50 Hz). To 
remove artifacts, Independent Component Analysis (ICA) with  multiple artifact rejection 
algorithm (MARA) will be used. The data will be re -referenced to the average and segmented 
into 2 -second epochs, with time points rejected if more than 0.01% of the epoch was >150μV. 
Power spectral density (PSD) will be calcula ted using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with a 
Hanning window. Mean power and relative power will be calculated for delta (1 -4 Hz), theta (4 -
8 Hz), alpha (8 -13 Hz), beta (13 -30 Hz), and gamma (30 -50 Hz) frequency bands. Mean power is 
the sum of the powe r values of each frequency band divided by [CONTACT_690092], a 
measure similar to absolute power. Relative power is the absolute power of a specific frequency 
band divided by [CONTACT_690093]. The theta -beta ratio (TBR) will als o be 
calculated. Each band and ratio was then averaged over frontal electrodes (Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, F5, 
F6, F7, F8, Fz, AF3, AF4), central electrodes (Cz, C3, C4), and posterior/temporal electrodes 
(Pz, P3, P4, P7, P8, P9, P10, T7, T8, O1, O2).  
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP)  
All data will be analyzed in SPSS ® V25.0. Baseline comparisons between the ADHD and 
controls for demographic and anthropometric data will be run using Wilcoxon rank sum test for 
non-normal continuous variables, Student’s t -test for no rmal continuous variables, or Chi -Square 
test for categorical variables. Baseline comparisons of mean and relative EEG power between 
groups will be analyzed using Wilcoxon rank sum test. Challenge week analyses for the ADHD 
and EC group will be run using G eneral Linear Modeling (GLM) with the within - 
subjects variable being the challenge week material (AFC/placebo) and the between -subjects 
variable being the order of challenge materials. GLMs will be run for ASRS scores (inattentive, 
hyperactive, and total) , simple attention measures, complex attention measures, and each 
frequency band of interest or TBR in the frontal, central, and posterior regions. At least 75% of 
the EEG data segments will need to be usable after preprocessing for the participant data to  be 
included in the statistical analyses.  
Since this is the first pi[INVESTIGATOR_690091], a power analysis for sample size was not able to be 
performed. Therefore, uncorrected p -values will be reported to a significance level of p=0.05 to 
note possible  effects of AFC across all measures.  