[ADDRESS_185794] 
in Tobacco Cigarette Smokers: Experiment 1  
Study Protocol  
7/13 /2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
Study Protocol  
Introduction  
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) was granted authority in [ADDRESS_185795] feature that could be changed is cigarette filter ventilation. A recent 
review ex amined the effects of cigarette filter ventilation and concluded that filter ventilation, 
by [CONTACT_160105] a cigarette burns, yields more mutagens and carcinogens, and results in 
greater puff volume and possibly depth of inhalation, which has led to increas es in peripheral 
lung adenocarcinomas (1). This, along with the ability to manipulate systemic levels of nicotine 
by [CONTACT_160106], as well as misconceptions about the lower toxicity of filter 
ventilation, may have also contributed to the use, appeal, and abuse liability of ventilated 
cigarettes. The extent to which commercial cigarettes are ventilated vary substantially in the 
market by [CONTACT_59584], ranging from 0 to 80%. However, smokers compensate for the lower nicotine 
yields associated with highe r ventilation by [CONTACT_160107], number of cigarettes 
per day, and blocking some portion of the ventilation holes. This compensatory behavior 
exposes smokers to more tobacco smoke constituents than would be indicated by [CONTACT_160108] s. Regulatory action that reduces or eliminates cigarette ventilation would not only 
reduce exposure to smoke constituents by [CONTACT_160109], but also 
change the smoker’s experience, likely resulting in harsher taste that may be pr oportional to 
the ventilation in a given cigarette brand. The potentially large effect on taste and preference 
corresponding to cigarette ventilation could alter the appeal and abuse liability of these 
products and could inform regulatory actions. However,  eliminating filter ventilation raises a 
variety of questions that constitute a gap in our knowledge and must be answered to assess the 
potential for adverse unintended consequences of removing filter ventilation. We will explore 
these questions within a b ehavioral economic framework.  
Behavioral economic demand analyses can be used to understand the level of 
motivation to consume a product on either an individual or small group level, including 
cigarettes (2,3). This level of analysis allows for experimenta l manipulations to be made on 
variables of interest. By [CONTACT_160110] a product, important indices of demand are obtained. These indices can be grouped 
into two main measures of consumption, d emand intensity and demand elasticity, which are 
associated with use level and dependence severity (3,4,5,6). Demand intensity is the amount of 
the commodity consumed when available at very low cost (approaching free), and demand 
elasticity quantifies the degree to which the individual is willing to increase monetary or effort -
based expenditures to maintain the same level of consumption as costs increase. Elasticity of 
demand has been shown to be a characteristic of the drug itself and independent of drug d ose 
for many drugs including nicotine (2,7,8). While drug demand plotted as a function of unit price 
has been often shown to be a function of the total drug consumed, some of our prior research 
with cigarette demand calls this conclusion into question. A p rior study we conducted (9) 
[ADDRESS_185796] available, the denicotinized cigarettes 
had comparable demand to nicotinized cigarettes . If both were available, however, participants 
preferred the nicotinized cigarettes. This suggests that cigarette demand is not strictly 
regulated by [CONTACT_55931], and that there is substantial abuse liability associated with other 
aspects of cigarettes (e.g., sensory components) apart from any nicotine content. Relevant to 
this point and the current application, we conducted a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], where conventional 
ventilated cigarette smokers purchased either their usual cigarettes (ventilated) or their usual 
cigarettes with the filter vents blocked. When each cigarette type was available alone in 
separate sessions, demand for both products was very similar. However, in a separate session 
in which both cigarette types were available concurrently at equivalent u nit prices, ventilated 
cigarettes were clearly preferred at all prices. These findings suggest that to fully understand 
the abuse liability of cigarettes will require that they are studied in contexts where other 
products are available (e.g., substitution) . 
Substitution is defined as an increase in the consumption of a constant -priced product 
while the cost of a different commodity is increased. For example, we have shown that as the 
price of conventional cigarettes is increased and its consumption decrease d, the consumption 
of nicotine gum increased even though its price remained constant (10). Substitution defines 
one end of a continuum of interactions between two commodities. At the other end of that 
continuum, commodities can also function as complements . Complementarity refers to the 
decreased consumption of a constant -priced product in response to an increase in the price of a 
different commodity. For example, the research team has previously shown that as the price of 
cigarettes increased, consumption of coffee decreased even though its price remained constant 
(11). Between these two extremes is independence, which occurs when changes in the price of 
one commodity have little or no effect on consumption of another commodity where price has 
remained unch anged. Substitution, complementarity, and independence are measured by 
[CONTACT_12783] -price elasticity of demand and are represented by [CONTACT_160111], negative, or 
near zero, respectively. Studies to date have almost exclusively examined only pairs of pr oducts 
and, in even fewer cases, three concurrently available commodities. For example, in one of our 
studies smokers had access to conventional cigarettes, denicotinized cigarettes, and nicotine 
gum13. When the price of conventional cigarettes increased, consumption of both 
denicotinized cigarettes and nicotine gum increased even though their prices were fixed. Thus, 
denicotinized cigarettes and nicotine gum functioned as substitutes for conventional cigarettes. 
Indeed, by [CONTACT_55949],  the smoker could reproduce both the central and 
sensory effects of standard cigarettes by [CONTACT_160112] (i.e., sensory 
effects) and nicotine gum (i.e., central effects). Importantly, denicotinized cigarettes functioned 
as a better substitute than gum (the use of denicotinized cigarettes increased the most). This 
effect could not have been predicted from the individual demand curves with these 
commodities. Only when they were measured together did these complex interactions emerge. 
Lastly, in this experiment consumption of conventional cigarettes was greatest when it was the 
[ADDRESS_185797] 
(e.g., 1 cigarette puff per self -administration), long and numerous sessions (e.g., one, 3 -hour 
session for each price examined). As such, these methods cannot and do not come close to 
replicating the ever more complex to bacco marketplace and underscore the gap in the 
understanding of how to examine these relationships among a large number of products that 
approximate the real world.  
To address this methodological gap and to inform how various products may interact, 
we ha ve developed and tested a novel method called the Experimental Tobacco Marketplace 
(ETM). The ETM is a systematic extension of similar marketplace methods used with other 
consumer products (e.g., food marketplaces used in obesity and other nutrition -relate d 
research). In experimental marketplaces, multiple products are available and the experimenter 
controls the prices for each. These marketplaces can be either physical or virtual stores (similar 
to online retailers) and permit the examination of price effe cts and an assessment of degree of 
substitution or complementarity in consumer behavior under conditions that approximate 
naturalistic settings. One such study (12) examined foods purchased by [CONTACT_160113] (increased price) an d healthier foods were subsidized (decreased 
price). These authors found that taxing less healthy food reduced caloric intake and proportion 
of calories from fat, while increasing the amount of protein consumed. Alternatively, 
subsidizing healthier foods d id not change the macronutrient profile of foods purchased while 
increasing energy intake. In a review of this emerging area of nutritional research, Epstein and 
colleagues noted that “price changes modify purchases of targeted foods, but research on the 
overall nutritional quality of purchases is mixed because of substitution effects” (p. 789; (13)). 
This statement suggests the importance of exploring regulatory options in complex 
marketplaces. The ETM developed by [CONTACT_160114] o nline store, that 
displays pi[INVESTIGATOR_499], information, and prices for several tobacco/nicotine products. In a recent 
study of ours (14), smokers were endowed with an amount of money comparable to their 
weekly tobacco purchases. They then made tobacco product pu rchasing decisions while the 
price of conventional cigarettes was varied and the price of 5 other tobacco products remained 
constant. Purchasing decisions from one, randomly selected cigarette price was actualized and 
smokers were provided the products pur chased and any unspent account balance. Smokers 
returned one week later to report tobacco/nicotine use and return unused products for a 
refund. Cigarette consumption decreased as a function of price. As the price of cigarettes 
increased, consumption of snu s, electronic cigarettes, and nicotine lozenges showed the 
greatest substitution. Importantly, this approach moves beyond the constraints of previous 
laboratory studies by [CONTACT_160115]/nicotine preference and consumption 
under conditions  that typi[INVESTIGATOR_160098]’ lives, including not being nicotine 
[ADDRESS_185798] (including cigarettes) consumption across a range of prices to model the effect of 
ventilation. We will assess these eff ects following initial exposure to commercially available 
cigarettes and alternative nicotine products (e.g., e -cigarettes, snus, gum), as well as these 
effects over time. We will also assess these measures in each of two smoker subtypes: those 
who normall y smoke ventilated and unventilated cigarettes (defined here as ≥20% and <10% 
filter ventilation, respectively). Prior research indicates that experimental exposure to “low -
nicotine yield” cigarettes (including those with increased filter ventilation) prod uces gradual, 
compensatory changes in smoking topography (e.g., longer puffs or blocking of ventilation 
holes) that: 1) are not evident upon initial cigarette exposure, and 2) effectively increase 
nicotine yield to levels similar to participants’ usual bra nd (15). The majority of this evidence 
suggests that asymptotic changes in smoking topography occur in two months or fewer (15 -17). 
For this reason, after initial exposure to commercially available cigarettes, participants will 
receive extended exposure to  these cigarettes for two months and will be assessed 
intermittently during this period in the ETM. Thus, in this experiment, we will examine whether 
the effects of ventilation differ by [CONTACT_160116].  
Participants  
Up to 200 smokers (plus an additional 20 to account for dropout) from the Roanoke VA area 
will participate in this study. To participate, smokers must:  
1) provide written informed consent,  
2) be 18 -65 years of age,  
3) be a current cigarette smoker  
4) have a breath carbon monoxide (CO) level that confirms cigarette smoking  
5) have stable self -reported mental and physical health,  
6) and have no immediate plans to stop smoking  
7) be willing to smoke commerically available cigarettes that are different from their typi[INVESTIGATOR_160099]  
8) be willing to sample alternative nicotine products such as e -cigarettes  
 
6 
 
We will recruit two groups of cigarette smokers: participants whose usual brand of cigarettes 
have approximately 0 -10% ventilation and participants whose usual brand of cigarettes have 
approximat ely 20% or greater ventilation.  
Individuals who are pregnant  or lactating or have plans to move out of th e area during the 
course of the  experiment will be excluded from participation. Use of other tobacc o/nicotine 
products w ill not be  exclusionary.      
Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited  using a separate IRB protocol to screen cigarette smokers 
into a variety of smoking studies in our lab (see IRB # 17-870). If participants have given prior 
permission (as explained in Q3.2) they will be contact[CONTACT_160117] p rocess mentioned above (IRB # 17-870). Participants may also be recruited through flyers 
and ads, which which will direct potential participants to either call our lab to screen over the 
phone or to complete our online prescreener. Participants may also pre screen in person. These 
participants will be pres creening for Protoco l IRB#[ADDRESS_185799] a history of 
successful recruitment of cigarette smokers into research programs. All par ticipants will enroll 
on a voluntary basis  
Consenting Process  
Potential participants will be provided with the written consent form prior to visiting 
VTCRI, the Virginia Tech Corporate Research Center (VTCRC) (e.g., by [CONTACT_6968]), or VT office space 
in Arlingi nton, if they wish. They will also be given additional time in a quiet room at VTCRI or 
VTCRC to read the form. VTCRI research staff will review each element of the written consent 
form with the potential participant. Participants may have the opportunity to watch a saved 
video of the written consent form, read and recorded by [CONTACT_16133]. The potential 
participant will be given the opportunity to ask questions and will have as much time as they 
need to decide whether they would like to participate i n the study. They will be encouraged to 
speak with whomever they wish before making this decision. Staff will reiterate that the 
potential participant can choose to decline participation in the study at that time or at any time 
thereafter without consequen ce. If the potential participant chooses to continue with the 
consent process, he or she will be asked to complete a brief quiz regarding the consent form. 
The potential participant and person obtaining consent will review the quiz and address 
additional q uestions. The potential participant and person obtaining consent will sign the 
consent form after the potential participant verbally states that s/he understands the 
conditions of the study, has no more questions, and chooses to participate.      
[ADDRESS_185800] characteristics including blend of tobacco, additives, nicotine and tar 
content levels will be similar across these two products but will only differ in the degree of 
ventilation. Ventilated ciga rettes will feature ventilation values in the 20 -30% range, whereas 
unventilated cigarettes will feature approximately 0 -5% ventilation.  
 
Procedure  
The duration of the experiment will be approximately 3 months. Participants will begin 
with an initial one week (approximately) exposure period to both unventilated and ventilated 
cigarettes as well as alternative nicotine products (e -cigarettes, snus, etc.) that will be made 
available throughout the experiment. Participants will be given the opportunity to sam ple both 
types of cigarettes and alternative nicotine products. In the following sessions, participants will 
alternate between Electronic Tobacco Marketplace (ETM) sessions and free exposure periods to 
their assigned cigarette, with weekly assessments thro ughout to track changes in smoking 
behavior and cigarette valuation. In total, participants will complete 10 experimental sessions 
(see Appendix B for experimental timeline figure). For the sake of clarity, session types are 
separated below. The consent an d initial sessions may take place in  the same or separate 
sessions.  
At the beginning of the experiment, participants will be assigned to one of two groups: 
ventilated or unventilated. Group assignment will determine what cigarettes will be given to 
the pa rticipant after sessions in which they do not actually purchase their cigarettes of choice. 
Additionally, participants that typi[INVESTIGATOR_160100] a menthol 
version of their assigned cigarette. Cigarettes will be similar in design  and will be labeled as 
Typa A or Type B.  
At the initial session and throughout the study, urine samples may be collected and 
stored for testing (for tobacco use and pregnancy) and breath samples for carbon monoxide 
and alcohol. Self -report may be used in  place of urine analyses on a case -by-case bases. Urine 
sample analyses for tobacco use may onl y take place at the VTCRI site.  
Initial Assessment Session and Sampling (Session 1).  
First, participants will complete the consenting process. The first session  will be an 
assessment session to collect information from participants on patterns and degree of tobacco 
and other substance use, perceptions of all cigarette types available in the ETM, as well as the 
8 
 
results of behavioral and cognitive tasks that we thi nk may inform or complement the results 
from the main study (see Appendix A for a co mplete list and descriptions).  
Participants will also complete the initial sampling period following the initial sampling 
session. The goal of this period is to familiari ze the participants with their randomly assigned 
cigarette as well as alternative nicotine products. After their assessment session, participants 
will be given a 7 -day supply of ventilated and unventilated (3.5 days of venitlated and 3.5 days 
of unventialt ed) cigarettes and asked to use these cigarettes. The actual number of cigarettes 
delivered to each participant will be determined by [CONTACT_160118] 7. Therefore, the average minimum number of cigarettes that will b e 
delivered is approximately 70 (10 cigarettes per day minimum to qualify to participate). They 
will be also be given a sample of the alternative nicotine products that will be made available 
during the Real -ETM sessions. Participants will be asked to repo rt their favorite flavor of each 
product to sample. If the participant is naïve to the alternative nicotine product, they will be 
asked to estimate which product flavor they would prefer. To verify usage during this and all 
subsequent usage period (see bel ow), participants will be asked to return spent cigarette filters 
in resealable bags we provide. However, while participants will be asked to smoke the 
cigarettes they are given and to not use any other cigarettes, they will only be asked to try the 
altern ative nicotine products during the sampling period, they do not have to finish them. A 
subset of these spent filters will be randomly chosen and analyzed to permit correlation of 
mouth -level exposure to smoke constituents with differences in ETM purchasing  behavior 
between ventilated and unventilated cigarettes. During this sampling period, participants will 
go about their daily lives, allowing them to sample these cigarettes in the social environment in 
which they typi[INVESTIGATOR_160101]. This “real -world” sampl ing period will serve to increase the 
generalizability of the results obtained in the ETM sessions. This duration of exposure was 
chosen to give participants time to begin to familiarize themselves with their assigned 
cigarettes. This will enable them to m ake informed purchasing decision s during the upcoming 
sessions.  
Real Experimental Tobacco Marketplace Sessions (Sessions 2,6, and 10).  
Following the initial sampling period, participants will complete a purchasing session in 
our realistic tobacco product  marketplace. Participants will be seated in front of a computer to 
access an online marketplace with an interface similar to many online merchants. This will allow 
participants to browse through the products and add as many as they desire to the virtual 
shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_160102]. Each product will have the price clearly displayed along with an image. Each ETM 
session will contain five pricing scenarios, in which we:  
i. manipulate the price of participants’ assigned cigarettes to assess demand in a context 
with no othe r products available;  
ii. manipulate the price of participants’ non -assigned cigarettes to assess demand in a 
context with no other products available;  
9 
 
iii. manipulate the price of both assigned and non -assigned cigarettes in unison to assess 
simple preference between the two;  
iv. manipulate the price of participants’ assigned cigarettes while the price of non -
assigned cigarettes remains constant to asses s the degree to which assigned cigarettes 
substitute for non -assigned cigarettes;  
     a. In this task, alternative nicotine products (e.g., e -cigarettes, chew, etc.) may also be 
available for purchase at a constant price.  
v. manipulate the price of partic ipants’ non -assigned cigarette while the price of 
assigned cigarettes remains constant to assess the degree to which non -assigned cigarettes 
substitute for assigned cigarettes.  
     a. In this task, alternative nicotine products (e.g., e -cigarettes, chew, etc.) may also be 
available fo r purchase at a constant price.  
In each of these scenarios, the price -manipulated cigarettes will be available across a 
range of prices (e.g., $0.12, $0.25, $0.50, $1.00, $2.00, and $4.00). Price -constant cigarettes will 
be set to the median cigarette price in the community. Participants will use an experimentally 
provided income (proportional to their real -world tobacco consumption) to purchase from the 
ETM. At each price, participants will be asked to make seven days of toba cco-product purchases 
from the ETM. After all [ADDRESS_185801] Testing (Sessions 
3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and 9).  
Following the first session in the ETM and its associated period of tobacco product use, 
participants will begin periods of freely provided exposure to their assigned cigarette 
(ventilated or unven tilated), alternating with two additional sessions in the ETM at regular 
intervals. The purpose of this additional  exposure between discrete ETM assessments is so that 
we may examine the effects of sustained exposure to participants’ assigned cigarettes at  
10 
 
regular intervals. During the extended -exposure periods, participants will visit the lab every 7 
days. At each of these sessions during extended -exposure periods, they will return any unused 
cigarettes, report the use of experimenter provided and non -expe rimenter provided tobacco 
products, receive cigarettes for the upcoming 7 days, and complete many of the assessments 
they completed at their initial assessment session.  
Following sessions 5 and 9 (the sessions immediately before the Real ETM sessions) 
participants will be given 6 days of their assigned cigarettes and 1 day of the unassigned 
cigarettes in order to expose the participant to the unassigned cigarett es before the Real ETM 
session.  
An abbreviated set of assessments will be collected on a weekly  basis throughout the 
experiment (Appendix A) in addition to any additional scheduled session (e.g., Real ETM). These 
assessments will focus on measuring tobacco product use and measures of dependence and 
withdrawal, including a Timeline Follow -Back for th e period since the last session, as well as 
product perceptions. We will also include a purely hypothetical version of the ETM (on non -real 
ETM sessions), in which participants do not receive products purchased to use outside the 
laboratory. Because these hypothetical ETM assessments can be repeated with greater 
frequency and without interrupting periods of continuous exposure to assigned cigarettes, data 
from hypothetical assessments will be used to inform determinations of the effects of time on 
valuation  of ventilated and unventilated cigarettes in more detail than primary ETM 
assessments.  
Risks and Benefits  
One risk of participation is embarrassment that may come from answering sensitive 
questions related to medical, psychiatric, and/or drug use history. Loss of confidenti ality is 
another risk of participation. Additionally, because the present experiment allows and 
sometimes involves participants self -administering cigarettes, participants might experience 
adverse effects associated with the use of nicotine products (e.g.,  nausea, vomiting, dizziness, 
diarrhea, weakness, and rapid heartbeat) or withdrawal from nicotine (e.g., anxiety, irritability, 
difficulty concentrating). These risks of effects of nicotine and withdrawal from nicotine may be 
more likely during periods in  which participants have been asked to abstain from smoking 
cigarettes or when assigned to smoke cigarettes that are different from the participant's typi[INVESTIGATOR_160103]. Some participants may also experience a minor increase  in throat or sinus irritation . 
Pregn ant women will be excluded from study participation to remove the risk that 
tobacco and nicotine products can have on the developi[INVESTIGATOR_16103].  
Participants will be screened, using medical history and structured interviews, for a 
history of medical contraindications (e.g., pregnancy, recent myocardial infarction), and current 
unstable medical illnesses. The study will be conducted on the campus of VTCRI, VTCRC, or VT 
office space in Arlington. Participants will be free to withdraw from the study at any time. In 
addition, if participants develop medical problems or experience adverse events during the 
11 
 
course of the study, assessments to determine whe ther participants should continue in the 
study and/or continue to use study products will be conducted and necessary referrals will be 
provided. Participants will also be told that they can stop using the study products at any time.  
Using only ID numbers and keepi[INVESTIGATOR_55919]/or in locked offices 
accessible only to trained study team members will protect confidentiality. Computer databases 
will have coded identifiers. These screening, monitoring, and confidentiality procedures have 
been in effect for more than [ADDRESS_185802] -protected 
computers accessible only to the research tea m. 
Participant Compensation  
 $40 for completion of the initial Consent and Assessment Session  
• $40 for each subsequent session  
• $100 bonus at the end of the study (Session 10) for successfully returning spent cigarette 
butts on 7 out of 9 sessions or more.  
 In addition, participants will receive money during the Real ETM purchase session to purchase 
tobacco/nicotine products (based on the participant's typi[INVESTIGATOR_160104]). The amount 
each participant receives will be proportional to his/her real -world nicotine product 
expenditure (calculated as the frequency of use of each product x market price of that product 
x 7 days).  
 Combined, the subjects could earn up to $[ADDRESS_185803] (www.greenp hire.com), an 
FDIC -insured payment provider that specializes in clinical trial stipend payments that comply 
with IRB privacy regulations and considerations. At the beginning of the study, the participant 
will receive a prepaid MasterCard debit card that ca n be used anywhere that accepts 
MasterCard. As payments are earned in the course of the study, additional funds will be added 
to the account for that participant. Funds are immediately available when added and 
participants can check their balance as desire d. This system will allow frequent, immediately 
available payments. Payments may also be made via  check, however, remote debit card 
payments will be used most often.  
 
 
 
 