	  Transcranial Photobiomodulation for reducing autism symptoms in children.				
October 1, 2020 
	Page	1	of	19 	PROTOCOL TITLE:  Transcranial photobiomodulation for reducing autism symptoms in children.   PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: [INVESTIGATOR_658372], MD Department   N/A Phone Number   CO-INVESTIGATORS: Name    [CONTACT_52063], Ph.D Department   N/A Phone Number  [PHONE_920]   Name   [CONTACT_52064], CFA, Esq. Department   N/A Phone Number  [PHONE_13626]   1.0 Purpose of the study: 	The purpose of this 8-week  open label feasibility study is to assess the tolerability, safety and efficacy of Transcranial LED Therapy for language learning and reducing symptoms of autism in children.    The investigators propose to enroll up to [ADDRESS_887970] been previously diagnosed with moderate to severe ASD by [CONTACT_52039], Fifth Edition (DSM-5) criteria for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).   The hypothesis to be tested is that exposure to photobiomodulation and speech parsing program will reduce children’s symptoms of autism, such as delays in language production and comprehension, anxiety, tantrums, limited eye-contact [CONTACT_658376].   2.0 Background / Literature Review / Rationale for the study: 	2.1 Background Science of Photobiomodulation and Rationale:   There are several studies that suggest that mitochondrial energy disturbance is an underlying mechanism of autism, for at least some of the children.		Specifically, Weisman, Kelley, Bauman, Cohen, Murray, Mitchell and Kern (2008) looked at the medical records of 25 children diagnosed with autism and found that “Levels of blood lactate, plasma alanine, and serum ALT and/or AST were increased at least once in 76%, 36%, and 52% of patients, respectively”. Furthermore, [ADDRESS_887971] for a subset of ASD children, mitochondrial disturbances in energy production could be the underlying mechanism.  Furthermore, Giulilvi, Zhang, Omanska-Klusek, Ross-Intra, Hertz-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32570], Tasson and Pessach (2010), looked at biochemical markers of ASD kids (2-5yo), and concluded that ASD children are more likely to have Mitochondria dysfunction, mtDNA replication and mtDNA deletion than neurotypi[INVESTIGATOR_52025].   
	Page	2	of	19 	In addition, Siddiqui, Elwell and Johnson (2016) conducted meta-analyses of the studies reporting decreased activity of mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) complexes and reduced gene expression of mitochondrial genes, in particular genes of respi[INVESTIGATOR_52026], in individuals with autism (not necessarily children). They concluded that current research supports the link between ASD and mitochondrial dysfunction. However, they also conceded that in many studies that they reviewed the sample size was small and argued for further research including near infrared spectroscopy to provide more precise information of Mitochondria dysfunction in ASD individuals. Based on these and other studies, it is reasonable to conclude that there is evidence linking ASD with mitochondria dysfunction (specifically difficulties with energy producing) in at least some ASD individuals.  Transcranial photobiomodulation (tPBM) could be the solution to Mitochondrial Disturbances in ASD individuals (resulting in functional  brain connectivity):  Michael Hamblin (2016) argued that Transcranial Photobiomodulation (“tPBM") could be helpful in addressing various neurological disorders (including ASD) because Nitric Oxide could be dissociated by [CONTACT_52043]. When Nitric Oxide is dissociated, the mitochondrial membrane potential is increased, more oxygen is consumed, more glucose is metabolized and more Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) is produced by [CONTACT_52044]. In another paper, [CONTACT_52069] discusses research on the effect of light stimulation on mitochondria, specifically he discusses in vitro studies with isolated mitochondria (isolated rat livers), where increased ATP synthesis was detected. Furthermore, tPBM has been found to be effective in treating several neurological conditions and disorders, including Stroke (Naeser and Hamblin, 2011), Traumatic Brain Injury (Naeser and Hamblin, 2015; Naeser et al, 2016) and Alzheimer’s Disease (Johnston et al, 2015).  	 There is preliminary data that transcranial photobiomodulation reduces symptoms of autism (e.g. improvement of speech, improvement of responsiveness, reduction of tantrums, and abberant behaviors, improvement of sleep, and improvement of eye contact), Leisman et al 2018.  Photobiomodulation has also been found to be effective for treatment of other neurological conditions without any side effects.  Conditions include Alzheimer’s, depression, TBI and stroke, Cassano et al 2016, Hamblin 2016, Naeser et al 2011, Naeser 2010.  Leisman et al (2018) administered tPBM to children (5-18 years old) diagnosed with autism and found significant reduction in symptoms (after only 2 months of applications, two sessions a week). Leisman et al stimulated brain’s temporal lobe (to reach Broca and Wernike areas) as well as occipi[INVESTIGATOR_52030]. Leisman et al (2018) specifically argued that administration of tPBM increases brain connectivity. Leisman et al used ERCHONIA laser for their study (please see attached spreadsheet, comparing our device’s specifications to those of Erchnoia). Currently, there is a an ongoing clinical study at Mass General hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (Tolga A Ceranoglu,PI;  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) which tests tPBM on adult individuals with ASD (older than 18).  During personal communication with one of the experimenters ([CONTACT_658381]), it was revealed that they found statistically significant improvement in brain connectivity and reduction of symptoms. In addition, tPBM is currently being used in clinical studies for other neurological disorders such as Down syndrome and Sleep Bruxism.    Overall, many researchers seem to agree that ASD could be a result of Mitochondrial disturbances, which leads to brain disconnectedness and tPBM could be beneficial for increasing ATP, promoting brain connectivity and reducing symptoms of ASD.  Overall, tPBM has been shown to increase blood flow to brain as well as increase its oxidative metabolism resulting in increased brain activation and decreased inflammation.  Dmochowky J & Dmoshowsky P (2018) demonstrated this process by [CONTACT_52041].  	In summary, the way photobiomodulation works is as follows: the mitochondria in brain cells absorbs the light and produces more ATP (energy molecules). Having more ATP enables the brain to have more energy, form new neural connections, and reduce inflammation.  In addition to ASD, tPBM is being used for various neurological and psychiatric conditions including dementia, depression, tbi and stroke (the same mechanism is beneficial for alleviating all those conditions).Therefore, children who 
	Page	3	of	19 	will be exposed to the photobiomodulation treatment may experience reduction of autism symptoms, which will improve their lifelong outcomes. Previous studies of photobiomodulation (using either LED or lasers) have found no side effects.       2.41Publications:   Published research on the benefit of photobiomodulation in neurological conditions:  • Cassano P., Petrie S.R., Hamblin M.R., Henderson T.A., Iosifescu D.V. Review of transcranial photobiomodulation for major depressive disorder: targeting brain metabolism, inflammation, oxidative stress, and neurogenesis. Neurophotonics. 2016;3:031404. • Hamblin, M. R. (2016). Shining Light on the Head. BBA Clinical, 6, 113-124 • Leisman, Machado, Machado (2018) Effects of Low-Level Laser Therapy in Autism Spectrum Disorder. Clinical Medicine Research, 111-130. • Naeser M.A., Saltmarche A., Krengel M.H., Hamblin M.R., Knight J.A. Improved cognitive function after transcranial, light-emitting diode treatments in chronic, traumatic brain injury: two case reports. Photomed. Laser Surg. 2011;29:351–358. • Naeser M.A., Martin P.I., Lundgren K., Klein R., Kaplan J., Treglia E., Ho M., Nicholas M., Alonso M., Pascual-Leone A. Improved language in a chronic nonfluent aphasia patient after treatment with CPAP and TMS. Cogn. Behav. Neurol. 2010;23:29–38. • Saltmarche A.E., Naeser M.A., Ho K.F., Hamblin M.R., Lim L. Alzheimer's Association International Conference, Toronto, Canada. 2016. Significant Improvement in Cognition after Transcranial and Intranasal Photobiomodulation: A Controlled, Single-Blind Pi[INVESTIGATOR_52031]    2.2 Background of the Physical Device:  We are developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a safe and effective protocol for administering tPBM via a wearable device. This physical device is getting developed by [CONTACT_658377]. The parameters are developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Eugenia Steingold (the PI [INVESTIGATOR_37105]), [CONTACT_52070] (leading photobiomodulation expert from Harvard Medical School and an advisor to JelikaLite), [CONTACT_52071] (leading neuroscientist who is studying photobiomodulation at [LOCATION_011] Medical University and an advisor to JelikaLite), and David Conroy (an industrial product designer with over 30 years of expertise in designing medical devices).  The purpose of this feasibility study is to evaluate the safety and comfort of the product, as well as preliminary efficacy of the treatment effect. The device will stimulate Default Mode Network (to increase brain connectiveness) as well as Broca and Wernike areas (to facilitate speech comprehension and production) and Occipi[INVESTIGATOR_52030] (as many ASD children rely on visual information for language learning). The device will be physically light, comfortable to wear for children and could eventually be used at home as frequently as necessary. The reason why the device may be helpful to children is because of the science of photobiomodulation. The device will have embedded LED lights in it, which will shine red light and near infra red lights. The children will wear the device for approximately 5-10 minutes, twice a week (closely replicating the protocol of Leisman et al as well as the clinical study at MGH). The light stimulates mitochondrial ATP production.  Only about 2% of the light penetrates the skull. However, because brain is the largest energy consuming organ of the body, even those 2% result in significant 
	Page	4	of	19 	improvement of the symptoms (even small boost in ATP production results in significant improvement).  Having more energy enables the brain cells to heal, grow and form new neural connections. Other benefits of tPBM is increased blood flow to the brain, which increase brain oxygen supply and reduce inflammation.  There have been two clinical studies done already that show that photobiomodulation reduces symptoms of autism. The major difference between our device and those used before is that we will be using LED instead of lasers and we will specifically target Default Mode Network (DMN) and language areas.  [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52032] (quoted above) targeted DMN.  Leisman et all targeted broca and wernike areas and occipi[INVESTIGATOR_52030]. We will target both DMN (to increase connectivity) and Language areas (broca and wernike) to facilitate language learning.   Previous studies (Naeser et al) found that targeting DMN reduces symptoms of Alzheimer, TBI and Stroke.  [CONTACT_52072] also shared with us her tPBM language production protocol, which she used with her Stroke patient who also suffered from Aphasia.  Therefore, there are preliminary findings suggesting that using our protocol will be beneficial for children with autism, because it is expected to improve their language abilities and reduce other symptoms. Because our device uses LED lights instead of laser, it is light, wearable, easy to use by [CONTACT_52046]. We are specifically using soft, soothing materials, which will be comfortable even for children with sensory-integration difficulties (exhibited by [CONTACT_52047]).    3.[ADDRESS_887972] to make a non-significant risk determination.   The device is not approved or marketed.   The device does not pose a risk to participants under 21 CFR 812.3(m).  This investigational device is not:  • Intended as an implant and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a participant; • Purported or represented to be for use supporting or sustaining human life and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a participant • For a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating or treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a participant or • Otherwise presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a participant.   Please see Response to January 15 New England IRB Letter, specifically Responses to Questions 5 and 6, for a full explanation of the device safety and comparison to other predicate devices.  .   4.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria: 	Inclusion Criteria:  1. Male or female participants between 2 years and 6 years of age (inclusive), of all races.   2. Previously diagnosed with moderate or severe ASD by a licensed professional. 
	Page	5	of	19 	3. Participants may be receiving any behavioral intervention therapy (e.g., ABA, Floor Time) during the course of the treatment. The final statistical analysis will control for the participants receiving behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_52035]. We expect the majority of the participants in both control and experimental conditions to be receiving behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. There is no known interactions or complications of tPBM with behavioral therapy.   4. Parents of participants must understand the nature of the study.  5. Parents of participants must sign an IRB- approved informed consent form before initiation of any study procedures. 6. Parents of participants must have a level of understanding sufficient to communicate with the investigator and study coordinator, and to cooperate with all tests and examinations required by [CONTACT_760].  7.  Participant child experiencing a major psychiatric disorder will be allowed to participate in the study provided they do not meet any exclusionary criteria.  8. The participant child is willing to participate in this study.       Exclusion Criteria:  1. Participant child is experiencing severe self-injurious behavior or severe aggressive behavior to self or others (within past 7 days).  2. Participant has been diagnosed with another psychiatric or neurological disorder (e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]) or have exhibited symptoms of major psychiatric disorders within the last 30 days.  3. Participant has an unstable medical condition (that requires clinical attention).  4. Participant has a significant skin condition at the procedure sites (i.e., hemangioma, scleroderma, psoriasis, rash, open wound or tattoo).  5. Participant has an implant of any kind in the head (e.g. stent, clipped aneurysm, embolised AVM, implantable shunt - Hakim valve). 6. Participant has receiving medication on a regular basis for Autism or any other medical condition. 7. Any use of light-activated drugs (photodynamic therapy) within 14 days prior to study enrollment (in US: Visudine (verteporfin) - for age related macular degeneration; Aminolevulinic Acid- for actinic keratoses; Photofrin (porfimer sodium) - for esophageal cancer, non-small cell lung cancer; Levulan Kerastick (aminolevulinic acid HCl) - for actinic keratosis; 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA)- for non-melanoma skin cancer).  8. Current treatment with a psychotropic medication.  9. Investigator and his/her immediate family, defined as the investigator's child or grandchild.    5.0 Sample Size:  [ADDRESS_887973] that participant, using the same Eligibility Screening Criteria.      6.0 Research Locations: 	[ADDRESS_887974] toys and books inside it. The caregiver and one of the researchers will be present in the room at all times.    7.0 Procedures Involved: 7.1	Location:	The	study	will	use	pre-test	and	post-test	design.	The	entire	study	on	the	children	will	be	done	in	the	office.	The	weekly	interview	with	the	parent	may	be	done	either	in	office	or	by	[CONTACT_648],	as	preferred	by	[CONTACT_658378].		 7.2 Conditions: There are two  conditions: placebo condition,  and combined light and audio therapy treatment condition. The placebo control condition will listen to nursery rhymes. The placebo control condition will wear the same device, however the lights are not going to be turned on. Otherwise, all experience for participants in control and experimental conditions will be identical.                                      This study replicates and extends previous studies of photobiomodulation in children older than 5 years of age (Leisman et al, 2018).    7.3 Participants: The participants will be matched on age, gender and number of hours of therapy they receive independent from the study.   The participants will be 24-71 month old children previously diagnosed with moderate or severe ASD. The experiment will use random assignment. We plan to use 30 participants (15in each group).   We plan to screen about 40 participants (or fewer) to recruit the 30 participants for this study.                                                                                 
	Page	7	of	19 	7.4 Random Assignment: Random assignment will be achieved by [CONTACT_658379] (such as random.org). Each participant is assigned a number. The list of [ADDRESS_887975] generated for 30 participants  1 – 23 2 – 25 1 – 12 2 – 15 1 – 21 2 – 5 1 – 19  2 - 9 Once the program generates the random sequence of 30 participants (in the example above, the sequence goes 23, 25, 12, 15, etc), we will simply alternate the assignment to treatment and control conditions.  For example, in the example above, participant number 23 is assigned to the treatment condition (1), and participant number 25 is assigned to the control condition (2).  Because the sequence of the participants is randomized, the assignment to conditions is random.    7.5 Treatment: The treatment will take place twice a week for up to 30 minutes at a time.  During the study, while participants will be wearing the photobiomodulation device, they will be listening to the audio program, and they may be playing with their parent or the experimenter, using the toys of their choice (out of the many available in the experimenter’s office). The caregivers will be present during the experiment at all times. When the child and the parent arrive, they will be welcomed to the office, and introduced to the toys.   The child will be encouraged to play with toys and interact with the parent (or the experimenter). The children in the experimental condition will be asked to wear the device for no longer than 15 minutes. The children in the controlled condition will play for 30 minutes and wear the same device, without turning it on (the device won’t be turned on at that time). The total time in the office will be about 30 minutes (including playing).   
	Page	[ADDRESS_887976]-Testing: CARS2 will be used for pretest and post-test. Please see attached a sample CARS [ADDRESS_887977] -treatment (before Starting treatment in session 1 and in the end of treatment of Session 8). Mobile FDA approved EEG device Brain Scientific will be used to collect children’s pre and post test EEG. There is no known danger of EEG collecting. In this study it will be using for measuring the efficacy treatment only.  7.7 On-going Data Collection: Parents will be asked to keep a daily diary of the child’s behavior, specifically – words spoken, comprehension of instructions, eye contact, his sleep pattern, number of tantrums, anxiety, social interaction and eating.  Qualitative data will be collected through short weekly interviews with the parents. These interviews can take place either in [CONTACT_52073]’s office during the child’s treatment or by [CONTACT_648]. During those weekly interviews, the parents will be asked questions about their children’s responsiveness to language, number of words they can produce, eye-contact, anxiety, frequency of tantrums, eating, and difficulties falling asleep and sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_52036]. Please see attached proposed script for the weekly call.  The qualitative data will be used to further inform and supplement quantitative data (total CARS 2 scores).   The study will collect qualitative and quantitative data.  The quantitative data will be the total CARS2 scores of the participants of both Control and Treatment groups, obtained before and after the study is done. Mixed Design Analysis of Variance will be used to analyze quantitative data. In addition, we will collect Before and After Prefrontal cortex EEG from the control and experimental treatment groups to measure electrophysiological changes in Prefrontal cortex. after treatment. EEG data will be analyzed (using Time-Frequency analysis),  and after baseline normalization, the data will be used  in aggregate to compare conditions numerically. The between group comparison before the treatment will be conducted using between subject T-test for each brainwave . The between group comparison will be conducted after treatment for each brain wave using between subject t-test.  In addition, for the treatment condition only Before and After comparison will be conducted, using within subject t-test.    In addition, we will obtain qualitative data from weekly parental interviews, during which we will ask participants’ parents about their children’s behavior (see attached protocol).  Qualitative data will be used for information purposes and will supplement quantitative data.  7.8 Blinding of the Researcher: [CONTACT_52073] (the PI) will not be present in the room when the child is receiving the treatment. She will not be aware what group each particular participant has been placed in. [CONTACT_52073] will be conducting the pre and post-testing interviews, as well as the on-going weekly interviews with the parents.   
	Page	9	of	19 	[CONTACT_52074] will be present in the room when the child receives the treatment. However, [CONTACT_52074] will not be doing the CARS testing, she will not be doing the weekly interviews, and she will not be doing the data analysis  Another professional (an independent contractor) will be analyzing the collected data at the end of the study, however, the individuals conducting the analysis will not have access to the private identifiable information and will not be aware about the specific group in which the individual participants have been placed.  Confidentiality: Participants’ confidentiality will be protected by [CONTACT_52052].  The quantitative data will be analyzed and reported only as aggregate (averages and F scores).  The qualitative data will be studied only by [CONTACT_52053], if reported for illustrative purposes only, it will be attached to the Study ID (not the identifying information).  The participants will be asked for consent to report qualitative data with the Study ID.    8.0 Recruitment Methods: 	We will put a flyer in both of [CONTACT_52073]’s offices, informing patients of this potential study. We will also give this flyer to various therapi[INVESTIGATOR_658373] (such as ABA therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], speech therapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437], etc.). We will also put up this flyer in centers and schools that provides ABA therapy and other therapy to children on the spectrum. (Please see attached proposed flyer).  Once a prospective parent contacts they researchers, they will be screened for eligibility. They will be asked questions regarding the Inclusion and Exclusion criteria. If the child is determined eligible, we will schedule their first session, which will start with debriefing about the purposes of the study, benefits and risks. After debriefing, participants will sign the Informed Consent (if they are still willing to participate), and proceed to the study. (Please see attached script for eligibility screening and obtaining Informed Consent).  Withdrawal from the Study Each participant (and their  parents) has a right to withdraw from the study at any time. If a participant decides to withdraw from all components of a research study, we will discontinue interacting or intervening with the participant in order to obtain data about his  or her participation in the study, we will not obtain additional identifiable private information about the participant for the research study from any source, and we will not obtain identifiable private information about the participant for the research study by [CONTACT_52056].   When a participant will inform us that he / she decides to withdraw, we will ask the participant to clarify whether the participant wishes to withdraw from all components of the trial or only from the primary interventional component of the trial. If the participant wishes to withdraw only from the primary interventional component, we may ask for permission to contact [CONTACT_52057]-up data about the child’s behavior.   
	Page	10	of	19 	  9.0 Recommendation for Only One Parent Consent 	Both	this	proposed	study	and	the	investigational	device	do	not	involve	greater	than	minimal	risk.		 Rationale for the device:  Safety of Photobiomodulation:  Photobiomodulation has been extensively studied on humans for more than 30 years, including its use for neurological conditions. There are several photobiomodulation products (for neurological conditions) that are on currently on the market (using both LED and Lasers). The consumers report no side-effects.  After more than three decades of research there are no known major side effects attached to photobiomodulation therapy. Rare Minor Side effects for first time users only include:  Tiredness (temporary) – probably due to the release of metabolites but the majority report a resurgence of energy.  Headaches (temporary) – from the reactivation of neural connections and increased microcirculation. Safety Issues of our product specifically: Our product emits non-laser based irradiation (incoherent light) with a low level energy intensity. Infrared emits non-laser based irradiation (incoherent light) with a low level energy intensity. We use 850 nm.  The participants  might perceive slight warm. No other perceptions will be produced by [CONTACT_52058]. No feelings of discomfort are anticipated (the device is especially made for children, it’s very comfortable and soothing to wear). There are no known side-effects of photobiomodulation (with 30 years of research and studies, including research on 5 year old children diagnosed with ASD).	 Rationale for the study: The study activities include: 1) wearing the device and / or 2) Listening to the audio program which provides language acquisition input or 3) free play while listening to nursery rhymes. In addition, the parents will be interviewed about the child’s behavior on a weekly basis.  None of these activities present greater than minimal risk to the health and well-being of the participants.    10.[ADDRESS_887978]. Steingold’s office, in a private room.  During the conversation, we will ask questions to ensure that the parent understands that the participation is voluntary, that the child may be placed in the placebo group, the time commitment required, the possible risks of being in the study and possible benefits.   
	Page	[ADDRESS_887979] the signed Informed Consent from the parents of every participant.   We will not be obtaining consent from the child participants. The reason is as follows: children between the ages [ADDRESS_887980] limited mental capacity and cannot be reasonably consulted about the risks and benefits of the study. Children will be asked to wear a device on their head. Due to their limited level of comprehension and responsiveness, they may not be able to give an affirmative verbal assent.  Nonetheless, if children demonstrate a visible discomfort, or verbally say that they do not want to wear the device, they will not be forced to do it.   11.0 Financial Compensation: 	No financial compensation will be provided.  Parents of participants will be responsible for the cost of transportation to the research facilities.  This is minimal risk to the participants.    12.0 Potential Benefits to Participants:  	 The possible benefit for the participant child may be improvement of speech, improvement of responsiveness, reduction of tantrums, reduction of anxiety, improvement of sleep, and improvement of eye contact.    13.0 Risks to Participants: 	Potential Risks Mitigating Factors Some questions may be very personal or upsetting to the parents • Parents may skip any questions that they do not want to answer. The child may feel uncomfortable wearing the headband and may want to take it off early • If the child wants to take off the headband, we will first encourage him to wear it, by [CONTACT_52059], 
	Page	12	of	19 	such as toys and music.  • If, however, the child insists on taking off the headband, he / she will not be forced to wear it and he / she may be able to take it off before the conclusion of the session.  Breach of confidentiality (child’s data being seen by [CONTACT_52060]’t have access to it) • We’ll keep all children identifying information separate from the research data, but we’ll be able to link it by [CONTACT_2329] a study ID. We will destroy this link after we finish collecting and analyzing the data. If child is in the group that receives placebo (no active treatment), the child’s symptoms or condition may not improve and the parent will be upset • We are conducting the study to see the effects of photobiomodulation on young children diagnosed with ASD. 
	Page	[ADDRESS_887981] is beneficial, the device may be available for treatment in the future and the particular child and other children may benefit from the outcome.  	 The	child	maybe	receiving	concomitant	medical	treatment														            • Even	though	there	are	no	interaction	of	the	tPBM	with	any	medications,	children	currently	receiving	any	medications	on	a	regular	basis,	will	be	excluded	from	participating	in	this	pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]-study.	This	will	be	determined	during	initial	screening.			• 		• Even	though	there	are	no	interaction	of	the	tPBM	with	any	medications,	children	currently	receiving	any	medications	on	a	regular	basis,	will	be	excluded	from	participating	in	this	pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]-study.	This	will	be	determined	during	initial	screening.					 The	child	might	be	receiving	behavioral	• There	are	no	known	interaction	of	this	treatment	with	any	behavioral	 • There	are	no	known	
	Page	14	of	19 	Intervention	such	as	ABA	simultaneously	with	participating	in	the	study.																							treatment.	Yuli	Fradkin,	MD	and	Eugenia	Steingold	Ph.D	will	monitor	(based	on	parental	interviews	and	diaries)	each	child’s	progress	and	if	there	are	any	changes	(as	reported	by	[CONTACT_658380])	in	children’s	ability	or	willingness	to	relate	to	ABA	therapi[INVESTIGATOR_658374],	the	parents	will	be	offered	to	withdraw	form	the	study.	We	think	that	negative		likelihood	of	such	an	interaction	is	extremely	unlikely.		The	positive	interaction	(e.g.,	children	becoming	more	responsive	to	ABA	therapy)	will	also	be	monitored	and	recorded	in	parental	diaries.		The	children	should	be	able	to	receive	their	regular	behavioral	therapi[INVESTIGATOR_658375].		  interaction	of	this	treatment	with	any	behavioral	treatment.	Yuli	Fradkin,	MD	and	Eugenia	Steingold	Ph.D	will	monitor	(based	on	parental	interviews	and	diaries)	each	child’s	progress	and	if	there	are	any	changes	(as	reported	by	[CONTACT_658380])	in	children’s	ability	or	willingness	to	relate	to	ABA	therapi[INVESTIGATOR_658374],	the	parents	will	be	offered	to	withdraw	form	the	study.	We	think	that	negative		likelihood	of	such	an	
	Page	15	of	19 	interaction	is	extremely	unlikely.		The	positive	interaction	(e.g.,	children	becoming	more	responsive	to	ABA	therapy)	will	also	be	monitored	and	recorded	in	parental	diaries.		The	children	should	be	able	to	receive	their	regular	behavioral	therapi[INVESTIGATOR_658375].		There may be risks that we do not know about yet. Exposure to LED lights is not known to have any negative side effects. • When the child will wear the headband, the child will be exposed to LED lights. The lights will be both red and near infra red. The lights will range in frequency 
	Page	16	of	19 	from 660 MHz to 850 MHz.  • After years of study, there are no known negative side effects of photobiomodulation.  • Throughout the study, we’ll tell parents if we learn anything that might affect their decision to let their child participate.   Some participants may have to be withdrawn from the study • If the child is not able to attend all the required sessions and the caregiver is not able to reschedule a cancelled session within a [ADDRESS_887982] to be withdrawn from the study.  • If the child becomes aggressive or self-injurious 
	Page	[ADDRESS_887983] to be withdrawn from the study. • In that event, only the data that has been collected up to the date of withdrawal will be kept.  • All identifying information will not be shared and all reports will be aggregated. • We will ask the child’s parents for permission to contact [CONTACT_52061]’s behavior.       Furthermore, the study will be under oversight of Yuli Fradkin, MD, who is a board-certified pediatric psychiatrist with more than [ADDRESS_887984] the Privacy and Confidentiality of Participants and the Research Data: 	Participants will be only interacting with [CONTACT_52073] or [CONTACT_52074], Esq.   Participants and their parents will be tested individually, in a quiet room, and their confidentiality will be protected, as they won’t be interacting with each other or with anybody else outside of the researchers.   
	Page	[ADDRESS_887985]. Steingold and [CONTACT_52074] will be able to access individual information.  The participants will be immediately assigned Study ID number and only STUDY ID will be used for data analysis and reporting.  Only aggregated data will be used for further reporting to the scientific community or to the business community.  Individual data will be reported for illustrative purposes only with STUDY ID (not identifying personal information).    The following information will be included as data: Signed consent form (immediately scanned and stored in a cloud).  Pre and Post-test Cars2 scores (with STUDY ID assigned).  Weekly interview data (with STUDY ID assigned).    Identifying information will include Name [CONTACT_52067], Gender and number of therapy hours of the participant, Name [CONTACT_52068]. Children’s  age, gender and number of therapy hours will be used for matching purposes (for assigning to the control or treatment condition).  Neither names of the participants nor names and phone numbers of their parents will be used for data analysis or reporting. Their names and phone numbers will be stored separately, in encrypted (password protected) file, in a secure cloud.  Secure clouds as well as encryption and password protection will be used to protect identifying information.   The raw research data will be stored for [ADDRESS_887986] the participants after the study is complete, a follow up interview in 6 months or a year could be useful to assess the sustainability of the benefits of photobiomodulation.  In this case, we will be applying for a separate IRB (minimal risks) to conduct the follow up interview. Presently, we do not plan to do it (although we recognize that it could potentially be useful for research purposes).   The data will be stored in encrypted, password protected files in a secure cloud.    15.0 Data Monitoring Plan to Ensure the Safety of Participants: 	We will conduct weekly interviews with the parents, asking them questions about child’s behavior and functioning to collect both safety and efficacy data. The interviews will be conducted either by [CONTACT_52062] (per parental choice).   Please attached interview protocol. [CONTACT_52076], a licensed clinical psychologist will review the data. The detailed qualitative data will be collected. No statistical analysis is necessary.    If a participant shows sudden developmental regress, we will recommend immediate neurological evaluation and his/her participation will be discontinued (unless this participant has been manifesting regress prior the start of the study). If two participants suddenly manifests signs of regress (not anticipated, not seen before in prior photobiomodulation studies), we will immediately discontinue the study.   
	Page	19	of	19 	16.0 Data, and if applicable, Specimen Banking:  	The raw research data will be stored for [ADDRESS_887987] the participants after the study is complete, a follow up interview in 6 months or a year could be useful to assess the sustainability of the benefits of photobiomodulation.  In this case, we will be applying for a separate IRB (minimal risks) to conduct the follow up interview. Presently, we do not plan to do it (although we recognize that it could potentially be useful for research purposes).   The data will be stored in encrypted, password protected files in a secure cloud.    17.0 Data Sharing:  	Only aggregated data will be shared with scientific community (via publications). Only aggregated data will be shared with potential investors.  If individual data (e.g., from an interview) is shared for illustrative purposes, identifying information will NOT be shared (STUDY ID will be assigned to each participant).  	