 
 Cover Page  
Study Title: Twitter and Cardiovascular Health  
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_678496]: Statistical analysis plan  
Last update 10.24 .2018  
 
  
Protocol  (Twitter and Cardiovascular Health:  Twitter and Hypertension)  
 
Background  
Cardiovascular (CV) disease  remains the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the US and 
is associated with significant economic burden. While there is effective medical treatment for 
hypertension  (HTN)  in the fo rm of prescription medications, blood  pressure management is 
likewise  depend ent on several lifestyle choices . A patient’s diet , exercise, monitoring of 
symptoms  and adherence to me dication (activities that occur  outside of the physician’s office ), 
have an effect  on clinical outcomes.  Social media channels like Twitter offer a new opportunity 
to explore health related communication generated by [CONTACT_678497].  
 
Objectives  
This project leverages Twitter, a public online platform, to study if  there is a potential benefit of 
tweeting regularly about health. We will ask patients with a diagnosis of HTN and elevated BP to 
regularly tweet about health content and evaluate if this intervention will improve their perceived 
disease management and their systolic blood pressure over a six-month  timeframe.   
 
Methods  
We will ident ify patients greater than or equal to  21 years of age , with known HTN (ICD -9 code 
401.9) from a single health system . These patients will then be contact[CONTACT_24211] . Eligibility 
questio ns include: greater than or equal to  21 years of age , not pregnant (self -report), a 
diagnosis of hypertension and a Twitter account or willingness to create an account for the 
study.  
 
Eligible patients who consent to participate would then comp lete a baseline survey and be 
randomized to the control or intervention group.  Randomization will occur via a computerized 
randomization program in a 1:[ADDRESS_918127] worth $25 would be provided for completion of the fi nal 
survey at 6 months. Baseline and follow -up surveys will include  questions regarding patient 
activation (PAM -13), self -rated health (SF -1), ideal CV health (BRFSS), HTN self -care practices 
and demographics.  To assess technology use, we will also ask que stions from the Perceived 
usefulness , and Perceived ease of use  surveys. Patients will also consent to having their 
electronic health records accessed to validate clinical data (e.g. blood pressure (BP), BMI).  
 
Control:  The control group study participation would include completing a baseline survey and a 
survey 6 mon ths later.  
 
Intervention:  Participants randomized to the intervention group will be asked to follow the study 
Twitter account , tweet or retweet health content twice per week using #health  and complete a 
survey at study initiation and 6 months later. Participants will be  sent weekly reminders to tweet.  
 
Outcome measures :  The primary outcome measure will be  change in systolic blood pressure  
(5mm) . The secondary outcome will be  patient acti vation measured by [CONTACT_671117] (a measure of 
behavior change that has been shown to be changeable  over time). Baseline variables will 
include demographic variables (gender, age, race/ethnicity, and geographic region of 
residence).  
 
Sample size : Sample size estimates based on the ability to detect a 5mmHg difference in 
systolic blood pressure at 90% power and type I error of 0.05. We planned to enroll 
approximately 240 in each control and intervention group, for a total of 480 participants, 
accounting for a 3 5% lost to follow up for a n online Twitt er intervention (total up to 648 ). 
 
Data analysis : We will use summary statistics to compare demographics and survey responses 
(health status, ideal CV health status, self -practices  perceived usefulness/ease of use ) between 
groups. Categorical variables will be presented as frequencies and percentages and  continuous 
baseline variables will be presented as means and standard deviations (if skewed these will be 
presented as medians and interquartile ranges).  
 
Our primary outcome will be  a 5mmHg change in systolic blood pressure  from baseline to study 
end at [ADDRESS_918128] for baseline SBP. The distribution of change in SBP will be assessed and if it is non -
normal (skewed) we will use an appropriate tra nsformation (such as natural log) or we will use a 
generalized linear model with appropriate family and link choices to model our outcome.  
For the secondary outcome measure , we will use paired t -test for pre -post differences of PAM 
scores. A multiple line ar regression model will also be used to account for additional imbalances 
in  demographic and baseline health characteristics not evenly distributed by [INVESTIGATOR_216] .  In all models, 
a binary indicator for control/intervention group will be included. Baseline PAM s core will also be 
adjusted for in the model. Covariates with missing data will be assessed for patterns of 
missingness and non -ignorability and will be multiply imputed if deemed necessary and 
reasonable.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 