Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 1  
Study Title : Prepare to Care, A Supported Self -Management Intervention for Head and Neck Cancer 
Caregivers  
 
Principal Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_215906], PhD  
 
Co-investigator(s) : Kathryn Weaver, PhD  
                                 Janet Tooze, PhD  
                                 Kathryn Greven, MD  
                                 Bart Frizzell  
                                 Greg Kucera, PhD  
                                 Christina Hugenschmidt, PhD  
Nevine Hanna, MD  
 
Study Personnel:   Katherine Pleasant  
                                Sandra Norona  
 Alexandra Dest  
 Eliza Dewey  
  
                                 
 
                                  
Sponsor or funding source: National Cancer Institute; Comprehensive Cancer Center  of Wake Forest 
University  
 
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
In 2016, 62,000 people are expected to be diagnosed with H NC in the [LOCATION_002]; over 13 ,000 people 
are expected to die from the disease [ 1]. Recurrence rates are high (20%) relative to other cancer 
diagnoses  [2, 3]. Treatment is complex and often includes radiotherapy (RT) for 5 days a week over 6 -7 
weeks, sometimes with chemotherapy and surgery  [4]. Patients experience significant side effects that 
impede core aspects of daily life, presenting challen ging care tasks for informal caregivers. One of the 
most notable side effects is dysphagia, affecting as many as 75% of patients and contributing to rapid 
weight loss, malnutrition, and dehydration [ 5, 6]. Other life altering side effects can  include pain, dry 
mouth, and difficulty hearing and speaking  [7, 8]. Caregivers must often engage in special food 
preparation (e.g., pureeing food) and tube management for patients  [9, 10 ], as well as more traditional 
informal caregiving tasks such as providing emotional support, managing medical appointments and 
insurance claims, and providing hands -on medical care with little to no training  [11, 12]. Patients may be 
stigmatized due to tobacco and alcohol use, or a human papi[INVESTIGATOR_27509] (HPV) association (major 
contributing factors in the disease etiology) or treatment -related disfigurement  [13]. Concurrently, 
patients may also experience embarrassment and isolation  [10]. Not surprisingly, HNC patients have a 
high incidence of psychological distress and report higher care needs relative to other cancer patients [ 14, 
15].  
 
Approximately 3.5 million people provide care for patients with cancer  [16]. Althoug h caregiving can be 
personally rewarding  [17], studies have overwhelmingly demonstrated a negative impact on cancer 
caregivers, including poor quality of life, risk of clinical depression, sleep disturbance, fatigue, pain, loss 
of physical strength, loss of appetite, and weight loss  [18-20]. Studies focused on HNC caregivers are 
sparse. The limited literature describes a high prevalence of agoraphobia (anxiety disorder)  [21], 
depression [ 22], and a high fear of patient cancer recurrence [23], with caregivers reporting poorer 
psychological health compared to patients and the general population [24]. Our research has shown that 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 2 during patient RT treatment, HNC caregivers experience increased schedule burden, decreased esteem, 
poorer self -reported health, and an abnormal c ortisol response (dysregulated cortisol slope) from 
treatment initiation to five weeks into patient’s radiotherapy (RT)  [25].  HNC caregivers have unmet 
informational needs and desire psychological support, self -help groups, and help with copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]  
[26-28]. In one study, most spouses of laryngectomized cancer patients desired to learn relaxation 
methods  [29]. Such services can be addressed in a psycho -educational (education pertaining to emotional 
well-being) and stress management intervention. Our own work has highlighted high interest in wellness 
programs in HN C caregivers [ 30].  
 
Psychosocial interventions for informal caregivers have successfully improved burden, depression, 
subjective well -being, perceived caregiver satisfaction, and ability/knowledge, with multiple component 
interventions more effectively reducing burden versus single component interventions  [31]. However, 
HNC caregivers have been neglected. One study [32] did evaluate the feasibility of a one- day 6 -hour 
workshop to facilitate copi[INVESTIGATOR_215907], but the workshop was not 
restricted to t hose providing care. Although participants were highly satisfied with the intervention, only 
19% of families approached agreed to participate. Barriers to recruitment and participation included a 
lack of interest in seeking family support or logistical bar riers. Our proposed study will overcome these 
barriers by [CONTACT_215926].  
 
A burgeoning area of research focuses on supported self -management ( SSM ) interventions. In SSM 
interventions, the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_215908] -directed educational materials to learn information and strategies to 
manage emotions and promote healthy behaviors typi[INVESTIGATOR_215909], such as 
cance r, with the support of a health care provider  [33, 34]. Accordingly, SSM interventions offer an ideal 
platform for delivery of psycho -education and stress management skills building. SSM interventions can 
be low cost, reduce health care utilization, and have greater dissemination potential  [33, 35 ]. Further, 
SSM interventions can be used according to the participant’s preferences for place and time and combat 
logistical barriers to in -person delivered interventions. As such, they may be especially attractive to HNC 
caregivers navigating the hectic RT treatment period. To date, SSM interventions have largely been 
applied in cancer patients, particularly in more common cancer types; they successfully improve fatigue, 
depression, anxiety, and overall QOL  [36]. One study did report feasibility and acceptabil ity of a SSM 
intervention for caregivers of blood and marrow transplant cancer survivors after treatment, but caregivers wished they had received the intervention earlier during patient treatment  [37]. Similarly, our preliminary 
data demonstrate that HNC caregivers desire wellness programs during patient treatment.  
 Salivary cortisol response is an important indicator of stress and is helpful for evaluating efficacy of 
stress- management trials.  Cortisol is a glucocorticoid and a biomarker of stress that is released from the 
hypothalamic pi[INVESTIGATOR_80560] (HPA) axis  [38].
 Studies within the psychoneuroendocrinology literature 
have demonstrated a relationship between psychological distress and cortisol response. For example, studies have demonstrated an association betw een cortisol and depressive symptoms[ 39, 40] , post -
traumatic stress disorder symptoms[ 41], and anxiety [ 42]. Additionally, other similar psychosoci al 
interventions have demonstrated changes in cortisol response  [43, 44 ].  
 
Objective s 
 
Aim 1: To assess feasibility (accrual, participation, and reten tion) and acceptability of a supported self -
management  intervention for psycho- education and stress management skills building designed for 
informal caregivers ( Intervention Group, n=20 ; Waitlist Control Group, n=20) of HNC patients 
undergoing RT .  
 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 3 Aim 2 a: To obtain preliminary data on caregiver intermediate (self -efficacy for (a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_215910] (b) abbreviated progressive muscle relaxation) and outcome variables (burden, psychological distress, 
quality of life) in intervention caregivers  and waitlist control caregivers at the start of radiation (T1), end 
of radiation (T2), and 6- weeks post -radiation (T3).  
 
Aim 2b:  To compare  intermediate (self -efficacy for (a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_215911] (b) abbreviated 
progressive muscle relaxation) and outcome variables (burden, psychological distress, quality of life)  
between intervention caregivers and waitli st control caregivers at T1, T2 , and T3.  
 
Hypothesis : (Aim 2a) Intermediate and outcome variables will improve in intervention caregivers 
post-intervention compared to pre -intervention and ( Aim 2b) intervention caregivers will have 
better intermediate (higher self -efficacy for a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_85509], and b) abbreviated 
progressive muscle relaxation) and outcome variables (less burden, less psychological distress, 
higher QOL) at T2 compared to waitlist  control caregivers.   
 Aim 3: To obtain preliminary data on caregiver cortisol response (cortisol slope, cortisol awakening 
response, area under the curve, and intra- individual cortisol variability) at T1 – T3 in intervention 
caregivers and waitlist control caregivers.  
 
Hypothesis: Intervention caregivers will demonstrate a more normal (steeper) diurnal cortisol 
rhythm (slope) at T2  compared to waitlist control caregivers.  
 
Aim 4 : To refine intervention procedures and materials for future studies by [CONTACT_66567]: a) qualitative 
data from caregivers and interventionist notes and b) quantitative data regarding module utilization.  
 
Methods and Measures  
 
Design : Recruitment will include both patients and caregivers , although patients are not receiving the 
intervention. We will recruit 40 caregivers (20 intervention caregivers; [ADDRESS_259683] control caregivers) of 
patients with head and neck cancer (HNC) referred for radiotherapy (RT)  and their informal caregivers, 
before or at the start of patient RT. After b aseline assessment, caregivers will be randomized  at the time 
of registration using a randomization scheme uploaded into the registration system , The randomization 
scheme will be developed by [CONTACT_30165] . Block sizes will be chosen randomly to ensure that future 
assignments cannot be inferred from previous ones.   Caregivers will be randomized  to receive either a 
psycho- educational and stress management skills building intervention offered in a SSM format , 
accessible in hard copy and online, with iPads linking to study materials available during daily patient RT 
sessions, or a waitlist control group. Caregivers will complete assessments at the start of RT (T1), end of 
RT (T2), and 6- weeks post -RT (T3). Wai tlist control caregivers will be offered Prepare to Care  materials 
(without support from the study interventionist) after final assessment at T3. Patient participation is 
optional and restricted to providing consent for study staff to abstract information on clinical  information 
from their medical record. If a patient declines to participate in the study , caregivers will be asked to 
report the patient clinical information collected at T1. See Appendix A for study schema.  
 
 
Setting : Participants will be recruited from the outpatient radiation clinic s at the Comprehensive Cancer 
Center of Wake Forest University  and the Lexington Medical Center  or by [CONTACT_2319] . Participants will meet 
with the study interventionist at the radiation clinic or by [CONTACT_756], and hav e the option to  access 
intervention materials from the study website using i -Pads that remain at the clinic  or accessing the 
website away from the clinic. The self -management intervention is designed so that caregivers can utilize 
the kit in a preferred lo cation (e.g., at home) and time.  
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 4  
Subjects selection criteria  
Caregivers  
• Inclusion Criteria  
(1) providing the majority of the informal (unpaid) care during RT for a patient meeting 
inclusion criteria (see below)  and participating in study , and ( 2) >18 years of age.  
• Exclusion Criteria  
(1) has a current cancer diagnosis, (2) cannot read/ communicate in English, (3) Caregivers 
who have an endocrine disorder (e.g., diabetes and thyroid disorders), or is currently 
taking a steroid -based medication  will not b e eligible to participate in the saliva portion 
of the study . 
 
 
Care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] 
• Inclusion Criteria  
• (1) has a new or recurrent AJCC stage I -IV squamous cell carcinoma of the upper 
aerodigestive tract (including lip/oral cavity, nasopharnyx, salivary gland, oropharynx, 
hypopharynx, paranasal sinus, and larynx cancers), (2) ha s planned external beam 
radiotherapy (+ /- chemotherapy) for 6- 7 weeks, (3) > 18 years of age , and (4) has an informal 
(unpaid) caregiver during RT  who is participating in study .  
• Exclusion Criteria  
(1) cannot read/ communicate in English.  
 
• Sample Size  
The sample size is based on feasibility (Aim 1). Our primary feasibility measures are 
participation and retention rates. About 110 patients present to our outpatient radiation clinic 
for treatment per year (9/mo). Based on previous experience, we expect ap proximately 75% 
of patients (n = 82) will have a caregiver and at least 75 patient -caregiver dyads will meet 
eligibility criteria (6/mo). With an estimated participation rate (consistent with PI’s 
experience) of 70%, we expect to recruit 40 patient -caregiv er dyads within 8- 10 months. If 
we approach 56  participants to recruit 40, we will be able to estimate the participation rate 
within +/-  12% using a two -sided 95% confidence interval; thus, we can be 95% confident 
that the true recruitment rate would be be tween 5 9% and 83%, which would support that the 
study is feasible. With 40 participants we can estimate the retention rate within +/ - 12%. If 
the observed retention rate is 80%, we can be 95% confident that the true rate is between 6 7% 
and 92 %, which would indicate a feasible study.  
 
Intervention s and Interactions  
 
 
After recruitment  and randomization, caregivers in the intervention group will meet with the study 
interventionist to review the intervention.  
 
Overview  of Intervention  (see Table 1)  
The multi- component intervention (or kit), Prepare to Care , includes:  
1) brief  introduction video on a DVD,  
2) binder including eight workbook modules offered in hard copy, and  
3) CD with audio instructions to facilitate Progressive Muscle Relaxation (PMR)  Training (included in 
module 8).  
Modules  
Protocol version: 1.4.[ADDRESS_259684] of supportive resources; modules 3- 8 focus on 
stress management skills to enhance caregiver copi[INVESTIGATOR_215912] (Table 1). Each module includes an 
introduction and rationale for the topic, strategies t o overcome relevant challenges, and a weekly exercise. 
PMR  training (in module 8) teaches caregivers to identify muscle tension signals and to use the signals as 
cues to trigger a relaxation response [45]. The breadth of topi[INVESTIGATOR_215913] a balance between addressing a comprehensive set of challenges and preventing  participant 
burden.  
 
 
 
Table 1. Prepare to Care  Kit Components  
Module: Topic  Description  
DVD Introduction  Brief introduction to the intervention: rationale and how to use the kit  
Educational  
1: Cancer Education  Information about HNC, RT (+/ - chemotherapy), side effects, and managing patient side 
effects  
2: Using Your  Resources  Information linking caregivers to supportive resources available within a) the CCCWFU, b) 
Forsyth County, and c) the internet  
Stress Management Skills  
3: Managing Time  Managing a busy schedule, including recognizing competing outside demands & 
prioritizing  
4: Seeking/ Accepting Support  Importance of social support, learning to identify supporters and ask for help when needed;  
5: Communicating with Others  Strategies to optimize communication with provider, patient, and other friends/family 
members  
6: Healthy Behaviors  Importance of healthy behaviors (diet, physical activity, sleep) as a cancer caregiver  
7: Positive Copi[INVESTIGATOR_215914] -frame  negative thoughts [46] 
8: Muscle Relaxation  Importance of engaging in relaxation; Also includes a CD with audio instructions for PMR  
 Intervention Delivery and Participation : Prepare to Care kit materials are offered in a blended delivery 
format. To maximize intervention engagement, in addition to the intervention kit, modules are also accessible on a study website and iPads linking directly to the website will be available for use at the RT 
clinic. Modules [ADDRESS_259685] to be 
completed in one sitting; caregivers are instructed to complete at least one module per week and re- visit 
previous modules as needed. Each week, caregivers will co mplete a needs assessment with the 
interventionist to help direct them to relevant modules. However, if new challenges present during the 
week, caregivers are encouraged to use other pertinent modules. This preference- based approach 
empowers caregivers to build skills to address current challenges. The workbook will include a time log 
for caregivers to record the date, modules utilized, and times for starting and ending each module. 
Waitlist control caregivers will not meet with the study interventionist wh en provided with the 
intervention.  
 
Interactions with Interventionist:  During weekly interventionist sessions (estimated to take 10 -30 min), 
the interventionist will complete needs assessments, as discussed above, and inquire about modules used 
the prior w eek, assist in overcoming potential barriers to participation, and assist with incomplete 
activities, if desired. These sessions will occur weekly at the RT clinic when caregivers typi[INVESTIGATOR_215915], capi[INVESTIGATOR_215916]. When necessary, sessions can also be completed via telephone. The 
interventionist will also send weekly email and/or text reminders each Wednesday to engage with 
caregivers and support adher ence. The interventionist has extensive experience interacting with 
participants in psychosocial/ behavioral research studies and will be trained in intervention content. 
Waitlist control caregivers will not meet with the study interventionist when provide d with the 
intervention.  
 
 
Outcome Measure(s)  
Protocol version: 1.4.[ADDRESS_259686] basic demographics and patient clinical information via 
medical chart review at recruitment and after RT. At T1 , T2 and T 3, caregivers will complete instruments 
at the RT clinic (or by [CONTACT_648] , mail,  or email using REDCAP ) to assess intermediate (self -efficacy in (a) 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_215911] (b) PMR  and outcome var iables (burden, psychological distress, quality of life). 
Caregivers may  also self -collect saliva samples (see additional details below). Between  T2 and T3, we 
will assess intervention caregivers’ overall acceptability of the intervention with a quantitati ve survey 
developed for the study and semi -structured interviews (lasting approximately 30 minutes  to an hour ) to 
explore factors influencing overall acceptability. Caregivers will be asked what they liked and disliked 
about content and delivery of interve ntion materials, weekly sessions with the interventionist, and 
email/text reminders. Interviews will be recorded and transcribed, and qualitative data will be managed 
using Microsoft Excel .  
 Salivary Cortisol:  Caregiver participants who do not have an endocrine disorder (e.g., diabete s and 
thyroid disorders), and are not  currently taking a steroid -based medication are eligible for the saliva 
portion of the study. Materials for saliva collection will be mailed or distributed to eligible participants in 
person at the start of the study . Participants will collect saliva samples three times a day (at awakening, [ADDRESS_259687] -awakening, and bedtime) for two consecutive days following T1, T2, and T3. Saliva 
samples are collected by [CONTACT_1299] a  cotton roll under the tongue for approximately 1- [ADDRESS_259688] been collected at each time point (T1, T2, T3), participants will 
return their samples in person at the radiation clinic (T1) or by [CONTACT_2319] (T2 & T3) us ing pre-paid postage to 
return their samples and saliva collection diaries to the Wake For est study site. Once received at the study 
site, all samples will be immediately centrifuged to remove the saliva from the adsorbent swabs , 
discarding the swabs and swab holder. The collection tube containing the saliva will be weighed. The 
saliva will the n be transferred in approximately equal aliquots to freezer storage tubes before freezing. All  
storage tubes will be labeled using a  barcode . Sample aliquots will be stored in freezer boxes at - 80° C 
until assayed . The location of each group of samples in the freezer will be recorded in the sample 
database.  
 
Samples will be assayed in duplicate at Wake Forest using The Salimetrics® Cortisol Enzyme 
Immunoassay Kit (State College, PA). The saliva storage tubes will be labeled with a barcode, a t no time 
in the testing process are samples identified by [CONTACT_215927]. On the day of analysis, samples are thawed at room temperature (20 to 22°C), centrifuged (1500 x g) for [ADDRESS_259689] 
used 25 μL of saliva per determination, has a lower limi t of sensitivity of 0.003 μg/dL, standard curve 
range from 0.012 μg/dL to 3.0 μg/dL, an average intra -assay coefficient of variation of 3.5% and an 
average inter - assay coefficient of variation of 5.1%. Method accuracy determined by [CONTACT_15209][INVESTIGATOR_215917] 100.8% and linearity determined by [CONTACT_215928] 91.7%. Values from matched serum 
and saliva samples show the expected strong linear relationship, r (47) = 0.91, p < 0.0001.  
Samples are returned to the freezer upon completion of pi[INVESTIGATOR_42115]. Assay data are reviewed by [CONTACT_215929]. Samples needing retesting are again thawed, 
analyzed and refrozen. After assays are complete, samples will be stored for up to three years and then 
disposed of per  applicable waste handling regulations.   
 
 
Table 2. Assessment Plan  
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 7 Assessment  Time  Description  
Caregiver sociodemographics  T1 Age, gender, race/ethnicity, education, employment, income , marital status, 
insurance status  
Patient clinical information  T1, T3 AJCC Stage, location of tumor, prior cancer (yes/no), time since surgery, 
new or recurrent diagnosis, chemotherapy (yes/no), # of weeks of RT , 
patient response to treatment  (T3 only)  
Caregiving characteristics  T1; T2;T3 Living with patient (yes/no), relationship to patient  (T1 only) , hours of daily 
care 
Aim 1  
Feasibility  
Participation  Study 
duration  Proportion of eligible participants who agreed to participate  
Retention  Study 
duration  Number of participants who completed the T2 visit divided by [CONTACT_215930]; Qualitative 
interview  (intervention caregivers 
only)1 Anytime  from  
T2-T3 15-item quantitative survey developed for study to assess how much 
caregivers liked different aspects of the intervention; Qualitative interviews 
to further explore factors associated with overall acceptability.  
Aims 2a & 2b  
Intermediate Outcomes  
Self-efficacy in copi[INVESTIGATOR_215918] (CI) [47]  T1; T2 ; T3 21-item instrument assessing caregivers’ perceived self -efficacy for copi[INVESTIGATOR_215919] ( managing medical information, caring for care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841], caring 
for oneself, managing difficult interactions/emotions ); demonstrated validity 
and reliability.  
Self-efficacy in PMR   T1; T2 ; T3 3-item instrument developed for study to evaluate self -efficacy in PMR . 
 
 
Outcome Variables  
(CES -D) [48] T1; T2; T3  20-item instrument how often over the past week they experienced 
symptoms associated with depression, such as restless sleep, poor 
appetite, and feeling lonely.  The CESD has been widely used in caregiver 
populations.  
(PROMIS  Emotional Distress 
Anxiety Short Form - 8a)[49] T1; T2; T3  Brief [ADDRESS_259690] week.  
Caregiver burden  
• Caregiver Reaction Assessment 
(CRA)  [50]  T1; T2 ; T3 24-item instrument assessing positive and  negative aspects of caregiving 
(esteem, lack of family support, finances, schedule, and health). The CRA 
has been tested in cancer caregivers; demonstrated validity and reliability  
[50, 51].  
QOL  
• Caregiver Quality of Life Index -
Cancer (CqoL -Canc)  [52] T1; T2 ; T3 35-item instrument assessing dimensions of caregiver QOL (burden, 
disruptiveness, positive adaptation, financial concerns). The Cqol -Canc has 
demonstrated validity and reliability  [51, 52].  
Aim 3  
Salivary Cortisol Collection  (for 
eligible caregivers only)  T1; T2; T3  Collect ed three times a day (at awakening, [ADDRESS_259691] -awakening, 
and bedtime) for two consecutive days following T1, T2, and T3. Saliva 
samples are collected by [CONTACT_1299] a cotton roll under the tongue for 
approximately 1- 2 minutes which is subsequently stored in a plastic tube 
and refrigerated.  
Aim 4 
Modules Utilized  (intervention 
caregivers only)  Study 
duration  Frequency of intervention modules utilized; retrieved from caregiver logs  
Interventionist notes  Study 
duration  Process notes regarding intervention implementation  
 
 
Analytical Plan  
The analyses will provide quantitative data on participation, retention, and accrual, and estimates of the 
effect size of the intervention for intermediate and outcome variables. This information, along with 
ratings of acceptability and qualitative analyses, will allow us to refine the protocol for a larger study.  
Aim 1: To assess feasibility (accrual, participation, and retention) and acceptability of a supported self -
management intervention for psycho- education and str ess management skills building designed for 
                                                 
 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 8 informal caregivers ( Intervention Group, n=20 ; Waitlist Control Group, n=20 ) of HNC patients 
undergoing RT.  
 
Accrual rate will be defined as the number of caregivers who agreed to participate divided by [CONTACT_215931]. Participation rate will be defined as the percent of eligible participants who 
agreed to participate. Retention rate will be defined as the number of participants who completed T 3 
measures divided by [CONTACT_215932]. Mean accrual rate, participation rate, and 
retention rates and their associated 95% confidence intervals (CI) will be estimated.  
 
Acceptability will be summarized quantitatively and qualitatively. Descriptive statistics will summarize 
participants’ overall rating of acceptability; ANOVA and regression models will examine if acceptability 
varies by [CONTACT_44009], caregiving, or patient characteristics. A codebook for analyzing the qualitative 
interviews will be developed using a thematic anal ysis procedure, facilitating coding into discrete 
categories. Interviews will be coded by [CONTACT_215933]. Frequency counts will be calculated for themes pertinent to caregivers’ 
likes/disl ikes.  
 Aim 2 a: To obtain preliminary data on caregiver intermediate (self -efficacy for (a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_215910] (b) abbreviated progressive muscle relaxation) and outcome variables (burden, psychological distress, 
quality of life) in intervention caregi vers and waitlist control caregivers at the start of radiation (T1), end 
of radiation ( T2), and 6- weeks post -radiation ( T3).  
 
Aim 2b:  To compare  intermediate (self -efficacy for (a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_215911] (b) abbreviated 
progressive muscle relaxation) and outcome variables (burden, psychological distress, quality of life)  
between intervention caregivers and waitlist control caregivers at T1 , T2, and T3.  
 
We will use a mixed effects model with a random subject effect  and time (T1,T2,T3), group, and a group 
by [CONTACT_215934] (self -efficacy for (a) copi[INVESTIGATOR_85509] 
(CI) and (b) PMR ) and outcome variabl es (burden (CRA), depression ( CESD ), anxiety ( PROMIS Short 
Form -Anxiety 7a), and QOL (CQoL -Canc ), by [CONTACT_215935] T1  to T2 to T3). We will use linear contrasts 
to compare the intervention to the control group  at T1 , T2, and T3. In exploratory analyses we wil l model 
the relationship between each outcome and the intermediate variable, by [CONTACT_215936] a fixed effect in the model. These results are exploratory due to concurrent measurement with outcome variables; in future studies we wou ld capture potential mediators at an intermediate time point.  
 
Aim 3: To obtain preliminary data on caregiver cortisol response (cortisol slope, cortisol awakening 
response, area under the curve, and intra- individual cortisol variability) at T1 – T3 in intervention 
caregivers and waitlist control caregivers.  
 
Analysis Plan:  Analyses for Aim 3 will be conducted using data from caregivers who were not excluded 
from the saliva portion of the study. Several summary measures will be derived from the three daily cortisol values, including the mean levels at each time, the mean cortisol awakening response (CAR – 
change in cortisol from awakening to 30 minutes), the area under the curve (AUC), the diurnal slope 
(change in cortisol between awakening and bedtim e), and the intraindividual cortisol variability, which 
will be estimated using the methods as described in Sannes et al. [53] to assess group differences in 
cortisol p arameters. W e will use a mixed model to evaluate differences between the groups in these 
parameters at times T1  and T2 and T3.  For a subset of the sample who completed measures on 
intermediate and outcome variables and cortisol , in exploratory models, we will include  the cortisol 
summary measures as predictor variables in  the models described for Aim 2  above . 
 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 9 Aim 4 :To refine intervention procedures and materials for future studies by [CONTACT_66567]: a) qualitative data 
from caregivers and interventionist notes and b) quantitative data regarding module utilization.  
 
We anticipate that participants who more fully utilize the modules may derive a greater benefit than those 
who do not. We will include utilization as an interaction term in the mixed effect model to assess this 
hypothesis in an exploratory analysis. This information will help us to refine the protocol, but will not be 
fully powered to quantify effects. Quantitative and qualitative findings will be synthesized, along with 
interventionist implementation notes, and included in a final report. The report will be used to determine 
potential refinement in the recruitment process, content of intervention materials, delivery of intervention 
components, and email/text reminders. The re port will be presented to advisory panel members who will 
participate in making final decisions for refinement.  
 
Human Subjects Protection 
All team investigators have completed their institution’s courses for Protection of Human Research Subjects and will maintain up to date certification throughout the study period.  
 
Human Subject Involvement and Characteristics.   
Caregiver involvement . This study will enroll 40 head and neck cancer (HNC) caregivers recruited from 
the outpatient radiation clinic s at the Co mprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University 
(CCCWFU)  and the Lexington Medical Center  or by [CONTACT_2319] . Caregivers will be recruited before or at the 
start of patient RT and participation will end 6 weeks after  patients complete RT. Caregivers will 
participate in either an intervention group that provides psycho- education and teach stress management 
skills during the patient’s radiotherapy (RT) treatment  or a waitlist control group who will receive the 
intervention at the end of the study, without interventionist support . The intervention (or kit) includes an 
introduction to the kit with a DVD, a binder including eight workbook modules offered in hard copy, and 
a CD with audio instructions to facilitate progressive muscle relaxation ( PMR ) training (included in 
module 8). An interventionist will meet with caregivers weekly for approximately 10- 30 min. Caregivers 
will complete assessments at the start of the patient’s RT (T1) , at the conclusion of RT (T2) , and [ADDRESS_259692]-RT (T3) . All quantitative data will be in the form of self -report and qualitative data (intervention 
group only) will be collected via semi -structured interviews. All assessments will take place while at the 
RT clinic , by [CONTACT_215937], by [CONTACT_2319],  or by [CONTACT_648].  
Patient involvement . Patient participation  is optional and only includes consent to abstract clinical  
information from his or her medical file  or self -report this information. We will abstract clinical 
information from a patient’s medical file if the patient is receiving radiation treatment at WFBMC. 
Patients who decide to receive radiation treatment outside of WFBMC  may have incomplete clinical 
information in their WFBMC medical file. In these cases, patients will be asked to self -report any 
information collected in the Patient Clinical Information Form that is not available in their WFBMC medical file. Patient -reported and caregiver -reported clinical data forms will be abbreviated versions of 
the medical chart review collection form  and only be collected at T1 to reduce participant burden. Further, 
it is unlikely that participants will be able to report on some of the clinical items we collect from the medical chart review. We will not collect self -report data from WFBMC patients during the proposed 
study . No patients will participate in the intervention.  
 
 
Subject Recruitment Methods  
Participants will be recruited from the outpatient radiation clinic s at the Comprehensive C ancer Center of 
Wake Forest University (CCCWFU)  and the Lexington Medical Center , or by [CONTACT_2319] . Eligible patients will 
be identified through referral from the treating radiation oncologist and mailed a recruitment package for 
themselves and  their primary inf ormal caregiver (person providing the majority of unpaid care) before RT 
begins. For potential participants  who have been identified before a clinic visit, the participants may be 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 10 contact[CONTACT_426] a member of the study team to introduce the study and, if agreeable, the study team member 
will confirm with the patient that they  will be present during their upcoming  clinic visit to discuss the 
study and consent the participant(s) . The study team will reach out to the patients' treatment team to 
inform them th at they will approach the potential patient during their visit.  
A study team member may also  make contact [CONTACT_10974] -caregiver dyads when presenting for the 
patient’s simulation appointment , treatment consultation , or at the start of patient RT  to determ ine 
willingness to participate.  Potential participants who are identified during treatment consultation, but 
decide to receive treatment outside of WFBMC  are still eligible to participate.  If the primary informal 
caregiver is not present with the patient a t the appointment, we will ask patients for permission to contact 
[CONTACT_215938]. A waiver of  signed informed  consent has been obtained in order to screen 
these participants (caregivers) . At this time the study team member will confirm eligibility criteria with 
the participant. Study staff may check in caregiver medical records if accessible to confirm eligibility for 
the saliva portion of the study. Patient participation  is optional, and only includes consent to abstract 
demographic and clinical  information from his or her medical file. If the patient refuses to participat e in 
the study, but the  caregiver is still interested , he/she can still  participate without patient consent. 
Caregivers will then be asked to report patient  clinical  information that is typi[INVESTIGATOR_215920]’s medical record  as part of the Patient Clinical Information Form . Caregivers will receive a $[ADDRESS_259693] at the completion of T1, T2 and T 3 assessments ($ 60 in gift cards total).   
Caregivers who do  not plan to attend visits in person may provide consent through a mailed informed 
consent form.  The study team will contact [CONTACT_2299] (caregiver) over the phone to review the 
Informed Consent Form.  Any questions about the study will be answered so that the potential subject is 
fully aware of what the study entails.  The study team member will mail or email the Informed Consent 
Form to the participant and the participant will be asked to print, sign, date and mail back the Informed 
Consent Form. Onc e the signed Informed Consent Form is received by [CONTACT_3476], the study member 
that consented the participant over the phone will print, sign and date the consent form. A copy of the 
completed Informed Consent Form will be mailed or emailed back to the  participant. No study procedures 
will take place until both the participant and study team member sign and date the consent form.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria.  Caregivers  will be eligible if they are: (1) providing the majority of the 
informal (unpaid) care during RT for a patient meeting the below criteria, and ( 2) >18 years of age.  
Caregivers will be excluded if they: (1) have a current cancer diagnosis, (2) cannot read/ communicate in 
English , (3) Caregivers who have  an endocrine disorder (e.g., diab etes and thyroid disorders), or are  
currently taking a steroid -based medication  are excluded from the saliva collection portion of this study . 
Patient criteria:  (1) have new or recurrent AJCC stage I -IV squamous cell carcinoma of the upper 
aerodigestive tract (including lip/oral cavity, nasopharnyx, salivary gland, oropharynx, hypopharynx, paranasal sinus, and larynx cancers), (2) have planned external beam radio therapy (+/ - chemotherapy) for 
6-7 weeks, (3) > 18 years of age , and (4) has an informal (unpaid) caregiver during RT . Patients will be 
excluded if they:  ( 1) cannot read/ communicate in English.  
Sources of Materials  
Sources of Research Material.  Data for this study will be collected from self -report surveys, qualitative 
interviews, participant self -collected salivary cortisol samples (for eligible caregivers only), and patient 
and caregiver medical chart review. Study investigators will have access to iden tifiable private 
information on participants, but it will be restricted to necessary data only. Data will be managed in a password protected data system for data entry and management. Access will be limited to study 
personnel.  
Use of Data. Data will be restricted to research purposes only.  
HIPAA Guidelines. Participant data will be protected through the use of ID numbers, in accordance with 
HIPAA guidelines. No individual data or participant identifiers will be reported, and this will be 
emphasized to parti cipants.  
Protocol version: 1.4.[ADDRESS_259694] their 
medical care.  
 
 
Potential Risks   
This study poses no more than minimal risks to participants. Caregivers may experie nce emotional 
discomfort when completing psychological instruments (copi[INVESTIGATOR_215921] -efficacy, distress, 
burden, quality of life), but this is not expected to be greater than that encountered during routine 
psychological examination. Caregivers may potentially experience discomfort when completing 
workbook activities; however, the ultimate goal of these activities is to reduce negative psychological effects associated with providing care. The primary risk to all participants is loss of privacy and we will 
take appropriate steps (see confidentiality and privacy ) to prevent this.  
Likelihood of Risks . Risks associated with this study are unlikely.  
Minimizing Risks.  All study staff will be trained to interview in a sensitive manner. We will explain to 
participants that they do not have to complete any assessments that they do not wish to complete and that 
they may withdraw from participation at any time. Furthermore, caregivers’ participation in the 
intervention is preference based, so they can opt out of modules. Caregiver psychological distress (anxiety and depression) data will be reviewed immediately and if levels are high, we will provide caregivers with 
contact [CONTACT_215939]. [CONTACT_215942] has 
training in clinical psychology and will assist with this process when necessary. All investigators will 
maintain current institutional protection of human subject s credentials.  
Confidentiality and Privacy 
Confidentiality will be protected by [CONTACT_117689], minimizing to the fullest extent possible the collection of any information that could directly identify 
subjects,  and maintaining  all study information in a secure manner .  To help ensure subject privacy and 
confidentiality, only a unique study identifier will appear on the data collection form.  Any collected 
patient/caregiver identifying information corresponding t o the unique study identifier will be maintained 
on a linkage file, store separately from the data.  The linkage file  will be kept secure, with access limited 
to designated study personnel.  Following data collection subject identifying information will be  
destroyed  three ye ars after closure of the study , consistent with data validation and study design, 
producing an anonymous analytical data set.  Data access will be limited to study staff.  Data and records 
will be kept locked and secure d, with any computer data password protected.  No reference to any 
individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study. 
Caregivers will be offered a private room away from the patient to complete surveys and will  also have 
the option to complete surveys by [CONTACT_6292] a study researcher. All interviews and sessions with the study interventionist will be completed away from the patient in a private room or by [CONTACT_648], if necessary. 
Use of study i -Pads does not need to occur in a private room; caregivers may choose to use the devices 
when patients are receiving treatment.  
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research. Caregivers may experience improvements in self -efficacy 
(in copi[INVESTIGATOR_215922] e muscle relaxation) psychological distress, burden, and 
QOL when participating in the intervention.  
Why Risks are Reasonable in Relation to Benefits. The proposed intervention is highly unlikely to 
pose risks to participants. The minimal risk is outweighe d by [CONTACT_215940].  
Protocol version: 1.4.[ADDRESS_259695] in monitoring safety of study participants. Safety events related to this research 
study are very unlikely to occur ; however, any unanticipated problems or serious and unexpected adverse 
events (Grade 4 or Grade 5) will be promptly reported by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_215923] .
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 13 References  
 
1. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts & figures . 2016  Retrieved March 25, 2015]; 
Available from: Available from: 
http://www.can cer.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/cancerfactsfigures2015/ . 
2. Humphris, G.M. and G. Ozakinci, Psychological responses and support needs of patients following head and neck cancer. Int J Surg, 2006. 4(1): p. 37- 44. 
3. Network, N.C.C. NCCN clinical prac tice guidlines in oncology: Head and neck cancers 
(version 2.2014) . 2014  Retrieved September 10, 2015]; Available from: Available from: 
http://www.nccn.org/
. 
4. Goldstein, N.E., et al., Factors associated with caregive r burden among caregivers of 
terminally ill patients with cancer.  J Palliat Care, 2004. 20(1): p. 38- 43. 
5. Bjordal, K., et al., Quality of life in head and neck cancer patients: validation of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire -H&N35. J Clin Oncol, 1999. 17(3): p. 1008- 19. 
6. Carnaby -Mann, G., M. Crary, and R. Amdur, "Pharyngocise": randomized controlled 
trial of preventative exercises to maintain muscle structure and swallowing function during head- and-neck chemoradiotherapy. International Journal of Radiation Oncology 
Biology Physics, 2012. 83 . 
7. Dirix, P., et al., The influence of xerostomia after radiotherapy on quality of life: results of a questionnaire in head and neck cancer. Support Care Cancer, 2008. 16 (2): p. 171- 9. 
8. Epstein, J.B., et al., Neuropathic and nociceptive pain in head and neck cancer patients receiving radiation therapy. Head Neck Oncol, 2009. 1: p. 26. 
9. Locher, J.L., et al., Disruptions in the organization of meal preparation and consumption among older cancer patients and their family caregivers. Psychooncology, 2010. 19(9): p. 967- 74. 
10. Penner, J.L., Psychosocial care of patients with head and neck cancer. Semin Oncol Nurs, 2009. 25(3): p. 231 -41. 
11. Blum, K. and D.W. Sherman, Understanding the experience of caregivers: a focus on 
transitions. Semin Oncol Nurs, 2010. 26(4): p. 243- 58. 
12. Schubart, J.R., M.B. Kinzie, and E. Farace, Caring for the brain tumor patient: family caregiver burden and unmet nee ds. Neuro Oncol, 2008. 10(1): p. 61- 72. 
13. Lebel, S. and G.M. Devins, Stigma in cancer patients whose behavior may have contributed to their disease. Future Oncol, 2008. 4 (5): p. 717- 33. 
14. Zabora, J., et al., The prevalence of psychological distress by [CONTACT_215399].  
Psychooncology, 2001. 10 (1): p. 19- 28. 
15. Chen, S.C., et al., Support needs of patients with oral cancer and burden to their family caregivers.  Cancer nursing, 2009. 32(6): p. 473- 81. 
16. National Alliance for Caregiving and AARP. Caregiving in the U.S. 2015  Accessed Septmber 15, 2015]; Available from: Available from: 
http://www.caregiving.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/05/2015_CaregivingintheUS_Final -Report -June-4_WEB.pdf . 
17. Li, Q. and A.Y. Loke, The positive aspects of caregiving for cancer patients: a critical review of the literature and directions for future research. Psychooncology, 2013. 22(11): p. 2399- 407. 
18. Northouse, L., et al., Psychosocial care for family caregivers of patients with cancer. J Clin Oncol, 2012. 30(11): p. 1227- 34. 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 14 19. Stenberg, U., C.M. Ruland, and C. Miaskowski, Review of the literature on the effects of 
caring for a patient with cancer. Psychooncology, 2010. 19(10): p. 1013- 25. 
20. Carter, P.A. and B.L. Chang, Sleep and depression in cancer caregivers. Cancer Nurs, 2000. 23(6): p. 410- 5. 
21. Drabe, N., et al., Psychiatric morbidity and quality of life in wives of men with long- term 
head and neck cancer. Psychooncology, 2008. 17(2): p. 199- 204. 
22. Lee, L.Y., et al., Postradiation trismus and its impact on quality of life in patients with 
head and neck cancer. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol, 2015. 119(2): p. 187-95. 
23. Hodges, L.J. and G.M. Humphris, Fear of recurrence and psychological distress in head 
and neck cancer patients and their carers. Psychooncology, 2009. 18 (8): p. 841- 8. 
24. Longacre, M.L., et al., Psychological functioning of caregivers for head and neck cancer patients.  Oral Oncol, 2012. 48(1): p. 18- 25. 
25. Nightingale, C.L., L. Lagorio, and G. Carnaby, A prospective pi[INVESTIGATOR_215924] -caregiver dyads. J Psychosoc Oncol, 2014. 
32(5): p. 477- 92. 
26. Baghi, M., e t al., Usefulness of MRI volumetric evaluation in patients with squamous cell 
cancer of the head and neck treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Head Neck, 2007. 29(2): p. 104- 8. 
27. Chang, C.W., et al., Lyophilized particles and ethanolic extracts of Antr odia cinnamomea 
mycelia suppress the tumorigenicity of head and neck cancer cells in vivo. Biomedicine 
(Taipei), 2014. 4: p. 26.  
28. Richardson, A.E., R. Morton, and E. Broadbent, Psychological support needs of patients 
with head and neck cancer and their caregivers: A qualitative study. Psychol Health, 2015: p. 1- 18. 
29. Meyer, A., et al., Psychological distress and need for psycho- oncological support in 
spouses of total laryngectomised cancer patients -results for the first 3 years after 
surgery.  Support C are Cancer, 2015. 23(5): p. 1331- 9. 
30. Nightingale, et al., Vulnerable characteristics and interest in wellness programs among head and neck cancer caregivers. Support Care Cancer, 2016.  
31. Sorensen, S., M. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051], and P. Duberstein, How effective are interventions with caregivers? An updated meta- analysis. Gerontologist, 2002. 42(3): p. 356- 72. 
32. Ostroff, J., et al., Interest in and barriers to participation in multiple family groups among head and neck cancer survivors and their primary family caregivers.  Fam 
Process, 2004. 43(2): p. 195- 208. 
33. Bodenheimer, T., et al., Patient self- management of chronic disease in primary care. 
JAMA, 2002. 288(19): p. 2469- 75. 
34. Lorig, K.R. and H. Holman, Self -management education: history, definition, outcomes, 
and mechanisms. Ann Behav Med, 2003. 26(1): p. 1- 7. 
35. Jacobsen, P.B., et al., Efficacy and costs of two forms of stress management training for cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol, 2002. 20(12): p. 2851- 62. 
36. Kim, A.R. and H.A. Park, Web-based Self -management Support Interventions for Cancer 
Survivors: A Systematic Review and Meta -analyses. Stud Health Technol Inform, 2015. 
216: p. 142- 7. 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 15 37. Bishop, M., et al., The LifeLines Cancer Caregiver Self -care Toolkit: Feasibility and 
prelimin ary outcomes in caregivers of blood and marrow transplant (BMT) survivors in 
American Psychosocial Oncology Society Annual Meeting2010: New Orleans, LA.  
38. Adam, E.K. and M. Kumari, Assessing salivary cortisol in large -scale, epi[INVESTIGATOR_215925].  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2009. 34 (10): p. 1423- 36. 
39. Murphy, S.E., et al., Salivary cortisol response to infant distress in pregnant women with 
depressive symptoms.  Arch Womens Ment Health, 2015. 18(2): p. 247- 53. 
40. Schrepf, A., et al., Cortisol and infl ammatory processes in ovarian cancer patients 
following primary treatment: relationships with depression, fatigue, and disability. Brain Behav Immun, 2013. [ADDRESS_259696] : p. S126- 34. 
41. Stoppelbein, L. and L. Greening, A longitudinal study of the role of corti sol in 
posttraumatic stress disorder symptom clusters.  Anxiety Stress Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 2015. 28(1): p. 
17-30. 
42. Vadiraja, H.S., et al., Effects of a yoga program on cortisol rhythm and mood states in early breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy: a randomized controlled trial.  Integr Cancer Ther, 2009. 8(1): p. 37- 46. 
43. Cruess, D.G., et al., Cognitive -behavioral stress management reduces serum cortisol by 
[CONTACT_215941]. Psychosom  Med, 2000. 62 (3): p. 304- 8. 
44. Nickel, C., et al., Men with chronic occupational stress benefit from behavioural/psycho-educational group training: a randomized, prospective, controlled trial. Psychol Med, 2007. 37(8): p. 1141- 9. 
45. Bernstein, D.A. and T.D. Borkovec, Progressive Relaxation Training.1973, Champaign, 
IL: Research Press.  
46. Beck, J.S., Cognitive behavioral therapy: Basics and beyond. 2nd Ed. ed2011, [LOCATION_001]: NY: The Guilford Press. 
47. Merluzzi, T.V., et al., Assessment of self -efficacy for caregiving: the critical role of self-
care in caregiver stress and burden. Palliat Support Care, 2011. 9(1): p. 15- 24. 
48. Radloff, L.S., The CES -D scale: A self report depression scale for research in the 
general population. Applied Psychological Measurements, 1977. 1: p. 385- 401. 
49. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_3708], P.A., et al., Item banks for measuring emotional distress from the Patient -
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS®): depression, anxiety, and anger. Assessment, 2011. 18(3): p. 263- 83. 
50. Given, C.W., et al., The caregiver reaction assessment (CRA) for caregivers to persons with chronic physical and mental impairments. Res Nurs Health, 1992. 15(4): p. 271- 83. 
51. Deeken, J.F., et al., Care for the caregivers: a review  of self- report instruments 
developed to measure the burden, needs, and quality of life of informal caregivers. J Pain Symptom Manage, 2003. 26(4): p. 922- 53. 
52. Weitzner, M.A., et al., The Caregiver Quality of Life Index -Cancer (CQOLC) scale: 
development  and validation of an instrument to measure quality of life of the family 
caregiver of patients with cancer. Qual Life Res, 1999. 8(1-2): p. 55- 63. 
53. Sannes, T.S., et al., Intraindividual Cortisol Variability and Psychological Functioning in Caregivers o f Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Patients. Psychosom Med, 2016. 
78(2): p. 242- 7. 
 
  
 
Protocol version: 1.4.19 
Template updated 9.24.14 16 Appendices  
1.  Study Schema  
2.  Re cruitment letter  
3.  Study Flyer  
4a. Patient Data Abstraction F orm T1  
4b. Patient Data Abstraction Form T3  
5a. C aregiver surveys T1  
5b. Caregiver surveys T2  
5c. Caregiver surveys T3  
6.  Caregiver Saliva Collection Instructions  
7.  Semi -structured qualitative interview script for caregivers  
8.  Title Page for Workbook Binder  
9a. Inter vention workbook : Cancer Education  
9b. Int ervention workbook:  Using your Resources  
9c. Intervention workbook:  Muscle Relaxation  
9d. Intervention workbook:  Social Support  
9e. Intervention workbook:  Positive Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
9f. Intervention workbook:  Healthy Behaviors  
9g. Intervention workbook:  Time Management  
9h. Intervention workbook:  Communicating with Others  
10. Prepare to Care Kit Time Log  
11. Weekly Needs Assessment  
12. Intervention Procedure Manual  
13. Introduction Video  
14. Patient Decline Form  
15. Caregiver Decline Form  
16. Caregiver Wi thdrawal Form  
17. Text Message Language 
 
 