Protocol version  5 – April [ADDRESS_808253] Pressures  During Elective Laparoscopic Surgery  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Background  
The frequency of surgical procedures that can be performed laparoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_609638].  Surgical conditions in laparoscopic surgery are largely determined by [CONTACT_609645].  Neuromuscular blockade  (NMB)  is frequently utilized 
in laparoscopic procedures to improve surgical conditions1 by [CONTACT_609646] [ADDRESS_808254] pressures, postoperative 
pain, risk of CO 2 embolism, and hemodynamic disturbances15.  Low insufflation pressure s of < [ADDRESS_808255] been associated with fewer adverse effects than higher pressures (>15 mm Hg)7. 
Though  studie s have  shown that sur gical view under deep block is statis tically superior to  the view 
under a moderate NMB block  across a single insufflation p ressure  6,8-11,  the primary outcome in 
these studies was a subjective , [ADDRESS_808256] 
pressures in the deep vs. moderate block group will provide us with an objective indice to use in 
making the determination if one type of block is ‘superior’ to the other.  
Additionally, t he degree of neuromuscular block for optimal surgical procedures has been the 
focus of  debate and research for several years.   Firstly,  different muscle groups have different 
sensitivity to neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA). For example, though neuromuscular 
blockade is often measured at the adductor pollicis muscle in the thumb , the abd ominal muscles 
and diaphragm are less sensitive to NMBA.2,[ADDRESS_808257] argued that paralysis of the diaphragm and the abdomi nal wall muscles can only be 
Protocol version  5 – April [ADDRESS_808258] -tetanic count (PTC) of 1.[ADDRESS_808259] 1 -2 twitches  (if one uses the traditional drug, neostigmine, to antagonize  
paralysis which would not needed if we use the newly FDA approved drug, sugammadex) .  Thus, 
a deep block throughout the procedure carries the inherent risk of delaying extubation  if 
sugammadex is not available . 
The Table below shows known and theoretical ri sks/benefits related to deep vs medium NMB.  
Deep NMB  Medium NMB  
Literature supports  better operating 
conditions/view by [CONTACT_609647]/view by [CONTACT_609648][INVESTIGATOR_609639], there  is clearly equipoise with regard to the comparative effectiveness of deep vs medium  
NMB.  Therefore, w e wish to ascertain if a deep neuromuscular block will decrease the airway 
pressures in patients undergoing laparoscopic procedures compared to those und er a moderate 
block.  A reduction in airway pressures  may lead to a decrease in the complications associated 
with elevated airway pressures including hypoxemia, total static lung compliance, alveolar edema, 
and long term morbidity16.  Additionally, we wish to understand if time from administration of 
sugammadex to reversal is different between patients that have a moderate NMB as compared to 
a deep NMB.  
To test our hypotheses , we will conduct a two period cross -over study by [CONTACT_609649] g patients 
undergoing laparoscopic surgery into 2 different groups: group 1 in which patients will receive 
“deep neuromusc ular blockade” in the beginning  portion of the surgery followed by a period of 
“moderate blockade”, and group 2 in which patients will  receive “moderate neuromuscular 
blockade” in the beginning portion  of the surgery followed by a period of “deep  blockade ”.  The 
deep neuromuscular block will be defined as  post tetanic count of [ADDRESS_808260] pressures and lower abdominal 
insufflation pressures  in patients undergoing elective laparoscopic procedures.   
 
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 3 of 12 Objectiv es 
Primary Outcome:  Peak Airway Pressures   
Secondary outcomes:  
 Hemodynamics (blood pressure ( BP), Heart rate ( HR)) measured q15 min at the time of 
airway pressure measurement  
 Duration from administration of sugammadex (to be given at skin closure) to Train of Four  
(TOF ) ratio = 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 and extubation  using the following guidelines (SpO2 >98% 
on 100% FiO2, R espi[INVESTIGATOR_697] (R R) <35, tidal volume ( TV) > 5 ml/kg , RR/Tidal Volume 
<100 ) 
 Recovery variables in the post -anesthesia care unit (respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen 
saturation, numerical pain rating,  nausea or vomiting, and level of sedation or alertness).  
 Adverse events (AE).  
 
Methods   
This will be a single -center,  prospective, randomized, two-period crossover  controlled trial.  
Approval from the local IRB will sought and patients will provide written  informed consent.  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
Inclusion criteria :  
The partic ipant must fulfill ALL the criteria listed below for entry . 
 Each participant must be willing and able to provide written informed consent for the study.  
 Each participant must be greater than or equal to  18 years of age.  
 Each participant must be ASA class I, II or III. 
 Each participant must be schedule d for elective laparoscopic surgery  (this includes robotic 
lapar oscopic s) . 
 Expected surgical duration of 60 min or longer  
Exclusion criteria :  
 Inability to give informed oral or written consent  
 Known or suspected neuromuscular disorders impairing neuromuscular function;  
 True a llergies as defined as hypotension, bronchospasm, or anaphylaxis to muscle 
relaxants, anestheti cs or opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]  
 A history (patient or family) of malignant hyperthermia  
 A contraindication for neostigmine administration  
 Renal insufficiency, as defined by [CONTACT_609650] 2.5 fold  the normal level  
 Body mass index >45 kg/m  
 Significant  respi[INVESTIGATOR_3765].  
 Planned postoperative mechanical ventilation  
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 4 of 12 Investigational plan and treatments  (see Figure 1)  
 
Subjects will  be randomly assigned to one of two study groups  using a random number generator  
and sealed envelope technique :  
 
Group 1 DM: After induction and intubation, the patient will be maintained in a “deep” (post -
tetanic count of zero  to two) neuromuscular block (NMB) .  Deep NMB will be obtained with an 
intubating dose of rocuronium of 0.5 mg/kg  or as per clinical team’s discretion . After surgical 
incision is made, the abdomen is insufflated, trocars are inserted , and prior to the beginning of the 
actual laparoscopic procedure, collection of data for “deep ” NMB period will begin. 
Neuromuscular blockade level will be maintained and a djusted throughout the course of surgery 
using intravenous bolus doses of rocuronium. Dosing of rocuronium will be determined by [CONTACT_109396].  Only the clinical team will administer any medications or fluids to patients enrolled 
in the study (no rese arch team members will be administering drug or fluid). The surgeon will 
inform the study team member  of the  first Surgical Rating Scale ( SRS) score for his /her view , and 
simultaneously, the first peak airway pressure and related variables will be  collected  (T0). For the 
next 20 minutes of surgery  during which  a “deep” NMB is being maintained,  peak airway pressure , 
heart rate, and blood pressure  will be collected every minute by [CONTACT_118734] (as per the  
anesthesia machine’s readings ), and the surgeon will provide the SRS score every 5 minutes.  
To minimize any type of carry -over effects, a fter the completion of the deep NMB 20 minute 
period , a “transition period” will begin  (T1).     
 
Upon successful acclimation to a “moderate” NMB, data collection may begin again  (T2): the 
surgeon will again provide the SRS score  simultaneously  with the commencement of collection 
for peak airway pressure and related values.  For the next 20 minutes of surgery during which a 
“moderate” NMB is maintained, peak airway pressure measurements (as well as other relevant 
secondary outcome measurements) will be collected every minute by [CONTACT_609651]’s readings and the surgeon will provide the SRS score every 5 
minutes.  After 20 minutes  (T3), the patient will remain at the “moderate ” NMB for the duration 
of the surgery  unless a change in the depth of blockade is requested by [CONTACT_11065].  Should such a 
request be made, this will be documented in the data collection (obtained from anesthesia record) 
along with the depth of blockade that the patient was switched to. By [CONTACT_185475] n closure, the patient’s 
NMB will be returned to “moderate.”        
 
Group 2  MD:  After induction and intubation, the patient will be maintained in a “moderate” 
(one or two twitches) neuromuscular block (NMB). Moderate NMB will be obtained with 
intubating dose of rocuronium of 0.5 mg/kg or as per clinical team’s discretion . After surgical  
incision is made, the abdomen is insufflated, trocars are inserted and prior to the beginning of the 
actual laparoscopic procedure, collection of data for “moderate” NMB period will begin. 
Neuromuscular blockade level will be maintained and adjusted throughout the course of  surgery 
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 5 of 12 using intravenous bolus doses of rocuronium. Dosing of rocuronium will be determined by [CONTACT_109396].  Only the clinical team will administer any medications or fluids to patients enrolled 
in the study (no research team members will be admini stering drug or fluid). The surgeon will 
inform the study team member of the first SRS score for his /her view , and simultaneously,   the 
initial peak airway pressure and related values are collected (T 0).  For the next 20 minutes of 
surgery (during which a  “moderate” NMB is being maintained), peak airway pressure 
measurements , heart rate, and blood pressure  will be collected every minute by [CONTACT_609652]’s readings , and the surgeon will provide the SRS 
score ever y 5 minutes.  
 
To minimize any type of carry -over effects,  after completion of the moderate NMB 20 minute 
period , a “transition period” will begin  (T1).  During this “transition period” additional IV bolus 
doses of rocuronium will be administered to the patient to achieve “deep” neuromuscular blockade.  
Upon successful acclimation to a “deep ” NMB, data collection may begin again  (T2): the surgeon 
will again provide the SRS score  simultaneously with the commencement of collection for  peak 
airway pressure and related values.  For the next 20 minutes of surgery (during which a “ deep ” 
NMB is maintained), peak airway pressure measurements (as well as other relevant secondary 
outcome measurements) will be collected every minute by [CONTACT_609653]’s readings , and the surgeon will provide the SRS score every 5 minutes.  
After 20 minutes  (T3), the patient ’s “deep” NMB will be maintained for the duration of the surgery 
unless a change in the depth of blockade is requested by [CONTACT_11065].  Should such a request be 
made, this will be documented in the data collection (obtained from the anesthesia record) along 
with the dep th of blockade that the patient was switched to.  By [CONTACT_609654], the patient’s depth 
will be returned to “deep.”        
 
(Both Group 1 and Group 2): At skin closure, subjects in both groups will be reversed with 
sugammadex 4 mg/kg or at the discretion o f the clinical team (T4). Patients will be extubated when 
the TOF ratio becomes 0.9 or higher (T5).  Time from administration of sugammadex to extubation 
will be recorded.  
 
In the recovery room (T6), the following variables will be measured by [CONTACT_69759] [ADDRESS_808261] 1 hour: respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen saturation, numerical pain rating 
(on a scale from 0, no pain, to 10, most severe pain imaginable), occurrence o f nausea or vomiting, 
and level of sedation or alertness. Additionally, the patient’s maximum inspi[INVESTIGATOR_609640] 30 minutes after arrival in the PACU via the use of an incentive spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007]. After one 
hour, all measurements will be complete (T7).  
Intraoperative and postoperative data will be collected by a research coordinator who is not blinded 
to the patient’s randomization. The research coordinator will not be directly involved with the 
patient’s care.  Rather, his/her sole purpose will be  to record the relevant data (airway pressures, 
abdominal insufflation pressures, PACU indices etc.) every [ADDRESS_808262] 
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 6 of 12 access to the electronically recorded patient data and will make their recordings directly from the 
anesthesia ma chine and/or the electronic anesthesia record. The research coordinator will also 
review data from the patient’s chart (anesthesia record, PACU record) after surgery to collect any 
additional information that may be necessary.   
 
Anesthe tic Technique  
 
Before administering any medications a baseline inspi[INVESTIGATOR_609641].  The type of anesthesia (general endotracheal) will be consistent 
with standard practice at Stony Brook and many other centers .  Induction of general anesthesia 
will be achieved by [CONTACT_609655]  [1 to 2.5 mg/kg  (lean body mass)]  
combined with bolus doses of fentanyl . Should a rapid sequence induction be desired based on the 
patient’s co -morbid conditions (reflux disease, etc.), succinylcholine or rocuronium may be used 
to obtain paralysis for intubation.  In the even t that succinylcholine is used, the patient will be 
allowed to obtain a full return of muscle strength (TOF 4/4), prior to administration of r ocuronium 
for further paralysis during the surgery.  Induction drugs and dosing may be modified at the 
discretion of the clinical anesthesia team. Maintenance of anesthesia will be achieved either 
through the use of volatile inhaled agents o r intravenous a nesthetic.  The choice of agents for 
maintenance will be based upon the discretion of the anesthesiologist.      
 
Neuromuscular monitoring  
 
Neuromuscular monitoring is standard of care for general endotracheal anesthesia. In this study 
neuromuscular function will be monitor ed using  the TOF -watch SX acceleromyograph (MSD BV, 
Haarlem, The Netherlands) at the adductor pollicis muscle. The thumb is attached to a flexible 
adaptor that applies a constant preload to the thumb. Neuromuscular sti mulation will be applied to 
the uln ar nerve via two pediatric elec trodes applied on the skin left and right of the  ulnar nerve at 
the distal fore arm. Before administration of any neuromuscular blocking agent, but after induction 
of general anesthesia, the following procedures will be conducted to standa rdize the neuromuscular 
monitor ing: (1) application of a tetanic ulnar nerve stimulation (50 Hz for 5 seconds); (2) 
calibration of the TOF -watch (CAL 2); (3) perform ance of a series of TOF measure ments, to 
ensure that the TOF ratio differs by [CONTACT_21316] 5% between measurements (if the TOF ratio differs 
by [CONTACT_726] 5%, the TOF -watch will be recalibrated). After these steps, the neuromuscular 
blocking agent according to protocol is administered. In patients requ iring rapid sequence 
induction, succinylcholine will be used for intubation and after return of 4/4 twitches, the 
aforementioned steps (steps 1 -3) will be conducted .  When, during the study, the number of 
measured twitches is zero, the PTC will be measured . A 50 Hz tetanic stimulation for 5 s is 
followed (after a [ADDRESS_808263]) by 15 single stimulations at 1 Hz. The number of twitches generated 
(that is, the PTC) corresponds with the degree of NMB, with a PTC of 1 to 2 reflecting a deep 
level of NMB.  
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 7 of 12 Ventilatio n 
 
The mode of ventilation for these cases will be standardized  consistent with routine practice .  All 
of the patients will receive volume -controlled ventilation at a tidal volume of 6 -8 ml/kg  (5 cm 
PEEP) .  The respi[INVESTIGATOR_609642] -tidal CO [ADDRESS_808264] Pressure s: Airway pr essures will be measured every [ADDRESS_808265] Pressure : In addition to the Peak airway pressure, the mean airway pressure will 
also be recorded every [ADDRESS_808266] 
pressures are being measured (“deep” vs. “moderate”) .  
 
Additional variables  
 
Additional variables will include duration of surgery, dr ug dosages (propofol, opio ids, muscle 
relaxant, reversal agent, glycopy rrolate , other agen ts used during anesthesia), and duration from 
reversal to extub ation.   Standard extubation criteria will be (SpO2 >9 8% on 100% FiO2 , RR <35, 
TV > 5 ml/kg) .  
 
Surgical rating  
 
During the procedure, the surgical condition will be  scored by [CONTACT_609656] a five -point SRS. 
To reduce variability in the surgical rating, all surgeries will be  performed by a core group of 
surgeon s who will receive training in how to report this information.   
The rating scale will be a five -point ordinal scale ranging from 1 = poor condition to 5 = optimal 
surgical conditions (see appendix, Table  1). The surgeon scores the c ondition at 15 -minute 
intervals. In case of a sudden change in surgical conditions, additional scores are obtained. If 
conditions are poor (score 1 or 2), muscle relaxation can be increased  (in effect converting patient 
from moderate to deep  according to methodology specified in this protocol  using the rocuronium 
infusion ). 
Protocol version  5 – April [ADDRESS_808267] 1 hour : respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen saturation, 
numerical pain rating (on a scale from 0, no pain, to 10, m ost severe pain imaginable), oc currence 
of nausea or vomiting, and level of sedation or alertness. The level of sedation/alertness will be 
assessed in the recovery roo m using the validated Leiden Ob server’s Assessment of 
Alertness/Sedation  (see appendix, table 2) .  Additionally, the patient’s maximum inspi[INVESTIGATOR_609643] [ADDRESS_808268] op day 1 (via phone or in person)17 
Other parameters  
 
Time to optimal ex tubation conditions from the mo ment of reversal (with optimal conditions 
defined as TOF 4 with ratio >90%), time in the post -anesthesia care unit, and drug consumption 
will be recorded.  
 
Safety evaluations  
 
Serious adverse events ( SAE) that occur during the study will be recorded in th e case report form. 
The AE record in the case report form includes the nature of the event (with onset date and time, 
end date and time), severity, treatment, outcome, and  the relationship to the treat ment given. All 
AEs that meet reporting criteria will b e reported to the med ical ethics committee and authorities, 
as required by [CONTACT_321769]/GRP guidelines.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Airway Pressure, Intra -abdominal pressure, Respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen saturation, blood 
pressure, heart rate  
In order to obtain the most accurate measurements possible, m ultiple readings  for the primary 
outcome ( peak airway pressure ) and secondary outcomes ( respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen 
saturation, blood pressure, and heartrate ) will be collected  once per minute for a maximum o f 20 
minute s per treatment period. S ummary measure s (i.e. descriptive statistics including mean ± 
standard deviation, median, and interquartile range) for each data element will be generated  for 
each patient, per each treatment period. Depending on the dis tribution  of the peak airway pressure 
variable  (as tested by [CONTACT_167672][INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilk tests), either a paired t -test or Wilcoxon Sign Rank test will be 
used to compare peak airway pressure between  the two treatment conditions.  Secondary outcomes 
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 9 of 12 (respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], arterial oxygen saturation, blood pressure, and heartrate ) will also be examined  
in a similar way  for differences between the two treatment groups.  P-values will be reported at the  
95% confidence level .   
Additionally,  linear mixed effects model s will be used  for the peak airway pressure outcome , with 
treatment group and time as fixed effects, and subject as random effect.  Group effect size and p -
value will be reported at the 95% confidence level.   
Duration from reversal to extubation  
Summary statistics (m ean ± standard deviation , median, IQR)  will be summarized for each  
treatment  condition . Two -sided t -test for independent groups will be used to compare the above 
variables between the two groups. P -values will be reported and 95% confidence in terval of group 
difference will also be reported. Wilcoxon rank sum test will be used instead in the rare event of 
non-normality.  
Surgical rating score s 
Summary statistics (mean ± standard deviation, median, IQR) will be computed for surgical rating 
scores  for each patient, per each treatment group. Wilcoxon sign rank tests will be used to compare 
surgical rating score between the two groups. P -values will be reported and 95% confidence 
interval of group difference will also be reported.  
Numerical pain rat ing, occurrence of nausea or vomiting, and level of sedation or alertness  
Numerical pain rating score and level of alertness will be presented as a graphical display of 
treatment group mean or median over each of the four time points in the recovery room. 
Contingency table ( condition *group *time) for nausea/vomiting will be presented.  GEE 
(Generalized estimating equation) will be used to compare the recovery room variables between 
the two treatment conditions with time and treatment group as covariates. Exchangeable 
correlation structure will be applied. The distribution of binary variable (occurrence of nausea or 
vomiting) is assumed to binomial, and the distribution of other ordinal variables are assumed to 
poison  or negative -binomi al based on the nature of data.    
Power analysis  
We will assume a normal distribution. Using the values found in the Casanova article,[ADDRESS_808269] deviation of 3.68 mmHg. Using an α=0.05, we will need around [ADDRESS_808270] approximately 81% power to detect a difference between 
moderate and deep peak airway pressures. We plan to enroll approximately 120 patients to account 
for drop outs.   
Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 10 of 12 Appendix  
 
Table 1 Surgical rating score  
 
1 Extremely poor conditions  
  
2 Poor conditions  
  
3 Acceptable conditions  
  
4 Good conditions  
  
5 Optimal conditions  
  
 
 
Table 2. Observer’s Assessment of Alertness and Sedation scale  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 11 of 12 Figure 1: Trial Timeline  
 
 
 

Protocol version  5 – April 5 , 2018   Page 12 of 12  
References  
 
1.    Lindekaer  AL, Halvor Springborg H, Istre O. Deep neuromuscular blockade leads to a larger  
intraabdominal volume during laparoscopy. J Vis Exp 2013; 76. doi:  
10.3791/[ZIP_CODE].    
2.    Dhonneur  G, Kirov K, Motamed C, Amathieu R, Kamoun W, Slavov V, Ndoko SK. Post -tetanic  count 
at adductor pollicis is  a better indicator of early diaphragmatic  
recovery than train -of-four count at corrugator supercilii. Br J Anaesth 2007;   99:376Ð9.  
3.    Kirov  K, Motamed C, Ndoko SK, Dhonneur G. TOF count at corrugator supercilii reßects  
abdominal muscles relaxation be tter than at adductor pollicis. Br J Anaesth  
2007; 98: 611Ð4.   
4.    Fuchs -Buder  T, Claudius C, Skovgaard LT, Eriksson LI, Mirakhur RK, Viby -Mogensen J. Good  
clinical research practice in pharmacodynamic studies of neuromuscular  blocking  
agents II: the Stockholm revision. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2007; 51: 789Ð808.  
5.    PU, Viby -Mogensen J, Bonsu AK, Tamilarasan A, Muchhal KK, Lambourne A.  
Relationship between posttetanic count and response to carinal stimulation  
during vecuronium -induced neuromuscular blockade. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1987;  
31: 593Ð6.   
6. Staehr -Rye AK, Rasmussen LS, Rosenberg J,  Juul P, Lindekaer AL,  Riber C, GŠtke MR. Surgical  space 
during  low-pressure laparoscopic  cholecystectomy with  deep versus moderate   
7. Dexter SP, Vucevic M et.  al. Hemodyanmic consequences of high and low pressure capnoperitoneum 
during laparoscopic cholecystectomy.  Surg Endoc 1999;12:376 -81 
8. Martini CH, Boon M. Evaluation of surgical conditions during laparoscpic surgery in patients with 
moderate vs. deep neuromuscular block. British Journal of Anaesthesia 112(3):498 -505 
9. Chen BZ, Tan L, Zhang L, Shang YC. Is muscle relaxant necessary in patients undergoing laparoscopic 
gynecological surgery with a ProSeal LMA? J Clin Anesth 2013; 25: 32Ð5  
10. Williams MT , Rice I, Ewen SP, Elliott SM. A comparison of the effect of two anaesthetic techniques 
on surgical conditions during gynaecological laparoscopy. Anaesthesia 2003; 58:574Ð8  
11. Dubois PE, Putz L, Jamart J, Marotta ML, Gourdin M, Donnez O. Deep neuromuscul ar block improves 
surgical conditions during laparoscopic hysterectomy: a randomised controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol 
2014; 31: 1Ð7  
12. Madesen MV, Staehr -Rye A.K.  Neuromuscular blockae for optimizing surgical conditions during 
abdominal and gynaecol ogical surgery:a systematic review. Acta Anaesthesilogica Scandinavica 2014.  
13. Bennett -Guerrero, E. et. Al. Patients with Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_609644],  
Moderate -Risk, Elective Surgery: Anesth Analg 1999;89:514 –9 
14. Groscott, MPW. Et. Al. Th e Postoperative Morbidity Survey was validated and used  
to describe morbidity after major surgery: Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 60 (2007) 919e928  
15. Smith, I. Anesthesia for Laparos copy with Emphasis on Outpatient Laparoscopy. Anesthesiology 
Clinics of North America Volume 19, Issue 1 (March 2001) Pgs [ADDRESS_808271] Pressures. The 
American Physiologic Society, 1990  
17. Myles, PS. et. Al. Development and psychometric testing  of a quality of recovery score after general 
anesthesia and surgery in adults: Anesth Analg. 1999 Jan;88(1):83 -90 
18. Casanova, J. et al. Deep versus moderate neuromuscular blockade during one lung ventilation in lung 
resection surgery.  Brazilian Journal of Anesthesiology.  In Press  