Study Protocol  
The proposed study will examine the question of whether phobic indi viduals will use a 
mobile phone in self-directed exposure ther apy.  A second question is whether phobic 
participants will find the use of a mobile phone as an acceptable means of conducting self-
directed exposure therapy.    
Accompanying these two research questions are additional specific hypotheses. The first 
hypothesis is that filmed exposure stimuli, availa ble on a mobile phone, will be associated with 
greater fear reduction in a self -directed exposure group relative to a control group.  The second 
hypothesis is that greater presence will be report ed with first-person perspective versus third-
person perspective.   
Method 
Experimental  Design 
 A three-group by [CONTACT_1192]-assessment mixed prosp ective design will be used in this study.  
Participants will be randomly assigned to  the order of each group and condition.  See Figure 1 
for flowchart of the proposed study.   
Participants 
G*Power 3, a power analysis program, deve loped by [CONTACT_47834], Erdfelder, Lang, and Buchner 
(2007), was used to determine sample si ze.  In order to achieve a power of φ = .[ADDRESS_50560] access to a mobile phone, and 
report discomfort with dental related care.  The participants will r eceive a compensation of 
$40.[ADDRESS_50561] rument no. S75-01 High Gain Bioamplifier/Coupler 
in order to filter and amplify el ectrocardiogram (ECG) data, which is used to obtain heart-rate.  
A Schmitt trigger apparatus, including a #551-12 Dual Retriggerable One-Shot and CI #S21-[ADDRESS_50562] three Ag/AgCI electrode s attached: one below the right clavicle, one 
below the left clavicle, and one on the left to rso (i.e., below the rib cage) as a ground.  The 
electrodes are equipped with adhesi ve ends and are filled with a NaCI .05 molar solution.  Beats 
per minute (bpm) are transformed from the recorded interbeat intervals.     
 Access to exposure materials.  The self-directed exposure will be provided to the 
participants via Qualtrics, which is an online website designed to conduct research.  Qualtrics is 
available to use on mobile devices , which will be utilized by [CONTACT_41314].  The participants 
will be given an ID and password to log into Qu altrics, and the assigned IDs will be used to 
differentiate the participants.  Before and after each exposure vi deo, the participants will rate 
distress on the Subjective Units of Distress Sc ale (SUDS; Wolpe, 1973).  Participants will 
complete the SUDS on their mobile phones that will be accessing the Qualtrics website.  The 
rating of SUDS and participants’ total time spen t on each webpage will be collected and stored 
on Qualtrics, which will be available for the resear cher to download at a later time.  Participants 
will receive daily text messages as a re minder to conduct the exposure session.   
Self-Report Measures  
 Demographic and general dental information questionnaire.  See appendix A for 
specific questions related to demographics and general dental information.  The questionnaire 
will consist of 20-items asking about the partic ipants’ age, sex, ethnicity, yearly income, 
education, employment status, tran sportation to the dentist, and dental related experiences.   
 Anxiety and Related Disorders Interview Schedule for DSM-5-Adult Version (ADIS-5).  The ADIS-5 is a structured interview conducted by [CONTACT_47835]-5 anxiety disorder, how ever, only the specific phobia section will be 
used in this study.  Previous versions (i.e., ADIS, ADIS-R, & ADIS-IV) have demonstrated good 
psychometric properties (Brown, Di Nardo, Lehm an, & Campbell, 2001; Di Nardo, Moras, 
Barlow, Rapee, & Brown, 1993).  For the cu rrent study, The ADIS-5 will be conducted by 
[CONTACT_47836], and be used in or der to describe the study’s sample.    
 Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS; Wolpe, 1973).  The SUDS is a visual analog 
scale in which the participants rate their anxiety/fear based on a range between 0 ( no 
anxiety/fear ) and 100 ( very severe anxiety/fear ).  Refer to appendix B.  A SUDS rating will be 
collected at the end of each video segment, re flecting maximum distress experienced during the 
viewing.  An average of maximum distress ratings will be calculated for all segments viewed at a 
single time.   
 Dental Fear Survey (DFS; Kleinkn echt, Klepac, & Alexander, 1973).  The DFS 
consists of [ADDRESS_50563] to dental  situations. Refer to 
appendix C.  The measure examines physiological and behavioral responses to specific dental circumstances and situations, and contains th ree subscales.  The subscales assess dental 
avoidance and anxiety, fear of dental stimuli/p rocedures, and arousal associated with dental 
treatment.  The DFS is rated on a 5-point Likert-type scale asse ssing how much of the responses 
(i.e., behavioral & physiological) oc cur in dental situations or the level of anxiety felt within the 
specific situations.  The DFS has a total score of 100, and higher scores reflecting more anxiety 
felt with dental care-related fear (Kleinknecht et al., 1973).   
 DFS scores reflect general dental care-related fear and anxiety.  The DFS has been 
widely utilized in behavioral den tistry research due to low demand on the participant in regard to 
time and cognitive requirements.  The specific situations allow for individually measuring the 
participants’ dental care-related fears.  Furthermore, the DFS ha s demonstrated reliability (test-
retest r = .88) and validity (α ’s ranging from 75 to 95; McGlynn, McNeil, Gallagher, & Vrana, 
1987; Smith & Moore, 1995; Heaton, Carlson, Smith, Baer, & Leeuw, 2007).   
 IGroup Presence Questionnaire  (IPQ; Schubert, Friedmann, & Regenbrecht, 2001).  
The IPQ is a 13-item questionnaire that  measures the s ubjective report of presence within a 
virtual environment. Refer to appendix D.  Th ree subscales make up the IPQ: spatial presence, 
involvement, and realness.  The IPQ is rated on a Likert-type scale ranging from 0 to 6, and 
contain a variety of anchors (e.g., fully disagree to fully agree, not at all to very much ).  
Psychometrics for the IPQ has been demonstrated to be sound, and the factor structure, across 
many samples, has been replicated (Schubert et al., 2001).      Abbreviated acceptability rating prof ile (AARP; Tarnowski & Simonian, 1992).  
The AARP consists of 8-items that assess acceptability of treatment.  Refer to appendix E.  Items 
are rated on a 6-point Likert -type scale ranging from 1 ( strongly disagree ) to 6 (strongly agree ).  
Good psychometrics have been demonstrated wi th the AARP (Cronbach’s alpha ranging from 
.93 to .97; Caporino & Karver, 2012; Tarnowski & Simonian, 1992).  The AARP was slightly 
modified to fit the current study.   
Dental Behavior Avoidance Test (DBAT).  In a laboratory furnished to exemplify a dental 
operatory, the DBAT will be conducted, consiste nt with prior research by [CONTACT_47837], McGlynn, 
Cassisi, and Vrana (1989).  The DBAT will cons ist of eight steps that simulate a dental 
examination, and each step will last up to 60 sec onds.  Escape from, or avoidance of, each step 
will be allowed, and will constitute a measure of  escape/avoidance (i.e., total number of seconds 
of escape/avoidance behavior).  A researcher will portray the dentist, and an undergraduate 
research assistant will portray the dental assistant.  A maximum-distress SUDS rating will be 
reported by [CONTACT_47838].  Throughout the procedure, 
participants’ heart rate will be measured using a computer that controls a Coulbourn Instrument to measure ECG data.  A four minute baseline will be recorded prior to th e start of the DBAT.  
Before initiating the next step in the procedure, there will be a [ADDRESS_50564] (e.g., a website that pr ovides services/goods).  Upon arrival  to the study, participants 
will be given a written informed consent fo rm and information on study procedures.  The 
researchers will discuss the proce ss of the study and what is expect ed of the participant.  The 
participants will be informed that they will receive $40.[ADDRESS_50565] in the study and completion of the ADIS-5, the participants 
will be randomly assigned to group (i.e., 2-week  waitlist or treatment group) by [CONTACT_47839], complete  the demographic questionnaire, conducted the 
DBAT, and answer the DFS.  The researchers will then provide a 15-minute demonstration on 
how to conduct self-directed expos ure therapy on the pa rticipant’s mobile phone , and how to rate 
SUDS.  The researchers will describe that watchi ng the exposure video three times per day is the 
ideal, one time per day is the suggested minimum, and viewing the exposure video five times per 
day is the suggested maximum.      
The video will display a typi[INVESTIGATOR_47833], including walking into the 
dental office, being called back for treatment by [CONTACT_47840], sitting in the dentist chair, 
and seeing the dentist perform a teeth cleaning.  The video will be 15-minutes in length, and be recorded by [CONTACT_47841]- and th ird-person perspective.  The actors in the video 
will be confederates and have knowledge about th e purpose of the video. The actors in the video 
are from the School of Dentistry at West Virginia University.  Participants in the treatm ent group will receive daily text  messages as a reminder to 
conduct the exposure.  Participants will be aske d to follow the link and sign in each day with 
their mobile phones.  Before each exposure video, the participants will rate expected distress on the SUDS.  Then the participants will be aske d to watch a video depic ting dental care-related 
phobic material.  After viewing the exposure vi deo, participants will rate actual distress 
experienced on the SUDS.  The participants will th en be prompted to watch the video again.  If 
the participant decides to view the video agai n, they will go through the same procedure of pre-
rating fear and anxiety, watching the video, a nd post-rating fear and anxiety.  Finally, the 
participants will be prompted to complete the procedure once more.  After completing the 
procedure three times, the participants will no longer be prompted, however, they have the ability to complete the procedure two more times if they so desire.   
 The participants in the treatme nt group will be randomly assigned
 by [CONTACT_47842] (i.e., first- or  third-person perspective).  After 1-week 
of first or third video perspective, the part icipants will be assessed by [CONTACT_47843].  Questions on the PQ and the DFS w ill be answered by [CONTACT_47844].  After the 
assessment, participants in the first-person perspective will be informed that the video content 
will change to third-person perspective.  Part icipants in the third-person condition will be 
informed that the video content will change to fi rst-person perspective.  At the end of the two 
weeks, participants will be asked to return  in person for a follow-up and to receive $40.[ADDRESS_50566] of the DBAT, completing the DFS, 
answering the PQ, and rating acceptability of us ing a mobile phone as a mean of self-directed 
exposure.   
 The control group will be assessed on the D FS after one week via telephone.  After the 
two weeks the participants in the control group w ill be asked to return for a follow-up assessment 
and receive $40.[ADDRESS_50567] of the same as the treatment 
group.  At the follow-up session, participants in  the control group will be offered the same 
treatment, for ethical reasons, as the experiment al group, however, the data will not be analyzed.  