 
[ADDRESS_84400]  S. Chang, MD  
 
  
 
Inova Medical Group – Sports Medicine  
 [ADDRESS_84401]., Suite 110, Fairfax, VA [ZIP_CODE]   
10/13/[ADDRESS_84402]  10 
10.  FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT  10 
11. OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS/COLLABORATORS  [ADDRESS_84403]  
  
Title:   The Effect of Blood Flow Restriction Therapy on Outcomes Following Anterior Cruciate 
Ligament Reconstruction  
  
Short Title :  Effect of BFR on ACL Reconstruction  
  
Rationale:  To investigate the effect of Blood Flow Restriction (BFR) exercises on the recovery process 
following an Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL) reconstruction.  
  
Objectives:   The main objective is to determine the impact of BFR therapy, in comparison to a standard 
rehabilitation protocol, on the functional outcomes of patients recovering from A CL reconstruction. The 
secondary objective is to determine if there are any adverse effects associated with BFR exercises.  
  
Study Type:   Prospective Randomized Control Trial (Level 1)  
  
Study Design:  Prospective Randomized Control Trial  
  
Study Methodology:  
Prospective data will be collected on 1 50 patients total, randomly divided into two groups based on the 
physical therapy regimen: (1) standard ACL rehabilitation (control group), and (2) standard A CL 
rehabilitation plus BFR therapy (BFR group). Patients in the BFR gr oup will begin BFR therapy post -
operative week 2, which will consist of the standard ACL rehabilitation exercises augmented with a 
pressure cuff during the session.  
 
Inclusion criteria w ill consist of patients 13 -55 years undergoing ACL reconstruction. Exclusion criteria 
include concomitant ligament reconstruction or concurrent procedures that require delayed weight bearing 
such as High Tibial Osteotomy (HTO), microfracture, etc. Addition al exclusion criteria include history of 
DVT/PE, immunocompromising conditions, history of coagulation disorders or current use of 
anticoagulants, and pregnancy.  
 
Outcome measures will include Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), Internati onal 
Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Evaluation Form (IKDC), Limb Symmetry Index 
(LSI), thigh circumference, and return to sport. Baseline scores will be obtained prior to surgery when 
applicable. Outcomes will be measured at designated time i ntervals for 2 year following surgery.  
  
Statistical Methodology : Data will be reviewed by a trained statistician.  Repeated -measures analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) will be used to evaluate all patient -reported outcome surveys at multiple time points. 
All st atistical tests will use two -tailed hypothesis testing with the statistical significance a priori set at 
alpha, α, is equal to 0.05  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 1.  INTRODUCTION  
1.1   Specific Aims  
It is hypothesized that blood flow restriction ( BFR ) therapy can help stimulate muscular development 
while recovering from surgery, producing a more rapid increase in function and an expedited return to 
playing sports.  
  
Our primary objective is to determine the effect BFR exercises on the functional outco mes of patients 
recovering from ACL reconstruction, compared to that of a control group using a standard rehabilitation 
protocol. The secondary objective is to determine if any adverse effects or complications are associated 
with BFR therapy.  
1.[ADDRESS_84404] Rehabilitation 
without BFR  
KOOS  Better  Worse  
IKDC  Better  Worse  
VAS  Better  Worse  
Limb Symmetry Index 
(LSI)  Better  Worse  
Thigh circumference  Better  Worse  
Return to sport  Better  Worse  
 
Null Hypothesis: There is no statistically significant difference in the functional outcomes of patients 
using a standard ACL rehabilitation protocol versus a standard ACL rehabilitation protocol augmented 
with BFR therapy.  
1.3  Background  and Significance  
Recovery from anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction involves early physical therapy to 
promote muscular development. Traditional training regimens are based on the concept that muscle 
growth is induced with high resistance exerc ises of at least 65 -70% of 1 -repetition maximum [1,4]. 
Achieving a high resistance level can be challenging in the early post -surgical patient who may be limited 
by [CONTACT_77368], muscle atrophy, diminished proprioception, and psychological factors. Increasing evid ence has 
suggested that Blood Flow Restriction (BFR) in resistance training, while transmitting a decreased load 
(25-50% of 1 -repetition maximum) across the surgical site, may provide an additional benefit of inducing 
muscular development similar to that o f high intensity exercises [2].  
 
Augmenting exercises with BFR involves an external pressure cuff applied to the proximal portion of the 
extremity, which is inflated to a pressure that restricts venous outflow while allowing arterial inflow to 
continue. Th is creates a pooling of oxygen poor blood that causes a buildup of lactic acid and protons, 
which stimulates ILGF -1, and other factors that lead to the release of human -growth hormone (HGH), and 
muscle hypertrophy. This allows patients to gain the hypertro phic effect of high resistance training, 
thoug h at a lower and safer resistance level .  Studies suggest that BFR stimulates muscular development 
through an increase in metabolic stress, muscle fiber recruitment, cell swelling, and protein synthesis [5 -
8]. 
 
 
[ADDRESS_84405] assessed the role of BFR 
therapy in postoperative rehabilitation in athletes. When utilizing BFR in isolation without strength 
training for patients after ACL reconstruction, an early study [7] found a decrease in disuse quad atrophy 
based on MRI cross -section area (CSA), but these results could not be re produced in a later study [2] with 
similar methodology. In another study of patients following ACL reconstruction, significantly greater 
increases in muscle strength and CSA were seen after 16 weeks in patients performing therapy exercises 
with BFR when co mpared to a non -BFR control group [3]. The purpose of this investigation is to assess 
the functional outcomes of patients using BFR therapy, compared to a control group, following ACL 
reconstruction.  
 
1.[ADDRESS_84406] SELECTION  
2.1 Study  Type 
This will be a single -center randomized control trial.  Patients will be recruited, consented, enrolled, and 
randomized before their ACL reconstruction surgery  
2.2   Setting/Location  
Surgery will be performed at an Inova facility. Physical therapy will be performed at an INOVA -affiliated 
physical therapy facili ty. Patients will be followed throughout their recovery in an outpatient setting at the 
Inova Orthopedics and Sports Medicine offices located [ADDRESS_84407] ruction  
3. Using an Inova affiliated physical therapy practice for rehabilitation  
2.8   Exclusion Criteria  
Patients with a diagnosed ACL reconstruction that chose not to undergo reconstruction  
 
1. Concomitant ligament reconstruction  
2. Concurrent procedures that require delayed weight bearing (ie: HTO, multiligament 
reconstruction, microfracture, etc)  
3. History of DVT/PE  
4. Immunocompromising conditions (ie: Rheumatoid arthritis, chronic steroid use, etc.)  
5. History of coagulation disorders or current use  of anticoagulants  
6. Completion of physical therapy at a location not affiliated with the study  
7. Pregnancy  
3.    STUDY METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
3.1   Study Treatment/Intervention  
Patients assigned to the intervention group will undergo BFR exercises in addition to the standard 
rehabilitation protocol. BFR therapy will be administered at an INOVA physical therapy location by a 
certified physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_77364]. Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_77365] a standardized ACL 
rehabilitation protocol (see appendix), which consists of [ADDRESS_84408] -operatively . 
3.2   Control Group  
Patients assigned to the control group will complete a standardized ACL rehabilitation protocol that does 
not include BFR therapy (see appendix). Similar to the treatment group, th e protocol will incorporate [ADDRESS_84409] 
at an INOVA physical therapy location.  
3.3   Randomization  
Upon enrollment in the study, before their surgery, patients  will be randomly assigned to the treatment 
group ( 75 subjects) or control group ( 75 subjects) using a random number generator.  
 
 
11 
 3.4   Endpoints/Outcomes Measurement  
3.4.[ADDRESS_84410] on the functional outcomes 
of patients recovering from ACL reconstruction. Functional outcome measures will include Knee 
Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), International Knee  Documentation Committee 
Subjective Knee Evaluation Form (IKDC), Limb Symmetry Index (LSI), knee extension strength 
using a dynamometer, and return to sport.  
3.4.2    Secondary Outcomes  
The secondary objective is  to determine if BFR exercises are associated  with adverse effects such 
as numbness, tourniquet -site pain, and bruising.  
3.5   Consent/Assent  
Patients will be assented with their parent(s)/guardian(s) consent. A witness will confirm the agreement to 
enroll and patients will always be required to be ac companied by [CONTACT_29382]/guardian at each visit, if 
they are under the age of 18. If the patient should turn 18 during the course of the study (13 -17 years old 
at enrollment), they will be re -consented as an adult at that time. Patients will not be coerced to participate 
in this research study and they will be informed that the quality or type of care received at Inova will not 
be affected by [CONTACT_77369].  
Indivi duals who are able to assent/consent  patients are Drs. Robin West , Edward Chang , Andrew Curley   
or Kendall Robinson . Drs. West and Chang are the participating surgeons on this study. Both are board 
certified Orthopaedic Surgeons who are fellowship -trained in Sports Medicine. Both surgeons are skilled 
in conducting clinical examinations, reviewing diagnostic imaging, performing surgery, and post -
operative management.   [CONTACT_77373] is a chief orthopaedic surgery resident at Georgetown University.  All 
of these i ndividuals are qualified to speak on the surgical and study procedures. All have completed the 
WIRB -Copernicus Group Academy (WCGA) research ethics training and have completed particular 
modules in obtaining informed consent.  
Separate HIPAA authorization will be obtain from each pa tient or parent(s)/guardian(s) of the patient. 
Parent(s)/guardian(s) will consent and provide HIPAA authorization, in addition to, getting the child’s 
assent. Adult patients will only need to provide HIPAA authorization as well a s consent for participation 
in the study.  
  
3.6 Data Collection  
The following data will be recorded:  
 
Demographics : 
• Gender  
• Age at time of surgery  
• BMI at time of surgery  
• Sports participation (if applicable):  
o Type of sport  
▪ ie: football, soccer, baseball, track, etc.  
o Level of competition  
▪ High school  
▪ Collegiate  
 
11 
 ▪ Professional  
▪ Recreational  
• Prior knee injuries:  
o Eg. ipsilateral/contralateral ACL tears, meniscal injuries, chondral injury  
• Smoking status  
o Non-smoker  
o Former smoker  
o Smoker (number of packs per  day) 
• Diabetes  
 
Injury Data:  
• Laterality of injury  
o Left 
o Right  
• Date of injury  
• Time from injury to surgery  
• Mechanism of injury:  
o Contact  
o Non-contact (ie: twisting)  
• Concomitant ligament injury observed on MRI:  
o Ligament  
▪ Medial Collateral Ligament (MCL)  
▪ Lateral Collateral Ligament and/or Posterolateral  corner (LCL/PLC)  
▪ Posterior Cruciate Ligament  (PCL)  
o Severity of injury  
▪ Grade 1: (minor sprain) high signal is seen medial (superficial) to the ligament, 
which looks normal  
▪ Grade 2: (severe sprain or partial tear) high signal is seen medial to the ligament, 
with high signal or partial disruption of the ligament  
▪ Grade 3: complete disruption of the ligament  
o Note: Concomitant ligament injury requiring reconstruction  is an exclusion criteria  
 
Intraoperativ e Data : 
 
• Type of ACL graft:  
o Bone -patellar tendon bone (BTB) autograft  
o Hamstring tendon (HS) autograft  
o Allograft  
• ACL graft fixation (interference screws, suspensory fixation)  
• Concomitant injuries observed intraoperatively  
o Meniscal tear  
▪ Medial vs. Lateral  
▪ Type of tear (longitudinal, radial, degenerative, bucket -handle)  
o Chondral injury  
▪ Location  
▪ Medial compartment  
▪ Lateral compartment  
▪ Patellofemoral joint  
▪ Severity (Outerbridge Classification)  
▪ Grade 0: normal  
▪ Grade I: cartilage with softening and swelling  
 
11 
 ▪ Grade II: partial -thickness defect with fissures on the surface that do not 
reach subchondral bone or exceed 1.5 cm in diameter  
▪ Grade III: fissuring to the level of subchondral bone in an area with a 
diameter more than 1.5 cm   
▪ Grade IV: exposed s ubchondral bone  
• Concomitant procedures performed:  
o Meniscectomy  
▪ Partial vs. Complete  
▪ Medial vs. Lateral  
o Meniscal repair  
o Chondroplasty  
o Microfracture  
o Note: Concomitant procedure requiring delayed weightbearing is an exclusion criteria  
 
Outcome Data:  
• Validate d patient reported outcomes:  
o Surveys:  
▪ Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS)  
▪ International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Evaluation Form 
(IKDC)  
▪ VAS  
o Completed at 3 month intervals  
▪ Baseline (prior to surgery)  
▪ 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months, 24 months  
• Limb Symmetry Index (LSI)  
o Consists of 4 assessments:  
▪ Single hop for distance, triple hop for distance, cross -over hop for distance, 6 
meter hop for time  
o Compare operative leg vs. non -operative leg  
o Completed at 3 month  intervals after surgery  
▪ 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months  
• Quadriceps muscle assessment  
o Thigh circumference  
o Compare operative leg vs. non -operative leg  
o Completed at 3 month intervals  
▪ Baseline (prior to surgery)  
▪ Just for thigh circumference  
▪ 3 months, 6 months, 9 months, 12 months  
• Return to sport  
o Defined as the date that patient is cleared for return to all sports without restriction by 
[CONTACT_77370].  
 
Adverse Effects:  
• Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -completed survey of BFR:  
o Administered during PT session  
o Assesses for bruising, tourniquet -site pain, numbness, compartment syndrome, 
rhabdomyolysis  
• Miscellaneous complications:  
o Ie: DVT/PE, reinjury, return to operating room, etc.  
o Will be recorde d during office visits  
  
 
11 
 4.    STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS/DATA ANALYSIS  
4.1   Sample Size  
We are currently aware of no studies that use KOOS, IKCD scores, limb symmetry index, or return to 
play for BFR therapy after ACL reconstruction.  However, studies [10, 11, 12, 13] of similar populations 
have found OOS, IKDC, LSI, RTP values  of 91.5, 87.5 , 79%, and 209 days, respectively.  Using those 
estimates, a power analysis was done and sample size of 150 provides enough power (80%, with an alpha 
of 0.05) to detect clinically significant changes in these values, while simultaneously accounting for any  
potential loss -to-follow -up or early withdrawal from the study.  
4.2   Method of Data Analysis  
Descriptive statistics including measures of location (mean, median, percentile) and spread (standard 
deviation, ranges) will be computed for continuous variable s. Frequency distributions will be computed 
for categorical data. Measures of association will be used to determine positive and negative predictors of 
functional outcomes and return to sport.  
4.[ADDRESS_84411]'s involvement in this research study will be stored in a locked file 
cabinet on the second floor of the Inova Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Group. The subject's 
identity of these records will be indicated by a case number  rather than by [CONTACT_2300], and the 
information linking theses case numbers with their identity will be kept separate from the 
research records. Only the researchers listed on the first page of this form and their staff will have 
access to a subject's research r ecords.  
 
Data will be collected in a standardized fashion by [CONTACT_77371]. No publication 
or reports will contain any identifying information about individual participants. PI, co -
investigators, and research staff will review medical rec ords, private office charts, and obtain new 
questionnaires from patients. The radiology report will be reviewed for exclusion criteria.  Only 
IRB-approved study members will have access to the data and study materials. Epic clinical 
information databases w ill be reviewed for information gathered from clinic visits and/or surgery.  
 
Data accuracy and protocol compliance will be assessed during standard Quality Control 
operations, to include compliance checks and regular data verification. Protocol deviations will be 
reported to the IRB as policy. Noncompliance will be reported to the IRB as standard.  
 
4.3.2    Records Retention  
Data will be stored as a dataset 5 years after completion of the study. Participation in this research 
involves the potential risk of a breach of confidentiality to stored health information. Inova tries to 
minimize those risks by (i) removing some direct identifiers from stored information (i.e., names, 
social security numbers, and medical record numbers); (ii) securing, in a separate l ocation, and 
limiting access to information that would identify patients; and (iii) limiting access to information 
stored to Inova investigators.  
  
All records related to a subject's involvement in this research study will be stored in a locked file 
cabine t on the second floor of the Inova Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Group. The subject's 
identity of these records will be indicated by a case number rather than by [CONTACT_2300], and the 
information linking these case numbers with their identity will be kept separa te from the research 
 
[ADDRESS_84412]'s research records.  
5.  HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTION (RISKS, BENEFITS, AND ALTERNATIVES)  
5.1   Risks 
Research Activity: Data collection  
Potential Risk:  A potential risk of an accidental breach of confidentiality.  
Patient confidentiality will be maintained at all times. All records will be assigned a case number. 
Information collected in this study will be stored in a locked file cabinet in a secure office and will be 
accessible only to the research staff. Subject will not be identified in any publications or presentations of 
the research results.  
 
Research Activity: Blood flow restriction therapy  
Potential Risks:  Potential risks include pain, bruising, numbness, damage to the surrounding structures, 
compartment syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, DVT/PE, and/or death.  
Patients will complete BFR therapy under the supervision of a certified physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_77366]. If the patient begins to develop symptoms consistent with the aforementioned 
potential risks, then the pressure cuff will be removed and the patient will be treated appropriately based 
on medical necessity. Of note, many of the se aforementioned potential risks are theoretical, as BFR has 
been investigated for safety concerns and has demonstrated no increased risks compared to that of 
traditional exercise programs [9].  
5.[ADDRESS_84413] will not be identified in any publications or 
presentations of the research results.  
 
All publicati ons and reports are based on aggregated data; no publications or reports will contain any 
identifying information about individual participants.  
6.  SUBJECT COMPENSATION  
6.[ADDRESS_84414] of care. There are no additional costs to participants.  
 
 
11 
 6.2   Payment  
Study subjects will not be compensated for the ir participation in this study.  
 
7.    ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Potential Adverse Event: Breach of Confidentiality.  
Patient confidentiality will be maintained at all times. All records will be assigned a case number. 
Information collected in this study will be stored in a locked file cabinet in a secure office and will be 
accessible only to th e research staff. Subject will not be identified in any publications or presentations of 
the research results.  
  
All adverse events (AEs) will be reported and logged per the IRC 11.[ADDRESS_84415] Operating Procedures manual . 
  
In the event of an AE, defined as “Any untoward medical occurrence (including a symptom/disease or an  
abnormal laboratory finding) during treatment with a pharmaceutical product in a patient or a human  
volunteer that does not necessarily have a relationship with the treatment being given,” the research  
coordinator will immediately document and report all applicable details to the IRB via the “Reportable  
Event” form, including start and end date (if applicable), severity, therapy provided, and rel ationship to  
protocol. If the AE/SAE occurs at the lead site, the “Internal AE/SAE” form will be completed. If the  
AE/SAE occurs at a site other than the lead site, that site will notify the lead site immediately with the  
aforementioned applicable details,  as well as follow their own institution’s protocol for AE reporting if  
applicable. The lead site coordinator will then submit the “External AE/SAE” form to the lead IRB.  
8.    FUNDING  
There will be no funding for this project.  
 
9.   CONFLICTS OF INTEREST  
There are no conflicts of interest reported by [CONTACT_77372].  
  
10.  FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT  
The data collection will be based at the Inova Orthopedics and Sports Medicine office located [ADDRESS_84416]., Suite 110, Fairfax, VA [ZIP_CODE] . Data will be entered into a secured Excel spreadsheet. 
Surgery will be performed at INOVA Fairfax Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77367]. Physical therapy 
will be performed at an INOVA -affiliated physical therapy facility using the BFR tourniquet and training 
equipment on the site.  
  
11.  OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS/COLLABORATORS  
There will be no consultants outside of the Inova network.  
 
12.  CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENTS  
There will be no outside contractual agreements inv olved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 13.  REFERENCES  
 
1. Hughes L, Paton B, Rosenblatt B, et al. Blood flow restriction training in clinical musculoskeletal 
rehabilitation: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Br J Sports Med. 2017;51:1003 –1011.  
2. Iversen E, Røstad V, Larmo A. Intermittent blood flow restriction does not reduce atrophy 
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. J Sport Health Sci 2016;5:115 –8.   
3. Ohta H, Kurosawa H, Ikeda H et al. Low -load resistance muscular training with moderate 
restriction of blood flow after anterior cruciate ligamen t reconstruction. Acta Orthop Scand 
2003;74(1):62 -68. 
4. Scott, BR, Loenneke JP, Slattery KM, et al. Blow Flow restricted exercise for athletes: A review 
of available evidence. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport . 2016;19:[ADDRESS_84417] Physiol 
2012;112(11):3915 -3920.  
6. Takarada S, Okita K, Suga T et al. Blood flow restriction exercise in sprin ters and endurance 
runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2012; 44(3):[ADDRESS_84418] Physiol 2000; 88(6):2097 -2106.  
8. Yasuda T, Brechue W, Fujita T. Muscle activation during low -intensity muscle contractions with 
restricted blood flow. J Sports Sci 2009; 27:479 -489.  
9. Loenneke JP, Wilson JM, Wilson GJ, et al. Potential safety issues with blood flow restriction 
training. Scan d J Med Sci Sports 2011;21:510 –8. 
10. Cathrine Aga,  MD, May Arna Risberg,  PT, PhD , Morten Wang Fagerland,  MSc, PhD , Steinar 
Johansen,  MD, Ingrid Trøan,  PT, MSc , Stig Heir,  MD, PhD , and Lars Engebretsen,  MD, PhD . No 
Difference in the KOOS Quality of Life Subsco re Between Anatomic Double -Bundle and 
Anatomic Single -Bundle Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction of the Knee: A Prospective 
Randomized Controlled Trial With 2 Years’ Follow -up. The American Journal of Sports 
Medicine 2018. [Epub ahead of print.]  
11. King, E. , Richter, C. , Franklyn ‐Miller, A. , Daniels, K. , Wadey, R. , Moran, R. and Strike, S. 
(2018), Whole body biomechanical differences between limbs exist 9 months after ACL 
reconstruction across jump/landing tasks. Scand J Med Sci Sports. Accepted  Author Manuscript. . 
doi:10.1111/sms.[ZIP_CODE]  
12. Saper, M., Pearce, S., Shung, J., Zondervan, R., Ostrander, R., & Andrews, J. R. . Outcomes and 
Return to Sport After Revision Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction in Adolescent 
Athletes.  Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine 2018 , 6(4). 
13. Neil K. Bakshi, Moin Khan, Fred T. Finney, Robby S. Sikka, and Asheesh  Bedi. Return to Play 
After Multiligament Knee Injuries in National Football League Athletes.  2018 Apr 
1:1941738118768812  