 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 Protocol Outline  
 
Protocol Title:  Self-Administered Hypnotherapy for Functional Dyspepsia  
Protocol Version:  4.0 
Protocol Date:  4/13/20 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_431269], PhD  
Research Team:  Sarah Kinsinger, PhD, Mukund Venu, MD, Olafur Palsson, PsyD  
(University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill)  
 
I. Abstract  
 
Functional dyspepsia (FD) is a very common health problem, affecting up to 20% of 
the world’s population, characterized by [CONTACT_431280] (GI) tract symptoms, 
including epi[INVESTIGATOR_50684], postpran dial fullness, and early satiety1.  These symptoms 
occur in the absence of any structural abnormalities2.  FD has significant economic 
impact due to financial cost related to h ealth care utilization as well as indirect cost 
associated with missing work and impaired work performance.  Patients with FD also 
report significant reductions in quality of life and increased rates of psychological 
distress3.  There are few effective treatment options for FD.  Medications typi[INVESTIGATOR_431270], prokinetic agents, or tricyclic antidepressants4.  
However, there is limited efficacy for thes e pharmacological treatments and current 
treatment approaches are considered unsatisfactory4,5.     
Psychological treatments have demonstrated good efficacy for functional GI disorders 
such as irri table bowel syndrome (IBS).  For example, gut -directed hypnotherapy has 
been studied extensively as a treatment for IBS with over 24 published trials, 10 of which 
are randomized controlled trials6. These studies consi stently demonstrate significant 
improvements in central IBS symptoms (abdominal pain, bowel habits) following a 
course of hypnotherapy6.  FD and IBS are thought to have overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_431271], 
including altered g ut motility, visceral hypersensitivity, and abnormal central processing 
of visceral signals.  Many of these underlying mechanisms in FD can potentially be 
targeted by [CONTACT_431281] -gut pathways.  For example, hypnosis has been 
shown to decrease ga stric emptying time in patients with dyspepsia.7   
To date there has only been one published trial of gut -directed hypnotherapy for 
functional dyspepsia, but with promising results8.  Calvert and colleagues found that 73% 
of patients in the hypnotherapy group had significant improvement in dyspeptic 
symptoms at long -term follow -up, compared to 34% of patients receiving supportive 
therapy plus a placebo pi[INVESTIGATOR_38847] 43% of patients rec eiving medical treatment.  
Additionally, patients in the hypnotherapy group had dramatic reductions in medication 
use and physician consultations at follow up.   
The goal of the current study is to develop and conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_431272] 
a self-administered gut -directed hypnotherapy intervention for treatment of FD, with the 
aim of assessing its potential as an inexpensive, easy -to-use and efficacious treatment for 
the disorder.   
 
 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 II. Background and Significance/Preliminary Studies  
 
Background an d Significance   
Both patients and providers are frustrated by [CONTACT_431282].  
This is a chronic condition and many patients continue to seek medical care for poorly 
managed symptoms, including multiple physician office visits and inv estigative 
procedures.  More effective treatment options are needed to reduce this health care 
burden.  Behavioral treatments (e.g., gut -directed hypnotherapy) are highly effective for 
other functional gastrointestinal disorders and have shown promise for FD.[ADDRESS_545569] been a few trials of very diverse forms of psychotherapy in FD w ith 
varying degree of reported success8-18; however, no treatment has had adequate testing 
and all of them involve a course of many visits to a highly specialized mental health 
professional which is expensive and not available in most places.  To date, one of the 
most successfu l and best designed trials of this kind has been Calvert et al.’s randomized 
controlled study of hypnotherapy for FD8.  This trial found significant improvements in 
FD symptoms and significant reductions in health -care utilization following a course of 
hypnotherapy with superior results compared to the two control groups and there was full 
maintenance of the treatment effect beyond one year follow -up.  These therapeutic effects 
demonstrate impressive potential for hypn osis as a therapy option in FD.  However, it is 
notable that the intervention tested by [CONTACT_431283]. consisted of a [ADDRESS_545570] involvement can be highly efficacious in 
improving GI symptoms19,20.  That form of delivery could make hypnotherapy a much 
more widely available treatment optio n if proven effective, as it could be delivered in a 
very inexpensive and easily disseminated form.  Our present study therefore aims to 
replicate the findings by [CONTACT_431283]. demonstrating that hypnosis treatment (HYP) can 
lead to clinically significant  improvements in dyspeptic symptoms, while testing it in an 
audio -recorded easy -to-use self -administered format.  
Patients are increasingly skeptical of long -term medication use for conditions such as 
FD due to concerns about risks and side -effects of medi cations like proton pump 
inhibitors.  A large number of patients with FGIDs are already using complementary and 
alternative medicine approaches21 and we suspect that patients will be receptive to a non -
pharmacolo gical treatment program that they can participate in from home.       
The results of the current study have the potential to significantly impact the clinical 
management of patients with FD.  Although there is strong scientific support for the role 
of inte rventions targeting brain -gut pathways and psychological factors in symptom 
severity for patients with FD, psychological treatments are not commonly recommended 
for this population.  Our study would provide further support for hypnotherapy as a 
behavioral treatment for this condition and our proposed administration of the treatment 
(self-administered via audio recordings) would increase the generalizability and 
accessibility of this treatment.  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545571].  For example, gut -directed 
hypnotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy are well established evidenc e-based 
treatments for IBS; however, these treatments are unavailable to many individuals.  
Barriers to accessing these treatments include a limited number of well -trained 
psychologists to offer these specialized treatments and the significant cost and tim e 
commitment required of patients.  Our study aims to address these barriers by [CONTACT_14659] a 
self-administered treatment.  Patients would administer the hypnotherapy treatment in 
their home by [CONTACT_431284], web -based audio recordings.  This methodology h as 
been used previously in hypnotherapy trials for IBS and pediatric abdominal pain with 
good results22,23.  If the self -administered home hypnosis treatment tested in this trial 
proves effica cious, this will reduce treatment cost and enable us to make it available 
nationwide to the many patients who live too far from a specialized center to be able to 
attend multiple therapi[INVESTIGATOR_431273].  This innovative delivery method 
will also have the potential to improve the care of large numbers of patients by 
[CONTACT_9851] a highly generalizable and inexpensive non -pharmacological treatment for 
this population.  
Additionally, our study is innovative in that we will test delivery of the tr eatment with a 
custom -designed easy -to-use secure online platform that can be used on practically any 
device and is designed to help motivate patients and direct them through the treatment 
course (an important consideration in self -administered treatment) by [CONTACT_431285].  
 
Preliminary Studies  
A published pi[INVESTIGATOR_431274] s by [CONTACT_3252] -investigator Palsson and his colleagues serves as a model for the 
hypnosis treatment in this FD trial19.  That study found that IBS patients who completed a 
seven -session self -administered audio home hypnosis  treatment course were twice as 
likely (53% vs 26%) to have a reduction in their gastrointestinal symptoms by [CONTACT_431286] [ADDRESS_545572] 
many similarities and a high degree of overlap (the  intervention tested in the prior 
hypnosis trial by [CONTACT_431283]., that showed high success in FD treatment, also utilized 
modified IBS hypnosis treatment for that purpose).  
 
 
III. Study Aims  
 
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_431275] a hypnothera py (HYP) treatment 
program for functional dyspepsia (FD) that can be self -administered using on -line audio 
recordings.  We hypothesize that patients will be receptive to the self -administered 
treatment design and willing to participate and complete the 12 -week treatment program.  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545573] that patients will experience a significant reduction in FD 
symptoms following the intervention.  Our specific aims include:  
 
Aim 1: Feasibility and Acceptability of Treatment  
The study will assess whether pa tients with FD will be willing to participate in the on -
line treatment program and the majority of patients enrolled in the study will complete 
the 12 week program, utilize the materials sufficiently, and report average to above 
average satisfaction with t reatment.  
 
Aim 2: Treatment Effectiveness  
The primary endpoint for Aim [ADDRESS_545574] - 
treatment score on psychological indices (e.g., anxiety) and disease -specific quality of 
life.   
 
IV. Administrative Organization  
 
All administrative activities related to the study will take place within the Division of 
Gastroenterology and Nutrition at Loyola University Medical Center (LUMC).  
Admi nistrative offices for the division are located in the Fahey Building on the LUMC 
campus where office furniture, file cabinets, and use of essential equipment (e.g., copi[INVESTIGATOR_3694], 
fax, phone, computer) will be provided.   
 
 
V. Study Design  
a. Experimental design of th e study:  
This is a non -randomized observational study designed to provide preliminary 
data on the feasibility and effectiveness of a self -administered HYP treatment 
for FD.   
 
b. Study population general description  
Eligible patients will be referred by [CONTACT_431287] a 
diagnosis of functional dyspepsia.   Additionally, any patients with functional 
dyspepsia referred by [CONTACT_431288]. Kinsinger's GI Beh avioral 
Medicine Service at LUMC will be made aware of the study.  
 
c. Sample size determination and power analyses  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 We will enroll 23  adults with FD from the Loyola University Medical Center 
outpatient gastroenterology practices, with the aim of  assessing feas ibility and 
acceptability of HYP treatment using on -line audio recordings.  Sample size 
was determined for aim 1 of the study.  Allowing for up to 20% drop -out and 
having at least 16 patients complete the study through the end of treatment 
(where the prima ry endpoint will be measured) will provide sufficient 
participant feedback on the web interface as well as the pi[INVESTIGATOR_431276] a future randomized controlled trial.    
 
 
d. Study outcomes/endpoints  
The primary endpoint for this study will be FD sym ptom scores.  Secondary 
endpoints will be disease -specific quality of life, psychological indices, and 
patient satisfaction.  
 
VI. Study Procedures  
a. Subject selection procedures : 
 
We will enroll 23  adults  with FD.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
(1) Diagnosis of functional dysp epsia by a gastroenterologist  
(2) Meeting ROME IV diagnostic criteria for functional dyspepsia  
(3) At least 18 yrs of age (no upper age limit)  
(4) Able to give informed consent  
(5) English speaking  
(6) Have daily personal access to the Internet via laptop or desktop 
computer,  tablet or a smartphone.  
Exclusion criteria  
(1) Concomitant organic gastrointestinal disease  
(2) Diagnosed or presenting with serious mental illness (e.g., 
eating disorder, schizophrenia, psychosis, obsessive -
compulsive disorder, post -traumatic stress disorder, or  a 
dissociative disorder)  
(3) Cognitive or language barriers that make completion of 
questionnaires difficult or limit understanding of a verbal 
intervention (hypnosis)  
i. Recruitment procedures  
1. Where will recruitment occur?  
Participants will be recruited from th e Loyola University 
Medical Center outpatient gastroenterology practices.  [CONTACT_431303], Director of Clinical Operations for the 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 Division of Gastroenterology will be actively recruiting 
patients in his clinics and will encourage our 
gastroenterology col leagues (15 gastroenterologists and 5 
mid-level providers) to refer patients to the study.   The 
research coordinator for the study will review patient charts 
in our division's outpatient gastroenterology practices to 
pre-screen for eligibility.  We will ob tain a waiver of 
consent for this process.  
We will also advertise the study on social media  (Loyola 
Medical Center twitter handle and facebook page)  and 
through the Loyola University student listserv .  We will 
obtain IRB approval for all advertisements.  
2. Where and when will consent be obtained?  
Consent will be obtained either at the patient's outpatient 
visit with their gastroenterologist or at  the time of the 
screening evaluation  visit with Dr. K insinger.  The research 
coordinator will recruit patients from  designated 
gastroenterology clinics and consent patients at those visits.  
If patients are referred for the study from other 
gastroenterology clinics that are not staffed by [CONTACT_10117], [CONTACT_431304] will obtain consent at the time 
of the sc reening visit.  The consent process will occur prior 
to beginning the screening evaluation.  During the COVID -
19 health crisis, all screening visits will be conducted 
electronically via telemedicine and consent will be obtained 
orally .  The study coordinato r will email participants a PDF 
copy of the consent form prior to their telehealth screening 
visit to review.  The study investigator ([CONTACT_431304]) will 
then review the consent form at the start of the video 
screening visit and ask the part icipant to sta te their consent 
verbally on the video in response to the following question: 
“Have you read the consent form and do you understand 
the procedure, risks, and benefits of  the research study and 
agree to participate ?”.  The study investigator will 
document the patient’s verbal  consent.  
 
 
3. Who will obtain consent?   [CONTACT_431304] or the research 
coordinator will obtain consent.  
4. What is the advertising plan, if applicable?  
a. Social media  (Loyola Medical Center twitter handle 
and facebook page ; [CONTACT_431304]'s LUMC  
webpage ) 
b. Loyola University student listservs  
c. Display brochures in gastroenterology outpatient 
clinics  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
  
5. What recruitment materials will be provided to the potential 
participant (brochures/information sheets/video 
presentation)?  
a. Website describing the study  
b. Brochures with study information  
c. Brief video conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Kinsinger describing 
the study  (see Appendix A  for a script of this video ; 
filming will be done after IRB approval is obtained ) 
d. We are in the process of developi[INVESTIGATOR_431277] .  
 
ii. Screening procedures  
1. What procedures are required for screening?  
 
Eligible participants referred by a Loyola 
Gastroenterologist will meet with [CONTACT_431304]  for a 
screening  evalu ation.  The purpose of this appointment is to 
determine appropriateness for behavioral treatment and 
provide education on FD, inform potential participants 
about the study and complete written or oral consent if they 
choose to participate and are eligible.   Patients that learn 
about the study from outside of Loyola will need to meet 
with a Gastroenterologist ([CONTACT_431305] , Co-I) to confirm 
diagnosis of functional dyspepsia prior to being enrolled in 
the study.  
 
[CONTACT_431304] has dedicated space within the Loyol a 
Outpatient Center for patient care that can be utilized for 
the screening evaluation  where patient privacy and 
confidentiality can be maintained.  
 
During the COVID -19 health crisis, the screening visit will 
be conducted electronically via one of the tel ehealth video 
platforms approved by [CONTACT_431289] (doxy.me, Doximity, Skype, 
FaceTime, or Zoom).  
 
Following this screening appointment, enrolled patient s 
will receive an email with information for accessing the o n-
line platform where they will complete pre -treatment 
assessment forms and access treatment materials.  
 
2. What is the screening schedule (number of visits, length of 
visits)?  Screening will involve a single , 1 hr appointment.  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
  
3. Which screening tests/procedu res are part of standard care 
and which are for research purposes only?   The screening 
will be for the purpose of the research study.  
 
4. What happens with screen failures (including any data 
gathered during screening)?   Data will not be collected on 
patients  that are screened as ineligible for the study.  
However, these patients will be provided with 
recommendations for alternative treatment options  by [CONTACT_431290] (medications, diet changes), alternative 
psychological treatments within the Loyola  GI behavioral 
medicine program, or a referral to an outside provider 
depending on patients' needs.  
b. Randomization procedures (if applicable) : N/A  
c. Study Intervention  
 
Patients will be given access to a password protected website containing HYP 
treatment mat erials.  They will be instructed by [CONTACT_431291] [ADDRESS_545575]. 
Kinsinger  (study PI).  The content of the video will include educational 
information about the patient's diagnosis, provide rationale for hypnotherapy 
treatment, set expectations for treatment, and dispel myths about 
hypnotherapy.  The video will also provide instructions on implementing the 
treatment protocol, including guidance on selecting a time and place to 
practice hypnotherapy and recommendations for weekly practice with audio 
recordings (5x per week).  See Appendix B  for a full script of this 
introductory video (video will be filmed aft er we receive IRB approval).   
 
We have develop ed a 7- session, hypnosis protocol for functional dyspepsia 
that is similar to an evidence -based protocol for irritable bowel syndrome 
developed by [CONTACT_3252] -investigator [CONTACT_431306], which has been found to be 
efficacious in [ADDRESS_545576] access to audio recordings of the protocol (pre -recorded 
by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Kinsinger, study PI) via secure streaming online that will work on any 
computer or mobile device  with internet access . Pati ents will be assigned a 
new hypnotherapy session to listen to every [ADDRESS_545577] sequence.  Each hypnotherapy session 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545578] on  the stomach  (i.e., decreases pain, allows the stomach to 
stretch and make room for food) .  Each of the 7 sessions will utilize different 
imagery.  
Patients will be instructed to practice a shorter 10 -12 minute audio recording 5 
times per week in between the longer sessions.  After the 12 -week treatment 
course is completed, patients will be able to continue to listen to the shorter 
home hypnosis reco rdings as often as they choose for up to one year.   
The web page will give patients pop -up notices to encourage them to increase 
their frequency of practice if their weekly frequency drops below the 
recommended 5 days of home practice.  Patients who do no t log into the 
online system to complete a hypnosis exercise for 7 consecutive days will be 
contact[CONTACT_431292].   
Additionally, patients will receive phone or MyLoyol a messaging (patient 
preference) from a study coordinator every [ADDRESS_545579] patient completion of hypnosis practice sessions. Patients are asked to 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545580] the privacy of study participants online, they will complete all 
study tasks in the online patient portal in a de -identified manner. No 
information that can reveal their personal identity is collected by [CONTACT_431293] p age or the online study questionnaires: No IP addresses, names, e -mail 
addresses, dates of birth or any such identifying information is collected 
online. Patients are only identified in the online study system by [CONTACT_431294].  
 
In a separate study management web page, study staff will be able to log in to 
see which main hypnosis sessions each patient has completed and whether 
they are significantly overdue for completing the next session, and also 
whether they have completed the s tudy questionnaire at the expected time 
points, and the frequency of practice of the shorter exercises for each 
individual. This information will alert the study staff to contact [CONTACT_431295][INVESTIGATOR_431278].  
 
d. Study Asse ssments and Activities  
Study Assessments:  
At baseline (week 0), week 6 (mid -treatment), week 12 (post -treatment), 
and at 12 weeks following end of treatment (i.e., 3 month follow up) 
participants will be asked to complete a set of questionnaires  listed bel ow. 
See Appendix D  for a complete list of survey items and questionnaires . 
Study assessments will be administered electronically  through the 
passw ord-protected online platform via highly secure Qualtrics Research 
Suite Software, and all questionnaire data will be collected in a fully de -
identified manner that neither obtains nor stores online any information 
that can reveal the personal identify of participants.  Participants will be 
assigned a unique subject code that will be associated with his/her 
questi onnaire data.   
 
Patients will be paid for completing each of the assessments: They will 
receive Amazon gift certificates in the amount of $25 each time, except 
the amount will be $50 at the  end -of-treatment point (as this is the most 
important assessment  time point).  Thus, patients will receive a total 
compensation of $125 for completing all 4 assessments in the study.   
 
Additionally, participants will be invited to participate in a phone 
interview to provide qualitative feedback about their experience with the 
intervention and using the web interface.  This will be a semi -structured 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545581] within one month following the 
final hypnotherapy sessi on. 
 
Patients will complete the following questionnaires:  
 Demographics  and psychosocial history (administered at week 0 
only): basic demographic data (e.g., age, gender, education) as well as 
disease related information (symptom severity, medication use).     
 The Rome IV Dyspepsia Module will be administered at baseline to 
confirm diagnosis of functional dyspepsia .  This self -report 
questionnaire is used to diagnosis functional GI disorders based on 
Rome IV criteria.2 
 The Patient Assessment of Upper Gastrointestinal Symptom 
Severity Index  (PAGI -SYM ) will be administered to assess symptom 
severity.  The PAGI -SYM  measures 20 dyspeptic symptoms on a 6 -
point Likert scale, 0 (no complaints) – 5 (severe complaints), 
subdi vided into six subscales: heartburn/regurgitation, 
nausea/vomiting, postprandial fullness/early satiets, bloating, upper 
abdominal pain, and lower abdominal pain.  The measure has 
demonstrated good reliability and validity for measuring symptom 
severity in  patients with functional dyspepsia .25  
 The Short Form Napean Dyspepsia Index  (NDI -SF) is a [ADDRESS_545582] 
excellent psychometric properties26 and responsiveness to treatment 
change has been confirmed27 and the 10 -item short form is 
recommended for use in clinic al trials.28 
 Visceral Anxiety (VSI):  The VSI is a 15 -item questionnaire that will 
be used to assess gastrointestinal specific anxiety29 .  This measure 
assesses fears of GI sympto ms and is a predictor of symptom severity 
in patients with functional GI disorders.  The VSI  uses a 6 point likert 
scale response format with total scores ranging from 0 to 75; higher 
scores indicate more severe symptom -related anxiety.   
 The Brief Sympto m Inventory (BSI)  will be used to assess 
depression, anxiety, and somatization.30  The BSI is an 18 -item 
questionnaire using a 5 -point likert scale with scores ranging from 0 to 
68; higher scores indicate higher le vels of distress.    
 Thought Impact Scale - Short Form (TIS -SF).  This [ADDRESS_545583] clinical response to 
hypnosis treatment.  The TIS -SF will be admin istered at baseline only 
to assess whether the traits that it measures (i.e., subconscious 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 connectedness) correlates with the degree of FD symptom 
improvement in the study .31 
 Adherence to Hypnosis Practice : Use of h ypnosis sessions will be 
recorded automatically by [CONTACT_431296], to track frequency of home practice of hypnotherapy by [CONTACT_431297].   
 Health care utilization : Patients will be asked at baseline, end  of 
treatment and at [ADDRESS_545584] t aken related to their 
functional dyspepsia symptoms.  
 Satisfaction with the treatment and global outcome : At the end of 
treatment only (12 weeks), patients will be asked additional two 
questions to assess how satisfied they were overall with their assigned 
treatment (on a 7 -point scale from "Extremely dissatisfied" to 
"Extremely satisfied") and how they feel their FD symptoms have 
changed overall since before the start of treatment (from "very much 
worse" to "very much improved").  
 Satisfaction with web -based  platform . At the end of treatment  only 
(12 weeks) , patients will be asked an open -ended question to obtain 
feedback on their experience using the web -based platform for 
treatment (“Please describe any difficulties you had using the web 
interface and/or su ggestions on ways we could improve the website.”).  
 
VII. Safety Monitoring Plan  
a. Definition of adverse events, serious adverse events  
 
 Participant risks in this study are minimal. We will screen individuals 
prior to enrolling them in the study and any patients w ith 
psychological comorbidities that increase risk of adverse events 
associated with hypnotherapy (e.g., post -traumatic stress disorder) will 
be ineligible to participate.   However, even with careful screening, it 
is possible that participants may experie nce emotional discomfort or 
increased anxiety as a result of participating in the hypnotherapy 
treatment  or completing study questionnaires . We will encourage 
participants to contact [CONTACT_431298] .  [CONTACT_431304], study PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_146130], will be available to discuss these 
concerns and further assess the patients psychological functioning and 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 discontinue treatment if necessary.  We will also provide referrals for 
counseling outside of the study if needed.   
 
 We will take steps to reduce the risk of discomfort associated with 
answering questions on assessment measures related to psychological 
functioning by [CONTACT_431299].  The participant will be reminded that 
s/he has the option of stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_431279] s/he is asked that s/he finds distressing. However, the study 
team shall determine if the extent of refusal may w arrant removal of 
the participant from the research study to ensure complete and accurate 
data collection.   
 
b. What procedures will be used to monitor subject safety?   
 Participants will be given contact [CONTACT_431300] h out if they experience an increase in 
psychological distress related to the treatment.  Participants will be 
told that they are welcome to withdraw from the study at any time.   
 We plan to use an electronic platform for this study to deliver the 
hypnothe rapy sessions as well as to conduct all patient evaluations 
online. It is same technology as [CONTACT_431306] has used successfully for 
online data collection in multiple NIH -funded RCT clinical trials. All 
study questionnaire s will be administered electronical ly in the 
password -protected online portal via highly secure Qualtrics Research 
Suite software, and all questionnaire data will moreover be collected in 
a fully de -identified manner that neither obtains nor stores online any 
information that can reveal the  personal identity of participants. This is 
accomplished by [CONTACT_431301].   
 The online hypnotherapy program is considered an investigational 
device under the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA) regulations 
and is categorized as a nonsignificant risk device.  
 Patient names will be keyed into unique subject code and the keyed 
file will be kept separate from the data file  to ensure patient 
confidentiality .  Data downloads will be stored in a sec ure study folder 
in HIPAA -compliant LUMC file server space, with study folder access 
restricted to IRB -approved study personnel. Any non -electronic study 
data will be stored in locked filing cabinets, accessible only by [CONTACT_1744] -
approved study personnel.  Data will be stored for 7 years after study 
completion per IRB policy.  
 
c. Who (list names) will identify, document, and report adverse events?  
[CONTACT_431307], study PI  
 
d. What is the frequency for review of summarized safety information and 
who will perform t he review (e.g., safety monitoring board)?  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545585] to efficacy and safety?  
Patients are free to withdraw from treatment at any time.  
 
VIII.  Analysis Plan  
Aim 1: Feasibility and Acceptability of Treatment.  Methods: Eligible and e nrolled 
patients will be followed to assess the percentage who log -in to the web interface, utilize 
the materials sufficiently, complete the [ADDRESS_545586] that the proportion of participants who are retained 
will be 80%, demonstrating feasibility of recruitment and retention. Treatment 
satisfaction will be calculated as the proportion of patients who  started treatment 
(dropouts included) who report that they are satisfied with the treatment (i.e., endorse the 
response either options “Somewhat satisfied”, “Very satisfied” or “Extremely satisfied” 
on the 7 -point treatment satisfaction measure). We expec t that the majority of patients 
will report satisfaction with the treatment.  Sample size justification: For the aim of 
retention, a sample size of n=23 achieves 92.8% power for a one -sided exact test for a 
proportion retained of 80%.  This test assumes th e null hypothesis proportion retained is 
50%, and we will reject the null hypothesis and conclude retention is acceptable should at 
least n=16 (69.6%) be retained.  Similarly, for the aim of satisfaction, a sample size of 21 
achieves 90.5% power for a one -sided exact test for a proportion satisfied of 50%.  This 
assumes 20% satisfaction under the null hypothesis, and we will reject the null hypothesis 
if at least 39% of the sample report they are satisfied with treatment.  Both tests were 
targeted at an 
 =0.05 significance level.   
 
Aim 2: Treatment Effectiveness.  Methods: The primary analyses to estimate treatment 
effects in this study will be linear mixed effects regression analysis.  Mixed effects 
regression is flexible for modeling linear an d nonlinear trends over time and robust to 
data missing at random.  A separate mixed effects model will be specified for each of our 
primary outcome variables (DSSI and NDI -SF).  Residual analysis will be performed and 
transformations of outcome measures w ill be applied as necessary.  These models will 
estimate treatment effects at each follow -up time point controlling for baseline score. 
Secondary endpoints include significant improvements in pre - to post - treatment score on 
psychological indices (e.g., an xiety) and disease -specific quality of life.  We will apply a 
similar approach using mixed effects regression analyses for these outcomes.  Analyses 
will be performed using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).  
 
 
IX. Literature Cited  
1. Ford AC, Mar waha A, Sood R, Moayyedi P. Global prevalence of, and risk factors for, 
uninvestigated dyspepsia: A meta -analysis. Gut. 2015;64(7):1049 -1057.  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 2. Stanghellini V, Chan FK, Hasler WL, et al. Gastroduodenal disorders. 
Gastroenterology . 2016;150(6):[ADDRESS_545587] AC, Forman D, Bailey AG, Axon AT, Moayyedi P. Initial poor quality of life and 
new onset of dyspepsia: Results from a longitudinal 10 -year follow -up study. Gut. 
2007;56(3):321 -327. 
4. Vakil NB, Howden CW, Moayyedi P, Tack J. White paper AGA: Functio nal 
dyspepsia. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2017;15(8):1191 -1194.  
5. Camilleri M, Stanghellini V. Current management strategies and emerging treatments 
for functional dyspepsia. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2013;10(3):187 -194. 
6. Palsson OS. Hypnosis trea tment of gastrointestinal disorders: A comprehensive review 
of the empi[INVESTIGATOR_33727]. Am J Clin Hypn . 2015;58(2):[ADDRESS_545588] of gut -oriented hypnosis 
on gastric emptying. Aliment Pharmacol Th er. 2006;23(8):1241 -1249.  
8. Calvert EL, Houghton LA, Cooper P, Morris J, Whorwell PJ. Long -term improvement 
in functional dyspepsia using hypnotherapy. Gastroenterology . 2002;123(6):[ADDRESS_545589] medical treatment in patients with 
functional dyspepsia. J Psychosom Res . 2015;78(6):563 -568. 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/[ADDRESS_545590] of psychotherapy in improving physical and psychiatric 
symptoms in patients with functional dyspepsia. Iran J Psychiatry . 2015;10(1):43 -49. 
11. Kawata H, Oka T. The use of psychotropic drugs for functional gastrointestinal 
disorders: Are they bene ficial? Nihon Rinsho . 2012;70(1):84 -88. 
12. Faramarzi M, Azadfallah P, Book HE, Tabatabaei KR, Taheri H, Shokri -shirvani J. A 
randomized controlled trial of brief psychoanalytic psychotherapy in patients with 
functional dyspepsia. Asian J Psychiatr . 2013;6 (3):228 -234. 
13. Jee SR, Jung HK, Min BH, et al. Guidelines for the treatment of functional dyspepsia. 
Korean J Gastroenterol . 2011;57(2):67 -81. 
14. Hjelland IE, Svebak S, Berstad A, Flatabo G, Hausken T. Breathing exercises with 
vagal biofeedback may bene fit patients with functional dyspepsia. Scand J Gastroenterol . 
2007;42(9):1054 -1062.  
15. Haag S, Senf W, Tagay S, et al. Is there a benefit from intensified medical and 
psychological interventions in patients with functional dyspepsia not responding to 
conventional therapy? Aliment Pharmacol Ther . 2007;25(8):973 -986. 
16. Hamilton J, Guthrie E, Creed F, et al. A randomized controlled trial of psychotherapy 
in patients with chronic functional dyspepsia. Gastroenterology . 2000;119(3):661 -669. 
17. Haug TT, Wilh elmsen I, Svebak S, Berstad A, Ursin H. Psychotherapy in functional 
dyspepsia. J Psychosom Res . 1994;38(7):735 -744. 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 18. Arn I, Theorell T, Uvnas -Moberg K, Jonsson CO. Psychodrama group therapy for 
patients with functional gastrointestinal disorders --a cont rolled long -term follow -up 
study. Psychother Psychosom . 1989;51(3):113 -119. 
19. Palsson OS, Turner MJ, Whitehead WE. Hypnosis home treatment for irritable bowel 
syndrome: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Int J Clin Exp Hypn . 2006;54(1):85 -99. 
20. van Tilburg MA, Chitkara DK , Palsson OS, et al. Audio -recorded guided imagery 
treatment reduces functional abdominal pain in children: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Pediatrics . 
2009;124(5):e890 -7. 
21. Stake -Nilsson K, Hultcrantz R, Unge P, Wengstrom Y. Complementary and 
alternative medicine used b y persons with functional gastrointestinal disorders to 
alleviate symptom distress. J Clin Nurs . 2012;21(5 -6):800 -808. 
22. Rutten JM, Vlieger AM, Frankenhuis C, et al. Gut -directed hypnotherapy in children 
with irritable bowel syndrome or functional abdomi nal pain (syndrome): A randomized 
controlled trial on self exercises at home using CD versus individual therapy by [CONTACT_431302][INVESTIGATOR_11437]. BMC Pediatr . 2014;14:140 -2431 -14-140. 
23. van Tilburg MA, Chitkara DK, Palsson OS, et al. Audio -recorded guided imagery  
treatment reduces functional abdominal pain in children: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Pediatrics . 
2009;124(5):e890 -7. 
24. Palsson OS. Standardized hypnosis treatment for irritable bowel syndrome: The north 
carolina protocol. Int J Clin Exp Hypn . 2006;54(1):51 -64. 
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
 25. R entz AM, Kahrilas P, Stanghellini V, et al. Development and psychometric 
evaluation of the patient assessment of upper gastrointestinal symptom severity index 
(PAGI -SYM) in patients with upper gastrointestinal disorders. Qual Life Res . 
2004;13(10):1737 -1749. 
26. Talley NJ, Verlinden M, Jones M. Validity of a new quality of life scale for 
functional dyspepsia: A united states multicenter trial of the nepean dyspepsia index. Am 
J Gastroenterol . 1999;94(9):2390 -2397.  
27. Talley NJ, Tack J, Ptak T, Gupta R, Gig uere M. Itopride in functional dyspepsia: 
Results of two phase III multicentre, randomised, double -blind, placebo -controlled trials. 
Gut. 2008;57(6):740 -746. 
28. Talley NJ, Verlinden M, Jones M. Quality of life in functional dyspepsia: 
Responsiveness of th e nepean dyspepsia index and development of a new 10 -item short 
form. Aliment Pharmacol Ther . 2001;15(2):207 -216. 
29. Labus JS, Mayer EA, Chang L, Bolus R, Naliboff BD. The central role of 
gastrointestinal -specific anxiety in irritable bowel syndrome: Furt her validation of the 
visceral sensitivity index. Psychosom Med . 2007;69(1):89 -98. 
30. Derogatis LR, Melisaratos N. The brief symptom inventory: An introductory report. 
Psychol Med . 1983;13(3):[ADDRESS_545591] scale: A measure of 
subconscious connectedness. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis . 2019.  
 
Protocol Version #:  4.0 
  Version Date:  4/13/20 
   
  
 