Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043407] of targeted physical activity and 
diet modification on kidney transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]’ outcome  
 
Primary Investigator: Enrico Benedetti, MD  
 BACKGROUND 
 
It is well known that in the general population, metabolic syndrome is tightly linked to 
obesity and is a strong risk factor for cardio- vascular disease and mortality. After renal 
transplantation, obesity and metabolic syndrome are prominent risk factors for post -
transplantation diabetes mellitus, chronic graft dy sfunction, graft loss, and patient death 
in renal transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] [1]. At the same time, obesity in the setting of end stage renal disease is associated with a condition called obese sarcopenia, which is characterized by [CONTACT_761894] a decreased ratio of lean body mass/fat body mass [2]. Both obesity and sarcopenia are associated with higher circulating concentrations of pro- inflammatory cytokines. These pro -inflammatory cytokines lead to 
systemic inflammation which contributes to c ardio -vascular disease development and 
higher morbidity and mortality in patients with end -stage renal disease [3].   Behavioral 
changes to prevent or convert weight gain and improve the lean body mass rate may counteract the post -transplant development of  obesity- related comorbidities and thereby 
[CONTACT_761895]- term [4].  
 
It is well known that lifestyle factors such as physical activity and diet are important modifiable factors for insulin resistance, and have been a ssociated with the risk of kidney 
disease. In the second National Health and Nutrition Examination, the risk of chronic kidney disease was related to physical inactivity, both with and without adjustment for age, sex, race and body- mass index [5]. In hemodialysis patients, exercise has been 
reported to enhance insulin sensitivity, improve lipid profile, increase hemoglobin, improve insulin- like growth factor 1 (IGF -1) status, increase muscle strength, decrease 
blood pressure, increase physical functionality and improve quality of life. Little is 
understood about the state of muscle mass following transplantation. While the patient is in renal failure, catabolism of muscle occurs due to protein processing derangements.   Post-transplant, renal function is res tored along with appropriate processing of protein 
and elimination of the catabolic state. Few studies have determined whether restoration of renal function allows the restoration of muscle mass, whether patients are sufficiently strong to accomplish activities of daily living,  whether the use of immunosuppressants impedes the ability to increase muscle mass, and whether increasing muscle mass can lead to reduction of medication side effects as has been shown recently with chemotherapy patients.  Further, little has been studied regarding protein content of post -
transplant diets and its manipulation to increase muscle mass.  
 Furthermore, although recommendations  to engage in physical exercise are routinely 
made by [CONTACT_761896], it has been extremely difficult to enroll post transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_761879]. Concern with performances, body images, 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043408] all contributed to the low level 
of physical activity typi[INVESTIGATOR_761880].  The present study aims to analyze the effectiveness of a specific physical activity /nutrition  training program ( for a detailed description of the GH method see 
Appendix 1)  in comparison to the standard of care for renal transplantations in kidney 
transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840].  
 GH METHOD AND PHILOSOPHY   There are four major components of the GH Method (also known as the Greg Ha chaj 
Method) : 
1) Become experts in our patients.   
 The GH Method incorporates multiple disciplines including fitness, 
psychology a nd nutrition.  The efficacy of the GH Method is built around the 
application of standard processes and curriculum that are then customized to the particular physiology and psychology of each individual patient.  For the GH Method to work effectively, we must develop a comprehensive expertise in our patients that demands constant updating as the physiology, psychology and life circumstances of each patient evolves during the program.   
 
 Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], fitness programs are not customized to fit with a patients’ 
physical and emotional life resulting in a much more limited health impact, shorter term participation, unsustainable changes, and an eventual return to the patients’ status quo at the beginning of the program.  However, the effective interplay of the dist inct disciplines of fitness, psychology and nutrition is critical 
to the GH Method’s success in achieving significant and sustainable health improvements in our patients measured in improved bodily function, mental health, and quality of life.  
2) Build and e xpand their life tissue. 
  
 The physical exercise component of the GH Method focuses on using the 
least amount of a patients’ energy to achieve the maximum health improvements.  We believe the most effective strategy for maximizing patient improvements with minimal energy is to focus on the building and expansion of patients’ life tissue or muscle mass.  This focus on the development of life tissue with minimal energy expenditure informs the strategy, intensity, techniques, and process of the physical exercise of the GH Method.  
 Many exercise programs focus on improving many aspects of patients’ 
physical health, while the GH Method focuses on strategies designed to maximize the development of life tissue.  This systematic strategic focus on muscle mass devel opment informs every aspect of the GH Method and is a critical driver of the 
significant measurable improvements experienced by [CONTACT_1962].    
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 3 of 25  
 3) Help them change their feelings and thinking patterns  
  
 The GH Method is designed to engage patients in an ongoing re -
evaluation of their own health and behaviors, resulting in increased self -
awareness of the cause -effect relationship of their lifestyle choices on their overall 
health and well being.  While we use a range of strategies including cognitive 
behavior tec hniques, our more novel approach is to focus first on changing how 
patients physically feel and then engaging in cognitive therapy techniques to help 
them change their thinking and behaving patterns leveraging their already more positive feelings.  We beli eve the most effective way to help patients modify 
behaviors is focus on helpi[INVESTIGATOR_761881] a paradigm shift in their feelings from 
passive and negative regarding their health towards more positive and empowered 
feelings about their health before embarki ng on more detailed thinking and 
behaving pattern changes.   
  
 The inter -disciplinary approach of the GH Method requires us to patiently 
understand the mindset of our clients and then even more patiently work collaboratively with clients to change their mindset in order to achieve lasting lifestyle and behavioral changes.  We believe the key to sustainable improvements in our patients’ lives is working with them at this deeper psychological level rather than just focus on the behaviors we want to change.  Far too often, physical 
fitness is handled independently of psychology and often that is delivered 
independently of nutrition guidance resulting in a disjointed patient experience that is difficult for patients to navigate.  The GH Method integrates all of  these 
resulting in deeper, more significant and more lasting measurable improvements in patient physical and mental health.  
 
4) Coach them to make sustainable improvements in their lifestyle  
 Through the written assessment process supplemented by [CONTACT_761897], the GH Method identifies the most impactful behavior/lifestyle changes for a particular patient with particular emphasis on improving their optimum recuperation and therefore enhancing the development of their life tissue.  After evaluating the impact of each potential behavior change (the GH Method uses 17 commonly accepted improvements including:  reducing sodium intake, minimizing emotional eating, increasing protein to support muscle developme nt, reducing cholesterol, eating 
more balanced meals), the GH Method then uses the Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change to determine which external behavior changes should be introduced first.  While we begin testing our hypothesis developed with the help of the MIPS profiling of how to be the most effective coach from the beginning, we do not ask patients to make significant behavior changes until after they have experienced a paradigm shift in their feelings about their own health and empowerment.  O nce we have initiated the phase of coaching external behavior 
changes, we stay focused on moving slowly so that the patient is only focused on one new behavior at a time, and they can connect that changed behavior with an 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 4 of 25  
 improved outcome in order to maxim ize sustainability and help the patient build 
momentum to increasingly more difficult external behavior changes.  
 Often, the nutrition/lifestyle component of an exercise program is built on 
the assumption that patients foremost need knowledge of healthier living in order 
to help them improve their behaviors.  The focus on knowledge is often communicated to the patient, sometimes in writing, and is intended to help 
patients make significant changes to their daily lifestyle.  Said simply, many 
fitness program s simply put patients on a diet and focus on the desired outcome 
which is often weight loss.  This type of dieting often leads to a classic pattern 
where patients that do have success struggle to maintain their success and the rate of recidivism is high.  The GH Method emphasizes implementation over 
knowledge and we therefore focus our energy on identifying the easiest changes 
for that patient to implement that will have a significant impact, and then helpi[INVESTIGATOR_761882].  We focus patients on 
the process not the outcome, because they can have more control over the process, and we make them responsible for observing the results of the behavior changes in terms of their energy, mood, and health.  
 
BECOME EXPERTS IN O UR PATIENTS  
The process of becoming an expert in our patients begins through the written assessment process and continues to evolve throughout their participation with the GH Method as their psychology and physiology continue to change.  We use five differ ent written 
assessments, some given only at the beginning of the GH Method and some being given at multiple points in the process.  
 
BUILD AND EXPAND THEIR LIFE TISSUE  
At the core of the GH Method’s approach to exercise is to build and expand life tissue or  
muscle tissue with a minimal amount of energy expenditure.  The GH Method aims to increase individual muscle development by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_761883], improved self-awareness, active participation in the program, and a deepening understanding of 
their own physiology.  The education of the patient is paramount, as they must be technically engaged and develop an increased awareness of physical sensations in order to fully participate in the precision required to build and expand life tissue.  The GH Method requires such precision that it can only be delivered to one patient at a time with minimal distractions given the engagement and concentration required by [CONTACT_761898].  The patient is re -assessed consistently throughout the program as their 
physiology changes and, therefore, the exercise needs to change as well to maximize the development and expansion of their life tissue.   
 The GH Method is a s ystematic approach to increasing individual muscle development 
that is customized to each client based on the assessments completed as well as their energy and recuperation levels.  Throughout the GH Method, we are constantly evaluating the patients’ optimum recuperation level to determine the right intensity to achieve the exercise objective.  We define optimum recuperation as the intensity level where the patients’ body can effectively incorporate the workout.  For example, if the 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043409] 12 months of the GH Method which may incorporate the following levels:  
 Level 0.    This level comprises approximately 8 separate weeks alt hough many of the 
weeks may be repeated depending on the needs of a particular patient.  The major physical objective of Level 0 is to effectively engage their muscle fiber (without much breakdown) to activate their innate strength, endurance and cardiovas cular capacity.  
Before the end of Level 0, we measure patient strength, endurance, and cardiovascular 
capacity to ensure we can train patients to their optimum recuperation level.  The major educational objective of this Level is to teach clients the tech nical form and self -
awareness that is mandatory before they can proceed to the next Level.  The major psychological objective of this Level is to establish a safe and caring environment for patients, to reframe how they think about exercise and their healt h, and for us to become 
experts in all aspects of the patient.  
 Level 1.   This level comprises approximately 12 weeks although many of the weeks may 
be repeated depending on the needs of a particular patient.  The major physical objective of Level 1 is to begin the process of increasing the development of individual muscles and therefore increasing patients’ life tissue.  More energy is directed towards the larger muscle groups which can increase in size the fastest resulting in improvements in patients energy levels, physical symptoms, and other measures.  The major educational objective of this Level is to promote the patients autonomous relationship with their own body by [CONTACT_761899] -awareness of physical sensations during their exercise and 
recovery.  The major psychological objective of this Level is to leverage the improved energy and autonomy to collaboratively initiate the process of making lifestyle/behaviorial changes.  Before the end of Level 0, we measure patient strength, endurance, and cardiovascular capacity to ensure we can train patients to their optimum recuperation level.  
 Level 2.   This level comprises approximately 20 weeks although many of the weeks may 
be repeated depending on the needs of a particular client.  The major physical objective of Level 2 is to continue the process of increasing the development of individual muscles 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 6 of 25  
 and therefore increasing the patients’ life tissue.  The Level includes weeks focused on 
improving muscle strength, muscle endurance, muscle size, muscle thickness, heart endurance, lung capacity, and resistance strength.  The main educational objective of this level is to promote patients awareness of the function of their bodies, including strength, energy, endurance, and recuperation so they feel more empowered and in- control of their 
physical health and aware of the improvements they are making.  The main psychological 
objective of this Level is to help patients use the increased self -awareness of their own 
body (the educational goal of Level 1) to understand the impact of the dietary and 
lifestyle changes they are making.  We aim to connect patients as closely as possible with feeling the impact of the individual changes they are making, as that is a key to both sustainability of the changes they ha ve already made and empowerment to continue 
making more changes.  
 
CHANGE FEELING AND THINKING PATTERNS  
As we become experts in our clients through the use of assessments, motivational interviewing, and careful observation, we develop a deep understanding of how our patients see the world, their physical health, their mental health, their behavioral  choices, 
and their future.  We use each session to add to the body of knowledge we have about each person, including their verbal and non- verbal communication, how they react to 
management and autonomy, their ability to execute behavior changes, their motivations and their outlook on the future.    During Level 0, we are absorbing as much knowledge as possible about our patients.  Often before the end of Level 0 patients feel some improvement in their daily function, whether its energy, attitude, or the reduction of pain.  We help patients listen to their own bodies and become aware of the changes they are experiencing.  When they confidently express on their own t he changes they are feeling, we work closely to leverage those 
positive feelings into a paradigm shift in how patients may be viewing their physical and mental health.  This is a critical step in how the GH Method achieves changes in feeling, thinking, and then behavior patterns.  
 Often, patients start out with a focus on negatives (concerns, fears, obstacles, limitations) which inform their cognitive thinking patterns and capacity for behavior change.  As patients become aware of changes in their body and life, we work to shift their paradigm from the negative to the positive (empowerment, sense of control, ability to improve symptoms, autonomy, hope for the future).  While each patient is different, a common early patient experience is improved energy, so that is a key point of focus and provides the most common pi[INVESTIGATOR_761884]’ feelings moving from negative towards positive.  We use many motivational interviewing techniques to help maximize the 
impact of this shift.    Cognitive behavior theory pos tulates that thinking patterns inform feeling and behavior 
patterns so changing the way we think can greatly impact how we feel and behave.  While we use cognitive behavior techniques, our more novel approach is to focus first on changing how patients phys ically feel and then leveraging that momentum towards 
encouraging changes in thinking and then behaving.  We believe the most effective way 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043410] effective techniques of 
cognitive therapy and motivational interviewing to create changes in each individual 
patient.  
 
The GH Method also utilizes Neuro Linguistic Programming (NLP) to better understand and then impact the outlook of patients and by [CONTACT_761900].  We study the conscious and unconscious process of how our patients code and store their feelings, insights, obstacles and successes so that we can impact that coding and therefore influence their thinking.  The key components of NLP are:  
 
a) Neuro.  The key for this component is to understand how patients translate the experience of their key senses into thought processes, both conscious and unconscious.  We are trying to learn how their senses, their mind, their feelings combine to function as one system. 
b) Linguistic.  The key for this component is to understand how patients use language to make sense of their experiences and how they choose to communicate that ex perience to themselves and others.  Language patterns have an enormous 
impact on how a patient feels, thinks and ultimately behaves, so learning their language patterns positions us to have a more significant impact on our patients. 
c) Programming.  This is t he coding of experience.  How patients mobilize their own 
experiences and vocabulary to attempt and execute changes in their own lives.  Individuals typi[INVESTIGATOR_761885], so we study how pati ents most effectively program themselves 
for success so that we can help them emulate or establish consistent and sustainable patterns of success.  
  
 
COACH THEM TO MAKE SUSTAINABLE IMPROVEMENTS IN THEIR 
LIFESTYLE  
We combine the written assessments with the  knowledge we have accumulated about our 
clients behaving patterns, routines, capacity for behavior change and attitude towards change to establish the priorities for that client for behavior/lifestyle changes.  The GH Method includes a formulaic approach to identifying the order and speed of changes for each patient based on the clients need for independence in terms of agenda -setting 
(discovered in the MIPS), their evaluation of general health (PROMIS v.1.1 Global Health questionnaire), their evaluation of mental health and pain intensity (PROMIS 29 Profile v2.0)  their readiness to change according to the Transtheoretical Model of Change 
(discovered in the Lifestyle Inventory), their actual habits and routines (discovered in the Food Journal) and our ongoi ng motivational interviewing and assessment process.  
 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043411] effectively execute behavior change plans.  The integration of the coaching program from physical exercise to lifestyle changes is crit ical to the GH Method’s effectiveness. 
 
The GH Method targets only one behavior change at a time and does not move onto the 
second until patients have achieved some level of success with the behavior change and become aware of the impact that change has on  their health.   This methodical and slow 
approach helps sustainability as patients feel the connection between the cause (the behavior change) and the effect (an improvement in their health).  After identifying the starting point for guiding the client through behavior changes, we use motivational interviewing to help the patient collaboratively accept the starting point or reject it and select another starting point where they are more ready to implement a change.  We then focus on helpi[INVESTIGATOR_761886] a strategy and a plan for implementing the change, set their own goals for the change, and then we help create accountability for the implementation.  
 Hypotheses:  
1. Counseling twice weekly on diet and nutrition will improve food choices to more healthy choices of fresh fruits and vegetables and low fat protein sources.     To test 
this hypothesis, patients will undergo a food frequency questionnaire at baseline to document choices prior to intervention. A food frequency questionnaire will be performed at the end of the intervention to determine the effect of counseling on protein 
source, number of calories, and frequency of fresh fruits and vegetables. Counseling will consist of the diabetes prevention program counseling which is a well -established, well -
verified intervention, commonly accepted as an effective means of providing a standardized nutritional education.  2. The combination of exercise and dietary intervention positively affects body composition. With this hypothesis we will test whether muscle strength (B iodex 
measurements) and muscle mass ( DEXA scan) changes after  [ADDRESS_1043412] of intervention. In addition, if patients in the control group and GH group decide to 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043413] the proportion of peripheral blood 
M1/M2 macrophages at baseline ,[ADDRESS_1043414] ci rculating levels of pro -inflammatory 
cytokines such as C -reactive protein(CRP), IL -6, IL -1, TNF -alpha , homocysteine, 
adiponectin, leptin, and resistin as well as pro -regenerative cytokines such as TGF -beta 
and IL -10.  
 5. We expect patients with strength t raining will experience less renal dysfunction, 
decreased hemoglobin A1C , increased peripheral vascular function, decreased 
fasting blood sugar when compared to the other treatment groups. The rationale for this hypothesis is the finding that muscle mass p rovides active regulation of glucose and 
other metabolites. Therefore increasing this may provide improved metabolic function. These laboratory panels are part of the standard transplant follow -up labs and add no cost 
to the project.  
 6. Patients with str ength training will have an overall improved sense of well -being 
and energy level compared to those with physical therapy or no treatment.  With twice weekly counseling for activity and nutrition, patients will be asked about their general health, mental h ealth and pain intensity using the PROMIS questionnaires.  
 METHODS  
Setting : The study will include [ADDRESS_1043415] -transplant; however they can be enrolled prior to transplant.    
 Main Study Inclusion criteria:  
 -Successful kidney transplantation (KTx) with primary graft funct ion 
- Age between 18 and 65 years  
- Adequate cognitive ability to complete the questionnaires, give consent  for the study 
and follow the physical and diet instructions   Main Study Exclusion criteria:  
- transplant of any other organ besides kidney alone or  a combination of a 
kidney/pancreas  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 10 of 25  
 -non-ambulatory or significant orthopedic problems  
- cardiac/pulmonary disease that contraindicate the physical training  
- any contraindication to exe rcise testing per the American H eart Association  
-unable to comply w ith the training program  
 
Muscle Biopsy Inclusion:  
- Age between [ADDRESS_1043416] a brachial –cephalic arteriovenous  fistula (AVF ) in the elbow or 
brachial –basilic AVF in the arm  
-Exercise Arm - the biopsy will only be performed once, afte r the 12 month exercise 
intervention is completed (which will be  longer than [ADDRESS_1043417] transplant surgery)  
-Control Arm - this proce dure will be performed once, around one year post  transplant 
surgery (may occur at any time during the study)  
 Muscle Biop sy Exclusion:  
-Patients that do not meet the inclusion criteria  
 Identifying potential subjects for recruitment:  
A waiver for an alteration of consent and waiver of documentation of consent is being requested for review of medical records to identify pot ential patients for study 
recruitment and also for a telephone screening process for patients that response to a recruitment flyer.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_761887].  This  presents no more than minimal risk since 
this data will be kept confidential.    Moreover, as part of the telephone screening process  for patients interested in this study 
there will be oral consent  obtained to start the screening process in order to dete rmine if 
the patients are eligible to be in the study. If the patients are eligible, they will be schedule for a visit where they will be consented to be in the study.  Randomization: All patients who meet the enrollment criteria will be randomized 4:1 to the GH group or the control group. 
• GH group: patients will be treated for 12 months with the GH method (Appendix 1) for one hour twice a week  
• Control group: patient will be treated according to the standard of care for post -
transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] ; control p atients will be offered the opportunity to undergo 
the GH regimen for the 1 year after their final visit as a control patient.  If the 
control patients chose to undergo the GH regimen, the extended follow up will be completed after 1 year from their final GH visit (totaling 4 years from the start of intervention).  
 
Long- term follow -up 
After the 12 month intervention period all patients will be followed for 2 additional years.  Patients will be contact[CONTACT_761901], employment  status, 
graft function and current weight.  Patient’s  medical records will also be reviewed to 
confirm BMI and graft function. This will be done every 6 months.  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043418] previously enrolled and completed the study (January 3, 
2012 to July 28, 2014). 
  Parameters to analyze  in all patients : 
 
The PROMIS v.1.1 -  Global Health short form will be administered to all patients at the 
time of enrollment, 6 mon ths and at the end of the study (12 months). The PROMIS v.1.1 
- Global Health short form will assesses health in general (i.e. overall health). The 
PROMIS Global Health short form is a 10- item instrument representing multiple domains  
(physical function, fa tigue, pain, emotional distress, social health) as well as perceptions 
of general health that cut across domains. Global items allow respondents to weigh 
together different aspects of health to arrive at a “bottom -line” indicator of their health. 
Similar g lobal health items have been found predictive of future health care utilization 
and mortality.  
  PROMIS 29 Profile v2.0  will be administered to all patients at the time of enrollment, 6 
months and at the end of the study (12 months). The PROMIS 29 Prolife v2.0 is a short form containing four items from seven PROMIS domains (Depression, Anxiety, Physical Function, Pain Interference, Fatigue, Sleep Disturbance, and Ability to Participate in Social Roles and Activities) along with a single item on Pain Intensity.  
 Multiple studies have been conducted by [CONTACT_761902]. Studies are shown at: http://www.nihpromis.org/science/validitystudies.aspx   Body composition and strength BMI will be calculated at the time of enrollment , at 6 months, and at the end of the study 
(12 months).T he most exact method to determine body fat and lean body mass is DEXA, 
a method that has been validated in patients with renal failure before and after transplantation [6,7]. Waist circumference as well as  blood pressure will be measured for 
general health markers.  Muscle s trength will be measured using a Biodex machine.  
Exercise capacity will be measure with a [ADDRESS_1043419] (VO2 max). Th ese [ADDRESS_1043420] Circumference:  
Waist circumference will be measured at the narrowest part of the torso (above the umbilicus and below xiphoid process) in the standing position using a tape measure.  This 
will be completed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043421] -intervention.  
Blood Pressure:  
Blood pressure will be measured in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547] (lying on back) in a dimly lit room after resting for fifteen minutes. This will be comp leted at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043422] -intervention.  
 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 12 of 25  
  
DEXA Scan:   We will determine percent body fat via a whole body scan by [CONTACT_11323] 
x-ray absorptiometry (GE, IDXA, Madison, Wi), which will be operated and calibrated 
using the manufacturer’s  stated guidelines.  The duration of the scan will be less than [ADDRESS_1043423] will be exposed to a radiation dose of ≤ 0.3 mrem based upon the 
manufacturer’s specifications and calculations from Standford Dosiometry, LLC RADAR Medical Procedure Rad iation Dose Calculator.   This amount of research 
protocol radiation exposure is minimal given the estimated effective equivalent dose is below the 100 mrem per year, a limit set by [CONTACT_221562] “general public” exposure.  
 Biodex: B ilateral isometric knee extensor and flexor peak torque will be measured using 
a Biodex System 3 dynamometer (Shirley, NY). Participants will be positioned in the dynamometer according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. Briefly, the axis of 
rotation of the machine will align with the lateral epi[INVESTIGATOR_761888]. The calf pad 
against which the participant exerts force will be positioned halfway between the lateral 
malleolus of the fibula and lateral epi[INVESTIGATOR_761888], and securely attached using straps. Straps will be placed over the thighs, pelvis, and torso regions to minimize movement during the test. We will use an anatomical reference position of 90° knee flexion, and isometric torque will be assessed at joint angles of 45°, 60°, and 75°. Pe ak 
torque will be obtained by [CONTACT_761903] 3 maximal contractions with the knee extensors for 5 seconds, which will be immediately followed by a 5 second 
maximal contraction with the knee flexors; [ADDRESS_1043424] involves walking as far as possible  (down the hallway) over a six -
minute period with distance recorded by [CONTACT_761904].  During this test the subjects will wear a mask on their face that measures how much oxygen the ir body uses 
during this task (Cosmed K4b2, Rome, Italy). VO2 will be assessed during this test to evaluate the amount of oxygen the  subject’s body utilizes  during acts of regular daily 
activity, such as walking, which will be completed on a treadmill (as described below) .  
Distance will also be collected as a way to measure the subject’s functional capacity  and 
to track progression.  This  test will be completed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043425] (VO2 max ):  For subjects over 55 yrs  or that are classified 
as moderate to high risk according to ACSM’s risk stratification scale , this will occur in 
the presence of a physician. We will use a modified Balke Treadmill protocol: the treadmill will be set at a cons tant speed (3.3 mph) while the incline is increased by 2% 
every two minutes. This protocol is selected to ensure that the elderly subjects will be able to perform a maximal aerobic test. For younger (18- 35 yr) subjects, the test will 
begin at a 10% grade a nd increase 2% every 2 minutes.  If maximal effort is not reached 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 13 of 25  
 by [CONTACT_761905] 10 and a 20% grade, speed will be increased by 0.3 mph until maximal effort 
is achieved.  
 Accelerometer: subjects will be given an accelerometer with instructions for use and be asked to wear it around their waist for [ADDRESS_1043426] Di Bella, and /or [CONTACT_761918], all of 
which are experienced surgeons with prior experience performing muscle biopsies. The 
muscle biopsy will be performed at the University of Illinois at Chicago Outpatient Clinic, with an address at [ADDRESS_1043427] of 
care at UIC,  the AV fistula is ligated ( a surgical procedure of closing off a blood vessel ) 
at around one year post -transplant. As a way to  retrieve bicep muscle biopsy  samples  we 
will retrieving sample s during the closing AV fistulas (ligation) in kidney transplant patients 
with stable renal function . Patients will be consented with a supplemental consent for the 
bicep muscle biopsy.  
 
In the upper extrem ities, the typi[INVESTIGATOR_761889]. We want to 
focus on the bicep muscle only and we will include only patients with brachial –cephalic AVF 
in the elbow or brachial –basilic AVF in the arm will be selected in order to have easil y 
access to the biceps muscle.  
 
The skin incision for closing brachial –cephalic or brachial –basilic AV fistula in the upper 
extremity is made over the area of the arteriovenous anastomosis: in the elbow for brachial –
cephalic AVF or in the arm for brachial –basilic AVF.  
 
After shaving and disinfection of the external part of the surgical site, local subcutaneous anaesthesia is achieved using 4 mL of lidocaine (2%) with special attention to ensure that no 
lidocaine is injected in the muscle. Thus, injection of lidocaine is done superficially and 
obliquely.  
 In case of voluminous fistula, a regional anesthesia via peripheral nerve block is preferred. In 
these cases, the anesthetic (a mix of lidocaine and ropi[INVESTIGATOR_10319]) is injected by [CONTACT_761906] a specific area of the body. Nerve 
blocks usually last longer than local anesthesia.  
 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 14 of 25  
 A small cutaneous incision (about 4- 5 cm) is made in the antecubital fossa, over the area of 
the arteriovenous anastomosis , following the medial border of the biceps muscle. The 
muscle is retracted slightly laterally in order to allow access to the thin aponeurotic 
sheath which contains the neuro- vascular bundle.  Biceps brachii muscle is visualized and 
cut. Muscle fibres are carefully dissected in their longitudinal axis away from the tendon 
insertion, to obtain a sample of 300 mg. This is about the size of 2-3 grains of rice. Both ends 
are immediately clipped and hemostasis is controlled. The bundle is fixed on a cork support  
at its apparent resting length.  
The skin incision is closed with 3.0 Nylon suture and pressure is applied to the incision site.  
 This procedure will be done once at 12 months for patients randomized to the exercise arm 
(after the exercise intervention i s completed) and once at any time during the [ADDRESS_1043428] fasted overnight, blood samples w ill be drawn for 
analyses of pro -inflammatory cytokines such as C -reactive protein (CRP), IL -6, IL -1, 
TNF -alpha, homocysteine, adiponectin, leptin, and resistin as well as pro- regenerative 
cytokines such as TGF -beta and IL -10. Peripheral blood M1/M2 macrophages will also 
be measured.  These tests will be performed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043429] -
intervention. Blood sampling will require approximately 20ml of blood at each blood draw. The total amount of blood drawn will be about 60 ml.  
 Metabolism and renal function changes  
All patients will be monitored for fasting plasma Glucose, HbA1c, Lipid profile (Serum Cholesterol, Triglycerides, HDL Cholesterol, LDL Cholesterol) , and serum creatinine 
during the study per standard of care for kidney transplant patients .    
 Vascular Function and Vascular Stiffness  
Brachial FMD will be used to assess macrovascular endothelial function. This method 
involves the measurement of vascular reactivity of the brachial artery using non-invasive 
ultrasound technique. Whi le the subject rests in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547], an [ADDRESS_1043430] Doppler will be used to determine brachial artery blood 
flow velocity. Brachial artery diameter and blood flow velocity will be measured under the 
following conditions: 1) At rest, 2) During reactive hyperemia produced by a five minute interruption of flow with a blood pressure cuff inflated >50mmHg above systolic pr essure, 3) 
For three minutes after reactive hyperemia (30-second intervals for the first minute and 1-
minute intervals thereafter).  
 Assessment of vascular stiffness using peripheral tonometery and ultrasound imaging  
Upon entering the lab, participants wi ll be required to rest quietly in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_33197] a 
dimly lit room for 10 minutes.  Arterial size and stiffness will then be measured via 
ultrasonography using several different methodologies:   1) Pulse wave velocity:  this test 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043431]'s torso.  A pen-shaped transducer is placed over the carotid artery 
(side of the neck), over the femoral artery (top of the leg), over the anterior tibiali s artery 
(inner ankle), and over the radial artery (wrist).  The distance between each of these sites will 
be measured using a tape -measure.   2) Arterial Distensibility and function by [CONTACT_533574]:  this test allows for non -invasive imaging of the carotid, brachial, and femoral 
arteries.  Central blood pressure will be determined using the aforementioned pulse -wave 
analysis method (SphygmoCor SCOR, PWV Medical, Sydney, Australia).  In brief, the 
pressure waveforms that are obtained at the radial art ery site are subjected to a generalized 
transfer function to derive the corresponding central arterial waveforms  
 
 Cardio -ankle vascular index ( CAVI ) and Ankle  Brachial Index (ABI)  
CAVI  and ABI  will be assessed by [CONTACT_761907] (VaSera VS 1500AU, Fukuda Denshi, Japan). The CAVI measurement requires the placement of ECG electrodes on both wrists, and a microphone for phonocardiography on the sternum in the second intercostal space, and [ADDRESS_1043432]’s wrist (radial 
artery).   This microphone measures how stiff the radial art ery is.  This test will be 
performed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043433]’s neck and 
then the artery at the top of their thigh.  We will use these  measurements to measure how stiff their central arterial system (the arteries in the midsection of the body) is. This test will be performed at baseline , [ADDRESS_1043434]’s neck using an ultrasound machine.  This 
machine is similar to what doctors use to look at babies within the womb.  We will place a small amount of gel on their neck to help us get a clearer pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  This gel is hypoal lergenic and washes off very easily.   We will place the probe on their skin, over 
the artery on the inside of their right neck.  This probe will allow us to look at the carotid artery and see how it moves with each heart beat.  This test will be performed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043435]’s heart function with ultrasonography using ultrasound gel and a probe.  It is the same probe used to visualize babies in the womb.  We will measure 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043436]’s heart contracts and relaxes.  This test will be performed at 
baseline, [ADDRESS_1043437] -intervention. 
 Other measurements: Resting heart rate will be measured in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547].  Resting blood pressure will be measured in the brachial artery using a digital sphygmomanometer in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_761890]. Blood pressure will be measured twice, one minute apart, and the 
average of the two values will use as resting bl ood pressure. Body mass index will be 
calculated as weight (kg) divided by [CONTACT_201098] (m) squared. Employment status will be 
confirmed. These measures will be completed at baseline, [ADDRESS_1043438] -
intervention.   GH subjects only:  
Personality Asse ssment  
Millon Index of Personality Styles (MIPS) is a 180 question true/false questionnaire that can typi[INVESTIGATOR_761891] 30 minutes and was developed to evaluate normally functioning adults who may be experiencing problems in various as pects of 
their lives.  The MIPS addresses three key dimensions of normal personalities:  motivating styles, thinking styles, and behaving styles.  Based on the patients motivating style we learn how to balance coaching with autonomy, and how patients engage emotionally with their surrounding environment. The outcome of thinking styles helps us 
understand the patients’ cognitive processes and prepares us for effectively influencing 
their cognitive thinking patterns.  The outcome of behaving styles helps us understand the patients’ way of interrelating with others so we can be the most effective coach when it’s time to help them change their behaviors. This will only be administered to the GH patients at the time of enrollment.   Lifestyle Inventory  
The GH Lif estyle Inventory was developed by [CONTACT_761908] a lifestyle inventory questionnaire 
combining factual assessment questions regarding their lifestyle, as well as questions evaluating their emotional relationship with their health, and finally a series of questions evaluating their readiness to change informed by [CONTACT_761909].  The tool typi[INVESTIGATOR_20187] 8 – 10 minutes for completion, involves 26 questions many of which are multiple choice but some free form fields.  The GH Lifestyle Inventory is primarily used to: allow patients to self -report lifestyle habits, understand 
their emotional relationship with their health and with their lifestyle. And develop hypothesis for where the patient is in terms of behavior change stages according t o the 
Transtheoretical Model of Behavior Change (pre -contemplative, contemplative, 
preparation, action, maintenance). This will only be administered to the GH patients at the time of enrollment.   Food Journal  
The Food Journal was developed by [CONTACT_761910] -reporting of actual eating 
and sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285816].  This is typi[INVESTIGATOR_761892], but never earlier than four consecutive weeks of participation.  The food j ournal is used to: validate or disprove the patients self -
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043439] focusing on actual intak e, and provide a tool for ongoing monitoring and an opportunity 
for increasing patient’s self -reflection on their food and sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_285816]. This will only be 
administered to the GH patients.  Importantly, this is not a measurement tool that we 
would give at  a specific time during the study; it is being used during the study by [CONTACT_761911] -reported behavior 
changes with the patients.   
Counseling 
Patient s in the both arms  will be counseled regarding weight loss per standard of care 
which consists of a pre -transplant and a post -transplant nutrition evaluation and 
education.  
 Video recording (optional)  
Video recordings will  be an option on the consent  form  for patients that are randomized 
into the GH exercis e group. The option to be video recorded by [CONTACT_761912]’s 12 months of training.  The recordings will be used to compare the progress of the patient from the beginning and end of GH training.    
 
 
GH Study Visits:  
At least one week prior to the  first GH session with a patient, the written assessments will 
be completed and returned to GH personnel  for scoring and processing. The first four GH 
sessions ( over 2 weeks) for any patient will be [ADDRESS_1043440] 4 sessions, 
ongoing patients will be slotted into recurring 60 minute time slots  for the remaining 50 
weeks . All of these visits will occur in the UIC Disability Health and Social Policy 
Building (DHSP) located at [ADDRESS_1043441] twice per week, GH personnel  will attempt to follow -up with patients via text 
message, email or a phone call  to evaluate their physical recuperation and overal l health 
and energy or to track their performance with a behavior change goal.  
 Patients will be asked to complete a physical regimen based on the following:  
 Summary  of GH Study Visits : 
• Patients may be asked to repeat previous weeks and/or skip a particular week depending on their energy, progress, and overall health.  
• Depending on a patient’s individual physical need, mobility, the program may be slightly modified (number of repetitions, number of exercises, etc...) to be safe and appropriate for that individual. 
• Each week comprises two different exercise days, each incorporating approximately 5- 10 minute light warm- up plus stretching and then the exercises. 
• Unless specified as a cardio or endurance week, all weeks consist of basic strength training/resis tance workouts.  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 18 of 25  
 • The attached exercise list includes all possible strength training exercises, and 
clients complete the appropriate exercises for that week during their two, one -
hour appointments each week.  Depending on a patients particular physical healt h 
(e.g. shoulder problems) certain exercises may be eliminated or modified in terms of the safe range of motion and intensity. 
• These sessions can be directly supervised by [CONTACT_761913].   
 
Week  Overview  Intensity/Weight  Breaks  
Week [ADDRESS_1043442] Set:  30 Seconds with Only 
Safety Instruction  
2nd Set:  [ADDRESS_1043443] Set:  Holding at top and bottom 
of range (20 se conds each hold)  
2nd Set:  20 rep’s and possible to 
add plus [ADDRESS_1043444] Set:  Warm -Up of 15 repetitions  
2nd Set:  Resistance focused 60 
seconds, possible plus 5  Light/Moderate  2 or more minutes  
Week 4  3 Sets for every exercise.  Each set 
is 12 repetitions with some holding 
for five seconds.   Moderate  30 seconds 
between sets.  2 minutes between 
exercises.  
Week 5  1 Warm Up Set of 15 repetitions.  
1 Heavier Set of 11 Repetitions.  Moderate/Heavy  3 minute breaks  
Week 6  Cardio Exercises (e.g. run in 
place).  5 different exercises are done as one round and two rounds 
total.  Light/Moderate  [ADDRESS_1043445] Set:  Warm up of 12 repetitions.  
2nd Set: 6 repetitions  Mod erate/Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 8  1 Set:  90 seconds  Light  3 minutes  
Week 9  1 Warm Up Set of 15 Repetitions.  
3 Sets of 6- 8 repetitions 
(depending on exercise)  Moderate/Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 10  3 Sets of Declining Heaviness with 
6 reps, 8 reps, and 10 reps  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 11  2 Sets Per Exercise without break 
between:  18 reps and 16 reps  Moderate/Light  2 minutes  
Week 12  1 Set of 25 - 30 repetitions  Moderate/Light  2 minutes  
Week 13  Cardio Exercises (e.g. run in 
place).  7 different exercises are done  as one round and three rounds 
total.  Moderate  2 - 3minutes  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 19 of 25  
 Week 14  1 Set of 12 - 16 Repetitions  Moderate  2 minutes  
Week 15  3 Sets of declining heaviness with 
8, 10 and 12 repetitions  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 16  3 Exercises in Each Set and 7 sets  Moderat e 3 minutes  
Week 17  1 Set 90 Seconds  Moderate/Light  3 minutes  
Week 18  Cardio Exercises (e.g. run in 
place).  3 different exercises per 
set.  3 Sets equal one Round.  
Three Rounds total  Light  2 minutes  
Week 19  1 Warm -Up Set of 12 repetitions  
1 Set of 7 R epetitions  Moderate/Heavy  [ADDRESS_1043446] Set:  Warm up of 12 repetitions.  
2nd Set: 6 repetitions  Moderate/Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 22  1 Set:  35 - 40 repetitions  Moderate/Light  3 minutes  
Week 23 1 Warm Up Set:  15 repetitions  
1 Heavier Set 8 - 10 repetitions  Moderate/Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 24  1 Set of 90 Seconds focused on 
resistance  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 25  Cardio Exercises.  10 exercises in a 
set.  2 Sets.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 26  3 Exer cises in 1 Set.  9 Sets.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 27  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 28  1 Warm Up Set 8 reps  
1 Heavy Set 8 reps.  Medium 
speed.  Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 29  3 Sets on each ex ercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 30  1 set 90 seconds.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 31  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 32  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 33  1 set 90 seconds.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 34  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 35  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 20 of 25  
 Week 36  1 set 90 seconds.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 37  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 38  2 Sets Per Exercise without break 
between:  18 reps and 16 reps  Moderate/Light  2 minutes  
Week 39  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 40  1 set 90 seconds focused on 
resistance.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 41  Cardio Exercises.  10 exercises in a 
set.  2 Sets.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 42  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate /Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 43  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 44  1 set 90 seconds focused on 
resistance.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 45  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 46  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 47  1 set 90 seconds focused on 
resistance.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 48  1 Warm Up Set:  8 – 12 reps.  
1 Heavy Set:  8 – 12 reps.  Slower 
Speed.  Moderate/Heavy  2 minutes  
Week 49  3 Sets on each exercise of 6, 8, 12 
repetitions. Lower weights each 
set.  Medium speed.  Moderate  3 minutes  
Week 50  1 set 90 seconds foc used on 
resistance.  Medium speed.  Lighter  2 minutes  
Week 51  1 Warm Up Set 8 reps  
1 Heavy Set 8 reps  Heavy  3 minutes  
Week 52  Cardio Exercises.  10 exercises in a 
set.  2 Sets.  Moderate  3 minutes  
 
GH Method:  List of Strength/Resistance Exercises  
MEN         WOMEN  
Exercise  Exercise  
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043447]:  Smith Bench Press/Incline  Glutes:  Abductor  
Glutes:  Abductor  Biceps:  Cable Easy Curl / Free Bar  
Biceps:  Cable Easy Curl/Free Bar  Quads:  Leg Extension  
Quads:  Leg Extension  Chest:  Smith Press  
Calves:  Calf Mac hine Abs:  Decline  
Biceps:  Preacher  Quads:  Leg Press  
Quads:  Leg Press  Back:  Pull Down Behind  
Quads:  Leg Extension  Hamstring:  Machine  
Abs:   Decline  Shoulders:  Dumbbell Press / Smith 
Press  
Back:  Pull Down Behind  Triceps:  Push Down / Kick Bac k / Rope 
Pull down  
Hamstring:  Curl Machine  Back:  Low Roll  
Shoulders:  Dumbbell Press / Smith Press  Abs:  Sit -Ups  
Back:  Low Roll  Shoulders:  Side Raise with Dumbbells  
Hamstring:  Good Morning with Dumbbell/ 1 Leg 
Hamstring Curl  Triceps:  Close Gri p 
Shoulders:  Side Rise with Dumbbells  Hamstring:  Good Morning with 
Dumbbells/1 Leg Hamstring  
Triceps:  Push Down / Kick Back  Triceps:  Push Down / Kick Back  
Abs:  Sit Ups  Abs:  Sit Ups  
Triceps:  Close Grip  Triceps:  Close Grip  
 
5)Statistical analyse s: 
 The efficacy of the method s will be determined by:  
 1. a significant difference in term of pre and post treatment perception of well being  
between the groups  
 2.a  significant difference in  the lean/fat body mass ratio between the groups  
 3. a signifi cant difference in BMI between the groups  
      
4. a significant difference between the inflamm atory  parameters between the groups  
      
5. a significant difference between the metabolic parameters between the groups  
 The data will be entered into an Excel  spreadsheet  and stored on the UIMCC hospi[INVESTIGATOR_761893] . The patient data, including age, sex, race, underlying kidney disease, length of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408], rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], comorbidities, and medications will be coded and patient names will not be included in the datasheet.   The de -identified collected data will be entered into a SAS  database. Initial descriptive 
analysis will include calculating means, standard deviations, ranges and frequencies. T -
tests for continuous variables and Chi Square or Fischer exact tests of association for 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 22 of 25  
 categorical variables will be used to compare results of the study between the two groups  
for the efficacy parameters listed above.  A P value<0.05 will be considered significant. 
 
 6) Benefits/risks  
The main risk of this research  is loss of confidentiality of medical information.  Consent 
will be obtained for all patients. Master patient code list  will be kept in a separate file 
accessible only by [CONTACT_34351]. A member of the transplant team will be available to answer any questions or discuss any concerns that patients may have.   
 The patient may experience mild anxiety or discomfort in providing information about their health and well -being. The patient may  also have a potential to feel anxiety when 
being video reco rded (if applicable).  
 
Risks associated with the exercise program  
The likely risks and discomforts expected in this study are those that largely involve being engaged in an exercise program after a prolonged period of inactivity. Such risks include: strain s, sprains, and muscle soreness.  Serious physical injury is considered 
unlikely given the screening for inclusion and physician approval. We will attempt to reduce risks of injury and harm by [CONTACT_761914] 3 month period and having exercise be instructed and supervised by [CONTACT_761915] l.  
 Risks associated with the blood draw:  
The risks associated with a blood draw include: mild pain, bleeding or bruising at the site of the draw.  In general, any bruising should completely disappear within several days.  
There are minimal risks of fainting or hypotension (low blood pressure) during or after the blood draw.  
 Risks associated with the Maximal Aerobic Capacity Test (VO2 Test)  and the [ADDRESS_1043448] include : 
The risks associated with the treadmill max test and [ADDRESS_1043449] include: fatigue, being out of breath, muscle soreness, heart rhythm irregularities, dizziness, loss of consciousness and death.  However, serious adverse e vents (side effects) are very rare 
and by [CONTACT_761916], the risk of such events are minimized. Further risks include slips, trips, ankle sprains  and falls.  These risks will be 
minimized by [CONTACT_7661] a research assistant wi thin arm’s reach for stability. All personnel 
assisting in testing are trained in CPR and emergency lab procedure (including calling 911 and the principal researcher) as outlined by [CONTACT_761917]’s procedures and policies.  
 Risks associated  with Vascular Function and Vascular Stiffness measures:  
There are no known risks associated with the ultrasound tests used to measure artery stiffness and heart function..  Because we will need to place [ADDRESS_1043450] the area on males 
where these will be placed which may cause some discomfort and/or redness. Some 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 23 of 25  
 adhesive may remain once electrodes are removed which may cause redness. This should 
wear off within 1 -8 hours. For the assessment of endothelial function (FMD) , the act of 
inflating a blood pressure cuff around the arm for five minutes before deflation may cause some discomfort, temporary numbness, or tingling. These discomforts, however generally last fo r a minimal amount of time post deflation.  
 
Risks associated with the Biodex include  
Risks associated with the measure of muscular strength (Biodex) testing include strains, 
sprains, and muscle soreness, as with an exercise program.   
  Measures of Physical Activity : 
There are no risks associated with the accelerometer.  Some other risks include shortness 
of breath, fatigue and rarely heart attack or stroke, and very rarely dealth.  
  
Radiation Exposure from the DEXA  scan:The duration of the scan will be le ss than 10 
min. The participant will be exposed to a radiation dose of less than or equal to 0.3 mrem 
based upon manufacturer’s specifications and pre -determined calculations.   This amount 
of radiation exposure is minimal given the estimated effective equi valent dose is below 
100 mrem per year, a limit set by [CONTACT_221562] “general 
public” exposure.  
  Risks of Muscle Biopsy and lidocaine use  
Risks of a muscle tissue biopsy include bleeding, bruising, and infection at the procedure 
site. A subfascial hematoma (a pocket of blood that forms beneath the fatty layer of the 
skin next to the muscle) may occur. M edical conditions  or use of  medication s or 
supplement s that causes excessive bleeding creates a higher risk of bleeding from the 
procedure site. Risk associated with any surgical procedure include infection. Due to the 
immunosuppressant drugs these patients are on as part of standard care, this risk may be 
increased, however the procedure will be done in a sterile environment with a mi nimal 
incision  to protect against infection. Less common risks include muscle contracture 
(shortening of the muscle) and nerve damage leading to loss of feeling at or around the 
procedure site. Arm  may be tender or sore for [ADDRESS_1043451]’s health.   We anticipate that the results of this study will contribute to our understanding of exercise training effects on persons who have had a kidney transplant. It is hopeful that the knowledge gained from 
this research will benefit others who undergo kidney transplant in the future. 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/[ADDRESS_1043452] of 
metabolic syndrome on graft function and survival after cadaveric renal 
transplantation. Am J Kidney Dis 2006;48(1):134 –42.  
2. Honda H, Qureshi AR, Axelsson J, Heimburger O, Suliman ME, Barany P, 
Stenvinkel P, Lindholm B. Obese sarcopenia in patients with end- stage renal disease 
is associated with inflammation and increased mortality. Am J Clin Nutr. 200 7 
Sep;86(3):633- 8. 
3. Ikizler TA, Wingard RL, Harvell J, Shyr Y, Hakim RM. Association of morbidity with markers of nutrition and inflammation in chronic hemodialysis patients: a prospective study. Kidney Int. 1999 May;55(5):1945- 51. 
4. Bosma RJ, Kwakernaak AJ, van der Heide JJ, de Jong PE, Navis GJ. Body mass index and glomerular hyperfiltration in renal transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]: cross -sectional 
analysis and long- term impact. Am J Transplant. 2007;7(3):645–52. 
5. Stengel B, Tarver -Carr ME, Powe NR, Eberhardt MS, Branc ati FL. Lifestyle factors, 
obesity and the risk of chronic kidney disease. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2003;14(4):479–87. 
6. Khan IH, Catto GR, Edward N, Fleming LW, Henderson IS, MacLeod AM. Influence of coexisting disease on survival on renal -replacement therapy. Lancet.  1993 Feb 
13;341(8842):415- 8. 
7. Wright RS, Reeder GS, Herzog CA, Albright RC, Williams BA, Dvorak DL, Miller WL, Murphy JG, Kopecky SL, Jaffe AS. Acute myocardial infarction and renal dysfunction: a high- risk combination. Ann Intern Med. [ADDRESS_1043453] 1;137(7):563- 70. 
8. Painter PL, Hector L, Ray K, et al. A rancdomized trial of exercise training after renal transplantation. Transplantation 2002;74:42- 8. 
9. Dubowitz V., Sewry CA, and Oldfors, A. Muscle biopsy: A practical approach. 4
th 
ed.  2013 : 2- 3. 
Physical Activity in KT  
Version 17    9/27/2018   Page 25 of 25  
  
 Baseline  6 mon ths 12 months  
Screening & 
consent  X X X 
BMI  X X X 
DEXA  X X X 
Biodex  X X X 
[ADDRESS_1043454] X X X 
7 day accelerometer  X X X 
Vascular function 
and stiffness  X X X 
Blood draw  X X X 
Questionnaires  X X X 
Muscle Biopsy    X 
 