[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date: 9/4/2018  
 Study Title : Genomic Outcomes of Metformin (GO MET)  
 
Principal Investigator , Co-investigator(s) : Jingzhong Ding, Yo ngmei Liu, Barbara Nicklas, Stephen 
Kritchevsky , William Applegate, Mike Miller , Jamie Justice, Anthony Molina, and Don McClain  
 
Sponsor or f unding source: Wake Forest Claude D Pepper Center  
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
The number of older adults is projected to increase dramatically by 2050 .  Aging-related diseases and 
conditions still seriously compromise the quality of life among mos t older adults.  Several pharmaceutical 
agents  (1-4), such as metformin, have been tested to extend lifespan and delay aging -related diseases and 
dysfunctions in mice.  Metformin , a biguanide antidiabetic drug , reduces the risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_36746] -[ADDRESS_767076]  with few adverse effects  (e.g., gastrointestinal irritation ) (5).  
Metformin prevents type -2 diabetes primari ly through decreas ing hepatic glucose synthesis  (6), as well as 
enhancing insulin sensitivity and increasing  peripheral glucose uptake  (7-9).  The molecular mechanisms 
remain unclear, although a number of potentia l mechanism such as activation of AMP -activated protein 
kinase (AMPK) and inhibition of mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase  have been proposed , 
see figure 1  (10;11) .  The fact that metformin treatment in persons with type -2 diabetes has been 
associated with reduced risk of other aging -related diseases and conditions, including cardiovascular 
disease  (12), cancer (13) and 
cognitive decline (14) supports 
the possibility  of the  beneficial 
effects of metformin on healthy 
aging.  It is imperative to 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_583540].    
 
 
To tra nslate animal findings to 
human intervention trials, 
appropria te aging biomarkers are 
needed. Methylomic and 
transcriptomic profiles in relevant 
cells may reflect molecular 
features that mediate effects of 
both genetic and environmental 
factors on aging -related 
functional decline and disease. 
The roles of monocytes  have 
been implicated in development 
of many aging -related diseases 
such as cardiovascular disease, 
cancer and neurodegenerative 
disease  (15).  In a cross -sectional 
association study of 1,200 monocyte samples, we identified 1,794 age -associated methylation sites  (16) 
and 2,704 age -associated transcripts  (17), which were over -represented in two networks  (autophagy and 
oxidative phosph orylation ) and suggestive of declin e in those f unctions  with age . Both autophagy  (18) 
and oxidative phosphorylation  (19) are considered as key con tributors to the aging process, and their 
dysfunctions have been linked to aging -related diseases  (20;21) . Changes in these aging -related omic 
biomarkers may be early indicators of cellular damage or disruption that eventually leads to age-related 
dysfunctions.  Assessment of these aging biomark ers in response to therapeutic intervention may also 
AMPK
PI3K
AktACCAMP
p66shcIRS-1
IRS-2
Metformin
Rapamycin
Ras
Protein Synthesis Autophagy Stress Defense InflammationErk1/2
Healthspan and
LongevityResveratrolNAD+NADH
Cellular SurvivalCytokine
Receptor
ATP
SIRT1 mTOR
ATG13p70S6K4EBP1
Bax p53 FOXO1
2
3NF-kBAdiponectin
Receptor INSR IGF-1RPAI-1
TNFa
IL-6 Adiponectin
InsulinMetformin
IGF-1Figure 1. Metformin targets multiple pathways of aging  
 
Protocol version: 9.4.[ADDRESS_767077] all the aims, it will provide essential preliminary data for developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a full scale research 
program.  
• Aim 1 A: To test  the effects of the me tformin treatment on transcriptomic profiles and related  
functional  changes in human monocytes,  
• Aim 1B: To explore  the effects of the metformin treatm ent on methylomic  profiles in human 
monocytes,  
• Aim 2: To invest igate the long itudinal relatio nship between transcriptional and functional  
changes in human monocytes  during the metformin treatment and  
• Aim 3: To test the effects of the metformin trea tment on frailty and other aging -related physical 
and cognitive measur es and investigate the longitudinal relationship between these changes and 
transcriptional changes.  
 
Methods and Measures  
 
Design  
A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled crossover  trial in [ADDRESS_767078], t his design 
can increase  study power for evaluating treatment effects by [CONTACT_583552]/her own 
control. The period effect may be minimum because t he primary outcomes , methylation and 
transcriptional measures, are relative ly stable overtime.  
 
Setting  
All visits will occur in the Geriatric Clinical Research Unit (G -CRU) or the Geriatric Research Center 
(GRC) in the Sticht Center on Aging.  
 
Subjects selection criteria  
All prospective participants in and around Forsyth County, NC will initially be screened via telephone to 
determine general eligibility. They will be asked about their age, medical history, and current 
medications. All participants must meet the inclusion/e xclusion criteria  below.    
Inclusion Criteria  
Age 65 – [ADDRESS_767079] meet criteria from one or more of the following groups :  
        Group 1 (Can have 1 or 2 of these, but not all 3)  
• History of coronary artery disease  (MI/heart attack , stroke, heart failure, o r peripheral 
artery disease)  
• Cancer, with no active treatment in the last year  
• MCI (MoCA >18<26 –inclusive of 1 point if <12 years of education  
        Group 2  
• Decline physical function (walking speed < 1 m/s)  
                   Group 3  (Either or both)  
• Abdominal obesity (>88cm women, >102cm men) AND hypertension (treated or resting   
 blood pressure >140/90  
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  3 • Abdominal obesity (>88cm women, >102cm men) AND  hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] (treated or   
 fasting total cholesterol >240  
English literacy  
Willing to provide infor med consent   
Exclusion Criteria  
 eGFR <45  
Type 2 diabetes  (HbA1c>6.5 ) or type [ADDRESS_767080] year   
Low vitamin B12 Levels (< 300 pg/mL)  
Self-reported severe difficulty or inability to walk 400m or climb 10 steps  (from Q 2 and 19 
on PAT -D) 
Self-reported difficulty or inability to perform basic ADL functions ( from  Q 10, 13, 14, 16 on 
PAT-D) 
Excessive alcohol use (>14 drinks/week)  
Cancer requiring treatment i n past year  (except skin)  
Dementia  – diagnosed and/or MoCA score < 18 
Parkinson’s  or other neurological disease  
Chronic liver disease  or cirrhosis  
End stage renal disease  or on dialysis  
Rheumatic condition s (Rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and any other autoimmune disease the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_583541])  
Thyroi d problems the PI [INVESTIGATOR_583542] g out  
Involved in another interventional study  
Hemoglobin <8 or diagnosed with anemia  
Recent unintentional weight change (+/ - [ADDRESS_767081] 12 months)  
BMI <18.5  
Likely to not follow the protocol    
PI [INVESTIGATOR_583543], consent and randomization. Individuals who pass the telephone screening will be scheduled 
for a visit to the Ge riatric Research Clinic (GRC) in the Sticht Center on Aging for a screening visit (SV). 
Before any data collection, all participants will provide written informed consent and complete a HIPAA 
authorization form in accordance with the Wake Forest School of Medicine Institutional Review Board 
policies. Individuals who meet all eligibility criteria and provide informed consent will be invited back for 
the first baseline visit  (BV). At the end of BV, participant s will be randomized to one of the two study 
intervention sequences  (metformin followed by [CONTACT_583553] ) using a web -
based randomization scheme (developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Miller) . The randomization sequences will be unknown to 
the research staff. Intervention assignment will be generate d using a program that the study coordinator 
will access from his/her PC through the study website.   
 
Schedule and organization of assessment visits  
All assessments will be conducted during 4 visits (before and after each intervention)  according to the 
chart below. All examiners are trained in the standardized conduct of all assessments before data 
collection.  Participants will be instructed to wear appropriate and comfortable clothing, and standardized 
written instructions will be provided prior to each study visit.  
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  4  
Assessment timeline                                               Visit code  SV BV 
On 
trial Mid  
On 
trial 
 FV 
Activity/assessment                                                       Week number  -4 0 12-14 24-26 
Informed consent, rev iew inclusion/exclusion criteria, demographics, 
weight, height, BP and pulse, fasting screening blood draw (metabolic 
blood panel , lipid panel, CBC, Vit B12, Hba1c ), eSPPB, cognitive 
screen (MoCA) , waist circumference,  medical history, medications  
PAT-D,  X   
  
 
Blood collection for methylomic and transcriptomic , bioenergetic 
capacity, CBC, and blood for storage, DSST, leg press, grip, , MATsf, 
and 6MWD   X  
  
 
Randomization   X     
Crossover – Dispense New Medication     X   
Vitals, blood collection for  methylomic and trans criptomic, bioenergetic 
capacity, and blood for storage , CBC, CMP, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], Hba1c,   eSPPB, 
MoCA, DSST, leg press, grip, PAT -D, MAT -sf, 6MWD     
X  X 
Health Maintenance       X 
The screening visit (SV)  will be conducted in the morning f ollowing an [ADDRESS_767082] for measurement of 
lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], blood count, Hba1c, Vitamin B12, and a metabolic panel for screening purposes. Vitals (blood 
pressure, pulse, heigh t, weight , and wa ist circumference ) are collected and the blood draw completed, 
participan ts will be given a snack and continue with the remainder of the visit. First, the  expanded  short 
physical performance battery ( eSPPB)  will be administered and scored and then undergo a cognitive 
scree n, assessed using the  Montreal Cognitive Assessment ( MoC A), and a medical history , review of 
medications and dietary supplements  We will also ask about the participants  demographics and  physical 
abilities using  the Pepper Assessment Tool for Disability (PAT -D), 
 
The first baseline visit  (BV), will be conducted in the morning following an [ADDRESS_767083] of the visit  consisting of l ower extremity muscle p ower (Nottingham Power Rig), grip strength, [ADDRESS_767084] (6MWD), and the Mobility Assessment Tool – short form (MAT -sf).  Cognitive 
function will be assessed using the Digit Symbol Test (DSST) . Once the visit is complete, the participant 
will be randomized and placed in one of the following groups discussed below. Participants will be 
provided with an information sheet that will provide additional details on how and when to take the 
medication, who to call if they have any problems, possible side effects, and what to do should they 
encounter any side effects.  
 
Interventions and Interactions  
Eligible participants will receive both interventions (3 -month metformin treatment and 3 -month  placebo) . 
Randomization will be used to determine the order in which the participants receive each intervention 
(i.e., 15 participants with metformin treatment followed by [CONTACT_14296], and 15 with placebo followed by 
[CONTACT_583554]). Neither the particip ants nor the investigators know the intervention order of a 
participant. Metformin reaches peak plasma concentration within one to eight hours, has an average 
elimination half -life of 6.2 hours in plasma, and is cleared but not metabolized from the body  by [CONTACT_583555] .  Treatment with metformin and placebo will be initiated at a dose of 425 mg taken orally once a 
day at night for 7 days. After the week, the participant will be called to assess tolerance and will be asked 
to increase dose to one pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] a t night at a dose of 850  mg for one week. At the end of the second week, 
participants will be called again and if they tolerated the second dose, they will be asked to take two 
850mg pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], one in the morning and one at night, for a total dose of 1700  mg which is within the range of 
the usual effective dose of 1500 to 2000 mg/day  for the remainder of the 3 months .  This dosing regimen 
was created in order to avoid or reduce possible gastro intestinal side effects. This can be modified if the 
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  5 participant is e xperiencing any side effects and will be handled on a case by [CONTACT_413]. Each study visit  
where stored blood is obtained  (BV, Mid, FV)  may be rescheduled if the subject has a fever, infection, or 
has taken antibiotics within 24hrs of this scheduled visit.  
 
All baseline assessments will be completed again at 12 weeks and again at 24 weeks  as listed in the 
assessment table .  
 
Outcome Measure(s)  
The primary outcome s will be the eigengene score s (and related individual transcriptional measures)  for 
the two  transcriptional  netw orks, the autophagy an d oxidative phosphorylation .  The eigengene score is 
defined as the first principal component of a transcriptional network. The secondary outcome s will 
include functional , methylation and other aging -related measures.   
 
Individual methylation sites and transcripts, especially the eigengenes of autophage, oxidative 
phosphorylation and protein synthesis networks  Methylomic and transcriptomic profiles in monocytes 
will be quantified using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip and the Illumina HumanHT -[ADDRESS_767085]. Liu’s laboratory  (22).  Blood will be collected in Vacutainer 
CPTTM cell separation tubes containing sodium citrate (Becton Dick inson, Rutherford, NJ) to separate 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells.  Then, monocytes will be isolated with the anti -CD14 coated 
magnetic beads using AutoMACs automated magnetic separation unit (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch 
Gladbach, Germanry). DNA and RNA will be isolated simultaneously using the AllPrep DNA/RNA Mini 
Kit (Qiagen, Inc., Hilden, [LOCATION_013]) .  
 
Functional measures : An autophagic profile in monocytes including macroautophagy, microautophagy 
and chaperone -mediated autophagy will be measured using fluorescent repo rters at [CONTACT_583563] ’s lab in Albert Einstein College of Medicine.  
 
Mitochondrial Function: Respi[INVESTIGATOR_583544], 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_583545]. Molin a’s lab (23). This will be performed 
by [CONTACT_583556] d monocytes . Specific outcomes of mitochondria 
function include respi[INVESTIGATOR_583546] (RCR), state 3 (maximal oxygen  consumption rate), and state 4  
(oxygen consumption upon inhibition of ATP synthase ). 
 
Other Data  
 
Vital Signs  Prior to randomization data are collected  on sitting blood pressure, heart rate, and weight. 
Body height is measured once prior to  randomization. Th e blood pressure assessments will allow the 
determination of the incidence of  hypertension and serve as basis for a temporary exclusion. The other 
measures are  collected primarily for descriptive purposes.  
 
Demographics and co -morbidities: Medical informat ion regarding co -morbidi ties and medications will 
be ascertained at the screening visit.  Demographic data such as socio -economic status, education level, 
age, and race also will be recorded and used as covariates if necessary.  Information about preventati ve 
health screenings and other health maintenance information is asked at the follow up visit . 
 
Physical performance will be assessed using the expanded Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB)  
(24). The expanded SPPB consists of 5 repeated chair stands, standing balance (semi - and full -tandem 
stands and a single leg stand for 30 seconds), a [ADDRESS_767086] of balance (walking at usual pace within line s of tape spaced 20 cm apart).  Scores for the 
traditional 0-12 point SPPB can also be obtained from these tests. We will also assess physical 
 
Protocol version: 9.4.[ADDRESS_767087] (6MWD). The participant is asked to walk at a pace 
they can maintain for six minutes and the distance covered will be re corded.  
Lower extremity muscle power will be measured using the Nottingham Power Rig, a safe, convenient 
method for assessing power output from the lower limb which has been used reliably in older adults. (25) 
Participants will sit in a chair and unilater ally depress a foot lever attached to a flywheel as hard and as 
fast as they can. Power output, derived from the acceleration of the flywheel, will be recorded in Watts. 
Power will be averaged for each leg following five trials at maximal effort. Participa nts that have had a 
unilateral hip or knee replacement should not have that side tested.  
 
Grip strength will be measured twice in each hand to the nearest 2 kg using an isometric Hydraulic Hand 
Dynamometer (Jamar, Bolingbrook, IL) and the mean value from the stronger hand used. Participants will 
be excluded from performing the test if they report hand -pain or recent hand or wrist surgery.   
 
Cognitive function will be assessed during screening using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA)  
(26), participan ts must score  ≥[ADDRESS_767088] (DSST)  (27; 28). Participants are given a 
series of numbered symbols and then asked to draw the appropriate symbols below a li st of random 
numbers. The score is the number of correctly made matches in 2 minutes (120 seconds).  
 
Body composition  will be measured by [CONTACT_583557] a 
tape measure.   
 
Blood lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]  (total cholesterol, HDL -Cholesterol, Triglycerides and calculated LDL levels ) will be 
measured at a clinical lab and all results will be entered into the data system.  
 
Activities of daily living will be assessed using the Mobility Assessment Tool – Short Form (MAT -sf). 
This is a no vel, computerized tool for self -assessment of functional performance designed to reduce bias 
from factors such as age, gender and body image.  The Pepper Assessment Tool for Disability (PAT -D) 
will also be used to assess the participant’s ability to complet e an array of important day -to-day activities 
without difficulty and, for a subset of activities, without personal assistance.  
 
Medication  adherence: Although we will attempt to enhance adherence by [CONTACT_583558], 
there may be inter -individ ual variability in adherence to the medication . At the end of each phase, 
participants will be asked to return any unused  pi[INVESTIGATOR_132918] a pi[INVESTIGATOR_583547]. 
Our primary analyses will be an intent -to-treat analysis of the effects of the metformin intervention, but 
secondary analyses will include adherence as a covariate.  
 
Analytical Plan   
We will use an analysis of variance model for crossover design to assess the effect of metformin on 
transcriptional  profiles and other aging -related  outcomes.  The factors in the analysis will include the 
baseline measure, sequence, participant  within  sequence, period, and metformin treatment.  We will 
explore for  the metformin by [CONTACT_583559].  We will also perform exploratory, linear regress ion analysis 
with transcriptional changes as the explanatory variables  and changes in other aging -related measures as 
the outcom e variables . The analy sis will b e focused on the eigengene score s of the autophag y and 
oxidative phosphorylation  transcriptional  networks  (and related individual transcriptional measure s).  As 
this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], focus of analyses will be on estimation of effects and constructing appr opriate 95% 
confidence intervals for these effects.    
 
 
Human Subjects Protection  
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  7  
Risk to participants  
The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) study, a placebo -controlled study of metformin vs. lifestyle 
intervention in persons with pre -diabetes (included s ubjects with fasting blood glucose 90 -125 mg/dL, n = 
3,234) provides insight into side effects of long -term metformin administration in the elderly and non -
diabetics.[ADDRESS_767089] was not hypoglycemia, but gastrointestinal symptom s 
(see table below).  
 
 
  
As far as common side effects, GI side effect and diarrhea are transient and usually pass after a week of 
therapy. In the DPP study, 3 -5% of subjects had continuous diarrhea; this portion of subjects would be 
excluded in the prese nt trial during the run -in, dose -titration period. No one had metformin associated 
lactic acidosis. Hypoglycemic events were either not in evidence or reported.  
 
Weight loss is a common occurrence with metformin and will be monitored. In such a case some p atients 
may complain of hypoglycemic symptoms ( rapid heartbeat, feeling light -headed or fainting, and nausea ), 
and in this case subjects will be asked to refrain from taking their next dose . Subjects may not need 
medical interventions, but will be given in struction for fruit juice  or other carbohydrate  and to call the 
coordinator immediately to come in for a blood glucose check. L evels will be checked by f inger 
(Accucheck) and labs to LabCorp to confirm levels .  If blood glucose levels are < 60 mg/dL they w ill be 
removed from the study  and replaced by [CONTACT_583560] . No more side effects were noted in the 
elderly; in fact, they had a better adherence to therapy.  Young and elderly had the same rates of GI side 
effects and diarrhea.  
 
Subject Recrui tment Methods  
We will recruit these individuals using community -based recruitment strategies including newspaper ads 
and mass mailings. We will also advertise in the VITAL newsletter (BG99 -559) and participate in 
community outreach events.  
 
Informed Consen t 
Written  informed consent will be obtained from each subject. The informed consent process will follow 
 
Protocol version: 9.4.[ADDRESS_767090] for this purpose. Staff is then required to question potential 
participants to ascertain whether s/he has understood the information. Potential participants who are 
illiterate or have impaired vi sion must have the consent read to them, followed by [CONTACT_224416], 
opportunity for questions, and discussion. This process will take place in a quiet, private room. A copy of 
the signed and dated consent form will be given to participants, and t he original document will be placed 
in subjects’ individual study files, which will be stored in a secure location. In compliance with the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Standards for Privacy of Individually 
Identifiabl e Health Information of the Department of Health and Human Services, we will access personal 
health information only after obtaining informed consent.  
 
Confidentiality and Privacy  
All data are obtained for research purposes only. Confidentiality of data is  maintained by [CONTACT_224421]. Data will be used only in aggregate and 
no identifying characteristics of individuals will be published or presented. The information collected has 
a low potentia l for abuse because the data do not address sensitive issues. Nevertheless, appropriate 
measures are taken to prevent unauthorized use of study information. Research records are kept in a 
locked room. Data access will be limited to study staff. Information  linking IDs to individuals is kept on a 
secure, password -protected server to which only authorized study personnel will have access. Data and 
records will be kept locked and secured, with any computer data password protected. A web -based data 
entry system  will be created for this study which will allow access only to study staff (user id and 
password required to access). Blinded staff will not have access to blinded study information on the web -
based database. Computer files are stored on file servers, whi ch are backed up each night and stored for 
easy retrieval in case of emergency.  Files may not be obtained from the research unit by [CONTACT_583561], who are asked to sign a document agreeing to maintain the confidentiality of 
the information. No data files distributed for analysis will include personal information. No reference to 
any individual participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the 
study. After the study is completed, the data will be stored with other completed research studies in a 
locked secure area.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_583548]  (William Applegate)  will be responsible for the 
overall monitoring of the data and  safety of  study participants. The study physician will be unmasked to 
treatment assignment as needed and appropriate. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_583549]. All participants will have a protocol -driven medical monitori ng plan to 
consistently assess for adverse events or medical safety concerns. In addition, participant safety in all 
Wake Forest Pepper Center OAIC -supported studies is monitored by a Data and Safety Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC). It reviews study recruitmen t, drop -outs, protocol changes, losses to follow -up, and 
adverse events every [ADDRESS_767091] Pepper Center OAIC Executive Committee.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations  
Any unanticipated problems, serious and unexpected adverse events, deviations or protocol changes w ill 
be promptly reported  by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_583550] . 
 
 
 
Protocol version: 9.4.[ADDRESS_767092] numerical study IDs with no personal identifiers of the 
participants. These are stored under the Pepper Center Tissue Repository (IRB#1219).  
 
Refer ence List  
 
 1.  Harrison,DE, Strong,R, Allison,DB, Ames,BN, Astle,CM, Atamna,H, Fernandez,E, Flurkey,K, 
Javors,MA, Nadon,NL, Nelson,JF, Pletcher,S, Simpkins,JW, Smith,D, Wilkinson,JE, Miller,RA: 
Acarbose, 17 -alpha -estradiol, and nordihydroguaiaretic acid e xtend mouse lifespan preferentially in 
males. Aging Cell  13:[ADDRESS_767093],TM, Minor,RK, Blouin,MJ, Schwab,M, Pollak,M, Zhang,Y, Yu,Y, Becker,KG, 
Bohr, VA, Ingram,DK, Sinclair,DA, Wolf,NS, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_172360],SR, Bernier,M, de,CR: Metformin improves 
healthspan and lifespan in mice. Nat Commun  4:2192, 2013  
 3.  Miller,RA, Harrison,DE, Astle,CM, Baur,JA, Boyd,AR, de,CR, Fernandez,E, Flurkey,K, 
Javors,MA, Nelson,JF, Or ihuela,CJ, Pletcher,S, Sharp,ZD, Sinclair,D, Starnes,JW, Wilkinson,JE, 
Nadon,NL, Strong,R: Rapamycin, but not resveratrol or simvastatin, extends life span of genetically 
heterogeneous mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  66:191 -201, 2011  
 4.  Satoh,A, Brac e,CS, Rensing,N, Cliften,P, Wozniak,DF, Herzog,ED, Yamada,KA, Imai,S: Sirt1 
extends life span and delays aging in mice through the regulation of Nk2 homeobox 1 in the DMH 
and LH. Cell Metab  18:416 -430, 2013  
 5.  Knowler,WC, Barrett -Connor,E, Fowler,SE, Ham man,RF, Lachin,JM, Walker,EA, Nathan,DM: 
Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J 
Med 346:[ADDRESS_767094],SI, Sowers,JR: Metformin: an update. Ann Intern Med  137:25 -33, 20 02 
 7.  Bailey,CJ, Turner,RC: Metformin. N Engl J Med  334:574 -579, 1996  
 8.  Collier,CA, Bruce,CR, Smith,AC, Lopaschuk,G, Dyck,DJ: Metformin counters the insulin -induced 
suppression of fatty acid oxidation and stimulation of triacylglycerol storage in rode nt skeletal 
muscle. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab  291:E182 -E189, 2006  
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  10  9.  Fantus,IG, Brosseau,R: Mechanism of action of metformin: insulin receptor and postreceptor 
effects in vitro and in vivo. J Clin Endocrinol Metab  63:898 -905, 1986  
 10.  Madiraju,AK, Erion,DM, Rahimi,Y, Zhang,XM, Braddock,DT, Albright,RA, Prigaro,BJ, Wood,JL, 
Bhanot,S, MacDonald,MJ, Jurczak,MJ, Camporez,JP, Lee,HY, Cline,GW, Samuel,VT, Kibbey,RG, 
Shulman,GI: Metformin suppresses gluconeogenesis by [CONTACT_583562]. Nature  510:542 -546, 2014  
 11.  Rena,G, Pearson,ER, Sakamoto,K: Molecular mechanism of action of metformin: old or new 
insights? Diabetologia  56:[ADDRESS_767095] of intensive blood -glucose control with metformin on complicati ons in overweight patients 
with type 2 diabetes ([LOCATION_006]PDS 34). [LOCATION_006] Prospective Diabetes Study ([LOCATION_006]PDS) Group. Lancet  
352:[ADDRESS_767096], Morris,AD, Evans,JM: New users of metformin are 
at low risk of incident canc er: a cohort study among people with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care  
32:1620 -1625, 2009  
 14.  Ng,TP, Feng,L, Yap,KB, Lee,TS, Tan,CH, Winblad,B: Long -term metformin usage and cognitive 
function among older adults with diabetes. J Alzheimers Dis  41:61 -68, 201 4 
 15.  Karlmark,KR, Tacke,F, Dunay,IR: Monocytes in health and disease - Minireview. Eur J Microbiol 
Immunol (Bp)  2:97-102, [ADDRESS_767097], Jr., Stunnenberg,H , Kritchevsky,SB, Hoeschele,I, McCall,CE, Herrington,DM, 
Tracy,RP, Liu,Y: Age -related variations in the methylome associated with gene expression in 
human monocytes and T cells. Nat Commun  5:5366, [ADDRESS_767098], Jr., Hoeschele,I, McCall,CE, Kritchevsky,SB, Herrington,D, 
Tracy,RP, Liu,Y: Transcriptomic prof iles of aging in purified human immune cells. BMC Genomics  
16:333, 2015  
 18.  Rubinsztein,DC, Marino,G, Kroemer,G: Autophagy and aging. Cell 146:682 -695, 2011  
 19.  Lopez -Otin,C, Blasco,MA, Partridge,L, Serrano,M, Kroemer,G: The hallmarks of aging. Cell 
153:1194 -1217, 2013  
 
Protocol version: 9.4.18  11  20.  Choi,AM, Ryter,SW, Levine,B: Autophagy in human health and disease. N Engl J Med  368:651 -
662, 2013  
 21.  Lin,MT, Beal,MF: Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. 
Nature  443:[ADDRESS_767099], Jr., Tracy,RP, Herrington,DM, Hoeschele,I: Methylomics of gene 
expression in human monocytes. Hum Mol Genet  22:5065 -5074, 2013  
 23.  Tyrrell,DJ, Bharadwaj,MS, Van Horn,CG, Kritchevsky,SB, Nicklas,BJ, Molina,AJ: Respi[INVESTIGATOR_583551] -Dwelling Older Adults. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci  2014  
 
24.     Simonsick EM, Newman AB, Nevitt MC, Kritchevsky SB, Ferrucci L, Guralnik JM, Harris T. 
Measuring higher level physical function in well -functioning older adults: expan ding familiar 
approaches in the Health ABC study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2001;56(10):M644 -M649.  
 
25.    Bassey EJ, Short AH. A new method for measuring power output in a single leg extension: 
feasibility, reliability and validity. Eur J Appl Physiol  Occup Physiol 1990;60(5):385 -90.  
 
26.    Donoghue OA, Horgan NF, Savva GM, Cronin H, O'Regan C, Kenny RA. Association between 
timed up-and-go and memory, executive function, and processing speed. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012 
Sep;60(9):1681 -6. 
 
27.    Wechsler D. WAIS -R manual. [LOCATION_001]: Psychological Corporation; 1981.  
 
28.  Salthouse TA. The role of memory in the age decline in digit -symbol substitution performance. J 
Gerontol 1978 March;33(2):232 -8.   
 
29.  Knowler et al. Reduction in the Inc idence of Type 2 Diabetes with Lifestyle Intervention or              
Metformin . N Engl J Med 346(6): 393 -403, 2002  
 