 FORM: IRB Proposal - Standard Submission  
NUMBER  VERSION DATE  
HRP -UT901  11/1/2022  
 
 
Page 1 of 37 
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Cover page  
 
Official Title of the study  
FUEL: Food, fUn, frEsh, famiLy program. Promoting children’s diet through afterschool program 
and family support.  
 
NCT number  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date of the document  
August 24 , 2023  
 
Unique Protocol ID:  
STUDY00004545  
 
  
Page 2 of 37 
 INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that are considered greater than minimal risk (full board) or qualify for expedited 
review (fits in one or more expedited review categories) . See section 5.3 of the UT IRB Policies and Procedures 
Manual for details regarding expedited research.  
• Do NOT submit this form if the study will qualify for exempt review . If your study is exempt, submit HRP -UT902 
Template IRB Proposal Exempt Submission . You can download proposal templates from the Templates tab in 
UTRMS -IRB Library .  
• If you are only using secondary data that will not be initially collected solely for this research project, do not 
complete this form . Instead, use HRP -UT903 Template IRB Proposal Secondary Use form instead. You can do wnload 
proposal templates from the Templates tab in UTRMS -IRB Library . 
• For studies following a sponsor protocol, please use this guidance  to assist in your completion of this for m.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to the research or if you believe you have already answered a 
question elsewhere in the application, state “NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the 
information). If you do not answer a question, the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or 
whether it is not applicable. This may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical 
language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, click o n the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs). Please note, Word 
online does not support Word checkboxes. Please download the file and use your desktop version of Microsoft 
Word.  
• To fill in a text box, make sure your cursor is wit hin the grey text box  before typi[INVESTIGATOR_52855].  
• Do not convert this Word document to PDF.  The ability for UTRMS -IRB to implement “tracked changes” is required 
to facilitate efficient review.  
 
INDEX  
General Study Information   Screening & Recruitment   Required Disclosures  
Study Element Identification   Obtaining Informed Consent   Privacy & Confidentiality   
Study Procedure Description  Benefits   Compensation & Costs  
Subject Population   Risks   
 
  
Page 3 of 37 
  
GENERAL STUDY INFORMATION  
 Study Title  
 Include the study title below.  
 FUEL: Food, fUn, frEsh, famiLy program. Promoting children’s diet through afterschool program and 
family support . 
  
1 Review Type (Choose one)  
 Please choose which level of review best fits your research. This is an investigator’s assessment of review and 
does not preclude the IRB from alternate determinations. In cases where the investigator and the IRB’s 
determination of review conflict, the I RB’s determination will be considered the official determination.  
 
Note : Expedited review does not refer to the timeliness of the review of your protocol, but specific categories of 
research defined by [CONTACT_114810]. If you would like help determining which type o f review best fits your research study, 
please contact [CONTACT_260163] & Compliance: 
https://research.utexas.edu/ors/human -subjects/get -help/   
 
a ☐ 
  Full Board Review  – Greater than Minimal Risk Research  
b ☒ 
  Expedited Review  – Minimal Risk Research  
 
2 Research Hypothes es 
Please describe the research aims and hypotheses in the box below. To input text, click in the box below and 
start typi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
Note: Procedures will be explained in a separate section below.  
  
 Our primary hypothesis is that the effect of an after -school curriculum on nutrition and physical 
activity for elementary aged children improves overall child diet better when resources to encourage 
healthier eating are provided to caregivers at the same t ime than if they are not provided.  
 
 
 
3 Study Background  
Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for the proposed activity, based on existing 
literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that the project is intended to address.  
 
 One approach to improving child health trajectories including diet has focused on after -school 
programming. A prominent example, the “Coordinated Approach to Child Health” (CATCH) program, 
provides curriculum on nutrition  and physical activity. CATCH has, over almost two decades of 
implementation and assessment, shown positive impacts on reducing the incidence of obesity and 
improving child diet (Hoelscher et al, 2010).  It is regularly used by [CONTACT_598650] [ADDRESS_791979] been shown to improve outcomes when added 
to such after -school programming (Brown et al, 2019) . However , family support is not a standard part 
of such programs today.  
 
Although family support is not simple to implement, t here are a variety of approaches of providing 
family support that can layer onto after -school programming and might enhance resul ts for the child .  
For example, fruit and Vegetable (VF)  vouchers provided  to parents and caregivers  as “prescriptions” 
during clinic visits have resulted in modest improvements in child diet (Ridberg et al, 2019 , Saxe -
Custack, et al 2021 ).  In 2021 our laboratory implemented and tested a brief  program to provide 
resources to caregivers to see if that might help them support their children in improving diet.  In 
partnership with the Boys and Girls Clubs of the Austin Area (BGCAA) , we pi[INVESTIGATOR_31219] a 4-week 
intervention for improving Elementary school age child diet by [CONTACT_598651] a 10 -lbs FV box and a 
$[ADDRESS_791980] to the BGCAA’s pandemic protocol of curbside distribution of resources 
(Kahlon et al., 2022). The weekly FV boxes inc luded customized recipes  and cooking tips .  An incentive 
was added for 3 weeks, where caregiver completion of a brief goals sheet provided a n additional $[ADDRESS_791981]  weekly.  Child and caregiver diet were assessed at 4 weeks at the end of the program and 
after another 4 weeks, as follow -up. A randomized trial provided families with the program as 
described above (intervention) or at the end of 8 weeks with grocery store cards of equivalent value 
(control). Child diet was assessed by [CONTACT_598652] , SPAN , 
and children in the intervention arm relative to those in the control arm showed statistically significant 
dose -dependent improvements in overall diet and in fruit and vegetable intake at 4 weeks, and 
sustained at  8 weeks.  
 
Here we assess : 
(1) Can we improve the effects of an evidence -based after -school program that focuses on 
nutritional education and physical activity by [CONTACT_598653].  We will assess the incremental benefit of adding family 
support to allow caregivers some financial flexibility to help their children try healthier foods 
such as fruits and vegetables.  We will compare the addition of family support with a 
randomized cont rol group that does not receive the family support but is still in the same after -
school program.   
 
To aid our research, we have built a partnership for implementation with the Boys and Girls Club of the 
Austin Area (BGCAA).  In addition, one of the origi nal designers and frequent assessor of the evidence -
based after -school program from the UT School of Public Health at Austin is our collaborator.  
 
References  
Brown T, Moore THM, Hooper L, Gao Y, Zayegh A, Ijaz S, Elwenspoek M, Foxen SC, Magee L, O'Malley C , Waters E, 
Summerbell CD. Interventions for preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2019, 
Issue 7. Art. No.: CD001871. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001871.pub4. Accessed [ADDRESS_791982] of Brief Produce Exposure and Unconstrained Grocery Gift Cards on Caregiver 
Influence on Diet of Elementary Age Children: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Netw Open. 2022;5(5):e2212973. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2022.[ZIP_CODE].  
Hoelscher DM, Springer AE, Ranjit N, et al. Reductions in child obesity among disadvantaged  school children with 
community involvement: the Travis County CATCH Trial . Obesity.  2010;18(S1):S36 -44. 
Olsho L EW, Klerman J A, Wilde P E, Bartlett S. Financial incentives increase fruit and  vegetable intake among Supplemental 
Nutrition Assistance Program participants: a randomized controlled trial of the USDA healthy incentives pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. Am J 
Clin Nutr. 2016;104(2):423 -35. doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.129320.  
Page [ADDRESS_791983] of a fruit and vegetable prescription program 
on children’s fruit and vegetable consumption. Prev  Chronic  Dis. 2019;16(73):180555. doi:10.5888/pcd16.180555.  
Saxe -Custack A, Lachance J, Jess J, Hanna -Attisha M. Influence  of a pediatric fruit and vegetable prescription program on 
child dietary patterns and food security. Nutrients. 2021;13(8). doi:10.3390/nu13082619  
 
 
 
4 Design and Methodology  
 Provide a brief description of the study design or data collection methodologies. Details regarding protocol 
specific research procedures will be discussed in a later section.  
 
 Design : A two-arm randomized trial . 
 
Randomization : 
• Eligible households with at least one child  (reference child) in the BGCAA after -school program  
whose  caregiver/parent  (guardian)  (reference caregiver) consents to participate in the study 
will be randomized to either the active  intervention  or the  control (1:1 ratio) . Randomization 
will be stratif ied by [CONTACT_192386] ’s SNAP  beneficiary status as SNAP could affect uptake  of 
treatment elements offered in the family support arm.  
 
 
Blinding: Outcome assessors, principal investigator, and biostatistician are blinded to participant 
allocation. Participant and other staff are unbl inded.  
 
Study arms  (19 weeks)  (Figure 1) : 
 
Randomized arms  
Children in both intervention and control arms participate in the BGCAA ’s after -school program with 
CATCH curriculum.  
1. Across participating school sites, the whole BGCAA’s after -school program runs  for 3h, Mon -Fri for 
the school year. Children enrolled are expected to attend a minimum of 2x/week.  
2. CATCH curriculum will be delivered  as a component of the after -school program  in blocks of 45 -60 
min, twice a week.  
3. Children also participate in active recreational time (approx. 60 min , offered 1x/week at a 
minimum ) which consists of a mixture of free play, structured physical activity games, and/or 
sports activities  (including soccer, football, and basketball) . 
 
Intervention  arm: BGCAA a fter-school program + Family support  
1. Children participate in the BGCAA ’s after -school program with CATCH curriculum  as 
described above.  
2. The child’s caregiver will receive the following:  
• Family tip sheets sent via mobile text at the start of the program and  then every 3 
weeks, to a total of  6 txt messages.  
• Weeks 1 -4 (4 weeks) : 
i. Welcome package mailed to the family’s residence approximately in the first week 
of the program.   
Page 6 of 37 
 ii. Weekly : 1 box of produce  
iii. Recipes  accompanying each box  (sample recipe card attached to submission)  
iv. Bi-Weekly: Grocery store gift card s (2x $20, to a total of $40)  
• Weeks 5-19 (total of 10 weeks  over the 19 -week study timeline ): 
i. For five weeks, a n optional online form (or “goal sheet ”) will be sent to the 
parent/caregiver (5 sheets in total)  with questions about trying new FV items to be 
completed within the next 7 days. As an incentive, a $[ADDRESS_791984] will be sent the 
following week to those who complete it (a potential total of $50). 
ii. Week  11: $[ADDRESS_791985] . Based on disruptions due to the school year 
breaks, we will provide an extra $[ADDRESS_791986] to re -engage the week after a school 
holiday.  
 
Control  arm: BGCAA a fter-school program only  
1. Children participate in the BGCAA ’s after -school program with CATCH curriculum  as 
described above.  
2. At the end of the study , they will receive $1 20 as grocery store gift cards.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Study design:  2 randomized arms  
 
Outcome s:  
• Primary :  
o Child’s diet quality : measured by [CONTACT_598654], HEI , scores calculated from the 
[LOCATION_007] School Physical Activity and Nutrition  (SPAN ), 2nd Grade . 
o Child’s fruits and vegetable consumption, measured by [CONTACT_598655],  2nd Grade . 
 
• Secondary outcomes:  
o Caregiver /parent  diet quality, measured by [CONTACT_598656],  8th 
Grade . 
o Child’s physical activity levels  
o Child’s body mass index , as percentile of BMI -for-age 
 

Page 7 of 37 
 Study m easure ments :  
Timepoint measurements for all study participants (child -parent dyads) include:  
• baseline ( approximately up to [ADDRESS_791987] being 
distributed). Height and weight will be taken during the first 1 -2 weeks of the research program start 
date during a BGCAA field day.  
• mid-point ( planned for  approx imately week s 5-8) 
• end-point ( approximately between week s 16 and 21). Height and weight will be taken during the 19th 
week of the program at the BGCAA’s field day.  
 
Outcomes  Tool  Time points  Administration  
Child’s Diet (primary)  TX SPAN 2nd grade 2019 -
2020 – Dietary questions  Baseline, Mid -point, End 
point  Child, Guardian -report ed 
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598657]  (includes total, 
healthy, and unhealthy 
scores)  Baseline, Mid -point, End 
point  Child, calculated from 
SPAN  
Physical Activity  TX SPAN 2nd grade 2019 -
2020 – Physical activity 
questions  Baseline, End point  Child, guardian -report ed 
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598658] – Children   
Sedentary Behavior  TX SPAN 2nd grade 2019 -
2020 – Sedentary 
behavior questions   Baseline, Mid -point, End 
point   Child, guardian -report ed 
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598659]’s mental health  Strengths and Difficulties 
Questionnaire (SDQ)  Baseline, Mid -point, End 
poin t Child, guardian -report ed 
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598660]-to-age    
Weight  Weight scale  Baseline, End point  Intervention and control 
arms only: Measured by 
[CONTACT_598661], End point  Intervention and control 
arms only: Measured, by 
[CONTACT_598662]/Guardian’s diet  NHANES 2009 -2010 
Dietary Screening 
Questionnaire  Baseline, Mid -point, End 
point  Parent, self -report  
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598663]/guardian’s 
quality of life (physical/ 
mental ) Short Form 12 (SF -12) Baseline, End point  Parent, self -report  
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598664]  
(Baseline only)  Tool  Administration  
Demographics & social 
needs (PRAPARE)  Customized. Related to:  
1. parent /caregiver  (age, gender, ethnicity, 
health insurance, work status, transportation 
and housing)  Parent, Self -report  
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_598665] 8 of 37 
 2. household  (income, housing, program 
participation like SNAP, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_598637])  
3. child  (sex, DOB, health insurance, program 
participation like SLP or SBP, previous BGCAA 
programs)  
Food security  USDA 6 -items  Parent, Self -report  
Structured interview 
over the phone by [CONTACT_14687]  
 
  
 
 
5 Data Analysis  
Describe the data analysis  plan, including any statistical procedures  or power analysis.  
 
 Because both the primary and secondary outcome measures are continuous, normally distributed 
measures, we anticipate having to rely on normal theory analytic methods. Specifically, mixed linear 
regressions on the primary (HEI) and secondary outcome measures ( such as Fruits & Vegetable  
subscores, BMI  and parent HEI) will be fitted to test differential trajectories for two groups from 
baseline to midpoint and end point assessment of the prog ram, time expressed as days elapsed from 
baseline. These models readily accommodate differential dropout in the arms with maximum 
likelihood estimation, random intercepts, and also adjust for any clustering effect of the B GCAA  sites.  
Because randomization  will be stratified by [CONTACT_598666][INVESTIGATOR_598638], the main 
effect of family ’s SNAP beneficiary  status will be included in all models in addition to the main target 
terms of interest: two -way interactions of time X treatment, time X SNAP , and their three -way 
interaction. Overall alpha will be set at 0.05 for each child outcome  on these target terms .  
 
In addition to these intention -to-treat (ITT) analyses we will also conduct as -treated (AT) analyses 
incorporating the ‘dose’ variable that  will be formed based on implementation database elements that 
permits the tracking of program elements consumed/ pi[INVESTIGATOR_100628]/ attended by [CONTACT_598667]/her parent/guardian in the two active arms. In AT models, total dose taken -up by [CONTACT_342123] e 
program will enter into product terms with time. As is typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855], we expect the AT models to have 
greater sensitivity/ precision in estimating the added value of the family support beyond the elements 
of the after -school program with CATCH for change in HEI and secondary outcomes. In addition the 
dose variable sheds light on the effects of Boys and Girls Club programming, including CATCH, 
regardless of other incentives. Statistical controls for family demographic characteristics, food 
insecu rity, child age, sex , and SNAP beneficiary status  will be included in the AT framework as ‘dose’ is 
not completely controlled by [CONTACT_598668] (e.g. economically disadvantaged fami lies may be more likely to uptake more of 
the program elements).  
 
The greatest opportunity lies in exploratory analyses of the two randomized  arm participants that 
permit the estimation of dose -response based on family characteristics. Both the “after -school 
program with CATCH ” and the “after -school program with CATCH + family support ” intervention arms 
are expected to show variation in dose.  In the case of dose for “after -school program  only ” 
Page [ADDRESS_791988] dose variation to be predicted by [CONTACT_598669] 
(e.g. number of days the target child attends BCG after -school program is predicted by [CONTACT_598670], family income, number of siblings and caretakers in the family as alternatives to 
BCG attend ance). In contrast, dose for “after -school program with CATCH + family support”  
participants is more complex and includes distinct elements that require greater motivation on the 
part of the parent/ guardian to engage with (e.g. completing goal sheets and receiving incentives 
versus not completing incentivized elements of the program). We will model the associations of 
separate aspects of ‘dose’ with response (HEI, physical activity) and predict separate aspects of ‘dose’ 
from family characteristics at base line. These exploratory analyses will provide clues on how to 
structure future programs, incentivize participation, as well as inform who is likely to benefit the most.  
In the exploratory analytic framework, we will engage in omnibus correction for inflat ions in type -I 
error rate and will not interpret any significant single result unless at least 10% of all examined 
associations are significant.  
 
STUDY ELEMENT IDENTIFICATION  
6 Study Elements  
 Check  each research procedure included in your study.  
A full  description of all study procedures should be provided in the Procedures (Details) section below .  
Procedures denoted with “*” below have supplemental forms. Navigate to the UTRMS -IRB Library, Templates  
tab to download the  applicable supplemental form.   
 
 ☐ 
 Bio-specimens * 
 ☒ 
 Biometrics  
 ☐ 
 Registry or Repository * 
 
 ☐ 
 Focus Group  
 ☐ 
 Genetic Analysis  
 ☐ 
 Genomic Data Sharing  
 
 ☐ 
 International 
Research * ☒ 
 Interview/Survey  
 ☐ 
 MRI  
 
 ☐ 
 Protected Health 
Information * ☐ 
 Observation  
 ☐ 
 Radioactive Material/PET/Nuc . 
Med  
 ☐ 
 Record Review  
 ☐ 
 Sensors  
(Externally Placed)  ☐ 
 Sensors  
(Inserted ) 
 ☐ Audio  (only)  
Recording  ☐ Video Recording  
 ☐ X-Ray/CT/DEXA  
 
  
7 Study Intervention  
 Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs) if you will implement any of the 
following interventions.  
A full description of all study interventions should be provided in the P rocedures (Details) section below .  
Page 10 of 37 
 * Intervent ions denoted with “*” below have supplemental forms. Navigate to the UTRMS -IRB Library, 
Templates  tab to download the applicable supplemental form.  
 
 ☒ Behavioral  
 ☐ Device * 
 ☐ Drug/Biologic * 
 
 
 
8 Clinical Trial  
 Click on the following check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs) if the research meets the 
below definition of a clinical trial.   
 
 ☒ This study meets the definition of a clinical trial according to clinical trials.gov in 
that it  involves one or more human subjects who are prospectively assigned to 
one or more interventions (which may include placebo or other control) to 
evaluate the effects of those interventions on health -related biomedical or 
behavioral outcomes.  
 
 
9 Additional Oversight  
 Check  the box (es) below  if you are implementing research procedures that require oversight from additional UT 
committees.   
 
 ☐ Energy introduced 
to the subject 
(electrical, 
magnetic, light)  
 
 ☐ Human embryonic, 
human induced 
pluripotent, or human 
totipotent stem cells; 
or human gametes or 
embryos  ☐ Radiation exposure without 
direct clinical benefit  
 
 
 
 
       
 ☐ Biological Samples, Biohazards, Recombinant DNA, or Gene Transfer  
  If biological samples are used and stored on UT campus UT IBC approval is needed.  
 a ☐ UT IBC has (or will have) oversight.  
   Provide UT IBC Number:  
         
 
    
 b ☐ Biological samples collected will not be stored at UT Austin and another 
agency has responsibility for biospecimen safety.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_791989] until they are accepted into the B GCAA after -school program.  
 
  
 
 STUDY PROCEDURE DESCRIPTION   
11 Procedure Description  
 Describe all study procedures, including a step -by-step outline of what participants will be asked to do or how 
data will be used. Be sure to describe all of the following in detail, as applicable:  
• Description of all research procedures being performed and when they are performed, in sequential 
order.  
• Describe/list all research measures/tests that will be used [ NOTE: upload copi[INVESTIGATOR_260145], 
surveys, scripts, data collection forms, etc., in “O ther Attachments” in UTRMS -IRB].  
• Secondary data or specimens that will be obtained, how they are collected, how are they used.  
• Where research activities will take place and duration (include expected time commitment of 
participants).  
• Study elements chec ked in #6 above should be described here.  
Note: if this is a multi -site or collaborative study include the following:  
• This is a “Multi -site Study that involves more than one site performing ALL aspects of the research 
procedures as outlined above.” OR “T his is a collaborative study that involves UT Austin researchers 
working with external researchers who are engaged in performing the following study activities (list 
activities).”  
• For assistance with multi -site/collaborative research, download HRP -UT932 R equest to Rely 
Assessment Form from the UTRMS -IRB Library and email [EMAIL_4980] . 
 
 Recruitment  and arm allocation  
1. Interest list  
a. BGCAA staff and Factor Health research staff (research associates, RAs) will use various 
methods (described in section 16) to identify interested participants. The name [CONTACT_13255] [CONTACT_598671] a shared spreadsheet in UT Box and 
this will serve as the interest list t hat study members will use to recruit people into the 
program. The spreadsheet will only be shared between study staff.   
b. From tabling activitie s, we will collect people’s names and phone numbers and will add to 
the interest  list. These tabling events will occur at BGCAA sites.  
2. Consent (caregiver/parent) + Assent  (child)   
Page [ADDRESS_791990], staff wi ll schedule another time 
and date for baseline phone measurements (more below) . 
3. Participating families (parent -child dyads) will then be allocated to study arms  as follows:  
a. Dyads with one reference caregiver and one reference child  in the BGCAA after -schoo l 
program will be randomized to one of the two active arms  (family support  + after -school 
program,  or after -school program only)  
 
Measurement s and data collection  procedures:  
 
There will be 3 data collection measurements over the course of 19 weeks. These are the baseline, 
mid-, and end -point measurements. The initial baseline phone call will take approximately an hour 
(counting consent/assent), while the mid - and end -point meas urements will take approximately [ADDRESS_791991] consented  in to 
the research, not the families participating in BGCAA’s regular program  and not participating in our 
research study .  
 
Questionnaire  data : 
At each measurement , the research associate ( RA), blinded to the active study arm of the 
participants, will gather parent -reported data and child -reported data with parental guidance over 
the phone as structured interviews . The structured interviews  will be done as follows:  
 
1. The RA place s the  phone call to the reference parent /caregiver . 
2. After introducing themselves and  the purpose of the call, they will proceed with the 
questionnaires as shown in Section #4 (e.g., diet, physical activity, demographics) . 
Questionnaires f or children will be asked to the parent (guardian -reported) who can confirm 
answers with the child if they are present and as needed.  At the parent’s discretion, the child 
may answer the questions themselves.  
3. After the children -geared survey answers are obtained, parent/caregiver will answer 
questions related to themselves and their diet.  
4. Answers will be  recorded in real time in REDCap by [CONTACT_21118].  
 
Measured data (height and weight) : 
Collected in the first week of the program (baseline) and in the last possible week  of the program  
(end -point) in person for approximately 5 minutes , as follows:   
 
1. Children in the two randomized intervention and control  arms:  
Page 13 of 37 
 a. BGCAA staff and/or research study staff (blinded to the study arm allocation) at 
participating sites will embed weight and height measurements as part of their regular 
after -school activities du ring a field day.  
b. As part of the field day, all children will participate in an interactive activity that 
measures their weight, height and how high they can jump. Having all children 
participate in the activity will ensure participant and non -participant privacy. Height 
will be measured using a stadiometer against the wall before the activity. The activity 
will utilize athletic tape and/or post it notes that the children will write their name [CONTACT_598687] a wall by [CONTACT_598672][INVESTIGATOR_158002]. Prior to jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_007], the chil d will stand on a mat with 
an integrated scale that will measure their weight. Both height and weight measures 
will be calculated for all children as part of Boys and Girls Club’s field day (non -study 
data), however, only the height and weight from the res earch participants will be 
collected and stored by [CONTACT_598673] (study data).   
c. The values of height and weight for the children participating in the study will then be 
scanned or typed in a secure and HIPAA -compliant database, such as UT Bo x.  
d. RAs involved in the study will then register them in REDCap for each child, both the 
original data and the transformed units (feet/inches for height and pounds for weight).  
 
This integration  of height/weight measurements with the after -school day has b een 
agreed to between study and BGCAA staff . Together we wish to minimize  the direct 
and open measurement of weight since it is a  sensitive activity for some children. In 
the experience of BGCAA staff  contextualizing it in a more fun and instructional 
activity (as the above) would reduce the likelihood of causing them unnecessary 
psychological discomfort  while still providing height and weight  measurements . 
During consenting into the study, parents/caregivers will be fully and dully informed 
about th is acti vity in which their child’s weight and height will be obtained . 
 
 
Interventions  
Arm #1  – Intervention arm : BGCAA after -school program + Family support  
• Children participate in the BGCAA ’s after -school program with CATCH curriculum  as well 
as other activities (such as active recreational time  that could include sport activities such 
as soccer, basketball, etc , homework/power hour, and snack time)  as they usually do . 
• Across school sites, the whole BGCAA ’s after -school program runs fo r 2-3h, Mon -Fri. 
The after -school program happens immediately after school and BGCAA provides 
transportation from the school to offsite locations if the program is not held at 
child’s school.  
• CATCH ( https://catch.org/ ) is a school -based program for health education and 
Whole Child wellness that BGCAA incorporates into their regular activities. BGCAA 
staff receives training (irrespective of the research) to focus on its healthy eating and 
healthy movement components. Ea ch site’s BGCAA staff will deliver these 
components over the course of the school semester on the days of the week of their 
choice, with a minimum frequency of 45 -60 min, twice a week.  
• Children participate in daily (M -F) recreational time (45-60 min) which  consists of a 
mixture of free play, structured physical activity games, and/or sports activities  
(including soccer, football, and basketball  as examples ). 
Page 14 of 37 
 4. The child’s parent will receive the following as part of a family support:  
• Approximately e very 3 wee ks (beginning in in Week 1) , educational sheets (“tip 
sheets”) will be sent electronically via mobile text messages (total of 6). Sample tip 
sheet included as an attachment.  
• 1-4 (4 weeks):  
i. One w elcome package will be mailed to the family’s address at the start of the 
program containing: A welcome letter , a ca lendar of important dates  related to the 
program and some educational handouts such as healthy food choices with “Go, 
Slow, Whoa List” , tip sheets  for activities , food allergy information, and c hild-
friendly recipes . Examples attached to this submission.  Participant’s address will be 
obtained via the demographic questionnaire at baseline.  
ii. Weekly: 1 box of produce  to be delivered centrally to each of the participating 
after -school sites and will be distributed by [CONTACT_598674]/caregivers during child pi[INVESTIGATOR_9107]. At the BGCAA housing sites, some children 
may walk home with the produce bag and a BGCAA  staff member will assist if 
needed (which is normal protocol for BGCAA). Participants cannot pi[INVESTIGATOR_598639], and therefore will not have control over potential 
allergens in the box. As such, participants with known food allergens rel ated to 
produce items will be excluded from the study.  
iii. Recipes accompanying each box  (sample recipe card attached to submission) . 
Recipes will be the same for all participants and will be sent via a text message link.  
The program team will also provide physical copi[INVESTIGATOR_598640] . Bi-Weekly: HEB Grocery store gift cards (total of $40)  
• Weeks 5 -16 (total of 10  weeks  over the 19 -week study timeline ): 
i. At the start of weeks 5, 7, 9, 12, and 14: An optional onlin e form (or “ goal sheet ”) 
will be sent to the parent/caregiver (5 sheets in total)  with questions about the 
produce items (including but not limited to: bananas, carrots, zucchini, squash, 
etc.) they received  to be completed within the next 7 days. As an in centive, a $[ADDRESS_791992] will be sent the following week to those who complete it (a potential 
total of $50). 
ii. Week 11: $[ADDRESS_791993]  
 
Since th e goal sheet  will contain identifiers (such as names), t his form will be built in a HIPAA 
compliant database, such as REDCap , Qualtrics,  or other secure database  where the 
information collected will be securely stored and then checked by [CONTACT_598675] .  
 
Arm #2  – Control  arm: BGCAA after -school program only  
• Children participate in the BGCAA ’s after -school program with CATCH curriculum  as well 
as other activities (such as active recreational time, homework/power hour, and snack 
time) —as described for Arm #1.  
• Children participate in daily (M -F) recreational time (45-60 min) which consists of a 
mixture of free play, structured physical activity games, and/or sports activities  (including 
soccer, football, and basketball) . 
Page 15 of 37 
 • They will be attending the same sites as the intervention arm  (Arm #1) . Hence, they will 
be exposed to the same after -school content at each participating site.  
• The after -school program happens immediately after school and BGCAA provides 
transportation from the school to offsite locations if the program is not held at child’s 
school.  
• At the end of the study, the reference parent will receive $[ADDRESS_791994] Populations  
Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs) each population, if they are 
specifically studied for this research.  
 
 ☐ 
 Active Military 
Personnel  ☒ 
 Children /Minors  
 ☐ 
 Decisionally Impaired Adults  
 
 ☐ 
 Emancipated Minors  
 ☐ 
 Fetuses  
 ☒ 
 Individuals with Limited 
English Proficiency  
 ☐ 
 Neonates  (Uncertain 
Viability)  ☐ 
 Neonates (Non -
Viable)  ☐ 
 Prisoners  
 
 ☐ 
 Pregnant Women  
 ☐ 
 UT Staff/Employees  
 
 ☐ 
 UT Students  
 
 
[ADDRESS_791995] multiple research populations (e.g., teachers and students), 
clearly outl ine characteristics for each group.  
 
 A household will be the subject of randomization, one index parent/caregiver and one index child 
(parent -child dyads) who meet inclusion criteria will be invited to participate in the research activities 
(data collection) . 
Participation in the BGCAA  after -school program is governed by [CONTACT_598676].  
  
Page [ADDRESS_791996] multiple research populations (e.g., teachers 
and students), clearly state the minimum age  for each group.  
  
 Children in  1st grade  (approx. 6 yrs old); 18 for adult participants (parents)  
 
  
c Maximum Age  
Include the maximum age range for target population. If you have multiple research populations (e.g., teachers 
and students), clearly state maximum age  for each group.  
  
 Children in  5th grade  (approx. 11 yrs old) ; No maximum age for adult participants (parents)  
 
  
d Inclusion Criteria  
Describe the specific criteria that will be used to decide who will be INCLUDED in the research from interested or 
potential subjects. Define technical terms in lay language, as applicable.  
  
 Parent must be [ADDRESS_791997] be  enrolled in grade 1  to 5 (age d approx.  6-11 y-o) for 
the 2023 -2024 school year  at one of the 11 sites where BGCAA offers after -school program  to 
elementary -aged children , AND:  
• For intervention and control arms : Participating in the BGCAA after -school program  at the 
beginning of the [ADDRESS_791998] be English and/or Spanish speaking and have the ability to receive text 
messages  
 
Locations where BGCAA offers after -school programming include:  
• Elementary schools:  
o NYOS (Not Your Ordinary School)  
o Woolridge Elementary  
o Overton Elementary  
o Walnut Creek Elementary  
o IDEA – Rundberg  
o McBee Elementary  
• Off-site locations  
o Home Club (BGCAA’s headquarters)  
o Meadowbrook Apartments (Housing Authority)  
o Booker T. Washington Court (Housing Authority)  
o Chalmers Court (Housing Authority)  
 
  
e Exclusion  Criteria  
Page [ADDRESS_791999] total number that could be invited (meeting inclusion/ exclusion criteria) to be 350 total index 
parent and child pairings. Below we discuss vario us realistic recruitment and retention scenarios given 
the capacity of our partner, BGCAA. Our aim will be to maximize recruitment but  are prepared for 
various recruitment scenarios.  
15 Sample size rationale  
Describe your sample size rational below.  
  
 We are conducting both as-treated ( AT) and intention -to-treat ( ITT) analyses.    
 
To inform our sample size calculations and power for the ITT and AT analyses, we relied on 
information from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_598641] 2021.  The pi[INVESTIGATOR_598642] (Kahlon et al., 2022).  
 
For the AT analysis, we use the results of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_598643] 2021 showing a dose response 
correlation, which was r = 0.31.  We have 80% power to dete ct this association with total N = 79. Even 
if the enrollment and retention is as low as n= [ADDRESS_792000] size for the ove rall child’s HEI (Healthy Eating Index) at the end of the 
study was .[ADDRESS_792001] 
an identical difference between the two randomized arms (Program+ Family Support and After -school 
program only ) with 80% power at alpha = .05, we would need to retain 120 children in each arm . 
Considering a 15% attrition rate, a  target recruitment of approx. [ADDRESS_792002] sizes (i.e., our ability to detect differences) in two scenarios, maintaining 80% 
power at alpha = .05.  
 
Page 18 of 37 
 SCREENING AND RECRUITMENT  
 
17 Identification and/or Screening Procedures  
Describe the identification and/or screening procedures below.  
 
 The Identification  of interested families will be done both by [CONTACT_598677] , as follows :   
 
• Distribution of flyers containing a QR code that links to an interest form to request more 
information later – at BGCAA sites & digitally via Class Dojo app that BGCAA staff use to 
communicate with families. In this form, if collecting interest information , we will collect the 
parent/guardian name, child name, school and/or afterschool site they attend, contact [CONTACT_598678], grade child will be in the fall, and preferred language. The path the QR code takes Assuming that all eligible households will be invited to participate  and that a conservative  potential 
pool of  approx.  300 households will be maintained  in the fall  (in the current school semester, Boys 
and Girls Club has approximately [ADDRESS_792003] 
one child) , we can expect the following : 
• If we successfully enroll 75%  in the study, N=226  
o With  n=[ADDRESS_792004] size d= .45 .  
o Considering 15% attrition  in each arm, we would end the study with  n=[ADDRESS_792005] size of d= .49.  
• If we successfully enroll 50%, N=150  
o With  n=[ADDRESS_792006] size d=.55  
o Considering 15% attrition , n=[ADDRESS_792007] size of d= .60.  
 
Therefore, we will invite to participate in the study all households with at least one eligible child to 
maximize our ability to detect meaningful mean differences in children’s HEI between the two active 
arms.  
  
16 Identificati on and Screening  
 Check the box below if this study involves a screening process prior  to the informed consent process.   
 
 ☒ This study involves obtaining information or biospecimens for the purpose of 
screening, recruiting or determining eligibility of prospective subjects prior to 
informed consent by [CONTACT_5640]:  
1. Oral or written communication with the prospective subject or LAR  
2. By [CONTACT_598679].  
Page 19 of 37 
 them will be to a secure and HIPAA -compliant datab ase (UT Box, REDCap, and/or UT Qualtrics) 
that will securely house the information to be filled out by [CONTACT_7071]/guardian.   
• Tabling at participating BGCAA sites during parent pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696] -up (after the after -school program) 
and/or events by [CONTACT_20240]. If a  parent wants to sign up to be contact[CONTACT_598680], 
the same fields listed above in bullet [ADDRESS_792008].  BGCAA staff will not actively recruit participants on their own and will refer 
all questions about the study to the research study staff members.  
• Posting about the research study on ClassDojo, a virtual platform BGCAA uses to communicate 
with thei r members. We also plan to use a QR code for the parents to learn more about the 
program (link to recruitment flyer) through BGCAA normal practices of communicating 
information to their members.  
• BGCAA will share the families participating in the after -scho ol program at the beginning of the 
[ADDRESS_792009] as of the beginning of the 2023 -2024 school year.  
• Tabling at participating BGCAA sites during parent pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696] -up (after the after -school program) 
and/or events both by [CONTACT_598681]/or BGCAA site staff.  
• Building upon BGCAA’s regular process of notifying caregivers’ child of enrollment into the 
after -school programming.  
• Interested families will be further screened at BCGAA sites or via phone call by [CONTACT_598682] 
“Intro Script” (uploaded as part of the local site documents) read to them.  
The families that ex press interest in joining the study or learning more about it will have their contact 
[CONTACT_3031] (as above) added to a spreadsheet (i.e. interest list) kept securely in UT Box. Research 
staff from Dell Medical School involved in the study will further scr een for interest and eligibility via a 
phone call and/or text message.  During this phone call, research staff will explain the study in more detail, 
including exclusion/inclusion criteria information. As part of the screening, the research staff member wil l ask if 
there are any food allergies or sensitivities to be aware of. If so, they will not be able to participate in the study.  
 
 18 Recruitment Overview  
 Check box indicating all recruitment methods utilized for this research.  
 
 ☐ E-mail  ☒ Flyer  
 ☒ In-Person  ☐ Letter  
 ☐ Social Media  ☐ Research Pool  
 ☒ Telephone/Text  ☐ Snowball Sampling  
 ☐ Web -post  ☒ Word of Mouth  
Page [ADDRESS_792010].  
Describe recruitment procedures in the box below. Describe all elements checked above to provide a complete 
understanding of the recruitment strategies/methods.  
NOTE: Upload copi[INVESTIGATOR_260151] -IRB in the “Recruitment Materials” section.      
 
 Recruitment:  
• Interest list  
• BGCAA staff and Factor Health research staff (research associates, RAs) will use various 
methods (described in sectio n 17) to identify interested participants. The name [CONTACT_13255] [CONTACT_598671] a  spreadsheet in UT Box and this will 
serve as the interest list that study members will use to recruit people into the program. 
The spreadsheet will only be shared between BGCAA staff and Factor Health research 
staff.  
• RAs will outreach to the individuals on the interest list and explain the study in more detail 
before following consent/assent procedures.  
• Tabling activities:  
o Research Staff will table at BGCAA sites when parents are expected to be there (i.e. 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696]-up/drop -off after school, etc.). From these tabling activities, staff can hand out 
flyers and inform potential participating families about the study. RAs will collec t 
contact [CONTACT_598683] (specific fields indicated in Section 17) and will add 
to the interest list.  
 
  
 
OBTAINING INFORMED CONSENT  
 20 Consent Overview  
 Check the  box(es) for consenting procedures that will be used.  
 
 ☐ Obtaining Written Informed 
Consent /Parental Permission  
 ☒ Requesting a Waiver of Documentation of 
Informed Consent  
 
 ☐ Requesting a Waiver of 
Informed Consent  
 ☐ Requesting an Alteration of the Required 
Elements of Informed Consent  
 
 ☒ Obtaining Child Assent  
 ☐ Obtain Consent Using a Short Form with a 
Witness  
Page 21 of 37 
  21 Consent and Assent Processes  
 Provide a detailed description of consent/assent procedures in the box below. Include: who will obtain consent, 
where will consent be obtained, how is consent obtained, how consent/assent is documented, and when the 
consent process will occur in such a manner that participants will have sufficient time for adequate 
consideration.   
NOTE: Upload copi[INVESTIGATOR_42117]/assent/permission forms /scripts  to UTRMS -IRB in the “Con sent Forms” 
section. This is required for UTRMS -IRB to appropriately stamp consent forms for approval.  
 
 1. Research team members will contact [INVESTIGATOR_392287]/or text the individuals who indicated 
interest in the study via recruitment strategies and will further explain the study to confirm 
interest  and screen participants .  
2. When interest is confirmed, the research team member will ask individual for their e -mail and 
e-mail copi[INVESTIGATOR_598644] . Then the research staff will proceed to rea d 
through the consent and assent form s over the phone (if the potential participant is willing to 
provide us an email address to do so). They will allow as much time as the person needs to ask 
any questions they may have.  
3. Research staff will also explain that the research is voluntary and they are not required to 
participate and may withdraw at any time for any reason. If the potential participant agrees to 
participate, they will be asked for their verbal consent and parental permission. Attainment of 
verb al consent and parental permission will be documented in Redcap. Verbal consent and 
parental permission will be obtained to reduce burden on participating families.  
4. After parent/guardian has given their consent, researcher will talk with child and read th rough 
the assent form over the phone. Similarly, they will allow time to answer questions and 
explain that the research is voluntary. Once the child agrees to participate, the verbal assent 
will be documented in Redcap.  
 
E-mail addresses will only be used  to send consent and assent forms. No other correspondence will 
take place via e -mail.  
 
When more than one child could be eligible for the study, the parent will be asked to select the child 
to be enrolled and assented into the study.  
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_598645], if potential participants 
wish to have a copy prior to expressing full interest.  
 
For Spanish speaking families, consent will be provided in Spanish. The Spanish -translated consent 
forms will be uploaded to UTRMS via modification prior to administration.  
 
 
22 Electronic Consent  
 Check the box below if this study involves obtaining consent with an electronic signature. Be sure the section 
above is consistent.  
NOTE: This box should NOT be checked participants are responding “yes” or clicking “I Agree” on a consent 
form. This section should only be completed if an electronic signature [CONTACT_260196].  
 
Page 22 of 37 
  
  ☐ This study involves documenting informed consent/par ental permission using 
an electronic signature.  
 
  If true, specify method for obtaining e -consent below (e.g., DocuSign):  
 
        
 
23 Consent and Translation  
Check the box below to indicate that consent documents/scripts will be translated to a language other than 
English.  
  
 ☒ The study population will likely include participants whose limited English 
speaking status requires translation of the consent form.  
 
  Translation Process  
If above is checked, complete the below information describing the translation process. Either A o r B 
must be checked.  
 
 A ☐ The consent documents will be translated by a certified translator.  
 
 B ☒ A non -certified translator will translate the consent documents.  
If selected, complete the next two items  below.  Section describing qualifications must be 
completed and backtranslation (ii) must be true.  
 
  i Describe the translator’s qualifications  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
   Multiple English fluent and native Spanish speakers within research personnel. One will 
translate and the other will confirm translation.  
 
    
  ii ☒ Another individual will  confirm that the translation is accurate and 
appropriate   
 
26 Waiver of Documentation of Informed Consent  
 Only complete this section if a waiver of documentation of consent is requested (checked above in #21). To 
approve a waiver of documentation of consent, one of the following options must be appropriate and justified 
by [CONTACT_3021].  
Please choose one waiver option and provide additional information as prompted.  Waiver option [ADDRESS_792011] 
common.   
 
Page 23 of 37 
  A Waiver Opt ion 1  
  Check the box below for each item (all required – #1-4) and provide protocol -specific information as to 
how the criteria below are met.    
NOTE: This is the only applicable waiver of documentation option for greater than minimal risk 
research. If your study is greater than minimal risk and does not meet Option 1 criteria, you will need 
to obtain written consent.   
 1 ☐ 
 The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent 
document . 
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 2 ☐ 
 The principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of 
confidentiality.  
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 3 ☐ 
 Each subject will be asked whether the subject wants documentation 
linking the subject with the research, and the subject’s wishes will govern.  
 
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 4 ☐ Describe the mechanism for documenting that informed consent was 
obtained  
   Briefly explain how the researcher will document that consent was obtained from participants.  
         
 
    
 B Waiver Option 2  
Page 24 of 37 
   Check the box below for each item (all required – 1-3) and provide protocol -specific information as to 
how the criteria below are met.    
 1 ☒ 
 The study is minimal risk.  
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
   Surveys can be collected over the phone and minimize burden on participants. Though 
we will collect  in-person height and weight measurements on the child, these will be 
done at events that parents don’t typi[INVESTIGATOR_598646]. In addition, we aim to collect 
survey measurements before the in -person measurements, due to the program 
schedule . 
 
    
 2 ☒ 
 Written consent would not be required outside the research context.  
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
   Families already participate in BGCAA  programs outside the research context, which does 
not require written consent.  
 
    
 3 ☒ Describe the mechanism for documenting that informed consent was 
obtained  
   Briefly explain how the researcher will document that consent was obtained from participants. To 
input text, click in the light grey area below.  
  i Informed consent and assent will be tracked in REDCap along with the 
enrollment/baseline measurement data.  
 
    
 C Waiver Option 3  
  Check the box below for each item (all required – 1-4) and provide protocol -specific information as to 
how the criteria below are met.    
 1 ☐ 
 The subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct 
cultural group or community in which signing forms is not the norm  
 
  i Describe the cultural group or community.  
         
 
Page 25 of 37 
  
    
 2 ☐ 
 The research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects.  
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 3 ☐ 
 There is an appropriate alternative mechanism for documenting that 
informed consent was obtained.  
 
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 [ADDRESS_792012] be 
checked.   
SKIP THIS SECTION IF NOT REQUESTING A WAIVER/ALTERATION OF CONSENT  
 
 A ☐ 
 The research involves  no more than minimal risk to the subjects.  
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below  
         
 
    
 B ☐ 
 The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
the subjects.  
Page 26 of 37 
   
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
         
 
    
 C ☐ 
 The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or 
alteration (it is impracticable to perform the research if obtaining consent 
is required and not just impracticable to obtain consent).  
 
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
         
 
    
 D ☐ 
 If the research involves using identifiable private information or 
identifiable biospecimens, the research could not practicably be carried 
out without using such information or biospecimens in an identifiable 
format.  
 
  i Provide protocol specific information as to how this criterion is met.  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
         
 
28 Deception /Incomplete Disclosure  and Debriefing  
Only complete the sections below if requesting an alteration of informed consent for research that involves 
deception/incomplete disclosure .  
Deception  (as applies to research) means intentionally giving research subjects false information in order to 
establish false beliefs during the course of a research study.  
Incomplete disclosure  means that the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_598647].  
See IRB Policies and Procedures Section 15 for a description of deception.  
If this study does not involve deception /incomplete disclosure , skip this section.  
 
 A ☐ It is appropriate to provide additional pertinent information to the subject 
after research activities are complete (e.g., the researcher needed to deceive 
the subject to the nature of the study).  
 
 B ☐ Research participants will have the opportunity to withdrawal their data 
during the debriefing.  
Page 27 of 37 
 BENEFITS  
29 Benefits to Society  
Describe the scientific and societal benefit(s) below.  
 
 Addressing nutrition through delivery of produce boxes and grocery store gift cards could potentially 
result in families with elementary school aged children not only obtaining the opportunity to try more 
fruits and vegetables, but improve their overall diet.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_792013] be checked.  
 
 A ☐ There is no anticipated direct benefit to participants.  
 
 B ☒ There are anticipated benefits to participants.  
 
  i If applicable, describe the potential direct benefits to participants.  
   Describe potential direct benefits to participants below.  
  
 C Describe the nature of deception /incomplete disclosure  and why it is necessary 
to conduct the research.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
        
 
   
 D Describe debriefing procedures . 
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  NOTE: Upload the debriefing form to UTRMS -IRB in the 
“Consent Forms” section.   
        
 
   Participating families may or may not benefit from this study. Families participating in 
this study may see the anticipated direct benefit of improved diet and access to healthy 
foods.  
Page 28 of 37 
 RISKS 
31 Describe the risks associated with each activity in this research  
To input text , click in the light grey area below.  Note: Risks should also be outlined in the consent form(s).  
 
 • Accidental loss of confidentiality  
• Although the study team and our BGCAA partners are taking every effort to minimize the 
possibility, p sychological distress related to in -person weight measurement  could occur .  
• Potential discomfort answering the research questions about diet and exercise habits, and 
other personal details about their lives and health.  
• May discover new food allergies or sensitivities from trying new foods (intervention arm 
ONLY, control does NOT get food of any kind from us as part of the study).  
 
  
32 Describe how each risk is mitigated /minimized . 
To input text , click in the light grey area below.  Note: Risks mitigation should be outlined in the consent form(s), 
as applicable.  
 
 • Participant study numbers within REDCap will be used to protect patient confidentiality.   All 
data will be stored in either Box or REDCap.  
• The height and weight measurements will be integrated within an activity at the health fair to 
minimize psychological distress related to these.  
• The research staff does not have control of the contents in the produce boxes, and we will not 
be able to accommodate special diets or prevent potential allergens from being in a produce 
box. As such, having a food allergy related to any produce product wi ll result in exclusion from 
the program.  
• Resources will be provided to help families identify the signs of a food allergy or sensitivity 
(Intervention only). These resources will provide guidance on symptoms and what to do if 
symptoms appear, and will be given to intervention participants along with the recipes they 
receive with their produce boxes.  
  
 
[ADDRESS_792014] be checked (A, B, or C).  
 
 A ☒ 
 In the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], t his study is minimal risk and does not 
require a Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) or a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board  (DMSB) . 
PLEASE NOTE: The IRB may determine minimal risk studies do require data safety monitoring 
under certain circumstances (e.g., if there is a known risk with an expected frequency).  
 
Page 29 of 37 
  B ☐ 
 This study does not have a Data Safety Monitoring Board, but  
resea rchers  have  an internal plan to monitor for safety  (Data Safety 
Monitoring Plan (DSMP)) . 
Complete Data Safety Monitoring Details  
 
 C ☐ 
 This study has a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB).  
Complete Data Safety Monitoring Details section below  or upload this study’s Data Safety 
Monitoring Board’s charter  that contains the information below.  
 
 
34 Data Safety Monitoring (Details)  
Complete this section if the study has a Data Safety Monitoring Plan. SKIP this section there is not a 
DSMP/DSMB.  
If the study has a DSMB, ensure all items below are addressed in the charter (and charted uploaded to UTRMS -
IRB) or provide additional information below, as needed.  
 
 A How is safety information collected?  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 B When will safety data collection start (for each participant or for the whole 
study, as applicable)?  
To input text, click in the light  grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 C How frequently will safety data be collected?  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 D Who will review the data for safety?  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 E How frequently will data be monitored for safety concerns?  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
Page 30 of 37 
  
        
 
   
 F What data will be reviewed?  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 G State the frequency or periodicity of the review of cumulative data . 
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
   
 H State any conditions that would trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
 
[ADDRESS_792015] the criteria for withdrawing individual participants from the study (e.g., 
safety or toxicity concerns, emotional distress, inability to comply with the 
protocol, or requirements from study sponsor).  
To input tex t, click in the light grey area below.  
 
  Participants may be withdrawn if it is determ ined it is unsafe for them to continue with the 
program. They may also be removed if a child leaves the BG CAA program  and is in one of the 
randomized  arms . 
 
   
 B Describe any necessary procedures for ensuring the safety of a participant 
who has withdrawn early.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
  There are no procedures in place to ensure the safety of a participant that is withdrawn 
early .  This is a minimal risk study and being withdrawn poses no risk to the participant.   
Page 31 of 37 
    
36 Describe any pre -specified criteria for stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_598648].  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 None.  
 
REQUIRED DISCLOSURES  
 37 Required Consent Disclosures  
 Identify each element below that may require additional information to be disclosed in the consent form.  
Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs).  
 
 A ☒ It is reasonable that researchers could discover or suspect child or elder abuse.  
Add appropriate disclosure in consent form(s).  
 
 B ☐ It is reasonable that researchers could learn of an incident that could require 
reporting under Title IX.  
Add appropriate disclosure in consent form(s). See Title IX and Research Guidance  for information a nd 
download the Title IX Reporting Form  on the Special Topi[INVESTIGATOR_598649].  
 
 C ☐ It is reasonable that researchers could discover  incidental findings or other 
information of medical interest about a participant's previously unknown 
condition.  
Add appropriate language to consent form(s).  
 
  i Articulate methods for  addressing and reporting incidental findings , if 
applicable.  
Ensure appropriate information is in consent form(s), as applicable.  
   Given the population of interest involves children, it is reasonable that researchers could 
discover or suspect child abuse. If we learn during the study about child abuse or neglect, 
we will report the information to the appropriate authorities, including  the police, Child 
Protective Services, and the [LOCATION_007] Department of Family and Protective Services.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_792016] and how participant involvement is protected from non -
participants.  Describe methods to ensure  participants’ privacy during identification, recruitment, screening, the 
consent process, the conduct of the study, and dissemination of data.  
To input text , click in the light grey area below.  
 
 Participant privacy will be maintained by [CONTACT_598684]. RAs will ensure 
no one who is not involved in the study is listening or around them. All phone calls will be conducted 
using a phone number provided by [CONTACT_2299].  Privacy for the height and weight measurement 
will be ensure d by [CONTACT_598685] a field day at BGCAA which is 
a normal activity they typi[INVESTIGATOR_44769]. Everyone, regardless of their participation in this study will 
participate in these field day activities that  recreational activitie s such as soccer, football , and 
basketball . To ensure privacy of non -participants, both research participants and non -participants will 
have their height and weight taken at the field day, but only the data of the research participants will 
be collected.  All data to  be collected by [CONTACT_598686] a secure file  and in a 
secure database .  
[ADDRESS_792017]  the confidentiality of data or address confidentiality concerns.  
Include the following , as applicable :  
• If identifiers will be coded to protect confidentiality describe how and where identifiers are store d.  
• Describe where and how data is stored and maintained.  
• Include details regarding storage of consent forms, if applicable.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
 All data will be stored in the Dell Medical School REDCap database and/or on UT Box. These secure, 
HIPAA compliant databases can only be accessed with password and dual authentication. REDCap will 
assign participants a unique study ID, protecting confident iality.  
 
Because verbal consent and assent will be obtained, no consent forms will need to be stored.  
 
  
 40 Research Data/Records Destruction Details  
 Confirm general research data/information (including consent forms, as applicable)  destruction timeline. One of 
the following must be checked.   
 
 ☒ Research Data/Records will be retained for [ADDRESS_792018] retention policy.  
 
Page 33 of 37 
  
42 Data Access  
 Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs) for  each group of individuals that 
will have access to study data.  
If you plan on creating a repository, complete the repository form as well  (download from Library in UTRMS -
IRB). 
 
 ☒ Study Team 
Members  ☒ External Collaborators  
 ☐ Data coordinating center  
 
 ☐ Sponsor  
 ☒ Future Sharing with 
other researchers  
 
 ☐ Others  
Describe below. To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
 
        
 
    ☐ Research Data/Records will be retained for longer than [ADDRESS_792019] be checked.  
 
 ☒ Identifiable data will be destroyed.  
If checked, ensure the below section describes  identifiable  data destruction plan and timeline.   
 
  Identifiers will be destroyed [ADDRESS_792020] in media opportunities, which would be completely optional for them to 
partake in.  
 
   
 ☐ Identifiable data will not be destroyed.  
If checked, explain below the rationale for retaining identifiable data indefinitely.  
 
        
 
Page 34 of 37 
  
COMPENSATION AND COSTS  43 Describe data sharing  plan for each group checked above and state whether 
researchers plan on sharing identifiable, coded, or de -identified data . 
To input text , click in the light grey area below.  Ensure that data sharing and future use is addressed in the 
consent form(s).  
 
 Due to the nature of the study, identifiable data will be shared with BGCAA during the study. This is 
necessary to be able to conduct the research study as BGCAA needs to know which of their members 
are receiving the intervention. We will not record data of ineligible participants. Non -aggregated and 
de-identified study data may be shared with BGCAA after analysis for the purpose of improving 
programming within their organization. Aggregated and de -identified data will be shared with BGCAA 
and may be prese nted in public forums.  
 
We may share data with other researchers for future research studies that may be similar to this 
study or may be different. The data shared with other researchers will not include information that 
can directly identify the particip ant.  
 
44 Certificate of Confidentiality  
Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs) to identify each element below that 
may require additional information to be disclosed in the consent form.  
If a Certificate of Confidentiality is not applicable for this study, skip this section.  
  
 A ☐ 
 NIH has issued a Certificate of Confidentiality for this study.  
 
Ensure CoC language is included in the consent form(s).  
 
 B ☐ 
 A Certificate of Confidentiality has not been obtained, but there are plans to 
apply for one.  
Ensure appropriate CoC language is included in consent form(s). Apply for a CoC for non -NIH funded 
research here: NIH Certificate of Confidentiality System . Once CoC is granted by [CONTACT_4289], you must update 
the consent form language and ensure a copy of the CoC approval (only for non -NIH funded  research) 
is uploaded to UTRMS -IRB.  
45 Compensation  
Click on the check box (or double click and type an “X” if using Google Docs). A or B  must be checked.  
 
 A ☒ 
 Subjects receive compensation.  
    
Page 35 of 37 
    i ☒ Confirm: Amount of  compensation and its form is reasonable for this 
population for the activities requested of them.  
     
  ii Total Amount of Compens ation  
Include the total amount of compensation below.  
   All p articipating families , whether in the intervention  or control  arm will be paid $ 30 for each 
measurement (baseline , mid -point  and follow -up), for a total of up to $ 90.  
 
 
    
  iii Type of Compensation  
   ☐ 
 Cash  ☐ 
 Check  ☒ 
 Gift Card  
   ☐ Course Credit  ☐ ClinCard  ☒ Tango Card  
   ☐ Other   
    Describe other form of compensation below.  
          
 
     
  iv Proration Schedule  
Describe the proration schedule for multi -visit/session studies. Skip if not applicable.  
   Participating families will be paid $ 30 for each measurement (baseline , mid -point, and follow -
up) for a maximum of $ 90 over the duration of the study. Gift cards will be distributed to the 
participants via text message  at the end of each measurement.  
 
    
 B ☐ 
 Subject s will not receive compensation.  
 
[ADDRESS_792021] be checked.  
  
 A ☒ Participants will have no costs associated with this study  
 
 B ☐ Participants will have the following costs associated with this study.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_792022]  
This section is required  for all studies. Please confirm that all research personnel who meet the definition of “ covered 
individuals ” are designated as such in the Local Study Team Members  section of the SmartForm application in UTRMS -
IRB.     ☐ Standard of care procedures 
contributing to study data   ☐ Research procedures not 
associated with standard of 
care  
   ☐ Administration of drugs / devices  ☐ Study drugs or devices  
 
   ☐ Transportation and parking  
 
 
  i Describe all costs below.  
To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
    
         
 
[ADDRESS_792023] includes utilizing your licensed intellectual property in the study; serving as a paid consultant, or 
advisory board member, or officer/director with a related entity; and equity or business ownership in a company 
that is related to this  project.  Additional guidance on financial conflicts of interest is available on the COI website  
 
A or B must be checked.  
  
 A ☐ The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or other covered individual(s) has/have  a financial interest 
related to this study   
  i If A is checked above, please provide the name(s) of the covered 
individuals involved, and briefly describe the interest:  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
         
 
 B ☒ To the best of your knowledge, no one on the study team has financial 
interest related to this study   
 
[ADDRESS_792024]  
Non-financial Interests could include such things as:  
- utilizing your unlicensed intellectual property in the study,  
Page [ADDRESS_792025] member or officer/director with a related entity,  
- equity or business ownership in a company that has yet to make a profit and is related to this project,  
- conflict of time/effort,  
- personal and professional relationships/affiliations,  
- intellectual passions or personal beliefs  
- other factors that could create bias in the  study   
 
A or B must be checked.  
 
 A ☐ The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or other covered  individual(s) has/have a non -financial interest 
related to this study   
  i If A is checked above, please provide the name(s) of the covered 
individuals involved, and briefly describe the interest:  
   To input text, click in the light grey area below.  
         
 
 B ☒ To the best of your knowledge, no one on the study team has non -
financial interest related to this study   