                                              
Enhancing the Effects of  Alcohol Treatment with Lamotrigine  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_527883]., PhD, ABPP  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:  NCT04 770493  
Date:     February 02, 202 1 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Rationale  
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) affects nearly one -third of adults in the [LOCATION_002] during 
their lifetime. Excessive alcohol use causes myriad acute and long -term medical, 
psychological, and social problems. It carries an economic burden of $[ADDRESS_1031566] improved treatment options for 
adults with AUD , treatment options for youth are limited.  
Adolescent and young adult alcohol use is a leading public health concern. The harmful 
effects of underage drinking are irrefutable and include premature death and possibly 
irreversible damage to the developi[INVESTIGATOR_38866]. In addition, adolescence is a critical period 
in the pathogenesis  of AUD; an estimated 3 to 15% of youth develop AUD before age 
18. Clinical trials have tested psychosocial interventions with youth, including family 
treatments, cognitive behavior therapy (CBT), and motivational enhancement the rapy 
(MET), that yield only modest short -term benefits. Our group has contributed 
substantially to this work.  
One potential way to improve treatments is to augment psychosocial interventions with 
pharmacotherapy. The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) has 
mounted a concerted effort to identify medications that reduce drinking for nearly thr ee 
decades. Although this effort improved treatment for adults, no medication is indicated 
for adolescent use, and randomized controlled trials with teenagers are almost 
nonexistent. This gap raises key questions about if and how medications could benefit 
youth. The urgency of this issue is underscored by [CONTACT_753540].  
Anticonvulsants are increasingly found to be efficacious for treating AUD. Many have 
intolerable side effects, however, that greatly limit their utilit y. Lamotrigine is a new 
generation mood -stabilizing anticonvulsant approved by [CONTACT_596969][INVESTIGATOR_753539]. We propose to study lamotrigine for three p rimary reasons.  
• First, lamotrigine is safe and well tolerated by [CONTACT_91948].  
• Second, lamotrigine targets brain mechanisms implicated in the pathogenesis of 
AUD, namely the glutamatergic system, which mediates the acute and chronic 
effects of alcohol.  
• Third, mounting human research that shows lamotrigine reduces alcohol and 
other substance use as well as craving.  
On the whole, modulation of the glutamatergic system is a key pharmacological target 
for AUD treatment. Anticonvulsants reduce alcohol and other drug use in adults and 
adolescents but are not well tolerated. There is strong preclinical and emerging clinica l 
evidence that lamotrigine also reduces alcohol and other drug use, and human studies 
show it is well tolerated.  
Objectives  
The primary objectives of this study are twofold. The first primary objective is to evaluate 
the feasibility, acceptability, and tolerability of lamotrigine (25 mg/day to 200 mg/day in 
two divided doses) as compared to placebo for 9 weeks plus a psychosocial platform 
comprised of motivational enhancement therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy (MET -
CBT; “Path 180”) among adolescents and young adults (ages 16 to 24 years) with AUD 
as confirmed by [CONTACT_92678] – Fifth 
Edition (DSM -5™). 
The second primary objective is to leverage a human laboratory paradigm to evaluate 
the effects of lamotrigine on an intermediate phenotype associated with alcohol use and 
outcomes in clinical trials. Specifically, we hypothesize that  lamotrigine , as compared to 
placebo, will decrease alcohol cue -elicited craving in the human laboratory during in 
vivo alcohol cue reactivity.  
Methodology  
This proof -of-concept study is a double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled, parallel 
group, single -site clinical trial. After obtaining consent/parent permission/assent, 
potential subjects and, if younger than 18 years, their parent(s) will complete a m edical 
history and psychiatric diagnosis interview (about the adolescent) to screen for eligibility. 
Youth will also complete a physical examination, vital signs, drinking history and an 
alcohol breathalyzer test . 
Forty -four eligible subjects will be randomized in an approximate 1:[ADDRESS_1031567] dose. Dose will be titrated, as tolerated, to a 
target dose of 200 mg in two divided doses per day of lamotrigine. Following the target 
dose period, participants will complete a 2 -week medication taper period (see dosing 
schedule below).Capsules should be swallowed whole and should not be cut, crushed, 
or chewed. Capsules should be taken with food and water.  
 
 
 
Schedule of Administration of Investigational Product  
Study Period  Time Period  Daily Dose  Dosing Schedule  
Titration  Weeks 1 -2 25 mg  Once daily  
 Weeks 3 -4 50 mg  Two divided doses  
 Week 5  100 mg  Two divided doses  
 Week 6  150 mg  Two divided doses  
Maintenance   Week 7 -9 200 mg  Two divided doses  
Taper  Week 10  100 mg  Two divided doses  
 Week 11  50 mg  Two divided doses  
 
At the randomization/baseline visit and after [ADDRESS_1031568] 
administration (i.e., Study Week 8), subjects will undergo a human laboratory paradigm 
(i.e., alcohol cue reactivity assessment).  
Main Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : Subjects will be male and female adolescents, ages 
[ADDRESS_1031569], Dosage and Mode of Administration : Lamotrigine (titrated for 6 
weeks; target dose [200 mg/day/BID] for 3 weeks) will be over encapsulated and 
supplied by a contracted pharmacy, along with identical matching placebo capsules.  
Reference Therapy, Dosage and Mode of Administration : Identically over encapsulated 
placebo tablets will be dispensed according to the same schedule as the lamotrigine 
capsules.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Primary Objective s 
• Feasibility of retention will be determined by [CONTACT_753541] (target ≥ 70%) and treatment -specific retention rates.  
• Acceptability will be determined based on overall study withdrawal rates (≤ 20% 
considered acceptable), as well as treatment -specific withdrawal rates. Treatment 
satisfaction will be considered acceptable if ≥ 80% of responses on the CSQ -8 are rated 
either “satisfactory” or “highly satisfactory.” We will also examine reasons for termination 
qualitatively.  
Secondary Objectives  
•  We hypothesize that lamotrigine , as compared to placebo, will decrease alcohol 
craving during an alcohol cue -exposure paradigm in the human laboratory.  