 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 1 of 23  PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation for Older Adults (MACRO)  
 
 
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_58447] E. Forman, MD  
 
 
VERSION NUMBER:  
Version # 1 
 
VERSION DATE:   
7/7/[ADDRESS_191542] Num ber:  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 2 of 23   
 
Table of Contents  
 
1.0      Purpose /Objectives       3-[ADDRESS_191543] the Privacy Interests of Subjects    22 
20.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury     22-23 
21.0 Economic Burden to Subjects       23 
22.0 Consent Process         23 
23.0 Process to Document Consent       23 
24.0 Drugs or Devices         23 
25.0 References          23-25 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 3 of 23  1.0 Objectives  
 
1.1 Purpose/Objectives . 
 
Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR)  is approved  for patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI)/acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS), coronary artery by[CONTACT_4897] (CABG) , percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI), stable ischemic heart disease (IHD), heart valve repair (surgical or transcatheter), 
heart failure (HF) , and peripheral arterial disease (PAD) .1 Yet, participation in CR is low in older adults 
(~13% nationally2), despi[INVESTIGATOR_165144] ( CVD ) in old age.    
 
Studies on CR participation among older adults cite a lack of systematic referral, delays in starting CR 
following hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], difficulty in finding programs that are convenient and accessible, competing 
time demands from family, and costs of copaymen ts as some of the reasons that CR is poorly utilized.[ADDRESS_191544]. Daniel Forman developed 
principles and infrastructure for a Modified Applicatio n of Cardiac Rehabilitation  for Older Adults 
(MACRO)  at the VA Pi[INVESTIGATOR_108710] (VAPHS) with the effect that participation in CR 
increa sed from <3% to ~64% (mean age 69 years).  MACRO was designed to address the idiosyncratic 
needs of older adults, and to facilitate successful implementation of CR for this population. The goal  of 
this trial is to more definitively  study the utility of the MACRO  intervention . 
 
A key significance of MACRO  is the expanded concept of risk . Aging physiology predisposes to CVD 
but also to disablement, multimorbidity, sarcopenia, frailty, cognitive impairment, and sensory 
deficiencies.[ADDRESS_191545] to metrics oriented to the heart and CVD (and standardized as such by [CONTACT_165161] [AACVPR]10), MACRO broadens  the 
approach to assessment with additional functional and frailty criteria. In other words, AACVPR criteria 
do not provide a full assessment of risk, since functional risk are distinct, and also predict poor 
cardiovascular outcomes, as well as risks of frailty and disability.7 To address this additional dimension 
of functional risk, the MACRO intervention impacts common geriatric challenges using comprehensive 
risk assessment and coordinated strategies to tailor CR to address these risks .11 
 
Specific Aims/Hypotheses  
 
Aim 1:  To establish efficacy, safety and acceptability of the MACRO intervention via a  RCT.   
We hypothesize that after [ADDRESS_191546] of care  (SOC ), participants 
randomized into the MACRO arm will have:  
 H1.1:  Greater improvements in function as measured by [CONTACT_165162] -Acute Care 
Computer Adaptive Test (AM -PAC-CAT) Basic Mobility Domain  (primary outcome ). 
 H1.2:   Greater improvements in function as measured by [CONTACT_91152] ; AM-PAC CAT Daily 
Activity Domai n; depression; frailty; self -efficacy; and quality of life . These will be collected to 
the extent possible in respect to local limitations that may result from fluctuations in COVID -19 
prevalence.  
 H1.3:  Greater CR participation and adherence . 
 H1.4:  Greater impact in  readmissions and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].   
 
Aim 2:  To examine the duration of benefit of MACRO  compared to SOC.   
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 4 of 23  H2.1:  We hypothesize that relative MACRO benefits ( i.e., function indices (see H1.2), 
adherence and readmissions/hospi[INVESTIGATOR_165145] 6 and 12 months (12 
months will be captured as timing allows)  
  
 Aim 3:  To explore characteristics of patients who benefit the most from the MACRO  intervention . 
H3.1:  We anticipate functional capacity and other baseline characteristics will identify those 
who benefit from the MACRO intervention  (exploratory).  
 
2.0 Background  
 
2.1 Relevant experience.  
Prevalence of cardiovascular disease increases with age.  Nonetheless, participation in CR decreases 
with age; only approximately 13% of eligible older patients enroll.2 CR is indicated for patients with 
AMI/ACS, CABG/PCI, stable IHD, heart valve repair (surgical or transcatheter),  PAD,  and/or HF. [ADDRESS_191547] many age -related problems in 
addition to CVD. MACRO organizes care relative to patients’ goals of care and composite risks. 
Patients are engaged, assessed for their goals and risks, and education is initiated to best facilitate 
informed choices regarding realistic and practical strategies . Selection of site -, home -, or hybrid -based 
care is based on  which option will best meet that individual patient’s preferences and comprehensive 
needs.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_191548] of transitions of care in CR 
 
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 5 of 23  3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
3.1 Screening for eligibility .  
 
A. Recruitment  
We will randomize approximately 374 participants over  approximately 36-months, allowing for a 
conservative 20% dropout to allow for uncertainties in the post -COVID -19 environment .We will 
identify participants using 1) inpatient admission list , 2) referral from providers,  3) CR consults list, 
and 4) approved flyers, letters, and mailings, 5)  cardiology consult lists and clinics, and 6) discharge 
list 
 
B. Randomization  
We will use the high quality pseudo -random deviate generator in SAS® (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, 
North Carolina) to randomize  participants to MACRO or SOC  in 1:[ADDRESS_191549] assessments will be blind 
to treatment assignment.  
 
3.2 Specific Criteria  
 
Summary of Inclusion criteria : 1) Age ≥70  year; 2) Eligible CVD diagnosis (h ospi[INVESTIGATOR_165146]/ACS, stable CAD, revascularization [CABG, PCI], valvular heart disease [specifically, 
surgical or percutaneous intervention for mitral regurgitat ion or aortic stenosis],  PAD or HF 
[exacerbation or new diagnosis ]); 3) English speaking and able to provide informed consent; 4) able to 
be assessed and undergo study interventions . 
 
Summary of exclusion criteria: 1) Unstable medical condition as indicated by [CONTACT_969], physical exam, 
and/or laboratory findings; 2) Presence of non -CVD conditions likely to be fatal within 12 months (e.g., 
metastatic cancer); 3) Severe cognitive impairment: Short Blessed with a score of 13 or greater , or 
cannot consent (as indicated by [CONTACT_38825]); 4) Long -term care resident at admission  with no plans 
to return to independent living ; 5) anticipates inability to return for required reassessments . 
 
3.3 Special Populations  
Vulnerable populations (fetuses, pregnant women, children, prisoners, and institutionalized persons) 
and adults unable to consent will not be included in this study.  
 
4.0 Multi -Site Research  
The University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_165147] . 
 
 
5.0 Study Timelines  
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 6 of 23  • Duration of an individual subje ct’s participation in the study:  
Each participant’s part icipation  in the study will last between approximately 26-52 weeks , 
depending on their time of enrollment into the study. The goal will be for as many 
participants to reach 52 weeks as the time of the study allows . Starting during inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_165148]  90 days  after an acute event and  followi ng the p articipants  for 
approximately  26-52 weeks f rom enrollment .  
 
• The duration anticipat ed to enroll all study subjects:  
We anticipate that we will enroll all study subjects over approximately 24 months.  
 
• The estimated date for the investigators to complete this study (complete primary analyses) : 
We anticipate that we will complete data collection over approximately [ADDRESS_191550] battery of assessments at baseline and 
after approximately 3, 6, and 12 months  (12 months as the study length allows ). Assessors will be 
blinded regarding each patient’s group assignment.  
 
Aim 1: to test relative benefits of the MACRO  vs. SO C arms , comparing (a) differen ces in the AM-PAC 
CAT Basic Mobility Domain  (primary  outcome; primary  endpoint  3 months ), as well as (b) 
complementary functional/qu alitative metrics accelerometry , AM-PAC CAT Daily Activity Scale , 
depression, frailty, self -efficacy, and quality of life ); (c) differences in participation, and adherence ; (d) 
readmissions and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
 
In Aim 2, assessments  in physical activity (accelerometry) ; AM-PAC CAT Daily Activity Domain; 
depression ; frailty; self -efficacy; and quality of life  will be repeated at approximately 6 and 12 months  
(12 months as the study length allows)  to evaluate longer term impact of the MACRO intervention vs. 
SOC.  
 
In Aim 3, moderator analyses will examine characteristics of patients to identify those most likely to 
benefit from a MACRO  intervention . 
 

 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 7 of 23  7.0 Procedures Involved  
 
7.1 Study design.  
 
Overview and summary of design:  This is a pragmatic randomized controlled trial (RCT) of 374 older 
adults , with 40 subjects at the University o f Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109] , eligible for CR: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_165149] ≥70 
years with a primary diagnosis of AMI/ACS, stable IHD, CABG, PCI, valvular heart disease (valve 
replacements or repairs for aortic stenosis or mitral regurgitation),  PAD or HF. Patients who consent to 
participate will be randomly assigned to MACRO or SOC  arms (which may include CR at the discretion 
of the providers) ( Figure below) . In the MACRO  arm, patients will benefit from personalized 
engagement and CR will be explicitly facilitated, enhanced, tailored to patients’ preferences and needs, 
and utilizing a flexible range of options (site -, home, or hybrid). In comparison, SOC provides no 
specialize d engagement, and no programmatic facilitation, enhancement, customization, or deliberate 
flexibility in how care is provided.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IN-HOSPI[INVESTIGATOR_165150] (3 months)  
 LONG -TERM FOLLOW -UP (6-12 mo)  
•Patients’ personal goals  
clarified  
•CR options selected 
(site, home, or hybrid) 
based on composite 
patient preference and 
risk assessment eval  
•MACRO Inpatient/ 
directly post discharge 
Edcuaiton  
•Phone call  within week of discharge to review 
plans for phase II outpatient CR  
•Outpatient phase II CR  initiated  
•Weekly MACRO phone calls continue  re: 
barriers and facilitators for sustained 
participation  
•Engagement techniques  throughout phases, 
tailored for older adult  
•Geriatric management:  de-prescribing 
medications; nutrition assessment  
•Monthly MACRO phone calls  
continue to engage patient 
and address barriers and 
facilitators to sustained 
behavior change  
MACRO  
n=[ADDRESS_191551]  
n=187  
 
•Standard of care  as 
determined by [CONTACT_165163]  
 
•Patient pursues referral for CR  
•Patient presents to outpatient phase II 
outpatient CR, is enrolled in site - or 
home -based model  
 
•No long -term intervention  
 
Function  
Cognitive function  
Adherence  
Rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_165151] -reports  
3 mo.  
6 mo.  
 12 mo.  
 Baseline  
 ASSESSMENT
S 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  

 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 8 of 23  A. Data collection overview  
   
B. Table 1 shows outcome measures planned at each time point.  
 
Table 1 .  Data Collection Plan  
 
Study Measure  Baseline  3, 6, 12 months  
Risk assessment  X  
AM-PAC CAT Basic Mobility Domain  (primary outcome)  X X 
Accelerometer  X X 
AM-PAC CAT Daily Activity Domain  X X 
[ADDRESS_191552] (not at WU site)  X X 
Questionnaires  X X 
CR adherence/attendance   X 
Reduced falls, medication burden, readmissions and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  X X 
 
 
7.2 Research procedures.  
 
Assessment s  
Assessments will occur at  some or all of the following time points:  baseline  (while inpatient or up 
to approximately 90 days  following an acute event) , and 3, 6, 12 months  (12 months as study 
length allows)  post-randomization . Assessments can be comp leted i n-person (at facility ), by 
[CONTACT_165164].  
Assessments are outlined below:   
 
A. Cognitive function.  Short Blessed (score ≥1 3) will be used as an initial screening tool to rule -out 
severe cognitive impairment . 
 
B. Depression: Patient Health Questionnaire 9 -item (PHQ -9). Older adults eligible for CR  have high 
rates of depressive symptoms that amplif ies vulnerability to disabilit y.12, 13  Mitigat ing depressive 
symptoms is a n important rehabilitation outcome. The PHQ -9 is a simple, pragmatic instrument that 
is well-validated and responsive to change. A score of 10 or  greater indicates depressi on 
symptoms.14  For all patients with PHQ -9 ≥[ADDRESS_191553]. Lenze and  also notify their primary provider  (as needed)  to enable 
follow -up and greater safet y. If a pa rticipant  expresses or demonstrates suicidal ideation , standard 
of policy of the local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_165152].   
 
C. Readiness for Change: Interventions like CR that require active engagement by [CONTACT_165165]’s willingness to adopt new activities, habits and routines.15 The 
TTM is a behavioral  framework for understanding readiness for change through 5 change -stages: 
(1) precontemplation, (2) contemplation, (3) preparation, (4) action, (5) maintenance. In studies 
examining patient -centered interventions with community -dwelling older adults, incre ased readiness 
for change was associated with a 62% greater likelihood of goal attainment.16  
 
D. AM-PAC -CAT: The AM -PAC is an activity limitations measure.[ADDRESS_191554] the heterogeneity anticipated in this population (i.e., frail 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191555]). AM-PAC allows for the examination of perceived difficulty and level of 
assistance/limitations in 3 domains – Basic Mobility  (primary outcome) , Daily Activity, and Applied 
Cognition, building on Item Response Theory (IRT).18 AM-PAC- combines items from existing 
instruments into one scale, and ranks them according to level of difficulty for each of the 3 domains. 
IRT assumes that all items within a domain measure a single concept and are independent.  In this 
study the Basic Mobility domain  will be the primary outcome, and the Daily Activity domain will be  
one of the secondary outcomes . 
 
E. Self-efficacy:  Higher self -efficacy correlates to greater capacity and duration for physical activity 
and independence.19-21 For this study we rely on the 13 -item self -efficacy scale developed by 
[CONTACT_165166], et al.22  
 
F. Quality of Life (QoL):  RAND -12 is a 12-item scale developed to evaluate QOL.  
 
G. Falls: Falls are a common, deleterious, and expensive aspect of aging which may be preventable 
via the tenets of MACRO such as good transitional care, age -appropriate exercise, and de -
prescribing. We will measure falls as follows: at baseline, we will ask, “Have  you had any falls in the 
past 3  months?” In follow -up assessments, we will ask about interim falls, as well as their severity 
(e.g., if they caused injury).  
 
H. Deprescribing -Eligible Medications (DEMs):  DEMs  are medications  that are potentially 
deleterious for participants. These med ications  are pre -identified, based in part on the Beers 
Criteria23 and in part based on CR -specific risks of falls . 
 
I. Readmissions: At follow -up assessment s, we will ascertain whether  the participant had any 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_165153] (e.g., ER visits).  
 
J. Institutionalization:  At follow -up assessment s, we will ascertain whether  the participant  required a 
brief or long -term institutionalization (e.g., Assisted Living, Skilled Nursing Facility [SNF] or inpatient 
rehab ilitation ).  
 
 
K. Physical activity.  Physical activity will be measured in all participants at each assessment for 
approximatel y 7-[ADDRESS_191556] 
participants by [CONTACT_165167] .   
 
L. Adherence to the cardiac rehabilitation program.  An assessment of the total number of CR 
sessions participants  complete will be tracked via telephone calls, collection of data f rom the onsite 
cardiac rehabilitation programs, and/or  self-report by [CONTACT_165168].  
 
 
M. Risk Assessment . The  aggregate  risk of each participant will be assessed at baseline. We will 
assess risk across three domains: medical, functional, and psychosocial. An assignment of high, 
moderate, or low risk will be determined using the participants’ scores on various baseline 
assessmen ts.     
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 10 of 23  N. Duke Activity Status Index (DASI)  is a [ADDRESS_191557] peak VO 2 and has been demonstrated to be a reliable and responsive tool to quantify 
physical activity in daily living.24 
 
O. FRAIL Scale. A five-item scale frailty assessment that assesses Fatigue, Resistance, Ambulation, 
Illnesses, and Loss of weight that can be administered over the phone.25     
 
P. Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy (REALM -SF).  (optional as now contingent on COVID -19 
risk)  Will be utilized to evaluate health literacy on all pa rticipants . 
 
Q. Nutrition :  Will be assessed  with the Rapid Eating Assessment for Participants short (REAP -S)26 (to 
be collected at all sites) and a 3-day food record  (not collected at WU site ). REAP -S is a 16-item 
questionnaire to assess  eating habits for patients .  A 3-day food record allows will also be collected 
to assess quantities of specific food groups (such as protein ).   
 
MACRO Intervention   
 
Early Contact . MACRO study staff  will continue to monitor inpatient participants electronic medical record 
charts for consults to PT/OT/CR . Education will be  provided over the phone or in person  to enhance the 
transition to home and to facilitate transition to outpatient CR. The rationale for CR will be explained and 
the shared decision making between the patient and providers  will be emphasized . 
 
Risk Determination . Aggregate risk assessment will be completed on each participant (both MACRO 
intervention and controls) with method s that integrate baseline study indices  across three domains: 
medical, functional, and psychosocial. In the MACRO Intervention group only, these r isk assessment 
scores will be used as a means to inform coaches of broad patient challenges  that need to be addressed  
with CR care, as parts of site-, hybrid - and home -based options . 
 
MACRO  Intervention arm transitional care : The MACRO  Intervention  includes  therapeutic 
reinforcements in the days after discharge /enrollment. When feasible, home calls  start the week  of 
discharge /enrollment , study staff will contact [CONTACT_165169] (intent to treat) 
to address questions and to encourage the  patient to continue the chosen CR option (site -, home -, or 
hybrid). Phone  calls will continue throughout the phase II CR period to help ensure adherence and as 
recovery evolves.  
 
Our methods for maintaining care and observation throughout transitions (including to  skilled  term nursing 
facility  [SNFs ] or rehab) were developed at the VAPHS and include (1) Establishing rapport with potential 
participants and their families; (2) Collecting information for several different methods of contact [CONTACT_165170]; (3) Phone calls  with participants intermittently while 
they are at SNF or inpatient rehab; (4) sending reminders to the participants and their family members that 
the team will be calling them; (5) Verificati on of discharge plan at SNF/rehab discharge and confirmation 
that alternate contact [CONTACT_165171] -to-date.27 
 
Patients in the MACRO Intervention arm will be  encouraged to participate in outpatient phase 2  
Clinical  CR (site -, home - or hybrid -based options)  
 
Site-based Clinical CR: MACRO Intervention participants may be enrolled in outpatient site -based CR .  In 
addition to the commitments and benefits of that program, participants will also receive weekly MACRO 
phone calls that reinforce complementary MACRO -based priorities. The emphasis of the calls is to 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 11 of 23  reinforce the site -based programs, and to also better facilitat e the goal of transitioning from site -based CR 
to management the pa rticipant  can achieve independently at home..  
 
Home -based  Clinical CR : MACRO Intervention participants may be enrolled in home -based CR. While 
home -based CR will vary with each site’s clinical program and even within each program over time, 
minimal standards of home -based CR for MACRO will include at least weekly contact [CONTACT_165172], with implementation of a curriculum that offers  requisite components of exercise training , 
education, support, and linkage to dietary consultation  when indicated .   
 
In addition to the commitments and benefits of the home -based program, participants in the MACRO 
intervention arm will also receive weekly MAC RO phone calls that reinforce complementary MACRO -based 
priorities.  The emphasis of the calls is to reinforce the home -based programs.  
 
Hybrid -based  Clinical CR : MACRO Intervention patients may also be enrolled in hybrid -based CR .  
Hybrid CR starts with site-based care, but then transitions to home -based care as the patient and clinicians 
feel suitable. The transition may be triggered by [CONTACT_165173], growing self -confidence, or other 
factors which impact on each patient’s capacity for home -based CR. The time required for this transition 
will vary between individuals.  
 
In addition to the commitments and benefits of the hybrid program, participants in the MACRO intervention 
arm will also receive weekly MACRO phone calls that reinforce complementary MACRO -based priorities.  
The emphasis of the calls is to reinforce hybrid CR.  
 
Responding to patients ’ goals  and needs : The MACRO Intervention arm tailors care to each pa rticipant 
in two ways, matching care to (1) the participant ’s personal preferences as part of Enhanced Medical 
Rehabilitation  (EMR)  goal setting and motivational ; and (2) elements of risk that are detected as part of 
their comprehensive risk profile (that includes medical, physical, and psychosocial domains). The 
underlying premise is that each patient requires a personalized approach to integrate preferences and 
risks. MACRO’s flexibility is an essential aspect of this management. The MACRO intervention, for 
example, emphasizes seated activities  for patients with risks of falls. The MACRO intervention also 
organizes family supports, repetitive learning strategies, and community activity resources for pa rticipants  
with learning impairments. The MACRO intervention emphasizes strength, balance, and nutrition for 
participants  who are frail.  
 
CDC Check for Safety  Check list :   
Participants in the MACRO Intervention arm may receive  a Home Fall Prevention Checklist for Older 
Adults. This check list will be utilized to provide the participant the opportunity to be better informed about 
safety. T he check list may be sent when  direct home assessment s are not completed.  
 
MACRO De -Prescribing:  All participants  in MACRO will have their medications reviewed to identify DEMS 
(deprescribing eligible medications).  DEMs worsen functional recovery, impair cognitive function, and 
increase medical risks (falls, bleeding).31 For p articipant s in the MACRO Intervention arm, o pportuniti es for 
de-prescribing will be reviewed and specific recommendations will be conveyed to the pa rticipant ’s clinician 
to optimize recovery (optimizing physical function , minimizing confusion, reducing falls) . 
 
Deprescribing assessments will be  conducted during the baseline assessments as part of a medication 
review .  Communication will then be initiated with the MACRO participant’s primary provider. DEMs  have 
been selected based on goals to optimize function , reduced sedation, and minimize falls.  
 
If DEMS are deprescribed, a standardized approach of follow -up assessments will be implemented to  
ensure deprescription is well tolerated.   
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 12 of 23   
MACRO arm p ersonalized nutrition: Older CVD patients are particularly prone to sarcopenia, frailty, and 
associated vulnerabilities such as exercise intolerance, falls, and poor QOL. A high-quality  diet and 
increased protein intake have been shown to be advantageous in these vulnerable adults. ￼ The MACRO 
Intervention participants will be strongly encouraged to meet with a registered dietitian and receive dietary 
recommendations that will account for sarcopenia, underweight, overweight, and specific dietary 
restrictions associated with comorbid conditions (e.g., DM, renal disease) and medications. Nutrition 
education and facilita tion will be optimized in MACRO. The MACRO Intervention participants will be 
strongly encouraged to meet with a registered dietitian and receive dietary recommendations that will 
account for sarcopenia, underweight, overweight, and specific dietary restrictions associated with comorbid 
conditions (e.g., DM, renal disease) and medications. Nutrition education and facilita tion will be op timized 
in MACRO . 
 
MACRO Intervention arm telephone intervention .  MACRO staff will contact [CONTACT_165174] . A subset of telephone calls will have a second MACRO staff 
member listening to calls to enable additional monitoring.   The components of each session  recorded on 
the checklist .  
 
7.3 Quality Assurance  
 
A. Fidelity refers to whether team members consistent ly perform the MACRO intervention with a high 
level of adherence to and competence  with the intervention protocol . Low fidelity is a common and 
often unrecognized problem leading to “failed” intervention studies.33 We will apply expertise from 
numerous intervention studies, including multi -site studies: (1) Attaining fidelity – we will train team 
members at each site. (2) Measuring and maintaining fidelity – Co-investigators will have regular  
supervisory calls with team member s. Their intervention sessions may be randomly sampled  by [CONTACT_165175]. The PIs are the ultimate fidelity 
supervisors; they will be in regular  contact [CONTACT_165176], study coordinators,  and research 
assistants to promptly detect and correct problems. Such training and monitoring have been successful 
in our recent rehabilitation studies.[ADDRESS_191558] matter experts in the specific area 
within the research team. Data will be reviewed for quality control , standardization , and abnormalities in 
collection  and will be discussed at regular  meetings.  
  
 
7.4 Procedures  performed to lessen the probability or magnitude of risks.  
In the event that in -person assessments or interventions become infeasible ( e.g., COVID 19 
outbreak), the researchers will carry out these study components remotely ( i.e., by [CONTACT_756] , 
mail, email, Redcap , e-consent , or video call . 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191559] risks.  Research staff is  trained  in each element of the study visit they 
will perf orm; including obtaining informed consent, administering questionnaires, protecting 
confidentiality of  collected data, performing the  frail assessment.  Additional training will be provided as 
needed .    
 
B. Minimizing risks related to assessments .  If a participant develo ps symptoms such as  chest 
discomfort, new dyspnea, new fatigue , study staff will notify ho spi[INVESTIGATOR_165154], or the  study 
cardiologist . 
 
C. Staff Training.  All research  staff will undergo training and certification prior to working with participan ts 
and will re-certif y as necessary every [ADDRESS_191560] (DSMB).   The DSMB will meet  approximately  every six months or 
as decided by  [CONTACT_4318] .  The DSMB will meet to review and approve the protocol prior to beginning 
data collection.  They will decide on specific stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_140482]. The biostatistician  and data 
manager will work closely with the DSMB to provide reports in an acceptable format . Serious  Adverse 
events (SAE) / Adverse events will be monitored continuously throughout the study and  will be reported 
to the DSMB and IRB according to pre -specified requirements.  SAE/AE  rates and interim study results 
will be reviewed and di scussed by [CONTACT_165177].   
 
7.5      Source records that will be used.  
Sources of material.  Primary and secondary outcome measures that will be collected for this study 
include the AM-PAC CAT, accelerometry , cognitive assessment, depression, frailty, IADLs, readiness 
for change, adherence, self -efficacy, falls, medication assessment, read missions, institutionalization.  
 
 
8.0 Data Storage  
 
8.1 Data to be stored   
Data at the active sites  will be coded; meaning that a key will exist that can link the codes back to 
the direct subject identifiers. Each participant will be assigned a unique study ID number that can 
be traced back to the study participant.  Data provided to the coordinating center will be d e-
identified.  
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191561] (DSMB).     
The DSMB  will also be expected  to meet  as needed,  but not less than,  every  six months  to provide  
an overall  summary  status  report  to the regulatory  agencies.  An emergency  meeting  of the DSMB  
may be called  at any time by [CONTACT_165178] .  
In addition,  the DSMB  Report  addressing  the following  information  will be submitted  to the IRB at 
the time of continuing  review  annually  or more  often  as required:  
• A list of the research  personnel  who participated  in the data and safety  monitoring.   
• The frequency  of monitoring  that took place  during  the renewal  intervals  and/or  the dates  
that data and safety  monitoring  was conducted.   
• A summary  of cumulative  data related  to unanticipated  problems  (including  adverse  events)  
including  a determination  of causality  and whether  the risk to benefit  assessment  has 
changed.   
• If appropriate,  a summary  of pertinent  scientific  literature  reports,  therapeutic  developments,  
or results  of related  studies  that may have  an impact  on the safety  of study  participants  or 
the ethics  of the research  study.   
• A summary  of the outcome  of reviews  conducted  to ensure  subject  privacy  and research  
data confidentiality.   
Final  conclusions  regarding  changes  to the anticipated  benefit -to-risk assessment  of the study  
participation  and final recommendations  related  to continuing,  changing,  or terminating  the study.  
 
C. Statistical Analyses. Overview -We will perform all main analysis based on intention -to-treat 
philosophy following the a priori plans outlined below. All statistical analyses will be performed and 
overseen by [CONTACT_165179]. Perera using SAS® version 9 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, North 
Carolina). Participant flow will be summarized using a CONSORT diagram.[ADDRESS_191562], a set of sensitivity analyses including additional covariates and ignoring 
missing data will be performed to evaluate the robustness of our findings.  
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191563] to study site and 
the large sample size , it is unlikely that other baseline participant characteristics will be significantly 
different between the arms. However, we will control for any participant characteristics that are 
found to be significantly different by [CONTACT_165180].  In such an event, we  will not alter the primary analytic strategy to preserve its a priori 
nature and pr edictability. We will use independent samples t-, Wilcoxon  rank sum , chi-square and 
Fisher’s exact  tests, as appropriate based on distributional properties, and continuous /categorical 
nature of  the characteristic being compared .  
 
Aim 1 Analysis -We will fit a series of linear mixed models36 using the SAS® MIXED procedure with 
baseline to follow -up changes in continuous outcomes as the dependent variable; intervention arm 
(MACRO /SOC), follow -up time point (3/6/12 months) and their interaction term as the fixed effects 
of interest; the baseline value of the continuous outcome  as a fixed effect covariate; and a 
participant random effect to account for multiple measurements over time from the same 
participant. We will appropriately constr uct means contrasts to estimate MACRO vs SOC at each 
follow -up time point. The magnitude and statistical significance at α=0.[ADDRESS_191564] a 
2.60 point improvement in AM-PAC CAT Basic Mobility Domain17 over 3 months, compute 
percentage of responders in both arms, and conclude a number -needed -to-treat (NNT) as the 
reciprocal of the difference in percentages. We will employ the same analytic strategy described 
above for each of our secondary continuous out comes such as physical activity, depression, frailty, 
self-efficacy and quality of life (H1.2) . For the secondary outcomes measured only once at 3 months 
such as participation, adherence and satisfaction (H1.3), we will consider using Wilcoxon rank sum, 
chi-square  and Fisher’s exact tests to make between -intervention comparisons, depending on the 
categorical/ordinal/interval nature of the outcomes and their propensity for ill -behaved distributional 
properties. For count outcomes such as falls, number of medications , readmissions and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54992] H1.4, we will fit a series of negative binomial regression models37 with the count 
outcome as the dependent variable; exposure time for the counts as an offset; a log link function; 
and intervention arm as the main independent factor of interest ; and a marker of history of the 
outcome at baseline as a covariate  MACRO vs SOC incident rate ratio and its statistical 
significance will serve as tests of H1.4.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_191565] benefits from 
MACRO compared to SOC  arms  and will be accomplished through exploratory subgroup analyses. 
We will examine subgroups based on baseline AM-PAC CAT Basic Mobility Scale , frailty status, 
cognitive function, and readiness for change. Specifically, for each subgroup definition considered, 
we will add subgroup and subgroup × intervention group interaction terms to the models used in 
Aims [ADDRESS_191566]/least likely 
to reap benefits from the MACRO  intervention . Specifically, we will only use the data from the 
MACRO arm, and define a meaningful responder as having a [ADDRESS_191567], we will compare the baseline characteristics of 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 16 of 23  responders and non -responders using methods described above. Second, we will fit logistic 
regression models with responder status (yes/no) as the dependent variable, and each of the 
baseline characteristics, one -at-a-time, as the sole independent variable to identify which factors a 
likely to be relevant. Third, we will fit a multivariable logistic regression model with all relevant 
baseline characteristics as independent variables, and a forward selection strategy to potentially 
identify a parsimonious col lection of relevant baseline characteristics predictive of likelihood of 
benefit. Finally, to better accommodate n on-linear associations and interaction effects among 
baseline characteristics, we will consider  a classification tree model or CART .[ADDRESS_191568] method to account for missing data under the ignorable or 
missing -at-random (MAR) assumption, and mitigates bias even when missing data is non -
ignorable.43 Specifically, we will generate M=[ADDRESS_191569] the 
uncertainty involved in imputation. SAS® MI and MIANALYZE procedures will be used. Other 
approaches to missing data will also be considered in sensitivity analyses.   
 
Sensitivity Analyses -We will perform sensitivity analyses to examine the robustness of our results 
against various assumptions, such as fitting zero -inflated models44 or using dichotomous (any/none) 
operational definitions and logistic regression models. In addition, if analyses of residuals from the 
linear mixed models show violations of statistical assumptions, we will consider fitting models after 
Box-Cox transformi ng the continuous variables to make them approximately conform to a normal 
distribution.45  
 
D. Sample Size and Power . 
Sample Size Justification.  We base our sample size on published  data, published statistical 
methods, and commercially available software ( SAS® POWER procedure; SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, 
North Carolina ). Between -subject standard deviation of the baseline to follow -up change in the 
primary outcome AM-PAC CAT Basic Mobility Scale  is approximately 7.97 in rehabilitation 
outpatients .17 We consider 2.60 points a minimally clinically important difference based on MDC 68 17, 
46. We plan to randomize 187+187=374 participants , anticipating 149+149 completers assuming a 
conservative 80% retention rate. We can detect a between treatment arm difference of 2.60 points 
in AM -PAC CAT Basic Mobility Scale  with 80% statistical power in a two -tailed test at α=0.05.47-[ADDRESS_191570] privacy and prevention of 
disclosure of identifying information.  
 
All data collection forms are maintained in a secure office space.  
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191571] protected; to which only authorized staff have access. A study manager must provide 
permission for programmers and research assistants to access study databases.  
 
A study identification number will be assigned to each participant. This identification number will be  
randomly generated and will only be connected to patient identifiers by a master list maintained at 
each site . 
 
9.3 Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of collected data.  
Quality Control.  All study staff  will undergo certification training prior to the beginning of 
the study . Every month data checks will occur to check accuracy of the data collection. 
Additionally, t o ensure uniformity of sites there may be site visits and on-site trainings for 
staff.   
 
10.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Serious adverse events  (SAE)  and Adverse events (AE)  will be reported to the DSMB  
following the DSMB charter guidelines.  The DSMB will have the ability to stop the study at 
any time if there are concerns about safety . SAE will also be reported to each active site ’s 
IRB following the provisions required for that site.  
 
• To provide for more complete assessment of the possible impact of COVID -[ADDRESS_191572] any concerns that an 
AE/SAE is  attributable to COVID -19.  This will prompt an expedited report to the DSMB 
and NIA.  
The AE/SAE SOP will be updated accordingly.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_191573] ensure  they are sufficiently stable and such that risks are minimized.  
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 18 of 23  Participants participating in CR (site - hybrid, or home -based models) will not participate in 
progressive exercise until a physician deems it appropriate.   
 
 
B. MACRO  intervention  
 
CDC C HECK FOR SAFETY; A Home Fall Prevention Checklist for Older Adults  will be mailed to 
participants and education will be provided based on participant questions. If there are concerns 
raised  by [CONTACT_165181] a clinical safety assessment will be requested on the 
participants behalf.   
 
C. Cognitive and depression assessment.  The PHQ9  and Short Blessed (screening)  assessments.  
Each assessment will be self-completed  by [CONTACT_4317] , and  they w ill have the option to skip 
questions if they feel uncomfortable answering. Additionally , staff will be trained in addressing 
questions and will have direct contact [CONTACT_165182][INVESTIGATOR_165155].    
 
D. Risks associated with questionnaire administration .  Participation includes a risk of loss of 
confidentiality regarding personal health information.  However, all research staff have undergone 
formal human subjects training to reduce this risk.  Research staff are trained to protect the privacy 
of research subject participants.  Burdens associated with questionnaires may be exacerbated by 
[CONTACT_165183].   
 
E. Accelerometry assessment : Participants  may wear  an ActiGraph  which is a watch like device 
that goes on your wrist for 7-[ADDRESS_191574] individual benefit.  The risk is 
justified by [CONTACT_165184], which includes the possib ility of 
improv ed cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_17863] (CRF) , efficiency , and PA. These data are important for the rising 
population of older adults who are prone to sedentariness and detrimental health effects.   
 
B. Clinical practice guidelines : Recommend s CR for all patients post -acute cardiovascular event , 
however CR is drastically underutilized across the Unitized States and even more so by [CONTACT_165185]. CR is a structured program that provides exercise and education for 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191575]. CR programs often require driving to facilities 
with limited scheduled and  costs associated with each visit  which can create barriers for many 
patients. Additionally , many patients are not told about the availability of CR or the importance  of 
CR is not emphasized at the time of the acute cardiac event .  MACRO directly addresses this  issue  
by [CONTACT_165186] .  
 
C. Importance of knowledge to be gained :  MACRO responds to a critical gap in CVD management 
by [CONTACT_165187] . MACRO is designed to optimize accessibility and 
effectiveness, and to augment the potential for recovery from CVD events that are highly prevalent 
and otherwise prognostically dire. MACRO constitutes an important advance in geriatric cardiology 
wherein the conventional approach to CVD care is transmuted and enriched by [CONTACT_165188] o f aging . 
 
14.[ADDRESS_191576] 
information or the option to complete the initial screening in person . Interested discharged 
patient s will be approached  after discharge if they are unable to be seen by a study team 
member during their stay . 
B.  Advertisements  
An approved study flier and recruitment brochure will be placed in key places and/or be distributed 
to physician offices, related clinics, or on other occasions/venues that present as an opportunity to 
recruit (e.g., a PI [INVESTIGATOR_165156]). Potential participants can self -refer by [CONTACT_165189] a telephone number/email add ress that is provided on these advertisements. With 
subject permission, they will be screened on the phone to make a preliminary assessment of 
eligibility. We will obtain permission to access their medical records in the UPMC database or 
request records fr om their provider as needed to further document eligibility.  
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191577] Reimbursement  
The participant will receive $20 for each of the assessments  that s/he undergoes  and $10 
per Actigraph return up to $120. If the participant withdraws from the study, s/he may still 
retain payment for the portions of the study that s/he completed. Participants  may be 
reimbursed based on mileage.  
17.0 Number of Subjects  
Recruitment .  
We will randomize approximately 374 participants , approximately 40 at the University  of 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_165157] 24-months, allowing for a 20% drop -out at [ADDRESS_191578] s’ privacy interests  and to make the 
subjects feel at ease with the research situation.  
Questionnaires  and assessments will be administered by [CONTACT_21646]/video calls 
and/or appropriate  space based on the activity  by a trained and certified research staff 
member . All information collected as part of the study will be stored in double locked 
locations or on secure access drive in which only study staff have access in accordance 
with each site’s  regulation.  Only de -identified data will be provided to coordinating center.   
 
19.[ADDRESS_191579]  about  the research.  
 
Non-English -Speaking  Subjects  
Potential participants who do not speak English will not be eligible for study participation.  
 
Subjects  who are not yet adults  (infants, children , teenagers ) 
Children will not be involved in this research . 
 
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
Participants who are cognitively impaired will not be eligible.   
 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 21 of 23  Consent will be required from all study participants .  
Participants who cannot provide informed consent are not eligible for participation.   
 
20.0 References  
1. McMahon SR, Ades PA, Thompson PD. The role of cardiac rehabilitation in patients with heart 
disease. Trends in cardiovascular medicine. 2017;27(6):420 -425. 
2. Schopfer DW, Forman DE. Cardiac Rehabilitation in Older Adults. The Canadian journal of cardiology. 
2016;32(9):1088 -1096.  
3. Ruano -Ravina A, Pena -Gil C, Abu -Assi E, et al. Participation and adherence to cardiac rehabilitation 
programs. A systematic review. International journal of cardiology. 2016;223:436 -443. 
4. Anderson L, Sharp GA, Norton RJ, et al. Home -based versus center -based cardiac rehabilitation. The 
Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2017;6:Cd007130.  
5. Hamm LF, Kavanagh T, Campbell RB, et al. Timeline for peak improvements during 52 weeks of 
outpatient cardiac rehabilitation. Journal of cardiopulmonary rehabilitation. 2004;24(6):374 -380; quiz 
381-372. 
6. Forman DE, LaFond K, Panch T, Allsup K, Manning K, Sattelmair J. Utility and efficacy of a 
smartphone application to enhance the learning and behavior goals of traditional cardiac rehabilitation: 
a feasibility study. Journal of cardiopulmonary rehabilitation and prevention. 2014;34(5):327 -334. 
7. Forman DE, Arena R, Boxer R, et al. Prioritizing Functional Capacity as a Principal End Point for 
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_165158]: A Scientific Statement for Healthcare 
Professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135(16): e894 -e918.  
8. Forman DE, Rich MW, Alexander KP, et al. Cardiac care for older adults. Time for a new paradigm. 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2011;57(18):1801 -1810.  
9. Covinsky KE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_165159] E, Johnston CB. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] -associated disability: "She was probably able 
to ambulate, but I'm not sure". Jama. 2011;306(16):[ADDRESS_191580] HH, Hildebrand MW, et al. Enhanced medical rehabilitation increases therapy intensity 
and engagement and improves functional outcomes in postacute rehabilitation of older adults: a 
randomizedcontrolled trial. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association. 2012;13(8):[ADDRESS_191581] better functional recovery over 2 years. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 
2006;54(7):1074 -1081.  
13. Lequerica AH, Donnell CS, Tate DG. Patient engagement in rehabilitation therapy: physical and 
occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_165160]. Disability and rehabilitation. 2009;31(9):753 -760. 
14. Lowe B, Unutzer J, Callahan CM, Perkins AJ, Kroenke K. Monitoring depression treatment outcomes 
with the patient health questionnaire -9. Medical care. 2004;42(12):1194 -1201.  
15. Rasmusson K, Flattery M, Baas LS. American Association of Heart Failure Nurses position paper on 
educating patients with heart failure. Heart & lung : the journal of critical care. 2015;44(2):[ADDRESS_191582], Szanton SL. Functional Goals and 
Predictors of Their Attainment in Low -Income Community -Dwelling Older Adults. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation. 2017;98(5):896 -903. 
17. Jette AM, Haley SM, Tao W, et al. Prospective evaluation of the AM -PAC-CAT in outpatient 
rehabilitation settings. Physical therapy. 2007;87(4):385 -398. 
18. Chakravarty EF, Bjorner JB, Fries JF. Improving patient reported outcomes using item response 
theory and computerized adaptive testing. The Journal of rheumatology. 2007;34(6):1426 -1431.  
19. Bandura A. Self -efficacy: The exercise of control. [LOCATION_001]: Freeman. 1997.  
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page [ADDRESS_191583] of self -efficacy on cardiovascular 
lifestyle. European journal of cardiovascular nursing:  journal of the Working Group on Cardiovascular 
Nursing of the European Society of Cardiology. 2011;10(3):180 -186. 
21. McAuley E, Blissmer B. Self -efficacy determinants and consequences of physical activity. Exercise 
and sport sciences reviews. 2000;28(2):85 -88. 
22. Sullivan MD, LaCroix AZ, Russo J, Katon WJ. Self -efficacy and self -reported functional status in 
coronary heart disease: a six -month prospective study. Psychosomatic medicine. 1998;60(4):473 -478. 
23. American Geriatrics Society 2015 Updated Beers Criteria for Potentially Inappropriate Medication Use 
in Older Adults. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2015;63(11):[ADDRESS_191584] -patient 
relationship on treatment outcome in physical rehabilitation: a systematic review. Physical therapy. 
2010;90(8):1099 -1110.  
25. Morley , J. E. , Malmstrom , T. , & Miller , D. ( 2012 ). A simple Frailty Questionnaire (FRAIL) predicts 
outcomes in middle aged African Americans . The Journal of Nutrition, Health & Aging , 16 ( 7 ), 601 – 
608 . American Occupational Therapy Association (2017). Home Safety and Accessibility 
Assessments.  2017.  
26. Segal -Isaacson CJ, Wylie -Rosett J, Gans KM. Validation of the Short Dietary Assessment 
Questionnaire: The Rapid Easting and Activity Assessment for Participants Short Version (REAP -S). 
Diabetes Educ Actions . Sep-Oct 2004;30(5):774, 776, 778.  
27. Skidmore ER, Dawson DR, Butters MA, et al. Strategy Training Shows Promise for Addressing 
Disability in the First 6 Months After Stroke. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair. 2015;29(7):668 -676. 
28. American Occupational Therapy Association (2017). Home Safety and Accessibility Assessments. . 
2017.  
29. Chiu T, Oliver, R., Ascott, P., Choo., L. C., Davis, T., Gaya, A., Letts, L. Safety Assessment of 
Functional and the Environment for Rehabilitation -Health Outcome Measurement and Evaluation 
(SAFER -HOME). Toronto, ON: COTA Health. 2006(Version 3 manual).  
30. Chiu T, & Oliver, R. Factor analysis and construct validity of the SAFER -HOME. Occupational Therapy 
Journal of Research. 2006;6:[ADDRESS_191585] R, Kent DM. Using group data to treat individuals: understanding 
heterogeneous treatment effects in the age of precision medicine and patient -centred evidence. 
International journal of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2016;45(6):2184 -2193.  
32. Landi F, Calvani R, Tosato M, et al. Protein Intake and Muscle Health in Old Age: From Biological 
Plausibility to Clinical Evidence. Nutrients. 2016;8(5).  
33. Hildebrand MW, Host HH, Binder EF, et al. Measuring treatment fidelity in a rehabilitation intervention 
study. American journal of physical medicine & rehabilitation. 2012;91(8):[ADDRESS_191586] E, Lang CE, Lenze EJ. Enhanced Medical Rehabilitation: 
Effectiveness of a clinical training model. NeuroRehabilitation. 2016;39(4):481 -498. 
35. Moher D, Schulz KF, Altman D. The CONSORT statement: revised recommendations for improving 
the quality of reports of parallel -group randomized trials. Jama. 2001;285(15):[ADDRESS_191587], Schabenberger O. Cary.  SAS® for Mixed Models. 
2006;Second Edition(North Carolina: SAS Institute, Inc).  
37. Hilbe JM. Negative Binomial Regression. [LOCATION_001]: Cambridge University Press. 2007.  
38. Wang R, Lagakos SW, Ware JH, Hunter DJ, Drazen JM. Statistics in medicine --reporting of subgroup 
analyses in clinical trials. The New England journal of medicine. 2007;357(21):2189 -2194.  
39. Breiman L FJ, Stone CJ, Olshen RA. Classification and Regression Trees. CRC Press. 1984.  
40. Little RJ, D'Agostino R, Cohen ML, et al. The prevention and treatment of missing data in clinical trials. 
The New England journal of medicine. 2012;367(14):1355 -1360.  
41. Rubin. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. [LOCATION_001];Wiley. 1987.  
42. Rubin. Multiple imputation after 18+ years. . ournal of the American Statistical Association 
1996;91:473 -489. 
 
 
Protocol - Modified Application of Cardiac Rehabilitation (CR) for Older Adults (MACRO)  Page 23 of 23  43. Graham JW HS, Donaldson SL, MacKinnon DP, Schafer JL.. Analysis with missing data in prevention 
research. In: Bryant K, Windle M, West SG eds. The Science of Prevention: Methodological Advances 
from Alcohol and Substance Abuse Research. American Psychological Association. 1997.  
44. Lambert D. Zero -Inflated Poisson Regression Models with an Application to Defects in Manufacturing. 
Technometrics. 1992;34:1 -14. 
45. Box GEP CD. An Analysis of Transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B -
Statistical Methodology 1964;26:211 -252. 
46. Wright A, Hannon J, Hegedus EJ, Kavchak AE. Clinimetrics corner: a closer look at the minimal 
clinically important difference (MCID). J Man Manip Ther. 2012 Aug; 20(3): 160 –166. 
47. Julious SA. Sample Sizes for Clinical Trials.  Boca Raton, FL.: Chapman & Hall/CRC.; 2010.  
48. Chow S -C, Shao, J., and Wang, H. . Sample Size Calculations in Clinical Research (Second Edition).  
Boca Raton, FL.: Chapman & Hall/CRC; 2008.  
49. Machin D, Campbell, M., Fayers, P., and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_164998], A. . Sample Size Tables for Clinical Studies.  2nd 
Edition ed. Malden, MA.: Blackwell Science; 1997.  
50. Zar JH. Biostatistical Analysis.  2nd Edition ed. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.: Prentice -Hall; 1984.  
 