    
 
 
CONTINUED  ACCESS  PROTOCOL:  Demonstration  of the Safety 
and Effectiveness of  ReCell® combined  with  Meshed Skin Graft  for 
Reduction of Donor Area in the Treatment of Acute Burn Injuries  
 
Investigational  Plan  
Study  Number:  CTP001 -7 
Device:  ReCell  Autologous  Cell Harvesting  Device  
 
Study  Type:  IDE Study  (IDE  [ZIP_CODE])  
Date:  August  25, 2016  
Sponsor:  Avita  Medical  Americas,  LLC 
[ADDRESS_418258] 
Northridge,  CA [ZIP_CODE] -2494  
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR’S  STATEMENT  
This statement is to certify that I have received the above -referenced investigational plan, which has been 
approved  for initiation  at my investigational  site by [CONTACT_338394] 
 . As Principal Investigator, I will ensure that all personnel who have been delegated 
responsibilities  for this study  will be trained  on the investigational  plan and associated  responsibilities  prior 
to study  participation.  I agree  to conduct  this clinical  study  in compliance  with the investigational  plan and 
applicable  requirements  of the U.S. Code  of Federal  Regulations  (21 CFR  Parts,  50, 54, 56, 812 and 45 CFR 
Part 46). 
Signature:    
[INVESTIGATOR_678]  
[CONTACT_1782]:   
  PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
 
Title  CONTINUED  ACCESS  PROTOCOL:  Demonstration  of the Safety  and 
Effectiveness  of ReCell® combined with  Meshed Skin Graft for Reduction of 
Donor Area in  the Treatment of Acute Burn Injuries  
Purpose  The overall purpose of this is study to provide continued access to the ReCell 
device following completion of protocol CTP001 -6, and to allow for collection of 
supplementary clinical outcome data for the ReCell device when used as an 
adjunct to meshed graf ts in subjects  with acute  thermal  burn injuries  requiring  skin 
grafting  for closure  of burn injuries  
Design  This is a prospective,  randomized,  multicenter,  evaluator  blinded,  within -subject  
controlled study. Patients 5 years or older with a total body surface area (TBSA) 
thermal burn injury between  5 and 50% (inclusive)  will be considered  for 
participation  in this study.  Following burn excision and confirmation of eligibility, 
a grafting plan will be developed and documented in accordance with 
investigators’ standard of care. Among the excision sites, two  comparable  
contiguous  or non-contiguous  areas  (i.e., similar  in burn injury  depth,  graft plan  
and size) at least 300 cm2 in size will be  identified  and labeled as Area A  and Area 
B. The wound regions will be randomly assigned to receive grafting consistent 
with the Investigator’s pre -identified graft plan (control) or to receive application 
of the ReCell - generated cell suspension applied over a graft more widely meshed 
than i dentified in the pr e-specified graft plan (ReCell -treated).  For example, if the 
graft plan called for a 2:1 mesh graft, for  the ReCell -treated wounds,  the area will 
be treated with  3:[ADDRESS_418259]-operative period  (i.e., through  12 weeks).  Pain,  healing  durability  and scar 
outcomes  will be evaluated in the  longer -term follow -up visits (i.e.,  24, 36  and 52 
week  visits).  Treatment -related  and serious adverse events will be captured 
throughout the duration of the study.  
Treatment -area closure  will be evaluated  via direct  visualization  by [CONTACT_338395] a qualified clinical investigator blinded to treatment allocation 
(i.e., Blinded Evaluator). The blinded assessment will serve as the primary healing 
assessment.  
At all  visits,  all subjects’  study  treatment  areas  will be  documented  
photographically  using standardized digital photography.  Scar outcomes will be 
measured using the Patient and Observer Scar Assessment Scale (POSAS) 
questionnaire which includes components for both the Blinded Evaluator and the 
patient.  
  Co-Primary 
Effectiveness 
Endpoint s 1.Confirmed treatment area closure at (or prior to) the Week [ADDRESS_418260] visualization by a 
qualified clinician.  Blinded  Evaluator  assessment  of wound  closure  will be 
performed  at Weeks 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12.  
2.The actual expansion ratios (treatment area to donor site area, inclusive of donor 
skin needed for secondary treatments) will be calculated separately for the ReCell 
and control treatments.  
Treatment area and donor area will be based on measurements of the treatment 
and donor  site wound  bed at the time of the grafting  procedure  (obtained  intra-
operatively). Calculation of expansion ratios will include any donor skin required 
for re -treatments performed to achieve wound closure, if applicable.  
Additio nal 
Effecti veness 
Endpoints  The following  additional  effectiveness  endpoints  will be investigated:  Subject  
Satisfaction at Week 24 (evaluating whether there is a preference for the ReCell  
treatment), 24 Week Observer POSAS Overall Opi[INVESTIGATOR_338392] 24 Week 
Patient POSAS Overall Opi[INVESTIGATOR_338393]:  
1. Delayed  healing  (all visits)  
2. Infection  (all visits)  
3. Allergic  response  to trypsin  (all visits)  
4. Treatment  area durability,  in terms  of any evidence  of recurrent  wound  
breakdown following initial complete closure (Week 12, 24, 36 and 52)  
5. Scars  necessitating  surgical  intervention  
6. Treatment -area pain via numeric rating  scale ([ADDRESS_418261] possible pain) will be evaluated at all visits, 
and incorporated as a component of the POSAS beginning at Week 12  
7. Treatment -related  and serious  adverse  events  (all visits)  
Other 
Evaluations  1. Healing  assessment  by [CONTACT_338396]  (all visits)  
2. POSAS  and Subject  Satisfaction  evaluations  at Week  12, [ADDRESS_418262]  and Blinded  Evaluator  blinding  effectiveness  
Enrollment  Up to 60 patients  enrolled  at up to 18 investigational  sites in the United  States  
Analysis  Data will be analyzed and  summarized in an  interim  analysis  at a time to coincide  
with the submission  of the ReCell  marketing  application.  At that time all 
available  data will be presented.  Data  will be analyzed  consistent  with the 
statistical  plan develop  for the CTP001 -6 protocol; however, there are no  formal 
statistical hypotheses  to be investigated . 
  Statistical 
Consideration  It is anticipated  that up to 60 subjects  may be accrued  in the period  between  the time 
the protocol  is approved and receipt of FDA marketing approval for the ReCell 
device.  Primary effectiveness will be assessed on the following two analysis sets : 
Intent to treat population (ITT) – All those enrolled into the study who are 
randomized ; and Per protocol population (PP) – ITT subjects who receive both 
study treatments and have no major protocol deviations .  
For the co -primary effectiveness endpoint for confirmed treatment area closure, 
the hypothesis test of non -inferiority will be one -sided with a 5% significance  
level;  for the endpoint  of relative  reduction  in donor  site area,  the hypothesis  test 
of superiority will be one -sided with a 2.5% significance level, all other statistical 
tests will be two -sided at the 5% significance level, unless otherwise noted . 
Data will be analyzed and summarized in an interim analysis at a time to coincide 
with the submission of the ReCell marketing application . 
For evaluation  of the co-primary  effectiveness  endpoints,  it is anticipated  that there  
will be minimal  missing  data.  However,  multiple  imputation  and sensitivity  
analyses (e.g., pattern mixture models) will be performed if appropriate to account 
for missing data.  
 