 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 1 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential                                               01 December 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
 
A Multi-Center Study of the Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) Inhibitor, 
Ibrutinib, in combination with Durvalumab  (MEDI4736), in Subjects with 
Relapsed or Refractory Solid Tumors  
 
 
 
PCYC-1135-CA 
Prepared by:  [CONTACT_348633]  
 
[ADDRESS_433169] overall response  
CBC complete blood count  
CIT Chemoimmunotherapy  
CR complete response  
CRF case report form  
CSR clinical study report  
CTCAE Common Termino logy Criteria for Adverse Events  
DCR Disease control rate  
DOR Duration of response  
DLT Dose limiting toxicity  
EOT End of treatment  
ECG Electrocardiogram  
ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group  
EU European Union  
FDA Food and Drug Administration  
FISH fluorescence in situ hybridization  
Hgb hemoglobin  
IPD important protocol deviation  
ITT intent-to-treat 
IWRS Interactive Web Response System  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MRI magnetic resonance imaging  
MTD Maximum tolerated dose  
NCI National Cancer Institute  
NE not evaluable  
ORR overall response rate  
OS overall survival  
PCYC Pharmacyclics LLC 
PD progressive disease  
PFS Progression  free survival  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 4 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
Abbreviation  Definition  
PK Pharmacokinetic  
PLT platelets 
PR partial response  
RP2D Recommended Phase 2 dose  
SAP statistical analysis plan  
SD stable disease  
SOC system organ class  
TEAE Treatment -emergent adverse events  
TNM Tumor node metastases staging  
TTP time to progression  
TTR time to response  
UNK unknown 
WBC white blood count  
WHO World Health Organization  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 5 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
1. INTRODUCTION  
This statistical analysis plan (SAP) lay s out key elements including definition s and statistical 
methods for analysis of data in evaluation of effi cacy and safety for the PCYC -1135-CA study. 
Analyses of pharmacokinetics data  and biomarkers will be addressed in separate documents.  
1.1. Study Design  
This is a non -randomized, open -label, multi -center, Phase 1b/2 study to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of ibrutinib in combination with durvalumab in subjects with relapsed or  refractory solid 
tumor types (Stage III/IV per TNM staging):  
• Non-small Cell Lung  cancer (NSCLC): adenocarcinoma or squamous -cell carcinoma  
• Breast cancer: HER2 positive or triple negative  
• Pancreatic cancer: adenocarcinoma  
RECIST 1.1 criteria will be used to evaluate response and document objective disease 
progression.  
Phase 1b:  
Phase 1b will follow a 6+3 dose de -escalation design to evaluate dose limiting toxicity (DLT) 
and determine the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D) or maximum tolerated dose (MTD) for 
this study. In cohort 1 (consisting  6 subjects regardless of tumor type ), ibrutinib  will be 
administered PO at a dose of 560  mg daily in combination with durvalumab  at a dose of 10 
mg/kg IV every [ADDRESS_433170] 28 days (Cycle 1=28 days and including laboratory 
assessments on Day 1 Cycle 2) of study treatment is <33.3% (ie, ≤1 of 6 or ≤2 of 9), this dose 
level will be consid ered safe to proceed to Phase 2, and will be defined as the RP2D.  A DLT is 
defined as any Grade 3 or higher non -hematologic or Grade 4 hematologic AE possibly related 
to study treatment (s) occurring during the DLT observation period . 
A similar 6+3 cohort d esign will be utilized in the dose de -escalation cohorts (see Table 1). De-
escalation cohorts -1A and -1B will be opened simultaneously to determine which dosing 
schedule is most appropriate for the phase 2 portion of the study. Determination of the RP2D 
will be based on the safety profile of the 2 treatment regimens. If necessary, the dose de -
escalation cohort -2 will be enrolled thereafter . 
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 6 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
Table 1: Phase 1b Dosing Levels  
28-Day Dosing Cycle  Ibrutinib  MEDI4736  
Cohort 1  560 mg once daily PO  10 mg/kg IV  
Cohort -1A* 420 mg once daily PO  10 mg/kg IV  
Cohort -1B* 560 mg once daily PO  3 mg/kg IV  
Cohort -2 420 mg once daily PO  3 mg/kg IV  
*: Cohorts -1A and -1B are 2 parallel cohorts and will be enrolled concurrently in the sequence of -1A followed by 
-1B. 
After the RP2D is determined, enrollment in Phase 2 will commence. Subjects who were not 
treated at the RP2D in Phase 1b will continue to be treated at the assigned dose. All subjects 
enrolled under Phase 1b will be followed for response evaluation  and overall survival.  
Phase 2: 
Subjects with one of t hree solid tumor type s (Stage III/IV)  will be enrolled per the specifications 
below. 
• NSCLC (adenocarcinoma and squamous -cell carcinoma at an approximate 2:1 ratio) (ie, at 
least 15 subjects with squamous -cell carcinoma will be enrolled)  
• Breast cancer (triple -negative and HER2 -positive cancer at an approximate 2:1 ratio) (ie, [ADDRESS_433171] cancer will be enrolled)  
• Pancreatic Cancer Cohort: (adenocarcinoma ) 
For each of the above three cohorts, the statistical framework of Simon’s optimal 2 -stage design 
will be implemented to enroll subjects (a n interim analysis for futility in the first stage and the 
final analysis in the second stage ). The interim analysis for futility will be performed t o evaluate 
the response and safety profile. Enrollment will continue while the interim analysis is performed. 
A cohort may be discontinued based on the interim efficacy and/or safety results. The decisions 
based on the results of the interim analysis are i ndependent in the 3 individual disease cohorts. 
At the time of the interim safety assessment, Investigators that enrolled subjects and the Sponsor 
(at a minimum: a Medical Monitor, a Drug Safety representative, and a Biostatistician) will 
review safety dat a and make recommendations for the conduct of the study: continue the trial 
unchanged, consider modifying in part or in whole, or stop the trial due to safety concerns.  
NSCLC and breast cancer cohorts (n=43 per cohort):  
The breast and NSCLC  cohorts will each enroll [ADDRESS_433172] 18 subjects in a cohort are evaluable for tumor response. If 2 or 
fewer responders are observed among the 18  evaluable subjects, the Sponsor may consider 
discontinuation of this cohort; however, assessment of biomarkers  (that may aid in prospective 
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 7 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
enrichment for responders) or tumor measurements (showing clinically relevant tumor 
reductions, ie, <30%, that fit the criteria for SD) may support continued enrollment.  
Pancreatic cancer cohort (n=44):  
This cohort will enroll [ADDRESS_433173] 17 evaluable subjects, the Sponsor may consider discontin uation of this cohort. Same as in 
the other two cohorts, the assessment of biomarkers or tumor measurements may support 
continued enrollment .  
 
1.2. Endpoints  
Primary Endpoint s 
Phase 1b:  
• Recommended Phase 2 Dose (RP2D) or Maximum Tolerated Dose (MTD)  
• Safety and tolerability  of ibrutinib in combination with durvalumab  
Phase 2: 
• Overall Response Rate ( ORR) 
 
Secondary Endpoint s 
Phase 1b:  
• ORR 
• Disease control rate ( DCR) at Week 20 (e nd of Cycle 5)  
• Duration of response ( DOR) 
Phase 2:  
• DCR at Week 20 (e nd of Cycle 5) 
• DOR 
• Progression -free survival ( PFS) 
• Overall survival ( OS) 
 
Safety Assessments  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 8 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
Safety and tolerability asse ssments include adverse events, clinical laboratory tests, and vital 
signs.  
 
1.3. Statistical Hypotheses  
There is no hypothesis testing for Phase1b. The primary objective of Phase 2 is to evaluate overall 
response rate (ORR) for the combination therapy at RP2D. Hypothesis testing will be conducted 
to address this objective as follows:  
Null hypothesis (H 0):            P <= x%; where P denotes overall respon se rate. 
Alternative hypothesis (H a): P >= y%; where P denotes overall response rate.  
For NSCLC cohort and breast cancer cohort,  a true response rate of 10% (H 0) versus 25% (H a) 
will be tested . For pancreatic cancer cohort, a true response rate of 5% (H 0) versus 18% ( Ha) will 
be tested.  
1.4. Sample Size Determination  
The study is not powered for comparison of dose cohorts or tumor type cohorts.  
Phase 1b : Dose de-escalation will follow the 6+3 design  and up to four dose cohorts will be 
enrolled for the DLT to determine the RP2D for the combination therapy . Therefore, Phase 1b 
will enroll a minimum of 6 and a m aximum of 36 evaluable subjects.  
Phase 2: Hypothesis for the true response rate will be tested as described below independently 
for each tumor type cohort b ased on the statistical framework of Simon’s optimal [ADDRESS_433174] 80% power based on the 
true response rate in the alternative hypothesis. Approximately 130 subjects (including the 
subjects treated at the RP2D in Phase 1b and with the tumor type) across the three tumor type 
cohorts will be included in the Phase [ADDRESS_433175] cancer cohort ( n=18 for interim and n=43 for final per cohort):  
For each of the two tumor type cohorts, a true response rate of 10% (H 0) versus 25% (H a) will be 
tested and the probability of early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_348631] 73.4% if the true response rate is ≤10% 
(H0), and no greater than 13.5% if the true response rate is ≥25% (H a). 
An interim analysis (for futility) will be performed based on the first 18 evaluable subjects for 
each cohort independently. If 2 or fewer responders are observed among the 18 evaluable 
subjects in a cohort, the enrollment may be stopped. Otherwise, the co hort will continue to enroll 
an additional 25 evaluable subjects for a total of 43 evaluable subjects for the final analysis. The 
null hypothesis will be rejected if 8 or more responders are observed among the 43 evaluable 
subjects. 
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 9 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
Each cohort will enroll  subjects according to the histolo gy ratio described in Section 1 .1. 
Pancreatic cancer cohort ( n=17 for interim and n=44 for final): 
A true response rate of 5% (H 0) versus 18% ( Ha) will be tested and the probability of early 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_348631] 79.2% if t he true response rate is ≤5% (H 0), and no greater than 16.2% if the 
true response rate is ≥18% (H a). 
An interim analysis (for futility) will be performed based on the first 17 evaluable subjects. If 1 
or no responder is observed among the 17 evaluable subj ects, the enrollment may be stopped. 
Otherwise, this cohort will continue to enroll an additional 27 evaluable subjects for a total of 44 
evaluable subjects for the final analysis. The null hypothesis will be rejected if 5 or more 
responders are observed a mong the 44 evaluable subjects.  
  
1.5. Planned Analyses 
1.5.1. Phase 1b Analys es 
The primary objective of Phase 1b is to determine the RP2D or MTD and to evaluate safety and 
tolerability of ibrutinib in combination with durvalumab. The secondary objectives are to 
evaluate efficacy and PK and PD in subjects receiving the combination regimen.  
1.5.2. Phase 2 Analyses  
Interim Analysis  for Futility : For each tumor type cohort, the interim analysis will be performed 
after the first 18 evaluable subjects (for the NSCLC and breast ca ncer cohorts) /17 evaluable 
subjects (for the pancreatic cancer cohort) completed at least one tumor response assessment or 
at least 3 responders (in the NSCLC and breast cancer cohorts) / 2  responders (in the pancreatic 
cancer cohort) were observed, which ever occurs first. Confirmation of response is not required 
for those responders for the interim analysis.  
Final Analysis: The final analysis for both safety and efficacy  will be performed at the end of the 
study based on all subjects treated for this study . A Clinical Study Report (CSR) will be 
produced when the analysis has been performed for all three cohorts.  
 
1.6. Testing Procedure and Level of Significance  
The 2-sided significance level for the final analysis of primary endpoint  (ORR) will be 0.05.  
Analyses of secondary endpoints will be performed using the same  significance level .  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 10 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
2. GENERAL ANALYSIS CON SIDERATION  
Time to event or duration of event endpoints will be based on the actual event date (or censoring 
date) rather than visit number or  visit label. Missing efficacy or safety data will not be imputed 
unless otherwise specified . 
In general, the baseline value is defined as the last valid measurement on or prior  to the first dose 
of study treatment . For by-visit analysis, visit windows wil l be used to associate assessment with 
a scheduled visit and will be created in reference to the date of first dose of study treatment to 
assign visit number based on assessment date.  
2.1. Analysis Sets 
Enrolled Population  
This population includes all subjects who were enrolled in Phase 1b and Phase 2 (signed the 
informed consent and met all eligibility criteria) . 
Response -evaluable Population  
The Response -evaluable Population is defined as all enrolled subjects who received  at least one 
dose of study treatment (ibrutinib or durvalumab ) and provided at least one post -baseline 
response assessment. This population includes all the qualified subjects from both Phase 1b and 
Phase 2. The Response-evaluable Population will be used as the primary population for analyses 
based on overall response rate and disease control rate at Week 20 ( end of Cycle 5). 
Safety Population  (Treated Population)  
Safety population  (Treated Population) includes all subjects who received at least 1 dose of study 
treatment  (ibrutinib or durvalumab ). Subjects in this population will be analyzed as randomized  
for the randomized subjects . The safety population will be used to summarize the safety  
(including dosing)  data.   
DLT Evaluable Population for Phase 1b  
DLT evaluable population includes Phase 1b subjects who received study treatment  and did not 
meet the criteria for subject replacement (in Section 1. 4.1) during the DLT observation period . 
2.2. Definition of Subgroups  
Subgroup  Definition of subgroup  Type of Ana lysis  
PD-L1 Expression  High versus Low/None  D, E (ORR)  
Histology for NSCLC cohort  adenocarcinoma versus squamous -
cell carcinoma  D, E (ORR)  
Histology for Breast Cancer cohort  HER2-positive versus triple -negative D, E (ORR)  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 11 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
D: Demographics and baseline disease characteristics. E: Efficacy. ORR: Overall response rate.  
3. SUBJECT INFORMATION  
3.1. Subject Disposition  
Subject disposition will  be summarized by [CONTACT_348634] . Subject enrollment will be 
summarized by [CONTACT_11338], country, and investigator.  
Time on study is defined in the same way as overall survival with reversed censoring, i.e., 
subjects who died will be censored at death date. The Kaplan -Meier method will be used to 
estimate the median time on study.  
3.2. Demographics and Baseline Charac teristics  
Baseline characteristics and demographic information at baseline will be summarized with 
descriptive statistics  by [CONTACT_231269] .  
3.3. Prior and  Concomitant M edications  
Medications will be coded to a generic name [CONTACT_348638] T herapeutic Chemical (ATC) 
class per the World Health Organization ( WHO) drug dictionary. Concomitant m edications will 
be summarized by [CONTACT_348635] . Concomitant 
medications are defined as medications that were taken at any time on tr eatment (i.e. from the 
date of the first dose of study treatment  through the date of the last dose of study treatment) . The 
following concomitant medications  will be summarized separately: growth factors , blood 
supportive products and immunoglobulin , CYP3A inhibitors /inducers, anticoagulants and /or 
antiplatelets .  
3.4. Extent of Exposure  to Study Treatment  
Exposure to study  treatment  will be summarized by [CONTACT_231269] . Descriptive statistics will 
be provided for treatment duration and dosing informati on (e.g. total cumulative dose 
administered, relative dose intensity, dose reduction due to adverse events) for all study 
treatment s.  
3.5. Previous Treatment Histor y and Subsequent Antineoplastic Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_348632] s ubsequent  antineoplast ic agents will be summarized  separately . 
4. EFFICAC Y AND SAFETY ANALYSES  
4.1. Efficacy Analyses  
Efficacy endpoints and analysis methods  are summarized in Table 2.  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 12 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
 
Table 2: Summary of Efficacy Analyses  
 
Endpoint  Definition  Analysis Method s 
Primary Endpoint  
Overall 
Response 
Rate 
(ORR) Proportion of subjects achieving the 
best overall responses of CR or PR  
with confirmation  Primary (Response -evaluable population)  
• Proportion and 2 -sided 95% CI based on exact 
Binomial distribution (Clopper -Pearson) 
• Waterfall plo t on tumor load from target lesion  
Sensitivity  (Treated population)  
Proportion and 2 -sided 95% CI based on exact 
Binomial distribution (Clopper -Pearson 
Subgroup  (Response -evaluable population)  
• PD-L1: High vs. Low/None (all cohorts)  
• Histology (Breast Ca: HER2 positive vs. 
Triple negative; NSCLC: Ad enocarcinoma vs. 
Squamous -cell Carcinoma)  
 
Secondary Endpoints  
Disease 
Control 
Rate 
(DCR) at 
Cycle 5 Proportion of response -evaluable 
subjects who maintain disease 
control (CR, PR or SD) at Week 20 
(Cycle 5)  Primary (Response -evaluable population)  
Proportion and 2 -sided 95% CI based on exact 
Binomial distribution (Clopper -Pearson) 
Sensitivity  (Treated population)  
Proportion and 2 -sided 95% CI based on exact 
Binomial distribution (Clopper -Pearson) 
Duration of 
Response 
(DOR) Duration of time from the date of 
initial response to the date of disease 
progression or the date of death due 
to any cause, whichever occurs first  Primary (Response -evaluable population)  
Proportion and Kaplan -Meier estimate  
Sensitivity  (Response -evaluable population)  
Proportion and Kaplan -Meier estimate for 
confirmed and unconfirmed response  
Progression 
Free 
Survival 
(PFS) Duration of time from the first  
dose date of study treatment 
(ibrutinib or durvalumab ) to the first 
documentation of disease  Primary (Treated population)  
• All PD and death considered events regardless 
any anticancer therapy prior to PD  
• Kaplan-Meier curve  
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page [ADDRESS_433176]  
 Sensitivity  (Treated population)  
• Subjects are censored for use of  subsequent 
anticancer  therapy prior to PD or death; 
subjects are censored after missing two or 
more consecutive assessment prior to PD or 
death 
•  Kaplan-Meier curve  
 
Overall 
Survival 
(OS) Duration of time from the first dose 
date of study treatment  
(ibrutinib or durvalumab) to the date 
of death due to any cause  Primary (Treated population)  
• All death considered events regardless of any 
anticancer therapy prior to death  
• Kaplan-Meier curve  
4.2. Safety Analyses  
Safety data wil l be summarized by [CONTACT_348636] . Table 3 summarizes the safety analyses to 
be performed  for all tumor type cohorts . 
Adverse events (AEs) will be coded in accordance with the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities (MedDRA ). Severity of AEs will be graded by [CONTACT_348637] -
CTCAE v4.03.   
All laboratory values will be converted to and reported as international standard (SI) units. In 
general, only data from the central laboratory will be summarized and an alyzed. Laboratory 
parameters will be graded using the NCI CTCAE v4.[ADDRESS_433177] dose of durvalumab, whichever occurs 
later, or the day before initiation of subsequent antineoplastic therapy.  
The treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) are those events  that occur or worsen during 
the treatment -emergent period or that are related to the study treatment.  Safety data include 
subject disposition/ study status, demographics, baseline characteristics and baseline disease 
characteristics, study drug and treatment exposure, treatment discontinuation and study exit 
including primary reason, duration of treatment, TEAEs of grade 3 and above, serious TEAEs, 
TEAEs of major hemorrhage, TEAEs leading to any study treatment discontinuation, survival 
status, and d eath listings . 
 
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 14 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
Table 3: Summary of Safety Analyses  
 
Safety 
Assessment  Definition  Analysis Methods  
 
Safety and 
tolerability   
AE: TEAEs, SAEs, grade [ADDRESS_433178] -baseline toxicity grade 
for selected lab tests: Worst post -
baseline toxicity grade, Hgb, 
creatinine clearance, abnormal 
uric acid, liver function 
abnormalities  
 
Vital signs,  blood pressure, heart 
rate, temperature, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], 
weight Descriptive summary statistics and/or 
listings 
AE: adverse event; SAE : serious adverse event ; TEAE: treatment -emergent adverse event  
 
 PCYC-1135-CA 
Statistical Analysis Plan  Page 15 of 15 
 
Version 3.0  Proprietary and Confidential  01 December 2017  
5. MODIFICATION OF ANALYSIS TO THE PROT OCOL 
Below is the major change  made to the analyses in the protocol : 
• Data from all three tumor type cohorts will be pooled together to perform a total 
analysis in the final analysis. This analysis is not specified in the protocol.  
• The terminology ‘Safety Assessments’ instead of ‘Safety Endpoints’ is used in 
Section 1.2 safety analysis part  
    
6. REFERENCE S 
Simon R, “ Optimal Two -Stage Designs for Phase II Clinical Trials ” Controlled Clinical Trials 
10:1-10 (1989)  
Rubinstein L and Simon R, “Phase I Clinical Trial Design ” Biometric Research Branch, National 
Cancer Institute , Handbook of Anticancer Drug Development  (2004) 
Eisenhauer EA et al, “New Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors; Revised RECIST 
Guideline (version 1.1). European Jo urnal of Cancer 45:228 -247 (2009)  
US Food and Drug Administration , “Guidance for Industry: Clinical Trial  Endpoints for the 
Approval of Cancer Drugs and Biologics ” (May 2007 ) 
US Food and Drug Administration , “Guidance for Industry: Clinical Trial Endpoints  for the 
Approval of Non -Small Cell Lung Cancer Drugs and Biologics ” (April 2015 ) 
EMA, Appendix1 to the Guideline on the Evaluation of Anticancer Medicinal Products in Man: 
Methodological Considerations for Using Progression -free Survival (PFS) or Disease-free Survival  
in Confirmatory Trials  (2011) 
Fleming TR, Rothmann MD, and Lu HL , “Issues in using progression -free survival when 
evaluating oncology products ” J Clin Oncol 27:2874 -2880 (2009) 
 
 
 