IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/2017    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baby’s Breath II Substudy: Nicotine Patch as an Adjunctive Intervention to Reduce 
Secondhand Smoke Among NICU families  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 09/27/2017  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/2017   Baby’s Breath II Substudy: Nicotine Patch as an Adjunctive Intervention 
to Reduce Secondhand Smoke Among NICU families  
 
 
Aim: In line with our current project aimed to reduce secondhand smoke (SHS) exposure in NICU 
infants’ homes, the aim of the substudy is to evaluate the feasibility and potential efficacy of adding 
nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) in the form of transdermal p atches to a motivational intervention 
targeting NICU families who have a smoker in the home. The majority of smoking cessation research is 
conducted with motivated quitters who state a desire to quit. However, a few studies have found that 
providing NRT to  unmotivated smokers who are not currently planning to quit was associated with 
positive smoking outcome s [1, 2]. Thus, we would like to explore the potential for directly targeting 
smoking cessat ion regardless of motivation level in a subsample of NICU parents with the ultimate goal 
of reducing SHS in their homes.  
Hypotheses : (1) Providing NRT as part of a comprehensive secondhand smoke program to NICU families 
will be acceptable and feasible; (2)  NRT as part of a comprehensive secondhand smoke intervention will 
increase smoking cessation rates and decrease SHS exposure in homes of NICU families as compared to 
education and referral to a smoking cessation quitline.  
Methods  
Overview . A two group, ra ndomized, controlled substudy (N = 32) will be conducted with parents who 
are smokers and have a high risk, NICU infant. Similar to the parent study, primary caregivers will be 
recruited in the NICU and offered to enroll in the SHS sub -study, including ran domization to either 
motivational interviewing and NRT (nicotine patch) or SHS education and referral to a smoking cessation 
quitline. Two follow -up assessments will be conducted [ADDRESS_1053525] -intervention.  
Participants and procedures will large ly be the same as the parent study. Altered procedures are noted 
below.  
Participants . Inclusion and Exclusion criteria from the parent study will be retained in this substudy with 
additional criteria related to the provision of NRT noted in red. The nicoti ne patch is available over -the- 
counter and has been used by [CONTACT_768196]. Only extreme disease 
conditions, which should be relatively rare in our population of new, young, parents will be excluded.  
Inclusion Criteria : Eligible mothers of any age or ethnic background must: (1) have an infant that is at 
least 1 week prior to the estimated date of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_768190]’s Memorial 
Hermann Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] ( CMHH ; ensuring time for the intervention); (2) report that she o r her partner smokes 
at least 5 cigarettes per day, on average, within the 2 months preceding the screening visit ; (3) agree to 
attend intervention sessions; (4) live within 50 miles of our center; and (5) have access to a telephone.  
Exclusion Criteria : Mo thers will be ineligible for study participation based on the following criteria: (1) 
severe cognitive, and/or psychiatric impairment, per judgment of NICU and research staff, that 
precludes cooperation with study protocol; (2) inability to read, write, an d speak English; (3) inability or 
unwillingness to provide signed consent for participation; and (4) inability or unwillingness to meet 
study requirements for data collection and intervention purposes.  
Additional exclusions:  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/2017   • Within  the month  immediately  preceding  the screening  visit,  use of any form  of tobacco  or nicotine 
products other than cigarettes (e.g., e -cigarettes, chewing tobacco, etc.) on 3 or more days within a 
week  if the individual  refuses  to refrain  from  such  tobacco  use during  the course  of the study.  
• Current  use of NRT or enrollment  (or plans  to enroll) in another  smoking  cessation  program  in the 
next 3  months  
• Uncontrolled  hypertension  (SBP  greater  than  180 or DBP greater  than  110).  
• History  of severe  cardiovascular  (stroke,  heart  attack),  kidney  (e.g.  chronic  or acute  kidney  failure)  or 
liver  disease,  or other  unstable  disease  in the last 3 months.  
• History  of hypersensitivity  or allergic  reaction  to NRT or similar  chemical  classes  or any component  of 
these formulations (including allergy to  latex).  
 
Measures . The baseline measures approved for the parent protocol will remain the same. Post 
treatment outcomes also will be largely the same, with a few additions, and will be collected at [ADDRESS_1053526] intervention.  
Feasibility/acceptability outcomes . Participants will be asked to report on whether or not any patches 
were used, and if any were used, questions will be asked regarding the # of patches used and 
acceptability and satisfaction with the patch.  
Smoking outcomes will consist of [ADDRESS_1053527] sustained abstinence from cigarettes. Similar to the parent study, 
the Timeline Follow -Back [3], a retrospective structured interview, w ill be used to obtain continuous 
data of actual cigarette consumption in the [ADDRESS_1053528] 
assessment. Parental Exhaled Carbon Monoxide concentration in parts per million will be measured by 
[CONTACT_768197] -50 (Vitalograph, Inc., Lenexa, KS), to indicate recent exposure to tobacco 
smoke in parts per million (ppm). These monitors are small, hand -held, bat tery-operated devices with 
disposable mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_6928].  Two such instruments purchased for the parent study are currently available 
for use. 
Secondhand smoke outcome measures will include reports of home and car smoking bans and the TLFB 
for secondhand smoke i dentical to the parent study.  
Intervention . The motivational intervention will be similar to the first two sessions of the parent study 
intervention protocol delivered in the NICU, with additional content related to smoking cessation. In 
addition, parents will be provided with 2 weeks of 21 -mg nicotine patches for each smoker (or [ADDRESS_1053529] medication instructions 
http://reference.medscape.com/drug/nicoderm -cq-nicotrol -nicotine -transdermal -999319).  
Control . The control condition will receive identical educational materials to the control group in the 
parent study and will also receive a referral to the Tex as Tobacco Quitline which provides counseling and 
2 weeks of free nicotine patches after enrollment.  
Sample size estimation  
The primary outcome for this feasibility and preliminary efficacy study is use of the nicotine patch. We 
estimate that 66.7% interve ntion and 33.3% control participants will use at least one patch during the  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/2017   study period. A sample size of 32 will provide 80% power to detect this effect at the .[ADDRESS_1053530] and Bayesian 
analyses. Bayesian analyses primarily will be employed to determine the probability of benefit of NRT 
provided directly to smoking parents in the NICU + the behavioral SHS intervention, relative to health 
education and quitline referral.  
Adverse Experiences Associated with Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT): All of the commercially 
available forms of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT), i.e. gum, transdermal patch, nasal spray, inhaler, 
lozenge and sublingual tablet, are effective as part of a strategy to promote smoking cessation, 
enhancing long -term abstinenc e rates as much as 50 to 70%18. Recent reports indicate that 
recommended changes to NRT product labeling by [CONTACT_768198] a removal of the warning that 
consumers should not use an NRT product if they are still smoking, chewing tobacco, using snuff or any  
other product that contains nicotine —including another NRT. The  FDA suggests to consumers, “There 
are no significant safety concerns associated with using more than one over -the-counter (OTC) NRT at 
the same time, or using an OTC NRT at the same time as another nicotine -containing product —including 
a cigarette” ( http://www.fda.gov/ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm345087.htm ). 
 
In general, the patch is tolerated well by [CONTACT_57669] w ho use it. The most frequent side effects reported by 
[CONTACT_768199]: nausea, redness at the patch site and/or minor 
swelling, dizziness, difficulty sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], rapid heart rate, abnormal dreams, increased blood pressure, 
headaches, rash and/or itching. A review of adverse effects based on 63 trials of 21 mg NRT did not find 
evidence of harm from major adverse cardiovascular events, with a slight increased risk for well -known 
lower -severity events, such as palpi[INVESTIGATOR_332] s and arrhythmia [4 ]. Additionally, a review of safety in 
patients with cardiovascular disease found no evidence of an increased risk of cardiac events [ 5]. 
Breastfeeding mothers who smoke will not be ex cluded as the nicotine patch is likely less detrimental 
than smoking cigarettes due to the numerous additional toxins in cigarettes (e.g., carbon monoxide, 
formaldehyde, benzene ) [6]. The American Academy of Pediatrics has sta ted that breastfeeding and 
parental smoking are less detrimental to child health than bottle -feeding and parental smoking, and 
therefore recommend that all mothers breastfeed, regardless of smoking status [ 7]. Further, data 
suggest that cotinine levels are lower with NRT relative to smoking cigarettes [ 8]. 
Protection Against Risks: NRT formulations, including the nicotine patch, are FDA approved medications 
for smoking cessation. Our trained resear ch assistants will screen participants for contraindications of 
the nicotine patch and we will monitor participants for adverse reactions while they are on medication. 
Questions regarding safety will be referred to our study physician, [CONTACT_768205] (re cently hired 
Family Medicine faculty member previously on the faculty at Virginia Commonwealth University).  
Potential participants with medical exclusions will be encouraged to see their physicians and obtain 
documented clearance for participation in the s tudy and use of NRT.  
The typi[INVESTIGATOR_768191] a few days to weeks 
after starting medication or once the medication is withdrawn. Adverse effects will be assessed at each  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/[ADDRESS_1053531] -baseline visits. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_768192]’ complaints of adverse 
events and, when necessary, adjust the dosage or discontinue medication in consultation with [CONTACT_768206].  
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects an d Others:  
NRT is an evidence -based treatment for nicotine dependence and has been associated with reductions 
in smoking, even among unmotivated smokers. We believe that the proposed research will provide 
preliminary feasibility and efficacy data in support  of NRT to increase smoking cessation and reduce SHS 
exposure and health consequences among NICU patients. Participants may benefit directly through 
reduction of the health risks posed by [CONTACT_768200].  Other 
members of  participant households may experience similar benefits. The risks posed by [CONTACT_768201], and effective interventions to reduce such exposure in high risk 
infants could result in significant decreases in adverse healt h effects and associated costs. If successful, 
the proposed intervention could be replicated in other settings that would benefit from evidence -based 
measures to improve the health status of infants and their caregivers. We believe these long -term 
benefits  outweigh the risks involved in using NRT and participating in counseling.  
 
 
Role of the Principal Investigator  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_768193] (the University of 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects [ CPHS ]). The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_768194]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_349866] -related adverse 
events. These include staff training, manual -driven processes, and periodic audit of data 
collection/entry.  
Data Safeguarding and Checking  
 
Drs. Stotts (PI) and Northrup (Project Director/co -I) will closely monitor the data to ensure participants 
in the study are protected and to ensure their interests are not made secondary to the interests of the 
scientific inve stigation.  Once a month all key personnel will meet in -person to review study progress 
and address any impediments. Specifically, this team of conscientious investigators will perform the 
following activities:  (a) review the research protocol and plans f or data and safety monitoring; (b) 
review major modifications to the study proposed by [CONTACT_768202]; (c) evaluate 
study progress, including data quality, participant recruitment rates, retention rates, outcome and 
adverse experience dat a, and risk -versus -benefit profile; (d) communicate information and 
recommendations to appropriate persons at the UTHSC -H IRB regarding the assessment of issues or 
problems and effective resolutions; (e) make recommendations regarding discontinuation of tr eatment 
for an individual patient based on adverse experiences; (f) make recommendations to terminate the trial 
because  of safety  concerns;  (g) protect  the confidentiality  of the trial data  and the results  of monitoring.  
IRB and Adverse Events Reporting.  
 
Adverse Events (AE) will be recorded by [CONTACT_768203], reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_768195] 24 
hours if determined to be serious. Serious AEs will also be reported immediately (verbally within 24 
hours) to co -investigators, and to the sponsor age ncy. A written report will follow as soon as possible 
but within no more than three days. The written report will be in the format required by [CONTACT_768204]: HSC -MS-11-0641 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 09/27/2017   and will contain information regarding the date of the SAE, description of the SAE, s everity rating (Grade 
1 to 4), assessment of cause, whether the SAE indicates an increased risk for current or future subjects, 
and whether changes to the informed consent form are necessary.  
 
 
References  
1. Jardin, B.F., et al., Evaluating the effect of acce ss to free medication to quit smoking: a clinical 
trial testing  the role of motivation.  Nicotine  and Tobacco  Research,  2014.  16(7): p. 992-999.  
2. Carpenter, M.J., et al., Nicotine therapy sampling to induce quit attempts among smokers 
unmotivated to quit: a randomized clinical trial. Archives of Internal Medicine, 2011. 171(21): p. 
1901 -1907.  
3. Sobell,  L.C.,  et al., Reliability  of alcohol  abusers'  self-reports  of drinking  behavior.  Behav  Res 
Ther, 1979. 17(2): p.  157-60. 
4. Mills, E.J., et al., Cardiovascular events associated with smoking cessation pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: a 
network  meta -analysis.  Circulation,  2013:  p. CIRCULATIONAHA.  113.003961.  
5. Benowitz, N.L. and S.G. Gourlay, Cardiovascular toxicity of nicotine: implications for nicotine 
replacemen t therapy.  Journal  of the American  College  of Cardiology,  1997.  29(7): p. 1422 -1431.  
6. Dorea,  J.G.,  Maternal  smoking  and infant  feeding:  breastfeeding  is better  and safer.  Maternal 
and Child Health Journal, 2007. 11(3): p.  287-291.  
7. AAP-AmericanAcademyofPediatricsCommitteeonDrugs, Transfer of drugs and other chemicals 
into human milk. Pediatrics, 2001. 108: p. 776-789.  
8. Bowker,  K.A.,  et al., Comparison  of cotinine  levels  in pregnant  women  while  smoking  and when 
using  nicotine  replaceme nt therapy.  Nicotine  and Tobacco  Research,  2014.  16(6): p. 895-898.  