Version  Date : March 8 , 2019   1  
 
 
Scalar Closed -Loop STN / GPi [INVESTIGATOR_127964] (Intraoperative Studies)  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document  Date:  March 8, 2019  
 
  
Version  Date : March 8 , 2019   2 Purpose of the Study  
The purpose of this study is to measure neural activity during deep brain stimulation (DBS). There are 
two types of neural activity that we will record from DBS electrodes during this study: DBS local evoked 
potentials (DLEPs) and spontaneous, local field potentials (LFPs). We will measure the effects of varyin g 
stimulation parameters on both the neural activity and changes in motor symptoms -- bradykinesia and 
tremor -- in subjects with Parkinson's disease (PD). Correlating neural activity characteristics with  
changes in symptoms will improve our understanding of the mechanisms of action of DBS.   This 
intraoperative study will specifically compare our ability to record neural activity using circuitry 
developed at Duke for this purpose [Kent et al, 2015] to a new, implanted pulse generator (IPG; RC+S) 
developed b y Medtronic.   These intraoperative studies will specifically test a preliminary version of the 
RC+S (that is not designed for implantation), and will lead to a clinical trial assessing the efficacy of the 
implantable RC+S IPG in PD patients once this devic e is available and approved for this trial.  
 
Background and Significance  
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a surgical intervention that is effective in treating movement disorders, 
particularly Parkinson's disease (PD). A battery -powered IPG, placed in the patient's chest, delivers 
electrical stimulation to a connected brain el ectrode typi[INVESTIGATOR_127965] 
(STN) or globus pallidus internus (GPi). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_127966], the underlying 
physiological mechanisms of action remain unclear and there is no capability for device self -adjustmen t 
or responsiveness to patient symptoms, limiting the full optimization of this treatment.   
 
Stimulation parameters (amplitude, frequency, and pulse width) are programmed after surgery and at 
follow -up intervals, and the efficacy of DBS depends on finding parameters that reduce symptoms 
without causing side effects. However, there are over 42,000 available combinations of amplitude, 
frequency, and pulse width in the IPG, and few data describing the relationships between stimulation 
parameters and clinical o utcomes. As a result, the selection of stimulation parameters is an ad hoc 
process, with associated difficulties of time, expense, and patient discomfort. Further, the patient is 
often deprived of the optimal benefits of stimulation until this time consumi ng process leads to efficacy.  
 
Application of each DBS pulse results in activation of a population of neurons around the electrode. This 
evoked neuronal activity creates a signal -- the DBS local evoked field potential (DLEP) -- that can be 
recorded with t wo of the four contacts on either the clinical DBS electrode or a second electrode. Thus, 
this intraoperative recording approach does not require implantation of any electrical hardware. The 
magnitude and character of the DLEP response will reveal the type  and spatial extent of neuronal 
element activation during stimulation, including between brain regions, such as between subthalamic 
nucleus (STN) and globus pallidus externa (GPe). Our previous work exploring the mechanisms of action 
of DBS revealed a very  strong correlation between the number and type of activated neurons and 
clinical efficacy during variation in stimulation intensity [Kuncel et al, 2007; Kent et al, 2015]. Therefore, 
we expect a strong correlation between the recorded DLEP and the changes  in symptoms during DBS. 
Spontaneous, local field potentials (LFPs) are also recorded using the same methods described above. 
LFPs are signals measured with electrode contacts that are continuously generated by [CONTACT_127969], whereas DLEPs are sh ort-duration signals evoked immediately following stimulation pulses. 
Together, DLEPs and LFPs are a potential biomarker for disease state and severity in PD, which we will 
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144273] initially intraoperatively and long -term using the RC+S IPG for scalar closed -loop control of the DBS 
parameters.  
 
The shape and magnitude of DLEPs and LFP activity may also be sensitive to DBS electrode location, and 
this dependence suggests that they may assist with targeting brain structures during DBS implant 
surgery as well as post -operative selection of stimulation contacts and dynamic adjustment of 
stimulation parameters [Kent et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2006].   We therefore expect that DLEP and/or LFP 
characteristics will vary with the placement of DBS electrode relative to  the brain regions targeted for 
stimulation.  
 
Study Design and Procedures  
We will measure DBS local evoked potentials (DLEPs) and/or local field potentials (LFPs) together with 
motor symptoms (tremor and/or bradykinesia) in response to deep brain stimulati on (DBS). The study 
will be conducted in the operating room at Duke University Medical Center.  Additional operating room 
costs will be covered by [CONTACT_127970]. The study will be performed on subjects who 
are undergoing implantation of t he DBS system during an awake, stereotactic procedure for PD.  
 
The subject group will only include patients undergoing a DBS implant procedure for PD. The surgical 
procedure will proceed as needed for treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD), including implan tation of 
the DBS electrode (one into STN or dual electrodes into STN and GPi/GPe) into the targeted regions of 
the brain. For this research, subjects will receive temporary (~45 min) percutaneous extensions to the 
DBS electrode(s) and DBS lead cannula aft er implantation. These temporary extensions will connect to 
both our Duke stimulation and recording system or the Medtronic RC+S test recording system, 
alternating as needed, to allow recording and direct comparison of neural DLEP responses and/or LFPs 
using the two different stimulation/recording systems.  Details of the stimulation and recording system 
are provided in the Study Interventions section. After the study is completed, the second DBS electrode 
(if placed) and the temporary percutaneous extensio ns will be removed. Then, the ordinary clinical 
conduct of the procedure will continue for treatment of the patient’s movement disorder.  
             
We will measure tremor and/or bradykinesia in persons with PD during DBS. Subjects will be familiarized 
with and able to practice the evaluation tasks before preparation for surgery. Further, they will be asked 
to discontinue use of dopaminergic and/or anti -tremor medications overnight prior to the study (as is 
the clinical routine for this procedure), to redu ce variability of motor symptoms due to the time course 
of medications. We will conduct evaluations using unilateral stimulation, with the limb contralateral to 
the side of stimulation used for measurement of motor symptoms. Subjects may also be asked to r ate 
any side effects that they experience on a [ADDRESS_144274]'s DBS electrode will be used for stimulation and recording, with a second 
electrode in either STN or GPi/GPe used for recording. The four DBS contacts are des ignated as [ADDRESS_144275] will be used for cathodic 
stimulation (1 - or 2-) and a conductive pad will be placed on the subject's skin, outside of the sterile 
field, to serve as the return  electrode. The recording contacts will be two other contacts on the DBS 
lead. For bipolar stimulation, DBS pulses will be applied between two electrode contacts, and the 
recording contacts will be the two remaining free contacts. The stimulus waveform wil l be a charge -
balanced biphasic pulse, with charge restricted to values below the limit set by [CONTACT_3455], 30 
µC/cm2. Another conductive pad will be placed on the subject to serve as the recording reference.   The 
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144276] both the tremor and DLEP and/or LFP responses 
from the DBS electrode(s). Severa l trials will be conducted with different stimulation amplitudes, 
frequencies (≤185 Hz), temporal patterns, and contact [CONTACT_127971]. The stimulation amplitude will be 
less than that identified to be uncomfortable to the subject or that generates side ef fects, as 
determined by a neurologist and/or neurosurgeon during the initial testing phase following 
implantation. The different stimulation parameters will be delivered in randomized order, and the 
subject will be blinded to the parameters. Measurements w ill be made during [ADDRESS_144277] minute of the trial, and on for the remaining minute. At 30 s into both 
the off (baseline) and on phases of the trial, tremor will be measured for [ADDRESS_144278]'s hand , and with the 
wrist extended such that the hand is parallel to the forearm. The elbow may either be supported or 
unsupported, depending on which induces greater tremor (determined prior to any trials in each 
subject). Tremor as measured by [CONTACT_127972] r correlates well with clinical tremor rating scales 
[Elble et al, 2006].  
             
In subjects with Parkinson's disease who do not have dominant tremor symptoms, we will record both 
bradykinesia testing responses and DLEP and/or LFP potentials. Several  trials will be conducted with 
different stimulation amplitudes, mean frequencies (≤185 Hz), temporal patterns, and contact 
[CONTACT_127971]. The maximum amplitude delivered will be determined as described as above. The 
different stimulation parameters will be delivered in randomized order, and the subject will be blinded 
to the parameters. Measurements will be made in [ADDRESS_144279] five minutes of the trial, and on for the remaining five minutes. At approxim ately 90, 210 and 
250 s into both the off (baseline) and on phases of the trial, bradykinesia will be measured for [ADDRESS_144280] of 
bradykinesia [Taylor -Tavares et al., 2005].  
 
Before DBS surgery, the subject's baseline pathological motor symptoms may be assessed in  the pre -
operative setting, to familiarize the patient with the task ahead of the implant procedure. Tremor or 
bradykinesia will be measured using the previously -described accelerometer measurement or the 
mouse click task, respectively. This task will take  about [ADDRESS_144281]’s pre -operative MRI and post -operative high -resolution CT scans may 
be used to determine the location of DBS electrode contacts within the brain.   Placement of the 
electrode during DBS implant surgery will not be altered by [CONTACT_67300].  
Version  Date : March 8 , 2019   5 Study Interventions  
The stimulation and recording system applies deep brain stimulation (D BS) and simultaneously 
measures the DBS local evoked potential (DLEP) and/or local field potential (LFP) responses from either 
the same or a second DBS electrode. Stimulation will be delivered through either an optically isolated 
stimulator (bp isolator, F HC Inc.) and pulses controlled by a high -speed digital -to-analog converter via 
MATLAB (Mathworks, Inc.), or the Medtronic RC+S test device. Both of these stimulation/recording 
devices are nonsterile and outside of the sterile field  and will be connected t o the DBS electrode using 
sterile connecting wires.   The DBS lead cannula or a surgical retractor normally placed at the cranial 
incision site may be used as a return electrode. The locations used for the return electrode and 
recording reference will be re corded on the case report form.  
             
For recording DLEP and/or LFP signals, the Duke system combines commercial amplifiers -- either SR560 
low-noise voltage preamplifiers (Stanford Research Systems) in a custom serial configuration or a single 
g.US Bamp amplifier (g.tec Medical Engineering) -- to limit the amplitude of the DBS stimulation artifact 
in the recording.   Differential recordings are made from two DBS contacts, with each recording contact 
[CONTACT_127973]. A circuit e mploying solid -state relays and anti -parallel diodes is 
utilized at the inputs of the amplifiers to limit the size of the artifact signal at high amplification and 
prevent saturation of the recording amplifiers. The DBS lead cannula may be used as a record ing 
reference.   The Medtronic RC+S test system includes the full stimulation and recording circuitry 
embedded in the RC+S IPG/PC+S IPG but in a non -implantable form that can be directly connected to 
the DBS electrode through a sterile extension.  
             
Study subjects may undergo standard of care imaging procedures required for their surgery, including 
pre-operative MRI and/or post -operative high -resolution CT scans.   The research protocol will not 
modify these procedures, but the images collected may be used to determine the location of DBS 
electrode contacts in the brain.  
             
The electrical safety of the study apparatus will be tested and certified annually for electrical safety.  
             
Perioperative staff responsible for preparing subj ects for surgery will be given a flyer that explains how 
perioperative patient care will be affected by [CONTACT_127974].   This form will require 
all monitoring equipment (IV line, blood pressure cuff, pulse oximeter, etc.) to be placed c ontralateral to 
the limb used for measurement of motor symptoms.   Additionally, instructions for sedation and 
intraoperative sterile drape setup will be listed.   Contact [CONTACT_30152], 
attending surgeon, and principal investigator w ill also be provided.  
 
Selection of Subjects  
It is anticipated that a total (maximum) of [ADDRESS_144282] agreed to undergo the clinica l procedure.   Patients will only be asked about research 
participation after being scheduled for the procedure. They will participate on a volunteer basis with 
informed consent as approved by [CONTACT_39644]. Apart from Parkinson's disease (PD) these indiv iduals 
will be in good health, as determined by [CONTACT_127975]. Inclusion criteria 
(separate from the criteria to undergo the DBS implant procedure for Parkinson’s disease) are that the 
patient is able to understand the study an d consent form, and is interested in proceeding with research 
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144283] pre -operative screening, and if the 
patient is determined to be pregnant (usin g a pregnancy test obtained along with the other needed 
blood tests per standard of care) then the elective procedure will be canceled and delayed until after the 
pregnancy is concluded and the patient has recovered.   This is standard practice for any elec tive surgical 
procedure since there is a possibility of unintended harm with anesthesia to the pregnancy.  
 
Subject Recruitment and Compensation  
We expect to enroll a total of [ADDRESS_144284] Parkinson’s disease (PD) and who are 
scheduled to already undergo the planned deep brain electrode placement for treatment of their 
movement disorder. The surgical operation and research study will occu r at Duke University Medical 
Center. Initial contact [CONTACT_127976]’s neurosurgeon ([CONTACT_127983] or [CONTACT_127984] (Nandan) Lad), who will be performing the stereotactic surgery (either 
frame -based or frameles s), during the patient’s pre -operative appointment. Patients receiving either 
type of electrode implantation will be recruited for the study. Duke patients that cannot be contact[CONTACT_127977] a telephone script. Consent will 
then be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Turner, [CONTACT_127985], or the study staff.  
             
If the subject agrees to be enrolled, the Study Coordinator will contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_127967]’s enrollment in the research  during the planned procedure. If the subject does not sign the 
informed consent or does not qualify for the study, any recorded information will be destroyed.   
  
Subject selection will not discriminate on the basis of  gender, race, or ethnicity, but the eligible 
population is limited, since only patients already scheduled for DBS procedures for their Parkinson’s 
disease will be candidates. The incidence of Parkinson's disease (PD) is higher in men (~65%) than 
women (~3 5%), and so we expect to enroll more male PD subjects than female subjects. The incidence 
of patients who undergo deep brain stimulation (DBS) for PD and are minorities is low (~5%), so we 
expect to enroll fewer subjects that are minorities than subjects w ho are not minorities. The percentage 
of the population undergoing DBS for PD and are children is very small, and so we do not expect to 
enroll any children. The age range will be [ADDRESS_144285] enrollment.    
 
Subjects will be compensated $[ADDRESS_144286].  
 
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144287] information of the study's PI, neurologists,  and neurosurgeons, as well as the  Duke 
University Institutional Review Board. Each subject will be allowed as much time as desired to make 
their decision.  
 
All potential subjects will be informed that participation in the research study is completely optional and  
that declining to partici pate will not affect their medical care. Study related risks will be conveyed  
through a review of the consent form led by a member of the study staff.  
 
Since the study  procedures require communication between the subject and investigators, subjects that 
do not speak  English will be excluded from the study.  
 
Subjects will be competent to give consent as they have already consented to undergo the DBS 
procedure.   Competency will be determined by [CONTACT_5051].  
 
Risk / Benefit Analysis  
Subjects who p articipate in this clinical study will derive no direct benefits to themselves. However, the 
data gathered in this study will be used to understand the mechanisms of action of deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) and provide a means for the rational selection of s timulation parameters based on 
recorded neural activity.  
 
This proposed clinical research study has certain risks, though these are similar to  the risks associated 
with DBS electrode implantation surgery or replacement of the implantable pulse generator (IPG) and 
clinical selection of stimulation parameters (routinely performed after DBS implantation).   In some 
patients (and in the eventual clin ical trial with the implantable RC+S IPG) we will place dual STN and 
GPi/GPe DBS electrodes.   This is similar to the clinical practice of replacing the DBS electrode clinically 
(up to 5 times in different brain regions) as needed for optimization of the el ectrode stimulation results 
and the risks are within the ordinary risks of the DBS surgical procedure.  
             
There are risks associated with having subjects refrain from taking their dopaminergic and/or anti -
tremor medication overnight prior to the study, but this is the clinical standard of practice implemented 
for new DBS implants in PD patients. This will create risks associated with the symptoms a subject 
experiences in the unmedicated state, and will be reviewed with the subject at the time of c onsent.  
             
There is a risk of infection at the incision site where the extension wire is externalized for connection to 
our stimulating and recording system. To minimize the risk of infection, the surgery to place the 
percutaneous extension is do ne under sterile conditions and the incision site will remain in a sterile field 
through the clinical study.  
             
There is a slight risk of inadvertent electrical shock due to connection to the external stimulating and 
recording equipment required to conduct the study. All electrical equipment will undergo routine and 
periodic biomedical safety checks. Further, all electromechanical equipment used during the clinical 
study will be tested and certified annually for electrical safety. Surgical retract ors and cannulae used to 
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144288] discomfort as stimulation may cause transient side effects, reduce the benefit 
of DBS, or even transiently worsen symptoms. Subjects may experience slight discomfort due to side 
effects experienced with certain stimulation parameters. Side effects include muscle contractions, 
dysarthria, ocular deviations, tremor, and par esthesias. However, side effects are reversible and will 
cease once the stimulation is turned off. In addition, some stimulation parameters may cause symptoms 
to worsen, but these symptoms will return to pre -stimulation levels soon after stimulation is tur ned off. 
Subjects will be asked to report any sensations they feel as a result of stimulation, and will be observed 
for any effects of the stimulation on tremor or bradykinesia.  
             
There is a slight risk of tissue damage resulting from the electr ode-tissue interaction during stimulation. 
To minimize this risk, we will apply charge -balanced biphasic pulses. This stimulation waveform is similar 
to that used in the clinically implanted stimulator (Medtronic), and charge densities will be below the 
manufacturer's established limit of 30 μC/cm2. Thus, the risk of tissue damage will be similar to the risks 
associated with everyday use of the implanted DBS system.  
             
No general anesthesia will be given to subjects during surgery, and the procedure will be performed 
under local anesthesia to allow subjects to perform the tasks required in this study. Subjects will receive 
monitored anesthesia care (MAC), in which sedation will be administered as needed, such that subjects 
are still responsi ve and pathological motor symptoms (tremor or bradykinesia) are present.  
             
There are risks associated with undergoing brain imaging procedures (MRI and/or CT) required for 
conduct of DBS surgeries and post -operative follow -up.  The research stud y does not modify these 
procedures or their associated risks.  
             
If an individual chooses not to participate in the study, he or she will still have surgery to implant the 
DBS electrode.  
 
Data Analysis and Statistical Considerations  
The data set will consist of recordings of neural and/or LFP recordings, and either mouse click timing 
data for measurement of bradykinesia in Parkinson's disease subjects or tremor accelerometry data for 
patients with Parkinson’s disease. The DLEP recordings will be s erially averaged with stimulus -triggering 
to remove random noise while preserving the evoked response. The signal -to-noise ratios of DLEP 
recordings will be compared across data sets to determine which combination of stimulation and 
recording sites maximiz e recording quality. We will quantify performance on the mouse click timing task 
by [CONTACT_127978]. Tremor will be quantified by [CONTACT_127979] a window of the power spectrum of the time seri es of the tremor. We will 
perform ANOVA and post -hoc statistical analysis, in which the amplitude, frequency, and contact 
[CONTACT_127980], and with dependent variables 
describing bradykinesia, tremor, an d DLEP characteristics. We will also calculate correlation coefficients 
between tremor or bradykinesia and DLEP characteristics. Data and statistical analyses will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_3476], including the study statistician, Donna Niedzwiecki (Associa te Professor of 
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics).  
             
Version  Date : March [ADDRESS_144289] neural activity (DLEPs and/or LFPs) relative to the brain 
region targeted for stimulation.   Other study staff will analyze DLEP and/or LFP recordings obtained 
during surgery to generate a p rediction of recording contact [CONTACT_127981], and clinical study staff will be blinded to these predictions during imaging analysis.   
             
Subjects will be included in data analysis if DBS is clinically effect ive at reducing motor symptoms for 
particular stimulation parameters, and DLEP and/or LFP data are observed during at least one trial.  
             
[CONTACT_127986] and [CONTACT_127984]  (Nandan) Lad conduct a total of [ADDRESS_144290] -operative follow -up 
appointments. Further, subjects' medical records will be reviewed by [CONTACT_127982] -
related complications. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_127968] a higher than expected frequency. Any complication will 
be reported to the Duke University Medical Center Institutional Review Boards as a safety adverse 
event.  
  
  
 
 