Page 1 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Joe’s Invitation Effectiveness Study  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Last approval d ate 9/22/20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)                                                                                          
 
HRP -[ADDRESS_499225] Article(s)  
 
Protocol Title:  
Provide the full title of the study as listed in item 1 on the “Basic Information ” page in CATS IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ).  
Increasing cancer screening among female patients at PHS St. Joe’s residency clinic: Letter notifying them about 
outdated screen and postcard with self -sampling option  
 
Principal Investigator:  
[CONTACT_5627]:  Christina Scartozzi, DO  
Department:  Family & Community Medicine  
Telephone:  [PHONE_8248]  
E-mail Address:  [EMAIL_7590]  
 
Version Date:  
Provide the date of this submission. This date must be updated each time the submission is provided to the IRB office 
with revisions.  DO NOT revise the version date in the footer of this document.  
March 18, 2020 September 22, 2020  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov Regi stration # : 
Provide the registration number for this study , if applicable . See “HRP-103- Investigator Manual , When do I have to 
register my project at ClinicalTrials.gov? ” for more information.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Important Instructions for Using This Protocol Template:  
This template is provided to help investigators prepare a protocol that includes the necessary information needed by [CONTACT_109610] a study meets all applicable criteria for approval.  
 
1. GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS:   
• Prior to completing this  protocol, e nsure that you are using the  most recent version by [CONTACT_109611].  
• Do not change the protocol template version date located in the footer of this document.  
• Some of the items may not be applicable to all types of research.  If an item is not applicable, please 
indicate as such  or skip question(s) if indicated in any of the instructional text .  
• GRAY INSTRUCTION AL BOXES:  
o Type you r protocol responses below  the gray instructional boxes of guidance language.  If the 
section or item is not applicable, indicate not applicable.  
o Penn State College of Medicine/Penn State Health researchers : Delete the instructional  boxes 
from the final version of the protocol prior to upload to CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ).   
o Penn State researchers at all other campuses : Do NOT delete the instructional boxes from the 
final version of the protocol.  
• Add the completed protocol template to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ) on the “Basic 
Information” page.   
2. CATS IRB LIBRARY:   
• Documents referenced in this protocol template (e.g. SOP’s, Worksheets, Checklists,  and Templates) can be 
accessed by [CONTACT_109612] ( http://irb.psu.edu ). 

Page 3 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
3. PROTOCOL REVISIONS :  
• When making revisions to this protocol as requested by [CONTACT_1201], please follow the instructions outlined in 
the Study Submission Guide available in the Help Center in CATS IRB (http://irb.psu.edu ) for using track 
changes.  
• Update the Version Date on page 1  each time revisions are made . 
 
 
If you need help…  
University Park and other campuses:  
Office for Research Protections Human Research 
Protection Program  
The 330 Building, Suite 205  
University Park, PA [ZIP_CODE] -7014  
Phone: 814 -865-1775  
Fax: 814 -863-8699  
Email:  [EMAIL_1492]  College of Medicine and Penn State Health : 
Human Subjects Protection Office  
[ADDRESS_499226], Mail Code A115, [PO_BOX]  
Hershey, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
(Physical Office Location: Academic Support Building 
Room 1140)  
Phone: 717 -531-5687  
Email:  [EMAIL_779]    
 
 
  
Page 4 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives  
2.0 Background  
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation  
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
7.[ADDRESS_499227] Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
14.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  
15.0  Resources Available  
16.0  Other Approvals  
17.0  Multi -Site Study  
18.0  Adverse Event Reporting  
19.0  Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
20.0  Future Unde termined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
21.0  References  
22.0  Confidentiality, Privacy and Data Management  
 
  
Page 5 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  1.0 Objectives  
 
1.1 Study Objectives  
Describe the purpose, specific aims or objectives.  State the hypotheses to be tested.  
 
The objective of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of offering self -sampling for high -risk human 
papi[INVESTIGATOR_28597] (HPV) testing in increasing participation in cervical cancer screening.  
 
Specifically , we will determine if women who are out -of-date for cervical cancer screening will be more 
likely to seek screening if offered the option to complete a self -sampled HPV test compared to standard 
of care. Eligible patients at Penn State Health St. Joseph ( seen through Family and Community Medicine 
and through Women’s Health) who are out -of-date with cervical cancer screening will be randomized to 
either a control arm or an intervention arm (2:1). Women in the control arm will receive a letter 
notifying them  that they need to be screened and they should contact [CONTACT_29383], 
according to standard clinical procedures (standard of care). Women in the experimental arm will 
receive (1) a slightly modified version of this letter informing them of a self-sampling option and (2) a 
pre-addressed post card to return to the study team if interested in self -sampling. Women who return 
the post card will then receive, via mail, a self -sampling kit to obtain a cervical sample for an HPV test.  
 
For both arms, women whose cervical cancer screening test (collected by a provider or by [CONTACT_396857]) indicate the presence of high -risk HPV will be directed to follow -up procedures 
following standard clinical practice.  
 
Hypothesis: Women notified of a need f or cervical cancer screening by [CONTACT_396858] -
sampling for cervical cancer screening will have a higher rate of screening that women notified by [CONTACT_396859].  
 
1.[ADDRESS_499228] a primary objective or endpoint. Additional objectives and endpoints are 
secondary.  The endpoints (or outcomes), determined for each study subject, are the quantitative 
measurements required by [CONTACT_109613].  Measuring the selected endpoints is the goal of a trial 
(examples: response rate and survival).  
 
The primary objective is to test the screening differences in control arm (i.e., receiving the standard 
reminder letter) versus the intervention arm (i.e., receiving a m odified reminder letter plus postcard to 
request HPV self -sampling kit). The purpose is to assess the impact of mailing HPV home sampling kits to 
patients in need of cervical cancer screening on HPV screening rates.  
 
The primary end point of 1) Completion  of cervical cancer screening 2) Use of home cervical cancer 
screening kit  will be evaluated over a three month time period  after reminder letters are mailed.  
 
1.3 Secondary Study Endpoints  
State the secondary endpoints to be measured in the study.  
 
The second ary endpoint is overall cervical cancer screening of people mailed a letter.  
 
Page 6 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  2.0 Background   
 
2.1 Scientific Background and Gaps  
Describe the scientific background and gaps in current knowledge.   
 
For clinical research studies being conducted at Penn State Health/Penn State College of Medicine , and 
for other non -PSH locations as applicable, describe the treatment/procedure that is considered standard 
of care (i.e., indicate how patients would be treated in non -investigational setting); and if applicable, 
indicate if the treatment, drug, or device  is available to patient without taking part in the study.  
 
The American Cancer Society estimates that 4,170 women in the [LOCATION_002] (US) will die from cervical  
cancer in 2018. It is possible to prevent many of the se deaths  through screening (e.g., with the human 
papi[INVESTIGATOR_28597] [HPV] test for cervical cancer ) and appropriate follow -up in women with positive 
screens.1 
 
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that women ages 30 -65 receive cervical 
cancer screening through (a) Pap testing every 3 years; (b) high -risk HPV testing every 5 years; or (c) Pap 
and high -risk HPV testing every [ADDRESS_499229] modalities and intervals. Regardless of the specific measure of up -to-date with cervical cancer 
screening, rates of screening are suboptimal, and vulnerable subgroups (including women in rural areas, 
racial/ethnic minorities, women with low socioeconomic status, and women who are underinsured) are 
even less likely to be screened4. Most cases of cervical cancer are detected among women who are out -
of-date for screening5. 
 
An emerging area of evidence sugge sts that women can collect their own samples for high -risk HPV 
testing6,7. Offering self -sampling for HPV testing to women who are out -of-date for screening has been 
associated with up to [ADDRESS_499230] 
demonstrated that  HPV self -sampling tests are comparable to clinician -collected samples for HPV 
screening.15 
 
The study team  has been involved in many studies on cancer prevention and control and primary care 
relevant to this proposal.  Cancer prevention studies performed by [CONTACT_396860] -sampling. These  studies emph asize the urgent need for 
interventions to improve cervical cancer screening behaviors in vulnerable  communities.  
 
Page 7 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  2.3 Study Rationale  
Provide the scientific rationale for the research.  
 
This pragmatic feasibility study will evaluate whether one method for of fering self -sampling for HPV 
testing (i.e., with a post card to request a mailed kit) will increase cervical cancer screening rates.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_499231] meet to be eligible for study 
enrollment (e.g., age, gender, diagnosis, etc.).  
 
Vulnerable Populations:  
 
Indicate specifically whether you will include any of the following vulnerable populations in this research. You 
MAY NOT include members of these populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate this in your 
inclusion criteria because s pecific regulations apply to studies that involve  vulnerable populations.   
 
The checklists referenced below outline the determinations to be made by [CONTACT_109615]. Review the checklists as these will help to inform your responses throughout the 
remainder of the protocol . 
 
• Children –Review “HRP -416- Checklist - Children”  
• Pregnant Women – Review  “HRP -412- Checklist - Pregnant Wom en” 
• Cognitively Impaired Adults - Review “HRP -417- Checklist - Cognitively Impaired Adults ”  
• Prisoners - Review  “HRP -415- Checklist - Prisoners ” 
• Neonates of uncertain viability or non -viable neonates - Review  “HRP -413- Checklist - Non-Viable 
Neonates” or “HRP -414- Checklist - Neonates of Uncertain Viability ” 
[Do not type here]  
 
3.[ADDRESS_499232] of the inclusion criteria that define who will be included in your final study 
sample (e.g. , age, gender, condition, etc .)  
 
• Female patients at  PSH St. Joe’s FCM residency clinic or women’s health clinic  
• 30-65 years of age  
• Out-of-date for cervical cancer screening  
• Able to speak,  read, and communicate well in English  or Spanish  
• Not greater than average risk for cervical cancer  
 
3.[ADDRESS_499233] of the exclusion criteria that define who will be excluded in your study.  
 
• Pregnant  
• Incarcerated  
• Greater than average risk for cervical cancer16 
o Already diagnosed with high -grade precancerous cervical cancer or cervical le sions  
o Have  a compromised immune system  
o With in-utero  exposure to diethylstilbestrol  
Page 8 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  • Unable to speak, read, and communicate well in English  or Spanish  
• Unable or unwilling to give implied consent or otherwise complete study requirements  
 
3.[ADDRESS_499234] withdrawal criteria (e.g., safety reasons, failure of subject to adhere to protocol 
requirements, subject consent withdrawal, disease progression, etc.).  
 
There are no foreseeable reasons why a study subject might be removed by [CONTACT_396861]. Subjects can voluntarily withdraw from the study at any time and for any 
reason.  
 
3.3.2 Follow -up for withdrawn subjects  
Describe  when and how to withdraw subjects from the study; the type and timing of the data to 
be collected for withdrawal of subjects; whether and how subjects are to be replaced; the 
follow -up for subjects withdra wn from investigational treatment . 
 
The withdrawal will be documented. Subject s who withdraw will be asked to describe why they 
are withdrawing so that we may better understand the study population.  Withdrawn subjects 
will not be replaced but all data coll ected up until the point of  withdraw will be included in data 
analysis.   
4.0 Recruitment Methods  
▪ Upload recruitment materials for your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ).  DO NOT  include the actual 
recruitment  wording  in this protocol.   
▪ StudyFinder:  If StudyFinder ( http://studyfinder.psu.edu ) is to be used for recruitment purposes, separate 
recruitment documents do not need to be uploaded in CATS IRB . The necessary information will be captured 
from the StudyFinder page in your CATS IRB study.    
▪ Any eligibility screening questions (verbal/phone scripts, email, etc.) used when contact[CONTACT_163933] (http://irb.psu.edu ). 
 
We will use the EHR to identify women who are potentially -eligible for this study. We have developed a way 
to query to EHR to identify patients at PSH St. Joseph’s FCM or Women’s Health clinics, age s 30-65, who are 
out-of-date with cervical cancer screening, and who do not have documentation of disqualifying conditions. 
This query consists of a set of search parameters that will be entered into the EHR to identify participants 
who meet eligibility cr iteria.  
 
 
4.1 Identification of s ubjects  
Describe  the source of subjects and the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects  (e.g., 
organizational listservs, established recruitment databases, subject pools, medical or school records, 
interactions during a clinic visit, etc.).    If not recruiting subjects directly (e.g., database query for eligible 
records or samples) state what will be queried, how and by [CONTACT_20898].  
 
StudyFinder :   
o If you intend to use S tudyFinder  (http://studyfinder.psu.edu ) for recruitment purposes, include this 
method in this  section .  
Page 9 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  o Information provided in this protocol needs to be  consistent with information provided on the 
StudyFinder  page in your CATS  IRB study.  
 
For Penn State Health  submissions using Enterprise Information Management (EIM) for recruitment, and 
for non -Hershey locations as applicable, attach your EIM Design Specification form on in CATS IRB 
(http://i rb.psu.edu ). See “HRP-103- Investigator Manual, What is appropriate for study recruitment?” 
for additional information.  DO NOT  include the actual recruitment material or wording in this protocol.  
 
Participants will be recruited from St. Joe’s  FCM  or Women’s Health  clinic s that meet inclusion/exclusion 
criteria. As described in 4.1, we will identify these participants using the EHR.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_499235] recruitment can 
involve various methods (e.g. , approaching potential subjects in person, contact[CONTACT_163934], letters, telephone, Resear chMatch, or advertising to a general public via flyers, websites, 
StudyFinder, newspaper, television, and radio etc.).  DO NOT  include the actual recruitment material or 
wording in this protocol.  
[Do not type here]  
 
4.2.[ADDRESS_499236] 
clinical procedures (standard of care). Women in the experimental arm will receive (1) a slightly 
modified version of this letter informing them of a self -sampling option and (2) a pre -addressed 
post card to return to the stud y team if interested in self -sampling. Women who return the post 
card will then receive, via mail, a self -sampling kit to obtain a cervical sample for an HPV test.  
 
 
4.2.[ADDRESS_499237]. Joseph’s FCM and Women’s Health clinics.  
4.2.3 When potential subjects will be recruited.  
Participants will be continuously recruited from among potentially -eligible patients until the 
anticipated sample size has been met. Using a 2:[ADDRESS_499238] unless HIPAA Authorization 
is obtained OR a waiver of HIPAA Authorization when applicable for the screening proce dures 
is approved by [CONTACT_1201].   [For FDA regulated studies, consent for any screening activities would 
need to be obtained prior to screening unless  specifically waived by [CONTACT_1201]. ] 
We have developed a way to query t he EHR to identify patients at PSH St. Joseph’s FCM or 
Women’s Health clinics, ages [ADDRESS_499239] prior to the informed consent process.  
Page 10 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
5.0 Consent Process and Documentation   
Refer to the following materials:  
• The “ HRP-090- SOP - Informed Consent Process for Research ” outlines the process for obtaining informed 
consent.   
• The “HRP -091– SOP - Written Documentation of Consent” describe s how  the consent  process  will be 
documented . 
• The “HRP -314- Worksheet  - Criteria for Approval”  section 7 lists the required elements of consent . 
• The “HRP-312- Worksheet - Exemption Determination ” includes information on requirements for the 
consent process  for exempt research.  In addition the CATS IRB Library contains consent guidance and 
templates for exempt research.  
• The CATS IRB library contains various consent templates for expedited or full review research  that are 
designed to include the required inf ormation.  
• Add the consent document(s) to your study in CATS IRB ( http://irb.psu.edu ). Links to Penn State’s consent 
templates are available in the same location where they are uploaded.  DO NOT  include the actual consent 
wording in this protocol.  
[Do not type here]  
 
5.1 Consent Process : 
Check all applicable boxes below:  
 
 Informed consent will be sought and documented with a written consent form [Complete Sections 
5.2 and 5.6]   
 
 Implied or verbal consent will be obtained – subjects will not sign a consent form  (waiver of 
written documentation of consent)  [Complete Sections  5.2, 5.3 and 5.6]  
 
  Informed consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be omitted or 
altered (e.g. , deception). [Complete section 5.2, 5.4 and 5.6]   
 
 Informed consent will not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement. [Complete Section 5 .5] 
 
   
 
 
5.[ADDRESS_499240] . 
 
Participants in the intervention arm will receive the HRP -586 along with the self -sampling kit in 
the mail.  
5.2.2 Coercion or Undue Influence during Consent   
Describe the steps that will be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion or undue influence 
in the consent process.  
 
Page 11 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  During the scree ning phone call the study team member will stress that participation in this 
study is entirely voluntary.   
 
5.3 Waiver  of Written Documentation of Consen t  
Review  “HRP – 411 – Checklist – Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent .”  
   
5.3.1 Indicate which of the following condition s applies to this research : 
  The research presents no more that minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
OR 
  The only record linking the subject  and the research would be the consent document and the 
principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each subject 
will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the research, 
and the subject’s wishes will govern. (Note: This condition is not applicable for FDA -regulated 
research. If this category is chosen, include copi[INVESTIGATOR_1309] a consent form and /or pa rental 
permission form for participants who want written documentation linking them to the 
research.)  
OR 
  If the subjects or legally authorized representatives are members of a distinct cultural group 
or community in which signing forms is not the norm, that the research presents no more 
than minimal  risk of harm to subjects and provided there is an appropriate alternative 
mechanism for documenting that informed consent was obtained.  (Note: This condition is not 
applicable for FDA -regulated research. )  
 
Describe the alternative mechanism for document ing that informed consent was obtained:  
 
Participants in the postcard to request HPV self -sampling kit arm of the study will consent the 
study by [CONTACT_396862] -sampling kit.  
5.3.2 Indicate  what materials, if any, will be used to inform potential subjects about the research 
(e.g., a letter accompanying a questionnaire, verbal script , implied consent form , or summary 
explanation of the research)  
 
 The HRP -[ADDRESS_499241] information for a study team member will be included on the HRP -586 so that 
participants can ask questions.  
 
5.4 Informed  consent will be sought but some of the elements of informed consent will be om itted or 
altered (e.g. , deception).  
Review “ HRP-410-Checklist -Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information.   
 
5.4.1 Indicate the e lements of informed consent t o be omitted or altered  
 
Not applicable.  
 
Page 12 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  5.4.2 Indicate why  the research could not practicably be carried out without the omission or 
alteration of consent elements  
 
Not applicable.  
 
5.4.3 Describe why the research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
 
Not applicable.  
 
 
5.4.4 Describe why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects.  
 
Not applicable.  
 
5.4.5 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, 
describe why the research could not be practicably be carried out without using such 
information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
 
Not applicable.  
 
5.4.6 Debriefing   
Explain whether and how subjects will be debriefed after participation in the study. If subjects 
will not be debriefed, provide a justification for not doing so.  Add any debriefing materials to 
the study in CATS IRB.  
 
Not applicable.  
 
 
5.5 Informed consent wi ll not be obtained – request to completely waive the informed consent 
requirement  
Review “ HRP-410-Checklist -Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information.  
 
5.5.1 Indicate why  the research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver of consent  
 
Currently, patients do not need to provide informed consent to receive reminders to obtain 
guideline -recommended clinical procedures. Requiring participants to provide consent would 
critically reduce the sample  size. More importantly, requiring potential participants to consent 
to receive information about cervical cancer screening could give them the impression that 
screening is somehow “new” or “experimental,” which could lead to patients who are out -of-
date w ith cervical cancer screening to avoid scheduling a screening.  
5.5.2 Describe why the research involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.  
 
Page 13 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Participants will receive a letter directing them to receive a guideline -recommended procedure 
that is considered stan dard of care. These procedures do not post more than minimal risks to 
subjects.  
 
5.5.3 Describe why the alteration/omission will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of 
subjects.  
 
The rights and welfare of subjects will be maintained because they will sti ll have the option of 
determining whether or not they want to schedule a cervical cancer screening.  
 
5.5.4 If the research involves using identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens, 
describe why the research could not be practicably be carried  out without using such 
information or biospecimens in an identifiable format.  
 
Our outcomes analysis will assess (1) participation in cervical cancer screening during the follow -
up period (yes or no), and (2) whether any follow -up procedures were indicate d for that patient. 
The follow up period will consist of three months after the mailing. We will assess differences in 
these outcomes for participants who receive the standard of care letter versus a modified letter 
with an option for HPV self -sampling. If  we did not use identifiable health information, we would 
not be able to link the letter type to clinical outcomes.  
 
5.5.5 Additional  pertinent information after participation  
Explain if subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation. If 
not applicable, indicate “not applicable .”    
 
Not Applicable.  
 
  
5.6 Consent – Other Considerations  
 
5.6.1 Non -English -Speaking  Subjects  
Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by [CONTACT_32825].  
 
If subjects who do not speak English will be enrolled, describe the process to ensure that the 
oral and written information provided to those subjects will be in that language. Indicate the 
language that will be used by [CONTACT_53030].  
 
Indicate whether the consent process will be documented in writing with the long form of the 
consent documentation or with the short form of the consent documentation.  Review “HRP-
091 –SOP- Written Documentation of Consent” and “HRP-103 -Investigator Manu al” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information.  
 
All participants will receive all materials in both English and Spanish.  
 
5.6.2 Cognitively Impaired Adults  
Refer “HRP-[ADDRESS_499242] - Cognitively Impaired Adults ” for information about research 
involving cognitively impaired adults as subjects.  
Page 14 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
[IP_ADDRESS]  Capability of Providing Consent  
Describe the process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent.  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Adults Unable to Consent  
Describe whether and how informed consent will be obtained from the legally 
authorized representative.  Describe who will be allowed to provide informed 
consent. Describe the process used to determine these individual’s authority to 
consent to research.  
 
For research condu cted in the state  of Pennsylvania , review “HRP-013 -SOP- Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children and Guardians ” to be aware of which 
individuals in the state of Pennsylvania  meet the definition of “legally authorized 
representative .” 
 
For research con ducted outside of the state  of Pennsylvania , provide information 
that describes which individuals are authorized under applicable law to consent on 
behalf of a prospective subject to their participation in the procedure(s) involved in 
this research.  One m ethod of obtaining this information is to have a legal counsel or 
authority review your protocol along with the definition of “children” in  “HRP-013 -
SOP- Legally Authorized Representatives, Children, and Guardians .” 
 
Not Applicable.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Assent  of Adults Unable to Consent  
Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  Indicate whether assent will be 
required of all, some or none of the subjects.  If some, indicate which subjects will 
be required to assent and which will not.  
 
If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an explanation of 
why not.  
 
Describe whether assent of the subjects will be documented and the process to 
document assent.  The IRB allows the person obtaining assent to document assent 
on the consent docu ment and does not routinely require assent documents and 
does not routinely require subjects to sign assent documents.  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
5.6.3 Subjects who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)   
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Parental Permission  
Describe whether and how parental  permission will be obtained. If permission will 
be obtained from individuals other than parents, describe who will be allowed to 
provide permission.  Describe the process used to determine these individual’s 
authority to consent to each child’s general me dical care.  
 
Page 15 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  For research conducted in the state  of Pennsylvania , review “HRP-013-SOP- Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Children and Guardians” to be aware of which 
individuals in the state of Pennsylvania  meet the definition of “children. ”  
 
For resear ch conducted outside of the state  of Pennsylvania , provide information 
that describes which persons have not attained the legal age for consent to 
treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the applicable law of the 
jurisdiction in which rese arch will be conducted.  One method of obtaining this 
information is to have a legal counsel or authority review your protocol along with 
the definition of “children” in “HRP-013-SOP- Legally Authorized Representatives, 
Children, and Guardians .” 
 
Not Applicable.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Assent  of subjects who are not yet adults  
Indicate whether assent will be obtained from all, some, or none of the children. If 
assent will be obtained from some children, indicate which children will be required 
to assent. When assent of children is obtained describe whether and how it will be 
documented.  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
6.0 HIPAA Research Authorization  and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  
This section is about the  access, use or disclosure of Protected Health Information (PHI). PHI is individually 
identifiable health information (i.e., health information containing one or more 18 identifiers ) that is transmitted 
or maintained in any form or medium by a Covered Entity or its Business Associate . A Covered Entity is a health 
plan, a health care clearinghouse or health care provider who transmits health information in electronic form.  
See “HRP-103 -Investigator Manual ” for a list of the 18 identifiers.   
 
If requesting a wa iver/alteration of HIPAA authorization, complete sections 6.2  and 6.3  in addition to section 
6.1. The Privacy Rule permits waivers (or alterations) of authorization if the research meets certain conditions. 
Include only information that will be accessed with the waiver/alteration.   
[Do not type here]  
 
6.1 Authorization and/or Waiver or Alteration of Authorization  for the Uses and Disclosures  of PHI  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Not applicable, no identifiable protected health information (PHI) is accessed, used or 
disclosed in this study . [Mark all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable]  
 
 Authorization will be obtained and documented as part of the consent process.  [If this is the 
only box checked, mark sections 6.2 and 6.3 as not applicable ] 
 
 Partial waiver is requested for recruitment purposes only  (Check this box if patients’ medical 
records will be accessed to determine eligibility before consent/authorization has been 
obtained) . [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
 Full waiver  is requested  for entire research study  (e.g., medical record review studies ). 
[Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
Page 16 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   Alteration is request ed to waive requirement for written documentation of authorization  
(verbal authorization will be obtained).  [Complete all parts of sections 6.2 and 6.3 ] 
 
6.2 Waiver o r Alteration of Authorization  for the Uses and Disclosures of PHI  
 
6.2.1 Access, use or disclosure of PHI represent ing no more than a minimal risk to the privacy of the 
individual  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Plan to protect PHI from improper use or disclosure  
Include the following statement  as written – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE 
unless this section is not applicable because the research does not involve a 
waiver of authorization.  If the section is not applicable, remove  the 
statement and indicate as not applicable .  
 
See the Research Data Plan Review Form . 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Plan to destroy identifiers or a justification for retaining identifiers  
Describe the plan to destroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity 
consistent with the conduct of the research. Include when and how 
identifiers will be destroyed . If identifiers will be retained, provide the legal, 
health or research justification for retaining the identifiers.  
 
Identifying information will be destroyed after data collection and cleaning is 
complete.  
 
6.2.2 Explanation for why  the research could not practicably be conducted without access to and 
use of PHI  
Provide an explanation for why the research could not practicably be conducted without access 
to and use of PHI.  
 
Access to PHI is required to identify women who are within the specified age range (30 -65 
years); out of date with cervical cancer screening; and don’t have any of the disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
Participants who request and return a self -sampling kit are providing their implied consent to 
collect their research in formation. Participants who do not request the self -sampling kit are 
receiving standard  
 
 
6.2.[ADDRESS_499243] of care for 
those who are out -of-date, so there would be no reason to consent these patients prior to 
sending the letter.  
 
Page 17 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  6.3 Waiver or alteration of authorization statements of agreement  
 
By [CONTACT_163939] a waiver of authorization, you agree to the following statement – 
DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE unless this section is not applicable because the research does not involve a 
waiver or  alteration of authorization.  If the section is not applicable, remove the statement and indicate 
as not applicable.  
 
Not Applicable . 
 
 
7.[ADDRESS_499244] be uploaded to CATS IRB 
(http://irb.psu.edu ).   DO NOT  include any actual data collection materials in this protocol (e.g. , actual survey or 
interview questions)  
 [Do not type here]  
 
7.[ADDRESS_499245]. Joseph patients who 
meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Participants will receive either (1) a standardized letter informing 
them that they are out -of-date and should schedule an appointment for their cervical cancer screening 
(control arm) or (2) a modified version of this letter, plus a pre -addressed postcard to request an HPV 
self-sampling kit (intervention arm). Kits will be mailed out to those that ind icate they want to receive 
one along with the HRP -586 consent form . Participants will mail self -collected cervical samples to the 
PSH Hershey lab for processing. A sample is stable for up to 6 months at room temperature: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/scien ce/article/pii/S2405852118300089. If we receive test kits returned 
after that timeframe, we will discard the sample and exclude those results. If negative result, patient  will 
be contact[CONTACT_257216] a study physician  with results . If positive result for  low-risk HPV, patient will be 
contact[CONTACT_426] a study physician to schedule a Pap test. If positive result for high -risk HPV, patient will be 
contact[CONTACT_426] a study physician to schedule a colposcopy.  Scheduling a Pap or Colposcopy test is 
standard of care for a low -risk or high -risk HPV result, respectively. The study team will monitor receipt 
of cervical cancer screening across the two arms.  
 
7.2 Study P rocedures  
Provide a step by [CONTACT_109624] (broken down by [CONTACT_765], if 
applicable) including such information as below (where and when applicable); d escribe the following : 
• HOW: (e.g. , data collection via interviews, focus groups, forms such as surveys and questionnaires, 
medical/school records, audio/video/digital recordings,  photographs, EKG procedures, MRI, mobile 
devices such as electronic tablets/cell phones, observations, collection of specimens, experimental 
drug/device testing, manipulation of behavior/use of deception, computer games , etc.)  
• WHERE: (e.g. , classrooms, labs, internet/online, places of business, medical settings, public spaces, 
etc.)  
 
 [Type protocol text here ] 
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_499246] in 
order of how these will be done .  If your study only involves one session or visit, use thi s section 
only and indicate 7.2.2 as not applicable.  
Page 18 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
We have developed a way to query to EHR to identify patients at PSH St. Joseph’s FCM or 
Women’s Health cli nics, ages [ADDRESS_499247], we will 
use REDCap to randomize participants to the control arm or intervention arm (2:1). The study 
team will then prepare mailings of letters (control arm) or letters with postcards (intervention 
arm) to send to participants.  
 
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_499248] in 
order of how these will be done.  If your study involves more than two sessions or visits 
replicate this section for each additional session or visit (e.g. , 7.2.3, 7.2.4, etc.).   
 
Once participants are randomized, they will then be sent a reminder letter in English and  
Spanish inviting them to schedule a screening. Participants in the intervention arm will receive a 
modified version of this letter, as well as a pre -addressed, pre -stamped postcard to request an 
HPV self -sampling kit.  
 
7.[ADDRESS_499249] Article(s) (Study Drug(s) and/or Study Device(s))  
 
7.4.[ADDRESS_499250] articles (drugs (including any foods and dietary 
supplements), devices and/or biologics used in the research including the purpose of their use 
and their approval status with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Include information 
about the form of the drug product (e.g., tablets, capsules, liquid).  
 
The Evalyn® Brush is a self -sampling kit that screens for H PV, a leading cause of cancer death 
among women. This tool has recently been FDA approved, but has not been incorporated into 
national clinical guidelines. This product is a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_396848] a 
sample of cervical cells.  
 
7.4.2 Treatment Regimen  
Describe dose, route of administration and treatment duration. Include information about dose 
adjustments.  
 
Participants will take a sample of their cervix cells that amounts to a few millimeters of bio 
specimen.  
 
7.4.3 Method for Assigning Subjec t to Treatment Groups  
Describe the randomization process and how the associated treatment assignment will be 
made.  
Page 19 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
Not applicable . 
 
7.4.[ADDRESS_499251] article is blinded.  
 
Not applicable.  
7.4.6 Receiving, Storage, Dispensing and Return  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Receipt of Test Article  
Describe how the test article will be obtained and from what source. 
Describe how the study test article will be packaged along with amounts 
(e.g., number of tablets/capsules or volume of liquid) and labeling. If drug 
kits are used, describe all the contents of the kit and associated labeling.  
 
1 HPV self -sampling kit will be sent to the Penn State Heath Clinical lab in a 
prepaid mailing. Inside the mailing will be the HPV self -sampling kit with 
the instructions and a Penn State  Heath Clinical lab Pathology Services 
Special Account Requisition form.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Storage  
Describe the plans to store, handle the test article so they will be used only 
on subjects and only by [CONTACT_10733]. Describe storage 
temperature requirements and  how temperature will be monitored and 
recorded.  
 
Before HPV self -sampling kits are sent to study participants, they will be 
stored in a locked cabinet in the Department of Family and Community 
Medicine offices at [ADDRESS_499252]. Kits mailed to the lab will be disposed of 
after analysis.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Preparation and Dispensing  
Describe how the test article will be assigned to each subject and 
dispensed. Describe the steps necessary to prepare the test article. Include 
where the test article preparation will be done and by [CONTACT_20898]. Fully 
describe how the study treatment is to be administered and by [CONTACT_20898].  
 
Before it is sent to the participant, the Penn State Heath Clinical lab 
Pathology Services Special Account Requisition document will be labeled 
with the participant’s ID #,  date of birth, and sex. The Mailing will include 
the HPV self -sampling kit with the instructions, a summary explanation of 
research, Penn State Heath Clinical lab Pathology Services Special Account 
Page 20 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Requisition form.  Also, the package will include a prepai d and labeled 
mailing to send the kit and Pathology Services Special Account Requisition 
document to the Penn State Heath Clinical lab. Participants will need to 
include the date and time of sample collection on the Requisition form.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Return or Destruction  of the Test Article  
Describe the procedures for final reconciliation of the test article supply at 
the end of the study and whether the test article is to be shipped back to a 
source or destroyed on site.  
 
HPV self -sampling kits will not be returned to pa rticipants. The samples will 
be analyzed and the kits will be destroyed by [CONTACT_396863].  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
Describe what prior and/or concomitant medical therapy will be collected. 
Describe which concomitant medicines/therapi[INVESTIGATOR_396849]. Describe which concomitant medicines are not permitted during the 
study.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
8.[ADDRESS_499253] Numbers  and Statistical Plan  
 
8.1 Number of Subjects  
Indicate the maximum number of subjects to be accrued /enrolled . Distinguish between the number of 
subjects who are expected to be enrolled and screened, and the number of subjects needed to 
complete the research procedures  if applicable  (i.e., numbers of subjects excluding screen failures.)  
 
The study seeks to have 1,211 participants. There will be 807 participants randomized into the control 
arm and 404 into the intervention arm.  
 
8.2 Sample size determination  
If applicable, provide a justification of th e sample size  outlined in section 8.1  to include reflections on, 
or calculations of, the power of the study.  
 
We assume a 15% response rate from the control group, i.e., in response to a standard reminder letter, 
for a final n=122.17 We further assume a 30% response rate for the intervention grou p, i.e., requesting 
an HPV self -sampling 18 kit, for a final n=[ADDRESS_499254] 244 participants to 
respond to their reminders to receive cervical cancer screening.  
 
8.3 Statistical methods  
Describe the statistical methods (or non-statistical methods of analysis) that will be employed.  
 
We will calculate the proportion of participants who obtain cervical cancer screening (in the Penn State 
Health St. Joseph’s FCM or Women’s Health clinics or with self -collected samples for HPV t esting) by [CONTACT_396864]. We will use chi-squared tests to compare the se proportion s, 
using an alpha of .05 and a beta of 0.80.   
 
Page 21 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  9.0 Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
This section is required when research involves more than Minimal Risk to subjects  as defined in “HRP -001 
SOP- Definitions.”  
 
Minimal Risk is defined as the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research that 
are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily encountered in da ily life or during the performance of 
routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  For research involving prisoners, Minimal Risk is the 
probability and magnitude of physical or psychological harm that is normally encountered in the daily live s, or in 
the routine medical, dental, or psychological examination of healthy persons.  
 
Please complete the sections below if the research involves more than minimal risk to subjects , otherwise  
indicate each section as not applicable.  
[Do not type here]  
See the Research Data Plan Review Form  
 
9.[ADDRESS_499255] events, and efficacy data.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
9.3 Method of collection of safety information  
Describe the method by [CONTACT_109629] (e.g., with case report forms, at 
study visits, by [CONTACT_109630]).  
 
Not applicable . 
 
9.4 Frequency of data collection  
Describe the frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
9.5 Individuals reviewing the data  
Identify the indiv iduals who will review the data. The plan might include establishing a data and safety 
monitoring committee and a plan for reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB and the 
sponsor.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
Page 22 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  9.[ADDRESS_499256] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences to the subjects related the 
subjects’ participation in the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, a description of the 
probability, magnitude, duration and reversibility of the risks. Consider all types of risk including physical, 
psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  Note: Loss of conf identiality is a potential risk when conducting 
human subject research.  
• If applicable, indicate which procedures may have risks to the subjects that are currently unforeseeable.  
• If applicable, indicate  which procedures may have risks to an embryo or fetus should th e subject be or 
become pregnant . 
• If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects.  
 
Potential risks associated with these procedures are minimal. Loss of confidentiality is a risk of participation.  
Participant’s personal information will be stored in REDCap, which will be accessible only to study team 
members that need it.  
 
Participants in the intervention arm who complete cervical cancer screening using a self -collected HPV test only 
may not necessarily receive a Pap test. There may be concerns that these women will have a missed cancer 
diagnosis. However, a  negative result on an HPV DNA test is better at predicting later disease than a negative 
result on a Pap test19. Based on the body of evi dence, USPSTF has determined that HPV testing without cotesting 
with Pap is adequate as a primary cervical cancer screening approach2. 
 
There may be some risk involved with the self -sampling kit from the way it is used. Participants can suffer some 
interna l injuries if they do not use the insertion tools properly. The likelihood of these injuries is minimal.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_499257] benefit to subjects, indicate as such. Compensation is not considered a benefit . 
Compensation should be addressed in section 14.0 . 
 
Page 23 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  The potential benefits to subjects could be the opportunity to get their  cancer identified and treated if 
they decide to participate and take the recommendation to get cervical cancer screening.  
 
11.[ADDRESS_499258] to get under screened patients 
to receive regular cervical cancer screening and improve screening rates.  
 
12.0 Sharing Results with Subjects  
Describe whether results (study results or individual subject results, such as results of investigational diagnostic 
tests, genetic tests, or incidental findings) will be shared with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care 
physicians) and if s o, describe how information  will be shared.   
 
Not Applicable.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_499259] Payment and/or Travel Reimbursements  
Describe the amount , type (cash, check, gift card, other) and timing of any subject payment or travel 
reimbursement. If there is no subject payment or travel reimbursement, indicate as not applicable .  
 
Extra or Course Credit:  Describe the amount of credit and the available alternatives. Alternatives should be 
equal in time and effort to the amount of course or extra credit offered.  It is not acceptable to indicate that the 
amount of credit is to be determined or at the discretion of the instructor of the course.  
 
Approved Subject P ool: Indicate which approved subject pool will be used; include in response below that 
course credit will be given and  alternatives will be offered as per the approved subject pool procedures.  
 
None.  
 
14.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
14.1 Costs  
Describe any costs that subjects may be responsible for because of participation in the research.  
 
None.  
 
14.2 Compensation for research -related injury  
If the research involves more than Minimal Risk to subjects, describe the available compensation in 
the event of research related injury.  
 
If there is no sponsor agreement that addresses compensation for medical care for research subjects 
with a research -related injury, include the following text  as written  - DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE : 
It is the policy of the institution to provide neither finan cial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research -related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is 
available but will be provided at the usual charge. Costs for the treatment of research -related injuries 
will be charged to subjects or their insurance carriers.  
Page 24 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
For sponsored research studies with a research agreement with the sponsor that addresses 
compensation for medical care for research -related injuries, include the following text  as written  - DO 
NOT ALTER OR DELETE : 
It is the policy of the institution to provide neither financial compensation nor free medical treatment 
for research -related injury. In the event of injury resulting from this research, medical treatment is 
available but will be provided at the usual charge. Such charges may be paid by [CONTACT_109632].  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
 
15.0 Resources Availabl e  
 
15.1 Facilities and locations  
Identify and describe the facilities, sites and locations where recruitment and study procedures will be 
performed.  
 
If research will be conducted outside the [LOCATION_002], describe site -specific regulations or customs 
affecting the research, and describ e the process for obtaining local ethical review. Also, describe the 
principal investigator’s experience conducting research at these locations and familiarity with local 
culture.  
 
Participants will be recruited through collaboration with St. Joseph’s Fami ly and Community Medicine 
and Women’s Health clinics. Participant will be identified through a previously -developed EHR data pull 
and recruited from their active patient files.  
 
15.[ADDRESS_499260]. Joseph’s Family and Community M edicine and Women’s Health clinics sees thousands of patients 
each year. The most recent EHR data pull indicated ~1500 women who met inclusion/exclusion criteria 
for this study.  
 
15.[ADDRESS_499261] s might need as a result of 
their participation in the study , if applicable . 
 
Page 25 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Not A pplicable . 
 
15.5 Process for informing Study Team  
Describe the training plans to ensure members of the research team are informed about the protocol 
and their duties, if applicable.  
 
The research team will meet regularly to discuss this study, its procedures , and any issues that may 
arise . 
 
16.0 Other Approvals  
16.1 Other Approvals from External Entities  
Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the research (e.g., from engaged 
cooperating institutions  IRBs who are also reviewing the research and other required review 
committees , community leaders, schools, research locations  where r esearch is to be conducted by [CONTACT_109633] , funding agencies , etc. ). 
 
This research  study  is unfunded . 
 
16.2 Internal PSU Committee Approvals  
 
Check all that apply:  
  Anatomic Pathology – Penn State  Health  only  – Research involves the collection of tissues or use of 
pathologic specimens. Upload a copy of “HRP-902 - Human Tissue For Research Form ” in CATS IRB.   
 
  Animal Care and Use – All campuses  – Human research involves animals and humans or the use of 
human tissues in animals  
 
  Biosafety – All campuses  – Research involves biohazardous materials (human biological specimens 
in a PSU research lab, biological toxins, carcinogens, infectious agents, recombinant viruses or DN A 
or gene therapy ). 
 
  Clinical Laboratories – Penn State  Health  only  – Collection, processing and/or storage of extra tubes 
of body fluid specimens for research purposes by [CONTACT_40460]; and/or  use of body fluids 
that had been collected for clinical purposes but  are no longer needed for clinical use. Upload a copy 
of “HRP-901 - Human Body Fluids for Research Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
  Clinical Research Center (CRC) Advisory Committee – All campuses  – Research involves the use of 
CRC services in any way.  
 
  Conflict of Interest Review – All campuses  – Research has one or more of study team members 
indicated as having a financial interest.  
 
  Radiation Safety – Penn State  Health  only  – Research involves research -related radiation 
procedures. All research involving radiation procedures (standard of care and/or research -related) 
must upload a copy of “HRP-903 - Radiation Review Form ” in CATS IRB.  
 
Page 26 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)    IND/IDE Audit – All campuses  – Research in which the PSU researcher holds the IND or IDE or 
intends to hold the IND or IDE.  
 
  Scientific Review – Penn State Health  only  – All investigator -written research studies requiring 
review by [CONTACT_109634]. The scientific review requirement may be fulfilled by [CONTACT_080]: (1) external 
peer -review process; (2) department/institute scientific review committee; or (3) scientific review by 
[CONTACT_109635].  N OTE: Review by [CONTACT_163947]  (PSCI) Protocol Review Committee or the PSCI Disease Team is required if the study 
involves cancer prevention studies or cancer patients, records and/or tissues. For more information 
about this requirement see the IRB website . 
 
17.0 Multi -Site Study  
If this is a multi -site study (i.e. , a study in which two or more institutions coordinate, with each institution 
completing all research activities outlined in a specific protocol ) and the Penn State PI [INVESTIGATOR_163927], 
describe the processes to ensure communication among sites in the  sections below . 
[Do not type here]  
 
17.[ADDRESS_499262] been obtained at each site (including approval by [CONTACT_779]’s IRB of 
record).   Describe the process for commu nication of problems with the research, interim results and 
closure of the study.  
 
Not Applicable . 
 
17.[ADDRESS_499263].  
 
Not Applicable . 
 
Page 27 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  17.[ADDRESS_499264] the study appropriately. Describe any 
on-site auditing and monitoring plans for the study.  
 
Not Applicable . 
 
18.0 Adverse Event Reporting  
18.1 Adverse Event Definitions  
 
For drug studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as written:  
Adverse event  Any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of the drug in 
humans, whether or not considered drug related  
Adverse reaction  Any adverse event caused by a drug  
Suspected adverse 
reaction  Any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the drug 
caused the adverse event.  Suspected adverse reaction implies a lesser degree 
of certainty about causality than “adverse reaction”.  
• Reasonable possibility.   For the purpose of IND safety reporting, 
“reasonable possibility” means there is evidence to suggest a causal 
relationship between the drug and the adverse event.  
Serious adverse 
event or Serious 
suspected adverse 
reaction  Serious adverse event or Serious suspected adverse reaction: An adverse event 
or suspected adverse reaction that in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a lif e-threatening 
adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6929], a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption 
of the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth 
defect. Impo rtant medical events that may not result in death, be life -
threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or 
subject and may require medical or surgical inter vention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed in this definition.  
Life-threatening 
adverse event or 
life-threatening 
suspected adverse 
reaction  An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “life -
threatening” if, in the view of either the Investigator (i.e., the study site 
principal investigator) or Sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or research 
subject at immediate risk of death.  It does not include an adverse event or 
suspected adverse reaction that had it occurred in a more seve re form, might 
have caused death.  
Unexpected 
adverse event or 
Unexpected 
suspected adverse 
reaction.   An adverse event or suspected adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if 
it is not listed in the investigator brochure, general investigational plan , clinical 
protocol, or elsewhere in the current IND application; or is not listed at the 
specificity or severity that has been previously observed and/or specified.  
 
 
 
For device studies, incorporate the following definitions into the below responses, as  written:  
Page 28 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Unanticipated 
adverse device 
effect  Any serious adverse effect on health or safety or any life -threatening problem 
or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or 
death was not previously identified in nature, sever ity, or degree of incidence 
in the investigational plan or IDE application (including a supplementary plan 
or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_499265], e.g., 
“Research subjects will be routinely questioned about adverse events at study visits.”  
 
In the response, incorporate the following as written:  
All adverse events (serious or non -serious) and abnormal test findings observed or reported to study 
team believed to be associated with the study drug(s) or device(s) will be followed until the event (or 
its sequelae) or the abnormal  test finding resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the 
investigator.  
 
An abnormal test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following criteria 
are met:  
• The test finding is accompanied by [CONTACT_4659]  
• The test  finding necessitates additional diagnostic evaluation(s) or medical/surgical 
intervention; including significant additional concomitant drug treatment or other therapy  
NOTE:  Simply repeating a test finding, in the absence of any of the other listed criter ia, does 
not constitute an adverse event.  
• The test finding leads to a change in study drug dosing or discontinuation of subject 
participation in the clinical research study  
• The test finding is considered an adverse event by [CONTACT_093].  
 
All adverse events (serious or non -serious) and abnormal test findings observed or reported to study 
team believed to be associated with the study drug(s) or device(s) will be followed until the event (or its 
sequelae) or the abnormal test finding resolves or stabiliz es at a level acceptable to the investigator.  
 
An abnormal test finding will be classified as an adverse event if one or more of the following criteria are 
met:  
• The test finding is accompanied by [CONTACT_4659]  
• The test finding necessitates addition al diagnostic evaluation(s) or medical/surgical intervention; 
including significant additional concomitant drug treatment or other therapy  
NOTE: Simply repeating a test finding, in the absence of any of the other listed criteria, does not 
constitute an adv erse event.  
• The test finding leads to a change in study drug dosing or discontinuation of subject 
participation in the clinical research study  
• The test finding is considered an adverse event by [CONTACT_093].  
 
18.3 Causality and Severity Assessments  
By [CONTACT_163948], you agree to the following statement – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE:  
 
The investigator will promptly review documented adverse events and abnormal test findings to 
determine 1) if the abnormal test finding should be classified as an adverse event; 2) if there is a 
reasonable possibility that the adverse event was caused by [CONTACT_5257](s) or device(s); and 3) if the 
adverse event meets the criteria for a serious adverse event.  
 
Page 29 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  If the investigator’s final determination of caus ality is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
study drug(s) or device(s)”, the adverse event will be classified as associated with the use of the study 
drug(s) or device(s) for reporting purposes.  If the investigator’s final determination of c ausality is 
“unknown but not related to the study drug(s) or device(s)”, this determination and the rationale for the 
determination will be documented in the respective subject’s case history.  
 
18.4 Reporting of Adverse Reactions and Una nticipated Problems to t he FDA.  
 
18.4.1  Written IND /IDE  Safety Reports  
For a drug study under an IND, incorporate the following from 21 CFR 312.32 as written – DO 
NOT ALTER OR DELETE:  
The Sponsor -Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA Form 
3500A) to t he responsible new drug review division of the FDA for any observed or volunteered 
adverse event that is determined to be a serious and unexpected, suspected adverse reaction.  
Each IND Safety Report will be prominently labeled, “IND Safety Report”, and a copy will be 
provided to all participating investigators (if applicable) and sub -investigators.  
 
Written IND Safety Reports will be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no event, 
later than 15 calendar days following the Sponsor -Investigator’s receipt of the respective 
adverse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria for reporting.  
 
For each written IND Safety Report, the Sponsor -Investigator will identify all previously 
submitted IND Safety Reports that addresse d a similar suspected adverse reaction experience 
and will provide an analysis of the significance of newly reported, suspected adverse reaction in 
light of the previous, similar report(s) or any other relevant information.  
 
Relevant follow -up information to an IND Safety Report will be submitted to the applicable 
review division of the FDA as soon as the information is available and will be identified as such 
(i.e., “Follow -up IND Safety Report”).  
 
If the results of the Sponsor -Investigator’s follow -up inv estigation show that an adverse event 
that was initially determined to not require a written IND Safety Report does, in fact, meet the 
requirements for reporting; the Sponsor -Investigator will submit a written IND Safety Report as 
soon as possible, but in no event later than 15 calendar days, after the determination was made.  
 
For a device study under an IDE, incorporate the following from 21 CFR 812.150 as written – 
DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE:   
The Sponsor -Investigator will submit a completed FDA Form 3500Ato the FDA’s Center for 
Devices and Radiological Health for any observed or volunteered adverse effect that is 
determined to be an unanticipated adverse device effect.  A copy of this completed form will be 
provided to all participating sub -investigators.  
 
The completed FDA Form 3500Awill be submitted to the FDA as soon as possible and, in no 
event, later than [ADDRESS_499266].  
 
If the results of the Sponsor -Investigator’s follow -up eval uation show that an adverse effect that 
was initially determined to not constitute an unanticipated adverse device effect does, in fact, 
meet the requirements for reporting; the Sponsor -Investigator will submit a completed FDA 
Form 3500Aas soon as possible , but in no event later than 10 working days, after the 
determination was made.  
 
Page 30 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  For each submitted FDA Form 3500A, the Sponsor -Investigator will identify all previously 
submitted reports that that addressed a similar adverse effect experience and will pro vide an 
analysis of the significance of newly reported adverse effect in light of the previous, similar 
report(s).  
 
Subsequent to the initial submission of a completed FDA Form 3500A, the Sponsor -Investigator 
will submit additional information concerning the reported adverse effect as requested by [CONTACT_1556].  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
18.4.2  Telephoned IND Safety Reports – Fatal or Life -threatening Suspected Adverse Reactions  
For a drug study under an IND, incorporate the following from 21 CFR 312.32 into the 
response, as written : 
In addition to the subsequent submission of a written IND Safety Report (i.e., completed FDA 
Form 3500A), the Sponsor -Investigator will notify the responsible review division of the FDA by 
[CONTACT_74170], fat al or life -threatening suspected 
adverse reaction.  
 
The telephone or facsimile transmission of applicable IND Safety Reports will be made as soon 
as possible but in no event later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor -Investigator’s receipt of 
the respec tive adverse event information and determination that it meets the respective criteria 
for reporting.  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
18.5 Reporting Adverse Reactions and Unanticipated Problems to the Responsible IRB  
By [CONTACT_163948], you agree to the following statement – DO NOT ALTER OR DELETE:  
 
In accordance with applicable policies of The Pennsylvania State University Institutional Review Board 
(IRB), the investigator will report, to the IRB, an y observed or reported harm (adverse event) 
experienced by a subject or other individual, which in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_40454] 
(1) unexpected; and (2) probably related to the research procedures. Harms (adverse events) will be 
submi tted to the IRB in accordance with the IRB policies and procedures.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_499267]’s source document. Include example(s) here why some one might unblind a study. In most 
cases, the unblinding will be part of managing a serious adverse reaction and will be reported with the 
serious adverse event. However, in cases where unblinding was not associated with a serious adverse 
event, such actio ns should be reported in a timely manner.  
 
Not Applicable.  
 
18.7 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_396850] a primary safety endpoint or studies with high risk to study subjects, provide the rules 
that define the circumstances and procedures for interrupting or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_10098]. If an independent 
Data and Safety Monitoring (DSMB) or Committee (DSMC) is set up for the study, the same stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_396851].  
 
Not Applicable.  
Page 31 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)   
19.0 Study Monitoring, Auditing and Inspecting  
 
19.1 Study Monitoring Plan    
 
19.1.1  Quality Assurance and Quality Control  
Include this section if FDA regulations apply to this study (see “WORKSHEET: Drugs (HRP -306)” 
and “WORKSHEET: Devices (HRP -307)”. HRP -306 and HRP -307 can be accessed by [CONTACT_396865] ( http://irb.psu.edu ).  
 
Describe how you will ensure that this study is conducted and that the data are generated, 
documented (recorded) and reported in compliance with this protocol, with institutional a nd 
IRB policies, with Good Clinical Practice guidelines and any other applicable regulatory 
requirements.  
 
Indicate who is responsible for monitoring the conduct of the study and specify how often the 
study will be monitored.  
 
For single -site studies with  low risk, it may be appropriate for the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_396852].  
 
For multi -center studies or single site studies involving significant risk, an independent monitor 
may be required (e.g., monitoring by [CONTACT_396866](s) or 
by a clinical research organization).  
 
A co - investigator will monitor the study every few months.  
 
19.1.2  Safety Monitoring  
Include this section if FDA regulations apply to this study (see “WORKSHEET: Drugs (HRP -306)” 
and “WORKSHEET: D evices (HRP -307)”. HRP -306 and HRP -307 can be accessed by [CONTACT_396865] ( http://irb.psu.edu ).  
 
Indicate the process for identifying, recording and reporting adverse events.  
 
Specify roles for adve rse event recording and monitoring. Indicate each staff member’s role in 
the adverse event reporting process. Include the following if applicable:  
 
The Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_74160] (AE) are correctly entered into the 
AE case report forms by [CONTACT_14676]; be available to answer any questions that the 
coordinators may have concerning AEs; and will notify the IRB, FDA, sponsor and/or DSMB of all 
applicable AEs as appropriate. All assessments of AEs will be made by a licensed m edical 
professional who is an investigator on the research.  
 
The Research Coordinator  will complete the appropriate report form and logs; assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_302991], FDA and/or DSMB of all Unanticipated Problems/SAE’s.  
 
The Monitor  will confirm that the AEs are correctly entered into the case report forms. The 
Monitor will also confirm that the adverse events are consistent with the source documents and 
are reported to the appropriate regulatory bodies as required.  
 
Page 32 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  The Principal In vestigator will confirm that all adverse events (AE) are correctly entered into the 
AE case report forms by [CONTACT_14676]; be available to answer any questions that the 
coordinators may have concerning AEs; and will notify the IRB, FDA, sponsor and/or DS MB of all 
applicable AEs as appropriate. All assessments of AEs will be made by a licensed medical 
professional who is an investigator on the research.  
 
The Research Coordinator will complete the appropriate report form and logs; assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_396853] r eports and notify the IRB, FDA and/or DSMB of all Unanticipated Problems/SAE’s.  
 
The Monitor will confirm that the AEs are correctly entered into the case report forms. The 
Monitor will also confirm that the adverse events are consistent with the source documents and 
are reported to the appropriate regulatory bodies as required.  
 
20.0 Future Undetermined Research: Data and Specimen Banking  
If this study is collecting identifiable data and/or specimens that will be banked for future undetermined  
research , pleas e describe this process in the sections below.  This information should not conflict with 
information provided in section 22 regarding whether or not data and/or specimens will be associated with 
identifiers (directly or indirectly).   If NOT applicable , indicate as such below in all sections.  
[Do not type here]  
 
20.1 Data and/or specimens being stored  
Identify what data and/or specimens will be stored and the data associated with each specimen.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
20.2 Location of storage  
Identify the location where the data and/or specimens will be stored.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
20.3 Duration of storage  
Identify how long the data and/or specimens will be stored.  If data and/or specimens will be stored 
indefinitely, indicate as such.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
20.4 Access to data and/or specimens  
Identify who will have access to the data and/or specimens.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
20.5 Procedures to release data or specimens  
Describe the procedures to release the data and/or specimens, including: the process to request a 
release, approvals required for release, who can obtain data and/or specimens, and the data to be 
provided with the specimens.  
 
Not applicable . 
 
Page 33 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  20.6 Process for returning results  
Describe the process for returning results about the use of the data and/or specimens.  
 
Participants will be instructed on what to do with their self -sampling kits when they receive the kit.  
 
21.[ADDRESS_499268] relevant references in the literature which highlight methods, controversies, and study outcomes.  
 
1. Siegel, RL, Miller, KD, Jemal, A. Cancer statistics, 2018.  CA Cancer J Clin 2018;68(1):7 -30. 
2. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: Cervical cancer: Screening. 2018; 
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/cervical -
cancer -screening2 , 2018.  
3. Oeffinger KC, Fontham ETH, Etzioni R, et al. Breast Cancer Screening for Women at Average Risk: 2015 
Guideline Update From the American Cancer Society. JAMA. 2015;314(15):[ADDRESS_499269] VB, Thomas CC, King J, Massetti GM, Doria -Rose VP, Saraiya M, et al.  Vital signs:  Cervical cancer 
incidence, mortality, and screening – [LOCATION_002], 2007 -2012.  MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep. 2014;63:1004 –9. 
5. Wendy A. Leyden, M. Michele Manos, Ann M. Geiger, Sheila Weinmann, Judy Mouchawar, Kimberly 
Bischoff, Marianne Ulcickas Yood, Joyce Gilbert, Stephen H. Taplin, Cervical Cancer in Women With 
Comprehensive Health Care Access: Attributable  Factors in the Screening Process,  JNCI: Journal of the 
National Cancer Institute, Volume 97, Issue 9, 4 May 2005, Pages 675 –
683,  https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/dji115  
6. Nelson EJ, Maynard BR, Loux T, et alTh e acceptability of self -sampled screening for HPV DNA: a systematic 
review and meta -analysisSexually Transmitted Infections 2017;93:[ADDRESS_499270], S., Szarewski, A., Cadman, L., Austin, J., & Wardle, J. (2006). Acceptability 
of unsupervised HPV self -sampling using written instructions. Journal of Medical Screening, 13(4), 208 –213. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/096914130601300409  
8. Szarewski, A., Cadman, L., Mesher, D.  et al.  HPV self -sampling as an alternative strategy in non -attenders for 
cervical screening – a randomised controlled trial.  Br J Cancer  104,  915–920 (2011) doi:10.1038/bjc.2011.48  
9. Rees I, Jones D, Chen H, Macleod U (2018) Interventions to improve the uptake of cervical cancer screening 
among lower socioeconomic groups: a s ystematic review. Prev Med 111:323 – 335. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2017.11.019  
10. Racey C, Withrow D, Gesink D. Self -collected HPV testing improves participation in cervical Cancer screening: 
a systematic review and meta -analysis. Can J Public Health. 2 013;104(2):e159 –e166. doi: 
10.1007/BF03405681  
11. Arbyn Marc, Smith Sara B, Temin Sarah, Sultana Farhana, Castle Philip. Detecting cervical precancer and 
reaching underscreened women by [CONTACT_396867]: updated meta -analyses BMJ 2018; 
363 :k4 823 
12. Polman Nicole J, Ebisch Renée M F, Heideman Daniëlle A M, Melchers Willem J G, Bekkers Ruud L M, Molijn 
Anco C, Meijer Chris J L M, Quint Wim G V, Snijders Peter J F, Massuger Leon F A G, van Kemenade Folkert J, 
Berkhof Johannes. Performance of human p api[INVESTIGATOR_341182] -collected versus clinician -collected 
samples for the detection of cervical intraepi[INVESTIGATOR_396854] 2 or worse: a randomised, paired 
screen -positive, non -inferiority trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2019;20(2):229 –238. do i: 10.1016/S1470 -
2045(18)[ZIP_CODE] -0. 
13.  Rees et al., Prev Med, 2018: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0091743517304607  
14. Arbyn Marc, Smith Sara B, Temin Sarah, Sultana Farhana, Castle Philip. Detecting cervical precancer and 
reaching underscreen ed women by [CONTACT_396867]: updated meta -analyses BMJ 2018; 
363 :k4823  
15. Polman Nicole J, Ebisch Renée M F, Heideman Daniëlle A M, Melchers Willem J G, Bekkers Ruud L M, Molijn 
Anco C, Meijer Chris J L M, Quint Wim G V, Snijders  Peter J F, Massuger Leon F A G, van Kemenade Folkert J, 
Page 34 of 34 (V.01/21 /201 9)  Berkhof Johannes. Performance of human papi[INVESTIGATOR_341182] -collected versus clinician -collected 
samples for the detection of cervical intraepi[INVESTIGATOR_396854] 2 or worse: a rando mised, paired 
screen -positive, non -inferiority trial. The Lancet Oncology. 2019;20(2):229 –238. doi: 10.1016/S1470 -
2045(18)[ZIP_CODE] -0. 
16. US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for Cervical Cancer:  US Preventive Services Task Force 
Recommendation Statement.  JAMA.  2018;320(7):674 –686. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.[ADDRESS_499271] of interventions to improve attendance in female 
cancer screening among lower socioeconomic groups: A review. Prev. Med. 2010;50:159 –164. doi: 
10.1016/j.ypmed.2010.01.007.  
18. Racey, C.S., Withrow, D.R. & Gesink, D. Self -collected HPV Testing Improves Participation in Cervical Cancer 
Screening: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. Can J Public Health 104, e159 –e166 (2013) 
doi:10.1007/BF0340 5681  
19. Mayrand M -H, et al. Human papi[INVESTIGATOR_396855]. N 
Engl J Med. 2007;357(16):1579 –88. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa071430  
20. Mayrand, Marie -Helene, Duarte -Franco, Aliane , Rodrigues, Isabel, Walter, Stephen, Hanley, James, Ferenczy, 
Alex, Ratman, Sam, Coutlee, Franciis, Franco, Eduardo. Human Papi[INVESTIGATOR_396856] . The New England Journal of Medicine  
21. Polman, Nicole, Ebis ch, Renee , Heideman, Danielle, Melchers, Willem, Bekkers, Ruud, Molijn, Anco, et al . 
Performance of human papi[INVESTIGATOR_341182] -collected versus clinician -collected samples for the 
detection of cervical intraepi[INVESTIGATOR_396854] 2 or wors e: a randomised, paired screen -positive, 
non-inferiority trial . The Lancet Oncology’s  2019, 20(2): 229 -238.  
22. Blake, KD, Moss, JL, Gaysynsky, A, et al. Making the case for investment in rural cancer control: An analysis 
of rural cancer incidence, mortality, and funding trends. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948] 2017.  
23. Moss, JL, Liu, B, Feuer, EJ. Urban/Rural Differences in Breast and Cervical Cancer Incidence: The Mediating 
Roles of Socioeconomic Status and Provider Density. Womens Health Issues 2017;27(6):683 -691. 
 