L 
 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Instructions for completing the Research Plan are available on the HRPP website.  
The headings on this set of instructions correspond to the headings of the Research Plan.  
General Instructions: Enter a response for all topic headings.  
Enter “Not Applicable” rather than leaving an item blank if the item does not apply to this project.  
Version date: 10/7/[ADDRESS_893900] TITLE  
PEP4PA - Peer Empowerment Program for Physical Activity in Low Income and Minority Seniors  
[R01HL125405]  
 
2. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR   
 
[INVESTIGATOR_662354] , PhD  
Professor, Department of Family Medicine and Public Health  
 
3. FACILITIES  
UCSD  office space:  Calit2  - Atkinson Hall – 3rd and 6th floors  
 
Intervention activities:  All activities will occur at center s and/or community centers located in San Diego County  
 
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY  
5 years: 12/01/2014 – 11/30/2019  
 
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)  
 
Older adults are the least active population group in the US. Yet, research has shown that an increase in  
physical activity (PA) can have immediate and profound effects on cardiovascular health. Older adults who are  
active use significantly fewer health care resources, and wit h the increasing number of older adults in the US it  
is imperative to curb health care expenditure in this group. PEP4PA ( Peer E mpowerment P rogram 4 P hysical A ctivity) is 
a multilevel intervention aimed at increasing physical activity levels in a populatio n of low income and ethnically diverse 
older adults.  It will be delivered in center s by [CONTACT_662381]. Participants will work towards a daily increase of 2000 
steps per day through self -paced incidental walking, peer led group walks, and attendance at existing center  PA classes. 
They will also work on projects to increase opportunities to be physically active at their center or in the surrounding 
neighborhood.  
 
6. SPECIFIC A IMS 
 
In a 2 -year cluster randomized controlled field trial of 465 ethnically diverse, older adults (50+ years old) in 12 low 
income community centers serving seniors in San Diego County we will investigate:  
 
1. The efficacy of PEP4PA ( Peer E mpowerment P rogram 4 P hysical A ctivity) to reduce disparities in PA by 
[CONTACT_177204] g the percentage of participants achieving 150 minutes of PA per week at 6 and 12 months. Hypothesis:  
Participants in PEP4PA will significantly increase PA minutes in moderate intensity (measured objectively by 
[CONTACT_91152]) to a greater extent than older  adults receiving usual care (e.g. normal PA programing) in control center s 
and a greater percent will meet NHANES criteria for weekly PA.  
2. The efficacy of PEP4PA to improve physical functioning, blood pressure (BP), depressive symptoms and 
quality of l ife. Hypothesis:  Participants in PEP4PA will significantly increase their physical functioning (measured 
objectively by [CONTACT_662382] [ADDRESS_893901]), decrease their systolic BP (mmHg) and reporting of depressive symptoms, and improve their quality of life scores (measured at baseline, 6 & 12 months) to a 
greater extent than older adults in control center s.  
3. Assess the incremental cost effectivenes s ratio (ICER) of PEP4PA  in terms of cost per MET hour and cost per 
QALY compared to usual programming in the control center s at [ADDRESS_893902] of PEP4PA on secondary outcomes such as sedentary time and sleep quality (measured by 
[CONTACT_662383]), cognitive/executive functioning, and walking routes (from GPS) at 12 months.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 2 Exploratory aims: 5. Examine individual, interpersonal, organizational, and environmental factors that affect 
implementation & behavior change. 6. Assess the efficacy, ef fectiveness  and ICER of PEP4PA at 24 months  
 
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
National data show that less than 3% of older adults meet PA guidelines and population PA levels have remained 
low despi[INVESTIGATOR_662355]. Many PA interventions are flawed because they focus on individual motivations and 
ignore variations in community resources, neighborhood walkability, and safety. Low income and ethnically diverse 
communities have disproportionately fewer resources and less support ive neighborhoods. This contributes to lower PA 
levels and health disparities in obesity, diabetes, hypertension and heart disease. Low income adults and ethnic minorities, 
therefore, present with chronic disease and loss of functioning at a younger age.  
PEP4PA ( Peer E mpowerment P rogram 4 Physical A ctivity) builds upon our previous  R01 multilevel 
intervention in retirement communities (MIPARC). PEP4PA will be delivered in low income, ethnically diverse center s 
by [CONTACT_662384]. PEP4PA is a comprehensive intervention that employs behavior change 
strategies a t the individual, interpersonal and institutional level. Participants will work towards a 2000 step increase in 
daily steps through self -paced incidental walking, peer led group walks, attendance at existing center  PA classes, and 
opportune breaks in sitti ng time. PEP4PA is therefore significant in several important ways: 1) it will impact important 
health outcomes in low income older adults who disproportionately burden the healthcare system, 2) it can reduce health 
disparities in a vulnerable population i n need, 3) it can improve upon existing PA programs in center s, 4) it will improve 
upon existing PA interventions in older adults, and 5) it can be a model for disseminating effective peer led programs in other community settings with broad population reac h. 
1. PEP4PA can impact important health outcomes in older adults who burden the healthcare system  
 Older adults (aged 50+) who increase their PA to 3 days a week had lower healthcare spending; on average 
$2,[ADDRESS_893903] medical costs of falls in older adults were $[ADDRESS_893904] cardiovascular disease, cancer and other morbidities such as obesity, diabetes, depression and lower 
cognitive functioning. Older adults will comprise 19% of the population by 2030.
i Objective data show less than 3% are 
meeting PA guidelines. Given the burden of inactive older adults on the healthcare sys tem, and the relatively low costs of 
PA interventions, it is imperative that a greater number of older adults have access to efficacious, evidence based PA 
programs. These programs are particularly important in older adults because their PA levels are natu rally declining; for 
example the control group in MIPARC had a 20 minute/week reduction in PA over [ADDRESS_893905] from an increase in PA.  In PEP4PA, participants 
will be encouraged to increase daily steps by 2000 per day over their baseline, which can result in an additional 30+ 
minutes of activity. Such increases can reduce mortality and heart disease risk by 40%.  In addition, since the PEP4PA 
participants spend most of their day at the center , it is feasible to institutionalize short PA breaks, such as “Take 10”,  or 
brief standing breaks.
ii Sedentary behavior is an independent risk factor for metabolic disease, regardless of PA status.  
Thus it is important to also encourage regular breaks from sitting. Our retirement community study included educational 
materials and behavioral strategies to reduce sitting time, and standing breaks were institutionalized in meetings and 
group events. PEP4PA will include a daily goal of [ADDRESS_893906] resources nearby [CONTACT_662385], the quality of these are often 
low thus reducing their use for PA.iv Our pil ot work in San Diego center s showed a >10% difference in those meeting PA 
guidelines across ethnicity and income groups. Low income ethnically diverse older adults were as inactive (1.3% 
(African American center) -  5.7% (Hispanic center) meeting guidelines ) as older adults in care settings who were almost a 
decade older (2.0%). Further, physician diagnosed hypertension rates were 36% higher, as were those self -reporting 
meaningful depressive symptoms (28% difference). Clearly, there is a need for an efficacious PA program in this 
population group. It is our aim in PEP4PA to reduce these documented disparities in PA by [CONTACT_662386] 10 -20%. Importantly, PEP4PA also identifies community barriers to PA, which 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 3 are likely to be higher around low income center s, and Health Coaches  and center  staff will advocate for community 
improvement projects. This is not only empowering, but important for the long term sustainability of PA levels.  
3. PEP4PA can improve upon existing PA programs offered in centers  
Government guidelines for PA in older adul ts include multiple types of PA because of the benefits of strength, 
balance, and aerobic activities for older adults. PA classes in center s focus on strength and balance. Our preliminary 
studies show that older adults attending center s with PA classes are  not meeting PA guidelines for moderate intensity  PA 
in their daily lives (only 1.3 -5.7%). Additionally, we measured a typi[INVESTIGATOR_662356] (EnhanceFitness) and found that, 
in a [ADDRESS_893907] a goal of 
providing high quality regular PA classes at the center . They will monitor attendance and instruction, and will be trained 
by [CONTACT_662387], our community advocacy partner, to advocate for additional resources such as resistance bands. 
PEP4PA encourages participants to attend PA classes at the center  but also includes pedometer logged walking so that 
multiple health benefits are likely to result. Importantly, because incidental steps are encouraged by [CONTACT_662388] -
monitoring, increasing PA is not solely dependent upon instructors’ availability or class schedules. Several studies show 
walking is the preferred activity in seniors and is absent from centers.  
 Very few PA programs employ older adults to help deliver  programs in community settings, despi[INVESTIGATOR_662357]. Our MIPARC intervention utilizing Health Coaches resulted in a sustained [ADDRESS_893908] interventions do not include: 1 ) ethnic 
minorities, 2) volunteers to help sustainability, 3) long term follow up, and 4) community advocacy. PEP4PA targets low 
income and ethnically diverse center s and will follow participants and Health Coaches  for 24 months to assess PA and 
program sustainability. A major barrier for older adults’ PA is safety. This includes fear of falling and physical and social 
concerns about neighborhood safety. PEP4PA addresses these concerns with educational content and gradual step 
increases, identifies and maps safe walking routes, and provides appropriately paced regular group walks. In addition, the 
Health Coaches and center  staff will be trained by [CONTACT_662389]. MIPARC demonstra ted that with brief training, small but impactful community 
improvement projects could be achieved within 12 months (see Appendix A). Community advocacy will be more important around low income center s and PEP4PA can achieve even greater change with a 24 m onth intervention period.  
5. PEP4PA is highly disseminable & can be a model for other community settings  
The NIH & other national and international government health agencies have prioritized interventions in 
community settings because of their population reach, especially to those in need, and because they offer the potential for interventions to become institutionalized. We are focusing on center s to ensure a more homogeneous environment for the 
efficacy trial.  If PEP4PA, however, proves to be an efficac ious model, it could be adopted in other community settings 
such as YMCAs, community centers, recreation centers, clinics, churches, libraries, private recreation facilities, and 
senior housing. If shown to be effective in older adults in multiple settings  it could also be adopted for intergenerational 
or youth programs, extending its reach to other population groups in need. PEP4PA is just the first step in the research 
process. The setting, the intervention structure, and the research design (including ef fectiveness and cost effective 
measures) demonstrate our commitment to dissemination efforts in future. In particular, the Older Americans Act Title 
IIID funding mechanism, that we’ve identified for phase 1 dissemination, reaches 8.2 million older adults. If this number 
of older adults increased their PA through PEP4PA, savings of over $18 billion could be achieved (based on increasing 
PA days to 3 and Martinsen’s costs savings calculation of $2,200). We will, however, be able to provide accurate cost 
impli cations of this program from our proposed cost effectiveness analyses.  
 
INNOVATIONS  
PEP4PA advances intervention science in several meaningful ways  
PEP4PA builds upon MIPARC, which was one of the first multilevel interventions that promoted change at all levels 
of the ecological model.
v PEP4PA is a peer led program in low income ethnically diverse center s, thus providing greater 
external validity than the MIPARC researcher led program in high income retirement communities. Because PEP4PA 
replicates ce rtain MIPARC program elements in a new context ( center s), it increases evidence for causality.vi However, 
PEP4PA advances the science by [CONTACT_662390][INVESTIGATOR_662358] a peer led program & 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893909] demonstrated efficacy in only one setting, the retirement 
community, it is important to continue to assess efficacy in the new setting, low income center s. However, because it is 
our intention to provide an intervention that can be disseminated through existing channels – in center s, delivered by 
[CONTACT_662391],  distributed by [CONTACT_662392] – it is important to test the 
processes that will support its implementation. A hybrid design is advantageous in that it results in more rapid gains in 
knowledge and translation of in terventions, thereby [CONTACT_662393]. It is additionally a much 
more efficient use of limited resources, which is crucial given the current economic climate. We propose, therefore, to 
assess the intervention effects on participants’ behavior and clinical outcomes using the latest objective techniques 
outlined below and in the methods section.   
Cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA).  CEA is a method measuring the relative efficiency of alternative interventions. 
It provides information to decision makers to help them maximize the use of scarce resources available to promote PA. 
CEA, however, has been largely absent in PA promotion in community settings, and even less so with low -income older 
adult populations. In the proposed project, we wi ll use two common measures of cost -effectiveness, cost per MET 
(metabolic equivalent) hour and cost per QALY (quality adjusted life years). Cost per MET hour captures intervention efficiency in improving PA outcomes, and cost per QALY measures intervention efficiency in promoting the broader 
concept of quality of life. The use of common measures of cost -effectiveness will allow us to compare the efficiency of 
PEP4PA with other PA interventions designed for older adults and help policy makers to prioritize a mong evidence -based 
interventions.    
 
PEP4PA combines Social Ecological theory, Empowerment theory & behavioral strategies  
 The Social Ecological Model provides a framework for addressing behavior change at different levels of 
influence, from the individual to policy. There are very few interventions that address each level . Theories such as the 
social cognitive theory (SCT) provide guidance for specific behavior change strategies, usually only applied to one or two levels. We are unique in applying these behavior strategies consistently across the individual, interpersonal and 
institutional levels of the Ecological Model. PEP4PA will employ strategies from SCT identified by [CONTACT_662394]. These include goal setting, self -monitoring, feedback, positive reinforcement, social 
support, planning, and problem solving. Such individual change strategies are totally absent from group based PA 
programs in center s.  
Empowerment theories create a mechanism for community participation, enhancing community problem -solving 
skills, providing leadership training, and creating jobs in the community.viii Strategies to facilitate empowerment include 
enhancing experience and competence, enhancing group structure and capacity, enhanc ing environmental support and 
resources, and removing social and environmental barriers.ix Organizational empowerment includes opportunities for 
members to take  on meaningful and multiple roles, and a peer-based  support system that helps members develop a social 
identity. Mentoring, supportive peer relationships, and a political consciousness have also been identified as mechanisms . 
Empowerment theory has not been used in previous PA research with older adults . PEP4PA will draw upon 
Empowerment theory and t he intervention strategies and goals mirror its key elements. PEP4PA will train Health 
Coaches  and center  staff to improve their health awareness, social support skills, organizational skills, and their ability to 
advocate and build capacity within the cen ters.  
 PEP4PA will collect state -of-the-science, objective data on PA, sedentary behavior, sleep, and location.  
There has been growing interest in collecting objective behavioral data from older adults, in part because self -
reports are plagued by [CONTACT_662395].
x Lack of concordance between subjective and objective measures of 
PA and sedentary behavior often yields huge discrepancies in behavioral prevalence estimates.xi, xii  We propose to use 
state-of-the-science Global Positioning Syst em (GPS) devices and hip - and wrist -worn accelerometers to provide better 
estimates of PA, but also to examine independent and interdependent relationships between PA, sedentary behavior, outdoor time and sleep quality
.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 5 8. PROGRESS REPORT  
N/A – this is a new protocol  
 
9. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 
We will conduct a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_662359]. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_662360]. When necessary, methods have been described individually for the two studies.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:  
We will recruit up to [ADDRESS_893910] (CAB) of older 
adults , center directors and other stakeholder to advise us which is held in this center. Because participants in the center 
have been very involved in the development of the study, we felt that it was not appropriate to include it as a study site.  
However, we feel that it provides an excellent opportunity to pi[INVESTIGATOR_662361], recruitment and 
sustainment of the program in this setting in order to inform the larger trial.  
 
Intervention:  The study will be 4 months in duration and w ill conducted in in English only.  Health Coaches and center 
staff will participate for 5 months, which will include their training as leaders of the program. There will be no control 
condition; all those who are interested will receive the physical activi ty intervention as described below  for 4 months.  
 
Measures:  Measurement will occur  at baseline, [ADDRESS_893911] at baseline.  They will be asked to wear pedometer every day and to track 
their steps in logs provided by [CONTACT_61207]. They may be asked to complete interviews with UCSD staff on their experiences  
or participate in a focus group at the end of the study.  
 
PEP4PA Intervention  
 
We propose to study increases in moderate PA in a 2 -year cluster randomized controlled field trial of 408 ethnically 
diverse, older adults (50+ years old) in 12 low  income center s in San Diego County. Community or center  participants 
will receive the PEP4PA ( Peer E mpowerment P rogram for P hysical A ctivity) intervention or usual care (i.e. normal 
center programing) in the control condition. The center s will be randomiz ed to either condition. Health coache s and 
center  staff will deliver the program with the support of feedback and training from a professional UCSD Health 
Educator. Participants will work towards a 2000 increase in daily steps through self -paced incidental  walking, peer led 
group walks, and attendance at existing center PA classes. Participants, Health coaches and sites’ progress will be 
monitored constantly over 24 months with outcome measures at baseline, 6, 12,18  and 24 months in both intervention and 
control participants. Intervention sites will be randomized a second time at 18 months to one of two conditions: 1) 
financial support for the last 6 months of the program, or 2) no financial support for the last [ADDRESS_893912] in English & Spanish. We will aim to train [ADDRESS_893913] chosen to use a usual care control condition for several r easons: 1) PA classes and social events are already 
offered in center s, 2) to disseminate PEP4PA in future we need to demonstrate to center s the cost benefits compared to 
their existing PA programing, and 3) because PEP4PA employs peers & center staff, att ention control is less problematic 
than in our previous UCSD led interventions. Finally, to support recruitment & retention in the control sites we will 
provide a health event ( health fair , speaker on health related topic, etc.)  at the end of measurement v isits where we 
provide feedback to participants on their BP. Sites are spread across the county so we do not expect contamination with control sites. We will assess any changes to PA programming in the control sites across the 24 month period.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 6 Spanish lan guage:  [CONTACT_662424] is bilingual and bicultural. She will supervise Spanish speaking staff members, for both 
measurement and intervention. Most of our self -report measurement outcomes are standard and have been validated in 
Spanish and in those with low education. Measures that are unique to the intervention will be translated and back 
translated to check for linguistic and cultural equivalence. Intervention materials have also been adapted, translated and 
back translated in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732]. Events will be he ld in both English and Spanish. In our center pi[INVESTIGATOR_662362], not confusing for participants, and the slower pace supported comprehension. There were no centers with only Spanish speakers so we anticipate gro ups will be mixed.  
 
Training:  Peer Health Coaches and center staff will receive [ADDRESS_893914] to complete explicit activities in order to achieve certification to lead the program. 
Once certified, the Health Coaches wi ll lead weekly case management meetings to review participant progress. The health 
educator will observe study activities and case management meetings and provide one on one feedback to Health Coaches 
as necessary.   Center staff will be trained and certifi ed in all activities so they can understand the program and play a 
supportive role, filling in if needed for an absent coach as needed. Health Coaches and center staff will receive additional training in community advocacy from Circulate San Diego, a local  bike and pedestrian advocacy group. They will 
identify local barriers to PA, prioritize steps for community change, work with community partners to advocate with local 
decision makers, and follow up to ensure community improvement projects are completed. These projects will support 
safe walking.  Each Health Coach will be assigned up to 10 participants that they will support throughout the program.  
 
Intervention dose:  Health Coach and center staff meetings will be weekly for the first 3 months, bi weekly for 3 months 
and then monthly for the next 6 months. After 12 months, the Health Coaches will continue to run the program with only 
intermittent support from the health educator as needed. For participants, intervention activities will remain at the daily 
level, including using pedometers, having daily goals, participation in daily activities such as Take 10 breaks, attendance 
at group walks and normal center PA classes, and recognition of efforts through weekly prizes and bi -weekly goal 
tracking with their Health Coach.  
 
Intervention activities:   
Participants  will receive the behavioral strategies outlined below to increase their moderate intensity PA and reduce 
sitting  time. The main goal is a 2000 daily step increase, achieved through the activities outlined below. All participants 
receive the same goal which adds to the group cohesion. Further, the goal can be achieved gradually within 6 months with 
a 100 step increas e per week. This schedule is easy to communicate and can be repeated by [CONTACT_662396].  
 
Goal setting  2000 daily step increase from incidental walking & group walks, group PA class, Take 10 breaks 
& 10 standing breaks / day.  
Monitoring/evaluati
on Pedometers to monitor steps. Simple functioning checks e.g. timed walk/balance test to show 
progress.  
Feedback  Graphs of daily steps overtime. Review of progress & verbal positive reinforcement from Health 
Coaches bi-weekly.  
Rewards/Recognitio
n Weekly prizes for step achievements. Weekly celebration board of participant achievements and 
group step progress e.g. on a map around US. Certificates for goal achievement. Monthly 
celebration lunches.  
Social support  Healt h Coach & staff encouragement. Group walks at appropriate levels and other group 
activities/events led by [CONTACT_445480]. Group sharing of challenges/solutions. Sharing of achievements with 
family.  
Role models/success 
stories  Health Coaches model step goals. Hear  about others who meet goals/overcome challenges during 
group sharing. Review testimonials from MIPARC participants. Record and review testimonials 
from PEP4PA participants.  
Positive experience  Fun events & supportive atmosphere in center. Well organized walks with different abilities 
accounted for. SMART goals that are challenging but achievable. Clear short and long term goals 
i.e. 100/day extra each week to meet 2000/day extra.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 7 Cues/reminders  Phone calls from Health Coaches to remind participant to att end center events, bi -weekly in person 
check ins, timers for standing breaks & Take 10 breaks, pedometers (with 7 day memory) & logs 
for steps. Promotional materials in Center.  
Planning/scheduling  Planning attendance at events, reviewing steps across day with pedometer, planning when to get 
steps.  
Problem solving  Work on overcoming barriers in bi -weekly review with Peer leader. Learn how others overcome 
barriers. Reduction of barriers e.g. crossing times, lack of equipment through community pro jects 
led by [CONTACT_662397]  [ADDRESS_893915] the expected activities. The 4 Health Coaches at each site 
will be responsible for about 9 participants each. They  will review individual step goal progress with participants bi-
weekly, lead group walks twice a week &  organize other activities & events such as celebratory lunches to maintain 
motivation.  Health Coaches  will communicate educational tips and lead discussions before & after events. Videos of 
expert PA content & answers to high level PA questions will be provided by [CONTACT_662398]. Each week coaches 
will recognize participants’ individual & group achievements through prizes and a celebration board that is housed in a 
focal point of the center. After advocacy training to all participants by [CONTACT_662399] S an Diego, Health Coaches and 
participants will decide if they’d like to work on a community project to reduce barriers to walking. Finally, they will 
work to build capacity for center participants to help with program elements, e.g. maintaining celebration board, 
organizing lunches etc. All intervention site s will receive $ 750($250 every 6 months up to 18 months)  to support 
promotional activities.  Sites randomized to receive funding in months 18--24 will receive an additional $250. We will 
provide  a tablet for every peer health coach enrolled  and a printer for  intervention sites to create the educational & 
promotional materials and to help track participants’ goals and attendance. Computer training is included.  
 
Center staff  will have a clear role and be trained to conduct the expected activities. In particular, the staff will be 
responsible for institutional level activities. Staff will review the quality and quantity of PA classes offered and work to 
optimize attendance and  PA levels in these, and where necessary advocate for additional resources to support 
improvements such as instructor training or equipment. Staff will provide a supportive center atmosphere with positive 
verbal reinforcement and promotional materials, mak ing sure PA events are well advertised.  Center staff will provide 
alternative activities when PA instructors are unavailable, e.g. evidence based exercise videos for older adults..   
Study Outcomes (all devices & outcome measures have been tested in low in come pi[INVESTIGATOR_662363] s) 
Measurement:  Measurement occurs at baseline, 6, 12 , 18 and 24 months. The measurement procedures are split into two 
visits; both held in the center facilities. In the first visit, participants are given devices and complete a written survey.   
The hip mounted accelerometer and GPS are worn on a single belt for at least [ADDRESS_893916] worn accelerometer is worn 24 hours a day  and will be worn at 
the beginning, 6, 12, 18 and 24 months . Participants are expected to wear the devices for 7 days. In the second visit, 
participants complete the functioning tests. Participants and health coaches complete all measures ; staff members will 
only complete surveys and have their blood pressure measured.  
 
Activity outcomes   
Minutes of moderate PA : The primary outcome of this study is moderate PA minutes per day. As Troiano’ s population 
level monitoring of PA has shown, it is important to use objective measures of  PA to gain an accurate assessment of PA 
minutes.[ADDRESS_893917] 4 days.  We will use cut points recently developed for older adultsxiv 
to determine time in the different PA intensities. In MIPARC participants walked the timed 400m walk at counts below 
the moderate cut off for adults (1952 counts per minute; CPM) suggesting this cut off would not capture purposeful 
walking in older adults (see Appendix G). PA will, therefor e, be defined as >1041 CPM. Activities <100 CPM will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 8 classified as sedentary.xv Average daily minutes at different intensities will be calculated. To provide perspective on 
disparities reduction, we will assess the percent of participants who meet PA gu idelines following the data processing 
decisions used in NHANES, including 10 min bouts & 30 minute s on 5/7 days. 
PA location/routes : Participants will wear the Qstartz BT1000X GPS device. A GPS device logs X,Y location 
coordinates, distance, speed, elevation, and time. The Quartz has an accuracy of [ADDRESS_893918] developed protocols to maximize compliance. Our NIH funded  PALMS software will allow us to merge the GPS data with the time stamped 
accelerometer data. PALMS has flexible data processing parameters to assess transportation modes, time spent in locations, routes and distances travelled (See Appendix H). We will assess changes in walking routes over time, and in 
relation to community projects.  
Sedentary behaviors:  will be assessed by [CONTACT_6270] -report, and the accelerometer. We have adapted the Sedentary 
Behavior Questionnaire
xviiixvi for older adults in our MIPARC study. It as sesses sedentary behaviors such was sitting while 
eating, reading, watching TV, etc. Sleep quality . Self -reported sleep quality will be assessed by [CONTACT_662400] -6.xvii Sleep quality is related to energy, fatigue with exertion, mood, and pain – each of which may 
influence involvement in PA. PA, and timing of it, may in turn influence sleep quality.  Because reporting errors of 
sleep behavior may be exacerbated among old er adults, particularly among those with mild dementia,xix we will also use 
wrist -based actigraphy to measure sleep parameters. Wrist -based actigraphy is a valid measure of sleep parameters.xx We 
have analyzed accelerometer sleep data in two existing studie s (TREC (U54 CA155435), and IWATCH ( CA164993) ). 
Cardiovascular outcomes Blood pressure : Increased walking has been shown to decrease blood pressure.xxi Blood 
pressure will be measured with a portable Critikon Dinamap [ADDRESS_893919], 3 consecutive measurements will be taken at 1 minute increments. Systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure will be recorded and the 3 readings will be averaged. Cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_92740]: is an essential part of functional cap acity in 
an older population and has been shown to improve with PA interventions.
xxii Cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_662364]  [ADDRESS_893920](  Troosters et al.  and Harada  et al. )  
Height and weight  will be measured at baseline. We  will collect by [CONTACT_662401] 6, 12 18 and 24 months.  
Physical, cognitive & emotional functioning Physical functioning: Functional performance will be measured with the 
Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB).xxiii
xxvii xxviii, xxiv The SPPB evaluates balance, gait, strength, and endurance by 
[CONTACT_662402] -by-side, semi -tandem, and tandem positions; time to walk 8 
feet; and time to rise from a chair and return to the seated position 5 times .The SPPB will be collected at baseline..  
Cognitive functioning :xxv, xxvi, ,  Depression  will be measured with CESD short form.xxix See Appendix D for 
surveys.  
 
Medication usage:  Medications will be assessed by [CONTACT_662403] (Pstay et. al.,1992). During the in person visit while participants are performing other standard tests, a research assistant will note all the medications and doses on a standard written study form.  In this way, 
collection of the medical data will cause no additional  burden to the participant. Once all medications are noted, the 
research assistant will check whether any medications are missing. [CONTACT_662425]  will review the medications before data 
entry and only blood pressure medications will be included in analyses
. 
 
Cost-effectiveness Measures will provide cost and effectiveness information to help community health leaders and 
center s to replicate and disseminate the PEP4PA intervention. We will use a center  perspective, which could also serve as 
a basis for future CEAs with broader perspectives  such as health care system or social perspective. Two ICEA measures 
will be calculated: cost per MET hour and cost per QALY. These two measures are chosen as they are standard measures 
in CEA literature in promoting PA. A MET represents the ratio of energ y expended divided by [CONTACT_662404]. MET hours are derived by [CONTACT_662405]. The type, intensity and time of PA will be derived from the Actigraph 3X -plus model as  described 
above. QALYs will be estimated using the EuroQual (EQ -5D).xxx The EQ -5D is a preference- based index that values 
health on a 0 (dead) to 1 (perfect health) scale to represent 5- dimensional health state descriptions for each participant. 
U.S. norma tive data for the Eq- 5D has been developed based on national surveys. xxxi Intervention costs will be estimated 
from the study using standard financial accounting methods. From a center  perspective, cost will account for all direct 
resources needed to conduc t the intervention. It will not include cost spent by [CONTACT_662406] 9 participants’ time on exercise. Study specific costs, e.g. measurement, will also be excluded from the estimate of 
intervention costs. Appendix I contains the list of costs.  
 
Participant level mediators & moderators (see Figure 1) Pain:  Older adults experience pain regularly, with an increased 
prevalence among those living in facilities.xxxii
xxxiii
xxxiv
xxxvi xxxvii xxxviii
xxxix Pain interference or the impact of pain will be assessed with the PROMIS -
Pain Impact Short Form- [ADDRESS_893921] 7 days.  Fear of falling: has been related to PA 
in older adults.  We will employ the 7- item Short Falls Efficacy Scale- International (FES -I) that has been shown to 
have excellent reliability and construct validity.xxxv  Neighborhood perceptions: The widely used NEWS -A, ,  
will be used to assess perceptions of residential neighborhood environment variables including walkability, aesthetics, 
and perceived s afety from traffic and crime. The NEWS was adapted for seniors.  Psychosocial:  Self efficacy and 
social support  from family and friends for PA will be measured with established psychometrics.xl, xli  Demographic 
characteristics : Participants will provide demographic characteristics including: gender, age, education, marriage, 
income, ethnicity, car and scooter use, and use of walking aides. Health Status: will be measured with a subset of the 
NHANES ‘medical conditions’ survey. Intervention mediators and moderators are outlined below in process measures.  
Process, fidelity and effectiveness measures Because this study employs a hybrid efficacy/effectiveness design, in 
addition to the carefully measured outcome measures above, we will also tra ck intervention process and implementation 
effectiveness outcomes. We will use the REAIM framework (Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation and 
Maintenance) to assess processes and outcomes at the individual (participants), interpersonal ( health coaches) and 
institutional (staff and center ) level. See Table 6 for details. A mixed methods design will be employed using qualitative 
and quantitative data collection methods. Participants will complete short evaluations of each event they attend to provide  
feedback to the Health coaches as well as satisfaction scales when they complete study measures at 6, 12 and 24 months. 
Peers, staff and MTs will rate their satisfaction with the training and their confidence & belief in their effectiveness. Characteristi cs of the Health coaches, staff, and Center resources will also be assessed as moderators.  Group cohesion : 
will be measured by a subset of items from the Group Attitude Scale (GAS) used to assess attraction to a group.
xliiixlii Items 
include: “I like my group”; “ I look forward to coming to the group”; “I feel involved in what is happening in my group”; 
“I feel included in the group”. See Appendix D for an example Health coach  survey. Health coaches and center staff will 
be trained in the importance of evaluation t echniques and be provided with tools to help them track their time, 
interactions with participants, event attendance, and community project progress. The intention is that these tools will 
serve as monitoring tools for tracking achievements and to reinforc e continued implementation. We will encourage multi -
media tracking of participant and project successes using photos and video testimonials. These are not only important for 
recognition of success but stories also can be employed to support future dissemin ation and influence decision makers. 
MTs will check that the evaluation tools are being used. Data will be recorded in a customized program on a tablet provided to each site. Data will be emailed to UCSD monthly over the [ADDRESS_893922] 12 weeks of the study, MT and Health coach  
activities will be observed and recorded to provide feedback to the leaders on their skills and to ensure intervention fidelity; found to be important by [CONTACT_2312].  In addition to systematic tracking as part of the intervention delivery, UCSD 
research staff will conduct focus groups & interviews at [ADDRESS_893923]. Natarajan will be the lead statistician and be responsible for generating randomization allocation sequences, 
supervising data analysis, and developi[INVESTIGATOR_662365]. She will be blinded to intervention condition. 
Summary statistics wi ll be calculated; groups will be compared on baseline characteristics; variables that are not balanced 
across study arms will be adjusted for in subsequent analyses. The primary analysis will use the intent -to-treat principle.  
 
Aim1 & 2 Analysis Plan:  Aim  [ADDRESS_893924] the efficacy of the PEP4PA intervention on PA, and will compare the 
PA intervention group to the usual care control group on minutes/day of PA and % meeting NHANES criteria measured 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893925] -intervention PA at 6 & 12 
months as the dependent variable and intervention arm (active vs control) as the independent variable, with baseline PA 
as a covariate. Gaussian link function will be used for the continuous PA outcom e; a binomial link will be used for the 
binary outcome (meeting vs not meeting guidelines). A random effect for site ( center ) and a subject -specific intercept 
(nested within site) will be added to the model to adjust variance estimates for clustering within site and within individuals over time. Additional covariates such as gender and age, and any factors found to be imbalanced between 
treatment arms at baseline will be included to examine the impact of covariates on estimated treatment effects. Aim 2 
assesses the efficacy of the PEP4PA to improve physical functioning, blood pressure, depressive symptoms & quality of 
life and will compare these outcomes between treatment and control arms using the same approach as Aim 1.  
Aim 3 Analysis Plan: Assess the incremental cost effectiveness ratio (ICER) of PEP4PA in terms of cost per MET 
hour and cost per QALY compared to usual programming in the control centers at [ADDRESS_893926] data collection and conducting CEA at 12 & [ADDRESS_893927]: cost per MET hour and cost per QALY. To allow comparisons to other PA interventions, cost per QALY derived from this study will be compared to subjective thresholds of the value of health care ($50,000 per QALY).We propose to 
use $1.[ADDRESS_893928] will be tested.  
Aim 4 Analysis Plan : This aim assesses the efficacy of the PEP4PAintervention on other PA outcomes (step 
counts, sedentary time) , psychosocial and lifestyle measures (cognitive/executive functioning, sleep quality), and walking 
routes (measured by [CONTACT_662407]). As in Aim 1, mixed effects models will be fit for each outcome at 6 & 12 months 
(dependent variable), with adjustment for baseline level, group, and other covariates. In addition, because several of these 
outcomes are likely correlated (e.g., sleep, sedentary time), we will apply statistical methods for multiple outcomes i.e. 
O'Brien's test  which is a weighted linear combinat ion of t -statistics for each outcome and multivariate repeated measures 
models   which will be used to examine treatment effects on the vector of outcomes over time.  
Aim 5  (Exploratory aims ) We will examine quantitative  participant  and intervention  mediato rs and moderators 
(see Figure 1) of behavior change and implementation success. Moderators will be tested by [CONTACT_662408].  Mediation will be assessed using path analysis. 
To examine multiple mediators, we will extend the above analysis to a multiple mediation framework for multilevel data. 
We will apply bootstrap methods to resample and refit mediation models to compute standard errors and examine 
consistency of results. We will also fit Bayesian graphical networks (BN). Qualitative data will be reviewed using standard content analysis procedures.  The ‘authenticity’ of emerg ent themes will be checked using validation procedures.  
Aim 6  The modeling approaches in Aims 1- 4 will be expanded to include the 18 and 24 month data.  
 
Sample size estimates  We determined sample size for the primary outcome (Aim 1) of improving PA  over 12 months., In 
preliminary analysis of our MIPARC study, we observed (i) a mean 40 min/day difference between intervention and control groups for LMPA at 6 months (SD = 57 min/d), yielding an effect -size of 0.7, and (ii) an intraclass correlation 
(ICC) of 0.07 for center  clustering effects on LMPA (in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_662366] -income seniors this ICC < 0.01). 12 sites 
and 28 subjects/site will yield 80% power (2- sided test α =0.05) to detect conservative effect -sizes between 0.[ADDRESS_893929] repeated measures of PA. Also, under these assumptions, there is 
80% power to detect percentages of 20% - 25% meeting guidelines in the intervention vs 5% (based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]) in the 
control arms at follow -up.  To allow for a worst -case attrition rate of 20% by 6 months (our RC retention rate is 91% at 6 
months), we aim to recruit 408 participants (12 sites w ith 34/site).  
 
Missing data  All outcomes will be tested using an intent- to-treat framework. Our analytic approach using mixed -models  
will yield unbiased results even if some observations are missing as long as the data are "missing at random", i.e., the 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 11 reasons for missingness can be predicted from observed measurements.  In MIPARC differences between drop -outs and 
baseline factors were similar between treatment arms (i.e., treatment*arm interactions were not statistically significant). 
Thus, under similar  assumptions the mixed model approach will give unbiased results in the proposed study. We will 
conduct sensitivity analyses to test for informative drop -outs and develop alternate approaches, e.g. pattern- mixture 
models . 
 
 
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
Community Advisory Board  (CAB) : 
We formed a volunteer community advisory 1 year ago to inform this study’s development. It is comprised of various 
stakeholders engaged with older adult services, including: senior and community center directors, older adult s who attend 
centers, San Diego walk advocacy groups, and staff from the County’s Aging and Independent Services. The CAB will 
continue to meet on a quarterly basis to provide feedback to questions about the study design and methods.  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:   
We will  recruit up to 4 peer Health Coaches, 2 staff members and 50 participants for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
Participants will be eligible if they:  
- are [ADDRESS_893930] consent comprehension assessment  
- able to commit approximately 10 hours per week to study activities (peer Health Coach only)  
- active for [ADDRESS_893931] 3 days per week (pee r Health Coach only)  
- able to commit approximately 5 hours per week to study activities (center staff only)  
 
Participants will be excluded if they: 1) are younger than 50 years, 2) have had a fall that resulted in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_79460] 12 months, 3)  cannot complete the walking test within 30 seconds, 4) are not able to read and write in English, 5) 
are not able to complete written surveys without assistance, 6) cannot regularly attend study activities at the center, 7) ar e 
not willing to complete stu dy activities, 8) are not able to provide written informed consent, 9) do not adequately answer 
questions on the post consent test , 10) cannot walk without human assistance . 
Health Coaches will be excluded from that role (but will be allowed to enroll as a participant) if they: 1) are not active for 
at least 20 minutes on 3 days per week, 2) cannot commit to 10 hours per week for study activities  for the length of the 
study.  
Center staff will be excluded  if they: cannot commit approximately 5 hours per to study activities  for the length of the 
study.  
 
PEP4PA Main Study:   
We will enroll [ADDRESS_893932] Health Coaches or staff 
members enrolled in the study. 
 
Participant Eligibility: Older adults (50+ years) who are eligible according to our criteria will be consented, enrolled and 
assessed. Eligibility criteria include :  
- [ADDRESS_893933] not participated in UCSD’s Community of Mine research study (intervention participants only)  
- able to complete a [ADDRESS_893934] within 30 seconds   
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 12 - able to walk without human assistance (cane or walker use okay)  
- able to read and write in En glish or Spanish  
- able to complete written surveys without assistance  
- able to attend regular study activities at the center  
- complete study assessments and wear study devices as described  
- able to provide written informed consent and complete a post consent comprehension assessment .  
- able to commit approximately 10 hours per week to study activities  (peer Health Coach only)  
- active for [ADDRESS_893935] 3 days per week (peer Health Coach only)  
- able to commit approximately 5 hours per week to study activities  (center staff only)  
 
Additional Staff   Eligibility : 
- work or volunteer full or part time at the community center  
- able to read and write i n English without assistance  
- able to provide written informed consent  
 
Participants who subsequently miss the baseline measurement or forget to wear the devices will not be enrolled in further 
assessments as we’ve found in previous studies that this indicates a cognitive deficit and feel the intervention would not 
be appropri ate. 
 
Participants will be excluded if they: 1) are younger than 50 years, 2) have had a fall that resulted in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_79460] 12 months, 3) have participated in the UCSD Community of Mine research study  (intervention participants only) ,  
4)cannot complete the walking test wit hin 30 seconds, 5) are not able to read and write in English or Spanish, 6) are not 
able to complete written surveys without assistance, 7) cannot regularly attend study activities at the center, 8) are not 
willing to complete study activities, 9) are not willing to complete study assessment and wear study devices 10 ) are not 
able to provide written informed consent, 11 ) do not adequately answer questions on the post consent test , 12) cannot 
walk without human assistance . 
Health Coaches will be excluded from that role (but will be allowed to enroll as a participant) if they: 1) are not active for 
at least 20 minutes on 3 days per week, 2) cannot commit to 10 hours per week for study activities for the length of the 
study.   For Spanish Speaking Sites, if they do not read, write, and speak both English & Spanish fluentely.  
Center staff will be excluded  if they: cannot commit approximately [ADDRESS_893936] a provider. While the falls risk criteria and ability to walk without the human assistance  
may exclude som e participants who would benefit from a PA program, given that the intervention encourages 
unsupervised walking, this precaution is necessary to mitigate the risk of enrolling individuals for whom a walking 
program would be unsafe.  In addition to the scre ening criteria, we will provide all eligible participants for the 
intervention study with the DHHS Physical Activity Guidelines Guidelines 
(http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/ ) so th at they may decide if the program is acceptable.  
 
11. RECRUITMENT AND PROCEDURES PREPARATORY TO RESEARCH  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:  
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_662367]. We have been working with them for 
several years and they host the Community Advisory Board (CAB) that we created to inform this study. The center has 
agreed to participate in t he pi[INVESTIGATOR_29426]. Four Health Coaches have already expressed interest as they have been 
participating in the CAB and are familiar with the program. The center director will identify a staff member who can 
devote 5 hours per week for the 5 month study.  The  health educator will train the staff member and Health Coaches, who 
will then recruit study participants from the center through methods that they agree upon. We will allow up to 50 older 
adults to participate.  
 
PEP4PA Main study:   
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893937] or are willing to provide an exercise class at their center.  Randomization occurs at the 
study site level, once centers sign a memorandum of understanding agreeing to either condition. Participants are therefore 
randomized before their bas eline measurements. Site level randomization is necessary as the intervention involves center 
staff and changes to the environment in and around the centers. Cross contamination would be unavoidable with 
participant level randomization. A permuted block de sign will ensure equal numbers of sites are in the intervention and 
control condition.  Intervention sites will be randomized a second time at 18 months to one of two conditions: 1) financial 
support for the last 6 months of the program, or 2) no financial  support for the last [ADDRESS_893938] been identifie d in neighborhoods where the average annual household income is low (8 sites in 
neighborhoods with under $35K average household income, and 4 under the $49k median for San Diego county). From the [ADDRESS_893939] advertisements in local 
publications  and media , at churches, in HUD housing complexes, and, if necessary, mail boxes.   We wil l announce 
informational talks  through twitter and posts on our research group Facebook page.  No personal information will be 
collected; it will serve as a place to communicate about the study and opportunit ies to attend events to find out more  
information .  We will also use marketing company data to identify participants meeting the age criteria (50+), with an 
address in the zip code surrounding the center. This method, which has been successfully implemented  by [CONTACT_978] , allows 
researchers to reach a large number of potential participants who live  in communities surrounding partic ipating 
centers .  The marketing company uses public data sources such as census data, survey reported data, and the white pages.  
We have purchased the marketing list for use in study #140510, thus there is no additional cost to utilizing the list.
 
  
People who meet the age criteria will first receive a letter from the study team explaining 1) the study, 2) the participant selection process, 3) that they will receive a follow up phone call.  The letter will inform them about the opportunity to 
particip ate in the study .  The letter will clearly specify that participation is completely voluntary and will also explain the 
procedures for having their name [CONTACT_662421][INVESTIGATOR_530].  This procedure has been used by [CONTACT_662409].  This 
method allows individuals to notify us that they do not want to be bothered.
  If a potential participant calls or e-mails  
asking to be removed from the recruit list, their request will be immediately respected and no attempt will be made to 
recruit the person into the study.  Two to three days after expected delivery, trained recruitment staff will contact [CONTACT_662410].   Up to [ADDRESS_893940] requests by [CONTACT_662411].  W e feel 
that these protocols provide potential participants with an up -front method of saying no in order to increase an 
individual’s ability to shield his/her privacy.
 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 14 We aim to recruit 34 participants per center  to complete the intervention and assessmen ts. Since all activities occur at the 
center , other center  attendees not eligible and enrolled can participate in inter vention activities if they complete  the 
center ’s normal activity waiver. They will not be assessed by [CONTACT_662412]. We will recruit & train up to [ADDRESS_893941] understood 
the study and their involvement, they will be given a sealed pedometer ( Pi[INVESTIGATOR_662368])  to determine their baseline walking level and will complete a survey.  
 
Those participating in the larger PEP4PA main study will also receive accelerometer s and a GPS device to wear for [ADDRESS_893942] like information collected by a cell phone. Combined with Geographic Information Systems (GIS), like 
google maps, we gain the contextual understanding of participants’ movements.  This data is not transmitted or viewed in 
real time. GPS data is stored with an identification number only on a secure server, still there is a low r isk of 
identification if UCSD servers were to experience a data breach.   
There is a risk of falls, injury or heart attack if p articipants  begin walking more.  However, if participants experience any 
of the following symptoms during exercise, they are advis ed to see a doctor.    
• Dizziness or lightheadedness  
• Fainting  
• Lack of concentration  
• Blurred vision  
• Nausea  
• Cold, clammy, pale skin  
• Rapid, shallow breathing  
• Fatigue, depression, thirst  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893943]. Risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_662413]://www.health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/ . These guidelines don’t require medical clearance to participate in 
physical activity.  They st ate that for older adults without chronic conditions, physical activity is generally safe (and safer 
than not exercising).  For those with  chronic conditions, they should understand (1) how their condition may limit their 
activity, (2) do as much as their condition allows, and (3) they are advised they should be under care for their 
condition.  We will provide this information when we ask participants to enroll in the study.  
 Safe walking information will be given to participants in the group meetings as well as in person from the  peer Health 
Coaches , who will be trained to ask about pain or injuries . We will make efforts to educate participants on how to walk 
safely and within their physical limits.  Participants will be encouraged to increase their walking gradually, beginning with only 100 additional steps per day.  Participants will also be provided safety information, including: safe walking 
shoes, using a cane or assistive devices, crossing intersections, staying hydrated, starting slowly and bei ng aware of 
symptoms.  They will be informed that they may discontinue their involvement at any time.  
 Health Coaches will carry cell phones and first aid kits on al l group walks. CPR training will be provided to any Health 
Coach or center staff member that wants to be certified. Were any adverse events to occur, the appropriate medical 
personnel will be immediately contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  In the case of an emergency, 9- 1-[ADDRESS_893944] to wear the devices.  They will also be told that the sensors are not considered to 
be medical devices or significant risk devices.  
 
Adverse Events:  All events that are reported or brought to the attention of the Health Coaches, center staff or the research 
staff during intervention or measurement activities will be reviewed in a team meeting with the Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_662369] , [CONTACT_662426] .  
 
Safety Protocol for Depression Questionnaire:  At the measurement visit, trained research staff will score the CES -D short 
form  (a screener for depression symptoms) . Participants with scores ≥ 10 will be permitted to enroll in the trial but will be 
given the following advice in private at the study visit: "Some of your responses to the survey questions suggest that you 
are feeling sad or down at the moment, and you may be experiencing some symptoms of depression. We would like to 
recommen d that you talk to someone about these feelings.”  Participants will be given information on resources available 
to them through the County or their center, when appropriate. The incidence of CES -D short form scores ≥ 10 will be 
recorded in the database.  
 
It will be explained to the subjects in clear terms, both verbally and in the written consent form, that their precise 
whereabouts for the entire time period the GPS device is worn will be collected.  GPS data is not transmitted in real time. Any potential r isk of embarrassment or privacy due to analysis with GIS data is mitigated by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_662370].   Additionally, environmental measures 
created from the GIS analysis will  be used in statistical modeling at the group level only, and will not be individually 
mapped or visualized for publication purposes.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 16 Participants will be informed that all survey responses and data collected from the GPS device will be kept confidential 
within the research team, and that no material that could personally identify them will be used in any reports or 
publications from this study , unless explicit permission is given via written release . To reduce the risk to (and fear of) 
confidentiality, all subject records and data will stripped of individual identifiers following data collection. We will assign 
each person a study ID and all records will be coded with the study ID rather than personal identifiers. The code that links 
the study ID and the  name [CONTACT_192570] a separate place than the data file until all of the measurements are complete.  
 All data will be stored in locked cabinets and on a secure computer server at UCSD that can only be accessed by [CONTACT_662414] m and university.  Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_662371]. Information about subject participation may be shared with participating centers in order to promote its activities, including  information like their name [CONTACT_662422].  Research staff 
will not share any identifiable research data collected at study assessments, like performance on the functioning tests.    
Participants will also be told about the confidentiality proc edures and that they have the right to refuse to answer 
questions or to terminate their participation in the study at any time without prejudice. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_662372].  
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS INCLUDING DATA ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT  
 
We have established an extensive protocol to protect participants’ privacy. We will keep hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_662373]. All data will be stored on a firewall and password -protected project server at the University of [LOCATION_004], San 
Diego . We will assign each person a study ID when enrolled in the study. All  sensor and survey data will be stripped of 
individual identifiers following data collection  and will be stored by [CONTACT_409646]. The code that links the study ID and 
the name [CONTACT_192570] a s eparate place than the data files.  Name [CONTACT_662423][CONTACT_7678]. For people 
who are ineligible and do NOT want to be contact[CONTACT_7678], their name , phone number  and date of birth will 
not be entered into our databases and only their age, race/ethnicity and reasons for ineligibility will be retained.  Paper 
data collection forms for these people will be destroyed. All data will be kept in locked cabinets at the study office , 
accessible only by [CONTACT_662415].  Participant data may be shared with other researchers for future 
analyses at the PIs discretion. They consent to this use. Participants may elect to have their data deleted from the databas e 
associated with the tablets used by [CONTACT_662416] [ADDRESS_893945] protocol -driven 
procedural gu idelines. UCSD staff will not share any identifiable sensor or survey data with study sites.   
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_662372].  
 
17. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Participants may or may not receive any benefit from participating in the study.  
 
The main benefit of this study is the development of a sustainable program that community centers may use to promote physical activity among older adults.  Such an intervent ion is necessary to help promote healthy behaviors in large 
populations and prevent chronic illness and cognitive decline.  By [CONTACT_4907], participants will gain knowledge of their own exercise habits and ways to improve them.  There is a potential for multiple health benefits to 
occur in all participating individuals.  In this age population in this setting, health is likely to be on the decline, walki ng 
can prevent this decline and in some cases reverse it.  
 
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
The known risks to participants are outweighed by [CONTACT_662417].  
 
19. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
There is no  expense to participant other than time.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 17  
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
CAB:  
Participants in the CAB who would like to accept payment for their time will receive $50 at each meeting for a total of 
$200 per year.  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:  
Participants  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_548511] $10 when upon completion of study the assessments at the begi nning, middle 
(2 months) and end (4 months) of the study, for a total of $30.  
Staff and Health Coaches will receive $100 at the end of each month as compensation for their time, for a total of $500.  
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_662374] $500 for costs relate d to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], including: new equipment, printing expenses, 
participant prizes and celebrations.  
 PEP4PA Main Study:  
Participants  in the study will receive $ 10 upon completion of study assessments at the beginning, 6, and 18 month time 
points  and $20 at the 12 and 24 month time points. Participants will receive $10 for attending the group orientation at the 
beginning of the study, for a total of $80. Participant s will not be paid if they are unable to wear the devices as instructed 
at baseline.  
Health Coaches (intervention sites only) will receive $100 at the end of each month as compensation for their time . At 
sites randomized to receive financial support  in mo nths 18- 24, health coaches will receive a total of $ 2,400.   At sites 
randomized to no longer receive financial support, health coa ches and staff will receive $1800 total. Health coaches will 
also receive $10 upon completion of study assessments at the begi nning, 6, and 18 month time points  and $20 at the 12 
and 24 month time points. Health coaches will also receive $10 for completing the supplemental survey at the beginning 
of the program for a total of $80.  
 
Study sites  (intervention sites only) will receive  $250 every 6 months  for costs related to the improvement of programs or 
equipment offered at participating centers. These expenses may be used to purchase PA equipment, pay for participants to be transported to offsit e locations for group walks, or to cover fitness instruction costs, for example. Intervention sites 
randomized to receive funding in months 18 -  24 will receive a total of $1000 and sites randomized to not receive funding 
in the final 6 months will receive  $750 total. An additional $250 every 6 months  will be given to the intervention sites to 
be utilized by [CONTACT_662418], monthly 
celebrations, or food for group meetings.  Interv ention sites randomized to receive funding in months 18 -  24 will receive 
a total of $1000 and sites randomized to not receive funding in the final 6 months will receive $750 total. Sites will 
receive $[ADDRESS_893946] with 
the intervention.  Intervention sites randomized to receive funding in months 18 -  24 will receive a total of $2400 and 
sites randomized to not receive funding in the final 6 months will receive $1800 total for staff costs.  
 
Payment to participants will be made in cash. Payment to study sites, peer health coaches will be made via a preprinted 
check (Scrip) that can be cashed at any bank. Participants in the physical activity intervention will be able to keep their 
pedometer.  
 
21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/LICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
All members of the research team listed below will be trained and certified in HIPAA and CITI policies for research 
subjects.  
 
Gregory Aarons,  PhD, Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_662427] is a Professor in the Department Psychiatry, School of Medicine at 
the University o f [LOCATION_004], San Diego. He is the Director of the Child and Adolescent Services Research Center (CASRC). 
His expertise is in the areas of dissemination and implementation research, organizational psychology, and health services 
research in public sector s ervices for youths and adults in primary care settings for adults and older adults. [CONTACT_662427]’ 
most recent work focuses on organizational factors that influence effective dissemination and implementation of evidence -
based practices in multiple settings in cluding primary care, social service, mental health, and alcohol/drug settings. [CONTACT_662428] IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893947] (3rd annual) DI conference.  
 
Veronica Cardenas, PhD, Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_662429] is an Assistant Clinical Professor in the Department of 
Psychology at the University of [LOCATION_004], San Diego, who completed her postdoctoral training in Clinical 
Geropsychology. Her research focuses on physical and mental health interventions in Latino, older adults. She has 
experience with interventions that include t he use of promotores , similar to the peer leader model proposed in PEP4PA.  
She is Co - Investigator on a San Diego County grant evaluating the implementation of a Spanish language treatment 
intervention in older adult Latinos diagnosed with diabetes and de pression, that includes physical activity.  [CONTACT_662424] is 
bilingual and bicultural [CONTACT_662429] will provide input into intervention design to ensure cultural relevancy. She will 
also provide case management supervision for the in person counselors, help with training and intervention delivery in the 
Spanish speaking Centers, and will help train Spanish speaking measurement assistants.  
 
Loki Natarajan,  PhD, Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_662430] conducts methodological research in biostatistics, primarily in the 
area of survival analysis. She is interested in modeling survival distributions in research situations where there are time 
dependent effects and wherein the proportional haz ards model is not applicable . [CONTACT_662430] is also a co -Investigator on 
[CONTACT_391929]’s improving sedentary behavior classification grant (1st percentile score). [CONTACT_662430] will provide statistical 
advice on design and analysis issues, generate randomization allocation sequences perform statistical analyses and 
develop statistical methodology where needed. will be the lead statistician and be responsible for, supervising data 
analysis, and developi[INVESTIGATOR_662375] , PhD, MPH, Co- Investigator . [CONTACT_398675] is an  Assistant Clinical Professor with the Department of Family 
Medicine and Public Health. Her research examines the role of exercise and other healthy lifestyle behaviors in the 
prevention and treatment of physical  and mental health problems. . She led the traditional exercise arm of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_662376]. traditional exercise on physical and mental health outcomes among heart failure patients with depressive symptoms. She designed and implemented an Internet -based exercise intervention for smoking cessation, 
which formed the basis of her dissertation. She has  worked on multiple exercise- related research studies, papers, and 
projects with [CONTACT_398672], who served as her research mentor at Brown University and my primary postdoctoral fellowship mentor at UCSD. She led a team of researchers at UCSD and the VASDHS investigating the effects of 
exercise- based programs on individuals at -risk for and diagnosed with SUDs, including a pi[INVESTIGATOR_662377] & drug treatment. Her position includes a blend of clinical, research, and teaching responsibilities, and 
one of her main goals is to increase collaborations between the researchers and clinicians in the Department.  
 
Dori Rosenberg,  PhD, MPH  is an Associate  Investigator at Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Reearch Institute and 
an Affiliate Assistant Professor in the Department of Health Services at the University of Washington’s School of Public 
Health. Her background is in behavi oral science through her advanced degrees in clinical psychology and public health. 
She has specific expertise in promoting physical activity and sedentary behavior change among various populations 
including youth, older adults, and people with chronic med ical conditions.  [CONTACT_401480] is a consultant and has helped 
develop all intervention protocols  and measurement assessments for the PEP4PA study . [CONTACT_401480] is  primarily 
responsible for providing advice on counseling techniques and handling challenging cases.  
 
Yuyan Shi,  PhD, Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_662431] is an Assistant Professor in the Division of Health Policy, Department of Family 
and Preventive Medicine, at the University of [LOCATION_004] San Diego ( UCSD).   Her research has focused on policy and 
economic evaluation of lifestyle interventions. Trained as a policy analyst and a health economist, [CONTACT_662431] specializes in 
research design and data analysis using large population surveys and large medical claims, cost -benefit analysis, cost -utility 
analysis, and cost -effectiveness of treatments and interventions to promote physical activity, smoking cessation and 
decrease alcohol misuse. The proposed research is an extension of her prior work on economic evaluation of physical 
activity interventions, where a method was developed to frame the relative magnitudes of effectiveness and costs of different  
community -based programs in terms of a single common metric [CONTACT_662431] will lead the two secondary aims in the prop osed 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893948]- certified public health & general preventive m edicine doctor and a c linical Professor in 
the Department of Family Medicine and Public Health at the University of [LOCATION_004], San Diego and an Associate 
Professor of Health Promotion in the Graduate School of Public Health at San Diego State University.  [CONTACT_116044] has 
directed two community health centers (CHC) in San Diego, providing direct patient care in addition to programmatic 
responsibilities.  She continues her [ADDRESS_893949] -doctoral fellow  in the Preventive Medicine Residency at UCSD. H e is 
interested in assessing falls risk, medication use and health care utilization in this population. H e will serve as the safety 
monitor for the PEP4PA intervention, responding to all adverse event reports.   
 
David Wing and Michael Higgins, MS  are experts in physical activity measurement and members of the EPARC lab. 
They will be responsible for initializing and downloading devices and training staff and students in study measures.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 20   
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1 Martinson BC, Crain AL, Pronk NP, O’Connor PJ, Maciosek MV. Changes in PA and short -term changes in health care 
charges: a prospective cohort study of older adults. Preventive Medicine. 2003; 37(4): 319- 326. 
 
[ADDRESS_893950] RR, O’Connor PJ, Fine LJ. Health Care Charges 
associated with Physical Inactivity, Overweight, and Obesity. Preventing Chronic Disease 2005; 2(4):A09.  
 
1 Gillespie LD , Robertson MC , Gillespie  WJ, Sherrington C , Gates S , Clemson LM , Lamb SE. Interventions for 
preventing falls in older people living in the community. The Cochrane Collaboration 2009; (2): CD007146.  
 
1 Tinetti ME, Kumar C. The Patient who Falls: “It’s Always a Trade- Off.” Journal of American Medical Association 
2010; 303(3)258- 266. 
 
[ADDRESS_893951] R, Taylor K. The effectiveness of a community- based program 
for reducing the incidence of falls in the elderly: a randomized trial. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 
2004; 52(9): 1487- 1494.  
 
1 Stevens JA, Corso PS, Finkelstein EA, Miller TR. The costs of fatal and nonfatal falls among older adults. Injury 
Prevention 2006;12:290 –295. 
 
[ADDRESS_893952] and frequency of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_662378] -related injuries in older  adults. 
American Journal of Public Health 1992; 82(7):1020- 1023.  
 
[ADDRESS_893953] RR, O’Connor PJ, Fine LJ. Health Care Charges associated 
with Physical Inactivity, Overweight, and Obesity. Preventing Chronic Disease 2005; 2(4):A09.  
 
1 Nelson ME, Rejeski  WJ, Blair SM, Duncan PW, Judge JO, King AC, Macera CA, Castaneda- Sceppa C. Physical 
Activity and Public Health in Older Adults: Recommendation from the American College of Sports Medicine and 
the American Heart Association. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 2007; 39(8): 1435- 1445.  
 
1 Wagner EH, LaCroix AZ, Buchner DM, Larson EB. Effects of Physical Activity on Health Status in Older Adults I: 
Observational Studies. Annuals Reviews of Public Health 1992; 13:451- 468. 
 
1 Department of Health and Human S ervices Agency on Aging (AOA). Profile of older Americans. [Accessed January 6, 
2014.]. Available at: http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/index.aspx  
 
1 Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical activity in the [LOCATION_002] measured 
by [CONTACT_6317]. Med Sci Sports Exerc  2008 Jan; 40(1):181- 8. 
 
[ADDRESS_893954] iveness of Community -Based 
Physical Activity Interventions. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2008; 35(6): 578- 588.  
 
1 CDC, Prevalence of PA, including lifestyle activities among adults – [LOCATION_002], 2000- 2001. MMWR 52: 764- 769, 
2003.  
 
1 Sun F, Norman IJ, and While AE. Physical activity in older people: A systematic review. (2013). Retrieved from 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471 -2458/13/449  
 
1 World Health Organization. Global  Recommendations on Physical Activity for Health.  Retrieved from  
 http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_olderadults/en/index.html  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893955]  2013 Aug 8;10:94.  
 
1 Kibbe DL, Hackett J, Hurley M, McFarland A, Schubert KG, Schultz A, Harr is S. Ten Years of TAKE 10!(®): 
Integrating physical activity with academic concepts in elementary school classrooms. Prev Med  2011 Jun;[ADDRESS_893956] 1:S43- 50. 
 
1 Kimura M, Moriyasu A, Kumagai S, Furuna T, Akita S, Kimura S, Suzuki T. Community- based interventi on to improve 
dietary habits and promote physical activity among older adults: a cluster randomized trial. BMC Geriatr  2013 
Jan 23;13:8.  
 
1 Rutten GM, Savelberg HH, Biddle SJ, Kremers SP. Interrupting long periods of sitting: good STUFF. Int J Behav Nutr 
Phys Act  2013 Jan 2;10:1.  
 
[ADDRESS_893957], Mokdad AH, Ajani UA. Sedentary behavior, physical activity, and the metabolic syndrome 
among U.S. adults. Obes Res 2005 Mar;13(3):608- 14. 
 
1 Bankoski A, Harris TB, McClain JJ, Brychta RJ, Caserotti P, Chen KY, Berrigan D, Troiano RP, Koster A. Sedentary 
activity associated with metabolic syndrome independent of physical activity. Diabetes Care 2011 
Feb;34(2):497- 503. 
 
1 Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Mâsse LC, Tilert T, McDowell M. Physical activity in the  [LOCATION_002] measured 
by [CONTACT_6317]. Med Sci Sports Exerc  2008 Jan;40(1):181- 8. 
 
1 Anderson G. Chronic Care: Making the Case for Ongoing Care. Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 2010.  
 
1 Evensen KR, Buchner DM, Morland KB. Objective measurement of physical activity and Sedentary Behavior Among 
US Adults Aged 60 Years or Older. CDC - Preventing Chronic Disease: Volume 9, 2012:11_0109.  
  
1 Song J, Hochberg MC, Chang RW, Hootman JM, Manheim LM, Lee J , Semanik PA, Sharma L, Dunlop DD. 
Osteoarthritis Initiative Investigators. Racial and ethnic differences in physical activity guidelines attainment 
among people at high risk of or having knee osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2013 Feb;65(2):19 5-
202. 
 
1 Kanjilal S, Gregg EW, Cheng YJ, Zhang P, Nelson DE, Mensah G, Beckles GL. Socioeconomic Status and Trends in 
Disparities in 4 Major Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease Among US Adults, 1971 -2002. Arch Intern Med 
2006;166(21):2348- 2355.  
 
1 Gordon-Larsen P, Nelson MC, Page P, Popkin BM. Inequality in the built environment underlies key health disparities 
in physical activity and obesity. Pediatrics 2006 Feb;117(2):417- 24. 
 
1 National Recreation and Park Association. Parks & Recreation in Underse rved Areas: A Public Health Perspective. 
http://www.nrpa.org/uploadedFiles/nrpa.org/Publications_and_Research/Research/Pape rs/Parks -Rec-
Underserved- Areas.pdf  
 
1 Perez -Terzic CM. Exercise in cardiovascular diseases. PM R 2012 Nov;4(11):867- 73. 
 
1 Nelson ME, Rejeski WJ, Blair SM, Duncan PW, Judge JO, King AC, Macera CA, Castaneda- Sceppa C. Physical 
Activity and Public Health in Older Adults: Recommendation from the American College of Sports Medicine and 
the American Heart Association. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 2007; 39(8): 1435- 1445.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 22 1 Rosenberg DE , Gell N, Papadopoulos H.   (2013, June).   Objectively quantifying physical activity in an evidence -based 
program for older adults.  Poster at the International Conference on Ambulatory Monitoring of Physical Activity 
and Movement annual meeting, Amherst, MA.  
 
1 Hooker SP, et al., Factors related to physical a ctivity and recommended intervention strategies as told by [CONTACT_662419]. Ethn Dis  2011. 21(3): p. 261- 7. 
 
1 Buman MP, Giacobbi PR Jr, Dzierzewski JM, Aiken MA, McCrae CS, Roberts BL, Marsiske M. Peer volunteers 
improve long- term maintenance of physical activity with older adults: a randomized controlled trial. J Phys Act 
Health  2011 Sep;[ADDRESS_893958] 2:S257- 66. 
 
1 Castro CM, Pruitt LA, Buman MP, King AC. Physical activity program delivery by [CONTACT_662420]: the 
TEAM randomized trial. Health Psychol . 2011 May;30(3):285- 94. 
 
1 Buman MP, Giacobbi PR Jr, Dzierzewski JM, Aiken Morgan A, McCrae CS, Roberts BL, Marsiske M. Peer volunteers 
improve long- term maintenance of physical activity w ith older adults: a randomized controlled trial. J Phys Act 
Health  2011 Sep;[ADDRESS_893959] 2:S257- 66. 
 
1 Chase, Jo -Ana D. Physical Activity Interventions Among Older Adults: A Literature Review. Research and Theory for 
Nursing Practice 2013; 27(1): 53- 80. 
 
[ADDRESS_893960], Subramanian SV, Li Y, Sorensen G. Neighborhood safety, socioeconomic status, and
 physical activity in older adults. Am J Prev Med  2009;37(3):207- 13. 
 
1 Mathews AE, Laditka SB, Laditka JN, Wilcox S, Corwin SJ, Liu R, Friedman DB, Hunter R, Tseng W, Logsdon RG. 
Older adults' perceived physical activity enablers and barriers: a multicultural perspective. J Aging Phys Act  
2010 Apr;18(2):119- 40. 
 
1 Martinson BC, Crain AL, Pronk NP, O’Connor PJ, and Maciosek MV. Changes in PA and short -term chan ges in health 
care charges: a prospective cohort study of older adults. Preventive Medicine 2003; 37(4): 319- 326. 
 
[ADDRESS_893961] K, Wasilenko K, Bolling K, Castro CM, Buchner D, 
Marshall S. Applying the Ecol ogical Model of Behavior Change to a Physical Activity Trial in Retirement 
Communities: Description of the study protocol. Contemporary Clinical Trials  2012; 33(6):1180- 1188.  
 
1 Mercer SL, DeVinney  BJ, Fine LJ, Green LW, Dougherty D. Study Designs for Effectiveness and Translation Research 
Identifying Trade -offs. Am J Prev Med  2007;33(2):139 –154.  
 
1 Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler  C. Effectiveness- implementation hybrid designs: combining 
elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. Med Care  2012 
Mar;50(3):217- 26. 
 
1 Jahnke RA, Larkey LK, Rogers C. Dissemination and benefits of a re plicable Tai Chi and Qigong program for older 
adults. Geriatr Nurs 2010 Jul -Aug;31(4):272- 80. 
 
[ADDRESS_893962] R, Taylor K. The effectiveness of a community- based program 
for reducing the incidence of falls in the elderly:  a randomized trial. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 
2004; 52(9): 1487- 1494.  
 
[ADDRESS_893963] Analysis of the Built 
Environment: The Case of Bike and Pedestrian Trials in Lincoln, Neb. American Journal of Public Health: April 2004, Vol. 94, No. 4, pp. 549- 553. 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page [ADDRESS_893964] -effectiveness of lifestyle and structured 
exercise interventions in sedentary adults: results of project  ACTIVE. Am J Prev Med  2000; 19(1), 1 -8. 
 
1 Sallis JF, Cervero R, Ascher WW, Henderson K, Kraft MK, Kerr J. An Ecological Approach to Creating Active Living 
Communities. Ann Rev Public Health  2006: 297- 322.  
 
1 Michie, Susan. From Theory to Intervention: Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_662379]. Applied Psychology: An International Review 2008, 57 (4), 660–680.  
 
1 Minkler M, Thompson  M, Bell J, Rose K. Contributions of Community Involvement to Organizational -Level  
 Empowerment: The Federal Health Start Experience. Health Educ Behav  2001;28:783- 807. 
 
1 Fawcett SB , Paine-Andrews A , Francisco VT , Schultz JA , Richter KP , Lewis RK , et al .  
 Using empowerment theory in collaborative partnerships for community health and development .  
 American Journal of Community Psychology 1995; 23(5), 677 -697. 
  
1 Maton  KL, Salem DA. Organizational characteristics of empowering community settings: a multiple case  
 study approach. Am J Community Psychol [ADDRESS_893965]; 23(5):631- 56. 
 
1 Kieffer CH. Citizen empowerment: A developmental perspective. Prevention in human  
 Services 1984; 3(2-3), 9- 36. 
 
[ADDRESS_893966] Health  2012;[ADDRESS_893967] 1:S56- 67. 
 
1 Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech BM, Pate RR, et al. Amount of time spent in sedentary 
behaviors in the [LOCATION_002], 2003- 2004. American Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  2008;167(7):875- 81. 
 
1 Troiano RP, Berrigan D, Dodd KW, Masse LC, Tiler t T, McDowell M. Physical activity in the [LOCATION_002]
 measured by [CONTACT_6317]. Med Sci Sports Exerc  2008;40(1):181- 8. 
 
1 Murray K, Kerr J, Natarajan L, Hipp A, Glanz K, Mitchell J, James P, Marshall S. Inter relationships among objectively 
measured phy sical activity, sleep and time outdoors, Submitted to ISBNPA 2014.  
 
1 Matts JP, Lachin JM. Properties of Permuted -Block Randomization in Clinical Trials. Controlled Clinical Trials  1988; 
9:327- 344. 
 
[ADDRESS_893968]- Cook A, Brauer  S, Woollacott M. Predicting the probability for falls in community -dwelling older  
adults using the Timed Up & Go Test. Phys Ther 2000;80:896- 903. 
  
1 Zimmerman, M. Handbook of Community Psychology. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, [LOCATION_001].  
 2000.  
 
[ADDRESS_893969] SC, Schnelle JF, Buchowski MS. Assessment of wear/nonwear time classification algorithms   
 for triaxial accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc [ADDRESS_893970];44(10):2009- 16. 
 
[ADDRESS_893971]  2009 January;17(1):17- 30. 
 
1 Celis -Morales CA, Perez- Bravo F, Ibañez L, Salas C, Bailey ME, Gill JM. Objective vs. Self -Reported  
 Physical Activity and Sedentary Time: Effects of Measurement Method on Relations hips with Risk  
 Biomarkers. PLoS One 2012;7(5):e36345.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 24 1 Rosenberg DE, Norman GJ, Wagner N, Patrick K, Calfas KJ, Sallis  JF. Reliability and validity of the Sedentary 
Behavior Questionnaire (SBQ) for adults. J Phys Act Health  2010 November;7(6):697- 705. 
1 Buysse DJ, Moul DE, Germain A, Yu L, Stover AM, Dodds NE, Johnston KL, Shablesky- Cade MA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_5544]. 
Development and validation of patient -reported outcome measures for sleep disturbance and sleep -related 
impairments. Sleep 2010; 33(6), 781- 92.  
 
1 Timing of exercise may improve sleep quality. Mayo Clinic Health Letter.  2004;22(3):4.  
 
1 Ersser, S. Measuring the sleep patt erns of older people. Nurs Times 1999 January 6;95(1):46- 9. 
 
1 Ancoli -Israel S, Cole R, Alessi C, Chambers M, Moorcroft W, Pollak CP. The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep 
and circadian rhythms. Sleep  2003 May 1;26(3):342- 92. 
1 Bravata DM, Smith -Spangler C, Sundaram V et al. Using pedometers to increase physical activity and improve health: a 
systematic review. JAMA  2007 November 21;298(19):2296- 304. 
[ADDRESS_893972] of some daily activities: a comparison in a young  and old 
population. Age Ageing  1993 March;22(2):90- 6. 
 
1 Anton SD, Manini TM, Milsom VA et al. Effects of a weight loss plus exercise program on physical function  in 
overweight, older women: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Interv Aging 2011;6:141- 9. 
 
[ADDRESS_893973];24(8):2261- 6. 
 
1 Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L et al. A short physical performance battery assessing lower  extremity 
function: association with self -reported disability and prediction of mortality and nursing home  admission. J Gerontol  
1994 March;49(2):M85- M94. 
 
1 Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Simonsick EM, Salive ME, Wallace RB. Lower -extremity function in persons over the age of 
70 years as a predictor of subsequent disability. N Engl J Med  1995 March 2;332(9):556- 61. 
 
[ADDRESS_893974] Neuropsychol  2002;9(3):187- 91. 
 
1 Steinberg BA, Bieliauskas LA, Smith GE, Ivnik RJ. Mayo's Olde r Americans Normative Studies: Age - and IQ-
Adjusted Norms for the Trail -Making Test, the Stroop Test, and MAE Controlled Oral Word  Association Test. Clin 
Neuropsychol  2005 September;19(3- 4):329- 77. 
 
1 Lezak MD, Howieson DB, Loring DW. Neuropsychological assessment . 4th ed. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University  Press; 
2004.  
 
1 Spreen O, Strauss E. A compendium of neuropsychological tests: administration, norms, and commentary . [LOCATION_001]: 
Oxford University Press; 1991.  
1 Barnes DE, Blackwell T, Stone KL, Goldman SE, Hi llier T, Yaffe K. Cognition in older women: the  importance of 
daytime movement. J Am Geriatr Soc 2008 September;56(9):1658- 64. 
 
1 Baker LD, Frank LL, Foster -Schubert K et al. Effects of aerobic exercise on mild cognitive impairment: a
 controlled trial. Arch Neurol  2010 January;67(1):71- 9. 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 25 1 Buell JS, Scott TM, Dawson -Hughes B et al. Vitamin D is associated with cognitive function in elders receiving home 
health services. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences  2009;64(8), 
888-895. 
 
1 Andresen EM, Malmgren JA, Carter WB, Patrick DL. Screening for depression in well older adults: Evaluation of a 
short form of the CES -D. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 1994. Mar -Apr; Vol 10(2): 77- 84. 
 
1  Brooks R, Rabin R, de Cha rro F. (2003). The measurement and valuation of health status using EQ -5D: A European 
perspective. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.  
 
1 Fryback DG, Dunham NC, Palta M, Hanmer J, Buechner J, Cherepanov D, et al. US norms for six generi c health -related 
quality- of-life indexes from the national health measurement study. Medical Care 2007; 45(12), 1162–1170.  
 
[ADDRESS_893975], Gibson SJ. The epi[INVESTIGATOR_662380]. Clin Geriatr Med  2001 Aug;17(3):417- 31.  
 
1 Amtmann  DA, Cook KF, Jensen MP, Chen W -H, Choi SW, Revicki D, Cella D, Rothrock N, Keefe F, Callahan L, Lai 
J-S. Development of a PROMIS item bank to measure pain interference. Pain  2010;150(1), 173- 82.  
 
1 Rantakokko M, Manty M, Iwarsson S et al. Fear of moving outdoors and development of outdoor walking
 difficulty in older people. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009 April;57(4):634- 40. 
 
1 Kempen GI, Yardley L, van Haastregt JC et al. The Short FES -I: a shortened version of the falls efficacy  scale-
international to assess fear  of falling. Age Ageing  2008 Jan;37(1):45- 50. 
 
[ADDRESS_893976] TL, Saelens BE, Frank LD, Sallis JF. Cross -validation of the factorial structure of the  Neighborhood 
Environment Walkability Scale (NEWS) and its abbreviated form (NEWS -A). Int J Behav  Nutr Phys Act  
2009;6:32.  
 
1 Cerin E, Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Frank LD. Neighborhood Environment Walkability Scale: validity and development of a 
short form. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2006 September;38(9):1682- 91. 
1 Saelens BE, Sallis JF, Black JB, Chen D. Neighborhood -based differences in physical activity: an  environment 
scale evaluation. Am J Public Health  2003 September;93(9):1552- 8. 
 
[ADDRESS_893977] TL et al. Age differences in the relation of perceived neighborhood  environment to 
walking. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2009 February;41(2):314- 21. 
 
1 Sallis JF, Grossman RM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_163313], Patterson TL, Nader PR. The development of scales to measure soci al support for 
diet and exercise behaviors. Prev Med  1987 November;16(6):825- 36. 
[ADDRESS_893978] Health  2013 Feb 8.  
 
1 Evans NJ, Jarvis PA. The group attitude scale. Small Group Research 1986;17(2):203- 16. 
 
[ADDRESS_893979] R, Taylor K. The effectiveness of a community- based program 
for reducing the inci dence of falls in the elderly: a randomized trial. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 
2004; 52(9): 1487- 1494.  
 
1 Evashwick C, Ory M. Organizational characteristics of successful innovative health care programs sustained over time. 
Family Community Health  2003; 26(3), 177- 193. 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 26 1 Diggle PJ, Liang KY, Zeger SL. Analysis of Longitudinal Data . [LOCATION_001], NY: Oxford University Press, 1994.   Pp. 1 -
254. 
 
1 Gold MR, Patrick DL, Torrance GW. (1996). Identifying and valuing outcomes. In M.R. Gold, D. L. Patri ck, & G. W. 
Torrance (Eds.), Cost -effectiveness in health and medicine. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press.  
 
1 Wu S, Cohen D, Shi Y, Pearson M, Sturm R. Economic Analysis of Physical Activity Interventions,  
 American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2011;40(2): 149- 158. 
   
1 Efron B. An Introduction to the Bootstrap. [LOCATION_001], NY: Chapman & Hall;1993. 
 
1  Van Hout BA, Al MJ, Gordon GS, Rutten FF. Costs, effects and C/E -ratios alongside a clinical trial. Health Econ 1994; 
Sep-Oct; 3(5):309.  
  
1 O'Brie n, PC. Procedures for Comparing Samples with Multiple Endpoints.  Biometrics 1984; 40: 1079- 1087.  
 
1 Lin X, Ryan L, Sammel M, Zhang D, Padungtod C, Xu X. A scaled linear mixed model for multiple outcomes. 
Biometrics 2000;56:593- 601. 
 
1 MacKinnon DP, Fairc hild AJ, Fritz MS. Mediation analysis. Annu Rev Psychol  2007;58:593- 614. 
 
1 Kenny DA, Kashy DA, Bolger N.(1998). Data analysis in social psychology.  In D. Gilbert, S.  Fiske, & G. Lindzey 
(Eds.), The handbook of social psychology  (Vol. 1, 4th ed., pp. 233- 265).  [LOCATION_011], MA: McGraw -Hill. 
 
[ADDRESS_893980] effects and moderated mediation in 
multilevel models: New procedures and recommendations. Psychological Methods 2006;11, 142- 163. 
 
1 Efron B, Tibshirani, Introduction to the Bootstrap, Monographs on Statistics & Applied Prob. 57, Chapman  & 
Hall/CRC, [LOCATION_001], 2000. 
 
1 Pearl, J. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann,  San 
Francisco 1988.  
 
1 Pearl, J. Causality, 2nd Edition, Cambridge University Press, [LOCATION_001]. 2009.  
 
1 Bloor, M. (1997). Techniques of validation in qualitative research: a critical commentary. In G. Miller and R.  
 Dingwall (Eds.), Context and method in qual itative research (pp. 37- 50). London: Sage Publications.  
  
1 Seale, C. (1999). The quality of qualitative research. London: Sage Publications Ltd.  
 
1 Diggle PJ, Liang KY, Zeger SL. Analysis of Longitudinal Data. [LOCATION_001], NY: Oxford University Press, 1994. Pp. 1-
254. 
  
1 Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data . 2 ed. [LOCATION_001]: Wiley; 2002.  
1 Schafer JL, Graham JW. Missing data: our view of the state of the art2. Psychol Methods  2002  June;7(2):147- 77. 
 
1 Little RJA. Modeling the drop- out mechanism in repeeated -measures studies. J Am Stat Assoc  1995;90:[ADDRESS_893981]. Application of random -effects pattern -mixture models for missing data in  longitudinal 
studies. Psychol Methods  1997;2(64):78.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 27 1 Park T, Lee SY. Simple pattern -mixture models for longitudinal data with missing observations:  analysis of urinary 
incontinence data. Stat Med 1999;18:2933- 2941.  
 
1 Daniels MJ, Hogan JW. Reparameterizing the pattern mixture model for sensitivity analyses under  informative 
dropout. Biometrics 2000;56:1241- 1248  
 
Troosters T, Gosselink R, Decramer M. Six minute walking distance in healthy elderly subjects. Eur Respir J. 1999 
Aug;14(2):270- 4 
 
Harada ND, Chiu V, Stewart AL. Mobility- related function in older adults: assessment with a [ADDRESS_893982]. Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil. 1999 Jul; 80(7):837 -41. 
23. FUNDING SUPPORT FOR THIS STUDY  
 
This study is funded by [CONTACT_572], Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health. 
(Grant # R01HL125405)  
 
24. BIOLOGICAL MATERIALS TRANSFER AGREEMENT  
N/A 
 
25. INVESTIGATIONAL DRUG FACT SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
N/A 
 
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
None  
 
27. CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
None  
 
28. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
N/A 
 
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
N/A 
 
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
Participants  in this study are older adults who may be  at risk for diminished decisional capacity.   A criteria for entry into 
the study is no cognitive, visual or hearing impairments that will affect independent participation in the study. We will be 
sure to carefully check this and other entry criteri a with participants. To mitigate against the risk of enrolling participants 
without obtaining informed consent, we will administer the generic 3- item interviewer rated test of decisional capacity 
after the informed consent form is read to participants.  The test items correspond to the key elements of the study design 
and procedures as well as participant rights.   Because participants are NOT being recruited with a primary condition of 
cognitive impairment, a longer test was not considered necessary. If par ticipants appear capable of participating in the 
study but did not fully understand the consent process we will repeat the information and test. Screening for participation 
will be conducted in person to better assess hearing impairments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions  
Page 28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 