 
P. [ADDRESS_1144711] Title 
Synergizing home health rehabilitation therapy to optimize patients’ activities of daily living  
Investigators  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_825484] -ju Liu , PhD, OTR/L, FGSA , UF Department of Occupational Therapy  
 
CO-I: Dorian Rose, PhD, PT, UF Department of Physical Therapy  
CO-I: Peihua Qiu, PhD, UF Department of Biostatistics  
 
Conflict of interest  
All the investigators declare no conflict of interest.  
Clinical Trial Registration #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
UF IRB202102816  
Supported  by [CONTACT_45429] (R21 AG076972 ) 
Date: 1/30/[ADDRESS_1144712]  
Regaining the ability to take care of oneself after an illness or medical epi[INVESTIGATOR_825485]. Each year, 3 to 4.5 million older adults receive home 
health care services that provide skilled rehabilitation therapy in their home. These patients experience reduced 
capacity to perform activities of daily living (ADL) independently, which is a significant risk factor for long -term 
care placement. Recent data has shown that nearly 40 % of ho me health patients do not improve in ADL at 
discharge. There is currently a lack of evidence -based rehabilitation programs in home health. Increasing 
activity -based intervention in home health care rehabilitation could be the key to improve patients’ ADL 
independence. The objective of this study  is to pi[INVESTIGATOR_825486] -enhanced program as an adjuvant therapy to 
usual home health rehabilitation to improve patients’ ADL outcome. The ADL -enhanced program facilitates 
patients’ participation in ADL first by [CONTACT_825491] a compensatory approach. As the patient 
increases physical capacity, the ADL -enhanced program shifts to a restorative approach, which increases the 
task demand to help the patient channel the improved physical capacity to better activity performance. Our 
specific aims were  to: 1) estimate the preliminary effect of the ADL -enhanced program on improving ADL; 2)  
estimate the preliminary effect of the ADL -enhanced program on improving  physical functioning of the upper 
extremity  and the lower extremity; and 3)  assess  the program completion rate, satisfaction rate, and adverse 
event rate (e.g., falls and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_614]) .   
 
P. [ADDRESS_1144713] of the activities of daily living (ADL) -enhanced 
program on improving ADL at treatment completion, one month, and 3 months after the completion.   
Hypothesis : Patients who receive the ADL -enhanced program plus usual rehabilitation therapy will show 
greater improvements in the Motor Skills scores of the Assessment of Motor and Process Skills (the 
primary outcome), Self -care items in the Outcome and Assessment Inf ormation Set (clinical outcome), 
and Activity Measure for Post -Acute Care Home Health Short Form (patient -reported outcome) at 
treatment completion and less decline at 1 -month and 3 -month follow -up than usual rehabilitation 
therapy.  
Secondary Objectives .  
Secondary objective 1: To estimate the preliminary effect of the ADL -enhanced program on improving 
physical functioning at treatment completion and one month after the completion.   
Hypothesis 1: Patients who receive the ADL -enhanced program plus usual rehabilitation therapy will 
show greater improvements in the Box and Block Test (upper extremity physical function), Jebsen Hand 
Function Test (upper extremity physical function), Timed -Up-and-Go Test (lower extremity physical 
function), and Short Physical Performance Battery (lower extremity physical function) at treatment 
completion and less decline at one -month follow -up than usual rehabilitation therapy.  
Secondary objective 2: To assess the completion, satisfaction, and adverse event rates of the ADL -enhanced 
program.   
Hypothesis 2a: We hypothesize that the program completion and satisfaction rates will be greater than 
75%.  
Hypothesis 2b: Fewer patients who receive the ADL -enhanced program will have hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], 
emergency room visits, and falls than patients who receive usual rehabilitation therapy at 1 -month and 
3-month follow -up. 
Background and Rationale  
Preserving older adults’ ability to perform activities of daily living (ADL) is critical to reduc ing risks of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_825487], long -term care placement, and mortality, especially after  an acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_825488] . Each year, 3 to 4.5 million U.S. patients receive home health care 
(HHC),  which provides in-home skilled rehabilitation services to homebound patients. These patients are often 
of advanced age  and with  multiple chronic conditions, poor health, and worsened functional status. A recent 
study indicates that 6% of HHC patients show no improvement in ADL status , and 36% show a decline in ADL 
status from admission to discharge.  Numerous community -based intervention trials have provided  strong 
evidence  of two intervention approaches to reduce ADL disability in frail older adults : (1) the compensatory 
approach  reduces the demands of the patient’s intrinsic capacity to perform activities  through home or task 
modifications (e.g., adding a shower bench or taking a sponge bath by [CONTACT_825492]) ; (2) the restorative approach  
increases a patient’s intrinsic capacity to perform activities through exercise (e.g., resistance exercise to improve 
leg strength).  However, neither approach has been tested in the HHC setting.   
Our proposed ADL -enhanced  intervention is innovative because it deliver s the compensatory approach first in 
HHC rehabilitation services to help the patient engage in ADL tasks immediately , followed by [CONTACT_825493]’ s intrinsic capacity  needed to perform activities . Additionally, the  restorative 
approach incorporates principles of activity grading  and motor learning  to help older adults translate muscle 
strength from resistance exercise into greater ADL performance.  
In this proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269] , we will test the preliminary effects of the innovative  ADL-
enhanced program, which combines the  compensatory approach and restorative approach in six OT visits  to 
boost usual rehabilitation services  on the ADL outcome  in enrolled HHC patients .    
 
P. 3 
 Study Design  
Study design overview.  This is a single -blinded , pi[INVESTIGATOR_825489] 48 Medicare patients  
referred  to HHC for skilled rehabilitation services  Twenty -four patients will be randomly assigned to the 
treatment -as-usual arm and receive usual rehabilitation services. The other 24 patients in the experimental arm 
will receive the ADL-enhanced program in six OT visits as well as usual rehabilitation services.   
 
Selection and Enrollment of Participants  
Participants will be recruited from partnered home health agencies  
Inclusion criteria . Patients are eligible  to the study  if they  are:  
(1) > 65 years of age,  
(2) Medicare  beneficiaries,  
(3) referred for skilled rehabilitation services; and  
(4) diagnosed with  three or more comorbidities.  
 
Exclusion criteria . Patients are ineligible if they have  contraindications for moderate -intensity  exercise , which 
include : 
• acute fractures with surgical or weight -bearing restrictions,  
• elective joint replacement surgery , 
• lower extremity amputation , 
• active treatment for cancer diagnosis , 
• on-going dialysis treatment , 
• acute cardiac surgery , 
• acute stroke or a major neurologic disorder limiting motor movements , 
• terminal stage of congestive heart failure , 
• a referral to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677] , or 
• severe cognitive deficits limiting verbal communication .  
 
Enrollment Procedures . 
Screening procedure.  The home health care team will obtain verbal permission  from new patients to allow  
the research coordinator  to contact [CONTACT_825494] . The coordinator will record the 
screening results (fail or pass) on a screening log.  The coordinator will call the eligible patient, verify the eligibility, 
and introduce the study.  
Consent procedure . The coordinator will then conduct a recruitment home visit to the eligible patient and 
obtain consent at the end of the visit. If the patient does not provide consent during the recurrent home visit but 
decides to participate in the study after wards , a study  outcome assessor will obtain consent  at the beginning of 
the baseline assessment visit. Reasons of rejection will be recorded.  
Patients who are eligible and agree to participate will be referred to the study outcome assessor , who will 
schedule the patient within 48 hours to obtain  the consent , if not yet obtained  by [CONTACT_23164] , and 
complete the baseline assessment s (ADL and physical functioning assessments ) at the participant’s home . The 
assessor will be blinded to group  assignment s.  
Randomization  procedure . [CONTACT_825503] (Co-I) will generate a randomization list using a computer software 
and seal the list in opa que envelopes . The on -site research coordinator will open one envelope after a patient 
has completed the baseline assessments. If the patient is assigned to the ADL-enhanced  group, the coordinator 
will notify the study  OT to start intervention.   
Study Intervention.  
Description of ADL-enhanced  intervention.  The experimental arm will receive the enhanced -ADL program  in [ADDRESS_1144714] and incorporate the patient’s activity pr eferences in the patient -
centered treatment plan . The study OT and the patient collaborate to identi fy and address  ADL tasks that are 
important and meaningful for the patient’s independence.   
Compensatory approach  procedures . The study  OT will conduct a semi -structured interview in the 1st visit to 
understand the patient’s daily routine  and to identify  two or three  ADL tasks that are meaningful but difficult  for 
the patient  because of reduced intrinsic capacity.  The study OT  and the patient collaboratively  decide  which 
energy conservation technique s to apply . The patient  practice s applying  these techniques  to the selected ADL 
tasks . The patient  is instructed to carry out these ADL tasks with practiced energy conservation techniques 
until the next visit.   
Restorative approach  procedures . The study OT will deliver the restorative approach starting at the 3rd visit. The 
selected self -care tasks include any in -home activities that the patient does to take care of self and others , which 
are not limit ed to basic ADL . In the beginning of each visit, t he study OT and the patient together identify  2 or 3 
activities where  the patient has experienced limitations or difficult ies. The study OT will apply o ne or two activity 
grading principles to each  selected activity . The intervention intensity will be kept at the moderate level 
(somewhat hard) using the  Omni Scale , which is a rated perceived exertion scale. For example, if a patient  
experiences difficulty to returning  pantry items to overhead shelves, the  study OT can let the patient  wear a 
weighted wrist cuff while sorting pantry items ( increase the  load), restore items to a n overhead versus  shoulder -
high shelf ( increase the  movement distance), restore items into different locations on the shelves (change of 
movement direction), speed up while storing items ( increase the  movement speed), store 10 pantry items versus 
store five items at a time ( increase the endurance), or carry grocer ies with a shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_825490] ( increase the  activity complexity by [CONTACT_825495], carrying 
groceries and sorting the pantry items after shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]).  Patients will practice e ach selected task for [ADDRESS_1144715] break if needed .  
Allowed interventions . All participants will receive the care plan approved by [CONTACT_825496]. The care 
plan should include regular home health rehabilitation therapy.  
Adherence Assessment . The adherence for the ADL -enhance intervention  will be evaluated by [CONTACT_825497] (60 days).  
 
Study Procedures.  
6.1. Schedule of Eval uations.  
 Baseline  
 Post-
intervention  
(Post 
intervention  + 7 
Business 
days )+ One-month 
follow -up (Day 
[ADDRESS_1144716]  
intervention + 7 
Business days ) 3-month follow -
up (Day [ADDRESS_1144717] 
intervention + 7 
Business days)  
Assessment of Motor and Process Skills  x x x  
Activity Measure for Post-Acute Care Home 
Health Short Form  x x x x 
OASIS self -care items from chart review  x x   
Box and Block Test  x x x  
Jebsen Hand Function Tes t x x x  
Timed -Up-and-Go Test  x x x  
Short Physical Performance Battery  x x x  
PEG three -item scale  x    
Patient Health Questionaire -9 x    
Saint Louis University Mental Status Exam  x    
 
P. 5 
 Patient demographic background and medical info 
from self -report as well as chart review  x    
Patient satisfaction survey   x   
Adverse events (hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], falls, emergency 
room visits)   x x X 
+: The end of ADL -enhanced program, the last home visit of usual care, or [ADDRESS_1144718] him/her . The research coordinator will follow a phone script approved by [CONTACT_825498] . The coordinator will obtain a verbal  permission prior to proceed ing with screening 
questions  from the potential research participant  after a brief introduction of the study . These screening 
questions are:   
1. Are you aged 65 years or above?   
2. How many medical conditions, including chronic conditions, that you currently have? Examples of the 
conditions include but not limit to diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, joint disease or arthritis, 
and lung disease.   
3. Do you have any of the following conditions?  
• an elective joint replacement surgery in the last month  
• orthopedic or heart surgery in the last month  
• lower extremity amputation  
• currently receiving treatment for cancer  
• an ongoing dialysis treatment  
• a neurologic condition, such as stroke or Parkinson’s disease, that significantly limits your 
movements  
• congestive heart failure that is at the terminal stage  
In addition to these questions, the interviewer will administer the “Six -item cognitive screener” to determine the 
potential participant’s cognitive ability. If a participant scores a 4, 5, or [ADDRESS_1144719] a 
recruitment home visit to the eligible patient within five business  days. During the visit, the coordinator will 
provide  the patient  with a detailed description of the research study  and go over the informed consent process. 
If the patient  does not provide  consent during the recurrent home visit but decides to participate in the study 
afterwards, a study outcome assessor will obtain consent  at the beginning of the baseline assessment visit. If 
the patient decided not to enroll, the r eason (s) of rejection will be recorded.  

 
P. 6 
 Baseline assessment . The enrolled p atient will be  then referred to the study outcome assessor , who will 
schedule the patient to obtain the consent , if not yet obtained by [CONTACT_23164],  and complete the 
baseline assessments at the participant’s home . The baseline assessment should occur within seven business  
days of the recruitment visit. The assessor will be blinded to patient group  assignment s. The blinded  outcome 
assessor will conduct the following assessments  during the baseline evaluation visit.  These assessments are 
listed in suggested order.  The outcome evaluator will alternate bet ween self -reported assessments and 
performance -based assessments as well as upper extremity performance tests and lower extremity performance 
tests  to reduce the testing burden for patients . Additionally , short  breaks (one to five minutes) between 
assessments will be provided to patients as needed.      
1. Demographic information  of age, gender, race/ethnicity, chronic conditions , and number of 
medications  
2. Assessment of Motor and Process Skills  
3. Activity Measure of Post -Acute Care Home Health Short Form  
4. Jebsen Hand Function Test  
5. Box and Block Test  
6. PEG three -item scale  
7. Patient Health Questionnaire -[ADDRESS_1144720] t he patient’s OASIS self -care item  scores  (scores at the start of care and 
discharge)  from medical chart when the patient has been discharged  from home health care or [ADDRESS_1144721]. Qiu (Co -I) will generate a 
randomization list using a computer software and seal the list in opaque envelopes. The on -site research 
coordinator will open one envelope after a patient has completed the baseline assessments. If the patient is 
assigned to the ADL -enhanced group, the coordinator will notify the study OT to start intervention.    
 
Post-intervention evaluation .  
The satisfaction survey will be given to the patient in the experimental group after the last visit  of ADL -
enhanced intervention  by [CONTACT_825499] .      
For the group  that will receive the ADL-enhanced program, t he post -intervention evaluation conducted 
by [CONTACT_825500] -enhanced intervention, whichever occurs last.  For the control 
group, the post -intervention evaluation conducted by [CONTACT_825501] [ADDRESS_1144722] the patient’s OASIS self -care item scores (scores at the start of care and 
discharge) from medical chart when the patient has been discharged from home health care or [ADDRESS_1144723] visit of usual home health rehabilitation therapy or ADL -
enhanced intervention  (Day [ADDRESS_1144724] intervention) , whichever occurs the last. Patients will be instructed not to 
discuss their therapy content with the blinded outcome assessor and vice versa. The following assessments will 
be administered during the one-month follow -up evaluation visit.  
1. Assessment of Motor and Process Skills  
2. Activity Measure of Post -Acute Care Home Health Short Form  
3. Jebsen Hand Function Test  
4. Box and Block Test  
5. Timed -Up-and Go  
6. Short Physical Performance Battery  
7. Adverse events questionnaire  
 
Final evaluation  or three -month follow -up evaluation . 
The final evaluation will occur over the phone  by [CONTACT_825502] -enhanced 
intervention  (Day [ADDRESS_1144725] intervention) . The following assessments will be administered during the final 
evaluation .  
1. Activity Measure of Post -Acute Care Home Health Short Form  
2. Adverse events questionnaire  
 
Data a nalysis plan.  
Preliminary a nalysis.  We will compare participant demographics and covariates (e.g., pain levels) between the 
two groups. Variables  with statistically significant differences will be included in the subsequent statistical model s 
as covariates . We will graph spaghetti plots for repeated measurements and examine for outliers.   
Data analysis.  Since ADL and physical functioning outcomes will be collected over three time poi nts (baseline, 
post-treatment , one -month  follow -up), the mixed -effects linear regression model ing will be conducted to fit the 
data, in which a random -effects term is included to accommodate within -subject data correlation and a quadratic 
growth curve is included to describe the temporal trend of the response.   
For Aim [ADDRESS_1144726] of the ADL-enhanced  program  on improving ADL , three 
separate mixed -effects regression  analyses will be conducted for the Motor Skills scores of the Assessment of 
Motor and Process Skills  (the primary outcome) , the Activity Measure of Post -Acute Care Home Health Short 
Form , and the OASIS self -care items , in each of which sex, race, age , and other covariates will be included  in 
the model .  
For Aim [ADDRESS_1144727], Timed -Up-and Go, and Short Physical Performance Battery .  
For Aim 3 , the program completion rate  and satisfaction rate  will be compared to the benchmark , 75%. Fisher’s 
Exact Test  will be performed to compare  the proportion of patients who experience adverse  events of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], emergency room visits, or falls (adverse event rate) between  the two  groups . 