CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  RESEARCH  PROTOCOL  
 
 
Feasibility  of Unattended  Home Polysomnography  and Comparison  to In-laboratory  
Polysomnography  in Pediatric  Patients  
 
 
 
 
David  S. Leonard,  MD 
Assistant  Professor,  Otolaryngology  
[EMAIL_030]  
 
James  Kemp,  MD 
Professor,  Pediatrics  
Division  of Pediatric  Allergy,  Immunology  and Pulmonary  Medicine  
Director,  Sleep  Laboratory,  St. Louis  Children's  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
[EMAIL_7986]   
 
 
 
Michael  McLeland,  Ph.D.,  RPSGT,  RST 
Coordinator  Sleep  Lab, St. Louis  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418471].McLeland@ bjc.org  
 
Michael  C. Montana,  MD, PhD 
Faculty  Instructor , Pediatric  Anesthesiology  
[EMAIL_031]  
 
 
 
 
 
Version  1.2 
April,  18, 2019  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  SYNOPSIS  
Study Title Feasibility  of Unattended  Home  Polysomnography  and Comparison  to In-laboratory  
Polysomnography  in Pediatric  Patients  
Objectives  1) To assess  the feasibility  of unmonitored  polysomnography  and 2) to compare  apnea  
hypopnea  index  (AHI),  average  SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  between  unmonitored  
polysomnography  and in-laboratory  polysomnography  in pediatric  patients.  
Study Period  2 years 
Number  of Subjects  100 children,  ages  5 to 12 years  of age  
Study Design  Single -center,  un-blinded,  feasibility , methods  comparison,  and non-inferiority  study  
Inclusion  and Exclusion  
Criteria  Inclusion  Criteria  
a) 5- to 12-years -old 
b) Parental  informed  consent  
c) Suspected  Sleep  Disordered  Breathing  
 
Exclusion  Criteria  
a) Developmental  delay  
b) Use of home  oxygen  
c) History  of Parasomnia  (e.g. narcolepsy,  restless  leg syndrome,  somnambulism)  
d) History  of tracheal  surgery   
e) History  of tracheal  stenosis  
f) History  of Nocturnal  Hypoventilation  
g) History  of Central  Sleep  Apnea  
h) Use of a Ventilatory  Assist  Device  (e.g. Non-Invasive  Positive  Pressure  Ventilation)  
Measurements  An unattended  at-home  overnight  sleep  study  using  a Type  III portable  monitor  
(polysomnography)  will be performed  on all subjects.  All subjects  will also have  an inpatient,  
Type  I monitored  polysomnography  performed  in the St. Louis  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418472].  For both studies  the Apnea -Hypopnea  Index,  Average  SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  
will be determined.   
Outcomes  Primary  outcome  will be the feasibility  of obtaining  greater  than or equal  to 6 hours  of data 
adequate  for polysomnography  analysis  and determination  of an apnea  hypopnea  index  
(AHI),  average  SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  using  un-attended  polysomnography.  Secondary  
outcomes  will be the comparison  of AHI, average  SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  between  
unattended  and inpatient  polysomnography.  An exploratory  outcome  will be a comparison  
of the McGill  Oximetry  Score  between  unattended  and inpatient  polysomnography . 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  1. Background  and Rationale:  Childhood  obstructive  sleep  apnea  (OSA),  defined  by [CONTACT_57670],  
partial  or complete  obstruction  of the upper  airway  during  sleep,  is a commo n disorder  in 
pediatric  patients.  The prevalence  of OSA  in children  is as high as 5%, and if untreated,  OSA  
can result  in significant  deleterious  behavioral,  cognitive,  and cardiovascular  consequences  1. 
First line treatment  for pediatric  OSA  is tonsillectomy  and adenoidectomy.  This surge ry is 
estimated  to be curative  in approximately  60% of patients,  and even  in patients  where  a 
complete  cure is not achieved  there  is a significant  reduction  in symptoms  in most  cases  2. 
Given  the high prevalence  and excellent  treatment  options,  it is impor tant that if OSA  is 
suspected  a diagnosis  is made  accurately  and efficiently.   
The current  gold standard  for the diagnosis  of OSA  is in-laboratory  polysomnography  
(PSG),  otherwise  known  as a Type  I sleep  study.  However,  in-laboratory  PSG  is expensive  and 
time consuming  as tests  are administered  by [CONTACT_418488],  and include  seven  or more  channels  to monitor  sleep,  cardiovascular  
parameters,  oximetry,  patient  position,  respi[INVESTIGATOR_77583],  and breathi ng. Furthermore,  due to 
regional  variations  in sleep  center  locations,  patients  do not uniformly  have  access  to centers  
that perform  in-laboratory  PSGs.  Thus,  there  has been  considerable  interest  in developi[INVESTIGATOR_418473],  also known  as portable  monitoring.  
Indeed,  the American  Academy  of Sleep  Medicine  (AASM)  has recommended  the use of 
portable  monitoring  as an alternative  to in-laboratory  PSG  for the diagnosis  of OSA  in selected  
adult  patients  3.  
Type  II studies are similar  to Type  I studies  except  they are not attended  by a specially  
trained  individual  and can be administered  in a subject’s  home.  Type  III portable  monitoring  
uses  fewer  channels  (generally  4 to 7) to obtain  data than does  in-laboratory  PSGs,  and does  
not usually  have  a registered  sleep  technologist  present  during  the study.  In certain  
circumstances  this may reduce  the fidelity  of the data collected.  However,  portable  monitoring  
has several  advantages  over in-laboratory  PSGs,  including  reduced  cost,  increased  patient  
accessibility,  and critically,  the ability  to assess  a more  typi[INVESTIGATOR_418474]’s  sleep,  since  the subject  is 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_418475].  However,  while  approved  
for adults,  the latest  guidelines  on childhood  OSA  published  by [CONTACT_418489] [ADDRESS_527891]  comparison  between  portable  monitoring  and in-
laboratory  attended  PSG  in children  is limited  1,6, and to quote  the 2012  guidelines,  “… 
additional  studies  of ambulatory  PSG  in children  of varying  ages  are needed.”  In addition,  
continued  technological  advances  in sleep  monitor  design  has decreased  the size of 
commercially  available  sleep  monitors  to the point  that some  are now size-appropriate  for 
pediatric  patients.   
 The purpose  of the study  proposed  below  is twofold.  First we will test the feasibility  of 
conducting  portable  sleep  monitoring  in school  aged  children  using  the Clevemed  Sleepview  
(www.clevelmed.com) , one of the smallest  portable  sleep  monitors  commercially  available  at [ADDRESS_527892]. Louis  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418476].  These  comparisons  
will be offered  to the families  of school  age children  suspected  of having  sleep  disordered  
breathing  who present  to the Washington  University  Pediatric  Otolaryngology  Department.  We 
hypothesize  that in-laboratory  attended  polysomnography  and portable  monitoring  will yield 
similar  results  in the diagnosis  of sleep  disordered  breathing  in school  aged  pediatric  patients.  
These  initial  comparisons  will be conducted  in otherwise  healthy  children.  Future  studies  will 
expand  this comparison  to children  with underlying  comorbidities,  including  younger  children  
and those  with developmental  delay.  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].   
2. Enrollment:  Patients  and their families  who present  to the Washington  University  
Department  of Pediatric  Otolaryngology  with a suspected  diagnosis  of sleep  disordered  
breathing  will be given  information  regarding  the study  in the otolaryngologist’s  office . A member  
of the research  team  will approac h the patient  and their family  once  they are identified  as 
needing  an in-laboratory  sleep  study  as part of their work  up for sleep  disordered  breathing.  
Written  informed  consent  will be obtained  from the patient’s  family  and assent  will be obtained  
from the patient  at that time.  The study  group  will consist  of one hundred  patients  who require  
diagnostic  PSG  for sleep  disordered  breathing.  Inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  are based  on 
independent  risk factors  for respi[INVESTIGATOR_418477]  7. The Washington  University  Pediatric  Otolaryngology  clinic  sees  approximately  
100 patients  a month  with tonsillar  hypertrophy,  snoring,  or other  concerns  for sleep  disordered  
breathing  that would  warrant  a sleep  study;  the St. Louis Children's  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418478]  1300  Type  I sleep  studies  a year.  We plan to enroll  125 patients  in this 
study , assum ing a 20% drop out rate from the study,  with an end goal of one hundred  study  
patients.  Given  the frequency  with which  patients  present  with concern  for sleep  disordered  
breathing  this should  be accomplishable  in the planned  time frame.   
 
3. Eligibility:  
 
3.1. Inclusion  Criteria  
3.1.1.  5- to 12-years -old 
3.1.2.  Parental  informed  consent  
3.1.3.  Suspected  Sleep  Disordered  Breathing  
 
3.2. Exclusion  Criteria  
3.2.1.  Developmental  delay  
3.2.2.  Use of home  oxygen  
3.2.3.  History  of Parasomnia  (e.g. narcolepsy,  restless  leg syndrome,  somnambulism)  
3.2.4.  History  of tracheal  surgery   
3.2.5.  History  of tracheal  stenosis  
3.2.6.  History  of Nocturnal  Hypoventilation  
3.2.7.  History  of Central  Sleep  Apnea  
3.2.8.  Use of a Ventilatory  Assistant  Device  
 
4. Methods:   
4.1. Study  design:   Single -center,  un-blinded,  feasibility,  and methods  comparison  study  
 
4.2. Otolaryngology  Clinic  Assessment:  Subjects  will be identified  from patients  presenting  to 
the Washington  University  in St. Louis  Pediatric  Otolaryngology  Clinic  who are suspected  of 
having  sleep  disordered  breathing.  Subjects  who are identified  by [CONTACT_418490] a member  of 
the research  team  who will explain  the study  to the subject  and their family  and obtain  informed  
consent.  During  this visit, subjects  will also be administe red a short,  validated  sleep  
questionnaire,  the Modified  STOP -Bang  Tool for Stratifying  OSA  Risk in Adolescent  Children  9. 
This questionnaire  is 8 questions  and routinely  administered  in the Washington  University  
Pediatric  Otolaryngology  offices.  
 
4.3.1. Unattended  Polysomnography : All eligible  subjects  will be asked  to conduct  an 
unattended,  overnight  sleep  study  performed  in their home  prior to in-laboratory  
polysomnography , using a standard  Type  III portable  monitor . This study  will be performed  with 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  an FDA approved  sleep  monitor  (e.g CleveMed  SleepView  or similar).  Per American  Academy  
of Sleep  Medicine  (AASM)  guidelines,  portable  sleep  monitoring  will include  air flow, respi[INVESTIGATOR_418479],  heart  rate and blood  oxygenation.  Airflow  will be measured  using  a nasal  cannula  and 
pressure  transducer  which  is located  within  the home  sleep  test (HST)  recording  device.  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_418480]  (RIP)  belts  
that will go around  the chest  at the nipple  line and around  the abdomen  at the navel  level.  Blood  
oxygenation  and heart  rate will be recorded  by [CONTACT_418491].  
Each  study  participant  and their family  will be shown  and educated  on how to apply  each  of the 
sensors  by a member  of the study  team.  Unattended  sleep  studies  will be interpreted  by [CONTACT_418492] . The first assessment  of the Unattended  sleep  study  for 
each  individual  patient  will be readability  of the recordings.   
 Polysomnography  testing  will determine  the apnea  hypopnea  index  (AHI),  blood  
saturation  oxygen  nadir  (SPO 2 nadir),  and average  blood  oxygen  saturation  3. The AHI is 
defined  as the average  number  of hypopneas  (epi[INVESTIGATOR_418481])  and apneas  
(epi[INVESTIGATOR_418482])  per hour of sleep.  Apneas  and hypopneas  will be defined  
per the American  Academy  of Sleep  Medicine  manual  for scoring  sleep  and associated  events  
10. The objective  is to obtain  greater  than or equal  to 6 hours  of data adequate  for 
polysomnography  analysis  and determination  of an apnea  hypopnea  index  (AHI),  average  
SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  using  home  un-attended  polysomnography . 
 A McGill  Oximetry  Score  11, which  only uses  the frequency  and depth  of SPO 2 
desaturations  throughout  a night’s  sleep  to assign  a score  of 1 (normal/inconclusive),  2 (mildly  
abnormal),  3 (markedly  abnormal),  and 4 (severely  abnormal)  will be also be assigned  to each  
home  sleep  test.  
Fidelity  of data collection  using  at home  sleep  studies  is reliable,  but not 100%  reliable  3. 
For example,  subjects  may unconsciously  remove  the nasal  cannula  or the finger  pulse  
oximeter  in their sleep,  resulting  in data drop outs.  A subject’s  parent  or guardian  will be 
requested  to periodically  monitor  the subject  throughout  the night  and be instructed  on how to 
reapply  sensors  to minimize  data drop outs.  Should  data from an initial  sleep  study  be 
uninterpretable  based  on sleep  study  expert  opi[INVESTIGATOR_418483].  A recent  study  on the feasibility  of Type  II 
comprehensive  (i.e. greater  than 7 channel)  pediatric  sleep  studies,  reported  that 91% of home  
sleep  studies  are successful  on initial  attempt  and a total of 98% are successful  after one repeat  
testing  12. A 2013  assessment  of Type  III sleep  studies  performed  both in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_339347]  (26 
patients)  and at home  (75 patients)  found  that technically  acceptable  and interpretable  studies  
were  obtained  from 93% of subjects  13. 
Should  data from the second  sleep  study  be uninterpretable  we will not proceed  with 
further  testing  of these  subjects  by [CONTACT_418493] . Regardless  of whether  a subject  
successful  completes  home  sleep  testing,  in-laboratory  polysomnography  will still be perfor med 
as part of their work  up for sleep  disordered  breathing.  
 
4.3.2.  Parental  Monitoring  Plan for Unattended  Polysomnography : Parents  will be instructed  that 
while  the device  is FDA approved  for use in adults  it is not FDA approved  in children  and 
therefore  they will need  to monitor  their child more  closely  during  the night  than they would  have  
to during  a typi[INVESTIGATOR_418474] ’s sleep.  Parents  should  remain  in close  enough  proximity  to hear their 
child should  their child call out for them  during  the night  for assistance  with any aspect  of the 
device.  Parents  will be instructed  that improper  routing  of leads  may result  in a choking  hazard.  
Parents  will be instructed  to inspect  for proper  effort  belt, nasal  cannula,  and pulse  oximeter  
placement  at least  every  two hours.  Parents  will be instructed  that should  they ever feel the 
device  presents  a significant  choking  hazard  to their child they should  entirely  remove  the 
device  and stop the study.   
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  4.4. In-laboratory  Polysomnography : All eligible  subjects  will have in-laboratory  
polysomnography  as is routinely  performed  in the diagnostic  work  up for suspected  sleep  
disordered  breathing.  The in-laboratory  sleep  study  will be done  at the St. Louis  Children’s  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418476],  which  is an American  Acad emy of Sleep  Medicine  accredited  
sleep  disorder  center.  The Center  is sound -proof,  and has been  designed  to provide  as natural  
and home -like an atmosphere  as possible.  Infrared  monitoring  equipment  allow s for patient  
observation  from outside  of the patient’s  sleep  room.  At least  one parent  is required  to stay in 
the room  overnight  with the patient.  A second  parent  can stay as well, but not required.  The 
Center  is located  inside  of St. Louis  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418484], which  is 
staffed  with physicians  and nurses  24 hours  per day.  
Per American  Academy  of Sleep  Medicine  (AASM)  guidelines,  in-laboratory  sleep  
monitoring  is attended  by a specially  trained  technologist  who sets up the sleep  study,  observes  
the subject  throughout  the duration  of the sleep  study,  and is available  to troubleshoot  in real 
time any monitoring  issues  that may arise.  In-laboratory  polysomnography  consists  of [ADDRESS_527893]  and interpreted  
by a physician.  Polysomnography  testing  will determine  the sleep  stages,  apnea  hypopnea  
index  (AHI) , blood  saturation  oxygen  nadir  (SPO 2 nadir) , and average  blood  oxygen  saturation,  
as defined  above  3. A McGill  Oximetry  Score  will also be calculated  for the in-laboratory  PSG.  
 
4.6. Subject  assessments : The unattended  home  polysomnogram  will record  blood  oxygen  
concentration,  pulse  rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_77583],  air flow and respi[INVESTIGATOR_77583].  The in-laboratory  
polysomnogram  will record  these  parameters  and will also measure  electroencepholograph y, 
electrocardiogram,  and heart  rate. 
 
4.7. Conclusion  of study : The study  ends  with the completion  of the in-laboratory  
polysomnogram.  Additionally,  the study  ends  at any time the patient  or parent/caregiver  
requests  it to end. Appropriate  treatment  for any diagnosis  of sleep  disordered  breathing  will 
proceed  based  on the attending  otolaryngologist  recommendations.  Recommendations  and 
treatment  will not be affected  by [CONTACT_418494].  As home  sleep  testing  in 
pediatric  patients  is explor atory;  only the in-laboratory  sleep  study  will be used  in making  any 
diagnosis  of sleep  disordered  breathing  and in determining  treatment  options.     
 
5.  Data Collection  and Monitoring  
5.1. Clinical  Assessments:  At the completion  of both the unattended  and in-laboratory  
polysomnography  we will determine  an Apnea -Hypopnea  Index,  Average  SPO 2, and SPO [ADDRESS_527894]. Louis  
Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_418485]’s  medical  record.  The 
unattended  polysomnogram  will not be included  in the patient’s  medical  record  and will only be 
accessible  to study  team  members.   
 
6. Outcome  Measures  
7.1. Primary  Outcome  Measure:  The feasibility  of obtaining  greater  than or equal  to 6 hours  of 
data adequate  for polysomnography  analysis  and determination  of an apnea  hypopnea  index  
(AHI) , average  SPO 2, and SPO 2 nadir  using  home  un-attended  polysomnography . 
 
6.2. Secondary  Outcome  Measures  
6.2.1.  Comparison  of AHI between  unattended  and in-laboratory  polysomnography  
6.2.2.  Comparison  of average  SPO 2 between  unattended  and in-laboratory  polysomnography  
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  6.2.3.  Comparison  of SPO 2 nadir  between  unattended  and in-laboratory  polysomnography  
6.2.4.  Comparison  of sleep  disordered  breathing  diagnosis  between  unattended  and in-
laboratory  polysomnography  
 
6.3. Exploratory  Outcomes  Measure : Comparison  of McGill  Oximetry  Scores  between  
unattended  and in-laboratory  polysomnography.  
 
6.4. Analysis:  The primary  outcome  is the feasibility  of obtaining  an adequate  sleep  study  from 
unattended  polysomnography  in pediatric  patients.  Percentages  of studies  that have  6 hours  of 
data sufficient  for analysis  will be reported.  The study  will be defined  feasible  if 85% or more  of 
participants  provide  [ADDRESS_527895],  home  sleep  studies  will be 
feasible  in our study  population.   
 
7.  Potential  Risks 
 
7.1. Unattended  Polysomnography:  There  is minimal  risk associated  with the sleep  study.  Per 
AASM  guidelines  [ADDRESS_527896]  to their child. Family  members  will be instructed  to listen  out for their 
child throughout  the night  (for example  by [CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_418486]) , and to check  on their 
child for proper  nasal  cannula,  effort  belt, and pulse  ox placement  at least  every  two hours.   
Patients  may experience  mild discomfort  from the ambulatory  sleep  monitoring  devices.  
Patients’  family members  may experience  mild inconvenience  during  the setup  of the sleep  
monitor , while  monitoring  of their child during  the home  sleep  study,  and should  any trouble  
shooting  be required  during  the time their child is asleep.  Patients  and their families  may 
experience  mild inconvenience  if they are asked  to perform  a second  sleep  study  due to results  
from the first study  being  uninterpretable.   
 
7.2. In-laboratory  Polysomnography:  This is standard  of care in the diagnosis  of pediatric  sleep  
disordered  breathing.  The in-laboratory  polysomnogram  is being  conducted  in an AASM  
accredited  sleep  disorder  center  that conducts  [ADDRESS_527897]  for one night.   
 
7.3 Steps  Taken  to Mitigate  Risk:  Studies  are conducted  under  the superv ision of the 
investigating  physicians  and personnel  with specialty  training  in sleep  medicine.  Research  team  
members  are trained  and experienced  in performing  research  in human  subjects,  and in 
monitoring  for adverse  effects.   
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  Inclusion  and exclusion  criteria, monitoring,  and the clinical  protocol  are designed  to 
ensure  that risks are absolutely  minimal.  Subjects  and their families  are informed  that 
participation  is voluntary  and they may refuse  to participate  and may withdraw  from the study  at 
any time without penalty.  Subjects  will be told that in the unlikely  event  of a physical  injury  as 
the direct  result  of study  procedures,  they will be cared  for by a member  of the investigating  
team  at no cost,  within  the limits  of the Washington  University  compensati on plan.  
During  the unattended  sleep  study,  there  is minimal  risk. Subjects  will be in their own 
home  and should  the unattended  sleep  study  equipment  prove  too much  of a discomfort  or too 
challenging  for parents  to maintain  they will be free to remove  the device  at any time.  A specific  
monitoring  plan to minimize  the possibility  that the device  could  present  a choking  hazard  is 
described  above.  In-laboratory,  attended  polysomnography  is standard  of care and as such  
carries  minimal  risk. 
Regarding  confidenti ality; 1) all subjects  will be assigned  a study  ID number,  and 2) 
unattended  polysomnography  reports  will be kept confidentially.  They  will be coded,  with 
information  linking  code  numbers  to names  kept at a separate  location,  under  lock and key. 3) 
The link to identifiers  will be destroyed  at the end of the study.  4) Data  will be stored  under  lock 
and key (office,  file cabinet)  and only the investigators  and research  team  will have  access.  If 
data are published,  there  will be no link to identifiers.  Study  data will not be revealed  to any 
organization,  individuals  other  than the subjects,  or the subjects  themselves.  5) Study  data from 
the unattended  polysomnography  will not be entered  in subjects'  medical  records.   
 
8. Management  of Intercurrent  Events  
8.1. Adverse  Experiences  
The investigator  will closely  monitor  subjects  for evidence  of adverse  events.  All adverse  
events  will be reported  and followed  until satisfactory  resolution.  The description  of the adverse  
experience  will include  the time of onset,  duration,  intensity,  etiology,  relationship  to the study  
drug (none,  unlikely,  possible,  probable,  highly  probable),  and any treatment  required.  
 
8.2. Premature  Discontinuation  
If a subject  withdraws  from the study,  the subject  will be replaced  to provide  the required  
number  of subjects.  Subjects  will be withdrawn  if the investigator  decides  that discontinuation  is 
in the best interest  of the subject,  or the subject  requests  withdrawal  from the study.  
 
9.  Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
Studies  conducted  in the Department s of Pediatrics,  Otolaryngology,  and 
Anesthesiology  follow  the Washington  University  Institutional  Review  Board  Policies  and 
Procedures  (last revision  April 20, 2015).  All individuals  working  on the study  are required  to 
read and be familiar  with and compliant  with the IRB Policies  and Procedures.  The specific  
monitoring  plan for this investigation  is commensurate  with the risks and the size and complexity  
of the investigations  planned.  The potential  risks are attributable  to performing  unattended  
polysomnography . Based  on the small  size and relatively  low risk nature  of the protocol,  the 
investigating  physicians  are involved  in the monitoring  plan.  A full DSMB  is not needed.  These  
individuals  will review  the annua l summary  of adverse  events.  In addition,  they will review  all 
reports  of a Serious  Adverse  Event,  or an Unexpected  Adverse  Event.  The investigators  will 
follow  the requirements  for principle  investigator  reporting  requirements  as outlined  in Section  X 
of the IRB Policies  and Procedures.   
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  References:  
 
1. Tan HL, Kheirandish -Gozal  L, Gozal  D. Pediatric  Home  Sleep  Apnea  Testing:  Slowly  
Getting  There!  Chest  2015;148:1382 -95. 
2. Friedman  M, Wilson  M, Lin HC, Chang  HW. Updated  systematic  review  of tonsillectomy  
and adenoidectomy  for treatment  of pediatric  obstructive  sleep  apnea/hypopnea  syndrome.  
Otolaryngol  Head  Neck  Surg  2009;140:800 -8. 
3. Collop  NA, Anderson  WM, Boehlecke  B, et al. Clinical  guidelines  for the use of 
unattended  portable  monitors  in the diagno sis of obstructive  sleep  apnea  in adult  patients.  
Portable  Monitoring  Task  Force  of the American  Academy  of Sleep  Medicine.  J Clin Sleep  Med 
2007;3:737 -47. 
4. Marcus  CL, Brooks  LJ, Draper  KA, et al. Diagnosis  and management  of childhood  
obstructive  sleep  apnea  syndrome.  Pediatrics  2012;130:576 -84. 
5. Marcus  CL, Brooks  LJ, Draper  KA, et al. Diagnosis  and management  of childhood  
obstructive  sleep  apnea  syndrome.  Pediatrics  2012;130:e714 -55. 
6. Alonso -Alvarez  ML, Teran -Santos  J, Ordax  Carbajo  E, et al. Reliabi lity of home  
respi[INVESTIGATOR_418487].  Chest  2015;147:1020 -8. 
7. Brown  KA. Outcome,  risk, and error  and the child with obstructive  sleep  apnea.  Paediatr  
Anaesth  2011;21:771 -80. 
8. Combs  D, Goodwin  JL, Quan  SF, Morgan WJ, Parthasarathy  S. Modified  STOP -Bang  
Tool for Stratifying  Obstructive  Sleep  Apnea  Risk in Adolescent  Children.  PLoS  One 
2015;10:e0142242.  
9. Goldstein  NA, Stefanov  DG, Graw -Panzer  KD, et al. Validation  of a clinical  assessment  
score  for pediatric  sleep-disordered  breathing.  Laryngoscope  2012;122:2096 -104. 
10. Berry  RB, Brooks,  R.,Gamaldo,  C.E.,  Harding,  S.M.,  Lloyd,  R.M.,  and Vaughn,  B.V. for 
the American  Academy  of sleep  medicine.  The AASM  manual  for the scoring  of sleep  and 
associated  events:  rules , terminology  and technical  specifications.  2.2 ed. Darien,  IL: American  
Academy  of Sleep  Medicine;  2015.  
11. Nixon  GM, Kermack  AS, Davis  GM, Manoukian  JJ, Brown  KA, Brouillette  RT. Planning  
adenotonsillectomy  in children  with obstructive  sleep  apnea:  the role of overnight  oximetry.  
Pediatrics  2004;113:e19 -25. 
12. Marcus  CL, Traylor  J, Biggs  SN, et al. Feasibility  of comprehensive,  unattended  
ambulatory  polysomnography  in school -aged  children.  J Clin Sleep  Med 2014;10:913 -8. 
13. Brockmann  PE, Perez  JL, Moya  A. Feasibility  of unattended  home  polysomnography  in 
children  with sleep -disordered  breathing.  Int J Pediatr  Otorhinolaryngol  2013;77:1960 -4. 
14. Bland  JM, Altman  DG. Statistical  methods  for assessing  agreement  between  two 
methods  of clinical  measurement.  Lancet  1986;1:307 -10. 
 
CONFIDENTIAL:  This document  is the intellectual  property of David Leonard, MD, Michael McLeland,  PhD, and Michael 
Montana,  MD, PhD. Acceptance  of this document  constitutes  the agreement  by [CONTACT_1955][INVESTIGATOR_418470].  Appendix  A: Modified  STOP-Bang Tool for Stratifying  OSA in Children  
Modified  from Combs (2015)8 
 
1)  SNORING: How often does your child snore loudly?  Don’t know, never, rarely, 
occasionally, frequently , or almost always.   
 
2)  TIRED: Is your child sleepy during the daytime? Don’t know, never, rarely, 
occasionally, frequently , or almost always.  
 
3)  OBSERVED APNEA:  Does  your child stop breathing  during  sleep? Don’t know, never, 
rarely, occasionally, frequently , or almost always.  
 
4)  BLOOD PRESSURE: S ystolic  or diastolic  blood  pressure  greater  than or equal  to 95th 
percentile  for height  and age? Yes or No? 
 
5)  BODY MASS INDEX: Greater than 95th percentile for age?  Yes or No?  
 
6)  ACADEMIC PROBLEMS: Does your child have learning problems? Don’t know, never, 
rarely, occasionally, frequently , or almost always.  
 
7)  NECK SIZE: Is your child’s neck circumference greater than the 95th percentile for age? 
Yes or No?  
 
8)  GENDER: Is your child’s Gender  Male? Yes or No?  
 
 
Answers  with choice  that include  don’t  know,  never,  rarely,  occasionally,  frequently , or almost  
always  are collapsed  into a positive  or negative  response  in the following  manner:   
 
1) Frequently  or almost  always  is considered  a positive  response . 
2) Don’t know,  never,  rarely,  or occasiona lly are considered  a negative  response.  
 
. 