Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 1 of 39 
 
  
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
  
Protocol Title:  Reducing Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_84311]:  Suzanne Ardito  
Primary Contact [CONTACT_7626]:  ([PHONE_1972]  
Primary Contact E -mail:  SArdito @northwell.edu  
Date Revised:  03/01/2021  
IRB Number:  19-[ADDRESS_513309]  Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
Guidelines for Preparing a Research Protocol  
 Instructions:  
• You do not need to complete this document if you are submitting an Application for Exemption  or Application for a Chart Review .   
• Do not use this template if: 
o  Your study involves an FDA regulated product.  In this case, use the Clinical Trial Protocol Template. 
o Your study has a protocol from a sponsor or cooperative group.  In this case, use the Protocol Plus .   
o Your study is a registry or repository for data and/or samples,  In this case, use Protocol Template – Registry Studies.  .   
• If a section of this protocol is not applicable, please indicate such. 
• Do not delete any of the text contained within this document. 
• Please make sure to keep an electronic copy of this document.  You will need to use it, if you make modifications in the future.   
• Start by [CONTACT_69061], according to these rules: 
o Protocol Title:  Include the full protocol title as listed on the application.  
o Investigator:  include the principal inves tigator’s name [CONTACT_407098]  
o Date Revised:  Indicate the date at which the protocol was last revised  
o IRB Number:  Indicate the assigned IRB number, when known.  At initial submission, this row will be left blank.   
• Once the table inform ation in entered, proceed to page [ADDRESS_513310] of the 
form.  
   
 Continue to next page to begin entering information about this study    
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 2 of 39  
 
1.  PREVIOUS STUDY HISTORY  
 
Has this study ever been reviewed and rejected/disapproved by [CONTACT_69062]? 
 
 No   Yes −   if yes, plea se explain:  
  
2. BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESEARCH  
• The summary should be written in language intelligible to a moderately educated, 
non- scientific layperson .  
• It should contain a clear statement of the rationale and hypothesis of your study, a 
concise description of the methodology, with an emphasis on what will happen to the subjects, and a discussion of the results.  
• This section should be ½ page  
 
Persons wit h Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias (ADRD) currently 
account for 3.[ADDRESS_513311], with less than 
5% reporting mandatory dementia care training. Three-quarters of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84312] (BPSD),  associated with  functional and cognitive decline, increased resource 
consumption, institutionalization, premature death, and caregiver burden. The overall objective of this project is to test the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of 
an innovative model of care, the PES -4-BPSD , for reducing BPSD by [CONTACT_84370] (PES) to deliver dementia care for acutely -ill 
patients with ADRD. Traditionally, mental health assistants with training in crisis -
prevention techniques provide care to psychiatric patients. On the intervention unit, these mental health assistants, as PES, purposefully engage patients with BPSD. In 
our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we found that patients with cognitive impairment admitted to the PES unit were significantly less likely to require constant observation, chemical and physical restraints, suggesting improved management of BPSD. Our central 
hypothesis  is that the PES -4-BPSD intervention will improve the ability of PES to 
create an “enabling” milieu that addresses the factors leading to BPSD and improves the experience of hospit al caregivers. Guided by a social -ecological 
framework, the PES -4-BPSD model incorporates: dementia education and training, 
environmental modifications-cohorting, increased staffing-PES, and staff support. Our multidisciplinary research team is well-positioned to accomplish the following aims: Aim 1: Determine the preliminary efficacy of the PES -4-BPSD intervention 
for reducing BPSD during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84314] 2: Evaluate whether dementia 
care training improves the perceived ability of PES staff (intervention) and nurse 
assistant staff (control) to care for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84315] . For Aim 1, we 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513312] a non -randomized preliminary efficacy trial of the PES -4-BPSD 
intervention enrolling N=158 patients (79 control and 79 intervention). The 
prim ary outcome will be the presence (through a multi -modal approach) of BPSD 
during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84316]- Questionnaire (NPI -
Q). In Aim 2, we will use survey methodology in a repeated measures design to evaluate within and between -group differences in attitudes, experience, and 
satisfaction toward managing patients with ADRD. Measures will be completed at baseline (T1), immediately following training (T2), and at end of the intervention period (T3). In response to the 2017 NIA Wo rkshop, “Innovating the Next 
Generation of Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease Care Interventions”, this proposal will be the first to study an innovative model of care utilizing PES as specialized hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407084]. Our findings will lay the essential groundwork for a multi -site trial of PES -4-BPSD, and will inform the 
development of a program that can be easily implemented in other hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]. 
Providing care for persons with dementia in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407085]. However, it is well known that hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84319]. The dementia training that will be provided for the staff on the control and intervention units will consist of ways to optimize the care already being provided (e.g. better ways to communicate with persons with dementia, ways to avoid restraints). The training will consist of 7 in -service modules for dementia care. The training is meant to 
improve the care for pe rsons with dementia by [CONTACT_407096]. The training will not change/alter the care but simply optimize the care already being provided. The training delivery is considered standard of care and is the way all hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407086] g is provided to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33717]. The modules will 
be presented on both the intervention and control units to all nursing and NA/PES staff. The 7 modules will include: 1) overview of dementia and dementia care; 2) addressing unmet needs; 3) avoiding restrai nts; 4) communicating with persons 
with dementia; 5) delirium; 6) the impact of the physical environment; 7) connecting to the family caregiver. The in -service sessions will be given on all 
nursing shifts, therefore covering all staff. The training should not be considered as altering the care. The care provided to persons with dementia remains the same (considered standard of care), the approach to getting that care will be optimized. Persons with dementia are frequently admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84321]/PES/nursing staff. The care provided will be the same, the training will simply enhance the care already provided. The hypothesis is that the personnel on the units that receive the training will have more confidence to provide this care.  Both the 
intervention and control units are already functioning, we are providing training to optimize the care. This study aims to evaluate whether the presence of PES is 
necessary to improve care for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84322]. It is important to note t hat this R21 is a feasibility, exploratory trial that will inform future larger 
efficacy trials.  
 
 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 4 of 39 3. INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND MATERIAL/PRELIMINARY STUDIES AND 
SIGNIFICANCE  
• Describe and provide the results of previous work by [CONTACT_69063] , including 
animal studies, laboratory studies, pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602] , pre-clinical and/or clinical studies 
involving the compound or device to be studied.  
• Include information as to why you are conducting the study and how the study differs from what  has been previously researched, including what the knowledge gaps are. 
• Describe the importance of the knowledge expected to result  
 
Patients with Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias (ADRD) are 
frequently admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407087]. Persons with 
dementia currently account for 3.2 million hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84324]; they have over three times more hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407088].
1–3,24 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84326] a seminal event that often lead s 
to delirium, lasting functional and cognitive impairment, institutionalization, premature death, increased resource consumption, and family caregiver (FCG) distress.
4–7,13,25 –[ADDRESS_513313] display behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD). For persons with dementia, the 
unfamiliar, complex environment of the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407089] (agitation, depression, apathy, repetitive 
questioning, psychosis, aggression, sleep problems, and wandering) that precipi[INVESTIGATOR_407090].
16,17 BPSD in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407091] (unmet 
needs, e.g. pain, fear, nutrition, toileting), hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84330] (stress, lack of dementia knowledge, communication issues), and environmental factors (lack of activity and structure).
17 There is a need for an intervention that addresses the 
multi- factorial contributants to BPSD . 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84331] (HCGs) are currently ill -prepared to prevent and manage 
BPSD.  HCGs are currently ill -prepared to prevent and manage BPSD and 
experience low jo b satisfaction, stress and burnout.10–14,32 –34 BPSD in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84332], all associated with adverse events and increased mortality.9,35– 40 The use 
of special observation (e.g. CO, sitters), usually performed by [CONTACT_84372], has 
been expanded for the management of older adults with behavioral symptoms.13,[ADDRESS_513314], CO by [CONTACT_84373] a clear understanding of their role results in poor patients outcomes.13,41,42 A 
National [LOCATION_006] audit found that less than 5% of acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407092] a third of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407093].
14 There is a need for innovative and prac tical 
approaches to improve dementia care of the acute care workforce.  
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513315]. The framework consists of four domains (social 
climate, care system 
processes, policies and procedures, physical 
design) and assumes 
that: (a) people cannot be understood apart 
from their environmental context, and (b) physical as well as social and 
organizational environments must be studied.
18–[ADDRESS_513316] to de velop BPSD, namely: policies and procedures (dementia 
education and training); physical design (environmental modifications including 
cohorting, use of common area, limit noise, lights); care system processes 
(increased staff ratio for non-medical needs with PES); and social climate 
(providing staff support to improve staff attitude and empathy with group 
sessions).20 
Scientific Premise. Persons with dementia occupy 25% of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84335].3 The 
quality of their care is a national concern.23,43 HCGs report lack of knowledge, 
skills and confidence in caring for people with dementia.10–[ADDRESS_513317] effective approaches to supporting HCG to deliver better care; two  review articles have suggested that patients and HCGs might benefit from 
increasing involvement of mental health staff who have chosen to work with patients with psychiatric conditions.
13,44 We pose that the PES -4-BPSD model, a 
multi-component interventio n of mental health assistants with dementia training on 
a dedicated unit, will decrease BPSD and improve HCG experience in caring for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84336] “enabling” milieu for both 
patients and HCG.  
Innovation. The status quo for caring for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84337], FCGs, and HCGs. Our proposal 
is innovative as it represents a substantive departure in the following ways: 1) it is 
the first study to explore the effectiveness of a new and enhanced model that adapts 
mental health assistants into Patient Engagement Specialists (PES) for the care of 

Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513318]; 2) this study focuses specifically on BPSD, 
which is a critical  outcome not only for patients, but also for FCGs and HCGs; and 
3) it evaluates a dementia training program that can be used in the real-world 
setting.  
Preliminary Studies. In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we demonstrated the feasibility of 
utilizing PES to provide care for acutely- ill patients with BPSD.15 Patients admitted 
to the intervention unit (with PES) had lower in-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_34380] (1.1% vs. 2.9%, p=.048) and decreased LOS (5.0 vs. 5.8 days, p=.004). They were also less likely to have an order for: constant or enhanced observation (12.0% vs. 45.8%, p<0.001 and 22.1% vs. 79.6%, p<0.001, respectively), benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651] (26.3% vs. 38.0%, p<.001), psychotropi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (41.2% vs. 54.0%, p<.001), and restraints (3.2% vs. 6.9%, p=0.01). Decreased LOS and use of CO (5.94 FTE reduction) resulted in cost 
benefits.   
 
 
4. OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESES  
• A concise statement of the goal(s) of the current study.  
• The rationale for and specific objectives of the study.  
• The goals and the hypothesis to be tested should be stated. 
 
We propose an NIA Stage I study of an innovative model of care that aims to 
reduce behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) during 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84338]’s Disease and Related Dementia (ADRD).   
 
Our long-term goal  is to implement and disseminate an innovative model of care, 
the PES -4-BPSD , which aims to reduce BPSD by [CONTACT_84374] (PES) to provide specialized dementia care for acutely -ill 
patients with ADRD. PES are mental health assistants with training in crisis prevention techniques, who provide care to psychiatric patients, under nursing 
supervision. On the intervention unit, which cohorts older patients with cognitive impairment and behavioral symptoms, these mental health assistants purposefully 
engage patients with BPSD, as an added layer of staff. In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we found 
that patients with cognitive impairment admitted to the PES unit were significantly 
less likely to require constant observation (CO) (12.0% vs. 45.8%, p<0.001), 
chemical (41.2% vs. 54.0%, p<.001) and physical restraints (3.2% vs. 6.9%, 
p=0.01), suggesting improved management of BPSD.
[ADDRESS_513319].  
 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513320]. Our 
central hypothesis  is that the PES -4-BPSD intervention will reduce BPSD by 
[CONTACT_84375] “enabling” milieu that addresses the 
factors leading to BPSD in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], namely: patient factors (unmet needs), 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84330] (lack of dementia knowledge, communication issues) and 
environme ntal factors (lack of activity and structure).16,17 Guided by a social-
ecological framework, the PES -4-BPSD model incorporates: policies and 
procedures (dementia education and training), physical design (environmental modifications -cohorting), care system processes (increased staffing -PES), and 
social climate (staff support).
18–[ADDRESS_513321] the added layer of PES staff, nurse assistants on the control unit will receive equivalent dementia training. Our 
multidisciplinary research team is well-positioned to complete the following aims: 
 
Aim 1: Determine the preliminary efficacy of the PES -4-BPSD intervention 
for reducing BPSD during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. We will conduct a non- randomized 
preliminary efficacy trial , enrolling N=158 patients (79 control and 79 
intervention). The primary outcome will be presence of BPSD as measured by a 
patient’s total score on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory -Questionnaire (NPI -Q ) 
during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].21 A multi- modal approach (chart review  and questionnaires) 
will be used to determine the presence and severity of BPSD. Secondary measures will include length of stay  (LOS), BPSD management practices during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
and family caregiver satisfaction on discharge.
[ADDRESS_513322] size estimates for a larger cluster -randomized trial.  
 
Aim 2: Evaluate whether dementia care training improves the perceived 
ability of nursing staff, PES staff (intervention) and nurse assistant staff 
(control) to care for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84315]. We will use survey methodology in a repeated measures design to evaluate within and between-group 
differences in attitudes, experience, and satisfaction toward managing patients with 
ADRD.
11,22 Measures will be completed at baseline (T1), immediately following 
training (T2), and at end of the intervention perio d (T3).  
  
5.  RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO CONDUCT THE HUMAN RESEARCH  
• Explain the feasibility of meeting recruitment goals of this project and demonstrate a potential for recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed recruitment period 
o How many potential subjects do you have access to? 
• Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are adequately informed about the protocol and their trial related duties and functions 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 8 of 39  
Aim 1: This study plans to enroll a n equal number of patients (n=79) from the 
control unit and from the intervention unit. This study predicts a 50% recruitment 
rate and approximately 158 patients and FCGs will be approached on each unit 
(316 in total). Based on our preliminary results, the median length of stay for 
persons with dementia in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77690] [ADDRESS_513323] 
Institute for Geriatric Nursing and the National Alzheimer Association publications “Try This: Best Practices in Nursing Care for Persons with Dementia,” and the “Person -Centred Care Training Programme for Acute Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (PCTAH)”, the 
PES staff will rece ive weekly 20 minute sessions.
32,34,51,52 Sessions will cover the 
following: types and impact of dementia, providing person- centered care, 
identification of and meeting people's emotional and physical needs, effective communication, connecting to the FCG, the impact of the physical environment, and redefining and supporting behaviors staff may describe as challenging. To 
ensure all PES receive training, sessions will be repeated during 3 shifts changes. Once recruitment begins, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84339] 20 minute group sessions, to reinforce traini ng and discuss challenging patient behaviors; meant to improve the 
attitude and empathy of HCGs towards patients. 
  
Aim 2: All nursing staff on both units, PES staff on the intervention unit and 
nursing assistants on the control unit are eligible to participate in the study. The 
control unit has a total of 40 nurses and 39 nurse assistants and the intervention unit 
has a total of 20 nurses and 21 PES personnel that are eligible to participate. 
Following approval by [CONTACT_84376]’s IRB, the research coordinator/ assistant  with no 
authority over the staff will directly approach eligible staff, nurses on both units, 
nursing assistants on the control units and PES personnel on the intervention unit, 
to participate in the study, emphasizing that participation is voluntary, with an 
option to opt out of the study at any point without repercussion/effect on the their 
employment. All information collected on employees will be restricted to the 
research team and will not be accessible or discussed with persons in supervisory 
positions. Their participation/non- participation will not affect their job at Northwell 
Health. Reimbursements of $25 will be offered over three installments 
corresponding to the completion of the two surveys at the three time points . A total 
of $75 will be given if completing the two surveys across the three time points.  
 
 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 9 of 39  
6.  RECRUITMENT METHODS  
• Describe the source of potential subjects 
• Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects 
• Describe any materials that will be used to recruit subjects.  A copy of any 
advertisements (flyers, radio scripts, etc.) should be submitted along with the 
protocol.  
• If monetary compensation is to be offered, this should be indicated in the protocol 
 
Aim 1 study plans to enroll an equal number of patients (n=79) from the control 
unit and from the intervention unit. This study predicts a 50% recruitment rate and 
approximately 158 patients and FCGs will be recruited  on each unit (316 in total). 
Based on our preliminary results, the median length of stay for persons with dementia in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77690] [ADDRESS_513324] in the study, daily NPI-Q collection via staff and EMR will begin . In addition, a follow-up phone call to the FCGs will occur 
within 48 hours of discharge to assess satisfaction with care. Therefore, attrition in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], once patients and FCGs are recruited should be minimal, as they will be in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Telephone numbers for the FCGs will be obtained on recruitment and verified on discha rge. FCG participants will be compensated a total of $30 for 
their participation ($20 at enrollment, $10 upon complete of the discharge follow-up) via ClinCard which will be given directly if interviewed in person or sent via mail if interviewed remotely.  
 For Aim 2 of our study, all nursing staff on both units, PES staff on the intervention unit and nursing assistants on the control unit are eligible to participate in the study. Following approval by [CONTACT_84376]’s IRB, the consenting investigator will directly approach eligible staff, nurses on both units, nurse assistants on the control units and PES personnel on the intervention unit, to participate in the study. Participants will be reimbursed for their time. Reimbursements of $25 will be offered over thre e 
installments (total $75) corresponding to the completion of the two surveys at the three time points.  
 
 
 
7.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA  
• Describe the characteristics of the subject population, including their anticipated number, age, ranges, sex, ethnic background, and health status. Identify the criteria for inclusion or exclusion of any subpopulation.  
• Explain the rationale for the involvement of special classes of subjects, such as fetuses, pregnant women, children, prisoners or other institutionalized individuals, or others who are likely to be vulnerable.   You cannot include these populations in your research, unless you indicate such in the protocol 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 10 of 39 • Similarly, detail exclusionary criteria: age limits, special populations (minors, 
pregnant women, decisionally  impaired), use of concomitant medications, subjects 
with other diseases, severity of illness, etc.  
 
Aim 1:  All patients [ADDRESS_513325] an acute medical admission to 
either the control unit (Geriatric Care Model) or intervention unit (PES -4-BPSD).  
Inclusion criteria: age 65 and above, FCG is English- speaking/reading, 
documentation of dementia in the medical record (based on ICD -9 codes) . For 
patients without a prior history of dementia documented in the EMR, an AD8 score of greater than or equal to 2 will be required. The AD8 is an eight item, informant -
based interview, used to screen for dementia. (57)  
 Exclusion criteria: patients who are known to be terminally ill and/or receiving hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84340]; LOS of less than [ADDRESS_513326] (based on ICD -9), FCG is not English- speaking/reading.  
 Aim 2: Inclusion criteria: All nursing staff (nurses on both units; PES  on the 
intervention unit ; and nursing assi stant staff on the control unit ).  
Exclusion criteria will include staff who decline to participate in the study and staff that are not  permane ntly based on either the intervention or control units  
 
 
 
8.  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS  
• Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally.  I f applicable, distinguish 
between the number of subjects who are expected to be pre -screened, enrolled 
(consent obtained), randomized and complete the research procedures.  
• If your study includes different cohorts, include the total number of subjects in each 
cohort. 
• If this is multisite study, include total number of subjects across all sites.   
 
Aim 1 of t he study plans to enroll n=158, an equal number of patients (n=79) from 
the control unit and from the intervention unit. 
 
Aim 2 of the study plans to enroll all nursing and PES staff on the intervention unit (n=21) and nursing and nursing assistants on the  control unit (n=26) who meet 
eligibility criteria.  
  
9. STUDY TIMELINES  
• Describe the duration of an individuals participation in the study  
• Describe the duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects  
• The estimated date of study completion  
 
Participants in Aim 1 of our study will be enrolled for their entire stay in the 
control or intervention unit. They will be followed -up within 48 hours after 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 11 of 39 discharge for a phone interview. The duration anticipated to enroll study subjects 
for Aim 1 is 12 months.  
 
Participants in Aim 2 of our study will be enrolled for 16 months. The duration anticipated to enroll study subjects for Aim 2 is 1 month.  
The proposed length of the study period will be 2 years.   
 
 
10.  ENDPOINTS  
• Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints  
• Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints  
 
Aim 1:  The primary endpoint of Aim 1 is the number, frequency, and severity of 
BPSD symptoms as assessed by [CONTACT_84377]- Ques tionnaire (NP I-Q) during a single acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063].  
Secondary endpoints will include length of stay, management practices of BPSD during stay on unit, and FCG satisfaction on discharge.  
 Aim 2: The primary endpoints will consist of whether :  
1) Baseline nurses, patient engagement  specialists (PES) and nurse assistant 
experience different with regard to caring for patients with dementia;  
2) Training improves the experience of nurses, PES and nurse assistant staff; and 
3) Nurses, PES and nurse assistant  staff differ in the how they respond to 
dementia care training.  
Secondary endpoints will include the interaction of the nurses, PES and nursing assistant demographics (age, sex, race, ethnicity, education, and work experience) position ( nurses vs. PES vs . nurse assistant) and previous exposure to dementia 
training on the attitude and satisfaction of staff.  
 
 
 
 
11.  RESEARCH PROCEDURES  
• Include a detailed description of all procedures to be performed on the research subject and the schedule for each procedure.  
• Include any screening procedures for eligibility and/or baseline diagnostic tests  
• Include procedures being performed to monitor subjects for safety or minimize risks  
• Include information about drug washout periods  
• If drugs or biologics are being administered provide information on dosing and route 
of administration  
• Clearly indicate which procedures are only being conducted for research purposes. 
• If any specimens will be used for this research, explain whether they are being collected specifically for research purposes.   
• Describe any source records that will be used to collect data about subjects  
• Indicate the data to be collecte d, including long term follow -up 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 12 of 39  
Aim 1:  Prior to patient recruitment, a [ADDRESS_513327] Institute for Geriatric Nursing and the National Alzheimer Association publications Try This: Best Practices in Nursing Care for Persons with Dementia, ACT on Alzheimers guide to dementia friendly hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], and the Person- Centred Care Training Programme for 
Acute Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (PCTAH), the research team will provide PES staff with weekly 20 minute sessions. The sessions will the following topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]: types and impact of dementia, providing person- centered care, identification of and meeting peoples 
emotional and physical needs, effective communication, connecting to the FCG, the impact of the physical environment, and redefining and supporting behaviors staff may describe as challenging. In order to ensure all staff get the training, sessions will be repeated 3 times per week during change of shift. Once patient recruitment begins, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84339] 20 minute group sessions, to reinforce training and discuss challenging patie nt behaviors.  
 Following the implementation of the dementia care training, eligible patients will be offered the opportunity to participate in the study. A waiver of consent will be obtained to pre -screen potential participants for age and history of dementia. For 
those eligible, the research coordinator /assistant  (RC/RA ) will contact [CONTACT_84378] (LAR) and FCG (who might be the same person) to provide study information and  offer the opportunity to participate.  If enrolled in 
person, written informed consent will be obtained in a private space and stored in a secure location. If enrolled via phone, verbal consent will be obtained and documented in REDCap and a copy of the consent will be mailed or emailed to the participant.  If FCG participant expresses interest in the study, daily NPI -Q 
collection via staff and EMR will begin.  Once a participant h as been enrolled in the 
study, demographic information will be obtained from the EMR and verified by [CONTACT_84379], including:  age, gender, race/ethnicity, marital  status, education, work status, 
current living situation, medical comorbidities, and reason for admission. A member of the research team will conduct a short interview with the FCG to verify patient background information and obtain baseline (1 month prior to admission) functional status (Barthel Index), dementia severity cognitive (Clinical Dementia Rating Scale)(5 stages of severity: no 0, questionable 0.5, mild 1, moderate 2, and severe 3), and behavioral symptoms using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI -Q). 
 
A member of the research team will then complete daily NPI -Qs to determine the 
number of behaviors and symptoms for each patient on a daily basis. The data collector will use a multi- modal approach drawing from electronic medical record 
(EMR) notes  and interviews with nursing staff regarding the patients behavior and 
treatment over the past 24 hours  (72 hours, if reviewing after a weekend ). Delirium 
will be assess ed daily by [CONTACT_941] R C using EMR keywords (e.g., forget, agitated) , 
which will be used as a covaria te. A final EMR chart review will be conducted 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 13 of 39 collection information such as length of stay, discharge disposition, in -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407094]: use of special 
observation (1:1 or enhanced), restraints, ps ychoactive medications, psychiatric 
evaluation. Within 48 hours of discharge, family caregivers (FCG) will be interviewed regarding satisfaction with care using the Carer Questionnaire Data from the National Audit of Dementia Round 3.  
 Aim 2:  Following rec ruitment into the study, participants will complete a short 
demographics survey. Participants will then complete the baseline (prior to training) surveys : Approaches to Dementia Questionnaire (ADQ ) and Staff 
Experience of Working with Demented Residents Sc ale (SEWDR ). The ADQ is a 
19-item scale designed to evaluate staff attitudes to people with dementia and 
providing dementia care.
22, [ADDRESS_513328] of ways to optimize the care already being provided (e.g. better ways to communicate with persons with dementia, way s to avoid restraints). The training 
will consist of [ADDRESS_513329] of weekly 20 minute sessions. The training is meant to improve the care for persons with dementia by [CONTACT_84371]. The training will not change/alter the care but simply optimize the care already being provided. The modules will be presented on both the intervention a nd control 
units to all nursing and NA/PES staff. The 7 modules will include: 1) overview of dementia and dementia care; 2) addressing unmet needs; 3) avoiding restraints; 4) communicating with persons with dementia; 5) delirium; 6) the impact of the physi cal environment; 7) connecting to the family caregiver. The dementia care 
training program is based on the John A. Hartford Institute for Geriatric Nursing 
and the National Alzheimer Association publications "Try This: Best Practices in 
Nursing Care for Pe rsons with Dementia", ACT on Alzheimer's guide to dementia 
friendly hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], and the Person- Centred Care Training Programme for Acute 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] (PCTAH).  
The in -service sessions will be given on all nursing shifts, therefore covering all 
staff. In order t o ensure all nursing, nurse assistants, and PES staff get the training, 
sessions will be repeated 3 times per week during shift change. The training is being given to everyone on the unit, but the research only involves those that provide consent. The staf f (nurses, NA and PES) that give consent will participate 
in Aim 2 (completing the survey at the 3 time points). Since all staff will get the in -
service sessions on both the intervention and control units, this should not “muddy 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 14 of 39 the waters” . The training s hould not be considered as altering the care. The care 
provided to persons with dementia remains the same (considered standard of care), 
the approach to getting that care will be optimized. Persons with dementia are frequently admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84321]/PES/nursing staff. The care provided will be the same, the training will simply enhance the care already provided. The hypothesis is that the personnel on the units that receive the training 
will have more confidence to provide this care.  
 
 
12.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
• Describe how your data will be used to test the hypotheses.  
• State clearly what variables will be tested and what statistical tests will be used.  
• Include sample size calculations.  
• If this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], state which variables will be examined for hypothesis generation in later studies.   
Aim 1:  Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) will be used to compare the primary 
outcome (mean NPI -Q total score) between intervention and control pati ents. 
Significance will be evaluated based on a two -sided test, with α=.05. To control for 
potential confounding, the model will include a set of covariates selected a priori (patient age, gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, CCI, LOS, days of delirium, dementia severity, baseline NPI -Q score for the month prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063], 
and NPI -Q score from ED to arrival on the unit). Based on a two- sample t -test and 
a type I error rate of .05, a sample size of [ADDRESS_513330] 80% power to detect a difference of 3 units in mean NPI -Q score, assuming the 
outcome has a sd of 6.0. A mean difference of 3 has been shown to be clinically significant. It has been shown that ANCOVA comparing groups of (1 -R2) ∙n 
subjects has the same power as a t -test comparing n subjects, where R2 equals the 
multiple correlation between the selected covariates and the outcome variable (R2 ranges from 0- 1). We will enroll 79 patients per group (158 total) in order to 
account for 20% attrition. Differences in the intervention effect across patient subgroups will be assessed individually by [CONTACT_407097]. We will assess wh ether sex, race, age, 
delirium days, and dementia severity modify the intervention effect for the primary NPI-Q score.  
As a secondary analysis, we will compare intervention and control patients on the mean number of NPI -Q behaviors (range 0- 12) occurring during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84342]. Secondary BPSD management outcomes (i.e. use of restraints, CO, etc.) will be treated as binary (yes/no) variables and compared between intervention and control patients using logistic regression. Differences  in 
LOS will be assessed based on a Cox proportional hazards regression model. Poisson regression will be employed to assess differences in the mean number of delirium days. Regression models for secondary outcomes will be adjusted for the covariates descr ibed previously. The difference in the proportion of intervention 
and control patients treated with antipsychotics will be assessed with a chi -square 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513331]. Differences in FCG satisfaction between intervention and control will be 
assessed based on responses  to question 8 of the National Audit of Dementia Carer 
questionnaire (“Overall, how would you rate the care received by [CONTACT_84381][INVESTIGATOR_4408]?”). Patient responses (excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor) will be compared using the Mann- Whitney U test. Lastly, we 
will report study feasibility measures that will be used to inform the planning of a future multi- site trial of the PES -4-BPSD intervention, namely: 1) number/percent 
of intervention and control unit patients meeting study eligibility criteria; 2) recruitment rate; 3) attrition rate 4) mean and standard deviation of the primary outcome (NPI -Q total score).  
 
Aim 2:  We will provide descriptive statistics to summarize the demographic 
characteristics of nurses, PES and nursing assistants. For each measurement scale, 
we will perform a two -factor mixed ANOVA where ADQ/SEWDR score is the 
within subject factor having 3 levels (T1, T2, T3), and group is the between subject factor having 3 levels ( nurses, PES, nurse assistant). We will assess the 
significance of the interaction between the two factors in order to determine whether nurses, PES and nurse assistant staff differ in their change in ADQ/SEWDR scores across the [ADDRESS_513332] hoc tests will be used to compare scor es between nurses, PES and nurse assistants at T1, and to assess 
whether the scores of each group differ across the 3 time points.   
  
13. SPECIMEN BANKING  
• If specimens will be banked for future research, describe where the specimens will be stored, how long t hey will be stored, how they will be accessed and who will have 
access to the specimens  
• List the information that will be stored with each specimen, including how specimens are labeled/coded  
• Describe the procedures to release the specimens, including:  the process to request 
release, approvals required for release, who can obtain the specimens, and the 
information to be provided with the specimens.  
 
N/A 
 
 
14.  DATA MANAGEMENT AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
• Describe the data and specimens to be sent out or received.  As applicable, describe:  
o What information will be included in that data or associated with the 
specimens?  
o Where and how data and specimens will be stored? 
o How long the data will be stored? 
o Who will have access to the data? 
o Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of data and specimens?  
• Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use and transmission.  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 16 of 39  
The principal investigator ([CONTACT_84396]), co -investigator ([CONTACT_84397]), 
and research team will be responsible for maintaining our data and maintaining 
security. We will use standard IRB -approved and HIPAA- compliant measures to 
maintain confidentiality, privacy and data security. Data privacy and security procedures will include: (1) training staff on data sensitivity and protocols for safeguarding confidentiality, (2) storing and processing sensitive hardcopy in a secured, centralized location, (3) securing sensitive hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_84349], (4) removing names, addresses, and other di rect identifiers from 
hardcopy and computer- readable data when they are no longer necessary for patient 
tracking and then using encrypted codes for subsequent identification of participants, (5) destroying all identifiable linkages to data after data accur acy has 
been verified and final analyses have been completed, (6) capturing and storing follow- up assessments in REDCap, a secure web -based HIPAA compliant 
application designed to support data capture for research studies, and (7) using restricted logon identification and password protection computer protocols for all computerized entry, retrieval, and analysis. We have developed a clear and concise privacy and security plan. Northwell is well suited to develop such a plan as we are currently engaging in si milar health technology projects that secure the electronic 
submittal of health information from patient to health system . 
 
 
15.  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN 
 
A specific data and safety monitoring plan is only required for greater than minimal risk research.  For guidance on creating this plan, please see the  Guidance Document
 on the 
HRPP website . 
 Part I – this part should be completed for all studies that require a DSMP.   Part II – This part should be completed when your study needs a Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee (DSMB/C) as  part of your Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan.   
 
Part I:  Elements of the Data and Safety Monitoring Plan 
•  Indicate who will perform the data and safety monitoring for this study.   
• Justify your choice of monitor, in terms of assessed risk to the research subject’ s 
health and well being.  In studies where the monitor is independent of the study staff, 
indicate the individual’ s credentials, relationship to the PI, and rationale for selection 
• List the specific items that will be monitored for safety (e.g. adverse events, protocol 
compliance, etc)  
• Indicate the frequency at which accumulated safety and data informat ion (items listed 
in # above) will be reviewed by [CONTACT_2037] (s) or the DSMB/C.   
• Where applicable, describe rules which will guide interruption or alteration of the 
study design.   
• Where applicable, indicate dose selection procedures that will be used to minimize 
toxicity.  
• Should a temporary or permanent suspension of your study occur, in addition to the IRB, indicate to whom will you report the occurrence.   
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513333] is a low -risk study. The study team will review the data on a 
weekly basis.  The work will be conducted with approval from the Human Research 
Protection Program (HRPP) . 
 
As per Northwell Health HRPP  policies, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84344]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_84345]. The procedures of this study, such as regular meetings with resear ch staff, will ensure discussion and reporting of all possible 
outcomes including any, though unlikely, adverse events. If the adverse event is due to the study and is unexpected, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_9965] a safety report and send a copy to the HRPP . The HRPP  comm ittee will serve as an objective review mechanism. 
This policy/procedure means that any potential conflict of interest inherent in the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84346].  
Plans for assuring adherence with requirements regarding the reporting of adverse 
events (AEs).  All serious AEs (e.g., medical occurrences resulting in death) that 
occur during the study defined by [CONTACT_62325], regardless of the relation to 
the research, must be reported to the HRPP  by [CONTACT_756], e -mail, or fax within 24 
hours of the investigator’s awareness of the occurrence of the event. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_84347]. These initial reports are followed by a safety report which is a  written 
account of the serious AE determined by a sponsor/investigator to be both related to the treatment under investigation and to be unexpected in nature. Serious AEs 
will be summarized annually in the HRPP  application for continuation or 
termination of research.  All expected non- serious AEs that occur at a greater 
frequency or severity than anticipated and all unexpected non- serious AEs will be 
reported to the HRPP  within 15 working days of the investigators becoming aware 
of the event. These AEs are also summarized annually in the HRPP  application for 
continuation or termination of the research.  
 
 
Part II:  Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee  
  
•  When appropriate, attach a description of the DSMB.   
• Provide the number of members and area of professional expertise.   
• Provide confirmation that the members of the board are all independent of the study. 
 
We plan to use a Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC) for this study. A SMC will 
be created to provide oversight and monitoring to ensure the safety of participants and the integrity of the data. Upon review and approval by [CONTACT_84382] R esearch (NINR) Program Official (PO), we plan the SMC to be chaired 
by a researcher (Renee Pekmezaris, PhD) who has extensive expertise in data safety and monitoring, clinical trials, and dementia caregiving research including bioethical considerations. The additional members of the DMSB will include a biostatisticians (Cristina Sison, PhD) who has experience on a SMC, a geriatrician (Gisele Wolf -Klein, MD) with extensive experience in care of older adults with 
dementia and a senior administrative manager  for research ( Tiffany Harvin , MBA). 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513334](s) and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84348].  
  
16. WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
• Describe anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn from the research without their consent  
• Describe procedures for orderly termination 
• Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the research, including part ial withdrawal from procedures with continued data collection.   
 
Subjects will not be withdrawn from the study (both Aim 1 and Aim 2) without 
their consent.  
Aim 1: Patients do not have ability to remove themselves from the intervention unit, but can choose to not participate in the study and withdraw from the study at any point, even following discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. If they do opt out, the treatment will not be altered in any way. On the control unit, patients and FCGs still benefit for dementia car e training for nurse assistant staff. While patients and 
FCGs cannot remove themselves from the unit, they can decline to participate in the study and can withdraw at any point, even after discharge.  
Aim 2: While nurses, PES and NA personnel cannot remove themselves from the intervention or control units, they can choose not to participate in the study and can withdraw at any point throughout the entire study. This will not alter their job in any way. If a nurse, PES or NA choose from withdraw from the study, data on the patients they are caring for may still be collected. This should not interfere with 
their job in any way.  
  
17. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
• Describe any potential risks and discomforts to the subject (physical, psychological, social, legal, or other) and assess their likelihood and seriousness and whether side effects are reversible. Where appropriate, describe alternative treatments and proce dures that might be advantageous to the subjects.  
• Include risks to others , like sexual partners (if appropriate)  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 19 of 39 • Discuss why the risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits 
and in relation to the importance of the knowledge that may reasonably be expected to results  
• Describe the procedures for protecting against or minimizing any potential risks, including risks to confidentiality, and assess their likely effectiveness.   
 
Aim 1:  Risks to subjects  
The primary potential risk of participating in this study is breach of confidentiality. 
Northwell Health and the research team will take all possible steps to ensure the 
security of the collected information. Inclusion in the intervention unit does not 
qualify as more than minimal risk because all standard of care practices are still 
present on the unit; the implementation of the intervention only adds an additional 
layer of trained healthcare professionals whose presence has been shown to be 
beneficial. Patients do not have ability to remove themselves from the intervention 
unit, but can choose to not participate in the study and withdraw from the study at 
any point, even following discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. If they do opt out, the 
treatment will not be a ltered in any way. On the control unit, patients and FCGs 
still benefit for dementia care training for nurse assistant staff. While patients and 
FCGs cannot remove themselves from the unit, they can decline to participate in 
the study and can withdraw at any point, even after discharge. If the RC observes 
concerning behavior, s he will alert the nurse or another staff member immediately. 
If the RC is called by [CONTACT_102], the RC will alert the unit staff. The RC will have 
direct telephone numbers to [CONTACT_84398] (PI) and [CONTACT_84399]- Cohen (clinical 
psychologist) and can contact [CONTACT_84383]. 
Aim [ADDRESS_513335] any adverse events directly 
attributable to the presence of the PES -4-BPSD intervention on the unit or with the 
dementi a care training for nurse assistant staff on the control unit.  
 The primary risk of this study is loss of confidentiality. The researchers take the issue of confidentiality very seriously.  IRB-approved and HIPAA compliant measures will be used to maintain patient confidentiality, privacy and data security. Extensive efforts will be undertaken to maintain study participants’ confidentiality and privacy. All study materials will be stored in locked file cabinets to which only study personnel will have acces s. 
 Northwell Health has policies and procedure in place to protect ePHI with reasonable administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the PHI and to prevent unauthorized and inappropriate access, use or disclosure of the data. Along with the organizational administrative, technical and physical safeguards and IRB approved measures, data privacy, security and confidentiality activities will include but not limited to -  
 Training staff on data sensitivity and protocols for safeguarding confidentiality;  
 Storing and processing sensitive hardcopy in a secured, centralized location;  
 Securing sensitive hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_84349]; which only study 
personnel wil l have access.   
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513336] identifiers from hardcopy and 
computer-readable data when they are no longer necessary for patient tracking and 
then using encrypted codes for subsequent identification of participants;  
 Destroyi ng all identifiable linkages to data after data accuracy has been verified 
and final analyses have been completed (Disposal Policy for Protected Health and Confidential Health System Information – policy no 800.47); and  
 Using restricted logon identification and password protection computer protocols for all computerized entry, retrieval, and analysis. 
 Additionally, all personnel will be instructed in the ethics of electronic data access.  All database servers are housed in Northwell Health’s secure data center and are subject to institutional policies on security, backup, recovery and control.  Passwords for data files are managed in accordance with institutional policies.  
Aim 2: Risks to subjects  
The primary risk to the nursing staff, PES staff and nurse assistant staff participating in the study is a breach in confidentiality. However, to protect subjects’ privacy all data will be de -identified and stored on HIPPA compliant 
drives or applications such as REDCap.  There is a risk of a n egative impact on mood, anxiety levels, and emotions of 
participants due to the increased stress of being asked to evaluate their own care abilities and experiences. To address this, the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_84350]- site clinical 
psychologist ([CONTACT_84400]- Cohen) will  be available to provide staff support. 
The training and support provided to both groups (nurses, PES and nurse assistants) is anticipated to increase staff self -efficacy and experience in caring for patients 
with dementia.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_513337] Risk 
The researchers take the issue of confidentiality very seriously.  IRB-approved and HIPAA compliant measures will be used to maintain patient confidentiality, privacy and data security. Extensive efforts will be undertaken to maintain study participants’ confidentiality and privacy. All study materials will be stored electronically and in locked file cabinets to which only study personnel will have access.  
 Northwell Health has policies and procedure in place to protect ePHI with reasonable administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the PHI and to prevent unauthorized and inappropriate access, use or disclosure of the data. Along with the organizational administrative, technical and physical safeguards and IRB approved measures, data privacy, security and confidentiality activities will include but not limited to -  
 Training staff on data sensitivity and protocols for safeguarding confidentiality;  
 Storing and processing sensitive hardcopy in a secured, centralized location;  
 Securing sensitive hardcopi[INVESTIGATOR_84349]; which only study 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513338] identifiers from hardcopy and 
computer -readable data when they are no longer necessary for patient tracking and 
then using encrypted codes for subsequent identification of participants;  
 Destroying all identifiable linkages to data after data accuracy has been verified and final analyses have been completed (Disposal Policy for Protected Health and Confidential Health System Information – policy no 800.47); and  
 Using restricted log on identification and password protection computer protocols 
for all computerized entry, retrieval, and analysis.  
 Additionally, all personnel will be instructed in the ethics of electronic data access.  All database servers are housed in Northwell Health’ s secure data center and are 
subject to institutional policies on security, backup, recovery and control.  
Passwords for data files are managed in accordance with institutional policies. 
 
 
 
 
 18. RESEARCH RELATED HARM/INJURY  
• Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that subjects might need as a result of anticipated problems that may be known to be associated with the research.  
• If the research is greater than minimal risk, explain any medical treatments that are available if research -related injury occurs, who will provide it, what will be provided, 
and who will pay for it.   
 
We do not expect any adverse events directly attributable to the presence of the 
PES-4-BPSD intervention on the unit or with the dementia care training for nurse 
assistant staff on the control unit. 
 The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_84350] -site clinical psychologist ([CONTACT_84400] -Cohen) will be 
available to provide psychological resources to Aim [ADDRESS_513339] on mood, anxiety levels, and emotions of participants due to the increased stress of being asked to evaluate their own care abilities and experiences . 
 
While we do not anticipate any adverse events,  in the case of a study -related 
adverse event, in accordan ce with Northwell Health guidelines, this protocol will 
employ the following mechanisms for adverse event reporting: 1) alert IRB of any 
and all reports of adverse events; 2) inform all members of the study team of any and all reports of adverse events. If  three or more adverse events are reported, the 
study team will assess potential causes of the adverse events and, if events are clearly linked to study participation, discontinue the study. 
 
 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 22 of 39 19. POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Explain what benefits might be  derived from participation in the study, noting in 
particular the benefit over standard treatment (e.g. a once -a-day administration 
instead of four times a day, an oral formulation over an IV administration).  
• Also state if there are no known benefits to subjects, but detail the value of knowledge 
to be gained  
Aim 1:  
The presence of PES personnel on the intervention unit has been shown to be beneficial to patient care in a prior study.
16 For the control unit, dementia care 
training has not been associated with any harm to patients, FCGs, or HCGs and can potentially improve care.  
 Aim 2 : 
Nurses, PES and nurse assistants who choose to participate in this study will benefit from training tha t is directly relevant to their employment. The 
implementation of this model aims to improve the experience of HCGs in caring for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84322] – by [CONTACT_84384] d ementia. Patients on the 
intervention unit will benefit from the presence of staff that have been specifically trained in the management of BPSD and the care of patients with ADRD . 
 
 
 
 20. PROVISIONS TO PROTECT PRIVACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the meth ods used to identify potential research subjects, obtain consent and 
gather information about subjects to ensure that their privacy is not invaded.  
• In addition consider privacy protections that may be needed due to communications with subjects (such as phone messages or mail).   
 
 Aim 1:  
A waiver of consent will be obtained to pre -screen potential participants for age 
and history of dementia or nurse report of confusion. Patients will be identified as being potential participants through either the electronic records system or nurse report . No PHI will be shared; all information will only be linked to a unique 
number that cannot be traced back to the participant. For those eligible, the research coordinator (RC) will  contact [CONTACT_84385] (LAR) 
and FCG (who might be the same person) to provide study information and offer the opportunity to participate. Patient information will be password protected and kept on a PHI protected file on the health system’s server. This database is password protected and HIPAA compliant. All hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_84351] (such as the original consents) will be kept in a locked cabinet that only the Northwell 
Health research staff will be able to access.  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 23 of 39  
Aim 2: All nurse s on the control and intervention units as well as nursing assistants 
on the control unit and PES personnel on the intervention unit will be eligible to 
participate in the study. Potential participants will be informed of the study.  
 
Consent for both aims will be obtained in a private space.     
 
  
21.  COSTS TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe any foreseeable  costs that subjects may incur through participation in the 
research  
• Indicate whether research procedures will be billed to insurance or paid for by [CONTACT_84386].    
 
n/a 
 
  
22. PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS  
 
• Describe the amount of payment to subjects, in what form payment will be received and the timing of the payments.    
FCG participants will be compensated a total of $30 for their participation ($20 at 
enrollment, $10 upon complete of the discharge follow -up) via ClinCard which will 
be given directly if interviewed in person or sent via mail if interviewed remotely . 
 
Reimbursements of $25 will be offered to participants of Aim 2 over three installments (total $75) corresponding to the completion of the two s urveys at the 
three time points  (baseline, after training, and at end of intervention .   
 
 
23.  CONSENT PROCESS  
 
If obtaining consent for this study, describe:  
• Who will be obtaining consent  
• Where consent will be obtained 
• Any waiting period available between informing the prospective participant and obtaining consent  
• Steps that will be taken to assure the participants’ understanding 
• Any tools that will be utilized during the consent process  
•   Information about how the consent will be documented in writing.  If using a  standard consent form, indicate such.   
• Procedures for maintaining informed consent.   
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 24 of 39 Aim 1:  
A waiver of consent will be obtained to pre -screen potential participants for age 
and history of dementia or nurse report of confusion. For those eligible, the 
research coordinator (RC) will  contact [CONTACT_84385] 
(LAR) and FCG (who might be the same person) to provide study information 
and offer the opportunity to participate. If the LAR is not present, the EMR will 
be reviewed for contact [CONTACT_84387]. The research team member wil l offer the participant’s  LAR  a study packet  in person 
or electronically via email link to REDCap  (study information, a copy of the 
consent form, research team contact [CONTACT_15750]), explain all aspects of the study, and state that participation of the study is voluntary, that the participant or his or her legal representative may opt out at any time, and that the  decision to 
decline to participate or to opt out will not affect the patient’s treatment. If FCG 
participant expresses interest in the study, daily NPI -Q collection via staff and 
EMR will begin.  If enrolled in person, w ritten informed consent will be 
obtained in a private space and stored in a secure location. If enrolled via 
phone, verbal consent will be obtained and documented in REDCap and a copy of the consent will be mailed or emailed to the participant. FCGs, who may or may not be the same person as the LAR, will be consented in the same manner . 
Once consented, the Research Coordinator /Research Assistant  will proceed 
with research surveys.  In the future, we may publish results of this study in 
scientific journals and may present it at scientific meetings. If we do, we will not identify the subject.  All data included in the publication will be de -
identified.  
 
Aim 2: The consenting investigator will directly approach eligible staff nurses on both units, nursing assistants on the control unit and PES personnel on the intervention unit, to participate in the study. Potential participants will be informed of the study. The investigator will emphasize that the study is voluntary, that the participant has the right to opt out of the study at any point without repercussion, and that the decision to decline to participate or to opt out 
of the study will not in any way affect their employment. Consent will be requested by a member of the research team  trained in Northwell Health’s 
consent procedures . The RC wi ll be someone who could not be interpreted to 
be in a position of power or influence over the participant  
 
 
In the state of NY, any participants under the age of 18 are considered children.  If your study involves children, additional information should be provided to describe:  
• How parental permission will be obtained  
• From how many parents will parental permission be obtained 
• Whether permission will be obtained from individuals other than parents, and if so, who will be allowed to provi de permission.  The process used to determine 
these individual’s authority to consent for the child should be provided  
• Whether or not assent will be obtained from the child 
• How will assent be documented  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 25 of 39 • Whether child subjects may be expected to attain legal age to consent to the 
procedures for research prior to the completion of their participation in the research.  If so, describe the process that will be used to obtain their legal consent to continue participation in the study.  Indicate what will occur i f consent 
is not obtained from the now -adult subjects.   
 
n/a 
 
 
If the study involves cognitively impaired adults, additional information should be provided to describe:  
• The process to determine whether an individual is capable of consent  
• Indicate who wil l make this assessment  
• The plan should indicate that documentation of the determination  and assessment will be placed in the medical record, when applicable, in addition to the research record.  
• If permission of a legally authorized representative will be obtained, 
o  list the individuals from who permission will be obtained in order of priority  
o Describe the process for assent of subjects; indicate whether assent will be 
required of all, some or none of the subjects.  If some, which subjects will be required to assent and which will not.  
o If assent will not be obtained from some or all subjects, provide an explanation as to why not  
o Describe whether assent will be documented and the process to document assent  
o Indicate if the subject could regain capacity and at what point you would obtain their consent for continued participation in the s tudy 
 
 
The Comprehension Assessment Form was initially being used to determine whether an individual was capable of consenting to participate in the study; however, due to the requirement for documented history of dementia and the severe nature of the illn ess, patients are unable to understand and give 
consent. Therefore, it would be least disruptive to the patient to forgo the Comprehension Assessment Form and for the RC to go directly to the LAR to present study information and obtain consent. All patient  observations 
are obtained through family caregiver, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84313], and electronic 
medical records as to not disrupt the patient.  
 
 
If the study will enroll non -English speaking subjects:  
• Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by [CONTACT_40228]  
• Indicate whether or not consent forms will be translated into a language other than English  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 26 of 39 • Describe the process to ensure that the oral and written information provided 
to those subjects will be in that language 
• If non-English speaking subjects will be excluded, provide a justification for doing so  
na 
 
 
24.  WAIVER OR ALTERATION OF THE CONSENT PROCESS         N/A          
 
Complete this section if you are seeking an alteration or complete waiver of the consent   process.  
• Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to the subject:   
• Explain why the waiver/ alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects 
• Explain why it is impracticable to conduct this research if informed consent is required   
• Explain why it is not possible to conduct this research without using the information or biospecimens in an identifiable form 
• If appropriate, explain how the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent information after participation.   If not appropriate to do so, explain why.  
 
We are seeking a waiver of consent to pre -screen potential participants for age 
and history of dementia; patients will be identified as being potential 
participants through the electronic records system. Once potential part icipants 
have been identified and express interest in the study, daily NPI- Q collection 
via staff and EMR will begin.  If enrolled in person, written informed consent 
will be obtained in a private space or through REDCap (if contact[CONTACT_14901]) and stored in a secure location. If enrolled via phone, verbal consent will be obtained and documented in REDCap and a copy of the consent will be mailed  or emailed to the participant. FCGs, who may or may not be the same 
person as the LAR, will be consented in the same manner In the future, we may publish results of this study in scientific journals and may present it at scientific meetings. If we do, we will not identify the subject.   All data 
included in the publication will be de -identified.   
 
Complete this section if you are obtaining informed consent but you are requesting a waiver of the documentation of consent (i.e., verbal consent will be obtained). To proceed with a waiver based on these criteria, each subject must be asked whether they wish to have documentation linking them to this study.  Only complete subsection 1 OR  
subsection 2.  
 
  SUBSECTION 1   
• Explain how the only record linking the subj ect to the research would be the 
consent document. 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 27 of 39 • Explain how the principal risk of this study would be the potential harm resulting 
from a breach in the confidentiality 
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement regarding the research.  
 
N/A 
 
SUBSECTION 2  
•  Describe the possible risks of harm to the subjects involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk.   
• Confirm that the research only involves procedure for which consent is not normally required outside the research context.  
• Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement regarding the research. 
 
We do not anticipate any risk of harm to the subjects . The study involves no 
more than minimal risk because all standard of care practices are still present on the unit; the implementation of the intervention unit only adds an additional layer of trained healthcare professionals whose presence has been shown to be beneficial.  The primary risk of this study is loss of confidentiality. The 
researchers take the issue of confidentiality very seriously.  IRB- approved and 
HIPAA compliant measures will be used to maintain patient confidentiality, privacy and data security. Extensive efforts will be undertaken to maintain study participants’ confidentiality and privacy. REDCap will be used to store 
data.  
 
. 
 
25. WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION      N/A       
 
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a full waiver of HIPAA authorization to use 
and/or disclose protected health information.  
• Describe the risks to privacy involved in this study and explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to privacy:   
• Describe your plan to protect identifiers from improper use or disclosure and to destroy them at the earliest time.  
•  Indicate why it is  not possible to seek subjects’ authorization for use or 
disclosure of PHI. 
• Indicate why it is  not possible to conduct this research without use or disclosure 
of the PHI.   
• Indicate if PHI will be disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, and if so, to whom.   Note:  PHI disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, without HIPAA authorization needs to be tracked. Please see guidance at www.nslij.com/irb
 for information 
about tracking disclosures. 
 
N/A 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 28 of 39  
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a partial waiver of the patient’s 
authorization for screening/recruitment purposes (i.e., the researcher does not have access to patient records as s/he is not part of the covered entity) 
Note: Information collected through a partial waiver for recruitment cannot be shared 
or disclosed to any other person or entity. 
• Describe how data will be collected and used:  
• Indicate why you need the PHI  (e.g.PHI is required to determine eligibility, 
identifiers are necessary to contact [CONTACT_69073], other) 
• Indicate why  the research cannot practicably be conducted without the partial waiver (e.g. no access to medical records or contact [CONTACT_69074], no treating clinician to assist in recruitment of the study population, other) 
Data will be collected from electronic health records. PHI is needed to 
determine eligibility of potential subjects, identifiers are necessary to contact 
[CONTACT_84388].  
 
 
26.  VULNERABLE POPULATIONS:  
 Indicate whether y ou will include any of these vulnerable populations. If indicated, 
submit the appropriate appendix to the IRB for review:  
  Children or viable neonate  
  Cognitively impaired  
  Pregnant Women, Fetuses or neonates of uncertain viability or nonviable  
  Prisoners  
  NSLIJ Employees, residents, fellows, etc  
  poor/uninsured  
  Students  
  Minorities  
  Elderly  
  Healthy Controls  
 If any of these populations are included in the study, describe additional safeguards that will be used to protect their rights and welfare.  
Informed consent will be obtained from the LAR/FCG  of all patients participating in 
the study prior to any information gathering (except for 4 pre- screening items). Patients 
will be identified as being potential participants through the EMR (based on age and  
history of dementia). The research coordinator, trained in Northwell Health’s consent procedures will approach the LAR  and FCG on the medical unit (or contact [CONTACT_84389], if unavailable in person during research hours). The person obtaining consent will discuss the study with the patient’s legal representative to obtain consent. If the 
LAR is not present, the EMR will be reviewed for contact [CONTACT_84390]:  03/01/2021   Page 29 of 39 the LAR via phone.  The research team member will offer the participant 's legally 
authorized representative (LAR) a study packet (study information, a copy of the 
consent form, research team contact [CONTACT_15750]), explain all aspects of the study, and state that participation of the study is voluntary, that the participant or his or her legal representative may opt out at any time, and that the decision to decline to participate or 
to opt out will not affect the patient’s treatment. If enrolled in person, w ritten informed 
consent will be obtained in a private space and stored in a secure location. If enrolled 
via phone, verbal consent will be obtained and documented in REDCap and a copy of the consent will be mailed or emailed to the participant. FCGs, who may or may not be the same person as the LAR, will be consented in the same manner.  
 While an  individual with dementia is at increased risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_407095], the intervention and control units do not pose an increased risk. Inclusion in the intervention and control units does not qualify as  more than minimal risk because all standard of care practices are still 
present on the unit; the implementation of the intervention unit only adds an additional layer of trained healthcare professionals whose presence has been shown to be beneficial. Pati ents do not have ability to remove themselves from the intervention 
unit, but can choose to not participate in the study and withdraw from the study at any point, even following discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. If they do opt out, the treatment will not be alt ered in any way. On the control unit, patients and FCGs still benefit f rom 
dementia care training for nurse assistant staff. While patients and FCGs cannot remove themselves from the unit, they can decline to participate in the study and can withdraw at an y point, even after discharge. If the RC observes concerning behavior, 
he will alert the nurse or another staff member immediately. If the RC is called by [CONTACT_102], the RC will alert the unit staff. The RC will have direct telephone numbers to [CONTACT_407099] ni (PI) and [CONTACT_84399]- Cohen (clinical psychologist) and can contact [CONTACT_84391].  
 We do not expect any adverse events directly attributable to the presence of the PES -4-
BPSD intervention on the unit or with the dementia care training for nurse assist ant 
staff on the control unit. While the RC will be on the intervention and control units to collect NPI -Q information, they will not have any direct interactions with the patients. 
If the RC observes concerning behavior, she will alert the nurse or anothe r staff 
member immediately. If the RC is called by [CONTACT_102], the RC will alert the unit staff. 
The RC will have direct telephone numbers to [CONTACT_84398] (PI) and [CONTACT_84399] -Cohen 
(clinical psychologist) and can contact [CONTACT_84383]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_84353].  
 
The primary risk of this study is loss of confidentiality. The researchers take the issue of confidentiality very seriously.  IRB -approved and HIPAA compliant measures will 
be used to maintain patient confidentiality, privacy and data security. Extensive e fforts 
will be undertaken to maintain study participants’ confidentiality and privacy. Only study team members that are on the Institutional Review Board (IRB) approved 
protocol will have access to the data that will be saved on a secured Northwell Health 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513340]. Individuals will be provided with a simple and timely means to access the 
collected data. They will meet the minimum and mandatory requirement to access the 
identifiable information as per the standards set by [CONTACT_84392]. Access and use of the  data will be strictly monitored by [CONTACT_079] (PI) and the research 
team. Northwell Health’s Administrative Policy and Procedure Manual policy number 800.42 titled Confidentiality of Protected Health Information particularly addresses the access and use of the electronic protected health information (ePHI). The purpose of this policy is to establish the general requirements for protecting the confidentiality of protected health information (PHI) while allowing the use, access and disclosure  for 
the purpose of providing high quality care at Northwell Health. PHI is any oral, written or electronic individually identifiable health information collected or stored by a facility. PHI includes also any demographic information and any information that relates to past, present or future physical or mental condition of an individual. 
 
Northwell Health has policies and procedure in place to protect ePHI with reasonable 
administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to ensure the confidentiality, 
integrity and availability of the PHI and to prevent unauthorized and inappropriate 
access, use or disclosure of the data. Along with the organizational administrative, technical and physical safeguards and IRB approved measures, data privacy, security and co nfidentiality activities will include but not limited to -   
1. Training staff on data sensitivity and protocols for safeguarding confidentiality;  
2. Storing and processing sensitive hardcopy in a secured, centralized location;  
3. Securing sensitive hardc opi[INVESTIGATOR_84349]; which only study 
personnel will have access.   4. Removing names, addresses, and other direct identifiers from hardcopy and 
computer -readable data when they are no longer necessary for patient tracking and then 
using encrypted codes for subsequent identification of participants;  
5. Destroying all identifiable linkages to data after data accuracy has been verified 
and final analyses have been completed (Disposal Policy for Protected Health and Confidential Health Syste m Information – policy no 800.47); and  
6. Using restricted logon identification and password protection computer 
protocols for all computerized entry, retrieval, and analysis.  Additionally, all personnel will be instructed in the ethics of electronic dat a access. 
Everything will follow the strict Health care Information and Technology – Privacy 
and Security rules, regulations, policies and procedures, and protocols established at Northwell Health based on the industry standards. Application and data acces s will be 
controlled by [CONTACT_84393]. It is the policy of 
the health system to use encryption safeguards on Sensitive and Highly Sensitive data 
as defined in the Data Classification Policy (900.12), such as ePHI, to ensure data 
authenticity and integrity where reasonable and appropriate, and in accordance with 
applicable laws and regulations.   
The purpose of the Data Encryption and Integrity Policy (900.25) from the administrative policy and procedure manual is to s tate what cryptographic techniques 
are acceptable and how cryptography will be used at Northwell Health.  
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 31 of 39  
Facility Access Controls Policy (100.99) identifies the security plan to safeguard its 
facilities from unauthorized physical access and to safeguard the equipment from unauthorized physical access, tampering, and theft while ensuring that environmental safeguards are in place to protect the confidentiality, access and integrity of protected health information as commensurate with data criticality and r isk assessment. This is to 
ensure and prevent from unauthorized physical access and to safeguard the equipment and business documents including, but not limited to, clinical and business documents from unauthorized physical access, tampering and theft.   We will establish and ensure that appropriate limits on the type and amount of 
information collected, used, and/or disclosed are in place. This will increase privacy protections and is essential to building trust in electronic exchange of individually ident ifiable health information because it minimizes potential misuse and abuse. 
Northwell Health’s Information System Review and Audit Controls Policy (900.27) will allow us to maintain a comprehensive internal security control and audit program, and establish ed procedures and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_84354], ethical 
and business practices. This will complement the user authentication process and acts as a deterrent to internal abuse by [CONTACT_84394], access reports, and security incident tracking reports are produced, reviewed and, where applicable, investigated. These internal security controls may take various forms including regular information system activity review. These reviews incorporate logon monitoring, audit trails and logs, access reports, and manually produced security incident tracking reports 
for network and ePHI systems.   It is the policy of health system to have departmental procedures (e.g. human resource, 
corporate security and information services) to grant, modify and revoke access, permissions and rights to health system networks, systems, applications, facilities and physical locations to staff based on their roles and responsibilities.   
We plan to use a Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC) for this s tudy. A SMC will be 
created to provide oversight and monitoring to ensure the safety of participants and the integrity of the data. Upon review and approval by [CONTACT_84395] (NINR) Program Official (PO), we plan the SMC to be chaired by a researcher (Renee Pekmezaris, PhD) who has extensive expertise in data safety and monitoring, clinical trials, and dementia caregiving research including bioethical considerations. The additional members of the DMSB will include a biostatisticians (Cristina Sison, PhD) who has experience on a SMC, a geriatrician (Gisele Wolf -Klein, 
MD) with extensive experience in care of older adults with dementia and a senior administrative manager  for research ( Tiffany Harvin, M BA). Given their clinical and 
research expertise, Drs. Pekmezaris and Wolf -Klein will be responsible for monitoring 
for adverse events and their potential relationship to the intervention. [CONTACT_84401] and [CONTACT_84402]  will ensure data security and privacy protections. [CONTACT_84402]  will also b e 
responsible for submitting necessary reports to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84355]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_84356]. The SMC 
will convene prior to the enrollment of subjects and then quarterly for the duration o f 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513341](s) and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84357]. 
 The group will meet at least annually via web conferencing. Telephone conferencing and email ma y be used for additional interactions as ne eded. The first meeting of the 
SMC will be prior to recruitment of participants and will focus on review of the study protocol and recruitment plan, consideration of participant burden, and a review of our plan for participant safety and comfort. The subsequent meetings will focus on the progress of the study with regard to data quality and timeliness, participant consent, accrual and retention of participants, participant risk versus benefit, performance of interv ention units, and any adverse events that occur during the course of the study to 
date. One or more major adve rse events will also trigger a SMC meeting.  At the end of 
each meeting the committee will make recommendations to NIH, institutional review board(s) and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84357].   Vulnerable Subjects  
The study will consider long- term care residents as eligible for the study. For nursing 
home patients who are eligible for study, the RC  will present study information to the 
patient 's LAR and family caregiver. Participation in the study is voluntary and 
patients/caregiver may decline. Given the prevalence of dementia in the nursing home setting, it will be important to include this patien t population. 
 
All subject information will be kept confidential and only shared with the research 
staff. All Northwell Health employees will be assured that there will be no consequences to their job status should they chose to participate or not to parti cipate in 
this study. In addition, no one in a supervisory position over an employee will be involved in obtaining consent. No one with authority in, or affiliation to, the control 
and intervention units will have access to identifiable data . 
 
 
27.  MULTI -SITE HUMAN RESEARCH (COORDINATING CENTER)  
 
If this is a multi- site study where you are the lead investigator, describe the management 
of information (e.g. results, new information, unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others, or protocol modi fications) among sites to protect subjects. 
N/A 
 
  
28.  REFERENCES/BIBIOGRAPHY 
 
Version Date:  03/01/[ADDRESS_513342] of references directly related to the study. Any diagrams for 
new medical devices or brief reprints from journals might also prove useful. 
 
References  
1. Phelan EA, Borson S, Grothaus L, Balch S, Larson EB. Association of incident 
dementia with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. Jama. 2012;307(2):165–172. PMID:22235087 
PMCID: PMC3312921 DOI: 10.1001/jama.2011.1964 
 2. Feng Z, Coots LA, Kaganova Y, Wiener JM. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84358]. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014;33(4):683–690. PMID:24711331 DOI: 10.1377/hlthaff.2013.1179 
 3. Alzheimer’s Association. 2017 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2017;13(4):325–373. 
 4. Stern Y, Tang M-X, Albert MS, Brandt J, Jacobs DM, Bell K, et al. Predicting 
time to nursing home care and death in individuals with Alzheimer disease. Jama. 1997;277(10):806–812. PMID:9052710 
 5. Andrieu S, Reynish E, Nourhashemi F, Shakespeare A, Moulias S, Ousset PJ, 
et al. Predictive factors of acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_51531] 134 patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a one year prospective study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002;17(5):422–426. PMID:11994930 DOI:10.1002/gps.624 
 6. Wancata J, Windhaber J, Krautgartner M, Alexandrowicz R. The consequences of non-cognitive symptoms of dementia in medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84359]. Int J Psychiatry Med. 2003;33(3):257–271. PMID:15089007 DOI:10.2190/ABXK-FMWG-98YP -D1CU. 
 7. Fick DM, Steis MR, Waller JL, Inouye SK. Delirium superimposed on 
dementia is associated with prolonged length of stay and poor outcomes in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84360]. J Hosp Med. 2013;8(9):500–505. PMID: 23955965 PMCID: PMC3928030 DOI: 10.1002/jhm.[ADDRESS_513343] K, Round J, et al. Behavioural 
and psychiatric symptoms in people with dementia admitted to the acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: prospective cohort study. Br J Psychiatry. 2014;205:186–196. PMID: 25061120 PMCID: PMC4432387 DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.[ADDRESS_513344] K, Scott S, Jones L, Sampson EL. The management 
of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in the acute general medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: a longitudinal cohort study. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2017;32(3):297–305. PMID: 27019375 PMCID: PMC5324689 DOI: 10.1002/gps.4463 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 34 of 39 10. Hessler JB, Schäufele M, Hendlmeier I, Junge MN, Leonhardt S, Weber J, et al. 
Behavioural and psychological symptoms in general hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84361], distress for nursing staff and complications in care: results of the General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84362]. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_57396]. 2018;27(3):278–287. PMID: 28065176 DOI: 10.1017/S2045796016001098 
 11. Åström S, Nilsson M, Norberg A, Sandman P -O, Winblad B. Staff burnout in 
dementia care—relations to empathy and attitudes. Int J Nurs Stud. 1991 Jan 1;28(1):65–75. PMID: 1856035 
12. Coffey A, Tyrrell M, Buckley M, Manning E, Browne V, Barrett A, et al. A multicentre survey of acute ho spi[INVESTIGATOR_84363]. Clin 
Nurs Stud. 2014;2(4):39. 
 13. Dewing J, Dijk S. What is the current state of care for older people with dementia in  general hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]? A literature review. Dementia. 2016;15(1):106–124. PMID: 24459188 D OI: 10.1177/1471301213520172 
 14. Royal College of Psychiatrists. National Audit of Dementia Care in General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] 2016- 2017: Third Round Report Audit [Internet]. Healthcare 
Improvement Quality Partnership; 2017 Jul. Available from: https://www.hqip.or g.uk/resource/national -audit -of-dementia -care- in-general -
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] -2016- 2017- third -round- of-audit -report/  
 15. Sinvani L, Warner -Cohen J, Strunk A, Halbert T, Harisingani R, Mulvany C, et 
al. A Multicomponent Model to Improve Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84364]: A Propensity Score -Matched Analysis. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2018;66(9):1700- 7. PMID: 30098015 DOI: 10.1111/jgs.[ADDRESS_513345], Lyketsos CG, Assessment DEP on the, Dementia M of 
the NS of. Management of neuropsychiatric  symptoms of dementia in clinical 
settings: recommendations from a multidisciplinary expert panel. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(4):762–769. PMID: 25731881 PMCID: PMC4707529  
 17. Kales HC, Gitlin LN, Lyketsos CG. Assessment and management of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. bmj. 2015;350(7):h369. PMID: 24635665 PMCID: PMC4146407 DOI: 10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE] 
 18. Parke B, Chappell N. Transactions between older people and the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84365]: a social ecological analysis. J Aging Stud. 2010;24(2) :115- 24. 
 19. Parke B, Hunter KF, Bostrom A -M, Chambers T, Manraj C. Identifying 
modifiable factors to improve quality for older adults in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]: a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_17971]. Int J Older People Nurs. 2014;9(1):8–24. PMID: 23067226 DOI: 10.1111/opn.[ZIP_CODE] 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 35 of 39 20. Parke B, Hunter KF, Marck PB. A novel visual method for studying complex 
health transitions for older people living with dementia. Int J Qual Methods. 
2015;14(4):1609406915614150. PMID: 23219329 DOI: 10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2012.11.005. 
 21. Kaufer DI, Cummings  JL, Ketchel P, Smith V, MacMillan A, Shelley T, et al. 
Validation of the NPI -Q, a brief clinical form of the Neuropsychiatric 
Inventory. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2000;12(2):233–239. PMID: 11001602 DOI: 10.1176/jnp.12.2.233. 
 22. Lintern TC. Qualit y in dementia care: evaluating staff attitudes and behaviour. 
[PhD Thesis]. Prifysgol Bangor University; 2001. 
 
23. Dementia Caregivers. Innovating the Next Generation of Dementia and 
Alzheimer’s Disease Care Interventions: Addressing the Needs of Persons 
Living with. 2017  
 24. By[CONTACT_21141], Rabins PV, Weller W, Niefeld M, Anderson GF, Wu AW. The relationship between a dementia diagnosis, chronic illness, medicare expenditures, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29399]. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2004;52(2):187- 94. 
 25. Shankar KN, Hirschman KB , Hanlon AL, Naylor MD. Burden in caregivers of 
cognitively impaired elderly adults at time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]: a cross -sectional 
analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2014;62(2):276–284. PMID: 14728626  
 26. Boltz M, Chippendale T, Resnick B, Galvin JE. Anxiety in f amily caregivers of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84322]: contributing factors and responses. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2015;29(3):236. PMID: 25635341 PMCID: PMC4714710 DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0000000000000072 
 27. Boltz M, Chippendale T, Resnick B, Galvin JE. Te sting family -centered, 
function- focused care in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84322]. Neurodegener Dis 
Manag. 2015;5(3):203–215. PMID: 26107319 PMCID: PMC4529403 DOI: 10.2217/nmt.15.[ADDRESS_513346] K, Williams A. The experience of  
family carers of people with dementia who are hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15583]. Dementia. 2016;15(5):1234–1245. PMID: 25394556 DOI: 10.1177/[ADDRESS_513347] A, Orrell M, Charlesworth G, Melunsky N, Poland F, Moniz -cook E. 
Behavioural and psychological symptoms in dementia and the challenges for family carers: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry J Ment Sci. 2016;208(5):429–434. PMID: 26989095 PMCID: PMC4853642 DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.153684 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 36 of 39 30. Jamieson M, Grealish L, Brown J -A, Draper B. Carers: The navigators of t he 
maze of care for people with dementia—a qualitative study. Dementia. 
2016;15(5):1112–1123. PMID: 25305279 DOI: 10.1177/1471301214554930 
 31. Burgstaller M, Mayer H, Schiess C, Saxer S. Experiences and needs of relatives of people with dementia in acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600] —A meta- synthesis of qualitative 
studies. J Clin Nurs. 2018;27(3–4):502–515. PMID: 28639361 DOI: 10.1111/jocn.[ADDRESS_513348] of a person -centred dementia 
care training programme on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84366], role efficacy and perceptions of caring for people with dementia: A repeated measures study. Int J Nurs Stud. 2016;53:144 –151. PMID: 26421910 DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2015.09.009 
 33. Scerri A, Innes A, Scerri C. Dementia training programmes for staff working in general hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69225] –a systematic review of the literature. Aging Ment 
Health. 2017;21(8):783– 796. PMID: 27662075 DOI: 
10.1080/13607863.2016.1231170 
 34. Surr CA, Gates C, Irving D, Oyebode J, Smith SJ, Parveen S, et al. Effective 
dementia education and training for the health and social care workforce: a systematic review of the literature. Rev Educ Res. 2017;87(5):966–1002. PMID: 28989194 PMCID: PMC5613811 DOI: 10.3102/[ADDRESS_513349] -traumatic stress disorder following intensive care: a 
hypothesis generating study of diversity in care. Intensive Care Med. 
2007;33(6):978–985. PMI D: 17384929 DOI: 10.1007/s00134- 007-0600- 8 
 36. Nirmalan M, Dark PM, Nightingale P, Harris J. Editorial IV: physical and pharmacological restraint of critically ill patients: clinical facts and ethical considerations. Br J Anaesth. 2004;92(6):789–792. PMID : 15145832 DOI: 
10.1093/bja/aeh138  
 37. Lyketsos CG, Colenda CC, Beck C, Blank K, Doraiswamy MP, Kalunian DA, et al. Position statement of the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry regarding principles of care for patients with dementia resulting f rom 
Alzheimer disease. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006;14(7):561–573. PMID: 16816009 DOI: 10.1097/01.JGP.[PHONE_1973].[ZIP_CODE].55 
 38. Schneider LS, Dagerman K, Insel PS. Efficacy and adverse effects of atypi[INVESTIGATOR_84367]: meta -analysis of randomized, placebo -controlled 
trials. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006;14(3):191–210. PMID: 16505124 DOI: 10.1097/01.JGP.[PHONE_1974].[ZIP_CODE].6d 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 37 of 39 39. Gill SS, Bronskill SE, Normand S -LT, Anderson GM, Sykora K, Lam K, et al. 
Antipsychotic drug use and mortality in older adults with dementia. Ann Intern 
Med. 2007;146(11):775– 786. PMID: 17548409  
 40. Jeste DV, Blazer D, Casey D, Meeks T, Salzman C, Schneider L, et al. ACNP White Paper: update on use of antipsychotic drugs in elderly persons with dementia. Neuropsychophar macology. 2008;33(5):957. PMID: 17637610 
PMCID: PMC2553721 DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301492 
 41. Dewing J. Special observation and older persons with dementia/delirium: a disappointing literature review. Int J Older People Nurs. 2013;8(1):19–28.  
 42. Moyle W, O lorenshaw R, Wallis M, Borbasi S. Best practice for the 
management of older people with dementia in the acute care setting: a review of the literature. Int J Older People Nurs. 2008;3(2):121–130. PMID: 20925901 DOI: 10.1111/j.1748- 3743.2008.[ZIP_CODE].x 
 43. US Department of Health and Human Services. National Plan to Address 
Alzheimer’s Disease: 2016 Update [Internet]. ASPE. 2016 [cited 2018 Jun 5]. Available from: https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/national -plan-address -alzheimers -
disease- 2016- update  
 44. Handley M, Bunn F, Goodman C. Dementia -friendly interventions to improve 
the care of people living with dementia admitted to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]: a realist review. BMJ Open. 2017;7(7):e015257. PMID: 28713073 PMCID: PMC5541590 DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen- 2016- 015257. 
 45. Boltz M, Capezuti E, Shabbat N. Building a framework for a geriatric acute 
care model. Leadersh Health Serv. 2010;23(4):334–360. 
 46. Boltz M, Capezuti E, Kim H, Fairchild S, Secic M. Factor structure of the geriatric institutional assessment profile’s professional issues scales. Res Gerontol Nurs. 2010;3(2):126–134. PMID: 20055337 DOI: 10.3928/19404921-20091207- [ADDRESS_513350] practices: Initial results of the NICHE SITE self -evaluation. Nurs Health Sci. 2013;15(4):518–524. PMID: 
23656606 PMCID: PMC3949432 DOI: 10.1111/nhs.[ZIP_CODE] 
 48. Sinvani L, Kozikowski A, Pekmezaris R, Akerman M, Wolf -Klein G. 
Delirium: A Survey of Healthcare Professionals' Knowledge, Beliefs , and 
Practices. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64(12):e297- e303. PMID: 27879983 DOI: 
10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE] 
 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 38 of 39 49. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Xiong C, Morris JC. Validity and reliability of the AD8 
informant interview in dementia. Neurology. 2006;67(11):1942–1948. PMID: 
17159098 DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.[PHONE_1975].[ZIP_CODE].eb 
 51. The Hartford for Geriatric Nursing. Dementia [Internet]. ConsultGeri. [cited 
2018 Jun 5]. Available from: https://consultgeri.org/try- this/dementia  
 52. Alzheimer’s Association. 50 Ways to Become a Dementia Fr iendly Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] 
[Internet]. [cited 2018 Jun 5]. Available from: http://preview.alz.org/stl_archive_6_29_2017/documents/50_Ways_To_Become_A_Dementia_Friendly_Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].pdf 
 53. van Doorn C, Bogardus ST, Williams CS, Concato J, Towle VR, Inouye SK. 
Risk adjustment for older hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84368]: a comparison of two methods of data collection for the Charlson index. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2001;54(7):694–701. PMID: 11438410 
 54. Pfeffer RI, Kurosaki TT, Harrah CH, Jr., Chance JM, Filos S. Measurement of 
functional activities in older adults in the community. J Gerontol. 1982;37(3):323-9. 
 55. Hughes CP, Berg L, Danziger W, Coben LA, Martin RL. A new clinical scale 
for the staging of dementia. Br J Psychiatry. 1982;140(6):566–572. PMID: 7104545. 
  56. Puelle, Marg aret R., et al. "The language of delirium: keywords for identifying 
delirium from medical records." Journal of gerontological nursing 41.8 (2015): 34-42. 
 57. Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring 
rules. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-4. PMID: [ADDRESS_513351]. Louis. Clinical Dementia Rating 
2003  [Internet] [cited 2018 Dec 20}. Available from: http://alzheimer.wustl.edu/adr c2
. 
 59. Mao H -F, Kuo C-A, Huang W-N, Cummings JL, Hwang T- J. Values of the 
minimal clinically important difference for the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire in individuals with dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2015;63(7):1448–1452. PMID: 26046666 DOI: 10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE] 
 60. Borm GF, Fransen J, Lemmens WA. A simple sample size formula for analysis of covariance in randomized clinical trials. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2007;60(12):1234–1238. PMID: 17998077 DOI: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2007.02.006 
Version Date:  03/01/2021   Page 39 of 39 61.  Boltz M, Chippenda le T, Resnick B, Galvin JE. Testing family -centered, 
function- focused care in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_84369]. Neurodegener Dis 
Manag. 2015; 5(3):203- 15. PMID: 26107319 PMCID: PMC4529403 doi: 
10.2217/nmt.15.10  
 
 
 