Title:  Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT): A Shared Management Pi[INVESTIGATOR_225984] # : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: 1 2/4/2023  
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 1 of 56 
  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  
 
 
 
The Human Subjects Division (HSD) strives to ensure that people with disabilities have access to all services and content.  If you 
experience  any accessibility -related issues with this form or any aspect of the application process, email 
[EMAIL_1004]  for assistance.  
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that will be reviewed by [CONTACT_52879] . Before completing this form, check HSD’s website  to 
confirm that this should not be reviewed by [CONTACT_52880] (non -UW) IRB.  
• If you are requesting a determination  about w hether the planned activity is human subjects research or qualifies for exempt 
status, you may skip all questions except those marked with a          . For example 1.[ADDRESS_271663] be answered.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to the research  or if you believe you have already answered a question 
elsewhere in the application , state “ NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the information) . If you 
do not answer a question, the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or whether it is  not applicable. This 
may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, place an “X” in the box.  To fill in a text box, make sure your cursor is within the gray text box bar before 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_52855].  
• For collaborative or multi -site research, describe only the UW activities unless you are requesting that the UW IRB provide 
the review and oversight for non-UW collaborators or co -investigators as well.  
• You may reference other documents (such as a grant application) if they provide the requested information in non -technical 
language. Be sure to provide the document name, page(s), and specific sections, and upload it to Zipline . Also, describe any 
changes  that may have occurred since the document was written (for example, changes that you’ve made during or after the 
grant review process). In some cases, you may need to provide additional details in the answer space as well as referencing a  
document .  
 
INDEX  
1 Overview  6 Children (Minors) and Parental Permission  10 Risk / Benefit Assessment  
2 Participants  7 Assent of Children (Minors)  11 Economic Burden to Participants  
3 Non -UW R esearch Setting  8 Consent of Adults  12 Resources  
4 Recruiting and Screening Participants  9 Privacy and Confidentiality  13 Other Approvals, Permissions, and 
Regulatory Issues  
5 Procedures    
 
1 OVERVIEW  
Study Title:  Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT): A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_225985] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271664] the research. Provide any helpful explanatory information.  
In general, the home institution is the institution (1) that provides the researcher’s paycheck and that considers him/her to  be 
a paid employee, or (2) at which the researcher is a matriculated stude nt. Scholars, faculty, fellows, and students who are 
visiting the UW and who are the lead researcher: identify your home institution and describe the purpose and duration of your  
UW visit, as well as the UW department/center with which you are affiliated w hile at the UW.  
 
Note that many UW clinical faculty members are paid employees of non -UW institutions.  
 
The UW IRB provides IRB review and oversight for only those researchers who meet the criteria described in the SOP Use of 
the UW IRB . 
 University of Washington School of Nursing  
1.2 Consultation history . Has there been any consultation with someone at HSD about this study?  
It is not necessary to obtain advance consultation. However, if advance consultation was obtained,  answering this question 
will help ensure that the IRB is aware of and considers the advice and guidance provided  in that consultation .   
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the consultation: approximate date, with whom, and method (e.g., by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone call, in -person meeting).     
       
1.3 Similar and/or related studies . Are there any related IRB applications that provide context for the proposed 
activities?  
Examples of studies for which there is likely to be a related IRB application: Using samples or data collected by [CONTACT_61921]; 
recruiting subjects from a registry established by a colleague’s research activity; conducting Phase [ADDRESS_271665], or 
conducting a continuation of another study; serving as the dat a coordinating center for a multi -site study that includes a UW 
site. 
 
Providing this information (if relevant) may significantly improve the efficiency and consistency of the IRB’s review.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the other studies or applications and how they relate to the proposed 
activities. If the other applications were reviewed by [CONTACT_52879], please also provide: the UW IRB 
number, the study title, and the lead researcher’s name.    
 The IMPACT intervention has been developed in collaboration with participants under UW IRB: 
STUDY00003144 : Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT): A Usability and Acceptability 
Study (short title - IMPACT Study).  PI [INVESTIGATOR_225986].  This protocol propos es to test the 
IMPACT intervention in an RCT.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271666] 
the proposed activity?  
HSD recognizes that everyone would like their IRB applications to be reviewed as quickly as possible. To ensure fairness, it is 
HSD policy to review applications in the order in which they are received. However, HSD will assign a higher priority to 
researc h with externally -imposed urgency that is beyond the control of the researcher. Researchers are encouraged to 
communicate as soon as possible with their HSD staff contact [CONTACT_52883] (in other words, before  
submitting the IRB a pplication). Examples: a researcher plans to test an experimental vaccine that has just been developed for 
a newly emerging epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]; a researcher has an unexpected opportunity to collect data from students when the end of the 
school year is only four week s away.  
 
HSD may ask for documentation of the externally -imposed urgency. A higher priority should not be requested to compensate 
for a researcher’s failure to prepare an IRB application in a timely manner. Note that IRB review requires a certain minimum 
amount of time; without sufficient time, the IRB may not be able to review and approve an application by a deadline.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the urgency or deadline as well as the reason for it.  
         
1.[ADDRESS_271667] . If hypotheses are being tested, describe them.  You will be asked to describe the specific procedures in a 
later section.  
 
If this application involves the use of a HUD “humanitarian” device: describe whether the use is for “on -label” 
clinical patient care, “off -label” clinical patient care, and/or research (collecting s afety and/or effectiveness data).  
 The purpose of this project is to pi[INVESTIGATOR_225987] a sample of sixty  children (7 -11 
years) with persistent asthma and one of their parents.  
 
The specific aims are to : 
1. Determine the feasibility, acceptability and initial efficacy of IMPACT with 60 parent -child dyads in an 
eight -week pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269] (RCT).  
a. We will use a priori benchmarks to determine the feasibility  of IMPACT based on study eligibility, 
enrollment, and retention.  
b. Acceptability  of IMPACT features and engagement will be determined via exit surveys and semi -
structured interviews.  
c. Preliminary effect sizes compared to control will be reported on primary  outcomes  (asthma 
responsibility, self -efficacy) and secondary outcomes  (medication adherence, asthma control and 
quality of life).  
d. We will also conduct preliminary testing of dyadic interdependence of asthma responsibility over 
time.  
 
1.6 Study design . Provide a one -sentence description of the general study design and/or type of methodology.   
Your answer will help HSD in assigning applications to reviewers and in managing workload. Examples: a longitudinal 
observational study; a double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized study; ethnographic interviews; web scrapi[INVESTIGATOR_52857] a 
convenience sample of blogs; medical record review; coordinating center for a multi -site study.  
 This study will use a randomized controlled trial design with two parallel study ar ms, intervention and control 
(usual care)  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271668] an “X” in at least one box.  
This question is essential for ensuring that your application is correctly reviewed. Please read each  option carefully.  
 Descriptor  
  1. Class project or other activity whose purpose is to provide an educational experience for the researcher 
(for example, to learn about the process or methods of doing research).    
  
  
2. Part of an institution, organization, or program’s own internal operational monitoring.    
  
  
3. Improve the quality of service provided by a specific institution, organization, or program.    
  
  4. Designed to expand the knowledge base of a scientific discipline or other scholarly field of study, and 
produce results that:  
• Are expected to be applicable to a larger population beyond the site of data collection or the specific 
subjects studied, or  
• Are intended to be used to develop, test, or support theories, principles , and statements of 
relationships, or to inform policy beyond the study.   X 
  
  5. Focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information or biospecimens are collected 
through oral history, journalism, biography, or historical scholarship activities, to provide an accurate and 
evidence -based portrayal of the individuals.    
  
  6. A quality improvement or program improvement activity conducted to improve the implementation 
(delivery or quality) of an accepted practice, or to  collect data about the implementation of the practice 
for clinical, practical, or administrative purposes. This does not include the evaluation of the efficacy of 
different accepted practices, or a comparison of their efficacy.    
  
  7. Public health  surveillance activities conducted, requested, or authorized by a public health authority for 
the sole purpose of identifying or investigating potential public health signals or timely awareness and 
priority setting during a situation that threatens public  health.    
  
  
8. Preliminary, exploratory, or research development activities (such as pi[INVESTIGATOR_52858], or 
reliability/validation testing of a questionnaire)   X 
  
  
9. Expanded access use of a drug or device not yet approved for this purpose    
  
  
10. Use of a Humanitarian Use Device    
  
  
11. Other. Explain:    
  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 5 of 56 
 1.8 Background, experience, and preliminary work . Answer this question only  if the proposed activity has one or 
more of the following characteristics. The purpose of this question is to provide the IRB with information that is 
relevant to its risk/benefit analysis.  
• Involves more than minimal risk (physical or non -physical)  
• Is a clinical trial, or 
• Involves having the subjects use a drug, biological, botanical, nutritional supplement, or medical 
device.  
“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater 
than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations o r 
tests.  
 a. Background . Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for the proposed activity, based 
on existing literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that the proje ct is 
intended to address.  
 This should be a plain language description. Do not provide scholarly citations. Limit your answer to less than one page, or 
refer to an attached document with background information that is no more than three pages long.  
 This is a minimal risk study that involves a clinical trial.  
 
Asthma is most common chronic condition of childhood, affecting over six million US children. Asthma is an 
incurable, lifelong condition that places children at increased risk for functional impairments, decreased 
quality o f life, school absences, increased healthcare utilization, and irreversible structural airway remodeling. 
Asthma management involves symptom monitoring and response, trigger avoidance, and timely and 
appropriate medication use.  Unfortunately, fewer than 50% of children with asth ma are adherent to asthma 
management regimens, leading to increased disease morbidity and mortality and potentially irreversible airway 
damage. Improving pediatric asthma management represents a critical health need . 
 
Children with asthma are missing a voi ce in their own care.  The school -age years (7 -11) represent a natural 
transition in asthma management, as children must assume some responsibility for asthma -related care while 
they spend increasing time away from parents at school and other extracurricula r activities. Developmentally, 
school -age children are rule -driven, understand right and wrong, and are able to problem solve, which supports 
their capability to be active participants in their own asthma management. Yet, existing interventions focus on 
parents alone and use prescriptive approaches, telling the parent what to “do” to the child to manage their 
asthma.  As a result, our current strategies are failing to provide children with asthma and their families the 
tools they need to manage asthma succes sfully within the realities of their daily lives. The answer to this 
problem lies in shared asthma management by [CONTACT_7071] -child dyad, with the school -age years (7 -11) the ideal 
developmental period for children to begin sharing responsibility with their parents and establishing lifelong 
health behaviors.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 6 of 56 
  b. Experience and p reliminary work . Briefly describe experience or preliminary work or data (if any) that you, 
your team, or your collaborators/co -investigators have that supports the feasibility and/or safety of this study.   
 It is not necessary to summarize all discussion that has led to the development of the study protocol. The IRB is interested 
only in short summaries about experiences or preliminary work that suggest the study is feasible and that risks are 
reasonable relative to the benefits. Examples: You r team  has already conducted a Phase 1 study of an experimental drug 
which supports the Phase 2 study being proposed in this application ; you r team has  already done a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_52859] -school program wi th 
classroom aides; you r team has  experience with the type of surgery that is required to implant the study device; the study 
coordinator is experienced in working with subjects who have significant cognitive impairment.  
  This proposal builds on the study team’s prior studies seeking to understand asthma management challenges 
faced by  [CONTACT_169559] -age children and their parents.  We have also developed and tested other technology -based 
behavioral interventions in this population.    
 
Our previous work sought to understand asthma management challenges from the perspective of parents and 
children (7 -11 years). Three challenges emerged: 1) symptom monitoring, 2) medication use and tracking, and 
3) shared asthma management responsibili ties.  Using a Human -Centered Design (HCD) framework, we 
collaborated with parent -child dyads to co -design Improving Asthma Care Together (IMPACT), a tailored 
shared management mobile health (mHealth) application that pairs the parent and child together as  a shared 
management team. IMPACT helps families tailor asthma management strategies to fit the realities of their 
social environments while facilitating intentional transition of asthma management to the child. In other 
words, IMPACT was designed by [CONTACT_941] e nd-users, which suggests a high likelihood of feasibility and 
acceptability for study subjects.  
 
Strengths of this study include: 1) prior successful recruitment of children with asthma and their parents; 2) 
established interdisciplinary study team with complimentary areas of expertise in asthma, spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], family 
informatics, and dyadic intervention expertise; 3) building logically on our prior work;  4) co -designing our 
intervention alongside parents and children that will use it; and 5) extensive usab ility testing during 
intervention development (prior IRB).  
 
1.9 Supplements . Check all boxes that apply, to identify relevant Supplements that should be complete d and 
upload ed to Zipline . 
This section is here instead of at the end of the form to reduce the risk of duplicating information in this IRB Protocol form that 
you will need to provide in these Supplements.  
 Check all 
That A pply  Type of R esearch  Supplement N ame  
    
Department of Defense  
The research involves Department of Defense funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Defense      
    
    
Department of Energy  
The research involves Department of Energy funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Energy      
    
    Drug, biologic, botanical, supplement  
Procedures involve the use of any drug, biologic, botanical or 
supplement, even if the item is not the focus of the proposed research  SUPPLEMENT Drugs      
    
    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 7 of 56 
     Emergency exception to informed consent  
Research that requires this special consent waiver for research involving 
more than minimal risk  SUPPLEMENT Exception 
from Informed Consent 
for Emergency Research 
(EFIC)      
    
Genomic data sharing  
Genomic data are being collected and will be deposited in an external 
database (such as the NIH dbGaP database) for sharing with other 
researchers, and the UW is being asked to provide the required 
certification or to ensure that the consent forms can be c ertified  SUPPLEMENT Genomic 
Data Sharing      
    
    Medical device  
Procedures involve the use of any medical device, even if the device is 
not the focus of the proposed research, except when the device is FDA -
approved and is being used through a clinical facility in the manner for 
which it is approved  SUPPLEMENT Devices      
    
    Multi -site or collaborative study  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
institutions in a multi -site or collaborative study.  SUPPLEMENT Multi -site 
or Collaborative Research      
    
    Non -UW Individual Investigators  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
individuals who are not affiliated with another organization for the 
purpose of the research.  SUPPLEMENT Non -UW 
Individual Investigators      
    
    Other REDCap Installation Attestation for Electronic Consent  
The research will use a non -UW installation of REDCap for conducting 
and/or documenting informed consent.  SUPPLEMENT Other  
REDCap Installation      
    
    
None of the above       
    
1.[ADDRESS_271669] an exception granted by [CONTACT_52884]:  (a) the only in -person interactions are 
essential for the study; (b) study team members and participants will wear face coverings throughout all 
procedures; (c) all study staff and participants will be screened for COVID -[ADDRESS_271670] prior to each research visit; and 
(d) no participants over the age of 85 years will be enrolled if their in -person participation is not connec ted with a 
clinical visit. See this webpage  for details, including what “screening” means.  
Review the HSD website  for current guidelines about which in -person research activities are allowable.  
 
 X Confirmed  
 
 
[ADDRESS_271671] populations or groups , including age range, 
gender, health status, and any other relevant characteristics.  
 60 children, ages 7 -11 years, with persistent asthma and one parent will be recruited for this study.  Participants 
will need to live in King, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], or Snohomish County in Washington State.  
 
Every effort will be made to recruit racial and ethnic minorities; asthma affects all races and ethnicities, with boys 
and non -Hispanic black children experie ncing the highest prevalence.  To ensure inclusion of racial and ethnic 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271672] 
data.  
2.2 Inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
a. Inclusion criteria.  Describe the specific criteria that will be used  to decide who will be included  in the research  
from among interested or potential subjects. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Parent/Caregiver Inclusion Criteria  
Child’s primary caregiver residing with the child (50% or more); > 18 years; speaks and reads English; has a 
smartphone with data plan; and has a parent -reported asthma responsibility mean score ≤ 2 .5 (parent assumes 
the majority of asthma management respo nsibility) .  Participants seeking in person visits must reside within 
King, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], and Snohomish Counties in Washington State , remote visits will be offered outside of those areas . 
 
Child Inclusion Criteria  
1) aged 7 -11 years, 2) diagnosis of persistent a sthma, defined as a prescription for a daily asthma medication; 3) 
speak English.  
 
b. Exclusion criteria. Describe the specific criteria that will  be used  to decide who will be excluded from the 
research  from subjects who meet the inclusion criteria listed above. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Parent/Caregiver Exclusion Criteria  
None.  
 
Child Exclusion Criteria  
Parent report of conditions that impair the child’s ability to learn shared -management including: 1) 
developmental delay (e.g., language < 5 -year level), 2) co -morbid condition (cancer, diabetes, autism); or 3) 
current asthma exacerbation at the time of recruitment (defined as a prescription for oral corticosteroids) as thi s 
is a serious health event and not an opportune time for learning shared management.  
2.[ADDRESS_271673] subjects who become prisoners while participating in the study?  
For example, a longitudinal study of youth with drug problems is likely to have subjects who will be prisoners at some point 
during the study.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, if a subject becomes a prisoner while participating in the study, will any study procedures  
 and/or data collection related to the subject be continued while the subject is a prisoner?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the procedures and/or data collection that will continue with  
 prisoner subjects  
       
2.4 Will the proposed research  recruit or obtain data from individuals that are known  to be prisoners?  
For records reviews: if the records do not indicate prisoner status and prisoners are not  a target population, select “No ”. See 
the GUIDANCE Prisoners  for the definition of “prisoner” , which is not necessarily tied to the type of facility in which a 
person is res iding . 
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 9 of 56 
   Yes → If yes, answer the following questions  (i – iv). 
 i. Describe the type of prisoners, and their location(s) : 
       
 ii. One concern about prisoner research is whether the effect of participation on prisoners’ 
general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and /or opportunity for 
earnings in pr ison will be so great that it will make it difficult for prisoners to adequately 
consider the research risks. How will the chances of this be reduced?  
       
 iii. Describe what will be done  to make sure that (a) recruitment and subject selection procedures 
will be fair to all eligible prisoners and (b) prison authorities or other prisoners will not b e able 
to arbitrarily prevent or require particular prisoners from participating.  
       
 iv. If the research is funded by [CONTACT_217299] (Health & Human 
Services; Energy; Defense; Homeland Security; CIA; Social Security Administration), and/or will 
involve prisoners in federal facilities or in state/local facilities outsid e of Washi ngton State: 
check the box below to provide assurance that study team members will (a) not encourage or 
facilitate the use of a prisoner’s  participation in the research to influence parole or pardon 
decisions, and (b) clearly inform each prisoner in advanc e (for example, in a consent  form) 
that participation in th e research  will have no effect on his or her parole  or pardon . 
  Confirmed   
2.[ADDRESS_271674] populations listed here. Check the boxes 
for any of these populations that will be purposefully include d. (In other words, being a part of the population is 
an inclusion criterion for the study.)  
The WOR KSHEETS describe the criteria for approval  but do not need to be completed and should not be submitted . 
 Population  Worksheet  
  
Fetuses in utero  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
  
Neonates of uncertain viability  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Non-viable neonates  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Pregnant women  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
a. If you check any of the boxes above, use this space to provide any information that may be relevant for the IRB 
to consider.   
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 10 of 56 
 2.6 Native Americans or non-U.S. indigenous populations.  Will Native American or non -U.S. indigenous populations 
be actively recruited through a tribe, tribe -focused organization, or similar community -based organization?  
Indigenous people are defined in international or national legislation as having a set of specific rights based on their hist orical 
ties to a particular territory and their cultural or historical distinctiveness from other po pulations that are often politically 
dominant.  
 
Exam ples: a reservation school or health clinic; recruiting during a tribal community gathering  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  name [CONTACT_52935], tribal -focused organization, or similar community -based  organization. T he 
UW IRB expects that tribal/indigenous approval will be obtained before beginning the research . 
This may or may not involve approval from a tribal IRB. The study team and any 
collaborators/investigators are also responsible for identifying any tribal law s that may affect the 
research.     
       
2.[ADDRESS_271675] private identifiable  information about other individuals  from the 
study  subjects? Common examples include: collecting medical history information or contact [CONTACT_52885], friends, co -workers.  
“Identifiable” means any direct or indirect identifier that, alone or in combination, would allow you or another m ember of the 
research team to readily identify  the person. For example, suppose that the research is about immigration history. If subjects 
are asked  questions about their grandparents but are not asked for  names or other information that would allow easy 
identification  of the grandparents, then private identifiable information is not being collected about the grandparents  and the 
grandparents are not subjects .  
 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, these individuals are considered human subjects in the study. Describe them and what data 
will be collect ed about them.     
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271676] or describe the maximum number of subjects (or subject units) 
need ed to complete the study, for each subject group?  
Subject units  mean units within a group. For most research studies, a group will consist of individuals. However, the unit of 
interest in some research is not the individual. Examples:   
• Dyads such as caregiver -and-Alzheimer’s patient, or parent and child  
• Families  
• Othe r units, such as student -parent -teacher  
Subject group  means categories of subjects that are meaningful for  the specific study . Some research has only one subject 
group – for example, all UW students taking Introductory Psychology. Some common ways in which  subjects are grouped 
include:  
• By [CONTACT_52886] – for example, an intervention group and a control group.  
• By [CONTACT_52887] – for example, urban versus rural families  
• By [CONTACT_654] – for example, children who are 6, 10, or 14 years old.  
 
The IRB rev iews the number of subjects in the context of risks and benefits. Unless otherwise specified, if the IRB determines 
that the research involves no more than minimal risk: there are no restrictions on the total number of subjects  that may be 
enrolled . If the research involves more than minimal risk: The number of enrolled subjects must be limited to the number 
described in this  application. If it is necessary later to increase the number of subjects, submit  a Modification . Exceeding the 
IRB-approved number ( over -enrollment ) will be considered non -compliance.   
  No → If no, provide the rationale in the box below. Also, provide any other available information about 
the scope/size of the research. You do not need to complete the table.    
  Example: It may not be possible to predict the number of subjects who will complete an online survey 
advertised through Craigslist, but you can state that  the survey will be posted  for two weeks and the number 
who respond is the number who will be in the study.  
       
 X Yes → If yes, for each subject group, use the table below to provide the estimate of the maximum desired 
number of individuals (or other subject unit, such as families) who will complete the r esearch.    
 Group name/description  Maximum desired number of individuals (or other 
subject unit, such as families) who will complete the 
research  
Provide numbers for the  site(s) reviewed by [CONTACT_217300] -wide total number ; example: 20/100  
 Children with asthma  65 (to account for anticipated attrition)  
 Parents of child with asthma  65 (to account for anticipated attrition)  
             
             
             
              
2.[ADDRESS_271677] with  the subjects.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271678] of symptoms and declaring the presence or absence of 
those symptoms. HSD strongly encourages adapting this Washington State Department of Health Screening Tool  
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Docum ents/1600/coronavirus/Employervisitorscreeningguidance.pdf  or the UW 
EH&S Example Symptom Self -Attestation in this document: 
https://www.ehs.wash ington.edu/system/files/resources/guidance -symptom -monitoring -COVID -19.pdf . If you will test 
for the virus, you must also describe here whether the testing lab is CLIA -certified and how the results will be reported to 
the subjects.  
 At this time, we antic ipate offering in -person sessions.  For in -person sessions, we will complete a symptom 
attestation using the WA DOH questions.  Attestation will be sent to study subject parents via REDCap SMS 
message or email (whatever participants prefer) 24 hours before  their study visit.  
 
 
3 NON -UW RESEARCH SETTING   
Complete this section only if UW investigators  and people named in the SUPPLEMENT: 
Non -UW Individual Investigators  will conduct research procedures  outside of UW and 
Harborview  
3.1 Reason for locations . Describe the reason(s) for choosing the location s.  
This is especially important when the research will occur in locations or with populations that may be vulnerable to 
exploitation. One of the three ethical principles the IRB must consider is justice: ensuring that reasonable, non -exploitative, 
and well -considered procedures are administered fairly, with a fair distribution of costs and potential benefits.  
       
3.[ADDRESS_271679] the 
research , how it is conducted, or how consent is obtained or documented . 
Examples: It would be culturally inappropriate in some international settings for a woman to be directly contact[CONTACT_426] a male 
researcher; instead, the researcher may need to ask a male family member for permission before the woman can be 
approached. It may be appropriate to obtain permission from community leaders prior to obtaining consent from  individual 
members of a group.  In some distinct cultural groups, signing forms may not be the norm.  
 
This federal site maintains an international list of human research standards and requirements:  
 http://www.hhs.go v/ohrp/international/index.html   
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271680] the research (especially the research design and 
consent procedures). The most common examples are laws about:  
• Specimens  – for example, some countries will not allow biospecimens to be taken out of the country.  
• Age of consent  – laws about when an individual is considered old enough to be able to provide consent vary 
across states, and across countries.   
• Legally authorized representative  – laws about who can serve as a legally authorized representative (and who 
has priority when more than one person is available) vary across states and countries.  
• Use of healthcare records  – many states (including Washington State) have laws that are similar to the 
federal HIPAA law but that have additional requirements.  
       
3.[ADDRESS_271681] the research.  
Example: A school district may require researchers  to obtain permission from the head district office as well as school 
principals before approaching teachers or students; a factory in China may allow researchers  to interview factory workers  but 
not allow the workers to be paid for their participation . 
       
3.5 If the PI [CONTACT_832] a s tudent: Does the research involve traveling outside of the US?   
  No  
  Yes → If yes, confirm by [CONTACT_52890] (1) you will register with the UW Office of Global Affairs  
before traveling; (2) you will notify your advisor when the registration is complete; and (3) you will 
request a UW Travel Waiver if the research involves travel to the list of countries  requiring a UW 
Travel Waiver.  
 Confirmed  
 
 
4 RECRUITING and SCREENING PARTICIPANTS  
4.1 Recruiting and Screening . Describe how subjects will be identified, recruited, and screened.  Include information 
about: how, when, where, and in what setting. Identify who (by [CONTACT_52891], not name) will approach and 
recruit subjects, and who wil l screen them for eligibility.  
 
Note: Per UW  Medicine policy, the UW Medicine eCare /MyChart  system may not be used for research recruitment 
purposes.  
 
 Recruitment  may use one or several of the following methods:  
• Social media posts via Facebook, Instagram, Google Ad Words and/or NextDoor.  Posts will guide 
potential participants to the IMPACT  Study eligibility screening  webpage.  
• Recruitment flyers  posted in community -based pediatric clinics, recreational centers, boys and girls clubs, 
and elementary schools  will have a QR  code and weblink directing to the study eligibility screening 
webpage . 
• ITHS Patient cohort identification.  We will submit a request to the ITHS biomedical informatics team to 
assist us with identifying prospective participants from the UW Medicine electr onic medical records – 
search criteria will include child age (7 -11 years) with asthma diagnosis ICD9 or ICD10 code. Among 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271682] the extracted cohort information include: child name [CONTACT_159006], 
parent name, parent email and home address. We will opt in to the ITHS compliance “add on” such that 
UW compliance will be notified of all extracted participants.  Parents will be contact[CONTACT_226023]/or direct mailing to include information about the study, a link to the IMPACT study 
webpage (where parents may choose to complete eligibility screening), and PI [INVESTIGATOR_225988] (phone, 
email).  
• Institute of Translational Health Sciences “Participate in Research” online webpage 
https://www.iths.org/participate/studies/ . A brief description of the study, eligibility, website, and contact 
[CONTACT_226024].  The 
screening will be automatically scored within REDCap and indicate whether participants appear to meet eligibility 
criteria or not.  Those who are not eligible are thanked for their time.  Those who are eligible  will be advised that 
the study team will contact [CONTACT_476] (see recruitment follow -up description) to invite subjects to an in -person data 
collection session. REDCap uses unique identifiers for potential participants and only the study team has the 
master list  connecting potential participant emails, names, and identifiers.  
 
For prospective participants that have questions, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_225989].  
 
4.2 Recruitment materials .  
 
a. What materials (if any ) will be used  to recruit and screen subjects?  
Examples: talking points for phone or in -person conversations; video or audio presentations; websites; social media 
messages; written materials such as letters, flyers for posting, brochures, or printed advertisements; questionnaires filled 
out by [CONTACT_52893].  
 Recruitment flyers, emails, web-postings, social media posts, direct mailings and study webpage will be used to 
recruit and screen subjects.   
b. Upload descriptions of each type of material (or the materials themselves) to Zipline . If letters  or emails  will be 
sent to any subjects, the se should include a statement about how the subject’s na me and contact [CONTACT_52894] . No sensitive information about the person (such as a diagnosis of a medical condition) should 
be included in the letter.  The text of these letters and emails must be uploaded to Zipline  (i.e., a description will 
not suffice).  
HSD encourages researchers to consider uploading descriptions of most recruitment and screening materials instead of the 
materials themselves. The goal is to provide the researchers with the flexibility to change some information on the materials 
without submitting a Modification for IRB approval of the changes. Examples:  
• Provide a list of talking points that will be used for phone or in -person conversations instead of a script.   
• For the description of a flyer, include the information that it will provide the study phone number and the name [CONTACT_4007] a 
study contact [CONTACT_9702] (without providing the actual phone number or name). This means that a Modification would 
not be necessary if/when th e study phone number or contact [CONTACT_52895]. Also, instead of listing the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the description below might  state that the flyer will list one or a few of the major 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• For the description of a video or a website, include a description of the possible visual elements and a list of the 
content (e.g., study phone number; study contact [CONTACT_9702]; top three inclusion/exclusion criteria; payment of $50; 
study name; UW research er).  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271683] an existing relationship with 
the study population(s)?  
Examples: a study team member may have a dual role with the study population (for example, being their clinical care 
provider, teacher, laboratory directory or tribal leader in addition to recruiting them for his/her research).  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the nature of the relationship.  
         
4.[ADDRESS_271684] payment plans. Provide the 
following information about your plans for paying research subjects in the text box below or note that the information 
can be found in the consent form.  
• The total amount/value  of the payment  
• Schedule/timing of the payment [i.e., when will subjects receive the payment(s)]  
• Purpose of the payment [e.g., reimbursement, compensation, incentive]  
• Whethe r payment will be “pro -rated” so that participants who are unable to complete the research may still 
receive some part of the payment  
The IRB expect s the consent process or study information provided to the subjects to include all of the above -listed information 
about payment, including the number and amount of payments, and especially when subjects can expect to receive payment. 
One of the most frequent complaints received by [CONTACT_217303] a check on the day that  
they completed a study and who were angry or disappointed when payment took 6 -8 weeks to reach them.  
  
 Participant dyads (parent and child) will receive graduated incentive payments in the form of digital gift cards:  
• $50 upon completion of the baseline  study visit (T0)  
• $[ADDRESS_271685] -intervention visit (T1)  
• $150 upon completion of the  8-week  follow -up visit (T2) 
 
OPTIONAL  
Participants will also be given the option to opt -in to completing a  child  cognitive (executive function ing) battery .  
This will be indicated as optional on the consent , but is available only to those who have in person visits .  
Cognitive battery completion will be paid an additional $[ADDRESS_271686].  
4.5 Non -monetary compensation . Describe any non -monetary compensation that will be provide d. Example: extra 
credit for students; a toy for a child. If class credit will be offered to students, there must be  an alternate way for 
the students to earn the extra credit without participating in the research.  
 All families will receive a home spi[INVESTIGATOR_201992], which is used to measure lung functioning in children.  
Families will use this periodically throughout the study but also keep it for future use.  Children may also receive 
stickers or another small token during/following in -person sessions (e.g., bubbles, pencil).  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 16 of 56 
 4.6 Will data or specimens be accessed or obtained for recruiting a nd screening procedures prior to enrollment?   
Examples: names and contact [CONTACT_3031]; the information gathered from records that were screened; results of screening 
questionnaires or screening blood tests; Protected Health Information (PHI) from screening medical records to identify possible 
subjects.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
 X Yes → If yes, describe the data and/or specimens (including PHI) and  whether it will be retained  as part of 
the study data.  
   Screening information includes:  
Parent  
• First name, email address, phone number, and preferred mode of contact (text, phone, 
email) for follow -up.   
• Confirmation that parent/child live in King, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], or Snohomish county  (if in person 
visit desired) .  Those outside of King, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], or Snohomish counties will have a 
remote visit option.    
• Child’s primary caregiver residing with the child (50% or more)  
• ≥ 18 years  
• Speaks/reads English  
• Has smartphone with data plan  
• Parent -reported asthma responsibility mean score < 2.5 (per screening survey)  
Child  
• First name, age, confirmation of prescription for daily asthma medication  
• NO parent report of conditions that impair the child’s ability to learn shared -
management includin g: 1) developmental delay (e.g., language < 5 -year level), 2) co -
morbid condition (cancer, diabetes, autism); or 3) current asthma exacerbation at the 
time of recruitment (defined as a prescription for oral corticosteroids) as this is a 
serious health even t and not an opportune time for learning shared management.  
 
Study data will be collected and stored in REDCap database, accessible only to the study team.  
4.7 Consent for recruiting and screening . Will consent be obtained for any of the recruiting and screening 
procedures? (Section 8: Consent of Adults  asks about consent for the main study procedures).  
“Consent” includes: consent from individuals for their own participation; parental permission; assent from children; consent 
from a legally authorized representative for adult individuals who are unable to provide consent.  
 
Examples:   
• For a study in which names and contact [CONTACT_52898] a registry: the registry should have consent 
from the registry participants to release their names and contact [CONTACT_52899].  
• For a study in which possible subjects are identified by [CONTACT_52900]: there will be no consent process.  
• For a study in which individuals respond to  an announcement and call into a study phone line: the study team person 
talking to the individual may obtain non -written consent to ask eligibility questions over the phone.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
 X Yes → If yes, describe the consent process.  
   See uploaded recruitment descriptions.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271687] on a 
consent form be used to document consent for  the recruiting and screening procedures ? 
  No → If no, describe the information that will be provided during the 
consent process and for which procedures.  
        
  Yes, written  → If yes, and a written  signature [CONTACT_217344]:  
• Upload the consent form to Zipline .  
  Yes, electronic  → If yes, and an electronic  signature [CONTACT_217344]:  
• Upload the consent form to Zipline . 
• If the eSignature [CONTACT_217345] , use the 
questions about electronic consent in Section 8.3 and  8.4 to 
differentiate between recruiting/screening and main study 
electronic consent. If electronic consent will be used for 
recruiting/screening but not main study consent , use 8.3 and 
8.4 to describe eConsent and note that it is only for 
recruiting/scree ning.  
   
5 PROCEDURES  
5.1 Study procedures . Using lay language, p rovide a complete description of the study procedures , including the 
sequence,  intervention or manipulation (if any),  drug dosing information (if any) , blood volumes and frequency of 
draws (if any), use of records,  time required, and setting/location. If it is available: Upload a study flow sheet or 
table  to Zipline .  
For studies comparing standards of care : It is important to accurately identify the research procedures. See  UW IRB POLICY 
Risks of Harm from Standard Care  and the draft guidance from the federal Office of Human Research Protections, “Guidance 
on Disclosing Reasonably Foreseeable Risks in Research Evaluating Standards of Care”;  October 20, 2014.  
Information about pediatric blood volume and frequency of draws that would qualify  for expedited review can be found in  this 
reference table  on the Seattle Children’ s IRB website . 
 T0 BASELINE ASSESSMENT  
Consent/Assent  
Eligible participants will be contact[CONTACT_226025] a data collection session, either at participant 
homes or convenient quiet location such as a community library.  Once scheduled, the study team will email a 
copy of the consent form for  review.   IF REQUIRED (temporary) - 24 hours prior to any data collection session, 
participants will be sent a COVID -19 screening attestation.  At the T0 session, the study team will describe the 
purpose of the study and obtain informed consent from the par ent by [CONTACT_226026] e -consent module 
(consenting for parent and child both to participate).  The consent will include the optional cognitive battery for 
an additional $25 per timepoint.  Parents will receive an automated emailed PDF copy of their co nsent form  after 
completion . After this, child assent will be obtained – a recording from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_225990].  If the 
recording does not function, the study team will read the assent materials to the child.  The child will indicate 
whether they  agree or disagree via REDCap (green check mark and “Yes, I’ll join the study or red ‘x’ and “no, I 
do not want to join the study”).  
 
Data collection  
Following consent and assent, the study team member will perform the direct child measures (height and weight).  
Next, the study team will assist the parent with pairing the spi[INVESTIGATOR_225991].  Note,  to calculate 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 18 of 56 
 expected lung functioning, spi[INVESTIGATOR_225992] a reference database that requires patient details including  age, gender, 
height, weight.  Th e parent will be instructed to input the study # (instead of name), year of birth (not date) to 
avoid unnecessary PHI disclosure.  The study team will coach the child through spi[INVESTIGATOR_225993] (via email or t ext).  Note, study team will make every effort to perform 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_225994] (weather permitting) and remain socially distanced and advised to wear masks for spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], 
since it is considered an aerosolizing procedure.   
 
Next, individual data collection will commence.  Parent participants will be provided an iPad with the electronic 
instruments preloaded and instructed to complete the instruments to the best of their ability.  If questions arise, the 
study team will answer as needed.  The study team will then work 1:[ADDRESS_271688] with instrument 
completion (reading items, if requested).  This technique has been used successfully in [CONTACT_226039]’s other prior 
dyadic study designs to preclude parental interference in child items.  Full instrument  descriptions and timepoints 
are outlined in table below.  Estimated time burden: Parent: 50 -55 minutes; Child: 40-50 (plus 30 -40 if cognitives 
added).   
 
Assignment  
REDCap randomization module will be used to assign dyads to groups using an externally generated block 
randomization scheme (stratified by [CONTACT_4321]).  After surveys are complete, the study team will assign dyads to 
intervention or control by [CONTACT_20683] “randomize” within REDCap and proceeding with the following, depending 
on assignment:  
 
Control  
Dyads assigned to the usual care control group will be advised of their assignment.  An information sheet will be 
provided that outlines the upcoming data collection sessions (T1 at 8 weeks and T2 and 16 weeks) with 
compensation amounts.  They will be advis ed to keep the spi[INVESTIGATOR_225995], and more frequently if 
they choose.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_225996], based upon spi[INVESTIGATOR_225997] (C -ACT),  with interpretation using the national asthma guide line standards.  This report may be shared 
with the child’s health care provider, if desired.  Finally, the family will be advised that at the end of the [ADDRESS_271689] system, including the app and wearable  device, should 
they wish to use it.    
 
Intervention  
Dyads assigned to the intervention group will be advised of their assignment.  An information sheet will be 
provided that outlines the intervention tasks (weekly activities) as well as upcoming data collection sessions and 
compensation amounts.  Next, the study team will assist the parent  with accessing/downloading the IMPACT app.  
The family will be encouraged to follow the onboarding screens once downloaded, including pairing the app with 
the event marker watch (symptom watch) and spi[INVESTIGATOR_225998].   The symptom watch is a commercially 
available event marker button that resembles a wristwatch.  Children will be taught to press the button when 
asthma symptoms occur.  These events are stored by [CONTACT_226027] p hone’s Bluetooth.   
 
IMPACT intervention overview:  
• Families will be asked to check in on the child’s asthma daily (they may use the app to set SMS 
notifications, if desired) to review symptoms reported by [CONTACT_226028] (tracked in the app dashboard).  
• They will also be asked to log in weekly to select asthma shared management goals (provided), 
anticipated barriers, and problem solving.  Each subsequent week, dyads will report on their goal progress 
and select new goals or retain the previous ones.   
• To monitor as thma control, families will be prompted to complete the C -ACT (7 item questionnaire) and 
for the child to complete spi[INVESTIGATOR_23943] y.  C -ACT and spi[INVESTIGATOR_225999] (see 
image)  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 19 of 56 
 • The intervention concludes after 8 weeks.  The app is c onfigured such that after the 8 -week intervention, 
the goal -setting/monitoring feature is “muted”, but dyads may continue to use the monitoring features 
(medication use, symptoms, asthma control).  
 
T1 POST -INTERVENTION ASSESSMENT (8 WEEK)  
The study team will schedule the T1 data collection session at week 8.  The child will be asked to complete 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_226000], as in T0.  Dyads  will be asked to complete parent and child 
instruments outlined in the table below , again using the iPads as described above.  Families assigned to the 
intervention will complete short intervention questionnaires and a brief semi -structured interview. Parent: 65 -75 
minutes; Child: 60-75 (plus 30 -40 if cognitives added).   
 
 
T2 FOLLOW -UP ASSESSMENT (16 WEEKS)  
T2 data collection is nearly identical to week 8, with children performing spi[INVESTIGATOR_226001].  Intervention families will be advised that they may continue 
using the app if they are interested, though study involvement has concluded (app will remain active).  Control 
families will be given the option to access the app.  For those interested, the study team will assist with app 
download and setup as described in T0.  Estimated time burden: Parent: 45 -50 minutes; Child: 40 -50 (plus 30 -40 
if cognitives added).   
 
 
 
This study requires in person sessions for data integrity and to facilitate participant use of new technologies (app, 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], symptom watches).  Should the COVID -19 situation evolve, the following remote protocol will be 
used.   Additionally, cognitive measures may only be collected in person.  
 
Remote protocol (due to COVID -19 restrictions  or participant family p reference ) 
Remote protocol (if needed): Should remote study visits be required  or preferred by [CONTACT_4317] , the study team 
will mail study materials (spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], paper tape measure) and arrange for web conferencing sessions via Zoom.  
A link to the study e-Consent and assent form (with video of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226002]) will be sent at that 
time.  Families may complete consent and assent asynchronously.  If not completed prior to the web conference, 
the study team will display the REDCap e -Consent module using screen share and allow the parent time to review 
and complete.  Once completed, the study team will read the study assent to the child.  After consent and assent, 
the parent will be sent a personalized weblink to their visit surveys via REDCap . For child survey data – the study 
personnel will display the survey s using screen share during the web conference.  The child may either use 
“mouse control” to self -select their responses or verbally indicate their responses and study personnel will enter 
them.  Next, the study team member will assist dyads with connecting  the previously mailed spi[INVESTIGATOR_226003]’s smart phone via Bluetooth and mobile app.  The app automatically prompts the user to enter sex at birth, 
age, height (paper tape measure provided) and weight (based upon recall).  The family will be instruc ted to enter 
the child’s participant ID in the “name” field.  The dyad will follow the app instructions for performing 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_038].  The final spi[INVESTIGATOR_226004].  After baseline measures, dyads will be 
assigned either to th e intervention or control group.  For those assigned to the intervention group, the study 
personnel will remotely assist intervention dyads with downloading IMPACT, pairing the symptom watch and 
reader with app, and reviewing written instructions for use.  For dyads assigned to the control arm, they will keep 
the spi[INVESTIGATOR_226005].  
 
Future data collection sessions will use a similar Zoom protocol.  Note, optional cognitive evaluations are only 
available in person.  
 
5.2 Recordings . Does the research involve creating audio or video recordings?  
 X No → If no, go to question 5.3. 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 20 of 56 
   Yes → If yes, verify that you have described what will be record ed in 5.1 and answer question  a. 
 a. Before recording, will consent for being recorded be obtained from  subjects and any other 
individuals who may be recorded?  
  No → If no, email [EMAIL_1004]  before submitting this application in Zipline. In 
the email, include a brief description of the research and a note that 
individuals will be recorded without their advance consent.     
  Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_271690] a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan as part of the study procedures?  
This means scans that are performed solely for research purposes or clinical scans that are modified for research purposes (f or 
example, using a gadolinium -based contrast agent when it is not required for clinical reasons ).  
 X No → If no, go to question  5.4. 
  Yes → If yes, answer questions a through c. 
a. Describe the MRI scan(s).  Specifically:  
• What is the purpose of the scan(s)? Examples: obtain research data;  safety assessment 
associated with a research procedure.  
• Which subjects will receive an MRI scan?  
• Describe the minimum and maximum number of scans per subject, and over what time period 
the scans will occur. For example: all subjects will undergo two MRI scans, six months apart.  
       
b. MRI facility . At which facility(ies) will the MRI scans occur? Check all that apply.  
  UWMC Radiology/Imaging Services (the UWMC clinical facility)  
  DISC Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (UWMC  research facility)  
  CHN Center for Human Neuroscience MRI Center (Arts & Sciences research facility)  
  BMIC Biomolecular Imaging Center (South Lake Union research facility)  
  Harborview Radiology/Imaging Services (the Harborview clinical facility)  
  SCCA Imaging Services  
  Northwest Diagnostic Imaging  
  Other: identify in the text box below:  
        
c. Personnel. For MRI scans that will be conducted at the DISC , CHN  or BMIC resear ch facilities: 
Indicate who will be responsible for operating the MRI scanner by [CONTACT_217304].  
  MRI technician who is formally qualified  
  Researcher who has completed scanner operator training  provided  by a qualified MRI operator  
5.4 Data variables.  Describe  the specific data that will be obtained  (including a description of the most sensitive 
items). Alternatively, a list of the data variables  may be uploaded  to Zipline . 
 App usage – login date and duration, management goals selected, anticipated barriers, progress reports, asthma 
check ins, C-ACT scores, spi[INVESTIGATOR_226006], reported medication use.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271691]  Instrument  Tim
e T0 T1 T2 
Demographics   
NINR 
Demographics  Parent (race, ethnicity, marital status, employment) ; Child (birthdate, 
education, race, ethnicity , asthma history ) (P) 5 X   
Child Weight, 
Height  Stadiometer (D)  to measure  child height (for spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]),  
Scale (D) to measure child weight   5 X 
X X 
X  X 
X 
Shared Management   
Asthma 
Responsibility  Asthma Responsibility Questionnaire (ARQ)  (P, C): [ADDRESS_271692] 
validity; IC reliability α= .78 (child), .84 (parent).  <5 X X X 
Asthma 
Management       
Brief Illness Perception Questionnaire (BIPQ) (P,C): 8 -item scale to assess 
beliefs about asthma, with higher scores indicating more burdensome 
perception.   <5 X X X 
Beliefs about Medicines Questionnaire (BMQ) (P,C): 10 -item, 5 -point scale 
to assess medication beliefs and concerns, with higher scores indicating 
higher perceived necessity or concerns.   <5 X X X 
Self-Efficacy  Asthma Management Self -Efficacy  (P, C): 13 -items (parent) and 12 -items 
(child), [ADDRESS_271693] validity; IC reliability α=.87 (child), .87 
(parent).  <5 X 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 X 
Medication 
Adherence  Medication Adherence Report Scale for Asthma (MARS -A) (P, C): 10 -items, 
5-point scale assessing reported asthma controller medication adherence. 
M ≥4.5 indicates adherence; IC reliability α=.68 (child) ; .74 (parent).  <5 X 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 X 
Family 
Functioning  Family Asses sment Device  (P): 60-item validated instrument  using 4 -point 
Likert scale, with higher scores indicating worse levels of family functioning.  10-
15 X X X 
Daytime Function & Health Outcomes   
Asthma 
control  Childhood Asthma Control Test (C -ACT)  (P, C): 7 total items --3 parent (5 -
point scale) and 4 child (3 -point scale) -- assess asthma control, higher 
scores indicate better control. IC reliability α=.79.  <5 X 
 
 X 
 
 
 X 
Child spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]  (D) – objective measure of expi[INVESTIGATOR_226007].2 
Asthma control  (FEV 1:FVC) will follow national spi[INVESTIGATOR_226008] .2 5 X X X 
Asthma -
Related 
Quality of Life       
Pediatric Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire  (P, C): 13 items, 7 -point 
scale, parent or child -reported tools measuring quality of life of child/parent 
of child with asthma.  Higher scores indicate higher QOL.  <5 X X X 
OPTIONAL COGNITIVE BATTERY  – in person only  
Executive 
Functioning  NIH Toolbox  Cognition Battery  (C): [ADDRESS_271694] Usability & Acceptability   
Acceptability  Feasibility and Acceptability of Intervention Measure s (FIM, AIM)  (P, C): 8 
items using 5 -point scale; higher scores indicate higher feasibility or 
acceptabi lity. Established validity, reliability.  <5  I  
Usability  System Usability Scale  (P): 10-items, 5 -point scale to report usability of 
system.  Higher scores indicates higher usability.  Established validity, 
reliability.  <5  I  
Overall  Semi -structured  Interview  (P,C): [ADDRESS_271695]-intervention interview with parent and child.  10-
15  I  
(P) Parent report, (C) child report, (D) direct measurement ; I= intervention group only ; C= control group only   
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271696] ed for this research: Identify whether the data are 
being obtained  from the subjects (or subjects’ specimens) or whether they are being obtained  from some other 
source (and identify the source) . 
If you have already provided this information in Question 5.1, you do not need to repeat the information here.  
 Direct measurement: child weight, height, spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], NIH Cognitive battery (optional)  
Self-report: all surveys/questionnaires  
IMPACT app use – site tracks unique ID logon date, time, duration , use (goals selected, progress, asthma 
symptom reports, asthma control – C-ACT and spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], medication use)  
5.6 Identifiability of data and specimens . Answer these questions carefully and completely. This will allow HSD to 
accurately determine the type of review that is required and the relevant compliance requirements.  Review the 
following definitions before answering the questions:  
Access means to view  or perceive data, but not to possess or record it. See, in contrast, the definition of “obtain”.  
Identifiable  means that the identity  of an individual is or may be readily (1) ascertained by [CONTACT_52905] a combination of data variables, or (2) associated with the informatio n.  
Direct identifiers  are direct link s between a subject and data/specimens. Examples include (but are not limited to): name, date 
of birth, medical record number, email or IP address, pathology or surgery accession number, student number, or a collection 
of data that is (when taken together)  identifiable.  
Indirect identifiers  are information that links between direct identifiers and data/specimens. Examples: a subject code or 
pseudonym.  
Key refers to a single place where direct identifiers and indirect identifiers are linked together so that , for example, coded data 
can be identified as relating to a specific person. Example: a master list that contains the data code and the identifiers li nked to 
the codes.  
Obtain  means to possess or record in any fashion (writing, electronic document, video,  email, voice recording, etc.) for 
research purposes and to retain for any length of time. This is different from accessing , which means to view or perceive data.  
a. Will you or any members of your team have access  to any direct or indirect identifiers?  
  Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
         
 X No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not have access to 
direct or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There is an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) to study team members under any circumstances.    
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  
There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271697] identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   
 Parent: Legal first , last name; parent email address; telephone number; home address; 
for study communication, study mailings  
 
Child: First and last name; date of birth  
 
Intervention dyads: IMPACT app will track IP address for website login dates, usage  
 
 
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not obtain direct 
or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There will be an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) under any circumstances.     
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.     
  
        
c. If any identifiers  will be obtained , indicate how the identifiers will be stored (and for which data).  NOTE: Do 
not describe the data security plan here – that information is requested in section 9.6. 
  
Identifiers will be stored with the data . Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately but a link will be maintained 
between the identifiers and the study data (for example, through the use of a code) . 
Describe the data to which this applies:   X 
  
  The master list linking study ID with identifier will be kept in a locked file cabinet inside 
the PI’s locked office.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 24 of 56 
  
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately, with no link between the identifiers 
and the study data. Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
d. Research collaboration . Will individuals who provide coded information or specimens  for the research also 
collaborate on other  activities for this research? If yes, identify the activities and provide the name [CONTACT_52937]’s institution/organization.  
Examples include but are not limited to: (1) study, interpretation, or analysis of the data that results from the coded 
information or specimens; and (2) authorship on presentations or manus cripts related to this work.  
       
5.7 Protected Health Information (PHI).  Will participants’ identifiable PHI be  access ed, obtain ed, use d, or disclose d for 
any reason (for example, to identify or screen potential subjects, to obtain study data or specimens, for study 
follow -up) that does not involve the creation or obtaining of a Limited Data Set?  
PHI is individually identifiable  healthcare record infor mation or clinical specimens from an organization considered a “covered 
entity” by [CONTACT_52906], in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. You must answer yes to this 
question  if the research involves identifiable health care r ecords (e.g., medical, dental, pharmacy, nursing, billing, etc.), 
identifiable healthcare information from a clinical department repository, or observations or recordings of clinical 
interactions.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this question; go to question  5.8 
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
  a. Describe the PHI and the reason for using  it. Be specific.  For example, will any “free text” fields 
(such as physician notes) be accessed, obtained, or used?   
 We will identify prospective participants through the ITHS biomedical informatics team and UW 
Medicine electronic medical records.  Search criteria incl ude: child age (7 -11 years), asthma 
diagnosis, in Pi[INVESTIGATOR_835], Snohomish and King county.  
Specific PHI to be exported include : 
• Child name  
• Child age  
• Parent name  
• Parent email  
• Parent home address  
 
We will collect child and parent names to clearly indicate eligible  individuals within the 
household.  
 
Parent email and home address requested in order to send study flyer/recruitment materials  
 
Child age included in order to ensure eligible for study  
 
b. Is any of the PHI located in Washington State?  
  No  
 X Yes  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271698] of how the PHI will be accessed or obtained, starting with the 
source/location and then describing the system/path/mechanism by [CONTACT_52907], 
accessed, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_52862] . Be specific.  For example: directly v iew records; search 
through a department’s clinical database; submit a request to Leaf.  
 UW Electronic Medical Records will be accessed by [CONTACT_226029].  For those records that meet criteria, the ITHS team will 
export the PHI into a secure REDCap database, which will be shared with the Study PI.  
d. For which PHI will subjects provide HIPAA authorization  before the PHI is accessed, obtained 
and/or used ?  
 None  
 Confirm by [CONTACT_52908], obtain, use, or disclose any UW Medicine PHI.  
  Confirmed    
 
e. Will you obtain any HIPAA authorizations electronically (i.e., e -signature)?  
X No 
  Yes 
If ‘Yes’, confirm by [CONTACT_217310] ‘Special    
Considerations’ section of the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information 
regarding the use of electronic signatures and HIPAA authorizations.  
 Confirmed  
 
f. For which PHI will HIPAA authorization NOT be obtained from the subjects?  
 • Child name  
• Child age  
• Parent name  
• Parent email  
• Parent home address  
 
 Provide the following assurances by [CONTACT_52909].  
 
 
The minimum necessary amount of PHI to accomplish the purposes described in this 
application will be accessed, obtained and/or used.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by 
[CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The HIPAA “accounting for disclosures” requirement will be fulfilled, if applicable. See UW 
Medicine Compliance  Policy # 104.   
X 
 
 
   
 
There will be reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any 
patient in any report of the research.     
X 
   
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 26 of 56 
 5.8 Genomic data sharing . Will the research  obtain or generate genomic data ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the question below.  
 a. Will genomic data from this research be sent to a national database (for example, NIH’s dbGaP 
database)?  
   No  
   Yes → If yes, complete the SUPPLEMENT Genomic Data Sharing  and upload it to 
Zipline . 
5.9 Whole genome sequencing. For re search involving biospecimens: W ill the research include whole genome 
sequencing?  
Whole genome sequencing is sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or 
exome sequence of that specimen.  
 X No  
  Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_271699] information will be used for any of the following:  
• Future research not descr ibed in this application (in other words, secondary research)  
• Submission to a repository, registry, or database managed by [CONTACT_3476] , colleagues, or others for 
research purposes  
• Sharing with others for their own research  
Please  consider the broadest possible future plans and whether consent will be obtained now from the 
subjects for future sharing or research  uses  (which it may not be possible to describe in detail  at this time).  
Answer  YES even if  future sharing or uses will us e de -identified information or specimens. Answer  NO if sharing is 
unlikely or if the  only sharing will be through the NIH Genomic Data Sha ring described in question 5. 8. 
Many federal grants and contracts now require data or specimen sharing as a condition  of funding, and many journals require 
data sharing as a condition of publication. “Sharing” may include  (for example) : informal arrangements to share banked 
data/specimens with other investigators; establishing a repository that will formally share with  other researchers  through 
written agreements; or sending data/specimens to a third party repository/archive/entity such as the Social Science Open 
Access Repository (SSOAR), or the  UCLA Ethnomusicology Archive.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
 a. Describe what will be store d for future use,  including whether any direct or indirect (e.g., subject 
codes) identifiers will be stored.  
 The study consent form provides an option for parent participants to opt -in to being 
contact[CONTACT_226030].  Those who opt in will have the following 
contact [CONTACT_226031]: parent name, phone, email, address; child name, age.  
 
All study data collected (instruments, app usage, interviews) will be stored for future 
use.  These d ata will be deidentified.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 27 of 56 
  b. Describe what will be shared  with other researchers or with a repository/database/registry , 
including whether direct identifiers will be shared and (for specimens) what data will be 
released with the specimens.  
 Not applicable    
 c. Who will oversee and/or manage the sharing?  
 Principal Investigator  
 d. Describe the possible future uses , including limitations or restrictions (if any) on future uses or 
users.  As stated above, consider the broadest possible uses . 
 Examples: data will be used only for cardiovascular research; data will not be used for research on 
population origins.  
 The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_226009], including mentoring of 
PhD students analyzing these data.  Only invest igators supervised by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_226010].  
  
 e. Consent . Will consent be obtained now from subjects for the secondary use, banking and/or 
future sharing?  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, be sure to include the information about this consent process in the 
consent form (if there is one) and in the answers to the consent questions in 
Section 8.  
 f. Withdrawal . Will subjects be able to withdraw their data/specimens from secondary use, 
banking or sharing?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how, and whether there are any limitations on withdrawal.  
 Example: data can be withdrawn from the repository but cannot be  retrieved after they 
are released.  
       
 g. Agreements for sharing or release . Confirm by [CONTACT_52910] (and, if applicable, UW Medicine) policies that require a formal agreement 
with  the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_52864].  
 Data Use Agreements or Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52865]; Material Transfer Agreements are used for 
specimens (or specimens plus data ). Do not attach  any template agreement forms; the IRB neither reviews nor 
approves them  
 X  Confirmed  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 28 of 56 
 5.11 Communication with subjects during the study . Describe the types of communication (if any) the research team 
will have with already -enrolled subjects during the study. Provide a description instead of the actual materials 
themselves.   
Examples: email, texts, phone, or letter reminders about appointments or about returning study materials such as a 
questionnaire; requests to confirm contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 Subjects will indicate their preferred method of communication, including phone, text, or email. The 
study team will use the preferred meth od of communication for reminders, scheduling visits, and 
troubleshooting as needed. In -person visits will include T0, T1, and T2 visits described above.  
5.[ADDRESS_271700] information  for subjects  so that they can be 
contact[CONTACT_52911] ? 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe the purpose of the future contact, and whether use of the contact [CONTACT_52912]; if not, describe who else could be provided with the contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  Describe the criteria for approving requests for the information.    
 Examples: inform subjects about other studies; ask subjects for additional information or medical record access 
that is not currently part of the study proposed in this application; obtain another sample.  
 Consent includes section where parent may opt in/out of retaining contact [CONTACT_226032]. If they opt in, subject provides preferred method of contact (phone, email, mailing 
address). If opt in, information will be stored on PI’s s ecure network and accessible only to the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_226011]  
5.13 Alternatives to participation . Are there any alternative procedures or treatments that might be advantageous  to 
the subjects ? 
If there are no alternative procedures or treatments, select “No”. Examples of advantageous alternatives: earning extra class  
credit in some time -equivalent way other than research participation; obtaining supportive care or a standard clinical 
treatment f rom a health care provider instead of participating in research with an experimental drug.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the alternatives.  
         
5.14 Upload to Zipline  all data collection forms  (if any) that will be directly used by [CONTACT_52914], and any  
scripts/talking points that will be used to collect the data . Do not include data collection forms that will be used 
to abstract data from other sources (such as medical or academic records ), or video recordings.  
• Examples : survey, questionnaires, subject logs or diaries, focus group questions.  
• NOTE: Some times the IRB can approve the general content of surveys and other data collection instruments rather than 
the specific form itself. This prevents the need to submit a modification request for future minor changes that do not add 
new topi[INVESTIGATOR_52866].  To request this general approval, use the text box below to identify 
the questionnaires/surveys/ etc. for which you are seeking this more general approval. Then briefly describe the scope of 
the topi[INVESTIGATOR_226012]. The HSD staff person who screens this 
application will let you know whether this is sufficient or whether you will need to provide more information.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are s ufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
• For data that will be gathered in an evolving way : This refers to data collection/questions that are not pre -determined 
but rather are shaped during interactions with participants in response to observations and responses made during those 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 29 of 56 
 interactions. If this applies to the proposed  research, provide a  description of the process by [CONTACT_52915]/questions will be established during the interactions  with subjects, how the data collection/questions  will be 
documented , the topi[INVESTIGATOR_52868] , the most sensitive type of information likely to be gathered , and the 
limitations (if any) on topi[INVESTIGATOR_52869] d or pursue d. 
Use this text box (if desired) to provide:  
• Short written descriptions of materials that cannot be uploaded, such as URLs  
• A description of the process that will be used  for data that will be gathered in an evolving way.  
• The general content of questionnaires, surveys and similar instruments for which general approval  is being 
sought . (See the NOTE  bullet point in the instructions above.)  
 Primary data collection method will be via REDCap surveys – PDF versions of these surveys will be 
attached.  
 
5.15  SARS -CoV-2 testing . Will the subjects be tested for the SARS -CoV-2 coronavirus?  
If the only testing is to screen the subjects (question 2.8), you do not need to answer this question  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes : 
• Name [CONTACT_52938]  
• Confirm that the lab and its use of this test is CLIA -certified or certified by [CONTACT_52916]  
• Describe whether you will return the results  to the participants and, if yes, who will do it and 
how (including any information you would provide to subjects with positive test results).    
        
5.[ADDRESS_271701] that is not part of a clinical facility?  
Examples: a computer tablet, a portable research ultra -sound device).  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes : confirm by [CONTACT_52917] d UW Environmental Health & Safety requirements described here: 
https://www.ehs.washington.edu/system/files/resources/cleaning -disinfection -protocols -covid -
19.pdf   
 X  Confirmed  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 30 of 56 
 6 CHILDREN (MINORS) and PARENTAL PERMISSION  
6.1 Involvement of minors . Does the research include minors (children )? 
Minor or child  means someone who has not yet attained the legal age for consent for the research procedures, as 
described in the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted. This may or may not 
be the same as the definition used by [CONTACT_52918] g agencies such as the National Institutes of Health.  
• In Washington State the generic age of consent is 18, meaning that anyone under the age of 18 is 
considered a child.  
• There are some procedures for which the age of consent is much lower in Washington S tate. 
• The generic age of consent may be different in other states, and in other countries.  
  No → If no, go to Section 8 . 
 X Yes → If yes, provide the age range of the minor subjects for this study and the legal age for consent in 
the study  population(s). If there is more than one answer, explain.    
  Child subjects range from 7 -11 years.  Child subjects will not be legal age to consent.  
  
Don’t know  →This means is it not possible to know the age of the subjects. For example, this may be true 
for some research involving social media, the Internet, or a dataset that is obtained  from 
another researcher or from a government agency. Go to Section 8 .  
 
6.2 Parental permission . Parental permission  means actively obtaining the permission of the parents. This is not the 
same as “passive” or “opt out” permission where it is assumed that parents are allowing their children to 
participate because they have been provided with information about the res earch and have not objected or 
returned a form indicating they don’t wa nt their children to participate.  
a. Will parental permission be obtained for: 
  
All of the research procedures  → Go to question 6.2b.  X 
  
  
None  of the research procedures  → Use the table belo w to provide justification , and skip question 
6.2b.    
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which 
parental permission  will not be obtained .   
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) for 
which there will be NO parental 
permission2 Reason why parental 
permission  will not be 
obtained  Will parents be 
informed  about 
the research ?3 
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 31 of 56 
       
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures : collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
2. If identifiable information or biospecimens will be obtained without parent permission, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52919]’ refusal to provide broad consent (for example, through the Northwest Biotrust).  
3. Will parents be informed  about the research beforehand even though active permission  is not being obtained ? 
b. Indicate the  plan for obtaining parental permission . One or both boxes m ust be checked.  
  Both parents, unless  one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available; or when 
only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child    
  
  
One parent, even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.   X 
  
  This is all that is required for minimal risk research.  
 If both boxes  are checked , explain:  
 Research is minimal risk, one parent will provide consent.  
6.3 Children who are wards. Will any of the children be wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, an advocate may need to be  appointed for each child who is a ward. The advocate must be in 
addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. The 
same individual can serve as advocate for all children who are wards.    
 Describe who will be the advocate(s). The description  must address the following points:  
• Background and experience  
• Willingness to act in the best interests of the child for the duration of the research  
• Independence of the research, research team, and any g uardian organization  
       
 
6.[ADDRESS_271702] involves interaction (in -person or 
remotely) with individuals under the age of 18, researchers must comply with UW Administrat ive Policy 
Statement 10.[ADDRESS_271703]-party led research (i.e., research conducted by a non -UW PI). 
Information and FAQs  for researchers  are available.  
 
This point is advisory only; there is no need to provide a response.  
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 32 of 56 
 7 ASSENT OF CHILDREN (MINORS)  
Go to Section 8  if your research does not involve children (minors).  
7.1 Assent of children (minors) . Though children do not have the legal capacity to “consent” to participate in 
research, they should be involved in the process if they are able to “assent” by [CONTACT_7661] a study explained to them 
and/or by [CONTACT_5978] a simple form about the study, and then giving  their verbal choice about whether they want to 
participate. They may also provide a written assent if they are older. See WORKSHEET Children  for circumstances 
in w hich a child’s assent may be unnecessary or inappropriate.   
a. Will assent be obtained for: 
  
All research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.2.  X 
  
  
None  of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justification , 
then skip to question 7.6   
  
  
Some of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to identify the 
procedures for which  assent  will not be 
obtain ed.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if 
any) for which assent will NOT 
be obtained  Reason why assent will not  be obtain ed 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse your answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
7.2 Assent process. Describe  how assent will be obtained , for each child group. If the research involves children of 
different ages, answer separately for each group. If the children are non -English speakers, include a description of 
how their comprehension of the information will be evaluated . 
 Following parental consent, research team me mber will play a recorded video of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226013] (or 
read assent form if video unavailable). Research team member will answer any questions, and will emphasize that 
participation is voluntary, and they can stop anytime. The child will indi cate whether they agree or disagree via 
REDCap (green check mark and “Yes, I’ll join the study or red ‘x’ and “no, I do not want to join the study”).  
 
7.3 Dissent or resistance. Describe how a child’s objection or resistance to participation (including non -verbal 
indications) will be identified during the research, and what the response will be .  
 If the child does not assent to participate, the parent and child will not be enrol led in the study. If already enrolled, 
the child/parent may withdraw at any time.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 33 of 56 
 7.4 E -consent. Will any electronic processes (email, websites, electronic signatures, etc.) be used to present assent 
information to subjects/and or to obtain documentation (signatures) of assent? If yes, describe how this will be 
done . 
 REDCap e -consent framework will be used for electronic consent.   
Child assent information will be read by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_226014], with the child indicating their 
agreement/disagreement with joining in REDCap.   
7.5 Documentation of assent.  Which of the following statements describes whether documentation of assent  will be 
obtained ? 
  
None of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justif ication, 
then go to question  7.5.b    
  
  
All of the research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.5.a, do not complete the 
table   X 
  
  
Some of the research procedures and/or child groups  → Complete the table below and then to go 
question 7.5.a   
  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which assent 
will NOT be documented  
            
            
            
            
            
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
 a. Describe how assent will be documented . If the children are functionally illiterate or are not fluent in English, 
include a description of the documentation process for them . 
  The child will indicate whether they agree or disagree via REDCap survey (green check mark and “Yes, I’ll 
join the s tudy or red ‘x’ and “no, I do not want to join the study”).  
 b. Upload all assent materials  (talking points, videos, forms, etc.) to Zipline . Assent materials are not required to 
provide all of the standard elements of adult consent; the information should be appropriate to the age, 
population, and research procedures. The documents sho uld be in Word, if possible.  
7.6 Children who reach the legal age of consent during participation in longitudinal research .  
Children who were enrolled at a young age and continue for many years : It is best practice to re -obtain assent (or 
to obtain it for the first time, if it was not obtained  at the beginning of their participation).  
Children who reach the legal age of consent : Informed consent must be obtained from the now -adult subject for 
(1) any ongoing interactions or interventions with the subjects, or (2) the continued analysis of specimens or data 
for which the subject’s identify is readily identifiable to the researcher, unless the IRB waives this requirement.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 34 of 56 
  a. Describe the plans (if any) to re -obtain assent from children.   
 Not applicable  
 b. Describe the plans (if any) to obtain consent for children who reach the legal age of consent.  
• If adult consent  will be obtained from them , describe what will happen regarding  now -adult subjects 
who cannot be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] . 
• If consent will not obtained or will not be possible:  explain why.  
 Study data collection will end in 2022, though i t is possible that data analyses may last for more than [ADDRESS_271704] information for the child 
subjects  (all outreach will have been conducted via the parent phone  or email).  Additionally, there will not 
be any ongoing interventions or data collection.  Data analyses will only use deidentified data.  
7.7 Other regulatory requirements . (This is for  information only; no answer or response is required.)  Researchers are 
responsible for determining whether their research conducted in schools, with student records, or over the 
Internet comply with permission, consent, and inspection requirements of the following federal regulations:  
• PPRA – Protection of Pup il Rights Amendment  
• FERPA – Family Education Rights and Privacy Act  
• COPPA – Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act  
 
 
[ADDRESS_271705]’s decision to participate in the research is  documented. This is 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_52870] a consent form.  
CONSENT FORM  is a document signed by [CONTACT_1766], by [CONTACT_61952].  
ELEMENTS OF CONSENT  are specific information that is required to be provided to subjects.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 35 of 56 
 CHARACTERISTICS OF 
CONSENT  are the qualities of the consent pro cess  as a whole. These are:  
• Consent must be legally effective.  
• The process minimizes the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Subjects or their representatives must be given sufficient opportunity to discuss 
and consider participation.  
• The information provided must:  
o Begin with presentation of key information (for consent materials over 
2,000 words)  
o Be what a r easonable person would want to have  
o Be organized and presented so as to facilitate understanding  
o Be provided in sufficient detail  
o Not ask or appear to ask  subjects to waive their rights  
PARENTAL PERMISSION  is the parent’s active permission for the child t o participate in the research. Parental 
permission is subject to the same requirements as consent, including written 
documentation of permission and required elements.  
SHORT FORM CONSENT  is an alternative way of obtaining written documentation of consent that is most 
commonly used with individuals who are illiterate or whose language is one for which 
translated consent forms are not available.  
WAIVER OF CONSENT  means there is IRB approval for not obtaining consent or for not including some of the 
elements  of consent in the consent process.  
 
NOTE : If you plan to obtain identifiable information or identifiable biospecimens without 
consent, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52922] a subject’s refusal to provide 
broad consent (for example, the Northwest  Biotrust).  
WAIVER OF 
DOCUMENTATION OF 
CONSENT  means that there is IRB approval for not obtaining written documentation of consent.  
8.1 Groups  Identify  the groups to which the answers in this section apply.  
 X Adult subjects  
 X Parents who are providing permission for their children to participate in research  
 → If you selected PARENTS , the word “consent” below should also be interpreted as applying to parental 
permission and “subjects” should also be interpreted as applying to the parents.  
8.2 The consent process  and characteristics . This series of questions is about whether consent  will be obtained for all 
procedures except recruiting and screening  and, if yes, how.  
The issue of consent for recruiting and screening activities is addressed in question 4. 7. You do not need to repeat your answer 
to question 4.6.  
 a. Are there any procedures for which consent  will not be obtained ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, use the table below to identify the procedures for which consent will not be obtained . “All” 
is an acceptable answer for some studies.    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271706], and sharing/banking of data and specimens fo r 
future work.  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) 
for which there will be NO consent 
process  Reason why consent  will not be 
obtain ed Will subjects  be 
provided with 
info about the 
research after 
they finish?  
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all groups , collaps e your answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Describe the consent process , if consent will be obtained  for any or all procedures, for any or all groups. 
Address groups and procedures separately if the consent processes are different.  
Be sure to include:  
• The location/setting where consent will be obtained  
• Who will obtain consent (refer to positions , roles,  or titles, not names)  
• How subjects  will be provide d sufficient opportunity to discuss the study with the research team and consider 
participation  
 The study team (PI, student assistant) will meet with potential parent participants and their child at their home 
or community library.  There, the study team will describe the study and review the consent form with the 
parent, answering any questions, and emphasizing that their participation i s voluntary.  An iPad with the 
preloaded consent form will be provided to the parent for review.  Should the parent wish to delay signing the 
consent form , they may reschedule the T0 visit and will be provided an electronic copy of the form to review.  
 
The parent consent form will include consent for the parent to participate as well as parent consent for their 
child to participate in the study. Both the parent and child will need to participate in order to be enrolled in the 
study. The parent will sign via  REDCap e -consent module, which will automatically provide an emailed PDF 
copy of the consent form for parent records.   
 
Remote protocol (due to COVID -19 restrictions  or participant family preference ) 
Remote protocol (if needed): Should remote study visit s be required  or preferred by [CONTACT_4317] , a link to the 
study e -Consent and assent form (with video of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_226002]) will be sent ahead of time .  
Families may complete consent and assent asynchronously.  If not completed prior to the web conference, the 
study team will display the REDCap e -Consent module using screen share and allow the parent time to review 
and complete.  Once completed, the study team will read the study assent to the child.   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271707] the subjects ’ understanding of the 
information  during the consent process . 
 Ask if the subject has any questions. Ask the subject to review the basic study procedure, providing prompts if 
needed (baseline vi sits, study duration, follow -up visits). Intervention involves weekly online activities , control 
just visits .  
d. Influence . Does  the research involve any subject groups that might find it difficult to say “no” to participation  
because of the setting or their relationship with someone on the study team , even if they aren’t pressured  to 
participate ?   
Examples: Student participants being recruited into their teacher’s research; patients being recruited into their healthcare 
provider’s research, study team members who are participants; outpatients recruited from an outpatient surgery waiting 
room just prior to their surgery.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what will be done to reduce any effect of the setting or relationship on the 
participation  decision.    
  Examples: a study coordinator will obtain consent instead of the subjects’ physician; the researcher will not 
know which subjects agreed to participate; subjects will have two days to decide after hearing about the 
study.  
       
e. Information provided is tailored to needs of subject population . Describe the basis for concluding that  the 
information that will be provided  to subjects (via written or oral methods ) is what a reasonable member of the 
subject population(s)  would want to know. If the research  consent materials contain a key information section, 
also describe the basis for concluding that the  informatio n presented in that section is t hat which is most likely  
to assi st the selected subject population with making a decision. See GUIDA NCE Key I nformation for Consent 
Materials . 
 
For example : Consultation  with publications about research subjects’  preferences, disease -focused nonprofit groups, patient 
interest groups, or other researchers/study staff with experience with the specific population. It may also involve directly 
consulting selected members of t he study population.  
 [CONTACT_226039], the study PI, has over [ADDRESS_271708]. Sonney also has over  7 years of research experience with this 
population, which makes her well qualified to understand essential information to provide prospective subjects.  
f. Ongoing process . For research that involves multiple or continued interaction with subjects over time, describe 
the opportunities (if any) that will be given to  subjects to ask questions or to change their minds about 
participating.  
 Prior to any subject interaction, study team will ask parent/child if they have any questions or concerns about 
participating. They will be reminded that they may stop at any time. During online participation, written 
prompts remind that they may stop at a ny time.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 38 of 56 
 8.3 Electronic presentation of consent information. Will any part of the consent -related information be provided 
electronically for some or all of the subjects?  
This refers to the use of electronic systems and processes instead of (or in addition to) a paper consent form. For example, an 
emailed consent form, a passive or an interactive website, graphics, audio, video podcasts. See GUIDANCE Electronic Informed 
Consent  for information  about electronic consent requirements at UW . 
  No → If no, skip to question 8.4  
 X Yes → If yes, answer questions a through e 
a. Describe the electronic consent  methodology and the information that will be provided.  
All informational materials must be made available to the IRB. Website content should be provided as a 
Word document. It is considered best practice to give subjects  information about multi -page/multi -screen 
information that will help them assess how long it will take them to complete the process. For example, 
telling them that it will take about 15 minutes, or that it involves reading six screens or pages.  
 After scheduling the T0 data collection session, the study team will email the parent a copy of the 
consent form for review (not signature.   
 
T0 visit - The study team (PI, student assistant) will meet with potential parent participants and 
their child at  their home or community library.  There, the study team will describe the study and 
review the consent form with the parent, answering any questions, and emphasizing that their 
participation is voluntary.  An iPad with the preloaded consent form will be p rovided to the 
parent for review  and the parent will be advised it will take 5 -10 minutes to complete .  Should the 
parent wish to delay signing the consent form, they may reschedule the T0 visit and will be 
provided an electronic copy of the form to review . 
 
The parent consent form will include consent for the parent to participate as well as parent 
consent for their child to participate in the study. Both the parent and child will need to 
participate in order to be enrolled in the study. The parent will sign via REDCap e -consent 
module  via REDCap , which will automatically provide an emailed PDF copy of the consent form 
for parent records.   
 
Remote protocol (due to COVID -19 restrictions  or participant family preference ) 
Remote protocol (if needed): Should  remote study visits be required  or preferred by [CONTACT_4317] , 
the study team will follow similar procedures outlined above, only displaying the e -consent form 
via Zoom videoconference if not previously completed.  
 
b. Describe how the information can be navigated (if relevant). For example, will the subject  be able to 
proceed forward or backward within the system, or to stop and continue at a later time?  
 Subject will be able to scroll to view entire consent on single page.  
c. In a standard paper -based consent process, the subjects generally have the opportunity to go 
through the consent form with study staff and/or to ask study staff about any question they may 
have after reading the consent form. Describe  what  will be done , if anything, to facilitate the 
subject’s comprehension and opportunity to ask questions when consent information is 
presented electronically. Include a description of any provisions to help ensure privacy and 
confidentiality during this process.  
Examples: hyperlinks, help text, telephone calls, text messages or other type of electronic messaging, video 
conference, live chat with remotely located study team members.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271709] the opportunity to ask the study team questions at any time, including d uring 
the consent process.  Data collection sessions are in person, therefore the study team is available 
for questions.  IF remote sessions are required  or preferred by [CONTACT_4317] , consent will still be 
collected live via videoconference (synchronously)  and the team will be available for questions 
during the Zoom meeting.  
 
The study team will ask if the subject has any questions. The team will ask the subject to review 
the basic study procedure, providing prompts if needed (baseline visits, study duratio n, follow -up 
visits). Intervention involves weekly online activities, control just visits.  
d. What will happen if there are  individuals who wish to participate but who do not have access to 
the consent methodology being used, or who do not wish to use it? Are there alternative ways in 
which they can obtain the information, or will there be some assistance available? If this is a 
clinical trial, these individuals cannot be excluded from the research  unless there is  a compelling 
rationale.  
 
For example, consider individuals who lack familiarity with electronic systems, have poor eyesight or 
impaired motor skills, or who do not have easy email or internet access.  
 In case of REDCap downtime, iPad failure, or other unanticipated issue, the study team will have 
paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_226015] (and all questionnaires) during in -person visits.  
Such paper -based consent, assent and data collection will be us ed if necessary.  
e. How will the research team ensure continued accessibility of consent materials and information 
during the study ? 
 Parents will be emailed a copy of the consent form automatically via REDCap (in PDF format).  
Should parents request it , a paper copy will be mailed at no cost to the subject.  
f. How will additional information  be provided to subjects during the research , including any 
significant new findings (such as new risk information)  If this is not an issue, explain why.  
 Families  will be notified of any significant new findings (i.e. risk information) via their preferred 
communication modality, email, phone or text.  Given that such details are difficult to convey 
over text, the subject will be texted to arrange a time to discuss the findings at a convenient time.   
8.4 Written documentation of consent. Which of the statements below describe whether documentation of consent 
will be obtained?  NOTE: This question does not apply to screening and recruiting procedures which have already 
been addressed in question 4. 7. 
Documentation of consent that is obtained electronically is not considered written consent unless it i s obtained by a method 
that allows verification of the individual’s signature. In other words, saying “yes” by [CONTACT_61965]  
a. Is written documentation of consent being obtained for: 
  
None of the research procedures  → Use the table below to provide justification then g o to question 
8.5.   
  
  
All of the research procedures  → Do not complete the table; go to question 8.4.b.  X 
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which written 
documentation of consent  will not be obtained  from adult  
subjects.    
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271710] 
group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which 
there will be NO documentation of consent  Will they be 
provided  with a 
written 
statement 
describing the 
research 
(optional)?  
  YES NO 
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
                 
 
     
      
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all adult  groups or all procedures, collaps e the answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Electronic consent signature. For studies in which documentation of consent will be obtained: will subjects use 
an electronic method to provide their consent signature?  
• See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information about options (including REDCap e -signature [CONTACT_217347]) and any associated requirements.  
• FDA-regulated studies must use a system that complies with the FDA’s “Part 11” requirements about electronic 
systems and records.  Note that the UW -IT supported DocuSign e -signature [CONTACT_52939] . 
• Having subjects check a box at the begin ning of an emailed or web -based questionnaire is not considered legally 
effective documentation of consent.  
  No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 41 of 56 
  X Yes → If yes,  indicate which  methodology will be used . 
 X UW ITHS REDCap   
  Other REDCap 
installation  → Please name [CONTACT_217348] (e.g. 
Vanderbilt, Univ. of Cincinnati) in the field below and 
provide a completed SUPPLEMEN T Other REDCap 
Installation  with your submission.  
  UW DocuSign   
  Other  → Please describe in the field below and provide a signed  
     TEMPLATE Other E-signature [CONTACT_226038].  
       
b.1 Is this method legally valid in the jurisdiction where the research will occur?  
NOTE: UW ITHS REDCap and UW DocuSign have been vetted for compliance with WA State 
and federal laws regarding electronic signatures . 
  No 
  Yes → If yes,  what is the source of information  about legal validity ? 
       
b.[ADDRESS_271711]’s identity be obtained if the signature [CONTACT_52940] a member of the study team? Note that this is required for FDA -regulated 
studies.  
See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information and examples  
  No →If no, provide the rationale for why this is not required or necessary to pr otect  
subjects or the integrity of the research. Also, what would be the risks to the 
actual subject if somebody other than the intended  signer provides the consent 
signature?  
       
  Yes →If yes,  describe how  subject identity will be verified, providing a non - technical  
 description that the reviewer will understand.  
       
b.3 How will the requirement be met to provide a copy of the consent information (consent 
form) to individuals who provide an e -signature?  
The copy can be paper or electronic and may be provided on a n electronic storage device or via 
email. If the electronic consent information uses hyperlinks or other websites or podcasts to convey 
information specifically related to the research, the information in these hyperlinks should be 
included in the cop y pro vided to the subjects and the website must be maintained for the duration 
of the entire study.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 42 of 56 
 8.5 Non -English -speaking or -reading adult subjects . Will the research  enroll adult subjects who do not speak English 
or who lack fluency or literacy in English?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the process that will be used  to ensure that the oral and written information 
provided to them during the consent process and throughout the study will be in a language readily 
understandable to them and (for written materials such as consent form s or questionnaires) at an 
appropriate reading/comprehension level.    
       
 a. Interpretation . Describe how interpretation will be provided,  and when. Also, describe the 
qualifications of the interpreter(s) – for example, background, experience, language proficiency 
in English and in the other language, certification, other credentials, familiarity with the research -
related vocabulary in English and the target language.  
       
 b. Translation s. Describe how translations will be obtained for  all study materials (not just consent 
forms) . Also, describe the method for ensuring  that the translations meet the UW IRB’s 
requi rement that translated documents will be linguistically accurate, at an appropriate reading 
level for the participant population, and culturally sensitive for the locale in which they will be 
used.  
       
8.6 Barriers to written documentation of consent . There are many possible barriers to obtaining written 
documentation of consent. Consider, for example, individuals who are functionally illiterat e; do not read English 
well; or have sensory or motor impairments that may impede the ability to read and sign a consent form.  
a. Describe the plans (if any) for obtaining written documentation of consent from potential subjects who may 
have difficulty with the standard documentation process (that is, reading and signing a consent form). Skip this 
question if written documentation of consent is not being obtained for any part of  the research.  
Examples of solutions : Translated consent forms; use of the Short Form consent process; reading the form to the person  
before they sign it ; excluding individuals who cannot read an d understand the consent form.  
 Eligibility requirements for the study include written/spoken English for adults and spoken English for children. 
Those who are functionally illiterate will not be eligible. For those who have sensory or motor impairments, it is 
presumed that such individu als would have been unable to read and complete the web -based online eligibility 
screening. However, in the event that parent has such impairments at the time of enrollment, such individuals 
likely would not meet the eligibility requirements of the study a nd would not be enrolled.  
 
8.7 Deception . Will information  be deliberately withheld,  or will false information  be provided,  to any of the subjects? 
Note: “Blinding” subjects to their study group/condition/arm is not considered to be deception , but not telling them ahead of 
time that they will be subject to an intervention or about the purpose of the procedure(s) is deception . 
 X  No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 43 of 56 
   Yes → If yes, describe what information and why.  
  Example: It may be necessary to deceive subjects about the purpose of the study  (describe why) . 
       
 a. Will subjects  be informed  beforehand that they will be unaware of or misled regarding the 
nature or purposes of the research ? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes  
 b. Will subjects be debrief ed later? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how  and when  this will occur . Upload any debriefing materials, 
including talking points or a script, to Zipline .   
       
8.8 Cognitively impaired adults, and other adults unable to consent . Will such individuals be included in the 
research?  
Examples: individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) or dementia; individuals who are unconscious, or who are significantly 
intoxicated.  
 X No → If no, go to question  8.9. 
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions.  
 a. Rationale . Provide the rationale for including this population.  
       
 b. Capacity for consent / decision making capacity . Describe the process that will be used  to 
determine whether a cognitively impaired  individual is capable of consent  decision maki ng 
with respect to the research protocol and setting.  
        
 b.1. If there  will be repeated interactions with the impaired subjects over a time period when 
cognitive capacity could increase or diminish, also describe how (if at all) decision -
making capacity will be re -assessed and (if appropriate) consent obtained during that 
time.  
       
 c. Permission (surrogate consent) . If the research  will include adults who cannot consent for 
themselves, describe the process for obtaining permission (“surrogate consent”) from a legally 
authorized  representative (LAR).   
 For research conducted in Washington State, see the GUIDANCE  Legally Authorized Representative  to 
learn which individuals meet the  state  definition of “legally authorized representative”.  
        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 44 of 56 
  d. Assent . Describe whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If some, 
indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not (and why not). Describe 
any process that will be used to obtain and document assent from the subjects.  
        
 e. Dissent or resistance . Describe how a subject’s objection or resistance to participation 
(including non -verbal) during the research  will be identified , and what will occur in response . 
        
8.[ADDRESS_271712] the method of abortion.  
  No enticements, benefits, or financial incentives will be used at any level of the process to incentivize  
abortion or the donation of human fetal tissue.  
  The informed consent form for the donation of fetal tissue for use in research will be signed by [CONTACT_116864].  
8.10 Consent -related materials . Upload to Zipline  all consent scripts/talking points, consent forms, debriefing 
statements, Information Statements, Short Form consent forms, parental permission forms, and any other 
consent -related materials that will be used . Materials that will be used by a specific site  should be up loaded to 
that site’s Local Site Documents  page.  
• Translations must be submitted and approved before they can be used . However, we strongly encourage you to wait to 
provide them until the IRB has approve d the English versions.  
• Combination form s: It may be appropriate to combine parental permission with consent, if parents are subjects as well as 
providing permission for the participation of their children. Similarly, a consent form may be appropriately considered an 
assent form for older childr en.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. URLs (website 
addresse s) may also  be provide d, or written descriptions  of websites . Examples of materials that usually cannot be 
uploaded: mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271713]  to 
recruiting, consenting, sensitivity of the data being collected, and the method of data collection.  
Examples:  
• Many subjects will feel a violation of privacy if they receive a letter asking them to participate in a study because they 
have ____ medical condition, when their name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and medical condition were drawn from medical 
records without their consent.  Example: the IRB expects that “cold call” recruitment letters will inform the subject 
about how their information was obtained.  
• Recruiting subjects immediately prior to a sensitive or invasive procedure  (e.g., in an outpatient surgery waiting 
room) will feel like an invasion of privacy to some individuals . 
• Asking subjects about sensitive topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (e.g. details about sexual behavior) may feel like an invasion of privacy to some 
individuals.  
 Recruitment concerns related to prospective subjects exported from the UW Electronic Health Record.  The 
recruitment letter will explain how the contact [CONTACT_226033] d ata were accessed, 
including diagnostic codes, age, name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_226034].  All data were accessed in 
accordance with UW Medicine protocols and only the study team has access to the data, which are securely 
stored.  
 
This research will  gather several types of sensitive information, around which special care must be taken. We will 
take measures to ensure that this information is handled appropriately, safely, and only for the scope of this 
research. There are additional privacy and confi dentiality concerns with reporting health -related information in 
the study.  
 
Confidentiality. We have several safeguards planned to protect against the loss of confidentiality.  All electronic 
questionnaire or audio taped data will be coded with a study sp ecific identifying number and all data 
(quantitative and qualitative) will be de -identified.  The identifying number will be kept on a password -
protected, secure and encrypted server through the Learning & Information Technology (L&IT) department at 
the Sc hool of Nursing.  The majority of data will be collected electronically via the REDCap server.  Subject 
contact [CONTACT_226035] a file on a password 
protected server.  Consent and assent a re all completed online via REDCap e -consent framework and are 
therefore encrypted and secure.  In person data collection sessions will be conducted either at the dyad's home  
or private community space (e.g., library study room ). If necessary, web conferen ce sessions will be conducted 
at the dyad’s preferred location.  Parents and children may choose not to answer questions or to stop surveys at 
any time. Parents and children may discontinue participation in the study at any time. Study data will be 
compi[INVESTIGATOR_5829] d from all subjects in the study and, when published, data will be reported in aggregate form; no 
participants will be identified in any report or publication.  
 
The subject's identity as a participant in this study will remain confidential; the research records kept confidential; 
and protected health information safeguarded as required by [CONTACT_226036].  
 
The research staff and the UW IRB will be allowed to inspect the information collected from this study. Only 
study identification numbers will be used to identify participants. Subjects in the intervention group will be 
given unique user logins and passwor ds to access the app and will be asked not to share these with anyone else. 
The software will be hosted on a secure server which has extensive safeguards in place with two firewalls, the 
latest virus protection, and daily back up of data. All contact [CONTACT_33484], identifying data and subject codebook 
will be kept on a password protected server to which only study staff has access.  
 
Web -based Security. Use of Secure Hyper Text Transmission Protocol (HTTPS) will provide an encrypted  
communication channel for  all communications between the subject and the study staff, thereby [CONTACT_226037] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271714] data will be housed in a 
Microsoft Azure SQL database that uses a HIPAA compliant, cutting -edge layered security and encryption 
(SSL, encryption -in-use, dynamic data masking).  
9.2 Identification of ind ividuals in publications and presentations . Will potentially identifiable information about 
subjects be used in publications and presentations, or is it possible that individual identities could be inferred from 
what is planned to be publish ed or present ed?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, will subject consent be obtained for this use?  
  Yes  
  No → If no, describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects (or small groups of 
subjects) from being identifiable.     
       
9.3 State mandatory reporting. Each state has reporting laws that require some types of individuals to report some 
kinds of abuse, and medical conditions that are under public health surveillance. These include:  
• Child abuse  
• Abuse, abandonment, neglect, or financial exploitation of a vulnerable adult  
• Sexual assault  
• Serious physical assault  
• Medical conditions subject to mandatory reporting (notification) for public health surveillance  
 
Are you or a me mber of the research team  likely to learn of any of the above events or circumstances while 
conduc ting the research AND  feel obligated to report it to state authorities?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  the UW IRB expects subjects to be informed of this possibility in the consent form or during 
the consent process, unless you provide a rationale for not doing so:    
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 47 of 56 
 9.4 Retention of identifiers  and data . Check the box below to indicate assurance that any identifiers (or links between 
identifiers and data/specimens)  and data  that are part of the research records will not be destroyed until after the 
end of the applicable records retention requirements (e.g. Washington State; funding agency or sponsor; Food 
and Drug Administration).  If it is important to say something about destruction of identifiers (or links to i dentifiers) 
in the consent form, state something like “the link between your identifier and the research data will be destroyed 
after the records retention period required by [CONTACT_52925]/or federal law.”  
This question can be left blank for conversion applic ations (existing paper applications that are being “converted” into a Zipline 
application.)  
 
See the “Research Data” sections of the following website for UW Records management for the Washington State research 
rectords retention schedules that apply in ge neral to the UW  (not involving UW Medicine data) : 
http://f2.washington.edu/fm/recmgt/gs/research?title=R  
 
See the “Research Records and Data ” information in Section 8 of this document for the retention schedules for UW Medicine 
Records : https://www.uwmedicine.org/recordsmanagementuwm -records -retention -schedule.pdf  
 X Confirm  
9.5 Certificates of Confidentiality . Will a federal Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for the research data? 
NOTE: Answer “No”  if the study is funded by [CONTACT_52926] , because all NIH -funded  and CDC -funded  studies 
automatically have a Certificate.  
 X No  
  Yes  
9.[ADDRESS_271715] ied to the data and specimens? If more than one level  will be used , 
describe which level  will apply to which data and which specimens  and at which sites . 
  Level [ADDRESS_271716] those 
here , including identifying the sites where this exception will apply . 
  Not applicable  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 48 of 56 
 10 RISK / BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
10.[ADDRESS_271717]:  
• Describe the magnitude, probability, duration, and/or reversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard, AND  
• Describe how the risks  will be reduced or managed . Do not describe data security protections here, these are 
already described in Question 9.6.  
• Consider possible physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic harms , includ ing possible negative effects on  
financial standing, employability, insurability, educational advancement or reputation.  For example, a breach of 
confidentiality might have these effects.  
• Examples of “others”: embryo, fetus, or nursing child; family member s; a specific group.  
• Ensure applicable risk information from any Investigator Brochures, Drug Package Inserts, and/or Device Manuals is 
included in your description.  
• Do not include the risks of non -research procedures that are already being performed.  
• If the study design specifies that subjects will be assigned to a specific condition or intervention, then the condition or 
intervention is a research procedure - even if it is a standard of care.  
• Examples of mitigation strategies: inclusion/exclusion cri teria; applying appropriate data security measures to prevent 
unauthorized access to individually identifiable data; coding data; taking blood samples to monitor something that 
indicates drug toxicity.  
• As with all questions on this application, you may ref er to uploaded documents.  
 Potential loss of confidentiality and invasion of privacy:  
This study team  will gather several types of sensitive information, around which special care must be taken. We 
will take measures to ensure that this information is handled appropriately, safely, and only for the scope of this 
research. There are additional privacy and confidentiality concerns with reporting health -related information in 
the study.  
 
Asthma Exacerbation  
It is a reasonable expectation that some child subjects may experience an asthma exacerbation (attack) during the 
study.  Study subjects will be told that  the intervention does not replace medical advice and that any concerns with 
their treatment should be discussed with the child’s health care provider.  For an emergency, call 911.  While the 
IMPACT app tracks asthma data (spi[INVESTIGATOR_10230] C -ACT data regardi ng asthma control), a disclaimer is present 
on the app that advises the app does not replace sound clinical judgement and provider recommended care. Should 
a family contact [CONTACT_941] [ADDRESS_271718] their provide r and/or seek 
immediate care.   
 
Mild discomfort related to symptom watch (intervention child subjects only):  
The watch band  may irritate the skin and participants will have the option to wear it over a long sleeve shirt. Skin 
reactions of this kind are unusual, and [CONTACT_226039] will be available to troubleshoot with participants as needed.   
Alternative watch bands may also be provid ed. 
 
Anxiety or fatigue while completing surveys:  
Questionnaires are routinely used in research, and pose no risks, though certain questions in the questionnaires 
explore health history of medical and/or psychological illness, family functioning. Particip ants may choose not to 
answer any questions causing discomfort, and may stop questionnaires at any time.   If fatigued, subjects will be 
offered breaks.   Additionally, subjects will be advised that there are no “correct” or “right” answers.  
 
Stress about co mpleting spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] (child participants):  
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_65515] a routine measure of lung function used in both clinical practice and research, and poses no risks. 
However, children may feel fatigued or stressed when performing the maximal exhalations. The spi[INVESTIGATOR_226016] (such as blowing out candles or inflating a balloon) to assist with completion. However, the 
child participants may choose to discontinue at any time.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 49 of 56 
 Social Risks  
To minimize embarrassment or anxiety about the symptom watch, child intervention participants may wear a 
long sleeve shirt over the watch.  
 
 
10.2 Reproductive  risks . Are there any ris ks of the study procedures to me n and women (who are subjects, or partner 
of subjects) related to pregnancy, fertility, lactation or effects on a fetus or neonate?  
Example s: direct teratogenic effects; possible germline effects; effects on fertility; effects on a woman’s ability to continue a 
pregnancy; effects on future pregnancies.  
 X No → If no go to question 10.3  
  Yes → If yes,  answer the following questions:  
 a. Risks . Describe the magnitude, probability, duration and/or reversibility of the risks.  
         
 b. Steps to minimize risk . Describe the specific steps that will be taken  to minimize the 
magnitude, probability, or duration of these risks.  
Example s: inform the subjects about the risks and how to minimize them;  require a pregnancy test before 
and during the study; require subjects to use contraception; advise subjects about banking of sperm and 
ova.  
 
If the use of contraception  will be required : descri be the allowable methods and the time period when 
contraception must be used.  
         
 c. Pregnancy . Describe what will be done  if a subject (or a subject’s partner) becomes pregnant  
For example; will subject s be required  to immediately notify study staff , so that the study procedures  can 
be discontinue or modified , or for a discussion of  risks, and/or referrals or counseling?  
         
10.3 MRI risk management. A rare but serious adverse reaction called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been 
observed in individuals with kidney disease who received gadolinium -based contrast agents (GBCAs) for the 
scans. Also, a few healthy individuals have a severe allergic reaction to GBCAs.  
a. Use of gadolinium . Will any of the MRI scans involve the use of a gadolinium -based contrast agent (GBCA?)  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, which agents will be used? Check all that apply.  
 Brand Name  [CONTACT_52936] / Primovist  Gadoxetate disodium  Linear  
  Gadavist  Gadobutro  Macrocyclic  
  Magnevist  Gadpe ntetate dimeglumine  Linear  
  MultiHance  Gadobenate dimeglumine  Linear  
  Omniscan  Gadodiamide  Linear  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 50 of 56 
   OptiMARK  Gadoversetamide  Linear  
  ProHance  Gadoteridol  Macrocyclic  
  Other, provide name:        
 1.) The FDA has concluded that gadolinium is retained in the body and brain for a 
significantly longer time than previously recognized, especially for linear GBCAs. 
The health -related risks of this longer retention are not yet clearly established. 
However, the UW IRB expects researchers to provide a compelling justification for 
using a linear GBCA instead of a macrocyclic GBCA, to manage the risks associated 
with GBCAs.  
 Describe why it is important to use a GBCA with the MRI scan(s). Describe the dose 
that will be used  and (if it is more than the standard clinical dose recommended by 
[CONTACT_3455]) why it is necessary to use a higher dose . If a linear GBCA  will be 
used , explain why a mac rocyclic GBCA  cannot be used . 
        
 2.) Information for subjects. Confirm by [CONTACT_52904] -approve d Patient Medication Guide for th e GBCA being 
used in the research  or that the same information will be inserted into the consent 
form.  
  Confirmed  
b. Who will (1) calculate the dose of GBCA; (2) prepare it for injection; (3) insert and remove the IV catheter;  (4) 
administer the GBCA; and (5) monitor for any adverse effects of the GCBA? Also, what are the qualifications 
and training of these individual (s)? 
       
c. Describe how the renal function of subjects will be assessed prior to MRI scans and how that information will 
be used to exclude subjects at risk for NSF.  
       
d. Describe the protocol for handling a sever e allergic reaction to the GBCA or any other medical 
event/emergency during the MRI scan, including who will be responsible for which actions.   
       
10.[ADDRESS_271719] risks that are currently unforeseeable?  
Example: using a drug that hasn’t been used before in this subject  population.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  identify the procedures.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 51 of 56 
 10.5  Subjects who will be under regional or general anesthesiology . Will any research procedures occur while 
patients are under general or regional anesthesia, or during the 3 hours preceding general or regional anesthesia 
(supplied for non -research reasons)?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, check all the boxes that apply.  
    
Administration of any drug for research purposes      
    
  
Inserting an intra -venous (central or peripheral) or intra -arterial line for research purposes    
  
  Obtaining samples of blood, urine, bone marrow or cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_52872] a research sample from tissue or organs that would not otherwise be removed 
during surgery    
  
  
Administration of a radio -isotope for research purposes**    
  
  
Implantation of an experimental device    
  
  
Other manipulations or procedures performed solely for research purposes (e.g., 
experimental liver dialysis, experimental brain stimulation)    
  
  If any of the boxe s are checked : 
Provide the name [CONTACT_52941] a physician anesthesiologist who is a 
member of the research team or who will serve as a safety consultant about the interactions 
between the research procedures and the general or regional anesthesia of the subject -
patients. If the procedures will be performed at a UW Medicine facility or affiliate, the 
anesthesiologist must be a UW faculty member, and  the Vice Chair of Clinical Research in 
the UW Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine must be consulted in advance for 
feasibility, safety and billing.  
        
  ** If the box about radio -isotopes  is checked : the study team is  responsible for informing in advance 
all appropriate clinical personnel (e.g., nurses, technicians, anesthesiologists, surgeons) about the 
administration and use of the radio -isotope, to ensure that any personal safety issues (e.g., 
pregnancy) can be appr opriately addressed. This is a condition of IRB approval.  
10.6  Data and Safety Monitoring . A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is required for clinical trials (as defined 
by [CONTACT_4289]). If required for this research , or if there is a DSMP for the research regardless of whether it is required , 
upload the DSMP to Zipline . If it is embedded in another document being  uploading (for example, a Study 
Protocol ) use the text box below to name [CONTACT_52942].  Alternatively, provide a description 
of the DSMP in the text box below .  
 Uploaded  
10.7  Un-blinding . If this is a double -blind ed or single -blinded  study in which the participant and/or relevant study 
team members  do not k now the group to whic h the participant is assigned: describe the circumstances under 
which un -blinding would be necessary, and to whom the un -blinded information would be provided.  
 The study statistician will be blinded to group assignment until dissemination of study findings.  No other 
anticipated need to unblind.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 52 of 56 
 10.8 Withdrawal of participants . If applicable, d escribe  the anticipated circumstances under which participants will 
be withdrawn from the research without their consent. Also, describe any procedures for orderly withdrawal of a 
participant, r egardless of the reason, including whether it will involve partial withdrawal from procedures and 
any intervention but continued data collection or long -term follow -up. 
 Participants may withdraw from the study at any time. Participants will also be asked to provide rationale 
behind their decision to withdraw, though they may choose not to provide rationale. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226017] -up assessments (T2 and/or T3), participants may choose to 
participate in data collection or not.  
 
10.[ADDRESS_271720] research -related benefits that some or all 
individual participants are likely to experience f rom taking part in the research, describe them below:  
Do not include benefits to society or others, and do not include subject payment (if any). Examples: medical benefits such as 
laboratory tests (if subjects receive the results); psychological resources made available to participants; training or educa tion 
that is provided.   
 Participation in this research may or may not benefit the subject.  Pa rticipation may help improve asthma 
management, asthma control, self -/shared -management skills, and improve health -related outcomes.   
 
10.10 Return of individual research results.  
In this section , provide your plans for the return of individual results. An “individual research result” is any information 
collected, generated or discovered in the course of a research study that is linked to the identity of a research participant . 
These may be results  from screening procedures, results that are actively sought for purposes of the study, results that are 
discovered unintentionally, or after analysis of the collected data and/or results has been completed.  
 
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about results that should and should not be returned, validity 
of results, the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment (CLIA), consent req uirements and communicating results.  
 a. Is it anticipated  that the research will produce any individual research results that are clinically actionable?  
 “Clinically actionable” means that there are established therapeutic or preventive interventions or  other available 
actions that have the potential to change the clinical course of the disease/condition, or lead to an improved health 
outcome.  
 
In general, e very effort should be made to offer results that are clinically actionable, valid and pose life -threatening 
or severe health consequences if not treated or addressed quickly. Other clinically actionable results should be 
offered if this can be accomplished without compromising the research.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, answer the following questions ( a.1-a.3). 
 a.1. Describe the clinically actionable results that  are anticipated and explain which results, 
if any, could be urgent (i.e. because they pose life -threatening or severe health 
consequences if not treated or addressed quickly).  
 Examples  of urgent results include  very high calciu m levels, highly elevated liver function test 
results, positive results for reportable STDs . 
 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_226018], which is associated with higher 
risk of an asthma exacerbation.   These results would be shared with the parent with the 
advice that they contact [CONTACT_78567].  
 a.2. Explain which of these results will be offered to subjects.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 53 of 56 
  Parents of child participants will receive an asthma control report for all study visits 
(T0, T1, T2 ), based upon spi[INVESTIGATOR_10230] C -ACT data and interpreted based upon the 
national asthma guidelines (of which [CONTACT_226039] is expert).  
 a.3. Explain which results will not be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for not 
offering these results.  
 Reasons not to offer the results might include:  
• There are serious questions regarding validity or reliability  
• Returning the results has the potential to cause bias  
• There are insufficient resources to communicate the results effectively and appropriately  
• Knowledge of the result could cause psychosocial harm to subjects  
 N/A  
 b. Is there a  plan for offering  subjects any results that are not clinically actionable?  
 Examples: non -actionable genetic results, clinical tests in the normal range, experimental and/or uncertain results.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, explain which results will be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for 
offering these results.   
       
 c. Describe the validity and reliability of any results that will be offered to subjects.  
 The IRB will consider evidence of validity such as studies demonstrating diagnostic,  prognostic, or predictive value, 
use of confirmatory testing, and quality management systems.  
 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], C -ACT are both valid and reliable measures of asthma control and are considered “gold 
standard” within the national asthma management guidelines.  All have been validated down to age [ADDRESS_271721] to the offer of results, who will 
communicate the result (if different), the circumstances, timing, and communication methods that will be 
used.  
 [CONTACT_226039] will be responsible for communicating all asthma control findings.  She will email the report 
to all study subjects with th e offer to discuss via phone or videoconference, should the family request to 
do so.  These reports will be sent within 2 weeks of the study visit.  
 e. Describe any plans to share results with family members (e.g. in the event a subject becomes 
incapacita ted or deceased).  
 Not applicable  
 f. Check the box to indicate that any plans for return of individual research results  have been described  in 
the consent document. If there are no plans to provide results to participants, this should be stated in the 
consent form.  
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about consent requirements.  
 X Confirmed  
10.[ADDRESS_271722] or patent could result from this 
study?  
  No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 54 of 56 
  X Yes → If yes,  describe whether subjects might receive any remuneration/compensation and, if yes, 
how the amount will be determined.   
   Subjects will not receive any compensation beyond what is outlined above related to study 
timepoints.   
 
 
11 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANTS  
11.1 Financial responsibility for research -related injuries.  Answer this question only if the lead research er is not a 
UW student, staff member, or faculty member whose primary  paid appointment is at the UW.  
 
For each institution involved in conducting the research: Describe who will be financially responsible for 
research -related injuries experienced by [CONTACT_1766], and any limitations. Describe the process (if any) by [CONTACT_52929]/comp ensation.  
 Not applicable  
11.2 Costs to subjects . Describe any research -related costs for which subjects and/or their health insurance may be 
responsible ( examples might include:  CT scan required for research eligibility screening; co -pays; surgical costs 
when a subject is randomized to a specific procedure; cost of a device ; travel and parking expenses that will not 
be reimbursed ). 
 None  
 
 
 
12 RESOURCES  
12.1 Faculty Advisor . (For researchers who are students, residents, fellows, or post -docs.) Provide the following 
information about the faculty advisor.  
• Advisor’s name  
• Your relationship with your advisor (for example: graduate advisor; course instructor)  
• Your plans for communication/consultation with your advisor about progress, problems, and changes.  
 Not applicable  
12.2 UW Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_52874] . Upload a current  or recent  Curriculum Vitae  (CV) , Biosketch (as 
provided to federal funding agencies), or similar document to the Local Site Documents page in Zipline. The  
purpose of this is to  address the PI’s qualifications to conduct the proposed research (education, experience, 
training, certificati ons, etc.).  
For help with creating a CV, see  http://adai.uw.edu/grants/nsf_biosketch_template.pdf  and 
https://education.uwmedicine.org/student -affairs/career -advising/year -4/residency -applications/curriculum -vitae/   
 X The CV will be uploaded.  
12.3 UW Study team qualifications . Describe the qualifications  and/or training for  each UW study team member to 
fulfill their role on the study and perform study procedures.  (You may be asked about non -UW study team 
members during the review; they should not be described here.) You may list these individuals by [CONTACT_2300],  
however if you list an individual by [CONTACT_2300], you will need to modify this application if that individual is replaced. 
Alternatively, you can describe study roles  and the  qualifications and training the PI [INVESTIGATOR_52875]. The IRB will use this information to assess whether risks to 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/2021  
Version 3.3 Version 1.2  
  Page 55 of 56 
 subjects are minimized because study activities are being conducted by [CONTACT_116869].  
Describe: The role (or name [CONTACT_52943]), the study acti vities they will perform, and the qualifications or 
training that are relevant to performing those study activities . 
 
 Examples:  
Research Study Coordinator:  Obtain consent, administer surveys, blood draw. Will have previous  experience 
coordinating  clinic al research and be a certified phlebotomist in WA.  
Undergraduate Research Assistant:  Obtain consent, perform all study procedures. Will have had coursework in 
research methods, complete an orientation to human subjects protections given by [CONTACT_8569], and will 
receive training from the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_52876].  
Acupuncturist:  Perform acupuncture procedures and administer surveys. Must be licensed with WA State DoH 
and complete training in admin istering research surveys given by [CONTACT_52931], an experienced survey 
researcher . 
Co-Investigator:  Supervise MRI and CT scan procedures and data interpretation, obtain consent. MD, specialty in 
interventional radiology and body imaging. 5 -years clinical research experience.  
 
   
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_226019], data collection and monitoring.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_226020].  PI [INVESTIGATOR_226021], administer surveys.  
 
Student Assistant – will receive CITI training and mandatory UW background checks, youth training.  Will 
receive training from PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a ll study procedures, including strategies for working with parent -child dyads.  
Obtain consent, perform study procedures, recruit, schedule study sessions, troubleshoot as necessary.  
 
Co-Investigator – review study procedures, enrollment tracking, deidenti fied data access, interpretation, analyses 
and dissemination.  
12.4 Study team training and communication . Describe how it will be ensured that each study team member is 
adequately trained and informed about the research procedures and requirements (includ ing any changes) as 
well as their research -related duties and functions.  
  There is no study team.  
   
 Procedure manuals will be used and checklists for data collection sessions. Any student assistants will be 
trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_226022].  
 
 
 
13 OTHER APPROVALS, PERMISSIONS, and REGULATORY ISSUES  
13.1 Approvals and permissions.  Identify any other approvals or perm issions that will be obtained. For example: from 
a school, external site/organization, funding agency, employee uni on, UW Medicine clinical unit.  
Do not attach the approvals and permissions unless requested  by [CONTACT_1201].  
 NIH/NCATS will review & approve the proposed IMPACT RCT protocol  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
04/29/2021  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  08/16/[ADDRESS_271723] (SFI) with this research as defined by [CONTACT_52932] 10 ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, has the Office of Research made a determination regarding this SFI as it pertains to the 
proposed research?    
  No → If no, contact [CONTACT_52933] ([PHONE_950], [EMAIL_1005] ) for  
guidance on how to obtain the determination   
  Yes → If yes, upload the Conflict Management Plan for every UW team member who has 
a FCOI with respect to the research, to Zipline . If it is not yet available, use the text 
box to describe whether the Significant Financial Interest has been disclosed 
already to the UW Office of Research and include the FIDS Disclosure  ID if 
available.   
       
 
 