 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COVER PAGE  
 
Date: 2 -25-20  
  
Study Protocol  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Brief Title:  Safety Planning in Juvenile Justice for Suicidal Youth   
Official Title:  Screening and Brief Intervention for Suicidality and Nonsuicidal  Self-
Injury Among Youth in the Juvenile Justice System   
Secondary IDs:  1R34MH114307 -01A1    [U.S. NIH Grant/Contract Award Number]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study  Protocol  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
The proposed study will be divided into two phases. In Phase I, we will conduct an open trial with [ADDRESS_910734] a master’s degree in the mental health 
field and work in the local community mental health clinic, Gateway, in which MPI [INVESTIGATOR_557100] -I Wolff have 
consulted. Counselors with community mental he alth experience were selected because youth in the JJS are 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_673845], so  this choice  was also made  with an eye toward eventual  
implementation . In addition,  the model  proposed  here – of mental  health  counselors  embedded  in Probation  -is 
consistent with a co -responder model, found across the U.S.in which a PO works collaboratively with a mental 
health professional to coordinate care. Thus, if the protocol is found to be effective, there is an existing 
infrastructure that could aide further implementation. We will hire a bilingual counselors so they will be able to 
conduct the intervention and give feedback to youth and parents who are Spanish -speaking.  
The counselors will cover afternoon appointments in  Probation and be employed by [CONTACT_673853][INVESTIGATOR_673846]. By [CONTACT_673854], we will be able to rate tapes of sessions for fidelity and competency (see below). In order to 
conduct  the study  under  conditions  most  relevant  to a future  implementation  trial, we  will also  employ  a training 
approach that has been successfully implemented by [CONTACT_15957] -I Wolff with Bachelors and Masters level staff in a 
psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]86,87 (see below). . 
In Phase II, of the study, we will: a) conduct qualitative interviews in Probation about attitudes toward the 
intervention as well as barriers to a future, larger implementation trial; and b) conduct a SIM Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 
described  above , to outline  a series  of other  potential  “points  of interception”  along  the JJS continuum,  beyond 
Probation, where screening and brief intervention might be implemented in a future system -wide trial.  
 
Phase  I. Open  trial and RCT 
Study overview.  In this treatment development grant, [ADDRESS_910735] 10  will be participate  in an iterative  development  open  trial. Then  60 youth  will 
be randomized to: 1) the screening/brief intervention safety planning intervention, or 2) standard practice.  
Open Trial Design. A total of 10 youth will be recruited for open trial in order to: a) test the protocol’s 
applicability  in Probation,  and b) train the mental  health  counselors  in the protocol.  We have  used  this [ADDRESS_910736] Probation appointment, they are 
asked to complete the MAYSI/NSSI assessment.  Youth who flag in on the MAYSI or NSSI item on this first 
screen, will be referred by [CONTACT_673855]. If the parent/caregiver consents to the study, the mental health counselor will then meet with the 
youth,  physically  separate  from the parent/caregiver,  to describe  study  procedures  in detail (including  the fact 
that only youth who are positive on the secondary screen continue in the study) and obtain juvenile 
assent  without  parental  presence  (see Human  Subjects ). Consenting  procedures  will also include  permission 
to access court records.  All youth will then complete the complete the Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors  
Interview 2.0  (SITBI -Short Form91, see  below) , to more  thoroughly assess  self-injurio us behavior.  Families will 
then be referred back to their PO to complete the secondary screen. If the youth screens in, he/she is then 
randomized to either standard practice or the safety planning intervention.  
Follow -up assessments will also be competed a t 1- and [ADDRESS_910737]  for 
not agreeing or being unable to participate in the research study (see Human Subjects/Letter of Support).  
Current standard practice.  The MAYSI -2 provides two cut -off scores: caution (2 items endorsed) and 
warning (3 or more items endorsed). (Note: a screening item from the SITBI – “Have you ever had thoughts of 
purposively hurting yourself without wanting to die, e.g. cutting, burning? If yes, how m any separate times in 
your life? - has also just been added as part of standard practice). If a teen has a positive screen for suicide 
risk, the PO completes  a "secondary  screener"  built into the MAYSI - 2 to determine  whether  there  is concern  of 
current and/or  imminent  risk. If a teen endorses NSSI more  than once  in the prior year,  then the PO asks about 
frequency and severity. If there is ongoing concern of risk for self -injurious behavior, then the PO arranges for  
a crisis evaluation in the Emergency Department (ED).  If the teen is not judged to be at imminent risk, the PO 
makes a referral back to the current treatment provider or to a community mental health clinic. In either case , 
the parents and youth receive a packet with mental health resources.  
In the experimental  condition,  if a teen screens  positive on  the secondary  screener, and  is randomized to 
the safety  planning  intervention,  the PO will  refer the case  to the mental  health counselor.  The mental  health 
counselor will conduct the safety planning intervention (described below) and then make a decision whether  
the teen remains at imminent risk, and needs to be referred 
for an ED evaluation.  If there is no  imminent  risk, the PO and 
mental health counselor together facilitate a referral back to 
the current treatment provider or to a community mental 
health clinic. The mental health counselor will also conduct a 
follow -up phone  call one week  after the safety  plan to answer 
any questions about the safety plan and promote linkage to 
treatment as needed.  
 
Participants. Youth offenders, ages 12 -17 will be eligible for 
enrollment with the following criteria: 1) Legal guardian 
available to consent for juvenile’s partici pation, 2) Juvenile 
and parents  are English  or Spanish  speaking;  and 3) Juvenile 
flags in on the MAYSI -2 or NSSI item.  In order to maximize 
the ecological validity of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], there will not be any 
exclusion criteria. Racial and Ethnic Minority  
Considerations . Consistent with 2016 RIFC  statistics, ethnic 
representation will be approximately 18% Hispanic and racial  
representation will be about 22% Africa American or Black (and other) and 72% White. Estimated Sample 
Size and Retention Rates. In 20 16, the RIFC handled offenses for 2,634 juveniles of whom 764 (29%) were 
female and 2,581 (98%) who were in the 12 -17 year old age range. The Juvenile Intake Department, for 
example, screens more than 904 juveniles per year and, of those youth who are scre ened, approximately 10% 
(N=89)  flag for recent SI. In 2015, the detention center admitted 470 youth. Probation had a caseload of 375 in 
2015. Of these youth, it is estimated that 20% of  youth screen positive for  current risk of self -injurious behavior 
(N=7 5). Even  with a  conservative  acceptance  rate of 60%, we  would  be able to recruit about 45  youth per year 
and meet our 20  month  projected  enrollment  goal of 60  participants, i.e. about  3 per month  (3 x 20 = 60). Using 
a conservative follow -up rate of 80% (s ee Retention ) of the 60 enrolled and retained participants, 
approximately 48 are expected to complete the 3 -month follow -up. This approach is feasible given our  
excellent working relationship with the JJS, including the RIFC, and prior experience recruitin g from the  
juvenile intake department (see RIFC Chief Judge and Probation Letters of Support). MPI [INVESTIGATOR_673847] a [ADDRESS_910738] -time offending CINI youth (DA034538). MPI [INVESTIGATOR_673848] a baseline  sample  of suicidal  CINI youth  for her NIMH  K23 
Mentored Career Award. MPI [INVESTIGATOR_557106] a referral system from RIFC to his NIAAA 
(AA017659) and NIDA (DA0029871) trials for youth with substance use -related court involvement.  
 
Experimental protocol: Safety Planning. This brief intervention, consists of an in -person and follow -up 
phone call that are based on cognitive behavioral principles designed to help identify a concrete list of copi[INVESTIGATOR_673849] a  crisis to  lower imminent  risk of NSSI 
or suicidal behavior. Specifically, the Safet y Plan will help the youth and caregiver identify: environmental risk 
factors including access to means and triggers; individualized warning signs; specific copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]; peer and 
family social supports to help distract from negative thoughts; adult conta cts for help; and reasons for living92. 
The Safety Plan is also reviewed with parents and any barriers to the plan are discussed. For example, 
logistical  barriers  related  to locking up  medication  may be problem  solved  or the family  may discuss  supportive 
ways the parent can respond if the teen reaches out for help. In youth who also report NSSI, the safety plan  
format is suitable to address both suicidal and nonsuicidal behavior . (Note: in a recent study, on which MPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_673850],  NSSI was found t o be a stronger predictor of future suicidal behavior than even a prior 
suicide attempt45). Safety planning has been determined to be a best practice by [CONTACT_673856]/American Foundation for Suicide Prevention Best Practices Regist ry for Suicide Prevention 
(www.sprc.org ). The plan helps youth and parents identify possible triggers to including suicidal and self - 
injurious thoughts, feelings, and behaviors; develop a plan to remove lethal means ; determine distress 
tolerance/emotion regulation skills that may be helpful; identify accessible social supports to target 
hopelessness/sense of isolation; reinforce the commitment to seek treatment; and reviews how and where to 
access emergency care. (Se e Appendix 1 for safety plan worksheet).  
If a juvenile  flags in  and is in the experimental  condition, the  safety  planning will  occur in  three  stages:  1) 
the juvenile will meet with a trained mental health counselor  to create the safety plan; 2) the juvenile and 
counselor  will meet  with the PO and caregiver  to share  the safety  plan and discuss  strategies  and challenges 
to implementing the safety plan92; and 3) the PO will then contact [CONTACT_673857], if the youth is not at 
immediate risk. In cases where substance use is an issue, the JJS staff member will ask permission of the 
youth to relay this to the community mental health clinic or current pro vider.  

The Safety  Plan intervention,  which  consists  of the one module  from Co-I Wolff’s  COPES  program  described 
above, incorporate the SITBI responses, which covers both suicidal and nonsuicidal ideation and behavior, to 
ensure  all areas  are covered  in the Safety  Planning  process.  For example,  the SITBI will  identify  suicide  means 
youth have thought about using. Youth  make a  list of dangerous items to  remove  from their surroundings  (e.g., 
alcohol, knives, razors, medications) in order to reduc e access to means, identify their warning signs and 
vulnerabilities that indicate they may become unsafe, generate helpful copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], and identify people 
that can help them manage negative feelings.  
The safety plan intervention concludes with a sec tion emphasizing completing referrals for outpatient care 
for those youth. Youth will also complete the 8 -item Motivation for Youth’s Treatment Scale (MYTS93) to 
facilitate  discussion  between  the counselor  and the youth  about  the youth’s  current  motivation  for treatment.  At 
the same time, the caregiver will complete the Barriers to Treatment Participation Scale (BTPS94) that will 
inform the mental health counselor about potential barriers (identified as “often a problem” or “always a 
problem”) and promote d iscussion during the safety planning with the youth and caregiver about those 
potentials barriers and generate ideas on how to overcome them.  
Brief  Intervention  Follow -up Phone  Call. One week after  the in-person  safety  planning,  the mental  health 
counselor  will contact [CONTACT_9166]’s parent/caregiver to review elements of the safety plan and problem -solve 
barriers to using the safety plan and engaging in treatment. If the  family has not made contact [CONTACT_4490] a treatment 
provider, the mental health counselor will fu rther assist the family in setting up an appointment. Co -I 
Weinstock’s  research  
with recently  incarcerated  
Implementation  
Outcomes  
• Measures  
• Acceptability  
•  Qualitative 
interview  and 
CSQ  
• Feasability  
•  Qualitative 
interview  and 
chart data  
•  Observation 
Ratings   
Service  Mechanisms  
• Fidelity  
• Safety  plan  tape  
ratings  
•  Efficiency  and 
Quality of 
Treatment  linkage  
•  Chart  Records  of 
service  
• Equity  of services  
• Observation  
• Youth  mechanisms  
- Treatment 
motivation, 
barriers, 
satisfaction   
Client  Outcomes  
• Measures  
•  Treatment 
attendance  
• Collateral  
• CASA  
•  Motivation  for 
treatment  
•  Barriers  to 
treatment  
• Suicide/NSSI  
• SITBI  
• SIQ 
• Recidivism  
• Court  records  and suicidal individuals 
has shown  that telephone 
follow -up intervention is 
feasible, acceptable, and 
powerful in building trust 
and reducing risk among 
these populations.  
 
 
 
 
Baseline and Follow -up Assessment. In order to pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087] a procedure with the greatest potential to be 
implemented in a large effectiveness trial in  the future, we collect all baseline data from information collected 
routinely and recorded in court records, with the exception of administering the SITBI. Therefore, potential 
participants  will not be  paid for the completion  of the baseline  measures.  The consent  form will specify  that, as 
part of participating in the study, the MPIs will be allowed to use the baseline data from the RIFC chart.  
The follow -up assessment  battery  was also designed  to reduce  participant  burden  and will be scheduled at  [ADDRESS_910739] approximately 1 hour. Juveniles and a caregiver will each be 
compensated $[ADDRESS_910740] Attrition. We do not anticipate a great deal of attrition at the 1 and 3 -month follow -up 
assessm ent, based on our prior success in following participants in our other treatment studies.  Nonetheless, 
after the baseline assessment, participants will be educated on the importance of completing the follow -up 
assessments; provided  the date and time of the  follow -up appointments,  and provided  a study  contact  [CONTACT_673858]. Detailed tracking information will be recorded.  Our retention strategies 
will include phone, texting, email, and postal mail contact (e.g., personalized ho liday, thank you, and birthday 
cards).  In addition, names of two  friends  or family members will  be requested  in the event  that research staff is  
unable to reach the participant using the above information. Participants will be asked to sign a letter 
addressed to each of their locators that explains that they are participating in a research project. Locators will 
be contact[CONTACT_673859]. Weekly case review meetings will review no - 
shows, non -verified and non -confirmed cases and activities necessary to ensure successful completion of the 
follow -up assessments97. We have used these procedures with success in ot her projects. Participants will be 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]  [ADDRESS_910741] with retention.  In 
MPI [INVESTIGATOR_557099]’s NIAAA -funded study with CINI youth, retention rates were 94% at 3 months and 84% at [ADDRESS_910742] 3 months.  
Similar to the other JJS -involved protocols for MPI [INVESTIGATOR_557099]’s other NIH -funded RCT projects, a primary 
bachelor’s  level research  assistant  (RA) will be trained  to administer  and score  the assessment  protocol  for 1 
and 3 -month  follow -ups. Under MPI [INVESTIGATOR_673851]’s oversight, the RA  will receive training on working in the  JJS and 
on how to appropriately respond to logistical questions that participants’ may have.  
Procedures for MH Deterioration/Safety Concerns. It is possible that some participants will report 
symptoms that may warrant additional mental health care. POs routinely refer to community mental health 
clinics,  as part of standard  procedure,  youth  with any other  emotional/behavioral  problems  in addition  to self- 
injury. Our research team has conducted a number of studies involving assessment of self -injury (e.g.  
MH095786 , MH090147,  MH082211)  and, as such,  has developed  procedures  for managing  self-injury  when 
necessary at follow -up interviews (detailed in Human Subjects and Appendix 2 ). 
 
Phase  I Measures  (see Appendix  3). The selection  of measures  was designed  to be realistic  for the JJS  with 
an emphasis on eventual implementation in a larger effectiveness trial. The measures below will be collected 
electronically or by [CONTACT_155353], if necessary, when there is limited internet access in Probation or on 
home visits.  
 
Background  variables  (obtained  at baseline  only) . 
Standard demographic va riables including age, sex, race, ethnicity, and education will be recorded from 
court  records.  (note: at  the follow -up, youth  will be asked  questions  about  their gender  identity because  it is not 
currently asked in Probation). Legal history will also be o btained (available  to study  staff)  as will item-level 
responses for  the MAYSI -[ADDRESS_910743] -intervention ratings on the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire [CSQ - 
8;120], a  well-established 8 -item self-report instrument  on a 4-point scale  used to  assess  patients’  satisfaction 
with psychiatric  treatment.  A score  above  24 is the benchmark  based  on previous  research. An  “exit interview” 
will also be conducted at the one month  follow -up about the intervention protocol that they received98–100. 
The Self-Injurious Thoughts and Behaviors Interview 2.0 (SITBI 2.0) Short Form91 is a structured interview 
designed  to assess  the presence,  frequency, and  characteristics of a  broad  array  of self -injurious  thoughts  and 
behaviors. The SITBI has good reliability and validity. The SITBI will be completed at baseline and 1 and 3 - 
month follow -up to assess suicidal ideation, attempts, and NSSI. Suicidal events  will be operationalized as a 
compo site score of suicide attempts and emergency interventions for acute suicidality assessed by [CONTACT_673860] 
(see below).). Recidivism (collateral data from RIFC database) including new  arrests , description of related 
charges  (e.g.,  substance - related,  property)  and time detained/incarcerated  (all tracked  by [CONTACT_673861]) 
will be available.  
Youth  level  mechanisms  
Treatment Attendance (self-report, parent/caregiver report, and collateral information ). The Child and  
Adolescent Services Assessment  [CASA101] is a self -and parent -report instrument designed to assess at 
follow -up the use of mental health services for youth across 31 settings including inpatient, outpatient, and 
informal  services.  The measure  has acceptable  psychometric  properties.  Collateral102 information  on treatment 
attendance (attendance at first treatment appointment and total number of treatment sessions attended) will 
also be collected by [CONTACT_557161]’ treatment provider at the 3 -month follow -up. A release of 
information is requested  at baseline,  for both primary care physicians (PCP) and  their MH provider/agency, as 
part of the court intake process when treatment referrals are made. The Motivation for Youth’s Treatment  
Scale93, an 8 -item measure, will be used to assess the y outh’s motivation to engage in treatment at baseline 
and at follow -up. The total scale and two subscales (Problem Recognition and the Treatment Readiness) 
produce alpha coefficients of above .80. The baseline MYTS will be completed at the end of the safety  
planning intervention to screen and address youth and caregiver motivation for treatment. The Barriers to  
Treatment Participation Scale94, a 44 -item measure, will be completed at baseline and 3 -month follow -up by 
[CONTACT_673862]/caregivers  experienced  since  intervention  and the role those  barriers 
may play in treatment engagement. Alpha coefficients range from 0.[ADDRESS_910744] Strategies  (PCTS103) will be used to assess safety planning skills because it is more 
ecologically  valid than a self-report  measure.  Raters  will assess  the extent  to which  participants  demonstrated, 
through their performance of, their reports of t he use of, and their stated intentions to continue the use of, 
safety planning skills based on a prompt to discuss what behaviors they did and continue to do to keep 
themselves safe. For example, “Did the youth understand and utilize restriction to means; individualized 
warning signs; specific copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]; peer and family social supports to help distract from negative thoughts; 
adult contacts for help; and reasons for living”.  Each of the areas will be rated on a 0 to 6 Likert -type scale.  
Ratings of 4 or higher are considered indicative of independent use of the  domain assessed by [CONTACT_456451] (i.e., 
clear  report  of the patient’s  making  use of this domain).  Three  raters, blind  to condition,  will rate session  tapes. 
Meetings of the entire rating group and pairs of raters will occur periodically to minimize rater drift . 
We will also specifically  ask teens  and parents  regarding  the teen’s  access  to potential  means,  including  
firearms,  medications  (over -the-counter  and prescribed),  and alcohol.  
Service -level  measures  
Efficiency and quality of treatment linkage.  Data regarding treatment coordination and referral for mental 
health  services  will be collected  from the RIFC  and Probation  database  regarding  Probation staff  coordination 
and collaboration with treatme nt providers in the community upon referral. Equity will be measured by 
[CONTACT_557160]/ racial/ethnic subgroups in the numbers of at -risk youth who receive the 
intervention, treatment linkage, and fidelity/quality of the safety intervention.  
Phase  I: Data  Analysis  Plan 
Prior to conducting analyses for the project aims, a series of routine procedures will be conducted to  
ensure the data accuracy/adequacy. All forms will be checked for missing data and all data will be double 
entered  and backed -up daily.  Descriptive  statistics  will be examined  for distributional  properties  of the variables 
(e.g., normality, internal consistency).  The data will be transformed to achieve normality if needed.  
We will conduct analyses in an intent -to-treat (as  randomized) manner, and examine as primary analyses 
unadjusted and secondarily adjusted for selected covariates identified above. Masking integrity will be 
reviewed.  ANCOVA  (outcome  regressed  on baseline)  methods  will be used,  and linear  mixed  effect  mode ls will 
be used to account for non -independence of repeatedly observed outcomes.  
We will examine attrition by [CONTACT_673863] -up assessment completers and non -completers on socio - 
demographic and baseline data to determine if they differ systematically. C onsistent with an intent -to-treat 
model, we will include all randomized participants in the analyses. Attrition/Missing Data . It is anticipated that 
less than 20% of subjects will not have follow -up data. We will test for differential attrition across the 
experimental condition and the baseline comparison.  The analyses described below can account for attrition 
at the follow -up points.  We will employ  multiple  imputation  as our primary  approach  to missing  data [138] and 
will conduct a sensitivity analysis treating all participants lost to follow -up as treatment failures at the point of 
loss, i.e. assuming no  change  on their self-injury -related  mechanisms  or outcomes.  If our  primary  conclusions 
are similar with and without extreme missing data assumptions, c onfidence in the findings will be higher.  
Primary  Aim.  Our primary  aim is to examine  feasibility  and acceptability  of the safety  planning  intervention 
to inform next -step study design. Feasibility of a larger future trial will be evaluated based on: a) enr ollment 
rates for the research project (target = 70%), and feasibility of the intervention,  b) the percentage of  
participants who complete the entire intervention protocol (target = 70%). We will also determine the 
appropriateness of our assessment battery  for a larger, future trial, by [CONTACT_673864]. Acceptability will be 
demonstrated  by [CONTACT_673865]  (< 20%)  and > 80% of the responses  on a consumer  satisfacti on scale rated 
as highly satisfactory. We will use logistic regression to model binary outcomes of enrollment, completion of  
the protocol, and withdrawal as a function of treatment assignment. We will use ordinal logistic regression for 
the satisfaction sc ale analysis.  
With respect to youth level clinical outcomes , the goal is to obtain a reasonably precise estimate of the 
standard deviation for the outcome variables, and pre -post correlations of outcome variables, which are 
essential statistics for powering a definitive trial. Following Leon et al (2011)104 and Kraemer et al (2006)105, 
our goal is not to obtain a preliminary estimate of the treatment effect size, but as per Teare and colleagues 
(2014)106, the size of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_673852] t to obtain sufficiently precise estimates of key variance 
and covariance  parameters  necessary  to design  a definitive  trial. Our approach  will be to conduct  an analysis 
consistent with the testing of the hypothesis that JJS youth enrolled in the experimental condition have less 
self-injurious ideation and behavior at  [ADDRESS_910745]  practice. 
We will also examine mechanisms including treatment attendance, safety skill acquisition, motivation for  
treatment,  and treatment  barrier  reduction.  The main  outcomes  are suicidal  ideation  and suicide  attempts/NSSI 
on the SITBI.  
We will use generalized linear mixed models107,[ADDRESS_910746] 
practice. This approach accommodates varying numbers of observations across individuals (allowing the 
inclusion  of all randomized  participants)  while  controlling  for within -subject  correlation.  Scores  from continuous 
measures are the dependent variables and treatment condition is the primary independent variable. Analyses 
will also be conducted  co-varying  baseline  SITBI  scores.  These  hypotheses  will be evaluated  by [CONTACT_673866] [ADDRESS_910747]  likely  to benefit  from the proposed  interventions.  Specifically, in  exploratory 
analyses, we will examine sex, race, and ethnicity to address the barrier of racial disparities.  
Power : We will recruit [ADDRESS_910748] comparisons across treatment groups result in 80% power to detect effect sizes 
amounting to standardized mean differences (Cohen’s d) of 1.[ADDRESS_910749] analytic framework. With repeate d measures for outcomes, under assumptions of reasonable 
reliability for the outcomes (r = .8) and high autocorrelation for repeated measures (r = .64), we will be able to 
detect smaller differences (d = .62) in pairwise comparisons (where .62 = (16*(1 -.8^2)/15) ^0.5, following Lehr 
[137]. A medium ES when power is set at .8, is typi[INVESTIGATOR_56388] a clinically relevant finding. Thus, if high 
levels  of feasibility  and acceptability  are found,  this would  suggest  that the protocol  should  be tested  in a large r 
trial. For power of .8 and a clinically relevant ES, i,e., a medium ES (d = .5),  a sample of 64 per group would 
be required in a future R01.  
Aim 2: Service  level  mechanisms  will be examined  as potential  mediators  of intervention  effects.  
Success  of treatment  linkage,  including  barriers  to outpatient  treatment,  and the equity  of intervention  fidelity 
and treatment linkage across sex, race, and ethnicity will be compared following the analytic approach 
summarized in Aim 1.  
PHASE  II: SIM and stakeholder  interviews  
In Phase II, in months [ADDRESS_910750] with National Center for Mental Health and Juvenile Justice 
(NCMHJJ) to conduct the SIM Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], which will identify key administrator and front line stakeholders 
(including families of JJ involved  youth) at each of the intercepts. We will then conduct qualitative interviews 
with these stakeholders and administer a measure on attitudes towards suicide screening and intervention at 
each  point  of intercept.  The goal of this  aim is to better  understand  the behavioral  and attitudinal  factors  of JJS 
staff and administrators as well as the needs of youth that would influence implementation of a suicide 
screening and brief intervention protocol across the entire JJS, not just Probation where the RCT takes p lace.  
The goals of this phase are to conduct a SIM to provide a conceptual framework to outline a series of 
“points of interception” along the JJS continuum in the state where screening and brief intervention may be 
implemented. We will apply this model to  identify the strengths and gaps of the current JJS in possible 
screening and intervention for SI and NSSI among JJ youth. The SIM is a facilitated, interactive process to 
determine  the flow of  youth  from the community  through  each intercept  of the JJS and back  to the community. 
During the process, the participants are introduced to evidence -based practices and emerging best practices 
from around the country. As the local systems are mapped, the group also identifies what practices they 
believe can be imple mented, gaps in services, and potential local resources.  
A core element of our SIM will be to conduct qualitative interviews with important stakeholders including 
JJS staff (n= 5 at each JJS intercept; N=25); treatment providers in the RIFC Mental Health C linic (n= 5) and 
the local community  mental  health  clinic  (n = 5) to assess  ways  to enhance  the hand  off to mental  health  care; 
JJ involved youth (n=10); and parents/guardians of JJ youth (n=10).  Key stakeholder interviews will be 
conducted to capture a na rrative history focused on CMIR implementation -level goals: 1) acceptability of 
screening and intervention in the JJS stakeholder’s respective setting by [CONTACT_3655], youth, and caregivers, and 2) 
barriers and facilitators of timely and efficient suicide screeni ng and intervention.  
Stakeholders (i.e., JJS staff, behavioral health providers, youth, and caregivers) will be interviewed 
individually in by [CONTACT_673867] [INVESTIGATOR_673851]. For JJS staff, interview questions will 
include system readiness an d acceptability (e.g., What factors impact staff and administration investment? 
What are the most desirable ways to incorporate screening and brief intervention into the court system?) 
Answers  to these  questions  will directly  inform  future  D&I efforts  across the JJS. Youth  and caregivers  will be 
interviewed about the acceptability of a brief intervention in the JJS, provide feedback about the perceived 
helpfulness  of such  an intervention,  the timeliness  and efficiency of the  intervention, and  discuss  concer ns of  
the court’s role in facilitating and monitoring treatment. Once each pool of stakeholders is identified, specific 
individuals  to interview  will be chosen  at random.  Interviews  will be audio  recorded,  coded,  and themes  will be 
extracted and summarized using standard content analysis procedures.  
Stakeholder compensation.  JJS staff and administrators are unable to receive compensation for 
participation  in a research  study.  Therefore, a  one-time donation  of $300  will be made  to the different poi nts of 
interception to help support their MH and substance use screening efforts. The qualitative interview will take 
the treatment providers, adolescents, and the parent/caregiver 30 -minutes each to complete. Treatment 
providers, juveniles, and a caregive r will each be paid $30 for completing the qualitative interview.  
Acceptability  will be assessed using qualitative interviews with JJ staff related to their perceived roles in 
screening and using the brief suicide/NSSI intervention. In addition, the  Attitu des toward Suicide Interventions  
(ATSI)  assesses attitudes towards and level and self –efficacy in relation to suicide screening and intervention. 
The ATSI is  a 39-item measure  modified  from the Attitudes  toward  Mental  Health  Screening scale109. The ATSI 
will measure knowledge about suicide and self -injury, attitudes, skills and confidence in suicide screening at 
each stakeholder interview.  
Phase  II: Data Analysis  
Aim 3: Identify organizational/ system -level factors, provider -level factors, and youth/famil y 
factors that promote or hinder uptake of a screening/brief intervention within the JJS.  Stakeholder 
interviews will be audiotaped, transcribed, and entered into NVivo, a qualitative data management program. 
MPI [INVESTIGATOR_673851], who has received extensive training i n qualitative methods, will develop the coding process, in 
collaboration with MPI [INVESTIGATOR_557100] -I Wolff,  for qualitative information related to the systems -building and 
implementation process as well as emergent content that arises as part of the coding p rocess (e.g., via 
verifying the coding scheme, training coders, coding data).  The coherence between qualitative coding 
schemes  and established  quantitative  measure  subscales  will allow  for triangulation  of the rich data captured 
by [CONTACT_223810]. We will ex amine: 1a) interest in and acceptability of screening and intervention in the JJS 
stakeholder’s respective, and 1b) barriers and facilitators of timely/efficient screening and brief intervention.  