 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, 03 -10-16, AMD  
Page 1 of 7 
  
 
 
 
Study Protocol with Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Study Title:   Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSTI) study  
NCT#: 02600871  
Document Date: 03/10/2016  (IRB approval date)   
 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, 03 -10-16, AMD  
Page 2 of 7 
 Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSTI) study  
Principal Investigator  
 
 [INVESTIGATOR_219100] , MD, FACEP  
Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine  
University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center, San Antonio  
 
Associate Investigators  
Gillian Schmitz, MD, FACEP  
Liem Du, MD  
Kourosh Jahangir, MD  
Christopher Frei, MD  
Joel Michalek, PhD  
Rose Ramos, PhD  
University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center, San Antonio  
 
 
 
Background  
 
A local  Practice -Based Research Network recently reported that one in five patients presenting 
to clinic for a methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) skin infection experienced 
treatment failure within [ADDRESS_263327] of $1,933 per patient. 1  In a subgroup of 
patients with moderate -complicated skin abscesses, failure rates were 36%, despi[INVESTIGATOR_219101]. Several clinic ians reported that household contacts (HCs) of  these 
patients later came to clinic too, with similar skin infections. Other studies have demonstrated a 
28% treatment failure rate after the incision and drainage of uncomplicated cutaneous 
abscesses. [ADDRESS_263328] enrolling clinics from prior studies to start this investigation. If the results of 
this pi[INVESTIGATOR_219102], we will work with Microdermis to design and implement a follow -
on statistically powered, clinical outcome study that w ill involve geographically distributed clinics 
and alternate sites around the US.  
  
Patients  
 
Study inclusion criteria  
 
1. Age 18 years or older  
2. Skin abscess (i.e., pus)  
3. Treatment requiring incision and drainage  
 
 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, 03 -10-16, AMD  
Page 3 of 7 
  
Study exclusion criteria:  
 
1. Unable or unwilling to provide informed consent  
2. Homeless, incarcerated, or living in a group home  
3. Abscess on the face or breast  
4. Abscess requiring surgical drainage in the operating room or requiring admission to the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
5. Intravenous drug users  
6. Previous enrollment in this study  
7. Documented history of iodine sensitivity  
 
Hypothesis  
 
We believe patients who use Provodine as a n antiseptic and  hand wash once daily for at least [ADDRESS_263329] better healing, better health outcomes, fewer treatment failures a nd fewer 
infections themselves and among their household contacts (HCs) than those w ho do not use 
Provodine . 
 
Specific Aims  
 
1. Compare clinical cure rates in patients with cutaneous abscesses at [ADDRESS_263330] 
information, age, gender, ethnicity, location of the abscess, measured length and width of 
palpable fluctuance and induration, measured length and width of surrounding cellulitis, 
presence or absence of fever, and previous medical history (including history of prior skin 
abscesses.) Assignment to a treatment group will be by [CONTACT_219105].  
 
All enrolled patients will be provided with an informed consent document and an overview  of the 
study. Baseline measurements including size of abscess (measured by [CONTACT_219106]) and maximal diameter of the largest area of cellulitis will be recorded.  
Providers will outline the area of palpable fluctuance with a n Aspen skin marker and delineate 
the surrounding area of cellulitis with a dotted line to establish baseline surface area of wound.  
All patients will have standard care including incision and drainage and wound culture of the 
abscess cavity. All patients will receive local anesthesia and additional pain management will be 
left to the discretion of the treating provider. Providers will make a linear incision over the length 
of palpable fluctuance and induration. The provider will explore the wound cavity an d break 
apart any loculations to allow for adequate drainage of purulent discharge. The provider will 
obtain wound cultures and irrigate with normal saline until clear irrigation fluid drains from cavity. 
Swabs will be sub -cultured on blood agar plates and  grown overnight for bacterial identification 
and antibiotic susceptibility testing.  
 
Patients randomized to Provodine  will have the abscess cavity and surrounding skin gently 
painted with Provodine solution. The contents of one foil packet of Provodine  will be applied with 
 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, [ADDRESS_263331] shown that there is no clinical benefit to antibiotics in the routine 
management of uncomplicated abscesses. 2,3  Patients with uncomplicated abscesses (defined 
as palpable abscess < 5 cm in a healthy patient with no history of diabetes, HIV, IVDA or 
immunocompromised state who has no systemic signs of infection) will not be treated with 
antibiotics. Patients who do not meet these criteria will be treated with antibiotics at the 
discretion of the provider.  
 
A study investigator w ill evaluate the patient in the emergency department or clinic within [ADDRESS_263332] care will cover wound with 4x4 gauze dressing and wash 
hands with soap and water for on e minute. Patients will be instructed to continue to perform 
once  daily cleansing/treatments until they are seen for their second wound recheck  or until 
wound cavity has closed . 
 
The patient will return for a 2nd visit between [ADDRESS_263333] compliance with intervention and side effects. Compliance 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_219107]. The 
cure rate, as measured by [CONTACT_219108], pain, erythema and purulent discharge, will be 
recorded. Wound management will again be left up to the discretion of the treating provider, but 
further incision and drainage, wound repacking and antibiotic use will be encouraged only for 
patients determined to be not clinically improving or getting wors e and will again be considered 
a treatment failure. Outcomes including clinical cure, reinfection, rate of new lesion 
development, and therapeutic changes to clinical management will be recorded.  
 
Patients will be called at home at 30 days to assess for t reatment failures requiring additional 
intervention and new lesion development in patients and their HCs.  
 
The figure below depi[INVESTIGATOR_219103] (Pts) and household contacts 
(HCs). Outcomes include rate of clinical cure rate of i nitial abscess and rate of new lesion 
development. Therapeutic changes (e.g., addition of new antibiotics or additional incision and 
drainage), or unplanned health care encounters for the skin infection (e.g., urgent care visits, 
emergent  care visits, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063] s) will be considered treatment failures . Fisher’s 
exact test will be used to compare outcomes between groups.  
 
.   
 Baseline
Incision and 
drainage72 hours
Cure (Pts)
New lesions (Pts)
Infection (HCs)7-10 days
Cure (Pts)
New lesions (Pts)
Infection (HCs)30 days
Cure (Pts)
New lesions (Pts)
Infection (HCs)
 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, [ADDRESS_263334] to cure (yes, no), new lesions  (yes, no), and infections (yes, no) with Fisher’s Exact 
tests.  Adverse events, if any, will be listed by [CONTACT_219109] (serious, not serious), severity (mild, moderate, severe), and relation to the 
treatmen t (related to the treatment, unknown but not related to the treatment).  All statistical 
testing will be two -sided with a significance level of 5%.  The sample size was not derived from 
a statistical power calculation but was motivated by [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_31093].  SAS Version 
9.4 for Windows or R will be used throughout.  
 
  
 
15-722H, Olson, Form BB, 03 -10-16, AMD  
Page 7 of 7 
  
 
                                                             
1 Labreche MJ, Lee GC, Attridge RT, Mortensen EM, Koeller J, Du LC, Nyren NR, Trevino LB, 
Trevino SB, Pena J, Mann MW, Munoz A, Marcos Y, Rocha G, Koretsky S, Esparza S, Finnie 
M, Dallas SD, Parchman ML, Frei CR. Treatment failure and costs in patients with methicillin -
resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) skin and soft tissue infections: a South [LOCATION_007] 
Ambulatory Research Network (STARNet) study. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013;26(5):508 -17. 
 
2 Schmitz GR, Bruner D, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_219104] R, Olderog C, Livengood T, Williams J, Hu ebner K, Lightfoot J, 
Ritz B, Bates C, Schmitz M, Mete M, Deye G. Randomized controlled trial of trimethoprim -
sulfamethoxazole for uncomplicated skin abscesses in patients at risk for community -associated 
methicillin -resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. Ann Emerg Med. 2010 Sep;56(3):283 -7 
 
 
3 Duong  M, Markwell S, Peter J, Barenkamp S. Randomized, controlled trial of antibiotics in the  
management of community -acquired skin abscesses in the pediatric patient.  Ann Emerg Med. 
2010 May;55(5):401 -7 