 
 
 
Development of a Mindfulness -Based Treatment for 
the Reduction of Alcohol Use and Smoking 
Cessation  
NCT0 3734666  
 
Protocol  V25 
Dated 07/01/2021  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine   
 
TITLE:  Development  of a Mindfulness -Based  Treatment  for the Reduction  of Alcohol 
Use and Smoking Cessation  
 
Coordinating  Center:  H. Lee Moffitt  Cancer  Center  
 
 
 
 
Protocol  Version  #25 Date : 7/1/21  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B2  
  
1. PARTICIPANT  SELECTION  
 
1.1 Eligibility  Criteria  
 
Aim 1:  Inclusion  criteria  will be ≥ 18 years  of age; currently  smoking  ≥ [ADDRESS_220414] year; carbon monoxide level ≥ 8 ppm; should carbon monoxide level yield a result less 
than [ADDRESS_220415] be ≥ level 3 ; motivated to quit smoking and decrease alcohol use within the 
next 60 days; if male, consumes ≥ 5 drinks and if f emale, consumes ≥[ADDRESS_220416] month; willingness and ability to attend the 8 weekly group sessions; valid 
home address in the Tampa Bay area; functioning telephone number; and can speak, read, and 
write in English.  
 
Aim 2:  Inclusion  criteria  will be ≥ 18 years  of age; currently  smoking  ≥ [ADDRESS_220417] year; motivated to quit smoking and decrease alcohol use within the next 60 days; if 
male, consumes ≥ 5 drinks and if female, consumes ≥[ADDRESS_220418] 
month;  willingness  and ability  to attend  the 8 weekly  video  group  sessions;  willingness  and ability 
to use an email account for study materials; valid address; functioning telephone number; and 
can speak, read, and write in English.  
 
1.2 Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Exclusion criteria will be contraindication for the nicotine patch; an active substance use 
disorder  other  than an alcohol  use disorder;  an active  psychotic  disorder;  current  use of tobacco 
cessation  medications; pregnancy  or lactation;  and a household  member  already  enrolled  in the 
study.  In rare cases, study  staff might exclude  a participant  for a reason  not specified  here (e.g., 
arrives intoxicated for multiple sessions).  
 
 
1.3 Inclusion  of Women  and Minorities  
 
Both men and women  and members  of all races  and ethnic  groups  are eligible  for this trial. 
 
1.4 Recruitment  
 
Participants will be recruited through print and media ads within the state of [LOCATION_012]. This will 
include radio and TV ads, recruitment through social media, general online a dvertising, and 
advertising on local busses. Flyers will be distributed throughout the local Tampa -Bay 
community, including to  primary care offices, wellness programs/clinics, and physicians (face -to- 
face meetings or presentations will occur as requested by [CONTACT_88235]/staff).  We will also 
reach out to human resources departments of local business for them to distribute our study 
flyers to potentially interested employees. Additionally, we will be distributing flyers through 
avenues  of the legal  system,  including,  but not limited  to, social  services  departments  and district 
courts. We will contact [CONTACT_186558]. TrialFacts will also be used to recruit participants. Participants recruited through 
TrialFacts will be invited to complete a brief online survey and/or telephone pre -screening 
conducted by [CONTACT_186559], which will include basic el igibility criteria. Our study team will then 
reach out to potentially eligible participants to complete a full study screen.  
Finally, we will leverage our relationship with The Tampa Bay Community Cancer Network 
(TBCCN), a network of community -academic par tners, which is led by [CONTACT_186560]: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B3  
 members  in our program.  Established  in 2005,  TBCCN  addresses  critical  access,  prevention  and 
control issues among medically underserved, low -literacy and low -income populations in the 
Tampa Bay and surrounding catc hment area. It is comprised of over 28 diverse partner 
organizations, including community clinics (e.g., federally qualified health centers, health 
departments, social service organizations, grassroots, faith -based and adult education groups) 
and Moffitt. Thus, during the first 3 months of this grant, we will determine which community or 
clinical organizations of TBCCN might be further interested in advertising our study to their 
members. Establishing these targeted relationships will not only bolster recru itment (including  
the possibility to hold group sessions at their locations), but would hopefully lead to  maintainable 
relationships that extend beyond this grant period.  
 
2. STUDY  DESIGN  AND  METHODS  
 
Aim 1. 
 
Project  Overview . The  primary  goal of Aim  I is to modify  an existing  treatment  – MBRP  – to 
include a focus on smoking cessation and reducing alcohol use (MBRP -SA). In this section we 
include  a description  of MBRP  and the proposed  modifications  to the original  protocol  to include 
a focus on smoking abstine nce and reduced alcohol use (Study 1).  
MBRP Overview. MBRP was designed to target key components in the relapse prevention 
process, with a specific focus on negative mood and craving. Principles of the treatment were 
derived MBRP139 and MBCT.140 MBRP -SA wi ll use the same session structure as MBRP, with 8 
weekly in -person group sessions that are 2 hours each. Group sizes for MBRP -SA will be 8 -10 
participants. The current study will follow the existing treatment manual for MBRP,141 with 
necessary  modification s as described  in the following  section.  The core aims  of MBRP  are to aid 
individuals in developi[INVESTIGATOR_186521] 
(i.e., the opposite of being on autopi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]) and to increase tolerance of emotional, cog nitive, and 
physical states that are unpleasant or negative. The mindfulness practices within MBRP teach 
individuals how to hone these skills, which allows them to better  manage substance use craving 
when it does occur. Examples of these practices include mindfulness meditation, mindful 
movement, body scan, and awareness of the senses.  
Sessions 1 and 2 of MBRP focus on providing a rationale for how mindfulness can be related 
to craving and mood, discussing the tendency to be on “autopi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]”, and increasing awareness of 
internal  and external  triggers  for substance  use. In these  sessions,  exercises  are designed  to aid 
participants in understanding how to “sit with” discomfort, which provides for the opportunity to 
mindfully choose a  response, instead of impulsively responding. Sessions 3 and 4 aim to 
increase participants’ awareness of habitual responding in order to expand their options for 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_186522] a craving. One particularly relevant exercise is SOBER (Stop, 
Observ e, Breathe, Expand, Respond) Breathing Space, which is practiced in session and 
participants are encouraged to utilize this skill as part of their daily activities. Session 5 focuses 
on the  ability to  balance  acceptance  with the need to  take skillful actio n. Session 6 highlights  the 
importance of decentering from thoughts, and noticing “thoughts are just thoughts” and not fact. 
Sessions [ADDRESS_220419] to 
cultivate  self-compassion and forgiveness. As 
participants progress through MBRP, home practices 
are introduced and built upon each week. Examples 
of formal home practice include body scans, sitting 
meditation, walking meditation, and mindful 
movement. Integrating mindfulness into daily activities  
is encouraged  via informa l exercises  (e.g.,  
 
awareness  of brushing  teeth,  washing  hands,  SOBER  breathing  space).  Participants  will be sent Table  1. MBRP  Session  Topi[INVESTIGATOR_87737]  1 Automatic  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_186523]  2 Awareness  of Triggers  and Craving  
Week  3 Mindfulness  in Daily  Life 
Week  4 Mindfulness  in High-risk Situations  
Week  5 Acceptance  and Skillful  Action  
Week  6 Seeing  Thoughts  as Thoughts  
Week  7 Self-care and Lifestyle  balance  
Week  8 Social  Support  and Continuing  Practice  
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B4  
 an email each  week including the handouts  from the session as well as  links to  the audio  files of 
the meditations practiced during the group. Table 1 provides session topi[INVESTIGATOR_186524].  
MBRP -SA Development. The primary adaptation for MBRP -SA will be to tailor some the 
session content and discussions to smoking cessation and alcohol use. These changes will be 
primarily guided by [CONTACT_186561] (e.g., studies on mindfulness -based treatments for 
smoking cessation) and the experience/knowledge of the investigative team. It should be noted  
that MBRP  already  addresses  some  of the primary  underlying  mechanisms  of smoking  cessation  
and reduced alcohol use (e.g., managing negative affect and craving) and that the extant  
literature indicates that key behavior modification constructs (e.g., self -efficacy) are impacted by  
[CONTACT_186562] .45,50,67,76 Therefore, we will not modify the core compone nts of MBRP, but instead 
supplement the existing protocol with content unique to smoking and alcohol use.  
Content  Modifications.  Content  modifications  listed  here fall into 3 categories:  smoking - 
specific, alcohol -specific, and co -use. Given MBRP has alrea dy demonstrated efficacy for 
reduced alcohol use, most of these modifications focus on smoking and co -use content.  
Modifications  are based  on the existing  literature,  ability  of content  to address  underlying 
behavior -change mechanisms (e.g., motivation) and Co -I [CONTACT_186582]’s experience developi[INVESTIGATOR_14632] a mindfulness - 
based cessation intervention.58 SMOKING -SPECIFIC : Quit 
date. Research regarding smoking cessation indicates that 
motivation can be enhanced by [CONTACT_20998] a specific quit date.142 
Therefore, MBRP -SA will set the smoking quit date at Session 
5, which is supported by [CONTACT_186563] -based cessation 
treatments  (e.g., 58). This permits  time for individuals to  develop 
their mindfulness practice (Sessions 1 -4) while still providin g 
ongoing support for 3 weeks after the quit day. Losing a friend . 
Many smokers report that smoking a cigarette represents a  
type of “friendship” and that quitting smoking is like losing a 
close friend.143-[ADDRESS_220420].142 Thus, participants will be  

PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B5  
 provided with nicotine patches at the end of Session 4, with the intention to begin using them at 
Session 5. Psychoeducation about patch use will occur at Session 4. Mindful Smoking is a 
mindfulness activity that brings awareness to the act of smoking a cigarette. An introductio n to 
this will occur at the end of Session 2, and the actual practice will be conducted right before the 
beginning of Session 3 group. Participants will be encouraged to continue mindful smoking until 
their quit day at Session 5. ALCOHOL -SPECIFIC : Reduced alcohol use . Alcohol use will be 
monitored  at each  treatment session. A  discussion  of goals related  to reduced  drinking  will begin 
at Session 1 and continue through Session 5. Participants will be encouraged to set realistic 
drinking  goals for  themselves,  which  is consistent with  a harm  reduction  approach  to alcohol  use 
and fits within  the framework  of social  determination  theory.146,147 Participants  will be encouraged 
to implement  drinking  goals at Session  5 (to coincide  with the smoking  quit date),  altho ugh many 
people  may have  already  decreased  use. At  the orientation  session,  participants  will be provided 
with a handout with psychoeducational information on alcohol use, and they will be encouraged 
to use this when deciding what their alcohol use goal will be. CO-USE: Psychoeducation on the  
health impacts of cigarette and alcohol use . Consistent wit h recommendations,[ADDRESS_220421] of cigarette and alcohol use on 
their health at Session 1. Information on the benefits of quitting smoking and reducing drinking 
(e.g., breathing becomes eas ier, decrease risk of cancer development) will also be discussed 
and provided. Relationship between smoking and drinking . Given common underlying 
mechanisms of the co -use of alcohol and smoking exist (e.g., cue -induced craving, positive and 
negative reinfo rcement),11-[ADDRESS_220422] decision r egarding their own co -use. These 
discussions will occur at Session 2.  
Procedures. The treatment development procedures will follow an iterative multi -step 
process (see Figure 3) based on the treatment development literature.148,149 Step one will 
develop a good working treatment protocol based on the above content modifications. Because 
an already well -developed treatment manual exists for MBRP,141 we anticipate that this can be 
done fairly quickly. Step two will involve training cou nselors in the new protocol (see Treatment 
Delivery section in Study 2 for additional detail on counselor training). Step three will entail 
administering  the protocol  to a small  group  of participants  (N=16)  to receive  feedback  on MBRP - 
SA. We  expect  to enroll about 8  participants per  group  in order  to run 3 groups. Eligibility criteria 
and study procedures will be identical to that outlined in Study 2 below, with the only exception 
being that participants will not complete the follow -up visits and will not complete the breath 
counting task.  
Compensation and Retention Procedures . Participants will be financially compensated for 
completing the assessment measures, and for the costs associated with participation such as 
transportation, child care, etc. Part icipants will receive $[ADDRESS_220423] 4 treatment visits will be paid at $15 per session, 
sessions 5 -7 will pay $20 per session, and session 8 and the follow -up will pay out $25 per 
sessi on. Participants will be compensated with a $[ADDRESS_220424] - 
cessation  follow -up call. For Visits  5 and 8, participants  who arrive  a half-hour early  will receive  a 
$5 bonus  at the end of their visit. 
Step four will include ext ensive querying of participants as to the appropriateness, 
acceptability, usefulness, etc. of all materials, assessments, procedures, and treatment. Some 
questions will mimic the acceptability questions outlined below for Study 2. However, more 
specific  detail regarding  MBRP -SA will also be gathered. A  focus  group  will be conducted  by [CONTACT_1600] [INVESTIGATOR_186525] (e.g., 
understandability of content and what information was most/least helpful regarding smoking and 
alcohol use), along with other general treatment -related issues (e.g., barriers to enrolling in the  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B6  
 treatment, concerns about logistically attending sessions, and appealing features of the 
treatment). Step five will incl ude revising the treatment procedures and content based on the 
results  from each  cohort  of development  testing.  Table  2 provides  an overview  of the timeline  for 
Study 1.  
Statistical  Considerations . The primary  goal of Study  1 is to develop  MBRP -SA. Qualita tive 
analysis of focus group will be the primary form of evaluation. The focus group will be audio - 
recorded and verbatim transcripts created for content analysis.150 Using hand coding, the goal 
will be to identify  key themes/textual  units  related  to mindfulness and  response  to the treatment. 
Results from the qualitative interviews will be analyzed using the interview transcripts and 
content analysis. Content analysis will be conducted using an “intuitive” or 
“immersion/crystallizing” analysis plan, wh ereby [CONTACT_186564].151 The research team will identify key 
themes as they read through the interview transcripts. Descriptive statistics of quantitative 
measures  will supplement  the qualitative  analysis.  These  may provide  information  for identifying 
aspects of implementation that require change prior to the feasibility study (Study 2).  
 
Aim 2. 
*Note:  All procedures  reported  for Aim 2 will be conducted  remotely,  primarily  via zoom  and 
phone  calls (but also via mailouts,  emails,  and text messages  as appropriate).  Group  treatment 
sessions (MBRP -SA and CBT) will be conducted via zoom.  
Project Overview . The primary goal of Study 2 is to measure benchmarks regarding the 
feasibility  and acceptability  of the MBRP -SA protocol  created  in Study  1. Participants  (N=64) will 
be randomized  to either  MBRP -SA or  CBT and  tracked from [ADDRESS_220425] - 
cessation (±5 days). The second follow -up appointment will be a phone call scheduled at [ADDRESS_220426]-cessation  (±5 days).  Table  [ADDRESS_220427] 
studies conducted at TRIP. All methods used in Recruitment section above will be used here  
Telephone Screening . Interested participants will be contacte d via phone and provided a 
detailed  overview  of the study.  Following  verbal  informed  consent,  potential  participants  will be 
screened for inclusion/exclusion criteria. Participants will complete the eligibility screening, 
including the MINI for Alcohol Use , Substance Use, and Psychotic Disorders for DSM -V for 
diagnostic information. The TLFB will confirm participants meet  the alcohol criteria  for the past 
month. Eligible participants will then be scheduled for a phone orientation session.  
 
 
Table  3. Aim [ADDRESS_220428] -cessation  Week  
Phone 
Screen  -5 
Orientation  -4 
Start 
of Tx -3 -2 -1 0 
Quit 
Day 1 2 3 
End of 
Tx 8 
Follow 
Up 16 
Follow 
Up 
Telephone  Screening  X            
TREATMENT  (Tx) PROCEDURES  
MBRP -SA or CBT Delivery    Tx 1 Tx 
2 Tx 3 Tx 4 Tx 5 Tx 6 Tx 7 Tx 8   
Nicotine  Patch  Dispensation       X X X X X X  
DEMOGRAPHICS  / MENTAL  HEALTH  
Demographics   X           
 
MINI  Psychotic  Disorders,  Alcohol,  and 
Substance Use Disorders for DSM -5   
X           
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B7  
  
ALCOHOL  USE MEASURES  
Alcohol  Use Goals    X   X    X X  
Alcohol  Use History   X           
Patient  Health  Questionnaire –Alcohol 
Use  X     X   X X  
Penn  Alcohol  Craving  Scale   X     X   X X  
Alcohol  Abstinence  Self Efficacy   X     X   X X  
Drinking  Motives  Questionnaire  - 
Revised   X     X   X X  
SMOKING  MEASURES  
Smoking  Use and History   X           
Brief Wisconsin  Inventory  of Smoking 
Dependence Motives   X     X   X X  
Wisconsin  Smoking  Withdrawal  Scale   X     X   X X  
Self-Efficacy  Scale -Smoking   X     X   X X  
MINDFULNESS  
Five Facet  Mindfulness  Questionnaire   X     X   X X  
Toronto  Mindfulness  Scale   X X X X X X X X X X  
NEGATIVE  AFFECT  / DEPRESSION  / STRESS  / ANXIETY  
Center  for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_186526]   X     X   X X  
Distress  Tolerance  Scale   X     X   X X  
Perceived  Stress  Scale   X     X   X X  
Positive  and Negative  Affect  Scale   X X X X X X X X X X  
BEHAVIORAL  TASK  
Breath  Counting   X         X  
ALCOHOL  USE AND  SMOKING  STATUS  / BIOCHEMICAL  VERIFICATION  
Timeline  Followback   X X X X X X X X X X X 
Carbon  Monoxide  (CO)  X X X X X X X X X X  
Urinalysis  hCG,  as applicable   X           
Urine  Cotinine  as applicable   X           
Blood  Alcohol  Content  (BAC)   X X X X X X X X X X  
FEEDBACK  FROM  PARTICIPANTS  
End of Treatment  Feedback 
Questionnaire           X   
WAI-SR Client  Version  Modified           X   
Follow -up Feedback  Questionnaire            X  
 
 
Table  4. Aim [ADDRESS_220429] -cessation  Week  
Phone 
Screen  -5 
Orientation  -4 
Start  
of 
Tx -3 -2 -1 0 
Quit 
Day 1 2 3 
End 
of Tx 8 
Follow 
Up 16 
Follow 
Up 
Telephone  Screening  Xa            
TREATMENT  (Tx) PROCEDURES  
MBRP -SA or CBT Delivery    Tx 1 Tx 
2 Tx 3 Tx 4 Tx 5 Tx 6 Tx 7 Tx 8   
Nicotine  Patch  Dispensation       X X X X X X  
DEMOGRAPHICS  / MENTAL  HEALTH  
Demographics   X           
 
MINI  Psychotic  Disorders,  Alcohol, 
and Substance Use Disorders for  
DSM -5  
Xa            
ALCOHOL  USE MEASURES  
Alcohol  Use Goals    Xa   Xa    Xa Xa Xa 
Alcohol  Use History   X           
Patient  Health  Questionnaire –Alcohol 
Use  X     X   X X  
Penn  Alcohol  Craving  Scale   X     X   X X  
Alcohol  Abstinence  Self Efficacy   X     X   X X  
Drinking  Motives  Questionnaire  - 
Revised   X     X   X X  
SMOKING  MEASURES  
Smoking  Use and History   X           
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B8  
  
Brief Wisconsin  Inventory  of Smoking 
Dependence Motives   X     X   X X  
Wisconsin  Smoking  Withdrawal  Scale   X     X   X X  
Self-Efficacy  Scale -Smoking   X     X   X X  
MINDFULNESS  
Five Facet  Mindfulness  Questionnaire   X     X   X X  
Toronto  Mindfulness  Scale   X X X X X X X X X X  
Avoidance  and Inflexibility  Scale   X     X   X X  
NEGATIVE  AFFECT  / DEPRESSION  / STRESS  / ANXIETY  
Center  for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_186526]   X     X   X X  
Distress  Tolerance  Scale   X     X   X X  
Perceived  Stress  Scale   X     X   X X  
Positive  and Negative  Affect  Scale   X X X X X X X X X X  
ALCOHOL  USE AND  SMOKING  STATUS  / BIOCHEMICAL  VERIFICATION  
Timeline  Followback  Xa     Xa    Xa Xa Xa 
Saliva  Cotinine             X 
FEEDBACK  FROM  PARTICIPANTS  
Client  Satisfaction  Questionnaire           X   
End of Treatment  Feedback 
Questionnaire           X   
WAI-SR Client  Version  Modified           X   
Feasibility  of Technology  Survey           X   
System  Usability  Scale           X   
Follow -up Feedback  Questionnaire            X  
a = data collected  during  phone  call (vs REDCap)  
 
Phone Orientation  Visit . Study personnel will call the participant  at their scheduled session 
time and provide a detailed description of the study and obtain verbal consent. A copy of the 
informed consent and a PowerPoint describing the study in detail will be mailed and/or emaile d 
to participants  before  the orientation  session.  If the participant decided  to consent  to the study, a 
series of self -report questionnaires to complete will be emailed to them(see Aim 3 below).  
Individuals  who are ineligible  or decline  to participate  will receive  self-help materials  and referrals 
for smoking cessation and alcohol use programs.  
Zoom Orientation Visit . Consented participants will be scheduled for a group Zoom 
Orientation  session  one week  before  the first treatment  session. Prior  to the visit, participants  will 
be provided a packet of instructions on how to access and navigate the video -conferencing app, 
Zoom, and additional materials related to the study (e.g. session handouts, welcome materials). 
Tablets, webcams, and/or microphones wil l be provided to participants on an as -needed basis.  
This orientation session will take place via Zoom. During this session, participants will be 
provided  with a training  on how to use video -conferencing  app and will discuss  the other  relevant 
materials se nt to participants in preparation for the first treatment visit.  Prior to all Zoom visits in 
the study, participants will join a waiting room before they are admitted to the group, where they 
will see banners with reminders about sessions content, privacy standards, etc. This procedure 
will be followed for all treatment sessions as well as the Zoom Orientation session.  
Randomization. Three stratification variables will be included: gender (men vs women), 
race/ethnicity  (non-Hispanic  White  vs Other),  and smoking rate (20+ cigarettes  per day [CPD]  vs 
less than 20). Within these 8 cells, eligible participants will be assigned to the two treatments 
using balanced -permuted block randomization with a block size of 4.  
Compensation  and Retention  Procedures . Participants  will be financially  compensated  for 
completing the assessment measures, and for the costs associated with participation such as 
child care, etc. Participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_220430] after completing measures sent after the 
Orientation vis it, and will receive an additional $[ADDRESS_220431] if they complete it in 24 hours. 
Participants  who decline  to consent  to the study  during  the Orientation  visit will receive  a $[ADDRESS_220432]. Participants will receive $10 for completing the Zoom Orienta tion visit. For measures 
completed  prior to visits  1-4, 6, and 7, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_220433], and a  $[ADDRESS_220434] if they complete them within 24 hours.. For measures completed prior to visits 5 and 8, 
participants  will receive a  $[ADDRESS_220435], and  a $[ADDRESS_220436] if they complete  the measures  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B9  
 within 24 hours. For completing the phone call assessment prior to visits 5 and 8, participants 
will be compensated with a $[ADDRESS_220437]. Payment for these visits differ based on  the length 
(e.g., participants are compensated more when asked to complete lengthier questionnaire 
packets). Participants will be compensated with a $[ADDRESS_220438] follow -up 
call and measures, and will receive a $[ADDRESS_220439]  if they complete the measures within 
24 hours. For completing the second follow -up call ([ADDRESS_220440] -cessation), participants will 
receive  a $[ADDRESS_220441]. Participants  will receive  a $10 bonus  for sending  back  a saliva  sample  to 
confirm tobacco abstinence. For any unreturned iPads after a period of two months of phone 
calls/emails from staff, a $[ADDRESS_220442] the following 
procedures to reduce attrition: reminder phone calls or texts prior to all study visits, flexible 
scheduling of the group sessions (e.g., evenings, various days of the week) to accommodate 
different schedules, requiring a functioning phone number and home add ress to contact 
[CONTACT_186565], and obtaining the name, address, and phone number 
of at least 2 collaterals (i.e., relatives, friends) who can provide contact [CONTACT_186566],  should  we be unable  to contact  [CONTACT_186567].  Participants  who are unable 
to complete the measures or phone assessments will be mailed the materials to complete.  
Treatment  Overview.  All participants  will receive  nicotine  replacement  therapy  (NRT)  and 
either MBRP -SA or CBT. Table [ADDRESS_220443] widely used pharmacotherapy and the 
Treating  Tobacco  Dependence  Clinical  Practice  Guideline  has identified  it as frontline  therapy.142 
The patch is safe, tolerable, and available over -the-counter. Patch therapy for participants who 
smoke >[ADDRESS_220444] until the subsequent visit. A reduction in dosage or cessation of the patch regimen will be 
implemented for any particip ants who show signs of being on too high of a dose, which is 
expected for very few participants since blood nicotine levels are usually much lower on the 
patch than while smoking. Note that for Aim 2, patches will be mailed each week.  
MBRP -SA and CBT . MBRP -SA was already described above. CBT is a well -established and 
commonly used treatment for substance use behaviors that primarily utilizes a problem solving 
and copi[INVESTIGATOR_186527],152 combined  with standards  from 
the Guideline.142 Session content will generally follow the manual used in the original MBRP 
RCT64, the MBAT RCT58, and standards from the Guideline (e.g., setting a quit date, providing 
NRT).[ADDRESS_220445] of 8 sessions (2 hours each), with [ADDRESS_220446] time. All 
treatment activities focus on promoting/maintaining smoking abstinence and reducing drinking, 
with specific treatment objectives for each sessio n. Participants will receive weekly emails that 
outline the group session as well as include relevant links and attached handouts for their 
review. Participants  will also receive  referrals  for mental  health  and substance  use at the end of 
treatment.  
Treatment Delivery and Fidelity. Explicit therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186528], extensive training, and 
on-going  monitoring  and supervision  of treatment  delivery,  fidelity,  and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186529], follow the protocols precisely, and prevent 
counselor drift and contamination.  
Selection Criteria . For both MBRP -SA and CBT, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186530] a minimum of a 
master’s  degree  in counseling,  psychology,  social  work,  or a related  field and experie nce running 
group therapy. For MBRP -SA, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186531]: complete the [ADDRESS_220447] been  trained in CBT. The decision to  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B10  
 utilize  different  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186532] a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186533].  
Although we are aware that the risk in using different therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186534] -specific 
effects to occur, we believe that MBRP -SA and CBT would be difficult to provide concurrently 
while  adhering  to both protocols.  Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -specific  effects  will be evaluated  (see below  for more 
detail).  
Training, Supervision, Adherence . As reported above, counselors providing MBRP -SA will 
already have a strong background in mindfulness -based techniques. Counselor training in CBT 
and the smoking cessation and alcohol use portion  of MBRP -SA will be conducted by [CONTACT_6283]. Vinci 
and Brandon, who have extensive experience in delivering behavioral treatments for nicotine 
dependence and alcohol use. This training will include a focus on smoking and alcohol use 
through  readings  of the MBRP -SA and CBT manuals, practicing  and role playing  each  session  of 
MBRP -SA and CBT, and working through anticipated issues that might arise during sessions.  
Training will occur in a regular series of half -day blocks (1 -2 per week) with the counselor 
studying and role -playing between training sessions. Training will continue until the counselor 
reaches performance criteria for competence and adherence to the protocols, which will be 
made on counselor rating forms during mock counseling sessions using t he validated 
Mindfulness -Based Relapse Prevention Adherence and Competence Scale (MBRP -AC)153 for 
MBRP -SA and a modified version of the Cognitive Therapy Adherence and Competence Scale 
(CTACS)  for CBT.[ADDRESS_220448] adherence and competence to the protocol and to 
prevent drift, all sessions will be recorded and a random sample of 10% will be rated by [CONTACT_186568] -AC and CTACS. Additionally, applicable staff at the University of 
New Mexico will receive audio recordings of the sessions to further monitor therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186535]. A counselor who falls below performance criteria will receive additional training. 
In order to observe any counselor -specific characteristics that may be unique to some groups 
and not others, participants will c omplete a measure at the final treatment  session that assesses 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_186536], warmth, empathy, credibility, confidence, 
trustworthiness, and responsiveness to questions. The audio recordings may also be used for 
participants wh o miss a group session. They may come into the research facility to listen to the 
audio  recording  from group  to make  up the missed  session.  Finally,  homework  completion  will be 
monitored weekly via questionnaire to assess treatment adherence (e.g., amount of time each 
day spent meditating, types of mediations practiced each week).  
Benchmarks  for Feasibility  and Acceptability . Table  [ADDRESS_220449] of benchmarks  that 
are the primary outcomes for Study 2. The  development  of these benchmarks was  informed  by 
[CONTACT_186569].155-157 In addition to the measurable outcomes 
below, other areas to be monitored include the ability to: randomize participants to group, 
effectively screen for eligibility criteria, organize al l questionnaires to be completed in -full for 
thorough data processing and analysis, and schedule participants for treatment sessions and 
follow -ups. For any participant who drops out early, a structured phone interview will be 
attempted to determine reason s for withdrawal and overall reaction to the treatment protocol.  
We will invite  a subset  of participants  (N=16)  back  for in-depth  interviews,  and questions  will 
mimic those from the interviews we will conduct as part of Aim 1. Interviews will be audio - 
recorded and transcribed for content analysis. We will specifically query participants on the 
appropriateness, acceptability, usefulness, etc. of the intervention, as well as other general 
treatment -related issues (e.g., transportation; barriers to enrolling in treatment). The analysis of 
these data will also model what we have written for Aim 1.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B11  
  
 
Table  5. Measureable Benchmarks  
Area of  Interest  Description  of Outcome  to be Evaluated  Measure  and/or  Expected  Outcome  
 
 
Acceptability  Participant  Satisfaction  Client  Satisfaction  Questionnaire158 
(satisfaction of ≥80%)  
Intention  to continue  to use skills  learned 
from the treatments  Questionnaire  developed  for this study  
Perceived appropriateness of the 
treatments  for smoking  and alcohol  use Questionnaire  developed  for this study  
 
 
 
Demand  Accrual  rates  for study  For recruitment,  the cost of each 
participant  will be ≤$100  
Completed  sessions  ≥40%  of participants  will complete  all 8 
sessions;  ≥60%  will complete  between 
4 and 7 sessions*  
Homework  Completion  For MBRP -SA, participants will engage 
in mindfulness  homework  at a minimum  
of 3.5 days  per week*  
 
 
 
Implementation/ 
Practicality  Screening/eligibility  for study  Record  number  of call attempts  for each 
participant and reasons for ineligibility  
Recruitment  Recruit 8 eligible participants per 
month;  60% of recruitment  will be 
completed by [CONTACT_96138] 2  
Retainment  Retain  80% through  end of treatment, 
70% through follow -up 
Questionnaire  completion  For sessions attended, 90% of 
questionnaires  will be completed  
Note.  * based  on data from Bowen  et al., 2014;  Vidrine  et al., 2016;  Witkiewitz  et al., 201464,66,[ADDRESS_220450] and examine descriptive data on proximal variables 
associated  with smoking  abstinence  and reduced  drinking  (e.g.,  negative  affect,  craving),  as well 
as distal variables (smoking abstinence, heavy alcohol use) from Study 2. Aim [ADDRESS_220451], assessment selection criteria included established 
reliability  and validity.  Second,  assessments  had to either  a) represent  hypothesized  treatment 
mechanisms/effects or b) have been empi[INVESTIGATOR_186537]/or reduced drinking. Third, to reduce the inconvenience associated with completing the 
assessments we will provide compensation for participants’ time and provide snacks and 
beverages at all visits . In sum, our assessments comprehensively assess all necessary 
variables, the ability of the team to implement  these procedures, and participant completion of 
the measures. Such information will inform future methods for a larger efficacy trial.  
Demographi cs/Description of Sample Measures. Demographics Questionnaire  collects 
data on gender, age,  race, ethnicity,  education, income,  employment,  partner status,  insurance 
status,  and preferred  language.  MINI  International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview  DSM -5 is a semi- 
structured interview to assess for the presence of psychiatric disorders and substance use 
disorders and will be used in the current study to describe the sample and determine eligibility 
criteria. The following modules will be administered: I. Alcoho l Use Disorder, J. Substance Use 
Disorder (Non -Alcohol), and K. Psychiatric Disorders and Mood Disorder with Psychotic 
Features.  
Alcohol Use  Measures.  Alcohol  Use History  will collect information  on past year alcohol  use 
(e.g.,  quantity/frequency  of use, typi[INVESTIGATOR_186538]),  alcohol  use history  (e.g., age 
of first drink), other household drinkers, number of friends/family who drink, and treatment  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B12  
 history. As part of the inclusion/exclusion criteria, p articipants will also be asked if they have a 
history of experiencing severe alcohol withdrawal symptoms and if they are motivated to reduce 
their drinking in the next 60 days. Penn Alcohol Craving Scale  (PACS) consists of [ADDRESS_220452] week.160 Alcohol Abstinence Self -Efficacy Scale  (AASE) 
evaluates an individual’s confidence to abstain from drinking according to 4 diff erent scenarios: 
negative  affect,  social/positive, physical  and other  concerns,  and withdrawal.161 Drinking  Motives  
Questionnaire Revised  (DMQ -R) utilizes self -reported data to measure drinking motives 
including social, enhancement, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and conformity.[ADDRESS_220453] information on the onset of 
regular smoking,  smoking  behavior  (e.g., CPD,  years  spent  smoking,  time to first cigarette  in the 
morning), smokin g history (e.g., age smoked first cigarette), quit attempts, other household 
smokers, number of friends/family who smoke, and use of other tobacco products (e.g., e - 
cigarettes, cigars, hookah, snus). Participants will also be asked if they are motivated t o quit 
smoking  in the next 60 days,  as part of the inclusion/exclusion  criteria.  Brief Wisconsin  Inventory  
of Smoking Motives  (WISDM) is a [ADDRESS_220454] via 11 different smoking motives.162 Wisconsin  
Smoking Withdrawal Scale  (WSWS) includes 7 subscales assessing nicotine withdrawal 
symptoms accordi ng to 28 items.163 Self-efficacy Scale - Smoking  is a 20 -item self -report 
measure that determines an individual’s level of confidence for not smoking in positive/social 
situations, negative affect situations, and out of habit.164 
Mindfulness  Measures.  Five Facet  Mindfulness  Questionnaire  (FFMQ)  is a 39-item Likert - 
scale measure assessing 5 facets of trait mindfulness.40 Toronto Mindfulness Scale  (TMS) is a 
13-item Likert -scale self -report measure of state mindfulness.41 The TMS yields two factors: 
Curiosity and Decentering.  
Negative  Affect/Depression/Stress/Anxiety  Measures.  Center  for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_186539]  (CESD) is a [ADDRESS_220455] week.165 Distress Tolerance Scale  (DTS) is a 15 -item, 
Likert -scale self -report measure of an individual’s perception of his/her own emotional distress 
tolerance.166 Perceived Stress Scale  (PSS) is a widely used self -report measure that assesses 
the degree to which participants find their lives to be stressful.[ADDRESS_220456]  
Scale  (PANAS) is a 20 -item self -report Likert -scale measure that assesses an in dividual’s 
positive and negative affect at a given point in time.168 
Alcohol and Smoking Outcomes. Alcohol Use . The Timeline Followback (TLFB)171-[ADDRESS_220457] time they 
completed the TLFB: before visits 4 and 8, and at the 8 -week and 16 -week follow -up. From the 
TLFB, the  primary  outcome  measure derived will be the  percent of heavy  drinking days  (defined 
as: on a single occasion, ≥5 drinks for men and ≥ 4 drinks for women). Other alcohol use 
outcomes, such as pe rcent days’ abstinent and alcoholic drinks per drinking day, will also be 
derived.  
Smoking Abstinence . To determine smoking abstinence, we will use the [ADDRESS_220458] alcohol use.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B13  
 G. Data  Management  and Statistical  Considerations  for Study  [ADDRESS_220459] sizes (e.g., Cohen’s d > .72) for simple, two -group comparisons of a continuous variable 
with alpha=.05, power > .80, and a two -tailed test. Binary variables  assessed under the same 
testing conditions would require an OR > 5.95.  
Data Analysis Overview. Analyses will be conducted with SPSS and SAS version 9.4174 
and Mplus Version 7.177 Descriptive statistics of demographics, smoking history, and alcohol 
history variables will be calculated and group comparisons will be performed. Descriptive 
statistics of all study  measures  (i.e., proximal and  distal measures  of alcohol use and  smoking)  
will be calculated.  Although  underpowered  to detect  small - or medium  sized  sex differences,  all 
analyses will examine sex as a covariate . Furthermore, analyses will include treatment group 
(i.e., each subset of participants who are treated with MBRP -SA or  CBT together) when the 
intraclass correlation coefficient is > 0.10.  
Aim 2 - Evaluate benchmarks regarding feasibility and acceptability . Feasibility will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_186570] 5. Each index will either be compared to 
published norms (e.g., CSQ) or our prior experience with clinical trials. We expect to recruit 
adequate numbers of eligible participants during the study timeframe with efficient cost 
expenditures,  retain  at least 80%  through  the end of treatment, and  retain  at least  70% through 
the end of the study.  Treatment acceptance  and satisfaction  are expected  to be 80% or higher, 
and participants are expected to comply with treatment requirements. The team will determine 
whether corrective actions for future stu dies are needed when an index suggests 
underperformance. Evaluation of all indices will inform and guide modification prior to the 
proposal of a full -scale RCT.  
Aim [ADDRESS_220460] and examine descriptive data on proximal and distal variables associated  
with alcohol  use and smoking . Descriptive  statistics  of proximal  measures  (e.g.,  negative  affect, 
self-efficacy) will be presented in figures to review change over time and treatment differences. 
Generalized  estimating  equations  (GEE)  will be used  to fit population -averaged  models  with the 
main variables of treatment, time, and their interaction. An AR(1) working  correlation matrix will 
be used with r=.70. Covariates and potential confounding variables will be included, as 
warranted. This approach preserve s data for analysis by [CONTACT_186571]. Qualitative analyses (e.g., 
thematic analysis) may also be conducted on aspects of the treatment process.  
A similar approach  to analysis wi ll be taken  for the primary outcomes  (the distal measures). 
TLFB  will be used  to derive  a measure  of heavy  alcohol  use and the 7-day point prevalence  will 
be created for smoking abstinence at five targeted 1 -week periods prior to a session: start of 
treatm ent (week -4), quit date (week 0), end of treatment (week +3), and two follow -ups (week  
+8 and  week  +16). Descriptive statistics will be presented in  figures. GEE  with an AR(1) working 
correlation  matrix  (r=.60)  will be used  to assess  the effects  of treatment,  time (-4, 0, +3, +8, +16), 
and their interaction on the primary outcome measures. Means, percentages, and 95% 
confidence intervals will provide useful guidance as we determine sample sizes for a full -scale 
RCT. There  is not adequate power to  detect small - to medium -sized  treatment group differences 
given the sample size. However, we would interpret any within -subject decreases in the number 
of heavy drinking days from pre - to post -treatment and/or any within -subject increases in 
smoking abstinenc e as evidence that the MBRP -SA intervention may be  beneficial for these  two 
problematic health behaviors. Given the small sample size, these changes are not likely to be 
significant. However, sample means and standard deviations will provide valuable data for 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B14  
 estimating  sample  size in a large -scale  RCT.  Changes  in craving,  self-efficacy,  and general  use 
of alcohol and smoking will also be examined as proximal outcomes that will also inform the 
development of a large -scale trial.  
 
3. REGULATORY  AND REPORTING  REQUIREMENTS  
 
3.[ADDRESS_220461]  is to be enrolled  on this protocol  until the Center’s  Institution  Review  Board  has 
approved it.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_220462]. Monitoring will be ongoing by  [CONTACT_458] (PI -[CONTACT_186583]), and the 
Institutional Review Boards (IRB) of Advarra. Overall, the plan for monitoring includes: 1) 
Monitoring the progress of the study; 2) Assuring complian ce with the requirements  for 
reporting  adverse  events  that may occur  during  the study;  and 3) assuring  data accuracy  and 
protocol  compliance.  For all study  protocols,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186540].  
[CONTACT_186583] will oversee the implementation of the study and daily  monitoring. This will 
include weekly  meetings  to discuss  any issues  related to  the progression  of the project and 
factors that may affect the outcome, including a review of data quality and security, 
recrui tment, and retention. Adverse events will also be discussed. A brief report will be 
created and submitted  annually  for the study  record and submitted  to the Chesapeake IRB. 
For any problems  that may arise,  [CONTACT_186583]  will consult  with the co-investigators  to discuss  how 
to best proceed.  
 
3.3 Informed  Consent  
 
The investigators and the research associated are responsible for obtaining consent by [CONTACT_32346].  The consent  process  will be conducted  remotely,  and a waiver  of written  consent 
will be requested  from the IRB to allow  us to obtain  verbal  consent.  Informed  consent  will be 
obtained over the phone prior to entry of any participant.  
 
3.4 Investigator  Study  Files  
 
Research  records  for patients  on this study  are the responsibility  of the investigator.  They  will be 
available for review by [CONTACT_186572], health care personnel involved in this study, the 
IRB, DHHS, and the FDA.  
 
Sources  of Materials  
Data collected from participants for research purposes include a saliva testing for Cotinine (a 
nicotine metabolite) and self -report measures and interview data that collect demographic, 
medical  history,  psychiatric  symptoms,  smoking -related  information,  alcohol -use information,  and 
questions about personality traits and curre nt affective and cognitive states. Data will be 
collected electronically via REDCap. The treatment sessions for the MBRP -SA group involve 
mindfulness (meditation) practice that is tailored to smoking cessation and reducing alcohol use. 
The treatment sessio ns for the CBT group involve copi[INVESTIGATOR_186541]. Participants will be asked about the 
feasibility and acceptability of the treatments, in addition to monitoring their homewor k practice 
each week.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B15  
  
Potential  Risks  
Minimal risks are anticipated for this study. Data including self -report, interview 
(psychological and medical), and biological samples (e.g., saliva) involve risk of breaches in 
confidentiality. Although everyone will be asked to keep the information shared during the group 
sessions confidential and to maintain anonymity outside of sessions, a breach of confidentiality  
is always  possible.  Participants  will always  be given  the option  to refuse  to answer  any questions 
on the measures that may be distressing. Successful abstinence may cause irritability, anxiety, 
general distress and difficulty concentrating. The nicotine patch that participants will wear 
beginning on the quit date will be the appropriate dose  for their level of smoking, and the patch 
should aid in the management of withdrawal symptoms. The nicotine patch and smoking 
cessation counseling have been shown to be safe and effective for smokers attempting to quit.  
However,  side effects  to the patch  may occur  and include  skin irritation/  rash,  nausea,  dizziness, 
dry mouth,  diarrhea,  nervousness,  headache,  vivid dreams  or sleep  disturbances,  irritability,  and 
irregular heartbeat.  
 
Protections  Against  Risks  
We believe  that this study  poses  minimal  risks.  Potential  side effects  from the nicotine  patch 
will be closely monitored by [CONTACT_186573]. Participants will be told of potential allergic 
reactions and side effects in response to the patch and nicotine side effects, and also told that 
they are free to remove the patch at any point in time. Should participants feel any possible side 
effects, they will be advised to discontinue the patch, and also told that they can call the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186542].  Counseling  will be provided  by [CONTACT_186574]. Emergency procedures will be in place should any psychiatric 
emergency arise during the screening and/or treatment processes. Although this is likely to be 
very rare, a ll study personnel and counselors will be trained in these procedures. Should a 
person drop -out of treatment early, community referrals for smoking, alcohol use, and mental 
health  services  will be provided. To  ensure  that any  data (e.g., psychological,  medical, personal) 
collected from this study remains confidential, hardcopy and electronic storage of data will be 
identified by [CONTACT_38741], so that data will not be directly associable with names.  
Association  between  participant  names  and numbers  will not be kept in the same  location  as the 
data. Electronic files will be protected by [CONTACT_186575], and hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_186543] a 
locked  cabinet  when  not in use. Saliva  samples  will be discarded  and have  no identifying 
information after analyses.  
 
Any electronic data will be stored on internal drives and in password -protected files without 
participant  identifiers.  Storage  of any paper  files will be kept in locked  filing cabinets.  Only study 
personnel will have access to these files.  
 
6.5. Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan 
 
The PI, [CONTACT_186584], will be responsible for executing the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Plan (DSMP), and complying with all reporting requirements. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_9042] a summary of 
the Data and Safety Monitoring (DSM ) report to NIH as requested. The DSM report may include 
participants’ sociodemographic characteristics, recruitment rates, any quality assurance or 
regulatory issues during the past year, summary of Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse 
Events  (SAEs),  unanticipated  problems,  and any actions  or changes  with respect  to the protocol. 
The DSM report to NIH may also include results of any interim data analyses.  
Questionnaire/interview data will be collected using paper forms and will only be identified 
with the participant’s study ID. Study staff will keep the codes that link the name [CONTACT_186581] a password -protected file. Data accuracy will be 
subject  to random  audit.  Data  management  reports  will be made  to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186544], 
which may include data entry progress, error rates, range checks, and general descriptive 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B16  
 statistics. The investigators will conduct all data  analyses using SPSS and/or SAS software.  
Trained study staff will monitor participants closely throughout each treatment session, and 
either the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a Co -Investigator will be at the study site to address any concerns that 
arise. Research staff will report Adverse Events (AE) to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_186545], Moffitt’s Clinical Trials Database. Serious Adverse Events (using the FDA definition of 
SAEs) will be reported according to the requirements of NIH, Moffitt’s Protocol Monit oring 
Committee,  and the IRB. Any IRB actions  in relation  to this protocol  will also be reported  to NIH. 
In the event, and only in the event, that study staff must work from home due to mandated 
orders (e.g., COVID -19 stay home orders), documents that cont ain protected health information 
may be temporarily kept at a personal residence for data entry and analysis. Documents will be 
secured  in such  a manner  that they will be protected  from being  accessed  by [CONTACT_186576]. Any remote meetings (e.g., zoom meeting) or conference  calls 
where  protected  health  information  may be discussed  will be performed  in a location  that does  not 
have  listening  devices  (e.g.,  amazon  echo)  and are not likely  to be overheard  by [CONTACT_186577].  
 
 
 
4. STATISTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Each  Aim above  outlines  the analytic  plan. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B17  
 REFERENCES  
 
1. American  Cancer  Society.  Cancer  Facts  and Figures  2014.  Atlanta:  American  Cancer 
Society; 2014.  
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of 
Smoking —50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. 
Department  of Health  and Human  Services,  Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention, 
National Center for C hronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on 
Smoking and Health; 2014.  
3. Hart CL, Smith GD, Gruer L, Watt GC. The combined effect of smoking tobacco and 
drinking  alcohol  on cause -specific  mortality:  A 30 year cohort  study.  BMC  Public  Health. 
2010;10(1):1.  
4. Vaillant GE, Schnurr PP, Baron JA, Gerber PD. A prospective study of the effects of 
cigarette  smoking  and alcohol  abuse  on mortality.  J. Gen.  Intern.  Med.  1991;6(4):[ADDRESS_220463] of 
cigarette  smoking  and alcohol  consumption  on mortality.  Prev.  Med.  2007;45(4):313 -319. 
6. Blot WJ, McLaughlin JK, Winn DM, Austin DF, Greenberg RS, Preston -Martin S, 
Bernstein  L, Schoenberg  JB, Stemhagen  A, Fraumeni  JF. Smoking  and drinking  in 
relation to oral and pharyngeal cancer. Cancer Res. 1988;48(11):3282 -3287.  
7. Negri E, La Vecchia C, [LOCATION_009]schi S, Tavani A. Attributable risk for oral cancer in 
northern  Italy.  Cancer  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_186546]  & Prevention.  1993;2(3):189 -193. 
8. Talamini  G, Bassi  C, Falconi  M, Sartori  N, Salvia  R, Rigo L, Castagnini  A, Di [LOCATION_009]sco 
V, Frulloni L, Bovo P. Alcohol and smoking as risk factors in chronic pancreatitis and 
pancreatic cancer. Dig. Dis. Sci. 1999;44(7):1303 -1311.  
9. Substa nce Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Results from the 2013 
National  Survey  on Drug  Use and Health:  Summary  of National  Findings,  NSDUH  Series 
H-48, HHS Publication No. (SMA) 14 -4863. 2014:Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Ser vices Administration.  
10. Falk DE, Yi H, Hiller -Sturmhofel  S. An epi[INVESTIGATOR_186547]-occurring  alcohol  and 
tobacco use and disorders. Alcohol Res Health. 2006;29(3):162 -171. 
11. [COMPANY_002]  DJ, Ray LA, Yardley  MM, King AC. Current  insights  into the mechanisms  and 
development of treatments for heavy -drinking cigarette smokers. Current Addiction 
Reports. 2016;3(1):125 -137. 
12. Verplaetse  TL, McKee  SA. An overview  of alcohol  and tobacco/nicotine  interactions  in 
the human laboratory. The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. 
2017;43(2):[ADDRESS_220464] NS, Metrik J. Alcohol use and initial smoking lapses among heavy 
drinkers  in smoking  cessation  treatment.  Nicotine  & Tobacco  Research.  2010;12(7):781 - 
785. 
14. Lam CY, Businelle  MS, Aigner  CJ, McClure  JB, Cofta -Woerpel  L, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_186548], Wetter 
DW. Individual and combined effects of multiple high -risk triggers on postcessation 
smoking urge and lapse. Nicotine & Tobacco Research. 2013; 16: 569 -575. 
15. Prochaska  JJ, Delucchi  K, Hall SM. A meta -analys is of smoking  cessation  interventions 
with individuals in substance abuse treatment or recovery. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 
2004;72(6):1144.  
16. Perkins  KA. Combined  effects  of nicotine  and alcohol  on subjective,  behavioral  and 
physiological responses in humans. Addict. Biol. 1997;2(3):255 -268. 
17. Witkiewitz  K, Marlatt  GA. Relapse  prevention  for alcohol  and drug problems:  That was 
Zen, this is Tao. Am. Psychol. 2004;59(4):224.  
18. Baca  CT, Yahne  CE. Smoking  cessation  during  substanc e abuse  treatment:  What  you 
need to know. J. Subst. Abuse Treat. 2009;36(2):205 -219. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B18  
 19. Kalman D, Kim S, DiGirolamo G, Smelson D, Ziedonis D. Addressing tobacco use 
disorder in  smokers  in early  remission  from alcohol  dependence:  The case  for integrating 
smoking  cessation  services  in substance  use disorder  treatment  programs.  Clin. Psychol. 
Rev. 2010;30(1):12 -24. 
20. Johnson  SS, Paiva  AL, Mauriello  L, Prochaska  JO, Redding  C, Velicer  WF. Coaction  in 
multiple behavior change interventions: Consisten cy across multiple studies on weight 
management and obesity prevention. Health Psychol. 2014;33(5):475.  
21. Prochaska  JO. Multiple  health  behavior  research  represents  the future  of preventive 
medicine. Prev. Med. 2008;46(3):281 -285. 
22. Lippke S, Nigg CR, Maddock JE. Health -promoting and health -risk behaviors: Theory - 
driven  analyses  of multiple  health  behavior  change  in three  international  samples.  Int. J. 
Behav. Med. 2012;19(1):1 -13. 
23. Paiva  AL, Prochaska  JO, Yin H-Q, Rossi  JS, Redding  CA, Blissmer  B, Robbi ns ML, 
Velicer WF, Lipschitz J, Amoyal N. Treated individuals who progress to action or 
maintenance for one behavior are more likely to make similar progress on another 
behavior: coaction results of a pooled data analysis of three trials. Prev. Med. 
2012;5 4(5):331 -334. 
24. Joseph  AM, Willenbring  ML, Nugent  SM, Nelson  DB. A randomized  trial of concurrent 
versus delayed smoking intervention for patients in alcohol dependence treatment. J. 
Stud. Alcohol. 2004;65(6):[ADDRESS_220465]. 2009;101(5):[ADDRESS_220466]  V, Altieri  A, Cogliano  V, 
WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer Monograph Working Group. 
Carcinogenicity of alcoholic beverages. The Lancet Oncology. 2007;8(4):292 -293. 
27. Fedirko  V, Tramacere  I, Bagnardi  V, Rota  M, Scotti  L, Islami  F, Negri  E, Straif  K, Romieu 
I, La Vecc hia C. Alcohol drinking and colorectal cancer risk: An overall and dose – 
response meta -analysis of published studies. Ann. Oncol. 2011;22(9):[ADDRESS_220467] cancer and 95,067 women without the disease. British Journal of Cancer . 
2002; 87(11): 1234 -1245.  
29. Kahler CW, Metrik J, LaChance HR, Ramsey SE, Abrams DB, Monti PM, Brown RA.  
Addressing  heavy  drinking  in smoking  cessation  treatment:  A randomized  clinical  trial. J. 
Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2008;76(5):852 -862. 
30. Rojewski AM, Fucito LM, Baldassarri S, Hyland A, Cummings KM, Toll BA. Nicotine 
replacement  therapy  use predicts  smoking  and drinking  outcomes  among  heavy -drinking 
smokers calling a tobacco quitline. Journal of Smoking Cessation. 2017;12(2):99 -104. 
31. Toll BA, Martino S, O'malley SS, Fucito LM, McKee SA, Kahler CW, Rojewski AM, 
Mahoney  MC, Wu R, Celestino  P. A randomize d trial for hazardous  drinking  and smoking 
cessation for callers to a quitline. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2015;83(3):445 -454. 
32. Fridberg DJ, Cao D, King AC. Integrating alcohol response feedback in a brief 
intervention  for young  adult  heavy  drinkers  who smoke:  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Drug  Alcohol 
Depend. 2015;155:293 -297. 
33. Breslin  FC, Zack  M, McMain  S. An information -processing  analysis  of mindfulness: 
Implications for relapse prevention in the treatment of substance abuse. Clinical 
Psychology: Science and Practice . 2002;9:275 -299. 
34. Kabat -Zinn J. Wherever  you go, there  you are: Mindfulness  in everyday  life. [LOCATION_001], 
NY: Hyperion; 1994.  
35. Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_186549], Carlson  LE, Astin  JA, Freedman  B. Mechanisms  of mindfulness.  J. Clin. 
Psychol. 2006;62(3):373 -386. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B19  
 36. Roemer  L, Orsillo  SM. Mindfulness:  A promising  intervention  strategy  in need  of further 
study. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice. 2003;10(2):172 -178. 
37. Teasdale  JD, Segal  Z, Williams  JMG.  How does  cognitive  therapy  prevent  depressive 
relapse and why should attentional control (mindfulness) training help? Behav. Res. 
Ther. 1995;33(1):[ADDRESS_220468]  VA, Soulsby  [CONTACT_54963], Lau MA. Prevention 
of relapse/recurrence in major depression by [CONTACT_186562] -based cognitive therapy. J. 
Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2000;68(4):615 -623. 
39. Williams  JMG,  Teasdale  JD, Segal  ZV, Soulsby  J. Mindfulness -based  cognitive  therapy 
reduces overgeneral autobiographical memory in formerly depressed patients. J. 
Abnorm. Psychol. 2000;109(1):150 -155. 
40. Baer  RA, Smith  GT, Hopkins  J, Krietemeyer  J, Toney  L. Using  self-report  assessment 
methods to explore facets of mindfulness. Assessment. 2006;13(1):27 -45. 
41. Lau MA, Bishop  SR, Segal  ZV, Buis  T, Anderson  ND, Carlson  L, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152]  S, Carmody  J, 
Abbey  S, Devins  G. The toronto  mindfulness  scale:  Development  and validation.  J. Clin. 
Psychol. 2006;62(12):[ADDRESS_220469] SA. From a state to a trait: 
Trajectories  of state  mindfulness  in meditatio n during  intervention  predict  changes  in trait 
mindfulness. Pers. Individ. Dif. 2015; 81: 41 -46. 
43. Adams  CE, Cano  MA, Heppner  WL, Stewart  DW, Correa -Fernández  V, Vidrine  JI, Li Y, 
Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629], Ahluwalia JS, Wetter DW. Testing a moderated mediation model of 
mindfulness, psychosocial stress, and alcohol use among African American smokers. 
Mindfulness. 2015;6(2):315 -325. 
44. Alexander V, Tatum BC, Auth C, Takos D, Whittemore S, Fidal eo R. A study of 
mindfulness  practices  and cognitive  therapy:  Effects  on depression  and self-efficacy. 
International Journal of Psychology and Counselling. 2012;4(9):115 -122. 
45. Chang VY, Palesh O, Caldwell R, Glasgow N, Abramson M, Luskin F, Gill M, Burke A,  
Koopman C. The effects of a mindfulness -based stress reduction program on stress, 
mindfulness  self-efficacy,  and positive  states  of mind.  Stress  and Health.  2004;20(3):141 - 
147. 
46. Murphy  C, MacKillop  J. Living  in the here and now:  Interrelationships  between 
impuslivity, mindfulness, and alcohol misuse. Psychopharmacology (Berl.). 
2011;219(2):527 -536. 
47. Ortner  CNM,  Kilner  SJ, Zelazo  PD. Mindfulness  meditation  and reduced  emotional 
interference on a cognitive task. Motivation and Emotio n. 2007;31(4):271 -283. 
48. Peters  JR, Erisman  SM, Upton  BT, Baer  RA, Roemer  L. A preliminary  investigation  of the 
relationships between dispositional mindfulness and impulsivity. Mindfulness. 
2011;2(4):228 -235. 
49. Tang YY, Ma Y, Wang J, Fan Y, Feng S, Lu Q, Yu Q,  Sui D, Rothbart MK, Fan M, 
Posner  MI. Short -term meditation  training  improves  attention  and self-regulation.  Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2007;104(43):[ADDRESS_220470]. Abus. 2009;30(4):318 -327. 
51. Vinci C, Spears CA, MacKenzie P, Copeland AL. Drinking motives mediate the 
relationship  between  facets  of mindfulness  and problematic  alcohol  use. Mindfulness. 
2016;7(3):754 -763. 
52. Vinci C, Spears CA, Peltier MR, Copeland AL. Facets of mindfulness mediate the 
relationship  between  depressive  symptoms  and smoking  behavior.  Mindfulness.  2016; 
7(6): 1408 -1415.  
53. Brewer  JA, Mallik  S, Babuscio  TA, Nich C, Johnson  HE, Deleone  CM, Minnix -Cotton  CA, 
By[CONTACT_186578], Kober H, Weinstein AJ, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ. Mindfulness training for  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B20  
 smoking  cessation:  Results  from a randomized  controlled  trial. Drug  Alcohol 
Depende nce. 2011;119(1 -2):72 -80. 
54. Davis  JM, Fleming  MF, Bonus  KA, Baker  TB. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_186550]. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2007;7:2.  
55. Davis JM, Goldberg SB, Anderson MC, Manley AR, Smith SS, Baker TB. Randomized 
trial on mindfulness  training  for smokers  targeted  to a disadvantaged  population.  Subst. 
Use Misuse. 2014;49(5):571 -585. 
56. Davis JM, Manley AR, Goldberg SB, Stankevitz KA, Smith SS. Mindfulness training for 
smokers  via web-based  video  instruction  with phone  support:  a prospective  observational 
study. BMC Complement. Altern. Med. 2015;15(1):1.  
57. Davis JM, Mills DM, Stankevitz KA, Manley AR, Majeskie MR, Smith SS. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_186551].  BMC 
Complement. Altern. Med. 2013;13(1):215.  
58. Vidrine  JI, Spears  CA, Heppner  WL, Reitzel  LR, Marcus  MT, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_186548], Waters  AJ, 
Li Y, Nguyen NTT, Cao Y, Tindle, HA, Fine, M, Safranek, LV, Wetter, DW. Efficacy of 
Mindfulness -Based Addiction Treatment (MBAT) for smoking cessation and lapse 
recovery: A randomized clinical trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2016;84:[ADDRESS_220471]. Behav. 2006;20(3):[ADDRESS_220472] 
KL, Reis DL, Potenza MN, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ. Mindfulness training and stress 
reactivity  in substance  abuse:  Results  from a randomized,  controlled  stage  I pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
Subst. Abus. 2009;30:306 -317. 
61. Wupperman P, Marlatt GA, Cunningham A, Bowen S, Berking M, Mulvihill ‐Rivera N, 
Easton  C. Mindfulness  and modification  therapy  for behavioral  dysregulation:  Results 
from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_186552]. J. Clin. Psychol. 
2012;68(1):50 -66. 
62. Zgierska  A, Rabago  D, Zuelsdorff  M, Coe C, Miller  M, Fleming  M. Mindfulness  meditation 
for alcohol  relapse  prevention:  A feasibility  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  J. Addict.  Med.  2008;2(3):165 -173. 
63. Bowen S, Chawla N, Collins SE, Witkiewitz K, Hsu S, Grow J, Clifasefi S, Garner M, 
Douglass  A, Larimer  ME, Marlatt  A. Mindfulness -based  relapse  prevention  for substance 
use disorders: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_74601]. Subst. Abus. 2009;30: [ADDRESS_220473] relapse prevention, and treatment as usual for substance use disorders: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(5) :547-556. 
65. Witkiewitz K,  Bowen  S. Depression,  craving,  and substance  use following  a randomized 
trial of mindfulness -based  relapse  prevention.  J. Consult.  Clin. Psychol.  2010;78(3):[ADDRESS_220474].  Use 
Misuse. 2014;49(5):536 -546. 
67. Spears  C, Hedeker  D, Li L, Wu C, Anderson  N, Houchins  S, Vinci  C, Hoover  D, Vidrine  J, 
Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_9384] P, Waters A, Wetter D. Mechanisms underlying mindfulness -based addiction 
treatment versus cognitive behavioral therapy and usual care for smoking cessation. J. 
Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2017;8 5:1029 -1040.  
68. Witkiewitz  K, Bowen  S, Harrop  EN, Douglas  H, Enkema  M, Sedgwick  C. Mindfulness - 
based treatment to prevent addictive behavior relapse: Theoretical models and 
hypothesized mechanisms of change. Subst. Use Misuse. 2014;49(5):513 -524. 
69. Arch JJ, Craske  MG. Mechanisms  of mindfulness:  Emotion  regulation  following  a focused 
breathing induction. Behavior Research and Therapy. 2006;44(12):1849 -1858.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B21  
 70. Gotink  RA, Chu P, Busschbach  JJ, Benson  H, Fricchione  GL, Hunink  MM. Standardised 
mindfulness -based interventions in healthcare: An overview of systematic reviews and 
meta -analyses of RCTs. PLoS One. 2015;10(4):e0124344.  
71. Vinci C, Peltier MR, Shah S, Kinsaul J, Waldo K, McVay MA, Copeland AL. Effects of a 
brief mindfulness  intervention  on negative  affect  and urge to drink  among  college  student 
drinkers. Behavior Research and Therapy. 2014;59:82 -93. 
72. Davidson RJ, Kabat -Zinn J, Schumacher J, Rosenkranz M, Muller D, Santorelli SF, 
Urbanowski F, Harrington A, Bonus K, Sheridan JF.  Alterations in brain and immune 
function  produced  by [CONTACT_186579].  Psychosom.  Med.  2003;65(4):[ADDRESS_220475] and cognition: multilevel and autoregressive latent trajectory 
modeling analyses. Front. Psychol. 2015;6:15.  
74. Geschwind N, Peeters F, Drukker M, van Os J, Wichers M. Mindfulness training 
increases momentary positive emotion s and reward experience in adults vulnerable to 
depression:  a randomized  controlled  trial. J. Consult.  Clin. Psychol.  2011;79(5):618 -628. 
75. Jain S, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152]  S, Swanick  S, Roesch  SC, Mills PJ, Bell I, Schwartz  GER.  A randomized 
controlled trial of mindfulness meditation versus relaxation training: Effects on distress, 
positive states of mind, rumination, and distraction. Annals of Behavior Medicine. 
2007;33(1):11 -21. 
76. Britton WB, Bootzin RR, Cousins JC, Hasler BP,  Peck T, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_74131]. The contribution of 
mindfulness practice to a multicomponent behavioral sleep intervention following 
substance  abuse  treatment  in adolescents:  A treatment -development  study.  Subst.  Abus. 
2010;31(2):86 -97. 
77. Adams CE, Benitez L, Kinsaul J, McVay MA, Barbry A, Thibodeaux A, Copel and AL. 
Effects  of brief mindfulness  instructions  on reactions  to body  image  stimuli  among  female 
smokers: An experimental study. Nicotine & Tobacco Research. 2013;15(2):376 -384. 
78. Bowen  S, Marlatt  A. Surfing  the urge:  Brief mindfulness -based  intervention  for college 
student smokers. Psychol. Addict. Behav. 2009;23(4):666 -671. 
79. Elwafi HM, Witkiewitz K, Mallik S, Thornhill TAt, Brewer JA. Mindfulness training for 
smoking  cessation:  moderation  of the relationship  between  craving  and cigarette  use. 
Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;130(1 -3):[ADDRESS_220476]. 
Neurosci. 2013;8(1):73 -84. 
81. Adams CE, Tull MT, Gratz KL. The role of emotional nonacceptance in the relation 
between  depression  and recent  cigarette  smoking.  The American  Journal  on Addictions. 
2012;21(4):293 -301. 
82. Witkiewitz  K, Bowen  S, Donovan  DM. Moderating  effects  of a craving  intervention  on the 
relation between negative mood and heavy drinking following treatment for alcohol 
dependence. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2011;79(1):54 -63. 
83. Adams CE, McVay MA, Stewart DW, Vinci C, Kinsaul J, Benitez L, Copeland AL. 
Mindfulness  ameliorates  the relations hip between  weight  concerns  and smoking  behavior 
in female smokers: A cross -sectional investigation. Mindfulness. 2014;5(2):[ADDRESS_220477]  health?  A mindfulness 
stress buffering account. Curr. Dir. Ps ychol. Sci. 2014;23(6):401 -407. 
85. Prochaska  JJ, Prochaska  JO. A review  of multiple  health  behavior  change  interventions 
for primary prevention. Am. J. Lifestyle Med. 2011;5(3):[ADDRESS_220478]. Behav. 2014;28(3):639.  
87. Vinci  C, Copeland  AL, Carrigan  MH. Exposure  to negative  affect  cues  and urge to 
smoke. Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2012;20(1):47 -55. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B22  
 88. Vinci  C, Li L, Guo L, Spears  CA, Correa -Fernandez  V, Cho CY, Etcheverry  PE, Stewart 
DW, Wetter DW. The association of positive emotion and first smoking lapse: An 
ecological momentary assessment study Health Psychol. 2017.  
89. Witkiewitz  K, Kirouac  M, Frohe  T, Armenta  M, McCallion  E, Roos  C, O’Sickey  A, Brown 
D, Hunter M, Coffman B, C lark VP. Mindfulness and transcranial direct current 
stimulation as an intervention for tobacco dependence. 3rd annual Collaborative 
Perspectives on Addiction meeting; 2015; Baltimore, MD.  
90. Oikonomou  MT, Arvanitis  M, Sokolove  RL. Mindfulness  training  for smoking  cessation:  A 
meta -analysis of randomized -controlled trials. J. Health Psychol. 2016.  
91. Maisto SA, Roos CR, Hallgren KA, Moskal D, Wilson AD, Witkiewitz K. Do alcohol 
relapse  epi[INVESTIGATOR_186553]‐term outcomes?  Investigating  the validity 
of existing definitions of alcohol use disorder relapse. Alcoholism: Clinical and 
Experimental Research. 2016;40(10):2180 -2189.  
92. Witkiewitz K, Dearing RL, Maisto SA. Alcohol use trajectories among non –treatment - 
seeking  heavy  drinkers.  Journal  of Studi es on Alcohol  and Drugs.  2014;75(3):[ADDRESS_220479], Kranzler  HR. Guidelines  for the 
reporting of treatment trials for alcohol use disorders. Alcoholism: Clinical and 
Experimental Research. 2015;39(9):[ADDRESS_220480], Kranzler HR. Recommendations for 
the design  and analysis  of treatment  trials  for alcohol  use disorders.  Alcoholism:  Clinical 
and Experime ntal Research. 2015;39(9):1557 -1570.  
95. Witkiewitz K, Marlatt A, Walker D. Mindfulness -based relapse prevention for alcohol and 
substance  use disorders.  Journal  of Cognitive  Psychotherapy:  An International  Quarterly. 
2005;19(3):[ADDRESS_220481]  and alcohol 
lapses following alcohol treatment. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2009;77(4):633 -644. 
97. Businelle MS, Kendzor DE, Reitzel LR, Costello TJ, Cofta -Woerpel L, Li Y, Mazas CA, 
Vidrine  JI, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_186548], Greisinger  AJ, Wetter  DW. Mechanisms  linking  socioeconomic 
status to smoking cessation: A structural equation modeling approach. Health Psychol. 
2010;29(3):262 -273. 
98. Cofta -Woerpel L, McClure JB, Li Y, Urbauer D, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629], Wetter DW. Ea rly 
cessation  success  or failure  among  women  attempting  to quit smoking:  Trajectories  and 
volatility of urge and negative mood during the first postcessation week. J. Abnorm. 
Psychol. 2011;120(3):[ADDRESS_220482]’s  relationship 
with smoking abstinence. Health Psychol. 2016;35(8):881 -890. 
100. Kendzor  DE, Businelle  MS, Costello  TJ, Castro  Y, Reitzel  LR, Cofta -Woerpel  LM, Li Y, 
Mazas CA, Vidrine JI, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629]. Financial strain and smoking cessation among 
racially/ethnically diverse smokers. Am. J. Public Health. 2010;100(4):702 -706. 
101. Kendzor  DE, Businelle  MS, Reitzel  LR, Castro  Y, Vidrine  JI, Mazas  CA, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_186548], 
Lam CY,  Adams CE,  Correa -Fernández V. The  influence  of discrimination  on smoking 
cessation among Latinos. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2014;136:[ADDRESS_220483],  and 
modifiable cancer risk factors in African -American smokers. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_186554] & Prevention. 2008;17(10):2546 -2554.  
103. Reitzel LR, Mazas CA, Cofta ‐Woerpel L, Li Y, Cao Y, Businelle MS, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629], 
Wetter  DW. Subjective  social  status  affects  smoking  abstinence  during  acute  withdrawal 
through affective mediators. Addiction. 2010;105(5):928 -936. 
104. Reitzel  LR, Vidrine  JI, Businelle  MS, Kendzor  DE, Costello TJ, Li Y, Daza  P, Mullen  PD, 
Velasquez MM, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629]. Preventing postpartum smoking relapse among diverse  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B23  
 low-income  women:  A randomized  clinical  trial. Nicotine  & Tobacco  Research.  
2010;12(4):326 -335. 
105. Vidrine  JI, Reitzel  LR, Figueroa  PY, Velasquez  MM, Mazas  CA, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_186548], Wetter 
DW. Motivation and problem solving (MAPS): Motivationally based skills training for 
treating substance use. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice. 2013;20(4):[ADDRESS_220484]: A new approach to smoking treatment delivery in 
health care settings. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2013;173(6):[ADDRESS_220485] MH, Galindo -Talton RM, Rabius V, Sharp B, 
Harmonson  P, Zbikowski  SM. The ask–advise –connect  approach  for smokers  in a safety 
net healthcare  system: A  group -randomized  trial. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2013;45(6):[ADDRESS_220486]  SL, Smith  SS, Fiore  MC, Jorenby  [CONTACT_34479], Baker  TB. Gender  differences 
in smoking cessation. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 1999;67(4):555 -562. 
109. Wetter  DW, Mazas  C, Daza  P, Nguyen  L, Fouladi  RT, Li Y, Cofta‐Woerpel  L. Reaching 
and treating Spanish ‐speaking smokers through the National Cancer Institute's cancer 
information service. Cancer. 2007;109(S2): 406-413. 
110. Wetter DW, McClure JB, Cofta -Woerpel L, Costello TJ, Reitzel LR, Businelle MS, 
Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629]. A randomized clinical trial of a palmtop computer -delivered treatment for 
smoking  relapse  prevention  among  women.  Psychol.  Addict.  Behav.  2011;25(2):[ADDRESS_220487]. Behav. 2014;28(2):580 -585. 
112. Heppner WL, Spears CA, Correa -Fernández V, Castro Y, Li Y, Guo B, Reitzel LR, 
Vidrine JI, Mazas CA, Cofta -Woerpel L. Dispositional mindfulness predicts enhanced 
smoking  cessation  and smoking  lapse  recovery.  Ann. Behav.  Med.  2016;50(3):[ADDRESS_220488]. Behav. 2015; 29(4): [ADDRESS_220489], and 
depression among smokers preparing to quit. Mindfulness. 2015;6(3):[ADDRESS_220490]  as motivation  to smoke.  Curr.  Dir. Psychol.  Sci. 
1994;3(2):33 -37. 
116. Brandon TH, Baker TB. The Smoking Consequences Questionnaire: The subjective 
expected  utility  of smoking  in college  students.  Psychological  Assessment:  A Journal  of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1991;3(3):484 -491. 
117. Brandon TH, Collins BN, Juliano LM, Lazev AB. Preventing relapse among former 
smokers:  a comparison  of minimal  interventions  through  telephone  and mail.  J. Consult. 
Clin. Psychol. 2000;68(1):103 -113. 
118. Brandon  TH, Herzog  TA, Juliano  LM, Irvin JE, Lazev  AB, Simmons  VN. Pretreatment 
task persistence predicts smoking cessation outcome. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 
2003;112(3):[ADDRESS_220491]-effectiveness  of a minimal  intervention  to prevent  smoking  relapse:  dismantlin g the 
effects of amount of content versus contact. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2004;72(5):797 - 
808. 
120. Brandon  TH, Simmons  VN, Meade  CD, Quinn  GP, Lopez  Khoury  EN, Sutton  SK, Lee J- 
H. Self-help booklets  for preventing  postpartum  smoking  relapse:  a randomized  trial. Am. 
J. Public  Health.  2012;102(11):2109 -2115.  
121. Brandon TH, Simmons VN, Sutton SK, Unrod M, Harrell PT, Meade CD, Craig BM, Lee 
J-H, Meltzer  LR. Extended  self-help for smoking  cessation:  A randomized  controlled  trial. 
Am. J. Prev. Med. 2016; 51(1): 54 -62. 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B24  
 122. Brandon  TH, Tiffany  ST, Obremski  KM, Baker  TB. Postcessation  cigarette  use: the 
process of relapse. Addict. Behav. 1990;15(2):105 -114. 
123. Brandon  TH, Vidrine  JI, Litvin  EB. Relapse  and relapse  prevention.  Annu. Rev. Clin. 
Psychol. 2007;3:257 -284. 
124. Brandon  TH, Zelman  DC, Baker  TB. Effects  of maintenance  sessions  on smoking 
relapse: delaying the inevitable? J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 1987;55(5):[ADDRESS_220492]-effectiveness  analysis 
of a complementary health intervention: The case of smoking relapse prevention. Int. J. 
Technol. Assess. Health Care. 2004;20(04):[ADDRESS_220493]. Behav. 2000;25(3):445 -449. 
127. Harrell  PT, Marquinez  NS, Correa  JB, Meltzer  LR, Unrod  M, Sutton  SK, Simmons  VN, 
Brandon TH. Expectancies for cigarettes, e -cigarettes, and nicotine replacement 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186555] e -cigarette users (aka vapers). Nicotine & Tobacco Research. 
2015;17(2):193 -200. 
128. Unrod M, Drobes DJ, Stasiewicz PR, Ditre JW, Heckman B, Miller RR, Sutton SK, 
Brandon  TH. Decline  in cue-provoked  craving  during  cue exposure  therapy  for smoking 
cessation. Nicotine & Tobacco Research. 2014;16(3):[ADDRESS_220494]. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl.). 2011;218(2):391 -403. 
130. Braun  AR, Heinz  AJ, Veilleux  JC, Conrad  M, Weber  S, Wardle  M, Greenstein  J, Evatt  D, 
Drobes D, Kassel JD. The separate and combined effects of alcohol and nicotine on 
anticipatory anxiety: A multidimensional analysis. Addict. Behav. 2012;37(4):485 -491. 
131. Dermody  SS, Tidey  JW, Denlinger  RL, Pacek  LR, al'Absi  M, Drobes  DJ, Hatsukami  DK, 
Vandrey R, Donny EC. The impact of smoking very low nicotine content cigarettes on 
alcohol use. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 2016;40:606 -615. 
132. Ditre JW, Oliver JA, Myrick H, Henderson S, Saladin ME, Drobes DJ. Effects of 
divalproex  on smokin g cue reactivity  and cessation  outcomes  among  smokers  achieving 
initial abstinence. Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2012;20(4):293 -301. 
133. Drobes  DJ. Cue reactivity  in alcohol  and tobacco  dependence.  Alcoholism:  Clinical  and 
Experimental Research. 2002;26(12):[ADDRESS_220495] 
on smokers' copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]. Behav. Res. Ther. 1994;32(1):165 -174. 
135. Oliver JA, Blank MD, Van Rensburg KJ, MacQueen DA, Brando n TH, Drobes DJ. 
Nicotine  interactions  with low-dose  alcohol:  Pharmacological  influences  on smoking  and 
drinking motivation. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 2013;122(4):1154 -1165.  
136. Oliver JA, Drobes DJ. Cognitive manifestations of drinking –smoking associations: 
Preliminary  findings  with a cross -primed  Stroop  task.  Drug  Alcohol  Depend.  2015;147:[ADDRESS_220496] power. Psychopharmacol. Bull. 2015;232(11):1879 -1885.  
138. Simmons VN, Sutton SK, Quinn GP, Meade CD, Brandon TH. Prepartum and 
postpartum  predictors  of smoking.  Nicotine  & Tobacco  Research.  2014;16(4):461 -468. 
139. Kabat -Zinn J. Full catastrophe  living:  Using  the wisdom  of your body  and mind  to face 
stress, pain, and illness. Random House LLC; 1990.  
140. Segal  ZV, Williams  JMG,  Teasdale  JD. Mindfulness -based  cognitive  therapy  for 
depression. Guilford Press; 2012.  
141. Bowen  S, Chawla  N, Marlatt  GA. Mindfulness -based  relapse  prevention  for addictive 
behaviors: A clinician's guide. Guilford Press; 2011.  
142. Fiore  M. Treating  tobacco  use and dependence:  2008  update:  Clinical  practice  guideline.  
DIANE  Publishing;  2008.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B25  
 143. Baker TB, Morse E, Sherman JE. The motivation to use drugs: A psyc hobiological 
analysis.  In: Rivers  C, ed. Nebraska  Symposium  on Motivation  Vol 34. Lincoln:  University 
of Nebraska Press; 1987:257 -323. 
144. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Pi[INVESTIGATOR_60124], Federman EB, Bolt DM, Smith SS, Fiore MC, Baker TB. A 
multiple  motives  approach  to tobacco  dependence:  the Wisconsin  Inventory  of Smoking 
Dependence Motives (WISDM -68). J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 2004;72(2):[ADDRESS_220497].  Behav.  2012;26(1):162 - 
165. 
146. Deci EL, Ryan  RM. Self-determination  theory:  When  mind  mediates  behavior. The 
Journal of Mind and Behavior. 1980;1:33 -43. 
147. Marlatt  GA, Witkiewitz  K. Harm  reduction  approaches  to alcohol  use: Health  promotion, 
prevention, and treatment. Addict. Behav. 2002;27(6):867 -886. 
148. Czajkowski SM, Powell LH, Adler N, Naar -King S, Reynolds KD, Hunter CM, Laraia B, 
Olster DH, Perna FM, Peterson JC. From ideas to efficacy: The ORBIT model for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_186556].  Health  Psychol.  2015;34(10):971 - 
982. 
149. Rounsaville  BJ, Carroll  KM, Onken  LS. A stage  model  of behavioral  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_186557]: 
Getting started and moving on from stage I. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice. 
2001;8(2):133 -142. 
150. Charmez  K. Conducting  Grounded  Theory:  A Practical  Guide  through  Qualatative 
Analysis Sage Publications 2006.  
151. Sandelowski  M, Barroso  J. Classifying  the findings  in qualitative  studies.  Qualatati ve 
Health Research. 2003;13:905 -923. 
152. Marlatt  GA, Gordon  JR. Relapse  prevention:  Maintenance  strategies  in the treatment  of 
addictive behaviors. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press; 1985.  
153. Chawla N, Collins S, Bowen S, Hsu S, Grow J, Douglass A, Marlatt GA. The 
mindfulness -based  relapse  prevention  adherence  and competence  scale:  development, 
interrater reliability, and validity. Psychotherapy Research. 2010;20(4):388 -397. 
154. Barber  JP, Liese  BS, Abrams  MJ. Development  of the cognitive  therapy  adherence  and 
competenc e scale. Psychotherapy Research. 2003;13(2):205 -221. 
155. Arain M, Campbell MJ, Cooper CL, Lancaster  GA. What is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_65219]? A 
review  of current  practice  and editorial  policy.  BMC  Med.  Res. Methodol.  2010;10(1):67.  
156. Bowen  DJ, Kreuter  M, Spring  B, Cofta -Woerpel  L, Linnan  L, Weiner  D, Bakken  S, Kaplan 
CP, Squiers L, Fabrizio C. How we design feasibility studies. Am. J. Prev. Med. 
2009;36(5):452 -457. 
157. Tickle -Degnen  L. Nuts and bolts  of conducting  feasibility  studies.  Am. J. Occup.  Ther.  
2013; 67(2):171 -176. 
158. Larsen DL, Attkisson CC, Hargreaves WA, Nguyen TD. Assessment of client/patient 
satisfaction:  development  of a general  scale.  Eval.  Program  Plann.  1979;2(3):197 -207. 
159. Sheehan,  D.V. (2015).  MINI  International  Neuropsychiatric  Interview . English  Version  7.0 
for DSM -5. 160.  Flannery B,  Volpi[INVESTIGATOR_48536]  J, Pettinati  H. Psychometric properties  of the 
Penn alcohol craving scale. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 
1999;23(8):1289 -1295.  
161. DiClemente  CC, Carbonari  JP, Montgomery  R, Hughes  SO. The alcohol  abstinence  self- 
efficacy scale. J. Stud. Alcohol. 1994;55(2):141 -148. 
162. Smith SS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Bolt DM, Fiore MC, Wetter DW, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629], Baker TB. 
Development  of the brief Wisconsin  inventory  of smoking  dependence  motives.  Nicotine 
& Tobacco Research. 2010;12(5):489 -499. 
163. Welsch  SK, Smith  SS, Wetter  DW, Jorenby  [CONTACT_34479], Fiore  MC, Baker  TB. Development  and 
validation of the Wisconsin Smoking Withdrawal Scale. Exp. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 
1999;7(4):354.  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_186520],  Christine  
B26  
 164. Velicer  WF, DiClemente  CC, Rossi  JS, Prochaska  JO. Relapse  situations  and self- 
efficacy: An integrative model. Addict. Behav. 1990;15(3):271 -283. 
165. Radloff,  L. S. (1977).  The CES–D scale:Aself -report  depression  scale  for research 
in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurement, 1, 385–401 
166. Simons  JS, Gaher  RM. The Distress  Tolerance  Scale:  Development  and validation  of a 
self-report measure. Motivation and Emotion. 2005;29(2):83 -102. 
167. Cohen  S, Lichtenstein  E. Perceived  stress,  quitting  smoking,  and smoking  relapse.  
Health  Psychol.  1990;9(4):[ADDRESS_220498]:  The PANAS  scales.  J. Pers.  Soc. Psychol.  1988;54(6):1063 - 
1070.  
169. Grossman P. Defining mindfulness by [CONTACT_186580] I think I pay attention during everyday 
awareness  and other  intractable  problems  for psychology's  (re) invention  of mindfulness: 
comment on Brown et al.(2011). 2011.  
170. Levinson  DB, Stoll EL, Kindy  SD, Merry  HL, Davidson  RJ. A mind  you can count  on: 
Validating breath counting as a behavioral measure of mindfulness. Front. Psychol. 
2013;5:1202 -1202.  
171. Sobell  L, Sobell  M. Timeline  Followback:  A Technique  for Assessing  Self Reported 
Ethanol Consumption, Vol. 17. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 1992.  
172. Sobell L, Sobell M. Alcohol Timeline Followback (TLFB). Handbook of psychiatric 
measures  B2. Handbook  of psychiatric  measures.  American  Psychiatric  Association, 
Washington, DC. 2000.  
173. Sobell  LC, Maisto  SA, Sobell  MB, Cooper  AM. Reliability  of alcohol  abusers'  self-reports 
of drinking behavior. Behav. Res. Ther. 1979;17(2):157 -160. 
174. SAS Institute  Inc. [LOCATION_003],  SAS for Windows  Release.  2002;8:Cary,  NC. 
175. Hertzog  MA. Considerations  in determining  sample  size for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602].  Res. Nurs. 
Health. 2008;31(2):180 -191. 
176. Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analysis of pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]: 
recommendations  for good  practice.  J. Eval.  Clin. Pract.  2004;10(2):307 -312. 
177. Muthén  LK, Muthén  BO. 1998 –2010  Mplus  user‘s  guide.  Muthén  and Muthén.  2010.  
178. Cooper,  M. L.,  Frone,  M. R., Russell,  M., & Mudar,  P. (1995).  Drinking  to regulate 
positive and negative emotions: a motivational model of alcohol  use. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 69 , 990e1005.  
179. Horvath, A.  O., &  Greenberg, L. S.  (1989).  Development  and validation  of the Working 
Alliance Inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36 (2), 223 -233. 