Parental Research on Interventions for Social Media (PRISM)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
02/28/[ADDRESS_1168218] (IRB)  
University of North [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center   
 
  
Protocol Synopsis for Research Project Involving Human Subjects  
PROTOCOL INFORMATION  
Title of Research Activity :  Parental R esearch on Interventions  for Social Media (Project PRISM)  (Phase II)  
Name [CONTACT_789] :  [CONTACT_375085]  M. Litt 
Institution:  University of North [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
 
Names of each Co -Investigator :  Melissa A. Lewis   
Sponsoring Agency / Company (if applicable) :  NIH/NIAAA  
Sponsor’s Protocol Number (if applicable) :  R34 AA026332  
A. Specific Aims – State the specific scientific objectives of the research.  
*Please  note  that this IRB application  is being  made  only for Phase  2 (Aim 2) of the associated  grant  
proposal.  Aim 1 is being  conducted  under  IRB approval  2019 -035. 
 
Aim 1  (IRB approval 2019 -035): Develop and refine an interactiv e parent based intervention (PBI) targeting 
the influence of  social networking site  (SNS) on high -risk SNS cognitions and alcohol use among 
adolescents. Interactive PBI content and text message prompts will be developed through focus groups, 
which will inform a new interactive PBI to be tested in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (Aim 2).  Up to 20 focus groups (for a total 
of no more than 160 participants (80 parents, 80 teens)  will be conducted with [ADDRESS_1168219] 
with the interactive SNS PBI and generate additional PBI content.  
 
Aim 2 : Conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_840736] 15 -20 from the Dallas/Fort Worth 
(DFW) area to determine feasibility, acceptability, and preliminary effect sizes (to estimate power and 
sample size for a future R01 application). Parent/teen dyads (N= 150 dyads for a total of 150 parents and 
150 teens ) will be randomized to interactive PBI (n= 75 dyads ) or active control (n= 75 dyads ) with a 1 - and 6 -
month follow -up. Parents in the interactive PBI condition will receive the interactive web -based SNS PBI with 
text message prompts developed and finalized through Aim 1 focus groups. Parents in the active control 
condition will receive an  emailed copy of the Surgeon General’s Call to Action: A Guide for Families. General 
Hypo theses (parent and teen). We hypothesize  that the interactive SNS PBI will be feasible  (i.e., number of 
eligible participants, number of parents who gave consent, number of teens who gave consent, length of 
time to achieve planned recruitment and enrollment goal, rate of study completion and rate of study attrition) 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 2 of 31 and acceptable  (i.e., proportion of parents and teens who find the intervention acceptable; ease of viewing 
and interacting with interactive PBI content; relevance of material; finding content helpful, beneficial, 
important; ratings of individual web -based modules and t ext messages of the PBI; the proportion of parents 
and teens who would recommend the study to other families, and the proportion of parents and teens who 
found the interactive PBI to be favorable overall) relative to active control. We furthe r hypothesize that teens 
and parents in the interactive PBI condition will report more positive communication about alcohol and SNS 
at the 1 - and 6 -month follow -up relative to active control. Parent Hypotheses : We hypothesize that at 1 - and 
6-month follow -up, parents in the interactive PBI condition will report greater knowledge about alcohol as 
well as the role of SNS in alcohol use relative to active control. Teen Hypotheses : We hypothesize that teens 
in the interactive PBI condition will report less drin king, fewer alcohol -related negative consequences, less 
favorable attitudes toward posting about alcohol on SNS, greater perceived vulnerability to the risks of 
posting alcohol displays on SNS, and decreased normative perceptions about how many teens post alcohol 
displays on SNS relative to active control at 1 - and 6 -month follow -up.   
  
B. Background and Significance  -Briefly  sketch the background leading to the present proposal. Describe 
the contributions that the study may make to the health of human beings and/or to the scientific community , 
using documentation from the literature , where appropriate.  Although it is helpful for the Board to have a 
decent understanding of the basis for conducting a research project, it is not necessary to have a full -blown 
literature review or extensive background and rationale for the proposed research plan of activity.  
Although adolescents spend an increasing amount of time with their friends (Currie et al., 2012; 
Steinberg, 2001), parents remain an important source of support and continue to play a key role in the 
lives of their adolescents (Steinberg, 2002; Turrisi et al., 2000). The extensive work in this area has 
resulted in parent -based intervention (PBI) efforts to prevent or reduce adolescent alcohol use (Jaccard 
& Levitz, 2013). Research has shown that teens whose parents received a PBI reported less alcohol use 
and fewer alcohol -related consequences up to 9 -month follow -up relative to controls (Ichiyama et al., 
2009; Testa et al., 2010; Turrisi et al., 2001, 2010). However, one major limitation of PBIs is that they do 
not currently take into account the large role  that social networking sites (SNS) play in adolescents’ lives 
and in relation to their alcohol use. Most (90%) adolescents are on SNS (Lenhart, 2015), and their 
Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter profiles include alcohol content (e.g., Cavazos -Rehg et al., 2015; 
Moreno et al., 2007, 2009 ). Thus, adolescents are making and are exposed to SNS alcohol displays, and 
these  displays are associated with high -risk cognitions and alcohol use (e.g., Fournier et al., 2013; Litt et 
al., 2018; Litt & Stock, 2011; Moreno et al., 2012). Research has argued that existing parental mediation 
techniques grounded primarily on television/f ilm media have fundamental inadequacies when applied to 
more interactive media such as websites, social media, and mobile apps as they do not account for the 
interactivity, immersive virtual environments, and mediated communication innate to SNS (Jiow et al. 
2016). Further, most PBIs are presented in static manual form (Kuntsche & Kuntsche, 2016; Turrisi et al., 
2010; 2013). We are unaware of any study to date t hat has developed and tested an interactive PBI 
about alcohol use and the role of SNS in adolescent alcohol use. As such, we propose to develop  and 
refine an interactive PBI designed to reduce both h igh-risk SNS cognitions and alcohol use among 
adolescents . This application responds to PA -18-067 “Pi[INVESTIGATOR_840737] ” as it aims to establish feasibility and acceptability of the newly 
developed interactive PBI that focuses on the role of SNS in adolescent alcohol use as well as to 
determine preliminary effect sizes for future studies . 
 
C. Preliminary Studies  - Summarize preliminary studies conducted by [CONTACT_840749]. State "none" if applicable.  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168220]. Litt conducted a Facebook study with 200 participants ages 13 -15 recruited from the local 
community (Litt & Stock, 2011). [CONTACT_840817] recently conducted a study ( R21AA024163) with participants age 
15 to 20 (N=306; mean age 18.4, 47% male) for an experimental study on SNS alcohol displays. For 
those particip ants age 15 to 17, we obtained parent consent from 87 of 93 parents (94%). [CONTACT_371150] has 
multiple funded studies that utilize the recruitment methods proposed in the application, all of which 
include local or national adolescent and YA samples (age 15 -25) recruited via methods similar to those 
proposed herein. We recruited (UW ADAI) a national sample (N =370) ages 17 -25 in five months. Of 
relevance to the current application, 201 participants age 17 completed the online screening and we 
obtained parent cons ent from 73.2% of parents of those teens. In addition, we conducted an intensive 
ecological momentary assessment study (UW ADAI) with participants age 15 to 25 (N=124; 41.5% age 
15-17; M  age =18.72, SD = 2.86). We recruited the sample over 4 months during the academic year 
(mid-Feb. to mid -June 2017). For those participants age [ADDRESS_1168221], we obtained 
parent consent from 66 of 74 parents (89%). Drs. Litt and Lewis have also used  an effective process for 
verifying age and other inclusion  criteria , as proposed herein,  for potential adolescent and YA 
participants and their parents recruited from multiple source s for two NIAAA projects (R01AA021379, 
R21AA024163).  
 
  
D. Investigator Experience  -Provide a brief synopsis of the principal investigator’s expertise, experience, 
and capability to perform this research.  Attach a copy of the curriculum vitae of the principal investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_840738].  
 
My background experiences have afforded me with the expertise, leadership, and motivation necessary 
to successfully perform the proposed research . I received my  Ph.D. in Applied Social Psychology at The 
George Washington University in [ADDRESS_1168222]. Mary Larimer at the University of Washington in 2011  and served as faculty 
from 2012 -2017. Since January 2018, I’ve been employed as an Associate Professor in the Department 
of Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at UNTHSC. The bulk of my 
research has focused on the application of social psychological theory to high -risk health behaviors, 
including alcohol use among in adolescents and young adults. In addition, I have written several 
manuscripts that focus on the role of cognitions and behavior among those individuals who are either 
abstainers or lighter drinkers (Litt & Lewis, 2015; Litt & Stock, 2011). Further, I  have been or  am currently 
the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_840739] 
(R00AA020869; R21AA024163 ; R34AA026004; R34AA026332 ). In order to successfully accomplish the 
proposed research plan, I have chosen a strong co -investigator  ([CONTACT_371150] ) who provide s expertise in 
social ps ychological theory, college student alcohol use, text messaging interventions, web -based 
recruitment and tracking in college samples, and  qualitative and quantitative statistical analysis.  In 
summary, I have demonstrated a record of successful and productive research, have put together a 
strong team, and my knowledge and experience will help me successfully lead and carry out the 
proposed research. Please see attached CV . 
 
E.  Experimental Design and Methods  -  
 
We will utilize a multi -method approach to reach a wide cross -section of parents of adolescents and 
young adults from [LOCATION_007] , including online and electronic newspaper ads, electronic flyers , and social 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168223] of an online Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram Fan page. Social media 
outreach will be from the STudying Alcohol and Related Risks (STARR) lab accounts and a specific 
Project PRISM Facebook account (same account approved for Phase 1 of PRISM). Because most 
STARR Lab research is aimed at adolescents and young adults and Facebook is more popular among 
adults of parenting age, the P RISM Facebook page will be geared towards advertising and updates to 
parents, the focus of recruitment for PRISM. Drs. Litt and Lewis are co -directors of the STARR lab. By 
[CONTACT_840750] , we 
allow additional protection for participants as interaction with our social media accounts will not indicate 
that a participant is in a specific study since multiple studies are conducted by [CONTACT_840751]. Moreover, 
there are additional indi viduals other than study participants who will interact with STARR lab social 
media and PRISM Facebook account, such as co -investigators, collaborators, and current and future 
graduate students. Researchers will interact with STARR lab social media by [CONTACT_840752]. Researchers will interact with 
the PRISM specific Facebook page by [CONTACT_840753]. This will allow additional protection to study 
participants as it will not indicate study participation in a particular study or any study at all.  Private 
messages can be sent to the research team or people can call the research team. Only research staff 
have access to STARR social media and PRISM Facebook accounts and the lab phone numbers used 
for Project PRISM. Thus, only those on this IRB protoco l will respond to participant inquiries. 
Researchers will direct interested participants t o the online survey link that they can find on the STARR 
lab and PRISM social media accounts and to the project website. Screening will only occur online so any 
interested participants will be directed to the online screening survey when calling. Researche rs will also 
answer any questions interested participants might have about the study. There will be an active post for 
the online screening survey on all STARR lab and PRISM social media accounts for Project PRISM. This 
will be the only screening survey fo r Project PRISM. This survey will begin steps for study eligibility for 
Project PRISM only. There will be no generic screening survey related to all projects, only the screening 
survey specific to Project PRISM. The posts for Project PRISM will only be abo ut Project PRISM and 
eligibility for Project PRISM. Individuals can like or share STARR and PRISM related accounts and 
posts. Research articles shared on the STARR and PRISM social media accounts are for information 
purposes for the team and their areas of  research,  not recruitment purposes. Individuals will not be able 
to post on the Facebook fan page without administrator approval by [CONTACT_840754]. Online recruitment ads (e.g., Craigslist, Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, online 
newspaper s) will provide a hyper -linked website address (URL) for more study information and eligibility 
screening. Other research projects that may recruit though the fan page will only be those approved by 
[CONTACT_840755]. In addition to other study information, there is a 
section on the study website that will lead individuals to the online consent statement and the online 
screening survey.  
 
We will also recruit parents through community organizations in major [LOCATION_007] cities. Contacts at 
community organizations will be initially contact[CONTACT_840756]. In this email, project staff will 
provide information about the study and encour age further questions. If they agree to share study 
information with their members, study staff will send them the consent link and/or QR code. Similar 
emails will be sent to high school administrators to recruit the parents of students.  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168224] PRISM website: To be constructed once website language is approved *. 
*Note that we will not launch the study  or initiate participant recruitment for this project until a link to the live 
parent -based intervention website has been reviewed and verified by [CONTACT_1201].    
PRISM Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/PRISM.unthsc  
PRISM Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/prism.unthsc/   
STARR Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/starr.unthsc/   
STARR Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/starrlab.unthsc/?hl=en   
STARR Twitter: https://twitter.com/STARRLab_UNTHSC   
 
Study Reminders.  
 
For all elements of this study, once the requested task (i.e., screening survey, baseline, follow -up surveys , etc.) 
has been completed by a participant, all reminders to complete that specific task will stop.  
 
Recruitment Methods.  
 
1. Online advertising  (See Appendix D)  
a. Social Networking Sites.  We target ads to show up in newsfeed of individuals age 30-66 in [LOCATION_007] . 
We pay for ads to show up in newsfeeds and sponsored stories on Facebook and Instagram. We 
do not buy ad space. Ads for this study will show up by [CONTACT_117310]/or birth sex to those in [LOCATION_007] . 
Ads do not appear based on any keywords. We submit ads directly via Facebook for both 
Facebook and Instagram and directly to Twitter. We do not use a recruitment agency. Ads in 
newsfeeds cannot be seen by [CONTACT_840757]. They are not pe rmanent to 
newsfeeds. Because these ads are not permanent and cannot be seen by [CONTACT_840758]. Participants will have the option to hide or 
not see any ads from the STARR Lab that will promote Project PRISM on Facebook, Instagram, 
and Twitter if they so choose . This is always an option for any ad on Facebook, Instagram, and 
Twitter. Project PRISM ads from the STARR lab would not trigger any other ads related to alcohol 
or drugs as we do not use these keywords for ads. Ads in newsfeeds are not visible to anyone 
other than the participant. The use of a Facebook Fan page for study communications is included 
in the consent documents. Participants will not be able to post on the Facebook Fan page without 
administrator approval by [CONTACT_5051]. In all consent doc uments, we inform parents and/or 
participants that if they “like” our Facebook Fan page and/or follow our Instagram or Twitter, they 
may see posts by [CONTACT_266206]. Liking the Facebook Fan page and/or following the 
Instagram or Twitter, is option al, are not required for study participation, and is not an indication 
of study participation as anyone who is a member of Facebook can like the study Facebook fan 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168225] and online 
channels (e.g., online version of the Star -Telegram, Dallas Observer).   
2. In-person recruitment and flyering (see Appendix D) 
a. Study staff will go to community areas (i.e., businesses and community centers) to hand out study 
flyers. Flyers will contain a brief description of the study, contact [CONTACT_3031], website link, and link 
to the online screening survey.  
b. Study staff will also post flyers in community areas (i.e., business and community centers).  
3. High Schools (see Appendix D) 
a. Study staff will contact [CONTACT_840759]. Once ads are 
approved by [CONTACT_840760], the ads will be published in their seasonal newsletter or newspaper. 
The ads will contain a brief description of the study, contact [CONTACT_3031], website link, and link to 
the online screening survey.  
b. Study staff will contact [CONTACT_840761] (e.g., via email). If the contacts (e.g., school counselors, 
principals, teachers, etc.) agree to share the study’s information with their parents , we will share 
with them the study’s consent link and the study’s QR code. Information shared with the parents  
will be currently approved language (e.g., summary of the study) and study materials (e.g., flyer, 
consent link). We are willing to get any special authorizations required, if needed. We will follow 
the policies they have in place in respect to sharing information with their students.  
4. Future Contact [CONTACT_46979]  
a. Individuals that previously completed the screening survey for Project PATH  (IRB #2018 -077) will 
receive one email invitation and 2 reminder emails to participate in this study. They will only 
receive this invitation if they  indicated that they wish to be contact[CONTACT_840762]. For eligible and ineligible individuals that  
indicated “yes” to being contact[CONTACT_393694] , all personal contact 
[CONTACT_840763] -identifiable survey data. The email invitation will 
include information about Project PRISM  as well as a link to the parent consent and screening 
survey. It will be sent to the email they provided in the Project PATH  screening survey . If teens 
are interested, they can enco urage their parents to read about the study and take the parent 
screening survey.  
b. Individuals that previously completed the screening survey for  The Freshman Experience Project 
(IRB #2018 -128) will receive one email invitation  and 2 reminder emails  to participate in this 
study. They will only receive this invitation if they  are within the eligible age range and  indicated 
that they wish to be contact[CONTACT_840764]. Participants were only asked this question if they were 18 -19 years of age. For 
eligible and ineligible individu als that indicated “yes” to being contact[CONTACT_417755] , all personal contact [CONTACT_840763] -identifiable 
survey data. The email invitation will include information about Project PRISM  as well as a link to 
the parent consent and screening survey. It will be sent to the email they provided in The 
Freshman Experience Project screening survey. If teens are interested, they can encourage  their 
parents  to read about the study and take the parent screening surve y.  
c. Individuals that previously completed the screening survey for  Project EQUIP  (IRB # 2020 -139) 
will receive one email invitation  and 2 reminder emails  to participate in this study. They will only 
receive this invitation if they  indicated that they wish to be contact[CONTACT_840765]. For eligible and ineligible individuals that 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 7 of 31 indicated “yes” to being contact[CONTACT_393694] , all personal contact 
[CONTACT_840763] -identifiable survey data. The email invitation will 
include information about Project PRISM  as well as a link to the parent consent and screening 
survey. It will be sent to the email they provided in Project EQUIP  screening survey. If teens are 
interested, they can encourage their parents to read about the study and take the parent 
screening survey.  
 
5. Community Organizations (See Appendix D) 
a. Study staff will contact [CONTACT_840766] (e.g., via 
email). If the contacts agree to share the study’s information with individuals in their organization, 
we will share with them the study’s consent link and the stu dy’s QR code for easy access. Any 
information shared will be currently approved language (e.g., summary of the study) and study 
materials (e.g., flyer, consent link). We are willing to get any special authorizations required. We 
will follow the policies th ey have in place in respect to sharing information with individuals in their 
organization.  
 
Online Screening ( see Appendix B) 
 
Parents.  After receiving information about the study and being presented with the online informed consent 
statement  that covers the screening survey , intervention, and follow -up surveys , if eligible  (Appendix A) , 
individuals will be asked to complete an electronic signature [CONTACT_840808], which will determine whether or not they are a good fit for the study. The electronic signature 
[CONTACT_840809] a text box where participants can draw their signature. This electronic signature [CONTACT_840810] a date and time stamp . Only those participants who sign both the online consent /assent  form and HIPAA 
Authorization Form (one for themselves; one for their child if age 15 -17) will be routed to the Screening 
Welcome Page. The consent form will include signature [CONTACT_840811] 15 -17. HIPAA forms will be separated for parent and for their child. Once they hit the “ Next” 
button on the screening welcome page, they will be routed to the online screening consent survey. Participants 
who do not  provide consent for themselves (and consent for their teen if age 15 -17) as well as HIPAA 
authorization form s for themselves (and their teen if age 15 -17) will be routed to the screening decline page and 
will never view the screening survey . The electronic signature [CONTACT_840809] a  text box where participants 
can draw their signature  [CONTACT_840812] . This electronic signature [CONTACT_840813] a date and time 
stamp.  
 
Participants who provide consent  will receive demographic questions (i.e., birth sex, race, ethnicity, ) and items 
that assess crucial eligibility questions such  as “Which social networking sites (SNSs) do you think *( INSERT  
TEEN’S NAME) has an active profile with ?” and “ Are you willing to participate in a study that involves a 
parenting program and a series of online surveys with your teen ?” The survey for parents will ask them to 
provide their contact [CONTACT_840767]’s contact [CONTACT_3031] (and parental consent  and HIPAA 
authorization if their teen is age 15 -17). Parents do not need to provide consent or HIPAA authorization for their 
teen if  they are age 18 -20, but  they will still need to provide their teen’s  contact [CONTACT_840768]. Participants will receive an onli ne copy 
of their consent form via email  and can request to be mailed a printed copy of their signed consent form . In 
addition, confirmation emails will be sent to participants to indicate receipt of their online screening survey.  If 
participants are deemed ineligible on any of the inclusion/exclusion criteria, they will be routed to an ineligible 
end page that will thank them for their time and inform them that they are not a good fit for the present study. 
They will also receive an email informing them that they are not eligible for the study. If a parent consent s but 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 8 of 31 does not complete the screening survey, they will receive up to 3 email reminders to complete the screening 
survey.  
 
Parents are informed in the Parent Consent Form that their teen will be asked to sign their own consent/assent 
form to indicate whether or not they want to participate in the research study. In the event that we do not receive 
a completed teen consent form, parents will be sent an email, SMS, and up to [ADDRESS_1168226] information (and 
consent and HIPAA form for their teen age 15 -17), their teen will be sent  a link  (using the contact [CONTACT_840769])  to the consent form and screening survey. Only participants age [ADDRESS_1168227] a parent 
who has completed the online screening survey (and provided consent for their teen age 15 -17) will be sent a 
secure link to complete their screening survey. We will send up to 7 email, 7 text, and 5 call reminders to teens 
who do not respond to the screening invitation. Participants will be presented with an online informed consent 
statement and will be asked to complete an electronic signature [CONTACT_840808], which will determine whether or not they are a good fit for the study. Th e electronic signature 
[CONTACT_840809] a text box where participants can draw their signature. This electronic signature [CONTACT_840810] a date and time stamp. Only t hose participants who sign both the online consent form and HIPAA 
Authorization Form will be routed to the Screening Welcome Page. Once they hit the “ Next” button on the 
screening welcome page, they will be routed to the online screening survey. Participants who do not sign the 
consent and HIPAA authorization form will be routed to the screening decline page or ineligible page and will 
never view the screening welcome page. The electronic signature [CONTACT_840809] a text box where 
participants can dra w their signature [CONTACT_840812]. This electronic signature [CONTACT_840813] a 
date and time stamp.  
 
The first question that participants will be asked in the screening survey is their age. Participants who are age  
15-20 will receive demographic questions (i.e., birth sex, race, ethnicity,) and items that assess crucial eligibility 
questions such as  “Which social networking sites (SNSs) do you have an active profile with ? Check all that 
apply) ” and “ Are you willing to complete 3 45-minute online surveys over the course of 6 months? ” Participants 
will receive an online copy of their consent form via email and can request to be mailed a printed copy of their 
signed consent form . In addition, confirmation emails will be sent to participants to indicate receipt of their online 
screening survey.  
 
If a participant age 15 -20 declines to participate or is not eligible, their parents will not be informed of the reason. 
Instead, the parent who initially screened into the study will be sent an email informing them that their 
participation (and their teen’s) is no longer needed.  In cases where a teen does not grant consent/assent or 
does not respond to the consent invitation or reminders, the teen’s contact [CONTACT_840770] [ADDRESS_1168228] completed the 
baseline survey, the parent may opt out without opting the teen out, and vice versa.  
 
Participants ( teens  of eligible parents) who indicate they are 14 or younger, or 21 and over will be deemed 
ineligible and automatically routed to the end of the survey using show -if logic  so they will not be shown any 
additional items . These ineligible participants will not receive any additional questions.. I f participants are 
deemed ineligible on any of the inclusion/exclusion criteria, they will  be routed to an ineligible end page that will 
thank them for their time and inform them that they are not a good fit for the present study.  They will also receive 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168229] provided their teen’s contact [CONTACT_2997] (and consent if age 15 -17) can access the 15-[ADDRESS_1168230] protected, and HIPAA compliant.  To maintain the confidentiality of data submitted over the 
internet, participants will log in to a secure website using their unique PIN created for study purposes.  Data 
transfer will be protected using Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.2 or higher.  The TLS encrypted session 
will ensure that data moving from th e participant to the server (i.e., participant responses) will be encrypted in 
transit using a [ADDRESS_1168231] user information from unauthorized access.    
 
 
Future Research Opportunities  
 
We ask all participants (parents and  teens ) in the online consent form  if they would like to be contact[CONTACT_594412] . Parents of teens age 15 -17 will also be asked if they would like for their teen to be 
contact[CONTACT_393694] . Participants that agree to be contact[CONTACT_840771] , they are only giving permission to be informed of future IRB -
approved opportunities  conducted by [CONTACT_840772].  For eligible and ineligible individuals who indicate “yes” to 
being contact[CONTACT_393694] , all personal contact /demographic  information is kept separate 
from the remaining non -identifiable survey data.  Contact /demographic  information from eligible participants who 
provide permission (and parent has provided permission for 15 -17 year old individuals) will be kept indefinitely.  If 
an [ADDRESS_1168232] /demographic  
information will be kept indefinitely as well. Examples of identifiable data that will be kept separate includes age, 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168233] permission to be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
Future research  conducted at UNTHSC by [CONTACT_6283]. L itt and/or L ewis would be the only research  that would have 
access to  this contact [CONTACT_4111]. Future IRB submissions would describe the use of the list in detail and would not be 
used without IRB approval.  
 
 
Consent Documents (see Appendix A) 
 
Consent documents and consent status are stored in our secure, HIPAA compliant database. We will easily 
have access to documentation that contains the typed signature [CONTACT_840814]. Individuals will receive a copy of their signed 
consent document via email when  their consent document is signed  and can request to be mailed a printed 
copy of their signed consent form .  
 
 
Parent Full Study Consent  
 
Please see study flow charts that demonstrate participant flow, including the consent process . 
 
We are requesting informed consent for the screening survey , baseline,  intervention,  and follow -up surveys  to 
be obtained online with an electronic signature [CONTACT_840815]. The electronic 
signature [CONTACT_840809] a text box where participants can draw their signature. Participants will provide 
informed consent (and assent if their child is age 15 -17) for the screening survey , baseline,  intervention, and 
follow -up surveys  with electronic signatures. Parents who indicate that they are not the legal guardians of their 
child age 15 -17 will be automatically marked ineligible a nd routed to the end page of the survey. Participants 
who decline to provide consent will be sent to the end page of the survey. For participants who do not provide 
consent, survey programming will skip the remainder of the survey,  thus instructing them to not sign the form is 
not necessary. Participants who do not provide consent  for themselves (and consent for their teen if age 15 -17) 
would be moved  straight  to the survey end page.  If a parent consents but does not complete the screening 
survey, they will receive up to 3 email reminders to complete the screening survey.  
 
We will ask parents for consent for their teen (if age 15 -17) for the full study (screening, baseline, and follow -up 
surveys) before commencing the screening survey.  As such, teens age [ADDRESS_1168234] parent 
consent for baseline and follow -ups. Teen c onsent /assent  will be obtained for the full study before commencing 
the screening survey . Thus, a separate consent form will not be signed at the beginning of each follow -up 
survey .  
 
Parents will be informed in the informed consent and screening survey that in order to be eligible for the study , 
their child must also assent/ consent  to and be eligible  to participate in the study.   
 
We ask for parent contact [CONTACT_840773] a way to track their own participation as well as to track participants 
whose parents indicated consent or non -consent throughout the study as an additional check to only recruit 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 11 of 31 teens with parent/guardian consent. We can program our tracking database to flag any parent contact 
[CONTACT_3031] ( email ) that was previously given from parents/guardians who rescinded their  consent. We also use 
parent/guardian contact [CONTACT_840773] a way to ensure that the parent/guardian and the teen have different 
email addresses. If duplicate emails are used, this is flagged in our system as part of the parent verification 
process and the teen will not be moved forward in the study and will receive the not  eligible end survey page.  
 
 
Participants Age 15 -20 Full Study Assent/ Consen t 
 
Please see study flow charts that demonstrate participant flow, including  the consent process . 
 
We are requesting informed consent /assent  for the screening survey , baseline,  and follow -up surveys  to be 
obtained online with an electronic signature [CONTACT_840815]. The electronic 
signature [CONTACT_840809] a text box where participants can draw their signature. Participants will provide 
informed consent for themselves (or assent if age 15 -17) for the screening survey  and fo llow-up survey s with 
electronic signatures. For participants who do not provide consent, survey programming will skip the remainder 
of the survey, thus instructing them to not sign the form is unnecessary. Participants who do not provide consent 
would be moved  straight  to the end page.  Particip ants will not be allowed to complete the screening survey 
unless their parent has already completed screening,  been  deemed eligible, and provided their contact 
[CONTACT_840774] 15 -17.    
 
In order to reduce participant burden, consent /assent  will be obtained for the full study (if eligible) for all 
participants  before commencing  the screening survey . Thus, a separate consent /assent  form will not be signed 
at the beginning of each follow -up survey  
 
We ask for parent contact [CONTACT_840773] a way to track their own participation as well as  an additional check  to 
ensure that the teens /young adults  completing the surveys are the children of the parents who previously 
screened in.  We also use parent/guardian contact [CONTACT_840773] a way to ensure that the parent/guardian and 
the teen have different email addresses. If duplicate emails are used, this is flagged in our system as part of the 
verification process and the teen will not be moved forward in the study and will receive the not eligible end 
survey page. We will retain this contact [CONTACT_840775]. Survey  programming will not move 
teens/young adults  who do not provide consent to the HIPAA form, thus instructing them to not sign the form is 
not necessary. Teens/young adults  who do not provide consent will be routed straight  to a survey decline 
confirmation page, where they will have the opportunity to return to the consent form  or confirm declin ing 
consent . Participants who decline consent will skip the remainder of the survey and go straight to the survey end 
page.  Survey programming will be done such that participants cannot advance to the HIPAA Authorization form 
until consent to participate has been provided. Survey programming will be done such that participants cannot 
advance to the survey items until both cons ent to participate and HIPAA Authorization has been provided.   
 
If we do not receive the completed consent /assent  form or screening survey  by [CONTACT_941] 15 -20 year old , we will 
periodically send reminders – via email (up to 7), text (up to 7) and/or phone/voicemail (up to 5). If we do not 
receive the participant ’s (age 15 -20) completed consent /assent  form, we will send an email reminder to the 
parent to speak to their teen. If a consent decision is provided by [CONTACT_2299] (age 15 -20), then all reminder 
contacts for consent procedures would end. Parents will indicate consent or non -consent for the informed 
consent form and the HIPAA authorization form through an elect ronic signature [CONTACT_840816]. In cases where a teen does not grant consent/assent or does not respond to the consent invitation or 
reminders, the teen’s contact [CONTACT_840776] [ADDRESS_1168235] a response from the child (age 15 -20) 
following the consent invitation/reminders. Parents may also decline participation for their teen  (age 15 -17) at 
any time throughout the study by [CONTACT_840777].  
 
 
Consent Procedures for When Minors Become Adults.  
 
Please see study flow charts that demonstrate participant flow, including  the consent process.  
 
Since this is a longitudinal study, there may be participants who are 17 years old when initially enrolled who turn 
18 years of age (i.e., adult) while still engaged in the study. These participants will be re -consented as adults 
when they turn 18 years of  age. Participants will re -consent  as adults  using the same consent/assent form they 
completed as a minor but the reconsent process will be documented in our participant tracking system by a time 
and date stamp and will be labeled as “Adult Reconsent” in o ur tracking system. To re -consent participants as 
adults, participants will be shown the online re-consent form before their nearest online survey ( i.e., baseline, 1 -
month, or 6 -month survey). Participants who do not provide re -consent or decline re -consent will not be allowed 
to access their next survey. Participants who do not provide a response to re -consent at the 1 -month survey 
time point  will not be able to access the 1 -month survey ; however , they will be shown the re -consent form again 
at the 6 -month time point , where they could re -consent and resume their participation. During the  online consent 
form, participants will be asked  to re-consent to the study with an electronic signature [INVESTIGATOR_1238] t yped full name. The 
electronic signature [CONTACT_840809] a text box where participants can draw their signature. Participants will 
also be asked to complete the HIPAA Research Authorization form again.  Participants who do not complete the 
re-consent and HIPAA forms will continue to receive their survey reminder emails (up to 7), text messages (up to 
7), and phone calls/voicemails (up to 3) until the re -consent, HIPAA forms, and online survey for the tim e point 
they turned [ADDRESS_1168236] another opportunity to provide re -consent at the 6 -month time point.  In this case, the participant would not 
participate in the study until they re -consented.  The re -consent will be obtained prior to any continued data 
collection.  
 
Phone Verification.  
 
After an eligible  parent has provided consent  and completed the screening survey , they will receive a  
confirmation email. Additionally, they will receive a  phone call  from study staff within approximately 3 business 
days. The purpose of this call is to verify that the information provided online is accurate and to give the 
participant additional details about the study.  Participants will receive up to 5 calls to complete the phone 
verification. Participants will also receive email reminders (up to 5) and text message reminders (up to 5) that 
verificat ion is required to continue with the study.  Once the parent has been verified, this process will be 
repeated with their teen. Participants who have not been verified after 21 days will be considered ineligible, and 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 13 of 31 their participation will end. Dyads (both parent and teen)  who are still deemed a good fit for the study and who 
are interested will be asked to complete the baseline survey to continue participation.  
 
 
Intervention Content  
 
After both parent and teen take the baseline assessment, randomization to condition (intervention or control) will 
use a stratified, blocked randomization, where assignment will be balanced across gender of teen and alcohol 
use.  
 
Parents in the intervention condition  will be sent an email containing a link to the intervention website and a 
text message with a link to the intervention website** (See Appendix C) along with an email explaining the study 
and providing guidelines for working through the modules with their teen. Parents may revisit the website as 
many times as they like over the course of a month prior to the 1 -month survey. Parents will also be sent a 
series of text messages  and emails  encouraging them to spend time on the website and encouraging them to 
speak with their children (see Appendix C for intervention text message /email scripts ).  
 
Parents in the control condition will be sent an email with a link to  The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to 
Prevent and Reduce Underage Drinking: A Guide to Action for Families. This manual is publicly available via the 
Surgeon General’s Website (see Appendix C). Parents  in the control condition  will be sent a series of text 
messages  and emails  encouraging them to spend time reviewing the website . Parents in the control condition 
will be provided the link to the intervention condition website at the end of study completion for them and their 
teen.  
 
**Please note that we are submitting word documents that contain intervention website wording  and content  that 
match what has been programmed into the intervention  the website. As requested, we are submitting  the final 
programmed website for IRB review prior to launching the study.  
 
Link to Project PRISM Intervention Website: https://project -prism.rivulent.com/   
 
Baseline Assessment, 1-Month , and 6-Month Assessments.  
 
Parent/teen dyads who meet inclusion criteria and pass phone verification will be emailed  and texted  a baseline  
survey  link. The baseline survey will include questions about demographics, social media  literacy , parenting,  
drinking and drug use, drinking cognitions, mental health, and other health behaviors and will take  approximately 
45 minutes to complete . Questions in the assessments will also include topi[INVESTIGATOR_840740], gender 
identity, religion, and relationship status. For those in the Intervention group, items in the 1 -month follow -up 
survey will assess satisfaction with the intervention website. If we do not receive the completed assessment at 
each follow -up (Baseline Assessment , 1-month , and 6-month assessment), we will periodically send reminders – 
via email (up to 8), text (up to 8) and/or phone/voi cemail (up to 5). Parents and teens can earn $2 5 for baseline, 
$35 for the 1-month  follow -up, $ 40 for the 6-month follow -up, meaning that all participants  can earn up to $ 100. 
 
Baseline Assessment, 1 -Month, and 6 -Month Measures.  
While the baseline, 1 -month, and 6 -month surveys will contain overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_277599], we may decide to include or 
exclude a measure over the course of the study, with IRB approval via a modification. Thus we are electing to 
not indicate in the consent form that the three surveys will be the same. Overlap in surveys is indicated by [CONTACT_840778]. Behavior will be reported over lifetime 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 14 of 31 (baseline) and the past month to reduce problems with retrospective recall and overlap. Demographics  will 
include age, height, weight, and family history characteristics . Parent -teen relationships will be evaluated in 
terms of parent -teen communication  regarding both alcohol and social media  (α =.53 -.75; Turrisi et al., 2000) , 
and parent -teen relationship closeness  (α = .90; Buchanan et al., 1991 ). To determine the nature of parental 
involvement and monitoring of teens, parental monitoring  will be assessed with the Parental Monitoring and 
Knowledge Scale ( α = .81; Branstetter & Furman, 2013 ) and the Parental Monitoring of SNS measures ( α = .67 -
.88; Livingstone & Helsper, 2008). In order to evaluate parental attitudes towards teen drinking,  parents will 
complete the Parental Approval of Drinking Scale ( α = .85; Wood et al., 2004). Teens’ perception of parental 
attitudes toward drinking  will be assessed with the Perceived Parent Approval of Drinking Scale  (α = .85; Wood 
et al., 2004). Both par ent and teens will be asked about their own social media use with the Social Media Scale, 
parents will also report perceptions of their teen’s social media use with the same scale. Social media literacy  
will be determined with the Alcohol Specific Media Literacy Scale and the Alcohol Specific Social Media Literacy 
Scale ( Martino et al., 2016; Unger et al., 2003 ).  
 
Teens will be evaluated on additional items related to social media use and beliefs. Perceived exposure to ads  
will be determined by [CONTACT_840779] ( Martino et 
al., 2016; Unger et al., 2003 ). Social media d escriptive norms  will be assessed by [CONTACT_840780] (Baer et al., 1991 ). Social media a ttitudes  
items will ask how much the participant approves or disapproves of a series of social media  behaviors. Social 
media i njunctive norms  will be measured using series of statements that assess participants’ perceptions of 
other’s attitudes and close friends’ attitudes toward  sharing social media content related to alcohol . Social media 
perceived vulnerability  will be assessed by [CONTACT_840781] ( Gerrard et al., 2008; Johnston et al., 2011 ). Social media p rototypes  will be 
measured by [CONTACT_840782][INVESTIGATOR_840741]  (α = .87; Gerrard et al., 2006 ). The social media willingness  
measure will assess willingness to post alcohol related s ocial media content in certain scenarios ( α = .85; 
Gerrard et al., 2008 ). 
 
Parents and teens will be asked questions regarding their alcohol and substance use. Family history of alcohol 
(baseline only)  as well as lifetime and past year alcohol use  (teen only)  will be assessed  (Johnston et al., 2014; 
Miller & Marlatt, 1984).  Marijuana Use  (Johnston et al., 2012) will be measured with items including lifetime  and 
past year  marijuana use for teens , and past month  marijuana use  for both parents and teens . Teens will also be 
asked about their perceived access to marijuana  (Harpin et al., 2018 ). Other substance use, including co -use 
cognitions and behaviors,  will be assessed for lifetime and past month frequency using the Customary Drinking 
and Drug Use Record (baseline only; α = .70 -.94; Brown et al., 1998; Schafer & Brown, 1991) as well as an 
adapted version that assesses co -use of substances. Drinking  will be assessed with the Daily Drinking 
Questionnaire  and the Quantity Frequency Index (DDQ; α = .73; Collins et al., 1985; Dimeff et al., 1999; Lewis & 
Neighbors, 2004), and the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test ( α = .85; Babor et al., 2001, Daeppen et al., 
2000) .  
 
Teens will be asked about additional behaviors, cognitions , and perceptions  related to their substance use. 
Consequences  will be assessed with the Young Adult Alcohol Consequences Questionnaire (α = .79; Read et 
al., 2006, 2007). Descriptive norms will be assessed by [CONTACT_840783] (α = .80; Baer et al., 1991; Lewis & Neighbors, 2004; Neighbors et al., 2008) among typi[INVESTIGATOR_840742]/women their age as well as close friends. Attitudes  items will ask how much the participant approves or 
disapproves of a series of alcohol behaviors (α = .85; Ajzen, 2006; Todd & Mullan, 2011). Injunctive norms  will 
be measured using a series of statements that assess participants’ perceptions of other’s attitudes and close 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 15 of 31 friends’ attitudes towards toward drinking and marijuana use (α = .70 -.93; Lewis et al., 2010; LaBrie et al., 2010). 
Perceived vulnerability  will be assessed by [CONTACT_840784] (α = .82; Gerrard et al., 2008; Litt & Stock, 2011). Prototypes  will be 
measured by [CONTACT_840782][INVESTIGATOR_840743] (α = .87; Gerrard et al., 2002, 2006). Experience of alcohol use  will consist  of one indicator of several key 
variables (i.e., age at first drink, quantity, frequency, perceived close friend alcohol use, and perceived access to 
alcohol). The willingness measure will assess willingness to use alcohol in certain scenarios (α = .85; Gerrard et 
al., 2002, 2008). Intentions  for alcohol use will be assessed by [CONTACT_840785] (α = 
.83; Ajzen, 2006; Gerrard et al., 2006). Perceived access  to substance use will be assessed with a modified 
version of The  Perceived Access to Alcohol and Other Drug Scale (α = .86; Kuntsche et al., 2008). Anxiety  and 
depression  will be measured using the PROMIS Anxiety v1.0 and PROMIS Pediatric Anxiety v1.1 Short Form (α 
= .96; Cella et al., 2010) and the PROMIS Depression and PROMIS Pediatric Depression v1.1 Short Form 
instruments (α = .96; Cella et al., 2010), respectively.  
 
Lastly, b oth parents and teens in the intervention group will be asked to complete a 1 month satisfaction scale  
related to their experience, perceptions, and interactions with the intervention website.  
 
 
1. Data Analysis and Data Monitoring  –  
In order  to evaluate  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_840744]  2 (Aim 2), we will examine  (a) recruitment  and retention  
rates,(b)  parent  post-intervention  feedback  as measured  at 1 month  follow -up (i.e., accessible,  usable,  
convenient,  relevant,  and helpful),(c)  teens’  rates  of alcohol  initiation  and use, alcohol -related  negative  
consequences,  attitudes  toward  posting  about  alcohol  on SNS,  perceived  vulnerability  to the risks of 
posting  alcohol  displays  on SNS,  and normative  perceptions  about  how many  teens  post alcohol  displays  
on SNS,  d) parental  knowledge  and attitudes  toward  alcohol  and SNS,  and e) parent  and teen report  of 
alcohol  and SNS related  communication  which  will provide  base  rates  and variance  in outcomes  to 
determine  adequate  power  for a future  clinical  trial R01 application.   
 
Feasibility  will be assessed  by (1) the proportion  of parents  who meet  inclusion  criteria  and enroll  for the 
study,  (2) the proportion  of teens  who meet  inclusion  criteria  and enroll  in the study,  and (3) the 
proportion  of parent  and teens  who complete  the interactive  SNS PBI at 1 month  follow -up. Finally,  the 
length  of time it took to recruit  our target  enrollment  number  will also be used  as an outcome  of 
feasibility.  
 
Acceptability  will be assessed with parent and teen responses at 1 month. Acceptability will be 
determined by (1)  the proportion of eligible parent/teen dyads enrolled, with 80% of eligible dyads 
agreeing to participate, (2)  the proportion of participants (both parents and teens) who find the 
intervention acceptable (e.g., acceptability of content delivery method), usable (e.g., ease of viewing and 
interacting with interactive PBI content), relevant (e.g., relevance of material), and helpful (e.g., finding 
content helpf ul, beneficial, important), (3) parents’ and teens’ ratings of individual modules in the SNS 
PBI, (4) whether teens would like to have additional conversations on this topic, (5) whether parents 
would share the information in the PBI with anyone else, (6) the proportion of parents and teens who 
would recommend the study, and (7) the proportion of parents and teens who found the program to be 
favorable overall.  Acceptability will be specifically determined if acceptability for the interactive SNS PBI 
is high er than control  and if at least  80% of responses in each domain are rated a 4 or higher (out of 5).  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168237]  sizes  for teens’  drinking  and 
risky cognitions  as well as parents’  knowledge  about  alcohol  and SNS,  and parent - and teen-reported  
outcomes  will be analyzed  in separate  models.  All models  will have  three  repeated  measures  (i.e., 
baseline,  1 month , and 6 month  follow -up), yielding  up to 450 Level  1 observations  (repeated -measures)  
across  150 Level  2 cases  (teens  or parents).  Prior  to inferential  statistics,  univariate  and bivariate  
descriptive  statistics  will be used  to assess  distributions  and simple  associations  among  variables.  
Primary  teen-reported  outcomes  are alcohol  use and negative  consequences  (both  count  outcomes)  as 
well as cognitions  (attitudes,  norms,  and perceived  vulnerability  related  to SNS alcohol  displays;  all 
modeled  as normally  distributed  outcomes).  Primary  parent -reported  outcomes  will be knowledge  about  
alcohol  and SNS (modeled  as normally  distributed  outcomes).  Given  the repeated  measures  design,  
generalized  linear  mixed  models  (GLMM;  Raudenbush  & Bryk,  2002)  will be used.  GLMM  (aka 
hierarchical  generalized  linear  models)  allow  for non-normal  outcomes  and missing  data.   
 
 
2. Data Storage and Confidentiality  – 
Screening , Baseline, 1 and 6 Month  Data.  Data from all online surveys  will be identified only by a 
seven -digit unique identifier  randomly generated for research purposes, and will not be identified by 
[CONTACT_4317]’ names. Participants are assigned a unique identifier at the start of the online screening 
survey. This unique identifier  will be embedded in all communications in which a link to surveys is sent. 
The unique identifier  embedded in the survey link means that the link is specific to that individual and 
their survey data will be connected to that unique identifier . Thus, participants will not ever need to enter 
their unique identifier  for purposes to complete study surveys. Participants are further protected by 
[CONTACT_840786] . An embedded unique identifier  is more secure than emailing the 
unique identifier  to participants as participants do not have to worry about keepi[INVESTIGATOR_840745]. There is also less participant burden with the use of an embedded unique identifier  as emailing 
the non -embedded PIN would require doing so in a separate  communication than the survey link.  The 
participant’s unique identifier  is kept separate (i.e. stored in separate secure files on our HIPAA 
compliant server) from their personal information, so that without their unique identifier , none of their 
answers can be linked to anything that might identify them . Identifiable data that will be kept separate 
includes name, contact [CONTACT_3031], city, state, and zip code of residency, and parent contact [CONTACT_3031]. 
Participants will not be identified in any research reports or presentations of the research. Their name 
[CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_840787], and will be stored separately from their data on computers with password protection 
and in locked file cabinets. The survey data will be retained indefinitely and will  be identified only by [CONTACT_840788]. The master list of identifiable data from personal data forms will be destroyed by [CONTACT_840789] (i.e. when funding ends).   
 
If a participant agrees to be contact[CONTACT_393694], their personal 
contact/demographic information will be stored on our secure LabArchives network which is protected by 
[CONTACT_1192]-step verification, configured sharing permissions, monitoring of activity, disabled permanent 
deletions, and conduction of regular access reviews.  Personal contact/demographic information will 
only be retained for participants who give permission to be contact[CONTACT_393694]. 
This information will be kept separate from the raw research data and will only be used to inform 
consenting participants of future research opportunities. The master list which connects identifiers to 
research data will be destroyed at the close of the study, preventing any connection between the future 
contact [CONTACT_840790].  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168238]. Litt’s research projects 
provided by [CONTACT_840791], Inc. Rivulent Web Design, Inc. employees and contractors are HIPAA 
certified. Data stored on the provided secure server is encrypted, password protected, and HIPAA 
compliant. T o maintain the confidentiality of data submitted over the internet, participants will log in to a 
secure website using their unique PIN created for study purposes. Data transfer will be protected using 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.2 or higher.  The TLS encrypted session will ensure that data 
moving from the participant to the server (i.e., participant responses) will be encrypted in transit using a 
2048 -bit minimum encryption key.  Data downloaded from the dedicated Rivulent Web Design, Inc. serve r 
will be stored by [CONTACT_840792], and is located in a 
locally managed datacenter.  The datacenter is protected by [CONTACT_1192] -step verification, configured sharing 
permissions, monitoring of activity, disabled permanent deletions, and conduction of regular access 
reviews.  
 
3. Setting  - Describe briefly where the study will be conducted, e.g., private outpatient clinics, physicians’  
offices.  
Screening , baseline, website module intervention content, and the 1 and 6 -month follow -up surveys  
for the study will be conducted online.   
4. Laboratory methods and facilities  - Indicate where specific laboratory  tests will be performed; e.g.,  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_786496], investigators' labo ratory, radiology clinic, etc. If None, state N/A  
N/A 
 
5. Estimated Period of Time to Complete the Study  – Describe the stages and total time of subject 
participation as well as overall time for the entire study (start to completion). Also, if study involves more 
than one visit, describe time range estimates for each visit (e.g., 20 -30 minutes; 2 – 3 hrs, etc.) . Where 
possible , use a table or “bullet -point” format to clearly illustrate the flow of activities and procedures.  
Overall time for the entire study, s tart to finish: [ADDRESS_1168239] participation: 2 hours and 20 minutes, plus the time parents allocate for either the 
intervention website or the Surgeon General’s Call to Action .  
 
The brief online screening and consent should take  approximately  5 minutes to complete.  
 
The online baseline survey  should take approximately 45 minutes to complete.  
 
Intervention content will be administered during a 4 -week period.  
 
The online 1 -month follow -up survey should take approximately 45 minutes to complete.  
 
The online 6 -month follow -up survey should take approximately 45 minutes to complete.  
 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 18 of 31  
 
 
F.  Human Subjects  - Describe the characteristics of the research population:  
1)  Sample Size : Number of subjects to be enrolled in this study at this sit e. Approximately  300 (150 parents; 
150 teens)  subjects  at 1 sites in the U.S. will be enrolled in the study overall.  
For Clinical Trial studies, indicate number of subjects to be randomized __ 300  
 
2)  Describe both Inclusion AND  Exclusion Criteria . BE SPECIFIC!  Also, if chil dren (persons under age 18) 
are excluded from this study provide scientific justification for such exclusion. Include physical, mental, 
cognitive, medical, and other relevant Inclusion and Exclusion criteria.  
 
Inclusion criteria  for Parents/Legal Guardians :  
1) have a child between the ages of 15 -20 who currently lives with them  
2) believe that their child is active on at least one SNS  
3) live in [LOCATION_007]   
4) did not participate in a Phase 1 focus group  
5) provide a valid email address  
6) own a cell phone with text messaging capabilities  and be okay with receiving messages  
7) provide valid contact [CONTACT_840793]  
8) willing  to participate in a study that involves a parenting program and a series of online surveys 
with their teen  
9) provide  a valid phone number  
 
 
Inclusion criteria for Teens:  
1) have an eligible parent  with whom  they currently live  
2) between the ages of 15 -20 
3) live in [LOCATION_007]  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 19 of 31 4) did not participate in a Phase 1 focus group   
5) active on at least one SNS  
6) provide a valid email addres s 
7) own a cell phone with text messaging capabilities  and be okay with receiving messages  
8) willing to complete 3 45 -minute online surveys over the course of 6 months  
9) Note that both parent and teen must be eligible to enroll in the study.  
10)   provide  a valid phone number    
 
Eligibility questions will be embedded in other questions so as not to make the criteria obvious. 
Screening will be conducted to ensure the participant meets eligibility criteria and also provides age, date 
of birth, and unique person items. If an individual meets criteria at screening, the programmed algorithm 
will trigger a  request to enter contact [CONTACT_3031]. We will monitor individuals’ personal information (e.g., 
home address, phone numbers, date of birth, computer IP address) to ensure that individua ls cannot 
participate multiple times.  
 
Exclusion criteria include not meeting inclusion criteria, unwillingness to participate, failure to provide 
consent (e.g., declining participation in the study), providing inconsistent responses (e.g., age  and 
date of birth ) identified by [CONTACT_100178], and having already participated in the study as identified by 
[CONTACT_840794], contact [CONTACT_3031], and demographics . 
 
3)  Describe intended gender, age range, intended racial and ethnic distribution . If any vulnerable subjects 
are involved in this study (e.g., those with limited autonomy or decision -making capabilities), justification 
must be provided.  
  
We will stratify recruitmen t based on age, gender, and ethnicity, recruiting equal numbers of parents with 
adolescents in each of the age categories (i.e., 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20) and targeting equal numbers of 
males and females in each age group.  We will recruit all minority parents to be above local census 
estimates.  
 
 
4)  Identify the source(s) from which you will obtain your study population .  
Participants will be selected by [CONTACT_840795] (Facebook/Instagram/Twitter; Craigslist and online 
newspapers)  advertisements , community organizations, schools, and in -person flyering and handouts .  
 
5) Describe plans for recruitment of subjects . All materials (e.g., flyers, ads, emails, letters, postings, 
handouts, etc.) to be used for recruiting subjects must be submitted to the IRB for review.  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168240] of a Facebook Fan page 
that will provide a brief study description and links to the study website. We will use Facebook’s 
advertising platform to also show our ads on Instagram. The Facebook Fan page is open to the public. 
Liking the Fan page is no t an indicator of study enrollment. The communication for the Fan page is a 
one-way communication platform whereby [CONTACT_840796]. 
Individuals will not be able to post or comment within the Fan page. They can shar e posts from the page 
on their newsfeed. We ask participants to like or share our Fan page but we do not ask them to post 
anything on the Fan page. Additionally, we created Twitter and Instagram accounts. We will use paid 
Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram s ponsored ads, stories, and promoted boosts on our Fan 
page/Twitter/Instagram accounts to increase our online presence. We will also advertise in local online 
versions of newspapers and in high school newspapers. Online (e.g., Craigslist, Facebook, Twitter,  
Instagram, newspaper) recruitment ads will provide a hyper -linked website address for more information 
and eligibility screening. Print advertisements in local newspapers will contain a brief description of the 
study and various methods of contact [CONTACT_840797] (website, phone number, email).  We will also share 
flyers and handouts with community organizations and schools either by [CONTACT_65056].  
 
Study staff will visit community areas (i.e., businesses and community centers) to hand out study flyers. 
Flyers will contain a brief description of the study, contact [CONTACT_3031], website link, and link to the online 
screening survey. Study staff will als o post flyers in community areas (i.e., business and community 
centers).  
 
We are targeting ads to show up in newsfeeds of individuals age 30-66 in [LOCATION_007] . We pay for ads to show 
up in newsfeeds in Facebook and Instagram. We do not buy ad space. Ads for this study will be targeted 
by [CONTACT_117310]/or by [CONTACT_840798] . Ads do not appear based on any keywords. We submit ads 
directly via Facebook for both Facebook and Instagram as well as directly to Twitter. We do not use a 
recruitment agency. Ads in newsfeeds cannot be seen by [CONTACT_840757]. They are  not 
permanent posts to newsfeeds. Because these ads are not permanent and cannot be seen by [CONTACT_840799]. Participants will have the option to 
hide or not see any ads from Project PRISM on Facebo ok, Instagram, and Twitter if they so choose. This 
is always an option for any ad on Facebook, Instagram, or Twitter.  
 
 
G.  Risk/Benefit Assessment  
1)  Describe the level of risk , and if more than minimal, describe how this research holds the prospect of a 
direct benefit for the subjects . If there is NO direct benefit to subjects, sta te such in protocol and in the 
consent documents.  
There is potential risk for participating in Project PRISM.  
 
 
2)  Describe how the anticipated benefit justifies the risk.  
There are several potential direct benefits for both parents and teens who participate in this study.  
Parents in the c ontrol condition will be sent the intervention website link at the end of study 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168241] proven successful at reducing the odds that nondrinking teens and young adults will initiate alcohol 
use (Ichiyama et al., 2009) and on general alcohol consumption (e.g., Doumas et al., 2013; Ichiyama et 
al., 2009; Turrisi et al., 2001, 2010, 2013). A systematic review (Kuntsche & Kuntsche, 2016) supported 
the idea of using parents in prevention programs. Across studies and concepts, they found evidence that 
participating in parent -based interventions improved  parenting measures such as rule -setting, monitoring 
and parent -child communication as well as the prevention and reduction of adolescent substance use . 
Thus, both parents and teens may directly benefit from participation in a parent -based intervention such 
as Project PRISM. Second, much of the intervention content related to parent -teen communication and 
engaging in non -reactive and non -judgmental conversations with their teens is in line with mindful 
parenting, which can be defined as the ongoing process of intentionally bringing moment -to-moment, 
non-judgmental awareness and communication to parenting ( Duncan et al., 2009).  This non -judgmental 
moment -to-moment communication can support parents in becoming more aware of what and how they 
communicat e and  allows parents to paus e and reflect before communication and consider current 
communication and relationships in context of the long -term relationship that they have with their teen, as 
well as attend to their teen’s needs. Research indicates that parents who either have a natu ral capacity 
for, or learn practices of mindful parenting will be more likely to develop higher quality relationships with 
their children (Duncan et al., 2009)  and that teens whose parents follow practices of mindful parenting 
including non -judgmental comm unication and listening with full attention and openness are less likely to 
experience conflict with their parents and thus are more likely to self -disclose when they have concerns  
(Smetana et al., 2006).  Given that many of the recommendations in the proposed intervention focus on 
mindful parenting (e.g., non -judgmental and non -reactive communication, relationship building, honesty 
and openness , listening with full attention, compassion for self and child ), participation in this study may 
have direct benefi t on the quality of communication and relationships between parent and teens.  
 
 
Second, there is a direct benefit related to the potential for reactivity to  behavioral survey  assessments , 
including the surveys utilized in this research study.  Reactivity is the possibility that the research 
methods themselves affect the behavior under study. The process of completing substance use  
assessments is often illuminating for participants such that they react by [CONTACT_840800]. 
Reactivity to alcohol assessment occurs when completing alcohol surveys is associated with changes in 
alcohol use, specifically reduced alcohol use.  Research has shown that there is reactivity to alcohol 
assessment for longitudinal surveys (McCambridge & Kypri; 2011;  Walters et al. 2009)  such that 
participants reduce alcohol use over time as a result of repeated assessments. Further, research 
indicates that completing assessments about a range of health behaviors can lead to increases in health -
promoting behaviors (Miles et al., 2020; Wood et al., 2016).  Thus, both parent and teen participants in 
Project PRISM have the potential to directly benefit from completing longitudinal  behavioral assessment  
surveys ( screening, baseline, 1 -month, and 6 -month surveys) .  
 
 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168242] the opportunity to learn more about their 
drinking and potentially be referred to services, if needed.  All participants (parents and teens), at the 
end of participation, will be provided with referral resources availa ble both locally and nationally , 
which is a direct benefit of participating in the proposed study.  
  
We believe that the potential risks of the study  (please see below)  are reasonable in relation to the 
importance of the knowledge gained and potential direct study benefits, which ju stifies the risk regarding 
uncomfortable  survey items and risk of confidentiality. First, as noted above the  direct benefit of  
potentially improving  parent -teen communication and alcohol use outcomes  outweighs potential risks 
related to sensitivity of questions and potential loss of privacy. Further, given that parents in the control 
condition will be sent the intervention website link at the end of study completion for them and their teen, 
all participants have potential to directly benefit from participation in this study.  In addition, the potential 
for reactivity from Project  PRISM  alcohol assessments (i.e., potential for participants to reduce alco hol 
use as part of the research study) is a potential  direct  benefit . We feel the above benefits justify the risks 
of Project  PRISM ; specifically, potential benefits from reactivity leading to reduced alcohol use  and 
benefits for parental communication  justifies participants ’ possible dis comfort with questions and 
confidentiality (discussed below).  All participants (parents and teens) will be provided with referral 
resources both locally and nationally, which is a direct benefit of participating in Project PRISM.  In sum, 
there are a multitude of direct benefits available to all Project PRISM participan ts. 
 
 
3)  Describe how the anticipated benefit of this research is at least as favorable to the subjects as that to be 
received by [CONTACT_786518].  
If the participant chooses not to participate in the study but has questions about alcohol or other 
substances, we can provide them with a list of information and referrals within the community. See 
Resource  Information Email ( Appendix C). 
 
4)  Describe any potential RISKS OR DISCOMFORTS in detail. Use evidence from clinical and/or animal 
studies to evaluate the level of potential hazards associated with participation in the research protocol. 
Indicate the methods for detecting adverse reactions. Describe the procedures for protecting against or 
minimizing potential risks (e.g., confidentiality, reputational injury, direct injury or harm to subject, etc.) 
and assess their effe ctiveness. Discuss why the risks to the subjects are reasonable in relation to  
proposed benefits to mankind. Be sure to describe any anticipated adverse events that might occur 
during the course of the study.  
The study procedures involve potential risk to participants. The consent procedures will make clear all 
of the potential risks of study participation. The most significant risk to participants in this research is 
loss of privacy and unauthorized release of confidential information. This could occur if data on an 
individual participant, or the information that he or she was participating in a study of alc ohol 
behavior, were to be released to anyone outside the study. Psychological risks posed by [CONTACT_840801]. Items include thoughts, feelings, 
and personal difficulties that may be private and personal behavior such as alcohol use and related 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168243] sensitive and personal topi[INVESTIGATOR_840746], and will be informed that they are free not to answer any question they wish not to answer, and 
can refuse to participate or withdraw from participat ion at any time without penalty. Psychological 
risks of experienced invasion of privacy or increased awareness or concern about one’s behavior as 
a resu lt of completing the survey s and potential loss of confidentiality will be addressed as a risk in 
the co nsent documents. Participants are encouraged to contact [CONTACT_840802]. Participants who express interest in seeking help for 
substance -related problems or for psychological distress will be offered re ferral information  and will 
be emailed a copy of the Resource List (see Resource List Email). Participants will not be restricted 
from seeking other alcohol , substance use,  or mental health education, prevention, or treatment 
opportunities, and we will ass ess for use of other services at each assessment.  
We do not ask any survey items that assess suicide, child abuse, or child neglect, so we would have no 
data related to these topi[INVESTIGATOR_840747]. However, if a participant discloses this information we will report it 
to the appropriate official/agency  according to [LOCATION_007] State Law . 
 
We have taken steps to protect participants against potential risks posed by [CONTACT_220876]. Participants will be fully informed of the range of items and the most sensitive and personal 
items in the consent forms  including alcohol and marijuana use , and will be informed that they are free 
not to answer any question they wish not to answer, and can refuse to participate or withdraw from 
participation at any time without penalty. Psychological risks of experienced invasion of privacy or 
increased awareness or concern about one’s behavior as a result of completing the survey s and 
potential loss of confidentiality will be addressed as a risk in the consent documents. In order to protect 
against risks posed by a potential loss of confidentiality, we will take the following steps: First, all data will 
be identified only by a uniq ue identifier , which will be randomly generated for study purposes. These 
unique identi fiers will be embedded in individual survey links such that they do not need to be entered by 
[CONTACT_840803]. Identifiable information entered online (such as contact 
[CONTACT_3031]) will be downloaded and stored separately from participants’ responses, but will be identified 
by [CONTACT_13160] . A master list of names and unique identifier s will be stored in a password -
protected database, on a password -protected computer with restricted access, and will be available only 
to senior research staff and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_32729].  All members of the research team have received or will 
receive training that includes emphasis upon the importance of confidentiality of information, and all 
personnel on the project (including research assistants and study staff) will complete the required N IH 
training in protection of human research participants. All staff will sign confidentiality statements. Third, to 
maintain confidentiality of data submitted over the internet, participants will be required to  log into a 
secure and HIPAA compliant servers using their unique identifier created for study purposes. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_840748]. Fourth, NIH issues  a federal 
Certificate of Confidentiality through the Department of Health and Human Services. This certificate 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168244] for identifying and referring individuals who report significantly worsening alcohol use 
trajectories as well as consumption of potentially lethal doses of alcohol (BAC's above .35) and potential 
for alcohol use disorder as measured on the AUDIT. Specifically, the baseline , 1-month , and 6 -month  
surveys will be screened immediately upon submission  for indication of significant risk based on criteria 
established in our prior trials of this nature and the research literature (i.e., a score of 8 or more (age 18 -
25)/a score of 4 or more (age 15 -17) on the AUDIT on baseline ,1-month, or [ADDRESS_1168245] month exceeding .35%; Chung et al., 2000; 2002). The AUDIT total 
score is used to assess the risk of alcohol use disorder. A score of 8 or more is suggested for identifying 
hazardous drinking behaviors among adults, and a score of 4 or more is suggested for identifying 
hazardous drinking behaviors among adolescents as young as 13.  Thus,  both outcomes (8+AUDIT and 
4+AUDIT, respectively) will be used to assess hazardous alcohol use for referral in combination of .35% 
BAC. Participants who meet this criterion will be emailed local referral information. All such contact [CONTACT_840804]. In our ongoing trials, we have used this procedure without incident. 
Information regarding the potential for a follow -up contact [CONTACT_840805]. Participants are also informed in the Informed 
Consent that they are free to seek other services for their alcohol use. This structure is c urrently in place 
and approved at both the local and federal level on all our existing drinking and health -risk behavior 
studies. All participants (parents and teens), at the end of participation, will be provided with 
referral resources available both locally and nationally . 
 
If an adolescent in the study reports significantly worsening alcohol use trajectories or consuming 
potentially lethal doses alcohol, their parents will not be informed about this report due to confidentiality.  
 
See Referral Information Email in Appendices.  
 
Participants are encouraged to contact [CONTACT_220877]. Participants who express interest in seeking help for substance -related problems or for 
psychological distress will be offered referral informatio n. Participants will not be restricted from seeking 
other alcohol , substance use (i.e., marijuana)  or mental health education, prevention, or treatment 
opportunities . 
 
 
H.  Payment/Compensation  - Describe any financial payments for subject participation (e.g. compensation 
for time and travel). Indicate any partial payment schedule for less than complete study participation. 
Recall that payments cannot be perceived as coercive (ove rpayment for time and effort). Remember: 
payments are NOT benefits.  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168246] that will be loaded with $ [ADDRESS_1168247]. 
If a parti cipant does not call/email  confirming they have received their Greenphire Mastercard within [ADDRESS_1168248] to get a cash advance at a bank.  
 
 
Compensation Schedule:  
 
Online screening survey : 5-10 minutes, no incentive  
Online  baseline survey :  45 minutes, $ [ADDRESS_1168249]  
Online 1 -month follow -up survey: 45 minutes, $[ADDRESS_1168250]  
Online 6-month follow -up survey: 45 minutes, $ [ADDRESS_1168251]  
 
 
Total Possible Over the Course of Study: $ [ADDRESS_1168252] will include the Principal Investigator, Co -Investigators, collabora ting investigators, study coordinators, 
etc.  
Name & Degree:  Dana M. Litt, Ph.D.  
Department:  Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at the University of North 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
Role:  Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_18706]:  [CONTACT_840817] will dedicate will be responsible for the overall scientific direction of the research, 
including design and development of protocols, assessments, materials, participant recruitment and retention, 
intervention development, and human subject compl iance. She will also take a key role in the data analysis and 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January [ADDRESS_1168253] be completed efficiently and on time.  
 
Name & Degree:  Melissa  A. Lewis, PhD  
Department:  Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at the University of North 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
Role:  Co-Investigator  
Responsibilities:  [CONTACT_371150] will assist [CONTACT_840817] in the development of the retention procedures, procedures for 
assessment reminders, development and implementation of participant tracking protocols; and intervention 
development and refinement. [CONTACT_371150] will work with [CONTACT_840817] in conducting data analyses and dissemination 
efforts.  
 
 
 
Name & Degree:  Allison Cross , MS 
Department:  Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at the University of North 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
Role:  Graduate Student  
Responsibilities:  Allison Cross will assist the Research Assistant as needed in the coordination of project 
tasks, scheduling of team meetings with investigators, monitoring participant email and phone communications, 
participating in meetings with study investigators, and coordination of recruitment materials. She will also assist 
the Research Assistant  in preparation, review, and modification of human subjects forms and scripts; 
preparation of materials to be mailed to participants; and subject payments. This individual will assist with the 
preparation of timely status reports and updates for the invest igators. In addition, she will assist in dissemination 
of research findings through assistance with manuscript preparation.  
 
Name & Degree:  Haleigh Hicks , BS 
Department:  Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at the University of North 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
Role:  Research Assistant  
Responsibilities:  The Research Assistant will coordinate project tasks with [CONTACT_840817] and [CONTACT_371150], coordinate 
scheduling of team meetings with investigators, monitor participant email and phone communications, 
participate in meetings with study investigators, work with Dr . Litt in coordination of recruitment materials, and 
being the primary contact [CONTACT_565840]. She will manage the secure database that records participant 
information not kept with the data files (e.g., contact [CONTACT_840806]), as well as program the 
initial screening. The Research Assistant will also be responsible for assisting in preparation, review, and 
modification of human subjects forms and scripts; preparation of materials to be mailed to participants; and 
subject  payments. This individual will assist with the preparation of timely status reports and updates for the 
investigators. In addition, the Research Assistant will assist in dissemination of research findings through 
assistance with manuscript preparation  
 
 
Name & Degree:  Katherine Vrotsos, MS  
Department:  Health Behavior and Health Systems in the School of Public Health at the University of North 
[LOCATION_007] Health Science Center  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 27 of 31 Role:  Graduate Student  
Responsibilities:  Katherine Vrotsos  will assist the Research Assistant as needed in the coordination of project 
tasks, scheduling of team meetings with investigators, monitoring participant email and phone communications, 
participating in meetings with study investigators, and coordination of recruitment materials. She will also assist 
the Research Assistant in preparation, review, and modification of human subjects forms and scripts; 
preparation of materials to be mailed to participants; and subject paymen ts. This individual will assist with the 
preparation of timely status reports and updates for the investigators. In addition, she will assist in dissemination 
of research findings through assistance with manuscript preparation.  
*Please note that although [CONTACT_346224] appears on the “About Us” section of the  Project PRISM 
intervention  website, he is not listed as key personnel on this project.  [CONTACT_220880] appears on the website as a 
professional courtesy given that his research on parent -based intervention s served as the basis of the present 
study. [CONTACT_220880] will not communicate  with participants in any way nor will he have access to participant data or 
files. [CONTACT_220880] will not be involved in any aspects of project coor dination.  As such, he is not listed as a key 
personnel on this project.  
 
 
K.  Literature Cited  – If any, the references should be limited to relevant and current literature pertinent to 
the proposed research.  
 
 
Ajzen, I. (2006). Constructing a TPB questionnaire: Conceptual and methodological consideration. Retrieved 
from http://people.umass.edu/aizen/pdf/tpb.measurement.pdf  
Babor, T. F., Higgins -Biddle, J. C., Saunders, J. B., Monteiro, M. G. (2001). AUDIT - The alcohol use disorders 
identification test: guidelines for use in primary care  (Research Report No. (WHO/MSD/MSB/01.6a). 
Retrieved from: World Health Organization website: 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2001/WHO_MSD_MSB_01.6a.pdf  
Baer, J. S., Stacy, A., & Larimer, M. (1991). Biases in the perception of drinking norms among college students. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 52,  580-586. 
Branstetter, S. A., & Furman, W. (2013). Buffering effect of parental monitoring knowledge and parent -
adolescent relationships on consequences of adolescent substance use.  Journal of Child and Family 
Studies, 22 (2), 192 –198. doi:10.1007/s10826 -012-9568 -2 
Brown, S. A., Myers, M. G., Lippke, L., Tapert, S. F., Stewart, D. G., & Vik, P. W. (1998). Psychometric 
evaluation of the Customary Drinking and Drug Use Record (CDDR): A measure of adolescent alcohol 
and drug involvement. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs , 59, 427.  
Buchanan, C.M., Maccoby, E.E., Dornbusch, S.M. (1991). Caught between parents: Adolescents’ experience in 
divorced homes. Child Development , 62, 1008 –1029. doi:10.2307/1131149 .  
Cavazos -Rehg, P. A., Krauss, M. J., Sowles, S. J., & Bierut, L. J. (2015). “Hey everyone, I’m drunk.” An 
evaluation of drinking -related Twitter chatter. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 76 , 635 -643. 
doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/jsad.2015.76.635 PMCID: PMC4495081  
Cella, D., Riley, W., Stone, A., Rothrock, N., Reeve, B., Yount, S., ... & Cook, K. (2010). The patient -reported 
outcomes measurement information system (PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -
reported health outcome item banks: 2005 –2008. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] , 63(11), 1179 -1194.  
Collins, R. L., Parks, G. A., & Marlatt, G. A. (1985). Social determinants of alcohol consumption: The effects of 
social interaction and model status on the self -administration of alcohol. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 53,  189-200. doi:10.1037/0022 -006X.53.2.189  
Currie, C. N. G. S., Roberts, C., Morgan, A., Smith, R., Settertobulte, W., Samdal, O., & Barnekow, V. (2012). 
Health policy for children and adolescents. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe, 252 . 
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 28 of 31 Daeppen, J. B., Yersin, B., Landry, U., Pécoud, A., & Decrey, H. (2000). Reliability and validity of the Alcohol 
Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) imbedded within a general health risk screening questionnaire: 
Results of a survey in 332 primary car e patients. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 24 , 
659-65. 
Dimeff, L. A., McDavid, J., & Linehan, M. M. (1999). Pharmacotherapy for borderline personality disorder: A 
review of the literature and recommendations for treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical 
Settings , 6, 113 -138. doi:10.1023/A:1026259431809  
Doumas, D. M., Turrisi, R., Ray, A. E., Esp, S. M., & Curtis -Schaeffer, A. K. (2013). A randomized trial 
evaluating a parent based intervention to reduce college drinking. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment, 45 (1), 31 -37. doi: 10.1016/j.jsat.2012.12.008  
Duncan, L. G., Coatsworth, J. D., & Greenberg, M. T. (2009). A model of mindful parenting: Implications for 
parent –child relationships and prevention research.  Clinical child and family psychology review , 12(3), 
255-270. 
Fournier, A. K., Hall, E., Ricke, P., & Storey, B. (2013). Alcohol and the social network: Online social networking 
sites and college students' perceived drinking norms.  Psychology of Popular Media Culture , 2(2), 86.  
Gerrard, M., Gibbons, F. X., Brody, G. H., Murry, V. M., Cleveland, M. J., & Wills, T. A. (2006). A theory -based 
dual-focus alcohol intervention for preadolescents: The Strong African American Families program. 
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors , 20, 185 -195 doi: 10.1037/[ADDRESS_1168254], M., Gibbons, F. X., Gano, M. L., & Vande Lune, L. S. (2005). Images of smokers and willingness to 
smoke among African American pre -adolescents: An application of the prototype/willingness model of 
adolescent health risk behavior to smoking initiat ion. Pediatric Psychology, 30, 305-318. 
Gerrard, M., Gibbons, F. X., Houlihan, A. E., Stock, M. L., & Pomery, E. A. (2008). A dual -process approach to 
health risk decision making: The Prototype Willingness Model. Developmental Review , 28, 29-61. 
doi:10.1016/j.dr.2007.10.[ADDRESS_1168255], M., Gibbons, F. X., Reis -Bergan, M., Trudeau, L., Vande Lune, L. S., & Buunk, B. (2002). Inhibitory 
effects of drinker and nondrinker prototypes on adolescent alcohol consumption. Health Psychology, 21 , 
601-609. doi:10.1037/0278 -6133.21.6.601  
Harpin, S. B., Brooks -Russell, A., Ma, M., James, K. A., & Levinson, A. H. (2018). Adolescent marijuana use and 
perceived ease of access before and after recreational marijuana implementation in 
Colorado.  Substance Use & Misuse , 53(3), 451 –456. doi:10.1080/10826084.2017.1334069  
Ichiyama, M. A., Fairlie, A. M., Wood, M. D., Turrisi, R., Francis, D. P., Ray, A. E., & Stanger, L. A. (2009). A 
randomized trial of a parent -based intervention on drinking behavior among incoming college freshmen. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, Supplement, 16 , 67-76. PMCID: PMC2701098  
Jaccard, J., & Levitz, N. (2013). Parent -based interventions to reduce adolescent problem behaviors: New 
directions for self-regulation approaches In G. Oettingen & P. Gollwitzer.  Self-regulation in adolescence , 
357-388. 
Jiow, H. J., Lim, S. S., & Lin, J. (2016). Level up! refreshing parental mediation theory for our digital media 
landscape. Communication Theory, 27 (3), 309 –328. https://doi.org/10.1111/comt.[ZIP_CODE]  
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg , J. E. (2012). Monitoring the Future national 
results on adolescent drug use: Overview of key findings, 2011. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research, 
The University of Michigan.  
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E. (2011). Monitoring the Future national 
results on adolescent drug use: Overview of key findings, 2010. Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research, 
The University of Michigan.  
Johnston, L. D., O’Malley, P. M., Miech, R. A., Bachman, J. G., & Schulenberg, J. E. (2014). Monitoring the 
Future national results on drug use: 1975 -2013: Overview, key findings on adolescent drug use.  Ann 
Arbor: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan.  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 29 of 31 Kuntsche, E., Kuendig, H., & Gmel, G. (2008). Alcohol outlet density, perceived availability and adolescent 
alcohol use: A multilevel structural equation model. Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_68789] , 62, 
811-816. doi:10.1136/jech.2007.065367  
Kuntsche, S., & Kuntsche, E. (2016). Parent -based interventions for preventing or reducing adolescent 
substance use —A systematic literature review. Clinical Psychology Review, 45 , 89-101. doi: 
10.1016/j.cpr.2016.02.004  
LaBrie, J. W., Hummer, J. F., Lac, A., & Lee, C. M. (2010). Direct and indirect effects of injunctive norms on 
marijuana use: The role of reference groups. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs , 71, 904 -908. 
PMCID: PMC2965299  
Lenhart, A., Duggan, M., Perrin, A., Stepler, R., Rainie, L., & Parker, K. (2015). Teens, social media & 
technology overview 2015. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center.   
Lewis, M. A., & Neighbors, C. (2004). Gender -specific misperceptions of college student drinking norms. 
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 18 , 334 -339. doi:10.1037/0893164X.18.4.334  
Lewis, M. A., Atkins, D. C., Blayney, J. A., Dent, D. V., & Kaysen, D. L. (2013). What is hooking up? Examining 
definitions of hooking up in relation to behavior and normative perceptions. Journal of Sex Research, 50 , 
757-766. doi:10.1080/00224499.2012.706333 PMCID: PMC3546226  
Lewis, M. A., Neighbors, C., Geisner, I., Lee, C. M., Kilmer, J. R., & Atkins, D. C. (2010). Examining the 
associations among severity of injunctive drinking norms, alcohol consumption, and alcohol -related 
negative consequences: The moderating roles of alc ohol consumption and identity. Psychology of 
Addictive Behaviors , 24, 177 -189. doi:10.1037/a0018302  
Litt, D. M. & Lewis, M.A. (2015). Examining the role of abstainer prototype favorability as a mediator of the 
abstainer norms -drinking behavior relationship. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 29 , 467 -472. 
doi:10.1037/adb0000042 PMCID: PMC4451453  
Litt, D. M., & Stock, M. L. (2011). Adolescent alcohol -related risk cognitions: The roles of social norms and social 
networking sites. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors,  25(4), 708 -713. doi:10.1037/a0024226  
Litt, D. M., & Stock, M. L. (2011). Adolescent alcohol -related risk cognitions: The roles of social norms and social 
networking sites. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors , 25, 708 -713. doi:10.1037/a0024226  
Litt, D. M., Lewis, M. A., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2152], E. S., Aulck, L., Waldron, K. A., Head -Corliss, M. K., & Swanson, A. (2018). 
#drunktwitter: Examining the relations between alcohol -related Twitter content and alcohol willingness 
and use among underage young adults. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 193 , 75–82. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.08.021  
Livingstone, S., & Helsper, E. J. (2008). Parental mediation of children's internet use. Journal of broadcasting & 
electronic media, 52 (4), 581 -599. doi: 10.1080/08838150802437396  
Martino, S. C., Kovalchik, S. A., Collins, R. L., Becker, K. M., Shadel, W. G., & D'Amico, E. J. (2016). Ecological 
momentary assessment of the association between exposure to alcohol advertising and early 
adolescents' beliefs about alcohol. Journal of Adolescent Health, 58 , 85-91. 
doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2015.08.010 PMCID: PMC4695253  
McCambridge, J., & Kypri, K. (2011). Can simply answering research questions change behaviour? Systematic 
Review and meta analyses of brief alcohol intervention trials. PLoS ONE, 6 (10). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0023748  
Miles, L. M., Rodrigues, A. M., Sniehotta, F. F., & French, D. P. (2020). Asking questions changes health -related 
behavior: an updated systematic review and meta -analysis.  Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] , 123, 59-68. 
Miller, W. R., & Marlatt, G. A. (1984). Manual for the comprehensive drinker profile . Psychological Assessment 
Resources.  
Moreno, M. A., Briner, L. R., Williams, A., Walker, L., & Christakis, D. A. (2009). Real use or “real cool”: 
adolescents speak out about displayed alcohol references on social networking websites.  Journal of 
adolescent health , 45(4), 420 -422. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.04.015  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 30 of 31 Moreno, M. A., Christaki, D. A., Egan, K. G., Brockman, L. N., & Becker, T. (2012). Associations between 
displayed alcohol references on Facebook and problem drinking among college students. Archives of 
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 166 , 157 -163. doi:10.1001/archpediatrics.2011.180  
Moreno, M. A., Parks, M., & Richardson, L. P. (2007). What are adolescents showing the world about their 
health risk behaviors on MySpace?.  Medscape General Medicine , 9(4), 9. PMCID: PMC2234280  
National Association for Media Literacy Education. (2007). Core principles of media literacy education in the 
[LOCATION_002].  
Neighbors, C., Geisner, I. M., & Lee, C. M. (2008). Perceived marijuana norms and social expectancies among 
entering college student marijuana users. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 22 (3), 433 -438. 
doi:10.1037/0893 -164x.22.3.433. PMID: 15000973.  
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis methods 
(2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.. Retrieved from 
http://www.unt.edu/rss/class/Jon/MiscDocs/Raudenbush_1993.pdf  
Read, J. P., Kahler, C. W., Strong, D. R., & Colder, C. R. (2006). Development and preliminary validation of the 
Young Adult Alcohol Consequences Questionnaire. Journal of Studies on Alcohol , 67, 169 -177.  
Read, J. P., Merrill, J. E., Kahler, C. W., & Strong, D. R. (2007). Predicting functional outcomes among college 
drinkers: Reliability and predictive validity of the Young Adult Alcohol Consequences Questionnaire . 
Addictive Behaviors, 32 , 2597 -2610.  
Schafer, J., & Brown, S. A. (1991). Marijuana and cocaine effect expectancies and drug use patterns. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 59, 558 -565. doi:10.1037/0022 -006X.59.4.558  
Smetana, J. G., Metzger, A., Gettman, D. C., & Campi[CONTACT_31806] ‐Barr, N. (2006). Disclosure and secrecy in 
adolescent –parent relationships.  Child development , 77(1), 201 -217. 
Steinberg, L. (2001). We know some things: Parent –adolescent relationships in retrospect and prospect. Journal 
of Research on Adolescence, 11 (1), 1 -19. doi: 10.1111/1532 -7795.[ZIP_CODE]  
Steinberg, L. (2002). Clinical adolescent psychology: What it is, and what it needs to be. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 70 (1), 124. doi: 10.1037/0022 -006X.70.1.124  
Testa, M., Hoffman, J. H., Livingston, J. A., & Turrisi, R. (2010). Preventing college women’s sexual victimization 
through parent based intervention: A randomized controlled trial.  Prevention Science , 11(3), 308 -318. 
doi: 10.1007/s11121 -010-0168 -3 
Todd, J., & Mullan, B. (2011). Using the theory of planned behaviour and prototype willingness model to target 
binge drinking in female undergraduate university students. Addictive Behaviors, 36 , 980 -986. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2011.05.010  
Turrisi, R., Abar, C., Mallett, K.A., & Jaccard, J. (2010). An examination of the mediational effects of cognitive 
and attitudinal factors of a parent intervention to reduce college drinking. Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 40 , 2500 -2526. doi:10.1111/j.1559 -1816.2010.[ZIP_CODE].x PMCID: PMC3035912  
Turrisi, R., Jaccard, J., Taki, R., Dunnam, H., & Grimes, J. (2001). Examination of the short -term efficacy of a 
parent intervention to reduce college student drinking tendencies . Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 
15(4), 366. doi: 10.1037/0893 -164X.15.4.366  
Turrisi, R., Mallett, K. A., Cleveland, M. J., Varvil -Weld, L., Abar, C., Scaglione, N. & Hultgren, B. (2013). 
Evaluation of timing and dosage of a parent based intervention to minimize college students’ alcohol 
consumption. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 74 , 30-40. doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/jsad.2013.74.30 PMCID: 
PMC3517262  
Turrisi, R., Padilla, K. K., & Wiersma, K. A. (2000). College student drinking: An examination of theoretical 
models of drinking tendencies in freshmen and upperclassmen. Journal Studies of Alcohol, 61 , 598 -602. 
doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/jsa.2000.61.598  
 
 
IRB Protoc ol Synopsis Format Instructions rev. January 2018                                             Page 31 of 31 Unger, J. B., Schuster, D., Zogg, J., Dent, C. W., & Stacy, A. W. (2003). Alcohol advertising exposure and 
adolescent alcohol use: A comparison of exposure measures. Addiction Research & Theory, 11 , 177 -
913. doi:10.1080/1606635031000123292  
Walters, S. T., Vader, A. M., Harris, T. R., & Jouriles, E. N. (2009). Reactivity to alcohol assessment measures: 
an experimental test.  Addiction,  104(8), 1305 -1310.  
Wood, C., Conner, M., Miles, E., Sandberg, T., Taylor, N., Godin, G., & Sheeran, P. (2016). The impact of 
asking intention or self -prediction questions on subsequent behavior: a meta -analysis.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Review , 20(3), 245 -268. 
Wood, M. D., Read, J. P., Mitchell, R. E., & Brand, N. H. (2004). Do parents still matter? Parent and peer 
influences on alcohol involvement among recent high school graduates. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 18 , 19-30. doi:10.1037/0893 -164X.18.1.19  
 
 
 
Attachments (in this order):  
 
I.  Consent Form  - THE CONSENT FORM IS TO BE A SEPARATE DOCUMENT. It is important that this form 
follows the IRB -prescribed format and includes all the required elements and certain other elements when 
appropriate.  
II. Recruitment Materials  (ads, flyers, emails, etc.) to be used in this Study  
III. Study Documents  (questionnaires, survey instruments, clinical trial protocol, investigator’s brochure, etc.)  
IV. Evidence of Human Subject Training for ALL Key Personnel listed in the protocol.  
V. Conflict of Interest Form , completed and signed by [CONTACT_840807].  
 