 
 
Non -Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
December 16, [ADDRESS_878380] of non -invasive transcranial 
alternating current stimulation (tACS) on distress tolerance and inhibitory control  in individuals 
with substance use disorder.  
Method Following screening, eligible participants will engage in two sessions. The primary 
outcomes, i nhibitory control and distress tolerance,  will be administered  at each assess ment 
session . During the first session, participants will complete both tasks while receiving the active 
sham tACS. During the second session, participants will complete both tasks and receive one of 
three tACS conditions based on a randomization procedure : (1) 10 Hz, (2) 40 Hz, or (3) active 
sham. Participants will also provide sociodemographic and mood information via self -report 
forms and interviews with research staff. Participants will be compensated at the end of the 
second session and debriefed at the end of all study data collection.  
Population Participants will be patients with current substance use disorder, aged [ADDRESS_878381] a total of 4 contacts: (1)  screening and the 
first session (approximately 1.5  hours), (2) a reminder call between the first and second session 
(approximately 5 minutes) , (3) the second session (approximately 1.5  hours), and the debriefing 
at the completion of all data collection (approximately 15 minutes).   We estimate that total 
participation to be approximately 3  hours  and 20 minutes . 
Descri ption Transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) may be a particularly promising 
approach as it is a safe and non- invasive method of electric stimulation that has the potential to 
effectively modulate neural network and circuit dynamics,  closely aligning with a network -based 
conceptualization of affective and cognitive processes, such as distress tolerance and inhibitory 
control . Furthermore, tACS allows for targeted stimulation with the potential to modulate specific 
frequencies of endogenous cortical oscillations at the administered frequency of stimulation 
(Hermann et al., 2013). More specifically, this more targeted approach allows for direct 
enhancement of selective cognitive functions. We will be usin g an active sham, [ADDRESS_878382].    
Schematic of Study Design  
Table 1. P articipants will be randomized into one of three of the following groups : 
2 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
Group 1  Active Sham  
Group 2  10 Hz tACS  
Group 3  40 Hz tACS  
Research Staff             
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_654494], Ph.D.  
UNC - Chapel Hill,  Department of Psychology & 
Neuroscience 
Email: [EMAIL_12467] 
Office: 247 Davie Hall  
Phone: (919) 962 -9924  
Co – Investigators  Regina Carelli, Ph.D.  
UNC - Chapel Hill Department of Psychology & 
Neuroscience 
Email:  [EMAIL_12468] 
Office:  115 Davie Hall  
Phone:  (919) 962- 8775  
 
Flavio Frolich, Ph.D.  
UNC – Chapel Hill, UNC School of Medicine, Department 
of Psychiatry  
Email: [EMAIL_1219]  
Office: 4109F Neuroscience Research Building 
Phone: (919) 966- [ADDRESS_878383] Manager &   
Study Coordinator  Jennifer Yi  
Post-Doctoral Fellows  Ryan Bell, Ph.D.  
Deepi[INVESTIGATOR_654495], Ph.D.  
Travis Moschak, Ph.D.  
Research Assistants  Rachel Haake  
Elizabeth Reese 
Yun Chen Kimberley Johnson  
Sydney Baker  
Rachel Phillips  John Thorp  
Katie McKay  
Savita Madan  
 
  
3 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
STUDY DESIGN              2  
The design of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_9962] a randomized, sha m-controlled, single -site study, which will be 
used to ideally demonstrate the feasibility administering tACS and to investigate the effects of 
tACS on distress tolerance  and inhibitory control  (Primary Outcomes) among treatment -seeking 
individuals with substance use disorder. Participants will be assigned to a block based on their age: (1) 18- 25 years old, (2) 25 -35 years old, (3) 35- 45 years old, and (4) 45- 55 years old. 
Within each block, participants will be randomized to one of three groups: (1) tACS at 10 Hz, (2) tACS at 40 Hz, or (3) active sham stimulation. This randomization will be done by [CONTACT_654500]. We hypothesi ze that individuals who receive 10 Hz tACS  
will demonstrate a significantly greater increase in distress tolerance compared to individuals 
who receive the active sham condition and the 40 Hz tACS condition.  
Research staff will recruit individuals at the Ga rner location of the SouthLight Treatment Center 
in Raleigh, NC by [CONTACT_654501] (SAIOP) groups. Eligible participants will be screened using the Word 
Reading Subtest of the Wide Range Achievement Test (WRAT) , Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine 
Dependence,  and the Alcohol Use Disorder, Substance Use Disorder , and Psychotic  Disorder  
Modules of the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) 7.0, which will both be administered in an interview format. Eligibility based on the study's inclusion and exclusion will 
be recorded on the Screening Form. Potential participants who do not meet criteria for the study 
will be informed of this decision and thanked for their time. Eligible patients who are willing to 
participate, provide informed consent, and sign the HIPAA Authorization Form and the UNC 
Release of Information Form will continue to the procedure of the first session.  
Participants will receive compensation upon the completion of their second session. If the 
individual withdraws from the study before completing the second session, they will not be compensated. This informati on will be clearly delineated verbally during the informed consent 
procedure and in written form in the consent form. Participants will be compensated with $[ADDRESS_878384] meet all of the following 
criteria:  
o Ages 18- 55  
o Current DSM -V Substance Use Disorder, diagnosed by [CONTACT_417671] (MINI) 7.[ADDRESS_878385] for Nicotine Dependence (FTND)  
o Abstinent from all substances  (except nicotine)  for at least the past 2 weeks  
o Verbal & written informed consent (signed & dated)  
Participant Exclusion Crit eria         3.2 
A potential participant who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded from participation in this study:  
o < 6 months since an electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) session  
o Current DSM -V Psychotic Disorder, diagnosed by [CONTACT_223151] (MINI) 7.[ADDRESS_878386] (WRAT) Word Reading Subtest  
o Non-Englis h speaker  
o Pregnancy and/or nursing  
o Prior brain surgery  
o Ongoing or history of traumatic brain injury (TBI), reoccurring seizures, stroke, or brain 
tumors  
o Medical or neurological illness (e.g., cardiac disease, AIDS, liver or renal impairment), or 
treatm ent for such an illness that could interfere with study participation  
o Any brain devices or implants (e.g., cochlear implants, aneurysm clips)  
o Current use of antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_006]  
o Current use of benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_654496]          3.[ADDRESS_878387] 
current stimulation (tDCS) or transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) studies. Thus, if at any time a female participant is found to be pregnant (by [CONTACT_654502] a positive 
pregnancy test) . she will be excluded from the study.  
Reasons for Withdrawal          3.4 
5 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
We will not withdraw participants from the study unless they fulfill one of the following criteria:  
o Voluntarily refuse continued participation in the study  
o Demonstrate an inability to comply with study procedures where collected data is found 
to be unreliable, misconstrued, or fabricated  
o Reveal information that they did not reveal during the screening procedure that prevents 
them from participating (e.g., personal or family history of a neurological condition, 
current use of an antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_32551], pregnancy).  
o Experience serious adverse side effects (e.g., seizure)  
o Fail to attend the  second session  
o Are asked to leave SouthLight by [CONTACT_654503]. In these cases, participants may no longer be eligible for particip ation in the 
study, even if they have already been screened and consented.  
Referral Procedure           3.5 
In the event that participants are found to be in need of medical attention or psychological counseling, senior research staff will determine necessary routes of treatment and care and 
refer participants to appropriate medical and psychological services. In addition, research staff 
will inform SouthLight health care professionals (e.g., medical doctors, nurses, psychologists, counselors) in the case that immediate medical attention or psychological counseling is deemed 
necessary.  
Termination of Study            3.6 
This study may be prematurely terminated if, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], there is sufficient 
reasonable cause.  Circumstances that may warrant termination include, but are not limited to:  
o Experience of a recruitment rate of < 20% of approached patients at SouthLight (who 
would otherwise qualify for our study) ; we will cease recruitment due to limitations 
surrounding generalizability.  
o An event during which a participant experiences a seizure during an assessment, a temporary hold will be placed over the study and further investigation will be pursued. 
Based on investigational findings, the study may be stopped prematurely or may be 
continued with further safety measures in place. If more than one participant 
experiences a seizure during his/her assessment, the study will be stopped prematurely. 
These individuals will be referred for further medical attention.  
The IRB will be informed pro mptly and provided the reason(s) for the termination or suspension 
by [CONTACT_171372]/institution, as specified by [CONTACT_3605](s).  
  
6 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
STUDY SCHEDULE          4 
Recruitment            4.1 
Research staff will recruit individuals at the Garner location of the SouthLight Treatment Center 
in Raleigh, NC by [CONTACT_654501] (SAIOP) groups. Research staff will introduce themselves as members of 
the UNC research team and provide brief information about the research that they are 
conducting in order to learn more about addiction. This brief information will include an overview 
of the study procedures including two research ses sions and the potential to review non-
invasive, safe brain stimulation while playing computer games, in addition to answering 
interview questions and filling out self -report questionnaires. Any interested individuals will be 
asked to stay after their group to discuss the date of the next screening session.  
Screening           4.[ADDRESS_878388] (WRAT) and the Alcohol Use Disorder and Substance Use Disorder Modules of the Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) 7.0, which will both be administered in an interview format. During the screening procedure, research staff will also ask potential participants about their age, most recent substance use, pregnancy/nursing status (females 
only), current medical conditions and medical history, current medications, and most recent 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) session. Eligibility based on the study's inclusion and exclusion will be recorded on the Screening Form. Potential participants who do not meet criteria for the 
study will be informed of this decision and thanked for their time. Eligible patients who are willing 
to participate, provide informed consent, and sign the HIPAA Authorization Form and the UNC 
Release of Information Form will continue to the procedure of the first sess ion. Administration of 
the screening procedure should take no longer than [ADDRESS_878389] will be provided a 
written referral to a SouthLight on- site physician that is a member of the participant's treatment 
team in order to obtain information on follow -up services, as well as a list of OBGYN referrals 
that will be prepared  with SouthLight staff before initiation of study recruitment  and enrollment 
procedures. Female participants that have a positive pregnancy test will also be informed of 
their withdrawal from study participation and thanked for their time and efforts. Part icipants who 
remain eligible for the study will complete a battery of self -report and interview measures with 
research staff, including the Contact [CONTACT_23094], Demographics Form, Use of Medications Form, 
Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II), Psychiatric Research 
7 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
Interview for Substance and Mental Disorders (PRISM) Timeline, Timeline Followback (TLFB), 
and the Timeline Followback (TLFB) Supplementary Form. After the participant completes these 
measures, the research staff will have t he participant sit in front of the computer and fill out the 
pre-tasks Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) and Brief Substance Craving Scale 
(BSCS). Next, the research staff will attach the physiological recording equipment and begin 
recording. T hen, the research staff will prepare the stimulator and the participant, including 
measuring the participant’s head for proper coordinate determination and applying the 
stimulation electrodes. Then the research staff will initiate the active sham stimulation. The 
participant will then engage in the Go/No- Go task, rate his/her level of distress on the Subjective 
Units of Distress Scale (SUDS.), and complete the distress tolerance (DT) task, the 
Computerized Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task (PASAT -C). Afte r the participant completes 
the DT task, the research staff will stop the stimulation and remove the physiological recording 
equipment, and the participant will complete the post -tasks PANAS, BSCS, PASAT -C 
Questionnaire, and the Post -Stimulation Questionnaire. Twenty minutes after the completion of 
the DT task, the research staff will assess the participant's level of distress by [CONTACT_654504] s/he is feeling again using the SUDS. If the participant provides 
a SUDS rating [ADDRESS_878390] the participant sit in front of the computer and fill out the pre -
tasks PANAS and BSCS. Next, the research staff will attach the physiological recording 
equipment and begin recording. Then, the research staff will prepare the stimulator and the 
participant, including measuring the participant’s head for proper coordinate determination and 
applying the stimulation electrodes. Then the research staff will initiate  the stimulation, based on 
the participant's randomization condition. The participant will then engage in the Go/No- Go task. 
After the participant completes the Go/No -Go task, the participant will rate his/her level of 
distress on the SUDS, and then completed the DT task. After the participant completes the DT -
task, the research staff will stop the stimulation and remove the physiological recording and 
tACS equipment, and the participant will complete the post -tasks PANAS, BSCS, PASAT 
Questionnaire, and the Post -Stimulation Questionnaire. Twenty  minutes after the completion of 
the PASAT, the research staff will assess the participant's level of distress by [CONTACT_654505] s/he is feeling again using the SUDS. If the participant provides 
a SUDS rating [ADDRESS_878391] the opportunity to 
8 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
ask questions and voice concerns, as well as withdraw their data, if they choose. After the 
debriefing procedure, participants will not be re -contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
  
9 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES & EVALUATIONS       5 
Clinical Evaluations           5.1 
Several clinical evaluations will be used throughout this study. These assessments are listed 
below.  
Beck Anxiety Inventory  (BAI; Beck et al., 1988) –  The BAI is a 21 -item self -report questionnaire 
that assesses the severity of anxiety. It has demonstrated high internal consistency ( α=.92), 
strong convergent validity with other clinical measures of anxiety (r=.25 -.51). The questionnaire 
will be administered at the first session and is estimated to take about 5 minutes to complete.  
Beck Depression Inventory -  II (BDI-II; Beck et al., 1996) –  The BDI -II is a [ADDRESS_878392] 7 days. It has demonstrated strong convergent validity with other measures of depression (r=.71) 
compared to measures of anxiety (r=.47). It has also demonstrated no association with 
demographic variables including  gender, ethnicity, and age. The questionnaire will be 
administered at the first session and is estimated to take about 5 minutes to complete.  
Brief Substance Craving Scale (BSCS; Somoza et al., 1995) - The BSCS is a [ADDRESS_878393] item ("The intensity of my craving, that is, how much I desired this substance in the past 24 hours was...") will be administered before and after completion of the PASAT. 
This item is assessed is a 5- point Likert scale (0=none at all, 1=slight, 2=moderate, 
3=considerable, 4=extreme). This item is estimated to take less than 1 minute to complete.  
Demographics Form  – This form will include basic demographic questions including age, sex, 
date of first day of last menstrual cycle (for females only), ethnicity/race, education level, employment status, occupation, and income. The questionnaire is estimated to take about [ADDRESS_878394] for N icotine Dependence (FTND; Heatherton et al., 1991) -  The FTND 
is a 6 -item self -report questionnaire that assesses the severity of nicotine dependence. 
The questionnaire will be administered during the screening procedure and is estimated 
to take 2- 3 minutes to complete.  
Go/No -Go Task  (as used in Bell et al., 2014) –  This version of the Go/No- Go consists of a 
series of neutral scenes from the International Affective Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2980] (IAPS) (Lang et al., 
1999). Participants view a serial stream of pi[INVESTIGATOR_654497] a 
button on the computer keyboard, but inhibit responses when pi[INVESTIGATOR_654498]. Accuracy (% correct non- occurrences/omissions) and mean response time will 
be recorded. This task will be used to asses s inhibitory control . The task will take approximately 
12 minutes to complete.  
MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview  (MINI; Sheehan et al., 1998) -  The MINI is 
a short, structured diagnostic interview. It will be administered during the screening 
10 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
procedure in order to assess for a current substance use disorder (Modules I and J) and 
psychotic disorder (Module K). The interview will take approximately 20 minutes to complete.
 
Computerized Paced Auditory Serial Addition Task  (PASAT -C; Lejuez et al., 2003) –  The 
computerized PASAT is a psychological distress -inducing task. Numbers are presented 
sequentially on a computer scr een and participants are asked to add the currently presented 
number to the previously presented number before the next number is presented. Participants 
select the answer using a computer mouse on a number pad displayed on the computer screen below the pr esented numbers. Presented numbers range from 0 to 20 with no sums greater 
than 20 in order to limit the role of mathematical skill. During the easy/titration phase (5 
minutes), an algorithm will automatically titrate the speed of the number presentations in order 
to account for some individual differences in cognitive capacity, but not to secure equal performance among individuals. During the hard phase (5 minutes), the individually titrated task 
speed will be maintained throughout. During the distress tol erance (DT) phase (up to 15 
minutes), the individually titrated task speed will be maintained throughout, but individuals will 
be told that they have the option to quit the task at any point. Incorrect or delayed responses are 
met with an aversive explosion sound. Participants will be told that their score, presented in the 
corner of the computer screen will increase by [ADDRESS_878395] answer. In addition, 
participants will be told that compensation for the task will be determined by [CONTACT_654506]. Accuracy (% correct and % omitted), mean inter -stimulus interval (ISI = ISImean -  
ISIbaseline), and latency to task termination (i.e., quit time) will be recorded. Participants will 
engage in this task at both sessions, always after the G o/No -Go task. The task will take 
between 10 and 25 minutes, depending on if and when a participant decides to quit the task 
during t he distress tolerance phase.  
PASAT Questionnaire  – This will be administered following administration of the DT task. The 
questionnaire is composed of 4 questions asking about the participant’s experience playing the 
computer game. The questionnaire is estimated to take about 2- [ADDRESS_878396] Scale (PANAS; Crawford & Henry, 2004) –  This is  a 20-item self -
report measure that assesses changes in positive (PA) and negative (NA) affect. PA assesses 
the extent to which an individual feels enthusiastic, alert, and active. NA assesses the extent to 
which an individual feels subjective distress and additional components of negative mood such 
as anger, contempt, disgust, and guilt. Individuals are asked to rate to what extent a they have 
felt a feeling/emotion (represented by [CONTACT_654507], e.g., hostile, guilty, interested) over a 
specified time inte rval (e.g., at the present moment, today, past few days, week, past few 
weeks, year, in general). In this study, participants will be asked to rate based on how they feel 
at the present moment. The PANAS has demonstrated good internal consistency for both the PA (α=.89) and NA ( α=.85) scales (Watson et al., 1988). This will be administered before and 
after each time a participant completes the PASAT. The questionnaire is estimated to take 
about 2 -3 minutes to complete.  
Psychiatric Research Interview for Substance and Mental Disorders  (PRISM) Timeline (Hasin et 
al., 1996; 1998; 2001; 2006) - This is a structured clinical interview that assesses a wide range 
11 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
of psychiatric disorders. For the purposes of our study, we will be using the Substance 
Screening Subs cale timeline to assess previous periods of chronic intoxication and binge use of 
various substances. This is estimated to take about 5 -20 minutes, depending on the 
particip ant's substance use history.  
Subjective Units of Distress Scale (SUDS; Wolpe, 1969 ) - The SUDS is a scale to measure an 
individual's self -reported distress from 0 to 100, with higher ratings indicating higher levels of 
distress. It will be used administered to assess participants' residual level of distress at the 
completion of the test ing session. It is estimated to take less  than 1 minute to complete.  
Timeline Followback  (TLFB; Sobell  et al., 1979) –  The TLFB is a clinician administered measure 
of substance use. It has demonstrated high test -retest reliability (ICC=.70 -.94, p<.001), 
convergent and discriminant validity with other measures, agreement with collateral informants’ 
reports of patients’ substance use, and agreement with the results form patients’ urine analysis 
(Fals -Sterwart et al., 2000). The measure is estimated to take about 10 minutes to complete.  
Timeline Followback (TLFB) Supplementary Form  – This form provides a summary of an 
individual's most recent substance use, as well as the amount, duration, and frequency. This 
form is estimated to take about 5- [ADDRESS_878397] Revised (WRAT- R) Word Reading Subtest  (Jastak &  Wilkinson, 
1984) – This assesses an individual’s ability to read and comprehend words. In particular for 
this study, this will be used during the screening procedure to assess an individual’s reading 
level prior to providing consent in order to determine if an individual can read at a fifth grade 
level. This is necessary for an individual to be able to comprehend and participate in the written 
proportions of the study. The assessment is estimated to take about 10 minutes to complete.  
Equipment & Forms           5.2 
BIOPAC Data Acquisition System  (BIOPAC Systems, Inc., Goleta, CA) –  Autonomic arousal will 
be measured throughout both assessments from measures of galvanic skin response (GSR), 
heart rate (HR), and pulse using two wireless devices of the BIOPAC MP150 system (BIOPAC, 
2011). GSR will be recorded using the GSR wireless module, which will be wrapped comfortably 
around the participant's wrist and Ag/AgCl electrodes attached to the first and third fingers of the 
participant's non -dominant hand. HR and pulse will be recorded using the ECG wireless 
module, which will be wrapped around the participant's waist and secured to the chest using an 
adhesive, and recorded from electrodes attached to the participant’s upper chest and lower rib. 
GSR and HR will be recorded throughout the entire duration of both tasks (Go/No -Go and 
PASAT) at both sessions.  
Contact [CONTACT_23094]  – This form including the participant’s best phone numbers, addresses, and 
alternate contacts, will be used to improve study retention by [CONTACT_654508] 
12 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
participants throughout the duration of the study. It will be administered in an interview format 
and is estimated to take about 10 minutes.  
Debriefing Information Sheet  – Participants will be provided with appropriate and correct 
information  about their study participation and of particular note, of the minor deception involved 
in the study. Participants will also be given a chance to ask any questions about the study. 
Participants and experimenters will sign and date the information sheet to document the 
completion of the debriefing procedure.  
Drop Out Questionnaire – This questionnaire will document the reason for a participant’s (self -
initiated) withdrawal from the study. This questionnaire is estimated to take 2- 3 minutes to 
complete.  
Planned Relaxation Exercise – Participants will be led through a planned relaxation exercise if 
they report residual distress as indicated on the SUDS, using a pre- recorded audio file. The 
audio for the exercise is approximately [ADDRESS_878398]-Stimula tion Questionnaire - This questionnaire will be administered after the stimulation 
procedures at both sessions in order to assess (1) safety of the tACS, (2) participant 
experiences with the tACS, and (3) physical and psychological symptoms that participants may 
believe are associated with tACS. This data will be used to assess whether participants were 
successfully blinded during the course of the study. This questionnaire is estimated to take 
about 5 minutes to complete.  
Pregmate One Step Urine Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) Pregnancy Test  – Female 
participants will provide a urine sample for a pregnancy test at the beginning of the first session 
to confirm that they are not pregnant before undergoing the stimulation procedures. The urine 
pregnancy test will provide results after 5 minutes.  
Screening Form  – This form will be used to record a participant's eligibility status according to 
the study's inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
Transcranial Current Stimulator  (Pulvinar Neuro LLC, 2016) -  We will b e using a transcranial 
current stimulator developed, XCSITE 100, by [CONTACT_654509]. The device is not implanted and has not been designed for or being used to support or sustain human life. This device does not hav e a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, 
or welfare of the participant. There has never been an instance of serious side- effect reported 
due to use of transcranial brain stimulation. This device has been used in previous studies by [CONTACT_654510] h Lab and which have always been classified as “non- significant risk” by [CONTACT_654511]. This device is functionally equivalent to the CE -certified Neuroconn Plus stimulator. The 
use of this device in this study has previously received a NSR designation on initial review by [CONTACT_61598]. Both devices are electrically equivalent and provide the same stimulation. In addition, the stimulator has built in safety features. The device is equipped with [ADDRESS_878399]  the stimulant from high currents. (See Additional 
Device Information for more details.)  
Additional Device Information 
13 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
The device consists of the following main components/subsystems:  
1. Tablet with user interface application (App)  
2. Microprocessor  
3.  Function generator chip 
4. Voltage controlled current source  
5. Safety circuitry  
First, the stimulation parameters are specified by [CONTACT_226247].  The parameters 
are: 
1. Number of channels  
2. Alternating (AC) or Direct Current (DC)  
3. Verum or Active Sham Stimulation  
4. Amplitude in miliamperes  
a. [ADDRESS_878400] stimulation  
5. Stimulation frequency (ignored for direct current) in Hertz  
a. 10 or 40 Hz  
6. Stimulation duration in seconds  
7. Ramp Up duration in seconds  
8. Ramp Down duration in seconds  
9. Active Sham duration (ignored for verum stimulation) in seconds  
 
Next, the parameters are sent via Bluetooth™ to the microprocessor.  The microprocessor 
interprets these parameters if the parameters fall within the acceptable ranges the 
microprocessor returns them to the app for verification and programs the function generator chip 
accordingly.  Once started by [CONTACT_654512], the function generator 
then creates the programmed waveform, which is ultimately a voltage signal.  The voltage signal 
is applied to a voltage controlled current source, which generates the specified amount of 
current through an arbitrary load resistance.  
Operation  
A. The desired current value is scaled to a register value and stored in the function 
generator.  
B. The value in the register determines the percent of full scale output current, generated 
by [CONTACT_654513].  
C. The generated current waveform from the function generator is driven through a 
specified resistance.  The resulting voltage drop is amplified by [CONTACT_654514].  
D. The voltage waveform from the output of the instrumentation amplifier is applied to a 
voltage controlled current source.  
Current Sensor Circuit -  A 33.[ADDRESS_878401] the 
stimulant from high currents.  The stages are as follows:  
1. Software parameter validation. All stimulation parameters are checked to be within the 
allowable ranges for those parameters. If values outside of this range are entered the 
app will not allow stimulation to start.  
2. Automatic software current cutoff.  The output of the current sensor described above is 
read by a microprocessor, which compares the reading to a value of +/ - 2.[ADDRESS_878402].  Since 
high-side current sensing is used (described above), any short circuit of the electrode 
terminals to ground will be detected.  
3. Automatic hardware current cutoff.  The output of the current sensor is fed into a pair of 
comparators which detect if the current exceeds +/ - 4.5 mA.  If so, the fault is latched 
such that the relay in series with the electrodes is opened.  Additionally, the 
microprocessor is notified of this instance through an interrupt.  Upon this interrupt, the 
microprocessor immediately stops stimulation and the power supply used for stimulation is turned  off. 
15 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
 
Figure 1 : Example hardware cutoff function. At –  54 μs, the current sensor is raised 
artificially (blue). With a latency of 54 μs, the high voltage rails are turned off (purple). 
The stimulation output (green) is zeroed [ADDRESS_878403] -acting fuse is in series with the 
electrode connector.  If the above over -current detection methods fail, the fuse will blow, 
and the participant will no longer be electrically connected to the current generator.  
5. Power supply fuse.  Finally, if for any other reason the entire device draws too much 
current, the main power supply fuse is blown.  This fuse is rated for 400 mA which is 
approximately 200% of nominal operating current.  
 
Risk Monitoring            5.3 
Risk of discomfort or injury caused by [CONTACT_654515]. tACS has been successfully 
utilized without any reports of serious side effects, deeming tACS an extremely safe and non-
invasive approach to modulate neural  oscillations. tACS passes weak electric current through 
the scalp, which is routinely done using other methodologies such as electroencephalography 
(EEG). It is important to note that tACS does not use the same procedures/methods as electroconvulsive ther apy, that applies many orders of magnitude higher of stimulation current. 
tACS uses a weak electric current, such as it does not produce super -threshold activation of 
neurons (Frohlich & McCormick, 2010).  
There is a rare, theoretical likelihood that neural stimulation can lead to epi[INVESTIGATOR_219601]. 
Previous studies using tDCS in patients with depression and schizophrenia have reported no 
seizures (Berlim et al., 2013; Brunelin et al., 2012). In order to minimize this occurrence, we will 
exclude individuals with personal and family history of neurological conditions and individuals 
who are currently taking benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_654499]. For the same reason, we will also exclude individuals that have not been abstinent for m ore than [ADDRESS_878404] reported transient tingling underneath the 
electrodes on the scalp, including itching, headache, burning sensations, and minor discomfort. 
Howe ver, a recent meta- review has failed to find any significant differences in occurrence rates 
of these symptoms between tDCS and a sham control condition (Brunoni et al., 2011). In addition, rTMS has also proven to be well tolerated by [CONTACT_654516] 
(Gorelick et al., 2014). More specifically, in studies utilizing rTMS on individuals with substance use disorders, active and shame rTMS groups had comparable drop- out rates and no reports of 
serious or unexpected adverse events.  
Safet y Monitoring          5.4 
After each stimulation session (active sham and tACS), the Stimulation Adverse Effects 
Questionnaire will be administered. This will be used to document any side effects experienced 
during stimulation. In addition, throughout the stimulation sessions, the researcher will check with the participant to make certain that no discomfort or injury is felt or has occurred. In the 
case that a participant reports unmanageable discomfor t or pain, the stimulation session will be 
terminated im mediately.  
  
[ADDRESS_878405] study (to our knowledge) to administer tACS 
in a sample of substance users, we utilized effect size estimates from tACS studies with mainly 
healthy controls. Using G*Power 3.1, we conducted a power analysis with a conservative effect 
size of 0.[ADDRESS_878406] 
sizes between 0.3 and 0.5 (Chi et al, 2010; Kar & Kerkelberg, 2014)  
Data Management           6.2 
Interview and hardcopy questionnaires that cannot be computerized will be entered into Ex cel 
(password protected) and SPSS databases on a secure UNC server, only accessible to the 
research staff. Data will be coded with study ID numbers that can only be matched to a participant's name [INVESTIGATOR_67078] a database stored in a separate, secure location on the  server, only 
accessible to the researcher staff using a password. Data entry of these questionnaires will 
utilize a double- entry approach, such that data will be entered twice by [CONTACT_654517]. A third researcher will clean the data using SPSS Data Entry Builder to identify and 
correct discrepancies between the primary and secondary entries. The project coordinator will 
be responsible for ensuring data quality and control, and data management oversight.  
Confidentiality            6.[ADDRESS_878407] of transcranial alternating currently stimulation (tACS) 
on inhibitory control and distress tolerance.  
Descriptive statistics (e.g., mean, standard deviation, variance, range) will be generated for all 
continuous study variables. Continuous study variables will also be examined for normality and 
homogeneity of variances using visual inspection methods (e.g., histograms, box plots, 
residuals, Normal Q -Q plots) and quantitative methods (Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilk test). If  these assumptions 
18 Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation and Substance Use  
 
are violated, the continuous study variables will be transformed, as necessary (e.g., log 
transformation). We will use hierarchical linear regression to test  whether there is a statistically 
significant effect of condition (tACS at 10 Hz, tACS at 40 Hz, or active sham stimulation) on 
session 2 DT and IC (controlling for session 1) .  
The latency to quit on the PASAT during the distress tolerance phase and d- prime on the Go/No 
Go primary outcome s of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
Aim 2  To demonstrate the feasibility of administering transcranial alternating currently 
stimulation (tACS) among a sample of adults with SUD recruited from a substance use 
outpatient  treatment cent er. Descriptive statistics and frequencies will be generated for all study 
variables related to assessing the feasibility of administering tACS (e.g., drop- outs, occurrence 
of unexpected and/or adverse events and side effects).  
Given that this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] s tudy, we hope to use the results of this study to act as a foundation for 
a larger, future study with the aim of examining the effect of tACS on substance use treatment outcomes and engagement among treatment -seeking  adults with SUD , with a focus on distress 
tolerance and inhibitory control as mechanism s of change. This larger, future study will be in line 
with our long- term goal of developi[INVESTIGATOR_66540] a novel non- invasive brain stimulation 
paradigm, using tACS, for the treatment of substance use di sorders.  