Study Protocol
Title: Veteran Peer Coaches Optimizing and Advancing Cardiac Health  
Protocol ID: IIR 14 -063 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Document Date: 12/3/2020 
IIR 14-063
Vet-COACH  (Veteran peer Coaches Optimizing and Advancing Cardiac Health)
MIRB #: [ZIP_CODE]
HSR&D
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_636022] M. Nelson, MD MSHS
[V2]Human Subjects Protocol
VA Puget Sound IRB
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073823]
BACKGROUND:  Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality among 
Veterans, and suboptimal risk factor control is an important mechanism for the continued 
prevalence of CVD. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_781109], 
pharmacy support, telephone care programs and intensive quality improvement efforts, CVD 
risk factors remain sub-optimally controlled among Veterans. Given the high prevalence and 
cost CVD within the Department of Veterans Affairs, cost-effective mechanisms are needed to 
manage the burden of prevalent CVD risk factors. Veteran peer health coaches may be one 
such mechanism; however, previous work has provided limited data of this model with VHA 
primary care. Previous studies of peer support in non-VHA populations report significant 
improvement in hypertension control and CVD risk reduction. 
OBJECTIVES:  The proposed project will test the effectiveness of Vet-COACH (Veteran peer 
Coaches Optimizing and Advancing Cardiac Health), a peer health coaching program to help 
reduce CVD risk among Veterans . The overall goal of this study is to test the effectiveness of a 
peer health coach intervention to promote health behavior change among Veterans with multiple  
CVD risk factors with a hybrid type [ADDRESS_1073824] one other CVD risk 
factor.  
METHODS:  We will conduct a randomized controlled trial that will enroll n=400 Veterans to 
compare a peer health coach intervention consisting of telephone support, and linkages to 
appropriate community-based and clinic resources compared to usual VHA primary care. The 
primary outcome is reduction in systolic blood pressure from baseline to follow-up at 1-year. 
Secondary outcomes include a reduction in Framingham Cardiovascular risk score, individual 
cardiovascular risks (tobacco use, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]), health related quality of life and health care use. We 
will also assess the effects of the peer health coach intervention on intermediate outcomes 
including social support, patient activation, patient/provider communication and health behaviors  
(e.g. medication adherence, physical activity, nutrition, alcohol use, and stress management). In  
addition, we will assess the cost of the intervention to inform feasibility for future studies, 
determine Veteran and staff satisfaction with the intervention, and identify barriers and 
facilitators to adoption.
IMPACT ON VETERANS HEALTH CARE:   Integrating peer health coaches into PACT primary 
care teams may improve the VA's ability to provide community outreach to Veterans. CVD risk 
reduction provides an ideal target for intervention given the prevalence of modifiable risks 
among Veterans. The proposed study will increase understanding of the utilization of peer 
support within PACT teams. If this study proves the main hypothesis, this evidence-based 
support model could be tested more widely among Veterans with other chronic conditions to 
improve health outcomes.  
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 2 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073825] of Abbreviations
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page [ADDRESS_1073826]-traumatic stress disorder
PVDPeripheral Vascular Disease
SBPSystolic Blood Pressure
Vet-COACHVeteran peer Coaches Optimizing and Advancing Cardiac Health
VFWVeterans of Foreign Wars
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Contents
Protocol Title:............................................................................................................................... 5
1.0Study Personnel................................................................................................................ 5
2.0Introduction....................................................................................................................... 5
3.0Objectives......................................................................................................................... 8
4.0Resources and Personnel ............................................................................................... 10
5.0Study Procedures............................................................................................................ 11
5.1 Study Design.................................................................................................................... 11
5.2 Recruitment Methods ....................................................................................................... 16
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures .......................................................................................... 17
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria .............................................................................................. 18
5.5 Study Evaluations ............................................................................................................ 19
5.6 Data Analysis................................................................................................................... 20
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects ..................................................................................................... 26
6.0Reporting........................................................................................................................ 26
7.0Privacy and Confidentiality .............................................................................................. 27
8.0Communication Plan ....................................................................................................... 28
9.0Information Security & Privacy ........................................................................................ 29
10.0    References………………………………………………………………………………………28
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 4 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Protocol Title:  
1.0Study Personnel (KEY)
Provide name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and affiliations/employee status for the 
following:
Principal Investigator: 
[INVESTIGATOR_636022] M. Nelson, MD MSHS
[EMAIL_14904]    [PHONE_16293]
Core Investigator/Assoc. Professor of Medicine
VA Puget Sound Health Care System
[ADDRESS_1073827], Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]
Co-Investigators:
Tiffanie Fennell, PhD
[EMAIL_14905]    [PHONE_16294]  
Clinical Health Psychologist, Health Behavior Coordinator
VA Puget Sound Health Care System
[ADDRESS_1073828], Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]
                                                                                                                          
Collaborators (at other institutions, not covered under the VA IRB approval):  
None
2.0Introduction
Provide scientific background and rationale for study.  
Include summary of gaps in current knowledge, relevant data, and how the study 
will add to existing knowledge.  
Include rationale for including or excluding certain populations – in particular 
vulnerable populations.
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 5 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
High prevalence and sub-optimal control of CVD risk factors among Veterans:
Cardiovascular risk is a composite measure of several modifiable risk factors including 
hypertension, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], and tobacco use. Sedentary lifestyles, unhealthy diets, and 
increasing obesity rates will likely continue to increase rates of hypertension, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_781110].18-20 Because of these trends, a 2020 American Heart Association (AHA) goal is the 
promotion of ideal cardiovascular health, defined as the presence of 4 health behaviors (non 
smoking, BMI ≤ 25 mg/kg2, physical activity at goal level, and diet consistent with current 
guidelines) and the presence of at least 2 ideal health factors (untreated total cholesterol < 200 
mg/dl, untreated blood pressure < 120/80 mmHg, or untreated fasting glucose < 100 mg/dl).[ADDRESS_1073829] poor control.23 Veterans who obtain care from 
VHA are more likely to be obese and physically inactive than the general population5 and the 
prevalence of tobacco use among Veterans is 25%.6  
CVD risk factor control will require a multi-faceted intervention:
Comprehensive approaches to control CVD risk will need to focus on multiple risk factors 
including blood pressure, high cholesterol, tobacco use, body-mass index, physical activity and 
nutrition.24,25 Control of hypertension and other modifiable CVD risks requires medication 
management in addition to behavioral interventions to change health behavior. National 
guidelines recommend that all individuals with hypertension undergo the following lifestyle 
modifications: loss of 5-10% of body weight, or maintain normal weight; moderate physical 
activity, change diet to be low sodium; smoking cessation and moderate alcohol consumption.[ADDRESS_1073830] significant benefit in 
blood pressure control from lifestyle modifications26,28,29 with a decrease in SBP from 5 - 20 mm 
Hg with 10 kg loss of body weight, a decrease in SBP from 8 - 14 mm Hg with dietary 
changes,30 a decrease of 4 - 9 mm Hg with regular physical activity31,32 and 2 - 4 mmHg with 
moderate alcohol consumption.33 Given the high rates of medication non-adherence among 
individuals with hypertension,34 focusing on this topic is critical. 
Gaps in knowledge about peer support interventions among Veterans in primary care: 
Trained peers may be a novel and innovative addition to existing programs, as peers can be 
effective in supporting health behavior change7 and make healthcare more patient-centered.41,[ADDRESS_1073831] team and RN care managers.
Peer support and the unique experiences of the Veteran community:
The positive health benefits of peer support may be particularly strong in the Veteran 
community. Veterans have long organized into community organizations (e.g. VFWs) based on 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 6 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073832]-discharge experiences (e.g. PTSD, integrating back into civilian life). Because of 
these common experiences, Veterans may find it easier to understand and accept the health 
recommendations of a peer health coach.45 Peer coaches may also be able to help Veterans 
and providers to understand each other’s perspective and priorities. This shared experience has  
been utilized effectively in the treatment of Veterans with mental health conditions.  The VHA 
Office of Mental Health Services (OMHS) has a well-developed peer support program and has 
hired [ADDRESS_1073833] mental health clinical teams. The core features of the recovery 
model for mental health (e.g. peer support, holistic orientation, self-direction, and patient-
centeredness) are integral to most chronic disease self-management programs.15 However, the 
peer support approach has not received widespread testing among Veterans cared for in 
primary care. By [CONTACT_781130], the 
peer coach model may be an untapped opportunity to improve health among primary care 
patients and may work more effectively in the VA, but this model needs further testing.  
Contributions of the proposed work:
CVD remains the number one cause of mortality among Veterans and sub-optimal risk factor 
control contributes to the ongoing prevalence of CVD. Our goal is to decrease CVD risk among 
Veterans by [CONTACT_781131] (hypertension, elevated cholesterol, 
overweight/obesity and tobacco use) with an innovative, patient-centered intervention. Our 
approach to multiple risk reduction with a novel peer coach intervention mirrors clinical practice, 
where multiple conditions and behaviors are considered simultaneously. Peer support models 
have been utilized effectively in other patient populations to manage CVD risk and improve BP 
control, but limited work has been done within the context of the PACT team or in Veteran 
populations. The intervention will be integrated into primary care clinics and PACT teams at two 
clinical sites, enhancing the potential for benefit and generalizability to other settings. The 
intervention is consistent with the PACT goals to provide more longitudinal and less epi[INVESTIGATOR_781111].16 The proposed intervention could potentially decrease CVD risk among Veterans by 1) 
building upon previous work with peer support among non-Veteran populations; 2) focusing on 
multiple synergistic CVD-related behaviors and risk factors and 3) targeting a high risk 
population (e.g. Veterans with 2 or more CVD risks) thereby [CONTACT_781132]. Our proposal is innovative in the use of a hybrid type [ADDRESS_1073834] team. Given the national prevalence of 
CVD and the low rates of risk factor control, easily disseminated interventions such as the one 
proposed could significantly improve health outcomes.
Relevance to VA Care:
Given the numbers of Veterans with sub-optimal cardiovascular control, developi[INVESTIGATOR_781112]. Peer support may provide a 
needed link between Veterans and available VHA clinical services and serve as a community-
clinic liaison to strengthen connections to community-based resources. Utilizing trained peers 
may be one mechanism to improve health among Veterans. However, much research is needed  
to determine the role and effectiveness of peer support. The VHA has a well-developed 
evidenced-based Health Promotion and Disease Prevention (HPDP) program. Expanding the 
reach of this program by [CONTACT_781133]-
effective health coaching. 
Unique and innovative features of the Vet-COACH intervention include: 
Veterans will not have to travel to a class or clinic, thereby [CONTACT_781134]-management education, enhancing recruitment and retention. 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 7 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Veterans will be more comfortable in their homes during the health coaching calls, and 
therefore more able to participate actively in learning activities and develop trusting 
relationships with the Veteran peer health coaches.
Peer health coaches will be able to role-model and observe participants in practicing 
self-management behaviors (e.g. managing medications).
Peer health coaches will be able to make suggestions that household members be 
enlistedto provide support for Veterans.
Peer health coaches will be able to link Veterans to pre-existing programs (e.g. disease 
self-management classes, MOVE, home tele-monitoring).
Peer health coaches have access to PACT teams and can assist Veterans engagement 
in care. 
The proposed research has the potential to contribute to the VHA mission to provide patient 
centered care, and also to develop, facilitate and integrate peer support into PACT teams. This 
proposal directly targets improving a Veteran-centric health care model to help Veterans 
navigate the health care delivery system and receive coordinated care. By [CONTACT_781135] , our goal is to present VHA 
policymakers with evidence regarding peer health coaches  work to decrease CV risk and 
improve Veteran health. 
3.0Objectives
Describe the study’s purpose, specific aims, or objectives. 
State the hypotheses to be tested.
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of mortality among Veterans, and sub-
optimal risk factor control is an important mechanism for the continued prevalence of CVD.1,2 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_781113]-based programming that includes nurse care management, pharmacy support, 
telephone care programs and intensive quality improvement efforts, CVD risk factors remain 
sub-optimally controlled among Veterans.3 Modifiable CVD risks include hypertension, 
hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] (HLD), obesity and tobacco use. These conditions are common, often co-exist, 
and are amenable to behavior change and disease self-management interventions.4 Among 
Veterans with hypertension, 25% have poor control (as defined by a blood pressure of >140/90 
mmHg). Similar to the US population, the majority of Veterans are overweight or obese, are 
sedentary and eat unhealthy diets.5 Over one quarter of Veterans smoke.6 To improve health 
and decrease CVD morbidity and mortality, CVD risk reduction is an important issue facing VHA  
and other U.S. health systems.
There is a growing literature about the positive health benefits of peer support on health 
outcomes and health behavior change.7 Previous studies of peer support in non-VHA 
populations report significant improvement in hypertension control and CVD risk reduction.8-11 
There are several peer support titles, including peer coaches, navigators, and community health  
workers (CHWs), with the common characteristic of sharing life experiences and social 
background with the patients being served, and promoting health by [CONTACT_781136], 
assistance, motivation and social support.[ADDRESS_1073835] been tested in 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 8 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073836] primarily targeted single conditions, e.g. diabetes12,13 or among Veterans with 
mental health conditions.14,15 
Specific Aims: 
1.Test the effectiveness of a peer health coach intervention for improving health outcomes for Veterans with  
multiple CVD risks in a randomized controlled trial. The primary outcome is a reduction in systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) from baseline to follow-up at 1 year. Secondary outcomes include change in 
cardiovascular risk, as measured by [CONTACT_662569]17, other cardiovascular risks (tobacco 
use, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]) and health related quality of life. Using administrative data at 1 year following randomization, 
we will examine healthcare utilization, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and emergency room visits.
2.Assess the effects of a peer health coach intervention on intermediate outcomes that are intervention 
targets including social support, patient activation, patient/provider communication  and health behaviors 
(e.g. medication adherence, physical activity, nutrition, alcohol use, and stress management ). 
3.Assess the cost of the intervention to inform feasibility for future studies. 
4.Determine Veteran and staff satisfaction with the intervention and identify barriers and facilitators to 
adoption.
The recent VHA medical home model initiative, the Patient Aligned Care Team (PACT), is an 
ideal setting to test peer support, as this social support model aligns with the PACT focus on 
team-based, patient-centered, and comprehensive care.[ADDRESS_1073837] team includes a primary 
care provider, an RN care manager, and a LPN; as well as support staff including pharmacists 
and Health Promotion and Disease Prevention (HPDP) staff. The focus of the HPDP program is 
to support chronic disease self-management and promote healthy lifestyle choices. Trained 
Veterans working as peer health coaches may be a mechanism to expand the reach of 
the PACT team by (1) providing brief health education messages based on HPDP 
program materials, (2) acting as a community-clinic liaison to create stronger linkages 
between primary care and community resources  and (3) by [CONTACT_781137]-based resources for healthy lifestyle choices . The overall goal of this study is to  
test the effectiveness of a peer health coach intervention ( Vet-COACH “Veteran peer Coaches 
Optimizing and Advancing Cardiac Health”) to promote health behavior change among 
Veterans with multiple CVD risk factors with a 4-year hybrid type [ADDRESS_1073838] primary care team may improve the VA’s ability 
to provide community outreach to Veterans. CVD risk reduction provides an ideal target for 
intervention given the prevalence of modifiable risks among Veterans. The proposed study will 
increase understanding of the utilization of peer support within PACT teams. If this study proves  
the main hypothesis, this evidence-based support model could be tested more widely among 
Veterans with other chronic conditions to improve health outcomes.  
4.0Resources and Personnel
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 9 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Include where and by [CONTACT_427346]. 
Provide a brief description of each individual’s role in the study.  Be sure to 
indicate who will have access to protected health information and who will be 
involved in recruiting subjects; obtaining informed consent; administering 
survey/interview procedures; and performing data analysis.
If applicable provide information on any services that will be performed by 
[CONTACT_495226].
N/A
If applicable provide information on any Memoranda of Understandings (MOUs) 
or Data Use Agreements (DUAs) that are being entered into including with whom  
and for what reason.   
N/A
Research will be conducted at VA Puget Sound Health Care by [CONTACT_781138]-
COACH project study staff:
Name [CONTACT_781176]/Informed  
Consent/Surveys/InterviewsData 
Analysis
Karin Nelson PI Y                     Y Y
Tiffanie Fennell Co-I Y N Y
Leslie Taylor Biostatistician N N Y
George Sayre Qualitative Analyst Y N Y
Marie Lutton Project Manager Y Y N
Jennifer Williams Research Assistant Y Y N
Jeff Rodenbaugh Programmer Y N Y
Kristen Gray Analyst Y N Y
Matt Augustine Analyst Y N Y
Kristin Rosendahl Nutrition expert Y N N
Brittney Hamilton Research Assistant Y Y N
Charles Bradley Kramer Graduate Research Student Assistant (RA)Y Y Y
Elizabeth Presley StrewlerResearch Social Worker / Research CoordinatorY Y N
5.0Study Procedures
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 10 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
5.1 Study Design
Describe experimental design of the study.  Include sequential and/or 
parallel phases of the study, including durations, and explain which 
interventions are standard of care.  
Include a description of how anticipated risk will be minimized and include 
an analysis of risk vs. potential benefit.
Provide description of the study population (delineate all categories of 
subjects – patients, providers, family members, employees, etc.). Include 
anticipated enrollment numbers
As applicable, provide information on any added protections for vulnerable  
populations. 
If applicable include information on data and specimen banking.
Study design overview: 
We propose a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effectiveness of Vet-COACH, a peer 
health coach program to control hypertension and reduce CVD risk among Veterans. The 
original program incorporated home visits by [CONTACT_781139], 
counseling and goal setting support. Due to safety concerns and social distancing restrictions 
stemming from the COVID [ADDRESS_1073839] teams and community 
based programs. The main outcome will be a reduction in systolic blood pressure. Secondary 
outcomes are cardiovascular risk, as measured by [CONTACT_662569] (FRS),17 health 
care utilization and intermediate behavioral outcomes including patient activation, social support  
and health behaviors (e.g. diet and physical activity, medication adherence). We will randomize 
a total of  [ADDRESS_1073840] clinically meaningful differences.  
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 11 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Description of Vet-COACH – a call-based peer health coach intervention:
The three goals of the peer health coach intervention include: (1) delivering brief health 
messages based on materials from the HPDP program, (2) acting as a community-clinic liaison 
and (3) providing expertise on the availability of community based resources for healthy lifestyle 
choices (e.g. places for physical activity, walking groups, grocery store tours, etc.) The focus of 
the intervention will be the provision of brief health messages, goal setting and action 
planning around health behavior changes shown to decrease CVD risk  (e.g. healthy diet, 
regular moderate-intensity physical activity, tobacco cessation if applicable). Peer health coach 
education modules, examples of key messages and measures used to assess participant 
progress are outlined in Table 2. Required education modules for hypertension include: physical  
activity, nutrition, and medication adherence (and weight management if overweight or obese).56
Table 2. Veteran Peer Health Coach Required Education Module Topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102],  Examples of Goals and Key  
Messages, Referrals to Community or VHA resources, and Measures Used to Assess Intermediate 
Outcomes
Behavioral 
targetsGoals and Key Messages Referral to appropriate 
community or VHA 
resourcesIntermediate outcome 
measures
Required modules – applies to all Veterans with Hypertension
Blood PressureWhat is high Blood Pressure? 
Understand systolic & diastolic 
measurements.  Tips to manage 
blood pressure.Offer blood pressure 
cuff if subject does not 
have one.  Record 
blood pressure 
measurements & report  
to PI, study nurse 
and/or PCP as needed.Standard protocols
Physical activityAvoid inactivity. Every [ADDRESS_1073841] food 
intake, avoiding processed foods 
high in sodium and 
carbohydrates, reduction of salt 
intake, increase in fruit and 
vegetable intake and decrease in  
total and saturated fat.Encourage referral to 
VHA nutrition
Offer healthy plate
Grocery store tour
Information on local 
resources (e.g., food 
banks, farmers 
markets)Self-reported nutrition 
behavior57 and food 
frequency (FFQ)[ADDRESS_1073842]  
and bring to each health care 
visit.  Feedback to PCP, 
nurse case manager
Offer medication 
organizerSelf-reported 
medication adherence (  
Voils, C. I. et al. )59
ReCOMP60
Communication 
with medical 
team/physicianBe involved with your health care.  
There are many ways to take an 
active role.Feedback to PCP, 
nurse case manager for  
appropriate follow upCAHPS-provider 
communication63
Optional Education modules- if applicable to individual Veteran
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 12 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Weight 
reduction, 
maintenance of 
normal BMIStrive for a healthy weight.  If you 
need to lose weight, even a small 
amount can improve your health.  
If you are a normal weight, 
maintain it.  Referral to MOVE 
program, assistance 
with enrollment 
questionnaire 
(MOVE23)BMI
Smoking 
cessationBe tobacco free!  If you are using 
tobacco, ask your health care 
team for help in quitting.Referral to smoking 
cessation resources, 
provide quit line 
numberSelf-report of smoking 
status
New medication for 
smoking cessation
Limiting alcohol 
intakeIf you choose to drink, do so in 
moderation. If drinking, limit to <= 
2 drinks/day for men, <= 1 drink 
for womenFeedback to PCP, 
nurse case manager for  
appropriate follow upAUDIT-C61
Stress 
management, 
depression and 
sleepPay attention to stress.  Tools are 
available to help you manage and  
reduce stress.  Feedback to PCP, 
nurse case manager for  
appropriate follow up; 
Referral to Mindfulness  
based stress reduction 
classPHQ-862
Participant Inclusion criteria:  
We will focus our intervention in the geographic area directly surrounding the VA Puget Sound 
(Seattle and ALVA clinics) that has a high prevalence of poorly controlled hypertension. As part 
of project planning, we have worked with the Office of Analytics and Business Intelligence to 
utilize Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to identify and target high risk areas. This type of 
patient mappi[INVESTIGATOR_781114], so this mechanism to identify and recruit participants is 
potentially generalizable.
We developed our inclusion criteria to identify Veterans who will benefit the most, by [CONTACT_781140] 75 years with poorly controlled risks that are amenable to change. 
Specific inclusion criteria include poorly controlled hypertension (mean systolic BP > 150/90 
mmHg) and one or more of the following CVD risks: overweight or obese (Body Mass Index 
(BMI) > 25 kg/m2), current tobacco use, or a diagnosis of hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] (defined as low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL-c) >130 mg/dL). Although we are selecting common conditions that increase 
cardiovascular risk, we are not excluding Veterans with other prevalent conditions (e.g. 
diabetes, arthritis, renal disease, or COPD), whose presence will be noted in the enrollment 
visit. We chose to focus on Veterans with elevations in systolic hypertension above the stage 1 
level of 140 mmHg, given recent data regarding treatment of mild hypertension. 
Exclusion criteria: 
We will exclude those who have been hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057] 3 months prior to enrollment for a CVD 
admission (IHD, CVA or PVD), as these Veterans may be too ill to participate in this 
intervention. We will exclude patients with dementia or severe cognitive impairment that would 
not allow them to participate in the program; patients with a suicidal ideation and/or disruptive 
behavior flag in CPRS; patients with end stage renal disease on dialysis, given the unique care 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 13 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
needs of this population; patients who have received palliative care or are enrolled in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_209934], given their limited life expectancy; Veterans enrolled in Home Based Primary Care, an all-
inclusive home visit nurse program or those who live in care facilities (nursing homes, assisted 
living facilities); homeless Veterans and women who are pregnant or planning to become 
pregnant. 
Enrollment and randomization:
a)Enrollment and exit visits
The research coordinators will interview participants during the enrollment and exit visits over 
the phone. If a participant expresses completion of the exit survey over the phone would pose 
difficulties for them, staff will provide the option to complete and return the exit survey by [CONTACT_2319].   
If the participant agrees, staff will mail a copy of the exit survey with a postage-paid return 
envelope to mail the completed survey to the HSR&D office. Study staff in possession of a VA-
issued flip phone will use it to conduct the call.  Study staff who do not have a VA phone or 
laptop will use their personal smart phone and conduct the call using the Doximity app. 
Scheduled participants will be mailed a letter prior to their enrollment visit that will confirm the 
date, time, and location of their appointment and a brief summary of what will be covered in the 
visit and program.  The baseline enrollment visit and exit call will include blood pressure 
measurements and labs (lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]). If there are no lipid panel results in CPRS dated within 12 
months prior to the baseline/enrollment date or [ADDRESS_1073843]. If a participant moves out of the Puget Sound area and/or receives lipid 
test results from a non-VA provider or clinic, we will request they send the lipid panel test results  
from the non-VA lab or VA lab in another state to the Puget Sound VA Primary Care Clinic via 
mail or secure fax.  This is already done by [CONTACT_781141] a non-VA 
facility. These results would be used as the lipid measurements typi[INVESTIGATOR_781115]. Juliana Bondzie (study coordinator and phlebotomist) will conduct the blood draw with 
participants completing the enrollment and/or exit visit with her.  [CONTACT_781177] has completed all 
the required trainings and coursework to conduct blood draws at the VA Puget Sound.  Any 
results flagged as high will be reported by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_781116]’s PCP -- either as an 
addendum to the research enrollment note or as an alert to the PCP if they are not enrolled in 
the study -- using the following statement: “We ordered a lipid panel test as part of screening or 
follow up for the Vet-Coach research project.  Your patient may or may not participate in this 
study.” Three blood pressure measurements will be collected by [CONTACT_781142]. For BP measurement, after the patient has sat comfortably 
for [ADDRESS_1073844] be >150/[ADDRESS_1073845] recent 
primary care visit to recruit Veterans with uncontrolled hypertension. Height and weight will be 
measured at baseline and weight will be measured at exit. Measures collected include: chronic 
disease self-management behaviors, health history, health care access, and health care 
utilization. Urgent issues will be referred immediately to the PI. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_781117]-up.
b)  Randomization
Following baseline assessments, a computerized randomization procedure will assign 
individuals to either the peer health coach intervention or to the usual care + education control 
group. Randomization of participants will occur in the order of completed enrollment visits. 
Randomization lists will be constructed in advance by [CONTACT_781143] 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 14 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
length blocks to ensure the groups are not unbalanced at any time. Concealment will be used to  
prevent the study staff from obtaining information on the sequence of assignment.
c)Usual care + education control arm
Usual care consists of enrollment in the Primary Care Clinic or Women’s Clinic at VA Puget 
Sound, plus an educational pamphlet with study materials provided at the baseline visit. The 
educational pamphlet will deliver the same information content as the intervention and consist of  
existing NCP materials (See Appendix 2 of attached IIR). We chose not to develop an attention 
control arm. Part of the process of the peer health coach intervention is the increased social 
support of the home visits. By [CONTACT_1541] “attention” in another way, we would not be able to test 
the effect of the increase in social support provided to intervention participants. Social support 
(or “attention”) has been shown to be a powerful resource to maintain both physical and mental 
quality of life, despi[INVESTIGATOR_781118].67 Perceived social support has 
been significantly related to health-related quality of life.67 
Follow-up calls for Intervention Group: 
The same peer health coach will make  a total of 10 phone calls over the 12 month intervention 
period (Table 3), including 5 phone calls (to replace the previous home visits) plus 5 telephone 
follow up calls.  We are basing the intervention frequency and number of visits on our previous 
work (1R18DK088072-01 ) and on frequencies noted in successful blood pressure trials.[ADDRESS_1073846] and support for participants.
Table 3.  Schedule of home visits, telephone follow up and staff member responsible for the activity
Months011.523456789101112Staff member responsible  
for activity 
Baseline 
enrollmentX Research Assistant (RA) 
Telephone 
callsXXXXX Peer health coach
Telephone 
follow up XXXXXPeer health coach
Exit call XRA, 
Visit content and development of a health action plan:
All Vet-Coaches receive training in adherence to the study protocol and specific instruction on 
conducting research at the VA. Vet-Coaches complete the same online trainings in data security  
as well as the in-person Human Research Protection Program (HRPP) Orientation required by 
[CONTACT_781144]. Vet-Coaches receive training in guidelines set by [CONTACT_781145], including an emphasis on maintaining participant 
confidentiality and keepi[INVESTIGATOR_781119]. Comprehensive 
trainings provide information on patient-centered communication, motivational interviewing, role 
modeling, comprehension of the health educational topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], health coaching skills, proper 
procedures for taking blood pressure measurements, goal setting techniques and proper 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 15 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073847] an annual, in person 
“Vet-Coach Refresher Training” with the Vet-Coaches that will review study protocol & limits of 
appropriate subject contact.  The training will emphasize regulations and acceptable 
communications and contact [CONTACT_781146]. There are bi-weekly meetings with the study team  
to discuss ongoing health coaching issues, problem-solve difficulties implementing study 
procedures or coordination of health care, and address concerns or questions specific to 
individual participants, etc.
Recommendations for potential health action plans, based on national guidelines and specific to  
the individual risk factor and patient motivation, will be generated at the enrollment visit. Using 
the results of the baseline assessment, the peer health coach will collaboratively develop an 
action plan with the Veteran. The protocols specify education content, Veteran skill development  
goals, participant and Veteran health coach actions. All Veterans will receive the five required 
education modules, including high blood pressure, medication adherence, physical activity, 
nutrition, and improved communication with medical team/physician (Table 2). The peer health 
coach will have participants prioritize their goals, ask what they would like to prioritize for their 
next call, and develop a goal-directed action plan [where the Veteran identifies a health related 
goal and decides how much time, when and how often they are going to complete the behavior 
(e.g. walk 10 minutes per day OR take my blood pressure pi[INVESTIGATOR_781120])], along with an 
assessment of how confident they feel in being able to complete the behavior. We will assess 
goal setting and goal completion rates in the Action Plan for the intervention participants. The 
peer health coach will document the skill or goal that was the primary focus for each call and the  
self-management strategies that were highlighted during that call on an encounter form. As 
progress toward the first goal is important for long-term motivation, a telephone follow up will 
occur [ADDRESS_1073848] met  
proficiency standards.  After initial proficiency standards are met, each Vet-Coach will continue 
audio-recording of randomly-selected calls to ensure ongoing proficiency. Audio recordings will 
be collected using secure, VA approved digital recorders or recording software.  Recordings and  
recording devices will be stored and transported in locked security bags to the VA Puget Sound 
office location every two weeks at study staff meetings.  Audio recordings will then be  uploaded 
to the secure, electronic folder on the VA server.  
At follow up calls, the peer health coach will learn about patient challenges and concerns, review 
progress on implementing the self-management plan, provide targeted education to help with plan  
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 16 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073849] an assigned  
VA provider, health coaching encounters will be discontinued because the PI [INVESTIGATOR_781121].  If a 
participant moves out of the area and retains a VA provider (at either the VA Puget Sound or a 
VA in another state) , we would continue to complete health coaching encounters and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_781122].  Study staff will continue 
to complete the exit phone visit with participants regardless of continuation of health coaching 
visits. 
5.2 Recruitment Methods
State how many subjects will be needed. 
Describe when, where, how and by [CONTACT_564625]. 
Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects, e.g., 
advertisements.  Include materials as an appendix or separate 
attachment.  Only refer to attachments as A, B, etc. Do not refer to version  
#’s or dates of versions. During the course of the study, changes in the 
attachments will require IRB approval; however, those changes may not 
require a revised protocol.
Describe any payments to subjects, including the amount, timing (at the 
end of the study or pro-rated for partial study participation), method (e.g., 
cash, check, gift card), and whether subjects will experience a delay in 
receiving the payment.
Eligibility for participation will be determined by [CONTACT_781147]-
Coaches from VA administrative data files from VA Corporate Data Warehouse, as well as the 
"Quality Improvement for Primary Care Clinic" project conducted through the Seattle VA Primary  
Care Clinic for relevant diagnostic and lab-based criteria. Census tract data from the Quality 
Improvement project will be linked to subject geographic data (address) in the VA administrative  
files. This information will be obtained by [CONTACT_507109]. Using administrative data, we 
identified approximately 17,080 Veterans at VA Puget Sound (cared for at either the Seattle or 
American Lake Divisions) with hypertension, of whom n=2,[ADDRESS_1073850] a systolic blood pressure 
that is > 150 mm Hg. Approximately 90% of this population is overweight or obese (a second 
criteria for entry into the study) (n=2,486). Our target sample size for recruitment is n=400. A 
letter from the study signed by [CONTACT_47028] (PCP) with an opt-out option will be 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 17 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073851] staff (project manager and research assistant) will then contact [CONTACT_781148]. 
We will also recruit subjects by [CONTACT_781149] (see attached flyer with tabs) on research 
bulletin boards, research kiosks, and research information tables (on designated research fair 
days) at the VA Puget Sound.  The flyer contains a contact [CONTACT_781150].  A copy of the study flyer without tabs will be 
included in the “Patient Education Programs” brochure, which is updated quarterly by [CONTACT_781151].  Vet-Coaches will also 
distribute copi[INVESTIGATOR_781123]. All interested callers will be asked to complete the phone 
screen with study staff to determine eligibility. Use of the recruitment flyers will occur during 
business hours through December 31, 2020.
Informed consent will be obtained at the time of enrollment.  To facilitate enrollment and 
retention, the project will offer $50 for completion of baseline data collection and $50 for 
completing one year exit data collection. We will not offer an incentive for participating in the 
intervention in order to maintain study generalizability and feasibility of wider adoption. 
Vet-Coaches will be Veterans with VA employee or “WOC” status who have completed all the 
online VA Human Subjects trainings (including data security, privacy and confidentiality 
trainings) as well as in-depth instruction in health coaching and education.  Vet-Coaches will 
serve as study staff to provide peer health coaching to Veteran subjects enrolled in the study. A 
letter will be sent to the provider of potential Vet-Coaches to identify candidates for this position 
(see attached letter to providers).  The letter will include a list of eligible Vet-Coaches identified 
from the "Quality Improvement for Primary Care Clinic" project, and will ask providers to identify 
those on the list who would be good candidates to serve as Vet-Coaches. Selected candidates 
will be sent a recruitment letter to inquire if they would be interested in applying for a Vet-Coach 
position (see attached letter to potential Vet-Coaches). The project manager will conduct a 
follow up phone call to collect more information about their qualifications and interest in the 
position (see attached phone script), and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_781124]-person interview with the 
most qualified candidates to make a final hiring decision. Hired Vet-Coaches will be provided 
with an information statement at the end of the study to see if they would like to participate in a 
voluntary qualitative interview (see information statement approved in the initial IRB application 
and the following “patient and provider interviews” section  in this protocol).
To facilitate enrollment and retention of eligible participants, the project will offer several 
incentives. After completion of the baseline visit, participants will receive an incentive of $50 and  
then $50 for completing year one follow-up data collection. Enrolled participants in the 
intervention group will receive a bag containing items that may encourage health related 
behavior including: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_173105]/organizer; a scale; a place mat with information on healthy meal 
choices & portions (routinely distributed in the VA Primary Care Clinic); educational handouts 
(routinely distributed in the VA Primary Care Clinic); and a meal portion control tool.  
See Attachment A (Recruitment Letter)
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 18 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures
Indicate if informed consent will be obtained and/or if you are requesting a 
waiver of informed consent or waiver of documentation of informed 
consent.  If the research involves multiple phases, specify for which 
phases of the research the waiver(s) is being requested and/or the 
informed consent will be sought.
Describe who will be obtaining informed consent, if applicable, and any 
circumstances that may need to be addressed (e.g. subjects with impaired  
decision making ability and the use of a legally authorized representative, 
etc.)
If applicable, indicate how local site study personnel will be trained 
regarding human subjects protections requirements and how to obtain and  
document informed consent.
Written informed consent will be obtained prior to enrollment by [CONTACT_464] 
(project manager and research assistant). At the enrollment visit, study staff will 
review a Commitment Script with potential participants prior to the consent 
process to discuss the study activities and commitments involved. This review 
will help participants determine whether the program is a good fit for them (in 
terms of the study activities, time commitments involved, etc.), and give them 
another chance to opt out prior to starting the consent process. The informed 
consent will also include information about audio-recording the Vet-Coach visits 
and phone calls as well as the semi-structured qualitative interviews. The 
consent will state that participants may decline to be audio-recorded at any time.  
Potential participants will be informed that participation is fully voluntary, that their  
decision regarding participation will in no way affect the services they receive, 
and that they may decline to answer any questions or decline any services 
offered as part of the project. Declining any one service will not affect their ability 
to receive other services from the project. They will also be informed that this 
study is a randomized trial and that they have an equal chance of receiving usual  
care or peer support intervention. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_781125]. Specifically, there will be an emphasis on explaining the enrollment 
process and clarifying that there are no consequences to their health care 
benefits whether they choose to participate or not.
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 19 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Describe the criteria that determine who will be included in or excluded 
from the study. 
Participant Inclusion criteria:  We will focus our intervention in the geographic 
area directly surrounding the VA Puget Sound (Seattle and ALVA clinics) that 
has a high prevalence of poorly controlled hypertension. As part of project 
planning, we have worked with the Office of Analytics and Business Intelligence 
to utilize Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to identify and target high risk 
areas. This type of patient mappi[INVESTIGATOR_781114], so this mechanism to  
identify and recruit participants is potentially generalizable. Specific maps are 
shown in Appendix [ADDRESS_1073852],  
by [CONTACT_781152] 75 (no age restrictions below age 75)  with 
poorly controlled risks that are amenable to change. Specific inclusion criteria 
include poorly controlled hypertension (mean systolic BP > 150/90 mmHg) and 
one or more of the following CVD risks: overweight or obese (Body Mass Index 
(BMI) > 25 kg/m2), current tobacco use, or a diagnosis of hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035]. 
Although we are selecting common conditions that increase cardiovascular risk, 
we are not excluding Veterans with other prevalent conditions (e.g. diabetes, 
arthritis, renal disease, or COPD), whose presence will be noted in the 
enrollment visit. We chose to focus on Veterans with elevations in systolic 
hypertension above the stage 1 level of 140 mmHg, given recent data regarding 
treatment of mild hypertension. 
Exclusion criteria: We will exclude those who have been hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057] 3 months 
prior to enrollment for a CVD admission (IHD, CVA or PVD), as these Veterans 
may be too ill to participate in this intervention. We will exclude patients with 
dementia or severe cognitive impairment that would not allow them to participate 
in the program; patients with a suicidal ideation and/or  disruptive behavior flag in  
CPRS; patients with end stage renal disease on dialysis, given the unique care 
needs of this population; patients who have received palliative care or are 
enrolled in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3677], given their limited life expectancy; Veterans enrolled in 
Home Based Primary Care, an all-inclusive home visit nurse program or those 
who live in care facilities (nursing homes, assisted living facilities); homeless 
Veterans and women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant. 
5.5 Study Evaluations
Describe all evaluations to be conducted (including screening; 
tests/questionnaires that will be administered; any procedures that 
subjects will be required to complete) and data collection methods.  
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 20 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Include materials as an appendix or separate attachment.  Only refer to 
attachments as A, B, etc. Do not refer to version #’s or dates of versions. 
During the course of the study, changes in the attachments will require 
IRB approval; however, those changes may not require a revised protocol.
The sources of data for this project will be participant interviews and medical records. The 
participant interviews will be collected specifically for this project while the medical record data 
will be obtained from existing sources. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed 
intervention, the study will administer baseline and exit interviews, conduct limited physical 
examinations where blood pressure, height and weight are measured, and, if needed, we will 
request the primary care provider order a blood test for potential participants. The proposed 
interview and limited physical exam will be administered at baseline and after the intervention 
period and will be conducted  by [CONTACT_781153]. Only the study 
personnel will have access to any personally identifiable health information.  
M  easures 
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_1073853] these outcome variables at baseline 
prior to randomization and   at   12 months in   both   the intervention and control groups  . Process 
and outcome data will be collected via the following sources: Patient Surveys: Baseline and 12-
month surveys will be conducted by [CONTACT_411086] s taff. The administrative assistant and 
project manager will review all questionnaires and other data collection records, correct errors, 
and enter them into a password-protected database within 10 days of collection. Semi-
structured Interviews : These will be conducted with purposive samples of Veterans  upon exit 
from the program and at one year. Primary care staff will be interviewed after completing the 
intervention phase. Time Logs: Logs will be used to track time spent by [CONTACT_781154], attempting to reach patients, and key information about the content of those 
interactions. Administrative and Clinical Data Systems : These will be used to track patients’ use 
of other VA inpatient and outpatient services.
 
Primary and secondary outcomes 
The primary outcome measures will be systolic blood pressure.  At the baseline visit and the final  
12 month exit call, the study staff will ask the participant to measure blood pressure three times.  
At the time of scheduling, study staff will ask if the participant has a blood pressure monitor and/
or scale in their possession.  If the participant does not have a monitor or scale, staff will mail 
them one from the VA office. The mean value for these readings will be used for the baseline 
and exit measurements, respectively. 
Secondary outcomes will include Framingham Risk Score (FRS), individual CVD risks (BMI, 
LDL-c, tobacco use), health care utilization and health-related quality of life.  A 10-year risk of 
total CVD (including myocardial infarction, angina, coronary revascularization, stroke, 
congestive heart failure and peripheral arterial disease) will be determined according to FRS 
algorithms,17 which include age, total and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, systolic blood 
pressure, treatment for hypertension, diabetes, and cigarette smoking. Individual components of  
this risk score are targets of the intervention (hypertension, hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], and smoking). The 
FRS algorithm has good predictive validity for CHD events (c statistics 0.74 and 0.77 for men 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 21 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
and women, respectively).69 Health care utilization will include outpatient visits, emergency 
department visits, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. Health care utilization  will be obtained from VA 
administrative data and by [CONTACT_38767]-report to capture non-VA health care utilization. 
Health-related quality of life will be  measured by [CONTACT_502682] 12-item measure,  
the SF-12.70 Two composite scales will be used to measure physical health (the physical 
component summary) and mental health (mental health component summary).70 
Intermediate endpoints 
a)Patient activation, self-efficacy and social support
An important intermediate endpoint is Veteran self-efficacy and patient activation. We 
hypothesize that exposure to Vet-COACH will improve chronic disease outcomes and lead to 
greater patient activation. We will use the Patient Activation Measure (PAM), a brief previously 
validated 13-item scale that assesses patient’s self-rated ability to take preventive actions, 
manage symptoms of medical problems, find and use appropriate medical care, and work with 
their health care providers to make decisions about their care.71 The PAM includes important 
constructs including self-efficacy and is not disease-specific. We will use the multi-dimensional 
scale of perceived social support to assess overall social support.72,73 In addition, we will utilize 
a measure of community support for healthy lifestyles (the Chronic Illness Resources Survey—
Brief Form).74
b)Self-management behaviors and patient-provider communication
Self-management behaviors will be measured with the following scales: The nutritional 
assessment of eating behavior will be a self-reported assessment  “Starting the conversation”, 
an eight-item validated, simplified food instrument designed for use in primary care and health-
promotion settings.60 We will utilize a food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) developed by [CONTACT_781155]. The FFQ provides estimates for 30 nutrients and has acceptable 
accuracy and reliability.61 Intake of fruits and vegetables, fat, and fiber can be calculated based 
on published algorithms.75 Level of physical activity will be assessed using the International 
Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ), a validated and reliable measure of physical activity.[ADDRESS_1073854] an assessment of medication adherence using a standardized 
participant interview.62 In addition, yearly medication adherence will be calculated from the 
electronic pharmacy data (ReComp).[ADDRESS_1073855] questions 
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey ( BRFSS).[ADDRESS_1073856] (AUDIT-C), a 3-item screening 
test for heavy drinking and/or abuse.64 We will ask about utilization of stress management 
techniques65 and patient-provider communication using previously validated questionnaires 
(CAHPS ).66,77 
Table 4.  Outcome Measures; measured at baseline and 12 months
Measurement domain Measurement instrument
Primary outcome
Blood pressure Systolic blood pressure (SBP) Standard protocols78
Secondary outcomes
Cardiovascular risk Framingham risk score (FRS) FRS algorithms17
Individual Cardio-
metabolic risksBody Mass Index (BMI)
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL-c)Standard protocols for height and 
weight
Laboratory data from CPRS if within 3 
months of enrollment, otherwise drawn 
by [CONTACT_781156]
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 22 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Health Care 
Utilization Outpatient and ER visits, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], pharmacy 
utilizationAdministrative data and participant self-
report for non-VA care
Health-related 
quality of lifeRole limitations caused by [CONTACT_781157], emotional problems, 
physical functioning, and general 
healthSF-1270
Intermediate outcomes
Patient activation, 
Self-efficacy  Self-rated ability to take preventive 
actions, manage symptoms of 
medical problems, find and use 
appropriate medical care, and work 
with their health care providersPatient Activation Measure (PAM)71 
Social Support Domains of Social support Multidimensional Scale of Perceived 
Social Support72
Self-management
Behaviors – 
Measure of 
behavioral 
enactmentPhysical activity
Nutrition – eating behavior, food 
frequency
Medication adherence 
Tobacco use
Alcohol use
Stress ManagementIPAQ59
“Starting the conversation”60,FFQ61
Voils, C. I. et al. Medication adherence 
questionnaire62 ReCOMP63 Medication 
Possession Ratio
BRFSS76 
AUDIT-C64
Utilization of stress management 
techniques65
Patient provider 
communicationCommunication with physician and 
health care teamConsumer Assessment of Health Plans  
(CAHPS)-patient-provider 
communication66 
Specific Aim 3: Determine intervention costs
These costs will include all labor and materials (pamphlets, home BP monitors, etc.) used in the 
intervention. We will administer weekly time sheets for all study personnel to estimate the 
amount of time they spend in various activities, and attribute the cost of these activities to either 
intervention costs or trial-specific costs, which are excluded from the intervention cost. 
Covariate data 
We will collect data on potential covariates that have been shown in previous studies to be 
associated with self-care and quality of life. We will use these covariates in our analysis to 
describe the patient population and to adjust for any differences across randomized groups. 
Demographic covariates include age, gender, household income, marital status, education, 
primary language and race/ethnicity (American Indian or Alaskan Native, Asian, Pacific Islander,  
black, white and their ethnicity as Hispanic or non-Hispanic). We will assess health literacy 
using a brief validated 3 - item screener.79 Depressive symptoms will be assessed using the 
PHQ-8.80
Measuring Intervention fidelity
Fidelity will be assessed to a) identify areas of needed improvement for ongoing remediation for  
the peer coaches through review of audio recordings (Section C.4.2); b) provide qualitative 
description of fidelity and needed changes to peer coaches at least quarterly (Section C.4.2); 
and c) include in the quantitative models to determine relationship between fidelity and 
outcomes (Section C.7.3).  We will develop a manual for implementation of the intervention, very  
similar to our manual for our diabetes self-management trial (Appendix 3 of attached IIR). This 
manual consists of required and optional educational modules and educational materials that 
will be provided to the participant for each topic. To assess if participants received the 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 23 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073857] demonstrate 
competence in delivering content with fidelity ( ≥ 80% of components) . We will require the peer 
health coaches to complete an encounter form for each intervention visit; which will consist of a 
checklist of required modules and if they were delivered.  We have developed encounter forms 
for our current CHW study that will be adapted for the current study. The study coordinators will 
abstract participant records to assess whether each client received the interventions specified 
by [CONTACT_333026]. Study staff (RA,  study coordinators, or Co-I) will also directly review audio 
recordings of one call per quarter to assess intervention fidelity. Fidelity will be measured using 
an observation form, and feedback will be given to each Vet-Coach.  Monthly control reports will  
ensure that each participant received the required components of the intervention.
Specific Aim 4: patient and provider interviews 
We will use theoretical purposive sampling to identify three groups of Veterans for semi-
structured interviews: 1) individuals who demonstrate significant improvement in hypertension 
control, 2) individuals without significant improvement  and 3) individuals who discontinued the 
intervention after 1 or 2 sessions. Veterans within all groups will be interviewed upon exit (< [ADDRESS_1073858] attendance) and Veterans in groups [ADDRESS_1073859]  
program completion. We anticipate that interviewing 15 to 20 Veterans in each group (n = 45-
60). Groups will be purposively sampled to include both male and female Veterans. Sample 
interview guides are provided in Appendix 4 of attached IIR (Follow-up interviews questions will 
follow the same format and be developed from the initial interview findings). These participants 
will be contact[CONTACT_781158] a 30-[ADDRESS_1073860] 10–15 minutes will be open ended and elicit 
overall description of the participants’ satisfaction with the intervention and experience with the 
program. Follow up questions and prompts will focus on specific aspects of the intervention and 
barriers and facilitators.  Interviews will be conducted in the clinic either before or after scheduled  
medical visits or over the telephone, based on participant preference. 
We will also interview a subset of PACT team members (including Vet-Coaches, PCPs, RN 
case managers, LPNs, and pharmacists) whose patients’ were enrolled in the program. 
Because we want to determine potential barriers and facilitators to implementation from the 
provider and PACT team perspective , the interviews will focus on staff perceptions of how the 
intervention helped, how it could be improved, potential barriers they can identify in 
implementation, and what changes in implementation strategy could potentially improve uptake. 
Vet-Coaches and PACT team members will be asked to participate in voluntary qualitative 
interviews at the end of the study.  They will be provided with an Information Statement detailing  
their subject rights and study activities they will be asked to participate in. Standard audio 
equipment will be used to record telephone-based interviews. At their exit interview, we will 
assess satisfaction with the program and offer opportunities to provide feedback. Although the 
exact number of subjects needed to generate meaningful qualitative results cannot be identified 
a priori, the main goals relate to developi[INVESTIGATOR_781126]-oriented perspectives, selecting subjects  
with a range of characteristics and perspectives, and achieving saturation (meaning the point at 
which subsequent interviews fail to produce new findings) for overriding content themes. Even 
though the precise number of cases required to achieve thematic saturation cannot be 
predetermined, the clarity of the topic being studied, multiple interviews with participants over 
time, the use of focused research questions and researcher experience decrease the sample 
needed for meaningful findings. We anticipate interviewing  [ADDRESS_1073861] team 
members will be sufficient for meaningful findings. We will use purposive sampling to include up  
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 24 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073862] information on the barriers and facilitators of implementation. We include features  
in the study implementation to promote external validity such as inclusive enrollment criteria and  
using the minimum intervention needed for change (e.g. implementing with the minimum 
intensity we believe necessary for effectiveness). We will ascertain the degree of participation 
by [CONTACT_781159]. We will use the following measures: (1) ability to contact [CONTACT_153718] (# reached/ # contact [CONTACT_14386]); (2) study enrollment rate (#enrolled in study/ 
#eligible reached); (3) study participation rate (# with at least one follow-up home visit or 
participation in one project group activity/ # eligible reached); (4) program dropout rate (# 
discharged from program/ # participating in program); (5) study completion rate (# completing 
exit data collection/ # enrolled in study). The project manager will track feasibility by [CONTACT_781160], FTE used, space used, and logistical barriers encountered. Program staff will 
complete time study logs weekly during the first six months of the project and then for one week 
every quarter. The program manager will collect data on adaptability by [CONTACT_781161]. We will assess components that 
worked well or did not through participant satisfaction questions at the exit interview, and semi-
annual discussions among project staff and investigators.
5.6 Data Analysis
Provide sample size determination and analysis (include anticipated rate 
of screen failures, study discontinuations, lost to follow-up etc.).
Describe how, where and by [CONTACT_427351].
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_1073863] one other CVD risk, the Vet-COACH intervention targeting behavior change and disease 
self-management will decrease SBP by 4 mmHg compared to a usual care + education control 
group. 
Baseline Analysis and descriptive statistics  
Equivalence of participants in the intervention and control arms will be assessed on 
demographic and clinical variables, including outcomes, health status, co-morbidity, and 
utilization variables. Because this is a randomized controlled trial, no systematic bias is 
anticipated. However, we will conduct adjusted analyses and use as covariates those factors 
that are thought a priori to be related to the primary and secondary outcomes. We will report 
summary statistics for all baseline covariates and outcomes (means, standard deviations, and 
quartiles for continuous variables; frequencies and percentages for binary variables) by 
[CONTACT_196880]. 
Primary Effectiveness Analyses for Specific Aims 1 & [ADDRESS_1073864] will be included in the 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 25 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
primary analytic model to take this correlation into account. For the Aim 1 primary outcome 
analysis, we will evaluate change in systolic blood pressure, from baseline to 12 months, in the 
intervention versus controls using the following random effects model:
 is the change in blood pressure from baseline to [ADDRESS_1073865] i having 
provider j (and k for peer coach intervention participants); 
  is the overall mean; 
  is group 
 are baseline 
 is the random effect for 
 is multiplied 
by [CONTACT_781162], as suggest by [CONTACT_781163]81). Our main goal is to test 
whether 
 which is the difference in BP change (from baseline to 12 months) between the 
intervention and control groups. All Aim [ADDRESS_1073866] of the intervention on primary outcomes, treatment receipt (“dose” of intervention: number  
of visits, phone calls, proportion of required modules delivered).  
Specific Aim 3
We will calculate intervention costs per patient. These costs will include all labor and materials 
(pamphlets, home BP monitors, etc.) used in the intervention divided by [CONTACT_781164].
Specific Aim 4 - Qualitative analysis   
Transcripts will be analyzed using simultaneous deductive and inductive content analysis. 
Inductive content analysis consists of open/unstructured coding and allows for the identification 
of emergent previously unidentified or unexpected themes while deductive content analysis is 
more structured and consists of identifying meaning units that fit within pre-identified a-priori 
categories.82 A-priori codes for patient interviews will include, but not be limited to: patient 
satisfaction, barriers and facilitators to participation, and acceptability.  A-priori codes for staff 
interviews will include, but not be limited to: barriers and facilitators to implementation, and 
sustainability acceptability, and changes in PACT team involvement in care . Coding will be done  
while simultaneously listening to the audio file and reading the transcripts. Sub-codes will be 
developed by [CONTACT_781165]-coding schemes based on 
representative recordings. Quotes that do not accurately fit existing sub-codes will be used to 
develop new sub-codes iteratively. Qualitative data collection and analysis will be blind 
regarding participants’ responder/non-responder status until the final merging stage of analysis. 
The results of the analysis process will be reviewed by [CONTACT_781166]. Accountability will be supported 
by [CONTACT_781167].
Missing data analyses
All appropriate efforts will be made to avoid missing data. Accruing data will be monitored for 
the presence of missing values, and the study coordinator will investigate causes and/or 
remedies for missing data. For key analysis variables that have 15% or more missing values, 
we will analyze patient and clinical factors that are associated with having a missing value. We 
will then perform analyses using multiple imputations to impute these key variables to allow 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 26 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073867] a clinically significant change in systolic blood pressure 
(SBP) of 5 mmHg) consistent with findings from other peer support and CHW studies.83,[ADDRESS_1073868] is n= 354 Veterans, which assumes 80% power, 15% attrition, alpha 
0.05, a PEER ICC 0.007, a provider ICC 0.015, provider cluster size of 5 (70 providers), PEER 
cluster size of 35 (5 PEER coaches).The SD of 14.2 mmHg was taken from a recently published  
review of CV risk factors among Veterans.85 We estimate we will lose 15% of the sample (n-53),  
which would result in a final sample size of N=400(or 200in each arm), similar to our rate in our 
ongoing CHW trial52 and previous CHW studies.86,[ADDRESS_1073869] adjusted both sample size calculations for potential 
clustering by [CONTACT_781168], using estimates of ICC = 0.015 based on other 
published hypertension trials among primary care practices88,89 and clustering by [CONTACT_781169] = 0.007, based on a randomized trial of peer support among individuals with 
diabetes.90 We will randomize n=200 Veterans to the control and n=200 Veterans to the 
intervention group (which will ultimately be reduced to 177 Veterans in the control and 177 
Veterans in the intervention group after an estimated 15% loss of participants), to have a power 
of 80% to detect a difference of  5 mmHg in systolic blood pressure between groups. 
5.7 Withdrawal of Subjects
Describe any anticipated circumstances under which subjects will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent. 
Describe the consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from the 
research and the procedures for orderly termination of participation by [CONTACT_1560] (e.g., the subject contact[CONTACT_427332]-of-study 
visit).
We do not anticipate any circumstances under which subjects will be withdrawn from  
the research without their consent.  In our previous peer support trials, this has not 
occurred.  The only circumstance where a participant would be withdrawn from the 
study would be in the event of threatening or unsafe behavior toward the study staff 
or peer health coaches.  If a participant decides to stop the study for any reason, the 
intervention visits would end and study personnel would attempt to schedule an exit 
visit.  
6.0Reporting
`
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 27 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
Include procedures for reporting unanticipated problems, serious adverse events,  
and protocol deviations.
Study progress and safety will be reviewed monthly (and more frequently if needed). 
An annual report will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_45186] a list and summarization of 
adverse events.  In addition, the annual report will the study is justified on the basis 
that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of the study; and (5) 
conditions whereby [CONTACT_72771]. Safety information 
will be collected on the data collection forms at study visits, follow up phone calls and  
any additional contact [CONTACT_20688]. PI [INVESTIGATOR_781127] (encounter) 
forms on an ongoing basis for data address (1) whether adverse event rates are 
consistent with pre-study assumptions; (2) reason for dropouts from the study; (3) 
whether all participants met entry criteria; (4) whether continuation of completeness 
and accuracy as well as protocol compliance. Encounter forms will be stored and 
transported in locked security bags immediately upon completion.  These bags will 
be used to transport the study data to the VA Puget Sound office location every two 
weeks at study staff meetings.  The encounter form will have a cover sheet 
containing the participant’s name, address & phone number (for identification 
purposes), which will be detached from the pages of the form containing data upon 
receipt by [CONTACT_781170].  Encounter form pages  
containing study data will not contain any identifying information (such as name, 
phone number, etc.) Pages containing data have a study ID to link data. The cover 
sheet and study data will be stored separately in a locked cabinet.  Safety data 
collection starts with enrollment of subjects. This includes study visits, follow up 
phone calls and any additional contact [CONTACT_20688].
The frequency of data review for this study differs according to the type of data and 
can be summarized as follows: Subject accrual (adherence to protocol regarding 
demographics, inclusion/exclusion) will be reviewed quarterly by [CONTACT_978]. Adverse 
event rates (injuries) will be reviewed quarterly by [CONTACT_978]. Compliance to treatment 
will be reviewed by [CONTACT_781171]-monthly. 
7.0Privacy and Confidentiality
Describe whether the study will use or disclose subjects’ Protected Health 
Information (PHI). 
Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access, password protection, encryption, physical controls, 
Certificates of Confidentiality, and separation of identifiers and data)
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 28 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073870] 
allowing her/him to opt out of further contact [CONTACT_781172]. A number of steps will be taken to ensure confidentiality and data 
protection throughout the rest of the study. All data gathered at the enrollment visit (the 
questionnaire, physical exam, health goals) and subsequent information will be 
confidential. Data will be kept in offices at VA Puget Sound HSR&D with locked filing 
cabinets and password protected computers. The investigators, project coordinator, and 
study staff will be the only staff to have access to confidential records. ID numbers rather  
than names will be used whenever possible. As part of the study, individuals will be 
reassured that information is to be kept confidential, no single individual will be identified 
by [CONTACT_781173]. All data files will be maintained on password 
protected PCs and password protected computer networks. Only aggregate data will be 
presented to external audiences. Individual identifiers will be deleted when they are no 
longer necessary for the project. 
8.0Communication Plan
Include a plan for obtaining required coordinating site approval (if we are a 
participating site of a multi-site study).
Include plan for keepi[INVESTIGATOR_427294], 
informed consent, and HIPAA authorization , if we are the coordinating center. If 
we are a participating site, include a plan for how this information will be shared 
with you by [CONTACT_434].
Include plan for informing local sites of any Serious Adverse Events, 
Unanticipated Problems, or interim results that may impact conduct of the study  if 
we are the coordinating center.  If we are a participating site, include a plan for 
how this information will be shared with you by [CONTACT_434].
N/A – We have 1 primary site.
9.0Information Security and Privacy
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_781128] (participant death and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]). For each such event, [CONTACT_92790] will evaluate the potential for 
causal relations between the incident and study or intervention procedures. Any 
adverse effects of the study will be reported to the participant and his/her health 
care provider. Major adverse events requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_781129] 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 29 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073871] 
confidentiality of collected information. Code keys and data collection documents 
(when not in use) will be kept in a locked file or password-protected terminals.
Several steps will be taken to minimize the risk of invasion of privacy.  Initial 
contact [CONTACT_781174] a  
stamped post card allowing her/him to opt out of further contact [CONTACT_781175]. A number of steps will be taken to 
ensure confidentiality and data protection throughout the rest of the study. All 
data gathered at the enrollment visit (the questionnaire, physical exam, health 
goals) and subsequent information will be confidential. Data will be kept in offices  
at VA Puget Sound HSR&D with locked filing cabinets and password protected 
computers. The investigators, project coordinator, and study staff will be the only 
staff to have access to confidential records. ID numbers rather than names will 
be used whenever possible. As part of the study, individuals will be reassured 
that information is to be kept confidential, no single individual will be identified by 
[CONTACT_781173]. All data files will be maintained on 
password protected PCs and password protected computer networks. Only 
aggregate data will be presented to external audiences. Individual identifiers will 
be deleted when they are no longer necessary for the project.
10.0References
REFERENCES
1.Berry JD, Dyer A, Cai X, et al. Lifetime risks of cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
Jan 26 2012;366(4):321-329.
2.Vimalananda VG, Miller DR, Christiansen CL, Wang W, Tremblay P, Fincke BG. 
Cardiovascular disease risk factors among women veterans at VA medical facilities. J 
Gen Intern Med. Jul 2013;[ADDRESS_1073872] 2:S517-523.
3.Johnson ML, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_216390] K, Battleman DS, Beyth RJ. Therapeutic goal attainment in patients 
with hypertension and dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035]. Medical care. Jan 2006;44(1):39-46.
4.Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong Y, Labarthe D, et al. Defining and setting national goals for 
cardiovascular health promotion and disease reduction: the American Heart 
Association's strategic Impact Goal through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. Feb 2 
2010;121(4):586-613.
5.Nelson KM. The burden of obesity among a national probability sample of veterans. 
Journal of general internal medicine. Sep 2006;21(9):915-919.
6.Brown DW. Smoking prevalence among US veterans. J Gen Intern Med. Feb 
2010;25(2):147-149.
7.Viswanathan M, Kraschnewski JL, Nishikawa B, et al. Outcomes and costs of 
community health worker interventions: a systematic review. Medical care. Sep 
2010;48(9):792-808.
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 30 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, [ADDRESS_1073873] of a community-based multiple 
risk factor intervention on cardiovascular risk in black families with a history of premature  
coronary disease. Circulation. Mar 15 2005;111(10):1298-1304.
9.Krieger J, Collier C, Song L, Martin D. Linking community-based blood pressure 
measurement to clinical care: a randomized controlled trial of outreach and tracking by 
[CONTACT_29430]. American journal of public health. Jun 1999;89(6):856-861.
10.Brownstein JN, Chowdhury FM, Norris SL, et al. Effectiveness of community health 
workers in the care of people with hypertension. American journal of preventive 
medicine. May 2007;32(5):435-447.
11.Morisky DE, Levine DM, Green LW, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] S, Russell RP, Smith CR. Five-year blood 
pressure control and mortality following health education for hypertensive patients. Am J 
Public Health. Feb 1983;73(2):153-162.
12.Long JA, Jahnle EC, Richardson DM, Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. Peer mentoring and 
financial incentives to improve glucose control in African American veterans: a 
randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. Mar 20 2012;156(6):416-424.
13.Heisler M, Vijan S, Makki F, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182]. Diabetes control with reciprocal peer support 
versus nurse care management: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. Oct 19 
2010;153(8):507-515.
14.Barber J, Rosenheck R, Armstrong M, Resnick S. Monitoring the Dissemination of Peer 
Support in the VA Healthcare System. Community mental health journal. 2008/12/01 
2008;44(6):433-441.
15.Pfeiffer PN, Heisler M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Rogers MA, Valenstein M. Efficacy of peer support 
interventions for depression: a meta-analysis. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. Jan-Feb 
2011;33(1):29-36.
16.Rosland AM, Nelson K, Sun H, et al. The patient-centered medical home in the Veterans  
Health Administration. The American journal of managed care. Jul 2013;19(7):e263-272.
17.D'Agostino RB, Sr., Vasan RS, Pencina MJ, et al. General cardiovascular risk profile for 
use in primary care: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. Feb 12 2008;117(6):743-
753.
18.Schroeder SA. Shattuck Lecture. We can do better--improving the health of the 
American people. N Engl J Med. Sep 20 2007;357(12):1221-1228.
19.Danaei G, Ding EL, Mozaffarian D, et al. The preventable causes of death in the United 
States: comparative risk assessment of dietary, lifestyle, and metabolic risk factors. 
PLoS medicine. Apr 28 2009;6(4):e1000058.
20.Murray CJ, Lauer JA, Hutubessy RC, et al. Effectiveness and costs of interventions to 
lower systolic blood pressure and cholesterol: a global and regional analysis on 
reduction of cardiovascular-disease risk. Lancet. Mar 1 2003;361(9359):717-725.
21.Ford ES, Li C, Zhao G, Pearson WS, Capewell S. Trends in the prevalence of low risk 
factor burden for cardiovascular disease among [LOCATION_002] adults. Circulation. Sep 
29 2009;120(13):1181-1188.
22.Bambs C, Kip KE, Dinga A, Mulukutla SR, Aiyer AN, Reis SE. Low prevalence of "ideal 
cardiovascular health" in a community-based population: the heart strategies 
concentrating on risk evaluation (Heart SCORE) study. Circulation. Mar 1 
2011;123(8):850-857.
23.Yoon J, Scott JY, Phibbs CS, Wagner TH. Recent trends in veterans affairs chronic 
condition spending. Popul Health Manag. Dec 2011;14(6):293-298.
24.van Berkel TF, Boersma H, Roos-Hesselink JW, Erdman RA, Simoons ML. Impact of 
smoking cessation and smoking interventions in patients with coronary heart disease. 
European heart journal. Dec 1999;20(24):1773-1782.
25.Hooper L, Summerbell CD, Thompson R, et al. Reduced or modified dietary fat for 
preventing cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;5:CD002137.
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 31 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
26.Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure:  
the JNC 7 report. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. May 21 
2003;289(19):2560-2572.
27.Blumenthal JA, Baby[CONTACT_173152], Hinderliter A, et al. Effects of the DASH diet alone and in 
combination with exercise and weight loss on blood pressure and cardiovascular 
biomarkers in men and women with high blood pressure: the ENCORE study. Archives 
of internal medicine. Jan 25 2010;170(2):126-135.
28.Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Espeland MA, et al. Sodium reduction and weight loss in the 
treatment of hypertension in older persons: a randomized controlled trial of 
nonpharmacologic interventions in the elderly (TONE). TONE Collaborative Research 
Group. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association. Mar 18 
1998;279(11):839-846.
29.Effects of weight loss and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure and 
hypertension incidence in overweight people with high-normal blood pressure. The Trials  
of Hypertension Prevention, phase II. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention 
Collaborative Research Group. Archives of internal medicine. Mar 24 1997;157(6):657-
667.
30.Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary 
sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium 
Collaborative Research Group. The New England journal of medicine. Jan 4 
2001;344(1):3-10.
31.Kelley GA, Kelley KS. Progressive resistance exercise and resting blood pressure : A 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. Mar 2000;35(3):838-843.
32.Whelton SP, Chin A, Xin X, He J. Effect of aerobic exercise on blood pressure: a meta-
analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. Apr 2 2002;136(7):493-503.
33.Xin X, He J, Frontini MG, Ogden LG, Motsamai OI, Whelton PK. Effects of alcohol 
reduction on blood pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Hypertension. Nov 2001;38(5):1112-1117.
34.Bosworth HB, Olsen MK, McCant F, et al. Hypertension Intervention Nurse Telemedicine  
Study (HINTS): testing a multifactorial tailored behavioral/educational and a medication 
management intervention for blood pressure control. Am Heart J. Jun 2007;153(6):918-
924.
35.Melnyk SD, Zullig LL, McCant F, et al. Telemedicine cardiovascular risk reduction in 
veterans. Am Heart J. Apr 2013;165(4):501-508.
36.McCall N, Cromwell J. Results of the Medicare Health Support disease-management 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_29426]. N Engl J Med. Nov 3 2011;365(18):1704-1712.
37.Crowley MJ, Powers BJ, Olsen MK, et al. The Cholesterol, Hypertension, And Glucose 
Education (CHANGE) study: Results from a randomized controlled trial in African 
Americans with diabetes. Am Heart J. Jul 2013;166(1):179-[ADDRESS_1073874] outreach program in patients with diabetes mellitus in 2 high-
performing health systems: the adherence and intensification of medications cluster 
randomized, controlled pragmatic trial. Circulation. Jun 12 2012;125(23):2863-2872.
39.Bosworth HB, Olsen MK, Dudley T, et al. Patient education and provider decision 
support to control blood pressure in primary care: a cluster randomized trial. Am Heart J. 
Mar 2009;157(3):450-456.
40.Wilson SR, Cram P. Another sobering result for home telehealth-and where we might go  
next. Arch Intern Med. May 28 2012;172(10):779-780.
41.Balcazar H, Lee Rosenthal E, Nell Brownstein J, Rush CH, Matos S, Hernandez L. 
Community Health Workers Can Be a Public Health Force for Change in the United 
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 32 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
States: Three Actions for a New Paradigm. American journal of public health. 
2011/12/01 2011;101(12):2199-2203.
42.Brownstein JN, Bone LR, Dennison CR, Hill MN, Kim MT, Levine DM. Community health  
workers as interventionists in the prevention and control of heart disease and stroke. 
American journal of preventive medicine. 2005;29(5):128-133.
43.Paul G, Smith SM, Whitford D, O'Kelly F, O'Dowd T. Development of a complex 
intervention to test the effectiveness of peer support in type 2 diabetes. BMC Health 
Serv Res. 2007;7:136.
44.Allen JK, Dennison Himmelfarb CR, Szanton SL, Frick KD. Cost-effectiveness of Nurse 
Practitioner/Community Health Worker Care to Reduce Cardiovascular Health 
Disparities. J Cardiovasc Nurs. Apr 30 2013.
45.Allicock M, Haynes-Maslow L, Carr C, Orr M, Kahwati LC, Weiner BJ. Training Veterans 
to Provide Peer Support in a Weight-Management Program: MOVE! Preventing Chronic 
Disease. 2013;10:E185.
46.Bandura A. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological 
Review. 1977;8:191-245.
47.Clark NM. Management of chronic disease by [CONTACT_1962]. Annual review of public health. 
2003;24:289-313.
48.Leventhal L BY, Brownlee S, Diefenbach M, Leventhal EL, Patrick-Miller L, et al. Illness 
representations: theoretical foundations.  In Perceptions of health and illness. : Harwood 
Academic Publisher.
49.Hibbard JH, Mahoney ER, Stock R, Tusler M. Do Increases in Patient Activation Result 
in Improved Self-Management Behaviors? Health services research. 2007;42(4):1443-
1463.
50.Rollnick S, Mason P, Butler C. Health Behavior Change . Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 2000.
51.van Dam HA, van der Horst FG, Knoops L, Ryckman RM, Crebolder HF, van den Borne 
BH. Social support in diabetes: a systematic review of controlled intervention studies. 
Patient education and counseling. Oct 2005;59(1):1-12.
52.Nelson K, Drain N, Robinson J, et al. Peer Support for Achieving Independence in 
Diabetes (Peer-AID): Design, methods and baseline characteristics of a randomized 
controlled trial of community health worker assisted diabetes self-management support. 
Contemporary clinical trials. Jul 2014;38(2):361-369.
53.Diao D, Wright JM, Cundiff DK, Gueyffier F. Pharmacotherapy for mild hypertension. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;8:CD006742.
54.Wing RR, Bolin P, Brancati FL, et al. Cardiovascular effects of intensive lifestyle 
intervention in type 2 diabetes. The New England journal of medicine. Jul 11 
2013;369(2):145-154.
55.U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, National Center for Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention, web-based educational materials.  [online]
56.Siebenhofer A, Jeitler K, Berghold A, et al. Long-term effects of weight-reducing diets in 
hypertensive patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2011(9):CD008274.
57.CDC, National Center for Health Statistics, National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey 2011-2012, web-based. [online]
58.Kim JW, Bosworth HB, Voils CI, et al. How well do clinic-based blood pressure 
measurements agree with the mercury standard? J Gen Intern Med. Jul 2005;20(7):647-
649.
59.Hagstromer M, Oja P, Sjostrom M. The International Physical Activity Questionnaire 
(IPAQ): a study of concurrent and construct validity. Public health nutrition. Sep 
2006;9(6):755-762.
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 33 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
60.Paxton AE, Strycker LA, Toobert DJ, Ammerman AS, Glasgow RE. Starting the 
conversation performance of a brief dietary assessment and intervention tool for health 
professionals. American journal of preventive medicine. Jan 2011;40(1):67-71.
61.Thompson FE, Midthune D, Subar AF, Kahle LL, Schatzkin A, Kipnis V. Performance of 
a short tool to assess dietary intakes of fruits and vegetables, percentage energy from 
fat and fibre. Public health nutrition. Dec 2004;7(8):1097-1105.
62.Voils, C. I., Maciejewski, M. L., Hoyle, R. H., Reeve, B. B., Gallagher, M. P., Bryson, C. 
L., & Yancy Jr., W. S. (2012). Initial validation of a self-report measure of the extent of 
and reasons for medication nonadherence. Medical Care, 50(12), 1013-1019. PMID 
22922431.63.Bryson CL, Au DH, Young B, McDonell MB, Fihn SD. A refill adherence 
algorithm for multiple short intervals to estimate refill compliance (ReComp). Medical 
care. Jun 2007;45(6):497-504.
64.Bush K, Kivlahan DR, McDonell MB, Fihn SD, Bradley KA. The AUDIT alcohol 
consumption questions (AUDIT-C): an effective brief screening test for problem drinking.  
Archives of internal medicine. 1998;158:1789-1795.
65.Lorig K SA, Ritter P, González V, Laurent D, Lynch J. Outcome Measures for Health 
Education and other Health Care Interventions. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage Publications; 
1996.
66.Solomon LS, Hays RD, Zaslavsky AM, Ding L, Cleary PD. Psychometric properties of a 
group-level Consumer Assessment of Health Plans Study (CAHPS) instrument. Medical 
care. Jan 2005;43(1):53-60.
67.Fortin M, Bravo G, Hudon C, et al. Relationship between multimorbidity and health-
related quality of life of patients in primary care. Quality of life research : an international 
journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and rehabilitation. Feb 2006;15(1):83-
91.
68.Uhlig K, Patel K, Ip S, Kitsios GD, Balk EM. Self-Measured Blood Pressure Monitoring in  
the Management of Hypertension: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Ann Intern 
Med. Aug 6 2013;159(3):185-194.
69.Wilson PW, D'Agostino RB, Levy D, Belanger AM, Silbershatz H, Kannel WB. Prediction 
of coronary heart disease using risk factor categories. Circulation. May 12 
1998;97(18):1837-1847.
70.Ware J, Snow K, Kosinski M, Gandek B. SF-36 Health Survey. Manual and 
Interpretation Guide. : The Health Institute, New England Medical Center, [LOCATION_011], MA; 
1993.
71.Hibbard JH, Stockard J, Mahoney ER, Tusler M. Development of the Patient Activation 
Measure (PAM): conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers. 
Health services research. Aug 2004;39(4 Pt 1):1005-1026.
72.Zimet GD, Powell SS, Farley GK, Werkman S, Berkoff KA. Psychometric characteristics 
of the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support. Journal of personality 
assessment. Winter 1990;55(3-4):610-617.
73.Vaglio J, Jr., Conard M, Poston WS, et al. Testing the performance of the ENRICHD 
Social Support Instrument in cardiac patients. Health Qual Life Outcomes. May 13 
2004;2:24.
74.Glasgow RE, Strycker LA, Toobert DJ, Eakin E. A social-ecologic approach to assessing  
support for disease self-management: the Chronic Illness Resources Survey. J Behav 
Med. Dec 2000;23(6):559-583.
75.National Cancer Institute, Applied Research, Cancer Control and Population Sciences, 
web-based Dietary Screener in 2010 NHIS Cancer Control Supplement. [online]
76.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Web-based Overview: BRFSS 2000 . 
[online]
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 34 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020
77.Fischer D, Stewart AL, Bloch DA, Lorig K, Laurent D, Holman H. Capturing the patient's 
view of change as a clinical outcome measure. JAMA : the journal of the American 
Medical Association. Sep 22-29 1999;282(12):1157-1162.
78.Pi[INVESTIGATOR_65528], Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for blood pressure 
measurement in humans and experimental animals: Part 1: blood pressure 
measurement in humans: a statement for professionals from the Subcommittee of 
Professional and Public Education of the American Heart Association Council on High 
Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension. Jan 2005;45(1):142-161.
79.Chew LD, Griffin JM, Partin MR, et al. Validation of screening questions for limited health  
literacy in a large VA outpatient population. Journal of general internal medicine. May 
2008;23(5):561-566.
80.Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ-[ADDRESS_1073875]. Apr 
2009;114(1-3):163-173.
81.Roberts C, Roberts SA. Design and analysis of clinical trials with clustering effects due 
to treatment. Clin Trials. 2005;2(2):152-162.
82.Elo S, Kyngäs H. The qualitative content analysis process. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing. 2008;62(1):107-115.
83.Krantz MJ, Coronel SM, Whitley EM, Dale R, Yost J, Estacio RO. Effectiveness of a 
community health worker cardiovascular risk reduction program in public health and 
health care settings. American journal of public health. Jan 2013;103(1):e19-27.
84.Levine DM, Bone LR, Hill MN, et al. The effectiveness of a community/academic health 
center partnership in decreasing the level of blood pressure in an urban African-
American population. Ethnicity & disease. Summer 2003;13(3):354-361
85.Goldstein KM, Melnyk SD, Zullig LL, et al. Heart matters: Gender and racial differences 
cardiovascular disease risk factor control among veterans. Women's health issues : 
official publication of the Jacobs Institute of Women's Health. Sep-Oct 2014;24(5):477-
483
86.Brown SA, Garcia AA, Kouzekanani K, Hanis CL. Culturally competent diabetes self-
management education for Mexican Americans: the Starr County border health initiative.  
Diabetes care. Feb 2002;25(2):259-268.
87.Gary TL, Bone LR, Hill MN, et al. Randomized controlled trial of the effects of nurse case  
manager and community health worker interventions on risk factors for diabetes-related 
complications in urban African Americans. Preventive medicine. Jul 2003;37(1):23-32.
88.Bosworth HB, Olsen MK, Neary A, et al. Take Control of Your Blood Pressure (TCYB) 
study: a multifactorial tailored behavioral and educational intervention for achieving 
blood pressure control. Patient education and counseling. Mar 2008;70(3):338-347.
89.Powers BJ, King JL, Ali R, et al. The Cholesterol, Hypertension, and Glucose Education 
(CHANGE) study for African Americans with diabetes: study design and methodology. 
Am Heart J. Sep 2009;158(3):342-348.
90.Smith SM, Paul G, Kelly A, Whitford DL, O'Shea E, O'Dowd T. Peer support for patients 
with type 2 diabetes: cluster randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2011;342:d715.
V6(11/19/2020) 
VA Puget Sound IRB Protocol Page 35 of 35
VA Puget Sound IRB 2
Effective Date: December 3, 2020