January 17, 2024  
Protocol T itle:  Hoarding Disorder Treatment With Virtual Reality  
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study Protocol /Method  
Procedure overview  
Participants diagnosed with HD participated in study interventions  for 16 weeks, including 16 weeks of 
remote BIT group sessions and 8  weeks of in -person individual VR -based sessions (the two session types  
overlapped during weeks 7 –14 of BIT). VR environments were individualized  to look like each 
participant’s cluttered room. Primary outcome  assessments were collected at Baseline (Week 0), 
immediately before  starting VR sessions (Week 6), and at Close Out (Week 17). Participants  completed 
the SSQ at the end of every session.  
Virtual  reality treatment protocol  
Beginning seven weeks into the BIT group sessions, eight weekly 1 -h individual VR sessions were 
administered (one for orien tation; seven  using the VR). Session content was consistent with protocols 
for in -home  decluttering visits (Linkovski et al., 2018). VR sessions were administered  by [CONTACT_806771]. Sessions w ere designed to augment 
sorting and discarding  skills learned in the BIT group; they are described in more detail  below.  In the first 
session, participants received psychoeducation on the VR  approach, and in Session 2, they familiarized 
themselves with the  virtual  home. In Sessions 2 and 3, the focus was on practicing cognitive skills  with 
the virtual objects. This included identifying core beliefs about  objects (“If you discarded this magazine, 
why would it be so upsetting?”)  and thinking through decision -making skills (“How many mugs would  be 
‘enough’?”), while holding the virtual object in question (a magazine,  a mug) and at times subsequently 
placing it into the virtual trash,  recycling, or donation bins.  In Sessions [ADDRESS_1113727], then started discarding items  lower on the hierarchy and 
worked their w ay up. In virtual discarding,  they placed objects into bins (trash, recycle, donate; there 
was no “keep” bin although this is sometimes used in real -life discarding practice). An  animated trash 
truck came to pi[INVESTIGATOR_806770].  Participa nts were encouraged to lean into the 
psychological immersion  of the process and the worry thoughts associated with discarding. During  
virtual discarding, they regularly rated their subjective distress on a  scale of 0 –10. As homework, they 
were assigned to actually discard one  of the items that they had virtually discarded in session (or a 
similar  item). In the final (8th) session, in addition to the VR activities, a relapse  prevention plan was also 
made.   
BIT Peer support group treatment protocol   
The BIT group met online once per week for 16 weeks and followed  the structured format detailed in 
the Buried in Treasures workbook (Tolin  et al., 2013) and the BIT facilitator’s guide (Shuer and Frost, 
2011). Each  2-h group session was led by [CONTACT_806772] (KV, TA),  one of whom was a 
doctoral trainee clinician. The content began with  psychoeducation about HD and non -acquiring skills, 
and then provided  educational content regarding skill s for discarding possessions (e.g.,  behavioral 
experiments where one discards an item and then tracks how  distressing it feels).  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
The relatively small sample size limits inference -based statistics such  as mixed effects models (MEMs); 
thus, primary analyses will be  descriptive stati stics. It is generally recommended that analysis of small  
samples, such as the present study, be descriptive (Grimes and Schulz,  2002; Lancaster et al., 2004). The 
goal is for preliminary data to support  the potential effectiveness of this approach, which can then be 
examined  in a larger study. For primary outcome measures, we calculated the  reliable change index 
(RCI; Jacobson and Truax, 1991), a statistical  approach for measuring individual change in self -report 
scores; RCIs  greater than 1.96 indicate rel iable change, likely attributable to treatment  rather than 
measurement error. To be thorough, we also note  clinically significant change on the SIR using a 
stringent standardized  criterion for this questionnaire (Norberg et al., 2021).  