Official title:  Analgesics in the pre -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]: Implications on 
hemorrhage tolerance - Fentanyl  
 
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date:  09-04-2019 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page [ADDRESS_898614] 
 
Study Title:  Analgesics in the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]: Implications on hemorrhage tolerance - Fentanyl  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_665196], Ph.D. 
Sponsor/Funding Source: Department of Defense—US Army  
Date:  
 
1. Introduction and Purpose:  
The purpose of this project is to test how the three recommended analgesics currently employed in 
the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_665197] —fentanyl, morphine, and ketamine—alter the capacity to 
tolerate a hemorrhagic insult in humans. 
 
Pain management on the battlefield is critical for the wellbeing of the soldier.  Given that a 
hemorrhagic injury on the battlefield is virtually always associated with pain, it is paramount that the 
selected pain medication does not disrupt appropriate physiological mechanisms that are beneficial towards the maintenance of blood pressure and vital organ blood flow during that hemorrhagic insult.  Current guidelines  for the selection of pain medications of a hemorrhaging soldier are based upon 
limited scientific evidence, with the vast majority of supporting studies being conducted on anesthetized animals.  Thus, the interaction between hemorrhagic shock and pain medications commonly employed on the battlefield is yet to be determined in the conscious humans.    With this background, we will address the following Specific Aims:  
• Specific Aim 1: To test the hypothesis that each of the three analgesics currently employed in 
the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_665197] —fentanyl, morphine, and ketamine—will impair the 
capacity for a conscious human to tolerate a hemorrhagic insult.  
• Specific Aim 2: To test the hypothesis that ketamine will be the least detrimental in compromising tolerance to a simulated hemorrhagic insult.  
 The data obtained from addressing these specific aims will provide the necessary scientific evidence 
in humans to support the Committee on Tactical Combat Casualty Care (CoTCCC) guidelines on the analgesic of choice for moderate to severe injuries where the casualty is in hemorrhagic shock.  Notably, such data will identify the analgesic that least compromises a human’s ability to tolerate a 
hemorrhagic insult, ultimately providing critical information to the combat medic on which analgesic 
should be employed for such an injury.    2. Background:  
Hemorrhage is the leading cause of battlefield and civilian trauma deaths (1– 3).  During the recent 
Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts, 91% of potentially survivable casualties in US soldiers were 
hemorrhage related (4).  Hypovolemic shock associated with hemorrhage occurs in concert with a 
reduction in circulating blood volume, culminating in low tissue perfusion pressure and accompanying insufficient organ perfusion to meet metabolic demands.  In the early stages of a hemorrhagic injury, compensatory mechanisms that are vital to maintain perfusion pressure.  Depending on the severity of the hemorrhagic insult, these compensatory mechanisms are sufficient to maintain perfusion to vital 
organs, such as the heart and brain.  As hemorrhage continues, however, these physiologi cal 
responses are no longer able to compensate for the loss of blood volume. The individual then 
transitions into a state of non-compensable hemorrhage, manifested by [CONTACT_665221] r esulting in decreases in systemic 
vascular resistance and cardiac output (5– 8).  Arterial pressure then falls to the point where it is 
insufficient to perfuse these vital organs, culminating in death.    Hemorrhagic injuries are always accompanied with pain, as long as the individual remains conscious.  Pain management of an injured soldier is a critical component of the medical care of that casualty (9–
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 2 of 13 11).  Current recommendations for analgesics in the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885], i.e., on the battlefield, include opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438] (morphine, fentanyl) and N -methyl -D-aspartate (NMDA) antagonists (ketamine) 
(10,11) .  Combat medics receive guidelines that originate from the Committee on Tactical Combat 
Casualty Care (CoTCCC) in choosing the ideal analgesic, based upon the type and severity of the injury (10,11).  Specifically, if the causality is experiencing moderate to severe pain AND the casualty is not in circulatory shock or respi[INVESTIGATOR_665198], then fentanyl is recommended, with morphine as an alternative if intravenous access has been obtained (10).  Conversely, if the casualty is in hemorrhagic shock or respi[INVESTIGATOR_1506], or s/he is expected to 
develop either of these conditions, then ketamine is recommended (10) .  However, the scientific basis 
for such recommendations are primarily limited to research in fully anesthetized (i.e., unconscious) 
animals.  For example, anesthetic doses (i.e., high doses that are unlikely to be employed in the pre-
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]) of drugs such as ketamine reduce or remove the otherwise benefi cial 
sympathoexcitatory responses and corresponding peripheral vasoconstriction during a hemorrhagic 
insult in mammals (7,12,13).  Moreover, morphine reduces hemorrhagic tolerance in fully 
anesthetized rats (14), greatly  increasing mortality. To our knowledge, no studies have evaluated the 
effects of analgesic doses of medications commonly employed in the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_665199] a simulated (or actual) hemorrhagic insult in humans.  Consistent with this concern, it is particularly 
noteworthy that “No studies have been published from the current conflict that review outcomes in 
combat causalities as a function of the type and route of analgesia used in combat casualties as well as the type and severity of wounds sustained, and physiological parameter indicative of circulatory or respi[INVESTIGATOR_82219].” Quote from 2014 by [CONTACT_70805]. (10).  
 We propose that if sufficient doses of commonly employed analgesics are administered to humans, otherwise appropriate cardiovascular responses to the hemorrhagic insult will be suppressed, thereby 
[CONTACT_665222].  That said, the effects of analgesic doses of 
such agents (i.e., doses that are recommended for the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]) on physiological responses necessary to preserve tolerance to a hemorrhagic insult in humans is entirely unknown.  Moreover, the aforementioned guidelines by [CONTACT_665223]- specific analgesics are not 
based upon hypothesis driven scientific evidence in humans, but rather primarily from fully 
anesthetized animals.  Thus, the applicability of that research to a soldier experiencing a hemorrhagic 
injury is questionable and remains a significant gap in the knowledgebase.       3. Concise Summary of Project:  
Three separate protocols, one for each analgesic —fentanyl, morphine, and ketamine will be 
employed.    Three laboratory visits will be required for this  protocol.  
 The first visit will begin with the consenting process. Should the interested subject qualify and agree to 
participate in the study, he/she will  undergo two separate experimental visits (placebo and fentanyl ) 
each conducted on a different day.  The protocol for each experimental visit is identical. After 
instrumentation, subjects will rest quietly followed by [CONTACT_665224] (via algometer, thermal grill, and the cold pressor test; order randomized).  Subjects will then receive the drug along with the progressive lower-body negative pressure (LBNP).  If necessary, after 
waiting for the effects of the first administration of this drug to subside, the drug will again be 
administered, followed by a recording of post-drug data and re-performance of the pain assessments.  
For the placebo trial, saline (sodium chloride 0.9% or if unavailable, 5% dextrose in water) will be administered where “Drug Administration” is indicated above. The enrolled subject will be required to complete both placebo and drug challenges for each drug.   
 
4. Study Procedures:  
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 3 of 13 All procedures in this protocol are experimental.  Therefore, none of the procedures are "standard of care." 
 
Experimental Protocol:  
Each subject will undergo two separate experimental visits (placebo and drug), each conducted on a 
different day, with the order randomized.  The selected dose (see below) is not expected to cause 
unconsciousness or significant sedation.  For  females , testing will be conducted during the same 
phase of the menstrual cycle or contraceptive use.   
The protocol, and approximate times, for each experimental visit is illustrated in Figure 1.   
 Following instrumentation and a quiet resting period, baseline data will be obtained.  This will be 
followed by [CONTACT_665225] a digital algometer, thermal grill, and a 
cold pressor test.  F ollowing  the pain assessment, the doses of the analgesic (or placebo) will be 
administered, with these doses being consistent with the US Army’s CoTCCC guidelines (10) :   
Fentanyl: (placebo and 75 µg intravenous ) 
 
 
Next, a progressive LBNP challenge will be completed until the onset of syncopal symptoms (defined 
as: profound bradycardia, a precipi[INVESTIGATOR_665200], a sustained systolic blood pressure less than 80 mmHg, and/or subjective symptoms such as l ight-headedness, sweating, nausea, or dizziness).  A fter waiting for the effects of 
the first administration of this drug to subside, the drug will again be administered, followed by a re-
performance of the pain assessments.   The purpose of repeated (i.e., two) drug administrations per 
trial is to ensure that the subject receives the peak concentration of the drug at the time of the LBNP 
testing as well as during the pain assessments .  Blood for the assessment of hemostatic responses  
will be drawn at the following time points to evaluate hemostatic function : baseline, after drug 
administration but before progressive LBNP, immediately after LBNP, and 60 min after LBNP . 
 
The following data/specimens will be measured/collected and recorded.  
• Heart rate and rhythm: electrocardiogram (ECG)  
• Arterial blood pressure:  
o R-wave gated automated auscultation of the brachial artery (Tango+)  
o B Beat-by -beat arterial blood pressure will be obtained via photoplethysmography 
(Finometer/Nexfin) 
• Internal body temperature: from an ingestible temperature sensing pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] (HQ Inc)  (or rectal 
probe)    
 
 
      Figure 1 : Timeline of each experimental day.   105 min:
Instrumentation and 
Quiet Rest30 min:
Baseline 
Data 
Collection & 
Pain 
Assessments
Drug/Placebo 
Administration45 min: 
Progressive 
LBNP to the 
onset of 
syncopal 
signs/symptoms 60 min:
Recovery to allow for 
drug effects to 
subside & Pain 
Assessments60 min:
Recovery to allow for 
drug effects to 
subside & Pain 
Assessments30 min: 
Data Collection 
& Pain 
Assessments
Drug/Placebo 
Administration
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 4 of 13 • Skin temperature: thermocouples attached at various locations on the subject  
• Cardiac output: m easured by [CONTACT_665226] (Innocor) 
• Muscle  sympathetic nerve activity: microneurography  
• Forearm blood flow: doppler ultrasound of brachial artery  
• Cerebral blood flow: transcranial Doppler and vessel diameters via Doppler ultrasound  
• Skin (cutaneous) blood flow: laser Doppler flowmetry  
• End tidal carbon dioxide: capnography  
• Oxygen saturation: pulse oximetry  
• Muscle  and brain oxygen saturation: near infrared spectroscopy  
• Compensatory reserve index: photoplethysmography of finger blood flow  
• Body mass  
• Venous catheter and blood samples: see list below  
• Saline infusion (via venous catheter)  
• Subjective pain reporting to pain assessments  (cold pressor test and thermal grill illusion test) 
• Maximum pain threshold: digital algometer  
• Urine specific gravity  
• Drug screening 
• Pregnancy test  
 
The following assays will be performed for each of the blood draws on the experimental visits:   
 
• Plasma catecholamine and vasopressin concentrations  
• Standard Complete Blood Count (CBC), venous blood gas and chemistry profile including 
platelet count 
• Proth rombin Time (PT): Evaluates the integrity of the extrinsic coagulation pathway. 
• Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT): Evaluates the integrity of the intrinsic coagulation pathway. 
• Thromboelastograph Haemostasis Analyzer  (TEG 5000): Provides multiple markers of clot 
formation and degradation from a cell -based whole-blood assay using a computer based 
analysis.   
• D-dimer: A marker of fibrinolysis.  
• Fibrinogen: Protein that thrombin coverts to fibrin during the clotting process.  
• Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA): A protein that contributes to the breakdown of clots through catalyzing the conversion of plasminogen to plasmin. 
• Antithrombin III: Inactivates enzymes facilitating coagulation (factors Xa and IIa). 
• Protein C: An anticoagulant that contributes to the regulation of clotting by [CONTACT_665227] V and VIII, as well as by [CONTACT_665228]-1 (see below). 
• Plasminogen activator inhibitor -1 (PAI -1): It inhibits tissue plasminogen activator (tPA, see 
above), thereby [CONTACT_144631]. 
• Von Willerand factor (vWF) antigen: A measure of the quantity or mass of Von Willerand protein in plasma, which contributes to the early stages of clotting.  
• Factors V and VIII: Factors essential in blood coagulation. Factor V is a critical cofactor for factor X which in turn activates factor II to IIa (Thrombin). Factor VIII is a critical cofactor for the factor IX -medicated activation of factor X. 
  
How Data/Specimens will be Collected 
• Cardiac and vascular variables: Heart rate and rhythm will be obtained from the ECG. Blood 
pressure will be obtained on the upper arm by [CONTACT_665229], while beat-by -beat blood pressure will be obtained from the finger via photoplethysmography. 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 5 of 13 Cardiac output will be measured by [CONTACT_665230]. Stroke volume will be calculated from the measurements of heart rate and cardiac output. Oxygen 
saturation will be measured using a pulse oximeter.  C erebral perfusion will be measured by 
[CONTACT_665231] .  Cerebral and forearm blood flow  will be measured by [CONTACT_665232].  
• Thermal variables: Internal body temperature will be measured using an ingestible telemetric 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] (or a rect al thermocouple probe). A weighted average of skin temperature will be obtained 
from thermocouples attached to the following six sites: upper chest, upper back, lower abdomen, lower back, thigh, and calf. Skin (cutaneous) blood flow will be measured by [CONTACT_665233].  
• Pain variables : Pain assessments will be conducted using a digital algometer to obtain 
maximum pain thresholds caused by [CONTACT_160309].  Pain assessment will also be measured by [CONTACT_665234]/her pain level (range [ADDRESS_898615] pain imaginable) during hand placement into an ice water bath (cold pressor test) as well as on a device consisting of 15 tubes alternating with perfused warm or cold water (thermal grill).   
• Other data/specimens: Muscle /brain oxygenation  will be measured using a near infrared 
spectroscopy sensor that will be secured to the skin. End-tidal carbon dioxide will be measured via capnograph. Muscle sympathetic nerve activity will be measured using microneurography. Compensatory reserve index will be estimated by [CONTACT_665235]. Body mass will be measured using a scale in a 
private area.  Venous blood samples will be collected from a peripheral arm vein. Urine specific 
gravity, drug screening and a pregnancy test will be determined from a urine sample collected at the beginning of the visit.  
 
Volume Collected  
• Urine: 1 – 2 ounces c ollected at the beginning of each visit 
• Blood: A maximum of 100 mL of blood will be collected during visits 2 and 3. 
 
De-identified data will be sent to the U.S. Army Institute of Surgical Research ([LOCATION_003]ISR) at Ft. Sam 
Houston, [LOCATION_007]  for their assistance in analyzing and interpreting the observations.  No subject 
information will be sent with these data and no subject information will be exchanged with [LOCATION_003]ISR.  
Furthermore, the [LOCATION_003]ISR will not be given access to the coding links back to subject identifiable 
information. 
 
Chronological Detail  
The times listed below are approximate and listed in order, from subject arrival.   All Specific Aims – 3 visits/subject (preliminary session: ~1 hour; 2 experimental visit s: ~5.5 hours  
each; total time ~12 hours): 
 
Visit 1 (preliminary visit)  (~1 h) 
• 60 min: consent form, HIPAA authorization, W-9 tax form, and self-reported medical history; resting blood pressure, [ADDRESS_898616], if applicable, procedure familiarization, 
and drug screen; instruction sheet for experimental visits will be provided  
 Visits 2 and 3 (experimental visits)  – 2 visits (~5.5 hours each visit) 
• 15 min: urine sample (pregnancy test, if applicable), nude body weight measurement, 
instrumentation with ECG , blood pressure cuff, skin temperature thermocouples  
• 90 min: supi[INVESTIGATOR_665201], insertion of an IV catheter in a vein of the arm, and muscle sympathetic nerve activity signal obtained 
• 30 min: baseline data collection followed by [CONTACT_665236]  (cold pressor test, thermal grill 
illusion, and pressure algometry)  
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 6 of 13 • 45 min: drug administration (placebo or fentanyl ) followed by [CONTACT_665237]/symptoms (blood pressure, cardiac output, forearm blood flow, cerebral blood flow, pulse oximeter, blood samples collected; heart rate, muscle sympathetic nerve activity 
measured continuously)  
• 60 min: recovery  
• 30 min: drug administration (placebo or fentanyl ) data collection followed by [CONTACT_665236] 
(cold pressor test, thermal grill illusion, and pressure algometry)  
• 60 min: recovery followed by [CONTACT_665236] (cold pressor test, thermal grill illusion, and pressure algometry)   
 
Primary Outcome Variables  
The primary outcome variable will be the ability to tolerate the LBNP challenge prior to the onset of signs and symptoms associated with ensuing syncope.   
 
Study Endpoints  
Data collection will end when 30 subjects  (15 men and 15 women)  have completed the experimental 
protocol.  
 
Sample Size Justification 
No study has evaluated the effects of analgesics on LBNP tolerance in humans.  The power and 
sample size estimates are based on findings from [CONTACT_40344]’s laboratory showing reduced LBNP 
tolerance in the heat-stre ssed individuals (15).  In that study heat stressed reduced LBNP tolerance 
by ~70% (997 cumulative stress index units to 303 cumulative stress index units; P<0.001).  Though we expect the analgesics to likewise reduce LBNP tolerance, we do not anticipate as large of a reduction as that observed with heat stress.  Thus, the sample size calculation was based upon an 
anticipated reduction in LBNP tolerance of half that seen with heat stress, i.e., ~35% reduction in the cumulative stress index.  Given this anticipate outcome, coupled with the associated variances 
observ ed in that study (15) , we anticipate 15 subjects per drug trial will be sufficient to address the 
primary hypothesis that the administered analgesic reduces tolerance to a simulated hemorr hagic 
insult, with a study power=0.80 at an adjusted alpha=0.015 to account for comparisons between drugs.  That value was inflated to 30 subjects in total (15 male and 15 female) to permit a comparison 
in the primary responses between sexes for each of the administered drugs.  That said, interim power 
analyses will be performed, with the number of required subjects adjusted based upon the variance of the obtained data.      
 5. Sub-Study Procedures:  
Not applicable  6. Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects:  
• 18-45 years of age  
• Healthy  
• Non-obese (body mass index less than 30 kg/m
2) 
• Body mass greater than or equal to 65 kg  
• Speak English 
 7. Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects: 
• Subjects not in the defined age range 
• Subjects who have cardiac, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], neurological and/or metabolic illnesses  
• Any known history of renal or hepatic insufficiency/disease  
• Pregnancy or breast feeding 
• Body mass less than 65 kg 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 7 of 13 • Current smokers, as well as individuals who regularly smoked within the past 3 years  
• Subjects who cannot speak  or read English  
• Positive urine drug screen 
• Currently taking pain modifying medication(s)  
 Although this study requires relatively uncomplicated procedures, inclusion of non-English speaking subjects would compromise subject safety. Consequently, it is imperative that the research and medical staff are able to communicate instantly and effectively with subjects, without the need of a translator. Therefore, the investigators feel that inclusion of non-English speakers would markedly and unnecessarily increase the risk to those participants.  
 8. Sources of Research Material:  
“Research Material” (i.e., data) will be obtained from healthy human subjects. See section 4: Study Procedures for a list of data that will be obtained.      
Healthy individuals: Complete datasets will be obtained from a total of 30 individuals ( 15 men and 15 
women).  Subjects will be 18-45 years.  
 Due to screening failures (e.g., not determined to be healthy, use of medication, etc.), we anticipate 50 subjects will be consented to achieve the desired 30 subjects.  
 
9. Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process:  
Subjects will be recruited from the Dallas/Fort Worth area using an IRB approved existing database of 
over 2500 subjects held at the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, IRB# STU 122010-188. Subjects will also be recruited using approved recruitment texts and flyers informing them of the 
study and requesting potential subjects to contact [CONTACT_665238]. The text will be used to recruit 
via ResearchMatch, CenterWatch, the Community Research Registry at UT Southwestern Medical 
Centre, Facebook , twitter, home owner associations, local churches, health and fitness centers /clubs, 
university and community alumni associations, country clubs, local university campuses, as well as e-mail notices sent within UT Southwestern Campus Updates and throughout the [LOCATION_007] Health Resources network. Qualified staff within the Thermal and Vascular Physiology Laboratory at the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, will assist with subject recruiting, obtaining 
informed consent, and scheduling logistics.  
 
A qualified member of the research team will perform an initial contact [CONTACT_665239]. During this initial contact, the member of the research team will explain the study (purpose, procedures, risks, benefits, alternatives to participation, etc.) in lay language. Furthermore, 
the research team member will perform an initial screening to ensure that the inclusion criteria are met 
and that the subject does not meet any of the exclusion criteria to participate in the study. If all inclusion criteria are met, the individual will be familiarized with the procedures used during data 
collection. T he interested individual will subsequently be invited to visit the laboratory, during which 
he/she will be provided adequate time to read the consent, ask additional questions and consider 
his/her options. Care will be taken that the subject is not pressured but that staff is available to address any questions. If the potential subject indicates that they would like to participate, open-ended questions will be asked to assess comprehension. If however, the potential subject needs additional time he/she can take the consent home to consider further. Staff phone numbers will be provided for questions. For subjects that agree to participate in the study, the potential subject will be asked to sign the consent form, fill out a self-reported medical history and we will measure their 
resting blood pressure, perform a resting [ADDRESS_898617] a urine specimen to complete a 
urine drug screen to ensure they qualify for the study.  
 
A partial waiver of HIPAA Authorization will be sought for the purpose of recruiting. Screening information is required to determine the eligibility of potential subjects, which is necessary in order to 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page [ADDRESS_898618]/consent before determining eligibility. Excessive amounts 
of time and other resources could potentially be wasted inviting subjects to participate without proper 
preliminary screening that would help determine eligibility. With regard to information collected, all preliminary screening information will be shredded if it is determined that the individual does not qualify or if the subject is not consented. If the individual qualifies and is consented, the preliminary screening information will be included in the subject’s laboratory chart.  
Persons from vulnerable populations will not be invited to participate. Potential subjects will not be 
coerced to participate, nor will coercive language be used in any recruitment materials. When presenting the study to subjects, all risks will be outlined, and it will be explained as completely voluntary.  
 
Subjects will be paid $35.[ADDRESS_898619] competed. If needed, ground 
transportation to and from the research center (IEEM)  will be pr ovided or reimbursed.  Subjects will 
receive a check in the mail from [LOCATION_007] Health Presby[CONTACT_24021][INVESTIGATOR_665202] [ADDRESS_898620] wages.   
 10. Potential Risks: 
The techniques utilized in the research project that pose potential risks are outlined below:  
Peripheral intravenous (IV) catheter  and saline infusion:  A sterile catheter will be inserted into an arm 
vein for the purposes of analgesic  administration (i.e. fentanyl, morphine, and ketamine)  and blood 
collection. In order to maintain patency of the catheter, saline will be infused through the venous 
catheter.   There is a small risk of infection and a still smaller risk of a blood clot or breakage of the 
catheter. The likelihood of these complications is remote (about 1 in 10,000) when the procedure is carried out by [CONTACT_175243], as during this study. There is also a 
small risk of the catheter perforating the vein or not being inserted into a blood vessel. The subject 
may have discomfort, bleeding, and/or bruising and on rare occasions, a person may feel dizzy or faint.  
 
Analgesic ( Fentanyl ) administration:  
Fentanyl  is a potent, synthetic opi[INVESTIGATOR_665203] a rapid onset and short duration of action.  
It is a pure agonist of the mu-opi[INVESTIGATOR_238299].  Fentanyl has common side effects (>10% of patients) such as diarrhea, nausea, constipation, dry mouth, somnolence, confusion, weakness, sweating, and less frequently (3-10% of patients) hallucinations, dyspnea, apnea, hypoventilation, and urinary retention.  The higher the dose, the greater frequency and severity of adverse effects.  
Fentanyl has a therapeutic index of 300 (therapeutic index = median lethal dose (LD50)/ lowest 
median effective dose (ED50).  R espi[INVESTIGATOR_665204].  T here is a specific, rapid and complete antagonist readily available.  Naloxone will 
completely reverse all opi[INVESTIGATOR_175235] [ADDRESS_898621].  However, at the doses and times in the study proposed, it is not our intent or expectation that significant respi[INVESTIGATOR_175236].  Moreover, we will monitor the patient's vital signs 
continuously.  We will monitor pulse oximetry and end tidal carbon dioxide continuously. These two 
monitors will provide sufficient accuracy and robustness to administer this medication safely.  An anes thesiologist will be present at all times to observe and intervene should the patient should the 
slightest evidence of respi[INVESTIGATOR_665205].  All standard 
airway intervention equipment will be readily available at all times. 
 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 9 of 13 Microneurography: There is a slight risk of a temporary pi[INVESTIGATOR_665206]; however this feeling goes away 
within [ADDRESS_898622]: This technique for pain assessment does not cause any damage to human 
tissue and therefore presents no risks.  The thermal grill apparatus consists of alternating tubes perfused with cold and warm water at innocuous temperatures .  Contact [CONTACT_665240] 
“illusion” consistent with  a painful burning sensation upon.  Withdrawal from contact[CONTACT_665241].  Su bjects are in contact [CONTACT_665242].   
 
Cold pressor t est:  This widely used technique for pain assessment presents minimal risk.  For this 
test, immersion of the hand in ice cold water will elicit painful sensations as well as  an increase in 
blood pressure.  These typi[INVESTIGATOR_665207]’s hand from the ice water.  The maximum duration for this test is three minutes and the 
subject can voluntarily remove the hand from the ice water at any time.   
 
Pressure a lgometry : This pain assessment technique is conducted by [CONTACT_175242] a 
hand-held digital algometer on the subject’s digit .  Force will be gradually increased and the peak 
force is recorded when the subject first reports a painful sensation.  Removal of the pressure from the 
algometer immediately relieves the painful sensation and the subject can voluntarily stop the test at 
any time.   
 
Measurement of internal temperature:  Intestinal temperature will be measured with a temperature-
sensing pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] (HQ Inc) that is swallowed by [CONTACT_665243] a receiver 
as it traverses the digestive tract. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_665208]. Although exceptionally rare, there are some risks associated with taking this pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]. It is 
possible that the pi[INVESTIGATOR_665209]’s lungs. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_665210] a perforation, 
blockage or infection of the intestinal tract, requiring endoscopy or surgery to remove it. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_665211] [ADDRESS_898623]’s medical history prior to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_665212]. Should a subject have any 
contraindications in taking the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382], this procedure will not be obtained, rather rectal temperature will be 
obtained.  
 If rectal temperature is used the subject will self-insert a small, single-use rectal temperature probe approximately 3 mm in diameter (Mon-a-therm General Purpose Temperature Probe). This probe will 
be inserted to a pre-marked depth of [ADDRESS_898624] had any heart conditions, inflammatory bowel or colon disease, and/or rectal or anal surgery. They also may not use the probe if they currently have hemorrhoids (internal or external), rectal bleeding, diarrhea or fecal impaction in the rectum. Each subject’s medical history will be verified prior to self-insertion of the rectal probe by [CONTACT_54340].  
 
Electrocardiogram :  In some cases, individuals have developed a rash or redness where the patches 
were attached. This rash is mild and typi[INVESTIGATOR_665213]. 
 
Lower body negative pressure : The possible risks of this procedure are light-headedness, feeling 
faint, nausea and rarely a subject may faint. If this occurs, the procedure will stopped and the subject will begin to feel better almost immediately.  
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 10 of 13  
Loss of confidentiality:  Anytime information is collected there is a potential risk for loss of 
confidentiality. Every effort will be made to keep information confidential, however, this cannot be guaranteed. 
 
All other procedures  (blood pressure, cardiac output, stroke volume, skin temperature, forearm blood 
flow, cerebral blood flow, skin blood flow, compensatory reserve index, end tidal carbon dioxide, 
oxygen saturation, muscle and brain oxygen saturation, body mass, urine specific gravity, drug 
screening, and pregnancy test) have little or  no risk involved.  
 
Overall, it is our opi[INVESTIGATOR_665214]. The researchers are experienced with all procedures outlined in this study.  A critical care trained RN will monitor the well -being of each subject and will be available as needed. Moreover, Joseph 
Hendrix, MD (a board certified anesthesiologist) will oversee the administration of the analgesics and 
will continuously monitor the subjects throughout the protocol.  [CONTACT_665251] has specialized training in Pain Medicine, which includes the administration of the assessed drugs in his clinical practice; thus, he is well versed in the administration of these drugs and any potential adverse effects.  In addition, 
Benjamin D. Levine, MD, Medical Director of the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, or 
cardiology fellows currently working at the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine, will be 
available to assist as needed. 
 11. Subject Safety and Data Monitoring:  
The researchers are experienced with all procedures outlined in this study. All subjects must be healthy to participate. The risks and benefits will be explained to the subjects before each signs an 
institutionally -approved consent form.  
 
Craig Crandall, Ph.D will oversee subject safety and data integrity throughout the study. [CONTACT_40344] 
has conducted studies such as these for ~20 years and is qualified to perform these responsibilities. Data monitoring will include study accrual rate, participant experience, study 
attrition/withdrawals/dropouts, patterns of adverse and/or unanticipated events, patterns of protocol 
violations and/or deviations and changes in risk/benefit. The data will be reviewed at least on a quarterly basis. A progress report summarizing the data will be submitted to the IRB at the time of continuing review and more frequently as indicated.   As with all studies involving human subjects, there are risks associated with experimentation.  To 
reduce these risks, all subjects must be healthy to enroll.  Since the CoTCCC guidelines for dosing of 
the indicated drugs are not weight specific, each subject must have a body mass of at least [ADDRESS_898625].  As stated above, Joseph Hendrix, MD (a 
board certified anesthesiologist) will  oversee the administration of the analgesics and will continuously 
monitor the subjects throughout the protocol.  Dr . Hendrix has specialized training in Pain Medicine, 
which includes the administration of the assessed drugs in his clinical practice; thus, he is well versed in the administration of these drugs and any potential adverse effects.  The protocol dictates that subjects remain awake/conscious throughout the procedures. The absence of significant sedation or altered of mental status will be ensured by [CONTACT_665244].  The subjects will have their vital signs monitored continuously with standard patient monitors.  
Resuscitative equipment will be readily available, including but not limited to supplemental oxygen, 
suction capacity, cardiac arrest cart with intravenous fluid and drugs (including naloxone), airway and 
intubation devices.  [CONTACT_175247] will intervene to ensure patient safety with any or all of these resources should the subject have any derangements outside of acceptable normal parameters for their vital signs.  Upon the conclusion of the protocol, subjects will not be permitted to leave the 
laboratory until all of the following discharge variables are met:  
• The subject presents with an Aldrete score (post- anesthesia discharge scoring system) 
matching baseline,  
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 11 of 13 • The subject demonstrates a awareness of time, person, and place and is able to answer questions appropriately 
• The subject is able to stand up and walk for  5 minutes without assistance (supervised)  
• The subject is able to drink water and eat crackers without reports of nausea 
• The subject able to void   
Moreover —to be consistent with THR/UTSW hospi[INVESTIGATOR_48799] —the subject will be required to have 
a responsible adult bring them home.  The responsible adult can either drive the subject home or accompany the subject home using ground transportation (bus, train, or taxi service).  The subject will 
also receive the recommendation to have someone observe them for the rest of the day and 
overnight.  
 The doses of the drugs are expected to cause analgesia, but with the subject remaining conscious and responsive to verbal commands.  These drugs are routinely administered for pain control in the absence of significant sedation.  Nevertheless, if after the first or second administration of the selected analgesi c the subject is  not responding appropriately to verbal commands (e.g., is 
excessively sleepy/sedated) or experiences any related adverse responses to the administered drug, the trial will be cancelled for that subject.   
 Subjects who, during the study, manifest a new onset, previously hidden or unknown cardiovascular, neurological or metabolic disease/illness will be removed from the study.   
The study will be stopped immediately for safety if a serious, unexpected problem or adverse event 
occurs. The entire project will  be terminated if this event is determined to place future participants at 
undue risk.  
 
12. Procedures to Maintain Confidentiality: 
1) Information will be given to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_665215].  
2) Information concerning subject’s medical histories will be furnished by [CONTACT_665245].  
3) This information will be used to determine qualification for participation in the investigation.  
4) Personal information will remain in the subject’s study chart and will not be released in any form to others unless permitted by [CONTACT_423].  
5) The consenting process for each subject will be conducted in a private room.  
6) No subject will be identified by [CONTACT_665246]. All computer records will be coded and will not include the subject’s name. All coded computer records will be 
saved on password protected computer systems and data files are maintained on a secure server. 
7) The signed consent form will be kept on file in the subject’s laboratory chart. Paper records of 
experiments and copi[INVESTIGATOR_665216]’s office which is locked whenever the nurse is not present. 
8) The urine specimens collected for the drug screening will not be labeled and will be directly handed to a member of the study team by [CONTACT_2299] (making it anonymous). There is no 
processing required as the results appear on the side of the specimen collection cup.  
 
Screening is conducted by [CONTACT_665247]-to-face interview in a private area. Study visits (including consenting) take place in the lab and are restricted to authorized personnel only.  
 
As part of [LOCATION_007] Health Presby[CONTACT_24021][INVESTIGATOR_665217], we utilize two identifiers (name [CONTACT_665250]) to process subject samples through the IEEM biochemistry lab.  
 All data collected will be de-identified and only research personnel will have access. All digital  
recordings will be locked and password protected. Paper records will be handled as stated above.  After three years, if the information is no longer needed, it will be shredded or otherwise appropriately 
destroyed so as to be unreadable. However, any time information is collected; there is a potential risk 
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 12 of 13 for loss of confidentiality. Every effort will be made to keep information confidential; however, this cannot be guaranteed. 
 
13. Potential Benefits: 
We do not anticipate that individuals participating in the research will receive any direct benefit.   
 As a result of the proposed studies, upon the completion of this objective, the Department of Defense will be provided with critical information regarding improved care of the hemorrhaging victim in a pre-
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885]. Combat injuries associated with hemorrhage are almost always accompanied with severe acute pain. This project focuses on evaluating analgesics employed by [CONTACT_665248]-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885], with an objective of identifying the/those analgesic(s) that do not, or only minimally, impair tolerance to a simulated hemorrhagic challenge in humans. Since hemorrhage is often encountered on the battlefield, it is imperative that the administered analgesic does not impede 
physiological responses that protect against ensuing hypovolemic shock. That is, the optimal 
analgesic used for battlefield trauma should provide pain control without impeding appropriate physiological responses to hemorrhage. The proposed experiments will serve to identify the effects of three currently recommended analgesics in the pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885] (morphine, fentanyl, and ketamine) on tolerance to a simulated hemorrhage in conscious humans.  The proposed work will also 
explore possible sex differences that may affect one’s ability to compensate for a hemorrhagic 
challenge while receiving each of these three analgesics.  With regard to those outside the military, the experiments outlined in this application will determine the effect of currently employed pain medications on tolerance to a simulated hemorrhage in humans. These data will identify the pain medication that least compromises a human’s ability to tolerate such 
an insult, thereby [CONTACT_665249]-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_665218].  Obtaining these data will be the first step in the continuum of 
research that will culminate in an increased understanding of the link between analgesia and hemorrhage. Moreover, the proposed work is particularly unique in that it will be the first investigation conducted in conscious humans to identify the optimal pain medication that will only minimally impair 
compensatory responses to a hemorrhagic injury, and thus the ability to “survive” that insult.  This 
information will be valuable to both the military and civilian populations as it will improve pre-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_665219].  
  14. Biostatistics: 
Not applicable – This project was peer reviewed by [CONTACT_2315] (US Army)  
 
 15. Refer ences 
1.  Bellamy RF. The causes of death in conventional land warfare: implications for combat 
casualty care research. Mil Med. 1984 Feb;149(2):55– 62.  
2.  Hoyt DB, Dutton RP, Hauser CJ, Hess JR, Holcomb JB, Kluger Y, et al. Management of 
coagulopathy in the patients with multiple injuries: results from an international survey of clinical practice. J Trauma. [ADDRESS_898626];65(4):755-764-765.  
3.  Sauaia A, Moore FA, Moore EE, Moser KS, Brennan R, Read RA, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_665220]: a reassessment. J Trauma. 1995 Feb;38(2):185– 93.  
4.  Ebert TJ, Cowley AW. Baroreflex modulation of sympathetic outflow during physiological 
increases of vasopressin in humans. Am J Physiol. 1992 May;262(5 Pt 2):H1372-1378.  
5.  Cooke WH, Ryan KL, Convertino VA. Lower body negative pressure as a model to study 
progression to acute hemorrhagic shock in humans. J Appl Physiol Bethesda Md 1985. 2004 Apr;96(4):1249– 61.  
6.  Evans RG, Ventura S, Dampney RA, Ludbrook J. Neural mechanisms in the cardiovascular 
responses to acute central hypovolaemia. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2001 Jun;28(5– 6):479– 87.  
STU092017- 069, Crandall, Form A, Mod_4, 09- 04-19  
Version <insert version number and date> 
Page 13 of 13 7.  Schadt JC, Ludbrook J. Hemodynamic and neurohumoral responses to acute hypovolemia in 
conscious mammals. Am J Physiol. 1991 Feb;260(2 Pt 2):H305-318.  
8.  Sander -Jensen K, Mehlsen J, Stadeager C, Christensen NJ, Fahrenkrug J, Schwartz TW, et 
al. Increase in vagal activity during hypotensive lower -body negative pressure in humans. Am J 
Physiol. 1988 Jul;255(1 Pt 2):R149-156.  
9.  Buckenmaier CC, Brandon-Edwards H, Borden D, Wright J. Treating pain on the battlefield: a 
warrior’s perspective. Curr Pain Headache Rep. 2010 Feb;14(1):1– 7.  
10.  Butler FK, Kotwal RS, Buckenmaier CC, Edgar EP, O’Connor KC, Montgomery HR, et al. A 
Triple-Option Analgesia Plan for Tactical Combat Casualty Care: TCCC G uidelines Change 13-04. J 
Spec Oper Med Peer Rev J SOF Med Prof. 2014;14(1):13– 25.  
11.  Buckenmaier MDC. Military Advanced Regional Anesthesia and Analgesia Handbook. 
Washington, DC: Borden Institute; 2009. [ADDRESS_898627] of anaesthesia on the haemodynamic 
and sympathoadrenal responses of the dog in experimental haemorrhagic shock. Acta Physiol Hung. 1985;65(3):239– 54.  
13.  Seyde WC, McGowan L, Lund N, Duling B, Longnecker DE. Effects of anesthetics on regional 
hemodynamics in normovolemic and hemorrhaged rats. Am J Physiol. 1985 Jul;249(1 Pt 2):H164-173.  
14.  Feuerstein G, Siren AL. Effect of naloxone and morphine on survival of conscious rats after 
hemorrhage. Circ Shock. 1986;19(3):293– 300.  
15.  Schlader ZJ, Crandall CG. Normothermic central hypovolemia tolerance reflects hyperthermic 
tolerance. Clin Auton Res Off J Clin Auton Res Soc. 2014 Jun;24(3):119– 26.  
  