Specific Aims  
The diagnostic system that is currently used for mental disorders is based on verbal report, observable 
behavior, and clinical phenomena that have been aggregated based on statistical approaches to provide 
reliable categories1.  However, the connection between psychiatric disorders and their underlying neurobiology 
has been difficult to establish.  The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework is a heuristic approach 
to integ rate neuroscience with psychopathology2.  Thus, RDoC is the attempt to develop constructs that (a) 
connect across units of analysis, (b) are applicable across established diagnostic criteria, and (c) are a point of 
departure to provide measurable constructs to gain a deeper understanding of psychiatric conditions3. 
We focus on the positive and negative valence system domains proposed by [CONTACT_720580]4,5, using self -report, 
behavior, physiology, and neural circuit unit of analysis measures, apply them to a clinical population of 
individuals with anxiety or depression recruited from primary care clinics across two sites and apply latent 
variable analysis to derive latent constructs of positive and negative valence systems functioning that cut 
across units of analyses.  Our prelimina ry studies provide initial evidence for the relative independence of 
measures designed to assess each domain.  Building on these studies we will adopt a three stage approach: 
first, principal component analyses will be used for variable reduction within a task; second, confirmatory factor 
analyses will be used to determine whether the model of positive and negative valence systems fit with the 
measures obtained from multiple units of analyses; and third, latent variable analysis will be used to relate 
measu res across different units of analysis.  The specific aims of the proposal are:  
(1) To recruit, assess, and analyze self -report, behavioral, physiological, and neural circuit unit of 
analysis data in an exploratory sample of n=100 treatment seeking anxious and /or depressed 
individuals presenting to primary care clinics at UCSD and UCLA.  
a. Hypothesis 1: Measures of reward sensitivity, attentional bias towards positive valenced stimuli, approach 
behavior in an approach/avoidance task, propensity to display a happy facial expression, increased 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_25570] (vagal tone), and activation in the ventral striatum during a reward processing 
task will load together on a latent construct (“Positive Valence System”).  
b. Hypothesis 2: Measures of high harm avoidan ce, attentional bias towards negatively valenced stimuli, 
avoidance behavior in a approach/avoidance task, propensity to display a negative facial expression (e.g., 
sadness, fear), increased heart rate and skin conductance while viewing negative stimuli, a nd amygdala 
activation during a fear conditioning task will load together on a latent construct (“Negative Valence 
System”).  
c. Hypothesis 3: Latent variable scores of individuals with anxiety or depression will span a two -dimensional 
space according to these  two latent constructs and will show significant variability across DSM IV (or 
DSM -5) diagnostic categories.  
(2) To obtain a confirmatory sample of n=100 subjects at both sites using the same measurement 
approaches to determine the reproducibility and robustne ss of the latent constructs obtained from 
the exploratory sample.  
a. Hypothesis 1: Latent constructs of positive and negative valence systems show good reproducibility in a 
confirmatory factor analysis.  
b. Hypothesis 2: Variable reduction can be used to obtain r eliable projection onto the latent constructs using 
latent variable analyses.  
c. Hypothesis 3: Individuals with clinically severe and impairing anxiety or depression will fall into 
heterogeneous clusters of dysfunctions within the positive and negative valenc e systems.  
(3) To obtain a reliability sample of n=50 individuals at UCSD and UCLA that will be re -tested within a 
month to determine the reliability of the latent constructs . 
a. Hypothesis 1: Latent constructs of positive and negative valence systems have good test-retest reliability.  
b. Hypothesis 2: Latent constructs of positive and negative valence systems have better test -retest reliability 
than measures from individual units of analyses.  
This will be the first time neural systems measures of positive valence a nd negative valence systems are 
investigated within the same broadly defined sample of anxious or depressed patients.  Thus, this study has 
the potential to substantially improve our understanding of how the positive and negative valence systems 
underlie c linically severe and impairing anxiety and depression in terms of inter -relationships across units of 
analyses.  Upon completion, we will have robust and reliable dimensional measures that quantify the positive 
and negative valence systems.  The latent constructs will be the deliverables of this proposal.  We will create a 
web-based repository to make these latent constructs, i.e. the measures and the derived factors, available to 
other researchers.  These latent constructs will serve as the p latform for subsequent work focused on 
treatment, which can be developed to remediate the dysfunction in the specified dimension(s).  
Research Strategy  
A. Significance  
The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework is a heuristic to integrate neuroscience appro aches 
with psychopathology2 that will guide the development of a dimensional classification of mental disorders 
based on genetics and neuroscience3, however , the lack of reliable, robust latent constructs derived from 
experimental measures is a  critical barrier to organiz ing mental disorders along dimensions.   The RDoC  
initiative highlights two important goals that need to be accomplished to overcome this barrier.  First, one 
needs to determine the relationship between different units of analyses, that is, between self -report, behavior, 
physiology, and neural circuits a nd clinically relevant psychopathology.  Second, one need s to transcend 
traditional diagnostic groups to adequately capture the variation of domains in clinical populations that can be 
mapped across units of analyses .  The current application aims to addre ss these needs.  
We propose to  use a clinical population of primary care patients with identified problems of anxiety 
and/or depression for this investigation to maximize generalizability and external validity .  Anxiety and 
depression are the most common me ntal disorders , and primary care remains the de facto  mental health 
service system in the US6, 7.  By [CONTACT_720581], we gain access to  the most generalizable 
sample of persons whose anxiety and/or depressive symptoms are troubling enough that they seek care, 
without the filtering and biasing that would be seen in general psychiatric or other even more specialized 
clinical settings (e.g.,  anxiety or mood disorder clinic).  Although we start with well -established measures that 
are heuristically aimed at quantifying positive and negative valence systems, we expect that the precise 
mappi[INVESTIGATOR_720557] e and negative valence domain s will be more 
complex and possibly surprising than expected.  For example, variables of attentional  bias for negative 
emotion, degree of avoidance behavior in a n approach/avoidance task, propensity to display negatively 
valenced facial expressions, and degree of amygdala activation during a fear conditioning procedure are 
hypothesized to relate to the negative valence domain.  However, the precise relationship and  the common 
variance shared among these units of analysis as well as the most sensitive variable s contributing to the 
domain are fundamentally unknown at this point in time.  Once identified, however, this understanding  will 
change the way we conceptualize  the positive and negative valence domain s, measure them , incorporate them  
into computational and neural process models , and eventually incorporate them  into treatment models . 
Once the proposed aims are completed, we will have a robust and reliable dimensi onal set of variables , 
obtained from two clinical sites,  that quantify the positive and negative valence domain s based on a latent 
variable approach .  These variables will subsequently be used to determine whether (a) they predict response 
to pharmacologic al or behavioral treatment; (b) they can be differentially responsive to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_720558], and (c) they can be used in 
subsequent computational and/or neural process models of anxie ty and depression to gain a more 
fundamental understanding of the pathology . 
Overview: Positive and Negative Valence Systems  
Affect, or the tendency to experience a given emotion, often is subdivided into two domains8. 
Positive affect is the tendency to experience positive emotions, such as happi[INVESTIGATOR_008],  excitement, elation, 
and enthusiasm.  Negative affect is the tendency to experience negative emotions, such as anger, 
resentment, sadness, anxiety, and fear.  Humans exhibit a range of emotions that span across positive 
and negative affect domains with some individuals experiencing more of one type of affect than 
another.   Positive  affect and negative  affect system s represent dimensions of psychopathology 
identified by [CONTACT_720582]4,5.  High negative affect is common to an xiety and depression9-[ADDRESS_984112] 
sensitivity.  
Positive Valence System : A central construct representing the positive valence system is approach 
motivation , which can be de fined as processes that regulate the direction and maintenance of approach 
behavior , albeit moderated by  [CONTACT_094]-existing tendencies, learning, memory, stimulus characteristics, and 
deprivation states.  The construct of reward seeking and reward sensitivity is one component of approach 
motivation.  Reward sensitivity refers to sensitivity to the anticipation and receipt of positive stimuli.  The neural 
mechanisms of reward sensitivity involve the ventral striatum (VS) and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC).  The 
structu res are involved in the processing of primary rewards, such as pleasant tastes14, smells15 or sights16, as 
well as secondary (monetary) rewards16-18.  The VS plays an important role in the anticipation of reward19,[ADDRESS_984113] -related 
processing that also includes the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), a subregion of the prefr ontal cortex22.  An 
important functional coupling exists between the VS and OFC23.  Reward -processing also involves other neural 
regions, including the amygdala24-26, dorsal ACC27  and the hippocampus28.  
Relationship between reward sensitivity and the positive valence system :  There is evidence to show that 
individuals with deficits in positive affect  (i.e., individuals with depressive disorders ) show deficits in reward 
processing, at both behavioral29 and neural levels30.  At the behavioral level, individuals with major depression 
are less responsive to reward -relevant stimuli than are non -depressed individuals and deficits in reward 
responding are associated with deficits in positive affect or the ability to experience pleasure29,31.  At the neural 
level, depression is associated with attenuated activation in fronto -striatal circuits, namely the VS and caudate, 
during reward processing30.  Anhedonia32,33 (or, the inability to experience pleasure ), and reward -related 
processing34 have been considered critical factors in the development of depression .  Reward sensitivity  in 
anxie ty disorders has been less well -studied. Similar to depression, evidence of attenuated striatal activation 
during reward processing has been found in individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD)35,36, particularly in relation to anhedonic features of PTSD (e.g. , emotional numbing).  Other studies, 
however, find evidence of heightened striatal activation during reward anticipation in some anxiety disorders37. 
This heterogeneity underscores the potential value of moving towards a dimensional understanding of reward 
sensitivity and positive valence system  functioning  in anxiety and depression . 
Negative Valence System : Response s to acute threat (fear) and potential harm (anxiety) were considered by 
[CONTACT_720583].  One approach to 
measur ing response to threat is via fear conditioning , which  involves excitatory learning of CS -US 
associ ations38,39.  Research on fear learning uniquely adapts to translational neuroscience contexts because 
we understand with great precision the relevant neural processes in many species, including humans.  The 
brain regions that have mo st consistently been associated with fear conditioning  are the amygdala40-44 (AMYG) 
and insular cortex45.  In healthy adults, increased activity in the AMYG and insula  is typi[INVESTIGATOR_720559] g.  Response to loss was cited by [CONTACT_720584], and may be particularly related to depression.  
Reward paradigms that include loss or punishment trials (e.g., losing money for incorrect responses46-48) can 
be used to measure behavioral and neural responses to loss anticipation and outcome.  Research in healthy 
adults suggests that t he ventral and dorsal striatum (caudate) are associated with anticipation and receipt of 
loss or punishment using these paradigms46,47. 
Relationship between fear conditioning , loss,  and the negative valence system : Individuals with 
disorders characterized by [CONTACT_720585]  (i.e., individuals with anxiety disorders ), exhibit behavioral 
and neural perturbations during fear conditioning.  In terms of behavioral data, individuals with high trait anxiety  
or with anxiety disorders show elevated excitatory learning (during fear conditioning)49,50.  In terms of neural 
data, individuals with anxiety disorders show elevated AMYG  activation during fear conditioning : this has been 
observed in individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder51,52, spi[INVESTIGATOR_720560]45. 
Although no studies have evaluated fear conditioning as a function of depression , other evidence shows that 
depression as a disorder is associated with dysregulation in the same neural regions that are central to fear 
conditioning.  For example, a number of studies im plicate AMYG hyperactivity in major depression during 
emotion -related tasks such as when viewing fearful faces53,54, and in individuals with the short allele of the 
5HTTLPR serotonin transporter polymorphism55, which is associated with depression vulnerability56 and 
symptom severity57.  Studies using behavioral paradigms to measure respon se to loss find that individuals 
diagnosed with major depression differ from healthy controls in their neural responses to loss in the striatum58 
and anterior cingulate cortex48.  Some evidence suggests that anhedonic features of depression may be 
particularly associated with n eural activation in the striatum in response to  loss58. 
Positive and Negative Valence Systems: Physiological, Behavioral and Self -Report Units of Analysis  
To more completely characterize positive and negative valence system constructs, the RDoC  initiative 
underscores the need to (1) identify measures at multiple units of analysis  (e.g., self -report, behavior, 
physiology)  that reliably capture the variation of a given domain, and (2) to establish  the relationship between 
different units of analys es, with an emphasis upon linking underlying brain function (e.g., neural circuits)  to 
behavior .  Thus, we will use well -established physiological, behavioral, and self -report measures  as the units of 
analysis , and with which our group has prior experience  (see Approach section below) , to (1) examine latent 
constructs of positive and negative valence domains  and (2) examine the relationships between those units of 
analysis and neural indices of reward sensitivity and fear conditioning .  Our choice of measures was guided by 
[CONTACT_62866][INVESTIGATOR_720561], and evidence  suggesting 
that those measures relate to neural circuits govern ing positive and negative valence system functioning.  For 
example, attentional biases for emotional information are considered a hallmark of anxiety and depression59,60. 
Attentional bias for threat -relevant stimuli is reliably associated with negative affective states (e.g., anxiety60) 
and has been linked to greater activation in the AMYG during emotion processing61.  In contrast, attentional 
bias for  positive stimuli is associated with positive affective states62 and neural activity reflecting approach -
oriented motivation63.  Moreover, diminished attentional processing of positive information is associated with 
depression64, and some anxiety disorders (e.g., social anxiety65). In the sections below, w e present preliminary 
data using measures of observable behavior (approach/avoidance conflict, facial express ion coding, attentional 
bias), physiology (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance ), and self -report (reward sensitivity, harm avoidance) to 
demonstrate that (1) we can reliably measure the constructs of interest and (2) empi[INVESTIGATOR_720562] r eflect positive and negative valence domains using data reduction methods.  
Summary   
The RDOC has identified positive and negative valence systems as constructs that can be used to 
relate altered neural systems functioning to anxiety and depression.  Reward sensitivity, measured via reward -
related decision -making paradigms, is viewed as a marker of the positive valence system.  Threat sensitivity, 
measured via fear conditioning paradigms, is viewed as a marker of the negative valence system.  The neura l 
underpi[INVESTIGATOR_720563] -related decision -making and fear conditioning are well understood.  However, no 
studies to date have assessed the neural processes of both reward sensitivity and threat sensitivity as unit s of 
analysis among a larger set of measur es (including cognitive, behavioral and physiological), within samples  of 
anxious or depressed patients that is sufficiently large to generate a robust and reliable dimensional set of 
variables that quantify the positive and negative valence domains.   That is the goal of this proposal.  We 
hypothesize that measures of reward sensitivity , attentional bias towards positive ly valenced stimuli, approach 
behavior in an approach/avoidance task, propensity to display a happy facial expression  while viewing positiv e 
stimuli,  increased respi[INVESTIGATOR_25570] (RSA; i.e., vagal tone) and activation in the ventral striatum 
during a reward processing task will load together on one latent construct (i.e., positive valence).  Also, we 
hypothesize that measures of har m avoidance, attentional bias towards  negatively valenced stimuli, avoidance 
behavior in a approach/avoidance task, propensity to display negative  facial expression s (e.g., sad ness , fear) , 
increased heart rate, skin conductance, and EMG while viewing negative stimuli, and amygdala activation 
during a fear conditioning task will load together on a second latent construct (i.e., negative valence).  Further, 
we hypothesize that latent factor sc ores of individuals with anxiety or depression will span this two-dimensional 
space.  We aim to replicate these latent factor scores in a confirmatory sample, and test the stability of these 
scores in a test -retest assessment in a smaller subset of the lar ger sample.  Our goal is to create a robust set 
of variables for measuring positive and negative valence that will become publically available for future 
research.  
B. Innovation  
The proposed project is innovative in the following ways :  
(a) Extant research on the neural underpi[INVESTIGATOR_720564] -IV diagnosed s ubjects  to healthy control subjects .  Here, we propose a large 
sample of individuals seeking treatment for anxiety or depressi on, who se symptoms are such that they are 
impairing and driving treatment seeking , but may or may not meet criteria for a well-defined  DSM -IV disorder. 
This approach is required to advance our understanding of the dimensions of psychopathology that are eit her 
shared across anxiety and depression (i.e., negative valence) or are more specific (although not exclusive) to 
depression (i.e., positive valence).  Furthermore, whereas studies of the neural correlates of positive and 
negative valence systems are begi nning to emerge, we are unaware of any studies that have included 
paradigms that are directly designed to asses s both valence systems within the same sample.  This will be the 
first time neural indices of positive valence and negative valence are investiga ted within the same broadly 
defined sample of anxious or depressed patients.  Extant studies of neural processes in emotional disorders 
are limited to relatively small sample sizes.  By [CONTACT_720586], we will recruit a large 
enough sample to conduct more comprehensive analyses than ever before achieved . 
(b) Although researchers have begun to evaluate relations hips between specific neural processes, such 
as fear conditioning, and other “units of analysis” such as attentional bias to t hreat, no study to date attempts 
the comprehensive approach proposed herein for measuring multiple units of analysis for each valence 
system.  That is, we propose to measure self-report, behavior, physiology, and neural circuits , and to assess 
their loadin g on constructs of positive and negative valence systems , and their relative contributions to each 
construct.  We are employing an empi[INVESTIGATOR_720565], involving latent variable analyses, for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a “battery of measures” for positive valence  and negative valence, thus avoiding the tautology of 
relying upon a predetermined measure of each valence system  against which to validate additional measures .  
(c) The majority of the experimental approaches we propose  for deriving variables (i.e., units  of 
analysis) are well -established . However, we additionally include the automated facial action coding system 
(i.e., Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox; CERT) as a novel approach to measuring behavioral indices 
of affect on a millisecond scale  in rea l time . Aside from its novelty  and empi[INVESTIGATOR_720566] a well -established 
literature of facial expression  coding  and emotion66, a very attractive feature of CERT is its potential clinical 
utility.  This measure can be easily incorporate d into real world clinical settings, and provide the clinician with 
an objective index of positive or negative valence, that in turn eventually may guide treatment choice.  
(d) We are collaborating with a stat istician who has developed sophisticated analytical approaches to 
arrive at individual level outcome predictions  (see letter of support from [CONTACT_720603]) .  Specifically, we 
propose a three step approach consisting of (1) data reduction based on principal component analysis , (2) 
hypothesis -driven examination of the positive and negative valence domain s using confirmatory factor 
analysis , and (3) latent variable analysis  to examine  the relationship be tween different units of analysis and 
underlying  brain function  to arrive at a comprehensive, robust, and reliable set of measures for quantifying 
negative and positive valence systems in clinically relevant populations.  
(e) We aim to have robust and reliable dimensional measures that quantify the posit ive and negative 
valence systems.  We will create a web -based repository to make these latent constructs  (i.e. the measures 
and the derived factors ), available to other researchers.  This will promote the validation of the positive and 
negative valence sys tems in other clinical populations, and thus are truly generic domains as envisioned by [CONTACT_720587].  Finally, these latent constructs will serve as the platform for a subsequent proposal  focus ed 
on treatment application; in other words, to what extent do treatments change measures of each construct, and 
to what extent do scores on each construct predict or moderate treatment outcomes ? 
C. Approach  
Sample  
We considered various populations based on our  prior studies.  We have conducted extensive studies in 
college populations67-69, non -treatment seeking70, and treatment seeking71 psychiatric populations presenting to 
an Anxiety Disorders Clinic.  We opted to identify individuals with anxiety or depressio n in a primary care 
setting , which we have used successfully to recruit a significant number of subjects72, to maximize 
generalizability and external validity .  Medication status was another important consideration.  On the one 
hand, including  medicated individuals with the possibility of using statistical techniques to account for their 
effect would provide a larger subject pool  and could be conceived as being more representative .  On the other  
hand , given our prior studies showing that antidepressants affect brain activation73-75, a medication -free group 
would provide a more scientifically compelling approach to delineate the underlying latent constructs reflecting 
the positive a nd negative valence systems.  Moreover,  the former would require a much larger number of 
subjects and could not rule out a contribution of medication we chose the latter approach as detailed below.  
Study clinics and subjects.  We will recruit  two waves of n=100 individuals  each from two clinics  (see power 
analysis) : UCSD Primary Care Clinic and the UCLA Family Health Center  (n=[ADDRESS_984114] per clinic ). The 
UCLA clinic has [ADDRESS_984115] to recruit a  sample where ethnic minorities  (approximately 40% in 
the UCLA clinic and 47% at the UCSD clinic)  and low -income individuals  (approximately  25% at both clinics)  
are well represented . Assuming equal non -refusal rates across sociodemographic groups, we project a final 
sample that is 50% female; 86% Caucasian, 6% African -American, 20% percent Hispanic, 6% Asian and 2% 
other; 25% low -income; and between 1 -5% uninsured.  
Facilitated Referral. Using methods we successfully used in the CALM study72, subjects will be enrolled in this 
study through an approach we call “facilitated referral.”  First, we will allow providers to refer potential subjects 
directly to our intake evaluation.  Second, p roviders may screen patients in participating clinics using screening 
instrument s described below, and  if eligible, then offer the potential subject referral to our intake evaluation.  
This “facilitated screening and referral” is intended to capture subjec ts who might have anxiety or depression 
that are not known to the provider.  To optimize recruitment and minimize  attrition we h ave added a  liaison at 
each clinic site who will aid in recruitment and enrollment  
Subject inclusion and exclusion criteria.  To enhance generalizability , and importantly, to enable selection of 
subjects in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_720567], this study will feature broad inclusion criteria and narrow exclusion 
criteria.  This approach was selected to maximize the clinical diversity o f the study population.   General 
Inclusion criteria are: (1) Referred for treatment of anxiety and/or depressive symptoms; (2) Score on the 
PHQ -9 is 10 or higher76 and/or score on the OASIS is 8 or higher77; (3) Between the ages of 18 -55; (4) Able to 
provide informed, written consent.   Notably, in our prior CALM study, inclusion based on the OASIS plus a 
DSM -IV anxiety disorder yielded a highly comorbid anxious and depressed sample approximately 7 6% had 
comorbid depression).  Thus, we fully expect that inclusion based on elevated anxiety (OASIS) or depression 
(PHQ -9) scores will yield a sample with the full range of anxiety and depression symptoms  and associated 
functional impairment .  Exclusion criteria include: The first 7 criteria below  closely match procedures we 
successfully employed in our prior primary care CALM study (1) No telephone or easy access to telephone; (2) 
Alcohol or marijuana dependence (but not abuse) in the past year ; (3) All other drug abuse or dependence in 
the past year . Subjects with alcohol or marijuana abuse in the past 12 months will be permitted in the study, 
but also will be given referrals for additional substance abuse treatment which may occur concurrently ; (4) 
Bipolar I  or Psychotic disorders ; (5) Moderate to severe traumatic brain injury with evidence of neurological 
deficits, neurological disorders, or s evere or unstable medical conditions that might be compromised by 
[CONTACT_9286] (to be de termined by [CONTACT_459465]); ( 6) Active suicidal ideation; ( 7) Inability to 
speak English ; (8) Current use of a medication that could affect brain functioning , e.g. , anxiolytics, 
antipsychotics, antidepressants, or mood stabilizers ; (9) MRI exclusions: cardiac pacemaker, metal fragments 
in eyes/skin/body (shrapnel), aortic/aneurysm clips, prosthesis, by -pass surgery/coronary artery clips, hearing 
aid, heart valve replacement, shunt (ventricular or spi[INVESTIGATOR_1304]), electrodes, metal plates/pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115]/ screws/wires, or 
neuro/bio -stimulators (TENS unit), persons who have ever been a metal worker/welder, history of eye 
surgery/eyes washed out because of metal, vision problems uncorrectable with lenses, inability to lie still on 
one’s back for 60 minutes; p rior neurosurgery; tattoos with metal dyes, unwillingness to remove body pi[INVESTIGATOR_2982]; 
(10) non -correctable vision or hearing problems, or color blindness, as some cognitive tests require intact 
sensory functioning .  Patients who are excluded from the study w ill be referred outside o f the study for 
additional care.  
Further diagnostic assessment . Although, as noted above, entry into the study is not based on meeting 
diagnostic criteria for a particular mood or anxiety disorder, it will be important to characterize how our findings 
map onto DSM (currently DSM -IV, but we will adapt to using DSM -5 criteria, which will become available for 
the start date of this study).  Accordingly, patients will complete a diagnostic interview with study personnel, 
using an abbreviated version of the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI Version 5.0.0  or its 
DSM -5 successor, when available )78.  The MINI was chosen over other diagnostic interviews (e.g., SCID or 
CIDI) because of its relative brevity, good inter -rater reliability, and suitability for use by [CONTACT_720588] , and because we used it in our previous primary care treatment study, CALM72, and so we have 
extensive experience in its training, quality control, use and interpretation.  We will include sections on PD, 
SAD, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, GAD, OCD, and Major Depression and several modules to provide further 
clinical information or to determine ineligibility (Suicidality, Manic/Hypomanic Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], Alcohol 
Abuse/Dependence, Drug Abuse/Dependence, and Psychoti c Disorders).  
Procedure s: Patients presenting to the UCSD and UCLA clinics and completed complete the screening 
measures (OASIS and PHQ -9) are eligible subjects and will be asked to participate  via our facilitated referral 
system. Individuals w ho accept an invitation to take part in the study  will undergo a MINI diagnostic interview.  
Subjects included in the study will return for a behavioral testing session and a neuroimaging testing session. 
During the behavioral session participants will complete the self-report assessments, modified probe detection 
task, approach/avoidance conflict task, and emotional reactivity assessment in which they will view blocks of 
emotional images while state affect and physiology will be assessed throughout the procedures. T he fMRI 
session will be scheduled within 2 days of the behavioral session and will comprise  the following sequence of 
events: Prior to scanning , each subject will complete (1) informed consent, (2), self -report emotion  
assessments, ( 3) review of fMRI procedures and MRI safety screen, ( 4) review of instructions to complete the 
fear conditioning and reward tasks, and completion of practice tasks to ensur e comprehension of instructions . 
The scanning protocol  will consist of (1) reward processing task , (2) high-resolution structural scan, (3) fear 
conditioning task.  At subset of participants (n=25 from each site) will be invited to return approximately one -
month later to complete the same battery of assessments to establish test -retest reliability of the l atent 
constructs  (see Specific Aim 3) . 
Self-report Measures   
(1) Positive and Negative Affective Schedule - State/Trai t (PANAS79): The PANAS is a widely used 
measure comprising 20 -items assessing activated forms of PA and NA using 5 -point scales  (1 = very 
slightly/not at all, 5 = extremely).  To assess trait PA and NA, participants will be asked to respond according to 
how they have felt "during the past week". State PA and NA will be asked by [CONTACT_720589] “right now (that is, at the present moment)” throughout the laboratory assessments  following blocks of 
viewing positive, neutral, and negative IAPs images  (see Emotional Reactivity section below ).  The PANAS 
has high internal consistency and temporal stability (trait version).  Correlational data support its convergent 
and discriminant validity.  Confirmatory factor analyses support the construct validity of the PANAS80. (2) Mood 
and Anxiety Symptom Questionnaire - Short Form  (MASQ9): The MASQ is a 62 -item measure of mood and 
anxiety symptoms developed to evaluate predictions of the tripartite model of anxiety and depression. The 
MASQ has four subscales: (1) General Distress Anxious Symptoms (GDA: 11 items), (2) General Distress 
Depressive Symptoms (GDD: 12 items), (3) Anxious Arousal (AA: 17 items), and (4) Anhedonic Depression 
(AD: 22 items). Respondents indicate the extent to which they experienced each symptom during the p ast 
week from 1=not at all to 5=extremely. The MASQ subscales have been found to have adequate convergent 
and discriminant validity as well as good internal consistency81,82 in student, adult volunteer, and clinical 
samples.  (3) Behavioral Inhibition and Activation Scales  (BIS/BAS83): The behavioral inhibition and 
activation scales (BIS/BAS) include 20 -items assessing dispositional BIS and BAS sensitivities (i.e. avoidance 
and approach motives), which are hypothesized to reflect the negative and positive valence systems, 
respectively. Items are rated on four -point scales (1 = strongly disagree; 4 = strongly agree).  The BAS has 
three subscales (Drive, Reward Responsiveness, and Fun Seeking); however, factor analyses support a single 
higher -order factor.  The BIS/BAS has good test -retest  reliability.  Correlational data support the relative 
orthogonality and convergent, discriminant, and predictive validity of the subscales83. 
Behavior al Measures  
(1) Approach/Avoidance Conflict Task84: Participants will complete a computer -based approach -avoidance 
conflict (ACC) task. For each trial of the AAC,  participants are shown a runway with pi[INVESTIGATOR_720568].  Each potential outcome includes an affective stimulus and a certain level of 
reward points.  The valence of the affective stimulus is represented via a sun in dicating a positive affective 
stimulus or a cloud indicating a negative affective stimulus.  Level of reward points is represented by [CONTACT_720590] (more red = more points).  The subject is to move an avatar on the runway (by [CONTACT_720591] 
a keyboard) to indicate their relative preference for each potential outcome.  The location of the avatar at the 
end of the decision phase corresponds to the probability of each of the two outcomes occurring.  If the subject 
moves the avatar to the middle o f the runway, there is a 50% chance of each outcome; if he moves all the way 
to one side, there is a 90% chance of the nearest outcome and a 10% chance of the further outcome; and so 
on.  Subjects therefore control the likelihood of the two outcomes but ar e unable to determine one or the other 
outcome for certain. The initial starting position of the avatar (at each of the nine possible positions, ranging 
from −4 to +4) is counterbalanced to enable characterization regarding the influence of effort on behav ior.  The 
affective stimuli used in the AAC paradigm include image and sound combinations (International Affective 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2980] (IAPS85); International Affective Digitized Sounds (IADS86) and other freely available audio 
files).  The “reward” includes 0, 2, 4, or 6 points presented along with a trumpet sound.  There  are three types 
of trials in the AAC task: (1) ‘Avoidance -only’, in which 0 points are offered for both outcomes.  For these 
conditions, there is no explicit motivation to approach the negative affective outcome. (2) 'Approach -only', in 
which reward outco mes can be acquired in the absence of punishment, and hence there is no explicit 
motivation to avoid the reward outcome.   (3) Three levels of ‘Conflict’ in which 2, 4, or [ADDRESS_984116] and punishment.  The main dependent measure will be the 
response latency from initial button press  to end decision point , averaged across trials.  
Preliminary evidence for Approach/Avoidance Conflict as a Behavioral Marker of Positive and 
Negative Valence Domains : Background: Research in animals and humans suggests that 
approach/avoidance conflict is a basic phenotype that reflects the relative strength of reward -related vs. 
aversive behavioral tendencies.  Our group has developed a paradigm in which approach and avoidance 
drives can be measured behaviorally by [CONTACT_720592] a given decision84.  We examined whether approach vs. avoidance behavioral tendencies, as measured 
through an individual's response latency to approach vs. avoid rewarding or aversive outcomes,  reflects 
distinct positive and negative dimensions.  Methods: A cross -section of young adults recruited from 
UCSD/SDSU (N=184) completed a computerized approach -avoidance conﬂict (AAC) paradigm  (described 
above) . Response latency data were used to compute separate approach and avoidance bias scores for each 
level of conflict, yielding a total of 3 approach bias scores and 3 avoidance bias scores.   Results:  A principal 
component analysis with Promax rotation indicated that the data were best described by a [ADDRESS_984117] dimension accounted for 56.1% of the variance and comprised the three avoidance conflict indices 
(negative valence domain).  The second factor accounted for 25.0% of the variance and comprised the three 
approach conflict indices (positiv e valence domain).  The two components were moderately related, r(184) = 
.38, but sufficiently distinct dimensions.  Conclusion:  Approach/avoidance conflict paradigms provide relatively 
independent indices of behavioral tendencies to approach rewarding out comes vs. avoiding aversive 
outcomes, which may reflect positive vs. negative valence domains, respectively.  
(2) Facial Expressions : Advances in computer vision and machine learning over the past [ADDRESS_984118] led to 
the emergence of technology for automatic analysis of affective behavior87.  During this time , the Machine 
Perception Laboratory at UCSD (MPLab) has focused on development of systems for automatic analysis of 
facial behavior, including audio -visual speech recognition88-[ADDRESS_984119] 
the face image is passed through a bank of Gabor filters at 8 orientations and 9 scales (2 -32 pi[INVESTIGATOR_41463]/cycle at 0.[ADDRESS_984120] steps).  The filterbank representations are then channeled to a classifier to co de the image in terms of a 
set of expression dimensions.  Research at the MPLab has demonstrated that performing feature selection on 
the Gabor filters prior to classification enhances both speed and accuracy .  This approach combines feature 
selection base d on Adaboost with feature integration using support vector machine .  Automatic Facial 
Expression Analysis : A video camera will record each participant during viewing IAPs pi[INVESTIGATOR_499] (see Emotion al 
Reactivity  section  below ) in order to permit coding of facial expressions. Automatic facial expression analysis 
will be conducted by [CONTACT_720593] (CERT94), software developed and 
validated by [CONTACT_459479] (MPLab).  CERT analysis 
corresponds to the well -validated Facial Action Coding System (FACS95,96), a comprehensive method to 
objectively code facial expressions.  CERT automatically codes the intensity of 26 component facial 
movements referred to as action units (AUs).  
Preliminary evidence for Automati c Coding of Facial Expressions during Emotion Elicitation of 
Distinct Behavioral Indices of Positive and Negative Valence Domains : Background:  Facial expressions 
are well -established as behavioral indices that reflect a person's emotions and internal state s.  The Fa cial 
Action Coding System (FACS66) is a reliable, valid, and widely used method to objectively c ode facial 
expressions.  Previous studies suggest that particular component facial movements referred to as action units 
(AUs) reflect positive vs. negative emotional states97.  For example, AU 12 (movement of the zygomatic major 
muscle) is associated with positive affective states whereas AU 1 5 (“lip corner depressors”; sadness) and AUs 
1+4 (anxiety) are associated with negative affective states.  To provide proof of concept, we used the 
Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox 
(CERT89,94) to automatically code facial expressions 
of participants completing impromptu videotaped  
speeches98.  Methods:  Videotaped speeches were 
obtained from N=59 participants from98 recruited for 
a study of public speaking fears. We used CERT to 
automatically code the intensity of 26 AUs from 
FACs . Drawing on prior research66,99, we examined 
the mean intensity rating for the following AUs  
averaged across the duration of  the speech task: 
AUs 12 and 6 (positive emotion); AU 15 (sadness); 
AU 1+4 (anxiety).  Results:  A principal component 
analysis  (PCA)  with Promax rotation indicated that 
the data were best described by a [ADDRESS_984121] dimension accounted for 41.6% of the 
variance and comprised AU 12 and 6 (positive 
valence domain).  The second factor accounted for 
28.1% of the variance and comprised AU 15 
(sadness) and AU 1+4 (anxiety) (negative valence 
domain). The two components were orthogonal, r(59) = .004. See Figure for component plot  (main figure) and 
scatterplot (inset) illustrating individual variability and independence of dimensions . Conclusion:  Automatic 
coding of facial expressions may provide a validated and efficient method to measure independent dimensions 
of positive and negative behavioral domains.  
(3) Modified Probe Detection Task : Attentional bias for positive and negative information will be measured 
using a version of the modified probe detection task (MPDT100).  Emotional stimuli will comprise standardized 
male and fem ale disgust, sad, happy, and neutral faces101.  For emotional trials, each face will be paired with a 
neutral face from the same person (e.g., disgust –neutral). For baseline trials, a n eutral face will be paired with 
a neutral face from the same person.  Neutral -neutral trials serve as a baseline to compute facilitation and 
disengagement bias scores102,103.  Participants will be presented with 128 trials —comprising all combinations 
of Actor (two male, two fem ale), Face Pairs (happy -neutral, disgust -neutral, sad-neutral, neutral -happy, 
neutral -disgust,  neutral -sad, neutral(h) -neutral(h), neutral(d) -neutral(d) , neutral(s) -neutral(s) ), Probe Type (E or 
F), Probe Location (Top or Bottom): 4 (Actor) x 8 (Face Pairs ) x 2 (Probe Type) × 2 (Probe Location).  
Evidence for the Independence of Attentional Bias Indices of Positive and Negative Valence 
Domains : Background: Attentional biases for emotional information are considered a hallmark of anxiety and 
depression59,60.  Whereas selective processing of positive stimuli is associated with positive affective states62, 
preferential attentional allocation for negative emotional information is associated with negative affective states 
(anxiety and depression).  Evidence also suggests that aberrant attentional processing of positive information 
is associated with depression64, and some anxiety disorders (e.g., social anxiety65).  We ado pted a dimensional 
approach to examine whether attentional biases for positive vs. negative stimuli reflect at least partially distinct 
dimensions.  Method: A cross -section of healthy young adults (N = 194) recruited as part of prior studies65 
completed a well -established modified probe detection task ( MPDT100) designed to measure attentional bias for 
positive and negative information (described above).  Trials comprised negative -neutral, positive -neutral, or 
neutral -neutral face pairs.  Neutral -neutral trials served as a baseline to compute facilitation and 
disengagement bias scores, yielding four attentional bias indices: (1) facilitation bias for positive; (2) facilitation 
bias for negative; (3) disengagement bias for positive; (4) disengagement bias for negative.  Results:  A 
principal component analysis with Promax rotation indicated that the data were best described by a [ADDRESS_984122] dimension accounted for 41.9% of the variance and comprised the two negative bias indices 
(negative valence domain).   The second factor accounted for 36.0% of the variance and comprised the two 
positive bias indices (positive valence domain).  The two components were orthogonal, r(194)  = -.07. 
Conclusion:  Measures of attentional bias for positive and negative stimuli reflect distinct dimensions and 
therefore may serve as a cognitive marker of positive vs. negative valence domains, respectively.  
Psychophysiological Measures : Research suggests that  physiological responses to positive and negative 
imagery are moderated by  [CONTACT_720594].  For example, Oliveira and colleagues104 reported that individuals high in 
trait positive affect display attenuated autonomic reactions to distressing images when these images where 
preceded by a safety signal .  Hofmann105 reported that trait affect moderated the relationship between state 
affect and EEG responses during an imagery induction. In addition, individuals high in trait anger, enjoyment 
and surprise display inhibited startle responses to positive images106.  Thus, g iven the well -established link 
between imagery and physiology107 we will use the validated International Affective Pi[INVESTIGATOR_307923] e System (IAPS85) to 
measure physiological responses to affective images.  
(1) Emotional Reactivity : a series of 20 positive, 20 neutral and 20 negative slides (from the IAPS85) each 
presented for [ADDRESS_984123] 
assessment and then counterbalanced as subsequent assessments. Images will be presented on a computer 
screen and interspersed with a fixation cross to which subjects are asked to attend.  Heart rate (HR), 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_25570] (RSA), skin conductance (SCR), and frontal electromyogram (EMG) will be 
recorded continuously using Biopac instrumentation (Lehigh,  Pennsylvania).  Data acquisition and storage will 
be facilitated by [CONTACT_720595], Keithley -Metraby[INVESTIGATOR_040] A -D board, and Labview software.  Raw data are 
continuously monitored via an oscilloscope.  Data are sampled at a rate of 20Hz, and averaged over 30 
second intervals corresponding to experimental periods.  Heart Rate:  Heart rate is recorded using standard 
limb electrocardiogram leads connected to a BIOPAC bioamplifier (S75 -01), that i nputs to a tachometer (S77 -
26) to plot beats per minute.  Vagal tone  will be measured via respi[INVESTIGATOR_720569] (RSA), a non -
invasive measure of cardiac vagal control characterized by [CONTACT_720596][INVESTIGATOR_720570]108.  RSA will be computed from the R -wave to R -wave interbeat interval 
series in the frequency range of spontaneous breathing (.12  Hz - .40 Hz)109.  Skin conductance:  Skin 
conductance responses (SCRs) will be recorded with two Ag/AgCl electrodes filled with isotonic electro lyte gel. 
The electrodes will be attached to the thenar and hypothenar eminences of the left hand.  Throughout the 
entire experiment a constant voltage of 0.5 V  will be applied across the electrodes that are connected to a 
BIOPAC SCR 100 C amplifier with a  gain of 2 mS/V. SCRs  will be recorded continually on AcqKnowledge373 
at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz during all study phases.  Startle Reflex Electromyogram : Electromyogram 
(EMG) responses w ill be measured from the orbicularis oculi using two electrodes (Ag/AgCl, [ADDRESS_984124] surface) filled with electrode gel and fitted with adhesive collars.  One 
electrode w ill be placed directly underneath the left eye, and a nother one approximately 1 cm to the left below 
the outside corner of the left eye. EMG activity w ill be amplified with a Biopac EMG amplifier and sampled 
(1000 Hz) by a Biopac MP150 workstation, filtered online with a passband of 28 –500 Hz, rectified, and  then 
smoothed (five -sample boxcar filter).  Responses will be  recorded on AcqKnowledge373 at a sampling rate of 
[ADDRESS_984125] Physiological Correlates of Positive and Negative Valence 
Systems : Background:  Positive and negative affect are well -established in their association with anxiety and 
depression.  However, it is less clear how positive and negative affect relate to psychophysiological measures  
in clinical samples of anxiety or depression .  As a firs t step toward addressing  this issue, we examined 
psychophysiological responses obtained from  a mixed anxiety disorder sample exposed to stress -provoking 
and relaxation -inducing experimental conditions .  Methods: Participants (N = 74) were a treatment -seeki ng 
sample from UCLA with a primary diagnosis of an anxiety disorder.  During a pre -treatment laboratory 
assessment, participants were evaluated using the Positive and Negative Affect Scale (PANAS) and 
psychophysiological measures (i.e., heart rate (HR) and  heart rate variability (HRV)).  PANAS was measured 
at the beginning of baseline and end of a hyperventilation task and meditative relaxation task, and 
psychophysiology was measured throughout the tasks.  Results:  During the 15 -minute meditative relaxation  
task, PA was associated  with, a) high -frequency heart rate variability (HF -HRV) throughout all 15 minutes of 
the task and, b) root mean square of the successive differences (RMSSD) during the last five minutes.  NA 
was associated  with HR during the last f ive minutes of relaxation.  Furthermore, baseline NA was negatively 
correlated with HF -HRV and positively correlated with RMSSD throughout all 15 minutes of relaxation and 
positively correlated with low -frequency/high -frequency heart rate variability (LF/H F-HRV) at the first and last 
five minutes.  Conclusions: This study demonstrates that we can measure physiological responses under 
different experimental conditions, and that positive and negative affect systems may be associated with 
differential markers of physiological reactivity.   In the current proposal, we will extend this  approach by 
[CONTACT_720597], neutral, and negative affective images . 
Neuroimaging  
(1) Reward Processing Task : We will employ a slow event -related fMRI card -guessing paradigm46,47,110 for 
three reasons: First, it is well validated and wide ly used for reward -related brain function.  Second, it 
specifically examines neural processes associated with basic reward -processing which most closely addresses 
our interest in reward sensitivity.  Third, it allows separate examination of reward -related brain function during 
anticipation and receipt of reward and loss.   Our group has already employed this task.  Trials will be 
presented in a pseudorandom order with predetermined outcomes.  During each [ADDRESS_984126] -anticipation (upward arrow ) or loss -anticipation (downward arrow) type.  In Reward -
Anticipation trials, participants can win money if their guess is correct with no -change in earnings if their guess 
is incorrect.  In Loss -Anticipation trials, participants lose money if their guess is incorrect with no -change in 
earnings if their guess is correct.  The anticipation -period is immediately followed by [CONTACT_48153] -period, 
where participants are presented with the “actual” numerical value of the card (500ms) and receive outcome 
feedback ( additional 500ms): a green upward arrow for win (Reward -Outcome), a red downward arrow for loss 
(Loss -Outcome), or a yellow circle for no -change feedback (No -Change).  A crosshair is then presented for 9 -
sec (inter -stimulus -interval, ISI).  The outcome -period is defined as a [ADDRESS_984127] three secs of 
the ISI.  24 trials will be presented in 1 run with a balanced number of trial type s within runs.  Participants will 
be told they will receive $[ADDRESS_984128], be fixed such that participants receive the same 
earnings,  although participants are led to believe their performance would 
determine net monetary gain.  The task is programmed in E -prime 2.1 (Psychology 
Software Tools, Inc., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA) using a Windows -based operating system.  
Stimuli will be presented in the MR scanner using a screen at the foot of the 
scanner bed via back -projection from a head -coil-mounted mirror or high -resolution 
magnet -compatible goggles (Resonance Technology, Inc).  Button press 
responses will be collecte d using an MR -compatible button box and recorded in E -
prime.  
Preliminary evidence for ventral striatal activation during reward 
processing as part of the positive valence system : The UCLA site completed 
an fMRI pi[INVESTIGATOR_720571] -related neural circuit ry in healthy participants (n=7), 
using a task by [CONTACT_476390] -Haim111, wherein participants pressed one of two buttons to 
obtain a monetary reward.  In guaranteed -reward trials, participants were told which button to press and got a 
reward for doing so; in non -guaranteed -reward trials, participants had to guess which button led to the reward 
(which was randomly determined).  Neutral control trials had participants passively view geometric shapes.  
Two participants were scanned at  another site ( NWU ) and five were scanned at UCLA, and all data were 
analyzed at UCLA.  Initial analyses using a small -volume correction on a VS ROI showed significant activatio n 
in the striatum during anticipation of guaranteed rewards ( -9, 9, -3, t=3.78, 20 voxels, see Figure 2), relative to 
neutral trials.  
(2) Fear Conditioning  Task : We will use a slow event -related fMRI differential Pavlovian  fear-
conditioning  task, as in several prior fMRI studies of fear learning in healthy and anxious samples.  All phases 
of conditio ning (i.e., Habituation, Conditioning, Extinction, and Extinction Recall) will be completed during fMRI 
scanning.  The US will consist of a shock applied to the fingers.  The CS will consist of 3 different neutral facial 
expressions as human faces lead to stronger conditio ning than geometric figures.  One CS will be paired with 
the US during acquisition and subsequently extinguished (CS+E); one will be paired with the US during 
acquisition but never extinguished (CS+U); and one will never be paired with the  US (CS -).  The specific 
neutral facial expressions assigned to CS+E, CS+U, and CS - will be counterbalanced across participants . 
Preliminary Evidence : The UCLA site completed a pi[INVESTIGATOR_720572] (n=10), aged 18 -21.  Participants (Ps) 
first completed habituation, fear conditioning, and extinction in the laboratory 
using two different neutral facial expression s as the CS+ and CS - and an 
uncomfortable scream as the US.  Approximately two weeks later, Ps 
completed fMRI scanning while they were presented with both CSs again, in 
the form of morphed images that combined the CS+ and CS - faces in different 
percentages .  Five Ps were scanned at another site (Northwestern University 
(NU) and five were scanned at UCLA.  Data from NU were transferred to UCLA. 
All data were analyzed at UCLA and combined to examine group effects.  Using 
parametric modulation analyses in whic h the stimulus -morphing range for each 
trial was entered as a regressor at the trial level, Ps exhibited significantly 
greater activity in subACC (3, 30, -12, t=3.20) in response to the CS+ vs. CS - 
Figure 4. subACC activation  of 
combined UCLA/NU Ps  during 
extinction r ecall of CS+ vs  CS-     
(3, 30, -12, t=3.20, p<.05).  

(see Figure 1).  Also, this subACC activation was negative ly correlated with activity in the AMYG ( -27, 0, -21, 
r=-.85, p<.05).  
fMRI Data Processing  
fMRI Image Acquisition:  Neuroimaging data will be acquired using a Siemens Tim Trio 3 Tesla MRI 
scanners at the UCLA Staglin IMHRO Center for Cognitive Neuroscience and a GE Signa 3 Tesla MRI 
scanner at the Keck Center for Functional Neuroimaging at UCSD. Task parameters will be identical at both 
sites.  There will be 3 functional runs (Habituation, Conditioning and Reward) in one session . Functional runs 
will utilize a gradient echo EPI [INVESTIGATOR_720573] 39 axial slices (3.1mm thick; TR=2000ms; TE=25ms; 
FOV=200x200mm; Matrix=64x64; Flip Angle=90°).  Structural 3D axial MPRAGE images will be acquired at 
both sessions to assist with image r egistration and normalization (1mm thick; TR=2200ms; TE=3.29ms; 
FOV=256x256; Matrix=256x256; Flip Angle=9°; 192 slices).  Within fear learning, Habituation scan will last 
4min12sec, and Conditioning  will last 11min12sec.  The Reward Processing Task will la st 13min.  To control 
random fluctuations in MRI field homogeneity and other factors (e.g., humidity and temperature) across the two 
scanning sessions, we will scan a standard phantom prior to each session and normalize data to the phantom 
for each P as ne cessary.  
Cross -site imaging consistency:  To maximize reliability of data collection across sites and the 
transfer of data from UCLA  to UCSD : (1) Initial phantom scans for site qualification will be used; (2) UCLA and 
UCSD  scans will be transferred to the neuroimaging data server at UCSD  within 48 hours of acquisition and 
kept in a separate ‘quarantine’ area until put through a standard quality control pi[INVESTIGATOR_720574], 
movement, etc.  Scans that pass this quality assurance will be placed i nto the main database.  UCLA  data will 
be transferred to the UCSD server  via a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) between the server at UCSD’s  Keck 
Center for Functional  MRI (C FMRI), where UCSD  data are collected, and the FUNC server at UCLA, (3) 
quality checks of data will be conducted and quality assurance scans conducted, and (4) analysis for site 
effects will be incorporated into the testing of primary study hypotheses.  A variety of metrics have been used 
to assess inter -scanner reliability, such as volume of activation or BOLD signal change, and the automated 
quality assurance routine, which gives one dispersion measure per volume (averaged across voxels) 
expressed as percent signal change r elative to the mean of the time -series.  This measure will be incorporated 
in first -level analyses as a covariate of no interest to account for differences in data quality.  Intraclass 
correlation coefficients (ICC) commonly based on a measure of effect si ze will be computed from this quality 
measure to estimate withi n and between site reliability.  The data preprocessing and modeling  pathway will 
also utilize field maps to correct for individual field in homogeneities of each scanner and several regressors  of 
no interest will be included to account for reliability in between site variance (using realignment parameters, 
and the quality measure as regressors).  
fMRI Data Analysis . Image analysis pathway : The basic structural and functional image processing 
will be done with the Analysis of Functional Neuroimages (AFNI) software package112.  A multivariate regressor 
approach detailed below will be used to relate changes in EPI [INVESTIGATOR_298980]. 
EPI [INVESTIGATOR_720575] -regis tered using a 3D -coregistration algorithm that has been developed to minimize the 
amount of image translation and rotation relative to all other images. Six motion parameters will be obtained 
across the time series for each subject.  Based on the distribut ion of these average motion parameters, 
subjects will be excluded if the average in any one of these parameters exceeds [ADDRESS_984129] deviations from 
the mean or if movement exceeds the size of the voxel (4 mm).  This assures that differences between groups 
are not due to differences in movements during scanning.  Motion parameters will be used as regressors to 
adjust EPI [INVESTIGATOR_720576]. This has been shown to increase power in detecting task -
related activation.  All slices of the EP I scans will be temporally aligned following registration to ensure different 
relationships with the regressors are not due to the acquisition of different slices at different times during the 
repetition interval.   
Multiple regressor analyses:  Regressors of interest have been described above for each task 
separately. Specifically, a 0 -1 reference function will be convolved with a gamma variate function to model a 
prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_298981] (6 -8 second delay) and to account for the temporal dynamics of the 
hemodynamic response (typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] 12 -16 seconds)[ADDRESS_984130].  The key measure is 
the voxel -wise normalized relative signal change (or % signal change for short), which is obtained by [CONTACT_720598] -order regressor and the mean  first-order regressor.  In 
previous studies, SPATIAL  smoothing using a filter with full width half maximum of approximately 1 -2 voxel -
size (i.e., 3 -6 mm) has resulted in intra -group variability of EPI [INVESTIGATOR_720577]114. 
Spatially smoothed % signal change data will be transformed into Talairach coordinates based on the 
anatomi cal MR image, which is transformed manually in AFNI.   
Second  level analyses : The voxel -wise Talairach -transformed % signal change data is the main 
dependent measure . For fear learning, contrasts include CS+E + CS+U vs. CS - to assess activity during 
Conditioning.  For reward, contrasts of interest include Reward -Anticipation vs. baseline and Reward -Outcome 
vs. baseline, indexing the expectation and receipt of reward, re spectively.  Similar contrasts will be used for 
Loss -Anticipation and Loss -Outcome.  Movement parameters from the realignment stage will be entered as 
covariates of no interest in these analyses to control for participant movement.  The dependent measures w ill 
be entered into a mixed effects model .  Mixed effects models offer a flexible framework to model the sources of 
variation and correlation115.  In particular, correlation among the data occurs when a number of observations 
are taken on the same observational unit over time.  In addition mixed effects models are particularly robust for 
the analysis of unbalanced data when compared to similar analyses within the general linear model framework.  
We will use the implementation of the linear mixed effects models in R116, which estimates the parameters of 
the mixed model using Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) or Restricted Maximum Likelihood Estimation 
(RMLE) procedure.  These calculations will be done within the R computing environment using routines that 
read in AFNI data sets.  
General Statistical Approach : The goal of this proposal is to derive latent variables that adequately quantify 
the positive and negative valence domain across different units of analyses.  The analysis of the variables that 
are extra cted from each unit (as shown in Figure below ) will consist of three steps.  First, a principal 
component analysis will be conducted for each unit of analysis to determine the number of independent 
degrees of freedom contributing to the variance observed i n each unit.  For example, we will utilize all facial 
action units, which have been recorded during viewing of IAPS pi[INVESTIGATOR_454987] a principal components analysis.  
We expect to extract at least two independent components (as show n in the p ilot data sections above ).  The 
action units that show the highest correlation with the components will be used for subsequent analyses.  
Second, we will conduct a confirmatory factor analysis with the variables from each unit of analysis that 
showed the highest correlation with the principal components and propose two factors – positive valence 
system an d negative valence system.  We will subsequently test the statistical significance of the coefficients  
contributing to the factors.  Finally, we will conduct a latent variabl e analysis as detailed below to relate one 
unit directly to another unit of analysis.  
 Power and sample size considerations:  Currently there is no estimation for sample size for factor 
analysis that is based on statistical theory.  The traditional perspec tive is that there should be at least [ADDRESS_984131], sample size depends on the ratio of the number of variables to the number of factors, and the 
proportion of the total variance in the data that is extracted by [CONTACT_720599]119. With 10 variables and 2 
proposed factors even given a high common variance a sample size of 50 subjects should suffice. 
Alternatively, one can take a multiple regression approach to approximate the variance that needs to be 
accounted for by a given variable.  For example, given a sample size of n=100, and 10 explanatory variables in 
the CFA, the minimum detectable r2 = 0.156 with an alpha  of 0.05 and a beta of 1–0.8120.  In other words, our 
approach will be successful if the measurement captures at least 15% of the variance observed in the 
population.  Our prior single regressor analyses revealed correlation coefficients of 0.[ADDRESS_984132] 16% and is therefore consistent with our proposed sample size.  Moreover, 
according to Westland118, several considerations should be given when examining sample sizes for structural 
equation models.  Among these is the notion that latent variables impose an a -priori belief system and re -
attribute the variance found among the measures across di fferent  levels of analyses.  Given our sample size of 
n=100, we will be able to examine a ratio of indicators to latent variables of > 3. In other words, we will be able 
to examine at least three latent constructs at one time . 
Linear latent variable appro ach: There is no uniformly agreed upon definition of latent variable 
analysis  121.  However, one ap proach is to define a latent variable as a variable for which there is no sample 
realization for at least some observations in a given sample.  In this context, the positive or negative valence 
domain can be considered a latent variable.   More formally, th e latent variable model consists of a 
measurement  part describing the responses Yi = (Yi1, . . . , Y ip)′: 
and a structural  part describing the latent variables ηi = (ηi1, . . . , η il)′: where  i = 1, . . . , n is the index of the 
sampling unit (e.g. individuals), j = 1, . . . , p is the index of the observed variab les (measurements or within 
cluster observations) and s = 1, . . . , l is the index of the l distinct latent variables.  Fundamentally, latent 
variable approaches can be divided into posteriori latent variables, which are latent variables derived from the 
data analysis and a priori latent variables are hypothesized prior to an examination of the data.  The approach 
proposed here is to utilize a -posteriori approaches with various latent variable models for the exploratory 
sample and to transition to the a -priori approach for the confirmatory sample.   The goal of this proposal is to 
develop a heuristic framework that will enable one to combine the different units of analysis in a hypothesis -
driven manner.  Practically, this translates to establishing different  structures that are superimposed on the 
measurement part and examining statistically whether certain structures 
provide better explanation of the observed variation than others.  
Implementation of the latent variable approach : We will use the 
implementatio n of the Linear Latent Variable model provided by [CONTACT_720600]-
package122 as part of the R116.  This package provides a very  general 
modeling  framework,  which includes structural equation models and 
mixed models as important  special cases. This model class also allows 
for non -linear effects of covariates  and non -linear parameter co nstraints.  
The models are specified independently of data using commands that are 
similar to  standard  regression modeling in R.  The la va-package also 
includes sophisticated inferential  methods such as multi -group analyses, 
robust standard errors for  clustered correlated data, maximum likelihood 
based inference with data  missing at random and inference fo r indirect 
and total effects.  
Example of latent variable approach relating 
approach/avoidance task to activation of brain areas during reward 
paradigm and fear conditioning paradigm :  This latent model was 
created with the lava package in R.  We assumed th at three units of 
analysis (attentional biases, facial expressions and approach/avoidance 
behavior) contribute differentially to positive and negative value systems 
(domains).  These latent factors – in turn – determine the degree of 
activation in ventral striatum (VS) orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and amygdala (AMY) during reward processing 
and insula (IN) and amygdala (AMY) during fear conditioning (FC).  The regression coefficients can 
subsequently be used to calculate for each subject the degree of positiv e and negative valence system “state”, 
which provides the measure that we termed the deliverable of this project.  
Test/Re -test Reliability : We will utilize standard test/re -test approaches using the omega function 
implemented in the psych package that is a vailable in R.  This tool calculates standard ICCs but also  
Cronbach's coe fficient  and Guttman’s estimates.   
Path diagram of an example model with 
correlation between residuals of the latent  
variables.  Observed variables are framed with 
rectangles whereas latent variables are framed 
with ellipses. Regression associations are 
depi[INVESTIGATOR_720578] -headed arrows and covariance 
or correlations are shown as (dashed) double -
headed arrows; color -codes: exogenous:=l ight 
blue, endogenous:=orange, latent:=green.  
posDomainAttbiasposAppbiasHappyFace
negDomainAttbiasnegAvoidbiasNegativeFace
VS_Rew OFC_Rew Amy_Rew
Ins_FCAmy_FC
References  
1. American Psychiatric A. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th Edition): DSM -IV. 
Washington: The American Psychiatric Association; 1994.  
2. Sanislow CA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29835], Quinn KJ, et al. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_386665]: research 
domain criteria. J Abnorm Psychol. Nov 2010;119(4):631 -639.  
3. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, et al. Researc h domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification 
framework for research on mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. Jul 2010;167(7):748 -751. 
4. Health NIoM. Positive Valence Systems: Workshop Proceedings.  http://www.nimh.nih.gov/research -
funding/rdoc/positive -valence -systems -workshop -proceedings.shtml . Accessed 10/12/2012, 2012.  
5. Health NIoM. Negative Valence Systems: Workshop Proceedings.  http://www.nimh.nih.gov/research -
funding/rdoc/negative -valence -systems -workshop -proceedings.shtml . Accessed 10/12/2012, 2012.  
6. Kessler RC, Ber glund P, Demler O, et al. The Epi[INVESTIGATOR_720579]: Results From 
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS -R). JAMA. 2003;289(23):3095 -3105.  
7. Kessler RC, Ruscio AM, Shear K, Wittchen HU. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_332374]. Curr Top Behav 
Neurosci. 2010;2:21 -35. 
8. James W. The principles of psychology . [LOCATION_001]: H. Holt and Company; 1988.  
9. Clark LA, Watson D. Tripartite model of anxiety and depression: psychometric evidence and taxonomic 
implications. J Abnorm Psychol. Aug 199 1;100(3):316 -336. 
10. Chorpi[INVESTIGATOR_105093]. The tripartite model and dimensions of anxiety and depression: an examination of structure 
in a large school sample. J Abnorm.Child Psychol. 2002;30(2):177 -190. 
11. Chorpi[INVESTIGATOR_105093], Albano AM, Barlow DH. The structure of nega tive emotions in a clinical sample of children 
and adolescents. J Abnorm Psychol. Feb 1998;107(1):74 -85. 
12. Weinstock LM, Whisman MA. Neuroticism as a common feature of the depressive and anxiety disorders: 
a test of the revised integrative hierarchical m odel in a national sample. J Abnorm.Psychol. 
2006;115(1):68 -74. 
13. Craske MG, Rauch SL, Ursano R, Prenoveau J, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29835], Zinbarg RE. What is an anxiety disorder? 
Depress Anxiety. 2009;26(12):1066 -1085.  
14. O'Doherty JP, Deichmann R, Critchley HD, Dolan RJ.  Neural Responses during Anticipation of a Primary 
Taste Reward. Neuron. 2002;33(5):815 -826. 
15. O'Doherty J, Rolls ET, Francis S, et al. Sensory -specific satiety -related olfactory activation of the human 
orbitofrontal cortex [corrected and republished in Neuroreport 2000 Mar 20;11(4):893 -7]. Neuroreport. 
2000;11(2):399 -403. 
16. O'Doherty J, Kringelbach ML, Hornak J, Andrews C, Rolls ET. Abstract reward and punishment 
representations in the human orbitofrontal cortex. Nat.Neurosci. 2001;4(1):[ADDRESS_984133] depend on saliency. Neuron. 2004;42(3):[ADDRESS_984134] -related probability learning. 
Neuroimage. 2005;24(3):[ADDRESS_984135] anticipation and outcome 
with event -related fMRI. Neuroreport. 2001;12(17):3683 -3687.  
20. Samanez -Larkin GR, Gibbs SE, Khanna K, Nielsen L, Carstensen LL, Knutson B. Anticipation of monetary 
gain but not loss in healthy olde r adults. Nat.Neurosci. 2007;10(6):[ADDRESS_984136] M, Nelson EE, Jazbec S, et al. Amygdala and nucleus accumbens in responses to receipt and 
omission of gains in adults and adolescents. Neuroimage. 2005;25(4):1279 -1291.  
22. Kringelbach ML. The human orb itofrontal cortex: linking reward to hedonic experience. Nat.Rev.Neurosci. 
2005;6(9):[ADDRESS_984137] 15 2008;43(1):44 -58. 
24. Zalla T, Koechlin E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38588] P, et al. Differential amygdala responses to winning and losing: a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging study in humans. Eur.J.Neurosci. 2000;12(5 ):1764 -1770.  
25. Breiter HC, Aharon I, Kahneman D, Dale A, Shizgal P. Functional imaging of neural responses to 
expectancy and experience of monetary gains and losses. Neuron. 2001;30(2):[ADDRESS_984138]. Nat.Rev.N eurosci. 2002;3(7):563 -573. 
27. Bush G, Vogt BA, Holmes J, et al. Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex: A role in reward -based decision 
making. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 2002;99(1):[ADDRESS_984139]. J Neurosci. 2001;21(8):2793 -2798.  
29. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Iosifescu D, Hallett LA, Ratner KG, Fava M. Reduced hedonic capacity in major depressive 
disorder: evidence from a probabilistic reward task. J Psychiatr Res. Nov 200 8;43(1):76 -87. 
30. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Holmes AJ, Dillon DG, et al. Reduced caudate and nucleus accumbens response to 
rewards in unmedicated individuals with major depressive disorder. Am J Psychiatry. Jun 
2009;166(6):702 -710. 
31. Davidson RJ. Affective style, psychopathology, and resilience: brain mechanisms and plasticity. 
Am.Psychol. 2000;55(11):[ADDRESS_984140] -related deficits. Trends 
Neurosci. Jan 2012;35(1):[ADDRESS_984141] MT, Zald DH. Reconsidering anhedonia in depression: lessons from translational neuroscience. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. Jan 2011;35(3):[ADDRESS_984142] and punishment processing in depression. Biol Psychiatry. Jul 15 
2010;68(2):[ADDRESS_984143] 
circuitry responsivity to monetary gains and losses in posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. Dec 
15 2009;66(12):[ADDRESS_984144] processing in the nucleus accumbens and 
mesial prefrontal cortex of patients with posttraumatic stress disorder. Neuropsychologia. Sep 
2008;46(11):2836 -2844.  
37. Guyer AE, Choate VR, Detloff A, et al. Striatal functiona l alteration during incentive anticipation in pediatric 
anxiety disorders. Am J Psychiatry. Feb 2012;169(2):205 -212. 
38. Bouton ME, King DA. Contextual control of the extinction of conditioned fear: tests for the associative 
value of the context. J.Exp.Psy chol.Anim.Behav.Process. 1983;9(3):248 -265. 
39. Griez E. Experimental models of anxiety. Problems and perspectives. Acta Psychiatr Belg. 1984;84:511 -
532. 
40. Davis M. Pharmacological and anatomical analysis of fear conditioning using the fear -potentiated s tartle 
paradigm. Behav.Neurosci. 1986;100(6):814 -824. 
41. Phillips RG, LeDoux JE. Differential contribution of amygdala and hippocampus to cued and contextual 
fear conditioning. Behav.Neurosci. 1992;106(2):274 -285. 
42. Labar KS, Gatenby [CONTACT_100160], Gore JC, LeDoux  JE, Phelps EA. Human amygdala activation during conditioned 
fear acquisition and extinction: a mixed -trial fMRI study. Neuron. 1998;20(5):937 -945. 
43. Buchel C, Dolan RJ. Classical fear conditioning in functional neuroimaging. Curr.Opin.Neurobiol. 
2000;10 (2):219 -223. 
44. Delgado MR, Olsson A, Phelps EA. Extending animal models of fear conditioning to humans. 
Biol.Psychol. 2006;73(1):39 -48. 
45. Etkin A, Wager TD. Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: a meta -analysis of emotional processing in PTSD, 
social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. Am J Psychiatry. Oct 2007;164(10):[ADDRESS_984145] and punishment: 
effects of valence and magnitude manipulations. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. Mar 2003;3(1):[ADDRESS_984146] 
and punishment in t he striatum. J Neurophysiol. Dec 2000;84(6):3072 -3077.  
48. Knutson B, Bhanji JP, Cooney RE, Atlas LY, Gotlib IH. Neural responses to monetary incentives in major 
depression. Biol Psychiatry. Apr 1 2008;63(7):686 -692. 
49. Phelps EA, Delgado MR, Nearing KI, LeDoux JE. Extinction learning in humans: role of the amygdala and 
vmPFC. Neuron. Sep 16 2004;43(6):[ADDRESS_984147], Lang A, et al. Computer -assisted delivery of cognitive behavioral therapy for 
anxiety disorders in primary -care settings. Depress Anxiety. 2009;26(3):235 -242. 
51. Bremner JD. Effects of traumatic stress on brain structure and function: relevance to early responses to 
trauma. J.Trauma Dissociation. 2005;6(2):51 -68. 
52. Milad MR, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_116186], Ellis CB, et al. Neurobiological basis  of failure to recall extinction memory in 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol Psychiatry. Dec 15 2009;66(12):1075 -1082.  
53. Sheline YI, Barch DM, Donnelly JM, Ollinger JM, Snyder AZ, Mintun MA. Increased amygdala response to 
masked emotional faces in depr essed subjects resolves with antidepressant treatment: an fMRI study. 
Biol.Psychiatry. 2001;50(9):651 -658. 
54. Fusar -Poli P, Placentino A, Carletti F, et al. Functional atlas of emotional faces processing: a voxel -based 
meta -analysis of 105 functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. J Psychiatry Neurosci. Nov 
2009;34(6):[ADDRESS_984148]. The amygdala response to emotional stimuli: a 
comparison of faces and scenes. Neuroimage. 2002;17(1):317 -323. 
56. Kendler KS, Kuhn JW, Vittum J, Prescott CA, Riley B. The interaction of stressful life events and a 
serotonin tr ansporter polymorphism in the prediction of epi[INVESTIGATOR_719786]: a replication. 
Arch.Gen.Psychiatry. 2005;62(5):529 -535. 
57. Zalsman G, Mann JJ. The neurobiology of suicide in adolescents. An emerging field of research. 
Int.J.Adolesc.Med.Health. 2005;17(3):195 -196. 
58. Stoy M, Schlagenhauf F, Sterzer P, et al. Hyporeactivity of ventral striatum towards incentive stimuli in 
unmedicated depressed patients normalizes after treatment with escitalopram. J Psychopharmacol. May 
2012;26(5):[ADDRESS_984149], Amir N. Attention and emotion regulation . [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press; 2010.  
60. Bar-Haim Y, Lamy D, Pergamin L, Bakermans -Kranenburg MJ, van IMH. Threat -related attentional bias in 
anxious and nonanxious individuals: a meta -analytic study. Psychol Bu ll. Jan 2007;133(1):1 -24. 
61. El Khoury -Malhame M, Reynaud E, Soriano A, et al. Amygdala activity correlates with attentional bias in 
PTSD. Neuropsychologia. Jun 2011;49(7):1969 -1973.  
62. Tamir M, Robinson MD. The happy spotlight: positive mood and selecti ve attention to rewarding 
information. Pers Soc Psychol Bull. Aug 2007;33(8):1124 -1136.  
63. Gable PA, Harmon -Jones E. Late positive potential to appetitive stimuli and local attentional bias. 
Emotion. Jun 2010;10(3):441 -446. 
64. Joormann J, Talbot L, Gotli b IH. Biased processing of emotional information in girls at risk for depression. 
J Abnorm Psychol. Feb 2007;116(1):[ADDRESS_984150]. May 
2010;24(4):403 -408. 
66. Ekman P, Friesen WV. Facial Action Coding System: A Technique for the Measurement of Facial 
Movement . Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press; 1978.  
67. Paulus MP , Feinstein JS, Simmons A, Stein MB. Anterior cingulate activation in high trait anxious subjects 
is related to altered error processing during decision making. Biol.Psychiatry. 2004;55(12):1179 -1187.  
68. Stein MB, Simmons AN, Feinstein JS, Paulus MP. Incr eased amygdala and insula activation during 
emotion processing in anxiety -prone subjects. Am.J.Psychiatry. 2007;164(2):318 -327. 
69. Simmons A, Matthews SC, Feinstein JS, Hitchcock C, Paulus MP, Stein MB. Anxiety vulnerability is 
associated with altered ant erior cingulate response to an affective appraisal task. Neuroreport. 
2008;19(10):1033 -1037.  
70. Stein MB, Kennedy CM, Twamley EW. Neuropsychological function in female victims of intimate partner 
violence with and without posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol.Psychiatry. 2002;52(11):[ADDRESS_984151] CB, Grimes EM, et al. Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activation during emotional 
anticipation and neuropsychological performance in posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
Apr 2012;6 9(4):360 -371. 
72. Roy-By[CONTACT_7943] P, Craske MG, Sullivan G, et al. Delivery of evidence -based treatment for multiple anxiety 
disorders in primary care: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical 
Association. May 19 2010;303(19):1921 -1928.  
73. Arce E, Simmons AN, Lovero KL, Stein MB, Paulus MP. Escitalopram effects on insula and amygdala 
BOLD activation during emotional processing. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008;196(4):661 -672. 
74. Simmons A, Strigo IA, Matthews SC, Paulus MP, Stein MB. Initial Evidence of a Failure to Activate Right 
Anterior Insula During Affective Set Shifting in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Psychosom Med. 
2009;71(4):373 -377. 
75. Matthews SC, Simmons AN, Strigo I A, Arce E, Stein MB, Paulus MP. Escitalopram attenuates posterior 
cingulate activity during self -evaluation in healthy volunteers. Psychiatry Res. 2010;182(2):81 -87. 
76. Manea L, Gilbody S, McMillan D. Optimal cut -off score for diagnosing depression with t he Patient Health 
Questionnaire (PHQ -9): a meta -analysis. CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association journal = journal de 
l'Association medicale canadienne. Feb 21 2012;184(3):E191 -196. 
77. Campbell -Sills L, Norman SB, Craske MG, et al. Validation of a brief meas ure of anxiety -related severity 
and impairment: the Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS). Journal of affective 
disorders. Jan 2009;112(1 -3):92 -101. 
78. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, et al. The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Int erview (M.I.N.I.):  
The development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 1998;59 (suppl 20):[ADDRESS_984152]: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol. Jun 1988;54(6):[ADDRESS_984153] schedule (PANAS): construct validity, 
measurement properties and normative data in a large no n-clinical sample. Br J Clin Psychol. Sep 
2004;43(Pt 3):245 -265. 
81. Watson D, Clark LA, Weber K, Assenheimer JS, Strauss ME, McCormick RA. Testing a tripartite model: II. 
Exploring the symptom structure of anxiety and depression in student, adult, and pat ient samples. J 
Abnorm Psychol. Feb 1995;104(1):15 -25. 
82. Watson D, Weber K, Assenheimer JS, Clark LA, Strauss ME, McCormick RA. Testing a tripartite model: I. 
Evaluating the convergent and discriminant validity of anxiety and depression symptom scales. J Abnorm 
Psychol. Feb 1995;104(1):[ADDRESS_984154] and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 1994;67:[ADDRESS_984155] in humans. Behav Brain Res. Aug 6 2011.  
85. Lang PJ, Bradley MM, Cuthbert BN. International affective pi[INVESTIGATOR_194035] (IAPS):  Affective ratings of 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_190696]. Technical Report A -8. Gainesville, FL: The Center for Research in 
Psychophysiology, University of [LOCATION_012]; 2008.  
86. Bradley MM, Lang PJ. International affective digitized sounds (IADS): Stimuli, instr uction manual and 
affective ratings (Tech. Rep. No. B -2). Gainsville, FL: The Center for Research in Psychophysiology, 
University of [LOCATION_012]; 1999.  
87. Pantic M, Rothkrantz LJ. Facial action recognition for facial expression analysis from static face image s. 
IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B Cybern. Jun 2004;34(3):[ADDRESS_984156] Man Cybern B Cybern. May 11 2012.  
89. Susski nd JM, Littlewort G, Bartlett MS, Movellan J, Anderson AK. Human and computer recognition of 
facial expressions of emotion. Neuropsychologia. Jan 7 2007;45(1):152 -162. 
90. Bartlett MS, Movellan JR, Sejnowski TJ. Face recognition by [CONTACT_720601]. IEEE 
Trans Neural Netw. 2002;13(6):[ADDRESS_984157] 1999;21(10):974.  
92. Bartlett MS, Hager JC, Ekman P, Sejnowski TJ. Measuring facial expressions by [CONTACT_720602]. Psychophysiology. Mar 1999;36(2):253 -263. 
93. Bartlett MS, Sejnowski TJ. Learning viewpoint -invariant face representations from visual experience in an 
attractor network. Network. Aug 1998;9(3):399 -417. 
94. Littlewort G, Whitehill J, Wu T, et al. The Computer Expression Recognition Toolbox (CERT). Paper 
presented at: IEEE International Conference on Automatic & Gesture Recognition and Workshops, 2011.  
95. Ekman P, Levenson RW, Friesen WV. Autonomic nervous system activity distinguishes among emotions. 
Science. 1983;221(4616):1208 -1210.  
96. Young AW, Rowland D, Calder AJ, Etcoff NL, Seth A, Perrett DI. Facial expression megamix: tests of 
dimensional and cate gory accounts of emotion recognition. Cognition. 1997;63(3):[ADDRESS_984158]. 1993;48(4):[ADDRESS_984159], Bomyea J, Amir N. Malleability of attentional bias for positive emotional information  and anxiety 
vulnerability. Emotion. Feb 2011;11(1):127 -138. 
99. Ekman P, Friesen W, Ancoli S. Facial signs of emotional experience. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology. 1980;39(6):1125 -1134.  
100. MacLeod C, Mathews A. Anxiety and the allocation of attention to threat. Q J Exp Psychol A. Nov 
1988;40(4):653 -670. 
101. Matsumoto D, Ekman P. Japanese and Caucasian facial expressions of emotion (JACFEE) [Slides].  San 
Francisco, CA: Intercultural and Emot ion Research Laboratory, Department of Psychology, San Francisco 
State University; 1988.  
102. Amir N, Taylor CT, Donohue MC. Predictors of response to an attention modification program in 
generalized social phobia. J Consult Clin Psychol. Aug 2011;79(4):53 3-541. 
103. Koster EH, Crombez G, Verschuere B, De Houwer J. Selective attention to threat in the dot probe 
paradigm: differentiating vigilance and difficulty to disengage. Behav Res Ther. Oct 2004;42(10):1183 -
1192.  
104. Oliveira LA, Oliveira L, Joffily M,  et al. Autonomic reactions to mutilation pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]: positive affect facilitates 
safety signal processing. Psychophysiology. Jul 2009;46(4):[ADDRESS_984160]. Int J Psychophysiol . 
Mar 2007;63(3):258 -264. 
106. Amodio DM, Harmon -Jones E. Trait emotions and affective modulation of the startle eyeblink: on the 
unique relationship of trait anger. Emotion. Feb 2011;11(1):47 -51. 
107. Lang PJ, Bradley MM, Cuthbert BN. Emotion, motivation,  and anxiety: brain mechanisms and 
psychophysiology. Biol Psychiatry. Dec 15 1998;44(12):1248 -1263.  
108. Berntson GG, Bigger JT, Jr., Eckberg DL, et al. Heart rate variability: origins, methods, and interpretive 
caveats. Psychophysiology. Nov 1997;34(6):62 3-648. 
109. Heart rate variability: standards of measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use. Task Force 
of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. 
Circulation. Mar 1 1996;93(5):1043 -1065.  
110. Nusslock R, Almeida JR, Forbes EE, et al. Waiting to win: elevated striatal and orbitofrontal cortical 
activity during reward anticipation in euthymic bipolar disorder adults. Bipolar Disord. May 2012;14(3):249 -
260. 
111. Bar-Haim Y, Lamy D, Gli ckman S. Attentional bias in anxiety: a behavioral and ERP study. Brain Cogn. 
Oct 2005;59(1):11 -22. 
112. Cox RW. AFNI: software for analysis and visualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages. 
Computers and Biomedical Research. 1996;29(3):162 -173. 
113. Boynton GM, Engel SA, Glover GH, Heeger DJ. Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance 
imaging in human V1. J Neurosci. 1996;16(13):4207 -4221.  
114. Skudlarski P, Constable RT, Gore JC. ROC analysis of statistical meth ods used in functional MRI: 
individual subjects. Neuroimage. 1999;9(3):[ADDRESS_984161] J, Natarajan R. Modelling covariance structure in the analysis of repeated 
measures data. Stat.Med. 2000;19(13):1793 -1819.  
116. Development Core Tea m, R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3 -900051 -07-0. Vienna, Austria; 2012.  
117. Neter J. Applied linear regression models . Chicago: Irwin; 1996.  
118. Westland JC. Lower bo unds on sample size in structural equation modeling. Electron. Commer. Rec. 
Appl. 2010;9(6):476 -487. 
119. MacCallum RC, Widaman KF, Zhang S, Hong S. Sample size in factor analysis. Psychological Methods. 
3/1999 1999;4(1):84 -99. 
120. Lenth RV. Java applets for power and sample size. http://www.stat.uiowa.edu/~rlenth/Power . Accessed 
10/16/2012, 2012.  
121. Bollen KA. Latent variables in psychology and the social sciences. Annu Rev Psychol. 2002;53:[ADDRESS_984162] K, Bustz -Joergensen E. Linear Latent Variable Models: The lava -package. Computational Statistics. 
2012.  
 
 