4.28.2020  
 Flare Study Protocol  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_339630], MD  
Co-Investigators : Frederick Azar, MD, Thomas Throckmorton, MD, and David Bernholt, MD  
Research Staff:  Myles Joyce BS, Renn Eason BS, MS, Margaret Knack RN, CCRP  
 
1. Purpose  
Triamcinolone acetate  (TA) and methylp rednisolone acetate (MA) are standard of care (SOC) 
medications administered in shoulder injections depending upon Physician preference.  The Physicians 
involved in the study have observed a difference in the rate of call backs following shoulder injection  due 
to a reported increase in shoulder pain following the SOC injection.  The purpose of this study is to 
compare the incidence of a flare reaction following administration of TA versus MA  intra-articular 
glenohumeral and subacromial injections.    
For the  study, a flare reaction is defined as an increase of 2 or more from the baseline score on the visual 
analog score (VAS) in the first week following the shoulder injection.   
2. Patient Enrollment  
The study is a non -randomized, prospective, parallel -cohort st udy among subjects treated according to 
standard of care. Subjects will be approached for participation after electing to receive a corticosteroid 
injection in the glenohumeral joint or subacromial space as part of their SOC treatment plan.   Three 
months was allotted for enrollment into the MA cohort followed by [CONTACT_339632].   
3. Inclusion Criteria  
Any patient aged [ADDRESS_420181] received a corticosteroid injection in the previous three months.  
 
  
4.28.2020  
 5. Outcome Measures  
The primary outcome measure is the incidence of a Flare reaction.  
Secondary measures include VAS scores collected at the three -month time point. Another secondary 
measure is “treatment failure,” defined as a VAS score equal to or greater than a subject’s baseline VAS 
score. Subjects that proceed to anothe r injection or surgery will also be defined as “treatment failures.”  
6. Study Procedures  
The consent form will be utilized to explain the study design to prospective subjects in a private room.  
Adequate time will be allotted for questions and answers with th e study team.  The pre -injection VAS 
will be administered in clinic. VAS scores for the week following injection will be obtained through a 
“home diary” data collection tool labeled with a subject code. After completing the “home diary” tool, 
patients will  mail the stamped, form to the study administrator. The three -, six-, and twelve -month VAS 
scores will be collected by [CONTACT_339633].  
7. Statistical Analysis Plan  
Data will be collected and summarized by [CONTACT_3647]. Advanced statis tical analysis will be performed, 
including risk ratios for flare reaction development by [CONTACT_339634].  
8. Risk to Subjects  
Subjects may experience tiresome or troublesome feelings while completing VAS scores thro ugh the 
“home diary” or phone interviews with research staff.   Loss of confidentiality is a potential risk disclosed 
to subjects.   
9. Benefit to Subjects  
There are no direct benefits to subjects outside of the possible benefits of the SOC procedures being 
studied.  However, the findings from the study may contribute to generalizable knowledge as assist with 
decision making practices at Campbell Clinic.  
10. Subject Discontinuation  
Subjects will not be contact[CONTACT_339635] “failed” treatment.  
11. Adverse Events  
4.28.[ADDRESS_420182] Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_339631]. “Home diaries” will be mailed by 
[CONTACT_339636] a manner that protects study confidentiality. Three -month VAS scores 
will be obtained through phone interviews conducted by [CONTACT_2710]. All data will be combined 
into a secure, password -protected electronic data capture (EDC) tool.  