ClinicalTrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
TITLE:  Financial incentives for homeless smokers: A community-based RCT 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  [INVESTIGATOR_306933] P. Baggett, MD, MPH 
GRANT NUMBER: R01 CA235617 (National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health)  
VERSION DATE:  December 7th, 2023 
 
I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE 
A. Historical background 
An estimated 68-80% of homeless adults are cigarette smokers1-6, in contrast to the 18% 
prevalence in the U.S. general population.[ADDRESS_375820] of inci dent 
cancers in this cohort were smoking-attributable, and the age-adjusted lung cancer inci dence 
and mortality rates were over 2-fold higher than in [LOCATION_005] adults.14 These findings 
contributed to 3- to 5-fold higher rates of death due to any tobacco-attributable cause relative to 
rates in the [LOCATION_005] general population.15  
Homeless smokers are interested in quitting.2, 16- 19 In 2002, Butler et al. reported that 56% of 
homeless smokers were contemplative about quitting and 17% were in preparation to quit; the 
level of interest in smoking cessation programs was not significantly different from t hat seen in 
low-income non-homeless smokers.16 In the same year, Connor et al. found that 37% of 
homeless smokers were ready to quit within the next 6 months.2 In 2004, Arnsten et al. reported 
that 44% of homeless smokers were somewhat or very interested in smoking cessation  
counseling, and 19% were either preparing or trying to quit.[ADDRESS_375821]-year desire to stop smoking.19 In a 2014 survey of 306 homeless smokers at [LOCATION_011] Health 
Care for the Homeless Program (BHCHP), 62% of participants had intentional ly quit smoking for 
at least [ADDRESS_375822] year and 85% planned to quit smoking in the future, includi ng 24% 
who planned to do so in the next month. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_306934], few homeless smokers are able to quit and self-efficacy for quitting may 
be low.18  Baggett and Rigotti found a quit ratio (the proportion of ever-smokers w ho are former 
smokers) of 9% in a national sample of homeless adults,[ADDRESS_375823] with a mean of 43 other smokers ea ch day.22  
Additionally, homeless smokers are a vulnerable subset of homeless individuals; they are more 
likely to have histories of childhood adversity, physical or sexual assault, and alcohol or drug 
use problems.[ADDRESS_375824]/antagonist at nicotinic receptors , easing withdrawal symptoms while also blocking the 
rewarding effects of nicotine from cigarettes.[ADDRESS_375825] of financi al 
incentives for smoking abstinence among adult smokers at BHCHP.  Recognized as a leader in 
homeless health care, BHCHP serves 12,000 currently and formerly homeless patients annually 
throughout greater [LOCATION_011].43 We will randomize 180 participants recruited from  3 BHCHP sites: 
a shelter clinic, a day center clinic, and a medical center clinic. All participan ts will be offered 12 
weeks of varenicline, 5 sessions of tobacco coaching, and 10 cotinine monitoring visits over a 
12-week period. Participants randomized to the financial incentives arm (n= 90) will receive 
escalating debit card payments (range $25-$70) at each monitoring visit for saliva cot inine 
levels <30 ng/ml . Control arm participants (n= 90) will receive a fixed payment ($10) at each 
monitoring visit regardless of their saliva cotinine level. We will use an embed ded-experiment 
mixed methods design,44 where qualitative (‘qual’) data collection  is embedded within a larger 
quantitative (‘QUAN’) RCT with the following specific aims:  
Aim 1. (QUAN) To determine the effect of the financial incentives intervention on cotinine-
verified 7-day smoking abstinence at A) the end of treatment (12 weeks) and B) 12 weeks after 
treatment (24 weeks). 
    Hypothese s: Incentive arm participants will have significantly greater cotinine-verified 7-day 
smoking abstinence than control arm participants at A) 12 weeks and B) 24 weeks.  
Aim 2. (qual) To assess why, how, and under what circumstances homeless smokers A) 
achieve abstinence in response to financial incentives and B) maintain abstinence after 
incentives are stopped. 
    Interviews with participants at A) 12 weeks (N=30) and B) 24 weeks (N=20) will examine 
cognitive (‘why?’), procedural (‘how?’), and contextual (‘under what circumstan ces?’) 
dimensions of their response to financial incentives to generate hypotheses about potential 
mechanisms for on-treatment and post-treatment effects and to inform modifi cations of the 
intervention for future use. 
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION 
A. Inclusion and exclusion criteria 
To be eligible to participate, individuals must meet all of the following criteria: 
1) Aged ≥18 years old, assessed by [CONTACT_6270]-report and verified by [CONTACT_156241]. 
Rationale : We wish to focus only on adult smokers since adolescent smokers present 
unique issues that merit separate consideration.  
2) Lifetime smoker of ≥100 cigarettes with current daily smoking of ≥5 cigarettes/day, 
verified by a saliva cotinine level ≥30 ng/mL.28  
Rationale : In order to document smoking abstinence via saliva cotinine levels, trial 
participants must smoke a sufficient number of cigarettes per day at baseline to be 
above the accepted threshold of 30 ng/ml for determining smoke exposure. 
3) Ready to try to quit smoking within the next 3 months, assessed by [CONTACT_6270]-report. 
Rationale : We wish to focus on smokers interested in quitting in the near future in order 
to better isolate a treatment effect. 
4) Proficient in English, assessed with items asking about native language and self-
reported comfort communicating in English among non-native speakers. 
Rationale : We do not have the resources to develop study materials or conduct in-
person counseling in languages other than English. 
5) Currently or formerly homeless, assessed by [CONTACT_6270]-report and defined as having ever 
stayed in an emergency shelter, transitional shelter, abandoned building, place of 
business, car or other vehicle, church or mission, hotel or motel, or anywhere ou tside, or 
having ever stayed in somebody else’s house, apartment/condominium, or room due to  
not having their own place to stay. 
Rationale : BHCHP and most HCH programs nationally continue to serve patients after 
they have gained housing. Additionally, currently and formerly homeless people smoke 
at similarly high rates,19 and our epi[INVESTIGATOR_306935]-attributable cancer 
and mortality disparities experienced by [CONTACT_306960] d 
formerly homeless individuals.15, 45  
6) Have a primary care provider (PCP) within the BHCHP system. 
Rationale : This will help ensure that we can communicate efficiently with participants’ 
PCPs via secure, EHR-based messaging systems regarding the safe use of varenicline 
for smoking cessation.  
 
Individuals will be excluded if they meet any of the following criteria: 
1) Unable to provide informed consent, assessed with knowledge questions about the 
material presented during the informed consent process that individuals must correctl y 
answer before providing consent to participate.  
Rationale : Participants must have a clear understanding of what is involved in the study 
prior to enrolling.  
2) Report a history of an allergic reaction to varenicline.  
Rationale: Varenicline is a treatment component in both study arms.  
3) Currently pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding. 
Rationale:  There is limited information on the safety of varenicline in pregnant women . 
46,47 
4) Past-month suicidal ideation with plan or intent , or past 12-month history of suicidal 
behaviors or attempts, based on the primary care screening version of the Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).48 
Rationale: Due to past reports of suicidal ideation in patients taking varenicline and 
limited research on the safety of prescribing varenicline to individuals with recent  suicidal 
ideation or behaviors,49, 50 we do not believe it is appropriate for these patients to 
participate in the study.  
5) Self-reported psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_60101] 3 months. 
Rationale : Varenicline carries a caution label for neuropsychiatric events. There is also 
limited research on the use of varenicline in patients with unstable mental ill ness. Hence, 
we do not feel that it is appropriate to include patients with a recent psychiatr ic 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_306936].41, 49, 51 
 
We will not exclude individuals who use alcohol or other drugs, as long as they meet al l of the 
above eligibility criteria. This decision was made because our prior survey of homeless smoke rs 
in [LOCATION_011] suggested that limiting the trial to individuals who do not use other d rugs or alcohol 
would considerably narrow the pool of potentially eligible participants and would severely li mit 
the generalizability of our findings. Concomitant drug and/or alcohol use is common amon g 
homeless smokers,[ADDRESS_375826] Medical School, the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_306640] 20 years of clinical experience with homeless 
patients and more than 13 years of research experience relating to the hea lth of homeless 
people. He has been a staff physician at BHCHP since 2008 and was named the Director  of 
Research at BHCHP in 2017. 
Recruitment of study participants will occur at up to 3 venues; however, initial  efforts will focus 
on the first of these sites: 
a) Medical center venue:  Jean Yawkey Place, adjacent to [LOCATION_011] Medical Center, is the BHCHP 
headquarters facility where medical, behavioral health, and dental clinics operate [ADDRESS_375827] in-pe rson participant 
recruitment while practicing COVID-appropriate social distancing and prioritizing the  health and 
well-being of both participants and study staff. 
Depending on the status of the COVID-19 pandemic, recruitment may later exp and to two 
additional locations when safe to do so: 
b) Shelter venue:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_306937] a 470-bed shelter serving both men and women where 
BHCHP operates a medical clinic 7 days per week in the men’s shelter and 6 days  per week in 
the women’s shelter.  
c) Day center venue:  St. Francis House is a multiservice day center for homeless people where 
BHCHP operates a medical clinic 5 days per week. 
Study participants will be recruited through five methods:  
a) Self-referral: Study staff will be stationed in heavily trafficked areas within the recruit ment 
sites at prespecified times each week. We anticipate that a general awareness of the study due 
to study staff presence and word- of-mouth will encourage prospective participants to approach 
study staff and undergo eligibility screening if interested. 
b) Proactive outreach:  BHCHP has a comprehensive EHR system (Epic) that prompts providers 
to assess tobacco use at every clinical encounter, facilitating determination of smoking hi story 
and current smoking status. Individuals with a BHCHP PCP who have been seen in a BHCHP  
clinic in the past year and who were current smokers at the time of their most recent clinical 
encounter will be approached in person at BHCHP clinical sites if they have a scheduled 
appointment or contact[CONTACT_306961] (if they have listed contact [CONTACT_3031]) by a 
research coordinator and screened for eligibility to participate. The BHCHP Chi ef Medical 
Officer has approved this recruitment strategy on behalf of all primary care provide rs at BHCHP 
clinical sites, who will in turn be notified about this recruitment approach (see  attached letter of 
approval).  
c) Referrals from [LOCATION_011] Health Care for the Homeless Program (BHCHP) clinical staff:  
Physicians, advanced practitioners, nurses, and other clinical staff at each BHCHP site rou tinely 
screen all patients for tobacco use. We will inform BHCHP  staff about the RCT through 
program-wide presentations and emails and encourage them to refer all current smoke rs for 
eligibility screening at one of the recruitment sites and/or securely message study s taff about 
potentially eligible patients who may be good candidates for outreach screening as described in 
section (b). 
d) Recruitment flyers: We will post and distribute study advertisements at BHCHP  sites to 
facilitate patient self-referrals for eligibility screening. 
e) Rescreening of previously screened participants: Participants who have previously been 
screened have also consented to letting study staff keep their data. Participants who  were 
previously screened and ineligible due to time-varying factors such as not having seen their 
PCP in the past year, or participants who previously screened as eligible but di d not enroll within 
two weeks of screening (see section V.A.2) will be periodically recontact[CONTACT_306962] . We will 
not contact [CONTACT_306963].  
Following screening , eligible individuals will be invited to attend a study enrollment visit to 
complete written informed consent and a baseline survey. 
 
IV. SUBJECT ENROLLMENT  
A. Methods of enrollment 
Participant screening, enrollment, and randomization will take place over the cou rse of 3 visits: 
1) Screening visit: Individuals recruited through the above methods will be screened for study 
eligibility. Prospective participants who approach study staff during prespe cified open -screening 
sessions at clinic sites will complete the entire eligibility screen in-person. Prospective 
participants who call study staff directly or who are proactively contact[CONTACT_306964]-person at JYP (see section V.A.). We anticipate 
screening up to 1000 people in order to reach our target of 180 randomized participants. 
2) Enrollment visit: Individuals who are eligible for the study will be invited t o attend a study 
enrollment visit for written informed consent, collection of demographic and contact [CONTACT_306965].  
3) Randomization and baseline clinician visit: Individuals who complete the enrollment visit  and 
baseline survey will be asked to return for a baseline clinical evaluation by [CONTACT_1003]. 
The study clinician will evaluate participants to determine if a varenicline prescription is 
appropriate and will provide the initial prescription for varenicline in most cases (see section 
V.A. for details). Concurrently, participants will be randomized to t he control arm (N= 90) or 
financial incentives arm (N= 90). Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_306966] (currently 
homeless vs. currently housed ). Following randomization, staff will set up a brief introductory 
video on a tablet to orient participants to their study arm. Participants w ithout a mobile phone 
will be provided one with a prepaid voice and text plan to facilitate communication and follow -up 
(see section V.C. for details).  
B. Informed consent procedures 
Informed consent will be obtained in person by a research staff person working under the 
direction of the PI. During the consent process, study staff will ask all potential participants if 
they would like to speak with a physician. If the participant chooses to speak with a physi cian, 
study staff will immediately send a secure message to the PI, [CONTACT_307008] ggett, who will 
respond to talk with the participants as soon as possible (within 30 minutes). To ensure that 
participants have an adequate understanding of the potential risks associated with study 
participation, all participants will be informed of these risks in plain language  on a written 
informed consent document that will be read aloud to each participant, making no assumption of 
literacy.  
Participants will be informed of the option of not participating in the study and that their decision 
regarding study participation will in no way impact their ability to receive future services at 
BHCHP. Following a practice we established in our prior survey work involving homeless 
smokers and further refined in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_306938], we will confirm individuals’ 
understanding of the consent materials with basic knowledge questions about the consent 
document content to ensure that they have the capacity to provide informed consent. Indi viduals 
who are able to correctly answer these questions will be asked to sign the paper  consent form if 
they wish to enroll in the trial. A signed copy will be retained by [CONTACT_205909] f and a second signed 
copy of the consent form will be given to participants for their own record s. 
C. Treatment assignment 
Participants will be randomized 1:1 to the control arm (n= 90) or the financial incentives arm 
(n=90). Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_306967] 2 study arms. The attached Study Schema 
provides an integrated summary of the screening, enrollment, and randomization procedures 
along with the components of each study arm and the principal study outcomes. 
The 2 study arms are as follows: 
    1) Control arm  (n=90): Participants in this arm will be offered [ADDRESS_375828] payment, irrespective of the result.  
    2) Financial incentives arm  (n=90): Participants in this arm will be offered [ADDRESS_375829] payments for saliva cotinine levels <30 ng/ml.  
 
V. STUDY PROCEDURES 
A. Study visits and measurements 
A complete timeline of study activities is depi[INVESTIGATOR_6517] [ADDRESS_375830] be completed within 4 weeks of enrollment. During this  visit, 
participants will be encouraged to set a quit date for the following week. P articipants who are 
prescribed varenicline by [CONTACT_306968] 2 follow-up clinician visits at wee ks 3 and 7 (+/- 
1 week). The first tobacco coaching session will occur on participants’ quit date and the 
remaining 4 sessions will coincide with on-treatment monitoring visits at 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks 
(or within one week after each of these time points). On-treatment monitori ng visits will begin 1 
week after the quit date. Selected participants will additionally be asked to participate in 
qualitative interviews at the end of treatment (12 weeks) and at the end of foll ow-up (24 weeks). 
The content and measurements involved in each of these visits are described below.   
 
Figure 3.  Study activities timeline 
 
Depending on space availability, participant preference, and the safety of having  in-person 
interactions based on the status of the COVID-19 pandemic, study participants may complet e 
surveys, coaching sessions , clinician visits, and qualitative interviews in the following ways : A) 
On-site in-person : Staff may administer the surveys/provide coaching in-person at a private 
area in the clinic space while adhering to physical distancing guidelines . B) On-site virtual : 
Study staff will set up a tablet in a separate on-site room for participants and administer the 
survey/provide coaching via Microsoft Teams or Enterprise Zoom. C) Remote and virtual : 
Participants with access to a phone, smartphone, or computer can complete the surveys , 
coaching sessions, clinician visits, and/or interviews virtually with study staff vi a phone call, 
Microsoft Teams, or Enterprise Zoom. 
Regardless of how participants complete study visits, the PI, [CONTACT_307009], and/or the 
study clinician will be available to advise study staff and speak with participants as needed. Any 
questions or concerns raised during the consent or enrollment phase in addition to  any issues 
unrelated to varenicline raised throughout the study will be directed to the PI. Any questions or 
concerns related to varenicline raised throughout the study will be directed fir st to the study 
clinician, with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_306939]- up.  
1) Screening visit: Participants will be screened for study eligibility through measurement of 
the specific data variables listed in section VI.A. Participants who are proactively contact[CONTACT_306969]. If their responses to the questions suggest that they are 
eligible to participate, they will be invited to meet with study staff in person  at JYP to confirm 
their eligibility with a saliva test for cotinine. If the cotinine saliva test is consistent with current 
smoking, participants will be able to proceed with enrollment procedures. Both the el igibility 
screener saliva test and all enrollment procedures need to occur within 2 weeks after the 
participant answered the eligibility screener questions . Eligible participants who complete all 
components of the eligibility screening in-person during open screening hours will be asked to 
come back at a later time to complete enrollment procedures (also within 2 weeks). 
2) Enrollment visit:  The enrollment visit will occur within 2 weeks after completing the 
screening visit . If more than 2 weeks has elapsed since screening, participants will need to be 
rescreened before proceeding to enrollment. During the enrollment visit, eligible par ticipants will 
provide written informed consent. Enrolled participants will then complete a baseline 
assessment that includes measurement of the specific data variables listed in section VI.A  and 
a demographics/contact [CONTACT_306970].A. Partici pants will 
also be provided with their CT Payer cards (listed below in section XI.A) during this  visit upon 
completion of the baseline assessment survey. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_375831] (EHR) and will complete a chart review form (data variabl es to 
collect listed in section VI.A). Enrolled participants will then be randomized to a study arm in the 
manner described above. 
3) Randomization and baseline clinician visit: The randomization and baseline clinician visit 
will occur within [ADDRESS_375832] need to undergo repeat screening to  confirm their 
continued eligibility, followed by [CONTACT_306971] m 
randomization and identify conditions relevant to varenicline use (see below), before  being 
allowed to proceed to randomization.  During the randomization visit, study staff will reveal the 
participant’s group assignment  and set up the introductory vi deo which will explain the study 
components and the study schedule. After the introductory video, staff will provide pa rticipants 
with a study cell phone if applicable (see section V.C.). The participant will the n be seen by [CONTACT_306972], as described in more detail below. During this visit, participants w ill be 
encouraged to set a quit date for the following week.52 Participants will receive $10 for attending 
this visit.  
4) Clinician visits: Participants who are enrolled and interested in varenicline will meet with the 
study clinician for a maximum of [ADDRESS_375833] visit, the clinician will assess health conditions relevant to  
participants ’ use of varenicline based on their responses on the baseline survey, their health 
history as documented in the BHCHP electronic health record, and their self-repo rted health 
history discussed during the visit. The clinician will use this information to f ollow a risk-based 
varenicline prescribing protocol detailed in section V.B. I f the participant is undecided on 
whether they would like to try varenicline or if approval is needed from the participant’s PCP and 
is still pending, the clinician may delay writing the varenicline prescription for up to 2 weeks 
following the initial clinician visit . Participants prescribed varenicline at the start of the study will 
attend 2 on-treatment follow-up clinician visits in conjunction with monitoring  visits at on-
treatment weeks 3 and 7 (or within [ADDRESS_375834] these timepoints). During these visits, 
participants will meet with the clinician to discuss varenicline adherence and side ef fects, as well 
as to have their prescription refilled, adjusted, or stopped depending on participants’ 
preferences and degree of response and tolerance to the medication. During the week [ADDRESS_375835] quit smoking 
or to further increase chances of quitting.52 If participants are interested in remaining on 
varenicline after completing 12 weeks, they will be encouraged to talk to their PCP to determi ne 
if continuing varenicline is appropriate for them. 
5) Tobacco coaching sessions : Coaching sessions will occur on the participant s’ quit date 
and at monitoring visit weeks 2, 4, 8, and 12. To enhance uptake of these services and 
acknowledge the competing life priorities53-56 of homeless smokers, participants will receive $15 
for each coaching session they attend. Participants can complete coaching sessions up to 1 
week after the scheduled date. 
a) Session 1:  A 30-minute baseline session will coincide with the participants planned quit date. 
During this session, the coach will assess participants’ readiness to quit, deliver a brief smoking 
cessation intervention using the “5 A’s” approach (Ask, Advise, Assess, Assist, and Arrange ),57 
provide motivational interviewing on the use of varenicline, and introduce the “ 3-sided triangle ” 
of tobacco addiction.  
b) Sessions 2- 4: 20-minute follow-up sessions at [ADDRESS_375836], which incorporated elements of motivational interviewing and cognitive behavio ral 
therapy, both applied in practical and concrete ways, to help homeless smokers overcome 
ambivalence about quitting and establish goals for behavior change. The protocol was 
structured around the American Lung Associatio n Freedom from Smoking  program theme of 
addressing the 3 parts of tobacco addiction: physical, mental, and social.58 Each session 
includes brief psycho-education in combination with skills-building and practical tips f or copi[INVESTIGATOR_306940], emotional triggers, and high-risk social situations, with content t ailored to the 
unique circumstances of homeless people. 
c) Session 5:  A final 30-minute session at [ADDRESS_375837] achieved abstinence at 12 weeks, this visit will 
focus on relapse prevention skills in addition to contingency planning for lapse or relapse. Fo r 
non-abstinent participants, this visit will focus on motivational enhancement strat egies. 
6) On-treatment monitoring visits:  10 cotinine monitoring visits will occur over 12 weeks. 
Monitoring visits will begin 1 week after the quit date and occur weekly through week 8, followed 
by [CONTACT_306973] 12. These visits serve 2 purposes: a) to assess self-repor ted 
smoking behavior, varenicline use and side effects, and selected other measures (section VI.A ), 
and b) to objectively verify smoking status through measurement of saliva cotinine. C otinine is 
the major metabolite of nicotine, and saliva cotinine is widely used to verify smoking ab stinence 
in research settings because it can be measured reliably, rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375], inexpensively, and wi th 
minimal invasiveness using saliva collection devices and cotinine detection kits at the point of 
care.[ADDRESS_375838]  
effective when delivered immediately.59, 60 Frequent objective verification of smoking status 
provides frequent opportunities for abstinence-contingent financial rewards for incent ive arm 
participants and serves as an attention control for control arm participants. 
Point- of-care saliva cotinine testing will be conducted using commercially available , 
professional-grade kits with documented performance characteristics and a cut-off leve l of 30 
ng/ml. Current examples include the Alere iScreen OFD cotinine oral fluid screening device  and 
the Jant Accutest Saliva Cotinine Test, although other tests with similar pe rformance 
characteristics may be used depending upon availability and supply chain considerations . 
Instructions and procedures provided by [CONTACT_306974]. Collected saliva samples will be discarded immediately upon reading the results and 
will be handled as if they were potential biohazards. No identifying information will be affi xed to 
the samples . For participants in the financial incentives arm, payments will be based exclusivel y 
on having a negative point- of-care saliva cotinine test and will not rely on self-report.30 Payments 
for negative cotinine levels will begin at $25 and increase by $5 for each successive abstinent 
measurement up to a maximum of $70. Non-abstinent measurements, or failure to pr ovide a 
saliva sample for cotinine measurement, will result in no payment and will reset t he subsequent 
payment for an abstinent test back to the starting value of $25 . An exception to this reset 
procedure will be made for participants who miss a monitoring visit due to CO VID-related 
isolation or quarantine requirements (described in section G). These individuals wil l not have 
their incentive payment schedule reset to the starting value for a COVID- related absence, but 
rather will resume payments at the value following where they left off prior t o the 
isolation/quarantine period. A similar exception will be made if the saliva cotinine test produces 
an invalid result. If this occurs during an intervention arm monitoring visit, the part icipant will be 
offered the chance to repeat the test for a 2nd and 3rd time on the same day and up to [ADDRESS_375839] the opportunity to undergo cotinine monitoring vi sits according to the 
same schedule used for incentive arm participants. Control arm participants will r eceive a fixed 
amount of $[ADDRESS_375840] up to two more times during that visit , but they will still be paid $[ADDRESS_375841] even if no 
valid results are produced. In addition to verifying abstinence through the above point- of-care 
measurements, we will also formally assess the primary study outcome at the week 12 
monitoring visit. This will involve collecting a second saliva sample for send-out cotinine testin g 
at a contracted laboratory that provides a more precise quantitative result using a 
chemiluminescence immunoassay or gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.[ADDRESS_375842] this testing, although other laboratories offering assays with 
equivalent performance characteristics may be engaged if circu mstances dictate doing so. For 
these tests, participants will be asked to hold a saliva collection sponge in their mouths fo r about 
5 minutes. When the sponge is completely wet, it will be placed back into the collection tube . 
The tube will be sealed and labeled with the participant ’s study ID number so that no personal 
information is associated with the saliva sample. Instructions and procedures provided by [CONTACT_306975]. Samples wil l be batch mailed to 
the contracted laboratory, where saliva cotinine levels will be quantified. Sample results will be 
reported to research staff via password protected email exchange.  
During the week 12 visit, we will also administer a follow-up survey to reassess several of the 
baseline data variables (listed below in section VI.A). Participants who miss their 12-week 
monitoring visit will be able to complete the outcome cotinine saliva test and foll ow-up survey 
within 2 weeks. 
7) Post-treatment outcome assessment visit: A post-treatment visit will occur at [ADDRESS_375843] to allow staff to immediately 
categorize participants for potential qualitative interviews as described below. We will al so 
administer a follow-up survey to reassess several of the baseline variables (listed below in 
section VI.A.) at each of these post-treatment assessment visits. Participants who miss  their 24-
week outcome testing visit will be able to complete the outcome cotinine saliva t ests and follow-
up surveys within 2 weeks of this timepoint.   
8) Qualitative interviews: We will conduct qualitative interviews with a purposively-selected 
sample of incentive arm participants to better understand why, how, and under what 
circumstances they A) achieve (or not) abstinence in response to financial incentives and B) 
maintain (or not) abstinence after incentives are stopped. Information gathered during these 
interviews will help generate hypotheses about potential mechanisms for on-treatm ent and post-
treatment effects and inform future modifications of the intervention.  
To address part A of this aim, we will purposively sample incentive arm participants at 12 weeks 
according to their on-treatment abstinence profile, categorized as follows:  
1) Non-responders (N=10): Earned <[ADDRESS_375844] payments and divided 
into 2 subgroups a) concordant reporters (N=5): showed concordance between self-
reported and biochemically-verified abstinence and b) non-concordant reporters (N=5): 
showed non-concordance between self-reported and biochemically-verified abstinence 
throughout the trial.   
2) Partial responders (N=10): E arned ≥[ADDRESS_375845] payments but was 
non-abstinent at the 12-week outcome assessment. 
3) Responders (N=10): earned ≥[ADDRESS_375846] payments and was 
abstinent at the 12-week outcome assessment.   
Abstinence at the 12- week outcome assessment will be based on participant’s point- of-care 
saliva cotinine level. To account for a potential treatment effect of these i nterviews44 on 
subsequent 24-week smoking outcomes, we will interview [ADDRESS_375847] inent at 12 
weeks based on point- of-care salivary cotinine testing.   
To address part B of this aim, at 24 weeks we will purposively sample from 2 strata of incentive 
arm participants who achieved abstinent cotinine levels at 12 weeks:  
1) Sustained responders (N=10): Abstinent cotinine levels at 12 and 24 weeks 
2) Non-sustained responders (N=10): Abstinent cotinine level at [ADDRESS_375848] will 
be used at the 24-week timepoint to ensure that interviews can be scheduled and completed 
within 2 weeks (since it may take up to [ADDRESS_375849] resu lt to return).  
Actual sample sizes for each response profile may be adjusted until thematic saturati on is 
reached. This sampling approach will ensure a diverse set of experiences with the financial 
incentives intervention and will aid in understanding the factors underpi[INVESTIGATOR_306941]. Part A participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_306976] 2 weeks of 
their 12-week follow-up visit. Part B participants will be recruited by  [CONTACT_150609] 2 weeks of 
their 24-week follow-up visit. Audiotaped interviews lasting up to 60 minute s will be conducted 
by [CONTACT_306977]-structured interview guides addressing the content areas 
described below in section VI.A. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_375850] the participant’s PCP to 
inform them of their patient ’s enrollment in a stop smoking study in which varenicline will be 
offered. Unless the participant reports a history of specific comorbidities, PCP  permission will 
not be required before the study clinician meets with the participant and prescrib es varenicline 
at the typi[INVESTIGATOR_306942]. However, PCPs will be invited to respond to study staff messages to 
express any questions or concerns, and if the PCP recommends that varenicline is not 
prescribed, the study clinician will follow this recommendation. For parti cipants with selected 
comorbidities, including seizure history, chronic kidney disease, or higher-risk mental st ates, we 
will follow a systematic algorithm to ensure safe varenicline prescribing (Appendix 2). 
Comorbidities will be assessed in various ways, including a) participants’  responses to the 
eligibility screener and baseline survey items related to chronic medical conditions and mental 
health symptoms, b) review of documented comorbidities within participants’  EHR, and c) 
baseline clinical assessment by [CONTACT_1003]. The action plans in response to specifi c 
comorbidities (as visualized in Appendix 2) are explained further below: 
1) Seizures:  During the baseline survey, participants will be asked if they have a lifetime 
history of seizures, and if yes, whether they had a seizure in the past year. If the  
participant has had a seizure within the past year, study staff will send the pa rticipant ’s 
PCP a direct message via Epic on the same day as the enrollment visit informing them 
of their patient’s enrollment in the study and requesting input from the PCP regarding 
whether a prescription for varenicline is appropriate. The study clinician will not prescribe 
varenicline to such a participant until explicit permission from the PCP is gr anted. If the 
participant has not had a seizure within the past year, study staff will still send the 
participant ’s PCP a direct message informing them of their patient’s enrollment in the 
study and invite their input if they have any questions or concerns; however, the clinician 
will proceed with prescribing varenicline unless the PCP directly expresses that the 
participant should not take varenicline. 
2) Chronic kidney disease (CKD): For participants with a history of CKD, our varenicline 
prescribing protocols are based on past research on varenicline use in patients with 
renal impairments and the recommendations listed on the [COMPANY_007] varenicline packet 
insert .52, [ADDRESS_375851] a lifetime 
history of CKD, and if yes, whether they are currently on dialysis. For participa nts on 
dialysis, the clinician will prescribe varenicline at a maximum dose of 0.5 mg once daily 
(a quarter of the typi[INVESTIGATOR_306943]). For participants who are not on dialysi s, the 
clinician will recommend that the participant completes lab testing to ascertai n current 
serum eGFR levels. If the participant refuses new labs, the clinician will prescribe  
varenicline at a maximum dose of 0.5 mg twice per day (half the maximum typi[INVESTIGATOR_306944]), 
which is the recommended dose for patients with severe renal impairment (eGFR < 30 ). 
Participants who agree to have labs drawn will be prescribed varenicline according to 
their eGFR results. If the participant’s eGFR is <30, the clinician will prescribe 
varenicline at a maximum dose of 0.5 mg twice per day. If the participant’s  eGFR is ≥30, 
the clinician will up-titrate varenicline to the typi[INVESTIGATOR_306945] 1.0 mg twice per 
day. In all cases, study staff will send an Epic message to the PCPs of participa nts with 
any degree of CKD to inform them of their patient’s enrollment in the st udy; however, the 
clinician will proceed with prescribing varenicline according to the above well-defined 
clinical protocols unless the PCP directly recommends otherwise. 
3) Higher-risk mental health states: Participant suicidality will be assessed during the 
eligibility screener, and other mental health symptoms will be assessed during the  
baseline survey using multiple assessments, as described in section VI.A. If the 
participant reports vague suicidal ideation but is otherwise found to be at low ri sk of 
suicide based on the C-SSRS primary care screening instrument (patients with  hi gh risk 
will be excluded) or if the participant is considered moderate risk of suicide only due to 
suicidal behavior over 12 months ago, study staff will send the participant ’s PCP a direct 
message via Epic on the same day as the enrollment/baseline survey study visit 
informing them o f their patient’s enrollment in the study and requesting input regarding 
whether prescribing varenicline is appropriate. The same procedure will occur for 
participants with high scores on standardized mental health symptom instruments 
administered during the baseline survey (see Appendix 2). The study clinician will no t 
prescribe varenicline to the patient until explicit permission from the PCP i s granted.   
At the time of the baseline clinician visit, the participant may be undecide d on whether they want 
to try varenicline, or final approval from the participant’s PCP or other provider m ay still be 
pending. In these instances, the clinician can delay issuing a varenicline prescription for up t o 2 
weeks. Undecided participants will be told to inform study staff if they decide to take varenicline. 
If PCP/provider approval is still pending, the study clinician will directly contact  [CONTACT_21122]/provider 
to ensure that a direct answer is provided within the 2-week window. Upon meeting wit h the 
participant, the study clinician may determine based on chart review or clini cal assessment that 
the participant has concerning comorbidities, symptoms, or circumstances that were not  
uncovered during screening and enrollment. In these cases, the clinician may determ ine that 
direct PCP input is necessary before prescribing varenicline and will direct message the 
participant’s  PCP to obtain this input before prescribing.  
For participants who are prescribed varenicline at baseline, treatment will conti nue for 12 
weeks, distributed in 1-month allotments in conjunction with follow-up clinician  visits at 3 and 7 
weeks to assess medication adherence and tolerance. Dose adjustments will be made for  
participants who experience non-serious side effects. 
The clinician will electronically send varenicline prescriptions directly to the BHCHP pharmacy 
or to an alternative pharmacy (based on patient request and current supply), where participants 
will be instructed to fill their prescriptions. The majority of participants wi ll have MassHealth 
insurance and can obtain their prescription with a $3.[ADDRESS_375852] (~$0.55 per 
month) to participants without insurance. Given the low cost of varenicline unde r 340B pricing 
and the low likelihood of recruiting participants without MassHealth, BHCHP has agr eed to 
voucher the medication costs for participants who have no insurance or who have insurance 
that only offers varenicline at a high copay. If a participant requests to  use an alternative 
pharmacy, the clinician will electronically send the varenicline prescription to this pre ferred 
pharmacy instead. 
C. Devices 
Participants who do not have a mobile phone of their own will be given a low-cost mobil e device 
(~$30/unit) with a 12-month talk and text plan (~$125/year through Tracfone) t o facilitate 
communication and follow-up. If a participant loses or sells their device, the phon e will not be 
replaced, and their plan will be deactivated. To incentivize phone retention, partici pants who still 
have their device at the end of the study will be allowed to keep it. 
D. Procedures 
There will be no procedures or surgical interventions in this study. 
E. Data Collection 
All data will be collected using password-protected, Mass General Brigham-approved laptops or 
tablets with full-disk encryption. We will use the Mass General Brigham-hosted Resear ch 
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) application for data collection and management. The 
specific data elements collected at each study visit are detailed below in section VI. 
F. Electronic Communication 
The Twilio text messaging feature will be integrated into our R EDC ap database. This will allow 
study staff to send participants automated text message reminder s about  their next scheduled 
appointment and the maximum potential payment they can earn at this visit.  Text messages will 
not include any identifying information and participants can opt out at any time by [CONTACT_306978] “ STOP ” (see Appendix 1 for sample text messages). Participants must consent to receive 
these text messages. The consent form includes information outlined in the Mass General 
Brigham guidelines for texting research subjects .63 
Study staff may use Mass General Brigham’s HIPAA-compliant video conference platforms, 
Microsoft Teams or Enterprise Zoom, to administer surveys and complete coaching sessions as 
part of the team’s in -person remote COVID-19 safety protocol (see section V.A). Participants 
who prefer this form of engagement will arrive to the BHCHP clinic where on- site study staff will 
set up a Teams or Zoom call on a study tablet for the participant to use. P articipants will 
participate in the video call using headphones in a private or semi-private space within the clinic;  
study staff will administer the survey or complete the coaching session via Teams or Zoom 
either on-site (in a separate room) or remotely. This will minimize in-perso n contact [CONTACT_306979]. For safety and security, no 
Teams or Zoom links will be shared with participants. Teams or Zoom meetings will require 
passwords and will not be shared with anyone other than study staff. Participa nts will be 
instructed not to use the chat function during these meetings as the feature is not en crypted. 
Participants will also be advised that photographs and recordings of Teams or Zoom  calls are 
not allowed. 
Participants may meet with the study clinician via MGB -hosted Microsoft Teams, MGB 
Enterprise Zoom, or BHCHP’s Epic/OCHIN integrated HIP AA-compliant Zoom platform. The 
third option allows participants to engage with the clinician in the manner currently used to 
provide COVID-safe virtual clinical care at BHCHP .  
Study staff may also engage with participants over the phone. If participants prefer remote 
virtual study visits for COVID-[ADDRESS_375853] number as necessary.  
Study staff may use Imprivata cortex, a HIPAA-compliant secure communications platf orm, to 
communicate with the study clinician using designated work iPhones encrypted with iOS 
MobileIron Mobile Device Management (MDM) software. 
G. COVID-19 Contingency Plans:  
The team is engaged in contingency planning and will continue to monitor hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], stat e, and 
federal guidance on COVID-19. Should a resurgence of COVID interfere with the ab ility to 
implement the study protocol as written here, the team will implement contingency plan s that will 
be adopted for the circumstances and restrictions present at the time of a future surge.  
Participants and staff will be asked to follow current CDC guidelines regarding isolation and/or 
quarantine in the event of developi[INVESTIGATOR_35910]-19 symptoms or experiencing a significant 
COVID-19 exposure. The implications of COVID-related absences for incentive arm payments 
are discussed above.  
H. Procedures for Restarting Enrolled Participants 
As described in protocol amendment 11, all study activities were paused on 07/06/[ADDRESS_375854] (see section 
V.A.1.) to confirm their continued eligibility before completing two st udy restart appointments as 
described below.    
To ease the response burden, participants will be offered the option to complete the  eligibility 
screener questions over the phone. I f their responses to the questions sug gest that they are still 
eligible to participate , they will be invited to meet with study staff in person at JYP within two 
weeks to confirm their eligibility with a saliva test for cotinine. If the cotin ine saliva test is 
consistent with current smoking, participants will immediately proceed with the  first study restart 
appointment . Participants who opt to complete all components of the eligibility re-screening in 
person will meet with study staff at JYP and, if still eligible, w ill be invited to complete the first 
study restart appointment either immediately or within 2 weeks. Participants who are found to no 
longer be eligible during any component of the eligibility re-screening process will be given the 
option to either screen again at a later date (if the reason for ineligi bility is a time-limited issue 
such as connectedness to care) or to unenroll from the study.  
At the first study restart appointment, participants will follow procedures simil ar to the enrollment 
appointment discussed in section V.A.2. Study staff will review an updated version  of the 
consent form with participants, and participants will be required to sign this up dated version of 
the consent form to continue study participation. Study staff will then  confirm participants’  
current demographic and contact [CONTACT_306980]. P articipants 
will receive $[ADDRESS_375855] their ow n phone will be 
offered a study phone and will be paid $[ADDRESS_375856]  recent 
data will be used for analyses and earlier data will be disregarded.  
 
VI. BIOSTATISTIC AL ANALYSIS 
A. Specific data variables 
The specific data elements collected at each visit are as follows: 
1) Screening visit data elements:  This visit will focus on assessing variables related to the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Variables collected during this visit will include: 
- First and last name 
- Date of birth 
- Native language and self-reported comfort communicating in English among non-native 
speakers 
- Ever smoked ≥100 cigarettes 
- Current cigarettes per day 
- Saliva cotinine level ≥30 ng/mL , based on point- of-care testing 
- Prior serious allergic reactions to varenicline  
- Currently pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding 
- Readiness to try quitting smoking within the next [ADDRESS_375857] 
- Name [CONTACT_307006] (and if PCP has been seen within the past year) 
- History of psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_75719] [ADDRESS_375858] their current phone number (if any) to facilitate communication about the 
enrollment visit 
2) Enrollment visit data elements:  When individuals present for enrollment, we will confirm 
that they have previously screened eligible for the study. For those who wish t o enroll in the 
study, we will collect additional demographic and contact [CONTACT_3031]: 
- Gender 
- Pronouns 
- Social security number 
- Current residence or place where sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_21693] 
- Current phone number (if any); confirm/update number if previously collect ed at 
screening visit 
- Emergency contact [CONTACT_3031] 
- BHCHP medical record number 
- Insurance coverage listed within BHCHP electronic health record 
We will also conduct a baseline survey assessing the following variables at the time of 
enrollment: Italicized measures will be collected during follow-up surveys at weeks 12 and 24:  
Domains Measures 
Sociodemographic Race/ethnicity; education; health insurance (all based on items from the 
2003 HCH User Survey23, 64 and our prior survey work45, 65, 66) 
Homelessness Homelessness  epi[INVESTIGATOR_306946]67; living situation ; past-month 
subsistence  difficulties53  
Mental/physical 
health General health status (SF- 1)68, 69; single item measurement of cigarette 
craving70; chronic medical conditions; Domains related to COVID-19, 
including diagnosis and symptom history71, 72, change in quitting 
motivation 73, 74, and receipt of the COVID-19 vaccine; AUDIT 76-78; 
DAST -10 78,79; past 3-month drug use inventory80,81 ; PHQ -9 82,83; GAD-
784; MDQ85, 88, 89; PSQ92, 95, 96  
Tobacco use Age of initiation; past quit attempts (>24 hours) ; use of cessation aids ; 
use of e-cigarettes or vape products ; cigarettes/day;  Fagerstrom Test 
for Nicotine Dependence88; 10-point importance and confidence 
scales2, 16, 18; stage of change91, 92; Contemplation Ladder91; social 
support for quitting18, past month use of alternative tobacco products 66 
 
3) On-treatment monitoring visit data elements:  The following variables will be collected at 
the timepoints specified in parentheses. If participants miss their week 12 monit oring visit, the 
underlined elements will be asked during the follow-up survey visit up to 2 weeks later. 
- Point- of-care saliva cotinine level (every monitoring visit, per Figure 3) 
- Date and time last smoked all or most of a cigarette (every monitori ng visit) 
- Date and time of last puff of cigarette (every monitoring visit) 
- Number of smoking days in the past 7 days (every monitoring visit) 
- Average number of cigarettes per day (every monitoring visit) 
- Use of vape or e-cigarette in past 7 days (every monitoring visit) 
- Use of other tobacco products in past 7 days (every monitoring visit) 
- Single item measurement on cigarette craving (every monitoring visit)[ADDRESS_375859] week use of varenicline prescribed by [CONTACT_106501] (every monitoring visit)  
- Average number of varenicline pi[INVESTIGATOR_306947] (if applicable, based on whether t he 
participant is prescribed varenicline by [CONTACT_1003]; every monitoring visit ) 
- Use of other quit smoking aids (every monitoring visit) 
- Side effects to varenicline, including abnormal dreams, aggressive/erratic behavi or, 
headaches, nausea, sleep disturbance/insomnia, vomiting, and other (if applicable; 
every monitoring visit) 
- Suicidal thoughts, intention, and behaviors since last study visit, as measured by a 
modified version of the C- SSRS  (if applicable; every monitoring visit).48 
- Other adverse events not related to varenicline if reported by [CONTACT_3445] (every 
monitoring visit) 
- All items italicized in the baseline survey table above at [ADDRESS_375860] 
4) Post-treatment outcome assessment visit data elements: The following variables will be 
collected at [ADDRESS_375861], unless otherwise specified in parenthesis.  
- Point- of-care saliva cotinine level (incentive participants only )  
- Date and time last smoked all or most of a cigarette 
- Date and time of last puff of a cigarette  
- Number of smoking days in the past [ADDRESS_375862] 7 days 
- All items italicized in the baseline survey table above 
- Laboratory saliva cotinine level 
5) Coaching session data elements: Baseline, 2 , 4, 8, and 12 weeks (or within 1 week) 
- Confidence to quit smoking (or to stay quit) 
- Importance of quitting smoking (or staying quit) 
- Past-month quit attempts 
- Summary of coaching session, including experiences delivering the intervention 
including the ease of delivery (including the length, scheduled time); the apparen t 
acceptability and relevance; comprehension of the material by [CONTACT_3038]; and 
factors that impeded or assisted in the delivery, and any issues related to safety or 
potential harms that emerge.  
6) Qualitative interview data elements : 12 and 24 weeks (or within [ADDRESS_375863]) 
    We will create 2 interview guides for incentive arm participants selected for qual itative 
interviews: one guide to address part A of this aim at 12 weeks, and a second guide to address 
part B of this aim at 24 weeks . Both will be structured around exploring the cognitive (‘why?’), 
procedural (‘how?’), and contextual (‘under what circumstances?’) dimensions of parti cipants’ 
response (or lack of) to the financial incentives intervention during and after trea tment. 
    ▪ Cognitive:  Questions in this domain will explore why participants abstain (or not) from 
smoking in response to financial incentives. A) At 12 weeks, interviewers will probe: the 
perceived impact of incentives on smoking cognitions, such as readiness, motivation, and 
confidence to quit or importance of quitting; the extent to which the extrins ic motivation of 
incentives was internalized by [CONTACT_4317]; the importance of incentive dollar amounts, 
frequency, and format on the perceived potency of incentives; the perceived fairness and 
understandability of the incentives scheme; and the overall utility of financ ial incentives in 
promoting cessation, particularly in relation to other treatments tried by [CONTACT_4317] . B) At 24 
weeks, interviewers will probe: how participants coped with transitioning off  incentives; how 
smoking cognitions, such as readiness, motivation, and confidence to quit or importance of 
quitting, changed following the removal of incentives; and the extent to which participants were 
successful (or not) in shifting from extrinsic to intrinsic motivational pathways. 
    ▪ Procedural:  Questions in this domain will explore how participants abstain (or not) from 
smoking in response to financial incentives. A) At 12 weeks, interviewers will probe: 
participants’ use of varenicline and other pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], coaching or other counseling 
services, or other mainstream or alternative strategies for quitting; how these supplemental 
strategies facilitated or impeded their response to the incentives intervention; and whe ther the 
intervention had spi[INVESTIGATOR_306948], such as increasing physical activity or reducing concurrent substance use. B) At 24 
weeks, the above areas will be explored again, but with a focus on assessing whether these 
behavioral strategies for sustaining abstinence increased, waned, or remained stable after 
incentives were removed. 
    ▪ Contextual:  Questions in this domain will explore the individual and social circumstances  
under which participants abstain (or not) from smoking in response to financial ince ntives. At 
both 12 and 24 weeks, interviewers will probe the ways in which individual material 
circumstances , such as housing status, food security, personal safety, and other basic survival 
needs; individual comorbidities , such as physical ailments, psychiatric symptoms, and 
concurrent substance use disorders; and social milieu characteristics , such as friends who 
smoke, second-hand smoke exposure, social support for quitting, and access to smoke-free 
settings, collectively influence A) on-treatment abstinence initiation and B) post-treatment 
abstinence maintenance in response to the financial incentives intervention. We will also prob e 
whether and how this relatively ‘high -touch’ intervention strategy fits within the broader social 
context of participants’ lives in order to optimize the approach for subsequent studi es aiming to 
disseminate and implement this treatment modality. 
    A third interview guide will be developed for control arm participants  that will generically 
explore their experiences with quitting smoking in the context of homelessness or un stable 
housing. 
B. Study Endpoints 
1)  Primary outcome : The Aim 1A outcome is saliva cotinine-verified 7-day smoking abstinence 
at [ADDRESS_375864] a sali va cotinine 
level of <10 ng/m L at the week 12 timepoint will be considered abstinent.  
2)  Secondary outcome : The Aim 1B outcome is 7-day smoking abstinence at 24 weeks , 
based on self-report and verified by a salivary cotinine level of <10 ng/mL. 
3)  Other outcomes: Other outcomes include 7-day smoking abstinence at weeks 1- 11 
(defined as no smoking the past 7 days and having a point- of-care saliva cotinine level <30 
ng/ml), use of varenicline or other smoking cessation medications (assessed by [CONTACT_6270]-repor t and 
BHCHP chart review), use of other tobacco treatment resources, changes in past-month dr ug 
and alcohol use and psychiatric symptoms (assessed with the AUDIT 76-78, DAST- 10 78,79,drug 
use inventory, PHQ-9, 82,83 GAD- 7,84  at 12 and 24 weeks).  
C. Statistical Methods 
Quantitative analysis:  Quantitative analysis will be based on the intention- to-treat principle. 
We will use Chi-squared tests to assess the difference between arms on attainment o f the 
primary and secondary outcomes. Cochran-Mantel-Hae nszel tests will determine whether the 
intervention effect is homogenous across study sites. We will use logistic regression t o assess 
the intervention effect while adjusting for site. In primary analysis, participants who  do not 
provide a saliva sample or are lost to follow-up will be assumed non-abstinent. A sensitivity 
analysis will use multiple imputation to impute missing outcomes data based on non-missing  
variables.94, [ADDRESS_375865] of financial incentives on smoking abstinence. This analysis, whi ch provides 
greater statistical power than cross-sectional analyses, will use generalized estimating 
equations (GEE) to account for the correlated data structure. We will also use G EE to analyze 
the other outcomes of changes in cigarette consumption, WHO ASSIST drug and alcohol  
scores, and mental health scores, each measured at baseline and 12 and 24 weeks. 
Qualitative analysis:  All interviews will be transcribed verbatim by a professional service and 
analyzed using NVivo 11 software. Data analysis will be based on a grounded theory 
approach94 and will occur concurrently with data collection to ascertain when thematic saturation 
is reached for each sampling stratum. Two trained study staff members, working in parallel 
under the direction of Drs. Baggett, Park, and Kruse, will begin by [CONTACT_31463]-c oding the raw 
transcript data to form initial categories using a principally inductive approach.95 During weekly 
team meetings, the method of constant comparison96,97 will be used to iteratively refine these 
categories, to resolve discrepancies through discussion and reference to raw data until high 
inter-rater reliability ( K≥0.80) is achieved, and to organize emergent major and minor themes 
into a hierarchical framework. Analyses will compare findings across treatment response 
profiles to generate insights about the reasons for response variability. Consistent  with the 
embed ded-experiment mixed methods design,44 the qualitative data will be used to answer the 
basic question: “To what extent do the qualitative process findings enhance the understanding  
of the experimental outcomes ?”[ADDRESS_375866] > 80% power to detect a difference 
in abstinence at 12 weeks of 4% in the control arm and 17.5% in the incentives arm at a two-
tailed p of 0.05.  
 
VII. RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS 
The potential risks and discomforts associated with this study are detailed below. The methods 
for mitigating these risks and monitoring the safety of participants are descr ibed in section IX .B. 
A. Complications of surgical/non-surgical procedures 
Not applicable. 
B. Drug side effects and toxicities 
Participants will be offered a prescription for varenicline. Common side effect s of varenicline are 
nausea, sleep problems, constipation, gas, and vomiting. Other possible, but less common, side  
effects include cardiovascular (chest pain, hypertension, tachycardia), sleep walking, allergic 
reactions, or serious skin reactions. Participants who are taking varenicline prescribe d by [CONTACT_306981]-t reatment 
monitoring visit. Procedures for addressing participants with significant side eff ects and 
suicidality are described below (section IX. D.). 
In June 2021, [COMPANY_007] announced a halt in global distribution of varenicline (brand name: [CONTACT_219190]) 
and a voluntary recall of selected lots after finding heightened levels of N-nitr oso-varenicline ( a 
nitrosamine compound) in some pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]. Although the risk posed by N-nitroso-varenicl ine is 
uncertain, nitrosamine compounds in general are considered carcinogenic when exposure 
occurs in sufficient doses over prolonged periods of time. The nitrosamine levels f ound in 
[COMPANY_007]’s varenicline product exceeded the FDA’s acceptable intake limit of 37 ng per day . In 
September 2021, [COMPANY_007] extended its recall to all lots of varenicline. 
The FDA has since approved two generic versions of varenicline: one manufactured by [CONTACT_306982]. The FDA also announced that they would not 
object to manufacturers distributing varenicline tablets above the FDA’s original acceptable 
intake limit of [ADDRESS_375867] levels of N-
nitroso-varenicline that are within the FDA’s interim acceptable intake limit .[ADDRESS_375868] been deemed safe by [CONTACT_1622]. 
C. Device complications 
Not applicable.  
D. Psychosocial (non-medical) risks 
i) Psychological and/or physical discomfort: Quitting smoking can be psychologically st ressful 
and, at times, physically uncomfortable because of cravings and nicotine withdrawal sym ptoms , 
such as irritability, depressed mood, sleep difficulty, and concentration difficulty. Participants will 
be asked to what extent they have craved cigarettes at each on-treatment monitorin g visit.  
ii) Risk to privacy: We will collect and record identifying information (e.g. na me, date of birth, 
and social security number) and ask participants about potentially sensitive topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]. Ther e is a 
risk to privacy if this data is compromised. 
E. Radiation risks 
Not applicable. 
G. Potential loss of study mobile phone  
Participants  may be at minimal risk of a breach of privacy if someone else gains access to their 
phone during the study. Therefore, we will inform participants of this risk during recrui tment and 
encourage participants to mitigate this risk by 1) not sharing their phone wit h others, 2) 
password protecting their mobile device, and 3) in the event of loss, notifying research s taff to 
terminate service to the device. Automated appointment reminder text messages will be sent  to 
participants. These text messages are designed to convey relevant information to participants  
while having a protective level of ambiguity. 
 
VIII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS 
A. Potential benefits to participating individuals 
Potential benefits for participants include the opportunity to receive assistance wit h smoking 
cessation, which may reduce their risk of tobacco-related health complications in addition to 
reducing the amount of money they direct toward purchasing cigarettes. The scope and 
magnitude of these potential benefits outweigh the risks to human subjects. 
B. Potential benefits to society 
As in the general population, cigarette smoking is a major contributor to m orbidity and mortality 
among homeless people.14, [ADDRESS_375869] (DSMB), consisting of researchers not involved in the study who have 
expertise in clinical trials and/or vulnerable populations, to oversee the integrity of the dat a and 
the safety of participants. The objectives and procedures of the DSMB are explained further 
below (section IX.I.). The following data and safety monitoring procedures (sections I X.A.-IX.G. ) 
will be implemented throughout the study.  
A. Data acquisition and monitoring 
All data will be collected using password-protected, Mass General Brigham-approved laptops or 
tablets with full-disk encryption. We will use the Mass General Brigham-hosted Resear ch 
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) application for data collection and management. REDCap is 
a secure, HIPAA-compliant web-based application hosted by [CONTACT_306983] & Services (ERIS). 
Because a Mass General Brigham username [CONTACT_307007], al l activity on 
study documents is electronically logged and therefore traceable. To help guard against errant 
data entries, REDCap has built-in functions providing real-time data entry val idation to help 
ensure accuracy and completeness. Data will be collected according to a standardized protocol 
that will detail which data elements should be collected at each study visit and the methods for 
doing so. We will operationalize this protocol by [CONTACT_306984]. Each dat a 
collection form will have instructions or prompts for collecting the required data elemen ts, and 
the response fields for each item will have appropriate ranges and formats to ensure  that the 
data is entered in a valid way. 
Data collected in REDCap is saved by [CONTACT_306985] a secure, HIPAA-compliant server. To help 
ensure the safety and integrity of the study data, the data will be peri odically exported from 
REDCap and backed up to a HIPAA-secure shared file area (SFA) accessible only to authorized  
study staff after logging on to the Mass General Brigham network. Data saved to  the study SFA 
can be accessed only via the Mass General Brigham-approved computing device, which by 
[CONTACT_306986], if the device is portable, full-disk encrypt ion. The SFA is 
backed up nightly by [CONTACT_306987]. Access to the study SFA will be overseen by [CONTACT_978] [CONTACT_1629] d can be 
changed only by a designated key-giver (who is independent of the study) under the expli cit 
direction of the PI. In addition to the SFA, selected data elements may also be stored on a 
project-dedicated Mass General Brigham Microsoft SharePoint site. Data saved on the proj ect-
dedicated SharePoint site will be accessible only to study staff. 
The qualitative interviews conducted at [ADDRESS_375870]-protected, Mass General Brigham-approved laptop or tablet  
with full- disk encryption. Audio files will be backed up to the PI’s SFA described above and then 
deleted from the portal device. 
The study data will be examined on a weekly basis by [CONTACT_306988], 
working in conjunction with the PI, to identify patterns of missing data or non-r esponse, to 
ensure that critical variables are being captured and recorded as intended, and to generate 
recruitment and enrollment reports for review by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_306949]-investigators. 
Free-text notes recorded by [CONTACT_306989]. The database programmer will prepare cl eaned, 
de-identified analytic datafiles for use by [CONTACT_306990]. Analyses will occur periodically throughout the s tudy and 
the findings will be reported in annual progress reports to the NIH and in c ontinuing review 
reports for the Mass General Brigham IRB. 
B. Quality assurance 
The tobacco coach will complete a checklist indicating topi[INVESTIGATOR_306950]. He/she will record experiences 
delivering the intervention including the ease of delivery (including the length, scheduled  time); 
the apparent acceptability and relevance; comprehension of the material by [CONTACT_306991]; 
and factors that impeded or assisted in the delivery, and any issues related to safety or  potential 
harms that emerge. 
Using a random selection process, the tobacco coach will identify a sub-sample of 15% of 
sessions to audio record. A clinical psychologist will periodically review the recordings and 
provide direct feedback to the tobacco coach using a standard coaching evaluation form rat ing 
adherence to the protocol, adherence to motivational interviewing principles, use of motivati onal 
interviewing tools/techniques, and participant engagement. The coach will obtain verba l consent 
from participants before starting the recording. Sessions will be recorded by a microphone 
connected directly to a password-protected, Mass General Brigham-approved laptop or tablet  
with full- disk encryption. Audio files will be backed up to the PI’s SFA described above and 
deleted from the portable device. Audio files will also be destroyed immediately after r eview. 
The coaching evaluation forms will not contain any identifying information and will be securel y 
stored on Microsoft Sharepoint. 
 
C. Safety Monitoring 
The eligibility criteria for the study are designed to identify individuals who w ould most likely 
benefit from the proposed intervention. These criteria represent an expansion of the cri teria 
used in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265],[ADDRESS_375871] contemplative about quitting (i.e. planning to quit in the  next 3 months). 
Whether financial incentives might motivate interest in smoking cessation among pre-
contemplative smokers is a separate scientific question that merits separate investigation. 
During eligibility screening, participants will be asked about potential contraindi cations to 
varenicline, including questions about suicidality via the primary care screening version of the  C-
SSRS (see Appendix 3).48 Individuals at low risk of suicide will be allowed to participate while 
being made aware of available behavioral health care resources, including 24-hour crisis li ne 
numbers and on-site mental health services at BHCHP. Individuals at moderate risk  of suicide 
only due to history of suicidal behavior > 12 months prior (and not due to current suicidal 
thoughts) will be allowed to participate if all other criteria are met, and will be made aware of 
available behavioral health care resources. Individuals at moderate risk of suicide due to history  
of suicidal behavior in the past 3-12 months (and not due to current suicidal tho ughts) will be 
excluded and made aware of available behavioral health care resources. Individuals at 
moderate risk of suicide due to suicidal thoughts with methods but without intent wi ll be 
excluded from the study, provided 24-hour crisis line numbers, and encouraged to m ake an 
appointment with a behavioral health clinician (at BHCHP or elsewhere) within [ADDRESS_375872] 3-month suicidal behavior (with no curren t suicidal 
intent) will also be excluded from the study and encouraged to make an appointment wi th a 
behavioral health clinician within [ADDRESS_375873] for homeless 
smokers,27 we will confirm individuals’ understanding of the consent materials with basic 
knowledge questions about the consent document content to ensure that they have the capacity 
to provide informed consent. Individuals who can correctly answer these questions wil l be asked 
to sign the paper consent form if they wish to enroll in the trial. A signed cop y will be retained by 
[CONTACT_85602] a second signed copy of the consent form will be given to participants  for their 
own records. 
During the trial, participants will be asked proactively about side effects at reg ular intervals 
during monitoring visits and encouraged to report side effects to varenicline at any time. 
Adverse reactions will be tracked and addressed according to the adverse event procedures 
outlined below. Participants will be asked to rate the severity of their si de effects as none, mild, 
moderate, or severe. Mild reactions will be recorded and monitored, and participants will be 
encouraged to let study staff know if they worsen or persist. If a participa nt rates a side effect as 
moderate, study staff will ask if the participant wants to speak with a clinician. If so, the clinician 
will phone participants within 48 hours to assess their symptom(s) and formulate a plan, which 
could include continuing as is, modifying the dose of varenicline, or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_219138]. If  a 
participant experiences severe side effects, study staff will advise the participant to immediately 
stop taking varenicline. The study clinician and PI [INVESTIGATOR_306951]-up with the 
participant within [ADDRESS_375874] ions (e.g., 
cardiac complications) will prompt immediate on-site medical assessment by a health care 
provider at BHCHP headquarters or at a nearby [CONTACT_2360][INVESTIGATOR_307]. The study clinician an d PI [INVESTIGATOR_306952]-up with the participant within 24 hours.  
Study staff will also proactively assess suicidality at every on-treatment monitorin g visit using a 
modified version of the C-SSRS (see Appendix 3).[ADDRESS_375875]. In instances in which 
participants show moderate or high risk of suicide based on the C- SSRS , study staff will 
communicate with participants’ PCPs via secure Epic messaging regarding the outcome of this 
assessment within 2 business days (if moderate risk) or within 24 hours (if high risk). Although 
suicidality will not be proactively assessed during tobacco coaching sessions, if partici pants 
spontaneously bring up suicidal thoughts, the tobacco coach will follow similar procedures to  the 
monitoring visits and assess suicidality risk using the modified C-SSRS and react  accordingly 
based on level of risk.  
If a participant misses their monitoring visit, this will trigger an automated text message to their 
study phone or personal phone advising them to call study staff if they are exp eriencing any 
side effects or other concerns related to their participation in the study (see Appendix 1). 
If a participant calls study staff with concerns, study staff will make a note of any reported side 
effects and their severity in a manner similar to that which would occur during an in-per son 
monitoring visit. However, to improve the efficiency of phone encounters, reduce the use of 
participants’ cell phone minutes and allow t he participant to direct the conversation in a more 
fluid way, a complete checklist of side effects and the C-SSRS scale will not be ad ministered by 
[CONTACT_306992] u nless dictated by [CONTACT_4317]’ reported symptoms. If a 
participant reports mental health concerns, this will prompt administration of t he (C-SSRS) over 
the phone, with triage according to the algorithm outlined for in-person m onitoring visits.  
Psychological status (including depression and anxiety symptoms ) will be formally assessed at 
baseline, and at [ADDRESS_375876] them with connecting or reconnecting with 
such care, either at BHCHP or at an outside facility (if preferred by [CONTACT_2299]).  
Study staff will be trained to recognize the signs of a n intoxicated participant and to activate a 
response plan appropriate to the level of symptoms or impairment. Participants de monstrating 
evidence of mild substance intoxication will be informed of on-site behavioral health services to  
address substance use. Participants with more profound levels of intoxication causing 
substantial impairment in functioning and well-being will be referred f or immediate on-site 
medical evaluation. The clinic at BHCHP headquarters has walk-in medical and behavi oral 
health appointments available every weekday to support the on-site referrals describe  above. 
D. Confidentiality safeguards: 
All participants will receive an identification number that will be used for all  forms, interviews, 
transcripts, and intervention materials. Forms and databases with identifying infor mation include 
the demographics form and the paper consent form. The demographics form will  be completed 
in REDCap. Consent forms will be scanned into REDCap as part of each participant’s individual 
study record. The physical consent form will be stored in a locked filing cabinet at B HCHP that 
only study staff can access. Study staff will periodically hand -carry the consent forms in a locked 
box from the BHCHP site to the main MGH office where the files will be permanently stored in a 
locked filing cabinet. 
Identifiable information from participants who are approached and screened but not enrol led will 
be saved with participant permission until recruitment ends . Once recruitment ends, we will 
remove any identifying information from all non-enrolled participants from our REDC ap 
database as well as from any log sheets for tracking recruitment efforts. I dentifiers in the 
REDCap database will be erased by [CONTACT_306993]. Identifiers within any additional log sheets for tracking r ecruitment will be 
manually erased. Identifiable data will be replaced with non-identifiable placeholder data.   
All staff who come into contact [CONTACT_306994]/or data collected from H uman 
Subjects will have received prior training about confidentiality during the course o f their IRB-
required Human Subjects training, which is conducted using the Collaborative IRB Training 
Initiative (CITI) system. 
E. Outcomes Monitoring 
Outcome monitoring will occur on a rolling basis each time a participant pr ovides a saliva 
cotinine sample. Because of the low-risk nature of the study, we will not cond uct a formal interim 
analysis of the data or define rules for early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_84953].  
F. Adverse Events 
1) Assessing Events : As described in section VI.A., we will assess for adverse events at every 
study visit. For participants who are prescribed varenicline through the study clinician, t his will 
include queries about potential side effects to varenicline using a standardized checklist  in 
addition to the C-SSRS for suicide risk assessment weekly through week [ADDRESS_375877] study personnel should problems occu r 
during intervals between visits. Adverse events will be documented, carefully asse ssed to 
determine expectedness, relatedness, and potential for harm, and steps will be  taken to prevent 
future similar events from occurring. Violations of participant privacy/confidentialit y will be 
treated as an unanticipated problem related to the study and will be consider ed reportable.   
2) Reporting of reportable events to the IRB: We will adhere to the Mass General Brigham 
policy statement on “Reporting Unanticipated Problems including Adverse Events.” Consistent 
with this policy, an adverse event will be defined as “ any untoward or unfavorable medical 
occurrence in a human subject, including any abnormal sign, symptom, or disease, t emporally 
associated with the subject’s participation in the research, whether or not considered r elated to 
the subject’s participation in  the research .” A serious adverse event will be defined as an 
adverse event that results in death, is life-threatening, requires hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], causes 
persistent or significant disability, or requires medical or surgical intervention.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_306953]. 
Adverse events reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_306954] a description of the event, the date and time of onset, the date an d time of 
resolution, the expectedness of the event, the relationship to the study, the seriousness of the 
event, and the action taken in response to the event. An adverse event will be deemed 
unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent with a known or 
foreseeable risk given the research procedures, the characteristics of the subject populatio n, or 
with an expected progression of an underlying condition. The following attribution scale will be 
used to describe the relationship of the adverse event to the study protocol: unrelated,  possibly 
related, or related to the protocol. 
Unexpected adverse events that are at least possibly related to the research and suggest t he 
research puts participants at increased harm will be reported to the Mass General Brigham IRB 
and Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB; see section H below) within [ADDRESS_375878] that the research puts participants at increased  risk of 
harm and will be reported to the Mass General Brigham IRB and DSMB  within the same time 
frame . Any action resulting in a temporary or permanent suspension of this study will be 
reported to the NIH funding agency’s program official. A summary safety report detailing all 
adverse events and their handling will be included in annual study progress repor ts to the Mass 
General Brigham IRB (if requested) and the NIH funding agency. Adverse event reports and 
annual safety summaries will be documented by [CONTACT_32221]; personal identifiers w ill not 
be included in these reports. 
3) Reporting mechanisms to NCI and DSMB: The PI [INVESTIGATOR_306955] 5 working days and follow-up with a written report (by 
[CONTACT_40743]) within [ADDRESS_375879] future participati on in the study.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_18148] a report to the Chairperson of the DSMB within 5 working da ys of learning of 
the event. The DSMB will review the event (usually on the phone or via em ail) and make a 
report via email to the PI, who will forward the report to the IRB and NCI Project Officer. 
G. Protocol Adherence 
1) Research staff: The study coordinators will be trained on the data collection protocols 
described above. Their understanding of these protocols will be assessed by [CONTACT_306995]- of-care and laboratory cotinine testing.  
2) Tobacco coach:  The tobacco coach will receive online and in-person training to prepare for 
the role. S/he will first complete the online 9- module course on “Basic Skills for Working with 
Smokers ” sponsored by [CONTACT_306996] & Training (UMass TTRT).[ADDRESS_375880] Core Certificate  training (UMass TTRT).[ADDRESS_375881] (TTS) because  this is a 
lengthy and intensive process that would reduce the generalizability of the intervention to  more 
resource-limited homeless health care settings that do not currently have a TTS and count not 
afford to hire or train one. This approach is consistent with the concept of “task -shifting” 
endorsed by [CONTACT_306997]-limited 
settings.[ADDRESS_375882] (DSMB) 
The DSMB will provide independent oversight of the safety  monitoring of study participants . The 
DSMB will review the study protocol and recommend changes that may improve the protoco l, as 
needed. Throughout the duration of the study, the DSMB will revisit the pro tocol to identify any 
emerging issues and recommend improvements and will monitor the safety of study participants 
by [CONTACT_306998].  The DSMB may recommend 
modifications to the protocol, or early termination of the study, should ove rwhelmingly significant 
benefits or risks become apparent, or if the DSMB deem s that the trial cannot be completed 
successfully.   
The main objectives of the DSMB include :  
i. Protocol review : The DSMB will review the study protocol and data and safety monitoring 
plan before data collection begins. The DSMB will recommend modifications to the st udy 
protocol and safety monitoring plan as needed. The members will also review subseque nt 
protocol changes proposed by [CONTACT_306999] a timeframe for 
implementing protocol changes . The NCI Program Officer will be informed of any protocol 
changes recommended by [CONTACT_4318].  
ii. Participant safety : The DSMB will review unanticipated problems, adverse events, and 
other reportable events and formulate recommendations to continue, amend, or ter minate 
the study based on established safety criteria.  
iii. Study progress:  The DSMB will review screening, recruitment, and retention data to 
ensure that the study can be completed in a reasonable timeframe to be of significant 
clinical relevance. 
1) Frequency of DSMB meetings:  The DSMB will review and provide input on study 
procedures prior to the start of enrollment . Following the start of enrollment, the DSMB will 
convene at designated intervals to provide oversight of study progress and safety . The first 
oversight meeting will occur [ADDRESS_375883]. Travis Baggett .  
 
2) DSMB reports: The DSMB Chair will prepare a draft report of the DSMB review. The repo rt 
will outline and summarize all discussions during the meeting and will clearly not e 
recommendations and action items from the Board. The report will be revi ewed by [CONTACT_307000] [INVESTIGATOR_306956]. Th e DSMB Report will 
be forwarded to the Project Officer. Clerical support will be provided by [CONTACT_307001]. Following each DSMB review, the C hair shall prepare a 
written report to be finalized within 14 working days following the fo rmal meeting and be sent to 
the PI. The report will review the 2 main aspects of the trial for whi ch the DSMB is responsible 
as noted in section 2 above (see sections I.I & I.II). In addition, following each stud y review, the 
DSMB will recommend one of the following:  
i. Continuation of the trial using the current protocol and statistical plan. 
ii. Continuation of the project with modifications as outlined by [CONTACT_164950]. 
iii. Immediate suspension of the trial for safety reasons for all participants, with a 
recommended plan of follow-up to minimize subject harm (requires unanimous vote). 
iv. Suspension of enrollment but continuation of assigned treatments for already -enrolled 
participants. Enrollment may resume once clarifications requested by [CONTACT_307002] (requires unanimous vote). 
3) Discussion of confidential material : No communications, either written or oral, of the 
deliberations or recommendations of the DSMB will be made outside of the DSMB  except as 
provided by [CONTACT_307003]. Study data are strictly confidential and must not be di vulged to any 
nonmember of the Board except as indicated by [CONTACT_160572]. 
4) Disclosure of any conflict of interest:  DSMB members will have no financial and/or 
scientific ties to the outcome of the study. Each DSMB member will be asked to provide 
financial disclosure documentation prior to the start of the member's term.  Each DSMB member 
will also be asked to sign a confidentiality statement promising not to disclose any data.  
 
X. PARTICIPANT REMUNERATION   
The remuneration of homeless individuals for participating in research studies requires special 
consideration of both practical and ethical issues. This section contains a discussion of these 
issues. 
A. Summary of remuneration plan 
All participants will receive $ 25 for completing a baseline survey at the enrollment visit, $10 for 
the randomization and clinician visit, and $15 for every tobacco coaching session they attend. 
Additionally, all participants will receive $30 for completing follow-up data collection visits 
(survey and laboratory saliva cotinine test) at 12 and 24 weeks. Up to 80 selected participants 
(50 from the incentives arm, 30 from the control arm) will each receive $30  for completing a 
qualitative interview. Participants will also be offered token items (e.g fidget t oys, tote bags, 
single serve snacks or drinks) at study visits to help pass time while completing the saliva 
assessments . Prior focus group data revealed that such items are greatly appreciated in this 
population and may enhance study visit adherence. 
Participants in the incentive arm will get escalating payments for negative cotinine levels ba sed 
on the point- of-care saliva test . Participants will receive payments starting at $25 and increasing 
by $5 for each successive cotinine-negative measurement, up to a maximum of $70. Non-
negative  measurements, or failure to provide a saliva sample for cotinine testing, will result in no 
payment and will reset the subsequent payment back to the starting value of $25 (excep tions to 
this procedure are described above in section V.A). The maximum cotinine-based reward 
payout will be $4 75. Thus, the maximum total amount that participants in the incentives arm can 
earn over the course of the study will be $ 675: $25 for the baseline survey, $10 for the 
randomization visit, $75 if they attend all tobacco coaching sessions, $60 if they attend both 
follow-up data collection visits , $475 for cotinine-based abstinence at all visits, and $[ADDRESS_375884] experience suggests that actual 
remuneration will average out to about 41% of the maximum, or about $277 per incentive arm 
participant. 
Participants in the control arm will get fixed $[ADDRESS_375885]. The maximum total 
amount that participants in the control arm can earn over the course of the study wil l be $300: 
$25 for the baseline survey, $10 for the randomization visit, $75 if they attend all tobacco 
coaching sessions, $100 if they attend all on-treatment monitoring visits, $60 for co mpleting 
both follow-up data collection visits, and $[ADDRESS_375886] is shipped with a “Card Kit” con taining 
the number of CT Payer’s 24/[ADDRESS_375887]/stolen card. All payments are tracked in real-ti me and may be 
organized by [CONTACT_568], participant ID, or card number. On-demand reporting features provide a 
convenient way to determine the total amount a participant received in reimbu rsements for tax 
or other purposes . Participants will sign a form acknowledging receipt when they receive a new 
CT Payer Visa debit card. As demonstrated in the email communication attached to this 
application, the Mass General Brigham Research Controller, Rhonda Lowe, has reviewed  
and approved our proposed use of CT Payer for this study. 
If the CT Payer platform is temporarily unable to load payments onto existing de bit cards or 
issue new cards, we will provide participants with single-use, non-reloadable gif t cards in 
denominations of $10, $15, $25, and $[ADDRESS_375888] or gift  cards to purchase 
cigarettes, alcohol, or other items that are potentially harmful to the ir health. This possibility is 
not unique to homeless people and does not justify violating the ethical principle of 
remunerating homeless participants in a fashion that is equitable with non-homeless people. 
Furthermore, the use of debit cards or gift cards (rather than cash) for study pay ments markedly 
limits their ability to be used for the purchase of illicit drugs. Another  safeguard is that 
participants in the incentives arm receive payments only for biochemically-verified smoking 
abstinence. If a participant chooses to apply this payment toward alcohol, drugs, or tobac co, 
then it is highly likely that the participant will relapse with smoking and/or miss the following 
study visit, resulting in no payment at that visit and resetting the subsequent reward pa yment to 
the starting value. In this fashion, the contingency management framework provide s a negative 
feedback loop for curtailing payments if a participant’s substance use worsens. In sup port of this 
notion, we observed no worsening of alcohol or drug use severity, measured serially using the  
Addiction Severity Index,105-[ADDRESS_375889]. 
C. Consideration of undue influence 
Undue influence occurs when the monetary value of remuneration for research participati on is 
so great in relation to the context of an individual’s life circumstances that his/her decision about 
whether to participate is inappropriately overwhelmed in favor of participating because of the 
financial reward for doing so.108 Below we consider the use of undue influence by [CONTACT_30157], 
since the participant payment scheme differs for each arm. Importantly, we note that  the 
concept of “coercion” does not apply to either study arm, because there is no threat of ne gative 
consequences for non-participation in the study or for not quitting smoking w hile in the study.[ADDRESS_375890] on their ability to receive care at any BHCHP site. 
Control arm:  The compensation provided to individuals in the control arm is consistent with that  
provided to homeless participants in other clinical trials110 and appropriate to the level of effort 
being asked of participants in this arm; therefore, payments made to control arm participants do 
not constitute undue influence. 
Incentives arm:  Compared with control arm participants, participants in the incentives arm 
have the potential to earn greater total compensation, raising the issue of whe ther this higher 
dollar amount may represent undue influence. However, we do not believe that the pr oposed 
payments for incentive arm participants constitute undue influence for several reasons.  First, the 
incentives are not designed to encourage trial participation per se and are not guaranteed by 
[CONTACT_307004]. Rather, they are tied specifically to biochemically- verified 
smoking abstinence, a health behavior for which there is substantial evidence of benefit,110,[ADDRESS_375891] 
when carrying it on themselves. 
E. Exemption from Mass General Brigham remuneration policy 
As noted above, the Mass General Brigham Research Controller has granted an exem ption 
from the Mass General Brigham policies on “Payments to Human Subjects for Participation in 
Research” and “Cash Control and Accountability for Payments to Human Subjects for  
Participation in Research” and has approved our proposed use of CT Payer to manage 
participant remuneration via reloadable Visa debit cards in the manner described above (see 
attached email communication). 
  
XI. REFERENCES 
1. Baggett TP, Rigotti NA. Cigarette smoking and advice to quit in a national sample of 
homeless adults. American Journal of Preventive Medicine . Aug 2010;39(2):164-72. doi:S0749-
3797(10)[ZIP_CODE]-3 [pii] 
10.1016/j.amepre.2010.03.024 
2. Connor SE, Cook RL, Herbert MI, Neal SM, Williams JT. Smoking cessation in a 
homeless population: there is a will, but is there a way? Journal of General Internal Medicine . 
May 2002;17(5):369-72. doi:jgi10630 [pii] 
3. Snyder LD, Eisner MD. Obstructive lung disease among the urban homeless. Chest . 
May 2004;125(5):1719-25.  
4. Szerlip MI, Szerlip HM. Identification of cardiovascular risk factors in homeless adults. 
Am J Med Sci . Nov 2002;324(5):243-6.  
5. Tsai J, Rosenheck RA. Smoking Among Chronically Homeless Adults: Prevalence and 
Correlates. Psychiatr Serv . Apr 1 2012;63(6):569-76. doi:10.1176/appi.ps.201100398 
6. Chau S, Chin M, Chang J, et al. Cancer risk behaviors and screening rates among 
homeless adults in Los Angeles County. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948] . May 
2002;11(5):431-8.  
7. Jamal A, Agaku IT, O'Connor E, King BA, Kenemer JB, Neff L. Current cigar ette 
smoking among adults --[LOCATION_002], 2005-2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Nov 28 
2014;63(47):1108-12. doi:mm6347a4 [pii] 
8. Hwang SW, Orav EJ, O'Connell JJ, Lebow JM, Brennan TA. Causes of death in 
homeless adults in [LOCATION_011]. Ann Intern Med . Apr 15 1997;126(8):625-8.  
9. Morrison DS. Homelessness as an independent risk factor for mortality: result s from a 
retrospective cohort study. Int J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . Jun 2009;38(3):877-83. doi:dyp160 [pii] 
10.1093/ije/dyp160 
10. Hwang SW, Wilkins R, Tjepkema M, O'Campo PJ, Dunn JR. Mortality among residents 
of shelters, rooming houses, and hotels in Canada: 11 year follow-up study. BMJ. 
2009;339:b4036.  
11. Hibbs JR, Benner L, Klugman L, et al. Mortality in a cohort of homeless adul ts in 
Philadelphia. N Engl J Med . Aug 4 1994;331(5):304-9.  
12. Baggett TP, Hwang SW, O'Connell JJ, et al. Mortality among homeless adul ts in [LOCATION_011]: 
shifts in causes of death over a 15-year period. JAMA Intern Med . Feb 11 2013;173(3):189-95. 
doi:1556797 [pii] 
10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.1604 
13. Hwang SW. Mortality among men using homeless shelters in Toronto, Ontario. JAMA . 
Apr 26 2000;283(16):2152-7. doi:jcu90010 [pii] 
14. Baggett TP, Chang Y, Porneala BC, Bharel M, Singer DE, Rigotti NA. Di sparities in 
Cancer Incidence, Stage, and Mortality at [LOCATION_011] Health Care for the Homeless Program . Am J 
Prev Med . Nov 2015;49(5):694-702. doi:S0749-3797(15)[ZIP_CODE]-0 [pii] 
10.1016/j.amepre.2015.03.038 
15. Baggett TP, Chang Y, Singer DE, et al. Tobacco-, alcohol-, and drug-attr ibutable deaths 
and their contribution to mortality disparities in a cohort of homeless adults in [LOCATION_011].  Am J 
Public Health . Jun 2015;105(6):1189-97. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2014.[ADDRESS_375892] Abus . Dec 2002;23(4):223-31. doi:453647 [pii] 
17. Okuyemi KS, Caldwell AR, Thomas JL, et al. Homelessness and smoking cessation: 
insights from focus groups. Nicotine & Tobacco Research . Apr 2006;8(2):287-96. 
doi:V468461608327310 [pii] 
10.1080/[ADDRESS_375893] in quitt ing among 
homeless smokers. Addictive Behaviors . Aug 2004;29(6):1155-61. DOI: 
10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.03.010. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.03.010 
S0306460304000851 [pii] 
19. Baggett TP, Lebrun-Harris LA, Rigotti NA. Homelessness, cigarette smoki ng and desire 
to quit: results from a US national study. Addiction . Nov 2013;108(11):2009-18. 
doi:10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE] 
20. Cigarette smoking among adults --[LOCATION_002], 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 
May 27 2005;54(20):509-13. doi:mm5420a3 [pii] 
21. Baggett TP, Tobey ML, Rigotti NA. Tobacco use among homeless people --addressing 
the neglected addiction. N Engl J Med . Jul 18 2013;369(3):201-4. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1301935 
22. Businelle MS, Cuate EL, Kesh A, Poonawalla IB, Kendzor DE. Comparing ho meless 
smokers to economically disadvantaged domiciled smokers. Am J Public Health . Dec 2013;[ADDRESS_375894] 2:S218-20. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2013.301336 
23. Baggett TP, O'Connell JJ, Singer DE, Rigotti NA. The unmet health care  needs of 
homeless adults: a national study. Am J Public Health . Jul 2010;100(7):1326-33. 
doi:AJPH.2009.180109 [pii] 
10.2105/AJPH.2009.180109 
24. Burling TA, Burling AS, Latini D. A controlled smoking cessation trial for su bstance-
dependent inpatients. J Consult Clin Psychol . Apr 2001;69(2):295-304.  
25. Okuyemi KS, Thomas JL, Hall S, et al. Smoking cessation in homeless populations: a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_29833]. Nicotine Tob Res . Oct 2006;8(5):689-99. doi:N62771P24387P631 [pii] 
10.1080/14622200600789841 
26. Okuyemi KS, Goldade K, Whembolua GL, et al. Smoking characteristics and 
comorbidities in the power to quit randomized clinical trial for homeless smokers. Nicotine Tob 
Res. Jan 2013;15:22-8. doi:10.1093/ntr/nts030 
10.1093/ntr/nts030. Epub [ADDRESS_375895], Rigotti NA.  Financial 
incentives for smoking abstinence in homeless smokers: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_306957]. 
Nicotine Tob Res . Aug 18 2017;doi:10.1093/ntr/ntx178 
28. SRNT Subcommittee on Biochemical Verification. Biochemical verification of tobacco 
use and cessation. Nicotine Tob Res . May 2002;4(2):149-59. doi:10.1080/14622200210123581 
29. Businelle MS, Kendzor DE, Kesh A, et al. Small financial incentives increase smoki ng 
cessation in homeless smokers: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Addict Behav . Mar 2014;39(3):717-20. doi:S0306-
4603(13)[ZIP_CODE]-7 [pii] 
10.1016/j.addbeh.2013.11.017 
30. Carpenter VL, Hertzberg JS, Kirby [CONTACT_62871], et al. Multicomponent smoking cessation 
treatment including mobile contingency management in homeless veterans. J Clin Psychiatry . 
Jul 2015;76(7):959-64. doi:10.4088/JCP.14m09053 
31. Gayman C, Anderson K, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_95670] C. Saliva cotinine as a measure of smoking abstinence 
in contingency management –A feasibility study. The Psychological Record . 2017;67(2):261-
272.  
32. Jarvis MJ, Russell M, Benowitz NL, Feyerabend C. Elimination of cotinine fr om body 
fluids: implications for noninvasive measurement of tobacco smoke exposure. American journal 
of public health . 1988;78(6):696-698.  
33. Fiore MC, Jaén CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 
update. Rockville, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services . 2008; 
34. Leone FT, Zhang Y, Evers-Casey S, et al. Initiating Pharmacologic Treatment in 
Tobacco-Dependent Adults. An Official American Thoracic Society Clinical Practice Gui deline. 
American Journal of Respi[INVESTIGATOR_50165] . 2020;202(2):e5-e31.  
35. Jorenby [CONTACT_34479], Hays JT, Rigotti NA, et al. Efficacy of varenicline, an α4β2 nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor partial agonist, vs placebo or sustained-release bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_306958]: a randomized controlled trial. Jama . 2006;296(1):56-63.  
36. Davies NM, Taylor AE, Taylor GM, et al. Varenicline versus nicotine replacement 
therapy for long-term smoking cessation: an observational study using the Cli nical Practice 
Research Datalink. Health Technology Assessment (Winchester, England) . 2020;24(9):1.  
37. Cahill K, Lindson ‐Hawley N, Thomas KH, Fanshawe TR, Lancaster T. Nicotine receptor 
partial agonists for smoking cessation. Cochrane database of systematic reviews . 2016;(5) 
38. Raich A, Ballbè M, Nieva G, et al. Safety of varenicline for smoking cessation in 
psychiatric and addicts patients. Substance Use & Misuse . 2016;51(5):649-657.  
39. Hurt RT, Ebbert JO, Croghan IT, Schroeder DR, Hurt RD, Hays JT. V arenicline for 
tobacco-dependence treatment in alcohol-dependent smokers: A randomized controlled tr ial. 
Drug and alcohol dependence . 2018;184:12-17.  
40. Rohsenow DJ, Tidey JW, Martin RA, et al. Varenicline versus nicotine patch with brief 
advice for smokers with substance use disorders with or without depression: effects  on 
smoking, substance use and depressive symptoms. Addiction . 2017;112(10):1808-1820.  
41. Raich A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_188561] C, Ballbè M, et al. Multimodal treatment for smoking cessation with 
varenicline in alcoholic, methadone-maintained, and psychotic patients: A one-year follow-up. 
Tobacco induced diseases . 2018;16 
42. Shelley D, Cantrell J, Wong S, Warn D. Smoking cessation among sheltered homel ess: 
a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]. American journal of health behavior . 2010;34(5):544-552.  
43. O'Connell JJ, Oppenheimer SC, Judge CM, et al. The [LOCATION_011] Health Care for  the 
Homeless Program: a public health framework. Am J Public Health . Aug 2010;100(8):1400-8. 
doi:AJPH.2009.173609 [pii] 
10.2105/AJPH.2009.173609 
44. Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL. Chapter 3: Choosing a Mixed Methods Design. Designing 
and Conducting Mixed Methods Research . 2nd ed. Sage; 2011:53-106. 
45. Baggett TP, Rigotti NA, Campbell EG. Cost of Smoking among Homeless Adult s. N Engl 
J Med . Feb 18 2016;374(7):697-8. doi:10.1056/NEJMc1508556 
46. Coleman T, Chamberlain C, Davey MA, Cooper SE, Leonardi ‐Bee J. Pharmacological 
interventions for promoting smoking cessation during pregnancy. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews . 2015;(12) 
47. Richardson J, Stephens S, Yates L, et al. Pregnancy outcomes after maternal 
varenicline use; analysis of surveillance data collected by [CONTACT_307005]. Reproductive Toxicology . 2017;67:26-34.  
48. Posner K BD, Lucas C, Gould M, Stanley B, Brown G, et al. Columbia-suici de severity 
rating scale (C-SSRS). Screener with triage for primary health settings. 2008. 
49. Anthenelli RM, Benowitz NL, West R, et al. Neuropsychiatric safety and effi cacy of 
varenicline, bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394], and nicotine patch in smokers with and without psychiatric disorders 
(EAGLES): a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled clinical trial. The Lancet . 
2016;387([ZIP_CODE]):2507-2520.  
50. Ashare RL, Thompson M, Serrano K, et al. Placebo-controlled randomized clini cal trial 
testing the efficacy and safety of varenicline for smokers with HIV. Drug and alcohol 
dependence . 2019;200:26-33.  
51. Pachas GN, Cather C, Pratt SI, et al. Varenicline for smoking cessation  in schizophrenia: 
safety and effectiveness in a 12-week open-label trial. Journal of dual diagnosis . 2012;8(2):117-
125.  
52. CHANTIX - Highlights of Prescribing Information . Medication Insert. 2019. 2/2019.  
53. Gelberg L, Gallagher TC, Andersen RM, Koegel P. Competing priorities as a barr ier to 
medical care among homeless adults in Los Angeles. Am J Public Health . Feb 1997;87(2):217-
20.  
54. Baggett TP, Rigotti NA, Chang Y, Campbell EG. Subsistence difficulti es and their 
association with perceived barriers to quitting smoking among homeless smokers in [LOCATION_011]. 
presented at: Scientific abstract presented at the 2016 Annual Meeting of the Society of General 
Internal Medicine; May 13, 2016 Hollywood, FL.  
55. Koegel P, Burnam MA, Farr RK. Subsistence Adaptation Among Homeless Adults in the 
Inner City of Los Angeles. Journal of Social Issues . 1990;46(4):83-107.  
56. Baggett TP, Singer DE, Rao SR, O'Connell JJ, Bharel M, Rigotti  NA. Food insufficiency 
and health services utilization in a national sample of homeless adults. J Gen Intern Med . Jun 
2011;26(6):627-34. doi:10.1007/s11606- 011-1638-4 
57. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 
Update. Clinical Practice Guideline. . Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of H ealth and Human 
Services. Public Health Service; May 2008. 
58. American Lung Association. Freedom from Smoking Online. Accessed March 30, 2016.  
59. Higgins ST, Redner R, White TJ. Contingency Management and the Community 
Reinforcement Approach. In: Ries RK, Fiellin DA, Miller SC, Saitz R, eds. The ASAM Principles 
of Addiction Medicine . 5th ed. Wolters Kluwer; 2014:877-893:chap 58. 
60. Lussier JP, Heil SH, Mongeon JA, Badger GJ, Higgins ST. A meta-analysis of voucher-
based reinforcement therapy for substance use disorders. Addiction . Feb 2006;101(2):192-203. 
doi:ADD1311 [pii] 
10.1111/j.1360-0443.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x 
61. Ballesteros J. Cotinine Testing. In: Sporn N, editor. 2020. 
62. Faessel HM, Obach RS, Rollema H, Ravva P, Williams KE, Burstein AH. A review  of the 
clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of varenicline for smoking cessation. Clinical 
pharmacokinetics . 2010;49(12):799-816.  
63. Texting Patients and Research Subjects: Guidelines for Obtaining Consent . 2020.  
64. Greene J, Fahrney K, By[CONTACT_119980] M. Health Care for the Homeless User/Visit Surveys, RTI  
Project Number [ZIP_CODE].021. . Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI International;  2004. 
65. Baggett TP, Campbell EG, Chang Y, Magid LM, Rigotti NA. Posttr aumatic Stress 
Symptoms and Their Association With Smoking Outcome Expectancies Among Homeless 
Smokers in [LOCATION_011]. Nicotine Tob Res . Oct 27 2015;doi:ntv238 [pii] 
10.1093/ntr/ntv238 
66. Baggett TP, Campbell EG, Chang Y, Rigotti NA. Other tobacco product and electronic 
cigarette use among homeless cigarette smokers. Addict Behav . Apr 19 2016;60:124-130. 
doi:S0306-4603(16)[ZIP_CODE]-0 [pii] 
10.1016/j.addbeh.2016.04.006 
67. Burt MR, Aron LY, Douglas T, et al. Homelessness: Programs and the People They 
Serve: Findings of the National Survey of Homeless Assistance Providers and Clients: 
Technical Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Deve lopment, 
Office of Policy Development and Research; 1999. 
68. DeSalvo KB, Bloser N, Reynolds K, He J, Muntner P. Mortality prediction wi th a single 
general self-rated health question. A meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med . Mar 2006;21(3):267-75. 
doi:JGI291 [pii] 
10.1111/j.1525-1497.2005.[ZIP_CODE].x 
69. Larson CO. Use of the SF-12 instrument for measuring the health of homeless persons . 
Health Serv Res . Jun 2002;37(3):733-50.  
70. West R, Ussher M. Is the ten-item Questionnaire of Smoking Urges (QSU -brief) more 
sensitive to abstinence than shorter craving measures? Psychopharmacology . 2010/02/01 
2010;208(3):427-432. doi:10.1007/s00213- 009-1742-x 
71. Oelsner. MESA COVID-[ADDRESS_375896] udy 
of Atherosclerosis (MESA) Website:  Collaborative Health Studies Coordinating Center; 2020.  
72. Symptoms of Coronavirus. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated 
5/13/2020. Accessed 10/1/2020, 2020.  
73. Kowitt SD, Cornacchione Ross J, Jarman KL, et al. Tobacco Quit Intentions and 
Behaviors among Cigar Smokers in the [LOCATION_002] in Response to COVID-19. Int J Environ 
Res Public Health . Jul 25 2020;17(15)doi:10.3390/ijerph17155368 
74. Release of Optional COVID-19 Questions for the MDS. North American Quitline  
Consortium 10/14/2020, 2020.  
75. Saunders JB, Aasland OG, Organization WH. WHO Collaborative Project on the 
Identification and Treatment of Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption. Report on phase I: 
the development of a screening instrument . 1987.  
76. Bohn MJ, Babor TF, Kranzler HR. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test 
(AUDIT): validation of a screening instrument for use in medical settings. Journal of studies on 
alcohol . 1995;56(4):423-432.  
77. Doran KM, Rahai N, McCormack RP, et al. Substance use and homelessness among 
emergency department patients. Drug and alcohol dependence . 2018;188:328-333.  
78. Skinner HA. The drug abuse screening test. Addictive behaviors . 1982;7(4):363-371.  
79. Yudko E, Lozhkina O, Fouts A. A comprehensive review of the psychometric properties 
of the Drug Abuse Screening Test. Journal of substance abuse treatment . 2007;32(2):189-198.  
80. Humeniuk R, Ali R, Babor TF, et al. Validation of the alcohol, smoking and  substance 
involvement screening test (ASSIST). Addiction . 2008;103(6):1039-1047.  
81. Stringfellow EJ, Kim TW, Gordon AJ, et al. Substance use among persons wi th 
homeless experience in primary care. Substance abuse . 2016;37(4):534-541.  
82. Nease DE, Malouin JM. Depression screening: a practical strategy. Journal of Family 
Practice . 2003;52(2):118-126.  
83. Robinson CD, Rogers CR, Okuyemi KS. Depression symptoms among homeless 
smokers: effect of motivational interviewing. Substance use & misuse . 2016;51(10):1393-1397.  
84. Keogh C, O’Brien KK, Hoban A, O’Carroll A, Fahey T. Health and use of he alth services 
of people who are homeless and at risk of homelessness who receive free primary health care 
in Dublin. BMC health services research . 2015;15(1):58.  
85. Bebbington P, Nayani T. The psychosis screening questionnaire. International Journal of 
methods in Psychiatric research . 1995; 
86. Johns LC, Cannon M, Singleton N, et al. Prevalence and correlates of self-reported  
psychotic symptoms in the British population. The British Journal of Psychiatry . 
2004;185(4):298-305.  
87. Ganesh A, Campbell DJ, Hurley J, Patten S. High Positive Psychiatrie Screening  Rates 
in an Urban Homeless Population. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry . 2013;58(6):353-360.  
88. Heatherton TF, Kozlowski LT, Frecker RC, Fagerstrom KO. The Fagerstr om Test for 
Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. Br J Addict . Sep 
1991;86(9):1119-27.  
89. DiClemente CC, Prochaska JO, Fairhurst SK, Velicer WF, Velasquez MM, Rossi JS. 
The process of smoking cessation: an analysis of precontemplation, contemplation, and 
preparation stages of change. J Consult Clin Psychol . Apr 1991;59(2):295-304.  
90. Snow MG, Prochaska JO, Rossi JS. Stages of change for smoking cessation among 
former problem drinkers: a cross-sectional analysis. J Subst Abuse . 1992;4(2):107-16. doi:0899-
3289(92)[ZIP_CODE]-L [pii] 
91. Biener L, Abrams DB. The Contemplation Ladder: validation of a measure of readiness 
to consider smoking cessation. Health Psychol . 1991;10(5):360-5.  
92. Nelson DB, Partin MR, Fu SS, Joseph AM, An LC. Why assigning ongoing tobacco use 
is not necessarily a conservative approach to handling missing tobacco cessation outcomes. 
Nicotine Tob Res . Jan 2009;11(1):77-83. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntn013 
93. Hedeker D, Mermelstein RJ, Demirtas H. Analysis of binary outcomes with mi ssing data: 
missing = smoking, last observation carried forward, and a little multiple imputati on. Addiction . 
Oct 2007;102(10):1564-73. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x 
94. Glaser B, Strauss A. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research . Aldine; 1967. 
95. Elo S, Kyngas H. The qualitative content analysis process. J Adv Nurs . Apr 
2008;62(1):107-15. doi:JAN4569 [pii] 
10.1111/j.1365-2648.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x 
96. Miles MB, Huberman AM. Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook . 2nd ed. 
Sage; 1994. 
97. Trochim WMK, Donnelly JP. Qualitative and Mixed Methods Analysis. The Research 
Methods Knowledge Base . 3rd ed. Thomson; 2007. 
98. Creswell JW, Plano Clark VL. Chapter 7: Analyzing and interpreting data in mixed 
methods research. Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research . 2nd ed. Sage; 2011. 
99. FDA. Laboratory analysis of varenicline products. Accessed November 11th, 2021.  
100. Baggett TP, Campbell EG, Chang Y, Magid LM, Rigotti NA. Postt raumatic Stress 
Symptoms and Their Association With Smoking Outcome Expectancies Among Homeless 
Smokers in [LOCATION_011]. Nicotine Tob Res . Jun 2016;18(6):1526-32. doi:ntv238 [pii] 
10.1093/ntr/ntv238 
101. Center for Tobacco Treatment Research & Training, University of [LOCATION_005] 
Medical School. Basic Skills for Working with Smokers - Online Course. Accessed Mar ch 28, 
2017.  
102. Tobacco Treatment Specialist (TTS) Core Training , University of [LOCATION_005] 
Medical school. Accessed February 17, 2021.  
103. World Health Organization. Taking stock: Task shifting to tackle health worker 
shortages. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006. 
104. McLellan AT, Kushner H, Metzger D, et al. The Fifth Edition of the Addic tion Severity 
Index. J Subst Abuse Treat . 1992;9(3):199-213.  
105. Zanis DA, McLellan AT, Cnaan RA, Randall M. Reliability and validity of  the Addiction 
Severity Index with a homeless sample. J Subst Abuse Treat . Nov-Dec 1994;11(6):541-8.  
106. Argeriou M, McCarty D, Mulvey K, Daley M. Use of the Addiction Severity I ndex with 
homeless substance abusers. J Subst Abuse Treat . Jul-Aug 1994;11(4):359-65.  
107. Drake RE, McHugo GJ, Biesanz JC. The test-retest reliability of standardized 
instruments among homeless persons with substance use disorders. J Stud Alcohol . Mar 
1995;56(2):161-7.  
108. The Belmont Report: Ethical Principls and Guidelines for the Protection of H uman 
Subjects of Research. [LOCATION_002], National Commission for the Protection of Human 
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research; 1979. 
109. Okuyemi KS, Goldade K, Whembolua GL, et al. Motivational interviewing to enhance 
nicotine patch treatment for smoking cessation among homeless smokers: a randomized 
controlled trial. Addiction . Jun 2013;108(6):1136-44. doi:10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE] 
110. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. The Health Benefits of Smoking  
Cessation: a report of the Surgeon General. U.S. Department of Health &  Human Services, 
Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, Center for Chronic Disease Preventi on and 
Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. DHHS Publication No. (CDC) 90-8416 ; 1990. 
111. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking: 
50 Years of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General. . Atlanta, GA: U.S . Department of 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center f or 
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health; 2014. 
112. Siu AL, Force USPST. Behavioral and Pharmacotherapy Interventions for Tobacco 
Smoking Cessation in Adults, Including Pregnant Women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med . Oct 20 2015;163(8):622-34. doi:10.7326/M15-
2023  
113. Jonas MA, Oates JA, Ockene JK, Hennekens CH. Statement on smoking and 
cardiovascular disease for health care professionals. American Heart Association. Circulation . 
Nov 1992;86(5):1664-9.  
114. American Lung Association. Tobacco Cessation & Prevention. Accessed September 22, 
2016.  
115. American Cancer Society. Stay Away from Tobacco. Accessed September 22, 2016.  
116. Tidey JW, Rohsenow DJ, Kaplan GB, Swift RM, Reid N. Effects of continge ncy 
management and bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_306959]. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl) . Apr 8 2011;doi:10.1007/s00213- 011-2282 -8 
117. Etter JF, Schmid F. Effects of Large Financial Incentives for Long-Term S moking 
Cessation: A Randomized Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol . Aug 23 2016;68(8):777-85. 
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2016.04.066 
118. Etter JF. Financial incentives for smoking cessation in low-income smokers: study 
protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials . 2012;13:88. doi:10.1186/1745- 6215 -13-88 
 