 1  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Title: Feasibility Study of the mindBEAGLE Device  in Patients with  
Disorders of Consciousness or Locked -In Syndrome  
Version Date : February 27, 2018  
  
 
 2 PARTNERS HUMAN RESEARCH COMMITTEE  
DETAILED PROTOCOL  
 
Feasibility Study of the mindBEAGLE Device  in Patients with  
Disorders of Consciousness or Locked -In Syndrome  
 
Study Investigators:  
Brian L. Edlow, MD (Principal Investigator)  
Leigh R. Hochberg, MD, PhD  
Sydney Cash, MD, PhD  
Eric S. Rosenthal, MD  
Ronald E. Hirschberg, MD  
Camille A. Spencer, BS  
Carol Grant, RN  
 
Version Date : February 27, 2018  
 
I. Background and Significance  
 
Estimates of diagnostic error among clinicians who treat persons with disorders of consciousness ( DOC ) are 
consistently reported to be approximately 40% (Andrews  et al. , 1996 ; Childs  et al. , 1993 ; Schnakers  et al. , 
2009 ). The absence of a “ gold standard” for consciousness is a major driver behind this problem. Behavior, as 
assessed by [CONTACT_125726], is the standard metric relied upon to judge level of consciousness but, in practice, 
is a poor proxy for consciousness. Behavioral signs of conscious awareness may be too subtle to detect reliably. 
Conversely, reflexive or random behaviors may be misjudged as voluntary. Electroencephalography ( EEG ) 
offers potential for the development of relatively inexpensive, simple, compact systems that can  be readily 
deployed at bedside to detect conscious processing in DOC patients.   
 
Similarly, there is a small set of patients for whom speech and movement are severely impaired, but cognition 
remains intact. These patients, some of whom have LIS, need bett er methods of communication with their 
clinicians, family, and friends.  
 
Over the last two decades, there has been considerable research into event -related EEG responses (ERs) 
(Chatelle  et al. , 2012 ). This growing literature suggests that EEG -based paradigms may be employed to 
investigate cognition in severely brain -injured individuals who lack the capacity for speech and active 
movement (Chatelle  et al. , 2012 ; Cruse  et al. , 2011 ; Lule et al. , 2013 ; Schnakers  et al. , 2008 ). Indeed, if 
conscious awareness could be identified for individual patients with high accuracy, this would contribute 
important information to early clinical decision making on a wide variety of medical and surgical issues. 
Similar EEG techniques can be used to enable communica tion for people with locked in syndrome  (LIS)  or 
other difficulties with communication.  
 
Even if ERs may offer a means to assess human information processing capabilities in the absence of overt 
behavior, the extent to which DOC patients are capable of pro cessing even simple instructions is unclear, and 
prognostic indicators predicting the functional outcome of these patients are limited and non -specific. Some 
studies have demonstrated preserved ERs in coma, vegetative states, and minimally conscious state (Cruse  et 
al., 2011 ; Cruse  et al. , 2012 ; Perrin  et al. , 2006 ; Schnakers  et al. , 2008 ; Steppacher  et al. , 2013 ), but due to the 
small numb er of investigated cases and frequent lack of outcome documentation, their clinical and prognostic 
significance is currently unclear. Almost none of these studies focus on the initial period after injury.  
 [ADDRESS_141419] subsequent recovery of consciousness and 
communicative abilities (Steppacher  et al. , 2013 ). These ER components depend on the synchronized activity of 
multiple brain regions, which may be critical for conscious awareness.  
 
A new, portable technology called “ mindBEAGLE”  has been developed by [CONTACT_125727]. We propose to evaluate the feasibility of this  
no-to-minimal risk technology with up to 20 inpatient participants at MGH. The EEG data collected from this 
system will be correlated with behavioral assessments of consciousness using the Coma Recovery Scale -
Revised  (CRS -R), which has been shown to optim ize sensitivity for detecting conscious awareness in patients 
with DOC and LIS.  The same system will be tested in up to 20 healthy controls to provide baseline validation of 
the technology.   
 
 
II. Specific Aims  
 
The primary aims of t his study are:  
 
1) To determin e the feasibility  of deploying mindBEAGLE, a portable, bedside EEG -based system, in the 
Neurosciences Intensive Care Unit in patients with DOC or LIS;  
2) To determine if mindBEAGLE neurophysiologic markers of cognitive function correlate with bedside 
behavior al assessments of consciousness;  
3) To determine if mindBEAGLE can serve as an assistive communication device for people with LIS.  
 
 
III. Subject Selection  
 
HEALTHY PARTICIPANTS  (n = 20)  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Minimum age: 18  
• Capacity to provide informed consent  
• Fluent in English  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• History of developmental, neurologic, or major psychiatric disorder resulting in functional disability  
 
INPATIENT PARTICIPANTS  (n = 20)  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Age 18 - 80 
• Fluent in English  
• For DOC only:  
 4 o Surrogate decision -maker (whomever is consenting for clinical procedures , as described in the 
consent procedures below ) available to provide informed consent  
o History of severe acquired brain injury with loss of consciousnes s  
o Diagnosis of coma, vegetative state, minimally conscious state or  confusional state  
o Inpatient at Lunder 6 (NeuroICU at MGH)  
• For LIS only:  
o Ability to maintain wakefulness for ~30 minutes without sedative medication, as assessed by 
[CONTACT_75462].  
o Ability to remain off intravenous sedative medication for ~60 minutes.  
o Inpatient at Lunder 6 (NeuroICU at MGH).  
o (see consent procedures below)  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• Prior history of developmental, neurologic, or major psychiatric disorder resulting in functional 
disability  
• Evidence of uncontrolled seizure disorder  
• Patients for whom EEG leads are contraindicated  
• Injury preventing the placement of surface EMG -type leads on the hands or back.  
 
 
IV. Subject Enrollment  
 
We plan to enroll a total of 20 patients t reated at [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (MGH)  for DOC or LIS . 
Eligible subjects who meet the inclusion criteria will be identifi ed by [CONTACT_125728] , and consent will be 
obtained from the patient’s surrogate  with assent from the patient if possible.  We also plan to enroll  [ADDRESS_141420] Screening  – Subjects will be screened by [CONTACT_125729] [ADDRESS_141421] . 
 
Consent - Informed consent will be obtained from all subjects (or their surrogates) by [CONTACT_125730] . Informed consent for parti cipation may be obtained from a  representative (surrogate) for 
those incapable of providing informed consent. The following categories of surrogates in order of preference 
may provide consent in writing on behalf of potential subjects incapable of providing informed consent on their 
own behalf:  
 
i) court appointed guardian with specific authority to consent to participation in research or au thority to 
make health care decisions for a class of diagnostic and therapeutic decisions inclusive of the 
proposed research  
ii) health care proxy/person with durable power of attorney with specific authority for making health care 
decisions inclusive of the p roposed research  
iii) spouse, adult child, or other close family member who knows the subject well and has been involved in 
their care  
 
 [ADDRESS_141422]. The investigator obtaining consent will also ensure that the surrogate understands 
that her/his decisions should b e based on the potential subject’s own views when s/he had the capacity to 
express them (“substituted judgment”). Subject assent will also be a requirement for participation in the 
research unless the subject is incapable of providing it, given her/his med ical condition.  
 
In order to minimize the possibility of patients and/or surrogates feeling obligated to participate in research in 
the event that one of the investigators is also their physician,  a physician colleague or research nurse not 
involved in their care will initially explain the study to potential subjects.  We will  also offer patients and/or 
surrogates the opportunity to review the consent form privately and be contact[CONTACT_125731]. 
 
The investigator obtainin g consent will explain in detail the protocol of the study, its purpose and potential 
benefits to society.  Surrogates and subjects will be informed about minimal risks of  EEG . Subjects will be 
informed that if they feel uncomfortable with the study, they c an choose to terminate the study at any time. 
Surrogates and subjects will be informed that their refusal to participate in the study or choosing to terminate it 
at some point will have no effect on care and treatment received by [CONTACT_125732] (i.e. 
Spaulding, MGH, etc.) now or in future. Informed consent clearly states that subjects and surrogates may 
choose to terminate the study at any time. Surrogates and subjects will be informed that their personal 
information will be protected as p er the HIPAA guidelines. Surrogates and subjects will have as much time as 
they wish to consider participation in the study.  Although subjects must be fluent in English in order to 
participate in the study , there may be circumstances where a subject is con sented to the study by a non -English 
speaking surrogate. In these circumstances, the consenting Investigator will utilize MGH Interpreter Services, 
and the consent process will be documented on the MGH IRB -approved short form consent document and full 
English-version consent form, in compliance with PHS IRB.  
 
Organization of the study  – Patients with DOC or LIS will be evaluated once, although the technology may be 
made available to them during their inpatient stay if it is found to provide a more reliable method of 
communication than the patient’s current method (as previously determined by a nurse, physician, or speech -
language therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]).  A behavioral assessment will be performed at the time of the mindBEAGLE EEG 
assessment.  
 
Healthy subjects will only b e assessed once and will be considered as a control group.  
 
Clinical data collection  - Demographic and clinical data recorded in the medical record at the time of 
admission will be collected in accordance with the common data elements recently proposed by [CONTACT_125733],  including age, gender, injury  mechanism, admission 
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score, CT findings, duration of coma, and brainstem function ( e.g. pupi[INVESTIGATOR_125724]).  We will also record standard clinical data a bout level of consciousness ( e.g. CRS -R score) , 
severity of LIS (e.g. cranial nerve and extremity motor examination),  and level of functional  recovery ( e.g. 
Disability Rating Scale score) .  
 
EEG  - Each  subject will  be given an EEG, which will utilize the mindBEAGLE system in order to attempt to 
assess level of consciousness.  The EEG will last up to [ADDRESS_141423] specific instructions abou t these tasks du ring the EEG.   
     
 
 6 Neuro behavioral  testing  – The primary behavioral  measure of level of consciousness will be the CRS -R-
derived diagnosis of recovery of consciousness, which will allow for classification of each patient as being in 
coma, vegetative state , minimally conscious state, emerged from minimally conscious state, confusional state, 
or in a state of fully re covered consciousness. This  assessment will be performed by [CONTACT_125728] . The 
entire neurobehavioral assessment will last up to 60 minute s. 
 
Neuro behavioral  (level of consciousness) data will be shared with the subjects, their surrogates, or their outside 
physicians, at the subject’s and/or the surrogate’s request, since these data come from well validated assessment 
tools that are routinel y used in clinical practice.  Furthermore, the results from these tests can be compared to 
prior results from these same tests, which are routinely performed as part of clinical care at MGH .  
 
Sharing EEG results with famil ies and treating clinicians  
 
After extensive consideration of the ethical implications of sharing or not sharing the mindBEAGLE EEG data 
with the patient’s family  (or non -family surrogate decision -maker)  and treating clinicians , our team has reached 
the following consensus : we believe that the most appropriate course of action from an ethical standpoint is to 
make the results of these tests available to the patient’s surrogate decision -maker AND clinical team, at the 
request of the surrogate decision -maker . In reaching this  consensus, we considering the following points:  
 
- While tools such as the mindBEAGLE system have  not been validated as prognostic tools in large, 
randomly controlled clinical trials, there are preliminary studies suggesting that stimulus -based EEG 
techniqu es may be able to detect signs of cognitive awareness that cannot be detected on bedside exam  
(Cruse et al. 2011).  On the one hand, we are hesitant to share data from tests that have not been fully 
validated.  However, we also believe that it would not be a ppropriate to withhold critically important 
information about functional activation of brain networks, especially since this information could 
potentially impact the surrogate’s decisions about goals of care as well as the clinical team’s impression of 
the prognosis.   
 
- Consistent with our team’s consensus opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], experts in the field of DOC research recently published a 
manuscript supporting the dissemination of EEG results to families  (Graham  et al. , 2015 ). The authors of 
this manuscript invoke the same  rationale articulated above.  There is thus an emerging consensus in the 
field that sharing these results is the ethically appropriate course of action.  
 
We therefore believe that sharing the mindBEAGLE results is ethically justifiable, given that withhold ing such 
information might prevent families and clinicians from making a fully informed formulation of the patient’s 
prognosis.   
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis  
 
In addition to determination of feasibility of deployment of the mindBEAGLE system in the ICU, w e wil l test 
correlations between mindBEAGLE neurophysiologic markers of cognitive function with CRS -R diagnosis, as 
well as with EEG biomarkers of consciousness. For example, univariate correlations will be tested using 
Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation test s. We will also attempt to determine whether mindBEAGLE 
neurophysiologic markers are stable and informative enough to use the system as an assistive communication 
device.   
 
 
VII. Risks and Discomforts  
 
 [ADDRESS_141424], for which there are no known or foreseeable risks.  Medical risk to 
subjects during the paradigm is not anticipated. There is a risk of minor superficial skin irritation. However, it is 
infrequent, easily treated and fully reversible.  
 
Study activities will be deferred or discontinued if subjects become medically unstable prior to, or during, 
procedures. Continuation will be dependent upon consensual approval of the participant or surrogate and the 
research team.  
    
There are no anticipated medical risks associ ated with the neurobehavioral/physical examinations that will be 
conducted in this study.  Some exams sometimes include brief application of noxious stimulation to the finger 
and/or toenail beds to assess motor responses in the absence of command -following.  Discomfort typi[INVESTIGATOR_125725]  [ADDRESS_141425] 
in the results of the study . 
 
 
 
References : 
Andrews K, Murphy L, Munday R, Littlewood C. Misdiagnosis of the vegetative state: retrospective 
study in a rehabilitation unit. British Medical Journal 1996; 313: 13 -6. 
Chatelle C, Chennu S, Noirhomme Q, Cruse D, Owen AM, Laureys S. Brai n-computer interfacing in 
disorders of consciousness. Brain injury : [BI] 2012; 26: 1510 -22. 
Childs N, Mercer W, Childs H. Accuracy of diagnosis of persistent vegetative state. Neurology 1993; 
43: 1465 - 7. 
Cruse D, Chennu S, Chatelle C, Bekinschtein T, Fernández -Espejo D, Junqué C, et al. Bedside detection 
of awareness in the vegetative state. The Lancet 2011; 378: [ADDRESS_141426] J, et al. The relationship 
between aetiol ogy and covert cognition in the minimally -conscious state. Neurology 2012; 78: 816 -22. 
 8 Graham M, Weijer C, Peterson A, Naci L, Cruse D, Fernandez -Espejo D, et al. Acknowledging 
awareness: informing families of individual research results for patients in th e vegetative state. Journal 
of medical ethics 2015; 41: 534 -8. 
Lule D, Noirhomme Q, Kleih SC, Chatelle C, Halder S, Demertzi A, et al. Probing command following in 
patients with disorders of consciousness using a brain -computer interface. Clinical neurophy siology : 
official journal of the International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology 2013; 124: 101 -6. 
Perrin F, Schnakers C, Schabus M, Degueldre C, Goldman S, Brédart S, et al. Brain Response to One’s 
Own Name [CONTACT_125734], Minimally Conscious S tate, and Locked -in Syndrome. Archive of 
Neurology 2006; 63: 562 -9. 
Schnakers C, Perrin F, Schabus M, Majerus S, Ledoux D, Damas P, et al. Voluntary brain processing in 
disorders of consciousness. Neurology 2008; 71: 1614 -20. 
Schnakers C, Vanhaudenhuyse A,  Giacino J, Ventura M, Boly M, Majerus S, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 
the vegetative and minimally conscious state: Clinical consensus versus standardized neurobehavioral 
assessment. BMC Neurology 2009; 9: 35.  
Steppacher I, Eickhoff S, Jordanov T, Kaps M , Witzke W, Kissler J. N400 predicts recovery from 
disorders of consciousness. Annals of neurology 2013; 73: 594 -602. 
 
 
 