 
Study Title : Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295226] s 
 
 
 
NCT number :  NCT0256092 2 
Document Date :  June 6, 2017  
 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 1 PCORI RESEARCH PLAN  TEMPLATE  
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
 
A.  BACKGROUND  
A.1.0  Osteoarthritis (OA) is a Highly Prevalent and Disabling Health Problem .  OA is one of the most 
common chronic diseases in the U.S.; about [ADDRESS_359889] frequently reported cause of disability in the U.S.4, commonly affecting 
walking, stair -climbing, and other daily tasks. Among older adults, the risk of disability attributable to knee OA  
is as great as that due t o cardiovascular disease and greater than any other medical condition 5.  In addition to 
pain and disability, OA has detrimental effects on other important patient -centered outcomes such as 
depression, anxiety, sleep, fatigue, physical activity, weight gain, and quality of life 6-9.  OA is a large and 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_295227] a substantial personal toll on many adults.    
A.2.0  African Americans Bear a Disproportionate Burden of OA Across Many  Patient -Centered 
Outcomes.  A number of studies show  that African Americans not only  experienc e a greater prevalence of OA 
than Caucasians , but also more sev ere pain, functional limitations , and other adverse outcomes  10-14.  Among 
adults in the National Health Interview Survey with arthritis (most commonly OA), Afr ican Americans were 
more likely than Caucasians to report having activity limitat ions attributable to arthritis ( 44% vs. 34%) and 
severe joint pain (34% vs. 23% );15 they were also 1.5 times as likely to be limited in their social participation16.  
In a community -based study in Johnston County, North Carolina, Afr ican Americans with knee OA had 
significantly worse scores than Caucasians on the Western Ontario and McMasters Universities Osteoarthritis 
Index  (WOMAC), a measure of pain, stiffness and function (32.8 vs. 24.3, respectively, p<0.001) 17.  Among 
about 900 V eterans with k nee or hip OA, African Americans had significantly worse WOMAC scores than 
Caucasians (61 vs. 55, p<0.001) 18.   In our clinical trial of Veterans with knee or hip OA 19, African Americans 
also had worse WOMAC scores (52.3 vs . 44.5, p<0.001) and more arthritis -related activity limitation (6.1 vs. 
4.8 on scale of 0 -10, p<0.001)  compared to Caucasians .  In both the  Johnston County and V eteran samples , 
racial disparities  in WOMAC scores reflect clinically relevant  differences 20. These studies signal an obvious 
need to address the disproportionate burden of OA among African Americans.  In fact, the  Institute of 
Medicine has identified interventions to reduce disparities in OA and other musculoskeletal diseases 
among its top 25 (highest tier) priority topi[INVESTIGATOR_295228] 21. 
 
B. SIGNIFICA NCE  
B.1.[ADDRESS_359890]’s Potential to Impact Health Care and Outcomes. This project has great 
potential to impact health care and outcomes  by [CONTACT_295293] -centered  outcomes for the 
large number of African American patients who have OA.   Despi[INVESTIGATOR_295229]- related conditions (including OA) among African Americans, very l ittle has 
been done to address these disparities  22.  A recent review noted that one key barrier to moving this 
research forward has been limited engagement by [CONTACT_295294]; as a result, pain 
management  theories, concepts, and interventions have gone largely un- tested in minority patient 
groups including  African Americans (RQ-1) 23.  Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295230] (CST) , a cognitive -behavioral 
intervention with shown efficacy to improv e OA -related pain and other patient -centered outcomes,  has strong 
potential to benefit  African Americans with OA  (see Section B.2.0 ).  However, stakeholder input and a stronger 
evidence base for the effectiveness of pain CST among African Americans is needed, particularly in the 
context of real -world setting s (RQ-1).  Pain management interventions like CST are highly under -utilized 24,[ADDRESS_359891] program that 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359892]  to improve health care and outcomes.   
B.2.0  Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295231] a Highly Promising Strategy to Address Racial Disparities i n OA  
B.2.1  There are Racial Differences in Pain Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295232].   Studies show that when 
compared with Caucasians, African Americans with OA  (and other chronic pain conditions ) report greater 
levels of pain catastrophizing (i.e., the tendency to focus on and magnify pain sensations and to feel helpless 
in the face of pain 26-29), lower perceived ability to cope with and control pain 30,31, and greater maladaptive 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] (i.e., emotion- focused or external copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]) 30,32-34. This is very important because 
these copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]- related characteristics have been associated with worse pain, function, and depressive 
symptoms 35-38.  Of particular relevance, these copi[INVESTIGATOR_295233]  39-43. 
B.2.[ADDRESS_359893] recently, we 
assessed the role of pain catastrophizing as a potential mediator of racial differences in pain among 300 
patients with hip and knee OA enrolled in a clinical trial19.  WOMAC pain subscale scores were wor se among 
African Americans than Caucasians in this sample (11.0 vs. 9.4  on a scale of 0 -20).  In a simple regression 
model of WOMAC pain scores, the estimate for ra ce was - 1.6 (CI= - 2.5, -0.8, p=<0.001 ).  When scores on the 
Pain Catastrophizing Scale were added to this model (with no other covariates), the regression coefficient for 
race became non- significant ( -0.7, CI= - 1.5, 0.1, p>0.05); greater Pain Catastrophizing scores were associated 
with worse WOMAC pain scores in this same model (regression coeffi cient = 2.1, CI= 1.7, 2.4), p<0.001). 
These results indicate that Pain Catastrophizing – a primary target of the proposed intervention -  
mediated the association of race with WOMAC pain scores in this patient group , with no other 
covariates included in  the model .   
Second, we previously found that in a 
separate cohort of African American  (N=221) 
and Caucasian (N=270) V eterans with knee and 
/ or hip OA , racial differences in baseline pain 
and function scores were no longer significant 
when controlling for participant characteristics 
including emotion- focused copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Table 1)  34. 
This is relevant to the proposed study because 
emotion- focused copi[INVESTIGATOR_295234]- related outcomes and is 
addressed by [CONTACT_295295].  Third, we 
examined associations of race and other 
variables with WOMAC scores (pain and 
physical function) among n=1,368 participants 
with knee OA (32% African American) in the 
community -based Johnston County Osteoarthritis Project 17.  Radiographic severity and demographic factors 
did not explain racial differences in pain and function.  However, depressive symptoms were an important 
mediator of this association. These results provide further support for the potential impact of CST among 
African Americans with OA , since studies show  that CST positively influences psychological health, including 
depression 39,44,45.  
B.2.[ADDRESS_359894] not obtained patient perspectives on cultural appropriateness.  Importantly , results 
of our recent pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (Drs. Allen, Keefe, and Campbell)  indic ate CST may be particularly beneficial 
for African Americans with OA and may reduce disparities in pain, copi[INVESTIGATOR_295235].   The first step in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_295236] V eterans with OA, where Table 1.  Results of Multivariable Linear Regression Model 
of AIMS2 Pain and Function Scores  
 AIMS2 Pain *  AIMS2  Function*  
 B (p-value)  B (p-value)  
African American  0.03 (0.874)  0.09 (0.419)  
Emotion -Focused Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]†  0.15 (<0.001)  0.18 (<0. 001) 
Arthritis Self -Efficacy  -0.30 
(<0.001)  -0.17 (<0.001)   
AIMS2 Affect Subscale  0.29 (0.028)  0.23 (<0.001)  
Age -0.01 (0.080)  --  
Perceived Inadequate 
Income  0.19 (0.342)  0.15 (0.245)  
Fair or Poor Health  0.64 (<0.001)  0.91 (<0.001)  
* AIMS -2 = Arth ritis Impact Measurement Scales -2; higher 
scores = worse pain and function . † Higher scores = more 
emotion -focused copi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359895]. Keefe and colleagues; this included 
exploration of issues related to  cultural relevance (e.g., concordance of intervention content with values, norms, 
and beliefs) . Feedback from the focus groups was i ncorporated into the pain CST program.  Next we evaluated 
the telephone- based CST intervention among n=30 patients at the Durham VA Medical Center (V AMC) with 
clinically documented OA (mean age = 58 years; 9 females; 14 Caucasians, 13 African Americans, 3 other 
racial / ethnic minorities). Outcomes were assessed at baseline and 12 -week follow -up and included AIMS -2 
subscales (pain, affect, mood, and physical function) and the Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295237] 51.   
As shown in Appendix Table 1, African American participants improved in all Arthritis Impact Measurement 
Scales -2 (AIMS -2) subscales, with s tatistically significant changes from baseli ne (p<0.05) for the Total, Pain, 
Walking and Bending, and Mood subscales.   Also importantly, African Americans exhibited greater 
improvements  than Caucasians in all AIMS -2 subscales.  In addition,  African Americans (but not 
Caucasians) had a significant (p <0.05) decrease  (improvement) in pain catastrophizing  scores .  This result is 
particularly relevant, given the strong and consistent association between high pain catastrophizing and 
greater pain severity  35-37.  The following quote from an African American patient in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_295238], “ “Before the program I really didn’t have the right 
tools in o rder to get rid of the pain. Now…I  actually do have tools in order to be able to make the pain 
decrease ...”  In summary, results of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_295239], with 
cultural tailoring,  may be particularly beneficial for African Americans OA and may be a key strategy 
for reducing racial disparities. However, work is still needed to: 1.) Engage the full range of S takeholders in 
the process of evaluating this CST program and its dissemination potential, with particular attention to cultural 
relevance.  2.) Conduct a larger clinical trial of pain CST among African Americans with OA to examine 
effectiveness in real -world settings. 3.) Create practical tools (“deliverables”) to facilitate dissemination and 
implementation of this program  in community and clinical settings that reach African Americans with OA.  
B.3.[ADDRESS_359896] is highly patient -centered because OA is a leading cause of pain and disability 4,52, 
outcomes that are consistently endorsed by [CONTACT_295296]  (RQ-6) 53-55.  OA -related pain 
also has a detrimental impact on other key patient -centered outcomes such as depression, anxiety, 
employment, relationships, sleep, fatigue, employment, and quality of life 6-9.  In addition, arthritis is a key 
barrier to engaging in other healthy behaviors, such as physical activity, and it is stron gly associated with 
obesity 56-58.   Therefore interventions that help patients manage OA -related pain also have tremendous 
potential for affecting other health outcomes of importance to patients 59. This is particularly important for 
African Americans with OA, since they bear a disproportionately high burden of symptoms.  
This project addresses the key PCOR I question,  “What can I do to im prove the outcomes that are 
most important to me?”   Specifically, information generated from this project will enable African Americans 
with OA to know whether participating in a pain CST program will improve key patient -centered outcomes  (RQ-
3). Participa tion in these types of programs requires a time investment by [CONTACT_1962] , and sometimes friends or 
family members who take over responsibilities to enable patients to participate. Therefore it is important to 
provide solid information on likely benefits, so patients can choose whether to invest their time in a pain CST 
program. We have applied patient -centered principles to all aspects and stages of the study conduct, 
summarized in Table [ADDRESS_359897]:  
B.4.[ADDRESS_359898] Studies by [CONTACT_295297]  / Culturally Enhanced Protocols .  Drs. Keefe, Somers, and 
Campbell have conducted extensive work on pain CST interventions.  [CONTACT_295323] is the developer of the CST 
intervention upon which the proposed intervention is  based . He has led an active program of research  
 involving trials of this intervention and is an international expert in the area of pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295240]  
39,41,44,46,48,49,59,[ADDRESS_359899] protocol for this patient group and has been the  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 4 principal investigator [CONTACT_4007] 2 studies (DOD and 
NIH-funded) evaluating the efficacy of 
culturally enhanced protocols in African 
American men with prostate cancer and 
their intimate partners . [CONTACT_295324]’s 
adaptations to CST protocols w ere 
designed to increase the cultural 
congruence of CST, such that intervention 
elements were  not in conflict with norms 
common to many African American 
communities. Norms identified in [CONTACT_295325]’s work include d the stigma 
attached to seeking psychologi cal services 
and the importance of productivity and not 
appearing lazy in the eyes of family, friends, 
and community. To address the issue of 
stigma, CST was  presented as an 
educational intervention rather than a form 
of treatment or therapy. Concerns related to 
productivity were  addressed in two ways. 
First, communication strategies were  taught 
in the intervention to provide participants 
with strategies for explaining CST to family 
and friends and requesting any support 
needed to fully participate in CST ( e.g., a 
break from some household duties, time off 
from church committee work ). Second, 
strategies involving rest or relaxation were  
taught with an emphasis on how rest and 
relaxation can ultimately improve stamina or performance in the long -term. These adaptations will be 
integrated into the proposed pain CST intervention for African Americans with OA and reviewed by [CONTACT_295298] . 
B.4.[ADDRESS_359900] recently conducted two clinical tr ials 
(one at Duke, one at the Durham VAMC)  of Patient and Provider Interventions for Managing OA in Primary 
Care ,[ADDRESS_359901]. Allen is also currently leading a clinical trial of physical therapy vs. internet -based exercise training for 
patients with knee OA, funded by [CONTACT_33230] -Centered Outcomes Research Institute.  These studies  
demonstrate our team’s experience in all aspects of conducting clinical trials among patients with OA, including 
recruitment, retention, intervention delivery and outcome assessment.  Although these prior trials have not 
exclusively enrolled African American patients, t hey have involved a substantial number of participants from 
this minority group. For example, in our trials of Patient and Provider Interventions for Managing OA in Primary 
Care, about 40%  of 537 participants (N=212) from the Duke- based study and 50%  of the 300 patients in the 
VA-based study are African American. This demonstrates our experience with reaching out to African 
Americans with OA in the context of clinical trial participation.   We also note that in both of these trials, 
rates of enrollment were  similar to or better among African American patients compared to Caucasian patients. 
In the Duke study, 53.6% of invited African American patients and 56.5% of invited Caucasian patients agreed 
to participate. In the VA study, 56.4% of invited African Amer ican patients agreed to participate, compared to 
40% of invited Caucasians patients.   Table 2.  Patient -Centered Approaches to Study Conduct  
Study 
Aspect  Patient -Centered Approach(es)  
Participant 
Recruitment  • Recruitment materials reviewed by [CONTACT_295299] y and cultural 
relevance  
• Enhanced consent process with increased 
attention to patient rights in research 
• All initial study activities (consent, assessments) 
done at one appointment to minimize participant  
burden  
Pain CST 
Intervention  • Telephone -based deliv ery to facilitate access and 
flexible scheduling for patients  
• Availability of evening and weekend sessions  
• Incorporation of enhancements to address issues 
of cultural relevance  
• Comprehensive approach that integrates 
comorbid health conditions and other beh aviors 
important for OA management  
Measures  
 • Primary outcome (pain) is the central symptom for 
patients with OA  
• Inclusion of a global quality of life measure, as 
recommended by [CONTACT_295300], to capture 
the impact of OA on many aspects of patients’  
lives 
Dissemination 
Potential  • Outreach to community -based organizations that 
serve many older African Americans; taking the 
intervention results and deliverables to “familiar 
ground.”  
• Use of patient testimonials to help patients see 
the impact of pain CS T on “people like me”  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 5 C.  STUDY DESIGN  & APPROACH  
C.1.[ADDRESS_359902] andards. Throughout 
the remainder of the proposal, we reference sections of the Methodology Standards ( in bold print, using 
PCORI Appendix A labels) that are addressed by [CONTACT_295301]. Sections C-G serve  as a 
protocol for this planned effectiveness clinical trial (RQ-2).  
C.2.[ADDRESS_359903] Program  (Specific Aim 1)  
  The first Specific Aim of this project is to: "  Engage African American patients with OA, their support 
partners, health care providers, clinic administrators, and public health representatives in a process of 
evaluating and refining a pain CST program for culturally appropriate content and dissemination potential. ”   
There is a growing body of literature supporting  the efficacy of health i nterventions that have been tailored to 
specific racial, ethnic, and cultural groups 61,66-69.  A recent review indicates that mental health interventions are 
more effective when adapted to meet the needs and expectations of minority populations 70.  There are also 
specific reasons we believe it is particularly important to consider issues of cultural relevance of a pain CST 
intervention among African Americans  with OA .  First , most studies of  pain CST among patients with OA have 
involved predominantly Caucasian samples.  Therefore the extent to which the CST intervention matches the 
cultural characteristics, values, and pain experiences of African Americans is not well understood.  As 
described above, [CONTACT_295324]’s work has identified issues related to t he stigma of psychological services and 
the importance of productivity among African American men with prostate cancer ; these areas, as well as 
others identified by [CONTACT_56049] P atient Stakeholders and their supportive partners , will be further explored and 
incorporated into the intervention.  Second , African Americans often experience a greater number and 
different types of stressful events (i.e., socioeconomic, environmental, occupational, racism -related) than 
Caucasians, and these stressors can be important cont ributors to the pain experience 71.  One focus of the 
CST intervention is applying pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295241].  Because of racial differences 
in the types and volume of stressors patients may experience, African Americans may experience barriers to 
incorporating pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] s kills in stressful situations. We will explore the areas of compound stressors and 
capacity to deal with race- related stressors with our P atient S takeholders.  Third , one core cult ural value of 
many African Americans is religion or spi[INVESTIGATOR_295242], and African Americans tend to employ more religious copi[INVESTIGATOR_295243] 71,72.  While the copi[INVESTIGATOR_295244], these aspects can be incorporat ed when religion or spi[INVESTIGATOR_295245] a core value for participants.  For 
example, prayer can be incorporated into relaxation exercises, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_52497] -statements can be based on 
Scripture or other texts. For some participants, pain may interfere wi th church attendance and result in the loss 
of a meaningful activity.  Activity pacing may allow for a return to church by [CONTACT_295302].   
We have already taken initial steps to evaluate issues of cultural relevance of pain CST, including our pi[INVESTIGATOR_295246] V eterans with OA described above.  However, there is still a need for broader 
Patient S takeholder input , particularly since our pi[INVESTIGATOR_295247].  As described 
below  (Section G), we have been meeting with Patient Stakeholders  during the course of this proposal 
development; we have presented the CST program (and other aspects of the study) to these stakeholders and 
have incorporated their input into the proposal .  For example, one them e we hear d from several patients was 
the important role of family or friends in the pain and pain management experience.  Based on this input, we 
have added a module to the pain CST program that will teach patients effective skills for communicating with 
others about their pain and soliciting support (similar to [CONTACT_295324]’s work described above)  and have invited 
supportive others to participate on the Stakeholder Panel.  At the beginning of the study  period, we will 
continue to work with Stakeholder Panel  members  to finalize the pain CST program.  (In addition, Section G 
describes  details of our Stakeholder Engagement plan relevant to  Specific Aim #1.)   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359904] program has 
been culturally enhanced  to date (based  on our  Veteran  pi[INVESTIGATOR_295248]. Campbell’s work ), as 
well as e xamples of other  areas where additional enhancements  could be applied, based on our initial work 
with the Stakeholder Panel and pi[INVESTIGATOR_280215].   
Table 3.  Examples of Cultural Enhancements to Pain CST Program  
Enhancements Based on Previous Work  
Tradition al CST Program Approach / 
Patient Concern  Culturally Enhanced CST Program Approach  
Described as “treatment” or “therapy”  Described as a n educational intervention to deal with the stigma of 
psychological services  
Some aspects of CST perceived as not 
prom oting productivity  Added a module on communication strategies to help patients talk with 
family and friends about CST skills and their need for support in 
managing pain  
Relaxation skills emphasize their ability to improve long -term productivity  
Literacy level too high for some patients  Simplified and lowered the reading level of patient handouts  
Examples of Potential Additional Enhancements (Based on Stakeholder Input)  
Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] s kills difficult to apply in 
context of compound / extreme life 
stressors  Provide additional and specific guidance on applying these skills in the 
types of situations noted by [CONTACT_295303] (may be 
a challenge for women with multiple 
caregiving roles)  Allocate intervention time to helpi[INVESTIGATOR_295249]’ religious beliefs, traditions and values  
C.3.0  Clinical Trial Design (Specific Aims 2 and 3)  
The clinical trial will address Specific Aims 2 and 3:  
Specific Aim 2:  Examine the effectiveness of an  11-session, culturally enhanced, telephone- based pain CST 
program among African Americans with hip or knee OA . 
Specific Aim 3:  Examine whether individual patient characteristics (particularly baseline pain catastrophizing 
score , comorbidity  and duration o f OA symptoms ) are associated with differential improvement in the pain CST 
program .   
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359905] Control (WL) groups.  The WL group mirrors a 
“usual  care” condition, since this study involves patients  who 
are under treatment for hip or knee OA at the University of 
North Carolina (UNC) Health Care System and the Durham 
VAMC  (RQ-5); all part icipants will continue other usual care for 
knee OA  during the study  period.  ( A description of participants 
and recruitment methods is provided in Section E, and detail 
on the enrollment sites is provided in Section F .)  
Randomization will be stratified according to enrollment site 
and gender, to ensure that the groups are balanced in these  
respect s. The two points for follow -up assessments will be at 
approximately 12 weeks  and 36 weeks .  The 12 -week time 
point will follow intervention completion. To allo w for the brief 
lag time between the baseline visit and randomization / first 
intervention call, as well as the potential for missed calls and 
scheduling conflicts, we will schedule follow up assessments 
between [ADDRESS_359906] adopted what we 
believe is a patient -centered approach to this issue.  Specifically , we will includ e intervention modules that help 
patients to engage and communicate with their support partners when available (or to seek  additional support 
for their pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], when appropriate).  We believe this strategy will provide the advantages of involving 
support  partners while not introducing restrictions that would exclude patients from the study.  
C.4.[ADDRESS_359907]  Intervention  (RQ-5) 
Rationale and Theoretical Basis for Pain CST .  There are a number of theories that link pain experiences with 
psychological and behavioral processes, including the gait control theory [ADDRESS_359908].  The gate can be 
opened by [CONTACT_295304] (e.g., injury), psychological factors ( e.g. depression), and behavioral factors 
(focusing on the pain). The gate can also be closed by [CONTACT_295304] (e.g., analgesic use), emotional factors 
(e.g., positive mood), and behavioral factors (e.g., distraction from the pain).  An important implication is 
that systematic training in skills for altering thoughts, feelings, and behaviors related to pain can 
reduce pain and minimize its detrimental impact on psychological and physical functioning  75.     
General Components of the CST Program.   This CST program will be based on a model developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Keefe and colleagues.   There basic components of the intervention are  75: 

 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359909] intervention, 
including components of gate control theory, which helps them to understand how their thoughts, feeling, and 
behaviors can influence pain and how learning copi[INVESTIGATOR_295250].   
2.  Counselor -Guided Training in Copi[INVESTIGATOR_206517] . A counselor provides instruction in cognitive and behavioral 
pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295251]. The following are 
main categories of cognitive and behavioral copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] , along with cultural enhancements we anticipate 
may be important , based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732] : 
Cognitive Restructuring. Cognitive restructuring is a process by [CONTACT_295305], feelings and behavior 76.  Patients are taught to identify overly 
negative, maladaptive thoughts regarding pain and to replace those with alternative, more realistic and helpful 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_295252].  This component of the intervention was 
adapted from a self -instructional training intervention by [CONTACT_220238]. 77. This skill is one for which cultural 
tailoring may involve more detailed or systematic  incorporation of spi[INVESTIGATOR_295253].    
Attention Diversion Methods. Patients are trained in three attention diversion methods to enhance 
pain control: relaxation, imagery, and distraction. Relaxation training is based on a protocol described by 
[CONTACT_295306]. 78, involving concentration of muscle tension and then using this as a cue to relax.  Imagery is 
taught as an adjunct to relaxation 79. Patients practice using pleasant imagery and changing from one image to 
another. Distraction techniques help patients focus on physical or auditory stimuli 79. This skill is one for which 
cultural tailoring may involve addressing norms about the acceptability of relaxation.   
Changing Activity Patterns.  Patients are taught how to change activity patterns to control pain via 
strategies for activity -rest cycling [ADDRESS_359910] (i.e., [ADDRESS_359911]), and gradually increase their activity level 
and decrease resting periods.  With respect to pleasant activity scheduling, patients identify activities they 
enjoy and make weekly plans for engaging in these activities. This skill is one for which cultural tailoring may 
involve greater attention to life challenges or demands that present challenges to planning and controlling 
activity patterns.  
Communication with Supportive Others about Pain and Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] .  One enhancement we have 
made to the CST program, based on Patient Stakeholder input, is the importance of others in dealing with 
chronic pain.   Therefore w e have added a module that provides guidance in speaking and listening strategies 
and expressive vs. decision- making conversations, all applied to communicating with supportive others about 
pain.   
3.  Home Practice and Maintenance Planning.   Patients are asked to engage in home -based practice of the 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_295254] -related situations.  The counselor 
addresses participants’ home practice, including successes and barriers, during intervention s essions.   
4. Consideration of Other  Lifestyle Factors  Important for OA Management .  The CST counselor will work 
with participants to place pain CST in the broader context of OA management.  P hysical activity and weight 
management are particularly important lifestyle strategies for managing OA  85,86.  Although pain CST will be the 
focus of this intervention, we will also support participants’ engagement  in these other  lifestyle approaches, 
using low literacy materials and intervention scripts we developed in other studies  19.  These materials  take a 
behavioral, goal -setting approach to weight management and physical activity .  Sessions 8 and 9 of the 
program will address physical activity and weight management, respectively (See Appendix).  This order was 
selected strat egically, since each of the pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295255] , and the 
counselor will be able to work with participants to integrate those skills in their efforts to change physical 
activity and dietary patterns.  For example,  activity -rest cycling is important for helpi[INVESTIGATOR_295256].  Cognitive restructuring is also important for helpi[INVESTIGATOR_295257].  For example, some individuals respond 
to pain with unhealthy eating patterns; uncovering and addressing unhelpful pain- related thoughts is a key to 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359912] counselor may also address participants’ comorbid illnesses in the contex t 
of engaging in weight management and physical activity, as well as the use of pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110].   
 C.5.[ADDRESS_359913] interventions will be based on the Copi[INVESTIGATOR_295258] (Osteoarthritis Version), 
developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keefe and colleagues, which provides detail ed session- by-session information, instructions 
for counselors, and patient handouts  39,41,44,49.  As part of our VA -based pi[INVESTIGATOR_295259], we 
adapted the counselor instructions and patient manual (See Appendix) into a lower literacy format.  As no ted 
above, we will also utilize low literacy materials from our recent OA studies to incorporate sessions on physical 
activity and weight management.  As described in Specific Aim #1 , further adaptations will be made to 
incorporate other issues of cultural  relevance based on S takeholder input . The patient manual, as well as an 
audio- recording of relaxation instructions, will be provided to participants .  Each session includes: teaching and 
/ or review of specific copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], counselor -led practice of copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], review of practice and use of skills 
during the prior week, and developi[INVESTIGATOR_295260].  
Participants are asked to document weekly goals.    
C.6.[ADDRESS_359914] counselor consistently follows the appropriate treatment protocol: 1) the 
counselor will follow a detailed treatment outline and scripts , 2) supervision sessions (with [CONTACT_85561]) will be 
conducted with the counselor, approximately weekly  (with a likely reduction in frequency as the program 
progress) , 3) audio- recorded CST sessions will be reviewed during supervision meetings , and the counselor’s 
adherence to the protocol will be rated using a scale developed and utilized by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keefe and Colleagues . 
Satisfactory adherence will be defined as 90% or more of the maximum possible score on the adherence rating 
scale, and ratings will be derived from a randomly selected 15% (approximately)  of all se ssions , or more as 
deemed necessary .   [CONTACT_295324] will also listen to  recorded CST sessions, including approximately the first 
10 sessions and 5 % thereafter.  [CONTACT_295324] will particular ly focus her review on issues related to cultural 
relevance.  Based  on the project’s sample size and projected rate of participant enrollment, the CST counselor 
will have sufficient time to conduct all sessions. However, i n case back -up is needed to deliver some pain CST 
(due to counselor vacation, unexpected leave, etc.) , we will also train another counselor  who is currently  on our 
VA study team (and who delivered the pi[INVESTIGATOR_295261]) , so we can avoid unexpected lapses in 
intervention delivery.  
C.7.0  Patient -Centered Outcomes  (PC-3, IR -4) 
C.7.1 Overview  (PC-2).  All study assessments will be conducted by [CONTACT_295307] s, blinded to 
participants’ randomization assignment . We will use scripts to ensure that measures are delivered in a 
consistent and valid manner. The CST counselor will not be involved in outcome assessment s.  Primary and 
secondary outcomes will be assessed at baseline (in- person), approx imately 12-weeks (in- person) and 36 
weeks (telephone). Participant characteristics will be assessed at baseline. Participants will be paid $[ADDRESS_359915] etion of in- person assessments and $[ADDRESS_359916] 
selected our pain- related outcomes on the basis of input from our Stakeholders (RQ-6) and the Initiative on 
Methods, Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Tri als (IMMPACT) 87, which r ecommends 
measurement of four chronic pain domains:  pain intensity (WOMAC pain subscale) , physical functioning 
(WOMAC function scale),  emotional functioning ( Patient Health Questionnaire- 8), and participant global 
impression of change.  Other secondary patient -centered outcomes focus on self -efficacy, pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], quality 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 10 of life pain interference and pa in medication use.  
C.7.2 Primary  Outcome: WOMAC Pain Subscale. We have chosen pain as the primary outcome because it is 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_295262] -centered outcomes (e.g., 
function, psychological health)  (RQ-6). The WOMAC pain subscale is  one of the most commonly used 
measures of pain among patients with lower extremity OA. It includes 5 items rated on a Likert scale of 0 (no 
symptoms) to 4 (extreme symptoms).  The reliability and validity of the WOMAC total score and subscales 
have been c onfirmed 88.  Construct validity has been confirmed by a significant association with the Lequesne 
Algofunctional Index for Knees 88. The WOMAC has been widely used in trials of behavioral interventions for 
patients with hip and knee OA, confirming its sensitivity to change in these types of interventions.  
C.7.3  Secondary  Outcomes . 
WOMAC Total Score and Function Subscale.  In addition to the pain subscale, the WOMAC includes 
stiffness (2 items) and function (17 items) subs cales.  The WOMAC total score and function subscale are also 
common patient -centered outcomes for patients with lower extremity OA.  We will assess the function subscale 
separately because of its importance as an outcome among patients with OA.  
Depressive Symptoms – Patient Health Questionnaire- 8 (PHQ -8).  We have chosen to assess  depressive 
symptoms because of their c lose association with pain 89.  These  symptoms will be assessed using the PHQ -8, 
a reliable and valid measure 90.  The PHQ -8 is an eight -item survey that consists of items corresponding to 
depression criteria listed in the Diagnostic and Statistics Manual Fourth Edition (DSM -IV).  Each of the eight 
questions is scored as 0 (not at all) to 3 (nearly every day), so that total scores  range from 0 to 24.   
Patient Global Impression of Change.  We will use this  scale to evaluate participants’ perspectives on overall 
changes in their joint pain during the study period 91.  This measure asks participants to describe their change 
in pain on a 7- point rating scale with the f ollowing options: “very much improved,” “much improved,” “minimally 
improved,” “no change,” “minimally worse,” “much worse,” and “very much worse.”  This scale has been widely 
used in clinical trials of chronic pain and is recommended by [CONTACT_170314] 87. 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_100779] (CSQ).   The CSQ is the most commonly used measure of copi[INVESTIGATOR_295263], and its measurement properties have been confirmed in  patients with a variety of 
pain- related conditions  51,92.  This scale i ncludes  48 items that assess 6 cognitive domains (Catastrophizing, 
Diverting Attention, Ignoring Sensations, Copi[INVESTIGATOR_170294] -Statements, Reinterpreting Pain Sensations, Praying -
Hopi[INVESTIGATOR_007]) and 1 behavioral  domain (Increasing Behav ioral Activities) . Each domain includes 6 items, and 
participants rate the frequency of their use of specific copi[INVESTIGATOR_295264] a 7 -point Likert scale from 0 (“Never 
do that”) to 6 (“Always do that”). The scale also includes two items that assess participants' perceived copi[INVESTIGATOR_295265], i.e. their subjective ability to control or decrease their pain, using a similar 7 -point Likert scale.  
Arthritis Self -Efficacy Scale.  We will assess arthritis self -efficacy because of its close association with other 
OA-related outcomes (i.e., pain and function)  and its patient -centeredness . The Arthritis Self -Efficacy Scale 
has shown acceptable construct validity (by [CONTACT_295308], disability, and depression), 
internal reliability (alpha = 0.76- 0.89), and test -retest reliability (Pears on r = 0.71- 0.85). Higher scores on this 
scale have been significantly associated with improved health outcomes and protection against poor functional 
outcomes 93,94.  This  scale includes 8 items asking respondents how certain they are that they can perform 
specific activities or tasks.  Items are scored on a Likert Scale (1=very uncertain to 10=very certain).   
Health- Related Quality of Life (HRQoL).  We are including a measure of HRQoL based on feedback from our 
Patient S takeholders, who stressed that OA affects many aspects of life and recommended that we broadly 
assess quality of life in this study  (RQ-6). We will use the Short -Form -12 (SF- 12), a validated measure that 
covers domains of general health, physical health , work and activity limitations, and emotional health 95. 
PROMIS Pain Interference Instrument (Short Form) 96.  The PROMIS Pain Interference (Short Form 6a) 
instrument measures the self -reported consequences of pain across aspects of life including social, cognitive, 
emotional, physical and recreational activities; this instrument refers to the past seven days.   This validated 
scale has five response options, with scores ranging from one to five.  
Pain Medication Use. Pain medications are a common  treatment for patients with OA, and some patients 
seek to reduce their use; therefore we have included this as a secondary outcome .  We will assess pain 
medication use using methods we have used successfully in previous studies.  We will ask participants to bring 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 11 to their study visits (or bring to the telephone) all medications (prescription and non -prescription) they are 
currently taking for their arthritis symptoms.  For each medication, the study team will record the mediation 
name, medication class, frequency of taking the medication.  
Arthritis Self -Efficacy for Pain Communication Scale – Patient Version 97.  This 7 -item instrument 
assesses patient’s level of confidence in communicating their pain to their partner  and receiving understanding 
and a helpful response from their partner. Items are rated on a scale from 10 (“very uncertain”) to 100 (“very 
certain”).  
Starting the Conversation: Diet  (STC)  98.  The STC is an 8 -item food frequency instrumen t that evaluates 
dietary assessment and intervention in a clinical setting. Response options for the survey are organized into 3 
columns; one column indicating the most healthful dietary practices (scored 0), the 2nd column indicating less 
healthful practi ces (scored 1), and the 3rd column indicating the least healthful practices (scored 2).  
Brief Fear of Movement Scale.  The Brief Fear of Movement Scale is a six item scale  for assessing fear of 
movement in OA.   The scale specifically assesses activity avoidance due to pain- related fear of movement. All 
items are measured on a 4- point scale from “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree.”  
Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS).  The PCS is a widely used measure of catastrophic thinking related to 
pain99. This [ADDRESS_359917] painful experiences and to indicate the 
degree to which they experienced each of the thoughts or feelings when experiencing pain. The PCS includes 
3 subscales –  rumination , magnification, and helplessness.  
Pain Medication Use.   We will use a single- item measure that asks participants  whether their overall pain 
medication use for OA has increased, decreased, or stayed about the same since the beginning of the study. 
Although  this is a simple approach for measuring pain medication use, it is patient -centered, as it assesses 
patients’ perceptions of how much they need to rely on medications to manage their OA -related pain.  
Time Missed From Work.   A single -item measure that ask s participants about time missed from work will be 
used. This question asks participants how many works hours they have missed in the past month due to their 
osteoarthritis pain, other symptoms, and related healthcare visits.  
C.7.4  Participant Characteris tics (RQ-4, IR-1).  For Specific Aim#3, we will focus on evaluating potential 
differential effects of pain CST program, with particular interest in differences according to  baseline pai n 
catastrophizing (CSQ subscale) , comorbidity  (Self-Administered Comorbidity Questionnaire) ,[ADDRESS_359918].   We are interested in potential diffe rences according 
to participants’ comorbid health conditions , since these are hig hly common among individuals with OA and 
may be associated with implementation of copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], as described in Section C  above.   We are 
interested in potential differences according on the duration of participants’ OA symptoms  so that we can 
understand whether patients may benefit differentially based on how long they have been dealing with 
symptoms.  It is possible that patients could benefit most when early in the disease course, before unhelpful 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_295266], but this is not known.  Understanding this association will help to guide whether 
this type of program should be implemented systematically, early in the disease course.  
We will also assess the following patient characteristics  to describe the study sample:  age, race/ethnicity, 
gender, marital status, household financial state, work status, education level, religiosity (Duke University 
Religion Index) 101, body mass index  (BMI; calculated from measured height and weight) , physical activity ( Yale 
Physical Activity S urvey)102, joint involvement (i .e., report of al l joints affected by [CONTACT_295309] s), tobacco and alcohol 
use, and general self -rated health.  Participants’ baseline BMI and physical activity assessments will also be 
used by [CONTACT_295310] 8 and 9; this will provide a foundation part icipants’ current 
status regarding these two important lifestyle behaviors related to OA.  
C.7.[ADDRESS_359919] 
group, we will obtain participants’ feedback on the intervention . This will include questions related to specific 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 12 content (e.g., perceived usefulness and suggestions related to each copi[INVESTIGATOR_104285]) and process (e.g. number and 
duration of sessions; See Appendix  for full list of questions ).  This information will be used to by [CONTACT_3476], 
in conjunction with the Stakeholder Panel, to refine the program prior to dissemination of deliverables.    
C.8.0 Analytic Methods  
C.8.1  Data Analyses  
General.   Our statistical approach is guided by [CONTACT_295311]. The primary and secondary 
analyses will be conducted on an intent -to-treat basis; patients will be analyzed in the arm to which they were 
randomized, regardless of intervention adherence, using all data up to the [ADDRESS_359920] available 
measurement  prior to exclusion or dropout 103. Additional supporting analyses focusing on alternative, more 
restrictive analytic cohorts (e.g., as treated) will  be considered as exploratory analyses to provide additional 
information about the impact of magnitude of exposure to the intervention (IR-5). 
Descriptive statistics.  Descriptive statistics, including graphic al displays, will be used to summarize all study 
variables overall and by [CONTACT_105150].  We will construct individual and mean trajectory plots of the 
longitudinal outcome variables to understand their general trends over the study period.  In addition , we will 
explore the variability and correlation structure of outcome variables.  All statistical  analyses will be performed 
using the SAS (Cary, NC) software packa ge / R (www.r -project.org).  
Missing Data (MD-2, MD -3, MD -5).  Because the main predictors o f interest - intervention arm and patient 
characteristics  - are collected at baseline, we do not anticipate much missing data in these variables.  Our 
plans for preventing and dealing with missing data follow the guidelines set forth by [CONTACT_295312]’s Panel on Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials.  Our goal is to achieve less than 20% attrition, 
which is very reasonable based on our prior and ongoing OA studies  that include large proportions of African 
Americans 19,62,64; we will use the same strategies of reminder calls, reminder letters and flexible scheduling to 
minimize attrition . There may be missing values in the outcome measures due to dropout, death, a missed 
interim assessment, or item non -response. Given a thorough understanding of the missing data mechanism, it 
is possible to use al l of the available information in analysis, rather than using only subjects with completely 
observed information.  Our main analysis technique for the primary outcomes, general linear mixed models via 
maximum likelihood estimation, implicitly accommodates missingness when missingness is due either to 
treatment, to prior outcome, or to other baseline covariates included in the model , defined as missing at 
random  104. Therefore, inferences will be valid even if we have differential dropout by [CONTACT_105150].  
However as a first sensitivity analysis,  we will cons truct a general, multivariate imputation model using all 
observed pain measurements , treatment arm, and any covariates predictive of missingness  (IR-5).[ADDRESS_359921] 
errors will be combined using appropriate combining rules.106. Multivariate imputation will be conducted via the 
SAS procedure PROC MI or the SAS macro IVEware (http://www.isr.umich.edu/src/smp/ive/).  If the probability 
of dropout is related to the actual missing response (which is unobserved because it is missing) or to other 
unobserved quantities, the missing data due to dropout is considered  missing not at random (MNAR) or 
nonignorable 107. We propose as a second sensitivity analysis to explore MNAR methods, including pattern -
mixture models and the toolkit of methods as presented in O’Kelly and Ratitch (IR-5) 108.   
Primary Research Question: Among African Americans with OA, does a pain CST program  result in 
improved pain and other patient -centered outcomes at 12 -week and 36- week follow -up (Aim #2 ) (IR-3) 
We will use a linear mixed model (LMM) that will account for the correlation between a participant’s repeated 
outcome measurements over  time. Because of the small number of time points ( 3), we will apply an 
unstructured covariance matrix to take into account the within- patient correl ation between repeated measures . 
The fixed- effect portion of the model will have the form:  Yit = β 0 + β 112week + β 236week + β 3CST*12week   + 
β4CST*36week 7,  where Y it is the WOMAC pain  score for subject i at t= 0, 12, 36 weeks . We will estimate the 
parameters in the model using the SAS procedure MIXED (Cary, NC), and will test to see if there is a 
difference in mean WOMAC pain scores  between the CST and WL group s at specified time points ( i.e., β 3=0 
and/or β4=0).  Time is coded in this model to fit a constrained longitudinal data model (cLDA) in which baseline 
WOMAC pain  is modeled as a dependent variabl e in conjunction with the constraint of a common baseline 
mean across the treatment arms  109. In this way, the cLDA model is comparable to an ANCOVA model; the two 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 13 models are equivalent when there is no missing data.  However, unlike an ANCOVA, subjects who are miss ing 
follow -up measurements are included in the model because baseline is part of the response vector.  For 
improvement in precision, the model will also be adjusted for stratification variables of enrollment site and 
gender 110.  Similar procedures will be used for all continuous secondary outcomes.  The secondary outcomes 
for pain medication use as defined in Section C.7.3 are either dichotomous or count type variables.  We will fit 
a generalized logit model 104 using the SAS procedure NLMIXED for thes e outcomes.  
Secondary Research Question: Are individual patient characteristics (baseline p ain catastrophizing 
score, duration of OA symptoms and comorbidity ) associated with differential improvement in the pain 
CST program (Aim #3) (IR -3), HT- 1-4, RQ- 4).  Patients may vary in their response to the CST program; this 
variation is known as heterogeneity of treatment effects (HTE).  We have selected three a priori patient 
characteristic s (noted above) and will conduct a separate descriptive HTE for each, as def ined in the PCORI 
Methods Report.  We will construct individual and mean trajectory plots of the longitudinal outcome variables 
according to each characteristic  and treatment arm  to understand their general trends over the study period.  
Our general steps in this secondary analysis will be to add the patient characteristic main effect, as well as the 
interaction variables , to the linear mixed model defined above for primary analysis.  We will examine the 
parameter estimates and 95% CI’s for the 3- way intera ctions , treatment*time*patient characteristic , to 
determine whether there is evidence of HTE. New state- of-the art modeling methods have taken the 
exploration of HTE to the next level, making it possible to explore and identify multidimensional subgroups 
exhibiting heterogeneous treatment effects .  We will explore whether the a priori defined patient characteristics  
define multidimensional subgroups that exhibit HTE. W e will utilize two different analytic strategies for doing 
so: multivariable logistic regr ession  (LR) 111,112  and recursive partitioning (RP) 113,114 .  Our general steps in this 
secondary analysis will be: construction of outcome variables; identification of multidimensional subgroups via 
LR and RP; and, finally, examination of treatment effects within the multidimensional subgroups.  
Logistic Regression Methods : We will construct a summary of each participant’s repeated measures profile 
to characterize the participant’s change over time.  Empi[INVESTIGATOR_295267]- effects models  
with random intercepts and slopes will be used to generate individual -level estimates of mean improvement  115. 
Multivariable logistic regression provides individual -level predicted probabilities of the binary outcome (i.e., 
improvement in pain)112. To generate these predictions, we will enter all a priori defined patient factors and 
interactions into a model to explain variation in study outcomes (beginning with the primary study outcome, 
WOMAC pain score)  and apply backward selection with a type- I error rate of 0.[ADDRESS_359922] and each of the quintile indicators.  The coefficients of these interaction terms w ill 
indicate whether improvements in outcomes differ between subgroups defined by [CONTACT_295313].  
Recursive Partitioning Methods:  Our second approach will be the empi[INVESTIGATOR_295268] k nown as recursive partitioning . RP methods identify several subgroups that vary in their predictors 
and outcomes improvement, which have a clearer clinical intuition (e.g., participants with longer duration of OA 
symptoms,  high comorbidity burden and high pain catastrophizing) compared to logistic reg ression113,114,116.  
We will conduct RP analysis us ing the r package “rpart” where all potential predictors will be included in the 
model statement. We will use the cross product prediction error to determine the optimal number of branches, 
and “prune” the tree back to the optimal number.  The final produc t is a very clinically intuitive “tree” with 
“branches”  116, with a predicted mean or proportion summarized at each terminal node. Treatment group can 
be included as part of the RP analysis to identify both predictors and moderators of treatment response; 
alternatively, treatment effect within each terminal node can be calculated to observe the clinical magnitude of 
effects across constructed subgroups.  
C.8.2. Additional Exploratory Analyses.  We may also conduct exploratory analyses of associations among 
other measures collected as part of this study. This may include associations among variables at baseline, 
potential roles of baseline variables as moderators or mediators of treatment e ffects, or association of baseline 
variables with intervention uptake and outcomes.  
 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 14 C.8.3  Sample size . The sample size estimate  of n=[ADDRESS_359923]*36week interaction in our model , as this will be the most conservative test due to 
higher att rition at the [ADDRESS_359924] sample size calculation for the between group 
difference, multiplied by a factor 1- (rho)^2, where rho represents the Pearson correlation between baseline and 
follow -up time point outcome measures.  This sample size is then adjusted to compensate for potential missing 
observations due to attrition. Based on previous data, we assume a correlation of 0. 6 between baseline and 
follow -up WOMAC pain scores,  and an SD of 3.9. With 80% power, alpha=0.05, SD= 3.9, rho=0. 60, and a 
conservative 20% attrition rate by [ADDRESS_359925]  group and the WL control group.   Based 
on a mean baseline WOMAC pain score of 9.2, this corresponds to appr oximately a 14% improvement or 0.33 
(medium) effect size difference in WOMAC pain, which is a clinically relevant improvement 20.  Similarly, for the 
remaining secondary outcomes we will be powered to detect a 0.[ADDRESS_359926] greater than 80% to detect a 1.[ADDRESS_359927] a power analysis for the HTE analysis for Aim 
#[ADDRESS_359928] important functions for monitoring a clinical trial.  These 
reports can provide immediate updates on the numbers of participants enrolled, excluded, withdrew, etc,. This 
will allow the study team to evaluate whether goals are being met and whether there are any differential rates 
of recruitment, drop -out, etc, according to patient demographi c characteristics.  These reports also facilitate 
easy checking of screening and outcomes data so the team can monitor for unexpected amounts of missing 
data (MD-1).  The project coordinator will generate weekly reports, based on a CONSORT diagram, that 
describe all of these metrics related to study flow, as well as participant refusal, ineligibility and withdrawal 
reasons (MD-4).  We will follow CONSORT guidelines for reporting study results (IR -6).  
 
D. PROJECT MILESTONES AND TIMELINE 
Table [ADDRESS_359929] involves engaging 
stakeholders (African American patients with OA, supportive partners, health care providers, clinic 
administrators, and public health representatives) in a process of evaluating and refining the pain CST program 
for cultural relevance and dissemination potential .  We will complete this Aim in the first six months of the 
project.  The draft materials for the CST program (including patient manual, intervention scripts, and audio 
instructions for progressive relaxation) are already prepared.  These will be disseminated to the Stakeholder 
Panel and other team members prior to the first monthly meeting.  At the beginning of the project, we will 
conduct an iterative process of  incorporating stakeholder recommendations into the pain CST program (see 
Table 3 above). We will then engage approximately eight additional patients (and supportive partners when 
available) to provide additional feedback on the enhanced version of the pai n CST program.  We aim to have a 
final version of the CST program, informed by [CONTACT_295314], by [CONTACT_295315] 4.  We will also disseminate 
other study -related materials to all stakeholders and study team members at the beginning of the project 
period.  This will include the protocol and summary, outcome assessments, recruitment plan, timeline and 
milestone summary, plans and specific goals for dissemination and implementation activities.   
Table 4.  Study Activities, Milestones and Timeline  
Activity / M ilestone  Study Month  
IRB Approval  Pre-funding period  
Registration with Clinicaltrials.gov  Month 1  
Complete Specific Aim #1 (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_295269] 4  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359930] six months of the study, we will be eng aged in other start-up activities related to Aims 2 
and 3, the randomized clinical trial.  These activities will include finalizing all databases (for screening, outcome 
assessment, and study tracking), training research assistants,  and training the CST counselor .   During the first 
six months the research assistants will also devote time to reviewing medical records from UNC and the 
Durham VAMC  to identify potential study participants.  This will provide a large pool of potentially eligible 
patients, to whom we will be ready to send recruitment letters, as soon as the clinical trial phase of the project 
begins.  
The recruitment period for the cli nical trial will be completed over a 17-month period (months 7 -23).  This 
will require enrollment of about [ADDRESS_359931] Control group will complete their 
intervention (which begins after  36-week follow -up assessment) by [CONTACT_24473] 36, the end of the project period.  
 We will routinely conduct data monitoring and data cleaning throughout the study period, so that analyses 
can be conducted efficiently and quickly.  We will begin conducting analy ses of baseline data as soon as those 
data are complete at month [ADDRESS_359932] intensive period regarding 
dissemination activities , described below . 
 
E.  PATIENT POPULATION  
E.1.0 Patient Characteristics  
This study will involve n= 248 African Americans  (based on self -reported race)  with symptomatic hip or knee 
OA (RQ-3).  The hip and knee are two of the most common joint sites for symptomatic OA and are main 
contributors to disability 5.  In addition, racial differences in pain and other outcomes  have been reported Program)  
Finalize Questionnaires and Protocol for Clin ical Trial (Specific Aims #2 and #3)  Month 5  
Submit Progress Report 1 and Engagement Update 1  Month 6  
Complete All Start -Up Activities for Clinical Trial  Month 6  
Submit Protocol Paper to Journal (Provide submitted & accepted versions to PCORI)  Month 7  
Start of Recruitment (Target Total: N=248)  Month 7  
     Completion of 25% of Recruitment  Month 11  
     Completion of 50% of Recruitment  Month 15  
     Completion of 75% of Recruitment  Month 19  
     Completion of Recruitment  Month 23  
Submit Progress Rep ort 2 and Engagement Update 2  Month 12  
Submit Progress Report 3 and Engagement Update 3  Month 18  
Submit Progress Report 4 and Engagement Update 4  Month 24  
Begin Submitting Abstracts and Manuscripts from Study Baseline Data  (Provide submitted & 
accepted  versions to PCORI)  Month 24  
Complete 12 -Week Follow -Up Assessments  Month 26  
Begin Analyses of 12 -Week  Follow -Up Data  Month 27  
Submit Progress Report 5 and Engagement Update 5  Month 30  
Complete 36 -Week Follow -Up Assessments  Month 32  
Generate “Delivera bles” Begin Dissemination of Results (See Dissemination and 
Implementation Section)  Month 33  
Complete Final Study Analyses  Month 34  
Complete Analytic Data Sets and Code Book  Month 34  
Submit Main Study Outcome Paper (Provide submitted and accepted versio ns to PCORI)  Month 35  
Submit Final Report  Month 36  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359933] one hip or knee:        
• Diagnosis of Hip or Knee OA .  This will be identified from UNC Health Care and Durham VAMC  electronic 
medical records  or based on participant self -report, with further  evaluation at screening  AND  
• Current Joint Symptoms .  We will use the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s definition for 
persistent joint symptoms 118.  Participants must answer, "yes" to two questions: "In the past [ADDRESS_359934] 
you had pain, aching, stiffness, or swelling in or around your ( joint(s) with OA )?" and "Were these symptoms 
present on most days for the past month?"   
Patients meeting any of the following criteria will be excluded: Diagnosis of gout (in knee or hip), 
rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, other systemic rheumatic disease; Dementia or other memory loss condition; 
Active diag nosis of psychosis, serious personality disorder, or current uncontrolled substance abuse; Total hip 
/ knee replacement surgery, other knee / hip surgery, ACL tear , or other significant knee/hip injury  in the past 6 
months; Scheduled for or on a waiting li st for joint replacement surgery; Severely impaired hearing or speech 
(patients must be able to participate in telephone sessions); Unable to speak English; Participating in another 
OA intervention study  or copi[INVESTIGATOR_295270] ; Unwilling to be ran domized either study arm ; Lower 
extremity paralysis ; Other health problem that would prohibit participation in the study (at the discretion of the 
Principal Investigator) . 
 We plan to enroll equal numbers of participants (n=124) from UNC Health Care and the Durham VAMC.   
We recently completed at data pull of patients with diagnoses of OA within the UNC Health Care System.  This 
resulted in over 10,000 patients; based on this overall number we are confident there will be an ample number 
of African American patients who are eligible to participate  (PC-2).  At the Durham VAMC, we base our 
estimate of potentially eligible patients on a data pull of  African American patients with ICD -9 codes for hip and 
/ or knee OA (which we have found to be more consistently used than in the Duke healthcare system)  and no 
ICD-9 codes for study exclusion criteria.  During FY 2011, there were approximately 1,970 African American 
patients at the Durham VAMC who met these criteri a, and the patient population has increased in volume since 
then.  Applying the estimated 29% enrollment rate based on our prior research 62, this would result in n =570 
patients  at the Durham VAMC, which also far exceeds our enrollment goal of n=124  (PC-2).  
 Participants will be withdrawn from the study  if they develop any new health problems or other events that 
would either a) make participation in the study intervention or measures unsafe o r b) confound study 
outcomes. These largely mirror study exclusion criteria.  In particular, participants will be asked  if they have had 
a total joint replacement (knee or hip) surgery, other significant knee or hip surgery, or ACL tear  prior to their 
12-week and 36- week assessments.  
E.2.0 Recruitment Process (PC-2) 
We will include three methods of recruitment, which we have successfully utilized in prior studies. First, we 
will use a variety of methods to advertise the study to potential participants.   Thes e may include: posting flyers 
and brochures in UNC clinics; advertisements on a UNC website and other websites appropriate for reaching 
our target patient group; advertisements in newsletters, magazines and other appropriate print media; email 
blasts to UN C employees; advertisement on the UNC closed circuit television. Flyers and brochures may also 
be distributed by [CONTACT_37157].   Second, providers will be able to refer patients to the study team 
directly, with patients’ permission.  Third, we will  use UNC and Durham VAMC medical records to identify 
patients with diagnoses of hip or knee OA and no exclusionary diagnoses, and we will mail and/or email 
invitation letters to these patients. (We will initially identify African American patients based on documented 
race in the medical record, but we will ultimately base enrollment on self -reported race assessed during 
telephone screening.)  For self -referred or provider -referred patients we will also check for exclusionary 
diagnoses in UNC or Durham VAMC medical records.  All potential participants will undergo a brief telephone 
screening questionnaire to check for eligibility criteria. If patients meet screening criteria and are interested in 
participating, they will be asked to meet a study team member at their clinic to complete consent and baseline 
assessments.  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 17 We will implement an enhanced informed consent process that includes education about the research 
process and participant bill of rights.  Participants will be mailed the “You’ve Got the Power!” booklet prior to 
their enrollment visit; this was developed and is distributed by [CONTACT_295316] – Increase Minority Participation and Awareness of Clinical Trials.  In addition, we will show all 
potential partici pants the nine- minute “ What You Should Know About Clinical Trials” video produced by [CONTACT_295317], at the beginning at the baseline visit.  This video includes basic information about clinical 
trials and perspectives from African Americans who have participated.  All study personnel will be trained in 
issues related to cultural relevance, including potential distrust of medical institutions and research among 
African Americans 119.  
During the baseline assessment, UNC participants will be asked for the name [CONTACT_4007] t heir main UNC physician 
so that we may send their doctor a message (through EPIC or by [CONTACT_2319]) making them aware of their patients’ 
participation in the study.   
Following baseline assessments, participants will be given their randomization assignment via telephone 
by [CONTACT_65460] (since the research assistants conducting baseline study assessments will be 
blinded to participants’ study group).  Randomization will be based on a computer generated sequence 
maintained by [CONTACT_295318]. We will mail participants in the CST group their patient manual and 
relaxation audio- recording prior to the first CST program telephone session.  The audio recording may also be 
sent via email or posted on a website for participants to access.   Participants randomized to the WL group will 
be informed they will begin the CST program after their follow -up assessments are complete.  
 
F.  RESEARCH TEAM AND ENVIRONMENT  
As described in the preliminary studies section above, our study team has extensive experience in areas of 
high relevance to the proposed project, including: development and testing of pain CST programs (Drs. Keefe, 
Somers, and Campbell), clinical trials among patients with OA, including large proportions of African 
Americans (Drs. Allen, Oddone, Keefe,  Somers, and Campbell), cultural enhancements to pain CST 
interventions and minority health research ([CONTACT_295324]),  and health services interventions (Drs. Allen and 
Oddone).  Dr s. Allen and Campbell also have ex perience with Stakeholder Panels as investi gators on other 
PCORI -funded research. The study Stakeholder Panel, described below, is also highly qualified to ensure 
relevance of the study and facilitate dissemination in multiple spheres. All participating institutions have robust 
research environment s that include support for study -related activities including:  interview / enrollment space, 
computer / IT support and infrastructure, budget and logistical support, regulatory support, and resources for 
investigators’ professional development.   
 As note d above, the study will take place in two different primary care setting s – UNC Health Care and the 
Durham VAMC -  to enhance generalizability and provide an opportunity to evaluate feasibility of 
implementation in these differing environments  (PC-2).  UNC Healthcare is a large not -for-profit integrated 
health care system associated with the UNC School of Medicine; it includes many community -based clinics 
across central NC and serves a diverse patient population. Over 780,[ADDRESS_359935] program in a study sample that includes a l arger proportion of men than are typi[INVESTIGATOR_295271]. The Durham VAMC serves over 47,000 veterans, about 68% of whom are age 55 or 
older and therefore in the prime age category for the development of OA.  About 1/[ADDRESS_359936] at both study sites, for patient convenience.  
The database with study outcome, tracking, and i ntervention- related data will be housed at UNC; for patients 
enrolled from the Durham VAMC, we will request permission to house data at UNC as part of the consent 
process.  All pre- consent data for the Durham VAMC will be housed in a database that resides at the VA.   Dr. 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359937] phone 
calls; these will remain on a UNC server.   
 
G.  ENGAGEMENT PLAN  
Key Stakeholders for this project are African American patients wi th OA, their supportive partners, health 
care providers, and public health and health service leaders  (PC-1).  The Appendix includes a list of 
Stakeholder Panel Members.  W e describe here our engagement of these Stakeholders to date and plans for 
continued engagement throughout the study period (PC-1).  
G.1.[ADDRESS_359938] intervention among African American Veterans with OA. This included both focus groups and individual 
interviews, where patients provided us with feedback on the program.  Participants expressed a high degree of 
satisfaction with and appreciation for the program, which corroborated the improvements in pain- related 
outcomes described above.  This very positive response by [CONTACT_295319][INVESTIGATOR_295272] a larger study to build the evidence base for this program 
among African Americans with OA .  The following are example c omments from pi[INVESTIGATOR_172165]:  
“The program has given me so many tools in order to actually deal with the arthritis pain…. It’s a lot of tools 
that they have given me, you know, the pleasant thoughts and the mini relaxation and then the relaxation that 
you know you do the whole full body one. There’s so many things that you can do that I have done and I’m 
beginning to do to deal with the pain, so the program has been a tremendous help.”  
“You know it makes my day, because if I get into a situation where something difficult because I’m having 
the pain then I can apply those skills.”  
“Well, before the study…I was kind of locked in to the idea that eventually I was going to have to have the 
knee replacement.  But once the study came in to play, I realized that I can cope with this and up until there 
really was an alternative.”   “And I think that the program probably, I’m sixty -two years old, would have probably 
put me at a place that I may never get the operation now, never.”  
“Before the program I really didn’t have the right tools in order to get rid of the pain. Now, more times than 
not, I actually do have tools in order to be able to make the pain decrease without having to use medication 
and it actually works out for a lot more than just the pain. It actually helps with stress, and I would think that in 
certain situations the stress helps to actually cause a lot of the pain.”  
In qualitative interviews following the pi[INVESTIGATOR_52393], participants noted that one unexpected result of the 
program was that  they were able to decrease their reliance on pain medications.  Based on this we have 
added assessments of pain medication use to this study. One example comment was:  
“The program has helped tremendously because it helps to be able to cope with pain, it helps cope with a lot of 
other stuff and for some reason, for me, it allowed me to get to a point where I didn’t have to take quite as 
much meds to control the pain because it allowed me to use my mind to do what I needed to get done as 
opposed to medicati on, which was a crutch for me because I hate taking medicine. I’d much rather be able to 
do it with my mind than to do it with meds.”   
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_295273]- based delivery.  
They liked t he “opportunity to be able relax in the comfort of my house,” and “ not having to take off work to go 
driving .”  Therefore the telephone- based delivery has been retained for this larger study.  
Additional Stakeholder  Engagement in Planning the Study .  We ha ve been meeting with Patient 
Stakeholders from our enrollment sites, as well as supportive partners (when available), who have  reviewed 
aspects of the project  including the research questions,  outcomes, recruitment plans, intervention content, and 
dissemin ation plans .  Examples of s pecific ways in which Patient Stakeholders influenced the study plan 
include the addition of a C ommunication module to the pain CST program (described above) and a ddition of a 
global health -related quality of life measure  as a pa tient-centered outcome .  We have also obtained input on 
the study design and methods from clinical  and public health stakeholders .  These individuals will be 
particularly instrumental in downstream implementation processes and have already helped the study  team to 
focus on these issues and potential barriers .  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 19 G.2.0  Conducting the Study.   
Throughout the study, we will hold monthly meetings (or email updates as appropriate) with the 
Stakeholder Panel.  Some stakeholders may participate via telephone becaus e of their geographic location.  
These meetings will include updates on study progress, requests for input from the Panel on any current study 
issues or questions, and an opportunity for general discussion and questions from the Panel. We have 
developed pr ogress report templates in our prior and ongoing clinical trials, which will be used to provide study 
update and monitoring information to the Panel.  These include summaries of key events and activities, a flow 
chart (e.g., CONSORT diagram) describing study enrollment, and description of participant characteristics that 
will allow Panel members to evaluate whether we are adequately enrolling a diverse sample (e.g., gender, age, 
religiosity, education, income). If stakeholders cannot make a meeting, [CONTACT_295326] en will communicate with them 
via email and / or phone to provide an update and get their input on any issues discussed.  
  The start -up period will be a particularly important and active time for the Stakeholder Panel, as we will be 
asking for their input  on various study materials and logistics prior to enrolling patients. We will use processes 
for this engagement that we have found to be successful in our current PCORI -funded  project. Specifically, we 
will disseminate materials for review prior to a mont hly meeting / call.  Panel members will be asked to review 
the materials and provide feedback to [CONTACT_54350] and the study team before and / or during the meeting.  We 
have found that disseminating these materials ahead of time facilitates meaningful and fruitful group discussion 
during the meeting.  Examples of materials / processes we will ask the Stakeholder Panel to review during the 
start-up period are: Final measurement battery , CST program scripts , CST program handouts , Recruitment 
materials , and Recruitment processes.  
We will also meet individually with our Patient Stakeholders during the start -up period, so that we may 
spend focused time in obtaining their input on recruitment materials (introductory letter, telephone screening 
script) and consent lan guage.  [CONTACT_54350] will have individual conversations with all Stakeholder Panel members 
throughout the study, to discuss whether they perceive they are meaningfully involved in the project and that 
their contributions are valued and incorporated. We plan f or these discussions to occur after 6 -months, 12-
months, and annually thereafter.  However, if discussions indicate a need for more frequent check -ins or other 
actions, we will modify this plan accordingly.  
G.3.0  Disseminating the Study Results  
A detailed description of our dissemination plans is described in the Dissemination and Implementation 
Potential section.  Here we provide a summary of Stakeholder Panel involvement in these activities:  
• The study team will create Patient Testimonial Videos; these w ill be brief interviews with patients who 
participated in the CST program, describing their experiences and perceived benefits. These will be used in 
multiple dissemination activities, including posting on websites and use in live presentations.  
• Patient S takeholders will provide recommendations for venues for presenting study results in the community 
(e.g., senior centers, other organizations in which they are active –  particularly those that serve a high 
proportion of older African Americans, and local media or print resources).   
• Patient Stakeholders will review dissemination materials, particularly those geared toward lay distribution.  
• Public Health Leaders (e.g., Arthritis Foundation, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) will facilitate 
broad dis semination of study findings and deliverables through their organizations’ newsletters, other 
publications, and websites.  
• Clinician  Stakeholder Panel Members will  help to organize presentation of study results to other health care 
providers (e.g., during Grand Rounds and Clinic / Service Team meetings).   
• All Stakeholder Panel members will be invited to co- author manuscripts.  
G.4.[ADDRESS_359939] expertise and 
experience in areas that differ from other team members. The over -arching principle of our study team is 
that all members’ contributions are of equal value.   When the team is considering questions related to the 
study, all members will have opportunity to voice their opi[INVESTIGATOR_6153] .  Since participation on a research team may 
will be new for some Patient Stakeholders, we will make special effort to ensure these individuals are able to 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359940] is a module developed by [CONTACT_295320], which focuses on guiding principles, privacy and participant rights.  The 
second is another module developed locally (Duke University Medical Cent er and Durham VA Medical Center) 
that provides an overview of clinical trial research methods. Both of these modules consist of sets of power 
point slides, in easy -to-read terms, which will be given to Stakeholder Panel members as handouts  following 
in-person training .  The third resource is a lengthier document, “Understanding Clinical Trial Design: A Tutorial 
for Research Advocates,” developed by [CONTACT_295321].  Because sections of this document 
are above “lay language,” we will summarize key points from this document into a slide set that will 
complement the other two resources described above.  We also recognize that best practices and resources 
for Stakeholder training are emerging, and we will incorporate new materials into this training as they become 
available.  
We will also  provide training to all study team members regarding meaningf ul Stakeholder Engagement.  
All members will become familiar with PCORI’s Engagement Rubric, to provide a basic understanding of 
expectations and roles of  Stakeholders.  Study team members will also watch the PCORI webinar on 
“Promising Practices of Meaningful Engagement in the Conduct of Research” and the archived Institute of 
Medicine video, “Partnering with Patients to Drive Shared Decisions, Better Value and Care Improvement. ”  
We realize that best practices for Stakeholder Engagement are emerging, and we will also utilize any other 
locally and nationally available training resources that become available by [CONTACT_295322].   
Partnership  
Stakeholder Panel members will be paid $100 for participation in each monthly meeting .  This will help to 
compensate Panel members for their time and effort.  (Employees of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention and the Department of Veterans Affairs cannot be c ompensated financially for these activities, but 
these Stakeholders have confirmed they are able to participate based on their normal work responsibilities, per 
Letters of Support).  Panel members have agreed that monthly meetings are a reasonable time com mitment, 
as noted in their Letters of Support.  In the process of planning monthly meetings, we will poll Panel members 
for their times of availability . As we have done in the past, we will also meet individually, in person, with Patient 
Stakeholders to foster those relationships and allow concentrated time to receive their feedback on aspects of 
the study; we will meet at locations convenient to and selected by [CONTACT_295300].   
Trust, Transparency, and Honesty  
All study team members will be asked to  sign document committing themselves to equal value among 
study team member perspectives and a framework for resolving differing opi[INVESTIGATOR_6153]. This document will also 
describe roles of the study team members and general principles of mutual respect.  We will f oster 
transparency through regular (monthly) reporting of study progress and opportunities for all team members to 
ask questions and provide input on study processes.  At the completion of the study, we will prepare an 
overview of findings; this will be mailed to all study participants (after review by [CONTACT_295300]).  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 21  
 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 [ADDRESS_359941] Practice & Research Clinical 
Rheumatology. 2014;28:5- 15. 
2. Lawrence R C, Felson DT, Helmick CG, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other 
rheumatic conditions in the [LOCATION_002]:  Part II. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2008;58(1):26- 35. 
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Projected state- specific incre ases in self -reported doctor -
diagnosed arthritis and arthritis -attributable activity limitations --[LOCATION_002], 2005 -2030. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report. 2007;56(17):423- 425. 
4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence and most commo n causes of disability among 
adults --[LOCATION_002], 2005. MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report. May 1 2009;58(16):421- 426. 
5. Guccione AA, Felson DT, Anderson JJ, et al. The effects of specific medical conditions on the 
functional limitations of eld ers in the Framingham Study. American Journal of Public Health. 
1997;84:351 -358. 
6. Dominick KL, Ahern FM, Gold CH, Heller DA. Health -related quality of life and health service utilization 
among older adults with osteoarthritis. Arthritis Care and Research . 2004;51:326- 331. 
7. Hawker GA, French MR, Waugh EJ, Gignac MA, Cheung C, Murray BJ. The multidimensionality of 
sleep quality and its relationship to fatigue in older adults with painful osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis and 
cartilage / OARS, Osteoarthritis Research Society. Nov 2010;18(11):1365 -1371.  
8. Furner SE, Hootman JM, Helmick CG, Bolen J, Zack MM. Health- related quality of life of US adults with 
arthritis: analysis of data from the behavioral risk factor surveillance system, 2003, 2005, and 2007. 
Arthritis Care and Research. 2011;63(6):788- 799. 
9. Murphy LB, Sacks JJ, Brady TJ, Hootman JM, Chapman DP. Anxiety and depression among US adults 
with arthritis: prevalence and correlates. Arthritis care & research. Jul 2012;64(7):968 -976. 
10. Dillon CF, Rasc h EK, Gu Q, Hirsch R. Prevalence of knee osteoarthritis in the [LOCATION_002]: arthritis 
data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1991- 1994. The Journal of 
rheumatology. 2006 33:2271- 2279.  
11. Jordan JM, Helmick CG, Renner JB, et  al. Prevalence of knee symptoms and radiographic and 
symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in African Americans and Caucasians: the Johnston County 
Osteoarthritis Project. The Journal of rheumatology. 2007;31(4):[ADDRESS_359942] 
2011;63(10):2974 -2982.  
13. Allen KD. Racial and ethnic disparities in osteoarthritis phenotypes. Curren t opi[INVESTIGATOR_214949]. 
2010;22(5):528 -532. 
14. Cruz -Almeida Y, Sibille KT, Goodin BR, et al. Racial and ethnic differences in older adults with knee 
osteoarthritis. Arthritis & Rheumatology. 2014;66(7):1800 -1810.  
15. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Racial/ethnic differences in the prevalence and impact of 
doctor -diagnosed arthritis -  [LOCATION_002], 2002. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 2005;54:119-
123. 
16. Theis KA, Murphy L, Hootman JM, Wilkie R. Social participation restriction amon g U.S. adults with 
arthritis: A population- based study using the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and 
Health (ICF). Arthritis care & research. Feb 11 2013.  
17. Allen KD, Helmick CG, Schwartz TA, DeVellis B, Renner JB, Jordan JM. Rac ial differences in self -
reported pain and function among individuals with radiographic hip and knee osteoarthritis: The 
Johnston County Osteoarthritis Project. Osteoarthritis & Cartilage. 2009;17(9):1132- 1136.  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 23 18. Groeneveld PW, Kwoh CK, Mor MK, et al. Rac ial differences in expectations of joint replacement 
surgery outcomes. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 2008;59(5):730- 737. 
19. Allen KD, Bosworth HB, Brock DS, et al. Patient and Provider Interventions for Managing Osteoarthritis 
in Primary Care: Protocols for Two Randomized Controlled Trials. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. Apr 24 
2012;13(1):60.  
20. Angst F, Aeschlimann A, Stucki G. Smallest detectable and minimal clinically important differences of 
rehabilitation intervention with their implications for required sample sizes using WOMAC and SF- 36 
quality of life measurement instruments in patients with osteoarthritis of the lower extremities. Arthritis 
and rheumatism. Aug 2001;45(4):384 -391. 
21. IOM (Institute of Medicine). Initial National Pi[INVESTIGATOR_295274]. 
Washington DC: The National Academies Press;2009.  
22. Green CR, Anderson KO, Baker TA, et al. The unequal burden of pain: confronting racial and ethnic 
disparities in pain. Pain medicine. 2003;4(3):277 -294. 
23. Campbell LC, Robinson K,  Meghani SH, Vallerand A, Schatman M, Sonty N. Challenges and 
opportunities in pain management disparities research: implications for clinical practice, advocacy, and 
policy. The journal of pain : official journal of the American Pain Society. Jul 2012;13( 7):611 -619. 
24. Giordano J, Schatman ME. An ethical analysis of crisis in chronic pain care: facts, issues and problems 
in pain medicine; Part I. Pain Physician. Jul -Aug 2008;11(4):483 -490. 
25. Ehde DM, Dillworth TM, Turner JA. Cognitive- Behavioral Therapy  for Individuals with Chronic Pain: 
Effiacy, Innovations and Directions for Research. American Psychologist. 2014;69(2):153 -166. 
26. Sullivan MJL, Thorn B, Haythornthwaite JA, et al. Theoretical perspectives on the relation between 
catastrophizing and pain. Clinical Journal of Pain. 2001;17(1):52 -64. 
27. Chibnall JT, Tait RC. Long -term adjustment to work -related low back pain: associations with socio-
demographics, claim processes, and post -settlement adjustment. Pain medicine. Nov 2009;10(8):1378-
1388.  
28. Edwards RR, Moric M, Husfeldt B, Buvanendran A, Ivankovich O. Ethnic similarities and differences in 
the chronic pain experience: a comparison of african american, Hispanic, and white patients. Pain 
medicine. Jan-Feb 2005;6(1):88- 98. 
29. Ruehlman LS, Karol y P, Newton C. Comparing the experiential and psychosocial dimensions of chronic 
pain in african americans and Caucasians: findings from a national community sample. Pain medicine. 
Jan-Feb 2005;6(1):49 -60. 
30. Tan G, Jensen MP, Thornby J, Anderson KO. Ethnicity, control appraisal, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and adjustment to 
chronic pain among black and white Americans. Pain medicine. 2005;6(1):18- 28. 
31. Allen KD, Bosworth HB, Coffman CJ, et al. Racial differences in pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295275]. Paper presented at: Annual Meeting of the American College of 
Rheumatology2012; Washington, DC.  
32. Jones AC, Kwoh CK, Groeneveld PW, Mor M, Geng M, Ibrahim SA. Investigating racial differences in 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_171843]. Journal of Cross Cultural Gerontology. 2008;23:339 -347. 
33. Allen KD, Golightly YM, Olsen MK. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_295276]: a 
daily diary analysis. Journal of Clinical Rheumatology. 2006;12(3):[ADDRESS_359943] JH, Bosworth HB. Racial differences in 
osteoarthritis pain and function: potential explanatory factors. Osteoarthritis & Cartilage. 2010;18:160-
167. 
35. Rapp SR, Rejeski WJ, Miller ME. Physical function among older adults wit h knee pain: the role of pain 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]. Arthritis care & research. 2000;13:270- 279. 
36. Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, Pells JJ, et al. Pain catastarophizing and pain- related fear in osteoarthritis 
patients: relationships to pain and disability. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 
2009;37(5):863 -872. 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 24 37. Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, Carson JW, Pells JJ, Lacaille L. Pain catastrophizing in borderline morbidly 
obese and morbidly obese individuals with osteoarthritic knee pain. Pain Research and Management. 
2008;13(5): 401-406. 
38. Allen KD, Coffman CJ, Golightly YM, Stechuchak KM, Keefe FJ. Daily pain variations among patients 
with hand, hip, and knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis & Cartilage. 2009;17(10):1275 -1282.  
39. Keefe FJ, Caldwell D, Williams DA, et al. Pain co pi[INVESTIGATOR_295277]- II:  Follow -Up results. Behavior Therapy. 1990;21(4):435 -447. 
40. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS. Cognitive behavioral control of arthritis pain. Advances in Rheumatology. 
1997;81(1):277 -290. 
41. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Baucom D, et al. Spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_295278]: long -term followup results. Arthritis Care and Research. 1999;12(2):101 -111. 
42. Keefe FJ, J.A. B, Baucom D, et al. Effects of spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_295279]: a randomized controlled study. Pain. 2004;110:539 -
549. 
43. Riddle DL, Keefe FJ, Nay WT, McKee D, Attarian DE, Jensen MP. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295280]: a quasi -
experimental study. Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation. Jun 2011;92(6):859 -865. 
44. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Williams DA, et al. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295281]: A comparative study. Behavior Therapy. 1990;21:49- 62. 
45. Sale JE, Gignac MA, Hawker G. The relationship between disease symptoms, life events, copi[INVESTIGATOR_295282], and depression among older adults with osteoarthritis. The Journal of rheumatology. 
2008;35(2):335 -342. 
46. Carson JW, Keefe FJ, Affleck G, et al. A comparison of conventional pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295283] a maintenance training component: a daily diary analy sis of short - and long -
term treatment effects. Journal of Pain. 2006;7(9):615- 625. 
47. Hurley MV, Walsh NE, Mitchell HL, et al. Clinical effectiveness of a rehabilitation program integrating 
exercise, self -management, and active copi[INVESTIGATOR_295284]: a cluster randomized 
trial. Arthritis Care and Research. 2007;57(7):1211- 1219.  
48. Emery CF, Keefe FJ, [LOCATION_009] CR, et al. Effects of a brief copi[INVESTIGATOR_295285]: a preliminary laboratory 
study of sex differences. Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 2006;31(3):262 -269. 
49. Keefe FJ, Caldwell DS, Baucom D, et al. Spouse -assisted copi[INVESTIGATOR_295281]. Arthritis Care and Research. 1996;9(4):279- 291. 
50. Dixon KE, Keefe FJ, Scipio CD, Perri LM, Abernethy AP. Psychological interventions for arthritis pain 
mangement in adults: a meta -analysis. Health Psychology. 2007;26(3):241- 250. 
51. Hastie BA, Riley JL, Fillingim RB. Ethnic differences in pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: factor structure of the copi[INVESTIGATOR_295286]- revised. Journal of Pain. 2004;5(6):304-
316. 
52. Song J, Chang RW, Dunlop D. Population impact of arthritis on disability in older adults. Arthritis & 
Rheumatism. 2006;55(2):248- 255. 
53. Hawker GA, Stewart L, French MR, et al. Understanding the pain experience in hip and knee 
osteoarthritis --an OARSI/OMERACT initiative. Osteoarthritis and cartilage / OARS, Osteoart hritis 
Research Society. Apr 2008;16(4):415 -422. 
54. Hawker GA. Experiencing painful osteoarthritis: what have we learned from listening? Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_295287]. Sep 2009;21(5):507 -512. 
55. Hall M, Migay AM, Persad T, et al. Individuals' experienc e of living with osteoarthritis of the knee and 
perceptions of total knee arthroplasty. Physiotherapy theory and practice. May-Jun 2008;24(3):167 -181. 
56. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among 
adults with diabetes - [LOCATION_002], 2005 and 2007. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 
2008;57(18):486 -489. 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 25 57. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among 
adults with heart disease -  [LOCATION_002], 2005 and 2007. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 
2009;58:165 -169. 
58. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis as a potential barrier to physical activity among 
adults with obesity --[LOCATION_002], 2007 and 2009. MMWR - Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report. 
2011;6019(614 -618).  
59. Somers TJ, Blumenthal JA, Guilak F, et al. Pain copi[INVESTIGATOR_295288]: a randomized controlled study. Pain. Jun 
2012;153(6):1199 -1209.  
60. Abbasi M, Dehghani M, Keefe FJ, Jafari H, Behtash H, Shams J. Spouse -assisted training in pain 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_295289]: A 1 -year randomized controlled trial. Eur J Pain. Jan 19 2012.  
61. Campbell LC, Keefe FJ, Scipio C, et al. Facilitating research participation and improving quality of life 
for African American prostate cancer survivors and their intimate partners: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_65452]-
based copi [INVESTIGATOR_25125]. Cancer. 2006;109 (2Suppl):414- 424. 
62. Allen KD, Oddone EZ, Coffman CJ, et al. Telephone- based self -management of osteoarthritis: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2010;153:570- 579. 
63. Sperber NR, Bosworth HB , Coffman CJ, et al. Participant evaluation of a telephone- based osteoarthritis 
self-management program, 2006- 2009. Preventing chronic disease. Mar 2012;9:E73.  
64. Allen KD, Bongiorni D, Walker TA, et al. Group physical therapy for veterans with knee osteoarthritis: 
Study design and methodology. Contemp Clin Trials. Mar 2013;34(2):296- 304. 
65. Allen KD, Sanders L, Olsen MK, et al. Effectiveness of internet and DVD decision aids for patients with 
hip and knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Research Society I nternational Meeting; 2014; Paris, [LOCATION_009].  
66. Harris KJ, Ahluwalia JS, Okuyemi KS, Turner JR, Woods MN. Addressing cultural sensitivity in a 
smoking cessation intervention: development of the Kick It at Swope project. Journal of Community 
Psychology. 2001 ;29(4):447- 458. 
67. Munoz RF, Mendelson T. Toward evidence- based interventions for diverse populations: The San 
Francisco General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_295290]. Journal of Consulting & Clinical 
Psychology. 2005;73(5):790- 799. 
68. Albright CL, P ruitt L, Castro C, Gonzales A, Woo S, King AC. Modifying physical activity in a multiethnic 
sample of low -income women: one- year results from the IMPACT (Increasing Motivation for Physical 
ACTivity) project. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. 2005;50(3):191 -200. 
69. Belle SH, Burgio L, Burns R, et al. Enhancing the quality of life of dementia caregivers from different 
ethnic or racial groups: a randomized, controlled trial. Archives of internal medicine. 2006;145:727 -738. 
70. Miranda J, Bernal G, Lau A, Kohn L,  Hwang W -C. State of the science on psychosocial interventions 
for ethnic minorities. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology. 2005;1:113 -142. 
71. Resnicow K, Braithwaite RL, Dilorio C, Glanz K. Applying theory to culturally diverse and unique 
populations. In: Glanz K, Rimer BK, Viswanath K, eds. Health Behavior and Health Education: Theory, 
Research, and Practice, 3rd Edition. San Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass; 2002.  
72. Cochran S, Mays V. Applying social psychological models to predicting HIV -related sexual ris k behviors 
among African Americans. Journal of Black Psychology. 1993;19:142 -154. 
73. Melzack R, Wall PD. Pain mechanisms: a new theory. Science. 1965;150(3699):971 -979. 
74. Melzack R. Evolution of the Neuromatix Theory of Pain.  The Prithvi Raj Lecture: p resented at the Third 
World Congress of the World Institute of Pain, Barcelona 2004. Pain Practice. 2005;5(2):85- 94. 
75. Keefe FJ, Somers TJ, Martire LM. Psychologic interventions and lifestyle modifications for arthritis pain. 
Rheumatic diseases clinics of North America. 2008;34:351 -368. 
76. Beck AT, Rush AJ, Shaw BF, Emery G. Cognitive Therapy and Depression.  [LOCATION_001]: The Guilford 
Press; 1979.  
77. D.C. T, Meichenbaum D, Genest M. Pain and Behavioral Medicine: A Cognitive- Behavioral Perspective.  
[LOCATION_001]:  Guilford; 1983.  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 26 78. Surwit RS. Progressive Relaxation Training Manual. Duke University Medical Center1979.  
79. McCaul D, Malot JM. Distraction and copi[INVESTIGATOR_54241]. Psychological Bulletin. 1984;95:516 -533. 
80. Keefe FJ. Behavior assessment and treatment o f chronic pain:  Current status and future directions. 
Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology. 1982;1(50):896 -911. 
81. Lewinsohn PM. The behavioral study and treatment of depression In: Hersen M, Eisler RM, Miller PM, 
eds. Progress in Behavior Modific ation: Vol 1. [LOCATION_001]: Academic Press; 1975:[ADDRESS_359944]. 2013;14:297.  
83. Perruccio AV, Katz JN, Losina E. Health burden in chronic disease: multimorbidity is assocaited with 
self-rated health more than medical comorbidity alone. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_295291]. 
2012;65(1):100 -106. 
84. Zullig LL, Bosworth HB, Jeffreys AS, et al. The association of comorbid conditions with patient -reported 
outcomes in Veterans with hip and knee osteoarthritis. Clinical rheumatology. 2014;Epub ahead of print.  
85. Hochberg MC, Altman RD, April KT, et al. American College of Rheumatology 2012 recommenda tions 
for the use of non -pharmacologic and pharmacologic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17969], hip and 
knee. Arthritis Care and Research. 2012;64(4):465- 474. 
86. McAlindon TE, Bannuru RR, Sullivan MC, et al. OARSI guidelines for the non- surgical managem ent of 
knee osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis and cartilage / OARS, Osteoarthritis Research Society. Mar 
2014;22(3):363 -388. 
87. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, Wyrwich KW, et al. Interpreting the clinical importance of treatment outcomes in 
chronic pain clinical trials : IMMPACT recommendations. The journal of pain : official journal of the 
American Pain Society. Feb 2008;9(2):105- 121. 
88. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study of WOMAC:  A health 
status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcomes to antirheumatic drug 
therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. The Journal of rheumatology. 1988;15:1833-
1840.  
89. Somers TJ, Keefe FJ, Godiwala N, Hoyler GH. Psychosocial factors and the pain experience of 
osteoarthritis patients: new findings and new directions. Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_214949]. 
2009;21(5):501 -506. 
90. Kroenke K, Strine TW, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Berry JT, Mokdad AH. The PHQ -8 as a measure of 
current depression in the general population. Journal of affective disorders. 2009;114(1- 3):163 -173. 
91. Guy W. ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology (DHEW Publication No. ADM 76- 338). 
Washington: Government Printing Office;1976.  
92. Rosenstiel AK, Keefe FJ. The use of copi[INVESTIGATOR_295292]:  Relationship 
of patient characteristics and current adjustment. Pain. 1983;17:33- 44. 
93. Lorig K, Chastain RL, Ung E, Shoor S, Holman HR. Development and evaluation of a scale to measure 
perceived self -efficacy in  people with arthritis. Arthritis and rheumatism. 1989;32(1):37 -44. 
94. Sharma L, Cahue S, Song J, Hayes K, Pai YC, Dunlop D. Physical functioning over three years in knee 
osteoarthritis: role of psychosocial, local mechanical, and neuromuscular factors. A rthritis & 
Rheumatism. 2003;48(12):3359 -3370.  
95. Ware J, Jr., Kosinski M, Keller SD. A 12 -Item Short -Form Health Survey: construction of scales and 
preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical care. Mar 1996;34(3):220- 233. 
96. Amtmann D, Cook KF, Jensen MP, et al. Development of a PROMIS item bank to measure pain 
interference. Pain. Jul 2010;150(1):173 -182. 
97. Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Wellington C, DeWilliams A. Pain communication in the context of osteoarthritis: 
patient and partner self -efficacy f or pain communication and holding back from discussion of pain and 
arthritis -related outcomes. Clinical Journal of Pain. 2008;24(8):662 -668. 
98. Paxton AE, Strycker LA, Toobert DJ, Ammerman AS, Glasgow RE. Starting the conversation 
performance of a brief d ietary assessment and intervention tool for health professionals. American 
journal of preventive medicine. Jan 2011;40(1):67- 71. 
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 27 99. Sullivan MJL, Bishop SR, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331] J. The Pain Catastrophizing Scale: development and validation. 
Psychological Assessment. 1995;7:524- 532. 
100. Sangha O, Stucki G, Liang MH, Fossel AH, Katz JN. The self -administered comorbidity questionnaire: 
a new method to assess comorbidity for clinical and health services research. Arthritis & Rheumatism. 
2003;49(2):156 -163. 
101. Koenig HG, B ussing A. The Duke University Religion Index (DUREL): a five- item measure for use in 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_9037]. Religions. 2010;1:78 -85. 
102. Washburn RA, Ficker JL. Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE): the relationship with activity 
measured by a portable accelerometer. J Sports Med Phys Fitness. Dec 1999;39(4):336 -340. 
103. ICH E9 Expert Working Group. ICH harmonised tripartite guideline - Statistical principles for clinical 
trials. Statistics in medicine. 1999;18:[ADDRESS_359945]. Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Hoboken, NJ: Wiley &Sons; 2006.  
105. Collins LM, Schafer JL, Kam CM. A comparison of inclusive and restrictive strategies in modern 
missing data procedures. Psychol Methods. Dec 2001;6(4):330 -351. 
106. Panel on Handling M issing Data in Clinical Trials - National Research Council. The Prevention and 
Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials.  Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2010.  
107. Molenberghs G, Kenward M. Missing Data in Clinical Studies.  Sussex, England: J ohn Wiley and Sons; 
2007.  
108. O'Kelly M, Ratitch B. Clincial Trials with Missing Data.  John Wiley & Sons; 2014.  
109. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied longitudinal analysis.  Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley -Interscience; 
2004.  
110. CPMP. Points to consider on adjustmnet for baseline covariates. Statistics in medicine. 2004;23:701-
709. 
111. Hayward RA, Krumholz HM, Zulman DM, Timbie JW, Vijan S. Optimizing statin treatment for primary 
prevention of coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. Jan 19 2010;152(2):[ADDRESS_359946] RA, Griffith JL, et al. An independently derived and validated predictive model for 
selecting patients with myocardial infarction who are likely to benefit from tissue plasminogen activator 
compared with streptokinase. The Americ an journal of medicine. Aug 1 2002;113(2):104 -111. 
113. Kiernan M, Kraemer HC, Winkleby [CONTACT_78729], King AC, Taylor CB. Do logistic regression and signal detection 
identify different subgroups at risk? Implications for the design of tailored interventions. Psychol  
Methods. Mar 2001;6(1):35- 48. 
114. Owens EB, Hinshaw SP, Kraemer HC, et al. Which treatment for whom for ADHD? Moderators of 
treatment response in the MTA. J Consult Clin Psychol. Jun 2003;71(3):540- 552. 
115. Singer JD, Willett JB. Applied Longitudinal Data Analysis:  Modeling Change and Event Occurrence.  
[LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 2003.  
116. James KE, White RF, Kraemer HC. Repeated split sample validation to assess logistic regression and 
recursive partitioning: an application to the prediction of  cognitive impairment. Statistics in medicine. 
Oct 15 2005;24(19):3019 -3035.  
117. Borm GF, Fransen J, Lemmens W. A simple sample size formula for analysis of covariance in 
randomized clinical trials. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2007;60(12):1234- 1238.  
118. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence of self -reported arthritis or chronic joint 
symptoms among adults -- [LOCATION_002], 2001. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 
2002;51(42):[ADDRESS_359947], race, and research. Archives of internal medicine. 
Nov 25 2002;162(21):2458- 2463.  
 
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR  (LAST, FIRST, MIDDLE):  ALLEN, KELLI DOMINICK  
 
 
PCORI Research Plan Template                                                                                                                                                 
 28  
 