Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 1 of 54UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER MEDICAL CENTER
WILMOT CANCER INSTITUTE
A mobile health exercise intervention for older patients with myeloid neoplasms
October 22, 2021
Study Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_24183] (Melissa) Loh, MBBCh BAO
Division of Hematology/Oncology
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161278], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_388]
Study Sub-Investigators: Supriya G. Mohile, MD, MS
Division of Hematology/Oncology
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161279], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_389]
Karen Mustian, PhD, MPH
Department of Surgery
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161280], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_2925]
Michelle Janelsins, PhD
Department of Surgery
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161281], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_2926] 
Martha Susiarjo, PhD
Department of Environmental medicine
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
[ADDRESS_161282], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_2927]  
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 2 of 54Study Personnel: Terri Lloyd 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161283], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Phone: ([PHONE_2128]/ Fax: ([PHONE_3169]
Email: [EMAIL_390]
Chandrika Sanapala
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161284], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Phone: ([PHONE_3170]/ Fax: ([PHONE_3169]
Email: [EMAIL_2928]
Biostatistician: Eva Culakova, PhD
Department of Surgery
University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center 
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161285], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Email: [EMAIL_2929]
Exercise Physiologist: Michelle Porto
James P Wilmot Cancer Center 
[ADDRESS_161286], Box 704 
[COMPANY_002]ster, NY [ZIP_CODE]
Phone: ([PHONE_2128]/ Fax: ([PHONE_3169]
Email: [EMAIL_2930]
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 3 of 54Study Schema (Aim 2)

Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 4 of 54TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sections Page
Study Schema…………………………………………………………………..3
1.0. Background………………………………………………………………..5
2.0. Aim and Hypothesis………………………………………………..……...[ADDRESS_161287] Design and Population………………..…………………………..11
4.0. Recruitment and Consent…………………………….…………………....13
5.0. Registration……….……………………………………………………….15
6.0. Intervention………………………………………………………………..16
7.0. Treatment Protocol………………………………………………………...22
8.0. Data Handling and Statistical Consideration……………………………...31
9.0. Data Management…………………………………………………………34
10.0. Risks/Benefits……………………………………………........................37
11.0. Data Safety and Monitoring……………………………………………...38
12.0. References………………………………………………………………..40
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 5 of 541.0. Background
1.1. Myeloid neoplasms are diseases of aging
MN are a group of diseases that include acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic 
syndrome (MDS), MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) overlap, chronic 
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and atypi[INVESTIGATOR_141940] (aCML).1 
Over 60% of MN are diagnosed in adults aged ≥60 years.2,3 For fit older patients with 
AML (i.e., without significant comorbidities or disabilities), the standard first-line 
treatment consists of intensive inpatient chemotherapy. Intensive chemotherapy provides 
the best chance for durable remission, but it is associated with a high treatment-related 
mortality (60-day mortality: 15-20%).4,5 Intensive therapy is utilized in <1% of older 
patients with AML seen in the community oncology setting, due to various reasons such 
as distance to tertiary centers and need for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].[ADDRESS_161288] decade, low-
intensity outpatient treatments with reduced treatment-related mortality rates, such as 
hypomethylating agents (HMA), have become available.7–[ADDRESS_161289] 
permitted more older patients with AML, including those with comorbidities and 
disabilities, to receive leukemia-directed therapy.10 Furthermore, given the recent FDA 
approval of HMA combination therapy for AML (e.g., HMA and venetoclax), which has 
similar or better efficacy than intensive therapy,[ADDRESS_161290] of 
care for older patients with MN. HMA are typi[INVESTIGATOR_141941], 
death, or stem cell transplant.
1.2. Even with HMA, a high percentage of older patients with MN experience physical 
function decline and symptoms (e.g., fatigue, mood disturbances).
In prior studies, up to 98% of older patients with MN receiving intensive chemotherapy 
experience physical function decline and symptoms.13–[ADDRESS_161291] also 
shown that 73% of older patients with MN receiving HMA had impairments in physical 
function and 33% reported mood disturbances.16,17 Physical function decline and 
symptoms can lead to reduced quality of life (QoL), treatment interruptions, and shorter 
survival.13,18–22 Therefore, it is imperative to develop interventions for older patients 
receiving HMA that prevent physical function decline and improve symptoms so that 
they can maintain their QoL and continue to receive cancer treatments.
1.3. Older patients with MN can exercise and may derive benefits from exercise. 
Exercise may prevent physical function decline and improve symptoms.23–26 Older adults 
can derive benefits from exercise even if they only maintain or minimally improve 
physical activity from baseline.27 A previous systematic review has shown that exercise is 
safe in frail older adults.28 Three pi[INVESTIGATOR_141942] 50 older patients with 
MN (only one receiving HMA was included) and showed that they can exercise and that 
it was safe. In addition, exercise improved physical function, fatigue, mood disturbances, 
and QoL.29–31 In our own pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732], older patients with MN receiving HMA reported 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161292] an average of 2k-3k steps/day, which is comparable to prior exercise 
studies in older patients with solid tumors, suggesting that they have similar exercise 
capacity. Overall, our pi[INVESTIGATOR_141943], but exercise interventions tailored to this 
population are limited.32
1.4. Exercise for Cancer Patients (EXCAP): 
[CONTACT_142003] (co-investigators) developed EXCAP, an individually tailored, low- to 
moderate-intensity, home-based walking and progressive resistance exercise program 
designed for patients with cancer and delivered by [CONTACT_141968]. By [CONTACT_8345], 
EXCAP is tailored to the physical capacity of patients with cancer. Our data from >300 
older patients undergoing active cancer treatments from 4 phase 2/3 studies demonstrated 
that they were able to perform the walking (average steps walked/day=4k-11k at post-
intervention) and resistance exercises (15-22 min/day, 2-4 days/week).23,27,33,34 EXCAP 
also improved physical function, fatigue, and mood in patients with solid tumors.35–[ADDRESS_161293] shown that EXCAP improved physical function 
(measured using the Short Physical Performance Battery, SPPB), mood, and QoL, but 
effect sizes were small (Cohen’s d=0.10-0.30).23,27,38 Older patients had lower exercise 
adherence than their younger counterparts (average steps walked/day=4k vs. 5k at post-
intervention).
1.5. The use of a mobile health (mHealth) application (app) may improve exercise 
adherence in older patients with MN.
Exercise adherence can be a challenge in older patients with MN due to comorbidities, 
symptoms, lack of exercise self-efficacy, and limited access to exercise oncology 
professionals and facilities.39–42 mHealth has the potential to improve exercise adherence 
by [CONTACT_141969]-efficacy and by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_141944].43,44 In our systematic review of studies in the cancer population, however, we found 
that older patients with MN are rarely included in mHealth exercise studies.43
1.6. PointClick Care Mobile App:
We have worked with a mHealth company (PointClickCare, formerly TouchStream) to 
upgrade an app (TouchStream) for monitoring older patients (12 had MN) receiving 
cancer treatment.[ADDRESS_161294] that the app is usable and feasible (Table 1). I 
conducted interviews with 16 patients to elicit barriers and facilitators for adaptation of 
the app and revision of the study protocol. Patients indicated their willingness to exercise 
and preferred a structured exercise program in combination with the app over physicians’ 
recommendations to exercise without a structured program and app.
1.7. Several mechanisms are associated with physical function decline, fatigue, and mood 
disturbances. 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 7 of 54Potential mechanisms include inflammatory dysregulation, neuroimmunological changes, 
energy imbalance, and skeletal muscle changes (e.g., mitochondrial dysfunction, decline 
in neural function, reduced satellite cell function, defects in calcium homeostasis);45,[ADDRESS_161295] virtually every biological system (the most relevant are the 
muscular, cardiovascular, and cerebrovascular systems).45 
1.8. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α and related inflammatory cytokines are associated 
with physical function decline, fatigue, mood disturbances, and worsening QoL in older 
patients with MN. 
TNFα is involved in early inflammatory responses and is regarded as the “master 
regulator” of inflammation.51,52 Preclinical studies demonstrate that cancer and 
chemotherapy increase serum TNFα and related cytokine levels [e.g., interleukin-1β (IL-
1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8)].53–55,56(p),57 Activation of TNFα and related 
cytokine pathways leads to physical function decline, fatigue, and mood disturbances,58–
[ADDRESS_161296] shown that higher baseline serum TNFα levels were associated with shorter 
survival. In patients with MN, our group and others also found that increased serum 
TNFα, soluble TNF receptor 1 (sTNFR1), and related cytokine levels were associated 
with physical function decline, fatigue, mood disturbances, and worsening QoL.64–[ADDRESS_161297] shown that exercise increases TNFα gene promoter methylation and 
decreases TNFα  gene and protein expression.73–[ADDRESS_161298] as our translational focus because 1) our 
preliminary data showed that higher serum TNFα and soluble TNF receptor 1 levels were 
associated with physical function decline, mood disturbances, and shorter survival;64 2) 
exercise increases TNFα gene promoter methylation and decreases TNFα gene and 
protein expression;73–76 3) it will allow us to expand our preliminary data and explore 
other TNFα related cytokine pathways (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8); and 4) we have the 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 8 of 54expertise to reliably measure, analyze, and interpret TNFα gene promoter methylation 
and TNFα gene and protein expression in a clinical trial.77 While we focus on older 
patients with MN, this population serves as a model for studying an individually tailored 
mHealth exercise intervention among vulnerable older patients receiving prolonged 
cancer treatments to prevent physical function decline and improve symptoms. Findings 
from our studies will inform research and practice for a large proportion of older patients 
who are currently understudied in behavioral intervention trials. This work is also highly 
novel and may lay the foundation for the use of biomarkers in the design of behavioral 
interventions to improve outcomes in older patients with cancer. 
Summary of knowledge/Proposed Solution: 
No mHealth exercise intervention is currently available for older patients with MN 
receiving outpatient chemotherapy, specifically HMA. TNFα and related cytokines are 
associated with physical function decline, fatigue, and mood disturbances. Based on our 
expertise and prior studies, we propose to integrate the content of EXCAP into the 
PointClick Care app to enhance older patients’ adherence to exercise and to understand 
exercise-induced changes in physical function, fatigue, mood, QoL, and TNFα  and 
related cytokine pathways.
The mobile app and EXCAP have been studied individually in previous studies.16,23,33,34,78 
In this study, we plan to combine them for older patients with MN receiving outpatient 
chemotherapy including HMA.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 9 of 542.0. Aim and Hypothesis
2.1. Primary Aim
To develop a mobile app delivery platform integrating EXCAP and adapt its content, 
format, and delivery for older patients with MN receiving HMA using feedback from 
15 patients.
2.2. Secondary Aim
To assess the feasibility of a mobile health exercise intervention (GO-EXCAP Mobile 
App) over 8± 4 weeks in a single-arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_9985] 25 patients with myeloid 
neoplasms receiving outpatient chemotherapy (including HMA).
2.3. Exploratory Aim
To examine relationships among TNFα and related cytokine gene promoter 
methylation and gene and protein expression.
2.2.1. Hypothesis
The GO-EXCAP Mobile App will be feasible in older patients with myeloid neoplasms 
receiving outpatient chemotherapy.
2.2.1. Feasibility metrics
The feasibility of the GO-EXCAP Mobile App will be evaluated based on the 
following: 
a) Percentage of patients wearing the activity tracker and entering resistance exercise 
data into the mobile app.
b) Percentage of patients performing both walking and resistance exercises during the 
study period days. 
c) Recruitment rates (percentage of patients who are approached and agree to enroll).
d) Retention rates (percentage of patients who are enrolled and complete post-
intervention assessments).
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 10  of 543.0. Study Design and Population
3.1. Study Settings 
Wilmot Cancer Institute (WCI), University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center (including WCI-
affiliated community practices such as Interlakes Oncology, Dansville, Pluta, Olean, 
Wellsville)
3.2. Study Type
Aim 1: Qualitative study
Aim 2: Single-arm pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]
3.3. Study Population
Aim 1: We will obtain feedback from 15 older patients receiving HMA. Our planned 
sample size (N=15) will allow us to achieve thematic saturation.79,80 To obtain 15 
patients, we will consent up to 20 patients to account for screen fail or withdrawal.
Aim 2: We will recruit 25 older patients receiving outpatient chemotherapy (see Section 
8.2.2 for sample size justification). To obtain 25 patients, we will consent up to 45 
patients to account for screen fail or withdrawal.
3.4. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Inclusion criteria 
Age ≥60 years (conventional definition of older age in clinical trials of MN)81–83
Have a diagnosis of MN
Receiving outpatient chemotherapy (e.g., HMA)
English speaking
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0-2
No medical contraindications for exercise per oncologist
Able to walk 4 meters as part of Short Physical Performance Battery measured 
walk (with or without assistive device)
Able to provide informed consent
Exclusion criteria 
Platelet count of 10,[ADDRESS_161299] recent blood draw (due 
to risk of spontaneous bleeding) prior to transfusion (i.e., patients are allowed to 
enroll if their platelet count is 10,000 per microliter or less but is scheduled to 
receive transfusion the day of consent)
Each subject’s eligibility will be documented on redcap. This will be printed and signed 
and dated by [CONTACT_458].
3.5. Number of Subjects
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 11  of 54Aim 1: We plan to enroll 15 patients in 3 months. In any given week, between 10 and 20 
older patients with MN are receiving HMA at the Wilmot Cancer Institute. In a previous 
qualitative study conducted in this population, recruitment rate was close to 100%.[ADDRESS_161300] to be able to recruit 15 patients in 3 months. 
Aim 2: Annually from 2012-2017, four oncologists saw approximately 150 patients with 
MN aged ≥60 at the Wilmot Cancer Institute, and 70% received outpatient HMA. In prior 
studies of older patients (including MN) enrolled on behavioral pi[INVESTIGATOR_141945], the recruitment rate was 65-75%.85,[ADDRESS_161301] to be able to 
recruit 25 patients in 18 months. 
3.6. Gender of Subjects
The gender ratio of patients to be enrolled on the study will be similar to the gender ratio 
of myeloid neoplasms in older adults (approximately 1.2:1 Male to female ratio).87 
3.7. Age of Subjects
We will recruit patients with myeloid neoplasms aged 60 and above (from date of 
consent, confirmed on electronic medical record). 
3.8. Racial and Ethnic Origin
Myeloid neoplams affects all races with similar rates. Whites, African American and 
Hispanics make up approximately 65%, 30% and 5%, respectively, of the older 
population in [COMPANY_002]ster, [LOCATION_001].88 As we limited enrollment to English-speaking 
patients, we anticipate a higher percentage of whites in our study. The study has no 
enrollment restrictions based upon race or ethnic origin.
3.9. Vulnerable Subjects
No special classes of subjects such as fetuses, neonates, children, pregnant women, 
prisoners, institutionalized individuals or other vulnerable populations will be recruited.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 12  of 544.0. Recruitment and Consent
Subjects will be enrolled at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center (URMC) Wilmot 
Cancer Center and WCI-affiliated community practices such as Interlakes Oncology, 
Dansville, Pluta, Olean, Wellsville. Study subjects will be recruited from the malignant 
hematology clinics at WCI and general oncology clinics at WCI-affiliated community 
practices. We plan to enroll 40 subjects (15 in phase 1 and 25 in phase 2) over a course of 
[ADDRESS_161302] begun treatment with chemotherapy. 
Second, with permission from oncology providers, we will screen for eligible patients 
from clinic schedules. The study coordinator contacts the physician (or their designee) 
and informs them that a patient may be eligible for the study. The physician (or their 
designee) then confirms if the patient is a study candidate or not (including whether they 
are a candidate to exercise). This will be documented in the subject research chart. If 
there is a question about eligibility, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_141946], review the medical records, and perform an assessment of 
eligibility if necessary. The same identification process will be used for all sites.
For in-person consent, below are the possible scenarios for obtaining consent.
1)Physician/Study Investigator makes the initial contact 
[CONTACT_141970], and patient signs consent with the 
physician  on the same day: After confirming with the 
physician  (or their  designee) that a patient is a potential 
candidate for the study, the study staff will provide a consent 
form to the treating physician/study investigator so he/she can 
provide it to the patient during an in-person clinic visit. The 
physician/study investigator will go over every detail of the 
study during the clinic visit with patient. If agrees, the patient 
will sign the consent form with the physician/study 
investigator during the same in-person visit.
2)Study staff makes the initial contact [CONTACT_141971] f orm, 
and patient signs consent with the study staff on the same day: 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 13  of 54After confirming with the physician  (or their  designee) that  a 
patient is a potential candidate for the study, the patient will be 
provided with an informed  consent form by [CONTACT_141972]-person clinic visit. The study staff 
will introduce  the study to the patients and go over every detail 
of the study. If agrees, the patient will sign the consent form 
with the study staff during the same in- person visit with the 
study staff.
For verbal consent, below are the possible scenarios for obtaining consent. 
Generally two in-person visits are required prior to the start of intervention (the first 
in-person visit is to provide the wearable  tracker and actigraphy, the second in-
person visit to perform the in-person assessments and provide the tablet). By 
[CONTACT_141973], we will be able  to mail  the wearable  tracker and actigraphy 
to the patient. 
1)Physician/Study Investigator makes the initial contact, study staff follows up 
with the patient on the phone, and patient provides verbal  consent on the 
phone: After confirming with the physician  (or their  designee) that  a patient is 
a potential candidate for the study, the physician/study investigator confirms 
with the patient that  he/she is willing to speak with the study staff about the 
study. The study staff will then call  the patient via phone. The study 
coordinator will use the verbal  consent script as a written  aid and will go over 
every detail of the study with the patient to recruit  them  for the study. Study 
staff will sign and date  it to confirm  that he/she followed the script and the 
patient agrees to participate in the study. An information sheet summarizing 
the study and p atient' s involvement will be mailed / emailed to the patient for 
their  records.
2)Physician/Study Investigator makes the initial contact [CONTACT_141974], study staff follows up with the patient on the phone, and patient 
provides verbal  consent on the phone: After confirming with the physician  (or 
their  designee) that  a patient is a potential candidate for the study, the study 
staff will provide a consent form to the treating physician/study investigator 
so he/she can provide it to the patient during an in-person clinic visit. If the 
patient is interested but does not want to consent on the same day, the patient 
will bring the consent form home. The study staff will then call  the patient via 
phone. The study coordinator will use the verbal  consent script as a written  
aid and will go over every detail of the study with the patient to recruit  them  
for the study. Study staff will sign and date  it to confirm  that he/she followed 
the script and the patient agrees to participate in the study. An information 
sheet summarizing the study and patient's involvement will be mailed/emailed 
to the patient for their  records.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 14  of 543)Study staff makes the initial contact [CONTACT_24203], 
study staff follows up with the patient on the phone, and patient 
provides verbal  consent on the phone: After confirming with the 
physician  (or their  designee) that  a patient is willing to speak with 
the study coordinator about the study, the patient will be provided 
with an informed  consent form by [CONTACT_141975]-person clinic visit. If the patient is interested but does 
not want to consent on the same day, the patient will bring the 
consent form home. The study staff will then call  the patient via 
phone. The study coordinator will use the verbal  consent script as 
a written  aid and will go over every detail of the study with the 
patient to recruit  them  for the study. Study staff will sign and date  
it to confirm  that he/she followed the script and the patient agrees 
to participate in the study. An information sheet summarizing the 
study and patient's involvement will be mailed/emailed to the 
patient for their  records.
4.1.1. Informed Consent
Informed consent will be obtained from the patient by [CONTACT_24207]. Consent documents will be signed by [CONTACT_141976][INVESTIGATOR_24187]. For verbal consent, 
documents will be maintained in the patient record with copi[INVESTIGATOR_141947].
4.1.2. Baseline Measures and Study Procedures
After consent, the patient will complete baseline measures. Study coordinator will 
be available to assist the patient. The study coordinator will obtain information 
necessary to complete the forms capturing clinical data from the patient’s medical 
records when the patient is unable to provide this information in sufficient detail 
(e.g. type of myeloid neoplasms, antecedent hematologic malignancies, treatment 
regimen). 
For patients consented at Olean, Wellsville, and Dansville, they will be asked to 
meet with the study coordinator at the Wilmot Cancer Institute/Strong Memorial 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_141948]. No research activities will be conducted at 
these sites.
4.1.3. Human Subject Protection
Ethical standards for human subjects will be strictly followed in accordance with 
the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Research Subject Review Board Investigator Guidance 
policy.89 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161303] to no longer participate.
4.1.5. Duration
Aim 1: The qualitative portion of the study will involve one semi-structured 
interview. Interviews with the patients will be held in person in a private space 
(clinic or office space). Interviews will be audio-recorded and led by [CONTACT_141977] 30 minutes. These recordings will be uploaded to Box, 
and the recordings will be deleted from the audio-recorder.
Aim 2: Study participants will be consented to actively participate, receive phone 
calls or meet with the research study team at the baseline visit (week 0) and 8± 4 
weeks after the intervention (week 8± 4). The research team may contact 
[CONTACT_141978]’ 
overall health and treatment, the study team may decide to take participants off the 
study without their consent if the study is stopped. Additionally, study participant 
data will be kept for [ADDRESS_161304] 
access only (See Section 9).
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161305] recent IRB approval date
5.2.3 Eligibility verification 
5.2.4 Verification that consent form has been signed and who signed by (patient 
and/or health care proxy) and date signed
5.2.5 Treatment facility (Wilmot Cancer Center)
5.2.6 Participant’s identification
5.2.6.a First and last names 
5.2.6.b Birth date (MM/DD/STREAM)
5.2.6.c Gender
5.2.6.d Race 
5.2.6.e Five-digit zip code
5.2.6.f Medical Record Number
5.2.6.g  Ethnicity
5.2.6.h Patient’s preferred and alternate phone numbers
5.2.6.i Date of baseline Visit
5.3. Initial Assessment
After consent procedures are completed, the patient, with the help of the study 
coordinator, will complete a baseline assessment (see Section 7.2). Patients who are 
eligible will be enrolled and complete study procedures. For Aim 1, this will involve one 
semi-structured interview. For Aim 2, patients will be provided with the intervention and 
will be asked to complete post-intervention assessment at week 8 (± 4 weeks).
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161306] component of the EXCAP exercise program is an individually tailored walking 
prescription and provides low to moderately intense aerobic exercise (3-5 exercise rating 
of perceived exertion on the American College of Sports Medicine [ACSM] revised 
rating scale, which is a visual analog scale ranging from 1 = “Not tired at all” to 10 = ”So 
tired, I can’t go anymore”) [ADDRESS_161307] to calculate the average number of steps they walk 
daily during that period. The wearable devices will be registered by [CONTACT_5051] (no 
phone or mobile identification numbers will be stored with data, and no GPS data will be 
collected to identify locations). Using the baseline average number of steps walked daily, 
patients are encouraged to increase their total steps walked by a minimum of 5% per 
week, while maintaining a moderate intensity. Subjects are encouraged to reach the 
ACSM suggested 10,000 steps a day if possible (this is not mandatory). As an 
instructional and motivational tool, at the start of the exercise intervention, a table will be 
provided that includes the average number of steps walked at baseline, as well as, the 
number of steps that would represent increases of 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% over this 
baseline amount for each of the 8 weeks of the intervention period 
The second component of the exercise program is an individually tailored therapeutic 
resistance band exercise prescription designed to provide low to moderately intense 
progressive resistance exercise [3-5 exercise rating of perceived exertion (RPE) on the 
ACSM revised rating scale] [ADDRESS_161308] will explain the proper use of the resistance bands, safety, and the 
appropriate mechanics for performing the resistance training exercises. Subjects are 
instructed to begin with an individually determined number of sets (1 set = 8-15 
repetitions) for each of the sixteen exercises at a moderately challenging level (RPE=3-5) 
[ADDRESS_161309] to find an optimally challenging number of sets and repetitions 
with the appropriately colored resistance band for each exercise with each patient. 
Subjects are instructed to increase the intensity by [CONTACT_141979] a different color band or 
by [CONTACT_141980]. They are encouraged 
to progressively increase from their individual baseline sets and repetitions to a maximum 
of 4 sets of 15 repetitions for each exercise daily over the course of the 8-week (± 4 
weeks) intervention at a rate that is optimally challenging. The therapeutic resistance 
band exercise prescription will be developed and individually tailored for each subject by 
[CONTACT_141981]. Each subject will report the intensity of their resistance exercise 
using 1) the rated perceive exertion (RPE) scale and 2) time spent for resistance band 
exercise by [CONTACT_141982].
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 18  of 546.2. PointClick Care Mobile App
PointClick Care is a mobile app that is preloaded on a tablet. The app was initially 
designed with the goal of helpi[INVESTIGATOR_141949]. The app provides assistance 
in managing medications, chronic health conditions, doctor appointments, and activities 
of daily living including reminders to exercise. The PointClick Care app is connected to a 
data plan (which will be paid for by [CONTACT_1758]) for internet access, as well as a web portal 
that is accessible using a desktop or laptop computer of which internet access is required. 
The University of [COMPANY_002]ster IT department has been contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. As per the University 
policy for devices, the hard drive must be encrypted to protect any patient data. 
PointClick Care encrypts all PointClick Care data transferred between backend servers 
and the tablets. Communications to the server is validated by [CONTACT_141983]. Data at rest is always encrypted. PointClick Care caches data on the tablet, 
and stores data on a PointClick Care server. On the tablet the cache in encrypted, the 
backend server hosts a Microsoft SQL Server database. The volume used by [CONTACT_141984]. Only the PointClick Care app, with a valid authentication key, can read this 
data. PointClick Care has a means to disable the PointClick Care app on a tablet. This 
feature only works, however, if the Tablet is connected to the server. 
6.2.[ADDRESS_161310] and reminders (such as 
taking medications, or exercising) (Figure 2). Activities displayed on the tablet can only 
be entered through the web portal (i.e. have you walked at least 4000 steps today?). Users 
can select whether the tasks are completed on the tablet and they can manually enter the 
number of daily steps. The system also allows the user to create questionnaires.
Figure 2: Default screen of the PointClick Care application

Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 19  of 546.2.2. Web-Portal
The web portal is accessed through a web address (https://client.PointClick 
Caresolutions.com) using a computer by [CONTACT_141985]/or patients if they wish. The homepage displays the patient’s 
information and a list of activities followed by [CONTACT_141986], and whether the 
tasks have been completed (Figures 3 and 4). This function will allow the exercise 
physiologist to monitor for exercise adherence at a distance.
Figure 3: Homepage of the web-portal
User can access the profile by [CONTACT_18943] “see more…” or “details”. There are 
several functions on the web portal (Figure 3). The toolbar includes “home”, 
“calendar”, “medications”, “health”, “contacts”, “alerts” and “reports”. Under 
“calendar” tab, activities can be entered as events (e.g. have you walked at least 
4000 steps today). Events can be entered as single or recurring events, and this 
can be displayed as a day or month view. Under “medications” tab, a list of the 
medications can be entered along with the time, strength, dosage, frequency and 
indication. Users are reminded to take their medications from the tablet device, 
and enter their compliance to generate a compliance report. Under “health” tab, 
vital signs or point of care information such as weight, blood pressure or blood 
glucose levels can be entered through the tablet, or electronically linked from the 
a monitoring system (weighing scale, glucometer or blood pressure cuff) to the 
web portal. A questionnaire can also be generated and questions can be tailored to 
cancer patients i.e. pain level measured using a Likert-scale. Under “contacts” tab, 
user can enter caregivers or healthcare teams’ contact [CONTACT_3031], and they can 
be contact[CONTACT_141987]. Finally the “report” tab generates reports on 
all the aforementioned functions. Of note, automatic reminders can be generated 
and sent to providers if tasks are not completed or certain threshold of vital signs 
are met. For the purpose of this study, we are asking patients to enter their 
exercise data. They are encouraged to use other functions to assist with care 
coordination but are not required to do so.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 20  of 54Figure 4: Main profile page on the PointClick Care web portal
6.3. GO-EXCAP Mobile App
We plan to integrate the content of the EXCAP exercise program into the PointClick Care 
mobile app (Figure 5). Older patients will participate in the EXCAP exercise program 
and enter exercise data into the mobile app. In addition, they will complete a symptom 
inventory and enter any barriers to exercise into the mobile app weekly. The study team 
(physiologist) logs into the web portal 2x/week to monitor intervention adherence, 
provide feedback, and adjust exercise prescriptions. These recommendations are 
available to the patients - they are automatically displayed via the mobile app daily. 
Patients can interact with the physiologist directly or via the mobile app. 
Symptom reporting and management is an important component of our intervention 
because symptoms are common barriers to exercise. Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299],16,90 we 
selected 15 common symptoms experienced by [CONTACT_141988]-
Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
(PRO-CTCAE).91 We will assess symptoms weekly. These symptoms will be recorded 
on the web portal (described above). Study coordinator will log on to the web portal at 
least weekly to ensure that the symptom surveys are being completed. If the symptom 
surveys are not completed, the study coordinator will remind the patient during the 
weekly calls. For each symptom, we will use standardized severity-based algorithms and 
self-management strategies based on established protocols (Figure 6).92–94 A symptom 
report will be generated at clinic visits. In addition, these reports will be provided to the 
clinic nurses on a weekly basis.
Therefore, the mobile app serves as a tracking, teaching, and self-management device 
that is tailored to the individual. We will adapt the intervention content, format, and 
delivery of the app based on feedback from patients.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 21  of 54In the case that participants are unable to use the PointClickCare mobile app (i.e. 
company no longer operating), we will administer the exercise surveys and symptom 
inventories as REDCap surveys. The surveys will be disseminated via email. If the 
PointClickCare mobile app is no longer available, current subjects who are enrolled in the 
study will transition to use of the REDCap surveys and will terminate use of the mobile 
app. The previously collected data and subsequent analysis will remain unaffected and 
there will be no changes made to the study aims. Current subjects will be verbally 
notified of this change. 
Figure 5: Proposed GO-EXCAP Mobile App
Figure 6: Example of severity-based algorithm/self-management strategies
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 22  of 54

Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161311]. HMA and other 
common chemotherapy are administered daily as an infusion or subcutaneous injection 
for 5-10 days every 4 weeks. There are outpatient chemotherapy that are pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]-based as 
well (e.g., enasidenib, ivosidenib) and are also dosed every 4 weeks. We will consent 
patients and they will complete measures during routine visits. They will complete 
baseline measures during the 4th week of a chemotherapy cycle up to day 1 of the 
subsequent cycle prior to chemotherapy administration (study week 0) (Figure 1). The 
intervention will start during the 1st week of of a new cycle (study week 1) and will last 
8± [ADDRESS_161312]-intervention measures will be completed 2 cycles later during the 
4th week of the cycle (study week 8± 4). To illustrate this, if the intervention starts in 
cycle [ADDRESS_161313] on cycle 7 week 4.
At the screening visit, we will confirm if the patient is eligible using the eligibility criteria 
above. Once we confirm their eligibility, we will obtain either in-person or verbal 
consent. The patient will then complete a demographic questionnaire that asks about the 
participant’s age, gender, race, ethnicity, education level, marital status, employment 
status, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status as well as 
their cancer and treatment characteristics (see Section 7.2). 
For Aim 1, one interview will be conducted with each participant in a private space for 
approximately [ADDRESS_161314], we will explain the rationale and demonstrate the use of 
the GO-EXCAP Mobile App. Second, we will elicit preferences for the content, format, 
and delivery of the intervention (Table 2). Collectively, the findings will be used to adapt 
the intervention. 
Table 2: Intervention features and example of adaptation based on feedback from 
patients
Feature Goal Example of Adaptation
Content To confirm the frequency, 
intensity, and duration of the 
exercises and appropriate 
percentage increment of steps 
and resistance band training 
exercise.If patients report that they are less able to 
exercise on the days of chemotherapy, we will 
plan to maintain rather than increase the number 
of steps and intensity of resistance training 
exercises during those days.
Format To elicit preferences regarding 
the format of the training manual If patients prefer an electronic training manual, 
we will develop this and incorporate it into the 
mobile app.     
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 24  of 54(i.e. paper, audio, video, or a 
combination).
Delivery To elicit preferences in the 
administration of the 
intervention (i.e. in-person, 
through the app, or a 
combination of both).If patients prefer the intervention to be 
administered entirely through the app (without 
the baseline visit with an exercise physiologist), 
we will develop a video to demonstrate the 
exercise techniques on the mobile app.
For Aim 2: Participants will be provided with an activity tracker to measure daily steps 
over 4-7 days. After baseline measures (including blood samples), participants will meet 
with an exercise physiologist in-person and/or via zoom/phone who will demonstrate 
how to perform the exercises and the basic features of the mobile app. Both the 
assessments and teaching will be conducted either at [CONTACT_142003]’s Physical Exercise, 
Activity and Kinesiology (PEAK) laboratory and/or virtually via zoom/phone. 
Alternatively, if requested, certain assessments and teaching will be completed at the 
cancer center. Patients will be provided with the GO-EXCAP Mobile App on a tablet 
which will be equipped with cellular connectivity. The Exercise Physiologist and/or study 
coordinator will ensure successful set up of tablet device for the subjects and he/she will 
also provide in-person instructions on the use of the mobile app. The study coordinator 
will also be available to answer any potential subsequent questions in regards to the use 
of the app.
For Wilmot affiliated sites (except for Olean, Dansville, and Wellsville where research 
activities will not be conducted), similar procedures will be used if participants are 
willing to travel to Wilmot Cancer Institute/Strong Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. For participants 
who are not willing to travel, our study coordinator will perform assessments at the 
affiliated sites. Blood samples will also be collected. Teaching will be conducted either 
in-person or via zoom. Assessments that are required to be performed at the PEAK lab 
will be omitted if participants are not willing to travel..
From study week 1-8 (± 4), participants will perform the exercises at home. Participants 
will enter their daily steps from the activity tracker, time spent for resistance band 
exercises, and exercise intensity into the mobile app. They will enter any barriers to 
exercise on the app and complete the PRO-CTCAE questionnaire weekly. These data will 
be transferred automatically from the app to a Web portal. The study team (physiologist) 
will log into the Web portal twice a week to monitor adherence, provide feedback, and 
adjust exercise prescriptions. These recommendations will be available to each 
participant via the app or directly. Participants can interact with the physiologist via the 
app or directly. The study coordinator will also call the patients weekly to answer any 
questions. The algorithms for symptom reporting and management developed in Aim 1 
will be incorporated into the app. To ensure safety, participants will answer questions 
weekly on the app to determine ongoing appropriateness of exercise (e.g., no interval 
cardiac symptoms) and ensure there are no new medical contraindications to exercise.95
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 25  of 54Mid-intervention (study week 3-5): We will conduct an in-person or zoom/phone 
interview (approximately 30 min) with participants. A three-week window will be used to 
conduct interviews with participants. App functionality, usability, and barriers to 
adherence will be elicited.
Post intervention (study week 8± 4 weeks; chemotherapy delay is common due to 
cytopenias): We will collect the same measures as baseline (including blood samples) and 
usability data. An exit interview (approximately 30-45 min) will be conducted with 
participants either in-person or via zoom/phone to elicit app functionality, usability, and 
barriers to adherence. Participants who complete both the baseline and post-intervention 
measures will receive $50. They may keep the exercise kit and activity tracker (value 
$150). 
Procedures at the affiliated sites will follow the baseline assessments.
7.2. Baseline Assessment of the Participants
Demographics, clinical and treatment/cancer characteristics will be collected. 
7.2.1. Socio-Demographics and Clinical Characteristics
Patient’s age, race, ethnicity, gender, highest level of education achieved, 
employment status, marital status, and ECOG performance status will be captured 
from the patients. The socio-demographics and clinical characteristics will only 
be collected at baseline.
7.2.2. Cancer and Treatment Characteristics 
Type of myeloid neoplasms, prior hematologic malignancies, cytogenetic risk 
group and treatment regimen will be abstracted from the medical records. This 
information will be collected at baseline only.
7.2.3. Outcomes of Interest (Baseline and post-intervention unless otherwise 
specified)
For patient-reported questionnaires, if we are unable to provide assessment forms 
to the participants, these will be mailed to them at least 1 week ahead of time. For 
assessments that needed to be conducted in-person (including blood sample 
collection), these may be omitted when appropriate for safety of the patients.
[IP_ADDRESS]. Physical Function 
Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB): The SPPB is an objective 
physical assessment evaluating lower extremity physical function.[ADDRESS_161315]. 
Impairment on SPPB testing has been shown to be predictive of short-term 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 26  of 54mortality and nursing home admission in community-dwelling older 
adults. We will also perform the virtual SPPB via the phone/zoom, which 
evaluates the participants’ perceived ability to perform above tests 
(walking, repeated chair stands, and balance). 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Fatigue
Brief Fatigue Inventory (BFI): BFI is a 9-item, patient-report instrument 
with established reliability and validity that we have used in previous 
studies.97 The BFI allows for the rapid assessment of fatigue level in 
cancer patients and identifies those patients with severe fatigue. The 
reliability and validity of the BFI were demonstrated in a study of 305 
cancer patients and 290 community-dwelling adults.98 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Depression
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_67905] (CES-D): The CES-
D is a 20-item depression scale developed and validated for use with a 
variety of populations.99 It is in a format similar to that of the Beck 
Depression Inventory, but with less emphasis on physical symptoms of 
depression that may be confounded with disease symptoms or treatment 
side effects. It has been shown to reliably and validly measure depression 
in cancer populations.100 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Quality of Life (QOL) 
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Leukemia (FACT-Leu): The 
FACT-Leu scale was created by [CONTACT_141989]-General module (FACT-G) and a sub-scale made up of 
17 leukemia-specific items.101 It been tested and determined to be a valid, 
reliable, and efficient instrument for evaluating leukemia-specific health-
related QoL.
[IP_ADDRESS]. Self-efficacy for Exercise and Exercise Adherence
Self-Efficacy for Exercise scale: This is a 9-item scale to measure self-
efficacy for exercise and higher score indicates higher self-efficacy.102
Actigraphy (research-grade). The actigraph is a small, lightweight, non-
invasive device worn on the waist (clipped to clothes or worn as a 
waistband). The actigraph contains an accelerometer that quantifies 
duration and intensity of physical activity and sedentary behavior 
throughout the day and week. We will use an actigraph that provides 
calculated energy expenditure values for active energy expenditure in 
kilocalories and total energy expenditure in metabolic equivalents per time 
in kilocalories/min/kg. We will use software supplied by [CONTACT_141990]: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 27  of 54to determine bouts of moderate or higher activity during each assessment 
period (T1, T2, and T3). This is a research-grade device that complements 
the commercial-grade wrist-worn Garmin activity tracker.
Exercise Readiness: This will be assessed using the Physical Activity 
Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q+) form. This is designed to assess 
patients’ readiness to participate in more physical activity or engage in a 
fitness appraisal. 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Other Geriatric Assessment Measures 
Activities of daily living (ADL): ADLs are measures of self-care. ADL 
independence will be assessed using the Katz Index of Independence in 
Activities of Daily Living, commonly referred to as the Katz ADL. The 
Katz ADL is the most appropriate instrument to assess functional status as 
a measurement of the client’s ability to perform activities of daily living 
independently. Clinicians typi[INVESTIGATOR_141950]. The 
Index ranks adequacy of performance in the six functions of bathing, 
dressing, toileting, transferring, continence, and feeding. Clients are 
scored yes/no for independence in each of the six functions. A score of 6 
indicates full function, 4 indicates moderate impairment, and 2 or less 
indicates severe functional impairment.
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL): Self-reported functional 
status will be assessed using the IADL subscale of the Multidimensional 
Functional Assessment Questionnaire: Older American Resources and 
Services (OARS). The IADL subscale consists of seven questions rated on 
a three-point Likert scale. It measures the degree to which an activity can 
be performed independently.
Fall History: A self-reported history of falls in the past three months will 
be recorded. A history of a recent fall has been demonstrated to be 
independently predictive of increased risk for chemotherapy toxicity in 
older cancer patients.[ADDRESS_161316] (6MWT): The 6MWT measures functional endurance 
and aerobic capacity.[ADDRESS_161317]’s gait to be measured as well as their 
pelvic rotations and swing leg accelerations. It provides objective and 
quantitative data that is related to muscles activity and kinematic 
parameters.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 28  of 54Nutrition: Screening for nutritional deficit will be performed with body 
mass index (BMI) evaluation and self-reported weight loss.  
 
Cognition; Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA): A 30-point cognitive 
screen test with excellent sensitivity for individuals with mild dementia 
and mild cognitive impairment. It can also be used to trend changes in 
cognitive status over time. If in-person assessment is not possible, MOCA-
blind will be conducted via zoom/phone.
Comorbidity (baseline only); OARS Physical Health Section: Patients self-
report their coexisting medical conditions and also rate the degree to 
which their illness causes impairment in daily activities. The OARS 
Physical Health Section has been shown to correlate significantly with 
health professional ratings of comorbidity as well.
Social Support (baseline only); OARS Medical Social Support survey: A 
13-question survey asking patients to identify the number of support 
persons involved in their medical care as well as the degree to which they 
felt supported in a variety of situations.  
Medications (baseline only): We will record all prescription and non-
prescription medications, dosage and frequencies from the medical 
records. Polypharmacy is defined as the use of 5 or more medications.
7.2.4. Complete blood count (CBC)
Blood counts measured by [CONTACT_141991]’s medical record.
7.2.5. Muscle mass testing
The RJL Bioelectrical Impedance System is a non-invasive, easy-to administer 
and safe method of assessing lean body mass. BIA involves passing a small 
electrical current through the body and evaluating the reactance and resistance to 
flow, which are related to fat-free mass (FFM) and total body water. Prediction of 
lean body mass from BIA is as reliable as skin-fold measurements and hydrostatic 
weighing. Participants have the option to be 4 hours fasted, although it is not 
required. Participants need to be abstained from alcohol and diuretics (unless 
prescribed) for 48 hours, well hydrated (water only), and voided completely prior 
to assessment. Participants lie supi[INVESTIGATOR_72301] a flat surface for approximately [ADDRESS_161318], to ensure a resting metabolic state. Electrodes are 
attached to the right hand (proximal phalanx of the 3rd finger and the radiocarpal 
joint), and the right foot (distal end of the 3rd and 4th metatarsal and distal end of 
the tibia and fibula). Skeletal muscle mass will then be calculated from the lean 
body mass.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161319] is 
administered with the patient standing in anatomical position; the elbow joint 
angle will be held constant at 90 degrees with the medial distal humeral 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_141951] 2 inches from the torso. Trials will be performed in an alternating 
bilateral sequence for a total of six attempts (three with each arm). The best score 
of the three trials will be used for right and left limbs to calculate static strength. 
The surgically involved arm(s) will be noted for data analysis. The handgrip 
dynamometer test has been previously used in a number of URCC NCORP 
protocols and has shown to be a reliable clinical method of assessing upper 
extremity strength.
Lower and upper extremity muscle strength will be assessed using the isokinetic 
muscular strength test. We will use an isokinetic knee flexion/extension for lower 
extremities and seated shoulder diagonal for upper extremities. If seated shoulder 
diagonal cannot be performed (e.g., prior shoulder injury), elbow 
flexion/extension will be performed instead. An exercise physiologist will provide 
a full orientation to the isokinetic machine including: aligning subject into 
position, setting range of motion, and conducting a warm up set. The exercise 
physiologist will be present during the test to ensure proper form and subject 
comfort. After the warm up set, subjects will complete a single set per side. 
Subjects will exert maximal force through their entire range of motion, moving at 
a set speed in degrees per second against the lever arm. Subjects will rest for 
approximately 3 minutes between sets. This isokinetic protocol will allow us to 
measure peak torque, maximal work, total work, and average power for each 
movement. We will use a Biodex System 4 Pro, which has been used successfully 
in over 1,000 research studies and is both safe and accurate in measuring 
muscular function.120
Muscle activation during strength testing (isokinetic muscular strength test) will 
be assessed using electromyography sensors. The BTS FREEEMG [ADDRESS_161320]’s skin surface over the muscle used 
during knee flexion and extension and elbow flexion extension repetitions.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161321] portion above the umbilicus and below the zyphoid 
process. 
7.2.7. Heart Rate Variability (HRV): HRV measures variation in consecutive 
heartbeat intervals. It provides acute measures of physiological recovery. HRV 
data will be collected for 5 minutes and assessed using the Firstbeat® system. 
Firstbeat® is a portable device consisting of two electrodes (one above and below 
the ribcage) placed on the patient. 
7.3. Post-Intervention Assessment of the Participants
At the post-intervention assessment, all subjects will continue to wear their Garmin 
activity tracker for 4-[ADDRESS_161322] an exit interview either in-
person or via zoom/phone to elicit app functionality and barriers to adherence to the 
intervention.
7.3.1. Intervention Usability105,106
System Usability Scale is a standardized questionnaire used to assess participants’ 
perceptions of usability. This robust and reliable scale consists of a 10-item 
questionnaire with each item rated on a 5-point Likert scale (see Appendix). The 
scores for each question will be converted to a new number (odd-numbered 
questions are calculated as the scale position minus 2, and even-numbered 
questions are calculated as 5 minus the scale position), added together, and then 
multiplied by 2.5 to get the final score (ranging from 0 to 100).
7.4. Assessment of inflammatory markers (Exploratory Aim 2)
Using blood samples, we will assess the blood concentrations of several inflammatory 
markers. All blood draws will occur in the Wilmot Cancer Center, a UR-affiliated lab, or 
medical office if needed (in the latter case, we will use a trained study staff member to 
transport the samples to our storage facility). The location will be selected to minimize 
subject burden and if possible we will perform blood draws at the same time as a 
regularly scheduled medical blood draws. The blood will be drawn by [CONTACT_32341]. The 
time of day will be noted, with future assessments at approximately the same time of day 
during post-testing. Fasted blood samples (4-6 hours prior to blood with encouragement 
to maintain hydration) will be drawn. If the blood sample is not fasted, we will still 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161323]. All 
subjects will be provided with a $[ADDRESS_161324] for a café at URMC.
A total of approximately 50 mL of blood (around 4-5 tablespoons) will be drawn at 
baseline and post-intervention. All tubes will be collected by a study team member, 
processed, and then transferred to a secured -80°C freezer in lab space maintained by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Janelsins in the Department of Surgery. We will collect the following:
1. One red-top tube for serum (9 mL each). This tube will be inverted 10 times, allowed 
to clot for 30 minutes at room temperature, centrifuged for 15 min at 1600 g and then 
frozen at -20°C or -80°C. These will be used to assess inflammation (cytokines, etc.).
2. Two purple-top EDTA tubes for DNA methylation and plasma analyses (9 mL each, 
18 mL total). This tube will be inverted 10 times and allowed to sit at room temp for 
30 minutes, centrifuged for 15 min, and then frozen at -20°C or -80°C. 
3. Two green-top tubes for peripheral blood mononuclear cells (9 mL each, 18 mL 
total). These will be pre-cooled and processed per SOP. This tube will be inverted 10 
times and allowed to sit at room temp for 30 minutes, centrifuged for 15 min, and 
then frozen at -20°C or -80°C. 
4. Two paxgene tubes for gene expression analyses (2.5 mL each, 5 mL total). This tube 
will be inverted 10 times and allowed to sit at room temp for 2-24 hours. Then they 
will be frozen at -20°C and moved to -80°C for long-term storage.
Inflammatory cytokines will be assessed using the latest available technology (e.g., in 
vitro enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; ELISA). These assays will assess the 
concentration of inflammatory cytokines including TNFα, sTNFR1, sTNFR2, IL-1β, IL-
6, sIL-6R, IL-8, IL-10. Cytokine analyses will be performed at [CONTACT_142004]’s 
lab.
For DNA methylation analysis, genomic DNA will be isolated from peripheral 
mononuclear cells with a DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) and quantified with the 
NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer. TNFα gene promoter methylation will be quantified 
using bisulfite pyrosequencing.107 Briefly, genomic DNA (1000 ng) will be bisulfite 
converted (converts cytosine to uracil but leaves 5-methylcytosine residues unaffected) 
using the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141952] (Qiagen). Using TNFα-specific primers, 
the region of interest will be amplified by [CONTACT_141992] (Qiagen). 
Pyrosequencing analysis will be used to measure DNA methylation in the TNFα 
promoter region from −360 to +50 base pairs (containing 12 CpG sites) using the 
PyroMark Advanced Q24 (Qiagen).108 We selected these 12 CpG sites based on a prior 
study which showed that total methylation and methylation at -245 bp correlated with 
serum TNFα levels.108 Methylation at -170bp and -120bp also predicted response to a 
lifestyle behavioral intervention.108 In addition, the majority of known regulatory 
transcription factor binding sites (e.g. NF-κB, Sp-1, Egr1)109 within the TNFα gene 
promoter region are located in this region. Other cytokine gene promoter methylation will 
be analyzed as per TNFα (promoter regions will be determined based on previous 
studies).110–[ADDRESS_161325]. Martha Susiarjo’s lab.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 32  of 54For gene expression, RNA will be extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) 
according to the manufacter’s protocol and quantified using the NanoDrop 
spectrophotometer.107 cDNA will be will be prepared by [CONTACT_937]-PCR using Superscript IV 
reverse transcriptase and random hexamers (Invitrogen). qPCR analysis will be 
conducted using the Applied Biosystems QuantStudio [ADDRESS_161326]. Martha Susiarjo’s lab.
All human biological materials will be disposed of in adherence with the University of 
[COMPANY_002]ster Office of Environmental Safety Biosafety Level II requirements. All 
laboratories used in the current study have received appropriate biosafety certifications 
by [CONTACT_141993]. All samples will be de-identified before being stored. 
7.5. Data specimen banking for future research
We will bank blood samples for use in future studies to assess other inflammatory 
markers and genome wide DNA methylation analysis. We will also keep remaining 
samples for future research by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Loh and her research team. The consent form includes 
a section asking whether subjects agree to have their samples banked for future studies by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Loh and her research team.
Genome wide DNA methylation [with subsequent DNA methylation age (DNAm age 
analysis) will be performed at Genomic Shared Resource at Roswell Park Cancer 
Institute. We are in the process of obtaining an MTA with Roswell. After processing, 
stored blood is aliquoted and identified using study ID. No patient identifiers are included 
in the label. Aliquotes will be sent to Roswell Park. DNA methylation microarray assay 
will be performed using the Illumina Infinium® Methylation EPIC Array platform, an 
oligonucleotide array that interrogates >850,000 CpG dinucleotides per sample, in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The raw data will be processed by [CONTACT_941] R 
package “minfi”, and converted to methylation ß-value, ranging from 0 to 1, with 0 being 
unmethylated and 1 being fully methylated, to represent the methylation level of each 
CpG site. Potential residue batch effects will be inferred from the data using a Surrogate 
Variable Analysis (SVA), and the ComBat algorithm will be used for correction. 
Rigorous quality-control criteria will be used for filtering at both the locus and sample 
levels. The final data will be supplied to the DNAm age estimation algorithms.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 33  of 548.0. DATA HANDLING AND STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS:  
8.1. Data Handling
8.1.1. The same protocols and procedures for data quality and control that are 
readily used for the NCI Community Oncology Research Program (NCORP) 
Research Base protocols currently being overseen by [CONTACT_24214] (which have 
accrued over 1,000 patients in the previous year) will be used for this study. 
Patients will fill out forms generated from RedCap and this information will be 
entered into RedCap (Section 9.5). Study personnel will perform SPPB and the 
scores will be entered into RedCap.   
8.1.2. It is anticipated that allowing for the appropriate number of evaluable 
participants and by [CONTACT_24215]-report measures for completeness, we will have 
a full complement of data. Every effort will be made to encourage and facilitate 
participants’ completion of all questionnaires and all items on the questionnaires 
for each study assessment.  In the event that missing data occur, every effort will 
be made to contact [CONTACT_141994].  The reasons for missing data will be 
documented. Missing questionnaire items will be treated in accordance with the 
documented scoring procedures. Although it is very unlikely that missing values 
will not occur randomly, we will confirm their randomness.  Multiple 
imputation113 will be applied to (1) give more accurate statistical tests and 
standard errors for key treatment effect parameters and to (2) give some indication 
of the sensitivity of the analyses to missing data.  The causes and pattern of the 
missing data will be examined and taken into consideration in the design of future 
studies.
8.1.3. Data collected with the tablets and Garmin activity trackers will only be 
accessed by [CONTACT_716]: 1) The research team including the exercise 
physiologist, 2) The treating physician and their designee, and 3) PointClick Care 
company. The research team and exercise physiologist will each have a username 
[CONTACT_142002]. The PointClick Care company 
will have access to the data on the tablets. As discussed above, PointClick 
Care encrypts all PointClick Care data transferred between backend servers and 
the tablets. Communications to the server is validated by [CONTACT_141983]. Data at rest is always encrypted. PointClick Care caches data on the 
tablet, and stores data on a PointClick Care server. On the tablet the cache in 
encrypted, the backend server hosts a Microsoft SQL Server database. The 
volume used by [CONTACT_141995]. Only the PointClick Care app, with a 
valid authentication key, can read this data. If the electronic data is breached, 
PointClick Care has a means to disable the PointClick Care app on a tablet. This 
feature only works, however, if the Tablet is connected to the server. We will also 
inform the study participants if the breach has occurred. Users are not able to exit 
the app from the tablet. If the tablet is lost or stolen, PointClick Care has a means 
to disable the PointClick Care app as soon as it is turned on. If the tablet is 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 34  of 54broken, it will be replaced with a new one (all data within the tablet will be 
erased).
8.1.4. We are currently communicating with OPRA regarding the need for a data 
use agreement with the PointClickCare company.
8.2. Data Analysis and Sample Size:
8.2.1. Analysis Plan for Aim 1
Our planned sample size (N=15) will allow us to achieve thematic saturation. We 
will conduct and audio-record all interviews, which will be transcribed by a 
professional transcription service. We will analyze the qualitative data using 
grounded theory and constant comparative methods, with coding to structure data 
into categories and create groups according to the broader issues or themes.114 An 
audit trail of the coding activity will be kept. We will critically examine the data 
collection and analysis process and reach consensus on key themes from patient 
feedback to be used to adapt the intervention in preparation for Aim 2. 
8.2.2. Analysis Plan for Aim 2
The feasibility of the GO-EXCAP Mobile App will be evaluated based on the 
following: a) Percentage of patients wearing the activity tracker and entering 
resistance exercise data into the mobile app and b) Percentage of patients 
performing both walking and resistance exercises during the study period days. 
Recruitment rates (percentage of patients who are approached and agree to enroll) 
and retention rates (percentage of patients who are enrolled and complete post-
intervention assessments) will also be described
We will consider the intervention feasible if 1) ≥70% of patients wear the activity 
tracker and enter resistance exercise data into the mobile app on at least 50% of 
the study period days, and 2) ≥70% of patients performed both walking and 
resistance exercises on at least 50% of the study period days. We chose these 
criteria based on our previous mobile app study16 and on published exercise 
studies in older patients with AML.29,30 We will report percentage of adherence 
with 95% exact confidence interval (CI) calculated by [CONTACT_39715]-Pearson 
method. We anticipate that about 20-30% of the participants will withdraw before 
post-intervention assessment due to rapid disease progression or death. These 
patients will not be included in the feasibility analysis because their withdrawals 
from the study are not related to the intervention. With [ADDRESS_161327] 17 patients to be evaluable for our feasibility aims. When we 
estimate the percentage of adherence, a 95% CI will span approximately +/- 25%. 
For example, if we observe 12/17 (71%) patients complete the tasks, the CI will 
be 44-90%. 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161328] the reasons patient decline to be enrolled. In addition, we 
will evaluate the distribution and describe the following measures using 
descriptive statistics: 1) activity levels, 2) physical function (SPPB/vSPPB), 3) 
fatigue (BFI), 4) depression (CES-D Scale), 5) quality of life (FACT-Leu), and 6) 
Other geriatric assessment measures. Differences in activity levels, physical 
function, fatigue, depression, quality of life, and other geriatric assessment 
measures between pre- and post-treatment will be assessed using paired t-tests or 
Wilcoxon signed rank tests. Anticipated sample size of more than 12 patients with 
baseline and follow-up data will be sufficient to obtain the preliminary estimates 
of the outcomes measures.115,116 
Qualitative data from the exit interviews will be analyzed as per Aim 1. 
Interviews will be conducted, audio-recorded, and transcribed. Two trained 
“coders” will utilize a multi-step process using coding and content analysis, with 
coding to structure data into categories and creating groups according to the 
themes.[ADDRESS_161329]. Mohile every two weeks to 
critically examine the data collection and analysis process, provide critical 
feedback on emerging codes, and reach consensus on principal themes to be used 
to optimize the intervention. For every five patients, we will use the principal 
themes to optimize the intervention in an iterative process. We will identify 
patients who are not entering their daily steps or the resistance training data into 
the app. For these patients, we will elicit specific barriers and explore the 
relationship between these barriers and exercise adherence. We anticipate that the 
barriers to exercise adherence will be modifiable (e.g., symptoms, lack of self-
motivation, and lack of knowledge of the benefits of exercise) or non-modifiable 
(e.g., caregiving obligations, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]). The intervention will be optimized 
based on the following modifiable barriers, such as: a) Symptoms (e.g., fatigue, 
soreness): Monitor symptoms with automated self-management feedback and/or 
notification to the healthcare team; b) Lack of self-efficacy: Provide reassurance 
and motivational messages through the app; c) Lack of knowledge: Provide 
education on the benefits of exercise.  
8.2.3. Analysis Plan for Exploratory Aim
Descriptive analysis will be used to describe cytokine gene promoter methylation 
(global % methylation of the gene promoter region and % methylation of each of 
the identified CpG sites) and gene and protein expression at baseline and post-
intervention. Changes from baseline to post-intervention will be compared using 
paired t-tests. We will use Spearman’s correlation to assess relationships between 
methylation status and gene and protein expression, as well as activity level and 
clinical measures. We will adjust for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–
Hochberg method.117
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 36  of 549.0. DATA MANAGEMENT 
9.1. Data Collection Table (Aim 2)
 SCHEDULE OF DATA COLLECTION
 Eligibility 
and 
Consent 
FormBaseline 
Assessment 
(week 0)Mid-
Intervention 
Assessment 
(week 3-5)Post-
intervention 
Assessment* 
(week 8± 4)
Written Informed Consent X    
Demographics  X  
Cancer and Treatment 
Characteristics X  
Qualitative Interview X X
Activity Levels (Activity 
Tracker)X X
Exercise Habits and 
ReadinessX
Short Physical Performance 
Batteryb/Virtual Short 
Physical Performance 
Battery X X
Brief Fatigue Inventory 
(BFI)  X  X 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141953] 
(CES-D)  X  X 
Functional Assessment of 
Cancer Therapy-Leukemia 
(FACT-Leu)  X  X 
Self-Efficacy for Exercise X X
Actigraphyb,d X X
Geriatric Assessment 
Measures
Activities of Daily 
LivingX X
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 37  of 54Instrumental 
Activities of Daily 
Living
Fall History
6-Minute Walk 
Testb,d 
Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA 
or MOCA Blind)
Bioelectrical Impedance 
Systema.b,dX X
Handgrip Dynamometerb,d X X
Muscle Strength Testinga.b,d X X
Heart Rate Variabilitya,b,d X X
Feasibility metrics  X
System Usability Scale  X
Complete blood count (from 
electronic medical record) X X
Blood samplesb  X X
aIf patient elects to undergo the assessments at the cancer center instead of the Physical Exercise, Activity 
and Kinesiology laboratory, these assessments will not be conducted.
bMay be omitted for patient safety (i.e., if in-person assessments are not possible)
dIf research activities are conducted at Wilmot affiliated sites, these assessments may be omitted 
9.2. All hardcopy research records will be stored onsite in the URMC, in locked research 
files at the James P. Wilmot Cancer Center.  The Cancer Center is secured with electronic 
key cards. Offices within the Cancer Center are again secured by [CONTACT_90393]. Electronic research records are stored on the URMC’s password 
secured and firewall protected networks. These are the same methods of security used for 
patient medical records. All study data (including the electronic data kept by [CONTACT_141996]) will be kept for a period of [ADDRESS_161330] hoc analyses as 
appropriate. Data will not be used for future studies without prior consent of the patient.  
The patient’s individual research record will not be shared with their treating physician, 
unless they provide consent or the patient’s treating physician is a study physician, in 
which case they will have access to study data as a study co-investigator.  Overall study 
results will be presented to participants, faculty and staff at the URMC after completion 
of the study. Study results will be presented at professional meetings and published.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161331] signed the consent form (chronologically based on the data they signed consent i.e., 
001, 002, 003…). All study forms and questionnaires will use this number and the 
participant’s first, middle, and last initials as identifiers, to ensure data integrity.  Other 
identifying information will not exist on these forms. A complete list of study participants 
with study ID, name, and contact [CONTACT_24218]. This linkage 
information will only be accessible to the study coordinator, study investigators, and the 
individuals responsible for maintaining the database.  
9.5. Additionally, data on the socio-demographics, clinical, cancer and treatment 
characteristics will be collected and managed by [CONTACT_141997].[ADDRESS_161332] 
and manage this information. 
9.5a. URMC provides the following information on the REDCap program: 
“Vanderbilt University, in collaboration with a consortium of institutional partners, 
has developed a software toolset and workflow methodology for electronic 
collection and management of research and clinical trial data, called REDCap 
(Research Electronic Data Capture). The REDCap system is a secure, web-based 
application that is flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of research. It 
provides an intuitive interface for users to enter data and real time validation rules 
(with automated data type and range checks) at the time of data entry. REDCap 
offers easy data manipulation with audit trails and functionality for reporting, 
monitoring and querying patient records, as well as an automated export mechanism 
to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S-Plus). Through the 
REDCap Consortium, Vanderbilt has disseminated REDCap for use around the 
world. Currently, over 240 academic and non-profit consortium partners on six 
continents with over 26,000 research end-users use REDCap.119 
9.5b. According to the Clinical and Translational Science Institute (CTSI), REDCap 
is supported with the following means. “The CTSI Informatics Core, a unit of the 
SMD Academic Information Technology (AIT) Group, will serve as a central 
facilitator for data processing and management.  REDCap data collection projects 
rely on a thorough study-specific data dictionary defined in an iterative self-
documenting process by [CONTACT_59881], with planning assistance 
from the AIT-CTSI Informatics Core . The iterative development and testing process 
results in a well-planned data collection strategy for individual studies.”119 
9.5c. The CTSI states that regarding security, “REDCap servers are housed in a 
local data center at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster and all web-based information 
transmission is encrypted. REDCap was developed in a manner consistent with 
HIPAA security requirements and is recommended to University of [COMPANY_002]ster 
researchers by [CONTACT_141998].119 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 39  of 54
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 40  of 5410.0. RISKS/BENEFITS 
10.1. Risks
There are two potential risks associated with participation in the proposed study: 1) 
physical harm associated with intervention procedures, and 2) loss of confidentiality.
10.1.1. In terms of physical harm associated with intervention procedures, 
commencement of a moderate walking and progressive resistance exercise 
program is not associated with any severe side effects and risks are minimal for 
individuals with no cardiopulmonary, orthopedic, or age identified risk factors as 
determined by a physician. The absolute chance of a cardiac event among adults 
while engaging in vigorous exercise is one per year for every 15,[ADDRESS_161333] aim will be paid $30 and those participating in the 
second aim will be paid $[ADDRESS_161334]-intervention assessment. Patients in Aim 
2, patients may also keep the exercise kit and activity tracker at study completion (value 
$150).
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 41  of 5411.0. DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING 
Only adverse events (AEs) related to the study intervention or procedures will be 
reported. In other words, AEs related to cancer treatment will not be reported.
11.1. Adverse Event Reporting Requirements
11.1.1. Adverse events will be reported using the URCC Adverse Event form 
and/or as required by [CONTACT_24222].  
11.1.2. Adverse events will be reported in accordance with the following 
guidelines:
11.1.3. Adverse event reports will be submitted in one of the following ways:
(1) By [CONTACT_6968]: (pdf)
(2) By [CONTACT_2319]:
(3) By [CONTACT_6791]:
11.1.4. An unexpected adverse event is defined as any adverse experience, the 
specificity or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information. This is 
a minimal risk study as both exercise and mobile app-driven interventions have 
been shown to improve outcomes in community-dwelling older adults.  
11.1.5. A serious event refers to any event in which the outcome results in any of 
the following: death, a life-threatening adverse experience, inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], a persistent or 
significant disability, incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important 
medical events that may not result in death, be life-threatening, or require 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious adverse drug experience when, based 
upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the participant and may 

Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161335] adverse 
events related to cancer treatments.
11.1.6. Adverse events will be reported in accordance with institutional policies 
(University of [COMPANY_002]ster, Research Subject Review Board, local IRB, URCC 
CCOP, CTO, and DSMB) as per their requirements. 
11.2. Data Safety Monitoring
11.2.1. All adverse events requiring reporting will be submitted to the current 
Project Coordinator as described in Section 11.1. Serious adverse event reports 
will be forwarded to the study chair and the Data Safety and Monitoring 
Committee (DSMC). Adverse events are entered into a protocol-specific 
spreadsheet.  
11.2.2. Adverse event rates are monitored utilizing the spreadsheet. If a serious 
adverse event is reported frequently, the study chair will conduct a detailed 
review. The DSMC Committee Chair will be notified and will determine if further 
action is required.
11.2.3. The Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) will review study 
progress and cumulative reports of adverse events every year and as needed. An 
overall assessment of accrual and adverse events will enable the committee 
members to assess whether significant benefits or risks are occurring that would 
warrant study closure.  
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 43  of 5412.0. References
 
1. Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World Health 
Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood. 
2016;127(20):2391-2405. doi:10.1182/blood-2016-03-643544
2. SEER Cancer Statistics Factsheets: Acute Myeloid Leukemia. National Cancer 
Institute. Bethesda, MD, http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/amyl.html.
3. Ma X, Does M, Raza A, Mayne ST. Myelodysplastic syndromes: Incidence and 
survival in the [LOCATION_002]. Cancer. 2007;109(8):1536-1542. 
doi:10.1002/cncr.[ZIP_CODE]
4. Lancet JE, Uy GL, Cortes JE, et al. CPX-351 (cytarabine and daunorubicin) 
Liposome for Injection Versus Conventional Cytarabine Plus Daunorubicin in Older 
Patients With Newly Diagnosed Secondary Acute Myeloid Leukemia. J Clin Oncol 
Off J Am Soc Clin Oncol. 2018;36(26):2684-2692. doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.77.6112
5. Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hills RK, et al. A comparison of clofarabine with ara-C, 
each in combination with daunorubicin as induction treatment in older patients with 
acute myeloid leukaemia. Leukemia. 2017;31(2):310-317. doi:10.1038/leu.2016.225
6. Ma E, Bonthapally V, Chawla A, et al. An Evaluation of Treatment Patterns and 
Outcomes in Elderly Patients Newly Diagnosed With Acute Myeloid Leukemia: A 
Retrospective Analysis of Electronic Medical Records From US Community 
Oncology Practices. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2016;16(11):625-636.e3. 
doi:10.1016/j.clml.2016.08.006
7. Kantarjian HM, Thomas XG, Dmoszynska A, et al. Multicenter, randomized, open-
label, phase III trial of decitabine versus patient choice, with physician advice, of 
either supportive care or low-dose cytarabine for the treatment of older patients with 
newly diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol Off J Am Soc Clin Oncol . 
2012;30(21):2670-2677. doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.38.9429
8. Juliusson G, Lazarevic V, Hörstedt A-S, Hagberg O, Höglund M. Acute myeloid 
leukemia in the real world: Why population-based registries are needed. Blood. 
2012;119(17):3890-3899. doi:10.1182/blood-2011-12-379008
9. Löwenberg B, Zittoun R, Kerkhofs H, et al. On the value of intensive remission-
induction chemotherapy in elderly patients of 65+ years with acute myeloid 
leukemia: A randomized phase III study of the European Organization for Research 
and Treatment of Cancer Leukemia Group. J Clin Oncol Off J Am Soc Clin Oncol. 
1989;7(9):1268-1274. doi:10.1200/JCO.1989.7.9.1268
10. Medeiros BC, Satram-Hoang S, Momin F, Parisi M. Real-World Treatment Patterns 
and Comparative Effectiveness Among a Population of Elderly Patients with Acute 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 44  of 54Myeloid Leukemia (AML). Blood. 2018;132(Suppl 1):835. doi:10.1182/blood-
2018-99-111267
11. DiNardo CD, Pratz KW, Letai A, et al. Safety and preliminary efficacy of venetoclax 
with decitabine or azacitidine in elderly patients with previously untreated acute 
myeloid leukaemia: A non-randomised, open-label, phase 1b study. Lancet Oncol . 
2018;19(2):216-228. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(18)[ZIP_CODE]-X
12. Khan C, Pathe N, Fazal S, Lister J, Rossetti JM. Azacitidine in the management of 
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes. Ther Adv Hematol. 2012;3(6):355-373. 
doi:10.1177/2040620712464882
13. Klepin HD, Geiger AM, Tooze JA, et al. Geriatric assessment predicts survival for 
older adults receiving induction chemotherapy for acute myelogenous leukemia. 
Blood. 2013;121(21):4287-4294. doi:10.1182/blood-2012-12-[ADDRESS_161336] of Intensive Chemotherapy on 
Physical, Cognitive, and Emotional Health of Older Adults with Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64(10):1988-1995. doi:10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE]
15. Alibhai SMH, Leach M, Kowgier ME, Tomlinson GA, Brandwein JM, Minden MD. 
Fatigue in older adults with acute myeloid leukemia: Predictors and associations 
with quality of life and functional status. Leukemia. 2007;21(4):845-848. 
doi:10.1038/sj.leu.2404576
16. Loh KP, Ramsdale E, Culakova E, et al. Novel mHealth App to Deliver Geriatric 
Assessment-Driven Interventions for Older Adults With Cancer: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_141954]. JMIR Cancer. 2018;4(2):e10296. doi:10.2196/[ZIP_CODE]
17. Carp J, Waldman L, Nicholson S, et al. Quality of life and psychological distress in 
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). J Clin Oncol . 
2018;36(15_suppl):7035-7035. doi:10.1200/JCO.2018.36.15_suppl.7035
18. Oliva EN, Nobile F, Alimena G, et al. Quality of life in elderly patients with acute 
myeloid leukemia: Patients may be more accurate than physicians. Haematologica. 
2011;96(5):696-702. doi:10.3324/haematol.2010.036715
19. Tinsley SM, Sutton SK, Thapa R, Lancet J, McMillan SC. Treatment Choices: A 
Quality of Life Comparison in Acute Myeloid Leukemia and High-risk 
Myelodysplastic Syndrome. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2017;17S:S75-S79. 
doi:10.1016/j.clml.2017.02.016
20. Hurria A, Togawa K, Mohile SG, et al. Predicting chemotherapy toxicity in older 
adults with cancer: A prospective multicenter study. J Clin Oncol Off J Am Soc Clin 
Oncol. 2011;29(25):3457-3465. doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.34.7625
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page [ADDRESS_161337] cancer. Support 
Care Cancer Off J Multinatl Assoc Support Care Cancer. 2015;23(11):3183-3191. 
doi:10.1007/s00520-015-2698-5
22. Brown JC, Harhay MO, Harhay MN. Physical function as a prognostic biomarker 
among cancer survivors. Br J Cancer. 2015;112(1):194-198. 
doi:10.1038/bjc.2014.568
23. Sajid S, Dale W, Mustian K, et al. Novel physical activity interventions for older 
patients with prostate cancer on hormone therapy: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_141955]. J 
Geriatr Oncol. 2016;7(2):71-80. doi:10.1016/j.jgo.2016.02.002
24. Mustian KM, Sprod LK, Janelsins M, et al. Multicenter, Randomized Controlled 
Trial of Yoga for Sleep Quality Among Cancer Survivors. J Clin Oncol. 
2013;31(26):3233-3241. doi:10.1200/JCO.2012.43.7707
25. Mustian KM, Janelsins MC, Peppone LJ, Kamen CS, Guido JJ, Heckler CE. EXCAP 
exercise effects on cognitive impairment and inflammation: A URCC NCORP RCT 
in 479 cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(15_suppl):9504-9504. 
doi:10.1200/jco.2015.33.15_suppl.9504
26. Craft LL, Vaniterson EH, Helenowski IB, Rademaker AW, Courneya KS. Exercise 
effects on depressive symptoms in cancer survivors: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141956] . 2012;21(1):3-19. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-11-[ADDRESS_161338] of exercise on quality of life (QoL) in 198 
older patients with cancer: A URCC NCORP nationwide RCT. J Clin Oncol . 
2017;35(15_suppl):[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE]. doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.35.15_suppl.[ADDRESS_161339] of Physical 
Exercise on Frail Older Persons: A Systematic Review. J Frailty Aging. 
2017;6(2):91-96. doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/jfa.2017.7
29. Klepin HD, Danhauer SC, Tooze JA, et al. Exercise for older adult inpatients with 
acute myelogenous leukemia: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Geriatr Oncol. 2011;2(1):11-17. 
doi:10.1016/j.jgo.2010.10.004
30. Alibhai SMH, O’Neill S, Fisher-Schlombs K, et al. A clinical trial of supervised 
exercise for adult inpatients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) undergoing 
induction chemotherapy. Leuk Res. 2012;36(10):1255-1261. 
doi:10.1016/j.leukres.2012.05.016
31. Schuler MK, Hentschel L, Göbel J, et al. Effects of a home-based exercise program 
on physical capacity and fatigue in patients with low to intermediate risk 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 46  of 54myelodysplastic syndrome-a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Leuk Res. 2016;47:128-135. 
doi:10.1016/j.leukres.2016.05.[ADDRESS_161340] M, Klepin H, Mustian K. Exercise for managing 
cancer- and treatment-related side effects in older adults. J Geriatr Oncol. March 
2018. doi:10.1016/j.jgo.2018.03.003
33. Kleckner IR, Kamen C, Gewandter JS, et al. Effects of exercise during chemotherapy 
on chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy: A multicenter, randomized 
controlled trial. Support Care Cancer Off J Multinatl Assoc Support Care Cancer. 
2018;26(4):1019-1028. doi:10.1007/s00520-017-4013-0
34. Mustian KM, Peppone L, Darling TV, Palesh O, Heckler CE, Morrow GR. A 4-week 
home-based aerobic and resistance exercise program during radiation therapy: A 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_83021]. J Support Oncol. 2009;7(5):158-167.
35. Kamen C, Heckler C, Janelsins MC, et al. A Dyadic Exercise Intervention to Reduce 
Psychological Distress Among Lesbian, Gay, and Heterosexual Cancer Survivors. 
LGBT Health. November 2015. doi:10.1089/lgbt.2015.0101
36. Cole C, Peppone LJ, Kleckner I, et al. Effects of exercise on dyspnea and cancer-
related fatigue in patients with prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol. 
2017;35(15_suppl):e16580-e16580. doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.35.15_suppl.e16580
37. Mustian KM, Sprod L, Janelsins MC, et al. EXCAP exercise to improve fatigue, 
cardiopulmonary function, and strength: A phase II RCT among older prostate 
cancer patients receiving radiation and androgen deprivation therapy. J Clin Oncol. 
2012;30(15_suppl):9010-9010. doi:10.1200/jco.2012.30.15_suppl.9010
38. Loh KP, Mohile SG, Canin B, Bautista J, Lin PJ, Flannery M, Peppone LJ, Kasbari S, 
Esparaz BT, Kuebler JP, Mustian K. Evaluating the effects of exercise on anxiety 
and depression in 198 older patients with cancer receiving active chemotherapy: 
Data from a randomized controlled trial in the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Cancer 
Center NCI Community Oncology Research Program (URCC NCORP) [O30]. 
2017;8(Supp 1):S36.
39. Courneya KS, Segal RJ, Reid RD, et al. Three independent factors predicted 
adherence in a randomized controlled trial of resistance exercise training among 
prostate cancer survivors. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2004;57(6):571-579. 
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2003.11.010
40. Moschny A, Platen P, Klaaßen-Mielke R, Trampi[INVESTIGATOR_141957] U, Hinrichs T. Barriers to 
physical activity in older adults in [LOCATION_013]: A cross-sectional study. Int J Behav 
Nutr Phys Act . 2011;8:121. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-8-121
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 47  of 5441. Egerton T, Chastin SFM, Stensvold D, Helbostad JL. Fatigue May Contribute to 
Reduced Physical Activity Among Older People: An Observational Study. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci . 2016;71(5):670-676. doi:10.1093/gerona/glv150
42. Sjörs C, Bonn SE, Trolle Lagerros Y, Sjölander A, Bälter K. Perceived reasons, 
incentives, and barriers to physical activity in Swedish elderly men. Interact J Med 
Res. 2014;3(4):e15. doi:10.2196/ijmr.3191
43. Schaffer K, Panneerselvam N, Loh KP, et al. Systematic Review of Randomized 
Controlled Trials of Exercise Interventions Using Digital Activity Trackers in 
Patients With Cancer. J Natl Compr Cancer Netw JNCCN. 2019;17(1):57-63. 
doi:10.6004/jnccn.2018.[ADDRESS_161341] SR, Delbaere K. Adherence to 
Technology-Based Exercise Programs in Older Adults: A Systematic Review. J 
Geriatr Phys Ther 2001. June 2016. doi:10.1519/JPT.0000000000000095
45. Mustian K, Lin PJ, Loh KP, Kleckner I. Cancer-related fatigue. In Feuerstein and 
Neklyudov L (Ed). Handbook of Cancer Survivorship. 2018.
46. Walston JD. Sarcopenia in older adults. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2012;24(6):623-627. 
doi:10.1097/BOR.0b013e328358d59b
47. Li Y-P. TNF-alpha is a mitogen in skeletal muscle. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 
2003;285(2):C370-376. doi:10.1152/ajpcell.[ZIP_CODE].2002
48. Carson JA, Hardee JP, VanderVeen BN. The emerging role of skeletal muscle 
oxidative metabolism as a biological target and cellular regulator of cancer-induced 
muscle wasting. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2016;54:53-67. 
doi:10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.11.005
49. Soysal P, Stubbs B, Lucato P, et al. Inflammation and frailty in the elderly: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing Res Rev. 2016;31:1-8. 
doi:10.1016/j.arr.2016.08.006
50. Van Epps P, Oswald D, Higgins PA, et al. Frailty has a stronger association with 
inflammation than age in older veterans. Immun Ageing A. 2016;13:27. 
doi:10.1186/s12979-016-0082-z
51. Parameswaran N, Patial S. Tumor necrosis factor-α signaling in macrophages. Crit 
Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 2010;20(2):87-103.
52. Sedgwick JD, Riminton DS, Cyster JG, Körner H. Tumor necrosis factor: A master-
regulator of leukocyte movement. Immunol Today. 2000;21(3):110-113.
53. Logan RM, Stringer AM, Bowen JM, Gibson RJ, Sonis ST, Keefe DMK. Serum 
levels of NFkappaB and pro-inflammatory cytokines following administration of 
mucotoxic drugs. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008;7(7):1139-1145.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 48  of 5454. Lamkin DM, Lutgendorf SK, Lubaroff D, Sood AK, Beltz TG, Johnson AK. Cancer 
induces inflammation and depressive-like behavior in the mouse: Modulation by 
[CONTACT_141999]. Brain Behav Immun. 2011;25(3):555-564. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2010.12.010
55. Elsea CR, Kneiss JA, Wood LJ. Induction of IL-6 by [CONTACT_142000]-free Female Mice. Biol 
Res Nurs. 2015;17(5):549-557. doi:10.1177/1099800414558087
56. Smith LB, Leo MC, Anderson C, Wright TJ, Weymann KB, Wood LJ. The role of 
IL-1β and TNF-α signaling in the genesis of cancer treatment related symptoms 
(CTRS): A study using cytokine receptor-deficient mice. Brain Behav Immun. 
2014;38:66-76. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2013.12.[ADDRESS_161342] increased mobilization of immature myeloid cells, which exacerbates 
inflammation and accelerates colon carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology. 
2013;144(1):155-166. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2012.09.057
58. Goodman MN. Tumor necrosis factor induces skeletal muscle protein breakdown in 
rats. Am J Physiol. 1991;260(5 Pt 1):E727-730. 
doi:10.1152/ajpendo.1991.260.5.E727
59. Bluthé RM, Pawlowski M, Suarez S, et al. Synergy between tumor necrosis factor 
alpha and interleukin-1 in the induction of sickness behavior in mice. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1994;19(2):197-207.
60. Biesmans S, Bouwknecht JA, Ver Donck L, et al. Peripheral Administration of 
Tumor Necrosis Factor-Alpha Induces Neuroinflammation and Sickness but Not 
Depressive-Like Behavior in Mice. BioMed Res Int. 2015;2015:716920. 
doi:10.1155/2015/716920
61. Kaster MP, Gadotti VM, Calixto JB, Santos ARS, Rodrigues ALS. Depressive-like 
behavior induced by [CONTACT_98416]-α in mice. Neuropharmacology. 
2012;62(1):419-426. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.08.018
62. Palin K, McCusker RH, Strle K, Moos F, Dantzer R, Kelley KW. Tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha-induced sickness behavior is impaired by [CONTACT_142001] c-jun N-terminal kinase. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008;197(4):629-
635. doi:10.1007/s00213-008-1086-y
63. Koo JW, Duman RS. Evidence for IL-1 receptor blockade as a therapeutic strategy 
for the treatment of depression. Curr Opin Investig Drugs Lond Engl 2000. 
2009;10(7):664-671.
64. Loh KP, Tooze JA, Nicklas BJ, Kritchevsky SB, Williamson JD, Ellis LR, Powell 
BL, Pardee TS, Klepin HD. Inflammatory biomarkers, geriatric assessment, and 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 49  of 54treatment outcomes among older adults treated intensively for acute myelogenous 
leukemia. Poster presentation at: Acute Leukemia Forum; 12-13 April 2018, Los 
Angelas, [LOCATION_004].
65. Panju AH, Danesh A, Minden MD, Kelvin DJ, Alibhai SMH. Associations between 
quality of life, fatigue, and cytokine levels in patients aged 50+ with acute myeloid 
leukemia. Support Care Cancer Off J Multinatl Assoc Support Care Cancer . 
2009;17(5):539-546. doi:10.1007/s00520-008-0512-3
66. Fung FY, Li M, Breunis H, Timilshina N, Minden MD, Alibhai SMH. Correlation 
between cytokine levels and changes in fatigue and quality of life in patients with 
acute myeloid leukemia. Leuk Res. 2013;37(3):274-279. 
doi:10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.[ADDRESS_161343] Cancer Survivors: A 
Systematic Review with Meta-analysis. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141958] . 2016;25(7):1009-1017. 
doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-[ADDRESS_161344] . 2011;2011:532620. doi:10.4061/2011/532620
69. Kim M, Costello J. DNA methylation: An epi[INVESTIGATOR_141959]. Exp 
Mol Med. 2017;49(4):e322. doi:10.1038/emm.2017.10
70. Jin B, Li Y, Robertson KD. DNA methylation: Superior or subordinate in the 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_141960]? Genes Cancer. 2011;2(6):607-617. 
doi:10.1177/1947601910393957
71. Sullivan KE, Reddy ABM, Dietzmann K, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141961]. Mol Cell Biol . 2007;27(14):5147-5160. 
doi:10.1128/MCB.[ZIP_CODE]-06
72. Uddin M, Koenen KC, Aiello AE, Wildman DE, de los Santos R, Galea S. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141962] a community-based 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_141963]. Psychol Med . 2011;41(5):997-1007. 
doi:10.1017/S0033291710001674
73. Shaw N, Leung WC, Tapp HS, Fitzpatrick AL, Saxton JM, Belshaw NJ. A change in 
physical activity level affects leukocyte DNA methylation of genes implicated in 
cardiovascular disease in the elderly. Proc Physiol Soc 31: C46, 2014.
74. Radom-Aizik S, Zaldivar FP, Haddad F, Cooper DM. Impact of brief exercise on 
circulating monocyte gene and microRNA expression: Implications for 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 50  of 54atherosclerotic vascular disease. Brain Behav Immun. 2014;39:121-129. 
doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2014.01.[ADDRESS_161345] J Int Assoc Study Obes. 
2000;24(9):1207-1211.
76. Greiwe JS, Cheng B, Rubin DC, Yarasheski KE, Semenkovich CF. Resistance 
exercise decreases skeletal muscle tumor necrosis factor alpha in frail elderly 
humans. FASEB J Off Publ Fed Am Soc Exp Biol. 2001;15(2):475-482. 
doi:10.1096/fj.00-0274com
77. Sprod LK, Palesh OG, Janelsins MC, et al. Exercise, sleep quality, and mediators of 
sleep in breast and prostate cancer patients receiving radiation therapy. Community 
Oncol. 2010;7(10):463-471.
78. Loh KP, Kleckner IR, Lin P-J, et al. Effects of a Home-based Exercise Program on 
Anxiety and Mood Disturbances in Older Adults with Cancer Receiving 
Chemotherapy. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019;67(5):1005-1011. doi:10.1111/jgs.[ADDRESS_161346] Phase of Usability Evaluation: How Many Subjects Is 
Enough? Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society. 1992;34(4):457–68. Doi: 10.1177/001872089203400407.
80. Nielsen J, Landauer TK. A mathematical model of the finding of usability problems. 
CHI ’93 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems; 1993; Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. 1993. Pp. 206–213.
81. Lancet JE, Uy GL, Cortes JE, et al. Final results of a phase III randomized trial of 
CPX-351 versus 7+3 in older patients with newly diagnosed high risk (secondary) 
AML. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(15_suppl):7000-7000. 
doi:10.1200/JCO.2016.34.15_suppl.7000
82. Walter RB, Michaelis LC, Othus M, et al. Intergroup LEAP trial (S1612): A 
randomized phase 2/[ADDRESS_161347] novel therapeutics in medically less fit 
older adults with acute myeloid leukemia. Am J Hematol . 2018;93(2):E49-E52. 
doi:10.1002/ajh.[ZIP_CODE]
83. Paper: North American Leukemia‚ Intergroup Phase III Randomized Trial of Single 
Agent Clofarabine As Induction and Post-Remission Therapy‚ and Decitabine As 
Maintenance Therapy in Newly-Diagnosed Acute Myeloid Leukemia in Older 
Adults (Age ≥60 Years): A Trial of the ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group 
(E2906). https://ash.confex.com/ash/2015/webprogramscheduler/Paper80738.html. 
Accessed September 7, 2017.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 51 of 5484. Loh KP, Kadambi S, Mohile SG, Mendler JH, Liesveld JL, O’Dwyer KM, Becker 
MW, McHugh C, Wittink M, Stock W, Majhail N, Wildes T, Duberstein PR, Klepin HD. Qualitative study of factors that influence treatment decision-making among community oncologists and older patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Poster presentation at: American Society of Hematology Annual Meeting 2018.
85. Mustian KM, Peppone L, Darling TV, Palesh O, Heckler CE, Morrow GR. A 4-week 
home-based aerobic and resistance exercise program during radiation therapy: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_83021]. J Support Oncol . 2009;7(5):158-167.
86. Magnuson A, Lemelman T, Pandya C, et al. Geriatric assessment with management 
intervention in older adults with cancer: A randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Support Care 
Cancer Off J Multinatl Assoc Support Care Cancer . 2018;26(2):605-613. 
doi:10.1007/s00520-017-3874-6
87. Roman E, Smith A, Appleton S, et al. Myeloid malignancies in the real-world: 
Occurrence, progression and survival in the [LOCATION_006]’s population-based Haematological Malignancy Research Network 2004–15. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . 2016;42:186-198. 
doi:10.1016/j.canep.2016.03.011
88. Race and Ethnicity in [COMPANY_002]ster, [LOCATION_001] (City)â ”Statistical Atlas. 
http://statisticalatlas.com/place/New-York/[COMPANY_002]ster/Race-and-Ethnicity. Accessed July 31, 2017.
89. Office for Human Subject Protection. Available from: 
Https://www.rochester.edu/ohsp/documents/ohsp/pdf/policiesAndGuidance/Policy_604_Research_Involving_Decisionally_Impaired_Adults.pdf27.
90. Klepin HD, Campi[INVESTIGATOR_141964]-Bacote A, Hong W-J, et al. Geriatric Assessment (GA) 
Measures and Patient-Reported Outcomes (PROs) Among Older Adults Treated in a Phase 1b Study for Relapsed/Refractory (R/R) Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML). Blood . 2018;132(Suppl 1):4076. doi:10.1182/blood-2018-99-116038
91. National Cancer Institute Division of Cancer Control & Population Sciences. 2018. 
Patient-Reported Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-CTCAE
TM). [ONLINE] Available at: 
Https://healthcaredelivery.cancer.gov/pro-ctcae/. [Accessed 31 December 2018].
92. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Guidelines for Supportive Care. 
[Cited 2019 Feb 18]. Available from https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/default.aspx#supportive.
93. Oncology Nursing Society. Symptoms and Side-Effects. [Cited 2019 Feb 18]. 
Available from https://www.ons.org/explore-resources?display=topic&topic=351&ref=RO.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 52  of 5494. Basch E, Barbera L, Kerrigan CL, Velikova G. Implementation of Patient-Reported 
Outcomes in Routine Medical Care. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book Am Soc Clin 
Oncol Annu Meet. 2018;(38):122-134. doi:10.1200/EDBK_200383
95. Schmitz KH, Courneya KS, Matthews C, et al. American College of Sports Medicine 
roundtable on exercise guidelines for cancer survivors. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2010;42(7):1409-1426. doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181e0c112
96. Ostir GV, Volpato S, Fried LP, Chaves P, Guralnik JM, Women’s Health and Aging 
Study. Reliability and sensitivity to change assessed for a summary measure of 
lower body function: Results from the Women’s Health and Aging Study. J Clin 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . 2002;55(9):916-921.
97. Shuman-Paretsky MJ, Belser-Ehrlich J, Holtzer R. Psychometric Properties of the 
Brief Fatigue Inventory in Community-Dwelling Older Adults. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil . 2014;95(8):1533-1539. doi:10.1016/j.apmr.2014.03.026
98. Mendoza TR, Wang XS, Cleeland CS, et al. The rapid assessment of fatigue severity 
in cancer patients: Use of the Brief Fatigue Inventory. Cancer. 1999;85(5):1186-
1196.
99. Beekman AT, Deeg DJ, Van Limbeek J, Braam AW, De Vries MZ, Van Tilburg W. 
Criterion validity of the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_141965] (CES-
D): Results from a community-based sample of older subjects in The Netherlands. 
Psychol Med. 1997;27(1):231-235.
100. Eaton WW, Kessler LG. Rates of symptoms of depression in a national sample. Am 
J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 1981;114(4):528-538.
101. Cella D, Jensen SE, Webster K, et al. Measuring health-related quality of life in 
leukemia: The Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy--Leukemia (FACT-Leu) 
questionnaire. Value Health J Int Soc Pharmacoeconomics Outcomes Res. 
2012;15(8):1051-1058. doi:10.1016/j.jval.2012.08.2210
102. Resnick B, Jenkins LS. Testing the reliability and validity of the Self-Efficacy for 
Exercise scale. Nurs Res. 2000;49(3):154-159.
103. Schmidt K, Vogt L, Thiel C, Jager E, Banzer W. Validity of the six-minute walk test 
in cancer patients. Int J Sports Med. 2013;34(7):631-636. doi:10.1055/s-0032-
[ADDRESS_161348] of sarcopenia on 1-year mortality in older 
patients with cancer. Age Ageing. 2019;48(3):413-418. doi:10.1093/ageing/afy212
105. Brooke J. (1996). SUS: A “quick and dirty” usability scale. In  Jordan P, Thomas B, 
Weerdmeester B (Eds.), Usability evaluation in industry; pp. 189–194). London, 
[LOCATION_006]: Taylor & Francis.
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 53 of [ZIP_CODE]. Peres SC, Pham T, Phillips R. Validation of the System Usability Scale (SUS): SUS 
in the Wild. Proc Hum Factors Ergon Soc Annu Meet . 2013;57(1):192-196. 
doi:10.1177/1541931213571043
107. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_34029] P, Latchney SE, Reed JM, et al. Identification of the novel Ido1 imprinted 
locus and its potential epi[INVESTIGATOR_141966]. Hum Mol Genet . November 
2018. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddy383
108. Campión J, Milagro FI, Goyenechea E, Martínez JA. TNF-alpha promoter 
methylation as a predictive biomarker for weight-loss response. Obes Silver Spring 
Md. 2009;17(6):1293-1297. doi:10.1038/oby.2008.679
109. Falvo JV, Tsytsykova AV, Goldfeld AE. Transcriptional control of the TNF gene. 
Curr Dir Autoimmun . 2010;11:27-60. doi:10.1159/000289196
110. Tekpli X, Landvik NE, Anmarkud KH, Skaug V, Haugen A, Zienolddiny S. DNA 
methylation at promoter regions of interleukin 1B, interleukin 6, and interleukin 8 in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Immunol Immunother CII . 2013;62(2):337-345. 
doi:10.1007/s00262-012-1340-3
111. Hashimoto K, Oreffo ROC, Gibson MB, Goldring MB, Roach HI. DNA 
demethylation at specific CpG sites in the IL1B promoter in response to inflammatory cytokines in human articular chondrocytes. Arthritis Rheum . 
2009;60(11):3303-3313. doi:10.1002/art.[ZIP_CODE]
112. Fu L, Ma C, Cong B, Li S, Chen H, Zhang J. Hypomethylation of proximal CpG 
motif of interleukin-10 promoter regulates its expression in human rheumatoid arthritis. Acta Pharmacol Sin . 2011;32(11):1373-1380. doi:10.1038/aps.2011.98
113. Little R, Yau L. Intent-to-treat analysis for longitudinal studies with drop-outs. 
Biometrics 1996;52:1324-33.
114. Hsieh H-F, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual 
Health Res . 2005;15(9):1277-1288. doi:10.1177/1049732305276687
115. Julious SA. Sample size of 12 per group rule of thumb for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Pharm Stat . 
2005;4(4):287-291. doi:10.1002/pst.185
116. Moore CG, Carter RE, Nietert PJ, Stewart PW. Recommendations for planning pi[INVESTIGATOR_141967]. Clin Transl Sci . 2011;4(5):332-337. 
doi:10.1111/j.1752-8062.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x
117. Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and 
Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing. J R Stat Soc Ser B Methodol . 
1995;57(1):289-300. doi:10.2307/2346101
118. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research 
Electronic Data Capture (REDCap)â ”A metadata-driven methodology and 
Protocol Version: 22OCTOBER2021 Page 54  of 54workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J Biomed 
Inform. 2009;42(2):377-381. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010
119. Clinical & Translational Science Institute. REDCap. REDCap at the University of 
[COMPANY_002]ster. Available at: Https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/ctsi/research-
help/REDCap.cfm.
120. Croisier JL, Ganteaume S, Binet J, Genty M, Ferret JM. Strength imbalances and 
prevention of hamstring injury in professional soccer players: a prospective study. The 
American journal of sports medicine. 2008;36(8):1469-1475.