PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 1 of 32PROTOCOL TITLE:
Education about Health and Cancer Study
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:
[INVESTIGATOR_552610], BM, BCh, MPH, PhD
Associate Director for Community Outreach and 
Engagement
[EMAIL_10522]
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:
Version 1: 1/29/2020
Version 2: 2/10/2020
Version 3: 3/17/2020
Version 4: 6/12/2020
Version 5: 8/31/2020
Version 6: 9/21/2020
Version 7: 10/15/2020
Version 8: 12/8/2020
Version 9: 4/20/2021
Version 10: 7/13/2021
Version 11: 9/10/2021
Version 12: 3/3/2022
Version 13: 04/2022
Version 14: 02/2023
REVISION HISTORY
Revision 
#Version Date Summary of Changes Consent 
Change?
2 2/10/2020 Removing language of HIPAA waiver. 
Information sheets updated to include HIPAA 
and data use language.Y
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 2 of 323 3/172020 Consent Changes:
For Experimental Arm 2 and Control Arm 
(both online: Adding language to Information 
sheets to include information about participant 
ability to download e-signed consent form.
For Experimental Arm 1: Adding HIPAA 
language to consent script (which should have 
been done during our 2/10/2020 modification) 
and adding a signature [CONTACT_552639].
For All Arms: Adding privacy/confidentiality 
risk language and request for personal 
information and that data will be stored for 6 
years No longer requesting waiver of 
signatureY
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 3 of 32(except that Experimental Arm 2 and Control 
are e-signatures).
See information sheets, script, and protocol 
section 18 for changes.
Other Changes:
Changing length of time data is stored (6 
years).
Adding the six control arm dummy questions 
to all arms of study (not just control arm).
Clarifying identifying information to be 
included in Experimental Arm 2 and Control 
Arm (to match Experimental Arm 1 
information)
Clarifying that all participants who pre-screen 
as eligible for both identified PI [INVESTIGATOR_552611] (not just 
Experimental Arm 1 participants)
Modifying online format for Experimental Arm 
[ADDRESS_726439] the 
video plus written education.
Adding documents for review:
-Video script
-Referrals data tracking sheets (referrals to 
research nurses and research teams/PIs for 
possible enrollment in studies)
4 6/12/2020 Consent Form changes, including initials; see 
tracked changes on consent forms
Other revisions within protocol:
-Clarifying sample size for Exp. Arm 2 and 
Control Arm.
-Modified recruitment plans for Exp Arm 2 and 
Control Arm (unpaid social media posts)Yes
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 4 of 32Re-ordering of study procedures; notably: 
Eligibility to come before consent, post-test to 
come before pre-screening for trials/studies 
questions
-Most survey questions programmed as 
mandatory response
- Updated online arm descriptions to specify 
use of Qualtrics for survey administration 
where before had indicated Qualtrics or 
RedCap
- Updates to data collection and storage 
procedures (including collection of contact 
[CONTACT_552616], not separate, 
to facilitate referrals to studies/trials)
-Updated electronic gift card information to 
indicate that unclaimed gift cards may be 
deactivated after 6 months
-Updated data management
-Updated privacy (team member access to data)
Other revised documents for review:
-Revised Studies Referral Tracker
-Revised Pre-Screening Questions and 
Information about trials/studies for referral
-Revised eligibility questions (new 
questions/answer options), pre- and post-test 
surveys (new and revised questions), and pre- 
screening questions/information about 
trials/studies for referrals (new and revised 
questions), revised contact [CONTACT_552617] (now all combined as a 
Qualtrics PDF)
Adding documents for review:
-Website education content
-Clinical trials video
Please note: Experimental Arm 1 (in-person) 
will not commence until Dartmouth/D-HH 
guidance supports in-person activities, in order 
to minimize risk of COVID-19 transmission.
5 8/31/2020 Updated procedures in protocol regarding order 
of study procedures (consent first, screening 
second; re-ordering of some post-test questions 
versus clinical trials linkages); updated Y
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 5 of 32recruitment procedures; updated PI
[INVESTIGATOR_552612]:
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 6 of 32Change of PI [INVESTIGATOR_552613] 2 with 
screening language
Update to recruitment language to include 
screening language
Update of study design from 
Observational to Interventional
Updated Qualtrics survey (reorder question 
sequence) Updated screening 
question/information form
Update of educational web site link
Addition of potential images for 
advertising/recruitment Considering addition of 
a setting in Qualtrics with accompanying 
instructions that will provide the participant with 
a time allocation for the intervention
6 9/21/2020 Change in protocol file name
7 10/15/2020 Added two Qualtrics survey questions 
pertaining to participant’s level of engagement 
with educational
content (participants are required to respond)
8 12/8/2020 Protocol edits:
-Changes and clarifications to study procedures for 
online study arms, resources/team members, other 
procedures (see tracked changes throughout); 
please note: some edits are simply corrections 
overlooked in past modifications (e.g., eligibility 
screening process that was changed in modification 
#4 above—some residual edits were needed for 
clarity only).
-Updated contact [CONTACT_33655] (Exp Arm 1- 
document; other arms- see Qualtrics survey)
-Updated survey (instructions throughout, 
logic/flow, question language, contact/personal 
information form, linkage/referral questions)
-Updated consent/information sheet for clarity (see 
tracked changes in enclosed document)
-Updated tracking sheet for study teams/nurses
-Updated linkage/referral questions documentY
9 4/20/2021 Study team edits:
-Adding Judith Rees as Co-I
-Removing Inger Imset as study team member
Protocol edits:Y
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 7 of 32-Removing control group
-Updating experimental arm 1 procedures
-Minor other edits
Updated survey for experimental arm 2 (and 
former control group)
-Removing control group intervention and 
‘dummy’ questions from the control group
-Updating contact [CONTACT_552618]
-Providing clarifying instructional language
-Adding two qualitative questions about the 
intervention
Providing electronic surveys (pre and post) for 
experimental arm 1
Updated consent for experimental arm 2 (and 
former control group):
-Updating contact [CONTACT_552619] :
-Updating study details
-Updating compensation
-Updating contact [CONTACT_3031]
10 7/13/[ADDRESS_726440] information for research team 
(instructional language in surveys, consent)
-Updating participant instructions related to 
timeline for compensation
-Updating study procedures for identifying bot/fake 
survey responsesY
11 9/10/2021 -Updating PI
-Updating documents (including consents) to 
reflect updated PI
-Updating materials related to trials/studies we will 
refer to, as they also are experiencing changes in 
their PI[INVESTIGATOR_552614]
12 3/3/2022 -Updating recruitment plans/verbiage for 
Experimental Arm 2
-Clarifying team members mentioned in protocol 
(though they’ve previously been updated in eIRB 
system)N
13 05/02/2022 Name [CONTACT_552640]
-Addition of new employees; removing previous 
employees
-Updating info for new Best Practice Alert for 
provider access to connect patients with clinical 
trials education
-Updating/clarifying listserve & Front Porch 
Forum information for advertising purposes
14 02/15/2023 -Addition new employee; remove former employee
-Addition After Visit Summary (AVS) for Epic to 
BPA
-Study Population Arm 2 updated to include 
listserves and flyers in addition to social media
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 8 of 32Table of Contents
1.0 Study Summary.........................................................................................................3
2.0 Objectives* ...............................................................................................................4
3.0 Background*.............................................................................................................4
4.0 Study Endpoints*......................................................................................................4
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent.................................................................4
6.0 Procedures Involved* ...............................................................................................5
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking*...................................................................................5
8.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects* ............................................................................6
9.0 Study Timelines* ......................................................................................................6
10.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*.............................................................................6
11.0 Vulnerable Populations*...........................................................................................6
12.0 Local Number of Subjects ........................................................................................7
13.0 Recruitment Methods................................................................................................7
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects*...........................................................................................7
15.0 Risks to Subjects*.....................................................................................................7
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects* .................................................................................8
17.0 Data Management* and Confidentiality ...................................................................8
18.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects* ...........................[ADDRESS_726441] the Privacy Interests of Subjects.............................................9
20.0 Compensation for Research-Related Injury..............................................................9
21.0 Economic Burden to Subjects...................................................................................9
22.0 Consent Process ........................................................................................................9
23.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing...............................................................12
24.0 Setting .....................................................................................................................13
25.0 Resources Available ...............................................................................................13
26.0 Multi-Site Research* ..............................................................................................13
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 9 of 321.0 Study Summary
Study Title Education about Health and Cancer Study
Study Design Interventional/Cohort Study
Pre-/Post-/Follow-up (via surveys and research records)
Primary Objective Aim 1: Implement and evaluate educational activities to 
improve knowledge of, attitudes and behavioral intentions 
toward, and participation in clinical trials and cancer 
research studies among rural residents living in NH and VT 
(Rural = RUCC 7-9 counties).
Secondary 
Objective(s)Aim 1a: Implement electronic portal access to educate 
regarding what clinical trials and cancer research are and 
evaluate the effect on knowledge of, attitudes and 
behavioral intentions toward, and actual enrollment into 
clinical trials and cancer research studies.
Aim 1b: Implement online education regarding what clinical 
trials and cancer research are and evaluate the effect on 
knowledge of, attitudes and behavioral intentions toward, 
and actual enrollment into clinical trials and cancer research 
studies.
Aim 1c: Compare the impact of  education about clinical 
trials with the impact of an innovative outreach modality 
using social media and web-based technology for 
educating the public about clinical trials; provider portal 
Epic (EDH) for patients.
Research 
Intervention(s)Experimental arm 1 (Aim 1a): Education about clinical trials 
and cancer research via  provider portal education to cancer 
survivors, caregivers, and the public.
Experimental arm 2 (Aim 1b): Education about clinical trials 
and cancer research via online video and module.
Study Population The main target population is adults aged 18 or older who 
reside in rural New Hampshire or Vermont; “rural” = Rural 
Urban Continuum Codes (RUCC) 7—9 counties (Coos and 
Sullivan County, NH; Caledonia, Windsor, Windham, 
Orange, Orleans, Lamoille, and Essex County, VT)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726442] meet the following eligibility criteria:
-Be a resident of one of the RUCC 7—9 counties in NH and 
VT and
-Be 18 years or older at the time of enrollment
Aim 1: The target population is adult cancer survivors, 
caregivers, and patients who are connected with the 
Dartmouth Cancer Center.
Aim 2: The target population is adults who reside in rural 
New Hampshire or Vermont.
Sample Size Experimental Arm 1: up to 50
Experimental Arm 2: 200-250
Study Duration for 
individual 
participantsUp to 7.5 months
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
DefinitionsBPA=Brief Provider Alerts
CHE= Community Health Educator 
NCI= National Cancer Institute
CRCHD=Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (a 
division of the National Cancer Institute)
NON= National Outreach Network (an effort of CRCHD) 
COE= Community Outreach and Education (a focus of the 
Norris Cotton Cancer Center)
DCC=Dartmouth Cancer Center
DHH=Dartmouth Hitchcock Health
NCCC= Norris Cotton Cancer Center
NCCC North= Norris Cotton Cancer Center North in St. 
Johnsbury
RUCC= Rural-Urban Continuum Codes (a U.S. Department 
of Agriculture schema for defining communities as 
rural/urban)
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 11 of 322.0 Objectives*
2.1The purpose of this project is to: (1) contribute to a nation-wide initiative to 
educate the public about clinical trials, (2) evaluate the effectiveness of education 
about clinical trials/research in changing knowledge, behavioral intentions, and 
behaviors related to clinical trials/cancer research enrollment.
Aim 1: Implement and evaluate educational activities to improve knowledge of, 
attitudes and behavioral intentions toward, and participation in clinical trials and 
cancer research studies among rural residents living in NH and VT (Rural = 
RUCC 7-9 counties).
Aim 1a: Implement electronic portal education regarding what clinical 
trials and cancer research are and evaluate the effect on knowledge of, 
attitudes and behavioral intentions toward, and actual enrollment into 
clinical trials and cancer research studies.
Aim 1b: Implement online education regarding what clinical trials and 
cancer research are and evaluate the effect on knowledge of, attitudes and 
behavioral intentions toward, and actual enrollment into clinical trials and 
cancer research studies.
Aim 1c: Compare the impact of  electroniceducation about clinical trials 
with the impact of an innovative outreach modality using social media, 
patient portals and web-based technology for educating the public about 
clinical trials.
2.2Hypotheses:
1- Accessingeducation about clinical trials will be effective in: a) increasing 
knowledge of clinical trials; b) increasing intent to participate in clinical trials; 
and c) increasing clinical trials/research project enrollment within six-months 
post-outreach.
2- Online/video outreach with online module about clinical trials will be effective 
in: a) increasing knowledge of clinical trials; b) increasing intent to participate in 
clinical trials; and c) increasing clinical trials/research project enrollment within 
six-months post-outreach.
3.0 Background*
3.1Since 2010, The Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities (CRCHD) 
has managed the NON, (National Outreach Network) of CHEs (Community 
Health
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 12 of 32Educators) located within NCI-funded cancer research programs. The program 
seeks to enhance the integration of underserved communities into the research and 
mission of NCI and strengthen NCI’s responsiveness to the cancer information 
needs of underserved communities. It is expected that the close affiliation of NON 
CHEs with other NCI-research programs will further strengthen the ability of NCI 
and DCC to reach underserved communities through region-based community 
education/outreach activities to disseminate cancer information aligned with 
NCI's research priorities. Through embedding this national network of CHEs in 
cancer centers throughout the nation, this has led to the development, 
implementation, and assessment of a broad range of culturally-tailored 
community outreach activities.
In 2019, DCC received a supplemental grant from NCI to continue to participate 
in the National Outreach Network and to continue to employ a Community Health 
Educator at the cancer center. Under the new award, NCI/CRCHD requires that 
every cancer center with the supplemental grant participate in a national effort to 
educate underserved communities (in our case, rural communities) about clinical 
trials/research, because underserved communities are often also underrepresented 
in trials/research.[ADDRESS_726443] commonly-reported barriers to 
participating in cancer clinical trials.1 The review did not identify any studies that 
reported on effectiveness of culturally-tailored education on clinical trials 
enrollment,1 and more research is needed in this area. A 2001 study also found 
that improving awareness/understanding of clinical trials may be an important 
step in improving attitudes toward clinical trials and, possibly, participation in 
trials.2
3.3. In order to implement education about clinical trials across 24 cancer centers, 
NCI/CRCHD has developed a set of key messages that all cancer centers must 
include in their educational activities, and the cancer centers are tailoring the 
educational messaging/curriculum and delivery of activities to be locally-relevant 
and tailored to the needs of our catchment area. NCI/CRCHD has also developed 
a pre-test and a post-test (surveys- see attached) that will be administered 
immediately preceding and proceeding our educational activities, with the intent 
of evaluating whether the educational interventions changed the participants’ 
knowledge of, attitudes toward, and behavioral intentions regarding taking part in 
clinical trials and research. NCI/CRCHD has asked us to track whether 
participants in our interventions go on to enroll in trials/studies in the six-months 
following our intervention (via our PIs’ and Office of Clinical Trials’ research 
records).
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 13 of 32This study will help measure and evaluate the effectiveness of different models of 
educating people about clinical trials. The data will be aggregated at a national 
level to assess the overall NCI/CRCHD activity. The data will be analyzed at the 
local/regional level to inform DCC’s Community Outreach and Engagement 
program’s future outreach models. Given the limited literature regarding the 
effectiveness of education on clinical trials knowledge, attitudes, and enrollment, 
this study will contribute meaningful and important information.
References:
[ADDRESS_726444], J. G., Howerton, M. W., Lai, G. Y., Gary, T. L., Bolen, S., Gibbons, M. C., ... & 
Powe, N. R. (2008). Barriers to recruiting underrepresented populations to cancer clinical 
trials: a systematic review. Cancer: Interdisciplinary International Journal of the American 
Cancer Society, 112(2), 228-242.
2. Taylor, H., & Leitman, R. Misconceptions and lack of awareness greatly reduce 
recruitment for cancer clinical trials.[article online, Health Care News, Vol. 1, Issue 3]. 
[COMPANY_002]ster (NY): Harris Interactive, Inc.; 2001 Jan 22 [cited 2001 Mar 29].[3 p].
4.0 Study Endpoints*
4.1Knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions (assessed via surveys)
4.2Actual enrollment into a clinical trial or cancer research study (assessed via 
DCC Office of Clinical Research enrollment records over [ADDRESS_726445] 
intervention and enrollment records for specified DCC trials/research studies 
(see enclosed document with information about those studies)
5.0 Study Intervention
5.1DCC’s Community Outreach and Engagement Team (Jenna Schiffelbein, , 
Regina-Anne Cooper, Anna Tosteson, Judith Rees, Lisa Purvis, Stephanie Papas, 
Kathy Stroffolino, Andrew Cowenhoven) will implement the clinical trials 
education in experimental arms— 1) education using electronic provider alerts 
(BPA) and 2) an online website/video format. The education in both formats will 
be based on a set of key messages that cover information about clinical trials, 
including what they are, the benefits, the risks, and how to locate available 
clinical trials (see attached outline of education).
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
We will evaluate educational outputs from electronic portal regarding what 
clinical trials and cancer research studies are. The educational content for videos 
was developed with the National Cancer Institute (NCI) toolkit as a foundation, 
with additional content added to adapt to our local institution, culture, and patient 
needs. The videos learning objectives focus on improving participants’ 
knowledge about what clinical trials and cancer research studies are and how to 
access trials and studies, increase positive attitudes toward participating in trials 
and studies, and increase their intent to enroll in trials and studies. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726446] the 
option to include After Visit Summary (AVS) to Patient Notes that will contain 
invitation link. Patients will receive a link to the survey. If they choose to take 
part in the study, they will do so by [CONTACT_552620], eligibility 
screening, pre-test, and contact [CONTACT_552621]; attend the class; and complete the post-test after the class to assess 
achievement of the learning objectives. They will also be asked a series of 
questions to assess their eligibility for existing DCC clinical trials and research 
studies (see enclosed Qualtrics PDF).
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
Participants will watch a video and view website materials (‘online module’) 
developed by [CONTACT_552622] 
(NCI) and tailored to our local context. The online module’s learning objectives 
will focus on improving participants’ knowledge about what clinical trials and 
cancer research studies are and how to access trials and studies, increase positive 
attitudes toward participating in trials and studies, and increase their intent to 
enroll in trials and studies. Eligible participants will complete pre- and post- 
surveys to assess achievement of the learning objectives, and they will also be 
asked a series of questions to assess their eligibility for existing DCC clinical 
trials and research studies (see enclosed questions).
6.0 Procedures Involved*
6.1Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
Out study will be largely advertised to DCC’s patients and caregivers (e.g., 
through Patient and Family Support Services’ catalog, DH events calendar, DCC/ 
DH Facebook, online listserves, waiting rooms).. 
a- Recruitment- recruitment to participate in the study will happen after a patient 
or caregiver receives a link to participate in survey from provider BPA. DCC 
porviders open a message from electronic provider portal BPA. The BPA 
promps an alert to providers – who open a message indicating the option to 
send a patient information about accessing the survey or, to be connected 
with a clinical nurse/coordinator who can walk the patient through the 
process of accessing the survey. 
1 – Provider portal option using electronic medical record portal EDH/Epic 
includes option inviting providers to click on Best Practice Alert when 
prompted.
b- The recruitment language provides prospective participants with a link to an 
online survey where they can consent, complete eligibility screening, the pre-
test, and contact [CONTACT_3031]. Contact [CONTACT_3031] (name, email, phone 
number, address) and date of birth is collected to facilitate: 1) hand-off to 
open studies/trials’ teams and clinical staff (Research Nurses/Nurse 
Navigators) for recruitment, 2) tracking subsequent enrollment into any 
study/trial, 3) gift card distribution for their time, and 4) to invite them to 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726447] survey (see attached Qualtrics PDF 
for Experimental Arm 1)- including:
• Post-intervention knowledge
• Pre-screening for eligibility into pre-selected open trials/studies at 
DCC (see attachment with study details and questions).
• Post-intervention attitude and behavioral intention questions
g- Provision of participant compensation for completing the post-test. E-gift 
cards that have not been claimed six months after being emailed may be 
deactivated.
h- Referral to pre-screened (possibly eligible) participants to PI’s of pre-selected 
open studies/trials, as well as DCC clinical staff (research nurses, nurse 
navigators). This will entail providing participant contact/health information 
to PIs/study teams/DCC clinical staff of studies/trials that the participant may 
be eligible for. Participants will have provided permission for their 
information to be shared (see information sheet and pre-screening section of 
the Qualtrics post-survey). Tracking of participants’ enrollment status into 
studies/trials over six months (via PI/study team records and DCC Office of 
Clinical Research  records/Oncore).
This will entail providing our participants’ identifying information to the 
PIs/research teams of selected studies and to DCC’s Office of Clinical 
Research and asking them to identify which participants have enrolled in 
studies/trials since the educational intervention. With permission/direction 
from DCC’s Office of Clinical Research, our study team members may 
track enrollment via Oncore. See enclosed Excel spreadsheet that will be 
used for tracking. [We will also collect aggregate enrollment in 
trials/studies at DCC for comparison with our participants.]
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726448] survey data files to NCI/CRCHD 
and/or its contractor for data entry, quality control, and national aggregation; 
e- mailing of tracking excel spreadsheet to NCI/CRCHD and/or its contractor.
j- Local analysis of data to determine effect of study objectives
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
The video and online education module arm will feature the following key 
elements:
a- Geo-targeted paid advertisements and other unpaid posts on social media 
(e.g., Facebook), listserves, or flyerswill invite prospective participants to our 
study by [CONTACT_552623] ‘Learn More’ to open the surveys in a new page 
in Qualtrics (see enclosed recruitment messaging). We will also recruit 
through other online opportunities, such as Front Porch Forum, e-newsletters 
and listservs, online community forums/groups, partner organizations, etc.
b- A consenting process utilizing a downloadable information sheet (see 
attachments- information sheet with e-signature)
c- Screening for eligibility questions- Prospective participants will be asked a 
series of questions to ascertain if they are adults living in rural VT or NH (see 
Qualtrics survey PDF). Those who are eligible and consented will be told they 
are eligible and invited to continue forward into the study. Those who are not 
eligible will be thanked for their time. All questions will be programmed as 
required.
d- Completion of a pre-test survey (see Qualtrics survey PDF)- includes 
demographics; baseline knowledge, attitudes, and behavioral intentions. (see 
Qualtrics survey PDF). All questions will be programmed as required.
e- Delivery of online module as the educational intervention (as described 
earlier- see enclosed link to module: 
https://cancer.dartmouth.edu/node/1167). The online module will include a 
video and accompanying educational information (not yet visible to the 
general public but may be used in select venues outside of research project).
p - Completion of a post-test survey (see Qualtrics survey PDF)- includes 
knowledge and attitudes questions. All questions will be programmed as 
required.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 17 of 32q - Pre-screening for eligibility into pre-selected open studies and other clinical 
trials at DCC (see Qualtrics survey PDF). All questions will be programmed as 
required.
r - Completion of a post-test survey (see attachment and Qualtrics survey PDF)-
behavioral intention questions. All questions will be programmed as 
required.
s - Collection of contact [CONTACT_3031] (name, email, phone number, address) and 
date of birth to facilitate: 1) hand-off to open studies/trials’ teams and clinical 
staff (Research Nurses/Nurse Navigators) for recruitment, 2) tracking 
subsequent enrollment into any study/trial, and 3) gift card distribution for 
their time. All components of the contact [CONTACT_3031]/identifying information 
fields will be programmed as required (see PDF of Qualtrics survey).
t - Provision of participant compensation for their time via emailed e-gift cards. 
E-gift cards that have not been claimed six months after being emailed may be 
deactivated.
u - Assignment of unique numeric identifiers to de-identify all survey data 
for sharing with NCI/CRCHD
v - Connection of pre-screened (possibly eligible) participants to PI’s of pre- 
selected open studies/trials. This will entail providing participant 
contact/identifying information to PIs/study teams of studies/trials that the 
participant may be eligible for, as well as connection of pre-screened 
(possibly eligible participants) to the cancer center’s clinical team (Research 
Nurses/Nurse Navigators) to explore available clinical trials/establish care. 
Participants will have provided permission for their information to be shared 
(see information sheet and Qualtrics survey PDF).
w - Tracking of participants’ enrollment status into the pre-selected open 
studies/trials and other DCC clinical trials over six months (via PI [INVESTIGATOR_552615]/Oncore). This will entail providing our 
participants’ identifying information to the PIs of selected studies and to 
DCC’s Office of Clinical Research and asking them to identify which 
participants have enrolled in studies/trials since the educational intervention. 
With permission/direction from DCC’s Office of Clinical Research, our study team 
members may track enrollment via Oncore.  See enclosed Excel spreadsheet 
that will be used for tracking.
x - E-mailing de-identified pre and post survey data to NCI/CRCHD and/or its 
contractor for data entry, quality control, and national aggregation. E-mailing 
of tracking excel spreadsheet to NCI/CRCHD and/or its contractor.
y - Local analysis of data to determine effect of study objectives
If any individuals contact [CONTACT_552624], we will seek information from them to match their survey record 
(e.g., their initials, time of day/date they were completing the survey) and provide 
them with assistance by [CONTACT_17084]/or email to enable them to complete the study 
procedures. In some cases, this may entail providing a separate survey link to them by 
[CONTACT_5301]: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 18 of 32email for them to complete.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 19 of 32We are discontinuing our control arm. Because the control arm was part of our 
local research procedures and not part of NCI’s national initiative, we will not be 
providing any control arm data to NCI or its contractor.
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking*
N/A- This study does not involve data and specimen banking.
8.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects*
Results of pre-/post-/follow-up survey scores/results will not be shared 
with individual study participants.
As described earlier, de-identified study data will be shared with 
CRCHD/its contractor for aggregation and evaluation.
At the commencement of the study, we plan to develop a community 
report to share with relevant stakeholders (e.g., DCC Community 
Advisory Board, cancer center researchers and clinicians, clinical trials 
staff, primary care providers, cancer control professionals, cancer center 
researchers) to learn about the study; all data in this report will be de- 
identified and aggregated. We will also seek opportunities to disseminate 
the results through academic channels, such as conferences and 
publications.
9.0 Study Timelines*
9.1Participants will conclude their participation within 7.5 months from 
enrollment. This timeline allows for a multi-week window for obtaining the 
follow-up clinical trials/research study enrollment records.
We anticipate enrolling all study participants within fouryears of study activation as 
study team’s grant has been extended.
10.[ADDRESS_726449] Population*
10.1The main target population is adults who reside in rural New Hampshire 
or Vermont; “rural” = RUCC 7—9 counties (Coos and Sullivan County, NH; 
Caledonia, Windsor, Windham, Orange, Orleans, Lamoille, and Essex County, 
VT), though others are eligible to enroll in Experimental Arm 1, as described 
below.
10.[ADDRESS_726450] be 18 years or 
older. We will measure whether they are a resident of RUCC 7—9 counties in NH 
and VT, but we will not limit their eligibility based on residency.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726451] meet the 
following eligibility criteria:
-Be a resident of one of the RUCC 7—9 counties in NH and VT and
-Be 18 years or older at the time of enrollment
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a): Participants will come from Electronic provider 
portal EDH/Epic. They will receive an invitation to participate in this research 
study only after accessing a Qualtrics survey. 
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b): Participants will be social media or listserve 
users. Flyers may be used in targeted areas. Social media advertising features will 
be used to target social media users in the appropriate age range (18+) and 
geographic locations of interest.
13.1 Regarding adults unable to consent: There are several steps 
involved in accessing our study which, we feel, will 
safeguard adults unable to consent from participating in the 
study; for example, in order to access experimental arm 2, 
that will require having a social media account, navigating 
away from the social media account to our survey site, 
reading the information sheet, and proceeding forward to the 
survey. To access experimental arm 2, that will require first 
accepting a link for the Qualtrics survey, deciding to follow 
the instructions in the invitation email, navigating away from 
the email to our survey site, reading the information sheet, 
and proceeding forward to the survey.
Regarding individuals who are not yet adults: All participants will be 
screened to self-disclose whether they are in the study age range (18+) at 
the time of enrollment; hence, no minors will be enrolled. Further, for 
some participants, recruitment for Experimental Arm 2 will use 
Facebook’s marketing features to target account holders in the age range 
of interest to the study (adults).
Pregnant women: Any inclusion of pregnant women will be strictly 
incidental and will not present any added risk should they choose to 
participate. We will not be asking any questions pertaining to pregnancy, 
and we will not specifically be targeting pregnant women. Regardless of 
whether a person is pregnant, receiving education about clinical trials and 
research does not pose a risk and has the potential to be beneficial.
Prisoners: We will not be initiating any research in institutionalized 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 21 of 32settings nor will we explicitly target prisoners. No questions, including 
screening questions, will be specifically asked about a person’s 
incarceration status. Any inclusion of prisoners will be strictly incidental 
and will not present any added risk should they choose to participate.
11.0 Vulnerable Populations*
11.1It is likely that some participants may be elderly. It is also possible that some 
participants will be from an economically disadvantaged background. We feel 
that the payment amounts we plan to provide are appropriate given the 
participants’ time involved and are not excessive or coercive.
As stated in Section 10, our study is not targeting any of the following vulnerable 
populations: pregnant women, neonates/non-viable neonates, prisoners, people 
who have not attained legal age to consent, or cognitively-impaired adults.
12.0 Local Number of Subjects
Our target sample size for completing the study is
-Experimental Arm 1: up to 50
-Experimental Arm 2: 200-250
Because of the nature of the study being primarily online, we anticipate additional 
people consenting into the study and not being eligible and/or not completing the study. As 
such, we anticipate consenting up to [ADDRESS_726452] about 1/3 complete all study 
procedures.
13.0 Recruitment Methods
13.1-13.4
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
To recruit participants for the evaluation/data collection, we will rely on people 
who are registered for an existing class at the Dartmouth Cancer Center 
(‘Clinical Trials: Another Approach to Cancer Treatment’). 
See recruitment messaging document attached.
Using DHH electronic medical reporting system Epic a Best Practice Alert (BPA) 
for cancer providers at point of care prompts to ask patients if a connection to 
education survey about clinical trials can be sent to them.  Patient is sent information 
to access survey, or, to be connected with clinical coordinator/nurse who can talk 
them through accessing the survey link.
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
We will purchase advertisements on social media (e.g., Facebook), listserves, or 
via flyers, which will be targeted to adults in VT/NH RUCC 7-9 counties. We will 
rely of Facebook’s algorithms to direct our recruitment messages to individuals in 
the appropriate age range and geographies. Advertisements will use verbiage such 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 22 of 32as:
“Researchers at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Norris Cotton Cancer Center are 
looking for adults to watch a video, read some information, and answer
surveys. Participation is voluntary and confidential. You will be 
compensated for your time. Click the “Learn more” button to learn more 
and to participate in this RESEARCH survey.”
We may also post the same recruitment message in unpaid social media posts 
and may also share our recruitment verbiage with partner organizations (e.g., 
Vermonters Taking Action Against Cancer, UVM, New Hampshire 
Department of Health and Human Services) and through other online 
opportunities (e.g., Front Porch Forum, e-newsletters and listservs, online 
community forums/groups, etc) to post our messaging in settings where their 
followers/members may view it (e.g., their website, social media, 
newsletters). See recruitment messaging document attached with sample 
messaging.
13.5 Participants in Experimental Arm 1 will receive a $[ADDRESS_726453]/e-gift code 
for completing the pre-test and will receive an additional $[ADDRESS_726454]/e-gift 
code after completing the survey and completing the post-test. Participants of 
Experimental Arm 2 will receive $10 in gift cards/e-gift codes (e.g. to 
Amazon.com) for completing the surveys and interventions. E-gift cards that 
have not been claimed six months after being emailed may be deactivated.
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects*
14.1Study subjects will be withdrawn from the study if they do not complete 
the pre-test, educational intervention, and post-test—which are the minimum 
data we need in order to evaluate a portion of our intervention.
14.2
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
A person can discontinue participation at any time by [CONTACT_552625]. Individuals who do not complete the in- 
person pre-test, education, post-survey, and contact/identifying information will 
not have their clinical trials/research enrollment followed at six-months.
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
Any participant can discontinue participation at any time by [CONTACT_552626]’s screen that contains our survey content. Individuals who do not 
complete the pre-test, education, post-survey, and contact/identifying information 
will not have their clinical trials/research enrollment followed at six-months.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 23 of 3215.0 Risks to Subjects*
15.1Because this activity is primarily educational, the risks are minimal. 
However, some participants with a family history of cancer or who have had 
negative experiences with clinical trials and research may be distraught by 
[CONTACT_114363]. Additionally, as with the collection of any identifiable information, 
there is minimal risk that confidentiality could be breached. However, we will 
have several safeguards in place, as described in Section 17 and in the attached
document entitled Data Collection Storage and Security.
Because the risks are unlikely and minimal, we feel that they’re reasonable in 
relation to the knowledge that participants will gain, as well as the knowledge that 
NCI/CRCHD and DCC will gain.
15.2-15.4. N/A
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects*
16.1-16.2. We do not expect a direct benefit to participants. However, participants 
may learn new information about clinical trials and research.
As feasible, participants will be referred to research nurses and/or research teams 
if they are identified as possibly eligible for a study/trial and interested in being 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].
17.0 Data Management* and Confidentiality
17.1. We will conduct various statistical tests on the data to determine whether 
participants experienced changes in knowledge, attitudes, behavioral intentions, 
and behavior as a results of any of the study arms, and changes will be look at 
across groups. 
17.2. To ensure confidentiality of data, we will have several safeguards in place:
Training: All research team members with access to study data will be 
trained on all procedures related to data management under this protocol.
Access restrictions: Access to electronic research materials/data will be 
limited to those on the research team. This will include only granting 
electronic access to Qualtrics and One Drive/Sharepoint to study team 
members, these sites/applications also require passwords to access. All 
laptops/computers being used will also be encrypted and password- 
protected. Access to physical research materials/data will also be limited 
by [CONTACT_552627].
Unique identifiers: We will assign a unique identifier to the study 
information using the numbers provided by [CONTACT_12134]/CRCHD/its contractor. 
We will link the pre-, post-, and follow-up enrollment data using the 
unique identifiers. Contact [CONTACT_552628]-up to be referred and gift card distribution will be 
managed and stored separately from the study data but will be obtained in 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 24 of 32the same survey; after data are downloaded from Qualtrics, participant 
contact [CONTACT_552629], with use of 
unique identifiers. The participant contact [CONTACT_552630].
Experimental Arm 1 participants asked to participate in a follow-up survey (post 
survey) will receive a shortened version of their unique identifier as part of the 
request for their participation in the follow-up/post survey and asked to 
manually enter their number into Qualtrics to facilitate our linking of their 
research records. See Experimental Arm 1 Qualtrics survey.
Data quality control:
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
The DCC research team will review results from Qualtrics survey. . If the review 
reveals a potential data quality issue, the research team will determine how 
widespread the issue is and will inform NCI/CRCHD (or its independent 
contractor) for guidance. At the end of the project, NCI/CRCHD plans to have its 
independent contractor review all data collected for quality.
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
The DCC research team will review data collected from advertisement wave that 
is launched to check for possible problems such as errors in computer display to 
participants, errors in skip logic, and robotic responses. If the audit reveals a 
potential data quality issue, the research team will review additional data to 
determine how widespread the issue is and will work with the appropriate DHH 
and DCC colleagues (e.g. tech support) and NCI/CRCHD to address the issues, as 
needed. To aid in identifying bot and fake responses and support data integrity, 
we will use several features in Qualtrics, including the bot detector and turning 
‘location’ settings to ‘on’ to track location of respondents (e.g., IP address).
As with any study that collects information about health, it is important to secure 
this information. As stated below, multiple safeguards have been put in place to 
minimize the risk of possible data disclosures. We do not plan to obtain a 
certificate of confidentiality.
17.3. Original paper research forms/data will be kept in a locked filing cabinet at 
DHMC for six years. All electronic files will be stored on password-protected, 
encrypted computers that are property of the Dartmouth Cancer Center. 
Electronic data will also be stored in password-protected sites/applications 
supported by [CONTACT_552631]/DHH, such as Qualtrics and /Sharepoint/One 
Drive; access will only be granted to official study team members. All files, 
paper and electronic, at DHH will be destroyed after six years.
De-identified survey copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]/survey data will be emailed/mailed to 
NCI/CRCHD/its contractor for data processing on a quarterly basis. Data 
collected from participants to be shared include pre-test, post-test, and follow-up 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 25 of 32data (all de-identified, using unique identifier) from our experimental arms (not 
control arm). We will also provide NCI/CRCHD/its contractor with general 
information about the in-person outreach (e.g., dates, locations, number of 
attendees), about the social media ad reach/metrics, and, as needed, cost. Judy 
Rees, Regina-Anne Cooper, Lisa Purvis, Jenna Schiffelbein,  Kathy Stroffolino, 
Andrew Cowenhoven and the research team will be responsible for sharing the 
data with NCI/CRCHD/its contractor. Please see the attached document from 
NCI/CRCHD entitled Data Collection Storage and Security for additional 
information.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 26 of 3218.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects* 
N/A- This study involves only minimal risks. The primary risk is related to 
privacy/confidentiality, however, we are addressing that risk on the Information 
sheet by [CONTACT_552632]:
Study team members are trained on all procedures
Study computers are encrypted and have passcodes, study data collection 
will have passcode access only, and the physical location of the research 
material is locked
All study participants will have a unique identifier code assigned to them 
stored separately from identifiable study information that will be collected 
for follow-up and gift card distribution
19.[ADDRESS_726455] the Privacy Interests of Subjects
` 19.1 and 19.2
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a): Participants will complete the information sheet 
and study surveys online. 
The information sheet provides information about how participants’ 
contact/identifying information will be used. Those who pre-screen as being 
potentially eligible for an open study/trial will provide permission for their 
contact/identifying information to be shared with the study teams and/or the 
clinical team (e.g., Research Nurses/Nurse Navigators) (see enclosed pre- 
screening question sheet with permission question and information sheet).
Experimental Arm 2 and Control Arm (Aim 1b):
Contact/identifying information requested from participants will be managed and 
stored separately from the study data.
The information sheet provides information about how participants’ 
contact/identifying information will be used. Those who pre-screen as being 
potentially eligible for an open study/trial will provide permission for their 
contact/identifying information to be shared with the study teams and/or the 
clinical teams (e.g., Research Nurses/ Nurse Navigators) (see enclosed 
information sheet and see Qualtrics PDF).
19.3 Any study forms containing identifiable information will not be available to 
all study members, with an exception of the Qualtrics account/survey, which will 
be managed by [CONTACT_552633]. Only the study coordinators and a 
manager/sub-investigator will have access to any other identifying information, 
and this information will only be accessed for purposes of gift card distribution 
and follow-up data tracking.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 27 of 3220.0 Compensation for Research-Related Injury
N/A- This study involves no more than minimal risk to subjects.
21.[ADDRESS_726456] to any costs for participating 
in the study/educational interventions.
Should our intervention be effective in encouraging them to participate in 
a clinical trial or research study, all costs associated with those 
trials/studies are beyond the scope of this study.
22.0 Consent Process
22.1. Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
23 Once the prospective participant clicks the link in the email invitation to 
learn more about the study, they will be presented with an information sheet 
with HIPAA authorization (attached) and asked to read it before proceeding. 
As part of the information sheet, participants will be provided with contact 
[CONTACT_552634]. They will e-sign the form with initials before continuing 
forward (see enclosed PDF of Qualtrics survey for consent, as well as 
information sheet file). They will then be presented with eligibility 
questions. If they are eligible for the study, they will be asked to move 
forward to complete the remaining study procedures.
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
Once the prospective participant clicks the Facebook ad, link in listserve ads or 
flyers to learn more about the study, they will be presented with an information 
sheet with HIPAA authorization.
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 28 of 32(attached) and asked to read it before proceeding. As part of the information 
sheet, participants will be provided with contact [CONTACT_552635]. They will e-sign the form with 
initials before continuing forward (see enclosed PDF of Qualtrics survey for 
consent, as well as information sheet file). They will then be presented with 
eligibility questions. If they are eligible for the study, they will be asked to 
complete the following components (in the same session): pre-test, educational 
module (video and website materials), pre-screening for eligibility for open 
trials/studies [for experimental arm], post-test, contact [CONTACT_3031], and e-gift 
card components.
We will be following procedures outlined in HRP-090, with a few exceptions:
Section 3 of HRP-090:
o3.8- If the prospective participant expresses interest in participating 
in Experimental Arm 2 or Arm 1(both online), based on clicking 
on the social media ad or email invitation, the participant will then 
be invited to review an information sheet and continue into the 
study, if they are interested. They will also be provided with study 
team contact [CONTACT_3031], should they have questions before 
consenting to participate.
Section 5 of HRP-090:
o5.3- For participants in Experimental Arm 2 and Arm 1(both 
online), an information sheet will be presented (rather than 
read) to the participants. See enclosed information sheets.
o5.4 and 5.5- For participants in Experimental Arm 2 and Arm 1 
(both online), they will be provided with study team contact 
[CONTACT_3031], should they have questions or want to talk with 
family/friends before consenting to participate.
o5.7- For participants in Experimental Arm 2 and Arm 1 (both 
online), they will be completing a consent process, which is 
explained in the information sheet—with an e-signature/initials. 
See enclosed information sheet and PDF of Qualtrics surveys for 
exact signature/initial verbiage as part of the consenting process.
Non-English Speaking Subjects: At this time, we will not enroll non-English 
speaking subjects. We plan to conduct our study in English with individuals who
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726457] ( https://www.masterword.com/) for translation. This 
company provides all translation services to Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical 
Center, provides excellent quality, and can translate materials into 250 different 
languages. If our event partners indicate that there is a likely, foreseeable 
opportunity that individuals will attend the event who do not speak English and 
may wish to participate in the study, we will assess the viability of including 
additional languages and submit an IRB modification if deemed viable. The 
online study will only be available in English.
Subjects who are not yet adults: We will not enroll any subjects who are 
not yet adults. Our age requirements are 18+ at the time of enrollment. 
Anyone outside of this age range will be screened-out of participating.
Adults unable to consent and cognitively-impaired adults: We do not 
intend to enroll adults who are unable to consent or cognitively-impaired 
adults. There are several steps involved in accessing our study which, we 
feel, will safeguard against these populations participating in the study; 
for example, in order to access the study online, that will require having a 
social media or email account, navigating away from the social media or 
email account to our survey site, reading the information sheet, and 
proceeding forward to the survey.
23.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing
23.1. We will be using collecting electronically-signed Information Sheets for 
Experimental Arm 2 and the Arm 1 (via providing initials and checking boxes—
see information sheets and Qualtrics surveys).
23.2 and 23.3. We will provide an information sheet about the study to all eligible 
participants. Participants in Experimental Arm 2 and Arm 1 will be asked to 
print/save a copy of the information sheet for their records. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page [ADDRESS_726458] in office 
space in the Rubin 8 building at DHMC (although in-person events will 
take place throughout New Hampshire and Vermont).
Experimental Arm 1 (Aim 1a):
Recruitment for Experimental Arm [ADDRESS_726459] through email invitation, 
and the surveys will be accessed online through Qualtrics. Participants will 
attend the class by [CONTACT_552636]-person at an DCC site.
Experimental Arm 2 (Aim 1b):
Recruitment for Experimental Arm [ADDRESS_726460] through social media (e.g., Facebook), listserves, flyers, and other 
online opportunities (as described earlier), and the surveys/intervention will 
be accessed online through Qualtrics.
DCC does have a Community Advisory Board that is administered by 
[CONTACT_552637]/or Lisa Purvis. Board members 
include cancer survivors and caregivers, community members, public 
health researchers, healthcare organizations, and non-profit 
representatives. We may consult with the Community Advisory Board 
regarding:
-Content of video and/or review of video and website materials
-Review of aggregate, de-identified results
-Next steps after this study is complete; steps regarding 
sustainability of video and/or in-person outreach
We will also work with our Patient Family Advisory Committee (composed of 
cancer survivors, family members to cancer survivors, and community-based 
allies) to receive and incorporate input on the educational video and website 
materials. We will also work with our internal Clinical Trials Advisory Board 
members (composed of Clinical Trials staff, Radiation Oncologists, Senior 
Leadership and our DCC Marketing & Communications Team, etc.) for the 
same purpose.
25.0 Resources Available
Our study team has several CITI-trained staff members (Jenna 
Schiffelbein, Regina-Anne Cooper, Kathy Stroffolino, Stephanie Papas, 
Lisa Purvis, Andrew Cowenhoven, and Judith Rees) who can be engaged for 
completing study procedures, including administering pre-tests and post-
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 31 of 32tests, providing education, pre-screening for eligibility into other 
studies/trials, distributing gift cards, and collecting follow-up data from 
PIs and DCC’s Office of Clinical Research. Additional CITI-trained staff 
or volunteers can be secured, if needed, in which case an IRB 
modification will be submitted.
Prior to conducting research activities, team members will convene to 
review the protocol, discuss the logistics of implementation, and address 
team member questions. Study progress and update meetings will be 
scheduled on an as-needed basis for this purpose, and any new study team 
members will be trained before being allowed to conduct study 
procedures.
Study planning and procedures will mostly take place in office space in 
the Rubin 8 building at DHH (although in-person events will take place 
throughout New Hampshire and Vermont). No special facilities/equipment 
is needed for the conduct of this study, aside from laptops and storage to 
secure study materials.
Additional resources available to our team include shared resources 
available through DCC and resources through Dartmouth 
College/DHH, including:
-Qualtrics support
-Data management and biostatistical analysis support
-Geo-spatial analysis support to identify population counts and 
rural communities
-Social media consultation support
-Provider portal EDH support
Additionally, our team has funding and in-kind support from:
-National Cancer Institute
-Dartmouth Cancer Center (institutional/philanthropic funds)
-Dartmouth-Hitchcock Marketing and Communications (for video 
development)
Finally, we have support from our internal clinical trials leadership and staff and 
our Community Advisory Board. We will leverage our partners for steps such as:
Identifying trials/research studies that participants could be screened for 
in terms of eligibility
Reviewing educational intervention content for accuracy
PROTOCOL TITLE: Education about Health and Cancer Study
Page 32 of 32Identifying mechanisms by [CONTACT_552638], 
we will provide participants with information about how to access 
clinical trials and cancer research studies. Any costs associated with 
future enrollment in other trials/studies will be outside of our scope.
Our recruitment targets are reasonable and feasible given that:
DCC has about 4,000 new patients annually
About 15% of NH and VT residents live in the rural communities 
of interest
26.0 Multi-Site Research* (Delete this section if this is not a Multi-Site 
Research Study.)
N/A- While about 23 other cancer centers are also conducting education about 
clinical trials, we are all operating independently from each other, under our own 
institutions’ IRBs.