The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
1 of 16 May 17, 201 6  
The Aerobics, Weights and Renal Disease (AWARD) Trial  
 
Protocol  
 
Principal Investigator s: Daniel E Weiner, MD, MS  and S tephen Seliger, MD  MS 
 
 
 
I. Introduction and Rationale  
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is increasingly prevalent in the elderly and carries 
sequelae that extend beyond pr ogression to kidney failure.[ADDRESS_308239] a 40% greater risk of incident 
dementia8, a 75% greater risk of physical frailty9, and poorer health -related quality  of 
life10, independent of tradi tional risk factors. Other f actors that may explain these 
cognitive and physical impairments include inflammation  and microvascular endothelial 
dysfunction, both of which are more frequent in CKD and are associated with 
compromised cognitive and  physical f unction in the general popul ation.11-[ADDRESS_308240]  a randomized parallel -group clinical trial in 120 
older ( ages 50 years  and older ) com munity -dwelling adults  with CKD stages 3b -[ADDRESS_308241] has the potential to substantial ly expan d current knowledge with the  ultimate  
goals of developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a feasi ble intervention to improve outcomes in older patients with 
CKD and furthering the understanding of  mechanisms related to the efficacy of this 
intervention.  
 
 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
2 of 16 May 17, 201 6  
II. Recruitment . 
Patients with chronic kidney disease (defined by [CONTACT_253391] R below 45 mL/min per 1.73m2) 
who are age [ADDRESS_308242] 
(for local nephrology practices) or Tufts Medical Center nephrologist with whom they 
have a relationship in the outpatient clinics at Tu fts Medical Center.   
 
Clinic schedules and active clinic patients will be screened using medical records to 
determine preliminary eligibility; nephrologists will be made aware of their potentially 
eligible patients in order to facilitate study referrals.  Additionally, study posters  will be 
posted in waiting areas and brochures will be available for potential participants.   
 
Local r ecruitment sites will include:  
• Tufts Medical Center  Nephrology  
• Tufts Medical Center General Medical Associates  
• St Elizabeth's  Medical Center (Drs. James Strom, Geetha Narayan, Anthony 
Dash and Bertrand Jaber)  
• [CONTACT_253401] (practices in Malden and Everett)  
• [CONTACT_253402] (practices primarily in Melrose and is a member of the Tufts 
Medical Center Division of Nephrology)  
• [CONTACT_253403] (practices pri marily at Lawrence Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_253382]. Elizabeth's Medical Center and is a member of the Division of Nephrology)  
• Drs. Andrei Kouznetsov and Valerie Price (practice primarily in Concord and are 
members of the Div ision of Nephrology at Tufts  Medical Center).   
 
Weekly patient lists will be acquired from the GMA clinic.  The list will include individuals 
scheduled to be seen by [CONTACT_253392] [ADDRESS_308243].   After referral to the investigating team, 
research study personnel will describe the study in detail to potential participants, and 
participants will be aske d for informed consent to pa rticipate in the study. An informed 
consent procedure approved by [CONTACT_253393], and this will 
include a full description of the purpose of the study, the procedures involved, and 
potential risks. Ind ividuals who give informed c onsent to participate will then undergo  
screening for full eligibility for the study at Tufts Medical Center. A copy of the informed 
consent document as well as the research authorization form will be provided to all 
enrolled pa rticipants.  
 
Patients will b e told clearly that they are not required or obligated to participate, and that  
their medical care will not be  influenced by a decision to not participate.  Beyond brief 
introductions , which  may occur in a private room in the cl inic, detailed discussion s 
between potential participants and investigators regarding eligibility and/or informed 
consent will take place at the Tufts Clinical and Translational Research Center (CTRC) 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308244] the opportunity to a sk any 
questions regarding the study and to discuss the decision to participate with family 
members and others.   To ensure continued consent and understanding of the study 
procedures , participants may, at any time , ask to review  individual  specific study 
procedures and any pre -procedure preparation they will need to do. The participants will 
also be encouraged to take as much  time as needed to decide whether they want to 
participate and will be encouraged to discuss the study wit h family and friends before 
signing  a consent form.  
 
Release of Medical Information  
Participants will be asked to sign a Release of Medical Information form at the screening 
or randomization visit.  This will be used to obtain relevant medical history info rmation 
and in the case of a  Emergency Department visit or Admission to an outside hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
 
 
III. Randomization  
After complet ing screening , eligible p atients will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to an 
exercise training intervention group or a directed health  and successful aging  education 
control group .  Randomization will occur using a permutated block  design, with block 
sizes of 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10.  The randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_3885].  Primary 
Investigators will not be blinded.   Study staff cond ucting the cognitive testing  will remain 
blinded to limit the potential for administer bias during the study.   
 
IV. Study Phases  
The study processes that occur after informed consent are detailed below : 
 
PHASE 1. SCREENING . 
Screening will occur following writt en informed consent a nd will  include medical history, 
physical exam ination, and a resting ECG . The Mini -Mental State Exam , Beck  
Depression Inventory (BDI), and CHAMPS: Physical Activity Questionnaire for Older  
Adults will be administered . A stress test (g raded exercise test without VO2 collection) 
will be preformed. Laboratory  tests will include eGFR HbA1c , CBC  and a chemistry [ADDRESS_308245]. Robert 
Peters, is located at the Baltimore site.  We  anticipate that approximate ly 30% of 
subjects undergoing screening/baseline treadmill testing will not qualify and have 
accounted for this in our recruitment plans.  
Participants who meet inclusion/exclusion criteria will proceed to Phase 2.  
 
PHASE 2.  BASELINE ASSESSMENT . 
The basel ine assessment will consist of two visit  and include : 
 
• Graded exercise treadmill test with assessment of VO 2peak (see below for 
description of this testing).   
• Blood pressure and other vital signs , medication log, anthropometry  
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
4 of 16 May 17, 201 6 • Blood and urine tests, Chem -7, CBC, HbA1c urine protein, urine creatinine, urine 
albumin, vitamin d, hsCRP, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], insulin resistance, IL -6 
• Additional blood and urine stored for future assessment of additional mediators (with 
additional funding)  
• Quality o f Life Assessments (MSAS -SF and SF -36, San Diego Claudication 
Questionnaire ) 
• Health status (EQ -5D-5L) 
• Sleep assessment (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_253383] x (PSQI) , Sleep Actigraphy)  
• Neurocognitive test battery  
• Physical function and strength assessment battery  
• Measurement of endothelial fu nction  
• Step Activity Monitoring (SAM)  
• Health Literacy Assessment (STOFHLA)  
 
 
 
PHASE 3. DIETARY COUNSELING . 
Baseline dietary  information will  be provided to all participants to minimize effects of 
dietary heterogeneity on respons es to exercise training. The  American Heart Association 
Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes diet for adults at high vascular risk will be recommended 
and described  in a standardized educational handout.  
 
 
  
PHASE 4:  3-MONTH BLOOD DRAW 
At 3-months after random ization, a Chem -7, CBC and H bA1c will be drawn for safety 
assessment.  If any of these labs had been run clinically within 30 days of the 3 -month 
time point, they will be used for the safety assessment.  
 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
5 of 16 May 17, 201 6 PHASES 5 AND 7.  STUDY INTERVENTIONS . 
The study i nterventions are described belo w, and, for both groups, de -intensify after 6 
months.   
 
PHASES 6 AND 8.  6-MONTH  AND 12-MONTH ASSESSMENT  
Phase 6 is the 6-Month assessment, at which time all baseline measures  will be  
repeated except for endothelial function as sessment, step activity moni tor, sleep  
actigraphy assessment  and STOFHLA .  Phase 8 is the 12-Month , at which time all 
baseline measures will be repeated  except for the STOFHLA . 
 
Phase 9:  Post -Education Group Exercise  
Participants who were randomized into t he Health Education interven tion group that 
completed all [ADDRESS_308246] will be used to 
determine the target heart rate for the participant.  Prior to initiation of this exercise 
intervention, a stud y physician will review each  participant’s medical history and 
medication lists for interim changes.  The study physician will determine that there is no 
contraindication for exercise in each participant.    
 
At the end of the [ADDRESS_308247]-exercise 
assessment.  At this assessment the following will be performed:  
 
- 6-minute Walk Test  
- SF-36 
- MSAS  
- BDI 
- EQ-5D-5L 
- PSQI  
- CHAMPS  
 
 
Phase 10:  Post -Intervention Assessment  
Participants who complete the [ADDRESS_308248] in -
center, by [CONTACT_648], or through the mail.   
 
Exercise Intervention Group :  Participants who complete the 12 -month exercise 
intervention gr oup will perform this follow  up visit 6 months after the 12 -month 
assessment (+/ - 3 weeks).  18 -Month Visit  
 
Education Group (NOT participating in optional exercise) :  Participants who complete 
the [ADDRESS_308249]-education exercise will perform this follow up visit 6 months after the 12 -month 
assessment (+/ - 3 weeks).   18-Month Visit  
 
Education Group (PARTICIPATING in optional exercise) :  Participants who complete 
the 12 -month Health Educat ion group who choose to part icipate in the optional exercise 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308250] -exercise 
assessment (+/ - 3 weeks).  [ADDRESS_308251]/trainer under the supervision of Roger Fielding, 
PhD in small groups compris ing up to [ADDRESS_308252] primarily of treadmill -based walking.  Exercise sessions will 
be prec eded by a brief warm -up and will end with a brief cool -down period. Obtaining 
appropriate exercise intensity is an essential component to a successful training routine, 
as intensity and duration that is too low may not result in  a meaningful improvement in  
function and capacity while intensity that is too high may both increase the risk of 
adverse events and may not be sustainable for a sufficient duration. Consistent with our 
prior studies, aerobic exercise intensity will be pre scribed as a target heart ra te (THR) 
corresponding to a percentage of the heart rate reserve (HRR) as defined by [CONTACT_253394].  For the first 4 -6 sessions, participants will exercise at an intensity 
of 50 -65% for 20 minutes with one or two 5 - minute breaks.  Intensity wil l progress to 
70–80% over the subsequent [ADDRESS_308253] acute medical events during the study and 
may need to curtail or temporarily suspend the exercise intervention.  When thi s occurs, 
the participant’s status will be changed to ‘suspended’.  When medically cleared, we will 
perform a modified re -initiation of the training phase until the participant can re -establish 
exercise intensity of 70 –80% of HRR, at which time they will r esume the study at the 
week at which they were assigned suspended status.  If an acute medical event occurs 
in the [ADDRESS_308254]-
Education 
Exercise  
3 Months  18-Month Assessment  -  Exercis e Intervention  
 
-  Education Group NOT   
Participating in Optional 
Exercise  
21 -Month 
Assessment  
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308255] 6 thrice  or twice -week ly in-center training 
sessio ns can be completed at target exercise intensity.  Participants will be restarted in 
the study when it is deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_2299]’s physician(s) and the study 
investigators.  Resistance training of the upper and lo wer extremities will follow aerobic 
training sessions twice weekly, using a strength training routine similar to that employed 
successfully in the LIFE -P study  (which is also being conducted at the HNRCA by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Fielding).   This 10 minute regimen focuses pr imarily on upper and lower e xtremity 
strengthening exercises, incorporating standing leg curls, knee extension and side hip 
raises with ankle weights, arm raises, biceps curls and overhead raises with hand 
weights, and leg squats and toe stands.  Subjects will be encouraged to perfor m the 
strength training exercises up to an intensity of 15 to 16 (“somewhat hard” to “hard”) on 
the rated perceived exertion (RPE) scale.  This brief moderate intensity resistance 
training program has previously been shown to ma intain muscle strength and s ize in 
mobility -limited older adults.  
 
B. HEALTH EDUCATION GROUP  
The Health Education Group will receive lifestyle counseling in a social setting,  
incorporating a Successful Aging Workshop series adapted from the LIFE -P clinical  trial 
and to be utilized in  LIFE.  Participants will receive  information on a variety of topi[INVESTIGATOR_253384] (e.g., effective negotiation of the health care system, safe 
travel, age  appropriate  preventive services and screenings, resources  for reliable health 
informa tion, etc.) with further discussion of factors relevant to  CKD (e.g., kidney 
replacement therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], dialysis access,  etc.).  The program includes an experiential 
component, in which participants  learn how to ‘take charge’ of the ir health in seeking out 
appropriate medical  information and services.  In addition to educational offerings, an  
instructor led program (5 -10 minutes) of upper extremity gentle stretching exercises and 
relaxation techniques are performed during each  class.   To promote involvement, 
additional upper extremity stretches will be added during the study.  As demonstrated in 
the LIFE -P, this  ‘placebo exercise’ activity helps foster adherence to the control arm of 
the study and increases the perceived benefit of th e Successful  Aging Workshop series 
without directly affecting study outcomes.   Workshops will occur weekly during the initial 
phase and monthly during  the maintenance phase. Following study completion, 
individuals randomized to  Health Education will have t he option of joining in an  
abbreviated structured exercise program , conducted under the direction of a trained 
exercise physiologist  at the HNRCA  similar to the research ex ercise intervention ; this is 
intended to improve compliance and retention in the con trol group and will not be p art of 
the study protocol.   The program will entail two sessions with an exercise physiologist to 
tailor a patient -appropriate exercise program which can be performed by [CONTACT_253395].   All education presentations will be submitted to the IRB for app roval prior to their 
use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
8 of 16 May 17, 201 6 VI. Study Outcomes  
As described above, assessments will be performed at baseline and after 6 and 12 
months of  intervention.   
 
Table. Study outcomes (*primary study outcomes; ^among non -insulin r equiring patients only)  
Neur ocognitive  Physical  Cardiovascular  QoL Biochemical  Sleep  
 
Executive 
function*  
Psychomotor 
speed*  
Memory and 
learning*   
6-minute walk*  
Timed ‘get up and 
go’ 
Short physical 
performance 
battery  
Lower extremity 
muscle power   
V02peak* 
Blood pressure  
Laser Dop pler 
flowmetry   
SF-36 
BDI 
MSAS -
SF  
EQ-5D-
5L  
eGFR, Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_253385], 
glucose^  
hs-CRP, IL -[ADDRESS_308256] 
(V0 2peak) and  performance on the [ADDRESS_308257], as well as several  secondary 
outcomes, including score on the short physical performance battery,  performance on 
the timed “get up and go” test, and assessment of mus cle power.  
a)  V02peak will be measured during a maximal treadmill exercise test  using a 
modified Balke protocol. During the test, O 2 consumption,  CO 2 production, and 
minute ventilation are measured breath -by-breath using a  metabolic cart (Quark 
Cardio Pul monary Exercise Testing  meta bolic analyzer, Cosmed, Rome), with 
values averaged for 20 second intervals .  We recognize that not all participants 
will be able to  obtain a true maximal aerobic capacity as defined by a plateau in 
oxygen consumption.   Therefor e, we plan to use the peak o xygen  consumption 
as our main outcome measure. Blood pressure and E CGs are monitored during 
exercise testing and recovery; testing is  stopped if termination criteria are  
achieved.  
b)  Six-minute walk test: Participants are instr ucted to "cover as much  distance as 
they can" over a flat 100 foot walking surface demarcated  by [CONTACT_112410]  
c)  The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) includes the following 
components: 1) Timed 4 -meter walk; 2) Repeated chair stand;  and 3) Balan ce 
tests. For each component , a score of 0 to 4 is assigned, with the sum of 
components comprising a final score  
d)  The Timed “Get Up and Go” Test: Beginning in a seated position in a  chair, 
participants are asked to stand up, walk 6 feet, turn around,  return to the chair, 
and sit down. The  time required to complete this task is recorded.  
e)  Muscle Power: 1 -Repetition Maximum (RM) Muscle Power for  a leg press will be 
determined using KeiserA420 pneumatic resistance equipment.    
 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308258]  Primary Neurocognitive Domain Assessed  Minutes  to 
Complete*  
Preliminary Screens    
Mini-Mental State Exam  General cognitive screen  [ADDRESS_308259], Part B^ Mental flexibility, attention, perceptuomotor speed  [ADDRESS_308260]^ Set-shifting, mental flexibility  [ADDRESS_308261]^ Working memory, attention  [ADDRESS_308262]  Verbal memory & learning  [ADDRESS_308263]^ Letter fluency  [ADDRESS_308264]^ Complex attention, concentration  9 
Digit Span subscale^ Attention, concentration, working memory  5 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA)  General cognitive screen  15 
* Based on published data or results of pil ot testing in older stage 3 -4 CKD patients.  
^ Tests assessing aspects of executive functioning  
 
C. QUALITY OF LIFE AND SYMPTOM BURDEN  
These elements will be assessed using the Medical Outcomes Study Short -Form 36 
(SF-36) and the Memorial  Symptom Assessmen t Scale Short Form (MSAS -SF), 
respectively. The BDI, a [ADDRESS_308265] and measures movement and ambient lig ht.  During the 
period which  the participant is wearing the actigraph, they will be instructed to maintain a 
sleep log to increase the interpretability of the actigraphy results.   
 
E. HEALTH STATUS  
Health status of study participants will be assessed usin g the EQ -5D-5L measure.  Thi s 
is a short validated measure for participant’s subjective assessment of their health 
status.  This will allow for analysis of quality -adjusted life years  in future cost 
effectiveness analyses . 
 
F. VASCULAR HEALTH AND INFLAMMAT ORY MARKERS  
Interleukin -6 (IL-6) and high -sensitivity C -reactive protein (hs -CRP) will be measured on 
plasma stored at -80C.   The v ascular health a ssessment utilizes Laser Doppler 
Flowmetry (LDF) to measure microvascular endothelial function. LDF uses a la ser light  
source and doppler  shift effect to non -invasively measure microvascular blood flow, 
permitting measurement of the relative change in  microcirculatory perfusion in response 
to various interventions. The thermal -hyperemic response will be used, ind uced by 
[CONTACT_253396] 44C for over two minutes; LDF flow is recorded for 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308266] for 4 m inutes, at which 
point the c uff will be released and the return of blood flow will be assessed over the 
subsequent minutes.   
 
G. OTHER VASCULAR RISK FACTORS  
Insulin concentration will be measured in stored plasma by [CONTACT_243359] (Millipore, 
Billerica,  MA). Total  cholesterol and triglycerides will be measured using enzymatic 
methods; LDL cholesterol will be calculated using the Friedwald equation;  total HDL 
cholesterol and HDL sub -fractions will be measured after precipi[INVESTIGATOR_253386]. For blood pressure, the average of the  second and third of three seated 
measures will be recorded; the dose of each antihypertensive medication will also be 
recorded.  
 
H. Physical Activity Assessment  
Participant’s daily physical activity will be assessed at ba seline and follow -up.  This 
assessment will be made using the CHAMPS, a validated questionnaire and through 
Step Activity Monitoring (SAM).  The SAM is a device worn around the ankle which 
measures movement.  This will be worn for [ADDRESS_308267]  reports as well as create p rograms to link 
existing data and to merge with other electronically transmitted data as needed.  
Following informed consent, participants’ data will be entered into the StudyTrax system 
with generation of a study ID.  Each cent er will perform double data entry, followed by 
[CONTACT_253397], and subsequent correction of any errors.  
 
VIII. Adverse Event Reporting  
Given the minimal risk nature of the current study (such that participants could engage in 
similar inte rventions in an unsupervised  fashion outside of the purview of this research 
study), we will be utilizing the Internal Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) of the 
Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center (GRECC) of the VA Maryland 
Healthcare System.    
  
Current voting members/ positions of the GRECC include:  
• Leslie Katzel, M.D., Ph.D., Chair (GRECC Clinical Care Associate Director)  
• Marianne Shaughnessy, Ph.D., C.R.N.P., Vice -Chair (GRECC Associate Director 
Education)  
• Gretchen Zietowski, M.S., R.N. (UM -OAIC clinical coordinator)  
• GRECC Nurse Manager (GRECC clinical coordinator)  
• Ivy Dorsey, B.S.N., R.N. (GRECC clinical staff member)  
• The Research Compliance Officer VA Research Services Baltimore VA Maryland 
Health Care System  
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
11 of 16 May 17, 201 6 • Kathleen Michael, Ph.D., R.N.,  C.R.R.N. (UM -OAIC and Maryl and Exercise & 
Robotics Center of Excellence investigator)  
• Peter Normandt, C.R.N.P. (GRECC and Maryland Exercise & Robotics Center of 
Excellence clinical staff)  
• John Sorkin, M.D., Ph.D. (Biostatistician, UM -OAIC Biostatistics an d Informatics 
Core principal  investigator)  
 
Alternate Voting Members of the GRECC include:  
• Jacob Blumenthal, M.D. (GRECC investigator)  
• Ronald Prigeon, MD (Biostatistician, GRECC investigator)  
• Dawn Jacobs, CRNP (GRECC clinical staff member)  
• Lynda Robey, MS  (GRECC clinical research co ordinator)  
 
Non-Voting Members of the GRECC include:  
• Andrew Goldberg, M.D. (UM -OAIC principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_253387])  
• Kara Longo, M.S. (UM -OAIC and Division of Gerontology Health Program 
Manager)  
 
In general, the GRECC and Division of Gerontology investigators, and support staff, 
work in a collaborative fashion on GRECC sponsored protocols.  This collaboration 
enhances the quality of the research and strengthens the medical oversight of the 
research. The degree of cross -collaboration varies conside rably from protocol to 
protocol. Any internal review of the protocols by [CONTACT_253398]. However, as licensed physicians in Maryland and 
the Federal Government,  they practice good clinical  practice in reaching all decisions to 
insure the proper, safe conduct of research in the GRECC and Division of Gerontology  
 
To minimize conflicts with the current protocol, [CONTACT_253404], a co -investigator of this 
protocol, [CONTACT_253405] ldberg, a co -investigator of  this protocol, and Kathy Brandt, a recipi[INVESTIGATOR_253388], will be excluded from the study evaluation process.          
 
Furthermore, to avoid conflict, the GRECC Internal SMB will provide its findings to bo th 
the GRECC internal and ex ternal advisory committees.  
 
Review Process  
DSM review and reporting will occur semi -annually (twice per year), and safety 
monitoring results will be reported both to the relevant IRBs as well as to the GRECC 
internal and extern al advisory committees.  The re will be no interim efficacy analysis.   
 
Data reviewed will include:  
• Adverse Events, both serious and non -serious  
• Patient Charts/Clinical Summaries when indicated  
• Laboratory Tests  
• Procedure Reports as part of QA audits  
• Enrol lment Numbers as part of rev iew of SAEs  
• QA audit results, operating procedures and consent forms when indicated  
 
The DSMB is just one part of the administrative oversight of research that will be 
undertaken in this study and that occurs in the Division of Gerontology at the Universit y 
of Maryland.  
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308268] access to patient identifiers and PHI as 
needed.  All specific patient identifiers will be removed in the DSMB report.   The DSMB 
will review the data described above from both the University of Maryland (“Maryland ”) 
site and from the Tufts M edical Center (“[LOCATION_011]”) site.    Consistent with other exercise 
intervention trials and in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_253389], there are no 
formal interim stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_3418].  
 
The major focus of the monitoring b oard is on safety, particula rly on expected and 
unexpected adverse events directly attributable to participation in the research; i.e. 
phlebitis due to an IV line insertion, fall during treadmill testing, etc.  All protocols will 
adhere to good clinical pr actice guidelines.  In the r eview of the adverse events, the 
board will review policies and procedures and make recommendation accordingly.  If 
there is a serious unexpected adverse event that brings into question the safety of a 
procedure or of the protoc ol, the board will temporari ly suspend new enrollment into the 
protocol and work in concert with both the Maryland and Tufts IRBs as well as the VA 
Research Committee to further evaluate the situation and determine if additional steps 
are necessary.  
 
All adverse events will also be r eported directly to the Tufts Medical Center IRB in 
accordance with their guidelines.  All unexpected serious adverse events will be reported 
to the IRB with proper paperwork within 5 days of the event.  Other serious adverse 
events will be reported with p roper paperwork within 15 days of the event.  All other 
adverse events will be reported during continuing reviews of the study.  
 
Safety and Event Reporting (Exercise Intervention)  
  
All adverse events and serious adverse events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_43038] y doctor at 
each site and reported to the site principal investigator.   Serious adverse events will be 
reviewed immediately and reported to the IRB.   All adverse events will be reviewed by 
[CONTACT_253399] y.   
 
Adverse event monitori ng:  Study subjects will be monitored for the occurrence of 
events defined as any undesirable experience.   Subjects will be monitored from the day 
of enrollment throughout the duration of the study period.   All adverse events wi ll be 
recorded on an adverse  event case report form and will include a description of all 
undesirable experiences, required interventions, subject’s condition after the event, an 
estimate of the extent of injury and potential strategies to prevent future o ccurrences.   
The Principal I nvestigator will classify the relationship of the study protocol to the event 
(see below).   As stated, the Principal Investigator, in consultation with the study 
physician, is responsible for reporting serious adverse events (li fe threatening, new, 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
13 of 16 May 17, 201 6 serious  or permanent disability, new kidney failure, death) to the IRB.   Other adverse 
events will be summarized annually for the IRB.  
 
Adverse events:  In the current protocol, an adverse event or experience is defined as 
any health -related unfavorable or uninten ded medical occurrence that happens during 
the process of screening, the study assessments and during the randomized 
intervention. Minor adverse events are defined as conditions that may be unpleasant 
and bothersome to the parti cipant, such as a head cold,  but that do not require 
discontinuing participant in the study.   Examples of minor adverse events include but are 
not limited to the following:   anxiety, fatigue, decreased appetite, insomnia, dizziness, 
muscle or joint stiffne ss, muscle strain or sorenes s, ankle or knee pain, foot pain, and 
other minor symptoms that may have restricted the participant’s usual activities for at 
least ½ day. Minor adverse events will be reported to the IRB during annual 
recertification.  
 
Serious  adverse events:  In the curr ent protocol, serious adverse events are defined to 
include: death, a life -threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_8448], a persistent or significant disability/incapa city, or 
new kidney failure.  Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -
threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_253390]. An example of this in the current protocol 
is an injurious fall resulting in a fracture that occurred in the HNRCA during a study visit. 
All serious adverse events will be reported promptly to the IRB.  
 
The Principal Inv estigator, in consultation with the study physician, will classify the 
relationship of the study protocol to the event as follows:  
 
Not Related:  The event is clearly related to factors such as the subject’s clinical state, 
not to interventions associated w ith the study protocol.  
 
Remote:  The event was most likely related to factors such as the subject’s clinical state, 
not to interventions associated with the study protocol.  
 
Possible:  The event follows a reasonable temporal sequ ence from interventions 
asso ciated with the study protocol but is possibly related to such factors as the subject’s 
clinical state.  
 
Probable:  The event follows a reasonable temporal sequence from interventions 
associated with the study protocol and cannot  be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_253400]’s clinical state.  
 
Highly Probable:  The event follows a reasonable sequence from interventions 
associated with the study protocol and cannot be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_253400]’s cl inical state.  
 
Data safety a nd monitoring plan:   If any of the blood draws show lab values newly and 
unexpectedly different from the normal range, these events will be reported to the 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_83618].   All adverse events will  be reported to the 
principa l investigator or a co -investigator within 5 working days of the incident.   All 
serious adverse events will be reported promptly to the IRB.    
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  [ADDRESS_308269] access to study personnel at other times to 
report serious adve rse events or concerns about the safety of participating in this study.  
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
15 of 16 May 17, 201 6 References:  
1. Coresh J, Selvin E, Stevens LA, et al. Prevalence of chronic kidney disease in the 
[LOCATION_002]. JAMA  2007;298:[ADDRESS_308270] iovascular outcomes and all -cause 
mortality: exploring the interaction between CKD and cardiovascular disease. Am J 
Kidney Dis 2006;48:392 -401. 
3. O'Hare AM, Bertenthal D, Covinsky KE, et al. Mortality risk stratification in chroni c 
kidney disease: one size f or all ages? J Am Soc Nephrol 2006;17:846 -53. 
4. Ryan JJ, Souheaver GT, DeWolfe AS. Intellectual deficit in chronic renal failure. A 
comparison with neurological and medical -psychiatric patients. J Nerv Ment Dis 
1980;168:763 -7. 
5. Gilli P, Bastiani P, Rosati G, et al. Impairment of the mental status of patients on 
regular dialysis treatment. Proc Eur Dial Transplant Assoc 1980;17:306 -11. 
6. Gilli P, De Bastiani P. Cognitive function and regular dialysis treatment. Clin Nephrol 
1983;19:188 -92. 
7. Wolcott DL, Wellisch DK , Marsh JT, Schaeffer J, Landsverk J, Nissenson AR. 
Relationship of dialysis modality and other factors to cognitive function in chronic 
dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1988; 12: 275 -84. 
8. Seliger SL, Siscovick DS, Stehman -Bree n CO, et al. Moderate renal impairment and 
risk of dementia among older adults: the Cardiovascular Health Cognition Study. J 
Am Soc Nephrol 2004;15:1904 -11. 
9. Shilpak MG, Stehman -Breen C, Fried LF, et al.  The presence of frailty in elderly 
persons with chro nic renal insufficiency.  Am  J Kidney Dis 2004; 43: 861 -67. 
10. Mujais SK, Story K, Brouillette J, et al. Health -related quality of life in CKD Patients: 
correlates and evolution over time. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009;4:[ADDRESS_308271] K, Penninx B W, et al. Inflammatory marke rs and cognition in well -
functioning African -American and white elders. Neurology 2003;61:[ADDRESS_308272] e comorbidities. J Gerontol A Biol Sci 
Med Sci 2009;64:[ADDRESS_308273] 
2008;108:c121 -6. 
14. Knopman DS. Invited commentary: Albuminuria and microvascular disease of the 
brain --a shared pathophysiology. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2010;171:287 -9; author reply 90 -1. 
15. Yaffe K, Barnes D, Nevitt M, Lui LY, Covinsky K. A prospective study of physical 
activity and cognitive decline in e lderly women: women who walk . Arch Intern Med 
2001;161:1703 -8. 
16. Laurin D, Verreault R, Lindsay J, MacPherson K, Rockwood K. Physical activity and 
risk of cognitive impairment and dementia in elderly persons. Arch Neurol 
2001;58:498 -504. 
17. Larson EB, Wang L, B owen JD, et al. Exercise is associated with reduced risk for 
incident dementia among persons 65 years of age and older. Ann Intern Med 
2006;144:73 -81. 
18. Podewils LJ, Guallar E, Kuller LH, et al. Physical activity, APOE genotype, and 
dementia risk: findings f rom the Cardiovascular Healt h Cognition Study. Am J 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2005;161:639 -51. 
19. Scarmeas N, Luchsinger JA, Schupf N, et al. Physical activity, diet, and risk of 
Alzheimer disease. JAMA 2009;302:627 -37. 
The Aerobi cs, Weights and Renal Diseas e (AWARD) Trial  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_58447] E Weiner, MD MS  
Protocol Version  4 
16 of 16 May 17, 201 6 20. Etgen T, Sander D, Huntgeburth U, Poppert H, Forstl H, Bickel H. Physical activity 
and incident cognitive impairment in elderly persons: the INVADE study. Arch Intern 
Med 2010;170:[ADDRESS_308274], et al. Exercise training reduces coronary 
risk and effectively rehabilitates hemodi alysis patients. Nephron 198 6;42:311 -6. 
22. Goldberg AP, Hagberg J, Delmez JA, et al. The metabolic and psychological effects 
of exercise training in hemodialysis patients. Am J Clin Nutr 1980;33:1620 -8. 
23. Molsted S, Eidemak I, Sorensen HT, Kristensen JH. Five m onths of physical 
exercise i n hemodialysis patients: effects on aerobic capacity, physical function and 
self-rated health. Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 96:c76 -81. 
24. DePaul V, Moreland J, Eager T, Clase CM. The effectiveness of aerobic and muscle 
strength trainin g in patients receiving hemo dialysis and EPO: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2002; 40:[ADDRESS_308275]: the Progress ive Exercise for 
Anabolism i n Kidney Disease (PEAK) study. Am J Kidney Dis 2007;50:574 -84. 
26. Painter P, Carlson L, Carey S, Paul SM, Myll J. Physical functioning and health -
related quality -of-life changes with exercise training in hemodialysis patients. Am J  
Kidney Dis 2000;35:[ADDRESS_308276] of intra -dialytic, low -intensity strength 
training on functional capacity in adult haemodialysis patients: a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_2284]. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010.  
 
 