59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              1  PROTOCOL FOR NON -EXEMPT RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN  SUBJECTS 
Title:  EPIC : Effect of Povidone Iodine periurethral  Cleansing on level of contamination with clean catch: A randomized 
control  trial 
IRB #:  FWH 20190009H  
Principal Investigator 
(PI) Rank Branch  AD/DoD Civ/ 
Ctr/Civilian  Dept/Base Phone #  E-mail  
Travis Callahan,EMPA -C Capt  [LOCATION_003]F  AD ED/Nellis  ([PHONE_10086]  [EMAIL_9274]  
 
The research relevance of this protocol focuses on:   
☒ Diagnosis  ☐ Treatment  ☐ Medical Utilization/Managed Care  
☐ Prevention  ☐ Medical Readiness  ☒ Other:   New method of urine collection in children  
 
Does the research fall under the purview of any other departments or committees?  No 
1. LOCATION AND SPONSOR  
Collaborating Facilities:  
99MDG/ Mike O’Callaghan Military Medical Center  
AF Sites Seeking Regional IRB:  
Jill Clark, (702) 653- 3298, [EMAIL_9275]  
Study Sponsors:  None  
2. RESEARCH PLAN  
Purpose of Study:  
The primary aim of this study is to see if the use of an antiseptic preparation (povidone iodine) versus cold normal saline, will  
decrease rates of urine contamination during the non -invasive Quick Wee (QW) collection of pediatric urine.   
Hypotheses, Research  Questions, or Objectives :  
To evaluate two different clean sing solution s in controlling urine contamination . 
Significance  
If the use of antiseptic preparation decreases the level of contamination in this study then it would provide an effective an d 
reliable clean catch method that staff could utilize prior to electing for catheterization or suprapubic aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516].  
Military R elevance: 
Having a  noninvasive Quick Wee method with  a high 5 minute v oid success rate; patient wait times  in the emergency 
department  will decrease, and parents will be happi[INVESTIGATOR_481792]. This improves patient safety, and 
provides the clinician with another method for collecting urine. In the Air Force’s move towards a culture of safety, and zer o 
harm; further eval uation into this novel technique ’s reliability will support our goals  provided rates of urine contamination  can 
be minimized . The importance of researching noninvasive methods with low levels of contamination is that it may prevent 
further invasive methods  from being used. For example if a child’s urine specimen from clean catch is contaminated the next 
step would be to get the sample via catheterization, a method that is traumatic to child, parent and sometimes staff. If 
research shows that urogenital prep with iodine decreases level of contamination in the urine then it provides an acceptable 
method of urine clean catch collection.  
Background and Review of Literature:  
Urinary tract infections  (UTI)  are common acute illnesses among pediatric patients , accounting for 5 -7% of emergency 
department  visits in the under two -year -old population  [1]. However,  obtaining urine samples from the  precontinent patient 
can be difficult. There is an ongoing debate regarding which noninvasive method for urine specimen collection is best for this 
population. The main argument against clean catch is the high rate of contamination compared to invasive collection and 
reliability.  
 
There are many methods of noninvasive urine collection. These methods are preferred as they are fairly well tolerated by 
[CONTACT_1962], less distressing to parents, cost effective, and require less technical expertise. In the past ; these methods have been 
dismissed due to their high rates of contamination, time to void and also effectiveness. The Nation al Institute of Health and 
Clinical Excellence (NICE, [LOCATION_006]) reco mmends a clean -catch urine (CCU)  be the first attempt at obtaining a urine specimen from 
children suspected of having  UTI [2]. This means placing the urine specimen collection container into the  urine mid -stream 
once the child has begun to void  to avoid contamination. Conversely, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends clean 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              2 catch urine for screening and a catheter  specimen urine collection or suprapubic aspi[INVESTIGATOR_481793]  [3].  Both of 
these invasive techniques produce quick urine samples with low rates of contamination ; however they can be painful and 
distressing to both the patient and parent.   
 
The Quick -Wee method for noninvasive urine collection has been evaluated in a one randomized controlled trial and has been 
shown to significantly increase the five minute voiding success rate for CC urine collection; 31%, n= 174. However a past stu dy 
demon strated contamination rate of 27%, n=174. No study has directly evaluated the use of antiseptic solution in the 
evaluation of the QW rate of contamination in pediatric patients. The purpose of this study is to see whether  the use of 
povidone iodine swabs prior to the QW method will decrease the rate of contamination. A decrease of the rate of 
contamination would strengthen the validity of this simple CC U method. Also using the this method for the collection method 
in both the experimental and control groups  will further evaluated the five min void success rate.  
 
We chose to use iodine as our preppi[INVESTIGATOR_481794]. It is readily available, inexpensive and has been shown to b e less caustic then other preppi[INVESTIGATOR_481795].  
Bibliography:  
1. Shaw, K. N., Gorelick, M., McGowan, K. L., Yakscoe, N. M., & Schwartz, J. S. (1998). Prevalence of urinary tract infection in  
febrile young children in the emergency department.  Pediatrics , 102(2), e16 -e16.  
2. Baumer, J. H., & Jones, R. W. A. (2007). Urinary tract infection in children, National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence.  Archives of Disease in Childhood- Education and Practice, 92(6), 189- 192.  
3. Representatives, L. (1999). Practice  parameter: the diagnosis, treatment, and evaluation of the initial urinary tract infection 
in febrile infants and young children. American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Quality Improvement. Subcommittee 
on Urinary Tract Infection.  Pediatrics , 103(4), 843 -52. 
3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
Research Design and Methods:  
Male and Female DoD beneficiaries , aged one month (28 days) to 12 months (365 days) , meeting the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria will be offered an opportunity to participate. Each child will already be scheduled for a standard of care urinalysis 
collection procedure through their pediatric PCM. They will be recruited from the clinics located at the 99MDG  through direct 
contact [CONTACT_465471]’s parents . All of the below items are research -related unless marked as ‘standard of care’:  
 
The study will be a non- blinded randomized controlled trial with parallel assignment of groups, taking place in the pediatric 
and emergency departments . The subject’s parents will be asked if the patient has had an allergic reaction to iodine in the past 
prior to being placed in experimental group and if they have had a reaction in the past they will be placed in the normal sal ine 
group instead. Additionally, if the patient develops a reaction to iodine during testing then they will have the region cleansed 
with normal saline, will be evaluated by [CONTACT_481800], then the urine and subject’s data will be disposed of and excluded from the study.  The experimental group w ill have their  periurethral  region cleansed with povidone 
iodine solution while the control group will be prepped with cold (2
oC) normal saline. Both groups will have the urine collection 
performed utilizing the QW method (see attached flow chart) . If a sa mple is not collected within five minutes with the QW 
method it will be documented as a failure  and the child will be referred back to their pediatric PCM and removed from the 
study. Urine collection will occur at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
 
Utilizing sequentially num bered opaque sealed envelopes (SNOSE), children  will be randomly assigned to one of the two  
treatment  groups. The envelopes will contain plastic forceps, gauze, and a 3x5 index card listing the  group the child has been 
assigned, i.e., iodine or normal saline,  as well as child’s  ID number; For the experimental group there will be a package of 
iodine swabs and the control will have a normal saline flush. Also contained within the envelope will be the Participant Data 
Sheet  to provide an easy way to track the urine collection process for the study. . 
 Children  will then have their periurethral  region gently cleansed for ten seconds with one of the previously discussed solutions. 
The procedure requires cold saline (approximately 2 °C) soaked gauze to be applied in  a circular motion over the bare 
suprapubic region of the child continuously for five minutes. The saline will come in the form of sterile saline flushes kept in a 
cooler of ice in the departments were the study is being conducted.  
 
If the child voids with in five minutes the time in seconds will be recorded on the provided worksheet. Also whether or not the 
urine was successfully “caught’ in the specimen cup will be documented. Whether or not the sample was contaminated by [CONTACT_481801] d on the data sheet once the results are available.  
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              3  
At the conclusion of the child’s participation, the parents will be asked to complete a Satisfaction Survey asking their over all 
satisfaction with the collection method utilized.  
a. Interventions  and Observations:  
The primary outcome of this study is to evaluate whether there is an improvement in the rate of  urine  contamination with 
iodine solution over normal saline prior to the QW. The secondary outcome will be the QW’s rate of success in providing a CCU  
in five minutes.  
b. Setting:  
This study will be conducted at the 99MDG  at Nellis AFB.  Children will be recruited from the emergency department as well as 
the pediatric clinic through parental permission and consent . Research Staff will enroll children through parental authorization,  
based on the child’s age,  and if a standard of care  urinalysis will be need ed during their course of treatment , base d on the 
determination of the child’s attending physician. If a urinalysis is not needed as a course of treatment for the infant, the child 
will not be accepted for the study.   
c. Date(s):  
11 January 2019  – 31 May 201 9 
d. Subjects : 
The sample population for this study are DoD beneficiary children from [ADDRESS_618859] of 
care urinalysis procedure as a course of treatment. They will be patients  enrolled at 99MDG  for evaluation and treatment. 
Children  will be recruited from the pediatric clinic as well as the emergency department  through parental permission and 
consent .  
e. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   
Inclusion Criteria  • DoD children aged  one month (28 days) to 12 months (365 days ) 
• if the child  was born less than 36 weeks gestation, age will be corrected  
• Precontinent (meaning that the child is unable to void on command)  
• Treating  clinician has determined that the child  requires urine sample  collection for course of 
treatment.  
Exclusion Criteria  • Children that are outside of the age range discussed in the inclusion criteria (less than one month 
(28 days) and older than 12 months (365 days) ).  
• If the treating clinician has determined that there is a need for immediate treatment and urine 
sample collection v ia invasive method, a ny type of anatomical or neurologic condition that will 
affect the ability to void or sensation  of the suprapubic area . Children  with past hypersensitivity 
reactions to iodine swabs.  
 
f. Source of Research Material:   
Will you be using private information in this study?  ☒Yes 
If Yes  ☒protected health information (PHI) held by a covered entity  
Use of identifiers  with private information  
Identifiers  to be Used ? Column A  
Looked at 
by [CONTACT_481802] B  
Recorded on 
enrollment log, 
subject list, or key 
list Column C  
Recorded on data 
collection tool 
(survey, spreadsheet, 
etc.)  Column D  
Recorded on 
specimen 
containers  Column E  
Shared w / 
others not on  
research team  Column F  
Stored after 
study ended  
Names  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Study codes linked to 
individuals’ identities using a key only accessible by [CONTACT_101491]   ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Dates (except year)  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Phone/Fax Numbers  ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
DoD ID#  & FMP code  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☒ ☐ ☐ 
Coding Plan?  
Describe the method that will be used Each participant will be assigned a patient identifier starting with either A or B to 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              4 to create and assign unique study codes 
to data.  show which group they were a member of and number 01 -60 following the letter.  
Describe the method that will be used 
to create and assign unique study codes 
to specimens.  Urine s pecimens will be associated with the child’s  DoD ID#  and FMP code for the 
initial results from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_481796]. On the work book 
the results will assigned to the child’s study code.  
What is the format of the key?  ☒Electronic  
Who will have access to the key?  Research Coordinators a nd Investigators  
Where will the key be stored and how 
will it be protected?  
 Location(s): All research data will be kept  separately from the Master Key of coded, 
identifiable PHI/PII  in an electronic database, which will be encrypted, double 
password protected and the access will be restricted.  At the conclusion of the 
study, the research data will be de -identified prior to review and analysis.  
Confidentiality measures: The research data will be coded to mask the identity of 
the child .  The  code will be retained until the conclusion of the research study. Once 
a Final Report has been approved by [CONTACT_1201], all the paper records will be stored and destroyed in accordance with the Long Term Storage Plan. The anonymized research data will not be utilized for further research activity beyond the protocol 
stipulations without additional IRB approval.  At the end of all data mergers, or no 
later than at the closure of the study, all identifi able patient information will be 
destroyed based on AFI 33 -332, “The Air Force Privacy and Civil Liberties Program” 
and the National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication (NIST SP 
800-88) for the approved methods to destroy PII.  
Source  of Research Material per Participant (Procedures)  # Routine Care  # Research Driven  # Total Procedures  
Urine specimen  1 0 1 
Participant Data Sheet  completed by  [CONTACT_11077]  0 1 1 
Satisfaction survey  (Parent)  0 1 1 
“All specimens kept at 99MDG  will be handled and disposed of in accordance with federal regulations.”  
g. Instrumentation:  N/A 
4. HUMAN SUBJECT PROTECTION  
Recruitment and Consent Processes:   
All potentially eligible childrens’ parents will be approached to have their child participate.  Primary Care Manager (PCM) 
referrals , with the patient s’ parents oral or written authorization, and posted advertisements will be utilized for recruiting 
children to the study. Some children may be patients of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_83852], however, they will have another  study staff recruit the 
children through their parents  to prevent any misconception of coercion or undue influence. When a potential child is 
identified by [CONTACT_481803], the ir parent(s) will either be provided a contact [CONTACT_342157], the Research 
Staff will be given the potential subjects contact [CONTACT_481804]’s oral or written authorization , or the 
Research Staff will speak with the child’s parent(s)  directly , if contact[CONTACT_481805] .  
 
Consent Processes:  
Parental Informed Consent (ICD) and HIPAA Authorization (HIPAA) will be sought in advance from each prospective child’s 
parent(s)  and appropriately documented in accordance with 32 CFR 219.117. Potential childrens’ parents  will be notified about 
the study either through posted advertisements, verbally through their child’s primary care manager , or upon check in at the 
clinic and will be given the opportunity to consent  for the child  by [CONTACT_481806]. The study 
coordinator will provide a written copy of the Parental Informed Consent Document and HIPAA Authorization. The potential 
child’s parents  may decline to consent  for the child  without prejudice. At the parent’s  discretion, they may take the ICD a nd 
HIPAA home to discuss further prior to making a decision. If the parent consents to having their child enrolled in the study, a copy of the ICD will be given to the m. Each parent will be asked to allow us to include their child ’s de-identified research data 
into the “Mike O’Callaghan Military Medical Center General Research Data Repository  (FWH20180064H)” for future research.  
 
Recruiting Service Members  Will you be recruiting service members in a group setting?  ☐Yes ☒No 
 
Participation Compensation :   
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              5 Children and parents  will not be paid for participation in this study.  
 
Assent Process:    
Parent consent will be acquired via the written consent forms  prior to the initiation of any research activities.  
 
Benefits:   
There may be decrease d levels of urine contamination in either the saline or the iodine prep group’s urine sample. If so , this 
will give a child’s treatment team more reliable test results and decrease the need for more invasive urine testing.  Additionally 
the normal s aline preparation may  be effective at decreasing the level of contamination as the iodine, this is the benefit of 
using normal saline for a preparation and comparing it to the iodine.  
 
Risks:   
Procedure is safe and the only possible negative outcome could be skin irritation from the iodine prep group . There are risks 
that urine sample may show that there was growth of bacteria on culture in which event the parents will be contact[CONTACT_481807] [INVESTIGATOR_481797]. There is a possibility that the 
child has an allergic reaction to the iodine swab. If this occurs, the child will be referred to their pediatric PCM. The urine 
sample collected during the QW pro cedure will still be used for the study. There may be a risk of inadvertent breach of 
confidentiality.  
 
Costs:  None  
 
Safeguards for Protecting Information:  
Parental Informed Consent and HIPAA authorization will be sought in advance of any screening and study -related procedures 
for each prospective child participant  and appropriately documented in accordance with 32 CFR 219.117. Parents of potential  
children  will be no tified about the study either through posted advertisements or through  their healthcare provider and 
parents will be given the opportunity to  be consent ed by [CONTACT_481806]. The study coordinator will 
provide a written copy of the I nformed Consent Document (ICD)  to the parent . The parent  may decline to consent  for their 
child  without prejudice. At the parent’s  discretion, they may take the ICD home to discuss further with family members or 
another physician, prior to making a decisio n. If they decide they are interested in  their child  participating in the study, they 
can contact [CONTACT_481808]. If the parent  consents, a copy of the signed ICD and HIPAA Authorization Document will 
be given to the parent . Parents who cannot provide Informed Consent  on behalf of their child, then the child will not be 
allowed to participate  in the study. No Legally Authorized Representatives (LAR) will be utilized. Each parent  will be asked to 
place their  child’s  de-identified research data  into the “ Mike O’Callaghan Military Medical Center General Research Data 
Repository” (FWH20180064H ) for future research. If the parent  does not give their authorization, then  the child’s  de-identified 
research data  will be destroyed no later than 3 years fol lowing the closure  of the study . 
Data and Specimen Storage Plan  
How will coded or identifiable data/specimens be stored?  
☒ Paper data, including 
completed consent forms  The research consents and HIPAA Authorization Documents will be stored in a locked  
cabinet in a locked room with restricted access.  
☒ Electronic data  Medical records will  not be annotated to reflect the child’s  participation in a 
research study since the child will not receive an invasive research intervention or 
procedure . All coded, de -identified research data will be electronically stored 
separately from the Master Key of identifiable patient demographics and PHI/PII . 
☒ Specimens  Urine samples will be  disposed of by [CONTACT_481809]. Results will be 
acquired through CHCS using the child’s  DoD ID#  and name. DoD ID#  will be used 
initially for urinalysis  results tracking and then Study code IDs will be used for de -
identified research dat a 
☒ Long -term storage (following 
completion of the study and 
inactivation of IRB approval)  The research data will be coded and any links to identifiable data will be destroyed 
(an approved shredding bin) as soon as possible or no later than at the closure of the study, with the exception of those parents  that consent ed to place their  child’s  de-
identified research data into the “ Mike O’Callaghan Military Medical Center General 
Research Data Repository” (FWH20180064H)  for future research . The anonymized 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              6 research data will not be utilized for further research activity  beyond the protocol 
stipul ations without additional IRB approval.  All de -identified research data will be 
maintained for 3 years following study closure.  
 
Safeguards for Protecting Subjects  Relative to Reasonably Expected Risks :  
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_146209].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_44303] ( e.g., 
consent forms, data pulls) and pertinent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_481798] [ADDRESS_618860]  being experienced by [CONTACT_481810], they will be referred to one of the Investigators for care  or to the child’s pediatric PCM.  
 
Categories of subjects  ☒Children (17 yrs or less), includes viable neonates  (28 days of age to 12 months)  
 
Clinical Care:   
All children will receive standard of care regardless of inclusion into this study. If at any time a child experiences any injury or 
adverse effects, appropriate clinical care will be given or the child will be referred to appropriate provider. If a urine sample should be abnormal the PI [INVESTIGATOR_481799]’s  parents and ensure they either follow up with their primary care 
provider or report to the emergency department , if symptomatic.  
 
Injury Compensation:  N/A 
 
Data Safety Monitoring  ☒N/A – none of the situations listed above apply  
5. ALTERNATIVES  
Alternatives:   
The alternatives for QW urine collection are urine specimen collection by [CONTACT_481811][INVESTIGATOR_1516]. The alternative to using an iodine cleansing solution is to use a 
normal saline solution. The parents also have the authority to deny their child’s participation in the study.  
6. DATA ANALYSIS  
Data Analysis:  
Primary analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_104992] -to-treat including all randomized children, where primary outcome data are 
available, consistent with the CONSORT guidelines for intention to treat analysis. The primary outcome measure is a binary 
yes/no outcome of detection of microbial markers to determine level of contamination. The absolute difference between the 
two groups will be reported so that the percentage of contamination samples, together with the 95% CI for the differences of 
percentages,  and calculate p values using a chi squared test. A p value of <0.05 will be considered significant. For the secondary 
outcome there will also be a measure of binary yes/no outcome of voiding urine within 5 minutes. The rate of successful 
voiding within 5 min will be described for each group with percentages and 95% CI. The p value will be estimated using chi 
squared test for categorical variables and t -test or Wilcoxon’s rank sum tests for continuous variables.  
 
Additionally we will also be evaluating patient’s gender, and age in months for comparative data analysis to help strengthen 
the study’s statistical design outcomes.  
 
Outcome Measures:   
Level of  urine  contamination (binary yes or no), if there was a sample collected in 5 minutes (binary yes or no), and time to 
void with a 300 second cap are the two outcome measure s being evaluated in this study.  
 
Sample Size Estimation/Power Analysis : 
This is a pil ot study and will have a relativity low sample of 60 subjects.  
 
Statistical Analysis:   
Data analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_481812] ([CONTACT_481813])  
 
Number of Subjects:  # Planned to Enroll  # Enrolled  # Planned to Complete Study  TOTAL  
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              7 Number of Subjects at 99 MDG  60 0 60 60 
7. STUDY DURATION  
Duration of Study:   
Approximate duration of the study: four months  
8. LOCAL AND EXTERNAL SUPPORT SERVICES  
Local and External Support Services: None  
Describe the plan for training/informing 
clinical personnel about the study.  Who will you train?  ☒Other: Nursing staff who will perform the QW and urine 
collection  and will be instructed when to use an iodine swab or saline flush to 
cleanse the periurethral area . When will you provide the training?  ☒Prior to the 
first subject being enrolled . How will you provide the training?  ☒In person  
9. INTRAMURAL (GME) AND EXTRAMURAL FUNDING SUPPORT 
Intramural (GME) and Extramural Funding Support: None  
10. DRUGS, BIOLOGICS, DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS, AND MEDICAL DEVICES  
Is this research an “ applicable clinical trial ” which must be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov?  ☒No 
 
Use of a placebo in place of standard therapy : 
Is a placebo being used in place of standard therapy?  ☒No ☐Yes 
11. MEDICAL RESEARCH AREA  
☒Emergency medicine   ☒Pediatrics  
12. ATTACHMENTS  
1. Form A, Signature [CONTACT_108798]  
2. Form A -2, Study Personnel Listing  
3. Form D, Informed Consent Document  
4. E-[ADDRESS_618861]  