Study Title: Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
 
Sponsor:   ABI Discovery Acceleration Initiative and NIH Grants  
 
Principal Investigator :  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
UAMS  Department of Geriatrics  
Arkansas Children’s Research Institute  
13 Children’s Way, Slot 317 
Little Rock, AR [ZIP_CODE] 
Office p hone (8 am -5 pm) : (501) 364- 3057  
Email:  [EMAIL_7522]  
  
Co-Investigator:   Shannon Rose, Ph.D.  
 UAMS Department of Pediatrics  
 Arkansas Children’s Research Institute  
   
 
Study locations :  Arkansas Children’s   
  1 Children’s Way  
  Little Rock, AR [ZIP_CODE]  
 
                           
Version #:   10 
Date:   23FEB2018  Page 1 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
Background and Rationale  
This research aims to better understand bioenergetics and metabolism in childhood obesity and 
type 2 diabetes (T2D). Obesity is a chronic condition that can lead to several serious health conditions. The prevalence of obesity in U.S. children has increased dramatically over the past 
several decades, and as a result, T2D is being diagnosed in a growing number of young children
1. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction have been implicated in obesity and 
the development of insulin resistance in adults2-5. However, the exact molecular mechanisms 
and their contribution to T2D development are not well understood and have been understudied in children. A better understanding of the pathophysiology of obesity and the development of insulin resistance in children is imperative for the development of effective  prevention and 
treatment strategies, to prevent the progression into more serious health concerns and to improve the lives of children.  
 An imbalance between cellular antioxidant defenses and endogenous reactive oxygen species (ROS) production results in oxidative stress. Numerous markers of oxidative stress are altered 
in obese children and adolescents
2, 6-10. Glutathione (GSH) is the major intracellular 
antioxidant/redox buffer against macromolecular oxidative damage, while cysteine, the rate 
limiting amino acid for GSH synthesis, and the oxidized form, cystine, serves as the major redox couple in the plasma for  circulating immune cells. Limited evidence indicates reduced GSH 
antioxidant/redox capacity in obese adults
11-14. Mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle is 
essential for insuli n-stimulated glucose uptake and fatty acid metabolism.  In adults, studies of 
muscle mitochondrial function have shown decreased activities in key enzymes15-21. In addition, 
reduced skeletal muscle mitochondria size and numbers have been reported in obese and to a greater extent in T2D adults, and the expression of nuclear encoded ETC genes in skeletal muscle was also decreased
22-24.   
 While mitochondrial dysfunction is known to play a role in obesity and the development of T2 D 
in adults, a major research gap remains in obese children irrespective of insulin resistance or T2D. Decreased resting energy expenditure (REE) has been shown to predispose to obesity 
and T2D in adults
25, but relatively little is known about REE in pediatric populations. Reduced or 
inefficient fa tty acid oxidation (FAO) is also associated with obesity and insulin resistance5, 26; 
however, this has not been studied in a pediatric population. Given advances in stable isotope technologies, it is now possible to perform non- invasive FAO studies in children.  
 Circulating blood cells are an easily obtainable source to examine bioenergetics and would be a preferred non- invasive alternative to collecting tissue biopsies, especially in children. 
Bioenergetic profiling of circulating cells has been used as a measure of systemic mitochondrial 
fitness, physical function and inflammation
27-29. While circulating blood cell bioenergetics has not 
been compared between lean and obese individuals, peripheral  blood monocyte bioenergetics 
was compared in morbidly obese adults before and after bariatric surgery, with observed post -
surgery increase in basal and maximal mitochondrial respi[INVESTIGATOR_390547]
30. Another recent report indicated that the 
monocyte and platelet maximal respi[INVESTIGATOR_390548]
31. These studies suggests that bioenergetic profiling of circulating 
cells largely reflects the bioenergetic capacity of other tissues.  
 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 2 
 
7LWOH%LRHQHUJHWLFVDQG0HWDEROLVPLQ3HGLDWULF3RSXODWLRQV
3,(XJHQLD&DUYDOKR3K'
7KHPDLQSXUSRVHRIWKHSURSRVHGLQYHVWLJDWLRQLVWRILOODFUL WLFDOUHVHDUFKJDSDQGJDLQLQVLJKW
LQWRWKHSDWKRSK\VLRORJ\RIREHVLW\DQGLQVXOLQUHVLVWDQFHLQF KLOGKRRGE\HVWDEOLVKLQJIRUWKH
ILUVWWLPHZKHWKHUREHVHLQVXOLQUHVLVWDQWFKLOGUHQH[KLELWUH GXFHGDQWLR[LGDQWUHGR[FDSDFLW\DQG
DEQRUPDOELRHQHUJHWLFVLQFLUFXODWLQJEORRGFHOOVDVFRPSDUHGW RQRUPDOZHLJKWDQGREHVH
LQVXOLQVHQVLWLYHFKLOGUHQDQGZKHWKHU5((DQG)$2DUHFRUUHOD WHGZLWKDEQRUPDOUHGR[VWDWXV
DQG ELRHQHUJHWLFV ,Q DGGLWLRQ QRW DOO REHVH VXEMHFWV DUHPHWDEROLFDOO\XQKHDOWK\082DQGERG\PDVVLQGH[%0,PD\QRWEHWKHEHVWGHWHUPLQDQWRIPHWDEROLFKHDOWK)DWPDVVRQW KH
RWKHUKDQGLVFRUUHODWHGZLWKLQVXOLQUHVLVWDQFHSDUWLFXODUO\ YLVFHUDO
DGLSRVLW\0HWDEROLFDOO\KHDOWK\REHVH0+2KDYHQRVLJQVRIW KH
PHWDEROLF V\QGURPH FDUGLRPHWDEROLF ULVN K\SHUWHQVLRQ DQGG\VOLSLGHPLDLQFOXGLQJFKLOGUHQ7KHUHIRUHDUHSHDWHGPHDVXU HV
VWXG\DWPRQWKVSRVWEDVHOLQHRQREHVHFKLOGUHQZLOOKHOSHVWDEOLVKQRWRQO\WKHGHJUHHRIFKDQJHLQWKHVWXGLHGRXWFRPHV 
EXWDOVRWKHLUSUHGLFWLYHYDOXHIRU7'GHYHORSPHQW
7KH
ILQGLQJVIURPWKHVHVWXGLHVZLOOOD\WKHIRXQGDWLRQQHHGHGIRU IXWXUH
LQYHVWLJDWLRQV LQWR LGHQWLI\LQJ WKH FHOOXODU DQG PROHFXODU
PHFKDQLVPVRILQVXOLQUHVLVWDQFHDQGWKHGHYHORSPHQWRIDQRQ LQYDVLYHELRPDUNHULQFKLOGUHQ
DWDQLQFUHDVHGULVNRIGHYHORSLQJLQVXOLQUHVLVWDQFH
+\SRWKHVLVDQG6SHFLILF$LPV:HK\SRWKHVL]HWKDWZKHQFRPSDUHGWRQRUPDOZHLJKWRUREHVHLQV XOLQVHQVLWLYHFKLOGUHQREHVH
LQVXOLQUHVLVWDQWFKLOGUHQZLOOH[KLELWDOWHUHGFLUFXODWLQJEOR RGFHOOELRHQHUJHWLFVDQGDPRUH
R[LGL]HGSODVPDUHGR[VWDWHDQGWKDWWKHVHDOWHUDWLRQVZLOOEH DVVRFLDWHGZLWKGHFUHDVHGUHVWLQJ
HQHUJ\H[SHQGLWXUHDQGLPSDLUHGIDWW\DFLGR[LGDWLRQ)$2)XU WKHUPRUHZHK\SRWKHVL]HWKDW
SRRUR[LGDWLYHFDSDFLW\RYHUWLPHPD\GLVWLQJXLVKEHWZHHQPHWDE ROLFDOO\KHDOWK\REHVH0+2
DQG PHWDEROLFDOO\ XQKHDOWK\ REHVH 082 SKHQRW\SHV DV ZHOO DV EH SUHGLFWLYH RI 7'
GHYHORSPHQW:HDOVRK\SRWKHVL]HWKDWELRHQHUJHWLFV5((DQG)$ 2ZLOOEHLPSURYHGLQREHVH
7'RULQVXOLQUHVLVWDQWFKLOGUHQDIWHUPRQWKVRIPHWIRUPLQW KHUDS\WKDWZLOOEHSUHVFULEHGDV
SDUWRIWKHLUFOLQLFDOFDUH 7RWHVWWKHVHK\SRWKHVHVZHZLOOHYDOXDWHWKHIROORZLQJ6SHFLI LF$LPV
6SHFLILF$LP 'HWHUPLQHZKHWKHUSHULSKHUDOEORRGPRQRQXFOHDUF HOO3%0&DQGSODWHOHW
ELRHQHUJHWLFVR[LGDWLYHSKRVSKRU\ODWLRQJO\FRO\VLVDQGIDWW\ DFLGR[LGDWLRQDUHLPSDLUHGDQG
ZKHWKHUSODVPDJOXWDWKLRQHPHGLDWHGUHGR[DQWLR[LGDQWFDSDFLW\ LVGHFUHDVHGLQREHVHLQVXOLQ
UHVLVWDQWFKLOGUHQDVFRPSDUHGWRQRUPDOZHLJKWDQGREHVHLQVXO LQVHQVLWLYHFKLOGUHQ
6SHFLILF$LP'HWHUPLQHZKHWKHUUHVWLQJHQHUJ\H[SHQGLWXUH5 ((DQGIDWW\DFLGR[LGDWLRQ
)$2DUHGHFUHDVHGLQREHVHLQVXOLQUHVLVWDQWDVFRPSDUHGWRO HDQDQGREHVHLQVXOLQVHQVLWLYH
FKLOGUHQDQGZKHWKHU5((DQG)$2DUHFRUUHODWHGZLWKELRHQHUJHW LFDQGUHGR[SURILOHV
6SHFLILF$LP'HWHUPLQHZKHWKHUWKHELRHQHUJHWLFR[LGDWLYHFD SDFLW\PHDVXUHGLQFLUFXODWLQJ
FHOOV3%0&VSODWHOHWVDQG)$2DUHYDOXDEOHSUHGLFWLYHPDUNHUV RI7'LQREHVHFKLOGUHQLQ
DGGLWLRQWRGLVWLQJXLVKLQJ082IURP0+2VXEMHFWV
6SHFLILF$LP'HWHUPLQHZKHWKHUFLUFXODWLQJEORRGFHOOELRHQH UJHWLFVDQGZKROHERG\5((
DQG)$2DUHPRGXODWHGE\PHWIRUPL QWKHUDS\WKDWZLOOEHSUHVFUL EHGDVSDUWRIFOLQLFDOFDUHLQ0102030
5 1 01 52 02 5
,QVXOLQ5HVLVWDQFH 
DUELWUDU\XQLWV 
)DW0DVVDUELWUDU\XQLWV 
)LJXUH$0HWDEROLFDOO\XQKHDOWK\
08OLSRG\VWURSK\%08REHVH
&0HWDEROLFDOO\KHDOWK\0+REHVH 
$ %
&
%
%
20
25
&
9HUVLRQ
'DWH)(% 3DJH
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
obese children with T2D  or insulin resistance.  
 
Study Design and Procedures  
This study consists of : 
1. An observational cross sectional bioenergetic and metabolic analysis of several groups 
of children including lean, obese, and T2D .   
2. A longitudinal bioenergetic and metabolic analysis  of obese children that will be followed 
for [ADDRESS_489805] -baseline.   
3. A prospective bioenergetic and metabolic analysis of obese insulin resistant children  (Aim 
3) and newly diagnosed children with T2D or insulin resistance who will be prescribed 
metformin  as part of their clinical care (Aim 4) .   
 
A prospective subject and his/her parent will come for the study visit that will last up to [ADDRESS_489806]  (and/or his/her  parent ) will be asked questions regarding the subject’s  medical history 
that will be reviewed by [CONTACT_390556]/exclusion criteria.  In 
addition, study staff may review medical records from ACH or  other  healthcare practitioners  
(such as physicians or pharmacists)  outside ACH in order to confirm the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria . Information from medical records may be collected from the time of consent up until the 
time that data analysis for this study is complete and results have been published. Study  staff 
will ask parents about d emographic information including biologic gender, date of birth,  
race/ethnicity , and parental occupations  as well as grade in school . 
 Prior to the study visit, study staff may contact [CONTACT_390557] . In the event that the 
participant is taking medications  or has a new health diagnosis  that may caus e him/her to be 
ineligible to participate in the study visit , the study visit may be rescheduled or canceled . Study 
staff may contact a parent and send the IRB approved consent form  and information regarding 
the scheduled visit to the parent(s) prior to the scheduled date. If the consent form has been revised since the last informed consent discussion, the new IRB approved consent form may be 
sent to parents. If applicable, the parent will be informed of the blood draw and advised that if the parent wishes their child to complete the blood draw at the visit, the child will need to be fasting  including no food or liquid after [ADDRESS_489807] to stay at the research location for the entire 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 4 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
visit in order for the samples to be obtained. Instructions will  be given to the parents for coll ection 
of samples if the parent  and child decide not to remain at the research location for the entire 
visit. 
 
If a procedure(s) (see below) is not successfully completed, the parent  and, if warranted, the 
participant  may b e asked to return to the study site for an additional visit to re- attempt the 
procedure. The decision to ask the parent/participant, to return for another attempt will be made 
by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or co- investigator . When a decision is made to  re-attempt the 
procedure, study staff will contact [CONTACT_390558]-attempt and if the parent is willing, schedule the visit. If a blood draw or fat oxidation estimation will be re -attempted, the parent will be r e-advised that if the parent wishes their child to complete 
the procedure, the child will need to be fasting including no food or liquid after 12 am, except for 
water and medications the day of the visit.  The study visit will be conducted in the same manner 
as the initial visit, with only the desired procedure(s) being re- attempted.  
 
The collection of s tool, saliva , and buccal swab samples is optional , and these samples may not 
be collected if the subject or parent does not want the sampl e(s) to be used for future research.   
 
Study Procedures  to be conducted at each visit :  
 
1. Intake of Food and Liquid: A parent will be asked by [CONTACT_390559]  (up until 
the last urine  sample is  collect ed for fat oxidation estimation). This is important 
because the diet will influence the fat oxidation estimation.  
 
2. Anthropometrics: Anthropometric measurements including height , weight , waist 
circumference, blood pressure, and pulse  will be obtained using standardized 
techniques. BMI-for-age will be calculated and plotted on CDC growth charts to 
confirm lean/obese stratification.  
 
3. Tanner (Puberty) S tage Assessment: P arents will be asked to complete a form  with 
draw ings depi[INVESTIGATOR_390549] . This form will be used to determine pubertal 
status . A physician may examine the subject for Tanner Stage (if the parent agrees) 
during the visit in order to confirm the parental report and for purposes of  analyzing 
study results . The questionnaire given to parents to complete is subjective and a 
parent could potentially incorrectly assess Tanner Stage . While the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria prevents the inclusion of those with puberty  development, 
if a parent incorrectly assesses his/her child’s Tanner Stage,  then this may alter the 
results or may cause the exclusion of many potential participants based on the parents response, especially in obese participants. Because the results from  the samples are 
reliant on the participants being pre- pubertal with no signs of maturation, conclusions 
may be incorrectly drawn from the study data if a child has pubertal development. At the beginning stages of puberty, insulin levels rise dramatically showing insulin 
resistance. Thus,  if the study determines the child to have insulin resistance but insulin 
resistance is ac tually due to development of puberty instead of being MUO then this 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 5 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
could alter the results and conclusions made from the study . Because of this, it is 
important to the study and the results to have the correct Tanner Stage  level for each 
participant.  
 
4. Physical Activity Questionnaire (Elementary School): A parent or participant will 
complete a form indicating the level of physical activity  the participant had during the 
previous week  in order to provide general estimates of physical activity levels for each 
subject during a 7- day period prior to the study . In addition, the parent or participant 
will be asked about the participant’s physical activity from the previous months leading up to the study visit.  
 
5. Depression Scale: With assistance from the parent, a child will complete a form 
(Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_25596] (CES -DC)) used 
as a depression scale. This scale will be used to account for depression as a 
confounding factor that could affect oxidative and bioenergetics parameters.  
 
6. Saliva  and Cheek Cells : We will ask each participant if he/she is willing to provide a 
sample of saliva and have his/her buccal mucosa swabbed. Cheek cells  will be 
collected by [CONTACT_390560] a soft swab to gently swipe the inside of the child’s 
cheek bilaterally for approximately one minute each, per cheek . The swabs  and saliva  
will be labeled with the stu dy ID number of the participant  and the study acronym . 
These samples will remain on ice  or in a refrigerator until transported to the PI’s 
laboratory. After the sample has been processed,  the sample will be  stored at -80°C 
in the PI’s laboratory. This  sample will be used for future research studies  on pediatric 
nutrition  and may be retained until it is used up . This is optional  and is not a 
requirement for completion of the study visit.  
 
7. Blood Collection: A pediatric nurse or trained phlebotomist will collect blood  from the 
participant under fasted conditions.  Depending on the child’s weight, up to the 
maximum allowed per the guidelines provided by [CONTACT_390561]’ s for the 
maximum allowable single blood draw volumes will be collected. The volumes are  
derived using a conservative 3.0 ml/kg estimate as well as a 5% of total body volume estimate.  Numbing cream  or a pain relieving device (Buzzy) may be used for the blood 
draw. Blood samples may be used for:  
a. Isolation of PBMC and platelets  for bioenergetics analysis using the Seahorse 
Extracellular Flux (XF)[ADDRESS_489808] been established by [CONTACT_390562] 
34, 35. Platelets and PBMC bioenergetics may be analyzed 
immediately, or cells may be cryopreserved and analyzed at a later time. Leftover cells may be cryopreserved for repeated bioenergetic profiling.  
b. Analyses of insulin, glucose, lipid levels, and other analytes including, but not 
limited to,  redox metabolites , hormones  and inflammatory markers.  
c. Leftover blood samples collected during this study may be stored in the PI’s  
laboratory and used for future research studies on pediatric nutrition.  
 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 6 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
8. Urine collection: Urine collection may occur at  the study location or the sample may 
be collected at home and brought back to study staff. When possible, attempts will be 
made to collect the first -morning urine. Urine collection will be attempted in a sterile 
specimen cup or in a hat and then transferred to a specimen cup. Samples collected 
during the study visit will be placed on ice, in an ice bath, or in a refrigerator until they 
can be delivered to the research site laboratory. Samples collected by [CONTACT_1766]/parents after the study visit may be stored in a tightly closed specimen cup in a refrigerator until  they are able to return to the research site, to occur within 6 
weeks  of collection. Samples delivered to the research site will be stored in a 
refrigerator until they can be transferred to the research laboratory and stored at -
80°C.  This sample will be used for this study and may be used for future research 
studies  involving pediatric nutrition.  
 
9. Stool collection: Stool collection may occur at one of the study locations or the sample 
may be collected at home and brought back to study staff. Attempts will be made to 
collect the entire sample using a hat and then transferring it to a sterile specimen 
cup(s). Samples collected during the study visit will be placed on ice, in an ice bath, or in a freezer until they can be delivered to the research site laboratory. Samples 
collected by [CONTACT_1766]/parents after the study visit may be stored in a tightly closed specimen cup in a freezer until they are able to return to the research site, to occur 
within 6 weeks  of collection. Samples delivered to the research site will be stored in a 
freezer until they can be transferred to the research laboratory and stored at -80°C.  
This sample will be used in future research studies  on pediatric nutrition. This sample 
is optional and is not required for the completion of the study visit.  
 
10. Fat oxidation estimation: Fat Oxidation may be measured by [CONTACT_390563]. Breakfast, lunch and snacks may be provided during this visit to the participant to ensure all participants are consistent . After obtaining a baseline urine 
sample, the stable isotopes will be administered. Follow up urine samples will be obtained  up to 3 times within 48 hours following the administration of the stable 
isotopes. Recommended collection times for the 3 samples will be approximately 2 (± 
30 minutes) , 6 hours  (± 1 hour)  post dosing, and the morning following the study visit,  
depending on the compliance of the child  and parent. The urine samples will be 
obtained  to measure the labeling in total body  water that may be used to estimate 
dietary fat oxidation. The stable tracer (
2H31-palmitic acid) may be administered orally 
at a dose of 15 mg/kg in a drink  and/or mixed with food (i.e. yogurt, etc.) . The parents 
will be asked to c ollect  some of these samples at home. They will be given thorough 
instructions about how to collect , label, record the time and store these samples. A 
specimen collection bowl (hat) may be used for collection of urine. The use of these stable isotopes in children to measure fat oxidation has been previously approved (IRB# 202870, 202954, 203770). If a baseline urine sample is not collected, then the 
stable isotopes will not be administered and the study visit will not be completed.   
 
11. Body composition may be assessed by [CONTACT_390564]. A device (InBody 570 Body Composition 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 7 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
Analyzer)  similar to the Tanita,  is routinely used  in the clinic . The Tanita requires 
participants to stand still with bare feet  on the weighing platform  while a small amount 
of electrical current is used to measure impedance.   
 
12. Resting energy expenditure by [CONTACT_46146]: A metabolic cart (Microlife 
Medgem Analyzer may be used to make gas exchange measurements (i.e. volume of oxygen consumed and volume of carbon dioxide produced by [CONTACT_2299]).  Measurements will be performed in a quiet, temperature- monitored room.  Children 
will be required to lie still without falling asleep for the duration of  the measurement.  
The data obtained will be used to assess whole- body substrate oxidation rates.  
  Participants  in the obese insulin- resistant and newly prescribed metformin groups may be asked 
to participate in additional visits.  The additional study visits will include the same procedures as 
the initial visit . For the newly prescribed metformin group, participants/parents will be asked to 
verify their compliance with metformin by [CONTACT_390565]/participant to report their compliance.  In addition, if a procedure(s) is not 
successfully completed, the parent and, if warranted, the participant may be asked to return to the study site for an additional visit to re- attemp t the procedure. The decision to re- attempt the 
procedure(s) will be made by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or co- investigator and the same steps 
as described for the re -attempt of a procedure from the initial visit followed.  
 
• Participants in the obese- insulin resistant group may be asked to complete one 
additional study visits to occur at 12 months (± 2 weeks) after the initial study visit. This is to follow changes in bioenergetic and metabolic parameters over time to assess validity and will help establish not only the degree of change in the studied 
outcomes, but also their predictive value for T2D development, in addition to  
distinguish between metabolically healthy obese (MHO) and metabolically unhealthy obese (MUO) phenotypes. We may request that all obese insulin resistant participants complete one additional study visit; however, this additional study visit is optional as 
we do not want to discourage potential enrollment due to the possibility of another visit 
or lengthy visit. We anticipate roughly 43% of the 70 obese insulin resistant 
participants will decline a 2
nd study visit with a goal of 40 subjects completing a second 
visit at 12 months  (± 2 weeks) .  
• Participants in the newly prescribed metformin group who are prescribed metformin 
as part of their clinical care will be asked to complete a second study visit to occur six 
months (± 2 weeks) after beginning metformin therapy  prescribed as part of their 
clinical care . We may request that all 20 participants in this group complete the 
addit ional study visit; however, the additional study visit is optional as we do not want 
to discourage potential enrollment due to the possibility of multiple visits or lengthy visits. We anticipate 50% of the 20 participants in this group will decline a 2
nd study 
visit with a goal of 10 subjects completing a 2nd visit at 6 months  (± 2 weeks) . 
 A participant/parent pair will be compensated $100.00 in gift cards for each study visit completed. 
Completion of the study visit may include participation in parental study forms, anthropometric 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 8 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
measurements, fat oxidation estimate measured by [CONTACT_390566], blood sample, urine 
samples, body composition assessment, and resting energy expenditure by [CONTACT_390567].     Because the parent and participant  do not have to stay at the study location for the entire visit, 
completion of the study visit would occur once the samples are obtained by [CONTACT_147849]. Parents/participants who are healthy with a normal weight and also healthy obese 
children, will be  given a one- time $100.00 in gift cards for participation in the research study visit. 
Parents/participants  with T2D or insulin resistance  who are prescribed metformin therapy at their 
normally scheduled doctor visit  or part of the obese with insulin resistance group  will be asked 
to complete two study visits and will be paid up to $200.00 in gift cards ($100.[ADDRESS_489809] study visit and $100.00 in gift cards at the second visit). For each study visit , a $[ADDRESS_489810] will be provided to the study participants /parents  after completion of the procedures to be 
completed at the research site (e.g., anthropometric measurements, Tanner Stage Assessment, physical activity questionnaire, depression scale, and blood collection) and another $[ADDRESS_489811] 
will be given to the study participants /parents  upon return of the study samples and intake of 
food and liquid form from the visit. Those participants /parents  who are asked to return to re-
attempt  procedure(s) n ot successfully completed at a study visit (initial or second) will be given 
a $[ADDRESS_489812] after re- attempting to complete the procedure(s). Participants/parents  may be 
given up to $[ADDRESS_489813] mail or to various locations, including pediatricians ’ office s, health 
fairs, daycare centers, schools/universities, recreational centers, child retail stores, websites 
(ACH, ACRI, ACNC, UAMS, and others as applicable) and churches. Also, print or digital ads 
may appear in newspapers, magazines, social media and circulars. On- hold phone messages, 
BoomText messages, screensavers, and radio/television advertisements may be used. In 
addition, research staff may contact [CONTACT_390568]. The research staff will educate the parents and children about the study. We will also work with physicians at ACH to identify 
subjects that may qualify.  They will provide study staff with contact [CONTACT_176543], 
and study staff will call and educate the parents and children about the study . The physicians 
will introduce the study to their patients; if the patient is interested the physician will obtain contact [CONTACT_390569]. In this case, the only contact [CONTACT_390570]. We will protect all personal information obtained during recruitment , enrollment, and testing processes, and maintain this in a locked drawer or cabinet.  
 175 pre-pubertal children ages 5-9 years old or T2D/insulin resistant  children ages 5- [ADDRESS_489814] been  newly  prescribed metformin will be recruited  and may enroll  for this study 
with the goal that 1 30 subjects stratified across the following groups will complete the study: i) 
healthy lean (n=20); ii) healthy obese (n=20); iii) obese insulin resistant (n= 70); obese with new 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 9 
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
metformin prescription(n=20) ( children with T2D or insulin resistant who have been newly 
prescribed metformin therapy as part of their clinical care). Every attempt will be made to 
ensure that groups are balanced with respect to sex and ethnicity.  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Age 5 -9 years and Tanner stage as reported by [CONTACT_390571] 1  OR Age 
5 years - 17 years  5 months , diagnosed with type 2 diabetes  mellitus  or insulin resistance  
and prescribed metformin (not yet taking)  
• Either healthy lean (BMI≥ 5th percentile and <85th percentile for age/sex) or obese (BMI ≥ 
95th percentile for age/sex)  
• For those with BMI≥ 95th percentile for age/sex, parental verbal confirmation will be 
obtained that the child had a history of BMI≥ 95th percentile for age/sex for at least six 
months prior to study enrollment  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
• Genetic or physical conditions impacting mobility over past year as determined by [CONTACT_978]  
• Having known chronic illnesses/disorders that may independently affect study outcome 
measures: type 1 diabetes mellitus, neurologic (e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]), developmental 
(developmental delay, autism spectrum disorder ), endocrine  (thyroid,  Cushing’s) , hepatic, 
autoimmune, cardiac and renal disorders.  Also, chronic lung disorders except well controlled asthma that does not require permanent use of inhaled/oral steroids  
• Taking  any of  the following  medications  that can affect study outcome: antipsychotics, 
thyroid hormone replacement therapy, inhaled/oral steroids, insulin, anabolic drugs (growth hormone replacement therapy and oxandrolone)  and stimulants  
• Taking metformin prescribed as part of their clinical care at the time of enrollment (may  
begin metformin therapy  prescribed as part of their clinical care while enrolled in the 
study)  
• BMI<5th percentile for age/sex (classified as underweight based on CDC growth charts)  
• Subjects determined ineligible by [CONTACT_978]. 
Risks and Benefits  
We do not foresee any adverse events associated with this protocol.  There is the  potential risk 
of loss of confidentiality to study participants . Measures to protect the confidentiality of study 
participants will be implemented by [CONTACT_390572][INVESTIGATOR_147414].  The proposed stable 
isotopes to measure whole body fat oxidation is non- radioactive and presents no risk to humans.  
There is a small risk that participants will encounter bruising and/or infection after having blood taken, however, the use of well -established blood taking techniques, and sterile procedures, by 
[CONTACT_390573] , will ensure the risk is minimal.  Also, numbing cream  and/or a 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 10  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
pain relieving device (Buzzy)  may be used to minimize the pain associated with the blood draw.  
There is the risk that researchers could develop ways in the future to link genetic information 
back to the subjects even though the samples do not include any personal identifiers , except for 
the assigned unique study code and the study acronym . Thus,  we do not anticipate any adverse 
effects associated with the study.  However, any adverse effects or unanticipated problems will be reported to the study PI, the IRB, and the study sponsor in accordance with IRB Policy 10.2. There will be no direct benefits to the study participants; however, knowledge gained from the study could potentially benefit patients in the future.  
 
Data Handling and Recordkeepi[INVESTIGATOR_390550] a unique identifying code or number.  The electronic 
key t o the code will be kept on a secure sharepoint site designed specifically for the study . 
Sharepoint is beneficial in that UAMS Techsource controls access for the site so that only select 
individuals are able to view the site. Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_390551].  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_390552]. 
Source documents and CRFs will be stored in a locked draw er. Documents will be archived 
according to UAMS/ACH/ACNC policies regarding destruction of research records.  
Data will be entered into a research database. Access to the study database(s)  is password 
protected and will be limited to study personnel  and regulatory authorities . 
At the time of collection, samples will be kept on ice or refrigerated (with the exception of stool which will be kept in a freezer) in the pediatric clinical research unit or in [CONTACT_390581]’s laboratory (Rm 4015 of ACRI) until th ey can be transported to the research laboratory . Samples  will be kept 
at -80°C once the initial processing and analyses have taken place. Samples will be stored in 
Room N2002 Freezer N2002FT6 or N2002FT18 of ACRI in [CONTACT_390582]’s  laborator y. These are 
monitored continuously for proper temperature and working condition. None of a subject’s 
personal identifiers will be present on any biological sample, except the unique subject ID and the study acronym.  The samples may be used until they are used up for res earch on pediatric 
nutrition.   At any time if the subject decides that he/she does not want to participate anymore, that subject’s data will be included as part of the planned analysis of study data. No more information will be collected after withdrawal,  however all data and samples collected prior to withdrawal  will still be 
used.  Information pertaining to this study will be made publically available through the ClinicalTria ls.gov website.  
 
Data Analysis 
Statistical and Power Analyses : 175 pre- pubertal children ages 5-9 years old will be recruited 
for this study assuming that 13 0 subjects stratified across the following groups will complete the 
study: i) healthy lean (n=20); ii) healthy obese (n=20); iii) obese insulin resistant (n= 70); obese 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 11  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
with new metformin prescription (n=20).   A one- factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used 
to compare mean outcome of interest across the groups of children (healthy lean, healthy obese,  
obese insulin resistant  and obese T2D ). Pair -wise comparisons using Tukey -Kramer post -hoc 
tests will be used to identify groups whose means differ significantly while retaining the family -
wise error rate at 5%. Outcomes will be also checked to verify that the assumptions of the 
parametric tes ts are met. When substantial deviation from assumptions are encountered, and if 
suitable transformation are not found, groups will be compared using the nonparametric Kruskal -
Wallis rank test, followed by [CONTACT_390574] -sum tests to ide ntify groups 
that differ. Generalized linear model (GLM) will also be used to incorporate important covariates and effect modifiers into the analysis.  
For Aim 3 : A paired t -test will be used to compare the mean change in the various outcomes 
described in S A1 and SA2 from baseline to [ADDRESS_489815] will be used. Alternatively, generalized linear mixed models 
(GLMM) will be used for Aim 3. GLMM account for the dependence between measurements 
from the same individual taken over time and allow the inclusion of fixed and time varying 
covariates.  
For Aim 4: A paired t -test will be used to compare the effects of metformin on the various 
outcomes on obese T2D/insulin resistant  children  with a new metformin prescription. If the 
assumptions for the paired t -test are not met, the non- parametric Wilcoxon matched -pairs 
signed- ranks test will be used. Alternatively,  generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) will be 
used for Aim 4. GLMM account for the dependence between measurements from the same 
individual taken over time and allow the inclusion of fixed and time varying covariates.  
Sample Size Justification: 
For Aims 1 and 2, statistical power was computed based on a one- factor ANOVA with a total of 
110 children ( 70 obese insulin resistant, 20 healthy obese, 20 healthy lean).  Assuming 80% 
power and α = 0.05, the minimum detectable Cohen's f effect size (ES(f)) is 0. 33. This is a 
medium effect  size and should provide valuable information regarding whether  a large study is 
warranted.   
For Aim [ADDRESS_489816] with a total of 40 children. 
Assuming 80% power and α = 0.05, the mini mum detectable Cohen's d effect size (ES(d)) is 
0.[ADDRESS_489817] with a total of 10 children. 
Assuming 80% power and α = 0.05, the minimum detectable Cohen's d effect size (ES(d)) is 1.0. Although this effect size is large, it should provide valuable information regarding whether a large study is warrant ed. 
 
Ethical Considerations  
This study will be conducted in accordance with all applicable government regulations  
and University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences research policies and procedures.   This 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 12  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
protocol and any amendments will be submitted and approved by [CONTACT_390575] (IRB) to conduct the study.    
The formal consent of each subject, using the IRB -approved consent form, will be obtained 
before that subject is submitted to any study procedure.   All subjects for this study will b e 
provided a consent form describing this study and providing sufficient information in language suitable for subjects to make an informed decision about their participation in this study.   The 
person obtaining consent will thoroughly explain each element of the document and outline the risks and benefits, alternate treatment(s), and requirements of the study.   The consent process 
will take place in a quiet and private room, and subjects may take as much time as needed to make a decision about their partici pation.   Participation privacy will be maintained and questions 
regarding participation will be answered.   No coercion or undue influence will be used in the 
consent process.   This consent form will be signed by [CONTACT_390576]. Written assent will be obtained from participants age 7- 17. A copy of the signed 
consent will be given to the participant, and the informed consent process will be documented in each subject’s research  record . A signed copy of the consent form may be placed in patients’ 
medical record.  If consent is given for samples to be used for future research studies and if 
samples are still being used when a participant turns the age of 18,  subjects will not be re-
contact[CONTACT_390577] a consent form and consent will be waived. However, subjects can contact [CONTACT_390578] 18 to ask that any remaining samples be removed. In addition, 
participants  may be recontact[CONTACT_390579] . 
 
Initially, samples will be stored at Arkansas Children’s Research Institute. The information 
collected at the study visit, saliva , blood, urine, stool  samples  may be stored indefinitely and may 
be used for future research studies  on pediatric nutrition. Prior to the information collected at the 
study visit and samples being used for future research studies, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_390553], and proposed future research will be 
reviewed by [CONTACT_390580]. The samples  and health information collected for the 
study visit may be shared with researchers at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
Arkansas Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], or Arkansas Children’s Research Institute. The samples may be 
shared with an outside group.  The samples will only have a study ID number  and study acronym  
to maintain confidentiality.  If participants decide they no longer want us to use their samples for 
future research studies, they may ask the study staff that the sample be removed. If the sample has been shared or if publication of results has occurred, then we may not be able to remove the sample.  In addition, research results from the depression scale may be shared with the 
child’s PCP or if the child is actively followed at ACH the depression scale results may be shared 
with the child’s ACH physician  if found to be significant and more information may be provided.  
If the child does not have a PCP  or is not actively followed at ACH , then a referral will be made 
to a PCP  for follow -up. For example, a score of 15 or greater on the CES -DC suggests that the 
participant expresses symptoms of depression. In this scenario, the child’s  PCP or ACH 
physician would be notified of the depression scale result.  If the child did not have a PCP, then 
a referral would be made to a PCP near the child’s home and the research results from the depression scale would be shared.  In addition, the parent would  be give n information of 
resources  to seek help fo r the child.   
 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 13  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
Dissemination of Data 
Results of this study may be used for presentations, posters, or publications. The publications 
will not contain any identifiable information that could be linked to a participant.    
 
References  
 
1. Mokdad AH, Ford ES, Bowman BA, Nelson DE, Engelgau MM, Vinicor F, Marks JS: 
Diabetes trends in the U.S.: 1990- 1998, Diabetes care 2000, 23:1278- 1283  
2. Vincent HK, Innes KE, Vincent KR: Oxidative stress and potential interventions to reduce 
oxidative stres s in overweight and obesity, Diabetes, obesity & metabolism 2007, 9:813- 839 
3. Civitarese AE, Ravussin E: Mitochondrial energetics and insulin resistance, 
Endocrinology 2008, 149:950- 954 
4. Hesselink MK, Schrauwen- Hinderling V, Schrauwen P: Skeletal muscle mitochondria as 
a target to prevent or treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, Nature reviews Endocrinology 2016,  
5. Patti ME, Corvera S: The role of mitochondria in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes, 
Endocrine reviews 2010, 31:364- 395 
6. Codoner -Franch P, Pons- Morales S, Boix -Garcia L, Valls -Belles V: Oxidant/antioxidant 
status in obese children compared to pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus, Pediatric diabetes 2010, 11:251- 257 
7. Faienza MF, Francavilla R, Goffredo R, Ventura A, Marzano F, Panzarino G, Marinelli G, 
Cavallo L, Di Bitonto G: Oxidative stress in obesity and metabolic syndrome in children and adolescents, Hormone research in paediatrics 2012, 78:158- 164 
8. Marin MT, Dasari PS, Tryggestad JB, Aston CE, Teague AM, Short KR: Oxidized HD L 
and LDL in adolescents with type 2 diabetes compared to normal weight and obese peers, Journal of diabetes and its complications 2015, 29:679- 685 
9. Matusik P, Prokopowicz Z, Norek B, Olszanecka- Glinianowicz M, Chudek J, Malecka-
Tendera E: Oxidative/Antioxidative status in obese and sport trained children: a comparative study, BioMed research international 2015, 2015:315747  
10. Vehapoglu A, Turkmen S, Goknar N, Ozer OF: Reduced antioxidant capacity and 
increased subclinical inflammation markers in prepubescent obese children and their relationship with nutritional markers and metabolic parameters, Redox report : communications in free radical research 2016, 1- 10 
11. Albuali WH: Evaluation of oxidant -antioxidant status in overweight and morbidly obese 
Saudi  children, World journal of clinical pediatrics 2014, 3:6- 13 
12. Codoner -Franch P, Boix -Garcia L, Simo- Jorda R, Del Castillo -Villaescusa C, Maset -
Maldonado J, Valls -Belles V: Is obesity associated with oxidative stress in children?, 
International journal of pediatric obesity : IJPO : an official journal of the International Association for the Study of Obesity 2010, 5:56- 63 
13. Paltoglou G, Fatouros IG, Valsamakis G, Schoina M, Avloniti A, Chatzinikolaou A, 
Kambas A, Draganidis D, Mantzou A, Papagianni M, Kanaka- Gantenbein C, Chrousos GP, 
Mastorakos G: Antioxidation improves in puberty in normal weight and obese boys, in positive association with exercise- stimulated growth hormone secretion, Pediatric research 2015, 
78:158- 164 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 14  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
14. Santillan LD, Moyano M, Frau M, Flores O, Siewert S, Zirulnick F, Ramirez DC, Gimenez 
MS: Reduced blood nrf -2 mRNA in local overweight boys at risk of metabolic complications: a 
study in San Luis City, San Luis, Argentina, Metabolic syndrome and related disorders 2013, 
11:359- 365 
15. Simoneau JA, Colberg SR, Thaete FL, Kelley DE: Skeletal muscle glycolytic and oxidative 
enzyme capacities are determinants of insulin sensitivity and muscle composition in obese women, FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American S ocieties for 
Experimental Biology 1995, 9:273- [ADDRESS_489818] C: Skeletal muscle metabolism and body fat content in men and 
women, Obesity research 1995, 3:23- 29 
17. Simoneau JA, Kelley DE: Altered glycolytic and oxidative capacities of skeletal muscle 
contribute to insulin resistance in NIDDM, J Appl Physiol (1985) 1997, 83:166- 171 
18. Simoneau JA, Kelley DE, Neverova M, Warden CH: Overexpression of muscle 
uncoupling protein 2 content in human obesity associates with reduced skeletal muscle l ipid 
utilization, FASEB journal : official publication of the Federation of American Societies for 
Experimental Biology 1998, 12:1739- 1745  
19. Kelley DE, Goodpaster B, Wing RR, Simoneau JA: Skeletal muscle fatty acid metabolism 
in association with insulin resistance, obesity, and weight loss, The American journal of 
physiology 1999, 277:E1130- 1141  
20. Ritov VB, Menshikova EV, He J, Ferrell RE, Goodpaster BH, Kelley DE: Deficiency of 
subsarcolemmal mitochondria in obesity and type 2 diabetes, Diabetes 2005, 54:8-14 
21. Ritov VB, Menshikova EV, Azuma K, Wood R, Toledo FG, Goodpaster BH, Ruderman 
NB, Kelley DE: Deficiency of electron transport chain in human skeletal muscle mitochondria in type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity, American journal of physiology Endocrinology and metabolism 2010, 298:E49- 58 
22. Kelley DE, He J, Menshikova EV, Ritov VB: Dysfunction of mitochondria in human 
skeletal muscle in type 2 diabetes, Diabetes 2002, 51:2944- 2950  
23. Patti ME, Butte AJ, Crunkhorn S, Cusi K, Berria R, Kashyap S, Miyazaki Y, Kohane I, 
Costello M, Saccone R, Landaker EJ, Goldfine AB, Mun E, DeFronzo R, Finlayson J, Kahn CR, Mandarino LJ: Coordinated reduction of genes of oxidative metabolism in humans with insulin resistance and diabetes: Potential role of PGC1 and NRF1, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the [LOCATION_002] of America 2003, 100:8466- 8471  
24. Sreekumar R, Halvatsiotis P, Schimke JC, Nair KS: Gene expression profile in skeletal 
muscle of type [ADDRESS_489819] of insulin treatment, Diabetes 2002, 51:1913- 1920  
25. Ten S, Bhangoo A, Ramchandani N, Mueller C, Vogiatzi M, New M, Lesser M, Maclaren 
N: Resting energy expenditure in insulin resistance falls with decompensation of insulin secretion in obese children, Journal of pediatric endocrinology & metabolism : JPEM 2008, 21:359- 367 
26. De Pergola G, Pannacciulli N, Minenna A, Martina RA, Cannito F, Giorgino R: Fuel 
metabolism in adult individuals with a wide range of body mass index: effect of a family history of type 2 diabetes, Dia betes, nutrition & metabolism 2003, 16:41- 47 
27. Chacko BK, Kramer PA, Ravi S, Benavides GA, Mitchell T, Dranka BP, Ferrick D, Singal 
AK, Ballinger SW, Bailey SM, Hardy RW, Zhang J, Zhi D, Darley -Usmar VM: The Bioenergetic 
Health Index: a new concept in mi tochondrial translational research, Clin Sci (Lond) 2014, 
127:367- 373 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 15  
 
Title:   Bioenergetics and Metabolism in Pediatric Populations  
PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_390546], Ph.D.  
 
28. Kramer PA, Chacko BK, Ravi S, Johnson MS, Mitchell T, Darley -Usmar VM: 
Bioenergetics and the oxidative burst: protocols for the isolation and evaluation of human 
leukocytes and platelets, Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE 2014,  
29. Tyrrell DJ, Bharadwaj MS, Van Horn CG, Marsh AP, Nicklas BJ, Molina AJ: Blood- cell 
bioenergetics are associated with physical function and inflammation in overweight/obese older adults, Experimental  gerontology 2015, 70:84 -91 
30. Nijhawan S, Richards W, O'Hea MF, Audia JP, Alvarez DF: Bariatric surgery rapi[INVESTIGATOR_390554], Surgical endoscopy 2013, 27:4569- 4573  
31. Tyrrell DJ, Bharadwaj MS, Jorgensen MJ, Register TC, Molina AJ: Blood cell respi[INVESTIGATOR_390555]: Implications for a minimally invasive biomarker of mitochondrial health, Redox biology 2016, 10:65- 77 
32. Bervoets L, Massa G: Classification and clinical characterization of metabolically 
"healthy" obese children and adolescents, Journal of pediatric endocrinology & metabolism : JPEM 2016, 29:553- 560 
33. Munoz -Garach A, Cornejo- Pareja I, Tinahones FJ: Does Metabolically Healthy Obesity 
Exist?, N utrients 2016, 8:  
34. Rose S, Frye RE, Slattery J, Wynne R, Tippett M, Melnyk S, James SJ: Oxidative stress 
induces mitochondrial dysfunction in a subset of autistic lymphoblastoid cell lines, Translational psychiatry 2014, 4:e377 35. Rose S, Frye RE, Slattery J, Wynne R, Tippett M, Pavliv O, Melnyk S, James SJ: 
Oxidative stress induces mitochondrial dysfunction in a subset of autism lymphoblastoid cell lines in a well- matched case control cohort, PloS one 2014, 9:e85436 
 
 
Version #:  10 
Date:  23FEB 2018  Page 16  
 