	1 A randomized controlled trial on the effects of NSAIDs on postpartum blood pressure in patients with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy  Investigators: Christina A. Penfield, Jennifer McNulty, and Michael Nageotte   October 13, 2016                          
	2   Background and Rationale: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are effective agents for the management of pain in the postpartum period.1,[ADDRESS_516863] been proposed to increase blood pressure is by [CONTACT_409879]. Elevated blood pressure in the immediate postpartum period can lead to adverse health consequences, particularly hemorrhagic stroke,3,4 as well as pathologic heart remodeling that can lead to long-term cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.5,6 Persistent postpartum hypertension is also associated with prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7959]7 and has the potential to influence patient satisfaction. Therefore, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology has suggested that these commonly used postpartum pain relief agents be replaced by [CONTACT_409880] 1 day postpartum.”[ADDRESS_516864], limiting use of this analgesic for postpartum women with hypertension may be premature. The suggestion from ACOG was extrapolated from studies conducted on patients with longstanding chronic hypertension, which included males and non-pregnant females. It is therefore unclear whether this recommendation is appropriate for patients with transient hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP). These pregnancy-associated disorders, which include gestational hypertension and preeclampsia, are diagnosed after [ADDRESS_516865] been inconclusive. One case report describes a postpartum hypertensive crisis in a patient with preeclampsia with severe features following rectal indomethacin administration.13 Notably, a recent retrospective study suggested that postpartum NSAIDs were not associated with an increase in blood pressure in women with severe features of preeclampsia.14 However, limited conclusions can be drawn from this study since it is unclear why some subjects had received NSAIDs and others did not. Therefore, in order to establish if there is a causal link between NSAIDs and elevated blood pressure in hypertensive postpartum women, a prospective trial is necessary.   Currently the use of NSAIDs is not restricted in women with HDP at Miller Children’s and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. We propose a double-blind randomized control trial to test the effects of postpartum analgesic medications on blood pressure control in women with HDP. We will also assess postpartum analgesic efficacy and patient satisfaction. With this data, we will be able to evaluate the safety and efficacy of using NSAIDs in the immediate postpartum period in women with HDP. 
	3 Study Objectives This study aims to investigate the effects of ibuprofen on blood pressure in postpartum women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP).  Women with HDP are often considered to have a distinct clinical course and risk of adverse outcomes if their hypertension is mild or severe. We will therefore consider these two subgroups as distinct study populations with different primary endpoints. Specific Aims:  1) In women with severe hypertension prior to delivery, we will compare the incidence of severe postpartum blood pressures in patients receiving ibuprofen versus acetaminophen.  Hypotheses: • There will be no difference in the proportion of women with an epi[INVESTIGATOR_409867].  2) In women with mild hypertension prior to delivery, we will compare average postpartum blood pressure in patients receiving ibuprofen versus acetaminophen.  Hypotheses: • There will be no difference in average postpartum blood pressure between study groups.  Study Population Potential subjects will be patients admitted for medical care at Miller’s Children’s and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Inclusion Criteria 1. Postpartum females at least 18 years old 2. Delivery occurred at equal to or greater than 24 0/7 weeks gestational age 3. Patient receiving care with the Women’s Perinatal Group (Maternal Fetal Medicine practice) or Obstetric Clinic resident services  4. Diagnosis of a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy (HDP), including the following: • Gestational hypertension • Preeclampsia without severe features • Preeclampsia with severe features  • Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzymes, Low Platelet (HELLP) Syndrome  • Eclampsia Exclusion Criteria 1. Diagnosis of chronic hypertension or documentation of elevated blood pressures before 20 weeks gestational age.  
	4 2. Renal dysfunction (Serum creatinine measurement >1.3mg/dL during the current pregnancy) 3. Low platelet count (recorded measurement <50,000 during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063]) 4. Significant liver dysfunction (AST or ALT >500) 5. Known sensitivities to ibuprofen or acetaminophen 7. Use of therapeutic doses of anticoagulation (low dose anticoagulation used for routine prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism is acceptable) 8. Postpartum hemorrhage requiring transfusion  Subgroups of HDP Enrollment will be stratified into two groups of hypertensive patients based on the degree of elevation of blood pressures.   • Group 1: “HDP-Severe” o Patients with at least one severe blood pressure measurement (systolic >160mmHg or diastolic >105mmHg) prior to randomization will be classified as having a severe hypertensive disorder of pregnancy. • Group 2: “HDP-Mild” o Patients without a severe-range blood pressure prior to randomization will be classified as having a mild hypertensive disorder of pregnancy.   The definition of severe hypertension is adopted from the definitions of the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology8 and the [LOCATION_004] Maternal Quality Care Collaborative.  Study Design  An outline of the study design can be found in Appendix I. This study will be a prospective double blinded randomized control trial with participants randomized to receive one of two oral postpartum study analgesic regimens: o Ibuprofen 600mg every [ADDRESS_516866] dose of study analgesic (either oral ibuprofen or oral acetaminophen) no later than [ADDRESS_516867] additional analgesic medications (i.e. hydrocodone, oxycodone) that are part of the standard options available for postpartum patients at Miller Children’s and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
	[ADDRESS_516868]. Measurements can be taken more frequently, as clinically indicated. Blood pressure cutoffs will be established for physician notification by [CONTACT_101035] (see study protocol order set).  Intravenous (IV) antihypertensive medications will be administered according to the previously established management guidelines at Miller Children’s and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (see Acute Hypertension Protocol, Appendix II) and the need for such treatment, if any, will be recorded. Oral antihypertensive therapy will be started to treat non-severe hypertension to keep blood pressure <150/100mmHg.  Oral antihypertensive medication regimens will be limited to nifedipi[INVESTIGATOR_409868]. After initiation of a regimen, subsequent increased dosing of medications will be managed at the treating physician’s discretion.  Pain scores will be assessed and recorded at least every 12 hours using visual (Wong-Baker facial grimace scale, Appendix III) or verbal numeric analog scale with scores 1-10 (Appendix IV). Pain measurements can be recorded more frequently as clinically indicated.  A 3-item survey will be administered to patients prior to discharge (Appendix V). The survey will include one item from the HCAHPS survey (Appendix VI), an item to assess patient satisfaction, and an item to assess side effects of the medication. The survey will be administered by [CONTACT_409881]’s study ID number.  An interim analysis will be performed for both the "HDP-severe" and "HDP-mild" study groups. The interim analysis will be performed on the primary endpoint when 50% of patients have been randomized and have completed the study including the 3-day outpatient blood pressure check follow-up. The interim analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_409882] 2-3 clinicians or researchers in conjunction with the research office who will be blinded to the treatment allocation. Outpatient Protocol At the time of discharge, if the patient is being prescribed oral antihypertensive medication as an outpatient, or if she had a blood pressure measurement systolic >140mmHg or diastolic >90mmHg in the prior 24 hours, then she will be advised to avoid ibuprofen as an outpatient. These patients will also receive a prescription for acetaminophen for mild analgesia, as well as additional opi[INVESTIGATOR_409869], with attention to avoiding more than the recommended 4g of acetaminophen from all sources in 24 hours. For example, postoperative patients could be prescribed hydrocodone or oxycodone 5/[ADDRESS_516869] at Miller’s Women’s and Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], a tertiary academic community hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4791] 6000 deliveries annually.  Patient Identification and Enrollment Residents, maternal fetal medicine (MFM) fellows, attending physicians, and research coordinators will screen patients for eligibility. The physician members of the team will screen for patients under their direct care, while research staff will review electronic medical records of patients to screen for potential candidates. The patient can be approached about enrollment in the study after admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_409870] a HDP. Recruitment will be completed before the initiation of the postpartum order set. Study personnel will be available 24/[ADDRESS_516870] with the study until its completion.  Research coordinators will obtain and maintain data on patient outcomes. All members of the research team will complete the appropriate human subjects research training and provide documentation to the IRB before participating in the study. Study Protocol Postpartum Order Set A specific study protocol postpartum order set will be used for all study participants.   The order set will include the following: • Indication of assigned randomization group (study medication A or B) • Study drug to be administered every [ADDRESS_516871] dose prior to 8 hours after delivery • Vital signs to be recorded every [ADDRESS_516872] procedure,  • Management of severe hypertension (defined as systolic BP of >160 OR diastolic BP >[ADDRESS_516873] Miller's Women's and Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_409871]: o Notify MD if systolic BP >160 mmHg or diastolic BP >105 mmHg and initiate acute hypertension protocol (Appendix II) • Pain score assessment at least every 12 hours as per unit policy • Do not administer NSAID medications   • Do not exceed 1400mg/day of acetaminophen from all sources while on study protocol. • Any serum creatinine measurement >1.[ADDRESS_516874] every 24 hours until the measurement is less than 1.1. A study representative should be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. • Orders for additional PRN pain management:  o Norco 5/325mg or 10/325mg 1 tab PO q6 hours PRN pain o Percocet 5/325mg or 10/325mg 1 tab PO q6 hours PRN pain o Additional orders can be activated by [CONTACT_409883] § Hydromorphone 1mg IV q2-4 hours PRN breakthrough pain 
	7 § Morphine 5mg IV q2-4 hours PRN breakthrough pain § Oxycodone 5mg or 10mg [ADDRESS_516875] will individually prepare each dose of the study drug and label it as “study medication A” or “study medication B” with the necessary lot number and expi[INVESTIGATOR_320]. The study medication will be dispensed as an oral solution to maintain blinding of patients, nursing, and patients. Only the pharmacist will know the identity of study medication A and B. The pharmacy staff will maintain a master inventory with logs of lot numbers and information on the study drug administered to participants.  Randomization Participants will be randomized by [CONTACT_22123]-generated random assignments of group “A” and “B”. These assignments will be placed in consecutively numbered opaque sealed envelopes. The HDP-mild and HDP-severe subgroups will be randomized separately to ensure a balanced number of subjects in each of these two categories. The physician will indicate the assigned study group “A” or “B” in the study postpartum order set to indicate to pharmacy staff which study medication should be administered.  Data Collection The following information will be collected for analysis. Please see Appendix VII for the data collection tool. Patient demographic information: • Age • BMI  • Race/ethnicity  • Parity • Tobacco or substance use in pregnancy • Pregestational or gestational diabetes Patient clinical information • Gestational age at delivery • IV magnesium use • Mode of delivery • Neonatal outcomes: Apgar scores, birthweight, NICU admission  Outcome variables Outcomes in the HDP-severe subgroup  The primary clinical concern for postpartum patients with HDP-severe is further postpartum epi[INVESTIGATOR_409872], which are associated with adverse health outcomes such as 
	[ADDRESS_516876] be treated with a combination of oral and IV antihypertensive medications to maintain blood pressure control below this threshold. Additionally, the presence of severe hypertension is important because patients cannot be discharged if blood pressures are at this level, which can result in prolonged postpartum hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7959]. By [CONTACT_409884], we will be able to evaluate if there is a difference in these postpartum complications in patients taking ibuprofen or acetaminophen. Additionally, pain scores will be regularly measured and recorded to assess adequacy of pain control with the two study medications.  Primary outcome for HDP-severe subgroup Evaluate the incidence of severe blood pressures in women randomized to ibuprofen versus acetaminophen. o Null hypothesis: There is no difference in incidence of postpartum severe hypertension between the two study groups. o Primary endpoint: Proportion of women with at least one epi[INVESTIGATOR_409873] (systolic >160mmHg or diastolic >105mmHg).      Secondary outcomes for HDP-severe subgroup I. Blood Pressure Measurements • Total number of blood pressures that are severe-range (systolic >160mmHg or diastolic >105mmHg) • Average MAP using “per protocol” approach (including patients who were treated)  • Average MAP in 24 hour intervals (postpartum day 1, day 2, day 3) and summative over the first 4 days of the postpartum period. • Outpatient postpartum blood pressure measurement within 3 days after discharge  II. Antihypertensive treatment  • Administration of an antihypertensive medication (yes/no)  • Administration of an acute IV antihypertensive medication (yes/no) • Administration of an oral antihypertensive medication (yes/no) o Need to increase dosing of antihypertensive medication (yes/no) • Summation of all antihypertensive medications and doses administered  III. Pain control • Average pain score using numeric analog scale 1-10 o Visual pain scores with Wong-Baker facial grimace scale will be translated into 1-10 scores • Use of additional analgesic medications (yes/no) o Total number and dosing of analgesic medications • HCAHPS patient survey at time of discharge  o “During this hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408], how often was your pain well controlled?” § Never, sometimes, usually, always 
	9 IV. Patient satisfaction/Side effects • “Were you satisfied with the pain medications you received postpartum?” - Definitely no, sometimes, usually, always • Patient survey for side effects from analgesic medications: GI irritation/sedation • Length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] o Number of cases where hospi[INVESTIGATOR_409874]-mild subgroup For the HDP-mild subgroup, we are primarily interested in average blood pressure during postpartum stay. Since this group rarely receives antihypertensive treatment, we will be able to isolate the effect of ibuprofen and acetaminophen on average postpartum blood pressure. We will also evaluate if there is a difference in incidence of severe hypertension and need for treatment between the two medication study groups. Additionally, pain scores will be regularly measured and recorded to assess adequacy of pain control with the two study medications.  Primary Outcome for HDP-mild subgroup Evaluate average blood pressure in postpartum women randomized to acetaminophen versus ibuprofen. o Null hypothesis: There is no difference in blood pressure between the two study groups. o Primary Endpoint: Average mean arterial pressure (MAP) during postpartum hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]. § We will exclude any patient who received antihypertensive medications postpartum from this primary analysis  Secondary Outcomes for HDP-mild subgroup I. Blood Pressure Measurements • Average MAP using “per protocol” approach (including patients who were treated) • Average MAP in 24 hour intervals (postpartum day 1, day 2, day 3)  • Incidence and total number of blood pressures that are severe-range (systolic >160mmHg or diastolic >105mmHg) • Outpatient postpartum blood pressure measurement within 3 days after discharge  II. Antihypertensive treatment  • Administration of an antihypertensive medication (yes/no)  • Administration of an acute IV antihypertensive medication (yes/no) • Administration of an oral antihypertensive medication (yes/no) o Need to increase dosing of antihypertensive medication (yes/no) • Summation of all antihypertensive medications and doses administered  
	10 III. Pain control • Average pain score using numeric analog scale 1-10 o Visual pain scores with Wong-Baker facial grimace scale will be translated into 1-10 scores • Use of additional analgesic medications (yes/no) o Total number and dosing of analgesic medications • HCAHPS patient survey at time of discharge  o “During this hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408], how often was your pain well controlled?” § Never, sometimes, usually, always IV. Patient satisfaction/Side effects • “Were you satisfied with the pain medications you received postpartum?” - Definitely no, sometimes, usually, always • Patient survey for side effects from analgesic medications: GI irritation/sedation • Length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] o Number of cases where hospi[INVESTIGATOR_409875], protocol compliance, documentation of CRFs, source document storage, and standards of privacy and confidentiality are maintained throughout the study by [CONTACT_409885]. Statistical Considerations The outcome data from the two subgroups of HDP-severe and HDP-mild will be analyzed separately.   Power analysis I. HDP-Severe Subgroup The study will be powered to detect a difference in the proportion of patients who have an epi[INVESTIGATOR_409876]. Based on a prior study of women with preeclampsia with severe features exposed to NSAIDs postpartum, 59% of women require treatment with antihypertensive medications.9 Another study reported an 88% rate of antihypertensive treatment postpartum in women with HDP, although they did not indicate if NSAIDs were prescribed.15 We therefore estimate that 75% of HDP-severe patients taking NSAIDs will have at least one severe blood pressure postpartum. Since NSAIDs have the potential to contribute to postpartum pain control, we anticipate that we would need to demonstrate a large clinical effect on blood pressure in order to influence current prescribing practices. We therefore would like to detect a 35% decrease in number of patients with at least one severe blood pressure postpartum in the acetaminophen study group, to a rate of 49%. With a statistical significance level of 0.[ADDRESS_516877], we 
	11 will need to enroll 122 participants. To account for potential dropout in our study groups, we plan to enroll 10% more patients, for a total of [ADDRESS_516878] a change in postpartum mean arterial pressure (MAP) between the two study groups. In several studies of non-pregnant patients, NSAID use led to a MAP increase of 4-6mmHg compared to acetaminophen and placebo groups.10-[ADDRESS_516879] deviation for average MAP during postpartum stay in women with HDP is 7.9mmHg.9 Assuming an average blood pressure of 140/[ADDRESS_516880], we will need to enroll 56 study participants. To account for potential dropout in our study groups, we plan to enroll 10% more patients, for a total of 62 HDP-mild patients.  Data Analysis STATA 11.0 software Comparison of mean arterial blood pressure between groups:  - Student’s t-test (comparison of means, assuming data is parametric) - Logistic regression for all postpartum blood pressure measurements as a continuous variable Comparisons of frequency of severe blood pressures: difference in median frequency between groups, nonparametric distribution. - Mann-Whitney U test Difference in pain score median averages, nonparametric data:  - Mann-Whitney U Test Other categorical variables: use of antihypertensive meds, need to increase antihypertensive medications, patient satisfaction/side effects - Chi-squared analysis, Fischer’s exact test    Schedule of Study Visits The patients will be scheduled for one outpatient postpartum blood pressure evaluation within 3 days after discharge.  Risks and Benefits Associated with the Study Procedure Benefits: There are no benefits to the study participants. 
	12 Risks: There are no additional risks over standard current care to participating in the study, since both study drugs are routinely administered for postpartum analgesia at Miller’s Children’s and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], regardless of the diagnosis of hypertensive diseases of pregnancy. The frequency and dosing of these medications are also consistent with the current standard of care at our hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. These medications are well tolerated, have minimal side effects, and are available over the counter.  If the assigned treatment regimen does not control pain adequately, several alternative pain medications will be available to the participant. However, the patient would not be able to receive the alternative non-narcotic treatment for mild pain control unless they withdraw from the study.  Monitoring Plan Research staff and the investigators will ensure that the consent process, protocol compliance, documentation of CRFs, source document storage, and standards of privacy and confidentiality are maintained throughout the study by [CONTACT_409885]. Additionally, storage of all sensitive material will be in a locked file cabinet and there will be no storage of data with protected health information (PHI) on laptop computers. No PHI will leave the LBMMC premises or be transmitted on personal emails. Research staff will audit the consent binders to assess that all protocols have been adhered to. Study personnel will be available 24/7 to answer all questions or concerns regarding the study.  Safety Considerations  Pharmacy and study personnel will ensure all safety procedures will be maintained throughout the study. If a significant unanticipated adverse event or other unanticipated problem is identified, the investigators or designee will report them within 7 days (if the event is serious) or within 14 days (for any other unanticipated problems) of becoming aware of the problem and records will be maintained in the research coordinator’s file.  All data will be kept in the research coordinator office, which has a locked door and in a cabinet that is double locked.  Potential complications of high blood pressure during pregnancy include stroke and seizures. Complications from antihypertensive medications include sudden symptomatic low blood pressure. Potential complications from the study medications include gastrointestinal bleeding and renal dysfunction (ibuprofen) and liver dysfunction (acetaminophen), although neither study drug will be administered in the high doses that are associated with these complications. However, as a precaution we will have a serum creatinine monitoring protocol in place. Currently, as part of routine of care, every hypertensive obstetric patient receives a measurement of creatinine (along with liver function enzymes and complete blood count) when admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. If serum creatinine measurement is >1.1mg/dl, we will monitor creatinine levels every 24 hours until the measurement is less than 1.1mg/dL. A study representative will be contact[CONTACT_409886].	If the creatinine increases to 1.4 mg/dl or above, the patient will be the study medication will be unmasked. If the patient was assigned to ibuprofen, the medication will be discontinued and this unanticipated problem will be reported to the IRB. 
	13 An interim analysis will be performed for both the "HDP-severe" and "HDP-mild" study groups.  The interim analysis will be performed on the primary endpoint when 50% of patients have been randomized and have completed the study including the 3-day outpatient blood pressure check follow-up. The interim analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_409882] 2-3 clinicians or researchers in conjunction with the research office who will be blinded to the treatment allocation. The validated Peto approach will be used: the trial will be ended if a significant difference in primary outcomes is found between the two study groups using symmetric stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_409877] p<0.001. Additionally, the study will be halted if there are significant differences in numbers of patients in each group with serum creatinine that exceeds >1.4mg/dl while using the study drug using symmetric stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_409877] p<0.001. Confidentiality Throughout the study, only study personnel will have access to collected subject data. Please see application for description of who will have access to data. Additionally, storage of all sensitive material will be in a locked file cabinet and there will be no storage of data with protected health information (PHI) on laptop computers. No PHI will leave the LBMMC premises or be transmitted on personal emails. The data will be collected until the predefined number of patients have been enrolled and completed the study. After the study’s closure, the data will be stored for thirty years, and subsequently destroyed. Please see HIPAA subject authorization form for more details (Appendix VIII). Appendices:  I. Study design flow diagram II. Hypertension Protocol  III. Visual Analog Pain Scale IV. Verbal Numeric Analog Pain Scale V. Discharge Assessment Patient Survey VI. HCAHPS Survey VII. Data Collection Tool VIII. HIPAA Subject Authorization Form  References: 1. Angle PJ, Halpern SH, Leighton BL, Szalai JP, Gnanendran K, Kronberg JE. A randomized controlled trial examining the effect of naproxen on analgesia during the second day after cesarean delivery. Anesth Analg. 2002;95(3):741–5–tableofcontents. doi:10.1213/01.ANE.[PHONE_8464].[ZIP_CODE].87. 
	14 2. Deussen AR APMR. Analgesia for relief of pain due to uterine crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/involution after birth (Review). December 2013:1-55. 3. Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BD, Moore RC, Rose CH, Cushman J, May W. Stroke and Severe Preeclampsia and Eclampsia: A Paradigm Shift Focusing on Systolic Blood Pressure. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;105(2):246-254. doi:10.1097/01.AOG.[PHONE_8465].[ZIP_CODE].56. 4. Bateman BT, Schumacher HC, Bushnell CD, et al. Intracerebral hemorrhage in pregnancy: frequency, risk factors, and outcome. Neurology. 2006;67(3):424-429. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.[PHONE_8466].[ZIP_CODE].a2. 5. Melchiorre K, Sutherland GR, Liberati M, Thilaganathan B. Preeclampsia is associated with persistent postpartum cardiovascular impairment. Hypertension. 2011;58(4):709-715. doi:10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.111.176537. 6. Ray JG, Schull MJ, Kingdom JC, Vermeulen MJ. Heart failure and dysrhythmias after maternal placental syndromes: HAD MPS Study. Heart. 2012;98(15):1136-1141. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2011-301548. 7. Goel A, Maski MR, Bajracharya S, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_409878]. Circulation. 2015;132(18):1726-1733. doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.015721. 8. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy. November 2013:1-100. 9. Wagner SJ, Craici IM, Grande JP, Garovic VD. From placenta to podocyte: vascular and podocyte pathophysiology in preeclampsia. Clin Nephrol. 2012;78(3):241-249. 10. Genbacev O, Zhou Y, Ludlow JW, Fisher SJ. Regulation of human placental development by [CONTACT_409887]. Science. 1997;277(5332):1669-1672. 11. Herse F, LaMarca B. Angiotensin II Type 1 Receptor Autoantibody (AT1-AA)-Mediated Pregnancy Hypertension. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2012;69(4):413-418. doi:10.1111/aji.[ZIP_CODE]. 12. Maynard SE, Min J-Y, Merchan J, et al. Excess placental soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt1) may contribute to endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, and proteinuria in preeclampsia. J Clin Invest. 2003;111(5):649-658. doi:10.1172/JCI200317189. 13. Makris A, Thornton C, Hennessy A. Postpartum hypertension and nonsteroidal analgesia. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004;190(2):577-578. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2003.08.030. 14. Wasden SW, Ragsdale ES, Chasen ST, Skupski DW. Impact of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Pregnancy Hypertension: An International Journal of Women's Cardiovascular Health. 2014;4(4):259-263. doi:10.1016/j.preghy.2014.06.001. 
	[ADDRESS_516881] P. Postpartum Course of Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia. Hypertens Pregnancy. 2010;29(3):294-300. doi:10.3109/10641950902777747.  