PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 1 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  INSTRUCTIONS:  
●Use this “TEMPLATE PROTOCOL (HRP -503)” to prepare a study protocol
outlining your research plan .
●Depending on the nature of your study, some major sections might not be
applicable to your research. If so , simply  mark as “N/A.” For example, a simple
survey  might have many sections with “N/A.”  For subsections  (e.g., 1.x or 8.x )
you can mark as “N/A” if you are certain that the subsection is not applicable .
●Once the IRB/HRPP approves your submission, your latest approved version of
the protocol  will be stored  in the IRB Protocol Management  online system .
●If your research plan changes and you need to modify the protocol, please submit
an amendment to Protocol  Management with the requested modifications.
Download your current  protocol from Protocol Management and indicate  the
changes /revisions  using  the track changes  feature in order  to make review of the
modifications easier to follow. If you are unable to use  track changes , please
create a new paragraph wherever you need to make a change, and  indicate
“Amendment: Date” before making a change to any section. Protocol
management will store the  older versions  of your protocol  if the  IRB or HRPP
staff need to comp are them during the review.
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Include the full protocol title .  
The role of altered nutrient partitioning in food reward  
PROTOCOL NUMBER:  
Include the number assigned in Protocol Management  (verify this has been added 
before submitting protocol to HRPP ).  
#21-964 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_42598] : Alexandra Gold DiFeliceantonio, PhD  
Department : HNFE  
Telephone Number : [PHONE_10568]  
Email Address : [EMAIL_9671]  
FUNDING:  
Sponsor (s): NIH UL1TR003015  
Funded already or in the proposal phase? : Funded already as a sub -award to 
Virginia Tech, pending receipt of funding from NIH NCATS CTSA UL1TR003015  
Is Virginia Tech the primary awardee or the coordinating center of this grant or 
contract? If not, list the primary institution : University of Virginia  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
1 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 2 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:   
Include the version number and date of this protocol. Versions should start at 1.0.  
 
2.0 
 
REVISION HISTORY:  
Use this table to keep track of changes.  Add more rows as needed.  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Brief Summary of Changes  
(i.e., the different sections)  Consent 
Change?  
1 10/12/22  Section 6.0: updated information about where 
and how recruitment materials will be used  
Section 11.0: Updated details about blood draw 
protocol to be consistent with the types of 
blood tubes we are able to procure  
Section 11.0: updated compensation amounts 
for each visit to equal ~$20/hr   
2 4/26/23  Section 12.0: Inclusion Criteria: changed 
inclusion criterion for fMRI scan f rom BMI 
25-35 kg/m2 to BMI >25 m/kg2  no 
    
    
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
2 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 3 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  4 
2.0 Objectives  4 
3.0 Background  5 
4.0 Study Endpoints  7 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  8 
6.0 Setting  8 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  [ADDRESS_658863] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
3 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 4 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658864] response 
following a flavor -nutrient conditioning paradigm across the 
normal to obese body mass index range  and in states of 
altered metabolic health  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  To develop an appropriate protocol for measuring metabolic 
flexibility in a "flex" metabolic chamber  
Study Population  The general US population  
Sample Size  15 
Research 
Intervention (s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  Blood measurements, resting and postprandial energy 
expenditure and substrate oxidation, questionnaires, 
magnetic resonance imaging  
Study Duration for 
Individual 
Participants  6-7 weeks in total:  
Week 1: Training Session (1 hour)  
Weeks 2 -4: Behavior Sessions (4 sessions x 2.5 hours each)  
Week 5: Post -testing Session with fMRI (only a subset of 
participants; 3 hours)  
Week 5: Post -testing Session without fMRI (a majority of 
participants; 1 hour)  
Weeks 6 -7: Metabolic chamber sessions (2 sessions x 6 
hours each, with 5 -day washout between sessions)  
4 days total of controlled feeding with food provided by [CONTACT_509645]: resting energy expenditure; MRI: magnetic resonance 
imaging;  FBRI: Fralin Biomedical Research Institute; 
CHBR: Center for Health Behavior Research  
 
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives  of this study : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
4 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 5 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658865] response 
following a flavor -nutrient conditioning paradigm across the normal to obese body mass 
index range and in states of altered metabolic health. The second aim is to develop  a 
protocol for measuring metabolic flexibility in a "flex" metabolic chamber over a 6 -hour 
measurement.  
 
 
 
2.2 State the hypotheses to be tested :  
 
We hypothesize that reinforcement learning will be impaired with increasing obesity and 
that metabolic flexibility can be determined utilizing data produced from a 6 -hour 
measurement inside a "flex" metabolic chamber.  
 
 
3.0 Background  
3.1 Summarize the relevant prior research on  this topic and gaps in current 
knowledge within the field of study : 
 
There is conflicting evidence as to whether  people with obesity find foods more 
reinforcing. People with obesity exhibit a greater motivation to  consume  palatable foods 
that does not habituate over time compared to healthy weight individuals (Saelens and 
Epstein  1996; Epstein et al. 2007; Temple et al. 2009); however, they do not report liking 
food more (Wall et al. 2020).  Obesity is also associat ed with decreased sensitivity to 
post-ingestive signals (Beutler et al. 2020), possibly due to dietary history and exposure 
(Small and DiFeliceantonio 2019). Further, there is evidence for impaired reinforcement 
learning and habituation in studies from bot h humans with obesity and animals (Kroemer 
and Small 2016; Coppin et al. 2014; Reichelt, Morris, and Westbrook 2014; Johnson and 
Kenny 2010). Additionally, many hormones that are altered in states of obesity and 
metabolic dysfunction, such as insulin,  influence food reinforcement. For example, a 
recent study in humans revealed central insulin signaling influences striatal dopamine 
tone (Kullmann et al. 2021). However, there is no experimental evidence in humans that 
post-ingestive learning is altered in sta tes of obesity. The experiments in this proposal 
aim to fill that gap.  
The normal process of energy metabolism  involves a dynamic and coordinated switch 
between primarily fat and carbohydrate as oxidative fuel substrates, depending upon 
nutritional or physiological condition. This process of adjusting  substrate oxidation to 
match substrate availability and energy demand is termed “metabolic flexibility” (Kelley 
and Mandarino 1990). Metabolic inflexibility, on the other hand, is caused by [CONTACT_509646] h a 
consistent mix of oxidative substrates,  regardless of nutritional or physiological 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
5 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 6 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  circumstances, is utilized (Muoio 2014). Metabolic inflexibility has been identified in 
obesity (GM et al. 2012; Hulver et al. 2003), type 2  diabetes(Kelley and Mandarin o 
1990), insulin resistance (Kelley et al. 1999; van der Kolk et al. 2016), and   other 
conditions characterized by [CONTACT_509647]. Metabolic inflexibility is 
putatively a key influence in the pathogenesis of peripheral insulin resistance, as 
biomarkers of altered fat oxidation have been  observed prior to the development of 
insulin resistance (Jans et al. 2011; Heilbronn et al. 2007). If flavor nutrient conditioning 
is dependent upon some mechanism involved in the pathway of nutrient 
sensing , transport, and utilization, altered nutrient partitioning due to metabolic 
inflexibility may provide insight into the relationship between post -ingestive metabolic 
signals and food reward in obesity and metabolic disease.  
 
Indirect calorimetry is a powe rful tool for determining energy expenditure and 
macronutrient oxidation in response to a mixed -macronutrient diet or meal. In other 
words, it allows for a versatility in measurement of  metabolic flexibility to both fat and 
carbohydrate in a physiologicall y relevant manner. Indeed, a new method  for assessing 
metabolic flexibility to a high -carbohydrate or high -fat meal using indirect calorimetry in 
a large,  whole -room metabolic chamber has recently been published (McDougal et al. 
2020); however, the  reprodu cibility of this method across metabolic chambers and 
clinical populations has not yet been determined. Furthermore, this methodology is 
designed around use of a 27 m3 chamber, which requires a relatively long  duration of 
measurement for an appropriate tem poral resolution of measured O2 and CO2 
concentrations to determine energy expenditure and macronutrient oxidation (Chen et al. 
2018). The Fralin Biomedical Research Institute houses two state -of-the-art metabolic 
chambers. The smaller of the two chambers,  approximately 4.6  cubic meters, allows for 
more rapid and accurate measurement of O2 and CO2 compared to large chambers and 
is specifically designed for conducting dynamic metabolic studies over shorter 
measurement durations. This  smaller “flex” chamber i s one of only a few in the world, 
and as such, no methodologies to assess metabolic flexibility specifically in the “flex” 
chamber have been developed. Thus, we are poised to take advantage of  novel 
technology to lead the development of a new method to ass ess a key component of 
metabolic health.  
 
 
 
3.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data : 
 
This is a new project without preliminary data collected.  
 
 
3.3 Based on the existing literature, p rovide the scientific or scholarly 
rationale for and significance of your research and how will it add to 
existing knowledge : 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
6 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 7 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658866] that 
although current treatments are effective in improving  metabolic health and reducing 
body weight in the short term, strategies that promote long -term maintenance 
of metabolic health and reduced body -weight remain el usive. Obesity is therefore a 
chronic disease that requires  lifelong attention. From a public health perspective, 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_109916] -term effective treatments is an essential  medical research goal. The gut -
brain axis has long been recognized as an important r egulator of metabolism  and energy 
homeostasis; however, only recently have advances in research tools allowed for a 
better  understanding of the complex mechanistic integration of gut and brain signals. The 
fidelity of the gut -brain axis presents a novel an d potentially powerful therapeutic target 
for obesity and metabolic diseases. In this proof -of concept pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we propose to probe the 
gut-brain axis as a target for obesity intervention by [CONTACT_509648] -brain 
axis 1) across a range of bod y mass index (BMI) and 2) in states of altered metabolic 
health  (independent of BMI). The data from this proposal will provide evidence  for the 
gut-brain axis as a therapeutic target in obesity treatment and allow the development of 
state-of-the-art tools to measure metabolic health at Virginia Tech, essential steps 
towards applying for federal funding.  
 
 
4.[ADDRESS_658867] common in clinical trials but are sometimes 
applicable to other types of biomedical  research , as well as social, 
behavioral, or educational research.  See link below for a discussion.  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wocz7K7a0hCQJPPO_khh5l1
SQQjhGDDGHzcOPRHR5Tw/edit?usp=sharing   
 
Primary study endpoints are blood metabol ite measurements, indirect calorimetry 
measurements, drink preference and ratings, and brain activation measured by [CONTACT_40394].  
 
 
4.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety  endpoints. These should be 
included for all studies that are greater  than minimal risk . (Minimal risk: 
The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the 
research that are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily 
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or 
psychological examinations or tests.) : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
7 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 8 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  There are no safety endpoints.  
 
 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  
5.1 Describe the basic study design/approach (e.g., qualitative study using five 
focus groups of first year students to describe assimilatio n into the 
university community;  randomized controlled trial of a behavioral change 
intervention to increase  dietary  intake of whole grains ; pre- post-test 
evaluation of new pedagogical techniques to improve adult literacy) : 
 
This study consists of two main aims. In the first aim, a within -subjects design will be 
used to compare the rewarding properties of two beverages, one containing 75kca l of 
sugar and one containing [ADDRESS_658868] meal using a 6 -hour metabolic chamber stay.  
 
 
 
 
5.2 Describe corresponding data analysis plan/approach (e.g., content analysis 
of focus gro up transcripts ; descriptive analysis followed by [CONTACT_40190] ; nonparametric analysis of pre - and post -test 
measures) : 
 
The first aim will use linear mixed effects models to compare ratings of the beverages 
and control for confounding varia bles. Linear regression will be used to relate blood and 
energy expenditure measures to liking and other subjective ratings. Standard 
preprocessing and statistical techniques for fMRI data will be used to compare beverages 
and look for relationships betwee n neural activity and physiological measures. The 
second aim will use linear mixed effects models to compare energy expenditure and 
substrate oxidation to the test high -carbohydrate and high -fat meals measured in the 
metabolic chamber. Measures of metaboli c flexibility will include changes in respi[INVESTIGATOR_509626], the time to reach peak respi[INVESTIGATOR_509627], slope from baseline to peak respi[INVESTIGATOR_17864], and rate 
and slope of the return to  baseline respi[INVESTIGATOR_17864].  
 
 
6.[ADDRESS_658869] the 
research.  Consider each of the items listed below:  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
8 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 9 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential 
subjects.  
● Identify where the team will perform the research procedures.  
● Describe the composition and involvement of any community 
advisory board (s). 
● For research conducted in other locations, describe:  
o Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research at 
those locations.  
o Local scientific and ethical review structure at those locations.  
Examples include work in other cultures or ethnic groups 
(within or outside of the U.S.)  and work with churches. The 
HRPP will provide additional guidance for international 
research.  
 
 
Approved study recruitment materials will be distributed in the follow ways. Flyers will 
be posted on bulletin boards and approved posting sites throughout Roanoke, Blacksburg, 
and surrounding areas. Digital advertisements will be displayed on DiFeliceanto nio lab 
and CHBR social media, VT News, and in list serves with permission.  
 
All advertisements will include a link to the lab website where there will be approved 
language describing the research study. Interested participants will fill out a general 
screening survey. All screening surveys will be delivered through Ripple. This screening 
survey will be used to determine study eligibility. Once the general screening survey has 
been completed, participants who may be eligible for this study will be contacte d via 
email (see attachment 'Screening email'). If participants choose to complete the study -
specific screening form and are eligible for this study, they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] 
a consent session.  
 
The study procedures for the study will all take pl ace at the Fralin Biomedical Research 
Institute (FBRI) at VTC campus in Roanoke, VA. The consent session and metabolic cart 
measurement sessions will occur in the Center for Health Behavior Research (CHBR) at 
the FBRI. Flex calorimeter sessions and control led feeding will occur in the metabolic 
chamber and metabolic kitchen, respectively, at the FBRI at VTC.  
 
 
 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  
7.1 Describe the study interventions (including behavioral interventions) and/or 
investigational agents (e.g., drug s or device s) to be used in this study .  Consider 
each of the items listed below:   
● Drug/Device Handling: If the research involves drugs or devices, 
describe your plans to store, handle, and administer the drugs or 
devices so that they will be used only on subjects , and only by 
[CONTACT_10733].  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
9 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 10 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Describe whether any of the following will be used: microwaves, X -
rays, DEXA scans, general anesthesia, or sedation  
● If control of the drugs or devices used in this pr otocol will be 
accomplished by [CONTACT_10734], approved organizational 
SOP (e.g., Research Pharmacy SOP for the Control of 
Investigational Drugs, etc.), please reference the SOP in this section.  
 
 
Beverage Solutions:  
This study will involve the use of 2 beverage solutions, which will be given to each 
participant. Beverages include citric acid, water, flavor, and either:  
1. 0 kcal sucralose (to match the sweetness of the calorie -containing sugar beverage)  
2. 75kcals sugars  
 
Sucralose, sugars, and citric acid are common food and beverage additives that nearly 
every participant would have consumed previously in their normal diet.  
 
The flavors used will be 0.002% acerola, 0.5% bilberry, 0.1% horchata, 0.1% lulo, 0.2% 
yuzu. 0.1% papaya, 0.1 % chamomile, 0.1% aloe vera, 0.1% mamey, and 0.2% maqui 
berry (Bell Labs Flavors and Fragrances,IL, [LOCATION_003], product numbers: 33.[ZIP_CODE], 15.[ZIP_CODE], 
132.[ZIP_CODE], 141.[ZIP_CODE]. 101.[ZIP_CODE], 102.[ZIP_CODE], 141.[ZIP_CODE], 141.[ZIP_CODE], 46.[ZIP_CODE] and 
13.[ZIP_CODE]).  
 
Foods:  
This study will involve consumption of high carbohydrate (60% carbohydrate, 20% fat) 
and high fat (60% fat, 20% carbohydrate) test meals. In addition, a standardized diet 
(50% carbohydrate, 30% fat) will be provided for [ADDRESS_658870] consumed in their normal diet. Participants will be screened for food 
allergies/intolerances and excluded if any of these foods are included in the study diet or 
test meals.  
 
Device Handling:  
This research involves use of a metabolic chamber and metabolic cart. Both are located in 
spaces with restricted, proxy access. This research also involves the use of an MRI 
scanner. The MRI scanner is located in a space in th e Human Neuroimaging Lab with 
restricted, proxy access, behind biometrically secure doors.   
 
 
 
 
7.[ADDRESS_658871] the name [CONTACT_40232]  (including any vitamins, supplements, herbs, or 
nicotine ) to be used in the study.  Indicate  whether  they have FDA 
approval, and list any limitations for their use :  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
10 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 11 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658872] all devices, how they will be used, their purpose in the study, and if 
they will be used in a manner consistent with their approved uses. If they 
will be used in ways that are not yet FDA approved , indicate whether they 
need  an IDE or a determination that they are exempt from the IDE 
Determination. If a determination of significant risk or non -significant risk 
is needed for any of the devices, include the researcher’s recommendation 
for each of those devices :  
 
Metabolic Chamber and Cart: Participant s will undergo metabolic measurements in a 
metabolic chamber and metabolic cart in a manner consistent with approved uses.  
 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A subset of participants will receive an MRI scan. The 
Siemens 3T scanner has been approved by [CONTACT_1622] a nd will be used in a manner 
consistent with approval.  
 
 
7.4 If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device), include the 
following information:  
● Identify the holder of the IND/IDE/ abbreviated IDE.  
● Explain procedures followed to comply with sponsor requirements 
for FDA regulated research for the following:  
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
 
 
N/A 
 
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
11 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 12 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
 
 
8.0 Procedures Involved  
8.1 Describe and explain the study design : 
 
This is a crossover design and within -subjects analysis plan where participants receive all 
conditions during the flavor -nutrient conditioning paradigm of Aim 1. A subset of 
participants will also undergo fMRI scanning for Aim 1. All participants will unde rgo the 
controlled feeding diet and metabolic chamber measurements for Aim 2.  
 
 
8.2 Provide a description of:  
● All research procedures being performed  
● If the study has more than one procedure, session, and/or subject 
population, descri be each procedure, session, and/or  study 
population separately. For complex studies, you are encouraged to  
include a figure or chart.  
 
 
Study Overview:  
Approximately 15 people from the general population will be recruited for Aim 1 
(without fMRI) and Aim [ADDRESS_658873] metabolic chamber session and controlled feeding for 
the second metabolic chamber session.  
 
Recruitment and Screening:  
Approved study recruitment  materials will be distributed in the follow ways. Flyers will 
be posted on bulletin boards and approved posting sites throughout Roanoke, Blacksburg, 
and surrounding areas. Digital advertisements will be displayed on DiFeliceantonio lab 
and CHBR social me dia, VT News, and in list serves with permission.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
12 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 13 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  All advertisements will include a link to the lab website where there will be approved 
language describing the research study. Interested participants will fill out a general 
screening survey. All screeni ng surveys will be delivered through Ripple. This screening 
survey will be used to determine study eligibility. Once the general screening survey has 
been completed, participants who may be eligible for this study will be contact[CONTACT_509649] (see attachmen t 'Screening email'). If participants choose to complete the study -
specific screening form and are eligible for this study, they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] 
a consent session.  
 
AIM 1:  
 
Consent and Training Session  
Informed Consent  
Participants will be asked to sign a consent form upon arrival to the CHBR. They will be 
given ample time to review and ask questions prior to signing the document. After 
research personnel have answered the participant's questions and the consent form has  
been signed, participants will begin the training session.  
 
Anthropometrics and Clinical Measures  
Participants' height and weight and hip and waist circumferences will be measured. A 
fingerstick blood sample will be collected for point -of-care hemoglobin A1C assessment 
to ensure eligibility. Blood pressure will be collecting using an automated 
sphygmomanometer. Body composition will be assessed using bioelectrical impedance 
analysis.  
 
Flavor Ratings  
The participants will first be trained by [CONTACT_509650] (Bartoshuk et al., 2 004). Then participants will taste and make 
ratings of beverages using the standard rating scales. After the participant has completed 
the tasting protocol, the researcher will determine two flavors that were equally liked and 
equally unfamiliar to the participant. These flavors will be used in the beverages the 
participants will consume during the behavioral conditioning sessions (one beverage per 
2 sessions). In addition, participants will complete a triangle test to determine whether 
they can detect a  difference between sugar - and sucralose -sweetened beverages.  
 
Mock MRI Training  
Participants will also complete a "mock" MRI training, in which they learn to swallow 
small amounts of liquids while lying supi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. (Note: most people have no difficulty 
learn ing to swallow small quantities of liquid while lying down). This training will be 
performed in an MRI simulator that is the same bore size and similar environment to the 
real scanner, but does not contain a magnetic field. Participants who have difficulty  with 
supi[INVESTIGATOR_509628] (i.e., Aim 1 without the fMRI scan and Aim 2).  
 
Dietary, Physical Act ivity, and Health Behavior Questionnaires  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
13 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 14 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658874] appropriate lab 
personnel to op t out of further participation if a participant wishes to do so.  
 
Behavior Sessions 1 and 3 (interchangeable with Behavior Sessions 2 and 4, 
respectively):  
Participants will come to the CHBR after a [ADDRESS_658875] scales.  
 
An IV catheter will then be placed in participants' arms for blood draws at seven time 
points during the 1 -hour session: at baseline and 10 -, 15-, 20-, 30-, 40-, and 60 -minutes of 
the session. For the IV catheter placement, a small plastic tube will be placed in one of 
the veins in the medial cubital fossa area of the arm; this tube will stay in place for the 
duration of the 1 -hour testing session. No more than three attempts will be made to insert 
the IV catheter during each blood draw testing session. Once the catheter is inserted, a 
baseline sample of 2 tubes of blood will be drawn: a 4 ml tube for EDTA plas ma, and a 5 
ml tube for serum.  In the case of difficulty inserting the IV catheter and obtaining blood 
at the baseline time point, we will evaluate whether to continue the protocol or not. If the 
participant is willing, venous blood draw samples may be co llected instead at baseline, 
30, and 60 minutes.  
 
Participants will then consume a single 355ml conditioning beverage (with the 
appropriate conditioning stimuli and flavor as determined during the consent and training 
session) within 5 minutes and rate int ernal states immediately after consumption. Two 
tubes of blood (one 4 ml EDTA plasma, one 5 ml serum) will be collected at 10 -, 15-, 20-
, 30-, 40-, and 60 -minutes following beverage consumption. In total, 14 tubes of blood 
will be drawn during the session (approximately 63 mls of blood). The IV catheter line 
will be flushed with normal saline between each blood draw to prevent coagulation in the 
catheter tubing. Once the [ADDRESS_658876] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
14 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 15 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  Behavior Sessions 2 and 4 (interchangeable with Behavior Sessions 1 and 3, 
respectively):  
Participants will come to the CHBR after a [ADDRESS_658877] 24h prior to their session. 
This session will occur within the same week as Behavioral session 1 (or 3, as 
appropriate) with at least one day in between the ses sions. They will first rate their 
internal states on standard scales.  
 
Participants will then rest for approximately [ADDRESS_658878] calorimetry determines gas exchange (i.e., oxygen consumption and carbon 
dioxide expi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]) a t the level of the lungs, and these measures are used to calculate 
energy expenditure and fat and carbohydrate utilization. During the test, participants lie 
supi[INVESTIGATOR_509629] a transparent plastic hood. There are two holes on 
the hood, one that allows the inflow of room air into the hood, and another that allows for 
the extraction of gases into the gas analyzer via a vacuum tube (see pi[INVESTIGATOR_50615]). The 
hood is then sealed around the participant's shoulders to prevent any gas from escapi [INVESTIGATOR_509630]. Indirect calorimetry using a metabolic cart is a common, noninvasive 
assessment conducted routinely in both research and clinical nutrition practice. There is 
no more than minimal risk associated with this method of indirect calorimetry , and 
participants may wear normal clothes during the procedure. Since the hood is clear 
plastic, participants will be able to see and communicate with research personnel 
throughout the test. Should a participant become uncomfortable with the test, they ma y 
choose to stop the procedure at any time.  
 
 
 
Following completion of the approximately [ADDRESS_658879] calorimetry 
measurement, participants will be given a 355 ml conditioning beverage (with the 
appropriate conditioning stimuli and flavor a s determined during the consent and training 
session) to consume within [ADDRESS_658880] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
15 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 16 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658881]-Testing Session (for participants NOT undergoing fMRI portion of the protocol):  
Participants will come to the CHBR after a [ADDRESS_658882]-Testing Session (for participants who ARE undergoing fMRI portion  of the 
protocol):  
Participants completing the fMRI portion of the protocol will first report to the CHBR 
after a [ADDRESS_658883] scales. Then, they will be escorted to the Human Neuroimaging 
Laboratory in 2 Riverside for the fMRI scan.   
 
During this scan, participants will lie on a table that slides into the bore of the scanner . 
Using a head coil, the functional images will be acquired using an EPI [INVESTIGATOR_509631]. 
Because the process is noisy (due to the sounds generated as the magnetic field gradients 
are changed), participants will wear a pair of headphones and disposable earpl ugs. During 
the entirety of the scan, subjects will be able to communicate with the experimenter via a 
speaker and microphone system. If subjects become uncomfortable or claustrophobic 
while in the scanner, they will be able to squeeze an emergency ball to  get the attention of 
the experimenters who will then immediately remove them from the scanner. They can 
then withdraw from the study if they are unable to complete the MRI.  
 
While in the magnet, subjects will taste small amounts of liquid stimuli that wi ll be 
presented according to a standard paradigm we have successfully used before in taste  
MRI studies (Small et al., 2003; Small et al., 2004). In brief, hydraulic pumps will be 
used to pump solutions through plastic beverage tubing attached to a mouthpie ce to the 
subject lying in the scanner. The mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_509632]. The mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_509633], just inside the subj ects’ mouth. This will 
not interfere with breathing through the mouth and subjects will always be able to breathe 
through their noses. To ensure participants can breathe through their nose, they will be 
asked to close their mouth and take one full breath ( inhale and exhale) through their nose. 
If they are unable to breathe normally through their nose on the day of the scan, the scan 
will be rescheduled.  The solutions will be dispensed through one tube at a time. The 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
16 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 17 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  overall flow rate of solution into the m outh will be very slow (0.5ml of a liquid over 3 -5 
seconds). Each taste will be followed by a rinse of a tasteless solution.  
 
After the fMRI is completed, they will be given access to bottles containing the two they 
consumed during the protocol sessions a nd allowed to drink as much or as little as they 
want from the [ADDRESS_658884].  
 
AIM 2:  
 
Controlled Feeding:  
Participants will consume a standardized diet (50% carbohydrate, 30% fat) for 2 days 
prior to each metabolic chamber session. Total daily energy needs for each participant 
will be estimated using average resting energy expenditure determined during complet ion 
of Behavior Sessions 2 and 4 in Aim 1 and an activity factor derived from the physical 
activity questionnaire completed as part of the Consent and Training Session in Aim 1. 
The 2 -day diet will be developed by a registered dietitian, and all foods will  be prepared 
and assembled in the metabolic kitchen located in 4 Riverside.  
 
Participants will report to the metabolic kitchen to pi[INVESTIGATOR_509634]. Participants 
will be provided with all foods and drinks, except water, for the 2 days preceding each  
metabolic chamber measurement and instructed to consume all foods and beverages 
provided in the coolers.  
 
Metabolic Chamber Sessions:  
Participants will report to the metabolic chamber lab in 4 Riverside after a >8 hour 
(overnight) fast. Participants will  also be asked to abstain from moderate -to-vigorous 
physical activity for at least 24h prior to their session.  
 
Participants will then enter the flex metabolic chamber, which is outfitted with a bed, 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_50151], and a TV, to rest quietly during the fasting m easurement. The fasting 
measurement will take approximately 50 minutes. After a fasting measurement, 
participants will be instructed to consume a high -carbohydrate (60% carbohydrate, 20% 
fat) or high -fat (60% fat, 20% carbohydrate) test meal within [ADDRESS_658885] calorimetry assumptions and 
principles as the metabolic cart, but the size of  the chamber (4.6 cubic meters) allows for 
longer measurements with better comfort for participants compared with the metabolic 
cart. There are no known risks associated with this method of indirect calorimetry, and 
participants may wear normal clothes dur ing the procedure. The chamber is outfitted with 
a 2-way intercom system, and one wall is clear plastic; participants will be able to see and 
communicate with research personnel throughout the test. Should a participant become 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
17 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 18 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658886], they may choose to stop the procedure at any time. (See 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_50615].)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.3 Describe:  
● Procedures or safeguards intended  to reduce the probability and 
magnitude of risks . (For example: Reducing the risk of injury in a 
virtual reality study either by [CONTACT_40200] -free space for walking. ) 
● Be sure to describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research , when 
they will be administered or used,  and their purpose.   
● Methods used to collect data  about subjects. Please upload all data 
collection forms to Protocol Management. Som e common e xamples 
are: 
● Screening questionnaires  
● Survey(s) , including online surveys  
● Demographic questionnaire(s)  
● Intervie w guide(s) , e.g., questions or pool of questions for semi -
structured interviews  
● Focus group guide(s)  
● Other document s used to collect data   
 
 
Procedures or safeguards intended to reduce the probability and magnitude of risks:  
 
Indirect calorimetry  
There are no known risks associated with either method of indirect calorimetry. However, 
some people may feel uncomfortable or anxious with the enclosed clear plastic hood 
placed over their head and shoulders during the metabolic cart measurement. Subjects  
will be able to breathe normally during the entirety of the testing procedure. They will 
also be able to see and communicate with the experimenter and will be able to tell the 
experimenter if they would like to terminate the measurement. Some people may f eel 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
18 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 19 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658887]'s comfort and to reduce a ny minimal risk. 
First and foremost, subjects will be thoroughly screened to make sure that MRI 
contraindications are not present. If, at any time, subjects experience discomfort, 
dizziness, or claustrophobia during the scan, they will have access to an em ergency 
squeeze bulb which they can squeeze to get the attention of the experimenters. Subjects 
who squeeze this bulb will be immediately removed from the MRI machine. 
Additionally, the staff operating the MRI will have completed Advanced MRI/Operator 
Training which is required for those persons wishing to conduct research on the Human 
Neuroimaging Lab (HNL) MRIs. Training consists of a safety training, full -day advanced 
user training, scanning observation, and hands -on practice, supervised scanning. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_509635], subject preparation and screening, scanner set -
up and operation, and troubleshooting.  Each person must also complete at least 4 hours 
of observation (to include 2 different studies) and at least 16 hours of superv ised scanning 
(to include 4 different studies). Certification is granted upon completion of the training 
and passing of a competency exam.  
 
An MRI Safety Screening Form will be completed by [CONTACT_509651].  
 
Catheter Blood Draw  
Some pain or discomfort may be experienced when the catheter is inserted in the vein, 
but this should persist for only a short time. During the blood draws, there may be pain 
and/or brui sing at the site where the IV catheter is inserted. In about 1 in 10 or 10% of the 
cases, a small amount of bleeding under the skin will cause bruising. The risk of a blood 
clot forming in the vein is about 1 in 200, while the risk of infection or signific ant blood 
loss is 1 in 1000. There is a small risk of the vein becoming inflamed and/or painful in 
the hours or days after the needle is removed. To reduce this risk, all catheter placements 
and blood draws will be performed by a trained and skilled medica l technologist, 
phlebotomist, or nurse. In addition, a maximum of three attempts will be made to insert 
the IV catheter at different sites. If the participant feels faint during or after a blood draw, 
research personnel will immediately have the participan t lie back in the phlebotomy 
chair.  
 
Fingerstick Blood Sample  
The risks associated with performing a fingerstick to collect a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509636]. The likely risks involve pain and bleeding in the fingertip at the collection site. 
Rarely, an  infection may occur at the puncture site. To minimize these risks, research 
team members will be trained on the proper technique for obtaining a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509637].  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
19 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 20 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658888] during the study and how you will  obtain  them ? 
Please i nclude descriptions of electronic data collection, database 
matching, and app-based data collection : 
 
Ripple will be used to collect screening information. Information about the beverages 
participants will be consuming at home as well as dietary, physical activity, and behavior 
information will be collected through REDCap. MRI safety information will be co llected 
via paper form (attached). Perceptual ratings will be collected using a laptop or tablet and 
custom software written in Matlab. Blood glucose will be measured using a Hemocue 
point -of-care system, and insulin will be measured using the Immunolite [ADDRESS_658889] metabolic cart from ParvoMedics and 
a metabolic chamber from MEI Research, Ltd.  
 
 
 
8.5 Who will transcribe or code audio and/or video recordings? : 
 
There will be no audio or video recordings.  
 
 
8.6 Include a description of any deception to be used in the study.  Include 
justification for the use of deception ( why the deception is necessary ), 
describe the debriefing process, and describe  how the study meets all the 
following criteria  for  alteration of consent  (deception is considered an 
alteration of informed consent) : 
• The research involves no more th an minimal risk to the subjects  
• The alter ation will not adversely affect the rights  and welfare of the 
subjects  
• The research could not practicably be car ried out without the 
alteration /deception  
• (Optional  but encouraged in most cases ) Subjects will be provided with 
additional pertinent informatio n after participation (i.e., debriefing f or 
studies involving deception)   
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
20 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 21 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  There will be no deception.  
 
 
 
8.7 If the study involves  long-term follow -up (once all research related 
procedures are complete), describe what data will be collected during the 
follow up period and when it will occur :  
 
There are no long -term follow ups.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.0 Data and Specimen Long Term Storage and Use 
9.1 If you will store data or specimens for future use, describe where you will 
store the data or specimens, how long they will be stored, and how and by 
[CONTACT_40207] : 
 
Indirect calorimetry data and [ADDRESS_658890] provided by [CONTACT_509652]. Behavioral (e.g., last time food eaten before measurement, last 
bout of exercise before measurement, etc.), anthropometric, responses to questionnaires, 
and pertinent energy expenditure variable s collected during indirect calorimetry 
measurement will be stored in FBRI's instance of REDCap.Data will be stored 
indefinitely for future analysis and use in developi[INVESTIGATOR_509638]. Only individuals with FBRI acces s to secure network drives and 
FBRI's instance of REDCap will have access to stored data. Plasma and/or serum aliquot 
samples will be frozen and stored for future analysis of insulin. As it is more cost 
effective to run an ELISA or Immulite 1000 with a ful l number of wells, these samples 
will be stored until they can be analyzed in batch. Additional aliquots of plasma and/or 
serum will be stored indefinitely after the completion of data analysis to allow for 
replicate testing to ensure data quality and for additional analyses as the field moves 
forward.  
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_658891] the data to be stored or associated with each 
specimen : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
21 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 22 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658892] a release, approvals 
required for release, who can obtain data or specimens, and what data 
will be provided with specimens : 
 
No specimens will be released.  
 
 
9.[ADDRESS_658893] access to it, and 
when it will be destroyed : 
 
Data will be coded using a [ADDRESS_658894] of the participant.  
 
Per Virginia Tech policy, in order to compensate participants, social security  number (or 
Taxpayer ID) and street address will be collected via a W -[ADDRESS_658895] the identifiers you will obtain  (whether directly from 
participants or from another source) , including but not limited to:  
 
☒ Name  
[CONTACT_40203]. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
22 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 23 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  ☒ Geographical subdivisions smaller than a state, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, zip code, and equivalent geocodes (note,  the initial 
three digits of a zip code  are not considered identifiable)  
☒ Elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death, and 
single year of age  over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) 
indicative of such age  (note,  such a ges and elements may be aggregated 
into a single category of age 90 +) 
☒ Phone numbers  
☐ Fax numbers  
☒ Electronic mail addresses (e -mail)  
☒ Social Security numbers  
☐ Medical record numbers  
☐ Health plan beneficiary numbers  
☐ Account numbers  
☐ Certificate/license numbers  
☐ Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
☐ Device identifiers and serial numbers  
☐ Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
☐ Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints (audio recording)  
☐ Full face photographic images and any comparable images  (including 
video recording)  
☐ Student record number or identification  number   
☐ User name [CONTACT_40233]  
☐ Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this 
does not mean the unique code assigned by [CONTACT_40209]) : Click here to explain.    
 
10.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
10.1 Describe whether you will share results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or 
incidental findings) with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care 
physician). If so, describe how  you will share  the results and include this 
information as part of the consent document. Upload materials you will use 
to explain the results  to subjects : 
 
Results of the study will  not be shared with the participants as they are de -identified prior 
to analysis and/or publication  
 
 
 
11.[ADDRESS_658896] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
23 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 24 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  11.1 Describe:  
● The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study  (for 
example, 1 hour, 2 -4 weeks, 3 -5 years) . 
● The amount of time expected to enroll all study subjects ( weeks, 
months, years, etc .) 
● The amount of time expected  for the investigators to complete this 
study  including  primary data analyses . 
 
Consent and Training Session: 2 hours  
Behavior Sessions 1 -4: 2 hours each (8 hours total)  
Post-Testing Session without fMRI: [ADDRESS_658897]-Testing Session with fMRI: 3 hours  
Metabolic Chamber Sessions 1 and 2: 6 hours each (12 hours total)  
 
Each participant is expected to be enrolled for approximately [ADDRESS_658898] 1 year.  
 
 
 
12.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
12.1 Describe how  you will screen  individuals for eligibility.  When will 
screening occur and what procedures will you use ? Upload any screening 
scripts or surveys to Protocol Management :  
 
Participants will complete an online screening survey after they have indicated interest in 
participating in the study. A link to the Ripple survey will be sent to participants via 
email, or they can access the link through a written web address or QR code on our flyer. 
Additionally, social media posts will contain the web address. Participants undergoing 
fMRI will also compl ete an MRI screening form.  
 
 
 
12.2 Describe the eligibility criteria that define who will be included and who 
will be  excluded from enrollment for each p rocedure  of your  study. 
Include any ge ographic criteria (e.g., Virginia Tech undergraduate 
students, a national sample of adults with engineering degrees, minors 
aged 8 -12 in the New River Valley, university faculty in Virginia and 
Paris, [LOCATION_009]) : 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
24 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 25 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019   
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age 18 -45 years  
2. BMI between 18.5 -40 kg/m2  
3. Not pregna nt or planning to become pregnant during study participation  
4. Residing in the Roanoke area and/or willing/able to attend sessions at FBRI  
5. Able to speak and write in English  
6. Specific to fMRI scan only: BMI >25 kg/m2  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Current inhaled nicotine use  
2. History of alcohol dependence.  
3. Current or past diagnosis of diabetes, or thyroid problems.  
4. Hemoglobin A1C >5.7%  
5. Taking medications known to influence study measures (including antiglycemic 
agents, thyroid medication s, sleep medications)  
6. Active medical or neurologic disorder.  
7. Recent change in body weight (gain or loss of > [ADDRESS_658899] 3 months)  
8. Current shift work (typi[INVESTIGATOR_509639]/activity overnight)  
9. Previous weight loss surgery  
10. Adhere nce to a special diet within the past 3 months (e.g., low -carb or ketogenic diet, 
exclusion of food groups/specific macronutrients, intermittent fasting, etc.)  
11. Allergy to any food or ingredient included in the study diets, meals, or beverages  
12. Curr ently pregnant or planning to become pregnant during study participation  
13. Claustrophobia  
14. Contraindications for MRI, including pacemaker, aneurysm clips, neurostimulators, 
cochlear or other implants, metal in eyes, regular work with steel, etc. (Note : This is an 
fMRI -specific exclusion criterion. Participants may be allowed to participate in all other 
study sessions and measures that do not involve fMRI.)  
15. Contraindications for bioelectrical impedance analysis, specifically implanted devices  
 
 
12.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations: (You may not include members of these 
populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate them in the 
description of your subject population.)  
● Minors, as defined by [CONTACT_40211] 
(infants, children, teenagers)  
● Pregnant women  (can be included in minimal risk studies by 
[CONTACT_40212] 13.1) 
● Prisoners  (including all incarcerated individuals)  
● Adults not capable to consent  on their own behalf  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
25 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 26 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658900] their rights and welfare.  Consider the applicable items listed 
below:  
● If the research involves Virginia Tech students, indicate whether 
these are students of any of the investigator s. If so, describe whether 
the activities will take place during  class time as part of the 
curriculum and the steps  you will  take to reduce the p ossibility that 
student s feel obliged  to participate in order to improve their course 
grade. The HRPP can provide further guidance as needed.  Describe 
whether you will request access to student records (e.g., SAT, GPA, 
GRE scores).  
● If the research involves  employees of Virginia Tech or the research 
sponsor, describe steps you will take to ensure that the employees 
are freely participating and describe how their data will be 
protected from inspection by [CONTACT_40213].  
● If the research involves Virginia T ech NCAA athletes, you must 
obtain approval from the athletic department.  
● For research involving Montgomery County Public Schools, you 
must obtain county approval (after obtaining contingent Virginia 
Tech approval). Other locales have different requiremen ts; please 
check on these and describe here.  Approval is typi[INVESTIGATOR_40170], principal, and classroom teacher (in that order). 
Approval by [CONTACT_40214]. School approval, in 
the form of a letter or a memorandum should be uploaded as a 
supporting document . 
● If the research involves pregnant women, review “CHECKLIST: 
Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information  in this protocol . 
● If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: Prisoners 
(HRP -415)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient information 
in this protocol.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
26 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 27 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● If the research involves persons who have not attained the legal age 
for consent to treatments or proced ures involved in the research 
(minors ), review the “CHECKLIST: Minors  (HRP -416)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol.  
● If the research involves cognitively impaired adults, review 
“CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults (HRP -417)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol.  
 
 
All subjects will be informed of the purpose of the study, the potential value of the study 
to society, the lack of value to the subject personally, and all potential risks to the subject.  
Study staff will explain to the subject that he or she is under no obligation whatsoever to 
participate, and that if he or she wis hes to discontinue their involvement at any time 
during the study, he or she is free to do so without penalty. Employees will be told that 
their employment status and evaluation will in no way be affected by [CONTACT_509653]. Students will be advised that their decision to 
participate will not affect their student status, grades, coursework, or extra -curricular 
activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
14.0 Number of Subjects  
14.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be enrolled  and how this number 
was determined (e.g., sample size calculation [show], number of available 
subjects in a finite pool, number of tests funding award would allow) :  
 
We plan to consent approximately [ADDRESS_658901] amount, the sample size we anticipate needing to generate 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]/feasibility data, and the anticipation of ~40% either droppi[INVESTIGATOR_509640] (e.g., unable to determine flavors equally liked and unfamiliar for the 
condit ioning paradigm, hemoglobin A1C outside of inclusion range, scheduling 
challenges, etc.).  
 
 
 
14.2 If this is a multi -site study, indicate the number of subjects to be enrolled 
at this site and the total to be enrolled from all sites : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
27 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 28 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658902] to 
screen  for enrollment , and the number of subjects you will need to 
complete the research procedures : 
 
We anticipate screening via the online screening survey approximately [ADDRESS_658903] 5 
participants complete the fMRI scan.  
 
 
 
14.4 If the study has more than one procedure, indicate the total number of 
subjects to undergo  each procedure separately : 
 
Consent and Training Session (flavor tasting/rating, anthropometrics, fingerstick sample 
for HbA1C): 25 participants  
Behavior Sessions 1 and 3 (IV catheter blood draw): 15 participants  
Behavior Sessions 3 and 4 (metabolic cart): [ADDRESS_658904] Session without fMRI (flavor and beverage tasting/rati ng): [ADDRESS_658905] Session with fMRI (flavor and beverage tasting/rating and fMRI scan): 5 
participants  
Metabolic Chamber Sessions 1 and 2: 15 participants  
 
 
15.0 Recruitment Methods  
15.1 Describe when, where, and how you will recruit potential subjects : 
 
Approved study recruitment materials will be distributed in the follow ways. Flyers will 
be posted on bulletin boards and approved posting sites throughout Roanoke, Blacksburg, 
and surro unding areas. Digital advertisements will be displayed on DiFeliceantonio lab 
and CHBR social media, VT News, and in list serves with permission.  
 
All advertisements will include a link to the lab website where there will be approved 
language describing t he research study. Interested participants will fill out a general 
screening survey. All screening surveys will be delivered through Ripple. This screening 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
28 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 29 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658906] eted, participants who may be eligible for this study will be contact[CONTACT_509649] (see attachment 'Screening email'). If participants choose to complete the study -
specific screening form and are eligible for this study, they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] 
a consent session.  
 
 
Opt-In Database  
Individuals who complete the screening survey in response to other studies in the lab will 
have the opportunity to opt -in to being notified of future studies our lab is conducting. 
One question on the screening survey as ks if individuals would like to be contact[CONTACT_509654]. Individuals who have opted -in to being 
notified of future studies receive an email containing information about the study and an 
email address for contact[CONTACT_30697] t he research study team. The email will be sent through 
Ripple, the secure web application we are using for storage and management of 
personally identifying information of research participants. Individuals who are interested 
in scheduling a consent session  will undergo a brief screening to ensure they have had no 
changes to their health history or other screening survey questions since they first 
completed the survey that would preclude them from participating.  
 
Carilion Clinic Recruitment  
Flyers will be po sted throughout Carilion Clinic waiting rooms and offices. Physicians 
and other providers will also be notified of this study and asked to encourage individuals 
who may qualify to complete the screening survey.  
 
 
 
15.2 Describe the source of subjects  (for example, clinic patients with specific 
conditions, students in the library, community members at a gathering, or 
members of a local gym) : 
 
Participants will be recruited from the general public.  
 
 
15.3 Describe the methods that you will use to identify potential subjects : 
 
Responses on the online screening form will be used to identify potential subjects.  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
29 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 30 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  15.4 Describe materials that you will be use to recruit subjects. Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_509641] n umber on each document .  
● For flyers, attach the final copy of printed flyers.  
● For Virginia Tech News, Facebook postings and ads, newspaper ads, 
websites, MTurk/SONA/online survey systems , etc., attach the final 
wording and graphics to be used.  
● For e mail recruitments, please include the subject line.  
● For advertisements meant for  audio  broadcast, please  submit the 
wording of the advertisement prior to tapin g (to avoid having to re-
record with approved  language) and submit the final recorded version 
for IRB review before use.   
● Describe any compensation to subjects. Separate compensation in to 
appropriate categories, such as: reimbursement for expenses, time an d 
effort, and additional incentives for study participation.  For each 
category, specify the amount (including any pro -rated amount), schedule, 
and method of payment.  
 
See above in 15.[ADDRESS_658907] of recruitment materials and methods that will be used.  
 
Consent and Training Session (2 hrs) - $40 
Behavior Sessions 1 -4 (2 ½ hours each) - $50each session, up to $[ADDRESS_658908] Session (1 hour) - $20  
fMRI Scan (2 hours) - $40 
Metabolic Chamber Sessions 1 -2 (6 hours each) - $120 each session, up to $240 t otal 
 
Total (with fMRI scan): up to $540  
Total (without fMRI scan): up to $[ADDRESS_658909] system.  
 
 
 
 
16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
16.1 Describe circumstances under which  you anticipate  subjects could be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent : 
 
As is standard with MRI research, if subjects experience unusual sensations, they will be 
withdrawn. In some cases, due to the magnetic field (as described in risks bel ow) subjects 
may experience peripheral nerve stimulation, e.g. tingling or twitching. They will be 
withdrawn from the study if this occurs.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
30 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 31 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658910], they will not 
continue in the study and will be compensated for the training session.  
 
Other potential reasons for withdrawal without participant consent include information on 
the screening questionnaire that would make participating unsafe for the participant, 
failure to follow the study p rotocol as instructed (e.g., not fasting for measurements, 
failure to consume beverages at home at the appropriate times, consuming foods or 
beverages outside of those provided by [CONTACT_509655], etc).  
 
 
 
16.2 If applicable, describ e any procedures for orderly termination  (e.g., 
discontinuation of a study drug or debriefing after a behavioral 
intervention) : 
 
There are no study drugs or behavioral interventions.  
 
 
16.3 Describe procedures that you will follow  when subjects withdraw from the 
research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued 
data collection (e.g., participant declines to continue with regular blood 
draws,  but continues with periodic behavioral questionnaires) : 
 
The followin g steps will be taken in the event a participant withdraws from the study 
while undergoing the study protocol and informs us they want their information 
destroyed:  
1. The participant database will be updated that the participant withdrew (for all 
withdrawals).  
2. Participant will be compensated for their time and sessions completed up to time of 
withdrawal. There will be no partial withdrawal.  
3. All participant identifying information and data collected up to time of withdrawal will 
be removed fro m study database(s).  
4. All stored blood samples collected on the participant will be removed from the storage 
freezer and discarded.  
5. All paperwork associated with the participant will be shredded.  
 
 
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
31 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 32 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658911] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the 
research. Include for the IRB’s consideration a description of the 
probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility  of the risks. Consider 
physical, psychological, social, legal, privacy, and economic risks. Do not 
indicate  “No risk” or “N /A.” Instead, for studies with very low risk (e.g., 
anonymous online questionnaire on a mundane topic) indicate  “The 
investigators are not aware of any risks from participation in this study.” 
or “No more than risks than are found in everyday life.”  The exa mple 
consent form presents a tabular method for risk information , which you 
can also use here . Common risk types include:  
● Physical (e.g., potential for pain, discomfort, infection)  
● Psychological (e.g., potential for stress, discomfort, and/or 
embarrassment ) 
● Social (e.g., potential for discrimination or stigmatization and 
disruption of personal and family relationships)  
● Legal (e.g., potential for disclosure of illegal activity, negligence)  
● Privacy (e.g., potential for personal information being accessed, use d, 
or disclosed without the subjects’ knowledge or consent, breach of 
confidentiality/security)  
● Economic (e.g., potential for individuals to lose access to economic 
services, employment, insurability)  
 
Food and beverages  
All components of the beverage and food stimuli are readily available outside the 
laboratory (grocery stores, etc.) and are likely already consumed by [CONTACT_3038]. 
There are no known risks associated with these stimuli.  
 
Indirect calorimetry  
There are no known risks associ ated with the noninvasive indirect calorimetry methods 
we will be using to measure gas exchange. These non -invasive procedures are simple and 
painless, and normal clothes can be worn during the procedures. For the metabolic cart 
procedure, subjects will be  lying back in a chair and a transparent "canopy hood" will be 
placed over their face and neck. The subjects will then be asked to relax and breathe 
normally during the entirety of the testing. During the testing, the study staff will be able 
to see and he ar participants so should they, at any time during the testing, become 
uncomfortable with the hood or chair, they may choose to stop the procedure. For the 
metabolic chamber procedure, subjects will rest quietly on a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_509642]. They will be asked to relax and breathe 
normally during the entirety of testing. During the testing, study staff will be able to see 
participants, so should they, at any time during the testing, become uncomfortable, they 
may choose to stop the procedure.  
 
MRI  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
32 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 33 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658912] . 
Participants will be required to wear headphones and earplugs to minimize the noise 
generated by [CONTACT_218862].  
 
The Siemens 3 T scanner has been approved by [CONTACT_1622]. However, there may be 
additional risks associated with scanning at 3.0 T compared to the conventional clinical 
scanners in the 1.5 -2.0 T range. These include:  
1. Effect of the static field. There is no conclusive evidence for irreversible or hazardous 
bioeffects to acute, short -term exposures of humans up to 2.0 T (Shellock and Kanal, 
1996). S tudies have indicated some side -effects at 4.0 T, namely unusual sensations 
including nausea, vertigo, and metallic taste (Schenck, 1991). However, there is no 
evidence that this is either irreversible or harmful. If subjects experience unusual 
sensations,  they will be withdrawn.  
 
2. Effect of the gradient field. MRI operates by [CONTACT_28423][INVESTIGATOR_42612], 
called gradients. This will induce small electrical currents in any conductor, and thus 
could theoretically induce mild peripheral nerve st imulation. However, this is not 
substantially different at higher magnetic fields since the gradients are separate from the 
main magnet. There is no evidence that the effect of the gradients is any different at [ADDRESS_658913]'s brain. The 
limits of RF energy that can be safely given to humans has been clearly defined by [CONTACT_1556]: a). The exposure to RF energy below the level of concern is an SAR of 0.4 W/kg or 
less averaged over the body, and 8.0 W/kg or less spatial pea k in any 1 g of tissue, and 
3.2 W/kg or less average over the head; or b). The exposure to RF energy that is 
sufficient to produce a core temperature increase of 1 degree C and localized heating to 
no greater extent than 38 degrees C in the head, 39 degree s C in the trunk, and 40 degrees 
C in the extremities, except for patients with impaired systemic blood flow and/or 
perspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. We will adhere to the recommendations for the head, which is also 
monitored by a Siemens built -in monitor.  
 
4. Acoustic Noise Levels. Rapid changes in the currents in the gradient coils of the MRI 
scanner produce significant levels of acoustic noise. The levels of noise range 
approximately between [ADDRESS_658914] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
33 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 34 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658915] may communicate with the experimenter at any time: 1) before, in between, 
or after a scan via an intercom dev ice between the scanner and control room, and 2) 
during a scan via a pneumatic squeeze bulb located in the scanner that triggers an alarm 
in the control room. Subjects who report discomfort and wish to discontinue their 
participation will be immediately wi thdrawn from the scanner. Subjects who are 
withdrawn from the study will be compensated for their participation to that point.  
 
IV Catheter Blood Draws  
All catheter placements and draws will be performed by a trained and skilled medical 
technologist, phleb otomist, or nurse in the appropriate laboratory setting with proper 
antiseptic technique. However, there are still some risks of this procedure. Some pain or 
discomfort may be experienced when the catheter is inserted in the vein, but this should 
persist f or only a short time. During the blood draws, there may be pain and/or bruising at 
the site where the IV catheter is inserted. In rare cases infection or blood clot may occur 
at the IV catheter site. These are the same risks associated with IV catheter pla cement in 
any medical setting.  
 
Fingerstick Blood Sample  
The risks associated with performing a fingerstick to collect a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509636]. The likely risks involve pain and bleeding in the fingertip at the collection site. 
Rarely, an inf ection may occur at the puncture site. To minimize these risks, research 
team members will be trained on the proper technique for obtaining a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509637].  
 
Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis  
The risks associated with having body composition measured with bioelectrical 
impedance analysis are minimal. The likely risks include potential interference with 
electronic medical device implants, including pacemakers and defibrillators. To minimize 
these ri sks, medical device implants are an exclusion criterion for study participation.  
 
 
 
17.2  Indicate the measures you will use to minimize risks and monitor subjects 
for safety. (e.g., asking a subject at regular intervals to rate how they are 
feeling from 1 to 10, or to slowly crouch in order to check their balance.)  
 
Indirect calorimetry  
Indirect calorimetry sessions (Behaviors Sessions 2 and 4, and Metabolic Chamber 
Sessions) will be performed by [CONTACT_21724]. Subjects who become uncomfortable 
during the measurements can withdraw at any time during the procedure.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
34 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 35 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658916] may communicate with the experimenter at any time: 1) before, in between, or 
after a scan via an intercom device between the scanner and control room, and 2) during a 
scan via a pneumatic squeeze bulb located in the scanner that triggers an alarm in the 
control room. Subjects who report discomfort and wish to discontinue their participation 
will be immediately withdrawn from the scanner. Subjects who are withdrawn from the 
study will be compensated for their participation to that point.  
 
Advanced MR/Operator Training:  Required for those persons wishing to conduct 
research on the HNL MRIs. Train ing will consist of presentations, observation, and 
hands -on practice. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_509643], subject 
screening and preparation, scanner set -up and operation, and troubleshooting.  Each 
person must also complete at least 4 hou rs of observation (to include 2 different studies) 
and at least 16 hours of supervised scanning (to include 4 different studies). Certification 
will be granted upon completion of the training and passing of a competency exam  
 
Fingerstick Blood Draw  
To redu ce the risks associated with performing a fingerstick, research personnel will train 
participants on the proper technique for performing a fingerstick blood draw and care for 
the site after the sample is obtained. Participants will also be given separate, single -use 
blood collecting devices to be used for each blood draw.  
 
IV Catheter Blood Draws  
To reduce the risks associated with inserting an IV catheter and drawing blood from the 
catheter, only skilled medical technologists, nurses and/or other medical professionals 
will insert the IV catheters and draw the blood samples. In addition, a maximum of three 
attempts will be made to insert the catheter in the participants' arm.  
 
 
 
17.[ADDRESS_658917] risks to the subjects 
that are currently unforeseeable. This will be rare, and usually applicable 
when testing a new  drug or device or a new use of an existing drug or 
device : 
 
There are no new devices or drugs used in this study.  
 
 
17.[ADDRESS_658918] be or become pregnant : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
35 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 36 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658919] a known risk to a fetus or embryo.  
 
 
17.5 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects (e.g., collection 
of sensitive health data that might affect sexual partners if disclosed, 
mandatory reporting of abuse, DNA testing that might affect family 
members or relationships) : 
 
N/A 
 
 
18.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
18.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects might experience 
from participating  in the research. Include the probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits , as this will be useful to the IRB ’s 
risk:benefit analysis . Do not include benefits to society or others.  Do not 
list monetary or non -monetary compensation  for participation, as this is 
not a benefit  These should be included in section 2 or 3  of this document : 
 
There is no direct benefit to the individual subject for participation.  
 
 
18.[ADDRESS_658920] benefit s for 
participants :  
 
There is no direct benefit to the individual subject for participation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
19.1 Describe procedures that  you will use for quality control  to ensure validity  
of collected data : 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
36 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 37 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658921] laboratory procedures 
(perceptual ratings, etc.).  
 
 
19.2 Describe any existing data or biospecimens you will obtain as part of this 
study. Include :  
● Variables or samples to be obtained  
● Source  of the data or specimens  
● Your authorization to access or receive the data or biospecimens  
● Whether the data or biospecimens are publicly available  
● Whether the  data or specimens  you receive will  contain identifiers  
 
This study collects new data.  
 
 
19.[ADDRESS_658922] protection, encryption, physical controls, c ertificates of 
confidentiality, separation of identifiers and data, etc. : 
 
Each subject will be assigned a coded designation. All study data to be used in analysis 
will be de -identified using this coded designation which will contain no biographical data 
that can be linked to individuals.  
 
Participant personal information and th e coded designation will be kept in Ripple™, a 
secure web application designed for the storing and management of personally 
identifying information of research participants. Ripple was initially developed at the 
University of Michigan to provide a user -friendly, web -based secure interface where 
research teams can centralize the storage and management of research participants’ 
personal information, including name, participant ID, demographics, and study workflow 
(e.g., appointments). Participant information managed with Ripple is private and secure. 
This information is kept in fully encrypted format inside dedicated databases that are 
segregated from other Ripple accounts and thus only authorized study staff will have 
access to the study data. Likewise, Rippl e infrastructure complies with the privacy and 
security guidelines of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), 
including [ADDRESS_658923] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
37 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 38 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658924] strength estimation, and enterprise administrative safeguards 
to prevent unauthorized staff from accessing participant information. Furthermore, Ripple 
is used only for sto ring personally identifiable  information of participants and is not used 
to capture other research data (e.g., questionnaires, health records, etc.). This ensures that 
the personally identifiable  information and research data are segregated. Only personnel  
who are direct members of the research team will have access to personally identifiable 
information stored in Ripple. The link between the coded designation and personal 
information will only exist on this secure platform.  
 
MRI images will be stored on se cured FBRI and VT ARC servers.  
The behavioral stream of data acquired during experiments will be collected and recorded 
using an encrypted FBRI laptop, desktop computer, or tablet and then transferred to an 
FBRI server.  
 
 
19.4 For multi -site studies , describe how data or specimens will be handled 
and secured for each site  (e.g., central or disseminated data storage, data 
coordinating center ): 
 
This is a single site study.  
 
 
19.5 Describe the plan for data disposition following the conclusion  of the 
study (e.g., long term maintenance of data, data destruction methods) .  
● What information will be included in the long term storage of data 
or specimens?  
● How long will the data or specimens be stored?  
● Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
● Who will have access to the data or specimens  during long term 
storage ? 
● Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
● How will data or specimens be shared or transported?  
● When and how will personal identifiers be destroyed?  
 
 
Data and specimens may be archived indefinitely for future analysis. All data and 
specimens will be de -identified, coded and contain no specific biographical information 
which can be related back to an individual. The 'key' will be stored in a database whi ch 
cannot be accessed unless specifically authorized. Deidentified data may be made 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
38 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 39 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658925] subjects’ privacy interests. 
“Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on with whom 
they interact or to whom they provide personal information (e.g., 
collecting the minimal amount of private information required to  complete 
the study, protecting the data once it is obtained) :  
 
Only the information required to complete the study, document participation or 
compensate the participant will be collected. Once obtained, these data will be stored 
securely, accessible only by [CONTACT_4144]. For instance, documents with a 
participant name (such as the Consent Form) will be stored in a separate, locked file 
cabinet from files containing participant coded identifiers. Study keys will only be 
accessible to  authorized staff requiring access, such as trained research coordinators 
interacting with the participant for the study session.  
 
 
20.2 Describe steps that you will take  to make subjects feel at ease with the 
research situation in terms of the questions being asked and the 
procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to physical 
discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in 
response to q uestions, examinations, and procedures (e.g., use of a same 
gender investigator to place sensors on the torso , a private changing area 
if clothing must be changed, sensitivity when discussing  pregnancy test ing 
with subjects , making it clear o n surveys tha t participants  can discontinue 
at any time, not asking questions about private or sensitive issues unless 
necessary for the research ): 
 
Research staff will be trained to check with participants throughout all procedures to 
ensure they are comfortable wit h all proceedings. Before all procedures, participants will 
be reminded they can stop at any time. After obtaining written consent for the study, 
research staff will always ask for verbal consent before each procedure.  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
39 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 40 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  20.3 Describe how you plan  to access existing sources of information about the 
subjects (e.g., medical records, grades) and how you will protect 
participant privacy through the data security plan : 
 
We will not access existing sources of information.  
 
 
20.4 Describe any required reporting  that might  occur as a result of your 
research questions, study populations, and data collection methods. 
Examples for Virginia and Virginia Tech include:  
• Any suspi[INVESTIGATOR_40179] (e. g., circumstantial, disclosed) of child abuse (physical, 
emotiona l, sexual) and neglect  
• Sexual discrimination and/or sexual violence that involves a  student  
• Disclosure or signs of intention to harm oneself (i.e., suicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Disclosure or signs of  desire to harm others (i.e. , homicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of vulnerable adults (e. g., 
individuals with a disability, elderly persons ) 
 
 
We do not foresee any circumstance where this type of required reporting would come up 
during our study.  
 
 
 
 
21.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Safety monitoring  is required  when research involves greater than minimal risk 
and is sometimes appropriate for other studies . 
21.1 Describe:  
● The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both 
harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe  (e.g.,  
periodic reporting to the IRB , establishing a data monitoring 
committee , reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB 
and the sponsor ). 
● What data you will review, including safety data, unexpected  events, 
and data that show the ability to produce the intended results . 
● How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report 
forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_40225] ). 
● The frequency of data collection, including when safety data 
collection starts.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
40 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 41 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Who will review the safety data and with what frequency . 
● The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine 
whether harm is occurring.  
● Any conditions that will trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research (e.g., a serious adverse event).  
 
 
The Principal Investigator (PI) or study staff will be responsible for ensuring participants’ 
safety on a daily basis and for reporting Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated 
Problems to the Institutional Review Board. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_509644]. Safety information will be collected at study 
visits by [CONTACT_2710]. This safety information will be reviewed w eekly by [CONTACT_978] 
[INVESTIGATOR_74964] a weekly lab meeting. A serious adverse event would trigger immediate 
suspension of the research.  
 
 
 
 
 
22.0 Compensation for Research  Related Injury  
22.1 If the research involves more than minimal risk to subjects, describe the 
available compensation in the event of research -related injury, if any : 
 
This study does not present more than minimal risk.  
While the risk involved in this study are minimal, in the event that a research -related 
event or injury does occur, participants will be treated appropriately according to the 
nature of the event or injury. If participants are no longer able to continue in the study, 
they will receive compensation in accordance with the type and number of sessions 
completed.  
 
 
 
22.[ADDRESS_658926] common for 
sponsored research : 
 
This study does not present more than minimal risk.  
 
23.[ADDRESS_658927] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
41 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 42 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  23.1 Describe any costs that subjects might be responsible for because of 
participation in the research, including any uncompensated costs for items 
such as transportation, missed work, and childcare : 
 
Participants are compensated for their time. They can make arrangements to participate 
outside of work and child -care needed hours.  
 
 
24.0 Consent Process  
24.1 Indicate the process by [CONTACT_314759] . Please  upload all consent, parental permission, and assent 
forms, documents, and scripts reference d in this section to Protocol 
Management.  
Describe the following:  
● Where the consent process will take place  (e.g., clinic waiting area, 
classroom, online)  
● The time interval between  sharing the consent information with  the 
prospective subjec t and obtaining consent . For lab, interview, and 
focus group studies, the Virginia Tech IRB prefers that subjects have 
at least 24 hours to review the consent form and study information 
before the appointment  where consent will be obtained . For simple 
online survey studies, you can typi[INVESTIGATOR_272414].  
● If applicable, process es to ensure ongoing consent or assent (e.g., 
for multiple sessions; for research in which a minor will turn 18 
during the study; for longitudinal research with minors who will 
later be asked to provide or affirm their assent ). 
● Please revi ew “SOP: Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP -
090)” for recommended procedure. Describe your process, being 
sure to include:  
o The name [CONTACT_314761] [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_42616]  
o The time that will be de voted to the consent discussion  
o Steps that you will take  to minimize the possibility  of coercion 
or undue influence  
o Steps that you will take  to gauge or ensure the subjects’ 
understanding  
 
Consent for the screening questionnaire will be documented by [CONTACT_509656]. Information about the study, instructions for completing the survey, 
next steps for participation, and what will happen with their information if the y are/are 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
42 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 43 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  not (i.e., screen fail) determined to be eligible to participate will be provided in the 
"Introduction" section of the survey.  
 
During the first session (Consent and Training Session), consent for participating in the 
study will be obtained on -site by [CONTACT_509657] a quiet, private room or waiting 
area. Consent materials will be emailed to the participants for their review at least 24hrs 
in advance of their first appointment.  
 
Participants will be given as much time as they request to revi ew the consent documents.  
 
This study involves multiple sessions and a single consent form will be signed that details 
all sessions. Participants will provide their consent for all sessions at the first session, but 
will be informed they may withdraw from  the study at any time. Verbal consent will be 
obtained before each subsequent session.  
 
Staff will devote as much time as requested to the consent process. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], review of 
the consent form takes approximately [ADDRESS_658928] had all questions answered prior to the participant 
signing the consent form.  
 
In order to determine understanding, staff will discuss each section with the participant, 
verifying their understanding by [CONTACT_509658].   
 
 
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
● Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by 
[CONTACT_40228].  
● If non-English speakers will be recruited , describe the process  you 
will use  to ensure that the oral and/or written consent information 
provided will be in  a language that they understand.  
● If you translate consent forms and study materials , please provide a 
certified translation of the form as well as the certification 
document.  
● Indicate the spoken language that study  personnel obtaining consent  
will use . Describe how you will assess fluency  of personnel obtaining 
consent  to ensure  that the translation is accurate.  
 
 
We will recruit only English -speaking participants.  
 
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
43 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 44 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves 
deception)  
● Review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process 
(HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations (i.e., that it meets the criteria 
for a waiver or alteration of the consent pro cess).  
 
We do not waive consent.  
 
 
 
Subjects who are not yet adults (minors: infants, children, teenagers)  
● Describe the criteria that you will use  to determine  legal age for 
consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research under 
the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be 
conducted (e.g., in Virginia, individuals under the age of 18 years).  
o For research conducted in Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the 
definition of “minor.”  
o For research conducted outside of the state, please describe 
the legal requirements for the definition of “minor.”   
● Describe the process for obtaining parental permission.  
o Permission from o ne parent  is acceptable for  studies  that 
involve  no greater than minimal risk OR involve greate r than 
minimal risk but present  the prospect of direct benefit to the 
minor  subject . 
o Permission from both parents is required in all other 
cases (unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not rea sonably available, or when only 
one parent has legal responsibility for the care and 
custody of the minor ). 
● Describe whether you will obtain permission from individuals other 
than parents or Legally Authorized Representatives , and if so, who 
will be allowed to provide permission. Describe the process you will 
use to determine these individuals’ authority to consent to the 
minor’s general medical care.  
● Indicate whether you will obtain assent from all, some, or none of 
the minors. If  you will obtain  assent from some minors, indicate 
which minors will be required to assent. Consider  chronological age 
and intellectual capacity  when determining who will be required to 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
44 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 45 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  provide assent (e.g.,  infants are unable to assent.  However,  
teenagers are likely able to read and sign an assent form ). 
● When assent of minors is obtained , describe whether and how you 
will document  it.  Will minors  sign an assent form or give verbal 
assent?  
● Attach parental permission and minor assent forms or scri pts in 
Protocol Management.  
 
 
Only adults 18 years or older will be eligible to participate in the study.  
 
 
 
Adults  Unable to Consent  
● Describe the process you will use to determine whether an individual 
adult is capable of consent.  
● List the individuals from whom  you will obtain  permission in order 
of priority (e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court 
appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and non -
minor child).  
o For research conducted in the Virginia , review “SOP: L egally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors , and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine  which individuals in the state meet the 
definition of “legally authorized representative.”  
o For research conducted outside of Virginia , please describe 
the legal requirements f or obtaining permission from a legally 
authorized representative in the state where the research will 
occur.  
● Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  
o Indicate whether y ou will require a ssent from  all, some, or 
none of the subjects. If some, indicate which subjects will be 
required to assent and which will not.  
o If you will not obtain assent from some or all subjects, please 
provide justification for not obtaining assent . 
o Describe whether and how you will document assent.  
 
Adults must be able to consent themselves.  
 
 
25.[ADDRESS_658929] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
45 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 46 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  25.1 Consult “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)” for 
recommended procedures , and  describe whether and how consent of the 
subject will be documented in writing : 
 
We do not request to waive written consent. See details in 8.[ADDRESS_658930] that the 
IRB waive the requirement to obtain written  documentation of consent 
(e.g., consent to participate is indicated by [CONTACT_7326] a button for an online 
questionnaire – after the consent information is presented and before the 
questionnaire begins) : 
 
We do not request to waive written consent.  
 
 
25.3 If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document with 
places for signatures. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent 
in writing, please attach the consent script or text. Review “CHECKLIST: 
Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information. You should use “TEMPLATE 
CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent document or 
script : 
 
Consent for this project is attached to this application.  
 
 
 
 
26.[ADDRESS_658931] Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
46 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 47 of 49 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_658932] the research . For example, as 
appropriate:  
● Describe t he PI’s availability to supervise the research.  
● Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required number of suitable 
subjects within the agreed recruitment period. For example, how 
many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of 
those potential subjects do you need to recruit?  
● Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing 
the research.  
● Desc ribe your facilities.  
● Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that 
subjects might need as a result of an anticipated or unanticipated 
consequence of participation in the research.  
● Describe your process to ensure that all persons ass isting with the 
research are adequately informed about the protocol, the research 
procedures, and their duties and functions (e.g., training plans, 
detailed study notebooks).  
 
The PI [CONTACT_832] a research -dedicated (100%) Faculty member at Virginia Tech and the Fralin 
Biomedical Research Institute. The majority of the PI's time is spent supervising and 
analyzing ongoing research.  
 
Fralin Biomedical Research Institute  
Dr. DiFeliceantoni o’s lab is part of the Fralin Biomedical Research Institute at Virginia 
Tech Carilion (FBRI at VTC), located in Roanoke, Virginia. The Research Institute was 
founded approximately eight years ago as part of a commitment to biomedical sciences 
by [CONTACT_8203] T ech, and was originally called the Virginia Tech Carilion Research Institute. 
The name [CONTACT_509662] [ADDRESS_658933] 
interdisciplinary group working in a variety of areas such as neural computation, 
psych iatric and developmental disorders, genetics, substance abuse and molecular 
virology and biology. The FBRI also provides to the faculty an administrative staff of 
individuals with expertise in grants management, personnel management, supply 
ordering/tracki ng, web systems management, desktop support, laboratory animal care, 
IRB support, software development and facilities and operations support and planning as 
well as general administrative support.  
 
DiFeliceantonio Lab Resources  
Dr. DiFeliceantonio’s lab i s equipped to draw blood using an IV catheter system, analyze 
blood samples for glucose, perform indirect calorimetry, train participants in the MRI 
scanner environment, and measure participant’s height and weight.  
Equipment includes:  
Stadiometer - Measure ment of height  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
47 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 48 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis equipment - Noninvasive measurement of body 
composition (% body fat)  
Hemoglobin A1C analyzer  
Scale - Measurement of weight  
Parvo -Medics Metabolic Cart – Measurement of gas exchange (O2 consumption, CO2 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_57774]) 
Hemocue Analyzer – Measurement of whole blood glucose (venous)  
Centrifuge  
MR Simulator (i.e., "mock" MRI scanner; Psychology Science Tools)  
Laptop Computer for data collection  
Two Tablets for data collection (Lenovo)  
Custom gustometer for delivery of liquids in simulated MR environment  
3 workstations for research personnel  
Laptop with Nutrition Data System for Research (NDSR) software and license  
 
 
Computing Resources  
The Fralin Biomedical Research Institute (FBRI) at Virginia Tech Carilion (VTC) house s 
the following shared computing resources available:  
Dell / Intel HPC Cluster ([ADDRESS_658934]) – 
SLURM; IBM iDataPlexLinux Cluster ([ADDRESS_658935]) - PBS; 10+ dedicat ed Linux servers (48 core AMD Opteron -
based, 192GB RAM) are available for image and data analysis; Virtualized infrastructure 
using VMware vSphere, virtual machine environment available for general compute and 
image and data analysis; 40Gbit/s storage conn ectivity for research data; 10 Gbit/s 
Internal Local Area Network between file servers and cluster; 8Gbit/s Fibre Channel 
Storage Area Network; 10 Gbit/s Wide Area Connection for access to Virginia Tech 
main campus / Internet; 1.4 Petaby[CONTACT_509659]; 250 Teraby[CONTACT_509660] -attached centralized disk storage; 400 Teraby[CONTACT_509661] -based tape backup; Nightly 
backups and snapshots; 2.4Ghz / 5Ghz secure wireless network; 1 Gbit/s commodity 
Ethernet network; Data Analysis Tools: MATLAB, SPM12,  AFNI, FSL, MRIcro, 
xjView, R, SAS, Prism Graphpad, SPSS; Productivity Tools: Adobe Suite, Microsoft 
Office Suite, vi, vim, emacs  
 
MRI Scanning Resources (FBRI)  
Virginia Tech has three research -dedicated Siemens 3T MR scanners (2 Siemens 
Magnetom TIM Trios , and 1 PRISMA -FIT) available. Each scanner bay is equipped with 
the following stimulation and response interfaces:  
behavioral response: two -hand, eight -button optical response pads with USB, serial, and 
TTL output (Current Designs, Inc.)  
video stimulation: rear -projection video display (Hitachi CP -SX635)  
corrective lenses for use with video stimulation: MR -compatible frames with insertable 
polycarbonate lenses (prescriptions range from -8.00 to +8.00) (Solo Bambini)  
stimulus delivery: dedicated computers for experiment presentation (Dell Optiplex 980)  
audio delivery: MRI compatible headphones.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
48 of 49
PROTOCOL ( STUDY) TITLE AND NUMBER  
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 49 of 49 Revised: March  5, 2019  Metabolic Chamber Resources (FBRI)  
Virginia Tech has [ADDRESS_658936] calorimetry 
available (MEI Research, Ltd). The l arger room is equipped for [ADDRESS_658937] the HRPP for multi -site research (i nvolving multiple institutions) and 
the details required for this section  will be provided. Otherwise , indi cate N/A. 
 
This is a single site study.  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 21-964 
Approved April 27, 2023 
49 of 49