Obstructive Sleep Apnea Endotypes and Impact on Phenotypes of People Living With 
HIV 
Research Plan  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
March 11, 2021 
UCSD Human Research Protections Program  
New Biomedical Application  
RESEARCH PLAN  
Instructions for completing the Research Plan are available on the HRPP website.  
The headings on this set of instructions correspond to the headings of the Research Plan. 
General Instructions: Enter a response for all topic headings.  
Enter “Not Applicable” rather than leaving an item blank if the item does not apply to this project. 
Version date: 9/30/[ADDRESS_123954], La Jolla, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
4. ESTIMATED DURATION OF THE STUDY
4 years  
5. LAY LANGUAGE SUMMARY OR SYNOPSIS (no more than one paragraph)
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a very common disease, which might explain some of the symptoms 
experienced by [CONTACT_111300] (HIV) , such as fatigue and heart disease.  
We seek to understand how the different underlying causes of OSA affect the way people living with HIV 
(PLWH) experience OSA.  We also want to understand how symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea improve with treatment, and if this too , is affected by [CONTACT_111301] 
6. SPECIFIC AIMS
Aim 1 : To compare the symptoms of PLWH+OSA vs. PLWH –OSA. This aim will allow us to test the 
hypothesis that fatigue is overexpressed in PLWH+OSA compared to PLWH -OSA, indep endent of known 
covariates.  We will develop a multivariate model to predict fatigue based on clinical accessible data.  
Aim 2: I
n those PLWH found to have OSA, we will: 
a. Compare neurocognitive performance [psychomotor vigilance test (primary outcome), NI H
Toolbox Cognition] in PLWH+OSA with low arousal threshold vs. those with a high arousal threshold. We
hypothesize that stratified for similar disease severity, low arousal threshold induced OSA yields worse
neurocognitive dysfunction compared to equal severity OSA with high arousal threshold.
b. Compare endothelial function (arterial tonometry) in PLWH+OSA with high loop gain
(ventilatory instability with associated hypoxemia/hypercapnia) vs. those with low LG, to test the hypothesisthat stratified for s imilar disease severity, LG -
induced OSA yields worse endothelial function compared to
equal severity OSA with low LG.
Aim 3: To test in PLWH+OSA whether [ADDRESS_123955] improvement in endothelial dysfunction with PAP therapy compared to other OSA patients with similar disease severity as measured by [CONTACT_111302].  
7. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE
People Living with HIV: The availability of effective and generally well -tolerated antiretroviral therapy for 
people with HIV has transl ated into dramatically longer survival and life expectancy. It is estimated that more 
than 50% of those with HIV infection in the US are now >50 years old.1 While efforts at disease prevention and 
cure are needed and ongoing, an important focus is now on understanding the symptoms and co- morbidities of 
people living with HIV. For example, fatigue is very commonly reported by [CONTACT_111303]4 counts.2,3 Nearly half of HIV -infected adults report poor sleep quality.4 
Corona ry artery disease and diabetes mellitus are now recognized as important complications of ART.5,6 One 
relatively unexplored co -morbidity that may link these symptoms and complications in PLWH is obstructive 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 2  sleep apnea (OSA).  
 
Sleep in HIV:  Sleep problems h ave long been recognized as a prominent symptom in HIV.54,55 Given the high 
prevalence of sleep problems across multiple cohorts, sleep was included in the HIV symptom index, developed 
in 2001.56 Again, fatigue remains a common symptom even in the modern era.5,6 While fatigue and sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_111282], we note that patients often use these terms interchangeably and both are prominent and common symptoms of OSA (and HIV).
57  
 
Obstructive Sleep  Apnea: OSA is defined by [CONTACT_111304], which leads 
to transient hypoxemia and arousals from sleep. Surges in sympathetic activity and sleep fragmentation lead to cardiovascular (e.g. hypertension, stroke, myocardial  
infarction) and neurocognitive (e.g. excessive daytime 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], poor work performance, auto accidents) consequences. Recent estimates suggest that roughly 10% of the US population has clinically important OSA (roughly 13% of men and 6% of US women), th
e high 
prevalence reflecting aging of the population and the obesity pandemic, both factors known to contribute to 
OSA risk.7,[ADDRESS_123956] pressure (CPAP), 
which acts as a pneumatic stent to  keep the upper airway open during sleep. CPAP is effective, but poorly 
tolerated and adherence is low.9 
 
OSA is a multifactorial disease with different manifestations – Endotypes and Phenotypes : OSA is increasingly 
recognized as a multifactorial disorder i.e., different people have OSA for different reasons. Although an 
anatomical predisposition (collapsibility of the upper airway) is generally required, other factors are important as well, including a low respi[INVESTIGATOR_111283] (wake up too easily), dysfunction in upper airway  
dilator muscles and instability in ventilatory control (which we quantify using the engineering term loop gain 
[LG]) which leads to periods of decreased pharyngeal tone.[ADDRESS_123957] different symptoms, and variable risk of certain co -morbidities. 
That is, two patients of  the same gender, weight and OSA severity, as defined by [CONTACT_111305] -hypopnea index 
(AHI), may have very different observable consequences of OSA, or phenotypes. The concept of OSA 
phenotypes has been advanced by [CONTACT_111306]. For example, Ye and colleagues found [ADDRESS_123958] clusters of 
OSA types based on sleep questionnaire responses, which they labelled the “disturbed sleep”, “minimally 
symptomatic”, and “excessive daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]” groups.[ADDRESS_123959] clearly shown that OSA cardiovascular complications in the elderly are less than in younger people for the same degree of OSA severity.49 Thus, the presenting symptoms, and rationale for treatment may be different in younger vs. older patients with OSA. 
 
OSA in PLWH: A recent study by [CONTACT_111307] a major proportion of HIV -infected subjects 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 3  (70% of the studied cohort) had OSA.10 Given the greatly improved l ong-term survival now common among 
PLWH, aging and obesity are increasingly prevalent in PLWH, which might explain this finding. However, the 
PLWH were younger and substantially leaner (as assessed by [CONTACT_44207]) than the controls in this study – and therefore wo uld have been expected to have a lower prevalence of disease.  Furthermore, current or prior ART 
use was associated with an increased prevalence of OSA (90 vs 57%), again, even though the prior ART group had a lower BMI. Thus, there appears to be an unexpectedly high prevalence of OSA in PLWH not predicted 
by [CONTACT_111308].  The lack of traditional risk factors may explain very low rates of OSA diagnosis 
(<4%) in some cohorts.11,12 
 
Untreated OSA is also likely to be relevant for symptoms in PLWH. Witnessed apnea, a fairly specific marker 
of OSA, was a predictor for clinically relevant fatigue in PLWH.64 Not only do PLWH complain of fatigue, 
they also complain with equal frequency of daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008] (defined as Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_111284] >11). 
Although these may be distinct symptoms with distinct underlying causes, the two terms are often closely 
intertwined and/or us ed interchangeably by [CONTACT_1962].  Untreated OSA is likely to be important for ongoing 
inflammation. The presence of moderate or severe OSA was associated with an increased odds (OR 6.9) of C -
reactive protein > 3.0mg/dL.65  In those with untreated disease it was also associated with viral load >10,000 copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]/mL (OR 7.1), as we ll as a higher TNF -alpha level.  
 
Unfortunately, f ew PLWH and OS A are treated. Perhaps because PLWH with OSA are younger and thinner 
than those without HIV and OSA, or because common OSA symptoms like fatigue/tiredness are ascribed to 
HIV, few PLWH have been diagnosed with OSA. In multiple practice settings [the Vete rans Aging Cohort 
Study (VACS) ,  in an urban clinic, and in an academic University CFAR clinic1] only about 4% of PLWH 
were diagnosed with OSA. Although OSA is often under -diagnosed in general, in the same Veterans Cohort the 
rate of OSA diagnosis in non HIV  was 12.4%. Thus, few patients or providers consider OSA in PLWH, 
although it is highly likely to be important for many comorbidities. 
 Thus, our overall hypotheses are 1) that OSA is incredibly common and underdiagnosed in PLWH, 2) that OSA has consequences for PLWH, and 3) that underlying endotype of OSA influences disease expression and response to treatment.  
 
8. PROGRESS REPORT  
N/A (initial submission)  
9. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
Under each visit subsection, we have added alternatives for researc hers to consider in order to maintain social 
distancing and perform study activities remotely due to COVID-19. After written informed consent has been obtained, the following procedures will be undertaken:  
 Daytime Visit 1 (Aim #1) 
1. Anthropomorphic assessment:  Baseline demographics and health status (medical problems, 
medications, allergies, social history) will be obtained. A basic exam, including height, weight, neck circumference, hip, and waist circumference, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation will be obtained.   
2. Lung Function Assessment using spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] : As per American Thoracic Society criteria.  In brief, 
subjects will blow into a pneumotachogram via a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_111285] a nose clip in place from full inhalation to complete exhalation.   
3. Questionnaires : Standard sleep related questionnaires will be used, including the Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7109], Pi[INVESTIGATOR_33548], and Insomnia Severity Index (ISI).  In addition subjective 
assessment of fatigue, depression , quality of life questionnaires , pain, and alcohol consumption will be 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 4  used including Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy Fatigue Scale (FACIT -F), Beck 
Depression Index- II, SF -36 Item Health Survey (SF-36), Brief Pain Inventory (Short Form), PROMIS 
pain inten sity, PROMIS pain inte rference, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), and 
Alcohol Dependence Scale (ADS). Subjects will also be given the FRAM body morphology 
questionnaire. 
 
4. Neurocognitive assessment : Subjective assessment will be done using, Patient’s Assessment of Own 
Function Inventory ( PAOF) questionnaire.  Objective assessment of brain function will be done using 
[ADDRESS_123960] (PVT).  Neurocognitive assessment will be done using NIH Toolbox Cognition.  This battery yields three composite scores: overall cognitive function, crystallized cognition and fluid cognition.  The two tests of “crystallized cognition” are less sensitive to acquired brain dysfunction and reflect past learning experiences (Oral Reading Recognition and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_111286]).  The five tests of “fluid cognition” assess multiple cognitive domains that are vulnerable 
to acquired brain dysfunction (i.e., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_111287] = epi[INVESTIGATOR_10682], Dimensional Change Card Sort Task = executive function/flexibility, Pattern Comparison Task = processing speed, Flanker Inhibitory Control and Attention Task = executive function/inhibitory control, and List Sorting Task = working memory).  
The NIH Toolbox battery has been nationally normed in a sample of 4,859 participants, English or Spanish speaking, ages 3 -85 years, representative of the U.S. population based on gender, race/ethnicity, and 
socioeconomic status. Based on these data, demographically -corrected T -scores are available to adjust for age, 
gender, education, language  and race/ethnicity.115 Additionally, this assessment tool is the result of an NIH 
initiative and is used in many studies, which allows for harmonization of findings.  It can be completed in approximately 30 minutes. 
 
5. Cardiovascular assessment:  Standard bl ood pressure and peripheral artery tonometry (PAT). 
Endothelial vasodilator function will be assessed using the EndoPAT 2000 (Itamar Medical, Caesarea, Israel) device. The EndoPAT test has been shown to be highly predictive of traditional cardiovascular risk factors. This test takes approximately 15 minutes. EndoPAT measures digital pulse amplitude with the probes placed on the tip of each index finger. The EndoPAT probe comprises a pneumatic plethysmograph that applies uniform pressure to the surface of the distal finger, allowing measurement of pulse volume changes in the finger. Digital pulse amplitude will be measured during three stages from both right and left index fingers. Arterial flow of one arm will be occluded for 5 minutes by a blood pressure cuff placed on a proximal forearm at a pressure of 60 mm Hg above the systolic blood pressure or 300 mm Hg (whichever is higher). The digital pulse amplitude of the non-occluded arm will be measured as the control baseline. The three stages of the test will be: 1) Before occlusion (resting period) - digital pulse amplitude will be recorded for [ADDRESS_123961]; 2) During arterial flow occlusion - 
arterial flow occlusion will be applied in one arm and digital pulse amplitude will be recorded for another 5 min; 3) After occlusion - the cuff is rapi[INVESTIGATOR_111288] 5 minutes to assess peripheral vasodilator response to reactive hyperemia.  
 
 
If time /equipment  does not allow for performance of these procedures,  subjects will be asked to complete it just 
prior to their sleep study, or during an additional visit  (for which they would receive additional compensation).  
 
6.  Actigraphy : Subjects will be fitted with a wristworn actigraph to measure activity and lig ht exposure  
which they will wear for [ADDRESS_123962]/activity cycle. We will use the 
Actiwatch Spectrum Pro (Philips Respi[INVESTIGATOR_5770]) which is the size of a wrist watch and weighs just 31 grams. We 
recognize that forced dys synchrony and constant routine are the gold standards for assessment of endogenous 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 5  circadian rhythm, and we are supportive of such efforts in PLWH. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this 
application we believe we can use actigraphy coupled with examination by a Sleep Medicine expert to diagnose 
clinically relevant circadian disorders (such as advanced sleep phase disorder). The information from actigraphy will also be relevant in assessing activity levels and sleep/rest duration.  
 We anticipate that all of these procedures will take up to [ADDRESS_123963] to complete a COVID-19 swab. Our research group and/or the university will cover all charges a ssociated with COVID-19 testing. Only subjects 
that are negative for SARS -CoV-2 virus can participate in the 4-hour visit.  
 Shortened in person Daytime Visit  + Remo
 te Daytime Visit #[ADDRESS_123964], EndoPat, and neurocognitive assessment  (NIH toolbox). An 
actigraphy watch will be given during the shortened daytime visit or mailed to the subject’s home.    For the remote daytime visit, participants will be sent a personalized RedCap link in order to  complete general 
health  and sleep questionnaires. A researcher will be present on the phone to help troubleshoot and guide the 
remote daytime visit.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_111289] a structured interview over the phone 
or via Zoom in order to get  a list of previous and current medications and substances they have used.  
Overnight Visit #[ADDRESS_123965] to change. Subjects will arrive to the research sleep laboratory at approximately 8PM and undergo the following procedures:  
 1. Polysomnogr
aphy: Monitoring for standard clinical polysomnography study will be applied to the subject, 
as follows: The subject will have EEG, EMG, EOG, and ECG electrodes, an adhesive body position sensor placed in standard locations.  Pulse oximetry sensor will be attached either to a finger or ear lobe and secured by [CONTACT_12896]. The following parameters will be measured during sleep: electroencephalogram, eye movement, electrocardiogram, electromyogram, leg movement, snoring sounds, nasal pressure, and nasal- oral airflow  by 
[CONTACT_111309], respi[INVESTIGATOR_111290]-electric bands of the thorax and abdomen or magnetometers, position sensors, and pulse oximetry.  This equipment is standard for diagnostic polysomnography and should not be uncomfortable.  
 
Once all of this equipment has been comfortably and securely fastened, the subject will be allowed to fall asleep and data recording will begin. Subjects will be asked to remain in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_111291]. All data will be acquired on a [ADDRESS_123966] : A sleep technician will arrive at the subject’s home to apply the following:  
Chest belt is secured around the chest to detect respi[INVESTIGATOR_64947]. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_111292] 
a nasal flow cannula in the nostrils to detect nasal airflow. A pulse oximeter probe will be clipped to the finger 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 6  or earlobe for continuous oxygen saturation monitoring. Apneas and hypopneas will be defined using the 
recent ly published American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) guidelines for syndrome definition and 
scoring techniques. We will provide the HST report to these subjects. If they are eligible to participate in our 
study based on the HST result, we will explain the study and protocols and informed consent to participate in specific arms of the study will be reviewed with the subjects in details.  
 The study will end at approximately 6AM. The equipment will be removed and given to the sleep technician.   2. Phlebotomy : Venipuncture will be performed by a certified research staff or physician using standard 
techniques and appropriate blood borne pathogen precautions.  Approximately 10-15 cc of blood will be drawn  in the morning at wake into serum separator and EDTA tubes . Serum samples will be immediately 
processed to separate serum, which will be stored in darkness at -70 F to preserve until analysis can be conducted. EDTA tubes will be processed and refrigerated for use within 24 hours. Blood will also be collected to m easure high sensitivity C Reactive Protein (hsCRP), insulin, glucose (to calculate HOMA -IR), 
cytokines such as IL -[ADDRESS_123967].  Fluids collected may be stored 
indefinitely and/or used in additional research to be conducted by [CONTACT_111310] (HNRP) conducting IRB approved research.  Samples and data 
collected in the course of the study will be banked and may be sent to other research scientists anonymously 
(without identification ).  
 
Generally, blood samples will be collected in the morning after the first polysomnography visit is completed. On occasion, subjects will be asked to come in on a separate day to complete their fasting morning blood draw, if staff or blood processing team are not available. Subjects will be scheduled to complete this blood draw during a 15 minute appointment between 7AM-8:30AM. Since this is a fasting blood draw, subjects will come in fasting (without food) and will be permitted to have water only.  Subjects will then be able to go home.  They will leave the actiwatch for the investigators.  We anticipate that 
Overnight Visit #[ADDRESS_123968] 10 hours (most of which will be spent asleep).   
 Remote Overnight Visit #[ADDRESS_123969]  (HST)  to complete after their first 
daytime visit. Instructions of how to use the HST can be offered through a secure Zoom video call and written instructions. Participants will be given the option to pi[INVESTIGATOR_111293]. A research technician will be on -call for questions and troubleshooting the night the 
subject completes their overnight sleep study.     Subjects will have to be scheduled for a separate morning visit to have their blood drawn.   If subjects are not found to have OSA, they will not continue with the study.  (End of Aim #1) 
 
Aims #2 and #[ADDRESS_123970] OSA (with AHI >5 events/hour) will be referred for clinical evaluation (by a sleep physician not involved in the study) and treatment, and will also return for overnight visit #2, and continue to be followed with weekly phone ca lls and a repeat assessment 3 months after starting OSA treatment.  
 Overnight Visit #2  (Aim #2) Measu
 rement of Endotypic Traits 
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page [ADDRESS_123971] locations.  Pulse oximetry sensor will be attached either to a finger or ear lobe and secured by [CONTACT_12896]. The following parameters will be measured during sleep: electroencephalogram, eye movement, electroc ardiogram, electromyogram, leg movement, snoring sounds, nasal pressure, and nasal- oral air flow by 
[CONTACT_111309], respi[INVESTIGATOR_111290]-electric bands of the thorax and abdomen or magnetometers, position sensors, and pulse oximetry.  This equipment is standard for diagnostic polysomnography and should not be uncomfortable.  
 Additional equipment for the physiological sleep study will also be applied to the subject, as follows:   A thin esophageal catheter (6 -8 french) with a n electrode array to measure diaphragm electromyography will be 
placed via the nares. Prior to the cannula placement the subject will received 2 sprays of a nasal decongestant (0.05% oxymetazolime hydrochloride), followed by 4% lidocaine topi[INVESTIGATOR_111294]. The catheter will be confirmed to be in the proper position by [CONTACT_111311], then taped to the nose (and later secured to the CPAP mask). The esophageal catheter placement may be omitted by [CONTACT_111312]; in this case subjects can still remain in the study.  
 A standard CPAP mask will be placed over the nose and secured with velco straps. If necessary, the subject’s mouth will be either taped closed or a chin strap applied to ensure nasal breathing. A specially modified continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device (ResMed, San Diego, CA) that delivers both positive and negative airway pressure will be connected to the mask. Once all of this equipment has been comfortably and securely fastened, the subject will be allowed  to fall asleep and data recording will begin. Subjects will be 
asked to remain in the supi[INVESTIGATOR_111291]. All data will be acquired on a 1401 plus interface and Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2531] 2 software (Cambridge Electronics Design Ltd, Cambridge, [LOCATION_006]).  After sl eep onset, airway pressure will be increased in order to abolish flow limitation. During sleep, a 
previously validated sequence of pressure reductions will be performed in order to measure respi[INVESTIGATOR_111295], as follows: T he holding pressure will be abruptly changed to atmospheric 
pressure for several breaths, then returned to holding pressure. After a short time, the pressure will be gradually reduced over the course of several minutes, until an arousal occurs on the EEG (generally not associated with any awareness by [CONTACT_423]). The subject will be given several minutes to resume normal sleep, and the procedure will be repeated until three stable readings are obtained. Subsequently, the procedure will be repeated, but with a reduction in pressure to a level that does not induce arousal. After a short period of time with stable breathing at this pressure, the pressure will be returned to the holding pressure to measure ventilatory response. This will be repeated until [ADDRESS_123972] is still sleepy, they will be allowed to sleep with 
CPAP applie d until they feel rested.  
Aim #[ADDRESS_123973] of CPAP on the phenotypic traits. 
 We anticipate that Overnight Visit #[ADDRESS_123974] 8 hours (most of which will be spent sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]).  
 Supplemental Daytime Visit (optional)  
Subjects will be asked to co mplete this visit, if [ADDRESS_123975] visit and the start of their 
PAP therapy. S ubjects will repeat all of the same meas urements described under Visit 1.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 8   
APAP Device Given to Subjects (optional)  
Subjects will be offered a trial o f a clinical Automatic Positive Airway Pressure (APAP) for up to [ADDRESS_123976] pressure (PAP)  device, where the pressure changes as needed to 
provide optimal pressure to splint the upper airway .  
 
Supplies will be given for the purposes of the study and returned after [ADDRESS_123977] is unable to 
come to our study location, we will send out the replacement device and provide postage for the 
broken device.          
 Weekly Phone calls:   Subject
 s will be referred to a sleep physician for PAP therapy. The treatment is expected 
every day to be worn when participants are asleep (including naps). In addition to usual clinical care provided to ensure optimal adherence to PAP therapy, the research staff will be in weekly contact [CONTACT_111313], and identify and troubleshoot impediments to all- night, every -night use of PAP 
therapy. These phone calls will be 10-15 minutes each for 12 weeks.   2 weeks
 prior to returning for Daytime Visit #2, subjects will be mailed or delivered an actiwatch to wear for 2 
weeks.  
 Daytime Visit #2 : Impac
 t of OSA treatment on Sleep and Activity Phenotypes 
 
After three months  of OSA treatment , subjects will return to the sleep lab to repeat all of the same 
measurements described under Visit 1  with the exception of the lung function testing (see Daytime Visit 
#1).  This visit will generally occur in the morning at which time another fasting blood sample will be colle cted.  If the fasting blood sample cannot be collected during this visit, a separate visit will be scheduled. 
Subjects will be scheduled to complete this blood draw during a 15 minute appointment between 7AM-8:30AM. Since this is a fasting blood draw, subje cts will come in fasting (without food) and will be 
permitted to have water only.  
 
Additionally for subjects uing PAP therapy for treatment of OSA, we will obtain a PAP download which will report therapeutic holding pressure, residual apnea -hypopnea index
, as well as multiple parameters of 
adherence such as days of use, number of days >4 hours per night, etc. Mask type (nasal vs. oronasal, etc) will be recorded. The actiwatch  will be returned to the investigators to assess the impact of PAP
 therapy on acti vity 
levels, pattern of activity and sleep duration. 
 We anticipate that Daytime Visit #2 will be 2 hours.  
 Shortened Daytime Visit and Remote Daytime Visit #2  
 As an alternative to having subjects come in for their final visit, subjects can complete the following activities 
remotely:  
 
Subjects will be asked to complete all the questionnaires via a RedCap link. A researcher will remain on the 
phone in order  to guide subjects and troubleshoot issues. The remaining study activities (anthropomorphic 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page [ADDRESS_123978], EndoPat, neurocognitive  assessment ) (NIH toolbox) , 10 minute PVT, and blood 
sample)  will have to be completed during a separate shorter daytime visit. An actigraphy watch may be mailed 
to the subject’s home in order for data to be collected before their final daytime visit.  
 
The total duration of the participant’s involvement in the study is expected to be a total of 18 weeks.   Summary Information: 
 Clinical and research procedures: All of the study procedures are intended for res earch purposes only.  
However, it is anticipated that we will discover some previously undiagnosed sleep disorders, mostly obstructive sleep apnea.  These subjects will be referred for a clinical sleep evaluation and treatment.
 rocedures 
carried out solely  for research purposes: Overnight sleep studies (polysomnogram),  pulmonary function 
testing, arterial tonometry (endoPAT), venipuncture, exhaled nitric oxide and carbon monoxide measurements 
 
Devices: This study does not use any devices considered experim ental or investigational. The sleep study 
equipment is FDA exempted. All FDA-regulated devices used in this study are approved for the proposed 
subject population and purpose. No significant risk devices are in use during this study.   Research material: Physiological recordings will be obtained as stated above. Records will be created within the native format of the software associated with the equipment, using the subject identifier (no protected health information). Similarly, blood samples will be labeled with subject identifiers. The study will maintain a database for future research purposes; however, any future projects will undergo a separate IRB approval prior to using this data/material.   Data collection and analysis: Raw data will be collected in  the native format of each device, with use of subject 
ID rather than any PHI. For example, sleep studies will be collected in Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2531]2. Signal analysis will be performed in MATLab. The master database for the study will be maintained within UCSD’s RedCap system  
behind a protected firewall . Data will be analyzed using statistic al software such as SPSS or R.  
 Women and Minorities: Women and minorities will be included in this study in a fashion that is non -biased 
from the screened population.  
Correspondence Letters to Our Research Subjects  
After a subject has completed the Overnight Study #1, a letter offering their preliminary result will be given or 
mailed to them. Subjects who have completed the study will also be sent a letter thanking them for their 
participation and explaining that study results should be published in a manuscript after data analysis is complete.  
 
10. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
People living with HIV  (n=120)  will be recruited into the study to undergo a standard sleep study 
(polysomnogram, PSG), a research sleep study, and PAP trial .   
  Inclusion Criteria:  
- Ages 18-65years old  
- BMI 20 – 35 kg/m2 
-  Physician diagnosis of HIV and viral suppression   Exclusion Criteria:  
- Pregnancy  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 10  - Inability to complete study procedures, such as questionnaires that  are only available/validated in 
English. 
- Already  on effective therapy and adherent to treatment for OSA  
- Other known untreated sleep fragmenting disorder, such as periodic limb movement disorder, or 
narcolepsy  
 
11. RECRUITMENT AND PROCEDURES PREPARATORY TO RESEARCH  
 
Subjects will be recruited from the following sources: 1) IRB - approved flyers or advertisements, with 
prospective subjects initiating contact [CONTACT_111314], 2) Persons who have participated in prior research 
studies from our laboratory or affiliated laboratories who have indicated that they would like to be contact[CONTACT_111315], 3) Patients from the UCSD Pulmonary and Sleep Center , UCSD Owen 
Clinic, and VA SPID clinic  who have indicated that they are interested in hearing  about research opportunities , 
and 4) Persons who have been identified via SlicerDicer  
  
Identifying Eligible Subjects with Partial HIPAA Waiver  
A temporary  waiver of consent and partial waiver of HIPAA authorization is requested for this study in order 
to: 1) Pre -screen persons (from sources 2 and 3 above) who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria, and 2) 
Perform telephone or in person interviews with potential subjects for screening of inclusion and exclusion 
criteria prior to obtaining consent. The following points justify the waiver of consent: 1) Private information that will be reviewed is non -sensitive, and anyone pre- screened will have previously agreed to contact [CONTACT_111316] , 2) No research procedures will be performed without consent, so there should be minimal possibility 
of adverse effect on potential subjects, 3) Adequate enrollment could not be achieved without accessing this information , since specific medical conditions are being investigated , 4) All persons contact[CONTACT_111317] . For the partial HIPAA authorization: 1) Any PHI accessed  
for screening  will be kept by [CONTACT_111318], or it will be destroyed immediately 
if consent and HIPAA authorization is not obtained, 2) Identifying potential subject s and then 
contact[CONTACT_30697]/approaching them to discuss the research will require accessing PHI, 3) Minimal necessary PHI will 
be accessed and kept only temporarily while that subject is being scre ened, as above , 4) PHI will only be 
accessed by [CONTACT_111319], and will include name, date of birth, medical record number, contact [CONTACT_3031], and diagnoses.  
  
SlicerDicer  
Slicer Dicer will be used to identify both Su mmary & Patient Level Requests:  
Researchers plan to use UC San Diego Health’s Epic SlicerDicer, a self -service cohort discovery tool. 
Researchers will have access to direct summary and patient level data. Using SlicerDicer, researchers will:    
Review the ch arts at a patient level to identify potential patients for recruitment.  
We will be identifying patients with  Hum an Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), ages [ADDRESS_123979] with  the patient’s name, phone 
number, and email address. This call list will be stored digitally under password protection on a UCSD secured 
drive shared between the research team.  Once identified, an investigator of the study team will contact [CONTACT_111320]. If yes, the study team member will provide full details about the study. If no, the patient’s name [CONTACT_111337]. All Epic Slicer Dicer users will ha ve access and security provided by [CONTACT_61207]’s Epic access team.  
 
Prospective subjects will also be recruited from the community after individuals have initiated contact [CONTACT_111321]. Permission to distribute IRB approved messages and flyers is being  requested for the following 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page [ADDRESS_123980]. The flyers will 
also be placed on UCSD Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_111296] (CTRI).    
Facebook Page Welcome Message  
We are requesting permission to have this message posted on a Facebook page creat ed for recruitment 
purposes.   
Welcome to the UCSD Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine Research group’s Facebook page. We 
have ongoing research  studies, primarily investigating obstructive sleep apnea. If you or 
someone you know has obstruct ive sleep apnea, please see our  IRB approved flyers below. 
Occasionally, we are looking for healthy individuals without sleep disorders. Please regularly check our page for flyers describing these research opportunities.    
 Research Match  
ResearchMatch will be used to contact [CONTACT_111322] B approved recruitment message. 
The message will be submitted for approval in an amendment if it is not already included with the initial project submission.   
Department of Motor Vehicles Booth   
The Research Team will set up  a booth between the hours of 8AM-5PM outside of the Clairemont 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) at [ADDRESS_123981] 30 days before the booth is prepared.   
Radio Station (list of radio stations)  
We are requesting permission to have the following message broadcasted on iHeartMedia San Diego radio stations --Star 94.1, 101.5 KGB, Channel 93.3, Rock 105.3, XTRA 1360 Fox Sports, KOGO: 600 AM, JAM’N 
95.7--KPBS 89.5 FM, Jazz 88.3 FM, KFSD 1450 AM, KURS 1040 AM, and AM 1170 The Answer:     
UCSD Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine Research is offering research study opportunities, primarily for people with sleep 
apnea. If you or someone you know suffers from obstructive sleep apnea, contact [CONTACT_7477] (858) 246- 2154 or 
[EMAIL_2206]  for more information. 
   
When this message is IRB approved, it will be submitted only to the radio stations listed above. We will 
request permission for any additional radio broadcasting stations.    
 
 
Research Group Website  
The UCSD Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine Research group has a webpage hosted by [CONTACT_111323]. 
Wording from IRB approved flyers will be posted there.   
 
UCSD CTRI REDCap Survey  
Prospective subjects can voluntarily choose to fill out a UCSD CTRI REDCap Survey for this protocol. Information will be securely collected and stored via REDCap and will be used to determine if the prospective 
subject is eligible for the study.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 12  MyC hart Messages  
UCSD Owen clinic patients may be sent a letter via MyChart by [CONTACT_111324]. Please see the document ent itled “MyChart Letter for Owen Clinic patients” for the 
message.        
12. INFORMED CONSENT  
The research coordinator will screen the subjects over the telephone (or in person for clinic patients, time and 
patient preference allowing) following the screening script.  A waiver of documented consent will be requested 
and once oral consent by [CONTACT_111325]. The reason for this is because the only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent document and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality.  Individuals interested in participating in 
this study will be given detailed explanation of the procedures, potential benefits, risks and discomforts of the study by [CONTACT_111326] . All study staff are CITI certified and the 
importance of following GCP and HIPAA rules has been impressed upon them by [CONTACT_978]. Staff obtaining consent will have sufficient knowledge of the study to answer any questions that might arise during the consent process.   
 A copy of the consent form will be given to the potential subject by [CONTACT_111327] a minimum of [ADDRESS_123982]’s research file in a locked cabinet.  No research procedures will be performed prior to obtaining informed consent.  
English wi ll be used in all discussions during the consent process. The patient will be excluded from the study if 
their preferred language is one other than English or if they do not understand English. The information being 
communicated will not include any exculpatory language through which the potential subject will waive or appear to waive any of the participant’s legal rights or release or appear to release the Researcher, Sponsor, the 
University or its  agents from liability for negligence.  Subjects unable to give their own consent will not be 
included in the study.  
As this study is separate from any clinical care, a waiver of the requirement to upload the consent and HIPAA waiver into the electronic medical record is requested.  
 
13. ALTERNATIVES TO STUDY PARTI CIPATION  
The alternative to study participation is not to participate.   Subject may choose not to participate in this research 
study if they wish.  
14. POTENTIAL RISKS  
Sleep Studies : During the sleep portion of the study, there may be discomfort at the e lectrodes sites; a localized 
skin irritation/allergy can occur due to application of the skin surface electrodes for EEG, EKG, and EMG recordings. Subjects may be sleepy after participating in our physiology studies if they have poor sleep.  
 
During the ph ysiological sleep studies, the tight-fitting nasal mask could lead to skin irritation, nasal 
congestion, and/or nasal dryness. Short periods of apnea during the study would not be expected to cause side effects, other than the possibility of awakening fr om sleep. Finally, when using positive pressure or having 
one’s mouth taped closed, there is a rare risk of vomiting, which could in turn lead to aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] , but this is 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page [ADDRESS_123983] four hours 
prior to the study and thus their stomach content is minimal.  T he mask can be easily removed  if needed for any 
reason. For these reasons we believe there is a minimal risk of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_111297].  Venipuncture: Local bruising and soreness can occur, which are usually mild and self limited.   EndoPAT: Tingling of the hands following cuff inflation can cause discomfort but goes away within a few minutes. No permanent injury has been reported by [CONTACT_3455].   Lung function testing: The test is routinely performed in clinical practice with few associated risks. Lightheadedness or coughing may be induced by [CONTACT_111328].  
 
Loss of Confidentiality: There is a risk of loss of subject confidentiality.  We will protect all subject information 
to the best of our ability so this will not happen, as detailed in subsequent sections.  
 
15. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES AND ADEQUACY OF RESOURCES  
We believe the risks of our research are q uite minimal.  All recordings will be performed in the closely 
monitored environment of our research laboratory in the CTF , CTRI , or MTF. Emergency equipment and 
personnel are readily available in the unlikely event of a serious complication. 
 
Following th e overnight study, subjects will have the option of sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], without instrumentation, for as long as 
they would like before driving home. We will offer them a cab voucher to have a cab take them home. They will only drive home if they feel adequately rested to do so and is corroborated by [CONTACT_111329] a health professional (MD, PhD, or equivalent) trained in sleep medicine. The subject will be assessed for excessive sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008] . If subject does not feel comfortable driving home, we will offer them a cab or they will be allowed to 
continue sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].   
Subjects will be given a phone number to report any post-study complications, which will be personally reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_111298] a 
serious unanticipated event. Because this is a research study, there may be some unknown risks that are currently unforeseeable. Any abnormal findings discovered as part of the study, will be relayed to the subject 
and, if requested, to their PCP.  For example, persistently high blood pressure measurements or high fasting glucose will be communicated to the subjects and to their doctor. DSM Report  A data safety monitoring report will be prepared at least annually and included with reports to the UCSD  HRPP 
(yearly continuing review) and the funding agency (yearly progress report). In addition to enrollment, it will track:  
 
1) All adverse events in which abnormal testing results were conveyed to the subject.  2) All adverse events in which abnormal testing results were conveyed to a subject’s designated physician. (A record of this communication will be kept in the patient’s file.) 3) Any other adverse events, serious adverse events, and unanticipated problems, all of which will be adjudicated and class ified as study-related or unrelated to the study.  
4) The report will also include amendments to the study protocol.  
 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 14  This yearly report will be comprehensive; however, more prompt reporting may be needed.  
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY CONSIDERATIONS  INCLUDING DATA ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT  
There is always the risk of subject information being released accidentally.  We will make every effort to 
maintain patient privacy and confidentiality both during and following the study. Electronic study data will be 
de-identified by [CONTACT_111330][INVESTIGATOR_94864] a secure disk for access by [CONTACT_111331][INVESTIGATOR_91685] a locked cabinet.In all 
correspondence and in internal study reports that require identification of individual subjects, subjects will be referred to and known by [CONTACT_111332]. HNRP staff will have access to data collected from research subjects that have previously participated in prot ocol with their research division. All 
subject data forms (CRF’s) will only list the ID number. All research staff are CITI certified and have had impressed upon them the importance of confidentiality. This study does not involve the collection of sensitiv e 
personal information from subjects. Data will be stored only at UCSD sites and its use will be confined to that specified in this protocol and its approved amendments. 
 
Data generated as a result of this study will only be made available for inspection u pon request of the UCSD 
Human Research Protection Program  or the study sponsor . 
17. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Subjects who participate may derive benefit if a previously unknown sleep disorder such as obstructive sleep 
apnea is diagnosed and treated.  Subjects who are not found to have OSA or other sleep disorder are unlikely to derive benefit.  Society in general may benefit as this study will help achieve a more complete understanding of 
breathing disorders.   
18. RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
The investigators feel ri sks associated with these studies are outweighed by [CONTACT_111333].   
19. EXPENSE TO PARTICIPANT  
There will be no cost to the subject for participating in this study. All of the tests and procedures that will be done 
for this research will be paid for by s tudy funds. We will pay for any sleep studi es done for research purposes.  
 
Subjects diagnosed with sleep apnea who are recommended to undergo treatment for OSA and elect to do so may have expenses incurred.  For example, they may have a co- pay as part of their clinical sleep evaluation, or as part 
of their OSA treatment.  
20. COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION  
Subjects will be compensated after completing each portion of the study, as outlined below:  
• Daytime Visit 1  (Aim 1): $50 
• Overnight Visit 1  (Aim 1):  Ro utine P olysomnography:$100 
• Actiwatch returned (Aim 1): $50 Overnight Visit 2  (Aim 2): Research Polysomnogram: $100 
• Weekly Phone calls (Aim 3) : Subject will be compensated for $ 20 for answering each weekly follow-up 
call for 12 weeks, in total of $240. 
• Dayti me Visit 2 (Aim 3): Day Testing $ 50 
• Actiwatch Returned (Aim #3): $50 
• If a separate visit needs to be scheduled for the fasting morning blood sample: $20 for each visit   
• If an additional daytime visit is needed  for data collection : $50  
• If data is inconclus ive and an additional polysomnogram night is required, they will be paid $100.  
Subjects will make up to a total of $-660.00 for completion of the all study  aims , unless additional data needs to 
be collected .  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 15   
If subjects only complete Aim 1, compensation will be $ 200.00. 
 
If subjects only complete Aim 1 and Aim 2, compensation will be $300.00.  Parking will be available free of charge and participants will also be reimbursed for minor out of pocket expenses including meal vouchers, public transportation or taxi vouchers. If the subject terminates the study early, they will receive an amount based on the visits that have been completed. If any of the visits are missed, the subject will not be compensated for those visits.   
 
21. PRIVILEGES/CERTIFICATIONS/L ICENSES AND RESEARCH TEAM RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
All physicians performing physical exams (PEs) and taking medical histories are medically licensed in the State of [LOCATION_004].  The personnel performing the sleep and physiology studies are experienced medical r esearchers 
and certified sleep technologists.  
 
• Robert Owens, MD , is a physician  in the Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine  and 
has privileges at the UCSD Health System. A s the Principle Investigator, [CONTACT_111338]  will oversee the 
study, responsible for recruitment, consenting and answering questions with the study subjects, data analysis, and interpretation of study results. He has experience in all aspects of the proposed research.   
 
• Atul Malhotra, MD, is chief of the Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, and has 
privileges at UCSD Health System. [CONTACT_111339] has very extensive clinical research experience in sleep 
disorders and is considered a world expert in sleep apnea physiology.  As Co -I, he will be responsible for  
consenting subjects, assisting with research procedures, data analysis, interpretation of study results, and final report writing processes.   
• Maile Young Karris, MD, is a physician in the Division of Infectious Diseases and has privileges at the UCSD Hea lth System. As Co-I, she will be  assisting with subject recruitment, answering subjects’ 
questions, data analysis, interpretation of study results, and final report writing processes.    
 
• Jeremy Orr, MD, is a physician in the Division of Pulmonary, Critica l Care, and Sleep Medicine and has 
medical privileges through UCSD Health System. As Co-I, he will be responsible for consenting subjects, 
assisting with research procedures, data analysis, interpretation of study results, and final report writing processes.  
 
• Christopher Schmickl, MD, is a physician in the Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep 
Medicine and has medical privileges through UCSD Health System. As Co-I, he will be responsible for 
consenting subjects, assisting with research procedures, data analysis, interpretation of study results, and final report writing processes.   
• Omar Mesarwi, MD, is a physician in the Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine and has medical privileges through UCSD Health System.  [CONTACT_111340] will act as the  designated medical 
monitor, who will help adjudicate any potential adverse event.   
 
• Naomi Deacon, PhD, is a postdoctoral researcher who will  As Co -I, She will be responsible for 
consenting subjects, assisting with research procedures, data an alysis, interpretation of study results, and 
final report writing processes.  
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 16   
• Pamela DeYoung is a board Registered  Polysomnography Technologists (RPSGT) and will be responsible 
for recruitment, consent ing subjects , running overnight sleep studies , and scoring of the data. Pam will 
also serve as the IRB Contact [INVESTIGATOR_71983].  
 
• Naa-Oye Bosompra, Stacie Moore, Rebbecca Brena, Dillon Gilbertson and Janelle Fine are research 
assistants for [CONTACT_111338] who will be responsible for recruitment, consent ing subjec ts, running overnight 
sleep studies, and scoring of the data.  Naa-Oye will serve as the IRB Administrative Contact [CONTACT_111334].  
 
• Matthew Dawson is a research associate for the project who supervises and trains the psychometrists 
performing neuropsyc hological testing.  He also oversees quality assurance of neuropsychological data 
and assists in performing analyses and writing manuscripts. 
 
• Donald Franklin is a research associate who will act as liaison between the HNRP and [CONTACT_111341] s’s staff 
at to ensure successful collaboration.  He will also perform analyses and write manuscripts as needed.  
 
• Everardo Aguilar is a bi -lingual Community Health Program Representative who has completed 
certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; he has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Robert Bryan is a Community Health Program Representative who has completed certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; he has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Susanna Concha- Garci a is a bi -lingual Senior Community Health Program Representative who has 
completed certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; she has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Roberto Gallardo is a bi-lingual Community Health Program Representative who has completed certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized traini ng to 
conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; he has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Allison Py is a community outreach worker who screens and schedules eligible participants for the 
study. She has completed certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received 
specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; she has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Manuel Romero is a bi -lingual Community Health Program Representative who has completed 
certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; he has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299].  
 
• Daisy Soria is a bi -lingual community outreach worker who screens and schedules eligible participants 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page [ADDRESS_123984] and document the informed consent process for this study; She 
has been authorized by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_111299]. 
 
• Crossby [CONTACT_111335] a bi -lingual Community Health Progra m Representative who has completed 
certification in the Protection of Human Research Subjects and has received specialized training to conduct and document the informed consent process for this study; he has been authorized by [CONTACT_111336].  
 
• Shannon Wright  will serve as the Fiscal Contact [INVESTIGATOR_71983].  
 
22. BIBLIOGRAPHY  
1. Kim DJ, Westfall AO, Chamot E, et al. Multimorbidity patterns in HIV -infected patients: the role of 
obesity in chronic disease clustering. Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes 2012;61:600-5. 
2. Deeks SG, Lewin SR, Havlir DV. The end of AIDS: HIV infection as a chronic disease. Lancet 2013;382:1525-33. 3. Johnson AS, Hall HI, Hu X, Lansky A, Holtgrave DR, Mermin J. Trends in diagnoses of HIV infection in the [LOCATION_002], 2002-2011. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical Association 2014;312:432-4. 4. . at https://grants.nih.gov/gr ants/guide/notice -files/NOT -OD-15-137.html .) 
5. Fredericksen RJ, Edwards TC, Merlin JS, et al. Patient and provider priorities for self -reported domains 
of HIV clinical care. AIDS Care 2015;27:1255-64. 6. Payne BA, Hateley CL, Ong EL, et al. HIV- associated fatigue in the era of highly active antiretroviral 
therapy: novel biological mechanisms? HIV medicine 2013;14:247-51. 7. Allavena C, Guimard T, Billaud E, et al. Prevalence and Risk Factors of Sleep Disturbance in a Large 
HIV-Infected Adult Population. AIDS Behav 2016;20:339- 44. 
8. Lakey W, Yang LY, Yancy W, Chow SC, Hicks C. Short communication: from wasting to obesity: initial antiretroviral therapy and weight gain in HIV -infected persons. AIDS research and human retroviruses 
2013;29:435-40. 9. Pullinge r CR, Aouizerat BE, Gay C, et al. Metabolic abnormalities and coronary heart disease risk in 
human immunodeficiency virus-infected adults. Metabolic syndrome and related disorders 2010;8:279-86. 10. Jordan AS, McSharry DG, Malhotra A. Adult obstructive sleep apnoea. Lancet 2014;383:736- 47. 
11. Peppard PE, Young T, Barnet JH, Palta M, Hagen EW, Hla KM. Increased Prevalence of Sleep -
Disordered Breathing in Adults. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2013. 12. Mehra R, Stone KL, Blackwell T, et al. Prevalence and correlates of sleep -disordered breathing in older 
men: osteoporotic fractures in men sleep study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2007;55:1356-64. 13. Capeau J, Bouteloup V, Katlama C, et al. Ten- year diabetes incidence in 1046 HIV -infected patients 
started on a combination antiretroviral treatment. Aids 2012;26:303-14. 14. Reutrakul S, Mokhlesi B. Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Diabetes: A State of the Art Review. Chest 
2017. 
15. Freiberg MS, Chang CC, Kuller LH, et al. HIV infection and the risk of acute myocardial infarction. 
JAMA Intern Med 2013;173:614-22. 16. Brooks D, Horner RL, Kozar LF, Render-Teixeira CL, Phillipson EA. Obstructive sleep apnea as a cause of systemic hypertension. Evidence from a canine model [see comments]. Journal of Clinical Investigation 1997;99:106-9. 17.  54. Womack JA, Murphy TE, Bathulapalli H, et al. Sleep Disturbance Among HIV-Infected and Uninfected Veterans. Journal of acquired immune deficiency syndromes 2017;74:e117-e20. 
55. Lee KA, Gay C, Portillo CJ, et al. Types of sleep problems in adults living with  HIV/AIDS. Journal of 
 
 
Biomedical IRB Application Instructions 
Page 18  clinical sleep medicine : JCSM : official publication of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine 2012;8:[ADDRESS_123985] AL, et al. Development and validation of a self-completed HIV 
symptom index. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2001;[ADDRESS_123986] 1:S77-90. 57. Chervin RD. Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], fatigue, tiredness, and lack of energy in obstructive sleep apnea. Chest 2000;118:372-9. 119. Montesi SB, Bajwa EK, Malhotra A. Biomarkers of sleep apnea. Chest 2012;142:239-45. 
 
 
23. FUNDING SUPPOR T FOR THIS STUDY  
Funding from NIH under 1R01HL142114 -[ADDRESS_123987] SHEET AND IND/IDE HOLDER  
Not applicable  
26. IMPACT ON STAFF  
This study is outside of any clinical care a nd thus will not impact any staff outside the research personnel.  
It is anticipated that we will diagnose [ADDRESS_123988] any financia l interests or other conflicts  
related to this study.  
28. SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR CANCER -RELATED STUDIES  
This study will include  enrollment of cancer patients. PRMC has determined that this protocol is not cancer -
related.  
29. OTHER APPROVALS/REGULATED MATERIALS  
Not applicable  
30. PROCEDURES FOR SURROGATE CONSENT AND/OR DECISIONAL CAPACITY ASSESSMENT  
Not applicable  
 