 
Page 1 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 UNM IRB PROTOCOL 
 
TITLE: Mindfulness-Based Intervention and Transcranial Direct 
Current Stimulation to Reduce Heavy Drinking  
VERSION DATE: 01/28/2018 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR/ 
RESPONSIBLE FACULTY: Katie Witkiewitz 
STUDENT INVESTIGATOR:  
FUNDING AGENCY: National Institut e on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
 
 
BACKGROUND/SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE 
Alcohol use is the third leading global contributor to the burden of disease (World Health 
Organization, 2009) and costs of excessive alcohol use in the [LOCATION_002] exceeded $220 billion in 
2006 dollars (Bouchery, Harwood, Sacks, Simon, & Brewer, 2011).  One-third of Americans meet lifetime criteria for alcohol use disorder (AUD) and 8.5% meet criteria for current AUD (Hasin, Stinson, Ogburn, & Grant, 2007).  Of those with AUD who receive behavioral or pharmacological AUD treatment, most return to drinking within the first year following treatment (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004; Witkiewitz & Masyn, 2008; Witkiewitz, 2008). As such, AUD has been characterized as a chronic 
relapsing disease (Leshner, 1997; McLellan, Lewis, O’Brien, & Kleber, 2000).  Behavioral interventions 
for AUD are the most common form of tr eatment; however, increased understanding of the 
neurobiological dysfunction associated with addict ion (Goldstein & Volkow, 2002; Koob & Volkow, 
2010; Koob, 2006) has led to greater interest in treatment approaches that target specific neural systems (Goldstein & Volkow, 2002; Koob, 2006; Koob et al., 2014; Litten et al., 2015).  The proposed 
study will evaluate the efficacy of combining two approaches designed to target behavioral and 
neurobiological dysfunction in addiction: mindfulness-based relapse prevention  (MBRP) (Bowen et al., 
2014; Witkiewitz, Bowen, Douglas, & Hsu, 2013; Witkiewitz & Bowen, 2010; Witkiewitz, Lustyk, & Bowen, 2013; Witkiewitz, Marlatt, & Walker, 2005; Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014) and transcranial direct current stimulation  (tDCS) (Feil & Zangen, 2010; Witkiewitz & Clark, 2015).  The ultimate goal of this research is to develop a more efficacious intervention for reducing heavy drinking that has minimal side effects and great potential for large-scale dissemination. 
Mindfulness-based relapse prevention (MBRP) for substance use disorders may be an ideal 
behavioral intervention for helpi[INVESTIGATOR_678498], cue-induced craving because it was 
designed to target experiences of craving and their role in the relapse process (Bowen et al., 2010; 
Brewer et al., 2011; Witkiewitz et al., 2005). Based on the results of numerous studies, MBRP is a 
feasible and efficacious behavioral treatment for substance use disorders (Bowen et al., 2009; Bowen 
et al, 2014; Witkiewitz et al., 2014).  The recent use of  tDCS over task relevant regions to alter behavior 
and improve learning holds incredible promise for us e in cognitive behavioral intervention protocols.  
This proposed study will attempt to enhance learning of mindfulness practices that are taught in MBRP 
by [CONTACT_678517] (BMT).  The objective of this study is to establish the 
feasibility and obtain preliminary data on the effectiveness of using tDCS with MBRP to reduce heavy 
drinking. 
Chronic alcohol use is strongly associated with poor behavioral and cognitive control (Bechara & 
Damasio, 2002; Bechara, Dolan, & Hindes, 2002; Goudriaan, Grekin, & Sher, 2007).  Imaging studies, have found that AUD is associated with altered functioning in brain regions that support cognitive control such as dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  (d lPFC), inferior frontal gyrus  (IFG), and anterior 
cingulate cortex  (ACC) (Claus, Feldstein Ewing, Filbey, &Hutchison, 2013; Pfefferbaum et al., 2001; 
Sullivan & Pfefferbaum, 2005) and degree of AUD severity predicts differential brain responses in these regions when performing cognitive control tasks.  For example, in a functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) study, Claus and colleagues (Claus et al., 2013) found severity of AUD was negatively 
associated with blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal change in right IFG, pregenual ACC, and 
 
Page 2 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 inferior parietal lobe (IPL) during correct inhibition trials; and bilateral IFG and dorsal ACC during error 
trials of a Go/NoGo cognitive inhibition task.  Us ing electroencephalography (EEG), numerous studies 
have found deficits in attention allocation, as evidenc ed by a decrement in P3 (e.g., P300) amplitudes 
during cognitive inhibition tasks among individuals with AUD and among individuals at risk for AUD, based on family history of AUD (Porjesz et al., 2 005).  Consistent with these findings, a combination 
fMRI-EEG study found that lower P3 amplitudes among subjects who were high-risk for AUD had 
significantly less activation in the bilateral IPL and reduced activation in the bilateral IFG as compared to subjects who were low-risk for AUD (Rangaswamy et al., 2004). 
Numerous studies have provided support for the impor tance of craving  (defined as the subjective 
desire to drink) in the relapse process and for the association between reactivity to alcohol cues, self-
reported craving, and drinking outcomes (Claus, Ewing, Filbey, Sabbineni, & Hutchison, 2011; E. L. 
Garland, Franken, & Howard, 2012; Litt, Cooney, & Morse, 2000; Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004; Witkiewitz, 2013).  Imaging work has consistently shown a diver se network of regions involved in cue reactivity 
such as ACC, ventral and dorsal striatum, orbitofrontal cortex  (OFC), insula, and brainstem (Claus, Ewing, Filbey, Sabbineni, & Hutchison, 2011; Myrick et al., 2008; Schacht, Anton, & Myrick, 2013; Vollstädt-Klein et al., 2010).  In a large sample  (n=326) of individuals with AUD who completed a cue 
reactivity task and found that increased AUD seve rity was associated with greater engagement of 
ventral and dorsal striatum, ACC, amygdala, and precuneus during cue presentation (Claus, Ewing, et 
al., 2011).  EEG studies have found increased P3 amplitudes in response to alcohol cues among individuals at risk for AUD (Bartholow, Lust, & Tragesser, 2010) and among AUD patients (Heinze, Wölfling, & Grüsser, 2007; Namkoong, Lee, Lee, Lee, & An, 2004), suggesting greater salience and motivational significance of alcohol cues(Bartholow, Henry, & Lust, 2007). 
Reactivity to stress and negative affect is comm only considered one of the hallmark features of 
addiction (Koob, 2006; Sinha & Li, 2007).  Our own work has found self-reported negative affect to be a primary predictor of alcohol relapse (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004; Witkiewitz & Villarroel, 2009; Witkiewitz, 2011).  Engagement of stress circuitry  that includes the hypothalamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-adrenal  
(HPA) axis and extended amygdala plays a key role in the development of stress and negative affect 
reactivity in AUD (Koob & Le Moal, 2008; Koob, 2006; Koob et al., 2014; Sinha et al., 2003).  Resting 
EEG, including decreased alpha power (8-13 Hz) and increased theta (4-8 Hz) and beta power (13-30 Hz) has been associated with both stress response and addiction (Enoch et al., 2008; Hodgkinson et al., 2010).    
Mindfulness can be defined as the awareness that arises through paying attention to the present 
moment in a purposeful and non-judgmental way.  Mindfulness based interventions (MBIs) have been 
shown to be efficacious in reducing alcohol use (Chiesa & Serretti, 2013; Witkiewitz, Bowen, et al., 2014; Zgierska et al., 2009).  Extant research suggests  that MBIs might be effective in part by [CONTACT_678518] (Bowen et al., 2009), decoupling the negative a ffect-craving association (Witkiewitz & Bowen, 
2010), decoupling the craving-substance use association  (Elwafi, Witkiewitz, Mallik, Iv, & Brewer, 
2012), increasing the mindfulness-based processe s of awareness, acceptance, and nonjudgment 
(Witkiewitz, Bowen, et al., 2013), and decreasing maladaptive responses to craving (Bowen, Witkiewitz, 
Dillworth, & Marlatt, 2007; Garland & Gaylord, 2010; Gifford et al., 2004).   
Previous reviews of neuroimaging studies have pos ited several putative neural mechanisms of 
mindfulness (Brewer, Elwafi, & Davis, 2013; Chiesa, Brambilla, & Serretti, 2011; Chiesa, Brambilla, & Serretti, 2010; Chiesa, Serretti, & Christian, 2013; Hölzel et al., 2011; Witkiewitz, Lustyk, & Bowen, 
2013).  In healthy adults, 8 weeks of MBI was found to be associated with decreased functional 
connectivity between right insula and ventromedial pr efrontal cortex  (vmPFC) when mindfully attending 
to internal states (Farb et al., 2007), and increased right insula activation following sadness provocation 
(Farb et al., 2010).  In a sample of smokers, decreased functional connectivity between the insula and 
the subgenual ACC was found when mindfully attending to smoking images compared to passively 
viewing the images, suggesting a decreased association between these reward regions (Westbrook et 
al., 2011).  An EEG study examining P3 amplitudes during a Go/NoGo task found increased P3 amplitudes during inhibition among individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder who received 
eight weeks of MBI, as compared to control; suggesting MBIs may increase inhibitory control (Schoenberg et al., 2014).  In summary, MBIs may improve functional connectivity between the ACC 
 
Page 3 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 and dlPFC, as well as reduce the connectivity between the insula and vmPFC (Witkiewitz, Lustyk, & 
Bowen, 2013), which may contribute to increases  in awareness and decreases in craving observed 
among AUD patients who receive MBIs (Witkiewitz, Bowen, et al., 2013).   
PI [INVESTIGATOR_678499] (RCTs) evaluating mindfulness-based 
relapse prevention (MBRP) as a treatment for s ubstance use disorder (Bowen et al., 2009, 2014; 
Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014).  MBRP is  a manualized intervention combining cognitive behavioral 
skills with brief mindfulness training (BMT).  Two RCTs have examined MBRP  delivered as aftercare 
following inpatient or outpatient treatment as compared to  (1) treatment as usual  (TAU, which consisted of psychoeducation, relapse prevention, and 12-step groups) (Bowen et al., 2009); or  (2) TAU and relapse prevention  (RP) (Bowen et al., 2014).  In both studies MBRP was associated with 
significantly fewer alcohol and drug use days (Cohen’s d=0.28) at 2-month (Bowen et al., 2009) and 12-
month (Bowen et al., 2014) follow-ups.  A third RCT examined MBRP as the primary intervention and 
found MBRP was significantly more effective in r educing alcohol and drug use days compared to RP  
(Cohen’s d=0.36) at a 15 week follow-up  (Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014).   
Thus, data from three RCTs provide support for the efficacy of MBRP, as compared to alternative 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_412648].  Yet, the effect  sizes are still small in magnitude and each of the 
former trials has been limited by [CONTACT_678519].  MBRP treatment 
compliance rates range from 50-60% of participants attending the majority of sessions (Bowen et al., 
2009, 2014; Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014), as compared to compliance of 70% in RP (Bowen et al., 2014; Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014).  Clinically, we have observed participants struggle with the mindfulness practices, perhaps due to significant def icits in executive function (Aharonovich et al., 
2006) and inhibitory control (Brewer, Worhunsky, Carroll, Rounsaville, & Potenza, 2008; Streeter et al., 
2008).  Those clients who are able to engage with MBRP experience fewer and less severe lapses, as well as report greater improvements in overall quality of life (Witkiewitz, Warner, et al., 2014) . 
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is a safe and non-invasive brain stimulation technique 
that applies weak electrical current to stimulate brain regions (Clark et al., 2011; Coffman et al., 2012; Falcone, Coffman, Clark, & Parasuraman, 2012; Ja cobson, Koslowsky, & Lavidor, 2012).  Most tDCS 
studies compare active (1.0 to 2.0 milliamps (mA)) tDCS to a sham/control condition with either 
reduced current strength (i.e., 0.1 mA) or a ramp-up/ramp-down procedure that introduces a modest current for a brief amount of time.  Active tDCS versus sham has been shown to enhance the effects of cognitive training in a number of domains, including me mory, attention and other forms of cognition.  
One study found that tDCS produced a doubling of performance accuracy in a learning task (Falcone et 
al., 2012).  There have been over 250 clinical trials using tDCS for a variety of disorders and diseases, 
with promising effects of tDCS in treating symp toms of schizophrenia (Brunoni et al., 2014), major 
depression (Shiozawa et al., 2014), Alzheimer’s disease (Hansen, 2012), chronic pain (O’Connell, Wand, Marston, Spencer, & Desouza, 2014), and stroke  (Bastani & Jaberzadeh, 2012).  There are also preliminary data suggesting tDCS has an effect on addictive disorders (Feil & Zangen, 2010). 
The neurobiological mechanisms of tDCS depend on a variety of factors, including current strength 
and duration; the number, polarity and specific placement of electrodes; the electrode composition and size; and individual differences in physiology.  TDCS has been shown to alter neuronal activity, cerebral blood flow, synaptic transmission, oscillatory acti vity, functional connectivity, and neurotransmitter 
concentrations (Clark, Coffman, Trumbo, & Gasparovic, 2011; Hansen, 2012; Kim, Stephenson, Morris, & Jackson, 2014).  The placement we plan to use in the proposed research, which we have used 
successfully in our prior work, is up to 2.0 mA of anodal stimulation of the right IFG (i.e., BA 
F10) with a left upper arm cathode.  
 
Page 4 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15  
Modeling of the electrical fields induced by [CONTACT_941] r ight IFG vs. left arm montage using finite element 
modeling (FEM (Datta, Bikson, & Fregni, 2010; Datta, Truong, Minhas, Parra, & Bikson, 2012), Figure 1), suggests that the largest effect is located underneath the anodal electrode, in the right IFG, including pars orbitalis, posteriorly into pars triangular is and to a lesser extent into the medial frontal 
regions.  Increased excitability is also observed in the inferior aspect of the right temporal pole extending along the inferior temporal gyrus, the right OFC,  and the right anterior insula.  Subcortically, 
the strongest fields are located within white matter tracts surrounding the right striatum, portions of the 
right medial temporal lobe, and the inferior aspect of the cerebellum, including adjacent white matter regions connecting these structures.  In addition to these regions, activity in other regions to which these areas are interconnected may also be altered.  These may include a large portion of cortex, as well as higher-order areas that mediate cognitive and affective processes that may facilitate the 
ongoing acquisition and maintenance of mindfulness and produce benefits for treating AUD.  
Importantly, tDCS has been shown to impact the behavioral targets of the proposed study in healthy 
controls and patient samples, with active tDCS effects on inhibitory control (Levasseur-Moreau & 
Fecteau, 2012; Stramaccia et al., 2015), cue-reactivity and craving (Jansen et al., 2013; Nardone et al., 2012), and negative affective reactivity (Plewnia,  Schroeder, Kunze, Faehling, & Wolkenstein, 2015; 
Pripfl & Lamm, 2015). 
Most investigations of tDCS for addictive disorders have focused on intermediate phenotypes, 
including effects of tDCS on decision making and cue reactivity among individuals with stimulant use disorders (Conti, Moscon, Fregni, Nitsche, & Nakamura-Palacios, 2014; Conti & Nakamura-Palacios, 2013; Shahbabaie et al., 2014), smoking and nicotine use disorders (Boggio et al., 2009; Fecteau et al., 2014; Fregni et al., 2008), and marijuana use (Boggio et al., 2010).  The growing literature of tDCS 
studies conducted with heavy drinkers and AUD patients have found significant effects of active tDCS 
on reductions in alcohol craving (Boggio et al., 2008; Den Uyl, Gladwin, & Wiers, 2015; Jansen et al., 2013; Nardone et al., 2012) and one small pi[INVESTIGATOR_678500] (Klauss et al., 2014). 
AUD has been characterized as a chronic relapsing condition (McLellan et al., 2000) with hallmark 
features that include loss of inhibitory control, hei ghtened salience of alcohol cues and experiences of 
craving, and persistent negative affect.  Each of t hese hallmark features has been successfully targeted 
independently with two novel interventions: mindf ulness-based intervention and tDCS.  Mindfulness-
based interventions have enduring effects, but treatm ent engagement remains a barrier to success.  
Given effects of tDCS on improvements in stat e mindfulness and executive functioning in our prior 
studies (described below), we hypothesize that tDCS could significantly increase engagement 
with mindfulness training .  Both tDCS and mindfulness have independently shown benefits for 
treating AUD.  The combination of tDCS and mindfulne ss may provide synergistic benefits to reducing 
symptoms of AUD greater than each can provide alone.  The proposed study will provide a sufficiently powered, sham-controlled double blind investigation of the efficacy of MBRP in combination with active 
tDCS as an intervention for AUD.  The design will also allow us to examine changes in inhibitory 

 
Page [ADDRESS_918129] reactivity, and cognitive behavioral skills training 
acquisition as mechanisms of behavior change following the intervention.  
Many individuals with AUD never receive treatment  (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration, 2014).  For those who seek care, relatively few efficacious treatments are available 
(Jonas et al., 2014; National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2011; Zindel & Kranzler, 2014).  
The low rates of utilization of treatments for AUDs  and the modest efficacy of existing interventions 
underscore the need to develop and test new treatments that are more efficacious and attractive to patients.  Mindfulness-based interventions and tDCS are already being developed and marketed 
for at-home use (Conti et al., 2014; Fecteau et al., 2014) , while both interventions (MBRP and 
tDCS) are relatively low cost with minimal side effects and have great potential for 
dissemination.  The application of tDCS can be directed to specific regions of interest allowing for 
induction of long-term neural plasticity that is regionally specific, a significant advantage over 
pharmacological treatments that bind to receptors without regional specificity.  It may ultimately be possible to personalize tDCS application to specific neural dysfunction, which has important implications for personalized medicine approaches to addiction treatment (Litten et al., 2015). 
 
OBJECTIVES/AIMS 
The goal of this study is to examine the effica cy of a MBRP and tDCS intervention in reducing 
drinking and impacting mechanisms of behavior change among individuals who are interested in 
reducing their alcohol drinking. The aims of the proposed research are:  
Primary Aim:  To examine the efficacy of a mindfulness-based intervention, in combination with 
active tDCS (up to 2.0 milliamp (mA)) versus sham (0.0 mA) tDCS of the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG), in reducing drinks per drinking day. 
Individuals who are interested in reducing their dr inking will be recruited from the community and 
clinician referrals.  All participants will receive group MBRP for 8 sessions with each session lasting 2 hours, for up to 8 weeks, and will also be randomized to receive active up to 2.0 mA tDCS or sham 0.0 mA tDCS.  Participants will complete weekly self -report measures during treatment and self-report, 
behavioral, and EEG assessments at baseline, end of treatment, and two months following treatment. 
Hypothesis 1.  Active tDCS, as compared to sham tDCS, will be associated with significant 
reductions in drinks per drinking day after treatment and 2 months following treatment. 
Secondary Aim:  To examine mechanisms of drinking behavior changes following treatment.  
Hypothesis 2.  Effect of active tDCS on drinks per drinking day at the 2-month follow-up will be 
mediated by [CONTACT_678520], greater inhibitory c ontrol and reductions in cue-reactivity, craving, 
and negative affect during treatment and at the post-tr eatment assessment. The effect of the “dose” of 
treatment, including session attendance and amount of m indfulness practice, on drinks per drinking day 
at 2-months will be mediated by [CONTACT_678521]-
reactivity, craving, and negative affect. 
Hypothesis 3.  Based on prior EEG studies of alcohol use disorder and mindfulness, we 
hypothesize significantly increased amplitude of the P3 (e.g., P300) component of the event-related 
brain potential (ERP) during cognitive inhibition and reduced P3 amplitude in response to alcohol cues in the active tDCS group at post-treatment, as compared to sham tDCS.  Changes in ERPs among 
those who receive active tDCS with MBRP will be significantly associated with reductions in drinks per drinking day following treatment. 
 
 
STUDY DESIGN 
I. Target Population and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
 
Page 6 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Participants for the proposed research include up to 350 individuals ages 18 and over who will be 
recruited from the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area using the following inclusion criteria: 
 
1) interested in reducing alcohol drink ing and consumed alcohol in past 30 days 
2) right-handed 
3) able to communicate in English 
 The inclusion criteria are based on our long-term goal of developi[INVESTIGATOR_678501].  The right-handed inclusion is based on the fact that the majority of people are right-handed and the effects of tDCS may be 
influenced by [CONTACT_678522] (a proxy for hemispheric dominance; Schade et al., 2012).  Ultimately we 
plan to develop separate tDCS montages that are specific to right and left hemisphere dominance, 
but for the purposes of this initial study we opted for increasing internal validity by [CONTACT_678523]-handed individuals. 
 The following exclusion criteria will be used for all participants 
(1) lifetime diagnosis of schizophrenia or bipolar disorder or current SUD other than nicotine or 
marijuana assessed via the phone screening questionnaire 
(2) cardiac pacemaker 
(3) implantable defibrillator 
(4) metal objects in upper body that might interfere with tDCS, or that tDCS may interfere with their 
function, including metal plates, screws and prosthetics in head, certain older tattoos and 
permanent makeup using metal containing inks, aneurysm clips, neural stimulators of any kind, ear implants or hearing aids, insulin pum ps, drug infusion devices and dental appliances 
(5) for females, pregnant or attempting to get pregnant  
(6) history of seizures or seizure disorder 
(7) allergic to latex, rubber, conductive medium like saline or electrode gel 
(8) if assigned to active tDCS and unable to tolerate 1.5 mA of tDCS during a baseline stimulation 
session 
(9) history of severe alcohol withdrawal including tremors, seizures, or delirium tremens 
(10) currently or previously prescribed anti-seiz ure medications or medications for alcohol 
withdrawal 
(11) score of 8 or greater on the Clinical Institute Withdrawal of Alcohol Assessment Scale – 
Revised at any tDCS sessions 
(12) unable to attend treatment groups at scheduled time and unwilling to wait for group treatment 
at a time that works for the participant 
(13) Arrested, charged, or convicted of a violent crime (e.g., aggravated assault) in the past [ADDRESS_918130] opted to exclude these individuals.  The exclusion of individuals with comorbid drug use disorder, 
other than nicotine and marijuana, was desired because of the early stages of this research and the 
limitations of intervention content, measurement t ools and cue presentation if individuals are more 
triggered or impacted by [CONTACT_678524]. Ot her drug use disorder could reduce applicability of an 
alcohol focused treatment and potentially reduce the impac t of alcohol cues in the cue reactivity task.  
The remaining exclusion criteria, (2 to 10), were select ed for safety concerns in the use of tDCS and/or 
EEG.  The exclusion of individuals who have been arrested,  charged, or convicted of a violent crime in 
the past [ADDRESS_918131] the 
research staff and other participants from the pot ential of violence by a participant in the group. 
 
Page 7 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15  
II. Participant Enrollment 
 Up to 350 individuals who want to reduce their drinking will be recruited for the study.    
III. Recruitment and Screening Procedures 
 Flyers posted in the Albuquerque metropolitan area, postings on online advertising sources (e.g. Craigslist), social media (e.g., Facebook), newspaper and radio advertisements, and flyers posted at treatment agencies and primary care provider offices will be the primary methods of recruitment. We 
will also recruit participants through referrals from studies of non-treatment seeking heavy drinkers 
currently being conducted at the Mind Research Network (MRN) and at CASAA (IRB through the HRRC). Study staff on the MRN and CASAA studies will be given recruitment information (e.g., the approved study flyer) to provide the information about  our study for treatment seekers who are 
excluded from their studies of non-treatment s eekers.  Similar strategies have been used to 
successfully recruit larger sample sizes in previous studies.  Participants will undergo an initial 
telephone screening to ascertain interest in the research study, interest in reducing drinking, and self-
reported right handedness, as well as absence of the exclusion criteria.  If they meet the basic 
requirements of the study, we will then check the public databases (nmcourts.gov) for information about arrests, charges, or convictions of violent crimes.  If they are not listed in the nmcourts.gov for violent 
crimes in the past [ADDRESS_918132] (for women who could be pregnant) and will be breathalyzed to ensure a BrAC of 0.0. In terms of  minority inclusion, individuals of all racial/ethnic 
backgrounds will be eligible. The racial/ethnic breakdown is expected to reflect the demographics of the 
Albuquerque area (i.e., predominantly Caucasian/non-Hispanic or Hispanic).  Furthermore, we will provide flyers to grassroots minority organizations in the Albuquerque metropolitan area to increase the awareness of our research among minority groups.  In addition, we will work on reducing the logistical and psychological barriers to participation among m inority groups by [CONTACT_678525] (bus 
vouchers), and addressing issues such as fear or distrust of research and the lack of familiarity with 
research procedures like randomization.  In terms of gender composition, we expect that the final sample will be 40% female.   
IV. Informed Consent Process 
 
Following phone screen, eligible participants will be invit ed to the Psychology Clinical Neuroscience 
Center (PCNC) for the baseline session, which includes being breathalyzed to ensure a breath alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.[ADDRESS_918133] appointment, prior to any testing, consent forms approved by [CONTACT_32064] w ill be administered by [CONTACT_678526] a confidential office.  Research staff w ill review the consent form, page by [CONTACT_3264], with each 
participant and solicit answers to critical questions (such as, “What are the limitations of confidentiality?” and “What are the risks associated with this study?”) at the end of each section to ensure that the participant has understood these issues.  The consent process will be documented in the participant’s file on a dated consent documentat ion note form.  Consent forms will be at the 6th 
grade reading level.  Signed consent forms will be stor ed separately from participant data in a secure 
location in the PI’s locked office.  Participants will be given copi[INVESTIGATOR_678502]. 
We are requesting a waiver of HIPAA Authorization for the disclosure of PHI for the study’s use of 
an eligibility screening form administered over the phone.  Since the form is administered without the physical presence of the potential participant, we would be unable to obtain their written authorization to 
disclose the information asked for on the form.  All PHI, aside from the first and last name [CONTACT_678542] [ADDRESS_918134] individuals (i.e. individuals who may have heart disease or 
be pregnant).  There is no reason to schedule research appointments with individuals who are ineligible 
for the intervention.   
Individuals who are not eligible for the research will be offered a list of community resources for 
additional alcohol and mental health treatment.  The same list will be offered to individuals who are eligible to participate in the research and who want or need additional resources. 
 
 
 V. Data Collection Procedures 
 Procedures.  Following phone screen, eligible participants will be invited to the Psychology Clinical 
Neuroscience Center (PCNC) for the baseline session,  which includes being breat halyzed to ensure a 
breath alcohol concentration (BAC) of 0.0, pregnancy testing for fertile female participants, providing informed consent, completing a battery of self-report and behavioral measures, baseline EEG, and 
baseline stimulation session.  Participants who have a BAC > 0.0 will be rescheduled, given snacks and water until their BAC is reduced to < 0.04 in accordance with NIAAA guidelines, and will be 
provided a taxi voucher. Participants will take part in the intervention for 8 two and a half hour sessions 
up to 8 weeks.  At each 150-minute session, partic ipants will undergo 30 minutes of initial assessment 
and verification of session eligibility (e.g., breathalyzer, withdrawal assessment, pregnancy tests, and self-report), [ADDRESS_918135] included self-report and behavioral assessment s of inhibitory control (NIH Cognition Toolbox, 
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale, Stop Signal Task), cue reactivity and craving (Penn Alcohol Craving 
Scale, Cue Reactivity), and negative affect (NIH Em otions Toolbox, Negative Affect Reactivity).  We 
have also included a blinding questionnaire to assess the degree to which individuals were blinded to the active versus sham tDCS randomization condition. Breathalyzer tests will be conducted prior to all interviews.  Participants who have a BAC > 0.0 w ill be rescheduled, given snacks and water until their 
BAC is reduced to < 0.04 in accordance with NIAAA guidelines, and will be provided a taxi voucher. 
 
Page 9 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 During each assessment period (i.e. baseline, end-of -treatment, and 2-month post-treatment follow-
ups), self-report measures, and the EEG sessions will occur within one week of the self-report 
assessment on separate days or on a single day with a break between assessments.  All assessments 
(behavioral, EEG) and treatment sessions will take  place in the PCNC.  The PCNC has three private 
assessment rooms to conduct behavioral assessm ents, as well as an EEG preparation room and 
shielded acquisition room.  
Table 1. Assessment schedule for proposed study.  Follow-up
Measure Description/Purpose Baseline Post 2-Mo
Locator Form Contact [CONTACT_678527] X X
Edinburgh Handedness scale Right handedness (inclusion criteria) X   
Electroencephalography (EEG) Electrical activity of the brain X X  
Demographic form Age, gender, education, ethnicity X   
Marital & employment status, income X X X
Drinking History Questionnaire Drinking history: onset, prior /current treatment X X X
Form 90 Alcohol & illicit drug us e, treatment seeking & AA X X X
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 
modified for DSM-5 to include craving item AUD diagnosis/comorbid SUD diagnoses X X X 
Short Inventory of Problems Brief meas ure of alcohol-related problems X X X
Penn Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS) Self-reported craving for alcohol X X X
Impaired Control Scale Self-reported cravin g, difficulty controlling craving X X X 
International Affective Pi[INVESTIGATOR_678503] (IAPS) Behavio ral measure cue/negative affect reactivity X X X 
UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale Urgency, lack of planning, perseveration X X X
Stop Signal Task Behavioral measure of cognitive control X X X
Mindfulness daily practice tracking sheet Current mindfulness practices X X X
Breath Counting Tool Behavioral measure of mindfulness X X X 
Toronto Mindfulness Scale “State” mindfulness X X X 
NIH Emotions Toolbox Social relationships, negative affect, and stress X X X 
NIH Cognition Toolbox Executive funct ion (shifting/attention), memory  X X X
Avoidance and Inflexibility Scale Behavioral avoidance X X X
Regulatory Flexibility Scale Copi[INVESTIGATOR_88393] X X X
Monetary Choice Questionnaire Delay discounting X X X 
Treatment History Form Assess ongoing treatment  and prior/ongoing 
experience with meditationX X X 
Treatment Goals Form Assess current  treatment goal (e.g., controlled 
drinking, abstinence)X X X 
Applied Mindfulness Process Scale Assess mindfulness skills learned during 
intervention  X X 
Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment of 
Alcohol Scale, Revised Measure of current alcohol withdrawal symptoms X   
Blinding Questionnaire One question assessing knowledge of condition  X  
Primary Drinking Outcome.   The Form 90  (Miller, 1996) is a semi-structured interview that gathers 
daily calendar-based alcohol and illicit drug use data.  A 2-month assessment window will be used at 
each of the time-points.  The Form 90 will be used to derive estimates of the primary outcome: drinks 
per drinking day.  The Form 90 has demonstrated reliability in the collection of alcohol and drug use 
data (Maisto, Conigliaro, Gordon, McGinnis, & Justice, 2008; Sobell, Brown, Leo, & Sobell, 1996).   
Weekly During Treatment Measures.  An abbreviated assessment battery will be administered 
weekly during treatment to assess state mindfulne ss (Toronto Mindfulness Scale (Lau et al., 2006)), 
mindfulness practice in the prior week, craving (PACS; Flannery Volpi[INVESTIGATOR_48536], & Pettinati, 1999), negative urgency and lack of planning items from the UPPS (Littlefield et al., 2015; Whiteside & Lynam, 2001), 
and negative affect (Short Forms of Anger, Sadness,  Stress from NIH Emotions Toolbox; Salsman et 
al., 2013). 
Behavioral Tasks.  All behavioral tasks will be completed via computer during EEG to provide a 
measure of electrical brain activity during rest and completion of the tasks.  To examine inhibitory 
control, we will use a Stop Signal Task  (Logan, Van Zandt, Verbruggen, & Wagenmakers, 2014) in 
which participants make left-right judgments of the directionality of an arrow presented on the screen.  
For each trial, a circle will appear for 500 ms, followed by a left or right-pointing arrow for up to 1 second, and between 500 ms and 2500 ms jittered inter-trial interval to reduce anticipatory responses.  Approximately 25% of trials will be “stop trials” wi th a tone played to signal participants to inhibit the 
 
Page 10 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 current response.  This timing of the tone is dynamically adjusted to ensure successful inhibition on 
approximately 50% of trials.  There will be 240 trials across six blocks (~10 minutes) (Wessel & Aron, 2015).  To measure cue-elicited responses to alcohol, we will use a visual cue presentation task.  
Following the designs of (Bartholow, Lust, & Tragesser, 2010; Myrick et al., 2008; Vollstädt-Klein et al., 2010), participants will view pi[INVESTIGATOR_678504]  (IAPS)  (Lang, Bradley, &Cuthbert, 1999) and from the web.  
Alcohol and neutral pi[INVESTIGATOR_678505] (e.g., presence of people).  We will examine responses to approximately 100 trials 
each of alcohol pi[INVESTIGATOR_678506] a mixed event design  (~15 minutes), in order to reduce predictability of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_678507].  To assess negat ive affect reactivity, participants will complete an 
anticipatory reactivity task in which arbitrary cues (c ircle or square) predict either neutral or aversive 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_606960]  (Lang et al., 1999).  Participants will be instructed to press a button as fast as 
possible when the white square appears.  If a response threshold is met, participants will see the neutral pi[INVESTIGATOR_678508] e pi[INVESTIGATOR_499].  Importantly, the response threshold 
is dynamically determined throughout the task to ensure success/failure on approximately 66% of 
neutral/negative trials.  Analyses will focus on the anticipatory period between the cue and pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  We 
are interested in examining differences between ant icipation and experience of negative compared to 
neutral pi[INVESTIGATOR_499].  We will use 150 trials per cue condition to ensure an adequate signal to noise ratio (Brown, Goodman, & Inzlicht, 2013) (~20 minutes).  Finally, we will include a novel breath-counting task 
that has been validated as a behavioral measure of mindfulness (Levinson, Stoll, Kindy, Merry, & 
Davidson, 2014).  Participants will be instructed to count breaths from 1 to 9, pressing one button for 
breaths 1-8 and pressing another button on the 9th breath.  The counting will be interrupted at random 
by [CONTACT_678528].  There will be 12 question 
probes every 60-120 seconds (~18 minutes).   
Procedures & Interventions  
Screening (30 minutes).  Initial eligibility will be determined via telephone with a Screening 
Questionnaire.  Individuals who do not meet criteria for the study will be referred to community drinking 
reduction programs. The phone screening form will be des troyed for those who are not eligible. First 
and last names of those who are excluded will be maintained to prevent re-screening. De-identified 
demographic information and reasons for ineligibility for those who are ineligible will be recorded in a separate document without identifiers for reporti ng purposes.  Eligible individuals will be scheduled for a 
baseline assessment session. Phone screening forms and contact [CONTACT_678529] a password protected file. The phone screening form will be de-
identified and only linked to the participant with the participant ID. 
Baseline (up to 5 hours).  Informed consent will be obtained, and participants will complete the 
Handedness Questionnaire and pregnancy test (fertile female participants only).  Participants will complete assessments listed in Table 1.  Particip ants will also complete a baseline tDCS stimulation 
session lasting less than [ADDRESS_918136] difficulty tolerating the 2.0 mA current during the baseline stimulation session will be tested at 1.5 mA.  If 1.5 mA is tolerated then participants will be enrolled in the trial at 1.5 mA.  If 1.5 mA is not tolerated during the baseline stimulation session then participants will be deemed ineligible. Participants who fail 
study eligibility requirements at this point will be com pensated for their time and referred to community 
alcohol treatment programs. 
MBRP + tDCS Sessions (2 hour treatment groups + 30 minutes for initial assessments, 
breathalyzer, pregnancy tests, and withdrawal assessments).  Following the baseline session, 
participants will begin a series of weekly or twice w eekly group MBRP + tDCS intervention sessions for 
up to eight weeks at the PCNC. To maximize the availability of groups and to accommodate various 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_678509]. All participants will receive up to 8 two hour sessions of MBRP + tDCS, regardless of the group schedule.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_918137] a BAC > 0.0 will be rescheduled, given snacks and water until their BAC is reduced to < 0.04 in accor dance with NIAAA guidelines, and will be provided a taxi 
voucher.  We will also assess all participants for potential alcohol withdrawal at the time of each tDCS 
session. If participants show significant signs of wit hdrawal and/or have a score of 8 or greater on the 
Clinical Institute Withdrawal of Alcohol Assessment Scale (CIWA), then the research assistant will recommend the subject go to the UNM Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_150730]. Our previous studies with more severely dependent individuals occasionally encountered patients with severe withdrawal, and this 
protocol was used successfully without any adverse consequences. Subjects with CIWA scores of [ADDRESS_918138] no lingering effects of the 
stimulation.  After tDCS stimulation the remaining time will be used for MBRP session content (described below).  
Post-Treatment Assessment (up to 5 hours).  After completing the MBRP + tDCS sessions (i.e., up 
to two weeks after final tDCS/mindfulness session), participants will complete the assessments listed in 
Table 1 at the PCNC. 
Follow-Up Assessment (up to 2 hours).  At 2 months following completion of MBRP+tDCS, 
participants will complete the assessments listed in Table 1, with the exception of EEG, at the PCNC. 
 Interventions:  
Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS)  
Previous reports suggest heavy drinking is related to dysfunction in brain regions related to attention 
and inhibitory control (Ahmadi et al., 2013) and that activation of the inferior frontal gyrus results in improved learning (Clark et al., 2010), tDCS will be applied over right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) 
implicated in inhibitory control and avoidant behavior (e.g., Aron, 2007).  According to standard tDCS procedures, saline or gel soaked electrodes will be placed on the scalp, and will be held in place with 
an armlet.  Similar to the methods we have prev iously used, the anode will be placed on the scalp over 
the rIFG and the cathode will be placed on the contr alateral shoulder.  The electrodes will deliver a very 
weak electrical current that may briefly result in an itching or tingling sensation. TDCS will begin 5 minutes before the beginning of meditation, during w hich participants will rate physical sensations 
associated with application of tDCS; if participants rate sensations as anything higher than persistent 
itching, the session will be terminated.  Participants in the Active tDCS condition will receive 2.[ADDRESS_918139] MBRP + 
tDCS session, participants will be queried whether they think they received real tDCS or sham. 
tDCS equipment consists of either an Soterix Medical [ADDRESS_918140] Current Model mini-
Clinical Trial Stimulator (Model 1601) or an Activa Dose II Iontophoresis Delivery Unit generator with a 
nine-volt battery, electrode wires and rubber electrodes, easy pad sponge electrode covers (for Soterix Medical) or rubber covers (Active Dose II), and latex-free, self-adherent bandages, coban (head wrap for Active Dose II) or elastic fasteners (Soterix Medical), in order to ensure safe and comfortable conduction of current to the subject. The procedure ensures that no metallic equipment will make 
contact [CONTACT_678530]. The Soterix Medical 1 x 1 and Active Dose II are not FDA 
approved for  intended use, however the device poses non-significant risk (NSR) and we have used the 
 
Page [ADDRESS_918141] a Master’s de gree in psychology or related field or have a Bachelor’s 
degree in Psychology and be enrolled in an Americ an Psychological Association-approved Clinical 
Psychology doctoral degree program, and experience with group treatment of AUD. Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_678510]. Witkiewitz, a licensed clinical psychologist with experience in MBRP therapi[INVESTIGATOR_57364].  All MBRP sessions will be audio-recorded for supervision purposes and will be coded for adherence and competence using the MBRP-Adherence and Competence Scale.  All treatment sessions will be [ADDRESS_918142] 30 minutes consisting of tDCS and guided 
meditation practice.  After tDCS, sessions will inc lude discussions of mindfulness as a means of copi[INVESTIGATOR_370517], cognitions, and emotions, role play exer cises, and mindfulness practice. Participants will 
be given audio format files (e.g., mp3 players or CDs ) developed specifically for MBRP for mindfulness 
practice outside of sessions. 
 
VI. Study Timelines 
 
Screening and informed consent will take approx imately [ADDRESS_918143]-treatment behavioral testing sessions will require up to 5 hours each (approximately 10 hours total). The 2-month f ollow-up assessment will not include EEG and is 
expected to take 2 hours.  The MBRP + tDCS interventions will require 2 hours and 30 minutes per 
session, including 30 minutes for initial questionnaires and withdrawal assessments, 15 minutes 
for tDCS setup, sensation checks, and cleanup at the end, 30 minutes for the tDCS, and 75 minutes for the MBRP intervention content.  Thus, total participation time for MBRP + tDCS will be 16 hours over up to 8-weeks.  Total participation time, after screening and consent, will be up to 32 hours.  
VII. Study Location(s) 
 Assessments and intervention sessions will take plac e in the Psychology Clinical Neuroscience Center 
in Logan Hall, Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico.  Data analysis will be done at 
Logan Hall, Department of Psychology, U niversity of New Mexico in offices maintained by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_678511]. 
 
VIII. Participant Compensation 
 We propose an incentive structure to maximize compliance that is consistent with other successful tDCS studies conducted by [CONTACT_20685].  Participants will be paid up to $20/hour for their participation during assessments: baseline (up to $100), session questionnaires during 8-sessions of 
treatment ($80), post-treatment (up to $100), and 2-month post-treatment (up to $40), plus an 
additional $[ADDRESS_918144]-treatment assessment, a $20 bonus for completing the 2-month follow-up assessment, and a $50 bonus for co mpleting all assessment sessions, making the 
maximum compensation $400.  To increase retention, participants will be asked to provide addresses, 
 
Page 13 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 phone numbers, and email addresses, as well as t he names and phone numbers for friends and family 
members who “will always know where you are.” We have used these methods in our prior studies and 
achieved 87.5% or greater follow-up rates. 	
 
IX. Study Resources 
 
The Psychology Department is located in Logan Hall on the south edge of The University of New 
Mexico’s main campus. This 55,334 square foot, three story building is comprised of faculty, staff and graduate student office space, four classrooms,  a library, a conference room, an undergraduate student 
computer lab, a graduate student computer lab, and hum an research and/or animal research facility lab 
space.   
In May [ADDRESS_918145] $5,000,[ADDRESS_918146] Limited Competition: Core Facility Renovation, Repair, and Improvement. The 
funds were used to renovate the Psychology Department’s neuroscience research space into a state-of-the-art Psychology Clinical Neuroscience Center (P CNC). The PCNC, directed by [CONTACT_15957]-I Clark, is a 
Category-I center in the Department of Psychology at UNM.  This 10,000 square foot, $5.5 million 
renovation includes 5 research pods containing offices for over 20 personnel, 4 imaging laboratories, 3 
meeting rooms, and a data processing laboratory and c lassroom for up to 20 students with computer 
systems for each.  Administrativ e resources include offices for the PCNC Director and for a Program 
Coordinator, as well as offices for a Computer Programmer and IT Manager. 
Space  
Laboratory  The PCNC has separate pediatric and adult electroencephalography (EEG) core 
laboratories (described in detail below), a neurostim ulation core laboratory, a large computer core 
laboratory and a dedicated imaging computer room for data acquisition and analysis for EEG, along with imaging and stimulation laboratories of individual faculty.  
Clinical Within the PCNC, three private assess ment rooms (all equipped with closed doors and sound 
screens) are available to research staff.   
Office [CONTACT_390373] has a private faculty office, as well as four individual Research Assistant offices 
and access to a conference room.   
Meeting Space The PCNC offers multiple group meeting locations to facilitate research.  Rooms will 
accommodate groups from [ADDRESS_918147] with extensive experience in the prevention and treatment of  substance use disorder. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_678512]. 
 EXPECTED RISKS/BENEFITS 
I. Potential Risks  
 There are only minor risks associated with participation in this study.  Potential risks of completing self-
report and behavioral assessments include: 1) some disco mfort associated with the nature of interview 
questions; and 2) breach of confidentiality. Potential ri sks of tDCS include: 1) skin damage (rare) or skin 
irritation; 2) neural tissue damage (rare); 3) pain (rare); 4) alterations in mood or affect (rare); and 5) 
 
Page 14 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 electrical shock (rare).  As enumerated below, we will take every possible step to reduce risk and 
discomfort to research participants.  Protections Against Risk  
General Protections.  All study staff will be trained in recog nizing signs and symptoms of intoxication 
as well as withdrawal symptoms. The UNM Psychology  Department is located less than [ADDRESS_918148] protected file.  All asse ssments for a given participant will be coded with 
his/her ID code.  Questionnaire data will be collected using Mind Research Network COINS system, hosted on a secure Mind Research Network server supporting 128-bit encryption and protected electronically using the most up-to-date security software available. Other data will be retained at the UNM Psychology Clinical Neuroscience Center (PCNC) in locked file cabinets and on password 
protected electronic files on computers with restri cted access. A single master list linking participant 
names and ID codes will be stored onsite in a separate locked file cabinet, and will only be available to research staff. Further, a Certificate of Confidentiality, which provides additional protection against obligatory release of confidential information, will be obtained from the Department of Health and Human Services prior to participant recruitment.  
EEG Protections.  EEG is considered a safe and noninvasive procedure.  There is some risk of 
seizure during EEG among individuals with seizure dis orders, so we will be excluding any participants 
with a history of seizures or seizure disorder.  Participants will be monitored throughout the procedure. If there is any discomfort, the procedure will be discontinued. The PCNC has facilities available to wash 
off the EEG gel. 
 
tDCS Protections.   Normal patient handling procedures are followed to eliminate risks. The 
participants will be able to communicate with the investigators at all times. The participant’s emotional state, mood, and physical sensation will also be monitored with a questionnaire administered before, 
during, and after the tDCS procedure.  The following potential risks that could be associated with transcranial direct current stimulation have been ident ified and we address them below.  We have 
conducted over [ADDRESS_918149] shrink-wrapped all of our wires (see Figure 2a and 2b below) and have experienced no other 
events. The Soterix 1x1 Mini-CT units were designed for clinical trials and have been tested in numerous treatment studies and clinical trials ( http://soterixmedical.com/ ).  All devices were designed 
by [CONTACT_678531]. 
 Figure 2a.  Electrode setup for tDCS.      Figure 2b.  Shrink-wrapped wires and banana plugs.
 
Page [ADDRESS_918150] 3.3 X 3.3 cm2 sponge/skin 
contact [CONTACT_678532] 2 mA stimulation resulting in a maximum current density of 0.19mA/ cm2 at the scalp 
surface. Most likely, 90% of this current will be shunted through the cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_678513]. Current distribution models of DC stimulation suggest that 2mA current at the scalp surface will result in a maximum current density of 0.[ZIP_CODE] mA/ cm
2 in the brain. While this current density is enough to 
elicit a transient modulation in cortical excitability, it does not elicit tetanic and/or suprathreshold 
excitation necessary to cause neuronal damage. Brain tissue heating is also insignificant for this level 
of stimulation. Moreover, the duration of stimulation specified in our design (~30 minutes) is well within 
the bounds of normal procedures. Protocols similar to  ours do not reveal changes in structural magnetic 
resonance images or pathological EEG signals resulting from tDCS. For these reasons, we believe that 
our stimulation protocol is within safe parameters and that the possibility of neuronal tissue damage is 
extremely unlikely.    To minimize any possible tissue damage, participants will fill out a tDCS sensation questionnaire form 
throughout the tDCS procedure.  This questionnaire allows us to monitor what the participants are physically feeling (including sensations of “itching,”  “heat/burning,” and “tingling”) at the electrode sites.  
This will be given at the following time points:  ap proximately [ADDRESS_918151] 3.3 X 
3.3 cm2 saline water or gel-soaked electrodes for our study  which minimizes the possibility of chemical 
reactions at the electrode-skin interface and result ant skin damage.  The scalps of each participant will 
 
Page 16 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 be visually inspected immediately before stimulation.  Any identified irritation or evidence of recent 
shaving of the head will postpone that participant’s participation in the study.  Participants will be encouraged at the beginning of the tDCS procedure to report any pain or discomfort that they may encounter throughout the procedure.  Any such reports, or evidence of redness or irritation of the scalp, will result in the immediate termination of stimulation.  We have found in our recent work that saline 
water soaked electrodes have acceptable sensation ratings for most individuals, but for some 
individuals (particularly those with more sensitive skin) gel electrode solution reduces irritation.  Thus, we include the option of either saline-soaked or gel soaked electrodes, which can further reduce skin irritation for some participants.  
Electrical shock. As with any contact [CONTACT_32113], there is a slight 
possibility of electrical shock. At UNM we have had no incidents of significant electrical shock resulting 
from DC stimulation, and we do not anticipate this event occurring in our experiment. One of the 
advantages of using the ActivaDose II stimulator (Figure 3) to induce DC current is that the current is obtained from a 9-volt battery and can be limited to a safe level. The Soterix medical stimulation (Figure 
4) is powered by a lithium ion battery and the stimulat ion is capped at 2.[ADDRESS_918152] with any 
potential conductors other than those specified in the experimental design (e.g. the tDCS stimulator).  
This measure greatly reduces the likelihood that electr ical shock will result from short circuiting or 
inadequate insulation.    
 Figure 3.  ActivaDose II stimulator and electrode set-up with blinding box apparatus. 
 
 
Figure 4. Soterix Medical 1x1 mini-CT tDCS stimulator with electrode set-up. 
 
Page 17 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 
 
 
II. Benefits  
 These studies are expected to add to the knowledge base on potential interventions for alcohol use. In 
addition, the mindfulness and tDCS application is expected to significantly decrease drinking for 
participants in the active condition and is also lik ely to reduce drinking in the mindfulness + sham 
condition.  Given only a slight risk to participants and t he greater possibility of long-term benefits to the 
knowledge base and to treatment interventions for AUD, the risks/benefits ratio seems reasonable. From a larger perspective, the findings of this investigation will increase the body of knowledge about 
the efficacy of a novel intervention for at-ri sk drinking and more broadly, will advance a biobehavioral 
conceptualization of treatment for AUD.  The current research will address several gaps in the treatment literature with regard to the potential effects of mindfulness-based approaches for AUD. Although research has supported mindfulness-bas ed relapse prevention (MBRP) as an effective 
intervention, our preliminary data suggests that its efficacy may be augmented by [CONTACT_678533], increase rates of 
abstinence, and potentially further reduce heavy drinking. Further, the proposed study will assess 
behavioral mechanisms of change. Considering these clinically relevant and innov ative study goals as 
well as the potential individual and societal benefits, the knowledge that may be gained in the current study will outweigh the risks for individual participants.  
 
III.  Privacy of Participants 
 
All consent procedures and experimental procedures will be conducted in offices maintained by [CONTACT_678534] (e.g. locked doors, opaque window coverings, 
and soundproof offices) in place.  All PHI will be password protected and stored on a secure database accessible only by [CONTACT_678535]. While the 
nature of the research dictates that data c annot be collected anonymously, additional safeguards will 
be put in place to protect against breach of confidentiality. Each participant will be assigned a unique ID 
code at screening. All assessments for a given parti cipant will be coded with his/her ID code.  
Questionnaire data will be collected using the Mind Research Network COINS system, hosted on a secure Mind Research Network server supporting 128-bit encryption and protected both physically (located in a locked room) as well as electronically using the most up-to-date security software available. Other data will be retained at the UNM Ps ychology Clinical Neuroscience Center (PCNC) in 
locked file cabinets and on password protected electronic files on computers with restricted access. A 
 
Page [ADDRESS_918153] obligatory releas e of confidential information, will be obtained 
from the Department of Health and Human Se rvices prior to participant recruitment. 
 
IV. Unanticipated Problems/Adverse Events 
 
We would terminate the study if we found there we re significant unanticipated adverse consequences 
for participation.  For example, we would terminate the study if we found statistically significant 
preliminary results indicating that participants receiving the active tDCS were drinking at a higher rate than those in the sham condition. Analyses to compare sham versus active tDCS treatment efficacy will 
be conducted in February 2018, after a sufficient number of subjects have been treated, and at the time of submitting our annual progress report to NIH, which will occur in June 2018. We would also 
terminate the study if we became aware of any publications with such findings in other studies. Any 
unanticipated problems or adverse events will be repor ted to the IRB promptly and within [ADDRESS_918154]. Katie Witkiewitz at ([PHONE_14052], Monday through Friday, 9am - 5 pm.  Alternatively, they can write to her 
at the PCNC, MSC 03-2220, Logan Hall, Albuquerque,  NM [ZIP_CODE] or via email at [EMAIL_7335].  
They may also contact [CONTACT_678536] t he IRB, ([PHONE_880], [EMAIL_920]. 
Website: http://irb.unm.edu/  All of this information is given to them upon their admittance to the study in their consent form.   
 STUDY DATA 
I. Data Management Procedures and Confidentiality 
Online surveys and data collection forms have been us ed in our previous studies, and will be re-tested 
prior to utilization. Data are monitored on a daily basis during the baseline period to track response rates, evaluate success of the randomization procedure for producing equivalent groups, and assess 
data quality.  Data are monitored on a weekly basis during each follow-up assessment period.  Data cleaning is minimal because COINS has safeguards in pla ce to minimize data entry errors. All data will 
be inspected continuously throughout the trial by a RA who is familiar with potential problems with data 
acquisition. All data will be double-checked by [CONTACT_678537]. Scoring syntax that was 
developed for our prior studies will be used to produce summary variables, and standard procedures will be utilized for dealing with missing data .  
 We have taken a number of measures to ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the data and the 
safety of the participants. As described in the protections for human subjects sections above, all data 
from the proposed study will be identified by a num erical ID code only, which will be assigned during 
the phone screening.  After phone screening, the phone screening form will be destroyed for those who are not eligible, although first and last names will be recoded to prevent re-screens and the demographic information and reasons for ineligibility for those who are ineligible will be recorded in a 
separate document without identifiers for reporting purposes. For eligible individuals the phone 
screening form will be de-identified and only linked to the participant with the participant ID code. The information linking the numerical participant ID  code to identifying information will be maintained 
separately in a locked filing cabinet and kept separ ate and secure from the de-identified. All identifying 
information will be stored in a separate encrypted and password protected file and will not be linked with the screening or assessment data.  At the conclus ion of the study, the list linking the ID code to 
identifying information will be destroyed. Further, a Certificate of Confidentiality, which provides 
additional protection against obligatory release of confidential information, will be obtained from the Department of Health and Human Services. 
 
Page 19 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15  
 II. Data Analysis/Statistical Considerations 
 Power analysis and sample size considerations.  We conducted power analyses using effect sizes 
from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (d=0.64 and d=0.[ADDRESS_918155]- and 2-month follow-up).  With 
desired power>0.80, a two-tailed α<0.05, and three time-points, we will need [ADDRESS_918156] of active tDCS + MBRP vs. sham t DCS + MBRP on drinks per drinking day at follow-up.  
For mediation analyses we will need [ADDRESS_918157].  Attrition of 15% is 
anticipated based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_678514] n=[ADDRESS_918158] the overall efficacy of the active 
tDCS + MBRP intervention compared to a sham t DCS + MBRP group.  We will use maximum likelihood 
estimation for all analyses, which provides the va riance-covariance matrix for all available data and is 
the preferred method for estimation when some data are missing.  Variables associated with missing 
data and those used in randomization (gender, age, treatm ent history) will be covaried in all analyses.   
Aim #1: Efficacy Analyses.  All assessment data will be analyzed for outliers and missing cases to 
detect any bias that might result from differential attrit ion.  The efficacy of active tDCS + MBRP versus 
sham tDCS + MBRP will be examined using a gener alized linear mixed model with drinks per drinking 
day at the end of treatment and follow-up as the prim ary outcomes.  We hypothesize active tDCS will 
be associated with significantly larger reductions in  drinks per drinking day following treatment, as 
compared to sham tDCS.  Interim analyses to compar e sham versus active tDCS treatment efficacy will 
be conducted in February 2017, after a sufficient number of subjects have been treated, and at the time of submitting our annual progress report to NIH, which will occur in June 2017.  
Secondary Aim: Mediation Analyses. Mediation models will be estimated for weekly and post-
treatment assessments of mindfulness, inhibitory contr ol, cue reactivity and craving, and negative affect 
using the product of coefficients method
19,132.  We will look at self-report and behavioral assessments of 
each proposed mediator in separate analyses and we will also examine whether latent variables of 
each construct provide an adequate fit and can be used in the analyses. The mediated effect will be obtained by [CONTACT_678538] (either separate measures or 
latent constructs) on treatment condition and for the regression of drinks per drinking day at the 2-
month follow-up on the mediators.  We will use bootst rappi[INVESTIGATOR_378550] 95% confidence intervals of the 
mediated effect. We hypothesize the effects of active tDCS on drinks per drinking day will be mediated by [CONTACT_678520], greater inhibitory control and reductions in cue reactivity, craving, and negative 
affect in the active tDCS group, as compared to sham tDCS. EEG Analysis .  EEG analyses will focus on the association between EEG biomarkers (e.g., resting 
state alpha, theta, beta, and gamma activity, P3 amplitude during tasks) and drinking outcomes, as well 
as changes in behavioral task performance.  Data will be analyzed using MATLAB-based signal 
processing toolboxes (e.g., EEGLAB, ERPLAB, EEGI FT).  We hypothesize significantly increased P3 
amplitudes during cognitive inhibition and reduced P3 amplitude in response to alcohol cues in the active tDCS group at post-treatment, as compared to sham tDCS.  
III. Participant Withdrawal 
 If a participant wishes to withdraw from the st udy all of their information held at the Psychology Clinical 
Neuroscience Center will be destroyed. They have t he right to withdraw their consent or stop 
participating at any time.  They can refuse to answe r any question(s) or refuse to participate in any 
procedure for any reason.  Refusing to participate in this study will not result in any penalty or loss of 
benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.  If they wish to stop participating at any time, they  can notify a study team member or [CONTACT_678543] at ([PHONE_14052], Monday through Friday, 9am - 5 pm.  Alternatively, they can write to her 
at the PCNC, MSC 03-2220, Logan Hall, Albuquerque, NM  [ZIP_CODE].  All of this information is given to 
them upon their admittance to the study in their cons ent form.  On the other hand, if the experimenters 
 
Page 20 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 decide that a participant is not eligible to continue with the study, their participation may be terminated 
without their consent.   PRIOR APPROVALS/REVIEWED AT OTHER IRBS 
 
No prior approvals. 
 REFERENCES 
 Aharonovich E, Hasin DS, Brooks AC, Liu X, Bisaga A, Nunes E V. (2006). Cognitive deficits predict 
low treatment retention in cocaine dependent patients. Drug Alcohol Depend . 81(3):313–22. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.08.003. 
Ahmadi, A., Pearlson, G. D., Meda, S. A., Dager, A., Potenza, M. N., Rosen, R., ... & Stevens, M. C. 
(2013). Influence of alcohol use on neural response to go/no-go task in college drinkers. Neuropsychopharmacology , 38(11), 2197-2208. 
Atkins DC, Baldwin SA, Zheng C, Gallop RJ, Neighbors C. (2013). A tutorial on count q1  bregression 
and zero-altered count models for longitudinal substance use data. Psychol Addict Behav . 
27(1):166–77. doi:10.1037/a0029508. 
Aron, A.R. (2007). The neural basis of inhibition in cognitive control. Neuroscientist, 13, 214-228. Bartholow BD, Henry EA, Lust SA. (2007).  Effects of alcohol sensitivity on P3 event-related potential 
reactivity to alcohol cues. Psychol Addict Behav . 21(4):555–63. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.21.4.555. 
Bartholow BD, Lust SA, Tragesser SL. (2010).  Specificity of P3 event-related potential reactivity to 
alcohol cues in individuals low in alcohol sensitivity. Psychol Addict Behav . 24(2):220–8. 
doi:10.1037/a0017705. 
Bastani A, Jaberzadeh S. (2012)  Does anodal transcranial direct current stimulation enhance 
excitability of the motor cortex and motor function in healthy individuals and subjects with stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Neurophysiol . 123(4):644–57. 
doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2011.08.029. 
Bechara A, Damasio H. (2002) Decision-making and addiction (part I): impaired activation of somatic 
states in substance dependent individuals when pondering decisions with negative future consequences. Neuropsychologia . 40(10):1675–89. 
Bechara A, Dolan S, Hindes A. (2002) Decision-making and addiction (part II): myopia for the future or 
hypersensitivity to reward? Neuropsychologia . 40(10):1690–705. 
Beck, A.T., Steer, R.A.  & Brown, G.K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. 1996, San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Bedi, G., Preston, K. L., Epstien, D. H., Heishman, S. J., Marrone, G. F., Shaham, Y., & Wit, H. de. 
(2011). Incubation of cue-induced cigarette crav ing during abstinence in human smokers. Biological 
Psychiatry, 69(7), 708-711. 
Bikson, M., Datta, A. &, Elwassif, M. (2009). Establishing safety limits for transcranial direct current 
stimulation. Clinical Neurophysiology, 120, 1033-1034. 
Boggio, P. S., Sultani, N., Fecteau, S., Merabet, L., Mecca, T., Pascual-Leone, A., ... & Fregni, F. 
(2008). Prefrontal cortex modulation using tran scranial DC stimulation reduces alcohol craving: a 
double-blind, sham-controlled study. Drug and alcohol dependence , 92(1), 55-60. 
Boggio PS, Liguori P, Sultani N, Rezende L, Fecteau S, Fregni F. (2009) Cumulative priming effects of 
cortical stimulation on smoking cue-induced craving. Neurosci Lett . 463(1):82–6. 
doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2009.07.041. 
Boggio PS, Zaghi S, Villani AB, Fecteau S, Pascual-Leone A, Fregni F. (2010). Modulation of risk-
taking in marijuana users by [CONTACT_50004] (tDCS) of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Drug Alcohol Depend . 112(3):220–5. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.06.019. 
Bowen S, Witkiewitz K, Dillworth TM, Marlatt GA. (2007). The role of thought suppression in the 
relationship between mindfulness meditation and alcohol use. Addict Behav . 32(10):2324–8. 
doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2007.01.025. 
 
Page 21 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Bowen, S., Chawla, N., Collins, S. E., Witkiewitz, K., Hsu, S., Grow, J., Clifasefi, S., et al. (2009). 
Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for substance use disorders: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_74601]. Substance Abuse, 30(4), 295–305. doi:10.1080/08897070903250084 
Bowen, S., & Witkiewitz, K. (2010). Depression,  craving and substance use following a randomized trial 
of mindfulness-based relapse prevention. Journal  of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(3), 
362-374. doi:10.1037/a0019172 
Bowen S, Chawla N, Marlatt GA. (2011) Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for addictive behaviors: 
A clinician’s guide . [LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford Press. 
Bowen, S., Witkiewitz, K., Clifasefi, S. L., Grow, J., Chawla, N., Hsu, S. H., ... & Larimer, M. E. (2014). 
Relative efficacy of mindfulness-based relaps e prevention, standard relapse prevention, and 
treatment as usual for substance use disorders: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA psychiatry , 71(5), 
547-556. 
Bouchery EE, Harwood HJ, Sacks JJ, Simon CJ, Brewer RD. Economic costs of excessive alcohol 
consumption in the U.S., 2006. Am J Prev Med . 2011;41(5):516–24. 
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2011.06.045. 
Brewer JA, Worhunsky PD, Carroll KM, Rounsav ille BJ, Potenza MN. (2008). Pretreatment brain 
activation during stroop task is associated with outcomes in cocaine-dependent patients. Biol 
Psychiatry .64(11):998–1004. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.05.024. 
Brewer, J. A., Sinha, R., Chen, J. A., Michalsen, R. N., Babuscio, T. A., Nich, C., Grier, A., et al. (2009). 
Mindfulness training and stress reactivity in substance abuse: Results from a randomized, controlled stage 1 pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Substance Abuse, 30, 306-317. doi: 10.1080/08897070903250241 
Brewer, J. A., Bowen, S., Smith, J. T., Marlatt, G. A., & Potenza, M. N. (2010). Mindfulness-based 
treatments for co-occurring depression and substance us e disorders: what can we learn from the 
brain? Addiction (Abingdon, England), 105(10), 1698–706. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2009.[ZIP_CODE].x 
Brewer, J. A., Worhunsky, P. D., Gray, J. R., Tang, Y.-Y., Weber, J., & Kober, H. (2011). Meditation 
experience is associated with differences in default mode network activity and connectivity. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(50), [ZIP_CODE]–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.111202910 
Brewer J a, Elwafi HM, Davis JH. (2013). Craving to quit: psychological models and neurobiological 
mechanisms of mindfulness training as treatment for addictions. Psychol Addict Behav . 27(2):366–
79. doi:10.1037/a0028490. 
Brown KW, Goodman RJ, Inzlicht M. (2013). Dispositional mindfulness and the attenuation of neural 
responses to emotional stimuli. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci .8(1):93–9. doi:10.1093/scan/nss004. 
Brown, R.A., et al., (2002). Distress tolerance and duration of past smoking cessation attempts. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 111, 180-5. 
Brunoni, A. R., Shiozawa, P., Truong, D., Javitt, D. C., Elkis, H., Fregni, F., & Bikson, M. (2014). 
Understanding tDCS effects in schizophrenia: a system atic review of clinical data and an integrated 
computation modeling analysis. Expert review of medical devices , 11(4), 383-394. 
Carroll, K. M., Ball, S. A., Martino, S., Nich, C., Babuscio, T. A., Nuro, K. F., ... & Rounsaville, B. J. 
(2008). Computer-assisted delivery of cognitive- behavioral therapy for addiction: a randomized trial 
of CBT4CBT. American Journal of Psychiatry , 165(7), 881-888. 
Carroll, K. M., Kiluk, B. D., Nich, C., Gordon, M. 
A., Portnoy, G. A., Marino, D. R., & Ball, S. A. (2014). Computer-assisted delivery of cognitive-behavioral therapy: efficacy and durability of CBT4CBT 
among cocaine-dependent individuals maintained on methadone. American journal of Psychiatry . 
Chiesa A, Brambilla P, Serretti A. (2010). Funct ional neural correlates of mindfulness meditations in 
comparison with psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy and placebo effect. Is there a link? Acta 
Neuropsychiatr . 22(3):104–117. doi:10.1111/j.1601-5215.2010.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Chiesa A, Brambilla P, Serretti A. (2011). Neuro- imaging of mindfulness meditations: implications for 
clinical practice. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_57396] . 2011;20(2):205–10. 
Chiesa A, Serretti A. (2013). Are Mindfulness-Based Interventions Effective for Substance Use 
Disorders? A Systematic Review of the Evidence. Subst Use Misuse . 1–22. 
doi:10.3109/10826084.2013.770027. 
Chiesa A, Serretti A, Christian J. (2013). Clinical Psychology Review Mindfulness  : Top – down or 
bottom – up emotion regulation strategy  ? Clin Psychol Rev .33(1):82–96. 
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2012.10.006. 
 
Page 22 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Clark VP, Coffman BA, Mayer AR, et al. (2010). TDCS guided using fMRI significantly accelerates 
learning to identify concealed objects. Neuroimage . 2012;59(1):117–28. 
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.036. 
Clark VP, Coffman BA, Trumbo MC, Gasparovic C.  (2011). Transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS) produces localized and specific  alterations in neurochemistry: a 1H magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy study. Neurosci Lett .500(1):67–71. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2011.05.244. 
Claus ED, Ewing SWF, Filbey FM, Sabbineni A, Hutchison KE. (2011). Identifying neurobiological 
phenotypes associated with alcohol use disorder severity. Neuropsychopharmacology . 
36(10):2086–96. doi:10.1038/npp.2011.99. 
Claus ED, Kiehl KA, Hutchison KE. (2011). Neural and behavioral mechanisms of impulsive choice in 
alcohol use disorder. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 35(7):1209–19. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Claus ED, Hutchison KE. (2012). Neural mechanisms of risk taking and relationships with hazardous 
drinking. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 36(6):932–40. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Claus ED, Feldstein Ewing SW, Filbey FM, Hutc hison KE. (2013). Behavioral control in alcohol use 
disorders: relationships with severity. J Stud Alcohol Drugs . 74(1):141–51.. 
Coffman, B. A., Trumbo, M. C., Flores, R. A., Garcia, C. M., Van Der Merwe, A. J., Wassermann, E. M., 
... & Clark, V. P. (2012). Impact of tDCS on per formance and learning of target detection: interaction 
with stimulus characteristics and experimental design. Neuropsychologia , 50(7), 1594-1602. 
Conti CL, Nakamura-Palacios EM. (2013). Bilat eral transcranial direct current stimulation over 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex changes the drug-cued reactivity in the anterior cingulate cortex of 
crack-cocaine addicts. Brain Stimul . 7(1):130–2. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2013.09.007. 
Conti CL, Moscon JA, Fregni F, Nitsche MA, Nakamura-Palacios EM. (2014). Cognitive related 
electrophysiological changes induced by [CONTACT_105]-invasive co rtical electrical stimulation in crack-cocaine 
addiction. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol . 17(9):1465–75. doi:10.1017/S1461145714000522. 
Cox, L. S., Tiffany, S. T., & Christen, A. G. (2001). Evaluation of the Brief Questionnaire of Smoking 
Urges (QSU-brief) in laboratory and clinical settings.  Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 3,7-16. 
Czapla M, Simon JJ, Richter B, et al. (2015). The impact of cognitive im pairment and impulsivity on 
relapse of alcohol-dependent patients: implications for psychotherapeutic treatment. Addict Biol . 
doi:10.1111/adb.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Datta A, Bikson M, Fregni F. (2010). Transcranial direct current stimulation in patients with skull defects 
and skull plates: high-resolution computational FEM study of factors altering cortical current flow. Neuroimage . 52(4):1268–78. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.04.252. 
Datta A, Truong D, Minhas P, Parra LC, Bikson M. (2012). Inter-Individual Variation during Transcranial 
Direct Current Stimulation and Normalization of Dose Using MRI-Derived Computational Models. Front Psychiatry . 3:91. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Den Uyl TE, Gladwin TE, Wiers RW. (2015). Transcr anial direct current stimulation, implicit alcohol 
associations and craving. Biol Psychol .105:37–42. doi:10.1016/j.biopsycho.2014.12.004. 
Dwyer-Lindgren, L., Flaxman, A. D., Ng, M., Hansen, G. M., Murray, C. J., & Mokdad, A. H. (2015). 
Drinking patterns in US counties from 2002 to 2012. American journal of public health , 105(6), 1120-
1127. 
Elwafi HM, Witkiewitz K, Mallik S, Iv TAT,  Brewer JA. (2012). Mindfulness training for smoking 
cessation: Moderation of the relationship between craving and cigarette use. Drug Alcohol Depend .  
doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.11.015. 
Engelmann, J. M., Versace, F., Robinson, J. D., Minnix , J. A., Lam, C. Y., Cui, Y.,Brown, V. L., & 
Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_9384], P. M. (2012). Neural substrates of smoking cue reativity: A meta-analysis of fMRI 
studies. NeuroImage, 60(1), 252-262 
Enoch M-A, Shen P-H, Ducci F, et al. (2008). Common genetic origins for EEG, alcoholism and anxiety: 
the role of CRH-BP. PLoS One . 3(10):e3620. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003620. 
Falcone B, Coffman BA, Clark VP, Parasuraman R. (2012). Transcranial direct current stimulation 
augments perceptual sensitivity and 24-hour ret ention in a complex threat detection task.  PLoS 
One. 7(4):e34993. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0034993. 
Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., Mayberg, H., Bean, J., McKeon, D., Fatima, Z., & Anderson, A. K. (2007). 
Attending to the present: mindfulness meditation rev eals distinct neural modes of self-reference. 
Social cognitive and affective neuroscience , 2(4), 313-322. 
 
Page 23 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Farb NAS, Anderson AK, Mayberg H, Bean J, McKeon D, Segal Z V. (2010) Minding one’s emotions: 
mindfulness training alters the neural expression of sadness. Emotion . 10(1):25–33. 
doi:10.1037/a0017151. 
Fecteau, S., Agosta, S., Hone-Blanchet, A., Fregni, F., Boggio, P., Ciraulo, D., & Pascual-Leone, A. 
(2014). Modulation of smoking and decision-making behaviors with transcranial direct current 
stimulation in tobacco smokers: a preliminary study. Drug and alcohol dependence , 140, 78-84. 
Feil J, Zangen A. (2010). Brain stimulation in the study and treatment of addiction. Neurosci Biobehav 
Rev. 34(4):559–74. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.11.006. 
Fergueson, S. G., Shiffman, S., & Gwaltney, C. J. (2006). Does reducing withdrawal severity mediate 
nicotince patch efficacy? A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consluting and Clinical Psychology, 
74(6), 1153-1161.  doi: 10.1037/0022-006X.74.6.1153 
Fiore, M. C., & Jaen, C. R. (2008). A clinical blueprint to accelerate the elimination of tobacco use. The 
Journal of the American Medical Association, 299(17), 2083-2085. doi: 10.1001/jama.299.17.2083 
Fitz NS, Reiner PB. (2015). The challenge of crafting policy for do-it-yourself brain stimulation. J Med 
Ethics . 41(5):410–2. doi:10.1136/medethics-2013-101458. 
First MB, Williams JBW, Karg RL. (2015). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disorders Clinical 
Trials Version . Arlington, VA, US: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. 
Flannery BA, Volpi[INVESTIGATOR_9823], Pettinati HM. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Penn Alcohol Craving 
Scale. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 23(8):1289–1295. 
Fregni F, Liguori P, Fecteau S, Nitsche MA, Pascual-Leone A, Boggio PS. (2008). Cortical stimulation 
of the prefrontal cortex with transcranial direc t current stimulation reduces cue-provoked smoking 
craving: a randomized, sham-controlled study. J Clin Psychiatry . 69(1):32–40. 
Gandiga, P. C., Hummel, F. C., & Cohen, L. G. (2006). Transcranial DC stimulation (tDCS): a tool for 
double-blind sham-controlled clinical studies in brain stimulation. Clinical Neurophysiology , 117(4), 
845-850. 
Garland E, Gaylord S. (2010). Mindfulness training modifies cognitive, affective, and physiological 
mechanisms implicated in alcohol dependence: results of a randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. J 
Psychoactive Drugs . 42(June):177–192. 
Garland EL, Franken IHA, Howard MO. (2012). Cue-elicited heart rate variability and attentional bias 
predict alcohol relapse following treatment. Psychopharmacology . 222(1):17–26. 
doi:10.1007/s00213-011-2618-4. 
Gifford, E. V., Kohlenberg, B. S., Hayes, S. C., Antonuccio, D. O., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29832], M. M., Rasmussen-Hall, M. 
L., & Palm, K. M. (2004). Acceptance- based treatment for smoking cessation. Behavior therapy , 
35(4), 689-705. 
Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. (2002). Drug addiction and its underlying neurobiological basis: 
neuroimaging evidence for the involvement of the frontal cortex. Am J Psychiatry . 159(10):1642–52. 
Goudriaan AE, Grekin ER, Sher KJ. (2007). Decision making and binge drinking: a longitudinal study. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 31(6):928–38. doi:10.1111/j.1530-0277.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Mult idimensional assessment of emotion regulation and 
dysregulation: Development, factor structure, and initial validation of the difficulties in emotion 
regulation scale. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 26(1), 41-54. doi:10.1023/B:JOBA.[PHONE_4870].[ZIP_CODE].94 
Grow JC, Collins SE, Harrop EN, Marlatt GA. (2015). Enactment of home practice following 
mindfulness-based relapse prevention and its association with substance-use outcomes. Addict 
Behav . 40:16–20. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2014.07.030. 
Hallgren KA, Witkiewitz K. (2014). Missing data in alcohol clinical trials: A comparison of methods. 
Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 38(SI). 
Hansen N. (2012). Action mechanisms of transcranial direct current stimulation in Alzheimer’s disease 
and memory loss. Front Psychiatry . 3:48. doi:10.3389/fpsyt.2012.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Hasey GM, Kiang M. (2013). A review of recent literature employing electroencephalographic 
techniques to study the pathophysiology, phenomenology, and treatment response of 
schizophrenia. Curr Psychiatry Rep . 15(9):388. doi:10.1007/s11920-013-0388-x. 
Hasin DS, Stinson FS, Ogburn E, Grant BF. (2007). Prevalence, correlates, disability, and comorbidity 
of DSM-IV alcohol abuse and dependence in the [LOCATION_002]: results from the National 
 
Page 24 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Epi[INVESTIGATOR_7446]. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 64(7):830–42. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.64.7.830. 
Heinze M, Wölfling K, Grüsser SM. (2007). Cue-induced auditory evoked potentials in alcoholism. Clin 
Neurophysiol . 118(4):856–62. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2006.12.003. 
Hodgkinson CA, Enoch M-A, Srivastava V, et al. (2010). Genome-wide association identifies candidate 
genes that influence the human electroencephalogram. PNAS . 107(19):8695–700. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_14053]. 
Hölzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., Schuman-Olivier, Z., Vago, D. R., & Ott, U. (2011). How does 
mindfulness meditation work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual and neural perspective. Perspectives on Psychological Science , 6(6), 537-559. 
Hsu, T.-Y., et al., (2011). Modulating inhibitory control with direct current stimulation of the superior 
medial frontal cortex. Neuroimage,  p. 1-9. 
Iyer, M.B., et al. (2005). Safety and cognitive effect of frontal DC brain polarization in healthy 
individuals. Neurology. 64(5): p. 872-875. 
Jacobson L, Koslowsky M, Lavidor M. (2012). t DCS polarity effects in motor and cognitive domains: a 
meta-analytical review. Exp Brain Res . 216(1):1–10. doi:10.1007/s00221-011-2891-9. 
Jansen JM, Daams JG, Koeter MWJ, Veltman DJ, van den Brink W, Goudriaan AE. (2013). Effects of 
non-invasive neurostimulation on craving: A meta-analysis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 37(10):2472–
2480. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.07.009. 
Jonas, D. E., Amick, H. R., Feltner, C., Bobashev, G., Thomas, K., Wines, R., ... & Garbutt, J. C. 
(2014). Pharmacotherapy for adults with alcohol use disorders in outpatient settings: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Jama ,311(18), 1889-1900. 
Kazdin AE. (2007). Mediators and mechanisms of change in psychotherapy research. Annu Rev Clin 
Psychol . 3:1–27. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091432. 
Kessler, R.C., et al. (2005). The World Health Organization adult ADHD self-report scale (ASRS): A 
short screening scale for use in the general population. Psychological Medicine, 35(2): p. 245-256. 
Kiluk, B. D., Nich, C., Babuscio, T., & Carroll, K. M. (2010). Quality versus quantity: acquisition of 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_678515]–behavior al therapy for substance use disorders. 
Addiction , 105(12), 2120-2127. 
Kim S, Stephenson MC, Morris PG, Jackson SR. (2014). tDCS-induced alterations in GABA 
concentration within primary motor cortex predict motor learning and motor memory: a 7 T magnetic resonance spectroscopy study. Neuroimage . 99:237–43. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.070. 
Kirby, K.N. and N.N. Marakovi ć, (1996). Delay-discounting probabilistic rewards: Rates decrease as 
amounts increase. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. 3(1): p. 100-104. 
Klauss J, Penido Pi[INVESTIGATOR_168824], Silva Merlo BL, et al. (2014). A randomized controlled trial of targeted 
prefrontal cortex modulation with tDCS in patients with alcohol dependence. Int J 
Neuropsychopharmacol . 17(11):1793–803. doi:10.1017/S1461145714000984. 
Kober, H., Siedlecki, P. M., Kross, E. F., Weber, J., Mi schel, W., Hart, C. L., & Ochsner, K. N.    (2010). 
Prefrontal-striatal pathway underlies cognitve regulation of craving. Proceedings of the    National Academy of Sciences, 107(33), [ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE]. doi:10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_2143] 
Koob GF. (2006) The neurobiology of addiction: a neuroadaptational view relevant for diagnosis. 
Addiction .[ADDRESS_918159]:23–30. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Koob GF, Le Moal M. (2008). Addiction and the brain antireward system. Annu Rev Psychol . 59:29–53. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093548. 
Koob GF, Volkow ND. (2010).  Neurocircuitry of addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology . 35(1):217–38. 
doi:10.1038/npp.2009.110. 
Koob GF, Buck CL, Cohen A, et al. (2014). Addiction as a stress surfeit disorder. Neuropharmacology . 
76 Pt B:370–82. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.05.024. 
Lane SP, Sher KJ. (2014).  Limits of current approaches to diagnosis severity based on criterion 
counts: An example with DSM-5 alcohol use disorder. Clin Psychol Sci . 
doi:10.1177/2167702614553026. 
Lang P, Bradley M, Cuthbert B. (1999). International affective pi[INVESTIGATOR_194035] (IAPS): Technical manual 
and affective ratings.  
 
Page 25 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Lang, P.J., Bradley, M.M., & Cuthbert, B.N. (2008). International affective pi[INVESTIGATOR_194035] (IAPS): 
Affective ratings of pi[INVESTIGATOR_190696].  Technical Report A-8. University of [LOCATION_012], 
Gainesville, FL. 
Lau M a., Bishop SR, Segal Z V., et al. (2006). The Toronto Mindfulness Scale: Development and 
validation. J Clin Psychol . 62(12):1445–1467. doi:10.1002/jclp.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Leshner AI. (1997). Addiction is a brain disease, and it matters. Science (80- ) . 278(5335):45–7. 
Levinson DB, Stoll EL, Kindy SD, Merry HL, Davids on RJ. (2014). A mind you can count on: validating 
breath counting as a behavioral measure of mindfulness. Front Psychol . 5:1202. 
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Levasseur-Moreau J, Fecteau S. (2012). Transla tional application of neuromodulation of decision-
making. Brain Stimul . 5(2):77–83. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2012.03.009. 
Litt MD, Cooney NL, Morse P. (2000). Reactivity to alcohol-related stimuli in the laboratory and in the 
field: predictors of craving in treated alcoholics. Addiction . 95(6):889–900. 
Litten RZ, Ryan ML, Falk DE, Reilly M, Fertig JB, Koob GF. (2015). Heterogeneity of Alcohol Use 
Disorder: Understanding Mechanisms to Advance Personalized Treatment. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 
39(4):579–584. doi:10.1111/acer.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Littlefield, A. K., Stevens, A. K., Cunningham, S., Jones, R. E., King, K. M., Schumacher, J. A., & 
Coffey, S. F. (2015). Stability and change in multi-method measures of impulsivity across residential addictions treatment. Addictive behaviors , 42, 126-129. 
Liu, A., Devinsky, O., Bryant, A., Jefferson, A., Friedman, D., Shafi, M., ... & Pascual-Leone, A. (2014). 
Efficacy of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation on Working Memory and Mood in Patients with 
Temporal Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (S43. 006). Neurology, 82(10 Supplement), S43-006. 
Logan GD, Van Zandt T, Verbruggen F, Wagenmakers E-J. (2014). On the ability to inhibit thought and 
action: general and special theories of an act of control. Psychol Rev . 121(1):66–95. 
doi:10.1037/a0035230. 
MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, S heets V. (2002) A comparison of methods to 
test mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychol Methods . 7(1):83–104. 
MacKinnon DP. (2008). Introduction to Statistical Mediation Analysis . [LOCATION_001]: Taylor & Francis 
Group. 
Maisto SA, Conigliaro JC, Gordon AJ, McGinnis KA, Ju stice AC. (2008). An experimental study of the 
agreement of self-administration and telephone adminis tration of the Timeline Followback interview. 
J Stud Alcohol Drugs . 69(3):468–71. 
Manna A, Raffone A, Perrucci MG, et al. (2010) Neural correlates of focused attention and cognitive 
monitoring in meditation. Brain Res Bull . 82(1-2):46–56. doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.03.001. 
McLellan AT, Lewis DC, O’Brien CP, Kleber HD. (2000). Drug dependence, a chronic medical illness: 
implications for treatment, insurance, and outcomes evaluation. JAMA . 284(13):1689–95. 
Miller WR. (1996). Form 90: A structured assessment interview for drinking and related behaviors . 
Project MA. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 
Myrick H, Anton RF, Li X, Henderson S, Randall PK, Voronin K. (2008). Effect of naltrexone and 
ondansetron on alcohol cue-induced activation of the ventral striatum in alcohol-dependent people. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 65(4):466–75. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.65.4.466. 
Namkoong K, Lee E, Lee CH, Lee BO, An SK. (2004). Increased P3 amplitudes induced by [CONTACT_131128]-
related pi[INVESTIGATOR_678516]. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 28(9):1317–23. 
Nardone, R., Bergmann, J., Christova, M., Lochner, P., Tezzon, F., Golaszewski, S., ... & Brigo, F. 
(2012). Non-invasive brain stimulation in the func tional evaluation of alcohol effects and in the 
treatment of alcohol craving: a review. Neuroscience research , 74(3), 169-176. 
NIAAA, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol and Health, Seventh Special 
Report to the US Congress. Rockville, Md : Dept of Health and Human Services; 1990 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2011). Alcohol-use disorders: Diagnosis, 
assessment and management of harmful drinking and alcohol dependence . Manchester, [LOCATION_006]: 
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
National Institutes of Health Toolbox Cognition Batte ry (NIH Toolbox CB) (2103). Monographs of the 
Society for Research in Child Development, Volume 78, Issue 4 Pages 1–172. DOI: 10.1111/mono.1203 
 
Page 26 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 NIH Toolbox for Assessment of Neurological and Behavioral Function (2013). Neurology, 80, 
Supplement 3, S1-S92. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182872e90 
Nitsche, M. A., Schauenburg, A., Lang, N., Liebetanz, D., Exner, C., Paulus, W., & Tergau, F. (2003). 
Facilitation of implicit motor learning by [CONTACT_678539]. Journal of cognitive neuroscience , 15(4), 619-626. 
O’Connell NE, Wand BM, Marston L, Spencer S, Desouza LH. (2014). Non-invasive brain stimulation 
techniques for chronic pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 4:CD008208. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008208.pub3. 
Oldfield RC. (1971). The assessment and analysi s of handedness: the Edinburgh inventory. 
Neuropsychologia . 9(1):97–113. 
Patton, J.H., M.S. Stanford, and E.S. Barratt, (1995). Factor structure of the Barratt Impulsiveness 
Scale. Journal of Clinical Psychology. 51(6): p. 768-774. 
Pfefferbaum A, Desmond JE, Galloway C, Menon V, Glover GH, Sullivan E V. (2001). Reorganization 
of frontal systems used by [CONTACT_678540]: an fMRI study. Neuroimage . 14(1 
Pt 1):7–20. doi:10.1006/nimg.2001.0785. 
Plewnia C, Schroeder PA, Kunze R, Faehling F, Wolkenstein L. (2015). Keep Calm and Carry On: 
Improved Frustration Tolerance and Processing S peed by [CONTACT_349475] 
(tDCS). PLoS One . 10(4):e0122578. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122578. 
Porjesz B, Rangaswamy M, Kamarajan C, Jones KA, Padmanabhapi[INVESTIGATOR_24124] A, Begleiter H. (2005). The 
utility of neurophysiological markers in the study of alcoholism. Clin Neurophysiol . 116(5):993–
1018. doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2004.12.016. 
Pripfl J, Lamm C. (2015). Focused transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) over the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex modulates specif ic domains of self-regulation. Neurosci Res . 91:41–7. 
doi:10.1016/j.neures.2014.09.007. 
Rangaswamy, M., Porjesz, B., Ardekani, B. A., Choi, S. J., Tanabe, J. L., Lim, K. O., & Begleiter, H. 
(2004). A functional MRI study of visual oddball: evidence for frontoparietal dysfunction in subjects at risk for alcoholism. Neuroimage , 21(1), 329-339. 
Salsman, J. M., Butt, Z., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_3708], P. A., Cyranowski, J.  M., Zill, N., Hendrie, H. C., ... & Cella, D. (2013). 
Emotion assessment using the NIH Toolbox. Neurology , 80(11 Supplement 3), S76-S86. 
Schacht JP, Anton RF, Myrick H. (2013). Functional neuroimaging studies of alcohol cue reactivity: a 
quantitative meta-analysis and systematic review. Addict Biol . 18(1):121–33. doi:10.1111/j.1369-
1600.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
Schade, S., Molladze, V., Paulus, W., & Antal, A. (2012). Modulating neuronal excitability in the motor 
cortex with tDCS shows moderate hemispheric asymmetry due to subjects' handedness: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 30(3):191-8. 
Schafer, J. L., & Graham, J. W. (2002). Missing data: our view of the state of the art. Psychological 
methods , 7(2), 147. 
Schoenberg PLA, Hepark S, Kan CC, Barendregt HP, Buitelaar JK, Speckens AEM. (2014). Effects of 
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy on neurophys iological correlates of performance monitoring in 
adult attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Clin Neurophysiol . 125(7):1407–16. 
doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2013.11.031. 
Shacham, S. (1983). A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. Journal of Personality 
Assessment. 47(3): p. 305-306. 
Shahbabaie, A., Golesorkhi, M., Zamanian, B., Ebrahimpoor, M., Keshvari, F., Nejati, V., ... & Ekhtiari, 
H. (2014). State dependent effect of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) on methamphetamine craving. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology , 17(10), 1591-1598. 
Shiozawa, P., Fregni, F., Benseñor, I. M., Lotufo, P. A., Berlim, M. T., Daskalakis, J. Z., ... & Brunoni, A. 
R. (2014). Transcranial direct current stimulation for major depression: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology , 17(9), 1443-1452. 
Sinha R, Talih M, Malison R, Cooney N, Anders on GM, Kreek MJ. (2003). Hypothalamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-
adrenal axis and sympatho-adreno-medullary responses during stress-induced and drug cue-
induced cocaine craving states. 
Psychopharmacology . 170(1):62–72. doi:10.1007/s00213-003-
1525-8. 
Sinha R, Li CSR. (2007). Imaging stress- and cue-induced drug and alcohol craving: association with 
relapse and clinical implications. Drug Alcohol Rev . 26(1):25–31. doi:10.1080/09595230601036960. 
 
Page 27 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Sobell LC, Brown J, Leo GI, Sobell MB. (1996). The reliability of the Alcohol Timeline Followback when 
administered by [CONTACT_20261]. Drug Alcohol Depend . 42(1):49–54. doi:10.1016/0376-
8716(96)[ZIP_CODE]-X. 
Sobell, L.C. and M.B. Sobell (1996). Timeline Followback user's guide: A calendar method for 
assessing alcohol and drug use. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Addiction Research Foundation. 
Stramaccia DF, Penolazzi B, Sartori G, Braga M, Mondini S, Galfano G. (2015). Assessing the effects 
of tDCS over a delayed response inhibition task by [CONTACT_678541]. Exp Brain Res . doi:10.1007/s00221-015-4297-6. 
Streeter, C. C., Terhune, D. B., Whitfield, T. H., Gruber, S., Sarid-Segal, O., Silveri, M. M., ... & 
Yurgelun-Todd, D. A. (2008). Performance on the Stroop predicts treatment compliance in cocaine-
dependent individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology , 33(4), 827-836. 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2014). Results from the 2013 National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health: Summary of National Findings . NSDUH Seri. Rockville, MD: 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. 
Sullivan E V, Pfefferbaum A. (2005). Neurocircuitry  in alcoholism: a substrate of disruption and repair. 
Psychopharmacology . 180(4):583–94. doi:10.1007/s00213-005-2267-6. 
Tang, D. W., Fellows, L. K., Small, D. M., & Dagher, A. (2012). Food and drug cues activate similar 
brain regions: A meta-analysis of functional MR I studies. Physiology & Behavior, 106(3) 317-324. 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2007, January 12). State & county Quickfacts: Allegany County, N.Y. Retrieved 
January 25, 2007, from http://quickfacts.census.gov . 
Vollstädt ‐Klein, S., Wichert, S., Rabinstein, J., Bühler, M., Klein, O., Ende, G., ... & Mann, K. (2010). 
Initial, habitual and compulsive alcohol use is charac terized by a shift of cue processing from 
ventral to dorsal striatum. Addiction , 105(10), 1741-1749. 
Weintraub S, Dikmen SS, Heaton RK, et al. (2013). Cognition assessment using the NIH Toolbox. 
Neurology . 80([ADDRESS_918160] 3):S54–64. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182872ded. 
Wessel JR, Aron AR. (2015). It’s not too late: the onset of the frontocentral P3 indexes successful 
response inhibition in the stop-signal paradigm. Psychophysiology . 52(4):472–80. 
doi:10.1111/psyp.[ZIP_CODE]. 
Westbrook, C., Creswell, J. D., Tabibnia, G., Julson, E., Kober, H., & Tindle, H. A. (2011). Mindful 
attention reduces neural and self-reported cue-induced craving in smokers. Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience [online publication]. 
Whiteside SP, & Lynam DR. (2001). The Five Factor Model and impulsivity: using a structural model of 
personality to understand impulsivity. Pers Individ Dif . 30(4):669–689. doi:10.1016/S0191-
8869(00)[ZIP_CODE]-7 
Witkiewitz K, Marlatt GA. (2004).  Relapse Prevention for Alcohol and Drug Problems: That Was Zen, 
This Is Tao. Am Psychol . 59(4):224–235. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.59.4.224. 
Witkiewitz K, Marlatt GA, Walker D. (2005). Mindfulness-Based Relapse Prevention for Alcohol and 
Substance Use Disorders. J Cogn Psychother . 19(3):211–228. doi:10.1891/jcop.2005.19.3.211. 
Witkiewitz K. (2008). Lapses following alcohol treatment: modeling the falls from the wagon. J Stud 
Alcohol Drugs . 69(4):594–604. 
Witkiewitz K, Masyn KE. (2008). Drinking trajectories following an initial lapse. Psychol Addict Behav . 
2008;22(2):157–67. doi:10.1037/0893-164X.22.2.157. 
Witkiewitz K, Villarroel NA. (2009). Dynamic a ssociation between negative affect and alcohol lapses 
following alcohol treatment. J Consult Clin Psychol . 77(4):633–44. doi:10.1037/a0015647. 
Witkiewitz K, Bowen S. (2010). Depression, crav ing, and substance use following a randomized trial of 
mindfulness-based relapse prevention. J Consult Clin Psychol . 78(3):362–374. 
doi:10.1037/a0019172. 
Witkiewitz K. (2011). Predictors of heavy drinking during and following treatment. Psychol Addict 
Behav . 25(3):426–38. doi:10.1037/a0022889. 
Witkiewitz, K., Lustyk, M. K. B., & Bowen, S. (2013). Retraining the Addicted Brain: A Review of 
Hypothesized Neurobiological Mechanisms of Mindf ulness-Based Relapse Prevention. Psychology 
of Addictive Behaviors. doi:10.1037/a0029258 
Witkiewitz K. (2013). Temptation to drink as a predictor of drinking outcomes following psychosocial 
treatment for alcohol dependence. Alcohol Clin Exp Res . 37(3):529–37. doi:10.1111/j.1530-
0277.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
 
Page 28 of 28  UNM IRB Protocol Template v10.05.15 Witkiewitz, K., Bowen, S., Douglas, H., & Hsu, S. H. (2013). Mindfulness-based relapse prevention for 
substance craving. Addictive Behaviors, 38(2), 1563–71. doi:10.1016/j.addbeh.2012.04.001 
Witkiewitz K, Bowen S, Harrop EN, Douglas H, Enkema M, Sedgwick C. (2014). Mindfulness-based 
treatment to prevent addictive behavior relapse:  theoretical models and hypothesized mechanisms 
of change. Subst Use Misuse . 49(5):513–524. doi:10.3109/10826084.2014.891845 
Witkiewitz, K., Warner, K., Sully, B., Barricks, A., Stauffer, C., Thompson, B. L., & Luoma, J. B. (2014). 
Randomized trial comparing mindfulness-based r elapse prevention with relapse prevention for 
women offenders at a residential addiction treatment center. Substance use & misuse , 49(5), 536-
546. 
Witkiewitz K, Clark V. (2015). Integration of br ain stimulation and imaging in clinical research and 
treatment of addiction. In: BrainStim.  Honolulu, HI; 2015. 
Witkiewitz, K., Warner, K., Sully, B., Barricks, A., St auffer, C., Steckler, G., Thompson, B., et al. (2014). 
A randomized effectiveness trial of mindfulness based relapse prevention and relapse prevention 
for women offenders at a residential addiction treatment center. Substance Use & Misuse.  
World Health Organization. (2009). Global health risks: mortality and burden of disease attributable to 
selected major risks . Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. 
Zgierska A, Rabago D, Chawla N, Kushner K, Koehler R, Marlatt A. (2009) Mindfulness meditation for 
substance use disorders: a systematic review. Subst Abus . 30(4):266–94. 
doi:10.1080/08897070903250019. 
Zindel LR, Kranzler HR. (2014). Pharmacotherapy of alcohol use disorders: seventy-five years of 
progress. J Stud Alcohol Drugs . [ADDRESS_918161] 1:79–88. 
Zuckerman, M. (1996). Item revisions in the Sens ation Seeking Scale Form V (SSS-V). Personality & 
Individual Differences, 20(4): p. 515. 