Study Protocol  Plan  
Stud y Title: Mindfuln ess Trainin g in Healthy Older Veterans 
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Date: 3/6/2016
Study Protocol  Plan  
Participants will be recruited at VA Northern [LOCATION_004], using the PIs existing participant database, posted 
fliers, and CPRS searches.  
Participants will be randomly assigned to either the MBSR or Brain Health control intervention. 
Randomization will be achieved with freely available software, using covariate adaptive randomization to 
ensure groups of equal size s that are balanced for age, education, and baseline anxiety and depression 
levels.  
Half of the study participants will complete an 8 -week Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) 
program on our VA campus. The course will be led by a certified MBSR instr uctor who has received 
extensive training in mindfulness -based interventions and specifically in MBSR. The MBSR group meets 
once per week for 2½ hours, with a day -long retreat for 7½ hours in the 6th week of the program. 
Participants are instructed in mind fulness practice in the form of sitting meditation, body awareness and 
mindful movement, and informal mindfulness practices of daily life (e.g., eating, communicating, working, 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]). Between classes, patients enhance their participation by [CONTACT_881341], 
homework assignments, and readings from the course materials and textbook. Home practice is tracked 
with pre -made logbooks that  patients keep for the duration of the study and record the number of hours 
engaged in practice at home. Logbooks are checked and recorded by [CONTACT_704815].  
The other half of participants will take part in an active control intervention, a Brain Health program, 
which is matched for the same number of hours, instructor, sch edule, homework, and home practice as 
the MBSR program. The Brain Health program has been used previously on our VA campus as an active 
control intervention for cognitive rehabilitation research protocols. It includes background and education 
about brain -behavior relationships and discusses how brain injuries can disrupt various aspects of 
cognition, such as memory and attention. We have found that our Brain Health program is the appropriate 
control intervention because it matches for critical process eleme nts such as clinician interaction, social 
interaction with the group, and homework activities, without the inclusion of a reflection/mindfulness 
component, which is hypothesized to be the critical factor for improving functioning.  
Treatment fidelity will b e assessed by [CONTACT_101198][INVESTIGATOR_881338]. Two independent individuals with extensive familiarity with the classes will rate the 
instructor on a scale from 1 -5, with higher numbers indicating better adher ence to the course manuals. 
Since the same instructor teaches both the MBSR and Brain Health class (in order to avoid the variability 
associated with different instructors), it is possible that there could be cross -contamination across classes 
(e.g., discu ssion of meditation in the Brain Health class). To monitor this, our fidelity check will also include 
review of class videotape for any possible cross -contamination, as judged by [CONTACT_590318]. Also, 
our instructor is very aware of this potential issue and is very conscious of avoiding cross -contamination, 
for example, by [CONTACT_881342] a student in the Brain Health class mentions topi[INVESTIGATOR_881339], such as meditation.  As a further check of cross -contamination, we will que ry participants with 
a short post -intervention questionnaire about their prior knowledge of class topi[INVESTIGATOR_881340] (which should only be endorsed by [CONTACT_881343]) and brain  anatomy (which should only be endorsed by [CONTACT_881344]).  
 
A battery of standardized psychological and cognitive measures will be administered 1) within two weeks 
prior to the intervention (pre -testing) and 2) within two weeks fo llowing the intervention (post -testing). 
All pre - and post -testing will be conducted by a licensed neuropsychologist who will be blinded to the 
participant’s intervention condition (MBSR vs. Brain Health/Education). The battery includes the Geriatric 
Depre ssion Scale and State -Trait Anxiety Inventory as primary outcome measures, and the Repeatable 
Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS) as a secondary outcome measure.  The 
RBANS was developed for the purpose of testing examinees at di fferent time points with multiple, 
matched versions of the battery that test a wide range of cognitive functions. The RBANS battery includes 
12 subtests and yields a total  scaled score for overall performance.   
All study staff involved in testing are licensed psychologists and will be vigilant in monitoring for acute 
suicidality. A verbal indication of suicidal intent or ideation during screening will be immediately evaluated 
and will trigger the VA Northern [LOCATION_004] Suicide Prevention Protocol which includes: 1) evaluation of 
imminent risk by a licensed psychologist; 2) if imminent risk, patient is im mediately brought to suicide 
team provider in Mental Health; 3) patient’s mental health or primary care physician is notified; and 4) 
written notification of a serious adverse event to the VA Institutional Review Board and Safety Monitoring 
Board within 24  hours. A determination of whether it is appropriate for the patient to continue in the 
research study will be made by [CONTACT_881345]’s medical providers.  
 
 