Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Title:  
 
Comparative Evaluation of SmartMouth Clinical DDS Advanced Oral 
Rinse and Chlorhexidine Mouth Rinse  
 
 
 
 
 
Date:  
 
7-13-2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction:  
 
The primary etiology for dental caries, gingivitis, and periodontal disease is the formation of 
bacterial colonies on the tooth surface. An inflammatory process follows the accumulation of 
dental plaque resulting in gin givitis . Many studies have demonstrated that plaque -induced 
gingivitis can be reversed following complete plaque remov al. Patients are instructed by [CONTACT_737036]  a daily oral hygi ene 
regimen. M any patients demonstrate poor compliance, possibly due to lack of motivation, 
dexterity , or skill . An antimicrobial mouth  rinse, when used as an adjunct to daily oral hygiene 
routine, can be beneficial to patients by [CONTACT_737037].  
 
Mouth  rinses with 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate are used commonly in Europe. Numerous 
studies have demonstrated the antiplaque and anti -gingivitis effectiveness of this rinse . Side 
effects associated with this mouth  rinse in clude tooth staining, calculus formation, and altered 
taste sensation. Studies have also been con ducted with 0.12% chlorhexidine.  T hese trials found 
the antiplaque and anti -gingivitis effectiveness is comparable to the 0.2% solution, but with 
diminished s ide effects . The 0.12% chlorhexidine mouth  rinse (Peridex®) is widely used on a 
prescription basis in the [LOCATION_002].  
 
Clinical trials have confirmed the efficacy of  cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) mouthrinses, but 
there is limited data comparing CPC to other antimicrobial ingredients. CPC rinses are not 
associated with side effects such as staining or taste al teration, and its use is well tolerated by 
[CONTACT_1962].  SmartMouth  Clinical DDS Advanced Oral Rinse (a.k.a. SmartMouth Advanced 
Clinical Formula) (Tr iumph Pharmaceuticals, Inc., St. Louis, MO)  is an over -the-counter mouth  
rinse formulated to reduce plaque and gingivitis and to provide long term fresh breath through 
the elimination and prevention of bad breath sulfur gases (Volatile Sulfur Compounds or VSC) 
utilizing zinc -ion technology.  The active ingredient in SmartM outh Clinical DDS Advanced 
Oral Rinse  is 0.05% cetylpyridini um chloride (CPC) .  
 
The aim of this six -week double -blind , placebo -controlled clinical trial was to provide evidence 
of the clinical efficacy of SmartMouth Clinical DDS Advanced Oral Rinse (SM) in comparison 
with the efficacy of 0.12% chlorhexidine rinse (CHX) and a placebo rinse (PL). The outcomes 
included measu res of plaque, gingiviti s, tooth staining, calculus formation , patient compliance, 
and taste perception.  
 
Materials and Methods:  
 
A six -week, double -blinded, clinical study will be  conducted on 80  subjects diagnosed with 
plaque induced gingivitis  and/or chroni c periodontitis.  The study will take  place at two centers: 
Saint Louis University Center for Advanced Dental Education (Site 1) and Southern Illinois 
University School of Dental Medicine  (Site 2) .  The study was approved by [CONTACT_737038] (IRB #[ZIP_CODE]) at Saint Louis University and Southern Illinois University 
Edwardsville.  
 
Subjects  who sign  the informed consent and medical history forms and me et the preli minary 
entrance criteria  will be  examined at baseline  (visit 1) .  All participants will be  informed of the 
nature of the study, its purpose, and a ny possible risks. Subjects will be  informed as to the length 
of the study and the specific procedures that would be performed . Subjects will be  informed that 
this was  a voluntary study and that they are  free to withdraw from the stu dy at any time . 
 
Gingival index (GI) will be  measured using the Loe and Silness method .24 The gingiva will be  
scored at six sites of each tooth  (distobuccal, buccal, mesiobuccal, distolingual, lingual, 
mesiolingual)  and given a score from 0 – 3.  By [CONTACT_737039] s ites, the GI for the patient will be  obtained.    
 
Sites with GI scores of 2 or 3 will be  counted as bleeding.  A whole mouth total Bleeding Score 
(BS) will be calculated by [CONTACT_737040].  
 
Extrinsi c tooth stain will be  scored on the facial surfaces of the eight incisor teeth using a 
modification of the Lobene tooth stain index (TSI). [ADDRESS_1006927]’s stain 
score.   
 
Supragingival calculus on the lingual surfaces of the s ix mandibular anterior teeth will be  scored 
using the Volp e-Manhold calculus index (CI).[ADDRESS_1006928] score calculated.  
 
Plaque will be  scored based on the Turesky modification of the Quigley —Hein Plaque Index  
(PI).33  A score of 0 – 5 will be  assigned to six sites of each tooth (distobuccal, buccal, 
mesiobuccal, distolingual, lingual, mesiolingual)  following the use of a disclosing solutio n. The 
Plaque In dex for the entire mouth will be  determined by [CONTACT_737041].  
 
Teeth with gross caries and thi rd molars will  not be scored .  A comp lete periodontal examination 
will be  performed for all subjects that me et the inclusion criteria.  A panoramic radiograph  will 
be taken for all subjects who  do not have full mouth radiographs within the las t year.  Safety 
assessments will be  made at each measurement visit.   
 
Visit 2 will oc cur within four weeks of Visit 1. For this relatively small cli nical study for which 
there are  two centers and  three treatments, subjects will be  assigned treatments through the 
process of minimization to assure a balance in the number of subjects in each treatment group:  
Group [ADDRESS_1006929] after visit 3 for use until the final visit.   Compliance will be  determined by [CONTACT_737042] a 3  week basis and by [CONTACT_737043] 
(compliance defined as percentage of product used).  
 
Subjects will be  examined again at visit 4, three weeks after visit [ADDRESS_1006930] will return  the unused rinse. Compliance will be  determined by [CONTACT_737044] d of the study. Subjects will be  given a Taste 
Perception S urvey to answer questions about their experience with the mouth  rinse.    
 
Following the study, the subjects will be treated by [CONTACT_30155]'s discretion.   Subjects can  
withdraw from the clinic trial at any time without providi ng reason. The investigators can  also 
withdraw subjects at any time due to protocol irregularity. All instances of  withdraw will be  
document ed.  
 
Intra -Examiner Calibration  
 
Intra -examiner calibration will be  completed prior to beginning the study. T hree examiners (EB, 
DF, AS) will make  original and repeat determinations of values for four teeth in ten subjects for 
each of  four indices. A kappa value will be  determined for each original and repeat 
determination,  and the average kappa value will be  determined for the four teeth for each index 
for each examiner. For an examiner to be considered calibrated, average  kappa value s for each 
index have  to be between 0.81 and 1 (almost perfect agree ment).  
 
Data Analysis  
 
The primary outcome measures are gingivitis and plaque.  Secondary outcome measures are 
tooth discoloration, taste perception, malodor and calculus. For each outcome measure, a single 
value will be calculated for each subject —that is, the subject is the unit of measurement for 
analyses.  
 
Analyses will be based on intention to treat (with randomized intervention). Sensitivity analyses 
will based on as treated an alyses. To test for differences among and between treatments, we will 
use repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with treatment and location as the 
between -group factors and one within -subject (repeated -measures) factor with 2 levels: (1) 
measureme nts at visit 3 and (2) measurements at visit 4. For these analyses, we will use 
multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), which does not require the assumptions of 
compound symmetry (homogeneous pooled within -group variances and across -subjects 
covarianc es) and sphericity (orthogonal components). Post -hoc testing will be performed with 
the Tukey honestly significant difference ([HSD) test.  
 
Sample -size calculation and power analysis (treatment effect of Smart Mouth ACF): One goal of 
the proposed study is to test the null hypothesis that the mean gingival score for Smart Mouth 
ACF is equal to the mean gingival score for the placebo (control).  With alpha (the criterion for 
significance) set at 0.05, a [ADDRESS_1006931] (which means that an effect in either dire ction will be 
interpreted), and a sample size of [ADDRESS_1006932] a power of 
99.9% to yield a statistically significant result. This computation is based on data from Ayad et al 
(2011), with the assumption that the mean dif ference is 0.44 (corresponding to means of 2.03 
versus 1.59) and a common within -group standard deviation of 0.27 (based on SD estimates of 
0.22 and 0.31). We assume that this effect size is reasonable, in the sense that an effect of this 
magnitude is anti cipated in this field of research. We could report an observed difference of 0.44 
with a 95.0% confidence interval of 0.27 to 0.61. Based on plaque scores given in Ayad et al 
(2011) and a sample size of [ADDRESS_1006933] a power >99.9% to dem onstrate a 
treatment effect for Smart Mouth ACF. Our intent is to enroll 25 subjects into each group. Our 
sample -size calculations assume a 20% dropout rate. We, however, anticipate that the dropout 
rate will be less than 10%.  
 
Equivalence of Smart Mouth ACF with 0.12% chlorhexidine. We will have power of 82% to 
demonstrate that the mean gingivitis score for Smart Mouth ACF is the same (neither lower nor 
higher) than the mean for .12% chlorhexidine. This assumes that the mean values for the two 
treatments are equal, with a common within -group standard deviation of 0.25, that a difference 
of .20 points or less is unimportant, that the sample size in the two groups will be 21 and 21, and 
that alpha (1 tailed) is set at .05. For this calculation, we used stand ard deviations from Ayad et 
al (2011).  Formally, the null hypothesis is that the mean for Smart Mouth ACF is 0.20 points 
lower or higher than the mean for .12% chlorhexidine, and the study has power of 81.7% to 
reject this null. Equivalently, the likeliho od is 81.7% that the 95.0% confidence interval for the 
mean difference will exclude a difference of 0.20 points in either direction.  
 
 