 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C-STAR – Center for the Study of Aphasia Recovery Modeling Treated Recovery from 
Aphasia  
NCT 03416738  
Unique Protocol ID: Pro00053559  
U.S. NIH Grant/Contract Award # P50DC014664  
 
Study Protocol (Version 14) and Research Plan  
April 20, 2020  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
Human Subjects Research Proposal  
Study Title:  Center for the Study of Aphasia Recovery (C -STAR)  
Project 001(032)1: Modeling Treated Recovery from Aphasia  
Project 003(038): Combining Behavior, Neuroimaging and Biomarkers to Predict 
Language Deficits after Stroke  
Principle Investigators:  Julius Fridriksson, Ph.D., Christopher Rorden, Ph.D.  
 
Table of Contents:  
A. Abstract………………………………………………………………………………………..p. 3  
B. Background and Significance…………………………………………………………p. 3  
C. Specific Aims an d Hypotheses………………………………………………………..p. 6 
D. Data Collection…………………………………………………………………………….. p. 8 
E. Data Analysis……………………………………………………………………………….. .p. 14 
F. Protection of Human Subjects……………………………………………………….. p. 15 
G. References and Literature Citations………………………………………………..p. 20 
H. Appendix A – Study Protocol…. ………………………………………………………p. 24 
I. Appendix B – Scripts for Treatment Tasks ……………… .………………………p. 34 
J. Appendix C  – COVID Remote Protocol ………………………… .………………….p. 49  
K. Appendix D  – POLAR Research Plan ………………………………………………p. 50  
L. Appendix E – Clinical Core Research Plan……………………………………….p. [ADDRESS_670292] is to investigate 
a variety of factors (e.g., biographical, cognitive/linguistic, and patterns of brain damage) 
that predict an ind ividual's response to aphasia treatment. To this end, the current 
submission is one part of a large, multi -center collaboration, with this specific project 
focused on assessment and treatment of [ADDRESS_670293] -stroke individuals in the chronic phase of 
stroke (> [ADDRESS_670294] -onset). In a crossover design, two different treatments will be 
studied, over the course of a 39 -week period (including rest periods). Following the 
completion of treatments, we will model participants' response to therapy based on 
biographi cal, cognitive/linguistic variables, as well as patterns of brain damage. An 
additional [ADDRESS_670295] (NIH submitted 
grant is included in this submission), and that additional  projects will stem from the results 
found here (and in turn, will likely require either amendments to the current IRB or entirely 
new IRB submissions at later dates).  
 
  
B. Background and Significance  
Background  
Speech/language therapy for the management of aphasic impairments is generally 
shown to be effective. However, the reasons that certain treatments may work for some 
individuals, and not others, and why some individuals do not respond to treatment is 
largely unknown.  Two  recent  Cochrane  reviews  of behavioral  aphasia  treatment  suggest  
that although  aphasia  treatment  may  be effective,  no specific  treatments  have  emerged  as 
standards  of care (1, 2) . After  decades  of research,  no general  consensus  has been  reached  
regarding  which  aspects  of language  or communication  abilities  should  be treated,  how  
treatment  should  proceed,  or which  factors  are important  for predicting  aphasia  treatment  
success.  As a result,  individuals  with  aphasia  receive  treatment  relying  on an assortment  of 
approaches,  often  with  very  minimal  scientific  data  to support  their  utility.  Additionally,  
prediction of  long -term  outcomes  typi[INVESTIGATOR_517103]  a “wait  and  see”  approach.  Accordingly,  
clinicians  who  routinely  treat  patient s with aphasia  have  very  limited  empi[INVESTIGATOR_517104].  Whereas  biomarker studies  are common  in 
medicine,  almost  no studies  have  been  carried  out to understand  the relationship between  
patient  factors  and  aphasia  rehabilitation  potential  in stroke (3-5). This  is a major  problem,  
as valuable  resources  are probably  wasted  because  time  and funds  available  to rehabilitate  
individual  patient s are likely limited.  Whereas  single  case  or small -group  studies  are helpful  
for testing  different  aspects  of aphasia  treatment,  the time  is ripe  for larger  scale  studies  
that  rely  on “big  data”  approaches  to answer  general questions  regarding  what  should  be 
treated  and  who  is most  likely  to respond  to treatment.  Over  time,  such studies  should  be 
 [ADDRESS_670296]  the 
potential  to provide  credibility  for the field  and  influence  public  policies  regarding  
appropriations  of rehabilitation  funds.  
Existing evidences suggests that aphasia  severity  is one of the few factors  that reliably  
predicts performance  in speech and language therapy (herein referred to as SALT) . It is 
generally  accepted  that  more  severe  aphasia  is associated  with  poorer  treatment  outcomes.  
However,  aphasia  severity  is a multidimensional  construct,  and patient s with  similar  overall  
severity  scores  might  demonstrate  very  different  language  impairment  profiles.   
Over the past decade, our group has sought to identify factors that predict post -stroke 
impairment and response to treatment. In a recent pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], data from our group has shown that 
different patterns of brain damage may influence treatment outcomes (6). In this study, treatment 
appr oaches were theoretically driven by [CONTACT_517182] (DS model; (7)). The dual strea m model 
proposes that the brain has two "streams" for processing speech/language - a dorsal stream in charge of 
production, and a ventral stream in charge of semantic processing.  Based on this model, it was predicted 
that participants with dorsal stream d amage would respond to dorsal treatments (i.e., 
phonological/production based treatments) and those with ventral stream damage would respond 
better to ventral stream treatments (i.e., semantically based treatments).  Participants underwent two 
types of tre atment - one that was based on phonological processes (sounds of words) and one that was 
based on semantic processes (meanings of words). Results of this work (6) show a wide range  in 
treatment  responses  across  the patient s, but generally, our results showed that responses to 
different treatment approaches may differ based on patterns of brain damage.  However, there 
are a number of other variables that may influence an individual's response to treatment, which were not 
investigated. For example, several  studies  suggest  that  factors  such  as aphasia  severity (8-11), 
lesion  location (9, 12) , and  time  post -stroke (13)  are related  to aphasia  treatment  outcome.   
Therefore, to better  understand  how language  impairment  relates  to treatment  
outcomes,  the current project will again consult the DS model. Specifically,  we will test  whether  
measures  of proportional  damage  to the cortical  areas  that comprise  the DS model  improve  
prediction  of aphasia  treatment  response,  beyond  biographical  and cognitive/linguistic  
factors. Accordingly, we will investigate whether the DS improves prediction of treatment 
response better than a "default" model (i.e., cognitive/linguistic factors alone).  To 
understand whether  our predictive  model  can be generalized  across  different  kinds  of 
treatment  foci,  each  participant  will undergo  two types of treatment  devoted  to phonological  
stimulation,  and  a separate  treatment  phase  focusing  on semantic  stimulation.   
Relying  on a large  participant  sample,  we plan  to identify  and  model  the interaction  of 
biographical,  cognitive,  and linguistic  factors  that  predict  aphasia  treatment  outcome.  This  
model  will provide  clinicians  with  crucial  information  to make  more  accurate  prognoses  
regarding  participant s' treatment  outcomes.  Whereas identifying  biomarkers  of positive  
aphasia  treatment  may  be important,  we believe  that  such  an endeavor  may be  improved  if it 
takes  models  of speech  and  language  processing  into  account.  That  is, cortical  damage  that  
affects  specific  speech  and  language  processes  may  not only  have  a particularly  negative  
effect  on communication,  but also  may  affect  aphasia  treatment  success. Furthermore, p rior 
research in aphasiology has shown that theory -driven treatments are more effective, but 
unfortunately, few treatments are indeed motivated by [CONTACT_10070] -supported theories.  Hence,  the 
current  project  will test  the utility  of the DS model,  arguably  the most  influential  
 [ADDRESS_670297]  learning  (or relearning),  the relationship  between  participant s’ capacity  to 
learn  and response  to aphasia  treatment  is poorly understood.  The  relatively  recent  emphasis  
on individual  differences  rather  than  group  averages  has highlighted  very  clear  differences  in 
learning  capacity  and potential  in the normal  population  (14-17). We will investigate  whether  
participant s’ ability  to learn  at baseline  predicts  long -term  success  in aphasia  treatment.  If 
this study  yields  positive  results,  it will further  improve  clinicians’  ability  to guide  aphasia  
management.  
In sum, there  is a great  need  for prognostic  indicators  of aphasia  treatment  response.  At 
the completion  of our research,  we will understand  why  some  participant s respond  better  
to aphasia  treatment  than  others.  We have  selected  treatment  approaches  that  are 
routinely  used  in clinical  practice,  allowing  for immediate  translation  of the findings  
directly  into  participant  management.  The  current  project  will yield  a vast  dataset  that  will 
be made publicly  available  allowing  others  to study  further  aphasia  treatment  response  in 
relation  to cognitive/linguistic and  lesion  factors (please see Data Analyses  section for 
human subjects protection related to this available dataset).  
Significance  
An important contribution of this project to the literature of aphasiology will be 
results from a large sample of participants. In the most  downloaded  article  in the history  of 
the Public  Library  of Science,  “Why  Most  Published  Research  Findings  Are False,”  Ioannidis  
(18)  noted  that  when  all factors  are equal,  in fields  where  smaller  studies  are the norm,  the 
chances  of research  findings  being  false  is much  higher  than  in fields  where  larger  studies  
are typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855].  The  norm  in aphasia  treatment  studies,  including  our own  previous  studies,  is to 
rely  on single -subject design  or very  small  group  studies.  It is straightforward  to 
understand  why  this  is the state  of affairs.  Treatment studies  take  a relatively  long  time  and  
a disproportionate  level  of resources  compared  to most  other  kinds  of research  in aphasia.  
Also,  subject  recruitment  is often  an issue,  especially  in studies  that  target  participant s with  
specific  cognitive/linguistic  impairment  profiles.  Nevertheless,  our field  needs  larger  
treatment  studies  to reveal specific  trends  that  can be generalized  to the larger  population  
of participant s, not just to a narrow  number  of cases.  We believe  that  our past  success,  
institutional  environment,  and  collaborative  spi[INVESTIGATOR_517105] a position  to conduct  a 
relatively  large  aphasia  study  that  has the potential  to exert  a sustained  impact  on the field  
of clinical  aphasiology.  In the context  of previous  aphasia  treatment  studies,  project 1  
entails  a relatively  large  sample  size  of treated  participant s (N=120; rational for sample 
size is described in the Human Subjects  Protection  section)  and  extensive  
cognitive/linguistic  testing,  including  assessment  of learning  potential  and a neuroimaging  
workup.  As we contend  that  recent  meta -analyses  studies have  demonstrated  the value  of 
aphasia  treatment,  the purpose  of this project  is not to test the efficacy  of treatment,  but 
rather  to determine  why  some  participant s respond  better  to treatment  than  others  and  
whether treatment  response  relates  to which  language  domains  are targeted  in treatment . 
The  overall significance of this work points to the fact that the  clinicians  who  provide  most  of 
 [ADDRESS_670298] 2 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517106], M.A., M.D., Johns 
Hopkins University) to fuel  Projects  3 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517107] ; USC ) and  4 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517108] ; University of 
[LOCATION_004], Irvine ). 
 
C. Specific  Aims and Hypotheses  
To test whether contemporary models of speech processing can be used to predict 
response to aphasia treatment in chronic stroke patient s. The goal is to develop a model that 
includes biographical and cognitive/linguistic factors to predict who is likely to  respond to 
aphasia treatment and what kinds of stimuli (phonological vs. semantic) should be emphasized in 
treatment . The specific aims are as follows:  
 
1. To identify biographical and cognitive/linguistic factors that predict aphasia treatment 
outcome. Con struct a predictive model of aphasia treatment success (herein referred to as the 
"default model") and make that model available on -line to clinicians.  
 
2. To test whether the DS model (as an anatomical model of speech and language processing) 
improves outcom e prediction beyond what can be inferred based on biographical and 
cognitive/linguistic factors. Essentially, this aim will test whether the DS model provides 
greater improvement in outcome prediction compared to the default model and classical 
models base d on localizationist approaches to brain -language relationships (i.e., the classical 
Wernicke -Lichtheim -Geschwind model; WLG (19-22)). 
 
To test whether measures of learning potential predict overall treatment outcome. Three 
learning tasks will be a dministered by [CONTACT_517183]  – two will be 
linguistic learning , whereas the third will be a nonlinguistic learning task.   
 
Specific Aims 1 and 2: Models  of Treated  Aphasia  Recovery    
Aim [ADDRESS_670299]  behavioral  testing,  
and MRI  scanning. Specific details for each of these components are presented in the 
Research Activitie s, Protection of Human Subjects section and the Appendix.  As we explain  in 
Data  Analysis section,  this informa tion will be used to determine treatment outcomes 
based on these different variables. We will model response to treatment based on: 1. 
Biographical  factors:  Age  (23, 24) ; education  (25, 26) ; gender (27) ; handedness  (28) ; age at 
stroke,  type  of stroke,  number  of strokes,  and  time  post  first  stroke  that  caused  the aphasia  
(29) ; 2. Cognitive/linguistic  factors:  Clinical  assessment  of aphasia (10, 11) , motor  speech  
production  (30) , grammatical  processing  (31) , semantic  processing  of verbs  and  nouns  (32) , 
phonological  processing  (33) , speech  discrimination  (34) , speech  repetition (35) , executive  
function ing (36) , and  verbal  short -term  memory  (37) . Once  we have  built our  final  data -
driven  model(s),  it will  be possible  to examine  the specific  interactions  between  these  
factors  that make  up each  model.  
 
 
 [ADDRESS_670300]  demonstrated  
that  functional  brain  changes  in the residual  language areas  of the left hemisphere  support  
treated  improvement  in naming  in aphasia (21, 38) . Based  thereon, we  could  conclude  that  
strengthening  of the residual  left-hemisphere  language  network,  the areas  that  remain 
intact  after  stroke,  leads  to improved  language  processing  in aphasia.  However,  as far as we 
can tell, no research  has examined  whether  this  kind  of network  compensation  relies  on 
overall  network  integrity  or survival  of specific  sub-components  of the network.  We suggest  
that  the DS model  offers  a principled  approach to answer  such  questions.  For example,  for 
cases  of damage  to the ventral  stream,  and  concomitant  semantic impairment,  treatment  
might  focus  specifically  on semantic  stimulation.  Here,  one could  assume  that  preservation  
of the ventral  stream  would  be related  to treatment  success,  so that patient s with  greater  
damage  to the ventral  stream  are less  likely  to respond  compared  to others  whose  ventral 
stream  is relatively  more  preserved.  This  view  would  contend  that  successful  rehabilitation  
relies  on the survival  of the network  that  is being  stimulated.  However,  an opposing  view  
could  argue  that  what  really  matters  is cross -domain  compensation  where  the dorsal  
stream  is forced  to become  more  strongly  involved  to support  improvements  in language.  
Along  these  lines,  we propose  that  reliance  on the DS model may  improve  our 
understanding  of why  some  patient s show  greater  improvements  than  others  and to relate  
the findings  in neuroanatomy.   
To test this, the data collected from the treatment and assessment of the individuals enrolled 
in this project will inform further projects (i.e., specifically [CONTACT_517295]’s  project, Project  3). This 
project  will rely  on the same  behavioral  data  collected h ere,  but it will  focus  on developi[INVESTIGATOR_517109]/recovery.  The  benefit  of this  setup  is that  each  
project  may  yield  complementary  results  that  can better  explain  differences  in treatment 
response  among  participant s. 
 
Specific Aim 3:  
Unlike  the measures  included  in Aims  1 and  2 that mostly  represent  static  factors  
(e.g.,  performance  on cognitive/linguistic  tests,  proportional  damage  to specific brain  
regions),  learning  potential  represents  dynamic  change,  something  that  could  be assessed  at 
baseline  to understand  if prolonged  aphasia  rehabilitation  is likely  to be effective.  Aim  [ADDRESS_670301]  to estimate  learning  is to measure  changes  in contextual  support  (e.g.  
cueing)  needed  to evoke  the correct  response  (124). In a previous study (N=30; 10, 85) our 
group investigated the level  of cueing  needed  to elicit  correct  naming response to stimulus 
presentations across multiple treatment sessions.  Results  revealed  that  changes  in cueing  
strength  during  the initial treatment sessions (for the phonological and semantic 
treatments)  strongly  predict  overall  treatment outcome.  These  results  suggest  that  
participant s whose  level  of cueing  strength  needed  to elicit  correct  naming decreases  during  
the initial  treatment  session  are far more  likely  to respond  to the overall  treatment,  
regardless of initial  aphasia  severity.  We recognize  that  decreased  reliance  on cues  during  
naming  may  not be a classical learning  task  and  that  what  we deem  “learning”  in this  context  
could  also  be called  “stimulability”  or priming.  Regardless,  performance  on the cueing  
hierarchy  task  by [CONTACT_56049] [ADDRESS_670302]  predictor  of outcome  and  no other  
factor  – behavioral  or neuroimaging  – came  even  close  in terms  of predictive  power. From  a 
theoretical  perspective,  it is a caveat  that  we do not know  whether  the changes  in cueing  
 8 
level represent  a general  learning  mechanism  or something  that  is language  specific.  
Therefore,  in addition  to measuring  potential  changes  in cueing  strength  during  a baseline  
session  that  uses  cueing  hierarchies  to elicit  pi[INVESTIGATOR_517110],  all participant s will also  
complete  a separate  learning  task  that  does  not explicitly  rely  on language processing.  As a 
result,  it will be possible  to determine  if initial  success  in treatment  is related  to language 
independent  learning  or is language  specific.  
 
 Hypothesis Aim 3 . Learning  is driven  by [CONTACT_517184]  – the ability  of the brain  to 
continuously  adapt  its structure  and  function  based  on internal  and external  environmental  
changes.  Neuroplasticity  occurs  due  to changes  in neuronal  morphology,  glia,  and vascular  
and metabolic  processes  and can be stimulated  by a variety  of sensory -motor  experiences  (5, 
39, 40) . Learning  potential  is a common  concept  in the education  literature  (41, 42) . It 
assumes  that  not all individuals have  the same  ability  to acquire  new  information  and  
probably  reflects  flexibility  of neural  systems  to adapt  to internal  changes  or external  
stimulation.  Although  most  clinicians  probably  assume that  some  aphasic  participant s have  
greater  rehabilitation  potential  than  others,  it is not clear  whether  participant s’ learning  
potential  is related  to aphasia  treatment  outcome. Nevertheless, we predict that learning 
potential will be related to treatment outcomes.  
 
D. Data Collection  
Comparing  Biomarkers  as a Function  of Treatment  Foci  
One  of the challenges  to interpreting  the value  of aphasia  treatment  biomarkers  is 
the generalizability  across  different  kinds  of treatment  types  and  foci. For that  reason,  this 
project  will rely  on a crossover  design  where  each  participant  completes  one  treatment  
phase  that  focuses  on semantic  stimulation and  another  treatment  phase  where  the focus  is 
on phonological  stimulation . Accordingly , we will be able  to compare  biomarkers  of 
treatment  outcome  and determine  if the same  factors  predict  success,  regardless  of 
treatment  focus,  or whether  biomarkers  are dependent  on treatment  focus.   
 
Research Design and Methods and Data Analysis  
 Our plan is to treat 120 participants with chronic aphasia caused by [CONTACT_517185]. Utilizing a crossover design, each participant will receive 45 minutes of aphasia 
treatment per weekday (5x/week) focusing on treatment tasks that emphasize  semantic or 
phonological stimulation (Table 1). Half of the participant s will receive treatment in the following 
order: a. 15 treatment sessions utilizing phonological stimulation tasks; b. 4 -week inter -
treatment interval; c. [ADDRESS_670303] baseline visit ( referred to as W0 here, but W1 in the consent form ), 
participant s’ biographical and testing information is entered into online modules in WebDCUTM 
(see P50 Administrative Core ). All subsequent participant  data, including testing and treatment 
scores, MRI related information, and treatment fidelity information, will also be entered and 
stored using WebDCUTM. To establish treatment baselines and for the purpose of in -depth 
characterization of the participant  sample, each participant  will undergo extensive testing during 
the week  prior to treatment.  
To assess treatment related changes in speech and language processing, testing will occur 
during the weeks immediately before and after each treatment phase. Follow -up testing will occur 
 9 
4-weeks and 6 months (at or around week 39) after completing the second treatment phase. To 
assess damage to the cortical areas included in the WLG and DS models, participant s will undergo 
MRI (see P50 Neuroimaging Core ) at baseline during the week before treatment is initiated . 
Additionally, participa nts will undergo MRI testing following each treatment phase and at [ADDRESS_670304] undergo aphasia treatment utilizing 
tasks that target phonological stimulation. Then, during the second treatment phase, these participant s will cross 
over to receive treatment focused on semantic stimulation. G2 (group 2) will undergo treatmen t using the opposite 
order of treatment phases. W=Weeks; Eval=Evaluation of performance (testing); Phon. Tx.=Phonological processing 
focused treatment; Sem. Tx.=Semantic processing focused treatment.  
 
 
Group  W1 
 W2-4 W5 W6-7 W8 W9-11 W12  W15*  W 39#  
G1 MRI & 
Eval 2 -3 
days  15 Phon. 
Tx MRI &  
Eval 1-
[ADDRESS_670305]  Eval 1-2 
days  15 Sem.  
Tx MRI &  
Eval 1-
2 
days Eval 1-
2 
days MRI &  
Eval 1-
2 
days 
G2 MRI & 
Eval 2 -3 
days  15 Sem.  
Tx MRI &  
Eval 1-
[ADDRESS_670306]  Eval 1-2 
days 15 Phon. 
Tx MRI &  
Eval 1-
2 
days Eval 1-
2 
days 
 
 MRI &  
Eval 1-
2 
days 
*W15 denotes 4 -week follow -up testing    
#W3 9 denotes 6 -month follow -up testing  (this testing should take place at or around week 39)  
 
Additional Follow -Up 
 A subset of participants will be called back for a long -term follow -up, at least six months 
after the 6 month follow -up (i.e., one -year post -treatment) . The purpose is to extend the follow -up 
window for the POLAR study, to one -year post aphasia treatment. There is evidence to suggest 
that declining performance in st roke -induced aphasia is attributed to pathologic changes in the 
brain's white matter, referred to as leukoaraiosis  (Basilakos et al., in press) . Leukoaraiosis is 
common in stroke survivors, and is often attributed to age, as well as cardiovascular health a nd 
other health concerns. In the general population, it has been associated with cognitive decline and 
loss of functional ability. By [CONTACT_517186] -up interval for the POLAR study, this study will 
address a new aim of evaluating the progression of leuko araiosis and how it affects overall 
cognitive -linguistic ability in stroke survivors. To this end, participants will undergo a subset of 
the same speech/language and cognitive testing administered at study baseline , as well as testing 
with the NIH Toolbox . Participants will also undergo a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
protocol  (about one hour in duration) . The extent of behavioral change will be evaluated and 
related to neuroanatomical changes. The role of cognitive reserve and other personal factors in 
mediating the effects of leukoaraiosis will also be explored.  The Appendix outlines additional 
measures that will be obtained at this testing time point.  
 
Recruitment  
Identification  of eligible  participants .  For Project  1, the Clinical  Core  team  will 
focus  recruitment efforts on referrals from rehabilitation professionals as outlined in our 
 10 
Patient/Participant Referral Program (PRP).  This program provides a monetary 
incentive of $[ADDRESS_670307] ed treatments that are typi[INVESTIGATOR_517111]. Neither semantic nor 
phonological processing exists independently of each other in oral language use. Accordingly, the 
treatment appro aches to be used here do not focus exclusively on either semantic or phonological 
processing; they each involve both, but place different emphasis on semantics versus phonological 
processing. In fact, even when semantic processing is the treatment emphasis , these treatments 
also affect phonological processing and vice versa. We stress that the main purpose here is not to 
assess whether one treatment focus is more potent than the other for improving language 
processing. Rather, we only include the two treatm ent foci to understand if factors that predict 
outcome with one treatment approach also predict success using the other treatment approach . In 
addition, we include two semantic and phonological treatment  foci to explore whether damage to 
the dorsal and ven tral streams differentially predicts response to phonological and semantic 
treatment.   
 
Semantically focused treatment tasks . Three types of tasks will be featured.  Please see 
the Appendix for scripts and examples for each treatment task. Tasks are as fol lows:  1) Semantic 
feature analysis  (SFA) has a relatively long history as a treatment approach for aphasia (43-45). 
For each pi[INVESTIGATOR_517112]. Then, he or she is 
encouraged to produce semantically related words that represent features similar to the target 
word (e.g. superordinate category, use, action, physical properties, location, and association). For 
example, to elicit a location feature, a clinician might say “where do you typi[INVESTIGATOR_517113]?” 
If the participant  is not able to name [CONTACT_517282], 
the clinician will say target word. Regardless of naming accuracy on the l ast item, treatment 
continues on to the next stimulus item. Because both nouns and verbs (46, 47)  have been used for 
SFA  focused  activities, stimuli for SFA tasks here will utilize both. 2) The second semantic 
treatment approach is the semantic barrier task . This approach includes features of the Promoting 
Apha sics’ Communication Effectiveness (PACE) approach (48-51) and has also been included as 
part  of constraint -induced language therapy  (52) . It relies on a stack o f pi[INVESTIGATOR_517114], which 
are split between the participant  and clinician and placed face up on a table. A visual barrier is 
placed between the clinician and the participant  so they cannot see each other’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. The goal 
of the task is for one participant (e.g., participant ) to describe each card so that the other 
participant (e.g., clinician) can guess the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517115]. Participants are only allowed to 
describe th e semantic features of the target and the clinician models the kinds of cues that are 
allowed. The clinician and participant  take turns describing pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. 3) The third approach, Verb 
network strengthening treatment  (VNeST), is a semantic treatment approa ch that targets lex ical 
retrieval of verbs and their thematic nouns  (53) . The objective of VNeST is for the participant  to 
generate verb -noun associates with the purpose of strengthening the connections between the 
verb and its thematic roles. VNeST can be modified to fit participant s with very limited speech 
output (e.g., using sentence completion).  
 
Phonologically focused treatment tasks. Three approaches, also with sound research 
pedigrees, will be used. 1) The first is the phonological components analysis task  (54) , which was 
modeled after semantic feature analysis. It requires the participant  to first name a given pi[INVESTIGATOR_517116] (e.g., first sound, syllables, last 
 11 
sound, association, and rhyme). Once the features have been identified, participants  are 
required to attempt to name [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_517117]. Then, the treatment moves on to the next item in a 
stack of targeted imageable nouns  and verbs . 2) Phonological production task  is a phonologic ally 
based therapy that focuses on the identification of phonological features using a stack of targeted 
imageable noun s and verbs . It requires t he participant to first sort the stack of pi[INVESTIGATOR_517118]. Once the participant has sorted the 
targeted words into two stacks, the treatment moves on to identifying the following hierarchy of 
phonological features using a pair of the targeted imageable nouns /verbs : a. first syllable -first 
syllable; b. first syllable -last syllable; c. last syllable -last syllable; d. last syllable -first syllabl e; e. 
first syllable -first sound; f. last syllable -last sound; g. first syllable -last sound; h. last syllable -first 
sound.  Once each targeted feature is identified for the pair of words, the participant  is required to 
blend the  syllables/ sounds together.  3) The phonological judgment task  relies on computerized 
presentation of verbs and nouns where participants  are required to judge whether pairs of words 
include similar phono logical features . The task is comprised of five conditions that entail 
determining if a set of words: a. Includes t he same number of syllables; b. Includes the same initial 
syllable; c. Includes the same final syllable; d. Which word has more syllables; and e. rhyme. 
Participants  respond to each condition by [CONTACT_517187].  Additional information regarding all treatment tasks can 
be found in Appendix A.  
 
 
Biographical Factors and Cognitive/linguistic Assessments  
Biographical factors . For the purpose of recording data on biographical factors, each 
participant  (and/or caregiver) will be required to fill out a case history form and a questionnaire 
on previous medical events, years of education, etc.  
 
Cognitive/linguistic testing.  The following tests and tasks will be utilized to assess 
cognitive/linguistic status at baseline, before any treatment starts: 1. The revised version of the 
WAB will be used to assess overall aphasia severity and type (55) . Although the WAB does not 
provide in -depth analysis of speech and language impairment, it is a test that is commonly used in 
clinical practice as well as a reasonable measure of overall aphasia sever ity; 2. The Apraxia of 
Speech Rating Scale (ASRS; (56) ) will be uti lized to rate the presence and severity of apraxia of 
speech AOS (note: the ASRS constitutes a major component of project 3); 3. To assess grammatical 
processing (agrammatism), we will rely on the Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences 
(57) . The NAVS was designed for participant s with aphasia and allows for detailed examination of 
verb processing (e.g. verb naming) as well as production and comprehension of canonica l and 
non -canonical sentences; 4. The Pyramids and Palm Trees Test (PPTT; (58) ) and the  Kissing and 
Dancing Test (KDT; (59) ) will be used to assess amodal semantic processing of nouns and verbs, 
respectively; 5. To assess phonological processing, several sub -tests from the Psycholinguistic 
Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia (PALPA; (60) ) will be utilized (a. Auditory 
discrimination of nonword minimal pairs; b. Auditory discrimination of word minimal pairs; c. 
Rhyme Judgments for pi[INVESTIGATOR_517119]; d. Phonological Segmentation of initial and final 
sounds); 6. To assess speech repetition ability we will rely on the Philadelphia Repetition Test 
(PRT), a low -imageability word repetition test (61) , and the non -word speech repet ition sub -test 
from the PALPA (65 ); 7. For analysis of cognitive status, the Matrix test on the Wechsler Adult  
Intelligence Scale (WAIS; (62) ) will be administered; 8. To assess verbal short -term memory, we 
will use ta sks described by [CONTACT_517188] a l. (63) . Their task s allow for detailed evaluation of lexical -
semantic performance in relation of verbal short -term memory load. All participant s will be 
screened for visual field cut and visual neglect during the neurological examination as a part of the 
NIH Stroke Scale. To minimize the influence of test fatigue, the assessment battery will be spread 
 [ADDRESS_670308] treatment outcome. In addition, the 
behavioral data collected here will also feed into projects 3 and 4 (e.g. non -word repetition and 
PRT). For details on test reliability, validity, and clinician training, please see the Clinical 
Core section in the overall P50 Grant Application (relevant pages beginning on p. 264). 
Additionally, scripts that will be used for each treatment approach are presented in 
Appendix B.    
 
Learning tasks for specific Aim 3  
 
All participants will complete three learning tasks; two linguistic based learning tasks 
(phonological and semantic) and one nonlinguistic learning task (spatial). These will be 
administered in random order for each part icipant and will be completed by [CONTACT_517189]. The tasks are set -up similar to the classical computer game “PONG.”  
 
Linguistic learning is completed by a game -like interface, where four words fall at randomly 
generated speeds from the top  of a computer screen. Participant s are asked to mouse over the 
words that fit the category of the game, such as ‘animal’ or ‘has the “s” sound’, and to avoid words 
that are not targets but may be semantically or phonologically related or unrelated.  
 
Nonl inguistic learning will be tested by [CONTACT_517190] -like interface.  The task involves shape -
patterns where participants are required to identify identical shapes to the target shape and to 
avoid distractor shapes. In this way, we circumvent internal languag e representations of task 
stimuli. Before beginning the task, the participant is shown a target shape and told that they will 
be presented with a computer screen where a variety of different shapes will fall from the top of 
their screen. The participant’s objective is to mouse over the target shape and to avoid the other 
shapes (distractors).  
  
All learning tasks will be conducted 5 times consecutively for 2 minutes each time. The accuracy 
score will be recorded for each session. The participant’s learning ability is summarized as the 
increase in accuracy between baseline and final session. The study will compare linguistically 
based task vs nonlinguistic learning tasks (each to be completed by [CONTACT_517191] 1 ) 
to determine whether learning pote ntial relates directly to prognosis.  
 
Treatment Outcome Measures  
Consistent with previous work in our lab and P roject 2, change in correct naming on the 
Philadelphia Naming Test  (PNT;  (64) ) will be assessed as an ou tcome measure. Confrontation 
naming is included on most comprehensive aphasia tests and is commonly assessed in aphasia 
treatment research, making it possible to compare the findings in the current project to other 
studies. The PNT will be administered twice at baseline and then once during the week before and 
the week after each [ADDRESS_670309] compi[INVESTIGATOR_517120] (65) . Participants are videotaped during 
assessment and responses are scored offline. In addition to assessing changes in correct namin g, 
potential treatment -related ch anges in naming errors will also be scruti nized.  The Treated Naming 
[ADDRESS_670310] naming of 
 13 
targeted nouns and verbs  from treatment .  There are a  total of  40 pi[INVESTIGATOR_517121]  (20 from phonological and 20 from semantic ). Of those 
20 from each deck they were equally matched  by [CONTACT_517192]. The nouns included are 
matched by [CONTACT_517193]. The verbs are matched only according to syllable length. Additionally, any words that 
appear on the PNT were excluded.  Unlike the PNT, the  Treated Naming 40 is administered only 
once during each assessment time p oint : baseline, before and after each treatment phase , and at [ADDRESS_670311] completion of treatment .   For a more detailed description of PNT and 
Treated Naming 40 scoring and training of clinicians, see Clinical Core.   
To evaluate the effects of treatment on discourse abilities, participant s will complete a 
discourse protocol included in AphasiaBank, an archival database of discourse samples funded by 
[CONTACT_517194] 2007. Three discourse tasks will be administered before and after each treatme nt 
phase: 1. Broken Window pi[INVESTIGATOR_517122] (66) ; 2. Cinderella story telling (67) ; and 3. 
A procedural description of how to make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich (first introduced by 
[INVESTIGATOR_165675], 1901 (68) , as referenced in Lau, 2013 (69). Transcription will be accomplished through the 
Clinical Core using transcription (CHAT) and the automated coding analysis (CLAN) systems 
available through AphasiaBank. We have already used this setup to assess outcome in aphasia 
treatment  (30) . As in the CATES trial, the analyses used for discourse samples will focus on lexical 
and syntactic aspects of spoken discourse: 1. Content words/min (excludes repetitions and 
nonwords); 2. Propositional density (70, 71) ; 3. Verbs/utterance. Each of these three measures is 
already  included in AphasiaBank and it is a particularly nice feature that our data can be 
compar ed against the 440 aphasic participant s included in AphasiaBank. This feature is especially 
important for determining variance across participants. In addition, we will assess potential 
changes in participant s’ ability to generate main concepts (72) . Finally, to ass ess the effects of 
treatment on functional communication ability, all part icipants will be administered the Adaptive 
Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure  (CAT -ACOM;  (73) ). The CAT -ACOM test adaptively 
administers [ADDRESS_670312] items from each domain (talking, writing, number use, comprehension, and naming) to 
insure that the content balance of each CAT -ACOM admini stration is reflective of the content 
balance of the full [ADDRESS_670313] to ensure that the same MRI  
sequences yield comparable data on both scanners. The MRI scanner at USC is housed at the 
McCausland Center for Brain Imaging (MCBI), a facility that is co -directed by [CONTACT_517195]. At MUSC, MRI scanning will take place at the Center for Biomedi cal Imaging, a facility 
Bonilha routinely uses for MRI data collection. Once MRI scanning is complete, all data are 
transferred to and stored on a secure server housed at University Technology Services (UTS), USC. 
Extensive data backup and data mirroring i s included as part of UTS services.  All preprocessing of 
MRI data will occur at USC under the direction of [CONTACT_517295] as part of the Neuroimaging Core . We 
have already constructed a state -of-the-art data pi[INVESTIGATOR_517123] a new software package to relate various types of MRI data to aphasia 
impairment and recovery.  
 
DNA Analyses  
 All participants will be asked to provide a saliva sample for the purpose of genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_517124] (brain derived neurotrophic factor)  and the FOXP2 gene (forkhead box p2) .  
 14 
BDNF is a growth factor that has been shown to promote plasticity. Some individuals are 
carriers of the VAL66MET polymorphism, which leads to reduced BDNF secretion, and potentially 
decreased outc omes in aphasia therapy (74) .  
The FOXP2 gene  is the first gene that has been implicated in speech -language impairment . 
Specifically, the FOXP2 polymorphism rs17137124. This gene  has been implicated in neurogenesis 
and synaptogenesis, but little is known about is role in post -stroke recovery  in humans . However, 
in a mouse model, FOXP2 expression has been related to recovery of vocalization (75) .  
We will investigate the extent that the presence of these polymorphism s affects therapy 
outcomes. To do so, a DNA Genotek Oragene -DNA -OG500 kit will be used. Each kit contains a small 
tube that collects saliva. Participants will be asked to spit into the tube until 2 milliliters of saliva 
has been acquired.  Participants will be provided with written/pi[INVESTIGATOR_517125] (see attached 
Oragene DNA User Instructions). The process of delivering a saliva sample takes approximately [ADDRESS_670314] that they either: i) come to the 
Aphasia Lab to supply a sample, ii) allow us to meet them at their home to obtain sample, or iii) for 
participants not living in the Columbia area, we will ask them to complete the  sample by [CONTACT_2319].  
If participants are to complete the sample by [CONTACT_2319], they will be asked to complete and 
return the provided consent form with their sample. We will ask that they call one of the treating 
clinicians if they need help providing the sample, a nd a SLP will guide them through the 
instructions. We will provide all postage for participants to mail their sample to the lab. Also, we 
will use the Aphasia Lab’s address as the return address to ensure confidentiality.  
  All samples will be stored in D NA Genotek DNA storage boxes and locked in a storage 
cabinet in the lab. Samples are stable at room temperature for up to [ADDRESS_670315] the default model  of rec overy , both biographical and cognitive/linguistic 
factors are entered into a step -wise regression analysis using a leave -one-out method. This 
approach narrows down the number of factors that provide independent prediction of treatment 
outcome. The leave -one-out method controls for selection bias where the same subjects are not 
used to select the factors and test the model. The factors that survive in the final step -wise 
regression model are then entered into the support vector regression (SVR) analysis to d etermine 
how well the default model predicts actual outcome in participant s. SVR is a more  
robust alternative to multiple linear regression. Both methods use a linear model to characterize 
the relationship between the predictors and the target variable (e. g, change in correct naming); 
that is, the target variable is modeled as a weighted sum of predictors, plus the offset term. The 
difference between the two methods is in the estimation of the model parameters (the weights 
and the offset). In multiple linea r regression, it is done by [CONTACT_517196] -Penrose pseudo 
inverse of the predictor matrix; this minimizes the prediction errors in the least -squares sense, 
but leads to highly unstable estimation if there is correlation between the predictors (76) . Also, 
the pseudo inverse cannot be computed if the number of predictors  is greater than the number of 
observations . In support vector regression, we do not attempt to minimize the prediction errors; 
rather, we allow for a certain amount of errors, and se t an upper bound on permissible prediction 
errors (77) . In this formulation, the stability of estimation is not affected by [CONTACT_517197], and by [CONTACT_517198]. The superiority of 
support vector regression over linear regression models has been d emonstrated by [CONTACT_517199]. 
(78) . We expect that the final default model will include a combination of several factors that 
togeth er contribute to outcome prediction. As not every factor will contribute equally to the 
 15 
proportional reduction in error, beta weights (converted to Z -scores) will be calculated so that 
clinicians can better understand the relationship between predictors.  
 
Specific Aim 2   
To compare the default model to previous models of speech/language processing (the WLG 
model and the DS model) we will also rely on SVR. Here, all factors that comprise each model are 
entered into an SVR analysis and the R2 for the correla tion between the actual scores (e.g., change 
in correct naming or propositional density) and the  predicted scores is calculated. Then, a 
statistical comparison is made between the R2 yielded by [CONTACT_517200]. The 
model with statistically significantly highest R2 compared to other models will be determined as 
the best prediction model. Separate analyses will be conducted for each treatment focus (semantic 
vs. phonological) and overall treatment outcome.  
 
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_670316] whether change in cueing in a single 
naming session or performance on the hit -and-avoid task predicts aphasia treatment outcome. 
The learning curve (slope of the regression line) will be calculated for each participant . The sam e 
SVR analyses planned for Aim 1 will be run again but now with the learning factors also included 
to assess whether the default model can be improved by [CONTACT_517201]. Potential concerns: Without collecting further data, it i s impossible to estimate the 
necessary length of the learning paradigms. This is a potential concern as administering an hour -
long learning task to participant s in clinical care is probably not feasible. Thus, we will calculate 
learning  curves for progress ively longer increments (e.g. for the first 10, 20, 30, or 40 minutes of 
the task) to appreciate the necessary length of each learning task. For example, it could be the case 
that improvement in performance over the first [ADDRESS_670317] treatment outcome.  
 
Making the Default Model Available On -line   
Once the default model  (i.e., response to treatment based on biographical and 
cognitive/linguistic factors)  has been constructed, we will make the algorithm available to 
clinicians who can then assess their own participant s and plug in the results to estimate treatment 
response  relying on either semantically or phonologically focused treatment. For this purpose, we 
will design a website that includes detailed instructions regarding what factors need to be 
assessed and the strengths and limitations of this approach. Similarly, we  will provide guidance 
regarding assessment fidelity, threats to assessment reliability and validity, as well as disclaimers 
about potential abuse of the model (e.g., denying participant s treatment based on model 
prediction of poor outcome).  Importantly, w hen datasets from this project are made available, no 
individually identifying information will be shared.  
 
 
F. Protection of Human Subjects  
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
 Approximately 150 participant s with left hemisphere ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke will 
be included in this study (120 will receive aphasia treatment). For the purposes of future projects 
(outlined in the P50 plan, Projects 3 and 4) , we will also test (but not treat) additional 30 
participant s with chronic left stroke who do not present with aphasia.  We will not exclude 
participant s with recurrent stroke unless one or more strokes included the right hemisphere. In 
general, aphasia recovery associated with spontaneous healing (i.e., rec overy not attributed to 
specific external intervention) is thought to mostly subside between [ADDRESS_670318] -stroke will be enrolled in thi s research.  The age range will be set at 21 -80 years. The lower 
limit is based on evidence suggesting that brain -language development is not complete until in the 
late teens (79) . The upper limit is set in an attempt to exclude participant s with dementia. To 
increase the chance that all participant s can perform the selected treatment tasks, potential 
participants will be excluded based on aphasia severity if their spontaneous spe ech score on the 
WAB is lower than [ADDRESS_670319] contraindications for MRI will be excluded, as we will not be able to 
determine the extent of damage to the cortical areas t hat comprise the DS model or the WLG 
model. Participant s will not be excluded based on AOS or dysarthria severity unless it is clinically 
determined by  [CONTACT_517202] (PNT). Each participant  will undergo in -depth 
assessment of speech and language abilities allowing for detailed description of the participant  
sample  
 
Rationale for Sample Size  
For Aim 1, the primary goal is to construct a model that p redicts aphasia treatment success. 
We have used results from prior work (80)  to conduct a power analysis for the current project.  
We used the factors from this data  to compute exhaustive leave -one-out regression values, 
resulting in the more conservative R2=.088, R2=.27 and R2=.36 for phonological, semantic, and 
overall treatment effects (rather than .22, .44 and .46). This suggests that a sample size of 120 
individuals provides 0.95 power at p <  0.05, and 0.85 power at p <0.01. Deriving power estimates 
for Aim 2 is more speculative: rather than comparing against a static null hypothesis (e.g., 
treatment has no influence) we are comparing against different dynamic models that will each 
benefit fro m a larger sample size. Conventional analyses suggest that a sample size of 120 
individuals will provide 0.92 power at p <0.[ADDRESS_670320], shown in Figure 
3 (default model’s ability to predict phonological treatment benefits) and 0.7 2 power at p < 0.05 
for distinguishing the difference between the default model and the D efault +DS model. We note 
that a null result for the latter in the presence of a robust result in the former could still be 
clinically meaningful, potentially suggestin g that initial behavioral tests are sufficient for 
treatment planning.  
 
Research  activities  
Participant  involvement will take approximately eight weeks (excluding time between 
treatment phases) with an inter -treatment interval of four weeks and follow -up testing scheduled 
at four weeks and six months after treatment completion. Each participant  will undergo  
neuropsychological testing, including baseline testing of naming ability, and complete t hree  
learning tasks, as well as an MRI session during the first week before treatment starts. The next 
three weeks will be devoted to behavioral aphasia treatment (wit h five treatment sessions 
administered on Monday -Friday each week) followed by a [ADDRESS_670321] established a large pool of participant s with chronic 
aphasia (N=1 45) from which we will recruit for the current project. The Midlands area of South 
Carolina, where the University of South Carolina is located, has one of the highest stroke rates in 
the [LOCATION_002] . As a result, the number of stroke participant s with ch ronic aphasia that live in 
Columbia and the surrounding areas is relatively high. In an ongoing unrelated study, we are 
testing participant s with left hemisphere stroke in acute care, providing us with a pool of 
participant s with and without aphasia. Many of these participant s end up coming to our weekly 
 17 
aphasia support groups (current enrollment=37) and are eager to participate in research, 
especially treatment studies. Based on our previous success in recruiting participant s for our 
treatment studies as w ell as a major recruitment effort that will reach South Carolina and 
neighboring states, we see no reason why we would not be able to enroll and treat 120 
participant s with chronic left hemisphere stroke.  
 
Eligibility  
Participant s with chronic aphasia (>12 months from stroke) as a result of left hemisphere 
stroke (ischemic or hemorrha gic) will be included . Persons who incur more than one stroke will 
be excluded only if the subsequent stroke(s) includes the right hemisphere. Inclusi on/exclusion 
criteria are summarized as follows .  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Participant s must have incurred a left hemisphere ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke.  
2. Participant s must be greater than [ADDRESS_670322] be MRI -compatible (e.g. no metal implants, not cla ustrophobic, etc.)  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Severely limited verbal output  (WAB Spontaneous Speech rating scale score of 0 -1) 
2. Severely impaired auditory comprehension (WAB Comprehension score of 0 -1).  
3. Bilateral stroke  
 
Source Materials  
Medical information will be obtained from study subjects. Results of assessments obtained 
during each subject contact [CONTACT_517203]. In the event that the 
participant ’s prior medical record is required to document medical history, an authorization for 
records release will be obtained from the subject. Each subject that signs the consent form and 
meets the study eligibility criteria will have a unique study identifier assigned to them by [CONTACT_517204]. The DCU computers and servers will not 
store any personal health identifiers (i.e., name, medical record number); rather, the subject will 
be tracked during the study period through the assigned unique identifier. Only the appropriate 
local site study personnel will have ac cess to a participant 's personal identifying information. All 
paperwork that includes participant  identifiers (e.g., medical records) will be kept in a locked 
cabinet in the PI’s office. Once a participant ’s baseline information has been reported in 
WebDCU TM, all subsequent testing and treatment data are entered online using customized case 
report forms (CRF) that are specifically designed with the specific needs of project [ADDRESS_670323] in charge of testing will obtain the informed consent. 
For participant s whose auditory comprehension is severely impaired, every effort will be made to 
convey what study enrollment entails and caregivers will be inc luded in the process.  An additional 
consent form will be completed to allow participants and caregivers (if applicable) to choose 
whether or not they give consent for media release of video files or pi[INVESTIGATOR_517126]/or shared on  social media.   
 
Potential Risks  and Discomforts  
For the current research, three areas are of paramount interest with regard to the 
protection of human subjects: 1) Potential adverse effects associated with MRI scanning; 2) 
Potential adverse effects associated with behavioral testing and treatment; and 3) Maintenance of 
participant confidentiality. We will address each of these below on point -by-point basis.  
 
1. MRI S canning.  For the purpose of determining the extent of cortical damage, each 
participa nt will undergo one pre -treatment MRI session  as well as three additional MRI sessions. 
Additional MRI scans will be completed following each treatment phase and at [ADDRESS_670324] received MRI in our studies exceeds 27 0 (includes both acute and chronic stroke). 
Among participant s with chronic stroke who have participated in our research, we have 
occasionally had to exclude participant s because of factors contraindicative to MRI. We find that 
most participant s who have r eported negative reaction to past MRI experiences do not have 
problems with our MRI setup. The MRI scanners used for this research at USC and MUSC are 
short -bore magnets (Siemens 3T Trio) with a wider bore than most older generation scanners. 
This allows t he participant  rather easily to see through either end of the scanner bore without 
shifting head position.  
 
All participant s will undergo thorough screening to check for factors counter -indicative for 
MRI scanning (e.g., metal implants, pregnancy [women w ho are of child bearing age will be 
required to take a pregnancy test], pacemaker, severe claustrophobia, etc.). We will follow the 
same protocol that we have used with past participants. First, each person fills out a questionnaire 
in collaboration with a  clinician and, when needed, a  caregiver. Then, we give each participant  
ample time to get familiar with the scanner (we show them the stimulus presentation hardware, 
the computer console, the headphone/microphone used to record speech) before the actual 
scanning session starts. We find that taking this extra time to familiarize participant s and, when 
appropriate, family members, with the MRI setup, participant s usually feel comfortable with the 
MRI session.  
 
2. Participant  Testing/ Treatment.  In our experie nce, occasional participant s will have a 
negative reaction to neuropsychological testing. For example, this can be caused when 
participant s realize that their performance on a given test is far worse than they would have 
expected. We always make sure that ample time is allotted for neuropsychological testing and that 
participant s are allowed breaks as needed. So far, we have never had a participant  discontinue 
study participation because of adverse reaction to study testing. Almost without exception, 
partic ipant s who participate in our treatment studies wish to continue study participation even 
when the treatment period has expi[INVESTIGATOR_517127]. With 
regard to the behavioral treatment, the only adverse reaction that we o ccasionally see is fatigue. 
This is something that we warn participants about ahead of time.  
 
 [ADDRESS_670325] (HIPAA). Because the DCU  uses a web -based system, source documents and 
CRFs will remain at the site. The study database and any study documents submitted to the DCU 
will only identify study subjects by [CONTACT_517205]. All data will be stored in a 
manner that is  HIPAA compliant, without the ability to track the information back to a specific 
subject except through a password protected system (all collected information about a subject will 
be stored by a unique identification code). All DCU personnel are certified  by [CONTACT_517206].  
 
Potential Benefits  
The participants enrolled in this research will receive behavioral aphasia treatment, gratis, 
something that few participant s with chronic aphasia receive through third -payer insurance.  
 
Importance of Knowledge to be Gained  
 Aphasia is common in stroke, th e leading cause of adult disability in the [LOCATION_002]. 
Although gradual, long -lasting aphasia recovery is probably common, most participant s with 
chronic aphasia remain aphasic for the rest of their lives. Aphasia therapy can improve aphasia 
recovery; h owever, very little is known about what kind of participant s benefit from different 
kinds of treatment. The current research will inform the relationship between language 
impairment profiles and responses to treatment.  
 
Data Sharing Across Research Projects, Service Cores, and Ongoing Study Trials:  
 Because the current submission is part of a larger multi -site collaboration, all data  
collection  for the entirety of the collaboration  will occur  as part of  the treatment  studies  
planned  in projects  1 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517128])  and  2 (PI: [CONTACT_480629]).  The  same  data  will also  feed  into  
projects  3 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517107])  and  4 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517108])  to predict  treatment  outcome.  Project cores will be 
managed to support the overall project (Clinical Core, Neuroimaging Core, and the Administrative 
Core). The  two  service  cores  – the Clinical  Core (PI: [CONTACT_480629])  and  Neuroimaging  Core (PI: 
[INVESTIGATOR_517107])  – will support  data  collection  and  analyses.  In addition,  we will incorporate  data  
from  two  ongoing  NIDCD  funded  trials:  1. tDCS  to Treat  Aphasia:  A phase  II trial  (CATES  
trial;  DC011739;  PI-Fridriksson);  and 2. Neural  Bases  of Language  and  Cognitive  Deficits  in 
Acute  Stroke  and  Recovery  (Early  Aphasia  Recovery;  DC005375;  PI–Hillis).  The  CATES  trial  
will provide  outcome  data  for a behavioral  treatment  that  combines  semantic  and 
phonological  stimulation,  which  will be compared  to outcomes  from  treatments  that  
assume  only  a semantic  or phonological  treatment  focus  (Project  1). Data  from  [CONTACT_50013]’  
Early  Aphasia  Recovery  project  will be utilized  in project  [ADDRESS_670326]. Rorden (i.e., NiiStat software: 
https://www.nitrc.org/projects/niistat/).  In addition,  project  [ADDRESS_670327]  (Bonilha,  Den Ouden,  
and Desai)  to further  study  language  impairment  and  aphasia  recovery. It should be 
stressed that any data shared will be de -identified; all participants will be referred to by 
[CONTACT_517207].  
 
In addition to the above collaborations, [CONTACT_517296] at the University of Chapel Hill 
will assist with processing of the MR images. [CONTACT_192437] is an expert in image segmentation, 
registration, and normalization, and will assist with the processing of the longitudinal data 
that are acquired. He wil l be provided with access to MRI scans and de -identified 
behavioral data. This data will be shared with him via the HIPPA compliant Dropbox.  
 
[CONTACT_517297] at Indiana University will also have access to data for the purpose of 
analysis and interpretat ion. There is an MTA agreement with IU and USC to allow for data 
sharing (dated 12/18/18) of “Audiovisual data of neurophysiological testing, including 
tasks evaluating language.”  Data will be shared via the HIPPA compliant Dropbox. She will 
have access t o MRI data and behavioral testing.  
 
G. References:  
 
1. Brady MC, Kelly H, Godwin J, Enderby P. Speech and language therapy for aphasia following 
stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;5(CD000425). doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD000425.pub2.  
2. Kelly H, Brady MC, Enderby P. Speech and language therapy for aphasia following stroke. 
2010. 2010;5(CD000425). doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000425.pub2.  
3. Burke E, Cramer SC. Biomarkers and predictors of restorative therapy effects after stroke. 
Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2013;13(2):329. doi: 10.1007/s11910 -012 -0329 -9. PubMed PMID: 
23299824; PMCID: 3580200.  
4. Floel A, Cohen LG. Recovery of function in humans: cortical stimulation and 
pharmacological treatments after stroke. N eurobiol Dis. 2010;37(2):243 -51. doi: 
10.1016/j.nbd.2009.05.027. PubMed PMID: 19520165.  
5. Milot MH, Cramer SC. Biomarkers of recovery after stroke. Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_83019]. 
2008;21(6):654 -9. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283186f96. PubMed PMID: 18989108; P MCID: 
2882885.  
6. Thors H, Richardson JD, Fridriksson J, editors. Dual stream model guided treatment of 
aphasia. Society for the Neurobiology of Language; 2015; Chicago, IL.  
7. Hickok G, Poeppel D. The cortical organization of speech processing. Nat Rev Ne urosci. 
2007;8(5):393 -402. doi: 10.1038/nrn2113. PubMed PMID: 17431404.  
8. Baird AE, Dambrosia J, Janket S, Eichbaum Q, Chaves C, Silver B, Barber PA, Parsons M, 
Darby D, Davis S, Caplan LR, Edelman RE, Warach S. A three -item scale for the early prediction  of 
stroke recovery. Lancet. 2001;357(9274):2095 -9. PubMed PMID: 11445104.  
9. Kertesz A. Recovery from aphasia. Adv Neurol. 1984;42:23 -39. PubMed PMID: 6209949.  
10. Pedersen PM, Jorgensen HS, Kammersgaard LP, Nakayama H, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. 
Manual and o ral apraxia in acute stroke, frequency and influence on functional outcome: The 
Copenhagen Stroke Study. Am J Phys Med Rehabil. 2001;80(9):685 -92. PubMed PMID: 11523971.  
11. Pedersen PM, Jorgensen HS, Nakayama H, Raaschou HO, Olsen TS. Aphasia in acute stroke: 
incidence, determinants, and recovery. Ann Neurol. 1995;38(4):659 -66. doi: 
10.1002/ana.410380416. PubMed PMID: 7574464.  
 21 
12. Fridriksson J, Bonilha L, Baker JM, Moser D, Rorden C. Activity in preserved left hemisphere 
regions predicts anomia s everity in aphasia. Cereb Cortex. 2010;20(5):1013 -9. doi: 
10.1093/cercor/bhp160. PubMed PMID: 19687294; PMCID: 2852500.  
13. Kertesz A. Western aphasia battery test manual: Psychological Corp; 1982.  
14. Kanai R, Rees G. The structural basis of inter -individ ual differences in human behaviour 
and cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience. 2011;12(4):231 -42. 
15. Lövdén M, Wenger E, Mårtensson J, Lindenberger U, Bäckman L. Structural brain plasticity 
in adult learning and development. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral R eviews. 2013;37(9):2296 -310.  
16. May A. Experience -dependent structural plasticity in the adult human brain. Trends in 
cognitive sciences. 2011;15(10):[ADDRESS_670328] predicts individual differences in memory ability in healthy young adults. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2008;105(47):[ADDRESS_670329] published research findings are false. PLoS Med. 2005;2(8):e124.  
19. Wernicke C. Der aphasische symptomenkomplex. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer; 1974.  
20. Lichteim L. On aphasia. Brain. 1885;7(4):433 -84. 
21. Geschwind N. Disconnexion syndromes in animals and man. II. Brain. 1965;88(3):585 -644. 
PubMed PMID: 5318824.  
22. Geschwind N. Language and the brain. Sci Am. 1972;226(4):76 -83. PubMed PMID: 
5014017.  
23. Holland AL, Wertz RT. Measuring aphasia treatment effects: large -group, small -group, and 
single -subject studies. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis. 1988;66:267 -73. PubM ed PMID: 
2451851.  
24. Wertz RT, Dronkers N. Effects of age on aphasia. In: Cherow E, editor. Proceedings of the 
research symposium on communication sciences and disorders of aging. Rockville, MD: ASHA; 
1990. p. 88 -98. 
25. Sarno M, Levita E. Natural course of recovery in severe aphasia. Archives of physical 
medicine and rehabilitation. 1971;52(4):175.  
26. Smith A. Objective indices of severity of chronic aphasia in stroke patients. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders. 1971;36(2):167 -207.  
27. Lomas J, Ker tesz A. Patterns of spontaneous recovery in aphasic groups: a study of adult 
stroke patients. Brain Lang. 1978;5(3):388 -401. PubMed PMID: 656906.  
28. Subirana A. The prognosis in aphasia in relation to cerebral dominance and handedness. 
Brain. 1958;81(3):4 15-25. 
29. Price CJ, Seghier ML, Leff AP. Predicting language outcome and recovery after stroke: the 
PLORAS system. Nature Reviews Neurology. 2010;6(4):[ADDRESS_670330] HI, Hudspeth SG, Holland AL, Bonilha L, Fromm D, Rorden C. Speech 
entrainment enables patients with Broca's aphasia to produce fluent speech. Brain. 2012;135(Pt 
12):3815 -29. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws301. PubMed PMID: 23250889; PMCID: 3525061.  
31. Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] K, Shelton J, Caramazza A. Grammatical class in lexical production and 
morhpological processing: Evidence from a case of fluent aphasia. Cognitive Neuropsychology. 
2000;17(8):[ADDRESS_670331] impairments. Brain and Language. 1997 ;56(1):68 -106.  
33. Milberg W, Blumstein S, Dworetzky B. Phonological processing and lexical access in 
aphasia. Brain and Language. 1988;34(2):279 -93. 
34. Caramazza A, Papagno C, Ruml W. The selective impairment of phonological processing in 
speech producti on. Brain and language. 2000;75(3):428 -50. 
 22 
35. Schlaug G, Marchina S, Norton A. From singing to speaking: why singing may lead to 
recovery of expressive language function in patients with Broca's aphasia. Music perception. 
2008;25(4):315.  
36. Lambon Ralph MA, Snell C, Fillingham JK, Conroy P, Sage K. Predicting the outcome of 
anomia therapy for people with aphasia post CVA: both language and cognitive status are key 
predictors. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2010;20(2):289 -305. doi: 10.1080/09602010903237875. 
PubMed PMID: 20077315.  
37. Caspari I, Parkinson SR, LaPointe LL, Katz RC. Working memory and aphasia. Brain and 
cognition. 1998;37(2):205 -23. 
38. Geschwind N. The organization of language and the brain. Science. 1970;170(3961):940 -4. 
PubMed PMID: 5475022.  
 
39. Kleim JA, Jones TA. Principles of experience -dependent neural plasticity: implications for 
rehabilitation after brain damage. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2008;51(1):S225 -39. doi: 
10.1044/1092 -4388(2008/018). PubMed PMID: 18230848.  
40. Cramer SC. Repairing the human brain after stroke. II. Restorative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Ann Neurol. 
2008;63(5):549 -60. doi: 10.1002/ana.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 18481291.  
41. Grigorenko EL. Dynamic assessment and response to intervention: two sides of one coin. J 
Learn Disabil. 200 9;42(2):111 -32. doi: 10.1177/0022219408326207. PubMed PMID: 19073895; 
PMCID: 3575109.  
42. Sternberg RJ, Grigorenko EL. Dynamic testing: The nature and measurement of learning 
potential: Cambridge university press; 2002.  
43. Boyle M. Semantic feature analys is treatment for anomia in two fluent aphasia syndromes. 
Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2004;13(3):236 -49. doi: 10.1044/1058 -0360(2004/025). PubMed 
PMID: 15339233.  
44. Boyle M. Test -retest stability of word retrieval in aphasic discourse. J Speech Lang Hear 
Res.  2014;57(3):966 -78. doi: 10.1044/2014_JSLHR -L-13-0171. PubMed PMID: 24686776.  
45. Boyle M, Coelho CA. Application of semantic feature analysis as a treatment for aphasic 
dysnomia. American Journal of Speech -Language Pathology. 1995;4(4):94 -8. 
46. Boo M, Ro se ML. The efficacy of repetition, semantic, and gesture treatments for verb 
retrieval and use in Broca's aphasia. Aphasiology. 2011;25(2):154 -75. 
47. Wambaugh JL, Wright S, Nessler C, Mauszycki SC. Combined Aphasia and Apraxia of Speech 
Treatment (CAAST):  Effects of a Novel Therapy. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research. 2014;57(6):2191 -207.  
48. Davis GA. PACE revisited. Aphasiology. 2005;19(1):21 -38. 
49. Davis GA. Aphasiology: Disorders and Clinical Practice. [LOCATION_011], MA: Pearson/Allyn and 
Baco n; 2007.  
50. Davis GA, Wilcox MJ. Adult aphasia rehabilitation: Applied pragmatics. San Diego, CA: 
Singular; 1985.  
51. Li EC. Treatment for naming impairment. In: Wallace GJ, editor. Adult aphasia 
rehabilitation. [LOCATION_011], MA: Butterworth -Heinemann; 1996. p.  229 -42. 
52. Pulvermuller F, Neininger B, Elbert T, Mohr B, Rockstroh B, Koebbel P, Taub E. Constraint -
induced therapy of chronic aphasia after stroke. Stroke. 2001;32(7):1621 -6. PubMed PMID: 
11441210.  
53. Edmonds LA, Nadeau SE, Kiran S. Effect of Verb Net work Strengthening Treatment (VNeST) 
on Lexical Retrieval of Content Words in Sentences in Persons with Aphasia. Aphasiology. 
2009;23(3):402 -24. doi: 10.1080/02687030802291339. PubMed PMID: 19763227; PMCID: 
2744980.  
54. Leonard C, Rochon E, Laird L. Treati ng naming impairments in aphasia: Findings from a 
phonological components analysis treatment. Aphasiology. 2008;22(9):923 -47. 
 23 
55. Kertesz A. Western Aphasia Battery -Revised. San Antionio, TX: Pearson; 2007.  
56. Strand EA, Duffy JR, Clark HM, Josephs K. The  apraxia of speech rating scale: a tool for 
diagnosis and description of apraxia of speech. Journal of communication disorders. 2014;51:43 -
50. doi: 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2014.06.008. PubMed PMID: 25092638; PMCID: PMC4254321.  
57. Cho -Reyes S, Thompson CK. Verb and sentence production and comprehension in aphasia: 
Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences (NAVS). Aphasiology. 2012;26(10):[ADDRESS_670332]: A test of semantic access from 
words and pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. C ambridge: Thames Valley Test Company; 1992.  
59. Bak TH, Hodge JR. Kissing and dancing -a test to distinguish the lexical and conceptual 
contributions to noun/verb and action/object dissociation. Preliminary results in patients with 
frontotemporal dementia. Journal of Neurolinguistics. 2003;16(2):169 -81. 
 
60. Kay J, Lesser R, Coltheart M. PALPA: Psycholinguistic assessments of language processing in 
aphasia. [LOCATION_001], NY: Psychology Press; 2009.  
61. Dell GS, Schwartz MF, Martin N, Saffran EM, Gagnon DA. Lexic al access in aphasic and 
nonaphasic speakers. Psychol Rev. 1997;104(4):801 -38. PubMed PMID: 9337631.  
62. Wechsler D. Wechsler adult intelligence scale –Fourth Edition (WAIS –IV). San Antonio, TX: 
NCS Pearson. 2008.  
63. Martin N, Kohen F, Kalinyak -Fliszar M, Soveri A, Laine M. Effects of working memory load 
on processing of sounds and meanings of words in aphasia. Aphasiology. 2012;26(3 -4):462 -93. 
doi: 10.1080/02687038.2011.619516. PubMed PMID: 22544993; PMCID: 3335394.  
64. Roach A, Schwartz MF, Martin N, Grewal RS, Brecher A. The Philadelphia naming test: 
Scoring and rationale. Clinical Aphasiology. 1996;24:121 -34. 
65. Francis WN, Kucera H. Frequency analysis of English usage: Lexicon and grammar. [LOCATION_011], 
MA: Houghton Mifflin; 1982.  
66. Menn L, Ramsberger G, Estabrooks NH. A linguistic communication measure for aphasic 
narratives. Aphasiology. 1994;8(4):343 -59. 
67. Grimes N. Walt Disney's Cindarella. [LOCATION_001], NT: Random House; 2005.  
68. Davis JD. The [LOCATION_011] Cooking School Magazine of Culinary Science and D omestic 
Economics. [LOCATION_011], MA: [LOCATION_011] Cooking -School Magazine; 1901.  
69. Lau M. Who Made That? [LOCATION_001] Times Magazine. 2013 June 7, 2013.  
70. Brown C, Snodgrass T, Kemper SJ, Herman R, Covington MA. Automatic measurement of 
propositional idea density from  part -of-speech tagging. Behavior research methods. 
2008;40(2):540 -5. 
71. Kemper S, Rash S, Kynette D, Norman S. Telling stories: The structure of adults' narratives. 
European journal of cognitive psychology. 1990;2(3):205 -28. 
72. Dalton SG, Richardson JD.  Core -Lexicon and Main -Concept Production During Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -
Sequence Description in Adults Without Brain Damage and Adults With Aphasia. American Journal 
of Speech -Language Pathology. 2015;24(4):S923 -S38.  
73. Doyle PJ, Hula WD, Hula SNA, Stone CA, Wambaugh JL , Ross KB, Schumacher JG. Self -and 
surrogate -reported communication functioning in aphasia. Quality of Life Research. 
2013;22(5):957 -67. 
74. de Boer RG, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_23061] K, Heijenbrok -Kal MH, van der Vliet R, Ribbers GM, van de Sandt -
Koenderman WME. The role of t he BDNF Val66Met polymorphism in recovery of aphasia after 
stroke. Neurorehabilitation and neural repair. 2017;31(9):851 -7. 
75. Doran SJ, Trammel C, Benashaski SE, Venna VR, McCullough LD. Ultrasonic vocalization 
changes and FOXP2 expression after experime ntal stroke. Behavioural brain research. 
2015;283:[ADDRESS_670333] SG, Aiken LS. Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for 
the behavioral sciences.: Routledge; 2003.  
 24 
77. Smola AJ, Scholkopf B. Bayesian Kernel Method. Advanced L ectures on Machine Learning. 
2003;2600:65 -117. doi: 10.1007/3 -540 -[ZIP_CODE] -X_3.  
78. Drucker H, Burges CJ, Kaufman L, Smola A, Vapnik V. Support vector regression machines. 
Advances in neural information processing systems. 1997;9:155 -61. 
79. Chugani HT. A critical period of brain development: studies of cerebral glucose utilization 
with PET. Prev Med. 1998;27(2):184 -8. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1998.0274. PubMed PMID: 9578992.  
80. Fridriksson J. Preservation and modulation of specific left hemisphere regions is vit al for 
treated recovery from anomia in stroke. J Neurosci. 2010;30(35):[ZIP_CODE] -64. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2227 -10.2010. PubMed PMID: 20810877; PMCID: 2938788.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [ADDRESS_670334] chronic left hemisphere stroke. Diagnostic evaluations 
will be conducted during the participant s' initial visit to confirm aphasia diagnosis for treatment 
inclusion. Participant s with aphasia diagnosis that are currently receiving speech and language 
treatment (apart from aphasia support groups) will be required to temporarily discontinue 
involvemen t until study completion.  A total of [ADDRESS_670335] be MRI -compatible (e.g. no metal implants, not claustrophobic, etc.)  
 
1.2 Participant  Exclusion Criteria  
1. Severely limited verbal output. (WAB Spontaneous Speech rating scale score of 0 -1) 
2. Severely impaired auditory comprehension (WAB Comprehension score of 0 -1).  
3. Bilateral stroke  
 
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
2.1 Study Procedures Overview  
After informed consent is received, a neurological examination  utilizing the NIH Stroke Scale  
will be performed  and multiple screening assessments will be conducted including a MRI 
safety screening. If the participant s pass the initial screening portion, multiple speech and 
language diagnostic tests will be conducted. Participant s will also undergo two baseline 
assessments of naming - and discourse ability (primary and secondary outcome measures) 
and structura l/functional  MRI examination. During the next three weeks the participant s with 
aphasia will receive 45 minutes of treatment every day, Monday through Friday  (weekend 
treatment/assessment may take place with schedule conflicts) . After the first treatment phase 
concludes, participant s will be tested, on one-two consecutive days, with the primary and 
secondary outcome measures  and undergo a MRI examination.  After t hat there will be a [ADDRESS_670336] the primary and secondary outcome 
measures. During the next three weeks the participant s will receive 45 minutes of treatment 
every day, Monday through Friday  (weekend treatment/assessment may take place with 
schedule conflicts) . After the second treatment phase is completed the participant s will be 
tested again, on one-two consecutive days, with the primary and secondary outcome 
measures  and undergo a MRI examination . Follow -up testing will occur at 4 -weeks and 6 -
month s (at or around week 39) after completion of the second treatment phase. Participants 
will complete an anonymous satisfaction survey at the [ADDRESS_670337] treatment completion, participants will undergo a fina l MRI 
examination.  
 
2.1.1 Procedures for Screening (Visit 1)  
The following procedures will be performed:  
1. Obtain written informed consent:  
 27 
• A signed and dated informed consent form will be obtained from each participant 
before conducting any screening proced ures. Participant s will then be assigned an 
identification number by [CONTACT_517208].   
• A media release form will be completed with each participant and caregiver if 
applicable.  
• All research staff authorized to obtain informed consent will have completed the 
Miami CITI course in the Responsible Conduct of Research and Protection of 
Human Subjects prior to their involvement with the study. Furthermore, they will be 
oriented to the study and trained by [CONTACT_9154] [INVESTIGATOR_365531] -investigators who 
have extensive training and experience in the ethical and practical aspects of 
informed consent procedures.   
2. Review inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
3. Obtain medical history.  
4. Conduct neurological examination.  
5. Administer the MRI safety screening.  
 
2.1.2 Procedures for  MRI Examination ( Week 1, 5, 12, 39 , and 52+ (if eligible for the one -
year post treatment follow -up)) 
1. Run the participant  on high -resolution anatomical MRI scans during vis it 1: 
• The participant will complete the fMRI Naming [ADDRESS_670338] pi[INVESTIGATOR_517129]. Administration time is approximately 10 -15 minutes.  
• Followi ng the fMRI Naming 40,  the participant is instructed to lay still.  
• Complete additional functional and structural scans per follow -up  
 
2.1.3 Procedures for Diagnostic Testing ( Collected only once. Baseline may be split 
over three days ( Visit 1 , 2, and 3 ) 
1. Administer the  Western Aphasia Battery -Revised  (WAB -R).  
• The WAB -R will characterize a participant’ s overall language impairment through the 
evaluation of the main clinical aspects of language functioning, including speech 
content, speech fluency, auditor y comprehension, repetition, naming , and reading . The 
WAB -R allows for the differentiation of these specific language abilities, as well as the 
classification of aphasia type. The WAB -R also yields a composite score, the Aphasia 
Quotient, which provides an  overall measure of severity, in which lower scores denote 
more severe aphasia (Kertesz, 2007). The reading section of the WAB -R: Part 2 will be 
completed to measure participant s’ oral reading ability and his or her reading 
comprehension of words and sente nces. Speech - language pathologists (SLPs) will 
refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and scoring 
procedures. Administration time will range between [ADDRESS_670339]  (PPTT).  
• The P PTT is a test of semantic processing. This test assesses the degree to which a 
participant  can access meaning from pi[INVESTIGATOR_517119]. Information from the test will 
help determine whether a participant ’s difficulty in naming or pointing to a named pi[INVESTIGATOR_517130] a difficulty in retrieving semantic information from pi[INVESTIGATOR_499], or a difficulty in 
retrieving semantic information from words, or, in the case of a naming failure, a 
difficulty in retrieving the appropriate spoken form of the word (Howard & Patte rson, 
1992). SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and 
scoring procedures. Administration time will range between [ADDRESS_670340] to distinguish the lexical and conceptual 
contributions to noun/verb and action/object dissociation (Bak & Hodges, 2003). SLPs 
will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and scoring 
procedures. Administration tim e will range between 10 -20 minutes . 
 
4. Administer sub -tests 1, 2, 8, 14, 15, 16 and 17 from the Psycholinguistic Assessments of 
Language Processing in Aphasia  (PALPA):  
1. Same -Different Discrimination Using Nonword Minimal Pairs.   
• All the materials in this ta sk are monosyllabic real words with a CVC structure and 
are designed for use in conjunction with word minimal pairs (see below). Good 
discrimination of nonwords implies that Auditory Phonological Analysis is intact. Poor 
scores may be due either to impaire d hearing or to impaired phonemic perception. 
Stimulus pairs are minimally different according to voice, manner or place of articulation. 
Differences occur either in initial or final positions of pairs or in pairs that are 
metathetically related (in which the order of the sounds is reversed).  
2.   Same -Different Discrimination Using Word Minimal Pairs.  
• All the materials in this task are monosyllabic real words with a CVC structure and 
are designed for use in conjunction with nonword minimal pairs (see above ). By 
[CONTACT_517209], one can look 
firstly for any impairment in phoneme perception and secondly for whether impairment 
is reduced by [CONTACT_517210].  
8. Nonword repetition.  
• All the materials in thi s task are nonwords. The purpose of the task is to test the 
integrity of sub -lexical acoustic –phonological conversion. It examines ability to repeat 
unfamiliar yet word -like sound forms in which length of utterance is systematically from 
one to three syll ables. Although syllable length is manipulated, phoneme length is 
constant across the items.  
14. Rhyme Judgment Requiring Pi[INVESTIGATOR_517131].  
• This task assesses whether a subject can select a pi[INVESTIGATOR_517132] 
a given stimulus pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103]. The tas k requires that the subject is fist able to retrieve pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -
names from the phonological output lexicon.  
15. Word Rhyme Judgments: Auditory Version.  
• This task aims to find out if the subject can detect whether a pair of words rhyme. 
For the task to be car ried out successfully, the two items must be held in storage 
temporarily while the relevant parts of the word are segmented and compared. The task 
therefore tests the integrity of phonological short -term storage systems (Monsell, 1987), 
as well as input pr ocessing abilities and segmentation skills.  
16. Phonological Segmentation of Initial Sounds . 
• All the materials in this task are monosyllabic words and nonwords of CVC 
structures. This task provides information about a person’s ability to segment at least 
the initial sounds of a heard string. By [CONTACT_517211], auditory 
analysis skills can be tested independently of lexical phonological processes.  
17. Phonological Segmentation of Final Sounds . 
• All the materials in this task are monosyll abic words and nonwords of CVC 
structures. This task provides information about a person’s ability to segment at least 
the final sounds of a heard string. By [CONTACT_517211], auditory 
analysis skills can be tested independently of lexic al phonological processes.  
 
 29 
SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and scoring 
procedures.  
 
5. Administer the Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences  (NAVS)  
• The NAVS was designed for participant s with aphasia and allows for detailed 
examination of verb processing (e.g. verb naming) as well as production and 
comprehension of canonical and non -canonical sentences  
(Cho -Reyes and Thompson, 2012).  
• SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructio ns regarding administration and 
scoring procedures. Administration time will range between [ADDRESS_670341] 7 (Matrix Reasoning) on the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale  (WAIS)  
• This subtest is composed of four types of nonverbal reasoning tasks: pattern 
completion, classification, analogy and serial reasoning. The examinee looks at a matrix 
from which a section is missing and either identifies by [CONTACT_517212]. This test will allow  for analysis of the 
cognitive status of the participant s (Wechsler, 2008).  
• SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and 
scoring procedures.  
 
7. Administer  tasks used for scoring the Apraxia of Speech Rating Scale  (ASRS)  
• This rating scale will be utilized to rate the presence and severity of a praxia of speech 
(AOS). It quantifies the frequency and severity of the characteristics associated with 
apraxia of speech (Strand et al., 2014).  
• SLPs will refer to (Strand et al., 2014) for explicit instructions regarding administration 
and scoring procedu res. 
• To score the ASRS (offline), the following tasks should be administered:  
o DDK rates (alternating and sequential motion rates)  
o Sustained phonation (do 3x, record duration of “ah”)  
o Mayo Clinic “supplemental tasks for the ASRS ." This includes word and sentence 
repetition tasks.  
o Cursory oral mech anism  evaluation  (ROM/strength/coordination of lips, tongue, 
jaw) 
 
8. Administer Philadelphia Repetition Test  (PRT)  
• This test was designed to test speech repetition ability. It uses the sa me items as the 
Philadelphia Naming Test, but instead of showing the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517133] s, the 
names are spoken to them, once only, and participant s must repeat the names back to 
the experimenter (Dell et al., 1997).  
 
9. Administer TALSA Battery ( short term memory tasks ) from Martin et al. (2012)  
• These tests asses s verbal short -term memory.  
• TALSA Word Rhyming Triplet Judgment . This task assesses the ability to identify  two 
rhyming words out of a selection of three. The non -rhyming foil will overlap 
phonologically with one of the rhyming words in one of three ways: same initial 
phoneme, same stressed vowel, or same final phoneme.  
• TALSA Rhyming Judgments. This task assesses the ability to identify if the words or 
nonwords presented rhyme with a 5 second delay presented and additionally a five 
second delay with a distraction presented. The nonwords are derived from the real 
words by [CONTACT_517213]. The words and nonwords are presented 
separately.  
 30 
• SLPs will refer to Martin et al. (2012) for ex plicit instructions regarding administration 
and scoring procedures .  
 
10.  Administer the Hit and Avoid Learning Tasks (Phonological, Semantic, and Spatial)  
• All participants will complete three learning tasks before initiation of treatment; two 
linguistic based learning tasks (phonological and semantic) and one nonlinguistic 
learning task (spatial). These will be administered in random order for each 
participa nt and will be completed  by [CONTACT_517183] . The tasks are 
set-up similar to the classical computer game “PONG.”  
• Linguistic learning is completed by a game -like interface, where four words fall at 
randomly generated speeds from the top of a computer screen. Participant s are 
asked to mouse over the words that fit the category of the game, such as ‘animal’ or 
‘has the “s” sound’, and to avoid words that are not targets but may be semantically 
or phonologically related or unrelated.  
• Nonlinguistic learning will be tested by [CONTACT_517190] -like interface.  The task 
involves shape -patterns where participants are required to identify identical shapes 
to the target shape and to avoid distractor shapes. In this way, we circumvent 
internal lan guage representations of task stimuli. Before beginning the task, the 
participant is shown a target shape and told that they will be presented with a 
computer screen where a variety of different shapes will fall from the top of their 
screen. The participan t’s objective is to mouse over the target shape and to avoid  
the other shapes (distractors).  
• All learning tasks will be conducted 5 times consecutively for 2 minutes each time. 
The accuracy score will be recorded for each session. The participant’s learning 
ability is summarized as the increase in accuracy between baseline and final 
session. The study will compare linguistically based task vs nonlinguistic learning 
tasks (each to be completed by [CONTACT_517191] 1 to  determine  whether 
learning potential relates directly to prognosis.  
 
11. Obtain Arterial Blood Pressure and Stiffness  
• Arterial stiffness plays a role in outcomes following cardiovascular disease and 
stroke, especially in individuals with hypertension. Accordingly, we w ill obtain 
measures of arterial stiffness using the SphygmoCor device. We will use data from 
this measue to inform our MRI analyses pertaining to brain health and its 
relationship with overall health.  
• SphygmoCor XCEL PWA (pulse wave analysis) uses a stand ard cuff to measure 
systolic and diastolic pressures, and capture a brachial waveform. The brachial 
waveform is then analyzed by [CONTACT_517214] a central aortic waveform. 
Central blood pressure measurements such as central aortic systolic blood 
pressure, and central pulse pressure. Aortic stiffness is approximated with non -
invasive measurement of carotid -femoral pulse wave velocity, with improvements 
made with time to make the assessment procedure quicker and more user 
independent.  
• Participants will  lay supi[INVESTIGATOR_517134] [ADDRESS_670342] a blood pressure cuff placed on their thigh.  Trained study staff will make three 
key measurements (cm) from the placement of the cuff to the major physical 
landmarks.  Study staff wil l locate the carotid and femoral arteries.  Using the wand, 
gentle pressure will be placed on the neck of participants at the strongest pulse 
point and study staff will move the wand slowly on the neck area around the carotid 
 [ADDRESS_670343]   (Week  1, 5, 8, 12, 15, & 39  [Administered twice - Week 1])  
1. Turn on the laptop computer and position in front of the participant  
2. Open PNT application  
• Go to “Utilities” and “Start Webcam Preview” and stop when positioned correctly.  
• Enter participant number and session and click “Start.”  
3. Administer the Philadelphia Naming Test  (PNT; Roach et al., 1996) on a laptop computer. 
The PNT is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -naming task consisting of 175 high - and medium -frequency nouns tha t 
vary in length from 1 -4 syllables.  
• Instruct the participant  to overtly name [CONTACT_365567][INVESTIGATOR_517135] . 
• Trials will end following a response or after [ADDRESS_670344] to Dropbox and you may exit the 
application.  
 
Treated Naming 40  (Administered once on Week  1, 5, 8, 12, 15, & 39)  
 
1. Turn on the laptop computer and position in front of the participant  
2. Open Treated Naming 40 application  
• Go to “Utilities” and “Start Webcam Preview” and stop when positioned correctly.  
• Enter participant number and session and click “Start.”  
 
3. Administer the Treated Naming [ADDRESS_670345] lists will include an equal 
number of nouns and verbs.  
• Instruct the participant  to overtly name [CONTACT_365567][INVESTIGATOR_517135] . 
Trials will end followin g a response or after [ADDRESS_670346] to Dropbox and you may exit the 
application.  
 
 
2.1.5 Procedures for Discourse Assessments (Administered once on Week  1, 5, 8, 12, 15, 
& 39)  
 
1. Turn on the laptop com puter and position in front of the participant  
2. Open Discourse  application  
• Go to “Utilities” and “Start Webcam Preview” and stop when positioned correctly.  
• Enter participant number and session a nd click “Start.”  
3. Administer pi[INVESTIGATOR_147265]:  Broken Window  
• Press esc when completed and file will save automatically  
4. Administer Story Narrative:  Cinderella Story  
• Press “Select to finish” button on screen when completed and file will save automatically  
5. Administer Procedural Dis course Task:  Making a peanut butter and jelly sandwich  
 32 
• Press esc when completed and file will save automatically  
6. Once completed, you may exit the application  
7. SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and scoring  
procedures. Administration time will range between 20 -30 minutes.  
 
 
2.1.6 Procedures for the Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure (ACOM) (Week 1 
and Week 39)  
• Administer the Adaptive Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure ( CAT-ACOM; 
Doyle et al., 2013).  
• The ACOM consists of 12 items from the 59 -item ACOM item bank using a content -
balancing strategy from each domain (talking, writing, number use, comprehension, and 
naming) to insure that the content balance of each CAT -ACOM is r eflective of the 
content balance of the full -length ACOM.  
• SLPs will refer to the manual for explicit instructions regarding administration and 
scoring procedures. Administration time will be approximately 15 minutes.  
 
2.1.7 Procedures for Treatment (Aphasi a Participant s Only) ( Weeks 2 -4 and  9-11) 
Two different types of treatment will  be used in this study; one primarily  semantically focused 
and one primarily  phonologically focused . Participant s with aphasia  will receive both types of 
treatments but in diffe rent order. The order of the sequence of treatments will be randomly 
assigned.  
 
 
 
Semantically  focused treatment tasks : 
 
1. Semantic Feature Analysis. This task requires participant s to actively analyze a concept 
and to attempt to generate its semantic features.  
 
2. Semantic Barrier Task. Clinician and participant  sit opposite to each other with a barrier 
between them so that they cannot see the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517136]. 
Both have a set of pi[INVESTIGATOR_517137] o ther individual enough 
semantic information to identify the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517138].  
 
3. Verb Network Strengthening Treatment (VNeST). This treatment approach targets 
lexical retrieval of verbs and their thematic nouns. The objective is for the participant  to 
generate verb -noun associates with the purpose of strengthening the connections 
between the verb and its thematic roles  and ultimately improve sentence production.  
 
 
 
Phonologically  focused treatment tasks:  
 
1. Phonological Components Analysis. Th is task requires participant s to first name a given 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103], and then identify the phonological features of the target word. Once the features 
have been identified, participant s are required to attempt to name [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_517117].  
 
2. Phonological Production Task . This task requires participa nts to first sort a stack of 
targeted imageable nouns  and verbs  by [CONTACT_517215] 
 33 
by [CONTACT_53737][INVESTIGATOR_517139]. The treatment then continues to focus on the identification 
of a hierarchy of phonological features  with a given pair of targeted words . Once each 
targeted feature is identified for the pair of words, the participant  is then required to 
blend the syllables/sounds together.   
 
3. Computerized Phonological Judgment Task. Participant s will watch videos of a speaker  
producin g words and nonwords, and will press a button (green for yes, red for no) to 
indicate whether successive stimuli rhyme, start with the same syllable, have the same 
number of syllables, etc.  
 
Each treatment task will take about 15 -minutes so the total trea tment time will be 45 minutes 
per day.  
 
2.1.8 Data Collection for Treatment Tasks  
 
Semantic Feature Analysis : 
 
• Target word is presented  prior to beginning the feature analysis  to determine if 
participant can  independently name. Credit given if the participant can name [CONTACT_517283], 
or with >50% of the phonemes correct and being intelligible to an unfamiliar listener.   
 
• Once the analysis is completed, and also reviewed, the participant is again asked to 
name [CONTACT_517284]  a second time. Same criteria for correct/incorrect is used.   
 
 
  
Semantic Feature Barrier Task:  
 
• Document  numbers of the target words  that were used in the task (ex: cards #21 -28), 
and whether it was a closed set (where both clinician and participant have the 
exact  same  cards, per exa mple both persons would have cards #21 -28 in front of them) 
or an open set (where the clinician and participant have  different  cards in front of them, 
per example: clinician would have #[ADDRESS_670347] -28, each 
having only four cards in front of them)   
  
Verb Network Strengthening Treatment (VNeST):   
 
• After STEP [ADDRESS_670348]  protocol, Data is collected for Steps 5 and 6. The either do or 
do not receive credit for being able to: recall the target verb correctly, as well as 3 WHO’s 
and 3 WHAT’s. Credit can be given for any [ADDRESS_670349] WHO’s and WHAT’s even if they vary 
from the original [ADDRESS_670350]  activity.    
  
Phonological Components Analysis:   
  
• Target word is presented prior to beginning the feature analysis to  determine if 
participant can independently name.  Credit can only be given if participant names target 
correctly without any phonemic errors.   
  
• Once the analysis is completed, and also reviewed, the participant is again asked at the 
end to name [CONTACT_517285] a second time. Same criteria for correct/incorrect is used.   
 34 
 
Phonological Production Task:  
 
• Data is kept on which of the levels the participant participated and how many trials were 
completed in that day. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], 5 or more repetitions of one level are to be completed 
before moving on to the next combination; however, clinician can use judgment to move on 
to the next level if  participant completed less than 5  in the time allowed,  but was not 
exhibiting significant difficulty  with the task.     
  
• If participant goes through all of the levels, start over again at “First Syllable – First 
Syllable” and move through the cycle a second time.  
  
Phonological Judgment Task:  
 
• Data is kept on which of the 10 Levels the participant worked on, and what the %  of 
accuracy was for the level(s) that day. Sometimes with time required for training the task 
there is only time for one attempt, but often time the task will be completed twice in one 
session.  Clinician can use clinical judgement as to when to stay at a certain level even if 
the percentage was low, or when to move up even if the participant has not mastered  that 
level at  80% (ex:  if frustration level gets too high on a certain level, switching to a different 
task)   
  
  
 
 
2.1.9 Procedures for Completion of  Participant Satisfaction Survey  
• At or around the [ADDRESS_670351] the participant in answering the questions on the aphasia -friendly  survey.  
  
2.1.10  Procedures for >one -year follow -up  
• Participants who are at least one -year post -treatment will be called back for follow up testing 
to determine change in performance on a subset of the initial baseline measures or treatment 
outcomes. They will also be ask ed to complete the entire battery of MRI sequences. 
Participants will be paid $100  for this visit  (in the form of a Visa giftcard) . They will be provided 
lodging and roundtrip  mileage reimbursement if they reside outside of the Columbia, SC 
metropolitan ar ea (>35 miles  travel distance ).  
• They will be asked to fill out a payment form and a W -9 so that the payment can be processed.  
• Specific measures that will be administered at this time include the:  
• Western Aphasia Battery -Revised  
• Philadelphia Naming Test  
• Philadelphia Repetition Test  
• Pyramids and Palm Trees Test, Kissing and Dancing Test  
• Aphasia Bank Discourse Assessments  
• Updated case history form/health history form  
• PALPA subtests  
• National Institutes of Health Toolbox – Cognitive Battery  
 35 
• Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure (ACOM)  
• WAIS Matrix Reasoning Subtest  
• Sphygmacor aterial stiffness measure  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 36 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B 
Scripts for Treatment tasks  
  
 37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Semantically focused treatment tasks   
 38 
SEMANTIC FEATURE ANALYSIS (nouns  & verbs ) 
 
• We are going to look at some pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. We will name [CONTACT_517286][INVESTIGATOR_517140].  
• Get whiteboard  
• I am going to place a pi[INVESTIGATOR_517141], and I would like for you to 
name [CONTACT_517287][INVESTIGATOR_517142].  (place in center)  Can you tell me the name [CONTACT_517288]?  
o If they are able to correctly name, then “Great, you said _________.  Now let us 
review the different fea tures.”  (write name [CONTACT_517289])  
o If they approximate with an artic error, semantic or phonemic paraphasia, then 
“Very close, you said ________. The name [CONTACT_517290] _______________ (and 
write the name [CONTACT_517291]).  Now let us review th e different 
features.”  
o If they are unable to name, then “The name [CONTACT_517290] ___________ (and write 
the name [CONTACT_517291]).  Now let us review the different 
features.”  
o *Note when reviewing features below – NOT EVERY FEATURE IS APPROPRIA TE 
FOR EVERY TREATMENT STIMULUS. ONLY ELICIT THOSE FEATURES 
APPROPRIATE FOR THE STIMULUS ITEM.  
• The first feature is group or category membership.  (For very first session, “For 
example, a triceratops is a dinosaur.”) Your item (or just name [CONTACT_13114])  is a member  of 
which group?  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move 
to next feature.  
• The second feature is use or utility.  (For very first session, “For example, a telescope 
is used to look into outer space.” ) What is ________ used for?  
o *If animal or person, SKIP  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated , shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move 
to next feature.  
• The third feature is action.  (For very first session, “For  example, a triceratops eats 
plants and runs from the t -rex”). What does ________ do?  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
o If unable to produc e, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move 
to next feature.  
• The fourth feature is properties, or a description.  (For very first session, “For example 
a triceratops has three horns and four legs”).  What are some properties of _______?  
(max 3)  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
 39 
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move 
to next fea ture. 
• The fifth feature is location.  (For very first session, “For example, a telescope is found 
near a window or on a rooftop”). Where do we find _______?  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carr ier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move 
to next feature.  
• The last feature is association.  (For very first session, “For example, a triceratops 
reminds me of a r hinoceros”). What does _______ remind you of?  
o If produced, write in box and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), write in box, move to 
next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sent ence), write in box, move 
to next feature.  
• To review the features again, try to say them with me  
o it is a _________ (group),   
o it is used for __________, it _______ (action),   
o it has/is __________,  
o it is found _________,  
o and it reminds you of ________.   
• What is the name [CONTACT_517292]?  
o If produced, then  “Great, next item.”  
o If approximated, shape to correct, have them repeat correct form after you, and then  
“Great, next item.”  
o If not produced, then “Say this after me: ______ _______”  OR “Say it with me: 
_________” “Great work on that. Lets move to the next item.”   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40 
SEMANTIC FEATURE - BARRIER (nouns  & verbs ) 
 
• I am going to deal some cards out to the both of us. We will each have a matched 
deck of X* cards (*5-10, depending on participant  ability). ^ We will take turns 
describing the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517143] t he other person to guess which pi[INVESTIGATOR_517144].  
o ^If the participant  is very good at this and/or as the treatment progresses, you may 
not need a matched deck. The matched deck is really to help narrow the field and 
give options for the participan t to choose from.  
• Before we start giving clues to each other, I want to quickly review the semantic 
features that you may decide to use as clues.  
• Get semantic barrier sheet  
• For example, if you were holding a pi[INVESTIGATOR_510] __________ (select sample card),  you 
might provide a clue like (give an example sentence about ‘group ’ feature)  or (give an 
example clue about ‘use’ feature) . If I am not able to guess which pi[INVESTIGATOR_517145], you could provide another clue like  (give an example sentence about 
‘physical properties ’) or (give an example sentence about ‘association ’).  
• If you have a hard time giving me clues, I will ask you to describe, draw, write, or 
gesture some features. If you are still having difficulty, I wil l ask you to describe or 
gesture the use or action. If we are still stuck, I will ask you to name [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_517146]/or show me your card. We will review a few features together before 
moving to the next pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  
• Place barrier between you and clie nt, give stack of cards  
• For very first session, clinician goes first to model  
• Okay, I am going to give you [ADDRESS_670352]  – (give group info) , and 
o Second  – (give use info, gesturing when appropriate)  
• Can you guess which pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] I am describing?  
o If correc t guess, “Yes, I was describing ___(target word)____.  (summarize 
features).  Now, your turn.”  
o If incorrect guess, provide 2 additional clues/features appropriate for the stimulus 
item, gesturing when appropriate . “Can you guess which pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] I am 
describing ?” 
 If correct guess, “Yes, I was describing ___(target word)___.  (Summarize 
features).  Now, your turn.”  
 If incorrect guess, review features you have already provided, provide 1 -2 
more if appropriate, then “I was describing ___(target word)___. Can you 
say that word with me?  __________.”  
• All right, now it is time for you to give 2 clues. You can use your feature visual to 
help g et you started.  
o Hopefully they provide 2 clues. **If they do, and if it is obvious,  guess correctly. If 
they do, and if you are pretty confident you know what it is but if it is the least bit 
ambiguous,  guess incorrectly, choosing the alternative. They wou ld then need to 
provide more clues.  
o If they are only able to provide 1 clue, ask them if they can give you more 
information.  ** 
o If they are unable to provide clues, ask them to describe, draw, write, or gesture 2 
specific features (name [CONTACT_517293], direct them to their visual 
aid). ** 
 41 
 If still having difficulty, ask participant  to describe or gesture the use or action. 
** 
 If still having difficulty, ask participant  to name [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_517147]/or 
show the card.   
o Once clinician has correctly guessed or participant  has named or shown pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103], 
review features . “You were describing ___(target word)___. Can you say that 
word with me? __________”  Now, please fill i n the blank with the features you 
provided:  (review only those provided, unless unable to provide, in which case, 
select 2 -3 features to review)  
 it is a _________ (group),  
 it is used for __________, it _______ (action),  
 it has/is __________,  
 it is found  _________,  
 and it reminds you of ________.   
• Take turns until time is up.  
 
For week 2, we can consider alternating between Clue -giving and 20 questions during the 
semantic barrier portion of the session.  
 
 
  
 42 
VERB NETWORK  STRENGTHENING  TREATMENT  (VNeST)  
 
• Now w e are going to talk about some verbs and try to make sentences  using some 
cards.  
o Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696] a card with a target verb for the session out of the 10 possible verbs  and put it 
on the table in front of you.  
Step 1. Generation of 3 agents and patient s for targeted verb.  
 
1. For this step I want to ask you to t ell me who can __(target verb)__ (e.g. ‘tell me 
who can measure’ ) * The participant  does NOT have to say the verb, only the nouns.  
o Write down the word  ‘who’ at the top left corner of a dry erase board. For each word 
generated , write the word underneath ‘who’ or place a card with the word written on 
it. Encourage the participant  to provide personal responses.  
o A minimum of [ADDRESS_670353], move on to 
the next step . 
o If participant  cannot produce 3 words, give the participant  2 cards with appropriate 
responses on them and 1 foil  written on them . “Now I have given you some cards 
to choose from. Can you tell me which ones you think go with the verb and 
which ones do not? ”  
o If still incorrect , provide the participant  with the correct answer and get them to say it 
with you.  
2. Now,  I want to ask you to tell  me what  can be_(target verb) _ (e.g. ‘what can be 
measured’ . 
o Write down the word  ‘what’ at the top right hand corner of the dry erase board.  For 
each word generated , write the word underneath ‘what’ or place a  card with the word 
written on it .  
o If participant  cannot produce 3 words, give the participant  2 cards with appropriate 
responses on them and 1 foil written on them . “Now I have given you some cards 
to choose from.  Please read the word pairs aloud and then tell me which ones 
you think go with the verb and which ones do not? ”  
o If correct, move on to the next step . 
o If incorrect , provide the participant  with the correct answer and get them to say it 
with you.  
o Once [ADDRESS_670354] been produced , move on to next step.  
 
Step 2: Read aloud each triad. (it ’s not important to conjugate the verb or add any 
articles to the nouns (e.g. ‘farmer drives tractor’ ).  
o They may be read aloud independently, in unison with clinician, or repeated 
after the clinician.  
 
Step 3. Answer wh -questions abou t agent -patient pair 
• Now I want you to pi[INVESTIGATOR_517148].  
o Write or move the pair of words (agent -verb-patient)  that they choose out of the list 
of agents and patients to focus attention. Write or place cards with  ‘where’, ‘why’ 
and ‘whe n’ on the dry erase board.  
• Now I am going to ask you to answer some questions about this pair of words.  (The 
participant s do NOT have to respond with complete sentences). A) Where does a _(agent -
verb -patient )_? (e.g., where does a chef measure sugar B) Why does a  _(agent -verb -
patient )_? (e.g., why does a chef measure sugar?) C) When does a _(agent -verb -
patient)_? (e.g., whe n does a chef measure sugar?)  
 [ADDRESS_670355], give the participant  options to choose from and say it with them . 
Step 4. Semantic judgment of sentences.  
• Remove all the cards from the table.  
• Now I am going to read some  sentences and I want you to tell me if the sentences 
make sense (are semantically correct) or not.  
o Read the 12 sentences containing the target verb ([ADDRESS_670356], 3 with inappropriate 
patient, 3 with inappropriate agent, 3 with agent and patient switched).   
o After each sentence, “Did this one make sense? ” 
o If participant  answers [ADDRESS_670357] them repeat.  
Step 6.  Generation of 3 agent -participant  pairs (repeat Steps 1 -2) 
• Now we are going to go back to the first thing that we did today , but this time we are 
not going to use the cards.  
o Ask the exact same questions that were asked in Step 1 , but without the cards. (i.e., 
Tell me who  (or what , to be alternated throughout a session) can __(target 
verb)__ (e.g. ‘tell me who can measure’ ) (be _( target verb) _ (e.g. ‘tell me what 
can be measure d’).) 
o Provide the participant  with general feedback (e.g. “good job ” etc.)  
• Once successful, start over from the top using a different verb . 
 
 
 
v  
 44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phonologically focused treatment tasks  
  
 45 
PHONOLOGICAL COMPONENTS ANALYSIS  
 
• We are going to look at some pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. We will talk about different sound features of 
the obj ects or actions in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  
• Get whiteboard  
• I am going to place a pi[INVESTIGATOR_517141], and I would like for you to 
name [CONTACT_517287][INVESTIGATOR_517142]. (place card in center ). Can you tell me the 
name [CONTACT_517292]?   
o If they are able to correctly name, then “Great, you said _________.  Now let us 
review the different features.”   
o If they approximate with an artic error, semantic or phonemic paraphasia, then 
“Very close, you said ________.  The name [CONTACT_517290] _______________ ). 
Now let us review the different features.”  
o If they are unable to name, then “The name [CONTACT_517290] __ _________   
Now let us review the different features.”  
• The first feature is the first sound of the item you see.  (For very first session, “For 
example, the wor d lotion starts with the sound ‘l’ .) What is the first sound of this 
item?  
o If produced, write in box, then read together * “the first sound is ____”  and move to 
next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the first sound is ____”  and move to next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the first sound is ____” and move to next feature.  
 *for all features, the participant  does NOT have to say the carrier phrase if 
they cannot or do not wish to, just try to encourage them to fill in the blank 
with you.  
• The second feature is the number of syllables.  (For very first session, “For example, 
the word lotion has two syllables” (tap out 2 syllables). ) How many syllables does this 
word have?   
o If produced, write in box, then read together  “the number of syllables is ______  
(then tap), and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to re peat, 
write in box, then read together  “the number of syllables is ______ (then tap), and 
move to next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the number of syllables is ______  (then tap), and 
move to next feature.  
• The third feature is the last or final sound of the item you see.  (For very first session, 
“For example, the final sound of the word lotion is “n”. ) What is the final sound?   
o If produced, write in b ox, then read together “the last sound is ____”  and move to 
next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together “the last sound is ____”  and move to next feature.  
o If unable to prod uce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the last sound is ____”  and move to next feature.  
• The fourth feature requires us to think of or make up a word that rhymes with our 
item.  (For very first s ession, “For example, a word that rhymes with lotion might be 
“ocean” or “motion”. ) What is a word that rhymes with ___________?   (max 2)  
 46 
o If produced, write in box, then read together  “____(target)___ rhymes with 
____(rhyming word)___”  and move to next fea ture. 
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “____(target)___ rhymes with ____(rhyming 
word)___”  and move to next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sen tence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “____(target)___ rhymes with ____(rhyming 
word)___”  and move to next feature.  
• The fifth feature is the vowel sound of the first syllable.  (For very first session, “For 
example, the vowel sound of the first syllable of lotion is “o” ). What is the vowel 
sound of the first syllable? (If the word is monosyllabic, acknowledge that and feel free to 
change your script to  “the vowel sound of this word”. )  
o If produced, write in box, then read together  “the vowel sound of the first syllable 
(or word) is _______”  and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the vowel sound of the first syllable (or word) is 
_______”  and move to next feature.  
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the vowel sound of the first syllable (or word) is 
_______”  and move to next feature.  
• The last feature  (IF MORE  THAN ONE SYLLABLE) is the vowel sound of the last 
syllable. (For very first session, “For example, the vowel sound of the last syllable of 
lotion is “uh”. ) What is the vowel sound of the last syllable?   
o If produced, write in box, then read together  “the v owel sound of the last syllable 
is _______”  and move to next feature.  
o If approximated, shape to correct (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the vowel sound of the last syllable is _______”  
and move to next featu re. 
o If unable to produce, provide answer (model w/ carrier sentence), prompt to repeat, 
write in box, then read together  “the vowel sound of the last syllable is _______”  
and move to next feature.  
• Great, we’ve reviewed all of the features. I want to go ove r them again, and I want 
you to say each feature with me.  (provide carrier phrase , they fill in with you with unison 
speech)  
o The first sound is __________,  
o The number of syllables is ____#____ ,(and then tap out together)  
o The last sound is __________,  
o A rhyming word is ___________,  
 (if listed 2, Another rhyming word is _________ ), 
o The vowel of the first syllable is ________,  
o The vowel of the last syllable is _______.  
• What is the name [CONTACT_517292]?  
o If produced, then  “Great, next item.”  
o If approximated, shape to correct, have them repeat correct form after you, and then  
“Great, next item.”  
• If not produced, then “Say this after me: _____________”  OR “Say it with me: 
_________” “Great work on that. Lets move to the next item.”  Go through al l the steps 
using a different pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103].  
 47 
PHONOLOGICAL PRODUCTION TASK  
 
• We need to sort the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517149] [ADDRESS_670358] 2 or more syllables.  
• I’ll do the first few.  (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9696] a card and tap the word while you say it.) That had X syllable(s) 
so it goes in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_5829].  (Do for a few more cards.)  
• Okay, now we will work together. This word is “_______” (and tap at same time). How 
many syllables does it have? OR Can you tap it out for me?   
o Let them try independently first .  
o If incorrect , “Close, but watch me  – (say the word and tap).  X syllable(s).”  
•  Complete entire stack or stop at 5 minutes .  
 
• “Now we have a stack of single syllable words and a stack of multi syllable words. 
We are going to break these words down into smaller syllables and sounds and then 
mix them all up to make new words. These words will not make any sense most 
likely, but they will be new words we are creating. ” 
 
• First syllable – First syllable (with multisyllabic cards only)  
o “First we will focu s on the first syllable of words. ”(Place target pi[INVESTIGATOR_517150] .)  
 This word has X syllables.  (tap all syllables). The first syllable of this 
word is “___”  (write syllable on white board)   
 Place next pi[INVESTIGATOR_517151].  
 This word has X syllables.  (tap all s yllables).  The first syllable of this 
word is “___” (write syllable on white board)  
 Now, let us make a new word with the first syllables of these words. 
“______” plus “______” makes “___________” (touch syllables while 
saying the isolated syllables, and the n pull written syllables together to make 
the final nonword while you are talking)  
 “Now, let’s  review and say these together. ” 
• The first syllable of this word is “_________”  (say together)  
• The first syllable of this word is “_________”  (say together)  
• “_____” plus “______” makes “___________” (say together, the 
syllables and nonword, or the nonword at the very least)  
• Complete 5 trials.  
• Follow the same steps with the given hierarchy:  
 First syllable – First syllable (multisyllabic cards only)  
 First syllable – Last syllable (multisyllabic cards only)  
 Last syllable – Last syllable (multisyllabic cards only)  
 Last syllable – First syllable (multisyllabic cards only)  
 First syllable – First sound (multisyllabic cards for first, single syllable cards fo r second)  
 Last syllable – Last sound (multisyllabic cards for first, single syllable cards for second)  
 First syllable – Last sound (multisyllabic cards for first, single syllable cards for second)  
 Last syllable – First sound (multisyllabic cards for first,  single syllable cards for second)  
 
DECISIONS  
 Monitor what subtask they finish each day and start with next level on the hierarchy if [ADDRESS_670359] been completed. If less than 5 trials were completed and participant is 
exhibiting significant difficulty,  repeat current level. Use clinical judgment to move 
throughout each level.  
 48 
 
COMPUTERIZED PHONOLOGICAL JUDGMENT TASK  
 
• Open Phonological Video Treatment application on the laptop   
o Enter participant number, session number and treatment level.  
o Press start.  
  
• Read the instructions that come up on the computer screen out  loud to the participant  and 
make sure they understand what is being asked of them. Give them an example of the 
task, e.g. if they’re doing the first task you give them an example of two words that have the 
same number of syllables and two that don’t.  
o “In this task, you will see two videos at a time. Each video is of a person's mouth 
saying a single word . Listen closel y to both words”  
o Complete the practice first.  
o Once the practice is completed, press start to begin task  
 
LEVEL 1:  Same number of syllables?  
• You will see 2 videos.  
• Press GREEN if they have the SAME number of syllables.  
• Press RED if they do not.  
LEVEL 2: Which has more syllables?  
• You will see 2 videos.  
• Press GREEN if the FIRST word has more syllables.  
• Press RED if the SECOND word has more syllables.  
LEVEL 3, 4, & 5:  Start with the same sound?  
• You will see 2 videos.  
• Press GREEN if they START with the SAME sound.  
• Press RED if they do not.  
LEVEL 6, 7, & 8:  End with the same sound?  
• You will see 2 videos.  
• Press GREEN if they END with the SAME sound.  
• Press RED if they do not. 
LEVEL 9 & 10:  Do they rhyme?  
• You will see 2 videos.  
• Press GREEN if they rhyme.  
• Press RED if they do not.  
 
Criteria  for each level:  
o If participant scores <60%  the program will recommend they move down a level.  
o If participant scores between 60%-80% then they remain at the same level.  
o If participant scores 80% or above , they should move up to a harder level.  
o If a participant were to achieve an 80% or above  on all levels prior to completion of treatment 
phase. Begin at level 1 and increase the target score  to 90% or higher for each level.  
 
DECISIONS:  
o Clinical judgment may be used  to determine whether the participant moves up or down a level in 
certain circumstances. For example, if the participant has just moved on to a new level and they are 
not demonstrating understanding of the task  and they score below 60%, clinical judgment can be 
used to override  the protocol for droppi[INVESTIGATOR_517152] a level . Another example would be if the participant 
is frustrated and stuck on a particular level  for several attempts , clinical judgment can be used to 
allow them to try the next level up (particularly if it is a separate targeted skill).   
 49 
Appendix C : Alternative Remote  Protocol During COVID 19 Quarantine  
 
A.  Modifications for Remote Assessment  
 To continue to enroll participants during the Covid 19 quarantine, some procedures will 
be adapted to be able to administer assessments online.  Changes are listed and explained 
below.  
 
1.  Online Platform – Individuals completing the assessments will be assigned a private, zoom 
account.  This online platform allows researchers to connect to participants in their own  homes 
via video -conferencing.  Video -conferencing will be password -protected and any 
videorecordings made during the assessment will be saved to the researcher’s local computer 
and then transferred to a HIPAA -compliant dropbox account.  Participants will be asked to 
have a friend or family member (assistant) to be present throughout the assessment to assist 
with the technology.  
 
2.  Informed Consent – Potential participants will be mailed 2 copi[INVESTIGATOR_517153] a pre-addressed, stamped envelope in advance of the assessment session.  
The individual consenting the participant will review the informed consent via video -
conferencing with his/her assistant who can assist with the technology as needed.  The 
participant ( or his/her assistant) will sign the consent and show it to the clinician via his/her 
webcam.  The clinician will take a screen shot of the form for a digital copy.  The participant will 
be asked to mail the original, signed form back to the Aphasia Lab in the stamped, pre -
addressed envelope provided.  
 
3.  Behavioral Assessments – Behavioral assessments have been adapted to be administered 
online.  A brief training session will take place before administration of assessments to make 
sure that the participant  and his/her assistant can demonstrate how to use controls in the zoom 
platform to point to pi[INVESTIGATOR_337641] a shared scree n.  The assistant will also be instructed on how 
to alter the webcam to allow the clinician to view the participant completing different t asks.  
 
4.  MRI/fMRI Tasks – MRI scans and the fMRI tasks will be postponed for participants until the 
COVID 19 quarantine is over.  At that time, participants will be contact[CONTACT_517216]/fMRI 
scanning appointment at MCBI.   
 
B.  Modifications for Remote T reatment  
 
1.  Teletherapy Kits – Each enrolled participant will be mailed a teletherapy kit to complete 
treatments.  These kits will include : 
• A laptop , touchscreen  computer pre -loaded with the treatment apps, zoom for online 
videoconferencing with the SLP and Team Viewer which will allow the SLP to see the 
participant’s computer to help with initial set -up and troubleshooting . 
• A high quality headset with a microphone to maximize communication with the SLP 
online.  
• A mouse for optional use.  
• A mobile WiFi hots pot if a participant does not have adequate WiFi connection at 
home.  
 
2.  Treatment Apps – Participant laptops will be preloaded with both semantic and 
phonological treatment apps which wil allow the SLP to interact with the participant during 
treatments.  The assistant will be asked to help with the treatment technology if necessary.  
 
 [ADDRESS_670360] few days and 
weeks following onset, approximately 30 -40% of patients are left with persistent aphasia affecting 
communication ability and life participation. Stroke is g enerally associated with older age, but a 
significant proportion of patients incur stroke in the fourth to sixth decade of life (15). Once spontaneous 
aphasia recovery has ceased, patients’ greatest chance at significant communication improvement is 
by [CONTACT_517217]. Although considerable evidence suggests that aphasia treatment is 
effective, the problem is that very little is known about what kind of treatment works best, and for whom 
(2, 3, 16, 17). As suggested in a recent paper by [CONTACT_517218] (18), the standard of care for the 
treatment of aphasia in the [LOCATION_002] is behavioral speech -language therapy. However, what 
exactly this therapy consists of probably varies widely - what might be common practice at one clinical 
facility mi ght be very different than what is practiced somewhere else. As anyone who has extensive 
experience treating aphasia knows, it is simply not the case that all treatment approaches work equally 
well, not even for patients with similar impairments (19). Neve rtheless, we believe that an appropriately 
weighted use of combined behavioral and neurophysiological biomarkers should improve our ability to 
predict treatment outcome, as well as aid in the choice of optimal treatment targets for individual 
patients with  aphasia.  
In the most downloaded article in the history of the Public Library of Science, “Why Most Published 
Research Findings Are False,” Ioannidis (20) noted that when all factors are equal, in fields where 
smaller studies are the norm, the chances of research findings being false is much higher than in fields 
where larger studies are typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]. The norm in aphasia treatment studies, including our own previous 
studies, is to rely on single -subject design or very small group studies. It is straightforward to 
understand why this is the state of affairs. Treatment studies take a relatively long time and a 
disproportionate level of resources compared to most other kinds of research in aphasia. Also, subject 
recruitment is often an issue, especially in studies that target patients with specific cognitive/linguistic 
impairment profiles. Nevertheless, our field needs larger treatment studies to reveal specific trends that 
can be generalized to the larger population of patients, not just to a narrow number of cases . We 
believe that our past success, institutional environment, and collaborative spi[INVESTIGATOR_517154] a position to 
conduct a relatively large aphasia study that has the potential to exert a sustained impact on the field of 
clinical aphasiology. In the contex t of previous aphasia treatment studies, the project proposed here 
entails a relatively large sample size of treated patients (N=120) and extensive cognitive/linguistic 
testing, including assessment of learning potential and neuroimaging workup. As we cont end that 
recent meta -analyses studies have demonstrated the value of aphasia treatment, the purpose of project 
[ADDRESS_670361] 1, the data collected here will also fuel projects 
3 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517107]) and 4 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517108]).  
1.1 Biomarkers of Treated Aphasia Recovery. In 1972 , Darley (21) suggested that factors such as 
age, education, intelligence, social status, health, time post -stroke, and aphasia type are related to 
success in aphasia therapy, but that very few studies had actually incorporated these factors as 
predictors of outcome. More than four decades later, the situation has not improved much, as limited 
research has established a strong relationship between specific patient factors and treated aphasia 
recovery. A few studies have related patient characteristics to sp ontaneous recovery (6, 7, 22 -24); 
however, it is not known whether the same factors would predict aphasia treatment outcome. 
Accordingly, clinicians who routinely treat patients with aphasia have very limited empi[INVESTIGATOR_517155]. Whereas biomarker studies are common in medicine, 
almost no studies have been carried out to understand the relationship between patient factors and 
aphasia rehabilitation potential in stroke (25 -27). This may not be a particular problem in a cademic 
settings where extensive diagnostic behavioral tests can be administered. But in clinical settings such 
as rehabilitation hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], sub -acute nursing facilities, long -term care facilities, and home health care 
 51 
settings, financial and personnel res ources are limited and often allow for only one initial assessment 
session (28). The point here is that the clinicians who provide most of the aphasia therapy in the United 
States could far better serve their patients if they were armed with prognostic fac tors that would indicate 
whether a given patient was likely to respond to direct speech and language therapy (SALT) , and what 
focus that treatment should assume for maximum recovery. In the spi[INVESTIGATOR_517156]’s argument, we 
believe that patient factors such as aphasia severity and patterns of cognitive/linguistic impairment 
may, indeed, provide clinicians with the necessary biomarkers regarding the type of treatment that 
should be utilized and the extent of expected improvement. Therefore, the major goal of A im 1 is to 
build a predictive model of treated aphasia recovery based on biographical and cognitive/linguistic 
factors. Henceforth, we refer to this model as the “default model” of outcome prediction.  
1.2. Models of Treated Aphasia Recovery. In a recent p ublication, Geranmayeh, Brownsett, and 
Wise (29) proposed a model to explain where in the brain plastic changes that support aphasia 
recovery occur. Their model is mostly based on neuroimaging studies conducted in the past two 
decades, but it provides far greater insight into spontaneous rather than treated aphasia recovery. As 
such, this model offers minimal guidance regarding the current project where the goal is to predict 
outcome based on biographical, cognitive/linguistic, and neuroimaging factors. It is widely assumed that 
a large number of factors predict how likely a given patient is to respond to aphasia treatment. 
However, we are not aware of comprehensive theories that attempt to predict aphasia treatment 
outcome. As a first step, we adopt a data -driven approach to explain response to aphasia treatment. By 
[CONTACT_517219], the process of theory building includes the following steps: 1. Observation; 2. 
Description; 3. Categorization; and 4. Analysis and a statement about causality. For Aim 1, the firs t 
three steps are accomplished by [CONTACT_517220], direct behavioral testing, and MRI scanning. As we explain in section 3.10 (Data 
Analyses), the final step is achieved by [CONTACT_517221]-wise multiple regression to identify the most 
important predictors and then rely on support vector regression analyses (SVR; See Neuroimaging 
Core for details) to compare different explanatory models. For the sake of clarity, we are not going to 
focus on the potentially very complex interactions between the environment (e.g., family support, 
access to healthcare, and residential setting) and treatment outcome, as doing so would probably 
constitute an increase in effort that far exceeds what can be sup ported in the current project. Instead, 
our default model focuses on two sets of factors that we propose are related to aphasia treatment 
response. 1. Biographical factors: Age (30, 31); education (32, 33);, gender (23, 34); handedness (35); 
age at stroke,  type of stroke, number of strokes, and time post first stroke that caused the aphasia (36); 
2. Cognitive/linguistic factors: Clinical assessment of aphasia (6, 7, 37), motor speech production (38), 
grammatical processing (39), semantic processing of verbs  and nouns (40 -42), phonological 
processing (43, 44), speech discrimination (45 -47), speech repetition (48 -50), executive functioning 
(51-56), and verbal short -term memory (57 -60). We have chosen to cite research that supports the role 
of the aforementione d factors as predictors of aphasia treatment outcome; however, it is beyond the 
scope of the proposal to speculate how these factors might interact to support treated aphasia 
recovery. Once we have built our final data -driven model(s), it will be possible to examine the specific 
interactions between the factors that make up each model.  
Aphasia severity is one of the very few factors that has been identified as a reliable predictor of aphasia 
treatment outcome, and it is generally accepted that more severe patients are less likely to respond 
(61, 62). It is a caveat, however, that aphasia severity is a multidimensional construct where different 
patients with severe aphasia might present with very different language impairment profiles. We believe 
that contem porary neuropsychological models of speech and language processing can help us better 
understand which aspects of language impairment predict response to aphasia treatment. This may 
seem like a straightforward notion. However, it is important to note that neuropsychological models of 
speech and language are typi[INVESTIGATOR_517157], but not to account for dynamic changes in response to behavioral manipulation. 
Nevertheless, if speech and langua ge impairment can be predicted based on lesion data (63 -73), it 
seems reasonable to expect that the extent of brain damage and lesion location in relation to the 
cognitive processes they support may also aid in the prediction of aphasia treatment outcome. The dual 
stream (DS) model was conceived to explain how auditory information maps onto the phonological -
 52 
articulatory (dorsal stream) and conceptual systems (ventral stream) in the brain (1, 74, 75). Even 
though this model has been highly influential in spe ech and language research for over a decade, it has 
not gained much traction in the aphasia rehabilitation literature. In Aim 2, we will test whether 
proportional damage to the anatomically defined dorsal and ventral streams improves outcome 
prediction bey ond what can be achieved with the default model in Aim 1. Specifically, by [CONTACT_517222] (proportional damage to the dorsal and ventral 
streams) we will be able to predict treatment outcome with greater  accuracy compared to the default 
model alone. We refer to this as the “default model + DS model” (D+DS model). Note, however, that 
damage to any area that is supplied by [CONTACT_517223]. Hence, we will compare the utility of the DS model to the 
Wernicke -Lichtheim -Geschwind anatomical model (76 -78) to predict aphasia treatment outcome. 
Accordingly, the crucial questions we aim to answer are whether the default model c an be improved by 
[CONTACT_517224], the Wernicke -Lichtheim -Geschwind model (D+WLG model). We certainly recognize that 
the WLG model has been fervently challenged for  well over a  century and that its power to  explain 
individual patients may  be limited.  However, most  published aphasia research  (e.g., 79 -82), including  
contemporary lesion studies (83,  84), continues to report aphasia  types based on the WLG model  and, 
in some ways, the model  could be considered a simpler  version of contemporary dual  stream models of 
speech processing. It is widely recognized by [CONTACT_517225], behavioral neurology, and 
speech -language pathology. As such, the WLG model serves  as a reasonable control to which to 
compare the DS model.  
Figure 1. A schema depi[INVESTIGATOR_517158] 1 and 2.  
 
Figure 1 shows the relationship between the models that will be tested in Aim 1. The default model 
(yellow) includes biographical and cognitive/linguistic factors that are collected in the first few patient 
sessions. A different model assumes improved outc ome prediction by [CONTACT_517226] (red; D+WLG model). We 
hypothesize that the strongest prediction of outcome will be achieved by [CONTACT_517227] (blue; D+DS model).  
Along with several other groups, we have demonstrated that functional brain changes in the residual 
language areas of the left hemisphere support treated improvement in naming in aphasia (77, 78, 85 -
87). Based thereon, we could conclude that strengthening of the residual left -hemisphere language 
network, the areas that remain intact after stroke, leads to improved language processing in aphasia. 
However, as far as we can tell, no research has examined whether this kind of network compensation 
relies on over all network integrity or survival of specific sub -components of the network. We suggest 
that the DS model offers a principled approach to answer such questions. For example, for cases of 
damage to the ventral stream, and concomitant semantic impairment (a component of the default 
model), treatment might focus specifically on semantic stimulation. Here, one could assume that 
preservation of the ventral stream would be related to treatment success, so that patients with greater 
damage to the ventral stream ar e less likely to respond compared to others whose ventral stream is 
relatively more preserved. This view would contend that successful rehabilitation relies on the survival 
of the network that is being stimulated. However, an opposing view could argue that  what really matters 

 [ADDRESS_670362] 
battery. In that case, the D+DS model will not outperform the Default model. [CONTACT_517295]’s project 
(Proje ct 3) will rely on the same behavioral data collected here, but unlike the current project, it focuses 
on developi[INVESTIGATOR_517159]/recovery. The bene fit of this setup is that each project may yield 
complementary results that can better explain differences in treatment response among patients.  
1.3. Comparing Biomarkers as a Function of Treatment Foci. One of the challenges to interpreting 
the value of aphasia treatment biomarkers is the generalizability across different kinds of treatment 
types and foci. For example, in one of our previous studies (38), the severity of apraxia of speech 
(AOS) was found to be a strong negative predictor of success in spe ech entrainment treatment, a 
training program that emphasizes real -time mimicking of audio -visual speech narratives by [CONTACT_517228]-fluent aphasia. Although AOS is generally recognized as a deterrent to aphasia treatment success 
(88), it is not guaran teed that the same relationship between AOS severity and patient improvement 
would have been realized had the treatment included a different approach such as Melodic Intonation 
Therapy (89, 90), a treatment program also specifically designed to improve spe ech production in non -
fluent aphasia. For that reason, Project [ADDRESS_670363] success, regardless of treatment focus, or whether 
biomarkers are dependent on treatment focus. In one of our previous studies (10, 85), a  group of [ADDRESS_670364] (see Section 3.1 – 
Preliminary Studies). Specifically, we u sed a subset of the factors that comprise the models shown in 
Figure 1 (default model, D+DS model, and D+WLG model) to predict success in semantically and 
phonologically focused anomia treatments. Our decision to divide the treatment phases to target 
seman tic versus phonological stimulation was based on the fact that most impairment based treatment 
approaches tend to assume a semantic or phonological focus (10, 91 -99). However, despi[INVESTIGATOR_517160] t to dissociate at both the behavioral 
(40, 91, 92, 100 -104) and cortical level (105 -107), it is practically impossible to dissociate semantic and 
phonological stimulation in aphasia treatment. Accordingly, we emphasize that we use treatment 
methods that s tress phonological stimulation but will also induce semantic processing, and vice versa. 
The key here is treatment focus rather than complete dissociation of targeted processes in treatment.  
In addition to relating patient factors to treatment outcome, Ai m 1 will take advantage of data collection 
in the CATES trial (‘Trans -cranial Direct Current Stimulation to Treat Aphasia: Phase II Trial’ U01 
DC011739). As we discuss in greater detail in section 3.1 (Preliminary Studies), the aphasia treatment 
in the CAT ES trial relies on a computerized training task that includes both phonological and semantic 
stimulation. Each of the two treatment phases used in the current project will emulate the timing 
components (timing of pre -post treatment testing, length and numb er of treatment sessions) of the 
treatment phase in the CATES trial. Accordingly, we will be able to compare potential predictors of 
aphasia treatment success across the current project and the CATES trial.  
 54 
1.4 Learning Potential as a Biomarker of Aphasia  Treatment Outcome. Learning is driven by 
[CONTACT_517184] – the ability of the brain to continuously adapt its structure and function based on 
internal and external environmental changes. Neuroplasticity occurs due to changes in neuronal 
morphology, glia, and vascular and metabolic processes and can be stimulated by a variety of sensory -
motor experiences (108 -112). Learning potential is a common concept in the education literature (113, 
114). It assumes that not all individuals have the same ability to acqu ire new information and probably 
reflects flexibility of neural systems to adapt to internal changes or external stimulation (112, 115 -117). 
Although most clinicians probably assume that some aphasic patients have greater rehabilitation 
potential than othe rs, it is not clear whether patients’ learning potential is related to aphasia treatment 
outcome. Unlike the measures included in Aims 1 and 2 that mostly represent static factors (e.g., 
performance on cognitive/linguistic tests, proportional damage to spe cific brain regions), learning 
potential represents dynamic change, something that could be assessed at baseline to understand if 
prolonged aphasia rehabilitation is likely to be effective. Aim [ADDRESS_670365] Aphasia Treatment Outcome. Comparing the outcomes of 
treatments that assume either a semantic or phonological focus is not new in the aphasia literature (91, 
93, 94, 96 , 98, 99). However, most of this research has relied exclusively on single -subject design or 
very small group studies. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies that included relatively 
large sample sizes have attempted to identify biomarkers of ap hasia treatment outcome. Each patient 
enrolled here will undergo a comprehensive cognitive/linguistic test battery, including measures of 
learning potential. Relying on the same SVR approach used in Project 3, we will construct a 
computational model that i ncludes the factors that strongly predict treatment success. Then, we will 
make that model available on -line in a web based format so that clinicians can find out which tests to 
administer. They can then plug in their test results to predict the likelihood  that a given patient will 
respond to speech and language treatment. Furthermore, at the end of Project 2 (PI: [CONTACT_480629]) we will also 
be able to explore whether a default model predicts response to speech and language therapy (SALT) 
with a phonological -seman tic focus.  
2.2 Relating Dual Stream Damage to Aphasia Treatment Outcome. Since its inception, the dual 
stream model of speech processing (1, 74, 75) has been highly influential in the field of cognitive 
neuroscience and neurolinguistics. Published in 2007  (1), the most comprehensive article that 
describes the model has now been cited over 1,[ADDRESS_670366] focus of 
the phonol ogical and semantic treatment approaches is necessary to relate ventral and dorsal stream 
damage to treatment outcome. Later, we can focus on what specific aspects of treatment contribute to 
aphasia recovery.  
2.3 Measuring Whether Patients’ Ability to Lea rn Predicts Treatment Success. Normal subjects’ 
ability to learn new information has been studied extensively for many decades (11, 12, 118, 119). 
Whereas it is beyond the scope of the current project to summarize the findings, it is clear that the 
ability  to learn varies quite significantly among the general population (11, 13, 14, 120 -122). As 
recovery from aphasia requires a (broken) system to relearn information, it is plausible that learning 
ability, as measured at baseline, should be related to how we ll a given patient responds to treatment. 
Our approach to take learning potential into account is innovative, given that this is an area of study 
that has received very little attention in previous aphasia treatment research. By [CONTACT_517229] -term 
improve ment on two separate tasks – one that relies on language processing and one that does not – it 
will be possible to understand if learning potential as a predictor of aphasia treatment outcome is 
 [ADDRESS_670367] battery to inform the default model.  
3. Approach  
3.1 Preliminary Studies. As we discussed earlier in section 1.3, one of our previous aphasia treatment 
studies (N=3 0 chronic patients with aphasia) related lesion and fMRI data to improvements in naming 
following 30 hours of anomia treatment (10, 85). Each patient completed two 15 -hour treatment phases 
separated by [CONTACT_517230] a semant ic cueing hierarchy and the 
other used a phonological cueing hierarchy (123). To provide support for Aim 1, we reanalyzed some of 
the data from this study to explore whether biographical factors (gender, chronological age, age at 
stroke, time post -stroke, and race) and cognitive/linguistic factors (Western Aphasia Battery subtests; 
WAIS Matrix Subtest; Pyramids and Palm Trees test [PPTT], [LOCATION_011] Naming Test [BNT]) predict 
treatment outcome. These factors would be a part of our “default model” of outcome pre diction. As this 
was an exploratory analysis, we used multiple step -wise regression with a liberal p -value threshold for 
significant predictors (p<.10).  
Figure 2. The relationship between age at stroke (y -axis) and treatment related changes in correct naming (x -axis).  
 
Treatment outcome (change in correct naming before and after treatment) was predicted separately for 
the phonological treatment, the semantic treatment, and overall treatment (collapsing across the 
phonological and semantic treatments). Two statistically significant regression models predicted 
phonological treatment outcome, Model 1: Age at stroke ( F=3.6, p=.06, R2=.11); Model 2: Age at stroke 
+ scores on the PPTT ( F=3.9, p=.03, R2=.22). Similarly, two models emerged as significant predic tors 
of semantic treatment outcome, Model 1: BNT scores ( F=16.2, p<.0001, R2=.37); Model 2: BNT scores 
+ Age at stroke ( F=10.7, p<.0001, R2=.44). Finally, two models predicted overall treatment outcome, 
Model 1: BNT scores ( F=9.8, p<.0001, R2=.26); Model 2: BNT scores + Age at stroke ( F=11.5, 
p<.0001, R2=.46). In relation to the current proposal, we find that these results are particularly important 
for three reasons: First, in a sample that only included 30 patients, one of our models (Model 2 for 
overall outcome: BNT scores + Age at stroke) accounted for almost half (46%) of all the variance in 
predicting which patients are likely to respond to treatment. Second, it appears that among the 30 
patients who completed our study, the age when they had th e stroke was a particularly important 
predictor of who was likely to respond to treatment (Figure 2). Finally, a combination of both 
biographical factors (Age at stroke) and cognitive/linguistic factors (PPTT and BNT) provided the best 
outcome prediction. Although the cognitive/linguistic test battery we used was not ideal for predicting 
outcome, we contend that these data provide strong support for Aim 1, which will rely on a more 
targeted cognitive/linguistic test battery and a far larger patient sample t han our preliminary study.  
To provide support for Aim 2, we further analyzed the dataset  discussed above to test whether adding 
the WLG model (proportional  damage to the arcuate fasciculus, Broca’s area [ pars opercularis+pars  
triangularis+pars orbitalis ] and Wernicke’s area [ STG]) to the default  model (based on the regression 
analysis above: Age at stroke; PPTT, &  PNT) would improve outcome prediction. Similarly, we 

 56 
combined the  factors in the default model with the DS model (proportional damage to  the dor sal 
stream [ pars triangularis+pars opercularis +posterior STG ] and ventral stream [ posterior MTG+posterior 
ITG+temporal pole ]) for outcome prediction. The results are summarized in figure 3. We  compared the 
models using SVR (leave -one-out method) where the  factors in each model were used to predict 
treatment related changes in  correct naming. The output from this analysis is the correlation  
coefficient between the actual improvement scores and the predicted  scores. For improvements in 
correct naming associat ed with semantic  treatment, phonological treatment, or overall treatment 
(collapsing  across phonological and semantic treatments), the D+DS model  provided the strongest 
outcome prediction. In fact, the D+DS model accounted for approximately 30 -40% better r eduction in 
error ( R2) than the D+WLG model across the three treatment outcomes. Although our research only 
included [ADDRESS_670368] to  estimate learning is to measure changes in contextual support  (e.g. cueing) needed to 
evoke the correct response (124). The  cueing hierarchies used in our study were ordered so that the  
weakest cues were presented first but proceeded to str onger  cues if correct naming was not achieved. 
We recorded the level  of cueing needed to elicit correct naming for each stimulus  presentation across 
all treatment sessions. This allowed us to  calculate change scores for the level of cueing needed to 
elicit correct naming during the beginning compared to the end of the  first treatment session. Then, 
these change scores were used to  predict overall improvement in correct naming following  
completion of all 30 hours of treatment (Figure 4).  
Figure 4. Changes i n the level of cueing in the initial phonological treatment session predict overall treatment outcome. Outliers are in red bo x.  
 

 [ADDRESS_670369] overall treatment  outcome, F(1,29)=25.28, R2=.50, p<.0001. When two outliers were 
removed, these statistics changed to, F(1,27)=89.34, R2=.78, p<.0001. Changes in cueing during the 
first semantic treatment session also predicted overall change in correct naming, F(1,29)=21.3, R2=.45, 
p<.0001. When aphasia severity was included as a cofactor, both regression analyses remained 
statistically significant and the R2 only showed a minimal decrease. These results suggest that patients 
whose level of cueing strength needed to elicit correct naming decreases during the initial treatment 
session are far more likely to respond to the overall treatment, regardless of initial aphasia severity. We 
recognize that decreased reliance on cues during naming may not be a classical learning task and that 
what we deem “learning” in this context could also be called “stimulability” or priming. Regardless, 
performance on the cueing hierarchy task by [CONTACT_56049] [ADDRESS_670370] predictor of outcome 
and no other factor – behavioral or neuroimaging – came even close in terms of  predictive power. From 
a theoretical perspective, it is a caveat that we do not know whether the changes in cueing level 
represent a general learning mechanism or something that is language specific. Therefore, in addition 
to measuring potential changes i n cueing strength during a baseline session that uses cueing 
hierarchies to elicit pi[INVESTIGATOR_320516], all patients will also complete a separate learning task that does not 
explicitly rely on language processing. As a result, it will be possible to determine if initial success in 
treatment is related to language independent learning or is language specific. For the purpose of 
control, we will use a hand -eye coordination task that is similar to the classical computer game 
“PONG.” Available at USC and MUSC, the hardware used for the control task is a KINARM End -Point 
Lab with Dexterit -E software (BKIN Technologies, Kingston, Canada). Patients are seated in a modified 
wheelchair base designed for stroke survivors who grasp a handle with their left hand. The patien ts 
move their less -affected hand in the horizontal plane to interact with visual targets displayed in the 
same plane as their hand by a virtual reality system. The actual task is a two -minute ‘object hit and 
avoid task’ where the patients use a virtual pad dle attached to left hand to hit away two kinds of visual 
targets (n=160) while trying to avoid other kinds of non -targets (N=80). The task is repeated five times 
and accuracy is collected for each run. Target shape, location and speed are randomly distrib uted, 
ensuring that every task repetition is distinct. Task difficulty increases slightly over time by [CONTACT_517231]. To provide ‘proof of concept’ that aphasic 
patients show learning on this task, we had 11 patients complete this task five times each. Figure 5 
shows that the overall accuracy (average number of target shapes hit and non -targets avoided) 
increased over the five runs.  
Figure 5. Task accuracy (y -axis) by 11 aphasic patients on the control lea rning task over five runs (x -axis). Error bars denote standard error.  
 
For Aim 3, our plan is to p lot a learning curve over the five runs and use the slope of the curve to 
predict overall outcome in aphasia treatment. Along with many other groups, we have demonstrated 
that audio/visual (AV) speech perception modulates frontal areas typi[INVESTIGATOR_517161] (125 -127). Our studies were specifically conducted to inform aphasic impairment and to 
understand if AV speech processing has implications for aphasia treatment. In Fridriksson et al (2009; 
125), we demonstrated that a training task  that involves pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -word matching where the words are 
presented as AV stimuli (seeing just the mouth of a talker) yields greater improvement in naming 
compared to a treatment that relies on pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -word matching with audio -only stimuli. The treatment 

 58 
task used in this study was fairly simple: Patients see a pi[INVESTIGATOR_517162] a computer screen (2 
sec) followed by [CONTACT_517232] -only presentation of a noun. The noun either matches the preceding 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_517163] a phonemic, semantic, or an unrelated f oil. The phonological relatedness of 
semantic and phonological foils to the target noun is parametrically varied. Patients must determine 
whether the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517164] (or audio -only) stimulus match by [CONTACT_206467] a green (correct match) or red 
(incorrect match) response button. Immediate feedback is provided in the form of a “smiley” face for 
correct responses and a “frowny” face for incorrect responses. We found that patients show greater 
improvement in pi[INVESTIGATOR_517165] a training phase that includes AV stimuli compared to training 
that relies on audio -only stimuli. This method was used in two subsequent pi[INVESTIGATOR_517166] (128 -130). Moreover, we continue to rely on the AV 
version of this treatment approac h in our current CATES trial and plan to use it in project 2 (PI: [CONTACT_480629]). 
Although there is limited consensus on what constitutes “typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]” aphasia treatment, we suggest that 
our approach builds on some of the same treatment principles often incorporated in current aphasia 
treatment approaches. For example, it includes a parametric relationship between treatment targets 
and cues (92, 123) and response -contingent feedback (93, 131). Besides taking into account literature 
on AV speech processing, this approa ch incorporates both phonologically and semantically related 
distractors. Therefore, it relies on both phonological and semantic stimulation within the same treatment 
task. For the purpose of the current project, we simply refer to the approach as ‘speech and language 
treatment’ (SALT) for aphasia. We will examine whether the same factors that predict outcome in 
treatments that assume a phonological or semantic focus also predict outcome in the CATES trial.  
3.2 Study Aims – Overall Strategy. Our plan is to treat 120 participants with chronic aphasia caused 
by [CONTACT_517233] (Appendix I: Study Protocol). Utilizing a cross -over design, each 
participant will receive 45 minutes of aphasia treatment per weekday (5x/week) focusing on treatment 
tasks that emphasize semantic or phonological stimulation (Table 1). Half of the patients will receive 
treatment in the following order: a. 15 treatment sessions utilizing phonological stimulation tasks; b. 4 -
week inter -treatment interval; c. [ADDRESS_670371] baseline visit (W0), patients’ 
biographical and testing information is entered into online modules in WebDCUTM (see Administrative 
Core). All subsequent patient data, including testing and treatment scores, MRI related information, and 
treatment fidelity information, will also be entere d and stored using WebDCUTM. To establish treatment 
baselines and for the purpose of in -depth characterization of the patient sample, each patient will 
undergo extensive testing during the week prior to treatment. Data from baseline testing will also be 
used for the purpose of projects 3 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517107]) and 4 (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_517108]). To assess treatment - related 
changes in speech and language processing, testing will occur during the weeks immediately before 
and after each treatment phase. Follow -up testing will occur 4 -weeks and 6 months after completing the 
second treatment phase. To assess damage to the cortical areas included in the WLG and DS models, 
patients will undergo MRI (see Neuroimaging Core) at baseline during the week before treatment is 
initiated. Approxima tely two -thirds of the patients will be enrolled at the University of South Carolina. 
The remaining one - third will be enrolled at the Medical University of South Carolina under the 
supervision of [CONTACT_517298], a stroke neurologist with ample experience man aging aphasia, and a long -
time collaborator of the PI.  
 [ADDRESS_670372] -one-out regression values, resulting in the more conservative 
R2=.088, R2=.27 and R2=.36 for phonological, se mantic, and overall treatment effects (rather than .22, 
.44 and .46). This suggests that a sample size of 120 individuals provides 0.95 power at p < 0.05, and 
0.85 power at p <0.01. Deriving power estimates for Aim 2 is more speculative: rather than compar ing 
against a static null hypothesis (e.g., treatment has no influence) we are comparing against different 
dynamic models that will each benefit from a larger sample size (as we discuss in more detail in section 
4.[ADDRESS_670373] 3). Conventional analyses sug gest that a sample size of 120 individuals will provide 0.92 
power at p <0.[ADDRESS_670374], shown in Figure 3 (default model’s ability to predict 
phonological treatment benefits) and 0.72 power at p < 0.05 for distinguishing the differ ence between 
the default model and the D+DS model. We note that a null result for the latter in the presence of a 
robust result in the former could still be clinically meaningful, potentially suggesting that initial 
behavioral tests are sufficient for trea tment planning (as we discuss in section [ADDRESS_670375] 3). For the 
purposes of projects [ADDRESS_670376] (but not treat) additional [ADDRESS_670377] 1 with additional 30 patients tested for projects 3 and 4 (total sample = 150 patients).  
3.4 Patient Eligibility. Participants with chronic aphasia (>12 months from stroke) as a result of left 
hemisphere stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic) will be included (specific inclusion/exclusion criteria are 
discussed in Protection of Human Subjects). Persons who incur more than o ne stroke will be excluded 
only if the subsequent stroke(s) includes the right hemisphere. The chance of recurrent stroke has been 
reported to be as high as nine times greater than having a first stroke and at least 30% of all stroke 
patients have had more  than one stroke (132, 133). Thus, excluding patients with more than one stroke 
fails to reflect the general population of stroke patients thus limiting the generalization of the findings. 
However, projects [ADDRESS_670378] event stroke, because these 
projects focus on making inferences about specific brain -behavior relationships rather than application 
to clinical practice. The number of strokes will be included as co -factors in the statistical analyses 
planned for ea ch aim. Proportional damage to different cortical areas will be determined based on 
structural MRI scans.  
Exclusion criteria are as follows: 1. Severely limited verbal output. As some of the treatment tasks rely 
on verbal output, it is pertinent to exclud e patients who are essentially mute or whose speech only 
consists of stereotypi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (judged as score of 0 -1 on the Spontaneous Speech rating scale on the WAB); 
2. Severely impaired auditory comprehension. Potential participants will be excluded if their 
Comp rehension subscore on the WAB falls in the 0 -1 range. Moreover, participants will be excluded if, 
as per clinical judgment, it is determined that they do not understand treatment task instructions; 3. 
Because damage to different cortical areas will be dete rmined using MRI, patients with 
contraindications to MRI will be excluded.  

 [ADDRESS_670379] treatments that are typi[INVESTIGATOR_517167]. Neither 
semantic nor phonological processing exists independently of each other in oral language use. 
Accordingly, the treatment approaches to be used here do not focus exclusively on either semantic or 
phonological processing; they each involve bot h, but place different emphasis on semantics versus 
phonological processing. In fact, even when semantic processing is the treatment emphasis, these 
treatments also affect phonological processing and vice versa (Appendix II: Scripts for treatment tasks). 
We stress that the main purpose here is not to assess whether one treatment focus is more potent than 
the other for improving language processing. Rather, we only include the two treatment foci to 
understand if factors that predict outcome with one treatmen t approach also predict success using the 
other treatment approach. In addition, we include two semantic and phonological treatment foci to 
explore whether damage to the dorsal and ventral streams differentially predicts response to 
phonological and semant ic treatment. Project 4 (Hickok) will attempt to zero in on measurement of 
“computational” level deficits and assessment of the computational effects of treatment. As we discuss 
both semantically and phonologically focused treatments, this must be kept in mind.  
Semantically focused treatment tasks: Three types of tasks will be featured. 1) Semantic feature 
analysis (SFA) has a relatively long history as a treatment approach for aphasia (134 -136)\. For each 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_517168]. Then, he or she is encouraged to 
produce semantically related words that represent features similar to the target word (e.g. 
superordinate category, use, action, physical properties, l ocation, and association). For example, to 
elicit a location feature, a clinician might say “where do you typi[INVESTIGATOR_517113]?” If the patient is 
not able to name [CONTACT_517282], the clinician will say targe t 
word. Regardless of naming accuracy on the last item, treatment continues on to the next stimulus 
item. Because both nouns and verbs (137, 138) have been used for SFA - focused activities, stimuli for 
SFA tasks here will utilize both. 2) The second semant ic treatment approach is the semantic barrier 
task. This approach includes features of the Promoting Aphasics’ Communication Effectiveness 
(PACE) approach (139 -142) and has also been included as part of constraint -induced language 
therapy(143). It relies o n a stack of pi[INVESTIGATOR_517114], which are split between the patient and clinician 
and placed face up on a table. A visual barrier is placed between the clinician and the patient so they 
cannot see each other’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. The goal of the task is for one par ticipant (e.g., patient) to describe 
each card so that the other participant (e.g., clinician) can guess the pi[INVESTIGATOR_517115]. Participants 
are only allowed to describe the semantic features of the target and the clinician models the kinds of 
cues that are allowed. The clinician and patient take turns describing pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. 3) The third approach, 
Verb network strengthening treatment (VNeST), is a semantic treatment approach that targets lexical 
retrieval of verbs and their thematic nouns (144, 145). The ob jective of VNeST is for the patient to 
generate verb -noun associates with the purpose of strengthening the connections between the verb 
and its thematic roles. VNeST can be modified to fit patients with very limited speech output (e.g., using 
sentence comp letion).  
Phonologically focused treatment tasks: Three approaches, also with sound research pedigrees, will 
the used. 1) The first is the phonological components analysis task (96), which was modeled after 
semantic feature analysis. It requires the patien t to first name a given pi[INVESTIGATOR_517169] s (e.g., first sound, syllables, last sound, association, and rhyme). Once the features have 
been identified, patients are required to attempt to name [CONTACT_32360][INVESTIGATOR_517117]. Then, the treatment moves 
on to the next item in a stack of targeted imageable nouns. 2) Phonomotor treatment is a phonologic 
sequence -based therapy that includes two stages of training that targets speech perception and speech 
production (146 -150). In Stage 1, the clinician uses multi -modality stimulation to practice perception 
and product ion of speech sounds in isolation. Stage 2 mirrors stage 1 but focuses on speech sounds in 
a variety of consonant -vowel sequences.  

 61 
3) The phonological judgment task relies on computerized presentation of verbs and nouns where 
patients are required to judg e whether pairs of words include similar phonological features (142, 151, 
152). The task is comprised of five conditions that entail determining if a set of words: a. Includes the 
same number of syllables; b. Includes the same initial syllable; c. Includes  the same final syllable; d. 
Which word has more syllables; and e. rhyme. Patients respond to each condition by [CONTACT_517234].  
3.6 Biographical Factors and Cognitive/linguistic Ass essments. Biographical factors: For the 
purpose of recording data on biographical factors, each patient (and/or caregiver) will be required to fill 
out a case history form and a questionnaire on previous medical events, years of education, etc. 
Cognitive/l inguistic testing: The following tests and tasks will be utilized to assess cognitive/linguistic 
status at baseline, before any treatment starts: 1. The revised version of the WAB will be used to 
assess overall aphasia severity and type (153). Although the  WAB does not provide in -depth analysis 
of speech and language impairment, it is a test that is commonly used in clinical practice as well as a 
reasonable measure of overall aphasia severity; 2. The Apraxia of Speech Rating Scale (ASRS; 154) 
will be utiliz ed to rate the presence and severity of apraxia of speech AOS (note: the ASRS constitutes 
a major component of project 3); 3. To assess grammatical processing (agrammatism), we will rely on 
the Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences (155). The NAVS  was designed for patients 
with aphasia and allows for detailed examination of verb processing (e.g. verb naming) as well as 
production and comprehension of canonical and non -canonical sentences; 4. The Pyramids and Palm 
Trees Test (PPTT; 156) and the Kiss ing and Dancing Test (KDT;(157) will be used to assess amodal 
semantic processing of nouns and verbs, respectively; 5. To assess phonological processing, several 
sub-tests from the Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia (PALPA; 158)  will 
be utilized (a. Auditory discrimination of nonword minimal pairs; b. Auditory discrimination of word 
minimal pairs; c. Rhyme Judgments for pi[INVESTIGATOR_517119]; d. Phonological Segmentation of initial and 
final sounds); 6. To assess speech repetition a bility we will rely on the Philadelphia Repetition Test 
(PRT), a low -imageability word repetition test (159), and the non -word speech repetition sub -test from 
the PALPA (158); 7. For analysis of cognitive status, the Matrix test on the Wechsler Adult Intel ligence 
Scale (WAIS; 160) \ will be administered; 8. To assess verbal short -term memory, we will use tasks 
described by [CONTACT_305974]. (161). Their tasks allow for detailed evaluation of lexical -semantic 
performance in relation of verbal short -term memory lo ad. All patients will be screened for visual field 
cut and visual neglect using a short in -house test developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Rorden. To minimize the influence 
of test fatigue, the assessment battery will be spread over two sessions administered on two separate 
days during the week before the first treatment phase starts. The motivation for the extensive 
behavioral test battery included here is to provide a comprehensive set of factors used to predict 
treatment outcome. In addition, the behavioral data collected h ere will also feed into projects 3 and 4 
(e.g. non -word repetition and PRT). For details on test reliability, validity, and clinician training, see 
Clinical Core.  
3.7 Learning tasks for Aim 3. All participants will complete two learning tasks before initi ation of 
treatment: Language learning – We will rely on the same cueing hierarchy naming task used in 
Fridriksson (2010; 10) and Fridriksson et al (2012; 85). This task will be completed in a [ADDRESS_670380] already demonstrated that improved performance on this task within a single session is 
a very strong predictor of anomia treatment success (see pi[INVESTIGATOR_517170] 4). Hit-and-avoid task – 
Each patient will complete the hit -and-avoid task described earlier (see pi[INVESTIGATOR_517170] 5). Mean 
accuracy for each of five runs will be plotted on patient -by-patient basis and the slope of the learni ng 
curve will be utilized as a predictor of aphasia treatment outcome. The total administration time of the 
hit-and-avoid task is approximately [ADDRESS_670381] (PNT; 162) will be assessed as an outcome measure. Confrontation 
naming is included on most comprehensive aphasia tests and is commonly assessed in ap hasia 
treatment research, making it possible to compare the findings in the current project to other studies. 
The PNT will be administered twice during the week before and twice during the week after each 3 -
week treatment phases (scores averaged to reduce variability). For follow -up testing, the PNT will be 
administered again at four weeks and six months after completion of the second treatment phase. The 
primary outcome measure, however, is specifically defined as change in correct naming immediately 
befor e and after each treatment phase. The PNT is a computer -based assessment of naming for 
persons with aphasia and includes [ADDRESS_670382] compi[INVESTIGATOR_517120] (163). Participants a re videotaped during 
assessment and responses are scored offline. The clinicians who score the PNT will be blinded to 
when each assessment video was recorded, either before or after each of the two treatment phases. In 
addition to assessing changes in corr ect naming, potential treatment -related changes in naming errors 
will also be scrutinized. For a more detailed description of PNT scoring and training of clinicians, see 
Clinical Core.  
To evaluate the effects of treatment on discourse abilities, patients will complete a discourse protocol 
included in AphasiaBank, an archival database of discourse samples funded by [CONTACT_517194] 2007. 
Three discourse tasks will be administered before and after each treatment phase: 1. Broken Window 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_517171] (164); 2. Cinderella story telling (165); and 3. A procedural description of 
how to make a peanut butter and jelly sandwich (first introduced by [INVESTIGATOR_165675], 1901 (166), as referenced in 
Lau, 2013 (167)). Transcription will be accomplished through the Clin ical Core using transcription 
(CHAT) and the automated coding analysis (CLAN) systems available through AphasiaBank. We have 
already used this setup to assess outcome in aphasia treatment (38). As in the CATES trial, the 
analyses used for discourse samples  will focus on lexical and syntactic aspects of spoken discourse: 1. 
Content words/min (excludes repetitions and nonwords); 2. Propositional density (168, 169); 3. 
Verbs/utterance. Each of these three measures is already included in AphasiaBank and it is a  
particularly nice feature that our data can be compared against the 440 aphasic patients included in 
AphasiaBank. This feature is especially important for determining variance across participants. In 
addition, we will assess potential changes in patients’  ability to generate main concepts (170). Finally, 
to assess the effects of treatment on functional communication ability, all participants will be 
administered the Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure (ACOM; 171). The ACOM consists of 59 
items that probe  different aspects of real life communication situations and can be administered in 15 -
30 minutes. Whereas the PNT and discourse measures will be administered during the weeks 
immediately before and after each treatment phase, the ACOM will only be adminis tered at baseline 
before both treatment phases and again at four weeks after completion of each treatment phase. By 
[CONTACT_517235].  
3.9 Neuroimaging. The effects of stroke on cortical areas that are described in the DS model 
(proportional damage to the dorsal stream [ pars triangularis+pars opercularis +lateral precentral 
gyrus+area Spt] and ventral  stream [posterior MTG+posterior inferior MTG+temporal pole]) and WLG 
model (Broca’s area [ pars opercularis+pars triangularis+pars orbitalis ], arcuate fasciculus, and 
Wernicke’s area [STS+STG]) will be qualified as proportional damage to each cortical regi on. Excluding 
area Spt (Sylvian fissure at the parietal - temporal boundary), the regions of interest (ROIs) for each 
cortical region will be selected using the Johns Hopkins University standardized brain atlas (172). We 
note that there is no standard way t o determine what ROIs should be included in either model. The 
ROIs for the DS model were selected in consultation with [CONTACT_517299], including an ROI for area Spt that 
was derived from a previous fMRI study (173). The ROIs for the WLG model were selected bas ed on 
input from Drs. Hillis and Bonilha, both of whom have extensive history with lesion -symptom mappi[INVESTIGATOR_517172]. Note that in comparison to the current project, Project 3 will accomplish much 
more detailed analyses of our neuroimaging data in  relation to treatment outcome.  
 63 
3.10 Data Analyses Aim 1 – To construct the default model, both biographical and 
cognitive/linguistic factors are entered into a step -wise regression analysis using a leave -one-out 
method. This approach narrows down the num ber of factors that provide independent prediction of 
treatment outcome. The leave -one-out method controls for selection bias where the same subjects are 
not used to select the factors and test the model. The factors that survive in the final step -wise 
regression model are then entered into the support vector regression (SVR) analysis to determine how 
well the default model predicts actual outcome in patients. SVR is a more robust alternative to multiple 
linear regression. Both methods use a linear model to  characterize the relationship between the 
predictors and the target variable (e.g, change in correct naming); that is, the target variable is modeled 
as a weighted sum of predictors, plus the offset term. The difference between the two methods is in the 
estimation of the model parameters (the weights and the offset). In multiple linear regression, it is done 
by [CONTACT_517196] -Penrose pseudo inverse of the predictor matrix; this minimizes the prediction 
errors in the least -squares sense, but leads to h ighly unstable estimation if there is correlation between 
the predictors (174). Also, the pseudo inverse cannot be computed if the number of predictors is 
greater than the number of observations (175). In support vector regression, we do not attempt to 
minimize the prediction errors; rather, we allow for a certain amount of errors, and set an upper bound 
on permissible prediction errors (176). In this formulation, the stability of estimation is not affected by 
[CONTACT_517236], and by [CONTACT_517237]. 
The superiority of support vector regression over linear regression models has been demonstrated by 
[CONTACT_517199]. (177). We expect that the final default model will include a combination of several fac tors 
that together contribute to outcome prediction. As not every factor will contribute equally to the 
proportional reduction in error, beta weights (converted to Z -scores) will be calculated so that clinicians 
can better understand the relationship betwe en predictors. Potential concerns: Relying on a relatively 
large sample of patients, it is possible that many biographical and cognitive/linguistic factors may 
correlate with treatment success. This is potentially problematic for clinicians who may not hav e time to 
administer the test battery necessary to assess each factor. Therefore, we will calculate several 
separate models that include sub -sets of predictors. Then, it will be possible for clinicians to estimate 
success based on a more restricted version  of the default model.  
Aim 2 – To compare the default model to the D+WLG and D+DS models, we will also rely on SVR. 
Here, all factors that comprise each model (e.g., D+DS model includes the default model factors in 
addition to proportional damage to the d orsal and ventral streams) are entered into an SVR analysis 
and the R2 for the correlation between the actual scores (e.g., change in correct naming or propositional 
density) and the predicted scores is calculated. Then, a statistical comparison is made be tween the R2 
yielded by [CONTACT_517200]. The model with statistically significantly highest R2 compared 
to other models will be determined as the best prediction model. Separate analyses will be conducted 
for each treatment focus (semantic vs. phonological) and overall treatment outcome. Potential 
concerns: Although we have been highly successful in  attracting patients to our treatment studies, we 
have never carried out a project that requires the sample size proposed here. If actual patient 
recruitment lags far behind planned recruitment at the University of South Carolina and the Medical 
University  of South Carolina, we will initiate enrollment of chronic patients at Johns Hopkins University. 
In such a case, .[ADDRESS_670383] (C -STAR) and the CATES trial will 
overlap by [CONTACT_3450] [ADDRESS_670384] for patient 
enrollment in t he CATES trial and at the time when the current proposal was submitted, 52/74 patients 
had been enrolled in the CATES trial (nine more patients are scheduled to complete enrolment in 
summer 2015).  
Aim 3 – Separate SVR analyses will be conducted to test wh ether change in cueing in a single naming 
session or performance on the hit -and-avoid task predicts aphasia treatment outcome. The learning 
curve (slope of the regression line) will be calculated for each patient. The same SVR analyses planned 
for Aim 1 wi ll be run again but now with the learning factors also included to assess whether the default 
model can be improved by [CONTACT_517238]. Potential concerns: Without 
collecting further data, it is impossible to estimate the necess ary length of the learning paradigms. This 
 64 
is a potential concern as administering an hour -long learning task to patients in clinical care is 
probably not feasible. Thus, we will calculate learning curves for progressively longer increments (e.g. 
for the f irst 10, 20, 30, or 40 minutes of the task) to appreciate the necessary length of each learning 
task. For example, it could be the case that improvement in performance over the first [ADDRESS_670385] treatme nt outcome.  
3.11 Making the Default Model Available On -line. Once the default model has been constructed, we 
will make the algorithm available to clinicians who can then assess their own patients and plug in the 
results to estimate treatment response rely ing on either semantically or phonologically focused 
treatment. For this purpose, we will design a website that includes detailed instructions regarding what 
factors need to be assessed and the strengths and limitations of this approach. Similarly, we will  
provide guidance regarding assessment fidelity, threats to assessment reliability and validity, as well as 
disclaimers about potential abuse of the model (e.g., denying patients treatment based on model 
prediction of poor outcome).  
  
 [ADDRESS_670386] to engender a positive 
treatment outcome. Different assessment foci can contribute to the mixed results.5-8 For example, if 
discrete language abilities are treated and assessed, improvement in those language abilities (relative 
to a control condition) may be considered to support treatment efficacy. However, an alternative view is 
that trea tment is only efficacious if there is a demonstration of improvement in communication activities 
or life participation that is clearly associated with the treatment, and not the control, condition. Different 
assessment administration procedures, particular ly those involving the patient response and resultant 
score (e.g., item time limits, multidimensional scoring, self -corrected responses counted as accurate, 
etc.), can also lead to a patient being labeled as a “responder” with one set of procedures and as a 
“nonresponder” with another. In addition, treatment factors (e.g., treatment elements, dose, etc.) are oft 
studied, but despi[INVESTIGATOR_517173], results are not straightforward. While the “more treatment is better” view 
is generally supported,1,3,9 -11 which tre atment elements and targets should be practiced more,1,3,12 and 
which outcome domains (e.g., body functions, activity limitations, participation limitations) benefit from 
intensive treatment schedules6, is unclear. Finally, numerous patient factors, includ ing stroke -related 
(lesion site and size, type of stroke, etc.), demographic, and neurophysiological variables have been 
the focus of many investigations, often with conflicting results.3,13-17  
This P50 grant application systematically investigates many o f these factors. Some elements (e.g., 
patient variability) may also be thoroughly discussed in “Limitations” and “Future Directions” sections of 
numerous journal articles, and solutions to preserve the validity of the study may be readily located in 
resear ch design references. However, in the speech -language or stroke rehabilitation literature, 
relatively little attention has been paid to other threats to a study’s validity that relate to correct 
implementation of treatment, and also assessment, procedures.  Statistical conclusion validity, referring 
to inferences about the presence of a relationship between two variables and the strength of that 
relationship, can be threatened by [CONTACT_517239], unreliable treatment implementation, and other 
sources of va riance introduced into the experimental setting, as well as low statistical power (which can 
also be a result of the random variance introduced by [CONTACT_517240]).18 These threats can 
increase the chance of Type I or Type II error, or the additional  error (“Type III”) of concluding 
significance or nonsignificance when in fact the tests or the treatments were not correctly 
implemented.19-21 Internal validity, referring to whether or not causation can be inferred from the 
statistical conclusions, can b e threatened by [CONTACT_517241], patient 
selection and attrition, and various assessment factors.18 (Note: All threats to statistical conclusion and 
internal validity are not listed here, only those most critical to im plementation of clinical procedures, 
which will fall under the aegis of the Clinical Core.) In other words, an additional contributor to the 
historically mixed results in aphasia treatment research emphasized by [INVESTIGATOR_54294] [ADDRESS_670387] 2 , and here 
in the Clinic al Core could also be those variables related to fidelity, or adherence to the study 
procedures. In the absence of fidelity monitoring, investigators are unable to confidently determine 
whether or not results (significant or nonsignificant) were caused by [CONTACT_517242] “drifted” from the protocol, or 
“contaminated” the protocol by [CONTACT_517243].[ADDRESS_670388] sizes (two to three times higher) 
for treatment outcomes compared to those studies that do not.[ADDRESS_670389] 
revealed that as the degree of treatment fidelity increase s, the rates of positive outcomes also 
 66 
increase.24 In addition, treatment fidelity (or “program integrity”) affects a number of variables in 
abuse prevention research.25,26 Thus, implementation can be a determinant of success. Hinckley and 
Douglas20 recent ly examined the reporting of treatment fidelity in aphasia treatment studies (reviewing 
149 aphasia treatment articles published between 2002 -2011), revealing that while almost half of the 
studies reported treatment methods that would enable replication, o nly 21/149 (14%) of the studies 
specifically described methods for establishing or monitoring treatment fidelity. Twenty of those studies 
utilized only a single treatment fidelity method - monitoring of adherence to treatment protocol, 
supervising treatmen t sessions, utilizing a training manual, or pre-implementation role -playing. Only 
one study utilized more than one treatment fidelity method, combining the use of a training manual with 
monitoring of adherence to the treatment protocol.  
The NIH has recent ly established a treatment fidelity workgroup within the Behavior Change 
Consortium (BCC) in recognition of poor monitoring of treatment fidelity in behavioral research. This 
workgroup is tasked with defining treatment fidelity and offering guidelines for researchers. According to 
the BCC workgroup, establishing treatment fidelity should address the following five components19: (1) 
study design – the study should be designed appropriately so that hypotheses can be tested and 
inferences are valid; (2) traini ng – training procedures should be standardized across clinicians; (3) 
treatment delivery – treatment should be monitored to ensure it is delivered as intended; (4) treatment 
receipt – the patient should understand the treatment procedures and demonstrate utilization of them 
within experimental sessions; and (5) treatment enactment – the patient should utilize behaviors 
targeted in treatment in real -world settings. The intricacies and the defense of study design for Projects 
[ADDRESS_670390] as there can be clinician drift from treatment procedures 
(e.g., cueing hierarchy not delivered as designed) and contamination of treatment procedures (e.g., 
clinician is incorporat ing cues from Treatment B into Treatment A), assessor and/or rater drift and 
contamination are just as likely to occur, especially when administering lengthy assessment batteries 
that include tests with different administration procedures (e.g., item time limits, assessor cueing) and 
complex scoring systems (e.g., discourse, Philadelphia Naming Test), and are given repeatedly over a 
long period of time. Borrowing from treatment fidelity guidelines, assessment fidelity components of 
training and assessment d elivery will be addressed in the Approach section of this Clinical Core 
proposal.  
1.[ADDRESS_670391] 
aims require recruitment and retention of patients and collection of high quality data that can be entered 
into the WebDCUTM (Clinical Core Aim 1). Those same [ADDRESS_670392] aims rely on data collected by [CONTACT_517244] p rescribed administration procedures and scored by a rater adhering to prescribed 
scoring procedures (Clinical Core Aim 2). Seven of [ADDRESS_670393] aims rely on treatment (Clinical Core Aim 
3).  
 [ADDRESS_670394] effects and increasing investigator and consumer confidence in the results. By [CONTACT_517245] o f making Type I, II, or III errors, we would decrease the probability that this ambitious 
endeavor (C -STAR) would result in research waste, the costs of which can only begin to be fathomed if 
one recognizes that the impact of those errors would not only be  felt in this study, but throughout the 
entire research community.19,[ADDRESS_670395] with patients and/or friends and family 
members to ensure that all exchanges are ethical, respectful, and employ successful communication 
strategies. For Aim 1, this will include training for c ommunication during initial recruitment and patient 
identification, for the informed consent process, and for participant retention. For Aim 2, this will include 
training of assessment administration procedures, and for Aim 3, treatment procedures. This tr aining 
will help to reduce variance introduced by [CONTACT_517246]. As far as we can tell, training of personnel in this manner has not been 
reported so far in the aphasia treatment liter ature.  
2.[ADDRESS_670396], the Clinical Core will 
monitor the rate of recruitment with a recentl y developed “recruitment index”. The Clinical Core has an 
adaptive plan for recruitment in place so that advertising and recruitment efforts will be modified if the 
recruitment index shows Projects [ADDRESS_670397] (e.g., clinician 
with at least 3 years of experience, etc.) or presenting intra - and inter -rater reliability information. Given 
the importance  of assessment to nearly all of the aims proposed in all projects, it is important that we 
take additional steps to ensure that data will be collected with appropriate administration procedures 
and will also be scored appropriately. This will entail traini ng of both assessors, who will also score 
baseline tests, and blinded raters, who will score repeated measures. Borrowing from treatment fidelity 
guidelines, the Clinical Core will coordinate assessor and rater training, assessment delivery, and 
reliabilit y of raters.  
3. Approach  
3.[ADDRESS_670398]. Argye Hillis is a Professor of Neurology, Physical 
Medicine & Rehabilitation, and Cognitive Science, as well as Director of the Cerebrovascular Division of 
the Department of Neurology  at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (JHMI). She has [ADDRESS_670399]. She directs a large, multidisciplinary Stroke Prevention an d Recovery 
Center (SPARC), which has been certified by [CONTACT_517247] a Comprehensive 
Stroke Center. Hillis is experienced in organizing national and international multidisciplinary groups; for 
example, she was recently President of the World Federation of Neurology Research Group on 
Aphasia and Cognitive Disorders and is on the Board of Directors of the American Neurological 
Association. As PI [INVESTIGATOR_517174], she will be responsible for overseeing all aspects of the core. 
She will work closely with the Clinical Core Coordinator (located at USC – to be hired ) to carry out the 
plans described herein, and that the goals of the core are being met. To ensure that the ideal staff 
members are hired and trained appropriately, [CONTACT_32135], Assistant Professor of Speech 
and Hearing Sciences, University of N ew Mexico, will serve as consultant and provide initial training to 
the Clinical Core Coordinator, speech -language pathologist (SLP) Clinical Core Project [ADDRESS_670400]. Richardson is a certified SLP, with 13 years of experience providing (and s upervising the 
provision of) diagnostic and therapeutic services to aphasic adults. Richardson is uniquely suited for 
this role given her previous contributions to some of the studies (published and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]) that have 
motivated this P50 application, with rol es ranging from treatment designer to assessor to clinician to 
trainer, including both behavioral and brain stimulation methods. [CONTACT_517300] is a neurologist 
and neurophysiologist at the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), where he is act ively 
involved in the care of patients with stroke within the large MUSC stroke center. Besides his clinical 
expertise, [CONTACT_517298] is a researcher with experience in behavioral and neuroimaging assessments of 
aphasia, being the leading neurologist at MUSC  in the NIDCD supported clinical trial “Transcranial 
Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) to Treat Aphasia: Phase II Trial” (CATES trial; DC011739, PI: 
[INVESTIGATOR_517175]) and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_517176] “Brain Connectivity Supporting Language 
Recovery in Aphasia” (NIH R01DC014021).  
Aim 1: To supervise data collection and data management at each clinical site.  
3.[ADDRESS_670401] data. Our discussi on of data collection and management thus begins 
with participant recruitment and is followed by [CONTACT_517248]. The Clinical Core’s 
recruitment plans focus on pre -enrollment activities while retention plans include post -enrollment 
activit ies designed to promote study completion.[ADDRESS_670402] wit h 
participants and/or the friends and family members of the participants will have a basic understanding 
of the communication needs and obstacles for this population, and also some understanding of their 
experience. While most study personnel will have had  a background with adult neurogenic 
communication disorders, standardizing this baseline training for all personnel, from those who might 
only be escorting them to the elevator to those who will be spending hours with them in treatment 
sessions, will ensur e that no erroneous assumptions about qualifications are made. This baseline 
training (see Appendix 1) comprises many components that are already implemented by [CONTACT_517249]’s 
lab, with positive feedback and results. The Clinical Core will facilitate the tra ining and will maintain 
compliance logs.  
First, all study personnel will complete human subjects training (CITI) to understand ethical treatment of 
human research participants, which is essential training even in the earliest stages of a study (e.g., to 
avoid coercion and/or bias during advertising and recruitment efforts). Second, all personnel will 
independently read two articles by [CONTACT_517250]: 1) 
“Aphasia blog talk: How does stroke and aphasia affect a per son’s social relationships?” (Fotiadou, 
Northcott, Chatzidaki, & Hilari, 2014); and 2) “Aphasia blog talk: How does stroke and aphasia affect 
the carer and their relationship with the person with aphasia.” (Winkler, Bedford, Northcott, & Hilari, 
2014). Thi rd, all personnel will independently view four videos available via AphasiaBank 
(http://talkbank.org/AphasiaBank/ ; participants consented to be videotaped by [CONTACT_517251]) during 
which persons with aphasia discuss their stroke story. Two videotaped persons will have nonfluent 
aphasia (1 high, 1 low severity) and two will have fluent aphasia (1 high, 1 low severity). Finally, the 
Clinical Core will lead small group sessions that will include a brief lecture on “How to communicate 
with individuals with aphasia ”, a lecture used by [CONTACT_517252] -language pathology 
students to be aphasia group leaders. This lecture will be followed by [CONTACT_517253] “Experiencing Aphasia: An Inservice Model Demonstrating A spects of Aphasia.”31 
The stated goals of the program are: (1) To give participants an opportunity to experience what it is like 
to be communicatively impaired; (2) To encourage participants to discuss their emotional responses to 
being treated as an impai red individual; and (3) To instruct participants about the different modalities 
that may be impaired as a result of stroke or head injury. This session will provide opportunities for 
personnel to participate in simulations of communicating with aphasia thr ough receptive language, 
expressive language, reading, and writing stations. Richardson has used this for training her lab 
members and social workers (with Adult Protective Services).  
3.4 Participant recruitment.  
Advertising and identification of eligible  participants – For Project [ADDRESS_670403] effective strategies for recruiting elderly patients,32-34 which forms the bulk of the 
target participant base (Table 2). We will depend on local and state news broadcasts and newspaper 
advertisements. If the yield is limited, radio advertisements and group presentations to stroke and 
aphasia support groups will b e added into the advertising plan.32,33 At the same time, the usual lab 
recruitment activities will continue, and include networking with colleagues, advertising studies through 
statewide directories ( http://scresearch.org/ ) and a lab website 
(http://www.m ccauslandcenter.sc.edu/aphasia/ ), and referrals from well -established area contacts 
(community, in -state, out -of-state). For Project [ADDRESS_670404] recruits participants with acute stroke directly from t he inpatient stroke wards at JHU and 
Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, and also the follow -up clinic, the Stroke Prevention and 
Recovery Center (SPARC) at JHMI. The stroke neurologist who is attending on the wards or in SPARC 
is approached by a study t eam member on a daily basis, and identifies potential participants who have 
agreed to be approached by [CONTACT_517254].  
 
 
 [ADDRESS_670405] and willingness to participate 
from potential participants with aphasia once they are made aware of the projects.34 Following 
successful advertising efforts, identification of eligible potential participants by [CONTACT_517255] (phone or face -to-face) and/or case history review for 
Project [ADDRESS_670406] 
investigators to coordinate the hiring of study personnel, screening for excellent interpersonal skills and 
a background communicating with persons with  communication impairment (speech -language 
pathologists, clinical coordinators with experience with this clinical population, speech -language 
pathology graduate students, etc.). The Clinical Core will ensure through training that anyone 
performing recruitm ent duties is well -informed about the study details (i.e., expectations, timelines, 
etc.), because individuals are likely to be more responsive if they are confident in the knowledge of the 
person they are speaking with.34 Training will include independent  reading of the full study protocol, the 
informed consent document, and any other related documents, followed by a review of the documents 
with a member of the Clinical Core team (Appendix 1). In addition, we will provide scripts to assist with 
communicati ng about the study via e -mail, telephone, or in -person. As discussed in Project 1 
(Research Plan, 4.4) and Project 2 (Research Plan 4.4.9), we do not anticipate difficulty recruiting 
participants, but these efforts will only serve to enhance the already su ccessful recruitment strategies 
employed by [CONTACT_517256] (Fridriksson, Hillis) and the other Clinical Core team members ( to be 
hired Clinical Core Coordinator, Bonilha) in their laboratories.  
Informed Consent – For both projects, study explanation and informed consent can be a challenging 
process. The potential participants not only have limitations in producing and/or understanding 
language, but are also being approached after what is often the most devastating event so far in their 
lives. For Project [ADDRESS_670407] be a skilled and supportive communicator who is aware of 
the realities faced by [CONTACT_517257], more time, etc. The person obtaining consent should also be skilled enough to recognize 
when the aphasic participant has a comprehension impairment (e.g., Wernicke’ s aphasia or Global 
Aphasia) so that they seek informed consent from the participant’s spouse, adult child, legal 
representative, or identified decision maker, with accompanying assent from the aphasic individual. The 
person obtaining consent will be a Cli nical Core leader (Hillis, Bonilha, to be hired Clinical Core 
Coordinator at USC) or another speech -language pathologist with informed consent training.35,[ADDRESS_670408] already been completed as part of baseline training . 
Additionally, the Clinical Core will facilitate the following informed consent training procedures 
(Appendix 1) for both Project [ADDRESS_670409] 2: (1) independent reading of informed consent articles 
(“Informed consent and aphasia: Evidence of pi[INVESTIGATOR_517177]” 37 and “Discrepancy between 
participants’ understanding and desire to know in informed consent: Are they informed about what they 
really want to know?” [ADDRESS_670410] 2 members ( “Informed consent: The rate -
limiting step in acute stroke trials” 39); (2) observation of a minimum of three expert (Hillis, Richardson, 
or Bonilha) consent sessions; (3) supervised consent sessions with expert feedback; and (4) yearly 
review of consent information plus expert supervision of 1-2 sessions. This training will ensure that the 
informed consent process is informative, respectful, and ethical, and will positively influence 
retention40,41.  
 

 71 
Research suggests that comprehension of written materials is significantly improved in people  with 
aphasia when the following modifications are made: language simplification, increased font size, 
increased spacing, increased white space, and use of pi[INVESTIGATOR_499].42,43 The Clinical Core will develop 
aphasia -friendly consent documents using these modific ations, additionally incorporating feedback from 
persons with aphasia. Figure 1 highlights sections of modified documents created (with aid of 
consultants with aphasia) and used by [CONTACT_517249]. Though not to scale (font size is actually 14 -point), 
aphasia -friendly features are clear: increased spacing between words, increased white space overall, 
and use of changes in typography, organizational tools, and pi[INVESTIGATOR_499].  
Figure 1. Sample elements from aphasia -friendly ICFs.  
 
 
3.[ADDRESS_670411]  participants to the study and then initiate th eir 
participation is essential, and challenging enough,  efforts to ensure participation should not end there.  
It is vital to the majority of aims across all projects  that participants complete all arms of study and that  
they are available for follow up ass essments (see Table 1). Participant retention plans are therefore 
crucial.[ADDRESS_670412] completion (as in Blanton et al.30), pre -enrollment activities or fact ors, such as study 
design and the informed consent process, can also influence participant retention.40,[ADDRESS_670413] to study 
design, studies that provide some benefit and make efforts to reduce participant burden (e.g., travel 
reimbursement), such as Project [ADDRESS_670414] realistic expectations of the study (schedule, 
burdens, benefits), and is less likely to drop -out because they were surprised or caught off -guard by 

 [ADDRESS_670415] with 
successful participation and completion , and concern the following: study personnel, study identity, 
contact [CONTACT_517258], and other visit characteristics.[ADDRESS_670416] person with whom they will communicate,40 
reducing the confusion that can accomp any communicating with multiple contacts through multiple 
outlets (e -mail, phone) and reducing the potential for mixed messages and lost information. Second, for 
Project [ADDRESS_670417] 2, a study logo, study name, and study -specific typography (font color, font style, 
etc.) (i.e., “study identity”40) will be used for all written and digital communication to promote easier 
discrimination of important study -related communications from others (e.g., junk mail, telemarketing 
calls, etc.) and a sense of study tea m membership. Third, once the aphasic individual has consented to 
participate, they will be mailed a packet that will include the following documentation marked with the 
study identity: aphasia -friendly study explanation with a personal message from the Cl inical Core team 
and the project PI, aphasia -friendly calendar of scheduled sessions (time, place, etc.), and a contact 
[CONTACT_517259][INVESTIGATOR_517178].[ADDRESS_670418], the Clinical Core will also coordinate reminder phone calls and/or 
emails to remind of upcoming appointments. Fourth, in regard to both personnel and visit 
characteristics, the Clinical Core will train all study personnel to be responsive to the participant (and 
friends and family members of the participant), quickly returning phone calls or emails and never 
hesitating to answer any and all questions they may have.30,[ADDRESS_670419] 2 , a 
newsletter will be sent frequently to everyone in database (see archived Aphasia Lab newslett ers at 
http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/aphasia/links -resources/ ). At the end of the study, participants will 
be sent a thank you card as well as a report of the assessment and treatment results.  
The Clinical Core will monitor the success of participant  recruitment and retention activities throughout 
the entire study so that changes to recruitment and retention efforts are modified accordingly. We will 
utilize an index introduced by [CONTACT_517260]46 and endorsed by [CONTACT_517261],30 called the 
recruitment index (RI), which provides an estimate of the number of days required to recruit one 
analyzable (completed the study) participant. It is calculated by:  
[INVESTIGATOR_166770]=[(LPFV –FPFV)xS] ÷ P  
where LPFV – FPFV is the number of days between “ last patient first visit” and “ first patient first visit”, S 
is the number of recruitment/study sites, and P is the number of participants who completed the study. 
The RI for each project will be calculated every [ADDRESS_670420] information related to participant attrition, to monitor whether 
or not it is systematic (e.g., drop - outs more likely to occur during Phase X than Phase Y) and therefore 
a threat to internal validity,[ADDRESS_670421] often by [CONTACT_211489]: detailed analysis of naming performance and errors, detail ed 
transcriptions of discourse, and judgments of motor speech behaviors that rely on motor speech and 
discourse tasks. It is also important that audiovisual recordings of assessment and treatment sessions 
are recorded for fidelity monitoring.  
 73 
Assessor – The Clinical Core will ensure that the assessor -rater will have multiple checks in place to 
ensure recording of assessment sessions. (We refer to these individuals as assessor -raters because 
they are responsible for administering the assessment and also sco ring or rating those measurements 
that are not repeated measures. Those scoring repeated measures are referred to as blinded raters, or 
raters. For the remainder of the document, we will refer to them as assessors and raters.) There will be 
two recording d evices in use for each assessment session - for Project 1, a laptop camera and a 
standalone digital camera, and for Project 2 , a laptop camera and an audio recording device. Quick 
A/V checks will be performed immediately before the session to ensure device s are working properly. 
Both recording devices will then be used to record assessment, and the assessor will be reminded to 
check the indicator lights to make sure capture is in progress. Immediately after the session, the 
assessor will log information abo ut the session into an experiment manual, checking procedures off of a 
list developed by [CONTACT_517262] (e.g., participant very tired; alarm went off during PNT administration;  etc.). Then, the 
assessor will check capture quality and file integrity and back up all recordings to data storage 
described in Project [ADDRESS_670422] 
(PRT),53 subtests of Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language Processing in Aphasia (PALPA),[ADDRESS_670423] (BNT),47 Patient Health 
Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9),57 Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices (RCPM),58 NIH Str oke Scale59 (with 
analysis of the Content Units, syllables/Content Unit in the “Cookie Theft” pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103],60-[ADDRESS_670424] 2 , the following data are automatically stored on the 
WebDCUTM: for Project 1 and 2, audiovisual files for pre -treatment and all follow - up assessments of 
naming untrained pi[INVESTIGATOR_499] (Philadelphi a Naming Test [PNT]64,65 Roach et al., 1996; Walker  
 
& Schwartz, 2012) and discourse measures; for Project 1 , output for Aphasia Communication Outcome 
Measure (ACOM; Doyle et al., 2013); and for Project 2 , output for computerized treatment measures. 
Loggi ng of these behavioral data, as well as scoring and analyses will be conducted by [CONTACT_517263] (the videocam in the computer sends videos and responses directly 
to the WebDCU)TM. These steps will be detailed in the assessmen t procedure manual that will be 
created by [CONTACT_517264].  
Rater – After a participant has completed all phases of the study, raters will obtain color -coded media 
files (with participant and session codes that do not  reveal the treatment condition or order) for outcome 
measures (e.g. PNT, discourse).The order in which the blinded rater will score these assessments is 
determined by a random sequence generator, and will differ for each participant and for each repeated 
measure. After scoring, raters will immediately input the scored data into WebDCUTM as above.  
Clinician – For Project 2, several additional data points need to be entered by [CONTACT_517265]. These include participant code, heart ra te, blood pressure, Wong -Baker FACES Pain 
Rating Scale (Wong, 1988), any symptoms noted by [CONTACT_2299], and evaluations of blinding. Date, 
time, and tDCS blinding is automatically recorded by [CONTACT_517266] . In addition, the Clinical Core will 
coordinat e the videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_517179] (1 -2 per week) to be used for 
monitoring of treatment fidelity, discussed in 3.[ADDRESS_670425] 2 . All behavioral data, both scored, and unscored, will be stored by 
[CONTACT_517267], described in the Administrative Core.  
Aim 2: To optimize and monitor assessment fidelity.  
3.[ADDRESS_670426] 2 , 
we highlight differences in instructions to the assessor regarding how the clinician is allowed to respond 
following item presenta tion, timing, and scoring (focusing on the language tests). As is evident, there 
are multiple opportunities for drift from assessment procedures and contamination of one assessment 
instrument by [CONTACT_20904]. For some measures, feedback is not allowed (e.g., KD T) while for others it is 
prescribed (e.g., PNT). Time limits, if provided, differ between measures and often even between 
subtests of the same measure (e.g., NAVS). Regarding scoring, some measures score the final 
attempts (including self -corrections) (e. g., NAVS), others score only the first attempt (e.g., PNT), and 
some measures even give credit for no responses (e.g., PPTT). So far, this has only highlighted 
variability; when the complexity of some of the scoring systems is also considered, specifically  for 
discourse and PNT, the need for a plan for monitoring assessment fidelity is obvious. Combining 
information regarding threats to validity,18,[ADDRESS_670427] identified the following threats that will fall under 
the purview of the Clinical Core: variability  in clinician qualifications, drift, contamination, and clinician 
turnover. We will apply well - established treatment fidelity guidelines19,22,27,66,67 to our assessment 
process and outline here the assessment fidelity plans that focus on assessor and rate r training, 
assessment delivery, and scoring reliability.  
Table 3. Sample instructions to clinician regarding assessment administration and scoring.  
WAB -R, 
Naming  “If the patient does not respond or responds incorrectly, ask him or her to hold the object (tactile cue) 
and to tell you what it is. If the patient still does not respond or responds incorrectly, present the first 
phoneme of the word (phonemic cue), or, i f it is a compound word, the first half of the word (semantic 
cue).” (cueing)  
KDT  (Following two practice items with feedback), “No more feedback is provided to the participant. If the 
participant does not know what a pi[INVESTIGATOR_517180], do not tell them. If th ey are unsure of the answer, 
participants should be encouraged to guess.” (feedback)  
PNT   
“After the subject has finished responding to an item, give him/her feedback: e.g., “good, that’s a fish”, 
or “actually, they’re looking for garage here”, or some variation thereof.” (feedback)  
NAVS, 
VCT/SCT  “Items/Sentences may be repeated once.” (repetition)  
WAB -R, 
AC  “Repeat the directions and the question if the patient gives an ambiguous or confabulatory response.” 
(repetition)  

 [ADDRESS_670428] and (after prompt) second attempts.  
NAVS, 
SPPT  Allow [ADDRESS_670429] and (after prompt) second attempts.  
WAB -R, 
Naming  Allow 20 seconds maximum for each item. [including cues]  
PNT  Allow a 30 second deadline to name [CONTACT_365567][INVESTIGATOR_517181], 
Rhyme  “In a few instances, regional pronunciation differences may result in disagreement about whether 
stimulus and target rhyme. Check by [CONTACT_517268].”  
PNT  “On each trial, score th e subject’s first “Complete Attempt”, defined as the first minimally CV 
(consonant -vowel) or VC response (schwa is not counted as a vowel) that meets one of the following 
criteria: 1) The attempt is not self -interrupted (cut -off) and has clear downward or upward/questioning 
intonation; may or may not be separated from a subsequent attempt by a noticeable pause; 2) The 
attempt is not self -interrupted (cut -off), is spoken with level intonation,....”  
PPTT  “When a subject completely refuses to respond to a triad, it should be given a chance score – 0.5.”  
NAVS, 
VNT  “If the subject self -corrects within 10 seconds, score the final response produced.”  
NAVS, 
ASPT  “Self-corrections/reformulations should be p ut in parentheses. Score only the final attempt at a target 
utterance.”  
WAB -R, 
AC  “Score [ADDRESS_670430] (ambiguous or 
confabulatory) response. If the patient self -corrects, score the last response he o r she gives.”  
WAB -R, 
Naming  “Score [ADDRESS_670431] is named correctly or with a minor articulatory error (e.g., dysarthric 
slurring) and no cue is needed. Score [ADDRESS_670432] name [CONTACT_517294], but with a phonemic 
paraphasia (e.g., “f ife” for “knife”) and no cue is needed. If a tactile, phonemic, or semantic cue is 
needed... score as [ADDRESS_670433] or no response after cueing as 0 points.”  
3.[ADDRESS_670434] “better training of raters” (reference 18; p. 
49). The Clinical Core will standardize assessor training for Projects 1  and 2 , beginning with the 
development of an assessment manual containing the following sections: project explanation, 
relationship of assessment measures to project goals, administration procedures for each individual 
test, and integrated information acro ss the tests highlighting “danger zones” for contamination. Though 
assessors will be speech -language pathologists who should already have a basic understanding of the 
project (through baseline and informed consent training, see sections 3.3 and 3.4), illus trating the 
relationships between the assessments the clinicians are giving and the specific project goals will 
emphasize the importance of the assessment process and adherence to prescribed procedures. This 
development of clinician “meta -competence” or “b uy-in” is thought to be important in treatment 
fidelity22,27 (Borrelli, 2011; Gearing et al., 2011), and is intuitive in assessment as well – understanding 
the “why” facilitates investment in the “how”, or adherence to procedures. In addition, highlighting  the 
opportunities most susceptible to drift or contamination serves to bring the information to the forefront 
so that it can be actively avoided. Finally, clinician attrition is likely to be observed less in clinicians who 
are invested in the project goal s and feel as if their contribution is important.  
The Clinical Core will facilitate the following assessment training procedures (Appendix 1) for both 
Project [ADDRESS_670435] 2 : (1) independent reading of the assessment manual; (2) video observation of 
expe rt administration of each test, administered to persons with varying types and severity of aphasia; 
(3) small group  
training session that will include manual review, highlighting of similarities and differences between 
administration procedures via discus sion and video observation, and supervised role -play with 
feedback; (4) at project initiation, three supervised assessment sessions with expert feedback; and (5) 
throughout study, yearly “booster” small group training and [ADDRESS_670436] clinician -to-clinician variability, drift, 
and contamination.  
3.10 Assessment Delivery. The Clinical Core will monitor adherence to assessment administration 
procedures throughout the ent ire study. A trained independent rater will watch videos of recorded 
sessions and rate the following for all assessments except the repeated measures (discourse, PNT): 
adherence to assessment administration procedures; frequency of additional, non -prescrib ed elements; 
frequency of omitted prescribed elements; frequency of cross -contamination; and assessor enactment 
and engagement. The blinded rater will conduct the implementation assessment for the repeated 
measures, as they will already be spending ample t ime observing the videos (as discourse transcription 
and PNT scoring often requires multiple viewings) and will also have expert knowledge of the 
assessment procedures and scoring. Each assessor will have 20% of their total assessment session 
time monitore d quarterly for accurate implementation . Continuous monitoring the delivery of the 
assessment will further guard against drift and contamination and alert the Clinical Core to the need for 
action if fidelity is compromised.  
3.11 Rater Training  
Assessor – As described in 3.6, the assessor will administer and score several tests for each project. 
The assessor training described above (3.9) includes several opportunities for expert feedback. The 
feedback will address administration procedures for all assessm ents as well as scoring procedures and 
accuracy for all assessments except the repeated measures.  
Rater – Blinded raters will be responsible for scoring of the repeated measures. There will be some 
overlap between training of the assessor and blinded rate rs. The Clinical Core will expect blinded raters 
to complete the following alongside assessors (Appendix 1): (1) independent reading of the 
assessment manual; (2) video observation of expert administration of the repeated measures 
administered to persons w ith varying types and severity of aphasia; and (3) attendance to small group 
training session that will include manual review, highlighting of similarities and differences between 
administration procedures via discussion and video observation, and supervis ed role -play with 
feedback.  
Raters will then participate in specialized training sessions for the repeated measures that serve as the 
primary and secondary outcome measures for the proposed projects. For Project 1 , this includes the 
PNT and the discourse production tasks. (The ACOM is also given more than once, but since it is 
computerized, the only rater responsibility will be checking the files and entry into DCU). For Project 2 , 
this includes also the PNT and a discourse production task.  
The specialize d training for PNT will include the following phases, facilitated by [CONTACT_517269]: (1) 
independent reading of material included in a blinded rater manual, which will contain “The Philadelphia 
Naming Test: Scoring and Rationale” 64, the “Detailed Guide  to PNT Scoring” (Moss Rehabilitation 
Institute), and the “Scoring Protocol” (Moss Rehabilitation Institute); (2) co -scoring of two PNT training 
videos (one mild aphasia, one moderate -severe aphasia) during which the expert rater will narrate the 
decision -making process and discuss with the trainee any pertinent topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]; (3) independent scoring of 
four PNT training videos, two with nonfluent aphasia (1 high, 1 low severity) and two with fluent aphasia 
(1 high, 1 low severity), to be checked by [CONTACT_517270]; (4) feedback session reviewing independent 
scoring; (5) repeat of steps 2 and 3 if acceptable point -to-point agreement (> 95%) was not achieved; 
and (6) throughout the study, yearly “booster” small group training and scoring review. Raters will also 
be instructed about a scoring modification needed for Project 4, where the final self -corrected 
responses are also scored with PNT scoring conventions. This means that for the majority of aims, the 
“first complete attempt” is rated as indicated by [CONTACT_517271] g guidelines and used for analyses, but for 
Project 4, it is necessary for the raters to also score self corrections on the PNT.  
 77 
The specialized training for discourse assessment will include the following phases, facilitated by [CONTACT_517272]: (1) dir ect instruction regarding use of Codes for the Human Analysis of Transcripts 
(CHAT) and Computerized Language Analysis (CLAN) tools,68 including EVAL,69 with relevant sections 
of corresponding manuals thoroughly reviewed; (2) independent reading of trainin g documents 
available via AphasiaBank ( “Coding Cheat Sheet”, “Error Coding”, and “CLAN Glossary”; 
http://www.talkbank.org/AphasiaBank/) and two journal articles ( “Presence, completeness, and 
accuracy of main concepts in the connected speech of non - brain -damaged adults and adults with 
aphasia;” 70 and “Main concepts for three different discourse tasks in a large non -clinical sample;” 71 (3) 
guided transcription of four training videos, two with nonfluent aphasia (1 high,  
1 low severity) and two with fluent aphasia (1 high, 1 low severity) to be checked by [CONTACT_517273]/rater; (4) feedback session reviewing transcription; (5 ) co-scoring of lexical and gist 
discourse measures for two of the four transcribed sessions, during which the expert rater will narrate 
the decision - making process and discuss with the trainee any pertinent topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]; (6) independent scoring 
of the remainin g two transcribed sessions; (7) feedback session reviewing independent scoring; (8) 
repeat of steps 5 and 6 if acceptable point -to-point agreement (list from literature) was not achieved; 
and (9) throughout the study, yearly “booster” small group training and transcription and scoring review.  
These thorough training procedures for scoring of naming and discourse performance will improve 
reliability (discussed below) and guard against rater drift. The blinding of raters further improves study 
validity by [CONTACT_517274]. Raters will also be trained how to rate the assessor’s 
adherence to administration procedures, rating the following (as described above): adherence to 
assessment administration procedures; frequency of additions, omis sions, and cross -contamination; 
and, assessor enactment and engagement.  
3.12 Reliability Point -by-point72 intra- and inter - rater reliability will be conducted for 25% of PNT 
sessions and 25% of discourse sessions, equally distributed across raters. Intra -class correlation 
coefficients for 25% of all assessment measures will be calculated.  
Aim 3: To optimize and monitor treatment fidelity.  
3.13 Rationale As discussed in the Significance section of this Research Plan, treatment fidelity can 
determine the detection (and if present, magnitude) of treatment effects. Eights of the [ADDRESS_670437] udy. Unreliable treatment 
implementation is a known threat to statistical conclusion validity;18 and Gearing and colleagues22 
identified threats to treatment fidelity at every component (design, training, delivery, receipt), which we 
use here to outline th e Clinical Core strategy for optimizing treatment fidelity. The strategies for Project 
[ADDRESS_670438] 1 – Standardized clinician training, relying upon a detailed manual of treatment procedur es, is 
recommended if treatment fidelity is desired.19 The Clinical Core will be responsible for the development 
of the treatment manual, which will include the following sections22,66: project explanation, relationship 
of treatment activities to project g oals, treatment administration procedures, comparison of active 
ingredients of each treatment approach (including highlighting of “danger zones” for contamination as in 
the assessment manual), and troubleshooting tips. Similar to the assessment manual, the  purpose of 
explaining the project and emphasizing the importance of treatment activities, and the differentiation 
thereof, promotes clinician buy -in and subsequent adherence to procedures.22,27 Explicit instructions for 
treatment tasks are included and ar e likely to reduce the likelihood of cross -contamination.66 The (non -
computerized) tasks used in Project 1 are no more complex than those practiced in everyday clinical 
practice, as indeed they arose from those practices; they are simply operationalized so  that procedures 
would be standardized across persons and settings.  
 78 
The Clinical Core will facilitate the following treatment training: (1) independent reading of the 
treatment manual; (2) video observation of treatment delivery (available from pi[INVESTIGATOR_1427] y) to persons 
with varying types and severity of aphasia; (3) small group training session that will include treatment 
manual review, with highlighting of “danger zones”, as well as supervised role -play with feedback; (4) at 
project initiation, three super vised sessions of each treatment arm with expert feedback; and (5) 
throughout the study, yearly “booster” small group training and 1 -2 supervised treatment sessions (both 
treatment arms) with expert feedback. These training procedures will guard against cl inician -to-clinician 
variability, drift, and contamination.  
Project 2 – Standardized training for Project [ADDRESS_670439] current stimulation (tDCS). With training and experience, this process becomes 
simple and routine. We have had no difficulty training clinicians to do this for the CATES trial (PI: 
[INVESTIGATOR_517175]) or for the studies at JHMI (Hillis). During the first two years of the project, [CONTACT_241940] 
will visit JHMI to ensure the electrode placeme nt (particularly for participants randomized to fMRI -
guided localization of electrode placement) is conducted in the same way as in the CATES trial. The 
greatest potential threat to validity concerns blinding, and automatic blinding of both the participant  and 
the clinician the WebDCUTM makes this threat negligible. The clinician enrolling the participant will not 
see the treatment assignment, only a numeric participant number generated by [CONTACT_517275], which 
is entered into a software package that contro ls whether tDCS or Sham is delivered to the participant. 
The in -house software/hardware setup allows for switching the tDCS on and off without any 
involvement from the participant or experimenter. The Clinical Core will develop the treatment manual 
for Project 2 , which will include the following sections: project explanation, relationship of treatment 
activities to project goals, treatment administration procedures, and troubleshooting tips.  
Training procedures facilitated by [CONTACT_517276] 2, most of which have been 
implemented with success for CATES, will include the following (Appendix 1): (1) independent reading 
of the treatment manual; (2) video observation of treatment delivery; (3) small group training sessions 
that will include treatme nt manual review, with a focus on the importance of blinding, as well as direct 
instruction and practice with electrode placement and device operations; (4) at project initiation, two 
supervised treatment sessions, with brain stimulation portions co -led wi th experts (Celnik, Richardson); 
(5) two supervised treatment sessions with expert feedback; and (6) throughout study, yearly booster 
training. These training procedures will guard against clinician -to-clinician variability, drift, and 
unblinding.  
3.[ADDRESS_670440] 2 : adherence 
to treatment procedures (Project 1, Appendix 2; Project 2, Appendix 1); frequency of additional, non -
prescribed elements; frequency of omitted prescribed elements; frequency of cross -contamination; and 
clinician enactme nt and engagement. Each clinician will have 20% of their total treatment session time 
monitored quarterly for accurate implementation . Continuous monitoring of treatment delivery will guard 
against drift and contamination, and alert the Clinical Core to th e need for action if fidelity is 
compromised.  
For Project [ADDRESS_670441] received the treatment, which can be 
assessed by [CONTACT_517277] -session participant comprehension or utilization  of treated behaviors.22,66 The 
trained independent rater assessing treatment delivery (3.15) will also rate the following for Project 1 : 
participant engagement, participant comprehension of treatment activities, and frequency of participant 
attempts to pe rform treatment activities. This information combined with the within -session data 
collected by [CONTACT_517278], cueing needed, etc. will serve as an indicator of treatment 
receipt. For Project 2 , the rater will also assess participant enga gement, and this rating combined with 
data produced after each computerized session will indicate treatment receipt.  
3.17 Clinical Core Management Plan – Overall management of the Clinical Core will be in the hand of 
[CONTACT_50013]. She will be assisted by [INVESTIGATOR_124] s. Fridriksson (USC), to be hired Clinical Care Coordinator (USC), 
and Bonilha (MUSC). The Clinical Core Coordinator will manage and implement day -to-day operations, 
as described above, with ad hoc supervision by [CONTACT_480629]. Priorities will be determined by [CONTACT_517279], Clinical 
Core Coordinator, and Fridriksson together in weekly videoconferences via www.GoToMeeting.com. 
Potential disputes will be resolved by [CONTACT_517280], using a conflict resolution model described 
by [CONTACT_517281],[ADDRESS_670442]. Hillis will devote a total of 35% effort to the C -STAR (25% to Project 2, 10% to the 
Clinical Core).  
 
 
 