  Official Title: Breast and Ovarian Catchment Pi[INVESTIGATOR_136886]: Clinical Outcomes for Offering Genetic Testing in a Tiered Approach   Study ID: [REMOVED] Document Type:  Study Protocol Date of the Document: 05/15/2020   
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 1 of 46 
   ZIPLINE  APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  
 
 
 
The Human Subjects Division (HSD) strives to ensure that people with disabilities have access to all services and content.  If you 
experience  any accessibility -related issues with this form or any aspect of the application process, email 
[EMAIL_1004]  for assistance.  
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that will be reviewed by [CONTACT_52879] . Before completing this form, check HSD’s website  to 
confirm that this should not be reviewed by [CONTACT_52880] (non -UW) IRB.  
• If yo u are requesting a determination  about whether the planned activity is human subjects research or qualifies for exempt 
status, you may skip all questions except those marked with a          . For example 1.[ADDRESS_551629] be answered.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to the research  or if you believe you have already answered a question 
elsewhere in the application , state “ NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the information) . If you 
do not answer a question , the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or whether it is  not applicable. This 
may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, place an “X” in the box.  To fil l in a text box, make sure your cursor is within the gray text box bar before 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_52855].  
• For collaborative or multi -site research, describe only the UW activities unless you are requesting that the UW IRB provide 
the review and oversight for non-UW collaborators or co -investigators as well.  
• You may reference other documents (such as a grant application) if they provide the requested information in non -technical 
language. Be sure to provide the document name, page(s), and specific sections, and upload it to Zipline . Also, describe any 
changes that may have occurred since the document was written (for example, changes that you’ve made during or after the 
grant review process). In some cases, you may need to provide additional details in the answer space as well as referencing a 
document .  
 
INDEX  
1 Overview  6 Children (Minors) and Parental Permission  10 Risk / Benefit Assessment  
2 Participants  7 Assent of Children (Minors)  11 Economic Burden to Participants  
3 Non-UW R esearch Setting  8 Consent of Adults  12 Resources  
4 Recruiting and Screening Parti cipants  9 Privacy and Confidentiality  13 Other Approvals, Permissions, and 
Regulatory Issues  
5 Procedures    
 
1 OVERVIEW  
Study Title:  Breast and Ovarian Catchment Pi[INVESTIGATOR_136886]: Clinical Outcomes for Offering Genetic Testing in a 
Tiered Approach  

Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551630] the research . Provide any he lpful explanatory information.  
In general, the home institution is the institution (1) that provides the researcher’s paychec k and that considers him/her to be 
a paid employee, or (2) at which the researcher is a matriculated student. Scholars, faculty, fellows, and students who are 
visiting the UW and who are the lead researcher: identify your home institution  and describe the purpose and duration of your 
UW visit, as well as  the UW department/center with which you are affiliated while at the UW.  
 
Note that many UW clinical faculty members are paid employees of non -UW institutions . 
 
The UW IRB provides IRB review and oversight for only those researchers who meet the criteria  described in the SOP: Use of 
the UW IRB . 
 The lead research will conduct the research through Seattle Cancer Care Alliance.  
1.2 Consultation history . Has there been any consultation with someone  at HSD about this study?  
It is not necessary to obtain advance consultation. However, if advance consultation was obtai ned, answering this question 
will help ensure that the IRB is aware of and considers the advice and guidance provided  in that consultation .   
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the consultation: approximate date, with whom, and method (e.g., by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone call, in -person meeting).     
 Virtual  meeting via Zoom with Jennifer McBride and Bailey Bodell from UW Reliance department 
on 4/24/20.  Marianne Dubard -Gault (study’s PI), Lauren Santos (study’s research coordinator), and 
Marth a Horik -Pyne (UW Medical Genetics research coordinator) were also present. This 
consultat ion was to discuss the  involved parties of this study as well as IRB re view guidance.  After 
review, it was determined that a complete protocol application must be submitted due to the type of 
grant that is funding this study.  
1.3 Similar and/or related s tudies . Are there any related IRB applications that provide context for the proposed 
activities?  
Examples of studies for which there is likely to be a related IRB application: Using samples or data collected by [CONTACT_52881]; 
recruiting subjects from a registry established by a colleague’s research activity; conducting Phase [ADDRESS_551631], or 
conducting a continuation of another study; serving as the data coordinating center for a multi -site study that includes a UW 
site. 
 
Providing this info rmation (if relevant) may significantly improve the efficiency and consistency of the IRB’s review.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the other studies or applications and how they relate to the proposed 
activities. If the other applications were reviewed by [CONTACT_52879], please also provide: the UW IRB 
number, the study title, and the lead researcher’s name.    
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551632] 
the proposed activity?  
HSD recognizes that everyone would like their IRB applications to be reviewed as quickly as possible. To ensure fairness, it is 
HSD policy to review applications in the order in which they are received. However, HSD will assign a higher priority to 
researc h with externally -imposed urgency that is beyond the control of the researcher. Researchers are encouraged to 
communicate as soon as possible with their HSD staff contact [CONTACT_52883] (in other words, before  
submitting the IRB a pplication). Examples: a researcher plans to test an experimental vaccine that has just been developed for 
a newly emerging epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]; a researcher has an unexpected opportunity to collect data from students when the end of the 
school year is only four week s away.  
 
HSD may ask for documentation of the externally -imposed urgency. A higher priority should not be requested to compensat e 
for a researcher’s failure to prepare an IRB application in a timely manner. Note that IRB review requires a certain minimum 
amount of time; without sufficient time, the IRB may not be able to review and approve an application by a deadline.  
 X   No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the urgency or deadline as well as the reason for it.  
         
1.[ADDRESS_551633] . If hypotheses are being tested, describe them.  You will be asked to describe the specific procedures in a 
later section.  
 
If this application involves the use of a HUD “humanitarian” device: describe whether the use is for “on -label” 
clinical patient care, “off -label” clinical patient care, and/or research (collec ting safety and/or effectiveness data).  
 This quality improvement  research study aims to improve the utilization of genetic counseling and testing 
among providers at Olympic Medical Center (OMC)  who are  caring for their cancer patients in a rural and 
underserved area. SCCA will coach the OMC providers to offer eligible patients genetic counseling and testing in 
order to increase access and help the OMC site meet genetic recommendations and guidelines.  Specifically, th is 
study aims to (1) review and dev elop OMC’s clinical operations workflow to identify cancer patients who meets 
criteria for genetic counseling and testing; (2) measure uptake of genetic testing; and (3) document clinical and 
patient reported outcomes following genetic test results.   
1.6 Study design . Provide a one -sentence description of the general study design and/or type of methodology.   
Your answer will help HSD in a  ssigning applications to reviewers and in managing workload. Examples: a longitudinal 
observational study; a double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized study; ethnographic interviews; web scrapi[INVESTIGATOR_52857] a 
convenience sample of blogs; medical record review; coordinating center for a multi -site study.  
 This is a  quality improvement research study  in which SCCA will provide coaching to  OMC providers  to offer 
genetic counseling and testing in order to address current gaps in caring for  their high-risk patients.   
1.[ADDRESS_551634]  an “X” in at least one box.  
This question is essential for ensuring that your application is correctly reviewed. Please read each option carefully.  
 Descriptor  
  1. Class project or other activity whose purpose is to provide an educational experience for the researcher 
(for example, to learn about the process or methods of doing research).    
  
  
2. Part of an institution, organization, or program’s own internal operational monitoring.    
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 4 of 46 
   
  
3. Improve the quality of service provided by a specific institution, organization, or program.   X 
  
  4. Designed to expand the knowledge base of a scientific discipline or other scholarly field of study , and 
produce results that:  
• Are expected to be applicable to a larger population beyond the site of data collection or the specific 
subjects studied, or  
• Are intended to be used to develop, test, or support theories, principles, and statements of 
relationships, or to inform policy beyond the study.    
  
  5. Focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information or biospecimens are collected 
through oral history, journalism, biography, or historical scholarship activities, to provide an accurate and 
evidence -based portrayal of the individuals.    
  
  6. A quality improvement or program improvement activity conducted to improve the implementation 
(delivery or quality) of an accepted practice, or to collect data about the implementation of the practice 
for clinical, practical, or administrative purposes. This does not include the evaluation of the efficacy of 
different accepted practices, or a comparison of their efficacy.   X 
  
  7. Public health surveillance activities conducted, requested, or authorized by a public health authority for 
the sole purpose of identifying or investigating potential public health signals or timely awareness and 
priority setting during a situation that threatens public health.    
  
  
8. Preliminary, exploratory, or research development activities (such as pi[INVESTIGATOR_52858], or 
reliability/validation testing of a questionnaire)    
  
  
9. Expanded access use of a drug or device not yet approved for this purpose    
  
  
10. Use of a Humanitarian Use Device    
  
  
11. Other. Explain:    
  
         
1.8 Background, experience, and preliminary work . Answer this question only  if the proposed activity has one or 
more of the following characteristics. The purpose of this question is to provide the IRB with information that is 
relevant to its risk/benefit analysis.  
• Involves more than minimal risk (physical or non -physical)  
• Is a clinical trial, or 
• Involves having the subjects use a drug, biological, botanical, nutritional supplement, or me dical 
device.  
“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater 
than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or 
tests.  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 5 of 46 
  a. Background . Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for the proposed activity, based 
on existing literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that the proje ct is 
intended to address.  
 This should be a plain language description. Do not provide scholarly citations. Limit your answer to less than one page, or  
refer to an attached document with background information that is no more than three pages long.  
 N/A 
 b. Experience and p reliminary work . Briefly describe experience or preliminary work or data (if any) that you , 
your team , or your collaborators/co -investigators  have that supports the feasibility and/or safety of this study.   
 It is not necessary to summarize all discussion that has led to the development of the study protocol. The IRB is interested 
only in short summaries about experiences or preliminary work that suggest the study is feasible and that risks are 
reasonable rela tive to the benefits. Examples: You r team  has already conducted a Phase 1 study of an experimental drug 
which supports the Phase 2 study being proposed in this application ; you r team has  already done a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_116805] d in this application  is feasible in an after -school program with 
classroom aides; you r team has  experience with the type of surgery that is required to implant the stud y device; the study 
coordinator is experienced in working with subjects who have significant cognitive impairment.  
  N/A 
1.9 Supplements . Check all boxes that apply, to identify relevant Supplements that should be complete d and 
upload ed to Zipline . 
This section is here instead of at the end of the form to reduce the risk of duplicating information in this IRB Protocol for m that 
you will need to provide in these Supplements.  
 Check all 
That A pply  Type of R esearch  Supplement N ame  
    
Department of Defense  
The research involves Department of Defense funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Depar tment of Defense      
    
    
Department of Energy  
The research involves Department of Energy funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Department of Energy      
    
    Drug, biologic, botanical, supplement  
Procedures involve the use of any drug, biologic, botanical or 
supplement, even if the item is not the focus of the proposed  research  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Drugs      
    
    Emergency exception to informed consent  
Research that requires this special consent waiver for research involving 
more than minimal risk  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Exception from Informed 
Consent for Emergency 
Research (EFIC)      
    
    
Genomic data sharing  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Genomic Data Sharing      
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 6 of 46 
     Genomic data are being collected and will be deposited in an external 
database (such as the NIH dbGaP database) for sharing with other 
researchers , and the UW is being asked to provide the required 
certification or to ensure that the consent forms can be c ertified  
    Medical device  
Procedures involve the use of any medical device, even if the device is 
not the focus of the proposed  research, except when the device is FDA -
approved and is being used through a clinical facility in the manner for 
which it is approved  ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT: 
Devices      
    
    Multi -site or collaborative study  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or mo re non-UW 
institutions in a multi -site or collaborative study.  SUPPLEMENT: Multi -site 
or Collaborative Research      
    
    Non -UW Individual Investigators  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
individuals who are not affiliated with another organization for the 
purpose of the research.  SUPPLEMENT: Non -UW 
Individual Investigators      
    
    
None of the above     X  
    
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_551635], ovarian, prostate, colon, or pancreatic cancer . The OMC providers  will be consenting to release their 
patients’ medical records  to SCCA so that SCCA subject matter experts (cancer geneticist and/or genetic 
counselor) can identify  patients with an underlying hereditary cancer syndrome to be offered genetic counseling 
and testing.  
b. Exclusion criteria. Describe the specific criteria that will  be used  to decide who will be excluded from the 
research  from subjects who meet the inclusion criteria listed above. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 This study will exclude OMC providers  who do not see patients with  an active diagnosis of cancer . This study 
will exclude patients who are minors, patients without an active diagnosis of cancer, and patients 
with precancerous  lesions such as  ductal carcinoma in situ (the presence of abnormal cells inside a milk duct in 
the breast) or colon polyps (a smal l clump of cells that form on the lining of the colon or rectum).   
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 7 of 46 
 2.3 Prisoners . IRB approval is required in order to include prisoners in research, even when prisoners are not an 
intended target population.  
a. Will the proposed research  recruit or obtain data from individuals that are known  to be prisoners?  
For records reviews: if the records do not indicate prisoner status and prisoners are not  a target population, select “No ”. See 
the WORKSHEET: Prisoners  for the definition of “prisoner”.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of part a. and continue to 2.3.b  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions  (i – iv). 
 i. Describe the type of prisoners, and which prisons/jails:  
       
 ii. One concern about prisoner research is whether the effect of participation on prisoners’ 
general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and /or opportunity for 
earnings in prison will be so great that it will make it difficult for prisoners to adequately 
consider the research risks. How will the chances of this be reduced?  
       
 iii. Describe what will be done  to make sure that (a) recruitment and subject selection 
procedures will be fair to all eligible prisoners and (b) prison authorities or other prisoners will 
not be able to arbitrarily prevent or require particular prisoners from participating.  
       
 iv. If the research will involve prisoners in federal facilities or in state/local facilities outsid e of 
Washington State: c heck the box below to provide assurance that study team members will 
(a) not encourage or facilitate the use of a prisoner’s  participation in the research to influence 
parole decisions, and (b) clearly inform each prisoner in advance (for example, in a consent  
form) that participation in th e research  will have no effect on his or her parole.  
  Confirmed   
 b. Is the research likely to have subjects who become prisoners while participating in the study?   
For example, a longitudinal study of youth with drug problems is likely to have subjects who will be prisoners at some 
point during the study.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, if a subject becomes a prisoner while participating in the study, will any study 
procedures and/or data collection related to the subject be continued while the subject is a 
prisoner?    
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the procedures and/or data collection that will continue with 
prisoner subjects    
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551636] populations listed here. Check the boxes 
for any of these populations that will be purposefully include d. (In other  words, being a part of the population is 
an inclusion criterion for the study.)  
The WORKSHEETS describe the criteria for approval  but do not need to be completed and should not be submitted . 
 Population  Worksheet  
  
Fetuses in utero  WORKSHEET: Pregnant Women    
  
  
Neonates of uncertain viability  WORKSHEET: Neonates    
  
  
Non-viable neonates  WORKSHEET: Neonates    
  
  
Pregnant women  WORKSHEET: Pregnant Women    
  
a. If you check any of the boxes above, use this space to provide any information that may be relevant for the IRB 
to consider.   
 None of the populations listed above will be purposefully included in this study.   
2.5 Native Americans or non-U.S. indigenous populations.  Will Native American or non -U.S. indigenous populations 
be actively recruited through a tribe, tribe -focused organization, or similar community -based organization?  
Indigenous people are defined in inter national or national legislation as having a set of specific rights based on their historical 
ties to a particular territory and their cultural or historical distinctiveness from other populations that are often politically 
dominant.  
 
Exam ples: a reservation school or health clinic; recruiting during a tribal community gathering  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  name [CONTACT_52935], tribal -focused organization, or similar community -based  organization. T he 
UW IRB expects that tribal/indigenous approval will be obtained before beginning the research . 
This may or may not involve approval from a tribal IRB. The study team and any 
collaborators/investigators are also responsible for identifying any tribal law s that may affect the 
research.     
       
2.[ADDRESS_551637] private identifiable  information about other individuals  from the 
study  subjects? Common examples include:  collecting medical history information or contact [CONTACT_52885], friends, co -workers.  
“Identifiable” means any direct or indirect identifier that, alone or in combination, would allow you or another member of the 
research team to readi ly identify  the person. For example, suppose that the research is about immigration history. If subjects 
are asked  questions about their grandparents but are not asked for  names or other information that would allow easy 
identification  of the grandparents, then private identifiable information is not being collected about the grandparents  and the 
grandparents are not subjects .  
 
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 9 of 46 
   Yes → If yes, these individuals are considered human subjects in the study. Describe them and what data 
will be collect ed about them.     
       
2.[ADDRESS_551638] or describe the maximum number of subjects (or subject units) 
need ed to complete the study, for each subject group?  
Subject units  mean units within a group. For most research studies, a group will consist of individuals. However, the unit of 
interest in some research is not the individual. Examples:   
• Dyads such as caregiver -and-Alzheime r’s patient, or parent and child  
• Families  
• Other units, such as student -parent -teacher  
Subject group  means categories of subjects that are meaningful for  the specific study . Some research has only one subject 
group – for example, all UW students taking Introductory Psychology. Some common ways in which subjects are grouped 
include:  
• By [CONTACT_52886] – for example, an intervention group and a control group.  
• By [CONTACT_52887] – for example, urban versus rural families  
• By [CONTACT_654] – for examp le, children who are 6, 10, or 14 years old.  
 
The IRB reviews the number of subjects in the context of risks and benefits. Unless otherwise specified, if the IRB determines 
that the research involves no more than minimal risk: there are no restrictions on  the total number of subjects  that may be 
enrolled . If the research involves more than minimal risk: The number of enrolled subjects must be limited to the number 
described in this  application. If it is necessary later to increase the number of subjects, s ubmit  a Modification . Exceeding the 
IRB-approved number ( over -enrollment ) will be considered non -compliance.   
  No → If no, provide the rationale in the box below. Also, provide any other available information about 
the scope/size of the research. You do not need to complete the table.    
  Example: It may not be possible to predict the number of subjects who will complete an online survey 
advertised through Craigslist, but you can state that  the survey will be posted  for two weeks and the number 
who respond is the number who will be in the study.  
        
 X Yes → If yes, for each subject group, use the table below to provide the estimate of the maximum desired 
number of individuals (or other subject unit, such as families) who will complete the research.    
 Group name/description  Maximum desired number of individuals (or other 
subject unit, such as families) who will complete 
the research  
Provide numbers for the  site(s) reviewed by [CONTACT_52888] -wide total number ; example: 20/[ADDRESS_551639], ovarian, prostate, colon, or pancreatic cancer  6 (4 MDs, 1 PA -C, and 1 ARNP)  
 Phase 1: Patients in the o bservational group  in 
which  SCCA collects data on OMC patients  who 
follow  their current processes (without intervention)   60/120  
 Phase 2: Patients in the monitoring group in which SCCA 
collect data on OMC patients who  follow the tiered 
intervention  (OMC providers receive coaching from 
SCCA subject matter experts)   60/120  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 10 of 46 
              
              
 
 
3 NON -UW RESEARCH SETTING   
Complete this section only if UW investigators  and people named in the SUPPLEMENT: 
Non -UW Individual Investigators  will conduct research procedures  outside of UW and 
Harborview  
3.1 Reason for locations . Describe the reason(s) for choosing the location s.  
This is especially important when the research will occur in locations or with populations that may be vulnerable to 
exploitation. One of the three ethical principles the IRB must consider is justice: ensuring that reasonable, non -exploitative, 
and well -considered procedures are administered fairly, with a fair distribution of costs and potential benefits.  
 OMC is the ideal site for this research study because of its rural and underserved location, which can pose many 
obstacles to their patients in accessing genetic evaluations for the treatment of their cancers and for their family 
members. OMC is an affiliate site of SCCA and this partnership, in which SCCA will prov ide coaching to OMC 
providers, will facilitate a more open line of communication between the sites. OMC providers will have the 
resources to increase access to genetic counseling and testing to its patients as well as refer their patients with 
more complic ated cases to SCCA for genetic consultation services  
3.[ADDRESS_551640] the 
research , how it is conducted, or how consent is obtained or documented . 
Examples: It would be culturally inappropriate in some international settings for a woman to be directly contact[CONTACT_426] a male 
researcher; instead, the rese archer may need to ask a male family member for permission before the woman can be 
approached. It may be appropriate to obtain permission from community leaders prior to obtaining consent from individual 
members of a group.  In some distinct cultural groups , signing forms may not be the norm.  
 
This federal site maintains an international list of human research standards and requirements:  
 http://www.hhs.go v/ohrp/international/index.html   
 N/A  
3.[ADDRESS_551641] the research (especially the research design and 
consent procedures). The most common examples are laws about:  
• Specimens  – for example, some countries will not allow biospecimens to be taken out of the country.  
• Age of consent  – laws about when an individual is considered old enough to be able to provide consent vary 
across states, and across countries.   
• Legally authorized representative  – laws about who can serve as a legally authorized representative (and who 
has priority when more than one person is available) vary across states and countries.  
• Use of healthcare records  – many states (including Washington State) have laws that are similar to the 
federal HIPAA law but that have additional requirements.  
 N/A.  OMC  is located in  Sequim, Washington. The laws in this region are the same as the laws that apply to 
SCCA.   
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551642] the research.  
Example: A school district may require researchers  to obtain permission from the head district office as well as school 
principals before approaching teachers or students; a factory in China may allow researchers  to interview factory workers  but 
not allow the workers to be paid for their participation . 
 N/A  
3.5 If the PI [CONTACT_832] a s tudent: Does the research involve traveling outside of the US?   
  No  
  Yes → If yes, confirm by [CONTACT_52890] (1) you will register with the UW Office of Global Affairs  
before traveling; (2) you will notify your advisor when the registration is complete; and (3) you will 
request a UW Travel Waiver if the research involves travel to the list of countries  requiring a UW 
Travel Waiver.  
 Confirmed  
 
 
4 RECRUITING and SCREENING PARTICIPANTS  
4.1 Recruiting and Screening . Describe how subjects will be identified, recruited, and screened.  Include information 
about: how, when, where, and in what setting. Identify who (by [CONTACT_52891], not name) will approach and 
recruit subjects, and who wil l screen them for eligibility.  
 Before the study begins, the SCCA study  team will identify  OMC providers  who meet eligibility criteria  through 
the OMC website’s oncology providers page . A virtual  meeting (via Zoom)  will be set up  by [CONTACT_1758]’s research 
coordinator  to include  the SCCA st udy team and  OMC’s medical director  and all the potential  OMC provider 
subjects . During this meeting, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_435474]’s target  patient  population, 
methods, procedures, and goals . OMC providers will be given time to introduce themselves and describe their 
patient population to ensure that  they are eligible to participate.   
4.2 Recruitment materials .  
 
a. What materials (if any ) will be used  to recruit and screen subjects?  
Examples: talking points for phone or in -person conversations; video or audio presentations; websites; social media 
messages; written materials such as letters, flyers for posting, broc hures, or printed advertisements; questionnaires filled 
out by [CONTACT_52893].  
 The SCCA study  team will recruit all eligible OMC providers  via a virtual meeting (through Zoom), where the 
study will be described and discussed in detail . As part of recruitment, all potentia l OMC provider participants  
will be provided copi[INVESTIGATOR_435475]’s research methods and procedures. After this meeting , the stu dy’s research 
coordinator will then email  a consent information sheet  (attached in Zipline) . The OMC providers who choose to 
participant will send an emailed consent to the study’s research coordinator.  
There is no recruitment process for OMC patients  because the study team will have no contact [CONTACT_435480].  OMC patients will be screened  by [CONTACT_435481], 
pathology report features, and treatment options  (after consent is given from t heir OMC provider to release their 
medical records).  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 12 of 46 
 b. Upload descriptions of each type of material (or the materials themselves) to Zipline . If letters  or emails  will be 
sent to any subjects, the se should include a statement about how the subject’s name  [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_52894] . No sensitive information about the person (such as a diagnosis of a medical condition) should 
be included in the letter.  
HSD encourages researchers to consider  uploading descriptions of most recruitment and screening materials instead of the 
materials themselves. The goal is to provide the researchers with the flexibility to change some information on the materials  
without submitting a Modification for IRB appro val of the changes. Examples:  
• Provide a list of talking points that will be used for phone or in -person conversations instead of a script.   
• For the description of a flyer, include the information that it will provide the study phone number and the name [CONTACT_4007]  a 
study contact [CONTACT_9702] (without providing the actual phone number or name). This means that a Modification would 
not be necessary if/when the study phone number or contact [CONTACT_52895]. Also, instead of listing the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the description below might  state that the flyer will list one or a few of the major 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• For the description of a  video or a website, include a description of the possible visual elements and a list of the 
content (e.g., study phone number; study contact [CONTACT_9702]; top three inclusion/exclusion criteria; payment of $50; 
study name; UW research er).  
4.[ADDRESS_551643] an existing relationship with 
the study population(s)?  
Examples: a study team member may have a dual role with the study population (for example, being their clinical care 
provider, teacher, laboratory directory or tribal leader in addition to recruiting them for his/her research).  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the nature of the relationship.  
         
4.4 Payment to participants . Describe any payment that will be provide d, including:  
• The total amount/value  
• Whether payment will be “pro -rated” so that participants who are unable to complete the research may still 
receive some part of the payment  
The IRB expect s the consent process or study information provided to the subjects to include information about the number 
and amount of payments, and especially the time when subjects can expect to receive payment. One of the most frequent 
complaints received by [CONTACT_52897] f rom subjects who expected to receive cash or a check on the day that they completed a study 
and who were angry or disappointed when payment took 6 -8 weeks to reach them.  
 
Do not include a description of any expenses that will be reimbursed.  
 No payment will be provided to participants.  
4.5 Non -monetary compensation . Describe any non -monetary compensation that will be provide d. Example: extra 
credit for students; a toy for a child. If class credit will be offered to students, there must be  an alternate way for 
the students to earn the extra credit without participating in the research.  
 No non -monetary compensation will be pr ovided to participants.  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 13 of 46 
 4.6 Will data or specimens be accessed or obtained for recruiting and screening procedures prior to enrollment?   
Examples: names and contact [CONTACT_3031]; the information gathered from records that were screened; results of screening 
questionnaires or screening blood tests; Protected Health Information (PHI) from screening medical records to identify possib le 
subjects.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
  Yes → If yes, describe the data and/or specimens (including PHI) and  whether it will be retained  as part of 
the study data.  
    
4.7 Consent for recruiting and screening . Will consent be obtained for any of the recruiting and screening 
procedures? (Section 8: Consent of Adults  asks about consent for the main study procedures).  
“Consent” includes: consent from individuals for their own par ticipation; parental permission; assent from children; consent 
from a legally authorized representative for adult individuals who are unable to provide consent.  
 
Examples:   
• For a study in which names and contact [CONTACT_52898] a registry: the registry should have consent 
from the registry participants to release their names and contact [CONTACT_52899].  
• For a study in which possible subjects are identified by [CONTACT_52900]: there will be no consent process.  
• For a st udy in which individuals respond to an announcement and call into a study phone line: the study team person 
talking to the individual may obtain non -written consent to ask eligibility questions over the phone.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of this section ; go to question 5.1. 
  Yes → If yes, describe the consent process.  
    
 a. Documentation of consent . Will a written or verifiable electronic signature [CONTACT_116870] a 
consent form be used to document consent for  the recruiting and screening procedures ? 
  No → If no, describe the information that will be provide d during the consent process  
and for which procedures.  
          
  Yes 
→ If yes, upload the consent form to Zipline .    
 
 
5 PROCEDURES  
5.1 Study procedures . Using lay language, p rovide a complete description of the study procedures , including the 
sequence,  intervention or manipulation (if any),  drug dosing information (if any) , use of records,  time required, 
and setting/location. If it is available: Upload a study flow sheet or ta ble to Zipline .  
For studies comparing standards of care : It is important to accurately identify the research procedures. See  UW IRB POLICY : 
Risks of Harm from Standard Care  and the draft guidance from the federal Office of Human Research Protections, “Guidance 
on Disclosing Reasonably Foreseeable Risks in Research Evaluating Standards of Care”;  October 20, 2014.  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 14 of 46 
  This quality improvement research  study is des igned in two phases, each phase is done over a 3 -month period for a 
total study duration of 6 months . The SCCA study  team will be enrolling eligible OMC providers  who will hand le 
all patient interaction and communication.  
 
Phase 1: The first phase  does not involve intervention;  OMC will be following their existing processes . OMC will 
gather identified data on the patient’s clinic  diagnosis and stage, pathology report features, and treatment options 
for patients with the a bove diagnose  and offer patients the option to fill out a  standardized  Family History 
Questionnai re (FHQ)  on the day of their initial visit  if they decide to do so . The FHQ  will be offered as part of 
clinical care up to the discretion of the OMC providers. OMC will also gather de-identified data on the number of 
patients seen with a diagnosis of breast, ovarian, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancer. The above  data will then be 
sent to the study’s research coordinator at SCCA (through secure email)  which wi ll be stored in a secured J -Drive 
folder  within the SCCA network. The research coordinator will randomly assign  all identified patient data  to a 
unique participant ID before distributing to SCCA subject matter experts (cancer geneticist and/or genetic 
coun selor) for review. From OMC’s collected data, SCCA subject matter experts wi ll measure how many patients 
met NCCN criteria for testing how many patients were referred to genetic counseling and how many either had a 
test online or were seen at UWMC and the SCCA for a genetic evaluation.  
 
Phase 2: The second phase involves  a tiered intervention in which SCCA subject matter experts will coach the  
OMC providers  to provide guidance on providing genetic counseling and testing to their patients. Involvement in 
this study does not dictate how the OMC providers carry out clinical care , so it is up to the OMC providers to 
decide whether or not to implement the coaching in their practice. First, patients and their families fill out the 
standardized FHQ before their initial appointment, which will be sen t via email  by [CONTACT_435482]. OMC will 
gather the same patient information described in Phase 1 which will then be sent directly to the study’s research 
coordinator at SCCA, where the research coordinator  will follow the same  data storage, participant ID assignment , 
and distribution pr ocesses as in Phase 1. SCCA subject matter experts would then review this information with  the 
OMC providers  at bi-monthly  virtual conference s before patients come for their initial visit at OMC. For patients 
who meet NCCN criteria, the oncology team at OM C would include in their initial visit workflow to discuss 
importance of cancer risk assessment and offer genetic testing. For the patients with a more complicated history, 
the OMC  team would offer a referral to the SCCA for a complete cancer risk assessme nt evaluation.   
 
At the end of phase 2, SCCA subject matter experts will measure how many patients met NCCN criteria for testing 
how many patients were referred to genetic counseling and how many either had a test online or were seen at 
UWMC and the SCCA for a genetic evaluation.  This data will then be compared with phase 1 data to measure the 
effectiveness of SCCA’s coaching for OMC’s providers  as well as quality improvement of their processes.  
 
5.2 Recordings . Does the research involve creating au dio or video recordings?  
 X No → If no, go to question 5.3. 
  Yes → If yes, describe what will be record ed (if not already described in 5.1) and answer question  a. 
 a. Before recording, will consent for being recorded be obtained from  subjects and any other 
individuals who may be recorded?  
  No → If no, email [EMAIL_1004]  before submitting this application in Zipline. In 
the email, include a brief description of the research and a note that 
individuals will be recorded without their advance consent.     
  Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_551644] a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan as part of the study procedures?  
This means scans that are performed solely for research purposes or clinical scans that are modified for research purposes (f or 
example, using a gadolinium -based contrast agent when it is not required for clinical reasons ).  
 X No → If no, go to question  5.4. 
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 15 of 46 
   Yes → If yes, answer questions a through c. 
a. Describe the MRI scan(s).  Specifically:  
• What is the purpose of the scan(s)? Examples: obtain research data;  safety assessment 
associated with a research procedure.  
• Which subjects will receive an MRI scan?  
• Describe the minimum and maximum number of scans per subject, and over what time period 
the scans will occur. For example: all subjects will undergo two MRI scans, six months apart.  
       
b. Use of gadolinium . Will any of the MRI scans involve the use of a gadolinium -based contrast agent 
(GBCA?)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, which agents will be used? Check all that apply.  
 Brand Name  [CONTACT_52936] / Primovist  Gadoxetate disodium  Linear  
  Gadavist  Gadobutro  Macrocyclic  
  Magnevist  Gadpe ntetate dimeglumine  Linear  
  MultiHance  Gadobenate dimeglumine  Linear  
  Omniscan  Gadodiamide  Linear  
  OptiMARK  Gadoversetamide  Linear  
  ProHance  Gadoteridol  Macrocyclic  
  Other, provide name:        
 1.) The FDA has concluded that gadolinium is retained in the body and brain for 
a significantly longer time than previously recognized, especially for linear 
GBCAs. The health -related risks of this longer retention are not yet clearly 
established. However, the UW IRB expects researchers to provide a 
compelling justification for using a linear GBCA instead of a macrocyclic 
GBCA, to manage the risks associated with GBCAs.  
 Describe why it is important to use a GBCA with the MRI scan(s). Describe 
the dose that will be used  and (if it is more than the standard clinical dose 
recommended by [CONTACT_3455]) why it is necessary to use a higher 
dose . If a linear GBCA  will be used , explain why a mac rocyclic GBCA  cannot 
be used . 
        
 2.) Information for subjects. Confirm by [CONTACT_52904] -approve d Patient Medication Guide for th e GBCA 
being used in the research  or that the same information will be inserted into 
the consent form.  
  Confirmed  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 16 of 46 
 c. MRI facility . At which facility(ies) will the MRI scans occur? Check all that apply.  
  UWMC Radiology/Imaging Services (the UWMC clinical facility)  
  DISC Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (UWMC research facility)  
  BMIC Biomolecular Imaging Center (South Lake Union research facility)  
  Harborview Radiology/Imaging Services (the Harborview clinical facility)  
  SCCA Imaging Services  
  Northwest Diagnostic Imaging  
  Other: identify in the text box below:  
        
Personnel. For MRI scans that will be conducted at the DISC or BMIC resear ch facilities: The role, qualifications, and 
training of individuals who will operate the scanner, administer the GBCA (if applicable), and/or insert and 
remove the IV catheter should be described in question 12.3 . 
5.4 Data variables.  Describe the specific data that will be obtained  (including a description of the most sensitive items). 
Alternatively, a list of the data variables  may be uploaded  to Zipline . 
 OMC clinic outcomes data : report including the number of patients seen at OMC with a diagnosis of breast, 
ovarian, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancer  
 
OMC patients’ Family History Questionnaire responses  
 
OMC patients’ identified data on clinical diagnosis and stage, pathology report features, and treatment options  for 
patients with a diagnosis of breast, ovarian, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancer  
5.[ADDRESS_551645] ed for this research: Identify whether the data are 
being obtained  from the subjects (or subjects’ specimens) or whether they are being obtained  from some other 
source (and identify the source).  
If you have already provided this information in Question 5.1, you do not need to repeat the information here.  
 OMC clinic outcomes data: pulled from patients’ clinical charts e.g. “referred for genetic counseling”. Collected by 
[CONTACT_435483] : filled out directly by [CONTACT_435484]’ identified data /relevant medical records: pulled from Epic. Collected by [CONTACT_207067] C 
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 17 of 46 
 5.6 Identifiability of data and specimens . Answer these questions carefully and completely. This will allow HSD to 
accurately determine the type of review that is required and the relevant compliance requirements.  Review the 
following definitions befor e answering the questions:  
Access means to view or perceive data, but not to possess or record it. See, in contrast, the definition of “obtain”.  
Identifiable  means that the identity  of an individual is or may be readily (1) ascertained by [CONTACT_52905] a combination of data variables, or (2) associated with the informatio n.  
Direct identifiers  are direct link s between a subject and data/specimens. Examples include (but are not limited to): name, date 
of birth, medical record number, email or IP address, pathology or surgery accession number, student number, or a collection 
of data that is (when taken together)  identifiable.  
Indirect identifiers  are information that links between direct identifiers and data/specimens. Examples: a subject code or 
pseudonym.   
Key refers to a single place where direct identifiers and indirect identifiers are linked together so th at, for example, coded data 
can be identified as relating to a specific person. Example: a master list that contains the data code and the identifiers li nked to 
the codes.  
Obtain  means to possess or record in any fashion (writing, electronic document, vide o, email, voice recording, etc.) for research 
purposes and to retain for any length of time. This is different from accessing , which means to view or perceive data.  
a. Will you or any members of your team have access  to any direct or indirect identifiers ? 
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   OMC will have access to all  of their  patients’ identifiers as part of their standard processes 
of care. The SCCA study  team will not have  direct access to any direct or indirect 
identifiers unless sent to them by [CONTACT_435485].   
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not have access to 
direct or indirect identifiers.     
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There is  an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) to study team members under any circumstances.    
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a  Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  
There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situati ons involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.    
  
        
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551646] identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   
 The study’s research coordinator will obtain identifiers  through OMC as included in the 
patients’ medical records. This will include m edical record number, first and last name, 
and date of birth.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not obtain direct or 
indirect identifiers.     
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There will be an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) under any circumstances.     
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a  Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situati ons involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.     
  
        
c. If any identifiers  will be obtained , indicate how the identifiers will be stored (and for which data).  NOTE: Do 
not describe the data security plan here – that information is requested in section 9.6.  
  
Identifiers will be stored with the data . Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately but a link will be maintained between 
the identifiers and the study data (for example, through the use of a code) . Describe the 
data to which this applies:   X 
  
  This will apply to FHQ results as well as data on patients’ clinical diagnosis and stage, 
pathology report features, and treatment options. The study’s research coordinator will 
use a tracking sheet to document patient identification and their assigned par ticipant ID, 
which will b e stored in a private SCCA network J -drive folder.  
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately, with no link between the identifiers 
and the study data. Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
   
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 19 of 46 
 d. Research collaboration . Will individuals who provide coded information or specimens  for the research also 
collaborate on other  activities for this research? If yes, identify the activities and provide the name [CONTACT_52937]’s institution/organization . 
Examples include but are not limited to: (1) study, interpretation, or analysis of the data that results from the coded 
information or specimens; and (2) authorship on presentations or manuscripts related to this work.  
T
h
e  Yes: The study’s research coordinator  will be in volved in coordinating  and organi zing the bi -monthly 
conference meetings with the OMC provider subjects and SCCA study team . They will also be involved in 
the interpretation and analysis of the data that results from the code d information .  
5.7 Protected Health Information (PHI).  Will participants’ identifiable PHI be  access ed, obtain ed, use d, or disclose d for 
any reason (for example, to identify or screen potential subjects, to obtain study data or specimens, for study 
follow -up) that does not involve the creation or obtaining of a Limited Data Set?  
PHI is individually identifiable  healthcare record information or clinical specimens from an organization considered a “covered 
entity” by [CONTACT_52906], in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. You must answer yes to this 
question  if the research involves id entifiable health care records (e.g., medical, dental, pharmacy, nursing, billing, etc.), 
identifiable healthcare information from a clinical department repository, or observations or recordings of clinical 
interactions.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of thi s question; go to question  5.8 
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
  a. Describe the PHI and the reason for using  it. Be specific.  For example, will any “free text” fields 
(such as physician notes) be accessed, obtained, or used?   
 PHI will include  patient’s free text medical records regarding their clinical diagnosis and stage, 
pathology report features, and treatment options. It will also include their responses to the FHQ. 
This identified information will be accessed and obtained by [CONTACT_435486]’s rese arch 
coordinator at SCCA. The research coordinator will need access to the identified data in order to 
ensure seamless communication between OMC oncologists and the SCCA subject matter experts 
during meetings to identify and provide coaching on eligible pa tients for genetic counseling and 
testing.   
b. Is any of the PHI located in Washington State?  
  No  
 X Yes  
c. Describe the pathway of how the PHI will be accessed or obtained, starting with the 
source/location and then describing the system/path/mechanism by [CONTACT_52907], 
accessed, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_52862] . Be specific.  For example: directly view records; search 
through a department’s clinical database; submit a request to Leaf.  
 OMC will  directly access PHI through their medical records system . These will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_435476] a single PDF for each, which will then be sent via secure email to the study’s 
research coordinator at SCCA. The research coordinator will then securely store this informa tion 
within a  private  SCCA network J -drive folder.  
d. For which PHI will subjects provide HIPAA authorization  before the PHI is accessed, obtained 
and/or used ?  
 N/A. Subjects will not provide HIPAA authorization for any PHI  
 Confirm by [CONTACT_52908], obt ain, use, or disclose any UW Medicine PHI.  
  Confirmed    
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 20 of 46 
 e. For which PHI will HIPAA authorization NOT be obtained from the subjects?  
 HIPAA authorization will not be obtained for any PHI from the OMC patient subjects. OMC has 
an established connection with SCCA as an SCCA affiliate site and already transfers patients’ 
medical records to SCCA oncologist s for review/second opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]. Transfe r of PHI within the study 
will follow those same established guidelines.  
 Provide the following assurances by [CONTACT_52909].  
 
 
The minimum necessary amount of PHI to accomplish the purposes described in this 
application  will be accessed, obtained and/or used.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by 
[CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted.   
X 
 
 
 
 
The HIPAA “accounting for disclosures” requirement will be fulfilled, if applicable. See UW 
Medicine Compliance  Policy # 104.   
 
 
 
   
 
There will be reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any 
patient in any report of the research.     
X 
   
 
5.8 Genomic data sharing . Will the research  obtain or generate genomic data ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the question below.  
 a. Will genomic data from this research be sent to a national database (for example, NIH’s dbGaP 
database)?  
  X No  
   Yes → If yes, complete the ZIPLINE  SUPPLEMENT Genomic Data Sharing  and upload 
it to Zipline .   
5.9 Whole genome sequencing. For re search involving biospecimens: W ill the research include whole genome 
sequencing?  
Whole genome sequencing is sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or 
exome sequence of tha t specimen.  
 X No  
  Yes  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551647] information will be used for any of the following:  
• Future research not described in this application (in other words, secondary research)  
• Submission to a repository, registry, or database managed by [CONTACT_3476] , colleagues, or others for 
research purposes  
• Sharing with others for their own research  
Please  consider the broadest possible future plans and whether consent will be obtained now from the subjects 
for future sharing or research  uses  (which it may not be possible to describe in detail  at this time).  Answer  YES 
even if  future sharing or uses will use de -identified information or specimens. Answer  NO if sharing is unlikely or if 
the only sharing will be through the NIH Genomic Data Sha ring described in question 5. 8. 
Many federal grants and contracts now require data or specimen sharing as a condition of funding, and many journals require 
data sharing as a condition of publication. “Sharing” may include  (for example) : informal arrangements to share banked 
data/specimens with other investigators; establishing a repository that will formally share with  other  researchers  through 
written agreements; or sending data/specimens  to a third party repository/archive/entity such as the Social Science Open 
Access Repository (SSOAR), or the  UCLA Ethnomusicology Archive.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
 a. Describe what will be store d for future use,  including whether any direct or indirect (e.g., subject 
codes) identifiers will be stored.  
       
 b. Describe what will be shared  with other researchers or with a repository/database/registry , 
including whether direct identifiers will be shared and (for specimens) what data will be 
released with the specimens.  
       
 c. Who will oversee and/or manage the sharing?  
       
 d. Describe the possible future uses , including limitations or restrictions (if any) on future uses or 
users.  As stated above, consider the broadest possible uses . 
 Examples: data will be used only for cardiovascular research; data will not be used for research on 
population origins.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 22 of 46 
  e. Consent . Will consent be obtained now from subjects for the secondary use, banking and/or 
future sharing?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, be sure to include the information about this consent process in the 
consent form (if there is one) and in the answers to the consent questions in 
Section 8.  
 f. Withdrawal . Will subjects be able to withdraw their data/specimens from secondary use, 
banking or sharing?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how, and whether there are any limitations on withdrawal.  
 Example: data can be withdrawn from the repository but cannot be retrieved after they 
are released.  
       
 g. Agreements for sharing or release . Confirm by [CONTACT_52910] (and, if applicable, UW Medicine) policies that require a formal agreement 
with  the r ecipi[INVESTIGATOR_52864].  
 Data Use Agreements or Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52865]; Material Transfer Agreements are used for 
specimens (or specimens plus data ). Do not attach  any template agreement forms; the IRB neither 
reviews nor approves them  
   Confirmed  
5.11 Communication with subjects during the study . Describe the types of communication (if any) the research team 
will have with already -enrolled subjects during the study. Provide a description instead of the actual materials 
themselves.   
Examples: email, texts, phone, or letter reminders about appointments or about returning study materials such as a 
questionnaire ; requests to confirm contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 The SCCA study  team will maintain communication with participating  OMC provider subjects 
throughout the course of the study. This will involve email communications and  virtual conference 
meetings. SCCA subject matter experts would meet with subjects via bi-monthly  virtual conference s 
before patients come in for their initial visit  to provide coaching on genetic  counseling and  testing for 
their patients . 
5.[ADDRESS_551648] information  for subjects  so that they can be 
contact[CONTACT_52911] ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the purpose of the future contact, and whether use of the contact [CONTACT_52912]; if not, describe who else could be provided with the contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  Describe the criteria for approving requests for the informa tion.    
 Examples: inform subjects about other studies; ask subjects for additional information or medical record access 
that is not currently part of the study proposed in this application; obtain another sample.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 23 of 46 
 5.13 Alternatives to participation . Are there any alternative procedures or treatments that might be advantageous  to 
the subjects ? 
If there are no alternative procedures or treatments, select “No”. Examples of advantageous alternatives: earning extra class  
credit in some time -equivalent way other than research participation; obtaining supportive care or a standard clinical 
treatment f rom a health care provider instead of participating in research with an experimental drug.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the alternatives.  
         
5.14 Upload to Zipline  all data collection forms  (if any) that will be directly used by [CONTACT_52914], and any  
scripts/talking points that will be used to collect the data . Do not include data collection forms that will be used 
to abstract data from other sources (such as medical or academic records ), or video recordings.  
• Examples : survey, questionnaires, subject logs or diaries, focus group questions.  
• NOTE: Some times the IRB can approve the general content of surveys and other data collection instruments rather than 
the specific form itself. This prevents the need to submit a modification request for future minor changes that do not add 
new topi[INVESTIGATOR_435477] o f the questions. To request this general approval, use the text box below to identify 
the questionnaires/surveys/ etc. for which you are seeking this more general approval. Then briefly describe the scope of 
the topi[INVESTIGATOR_435478]. The HSD staff person who screens this 
application will let you know whether this is sufficient or whether you will need to provide more information.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descrip tions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that  usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
• For data that will be gathered in an evolving way : This refers to data collection/questions that are not pre -determined 
but rather are shaped during interactions with participants in response to observations and responses made during those 
interactions. If this applies to the proposed  research, provide a  description of the process by [CONTACT_52915]/questions will be established during the interactions  with subjects, how the data collection/questions  will be 
documented , the topi[INVESTIGATOR_52868] , the most sensitive type of information likely to be gathered , and the 
limitations (if any) on topi[INVESTIGATOR_52869] d or pursue d. 
Use this text box (if desired) to provide:  
• Short written descriptions of materials that cannot be uploaded, such as URLs  
• A description of the process that will be used  for data that will be gathered in an evolving way.  
• The general content of questionnaires, surveys and similar instruments for which general approval  is being 
sought . (See the NOTE  bullet point in the instructions above.)  
 Family History Questionnaire  that identifies an individual’s relationship to the patient as well as their 
diagnosis. No PHI will be included. The purpose of this questionnaire is to identify eligible patient for 
genetic counseling and testing . 
Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire to as sess patients’ experience s with genetic counseling and testing .  
 
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 24 of 46 
 6 CHILDREN (MINORS) and PARENTAL PERMISSION  
6.1 Involvement of minors . Does the research include minors (children )? 
Minor or child  means someone who has not yet attained the legal age for consent for the research procedures, as 
described in the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted. This may or may not 
be the same as the definition used by [CONTACT_52918] g agencies such as the National Institutes of Health.  
• In Washington State the generic age of consent is 18, meaning that anyone under the age of 18 is 
considered a child.  
• There are some procedures for which the age of consent is much lower in Washington S tate. 
• The generic age of consent may be different in other states, and in other countries.  
 X No → If no, go to Section 8 . 
  Yes → If yes, provide the age range of the minor subjects for this study and the legal age for consent in 
the study  population(s). If there is more than one answer, explain.      
        
  
Don’t know  →This means is it not possible to know the age of the subjects. For example, this may be true 
for some research involving social media, the Internet, or a dataset that is obtained  from 
another researcher or from a government agency. Go to Section 8 .  
 
6.2 Parental permission . Parental permission  means actively obtaining the permission of the parents. This is not the 
same as “passive” or “opt out” permission where it is assumed that parents are allowing their children to 
participate because they have been provided with information about the res earch and have not objected or 
returned a form indicating they don’t wa nt their children to participate.  
a. Will parental permission be obtained for: 
  
All of the research procedures  → Go to question 6.2b.   
  
  
None  of the research procedures  → Use the table belo w to provide justification , and skip question 
6.2b.    
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which 
parental permission  will not be obtained .   
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) for 
which there will be NO parental 
permission2 Reason why parental 
permission  will not be 
obtained  Will parents be 
informed  about 
the research ?3 
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 25 of 46 
       
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures : collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
2. If identifiable information or biospecimens will be obtained without parent permission, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52919]’ refusal to provide broad consent (for example, through the Northwest Biotrust).  
3. Will parents be informed  about the research beforehand even though active permission  is not being obtained ? 
b. Indicate the  plan for obtaining parental permission . One or both boxes m ust be checked.  
  Both parents, unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available; or when 
only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child    
  
  
One parent, even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.    
  
  This is all that is required for minimal risk research.  
 If both boxes  are checked , explain:  
       
6.3 Children who are wards. Will any of the children be wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, an advocate may need to be  appointed for each child who is a ward. The advocate must be in 
addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. The 
same individual can serve as advocate for all children w ho are wards.    
 Describe who will be the advocate(s). The description  must address the following points:  
• Background and experience  
• Willingness to act in the best interests of the child for the duration of the research  
• Independence of the research, research team, and any guardian organization  
       
 
 
7 ASSENT OF CHILDREN (MINORS)  
Go to Section 8  if your research does not involve children (minors).  
7.1 Assent of children (minors) . Though children do not have the legal capacity to “consent” to participate in 
research, they should be involved in the process if they are able to “assent” by [CONTACT_7661] a study explained to them 
and/or by [CONTACT_5978] a simple form about the study, and t hen giving their verbal choice about whether they want to 
participate. They may also provide a written assent if they are older. See WORKSHEET: Children  for circumstances 
in which a child’s assent may be unnecessary or inappropriate.   
a. Will assent be obtained for: 
  
All research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.2.   
  
  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 26 of 46 
   None  of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justification , 
then skip to question 7.6   
  
Some of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to identify the 
procedures for which  assent  will not be 
obtain ed.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if 
any) for which assent will NOT 
be obtained  Reason why assent will not  be obtain ed 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse your answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
7.2 Assent process. Describe how assent will be obtained , for each child group. If the research involves children of 
different ages, answer separately for each group. If the children are non -English speakers, include a description of 
how their comprehension of the information will be evaluated . 
       
7.3 Dissent or resistance. Describe how a child’s objection or resistance to participation (including non -verbal 
indications) will be identified during the research, and what the response will be .  
       
7.4 E -consent. Will any electronic processes (email, websites, electronic signatures, etc.) be used to present assent 
information to subjects/and or to obtain documentation (signatures) of assent? If yes, describe how this will be 
done . 
       
7.5 Documentation of assent.  Which of the following statements describes whether documentation of assent  will be 
obtained ? 
  
None of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justif ication, 
then go to question  7.5.b    
  
  
All of the research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.5.a, do not complete the 
table    
  
  
Some of the research procedures and/or child groups  
  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 27 of 46 
   → Complete the table below and then to go 
question 7.5.a 
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which assent 
will NOT be documented  
            
            
            
            
            
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
 a. Describe how assent will be documented . If the children are functionally illiterate or are not fluent in English, 
include a description of the documentation process for them . 
        
 b. Upload all assent materials  (talking points, videos, forms, etc.) to Zipline . Assent materials are not required to 
provide all of the standard elements of adult consent; the information should be appropriate to the age, 
population, and research procedures. The documents sho uld be in Word, if possible.  
7.6 Children who reach the legal age of consent during participation in longitudinal research .  
Children who were enrolled at a young age and continue for many years : It is best practice to re -obtain assent (or 
to obtain it for the first time, if it was not obtained  at the beginning of their participation).  
Children who reach the legal age of consent : Informed consent must be obtained from the now -adult subject for 
(1) any ongoing interactions or interventions with the subjects, or (2) the continued analysis of specimens or data 
for which the subject’s identify is readily identifiable to the researcher, unless the IRB waives this requirement.  
 a. Describe the plans (if any) to re -obtain assent from children.   
       
 b. Describe the plans (if any) to obtain consent for children who reach the legal age of consent.  
• If adult consent  will be obtained from them , describe what will happen regarding  now -adult subjects 
who cannot be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] . 
• If consent will not obtained  or will not be possible:  explain why.  
       
7.7 Other regulatory requirements . (This is for  information only; no answer or response is required.)  Researchers are 
responsible for determining whether their research conducted in schools, with  student records, or over the 
Internet comply with permission, consent, and inspection requirements of the following federal regulations:  
• PPRA – Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment  
• FERPA – Family Education Rights and Privacy Act  
• COPPA – Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551649]’s decision to participate in the research is  documented. 
This is typi[INVESTIGATOR_52870] a consent form.  
CONSENT FORM  is a document signed by [CONTACT_1766], by [CONTACT_52921].  
ELEMENTS OF CONSENT  are specific information that is required to be provided to subjects.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF CONSENT  are the qualities of the consent pro cess  as a whole. These are:  
• Consent must be legally effective.  
• The process minimizes the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Subjects or their representatives must be given sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider participation.  
• The information provided must:  
o Begin with presentation of key information (for consent materials 
over 2,000 words)  
o Be what a reasonable person would want to have  
o Be organized and presented so as to facilitate understanding  
o Be provided in sufficient detail  
o Not ask or appear to ask  subjects to waive their rights  
PARENTAL PERMISSION  is the parent’s active pe rmission for the child t o participate in the research. 
Parental permission is subject to the same requirements as consent, including 
written documentation of permission and required elements.  
SHORT FORM CONSENT  is an alternative way of obtaining written documentation of consent that is most 
commonly used with individuals who are illiterate or whose language is one for 
which translated consent forms are not available.  
WAIVER OF CONSENT  means there is IRB approval for not obtaining consent or for not including some of 
the elements of consent in the consent process.  
 
NOTE : If you plan to obtain identifiable information or identifiable biospecimens 
without consent, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52922] a subject’s 
refusal to provide bro ad consent (for example, the Northwest Biotrust).  
WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION 
OF CONSENT  means that there is IRB approval for not obtaining written documentation of 
consent.  
8.1 Groups  Identify  the groups to which the answers in this section apply.  
 X Adult subjects  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 29 of 46 
   Parents who are providing permission for their children to participate in research  
 → If you selected PARENTS , the word “consent” below should also be interpreted as applying to parental 
permission and “subjects” should also be interpreted as applying to the parents.  
8.2 The consent process  and characteristics . This series of questions is about whether consent  will be obtained for all 
procedures except recruiting and screening  and, if yes, how.  
The issue of consent for recruiting and screening activities is addressed in question 4. 7. You do not need to repeat your answer 
to question 4.6.  
 a. Are there any procedures for which consent  will not be obtained ? 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, use the table below to identify the procedures for which consent will not be obtained . “All” 
is an acceptable answer for some studies.    
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including future contact, and sharing/banking of data and specimens for 
future work.  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) 
for which there will be NO consent 
process  Reason why consent  will not be 
obtain ed Will subjects  be 
provided with 
info about the 
research after 
they finish?  
   YES NO 
Phase 1 
patients  Data collection  of patients’ medical 
records including  clinical diagnosis and 
stage, pathology report features, and 
treatment options   The study’s researchers will not have 
any contact [CONTACT_435487]. OMC providers will 
not obtain consent from their patients 
because they are not members of the 
study team , they are subjects 
themselves. OMC provider s will 
consent to release their patien ts’ 
medical records  to SCCA.        
    X  
      
Phase 2 
patients  Data collection of patients’ medical 
records including clinical diagnosis and 
stage, pathology report features, and 
treatment options  The study’s researchers will not have 
any contact [CONTACT_435487]. OMC providers will 
not obtain consent from their patients 
because they are not members of the 
study team, they are subjects 
themselves. OMC provider s will 
consen t to release their patients’ 
medical records  to SCCA.        
    X  
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 30 of 46 
 Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all groups , collaps e your answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Describe the consent process , if consent will be obtained for any or all procedures, for any or all groups. 
Address groups and procedures separately if the consent processes are different.  
Be sure to include:  
• The location/setting where consent will be obtained  
• Who will obtain consent (refer to positions , roles, or titles, not names)  
• How subjects  will be provide d sufficient opportunity to discuss the study with the research team and consider 
participation  
 Before the start of phase 1, the SCCA study team and the potential OMC provide r subjects  will have a virtual 
meeting to discuss details of the study and prospective timeline (phase 1 and 2). Time will be allocated for the 
OMC providers to ask questions to ensure that there is complete understanding of the research methods, 
procedure, and goal s. After the meeting is completed, the  study’s research coordinator will then email a consent 
information sheet  to the OMC providers for review and  provide a contact [CONTACT_435488]. The OMC providers who agree to particip ate will send an emai led consent  to the study’s research 
coordinator . 
c. Comprehension . Describe the methods that will be used to ensure or test the subjects ’ understanding of the 
information  during the consent process . 
 The SCCA study team will host a virtual meeting  with the potential OMC provider subjects  to discuss the 
material and allow subjects to ask questions and address any concerns. After the meeting, all  potential  subjects 
will be provided a written copy of the study procedures, which will be clearly outlined and broken down by 
[CONTACT_16303] [ADDRESS_551650] groups that might find it difficult to say “no” to participation 
because of the setting or their relationship with someone on the study team, even if they aren’t pressured to 
participate ?   
Examples: Student participants being recruited into their teacher’s research; patients being recruited into their healthcare 
provider’s research, study team members who are participants; outpatients recruited from an outpatient surgery waiting 
room just prior to their surge ry. 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what will be done to reduce any effect of the setting or relationship on the 
participation decision.    
  Examples: a study coordinator will obtain consent instead of the subjects’ physician; the researcher will not 
know which subjects agreed to participate; subjects will have two days to decide after hearing about the 
study.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551651] population . Describe the basis for concluding that the 
information that will be provided to subjects (via written or oral methods) is what a reasonable member of the 
subject population(s)  would want to know. If the research consent materials contain a key information section, 
also describe the basis for concluding that the  information presented in that section is that which is most likely  
to assi st the selected subject population with making a decision. See GUIDANCE: Key Information for Consent 
Materials . 
 
For example : Consultation  with publications about research subjects’  preferences, disease -focused nonprofit groups, patient 
interest groups, or other researchers/study staff with experience with the specific population. It may also involve directly 
consult ing selected members of the study population.  
 The oral and written information provided to the potential OMC provider subject s covers all points that they 
would want to know . The information provided will explain the justification and relevance of the study, details 
about what  participation in this study involves, and a comprehensive overview of the OMC patients’ roles in the 
study specifically regarding medical records collection and analysis .  
 
The key information section  of the consent information sh eet that SCCA will be providing  includes of (1) the 
fact that consent is being sought for research and that participation is voluntary, (2) the purposes of the research, 
the expected duration of the prospective subject’s participation, and the procedures t o be followed in the 
research, (3 ) The most important, reasonable foreseeable risks or discomforts to the pros pective subject  and the 
benefits to the prospective subject or to others that may reasonably be expected. All of this information will 
assist the selected population with making a decision.  
f. Ongoing process . For research that involves multiple or continued interaction with  subjects over time, describe 
the opportunities (if any) that will be given to subjects to ask questions or to change their minds about 
participating.  
 The SCCA study team and participating OMC provider  subjects  will meet at bi-monthly  virtual  conferences to 
discuss patients. At each of these meetings, the OMC provider subjects will be given the opportunity to ask 
question or to change their minds about participating.  
8.3 Electronic presentation of consent information. Will any part of the con sent -related information be provided 
electronically for some or all of the subjects?  
This refers to the use of electronic systems and processes instead of (or in addition to) a paper consent form. For example, an 
emailed consent form, a passive or an interactive website, graphics, audio, video podcasts. See GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed 
Consent  for information  about electronic consent requirements at UW.  
  No → If no, skip to question 8.4  
 X Yes → If yes, answer questions a through e 
a. Describe the electronic consent  methodology and the information that will be provided . 
All informational materials must be made available to the IRB. Website content should be provided as a 
Word document. It is considered best practice to give subjects information about multi -page/multi -screen 
information that will help them assess how long it will take them to complete the process . For example, 
telling them that it will take about 15 minutes, or that it involves reading six screens or pages.  
 The consent information  sheet  will be sent as an electronic PDF via secure email to all OMC 
provider subjects.  
b. Describe how the information can be navigated (if relevant). For example, will the subject  be able to 
proceed forward or backward within the system, or to stop and continue at a later time?  
 N/A. Straightforward navigation by [CONTACT_435489] . 
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551652] the opportunity to go 
through the consent form with study staff and/or to ask study staff about any question they may 
have after reading the consent form. Describe what will be done,  if anything, to facilitate the 
subject’s comprehension and opportunity to ask questions when consent information is 
presented electronically. Include a description of any provisions to help ensure privacy and 
confidentiality during this process.  
Examples : hyperlinks, help text, telephone calls, text messages or other type of electronic messaging, video 
conference, live chat with remotely located study team members.  
 All key points of the consent information sheet will be discussed  during the initial virtual 
meeting with the potential OMC provider subjects and SCCA study team  before the start of the 
study . All will be provided with the study’s research coordinator’s contact [CONTACT_435490].   
d. What will happen if there are individuals who wish to participate but who do not have access to 
the consent methodology being used, or who do not wish to use it? Are there alternative ways in 
which they can obtai n the information, or will there be some assistance available? If this is a 
clinical trial, these individuals cannot be excluded from the research unless there is a compelling 
rationale.  
 
For example, consider individuals who lack familiarity with electronic systems, have poor eyesight or 
impaired motor skills, or who do not have easy email or internet access.  
 If a participant cannot view the electronic consent form , the study’s research coordinator will 
mail a physical copy at request.  Patients w ho wish to participate but cannot send an emailed 
consent can provide verbal consent by [CONTACT_435491]’s research coordinator (contact 
[CONTACT_435492]).  
e. How will additional information be provided to subjects d uring the research, including any 
significant new findings (such as new risk information) If this is not an issue, explain why.  
 Additional information will be provided to the OMC provider subjects at the regular bi-monthly  
virtual conferences that will be hosted by [CONTACT_435493].   
8.4 Written documentation of consent. Which of the statements below describe whether documentation of consent 
will be obtained? NOTE: This question does n ot apply to screening and recruiting procedures which have already 
been addressed in question 4. 7. 
Documentation of consent that is obtained electronically is not considered written consent unless it is obtained by a method 
that allows verification of the individual’s signature. In other words, saying “yes” by [CONTACT_61965]  
a. Is written documentation of consent being obtained for: 
  
None of the research procedures  → Use the table below to provide justification then go to question 
8.5.  X 
  
  
All of the research procedures  → Do not complete the table; go to question 8.4.b.   
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which written 
documentation of consent will not be obtained from adult 
subjects.    
  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551653] 
group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which 
there will be NO documentation of consent  Will they be 
provided with a 
written 
statement 
describing the 
research 
(optional)?  
  YES NO 
Phase 1 
patients  Data collection of patients’ medical records including clinical diagnosis and stage, 
pathology report features, and treatment options . OMC providers will be 
consenting to release the patients’ medical records to the SCCA research team.        
    X  
      
Phase 2 
patient  Data collection of patients’ medical records including clinical diagnosis and stage, 
pathology report features, and treatment options . OMC providers will be 
consenting to release the patients’ medical records to the SCCA research team.        
    X  
      
OMC 
Providers  No documentation of consent fo r all aspects of this study. Per UW HSD, written 
documentation of consent for this minimal risk study is not needed . The SCCA 
study team will host a virtual meeting to offer OMC providers an opportunity to 
ask questions, discuss the study, and to consider participation.  The SCCA study 
team will electronically distribute a PDF consent information sheet.       
 
 X    
      
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all adult groups or all procedures, collaps e the answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Electronic consent signature. For studies in which documentation of consent will be obtained: will subjects use 
an electronic method to  provide their consent signature?  
• FDA-regulated studies must use a system that complies with the FDA’s “Part 11” requirements about electronic 
systems and records.  Note that the UW -IT supported DocuSign e -signature [CONTACT_52939] . 
• Having subjects check a box at the beginning of an emailed or web -based questionnaire is not considered legally 
effective documentation of consent.   
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe the methodology that will be used.  
See the GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed Consent  for information about options (i ncluding the DocuSign 
system available through UW-IT) and requirements.  
       
b.1 Is this method legally valid in the jurisdiction where the research will occur?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes,  what is the source of information  about legal validity ? 
       
b.[ADDRESS_551654]’s identity be obtained if the signature [CONTACT_52940] a member of the study team? Note that this is required for FDA -regulated 
studies.  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 34 of 46 
 See the GUIDANCE: Electronic Informed Consent  for information and examples  
  No →If no, provide the rationale for why this is appropriate. Also, what would  
be the risks to the actual subject if somebody other than the intended  
signer provides the consent signature?  
       
  Yes →If yes,  how?  
       
b.3 How will the requirement be met to provide a copy of the consent information (consent 
form) to individuals who provide an e -signature?  
The copy can be paper or electronic and may be provided on an electronic storage device or via 
email. If the electronic consent information uses hyperlinks or other websites or podcasts to convey 
information specifically related to the research, the information in these hyperlinks should be 
included in  the cop y provided to the subjects and the website must be maintained for the duration 
of the entire study.  
       
8.5 Non -English -speaking or -reading adult subjects . Will the research enroll adult subjects who do not speak English 
or who lack fluency or literacy in English?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the process that will be used to ensure that the oral and written information 
provided to them during the consent process and throughout the study will be in a language readily 
understandable to them and (for written materials such as consent form s or questionnaires) at an 
appropriate reading/comprehension level.    
       
 a. Interpretation . Describe how interpretation will be provided, and when. Also, describe the 
qualifications of the interpreter(s) – for example, background, experience, language proficiency 
in English and in the other language, certification, other credentials, familiarit y with the research -
related vocabulary in English and the target language.  
       
 b. Translation s. Describe how translations will be obtained for all study materials (not just consent 
forms). Also, describe the method for ensuring that the translations meet the UW IRB’s 
requirement that translated documents will be linguistically accurate, at an appro priate reading 
level for the participant population, and culturally sensitive for the locale in which they will be 
used.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 35 of 46 
 8.6 Barriers to written documentation of consent . There are many possible barriers to obtaining written 
documentation of consent. Consider, for example, individuals who are functionally illiterate; do not read English 
well; or have sensory or motor impairments that may impede the ability to read and sign a consent form.  
a. Describe the plans (if any) for obtaining written documentation of consent from potential subjects who may 
have difficulty with the standard documentation process (that is, reading and signing a consent form). Skip this 
question if written documentation of  consent is not being obtained for any part of the research.  
Examples of solutions : Translated consent forms; use of the Short Form consent process; reading the form to the person  
before they sign it ; excluding individuals who cannot read an d understand the consent form.  
 N/A. Written documentation of consent is not being obtained for any part of the research.  
8.7 Deception . Will information be deliberately withheld, or will false information be provided, to any of the subjects? 
Note: “Blinding” subjects to their study group/condition/arm is not considered to be deception , but not telling them ahead of 
time that they will be  subject to an intervention or about the purpose of the procedure(s) is deception . 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what information and why.  
  Example: It may be necessary to deceive subjects about the purpose of the study  (describe why) . 
       
 a. Will subjects be informed beforehand that they will be unaware of or misled regarding the 
nature or purposes of the research ? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
 X No  
  Yes  
 b. Will subjects be debrief ed later? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how and when this will occur. Upload any debriefing materials, 
including talking points or a script, to Zipline .   
       
8.8 Cognitively impaired adults, and other adults unable to consent . Will such individuals be included in the 
research?  
Examples: individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) or dementia; individuals who are unconscious, or who are significantly 
intoxicated.  
 X No → If no, go to question  8.9. 
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions.  
 a. Rationale . Provide the rationale for including this population.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 36 of 46 
  b. Capacity for consent / decision making capacity . Describe the process that will be used  to 
determine whether a cognitively impaired  individual is capable of consent  decision making 
with respect to  the research protocol and setting.  
        
 b.1. If there  will be repeated interactions with the impaired subjects over a time period when 
cognitive capacity could increase or diminish, also describe how (if at all) decision -
making capacity will be re -assessed and (if appropriate) consent obtained during that 
time.  
       
 c. Permission (surrogate consent) . If the research  will include adults who cannot consent for 
themselves, describe the process for obtaining permission (“surrogate consent”) from a legally 
authorized representative (LAR).   
 For research conducted in Washington State, see the GUIDANCE : Legally Authorized Representative  to 
learn which individuals meet the  state  definition of “legally authorized representative”.  
        
 d. Assent . Describe whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If some, 
indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not (and why not). Describe 
any process that will be used to obtain and document assent from the subjects.  
        
 e. Dissent or resistance . Describe how a subject’s objection or resistance to participation 
(including non -verbal) during the research will be identified, and what will occur in response . 
        
8.[ADDRESS_551655] the method of abortion.  
  No enticements, benefits, or financial incentives will be used at any level of the process to incentivize  
abortion or the donation of human fetal tissue.  
  The informed consent form for the donation of fetal tissue for use in research will be signed by [CONTACT_52924] & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 37 of 46 
 woman and the person who obtains the informed consent.  
8.10 Consent -related materials . Upload to Zipline  all consent scripts/talking points, consent forms, debriefing 
statements, Information Statements, Short Form consent forms, parental permission forms, and any other 
consent -related materials that will be used. Materials that will be used by a specific site  should be uploaded to 
that site’s Local Site Documents  page.  
• Translations must be submitted and approved before they can be used . However, we strongly encourage you to wait to 
provide them until the IRB has approve d the English versions.  
• Combination forms : It may be appropriate to combine parental permission with consent, if parents are subjects as well as 
providing permission for the participation of their children. Similarly, a consent form may be appropriately con sidered an 
assent form for older children.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. URLs (website 
addresses) may also  be provide d, or written descriptions  of websites . Examples of materials that usually cannot be 
uploaded: mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_551656] to 
recruiting, consenting, sensitivity of the data being collected, and the method of data collection.  
Examples:  
• Many subjects will feel a violation of privacy if they receive a letter asking them to participat e in a study because they 
have ____ medical condition, when their name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and medical condition were drawn from medical 
records without their consent.  Example: the IRB expects that “cold call” recruitment letters will inform the subject 
about how their information was obtained.  
• Recruiting subjects immediately prior to a sensitive or invasive procedure  (e.g., in an outpatient surgery waiting 
room) will feel like an invasion of privacy to some individuals . 
• Asking subjects about sensitive to pi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (e.g. details about sexual behavior) may feel like an invasion of privacy to some 
individuals.  
 This is a quality improvement research study that intends to improve the standard processes of care for OMC 
cancer patients regarding genetic counseling and genetic testing. All collection and review of patient s’ 
information and medical records will be part of their clinical care and screening. The patients’ information will 
not be used for any type of enrollment or recruitment.  The OMC provider s (study’s subject s) will grant  
permissions for the release of their patients’ medical records  to the SCCA study team by [CONTACT_42574] a consent 
information sheet and sending emailed consen t to the study’s research coordinator .  
9.2 Identification of individ uals in publications and presentations . Will potentially identifiable information about 
subjects be used in publications and presentations, or is it possible that individual identities could be inferred from 
what is planned to be publish ed or present ed?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, will subject consent be obtained for this use?  
  Yes  
  No → If no, describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects (or small groups of 
subjects) from being identifiable.     
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 38 of 46 
 9.3 State mandatory reporting. Each state has reporting laws that require some types of individuals to report some 
kinds of abuse, and medical conditions that are under public health surveillance. These include:  
• Child abuse  
• Abuse, abandonment, neglect, or financial exploitation of a vul nerable adult  
• Sexual assault  
• Serious physical assault  
• Medical conditions subject to mandatory reporting (notification) for public health surveillance  
 
Are you or a member of the research team  likely to learn of any of the above events or circumstances whil e 
conduc ting the research AND  feel obligated to report it to state authorities?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  the UW IRB expects subjects to be informed of this possibility in the consent form or during 
the consent process, unless you provide a rationale for not doing so:    
         
9.4 Retention of identifiers  and data . Check the box below to indicate assurance that any identifiers (or links between 
identifiers and data/specimens)  and data  that are part of the research records will not be destroyed until after the 
end of the applicable records retention requirements (e.g. Washington State; funding agency or sponsor; Food 
and Drug Administration).  If it is important to say something about destruction of identifi ers (or links to identifiers) 
in the consent form, state something like “the link between your identifier and the research data will be destroyed 
after the records retention period required by [CONTACT_52925]/or federal law.”  
This question can be left blank for conversion applications (existing paper applications that are being “converted” into a Zipline 
application.)  
 
See the “Research Data” sections of the following website for UW Records management for the Washington State research 
rectords retention sched ules that apply in general to the UW  (not involving UW Medicine data) : 
http://f2.washington.edu/fm/recmgt/gs/research?title=R  
 
See the “Research Records and Data ” information in Section 8 of this document for the retention schedules for UW Medicine 
Records : https://www.uwmedicine.org/recordsma nagementuwm -records -retention -schedule.pdf  
 X Confirm  
9.5 Certificates of Confidentiality . Will a federal Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for the research data? 
NOTE: Answer “No”  if the study is funded by [CONTACT_52926] , because all NIH -funded  and CDC -funded  studies 
automatically have a Certificate.  
 X No  
  Yes  
9.6 Data and specimen security protections . Identify the data classifications and the security protections that will be 
provided  for all sites where data will be collected, transmitted, or stored , referring to the ZIPLINE  GUIDANCE: 
Data and Security Protections  for the minimum requirements for each data classification level . It is not possible 
to answer this question without reading this document. Data security protections should not conflict with 
records retention requirements.  
 a. Which level  of protections will be appl ied to the data and specimens? If more than one level  will be used , 
describe which level  will apply to which data and which specimens  and at which sites . 
  Level 4  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551657] access to the identified data will be the study’s research coordinator at SCCA. The 
research coordinator will follow all user, device, server, and data transmission guidelines. Any information 
provided to the SCCA subject matter experts will be deidentified.  
 
 
10 RISK / BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
10.[ADDRESS_551658]:  
• Describe the magnitude, probability, duration, and/or reversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard, AND  
• Describe how the risks  will be reduced or managed . Do not describe data security protections here, these are 
already described in Question 9.6.  
• Consider possible physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic harms , including  possible negative effects on  
financial standing, employability, insurabil ity, educational advancement or reputation.  For example, a breach of 
confidentiality might have these effects.  
• Examples of “others”: embryo, fetus, or nursing child; family members; a specific group.  
• Do not include the risks of non -research procedures tha t are already being performed.  
• If the study design specifies that subjects will be assigned to a specific condition or intervention, then the condition or 
intervention is a research procedure - even if it is a standard of care.  
• Examples of mitigation str ategies: inclusion/exclusion criteria; applying appropriate data security measures to prevent 
unauthorized access to individually identifiable data; coding data; taking blood samples to monitor something that 
indicates drug toxicity.  
• As with all questions on this application, you may refer to uploaded documents.  
 Participation in this study involves a time commitment from the OMC provider subjects in which they are 
required to designate time from their schedule to participate  in bi-monthly virtual conferences. If a participant 
decides to implement the coaching from SCCA in their clinical care, time will be required to discuss genetic 
counseling and testing with their eligible patients, ordering genetic testing, and allocating extra time at patient 
follow -up visits to review genetic results . This time commitment may cause str ess in the OMC provider subjects 
because it will likely require them to change how they manage their schedules.  
This study requires OMC provider subjects to grant permissions to SCCA to collect their patients’ medical 
records , which may pose security concerns and a breach of confidentiality for their patients.  
10.2 Reproductive  risks . Are there any ris ks of the study procedures to me n and women (who are subjects, or partner 
of subjects) related to pregnancy, fertility, lactation or effects on a fetus or neonate?  
Example s: direct teratogenic effects; possible germline effects; effects on fertility; effects on a woman’s ability to continue a 
pregn ancy; effects on future pregnancies.  
 X No → If no go to question 10.3  
  Yes → If yes,  answer the following questions:  
 a. Risks . Describe the magnitude, probability, duration and/or reversibility of the risks.  
         
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 40 of 46 
  b. Steps to minimize risk . Describe the specific steps that will be taken  to minimize the 
magnitude, probability, or duration of these risks.  
Example s: inform the subjects about the risks and how to minimize them;  require a pregnancy test before 
and during the study; require subjects to use contraception; advise subjects about banking of sperm and 
ova.  
 
If the use of contraception  will be required : describe the allowable methods and the time period when 
contracepti on must be used.  
         
 c. Pregnancy . Describe what will be done  if a subject (or a subject’s partner) becomes pregnant  
For example; will subject s be required  to immediately notify study staff , so that the study procedures  can be 
discontinue or modified , or for a discussion of  risks, and/or referrals or counseling?  
         
10.3 MRI risk management. Answer this question only if the subjects will receive MRI scans . A rare but serious adverse 
reaction called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been observed in individuals with kidney disease who 
received gadolinium -based contrast agents (GBCAs) for the scans. Also, a few healthy individuals have a severe 
allergic reaction to GBCAs.  
a. Describe how the renal function of subjects will be assessed prior to MRI sca ns and how that information will 
be used to exclude subjects at risk for NSF.  
 N/A, subjects will not receive MRI scans  
b. Describe the protocol for handling a sever e allergic reaction to the GBCA or any other medical 
event/emergency during the MRI scan, including who will be responsible for which actions.   
 N/A, subjects will not receive MRI scans  
10.[ADDRESS_551659] risks that are currently unforeseeable?  
Example: using a drug that hasn’t been used before in this subject population.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  identify the procedures.  
         
10.5  Subjects who will be under regional or general anesthesiology . Will any research procedures occur while 
patients are under general or regional anesthesia, or during the 3 hours preceding general or regional anesthesia 
(supplied for non -research reasons)?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, check all the boxes that apply.  
    
Administration of any drug for research purposes      
    
  
Inserting an intra -venous (central or peripheral) or intra -arterial line for research purposes    
  
  Obtaining samples of blood, urine, bone marrow or cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_435479] & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 41 of 46 
   Obtaining a research sample from tissue or organs that would not otherwise be removed 
during surgery    
  
  
Administration of a radio -isotope for research purposes**    
  
  
Implantation of an experimental device    
  
  
Other manipulations or procedures performed solely for research purposes (e.g., 
experimental liver dialysis, experimental brain stimulation)    
  
  If any of the boxe s are checked : 
Provide the name [CONTACT_52941] a physician anesthesiologist who is a 
member of the research team or who will serve as a safety consultant about the interactions 
between the research procedures and the general or regional anesthesia of the  subject -
patients. If the procedures will be performed at a UW Medicine facility or affiliate, the 
anesthesiologist must be a UW faculty member, and  the Vice Chair of Clinical Research in 
the UW Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine must be consu lted in advance for 
feasibility, safety and billing.  
        
  ** If the box about radio -isotopes  is checked : the study team is  responsible for informing in advance 
all appropriate clinical personnel (e.g., nurses, technicians, anesthesiologists, surgeons) about the 
administration and use of the radio -isotope, to ensure that any personal safety issues (e.g., 
pregnancy) can be appr opriately addressed. This is a condition of IRB approval.  
10.6  Data and Safety Monitoring . A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is required for clinical trials (as defined 
by [CONTACT_4289]). If required for this research , or if there is a DSMP for the research regardless of whether it is required , 
upload the DSMP to Zipline . If it is embedded in another document being  uploading (for example, a Study 
Protocol ) use the text box below to name [CONTACT_52942].  Alternatively, provide a description 
of the DSMP in the text box below .  
 The OMC provider subjects will be given detailed instructions (both written and verbal) on how to collect 
relevant patient data and send electronically to the study’s research coordinator (via secure email). Once 
received by [CONTACT_1758]’s research coordinator, the data will be stored in a secured J -Drive folder within the 
SCCA network.  The research coordinator  will randomly assign  all identified patient data  to a unique 
participant ID before distributing to SCCA subject matter experts (cancer geneticist and/or genetic 
counselor) for review.  For the bi-monthly  conference meetings in which the SCCA subject matter experts 
review patients’ medical records, the study’s research coordinator will order the patients for discussion 
(OMC provider s will receive the meeting agenda s that lists the  patient discussion order which will include 
patient PHI. SCCA subject matter experts will also receive meeting agendas that lis ts the  same  patient 
discussion order but will only have access to the unique participant ID and no PHI).  
10.7  Un-blinding . If this is a double -blind ed or single -blinded  study in which the participant and/or relevant study 
team members  do not k now the grou p to whic h the participant is assigned: describe the circumstances under 
which un -blinding would be necessary, and to whom the un -blinded information would be provided.  
 N/A. This is not a double -blinded or single -blinded study.  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551660] research -related benefits that some or all 
individual participants are likely to experience f rom taking part in the research, describe them below:  
Do not include benefits to society or others, and do not include subject payment (if any). Examples: medical benefits such as 
laboratory tests (if subjects receive the results); psychological resources made available to participants; training or educa tion 
that is provided.   
 This research will improve patient access to  genetic testing which would enable us to identify if there are any  
previously undetected genetic predispositions in a patient's family. As a result, we can offer participation 
in cancer screening, surveillance, and prevention programs for family members a t risk of cancer to 
decrease their risk to as close to zero as possible. Overall, this study will improve utilization of genetic 
counseling and testing amongst OMC providers  caring for their cancer patients . 
10.10 Return of individual research results.  
In this section , provide your plans for the return of individual results. An “individual research result” is any information 
collected, generated or discovered in the course of a research study that is linked to the identity of a research participant . 
These may be results  from screening procedures, results that are actively sought for purposes of the study, results that are 
discovered unintentionally, or after analysis of the collected data and/or results has been completed.  
 
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about results that should and should not be returned, validity 
of results, the Clinical Laboratory Improve ment Amendment (CLIA), consent requirements and communicating results.  
 a. Is it anticipated  that the research will produce any individual research results that are clinically actionable?  
 “Clinically actionable” means that there are established therapeutic or preventive interventions or other available 
actions that have the potential to change the clinical course of the disease/condition, or lead to an improved health 
outcome.  
 
In general, e very effort should be made to offer results that are clinically actionable, valid and pose life -threatening or 
severe health consequences if not treated or addressed quickly. Other clinically actionable results should be offered if 
this can be accomplished  without compromising the research.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions ( a.1-a.3). 
 a.1. Describe the clinically actionable results that are anticipated and explain which results, 
if any, could be urgent (i.e. because they pose life -threatening or severe health 
consequences if not treated or addressed quickly).  
 Examples  of urgent results include  very high calciu m levels, highly elevated liver function test results, 
positive results for reportable STDs . 
       
 a.2. Explain which of these results will be offered to subjects.  
       
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 43 of 46 
  a.3. Explain which results will not be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for not 
offering these results.  
 Reasons not to offer the results might include:  
• There are serious questions regarding validity or reliability  
• Returning the results has the potential to cause bias  
• There are insufficient resources to communicate the results effectively and appropriately  
• Knowledge of the result could cause psychosocial harm to subjects  
       
 b. What is the plan (if any) for offering  subjects any results that are not clinically actionable?  
 Examples: non -actionable genetic results, clinical tests in the normal range, experimental and/or uncertain results.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, explain which results will be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for 
offering these results.   
       
 c. Describe the validity and reliability of any results that will be offered to subjects.  
 The IRB will consider evidence of validity such as studies demonstrating diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive value, 
use of confirmatory testing, and quality management systems.  
 The results that will be offered to the OMC provider subjects will be reliable due to the consistent, 
uniform processes in data collection  and recommendation  that will be followed throughout the  entire 
course of this study. The results will be valid because the reporting of the numbers of patients meeting 
criteria, referrals  for genetic counseling/testing, complete d genetics appointment s, and genetic testing  
results , will be recorded and tracked by [CONTACT_435494] . 
 d. Describe the process for communicating results to subjects and facilitating understanding of the results. In 
the description, include who will approach the participant with regard to the offer of results, who will 
communicate the result (if different), the  circumstances, timing, and communication methods that will be 
used.  
 Results will be communicated to the OMC provider  subjects at the end of phase 1 and phase 2. The SCCA 
study  team and subjects will meet to discuss the number of patients seen who were eligible for genetic 
testing, number of those patients who were referred for genetic counseling/testing, the number of those 
patients who complete a genetics appointment, and the number of those patients who chose  to un dergo 
genetic testing . The OMC provider subjects will also be sent this data for their review in order to assess 
their current clinic processes.  
 e. Describe any plans to share results with family members (e.g. in the event a subject becomes 
incapacitated  or deceased).  
 N/A  
 f. Check the box to indicate that any plans for return of individual research results  have been described  in 
the consent document. If there are no plans to provide results to participants, this should be stated in the 
consent form.  
 See the GUIDANCE Return of In dividual Results  for information about consent requirements.  
  Confirmed   
10.[ADDRESS_551661] or patent could result from this 
study?  
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 44 of 46 
   Yes → If yes,  describe whether subjects might receive any remuneration/compensation and, if yes, 
how the amount will be determined.   
         
 
 
11 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANTS  
11.1 Financial responsibility for research -related injuries.  Answer this question only if the lead research er is not a 
UW student, staff member, or faculty member whose primary  paid appointment is at the UW.  
 
For each institution involved in conducting the research: Describe who will be financially responsible for 
research -related injuries experienced by [CONTACT_1766], and any limitations. Describe the process (if any) by [CONTACT_52929]/compensation.  
 N/A. The lead research is a UW staff member whose  prima ry paid appointment is at the UW.  
11.2 Costs to subjects . Describe any research -related costs for which subjects and/or their health insurance may be 
responsible ( examples might include:  CT scan required for research eligibility screening; co -pays; surgical costs 
when a subject is randomized to a specific procedure; cost of a device ; travel and parking expenses that will not 
be reimbursed ). 
       
11.3 Reimbursement for costs . Describe any costs to subjects  that will be reimbursed  (such as travel expenses) . 
       
 
 
12 RESOURCES  
12.1 Faculty Advisor . (For researchers who are students, fellows, or post -docs.) Provide the following information 
about the faculty advisor.  
• Advisor’s name  
• Your relationship with your advisor (for example: graduate advisor; course instructor)  
• Your plans for communication/cons ultation with your advisor about progress, problems, and changes.  
 N/A  
12.2 UW Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_52874] . Upload a current  or recent  Curriculum Vitae  (CV) , Biosketch  (as 
provided to federal funding agencies), or similar document to the Local Site Documents page in Zipline. The  
purpose of this is to  address the PI’s qualifications to conduct the proposed research (education, experience, 
training, certifications, etc.).  
For help with creating a CV, see  http://adai.uw.edu/grants/nsf_biosketch_template.pdf  and 
https://education.uwmedicine.org/student -affairs/career -advising/year -4/residency -applica tions/curriculum -vitae/   
 X The CV will be uploaded.  
12.3 UW Study team qualifications . Describe the qualifications  and/or training for  each UW study team member to 
fulfill their role on the study and perform study procedures.  (You may be asked about non -UW study team 
members during the review; they should not be described here.) You may list these individuals by [CONTACT_2300], 
however if you list an indi vidual by [CONTACT_2300], you will need to modify this application if that individual is replaced. 
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#2003   Page 45 of 46 
 Alternatively, you can describe study roles  and the  qualifications and training the PI [INVESTIGATOR_52875]. The IRB will use this information to assess whether risks to 
subjects are minimized because study activities are being conducted by [CONTACT_116869].  
Describe: The role (or name [CONTACT_52943]), the study activities they will perform, and the qualifications or 
training that are relevant to performing those study activities . 
 
 Examples:  
Research Study Coordinator:  Obtain consent, administer surveys, blood draw. Will have previous  experience 
coordinating  clinical research and be a certified phlebotomist in WA.  
Undergraduate Research Assistant:  Obtain consent, perform all study procedures. Will have had coursework in 
research methods, complete an orientation to human subjects protections given by [CONTACT_435495], and will 
receive training from the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_52876].  
Acupuncturist:  Perform acupuncture procedures and administer surveys. Must be licensed with WA State DoH 
and complete training i n administering research surveys given by [CONTACT_52931], an experienced survey 
researcher . 
Co-Investigator:  Supervise MRI and CT scan procedures and data interpretation, obtain consent. MD, specialty in 
interventional radiology and body imaging. 5 -years clinical research experience.  
 
   
 Research Study Coordinator  (Lauren Santos) : Will obtain and securely store all study data and distribute 
appropriately to SCCA subject matter experts for review , facilitate communications between OMC and 
SCCA, participate in data analysis of study’s result. Has completed the Human Subjects Learners and Good 
Clinical Practice and ICH (GCP) certification from the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI).  
Has prior experience with data analysis and data visualization through UW’s Healthcare Analytics certificate 
program.  Completed  Microsoft Excel workshops and data organization/data science classes through Fred 
Hutch Learning.  
12.4 Study team training and communication . Describe how it will be ensured that each study team member is 
adequately trained and informed about the resear ch procedures and requirements (including any changes) as 
well as their research -related duties and functions.  
  There is no study team.  
   
 The study team will meet bi-monthly  to discuss and debrief research procedures and requirements as well 
as their research -related duties and function. The study team will also regularly meet with  OMC to 
ensure complete understanding of data collection and distribution processes.  
 
 
13 OTHER APPROVALS, PERMISSIONS, and REGULATORY ISSUES  
13.1 Approvals and permissions.  Identify any other approvals or perm issions that will be obtained. For example: from 
a school, external site/organization, funding agency, employee uni on, UW Medicine clinical unit.  
Do not attach the approvals and permissions un less requested by [CONTACT_1201].  
 N/A  
Document Date & Version   Dubard -Gault  
11/15/2019  ZIPLINE APPLICATION: IRB Protocol  5/4/2020  
Version 2.2 Version 1  
#[ADDRESS_551662] (SFI) with this research as defined by [CONTACT_52932] 10 ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, has the Office of Research made a determination regarding this SFI as it pertains to the 
proposed research?    
  No → If no, contact [CONTACT_52933] ([PHONE_950], [EMAIL_1005] ) for  
guidance on how to obtain the determination   
  Yes → If yes, upload the Conflict Management Plan for every UW team member who has 
a FCOI with respect to the research, to Zipline . If it is not yet available, use the text 
box to describe whether the Significant Financial Interest has been disclosed 
already to  the UW Office of Research and include the FIDS Disclosure ID if 
available.   
       
 
 