Protocol Version: August [ADDRESS_869615] enhanced ultrasound compared to MRI 
for differentiation of hepatic lesions  
  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
  
August 20, 2019  
Protocol Version: August [ADDRESS_869616] enhanced ultrasound compared to MRI 
for differentiation of hepatic lesions  
 
Principal investigator:  [CONTACT_374113] K. Swensson, M.D.  Radiology 
 
Aim 
 In patients with hepatic lesions, to evaluate the efficacy of contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) compared to MRI in differentiating focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatic adenoma.  
Studies from Europe (Dietrich et al, [COMPANY_002] et al) have described different patterns of 
enhancement between FNH and hepatic adenoma.  MRI is the current imaging modality of choice 
for making this determination, but has limitations.  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_648821] , using MRI as the gold standard.  
 Rationale  
 Hepatic imaging plays an important role in identifying and differentiating both benign and malignant neoplasms of the liver. One of the clinical and radiologic dilemmas facing hepatic medicine is the accurate differentiation of focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatic adenoma (HA). This is a question of some import, as there are significant prognosis and treatment differences between these entities, as well as overlap in the patient populations in whom they occur.  
 FNH is the second most common benign neoplasm of the liver, with a strong female predilection. These lesions are usually asymptomatic and incidentally discovered, and carry only a small risk of complication such as bleeding. There is no malignant potential. Hepatic adenomas  
(HAs)  are more rare benign neoplasms that also have a female predilection. However, these 
lesions are more likely to be symptomatic, and carry a higher bleeding risk especially as they 
grow over 4 cm. In addition, they harbor a small risk of m alignant transformation to 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) . Of note, patients may present with both types of lesion 
concurrently.  Currently, MRI with hepatobiliary contrast agents is the standard for differentiation of these lesions. These agents (such as gadoxetate disodium, or Eovist) are actively transported into hepatocytes, which are present in FNH and only in very rare cases with HA. Previous research (such as from Grazioli et al.) has shown that hepatobiliary agents can differentiate these lesions with excellent accuracy. However, there is still overlap between these lesions on imaging, and for certain patients MRI may be difficult or impossible.  
 FDA approval of contrast enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) agents in [ADDRESS_869617] been described in the 
literature as having d ifferent appearances . CEUS can be especially useful for focal liver lesion 
Protocol Version: August [ADDRESS_869618] undergone  (within 365 days)  or are s cheduled to undergo abdominal MRI with 
contrast at a performance site for evaluation of a hepatic lesion(s).  
 Exclusion criteria  
 1.  History of acute cardiac ischemia  
2.  History of hypersensitivity reaction to Lumason 3.  Pregnancy  
 
Methods  
 Potential subjects will be identified by [CONTACT_648826].  
1)  From the MRI schedule at the performance site, a radiology investigator will prospectively identify patients who are to undergo abdominal MRI with hepatobiliary contrast and who otherwise meet entry criteria.  Exclusion criteria will be evaluated by [CONTACT_648827].  At the time of MRI  scanning, a radiology investigator will 
meet with the potential subject, confirm that exclusion criteria are not met, explain the study, answer any questions, and seek written informed consent.  If consent is granted, CEUS  of the liver will be scheduled.  
2) From the surgery/hepatology clinic schedule, a surgery or hepatology investigator will identify patients who meet entry criteria.  The investigator will explain the study to the patient; if he/she expresses interest, the investigator will give a copy of the informed consent to the potential subject, and contact [CONTACT_648828].  At the time of CEUS, a radiology investigator will meet with the potential subject, confirm that exclusion criteria are not met, explain the study, answer any questions, and seek written informed consent.   
3) The principle investigator will retroactively review the radiology database, DORIS, for patients who have had a recent MRI with hepatobiliary contrast and who otherwise meet entry criteria that may have been missed by [CONTACT_648829].  A study 
Protocol Version: August 2019 radiology investigator will reach out to the patient’s hepatologist about enrolling them in 
the trial and obtain best contact [CONTACT_3031].  A study coordinator will contact  [CONTACT_648830] , with IRB approved script , to seek consent to contact [CONTACT_648831].  
 
The subjects will be scanned in the University or Methodist Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_648822], under supervision of one of the study's key personne l. The 
contrast agent used will  be Lumason (sulfur hexafluoride lipid- type A microspheres) distributed 
by [CONTACT_648832].  Previous MRI images will be reviewed, and up to two of the largest 
lesions will be evaluated.  Each lesion will be interrogated with a single intravenous dose of 
contrast (2.5 mL ). If there is a single lesion, a second 2.5 mL  injection may be used as needed to 
improve lesion visualization . If there are two lesions, each will be evaluated with on e injection. 
Since the intention to treat includes all lesions chosen from MRI, i f the injection(s) do not 
provide adequate images, the lesion in question will not be excluded from the study. 
 Once the study is closed to enrollment and all subjects have completed the  research CEUS scan .  
The obtained CEUS images will  then be reviewed in consensus by [CONTACT_648833], 
blinded to clinical information and MRI findi ngs.  Each lesion assessed will  be given a presumed 
diagnosis of FNH, HA, or indeterminate. At the completion of the study, the CEUS data will  be 
compared to the official reports from the MRIs dictated by [CONTACT_648834].   
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_648823], subject recruitment, accrual, 
outcome and adverse event data; assess scientific reports or therapeutic development, results of related studies that may impact subject safety, and procedures designed to protect the privacy of subjects . 
 We will compi[INVESTIGATOR_648824], specificity, and accuracy of CEUS for differentiating FNH and hepatic adenoma, compared with MRI results as the gold standard.  
 Enrollment  
 As this study explores a new method of diagnosing hepatic lesions and there is little published data on the subject, we do not have sufficient knowledge to do power and sample size calculations to demonstrate the number of patients needed to show equivalence between the two imaging methods.  The proposed enrollment of 40 patients reflects the availability of both Lumason and the approximate number of qualifying patients who would undergo MRI for evaluation of these lesions in one year.  
 Resources/Budget  
 At the performance site, patients with suspected FNH or HA typi[INVESTIGATOR_648825], and the patient or insurer will be billed for the examination and radiologic interpretation.  CEUS is not routinely performed in this population.  The cost 
Protocol Version: August 2019 associated with CEUS and the time of the investigators will be the r esponsibility of the 
Department  of Radiology and Imaging Sciences.  
 
Subjects will be compensated for their time and effort with a $50.[ADDRESS_869619] upon completion of research imaging.  
 
References  
 
Bieze M, van den Esschert JW, Nio CY, et al .  Diagnostic accuracy of MRI in differentiating 
hepatocellular adenoma from focal nodular hyperplasia: prospective study of the additional value of gadoxetate disodium.  AJR Am J Roentgenol  2012;  199:26- 34. 
 Dietrich CF, Schuessler G, Trojan J, Fellbaum C, Ignee A.  Differentiation of focal nodular 
hyperplasia and hepatocellular adenoma by [CONTACT_22242] -enhanced ultrasound.  Br J Radiol  2005; 
78:704- 707. 
 Grazioli L, Morani G, Kirchin GA, Schneider G.  Accurate differentiation of focal nodular 
hyperplasia from hepatic adenoma at gadobenate dimeglumine –enhanced MR imaging: 
prospective s tudy.  Radiology 2005; 236: 166-177. 
 Kim TK, Jang HJ, Burns PN, Murphy- Lavallee J, Wilson SR .  Focal nodular hyperplasia and 
hepatic adenoma: differentiation with low -mechanical -index contrast -enhanced s onography.  
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 190:58- 66. 
 Kong WT, Wang WP, Huang BJ, et al .  Contrast -enhanced ultrasound in combination with color 
Doppler ultrasound can improve the diagnostic performance of focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatocellular adenoma.   Ultrasound Med Biol  2015;  41:944- 951. 
 Purysko AS, Remer EM, Coppa CP, et al .  Characteristics and distinguishing features of 
hepatocellular adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia on gadoxetate disodium -enhanced MRI.  
AJR Am J Roentgenol  2012;  198:115- 123. 
 Quaia E, Calliada F, Bertolotto M, et al .  Characterization of focal liver lesions with contrast -
specific US modes and a sulfur hexafluoride -filled microbubble contrast agent: diagnostic 
performance and confidence.  Radiology 2004;  232:420- 430. 
 [COMPANY_002] V, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_228065] F, Tselikas L, et al.  Differentiation of focal nodular hyperplasia from hepatocellular adenomas with low -mechanical -index contrast -enhanced sonography (CEUS): 
effect of size on diagnostic confidence.  Eur Radiol  2015; 25:186- 95.  
 Roux M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_228065] F, Calderaro J, et al.  Differentiation of focal nodular hyperplasia from 
hepatocellular adenoma: Role of the quantitative analysis of gadobenate dimeglumine -enhanced 
hepatobiliary phase MRI.   J Magn Reson Imaging 2015; 42:1249- 1258.  
 
Protocol Version: August [ADDRESS_869620] -Enhanced  Ultrasound.  Ultrasound Med Biol  2017;  43:2144- 2150. 
 