Document Cover Page  
Official Title of the Study: 
Responsible Fatherhood Opportunities for Reentry & Mobility (ReFORM)  
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Date of Document: September 29, 2020  
 
  
  
Responsible Fatherhood Opportunities for Reentry & Mobility (ReFORM)  
Protocol  
 
Background  
Mountain Comprehensive Care Center (MCCC) in Prestonsburg, KY was recently awarded a grant from the Administration for  Children and Families (ACF) as part of the 
Responsible Fatherhood Opportunities for Reentry and Mobility (ReFORM) Program to  
strengthen positive father -child engagement, improve employment and economic mobility 
opportunities, improve healthy  relationships and marriage, and decrease barriers to 
successful community reentry. MCCC has a physical presence in Floyd,  Johnson, 
Lawrence, Magoffin, Martin and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_22863]- release services (Floyd County Detention 
Center and Big Sandy Regional Detention Center).  
 To address barriers to service participation, grant funding will be used to provide evidence- based services to strengthen parenting  skills for fathers who are incarcerated 
and planning for community re- entry, along with interventions to increase economic 
mobility and  relationships. Individualized, culturally - /gender - competent and 
comprehensive case management and wraparound services will also foster program 
participation and success.  The project will offer integr ated services for fathers who are 
incarcerated in the targeted area who are incarcerated in Floyd County or Big Sandy 
facilities. Responsible parenting activities will include skills -based parenting  education, 
dissemination of information regarding good parenting practices, one- on-one counseling 
regarding parenting issues, and will encourage and seek to facilitate the financial support 
of participants’ children. Economic stability activities will include job  readiness workshops, 
and upon release, linkages w ith additional job training and educational assistance, job 
search and placement  assistance as well as employment incentives at 30 days of 
employment. Finally, healthy marriage/relationship activities will include marriage and 
relationship education, confl ict resolution skills training, financial literacy seminars and 
counseling. Semi -annual  parent/child events and annual relationship events will also be 
available to foster stronger family connections.  
 Objectives The ACF award to MCCC primarily supports service enhancement and service delivery.  
To ensure the effectiveness of the proposed services, MCCC will be contracting with 
University of Kentucky to perform the evaluation. The evaluation includes two primary components:  
1) consultation on the collection  of ACF required Performance Measures to 
document program client characteristics, program operations, enrollment and  
participation, and pre- test/post -test outcome measures; and  
2) responsibility for the local evaluation which includes a quasi -experimental  
two group design to examine the effectiveness of targeted services for fathers at MCCC   
 
 
Study Design The local evaluation will utilize a quasi -experimental research design including an 
experimental group (receives MCCC targeted services under the newly  funded ACF 
grant) and a comparison group (incarcerated fathers who do not receive targeted services 
in a comparable local regional jail). The Kentucky River Regional Jail  (KRRJ) is selected 
as the site for comparison group recruitment because it does not fall in the Mountain 
Comprehensive Care designated service region, and individuals residing in the KRRJ are 
comparable in demographics and other key variables of interest.  
 In the proposed evaluation, eligibility criteria used to select participants for the targeted MCCC grant -funded services in the Floyd County Detention Center and the Big Sandy 
Regional Detention Center will also be implemented in a comparison jail site. The  
Kentucky River Regional Jail (KRRJ) located in Hazard, Kentucky is not in the targeted service area for this MCCC project. KRRJ is  comparable in size, characteristics of the 
offender population, and geographic location to the targeted facilities in Floyd County and  
Big Sandy. Following standardized screening based on grant eligibili ty criteria, the only 
anticipated difference between the experimental condition and the comparison condition 
is the opportunity to receive targeted services based on jail.  
 Following targeted screening, participants in the experimental (n=250) and compari son 
groups (n=250) will participate in baseline interviews focused on fatherhood, family relationships, and economic stability indicators, as  well as factors which might impact 
these key outcomes including substance abuse and mental health. All participant s in the 
local evaluation will also complete the post -test assessment at the conclusion of the 
courses (experimental group) or at a comparable time frame of [ADDRESS_21935] year a minimum of 50 participants will be served accounting for up to a 9- month planning  period. It is  estimated that 150 participants will 
be served annually in years 2- 5, with a final total of 650 participants over 5 years. Of  these 
participating individuals, 250 will be randomly selected ([ADDRESS_21936]) to be involved in the local evaluation.  In addition, 250 comparison group participants will 
be recruited from a non- treatment site (jail). The [ADDRESS_21937] been tried and convicted as an adult; within 3 to 9 
months of release; are low -income; and may be an expectant father, a biological father,  
an adoptive father or a stepfather or who a person who is acknowledged as a father figure 
(e.g., grandfather) of a dependent child or  young adult child up to 24 years of age, and 
interested in participation. The target population does not exclude individuals from  
participants because of age, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, culture, literacy, disability, or language.  
 
Based on data from the two targeted detention centers, 80% of all inmates are male and 
approximately 94% are parents. It is also anticipated that offenders will share similar 
characteristics to the targeted area including race (primarily White), chronic poverty, low  
educational attainment, high unemployment as well as 90% who have been arrested on alcohol or drug -related charges leading to family instability and separation. This 
population frequently faces not only the ch allenge of offender status but also substance 
use when trying to secure employment. Once enrolled in the evaluation, all participating 
clients will have access to the targeted ReFORM  interventions. The local evaluation will 
enable analysis to focus on the unique contribution of enhancing parenting and 
relationship skills as well as job readiness and other employment and economic skills.  
 Subject Recruitment Methods and Privacy 
Recruitment efforts will target two groups of incarcerated fathers:  
1) those who receive MCCC grant funded services (Floyd County  
Detention Center; Big Sandy Regional Jail, n=250); and  
 2) those who are incarcerated in jails not in the service delivery region for  
grant funded services (Kentucky River Regional Jail, n=250).  
 Participants in the treatment group will be informed about the local  evaluation at treatment 
intake, and will be provided with an overview of the evaluation. If MCCC treatment participants are willing to be  in the sampling frame for the local evaluation, t hey will sign 
the release of information form with the MCCC treatment coordinator. For  the comparison 
group, the [LOCATION_006] Program Coordinator will recruit participants from KRRJ once a month based on a randomized schedule. On each recruitment day, [LOCATION_006] research st aff will 
randomly select male offenders serving time in the jail from the daily  census sheet to 
participate in the screening sessions. Jail personnel are not engaged in the research and not involved in the random  selection of cases, and they will only prov iding access to the 
daily census sheet. [LOCATION_006] research staff will randomly select 10- [ADDRESS_21938] been tried and convicted as an  adult; within 3 to 9 months of 
release; are low -income; and may be an expectant father, a biological father, an adoptive 
father or a stepfather or a person who is acknowledged as a father figure (e.g., 
grandfather) of a dependent child or young adult child up to 24 years of age, and 
interested in participation. It is anticipated that approximately 5 comparison group participants will be recruited into the study each month in order to maintain a manageable 
number of participants for follow -up interviews.  
 
Advertising  
N/A 
 
  
Informed Consent Process  
Names of interested and eligible treatment participants will be shared with the [LOCATION_006] 
research staff after they sign a MCCC release of  information. No research/evaluation 
activities will be initiated with the treatment participants u ntil they meet with the [LOCATION_006] 
research staff  and sign informed consent. Comparison group participants who are 
interested in the study will be asked to participate in the screening session at the jail with 
the [LOCATION_006] research coordinator. Potential participants in both conditions will be provided with 
informed consent prior to the collection of ANY data.  
 As part of the informed consent process, potential participants will be assured that:  
(a) Neither participation nor refusal to participate in a protocol will affect  their legal 
parole status (if applicable);  
(b) No individual or  identifiable data collected as part of a study protocol will be 
made available to any criminal justice authority including jail, parole, or  
community mandated treatment; and  
(c) If potential partic ipants do NOT wish to participate, their parole or other legal 
status will not  be affected. Potential participants who choose NOT to participate 
in the study protocol will not be identified in their records, and nonparticipation  
will NOT become a matter of  official record in any file.  
 Informed consent procedures will cover participation in the screener (for the comparison 
group), baseline interview, and follow -up interviews so that participants are fully aware of 
all possible study procedures before making a decision about entering the study.  Due to 
the sensitive nature of some of the questions asked in the interviews, confidentiality issues will be stressed during informed consent which will include a description of a 
federal Certificate of Confidentialit y which provides an additional layer of human subject  
protection.  Participants will also be assured that their screening results, study 
participation, and study data will not be made available to any representative of the 
criminal justice system. The research coordinator will keep detailed records on the number of interested participants who participate in the screening session and the 
number of refusals. Screening data will be examined as part of the  implementation phase 
to examine characteristics of parti cipants who enter the study compared to those who are 
not eligible.  Because of the short time frame between baseline and follow -up interviews 
(approximately 12 weeks), consent procedures will not  be repeated at each follow -up 
interview since no new procedures will be introduced. However, a follow -up script will be 
reviewed with The participant to remind him of the key elements of informed consent.  
 Research Procedures To fulfill the requirements of the ACF funded grant, agency administrators and treatment 
staff are required to collect standardized performance measures. The evaluation PI [INVESTIGATOR_22864]- identified data through the ACF mandated nFORM data 
management system in order to assist the agency with data analysis for quarterly r eports 
on: 
1) program inputs  (recruitment, enrollment, and characteristics of the client 
population);  
2) program activities (quality assurance and monitoring,  implementation 
challenges, and referrals to community agencies);  
3) program outputs (enrollment, timing of client participation,  program 
attendance, and overall program retention); and  
4) program outcomes (changes in parenting behaviors, economic stability,  
relationships, personal development and well -being, and overall perceptions of 
the program).  
 
These  data are de-identified and required by [CONTACT_22866] (ACF) to monitor 
program operations. This IRB application is focused primarily on the local evaluation. 
The nFORM data will only be used for the local evaluation with a signed release from 
the participant.  
 Potential local evaluation participants receiving targeted services at the Floyd County Detention Center or Big Sandy Regional jail will  be asked about their interest in the local 
evaluation. If the participant is interested, he will be asked to sign a release of information to the evaluation team to access his nFORM information (specifically 
demographics and intake assessments which will be specified on the release). The [LOCATION_006] 
research staff will work closely with MCCC project staff to identify  individuals interested 
in the local evaluation.  
 
Comparison group screening : Following random selection, the purpose of the screening 
session is to identify rural men who meet  similar criteria as individuals receiving targeted 
MCCC services. The screening  session (estimated 20 minutes) will be conducted 
between a trained study interviewer and the potential participants either in a face- to-face 
format or in a group setting, depending on the available jail accommodations. The session 
will include informed consent and an emphasis on the voluntary nature of study  
participation. Following consent, participants will be administered the ReFORM screening assessment (under development, will be forwarded for IRB approval prior to 
implementation). If the screener is administered in a group format, questions will be read aloud to  participants and responses will be recorded confidentially on paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_22865]. Eligible participants will need to meet all  of the specified study criteria to be 
invited to do a bas eline interview.  
 
Data collection : Potential comparison group participants meeting study eligibility criteria 
will complete a face- to-face baseline  interview  with the study interviewer the same day of 
the initial screening session, which is expected to las t about [ADDRESS_21939] for 
Incarcerated Fathers, followed by [CONTACT_22867] (in 
person, phone, or Wi -Fi audio) at [ADDRESS_21940] -intake (or completion of services), and 
again at [ADDRESS_21941]-release from jail. Participants will receive incentives for their 
time to complete data collection intervi ews. 