Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 1 of 9   PROTOCOL TITLE: 
Investigate the anti-pain effect of taVNS in patients with chronic post-stroke upper extremity pain 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: 
[INVESTIGATOR_540143], PhD 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
 
Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 2 of 9    1.0 Objectives / Specific Aims 
In this study, our main goal is to establish transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS) as an effective 
non-invasive neuromodulation method for analgesia of post-stroke upper extremity pain.  
We will recruit up to [ADDRESS_704049] quantitative sensory 
testing (QST) conducted to determine baseline pain thresholds. Participants will then receive 30 minutes of taVNS 
(either active or sham). Upon the completion of the stimulation intervention, they will then be tested for another QST 
and pain questionnaires. All research is being done at MUSC [ADDRESS_704050] Center for Biomedical Imaging. 
Aim 1: Test the safety and feasibility of taVNS in participants with chronic post-stroke upper extremity pain. 
Over the last [ADDRESS_704051] demonstrated that taVNS is well tolerated and safe for participants with 
chronic stroke in our previous clinical trial (Badran et al., 2023, Peng et al., 2023). In this study, we will further verify 
the safety and feasibility of taVNS in the population with chronic post-stroke upper extremity pain.  
Aim 2: Investigate whether taVNS can modulate pain in this population compared to sham.  
In this single-visit, single-blinded, sham-controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], we will compare changes in post-stroke upper 
extremity pain scores and pain threshold derived from QST before and after a 30-minute taVNS intervention, as well 
as between active and sham taVNS. The findings will help us understand whether taVNS can modulate pain in this 
population.  
 
2.0 Background 
Pain is a common symptom after a stroke. Up to 50% of stroke survivors experience pain, including muscle and joint 
pain such as spasticity and shoulder pain, complex regional pain syndrome, and central post-stroke pain (Naess et al., 
2012, Harrison and Field, 2015). Pharmacological approaches are currently the mainstream first-line treatment for 
poststroke pain; however, many recommended medications such as antidepressants or anticonvulsants have limited 
effectiveness in reducing severe pain (Kumar et al., 2009, Treister et al., 2017). A considerable proportion of 
poststroke pain symptoms become treatment resistant, which then necessitates the employment of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], also 
known for a high risk of dependency (Kim, 2014, Scuteri et al., 2020).  
Emerging evidence indicated that neurostimulation therapy approaches, such as deep brain stimulation (DBS) and 
vagus nerve stimulation (VNS), could be promising alternatives for the pain treatment of refractory patients and have 
successfully demonstrated analgesic effects in acute pain, post-surgical pain, and chronic pain disorders (Dang et al., 
2019, Bittar et al., 2005, Lempka et al., 2017, Boon et al., 1999, Chakravarthy et al., 2015, Bao et al., 2020). However, 
these brain stimulation methods are significantly limited due to their costly and invasive nature. Thus, developi[INVESTIGATOR_540144]-invasive and affordable neuromodulation methods for the treatment of post-stroke pain will be of great benefit. 
Recent innovations in VNS have enabled non-invasive administration at the ear, known as transcutaneous auricular 
vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS), which has become popular due to minimal side effects and low cost. Importantly, 
taVNS may produce analgesia and reduce opi[INVESTIGATOR_540145], which subsequently modulate afferent cortical vagal 
networks controlling pain. However, only limited knowledge currently we have for the feasibility and efficacy of 
taVNS analgesia in post-stroke pain.  
 
3.0 Intervention to be studied (if applicable) 
The intervention we are studying is transcutaneous auricular vagus nerve stimulation (taVNS) which is simply 
electrical nerve stimulation administered at the ear which targets the auricular branch of the vagus nerve. In this 
study, taVNS will be administered using the Spark Sparrow Ascent System which is a non-significant risk 
Version 2; June 28, [ADDRESS_704052]-stroke upper extremity 
pain. Participants will be randomized to receive 30-minute active taVNS (tragus and cymba conchae) or sham taVNS 
(earlobe) during their in-person visit. In prior studies in our laboratory, we demonstrated that taVNS can be safely 
and feasibly administered in chronic stroke populations (Peng et al., 2023, Badran et al., 2023). 
 
4.0 Study Endpoints (if applicable) 
Primary Outcome: Safety and Feasibility  
The main outcomes of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_540146]-stroke upper extremity pain. 
Secondary Outcomes: Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) 
We will systematically determine information about Aβ (sensory), Aδ (pain), and C (pain tolerance) fiber activity 
with a 30 × 30 mm thermode attached to the non-affected forearm (left arm) of participants (TSA2 thermode; Medoc, 
Durham, NC, [LOCATION_003]). Using the TSA2, we will determine heat sensory, pain, and tolerance thresholds using the 
method of limits, beginning at 32°C and increasing by 0.5°C per second. Participants will be asked to press a button 
(to record temperatures) when the stimulus is first detected (sensory threshold), when it becomes painful (pain 
threshold), and then when the stimulus is intolerable (pain tolerance). When ‘intolerable’ is indicated, the thermode 
ceases heating and quickly returns to 32°C. This is repeated for [ADDRESS_704053] ratings.  
Secondary Outcomes: Subjective Pain Ratings 
Participants will rate their post-stroke upper extremity pain intensity before and after the taVNS using a standard 
numeric pain rating scale (0-10). We anticipate participants will rate lower pain intensity post-intervention. 
 
5.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria/ Study Population 
Twenty participants with upper extremity post-stroke pain of all ethnic and racial categories will be accepted into this 
study protocol. No preference will be given based on race, gender, or ethnicity. Pregnant females and children under 
the age of 18 will be excluded for safety reasons. 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 Age 18-80  
 Have the capacity and ability to provide one’s own consent in English and sign the informed 
consent document.  
 Ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke that occurred at least 6 months prior 
 Unilateral stroke lesions in the left hemisphere  
 Right upper extremity pain 
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 Primary intracerebral hematoma or subarachnoid hemorrhage  
 Documented history of dementia 
Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 4 of 9    Documented history of uncontrolled depression or psychiatric disorder 
 Uncontrolled hypertension despi[INVESTIGATOR_2391], specifically SBP (Systolic Blood Pressure) / 
DBP (Diastolic Blood Pressure) >=180/100mmHg 
 Pregnancy  
 
6.[ADDRESS_704054] of the study 
procedures. 
 
8.0 Recruitment Methods 
This study will recruit from the Registry for Stroke Recovery (RESTORE-Pro#00037803, IRB approved 9/6/14) 
which is a research tool sponsored by [CONTACT_7681] (NIH) Center of Biomedical Research 
Excellence (COBRE) in Stroke Recovery with subjects consented for future contact [CONTACT_540150].  RESTORE staff will query the registry for potential subjects and provide the Principal 
Investigator (PI) with the contact [CONTACT_247345]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_540147]. 
Additionally, RESTORE staff can also give rack cards to interested RESTORE (stroke registry) individuals. They 
will be further screened for potential enrollment. 
 
9.[ADDRESS_704055] Center for Biomedical 
Imaging. Approved study personnel will walk through the consent procedures with the participants. Furthermore, 
after the consenting procedures, the consent form will be printed and provided to all participants to independently 
review to ensure understanding, including describing the laboratory measures, study duration, and equipment and 
materials. The study team will describe confidentiality/privacy measures, participant right to withdraw, 
risks/benefits. In addition, participants will be prompted to ask questions throughout consenting to further ensure 
understanding. After signing the consent form, they will also be offered a hard copy. 
 
10.0   Study Design / Methods 
Study Overview:   
After determining eligibility and interest, written informed consent will be obtained from participants at the MUSC 
Center for Biomedical Imaging. After consent is obtained, the participants will then complete a pregnancy test and 
conduct a brief daily life functioning battery. Enrolled participants will start the experiment.  They will first finish the 
subjective pain rating and have quantitative sensory testing (QST) conducted to determine baseline pain thresholds. 
Participants will then receive 30 minutes of taVNS (either active or sham). Upon the completion of the stimulation 
intervention, they will then be tested for another subjective pain rating and QST. The timeline of the experiment and 
group assignment overview are displayed below. 
 
 
Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 5 of 9    
Experiment Overview  – Investigate the anti-pain effect of taVNS in chronic post-stroke upper extremity pain 
Recruitment, Screening, and Consent Procedures:   
Recruitment will be conducted by [CONTACT_540151]. Participants who are found to be appropriate candidates will be offered to be 
phone screened and educated regarding the study’s details. If interested in participating in the study, they will be 
consented and enrolled into the study’s protocol. Additionally, RESTORE staff can also give rack cards to interested 
RESTORE (stroke registry) individuals. If interested in participating in the study, they will be consented and enrolled 
into the study’s protocol. 
Daily Life Function Battery:   
All participants will complete a daily life function battery after being enrolled. This battery includes the following 
questionnaires in specific life domains that will be used to identify baseline characteristics of individuals: 
Demographics; Pain Screening; Substance Use: TAPS; Pain Intensity & Interference: PEG; Physical 
Functioning/QDL: PROMIS Physical Functioning 6b; Sleep: PROMIS Sleep Disturbance 6a; Sleep: Sleep Duration; 
Depression: PHQ9; Anxiety: GAD7. 
Pregnancy Test Procedures:   
If participants are a person of childbearing age, they will be provided with a pregnancy test strip After completing 
the pregnancy test, participants with negative results will be asked to continue to the remaining study procedures, 
whereas those with a positive result will be debriefed and released.  
Subjective Pain Rating: 
Participants will rate their post-stroke upper extremity pain intensity before and after the taVNS using a standard 
numeric pain rating scale (0-10).  
Quantitative Sensory Testing Procedures:   
We will measure pain assessments by [CONTACT_540152] (Medoc, 
Durham, NC) using a [ADDRESS_704056] will be done using method of limits testing on the thenar 
eminence of the non-affective forearm (left arm). A program will be set up to administer 5 hot stimuli with random 
durations between each trial. The ATS thermode begins at 32 deg C and increases by 0.5 deg C per second. 
Participants will be asked to press a button in order to signify three different measures: (1) sensory threshold, or the 
temperature at which the stimulus becomes noticeable, (2) pain threshold, or the temperature at which the stimulus 
becomes painful, and (3) pain tolerance, or the temperature at which the stimulus becomes too painful to tolerate. 
Measuring these thresholds will yield information about Aβ, Aδ, and C fibers, respectively. The device will be set to 
stop heating at 51.5º C and stop cooling at 0º C to avoid tissue damage. The QST procedures will be tested before 
and after the taVNS. 
taVNS Procedures:  
All stimulation will be conducted using the Sparrow Ascent transcutaneous auricular neuromodulation (tAN) device 
manufactured by [CONTACT_540153] (Dallas, TX). These tAN devices are portable, wearable systems that have 2 Subjective Pain Rating
(Baseline)Pain QST Testing
(Baseline)30-mins Stimulation
*(taVNS / Sham)
taVNSActive Sites
(Tragus + Cymba)
Sham Active Site
(Earlobe)Ear Targets * Stimulation Groups
[ADDRESS_704057]-stroke Pain
Group 1: taVNSActive
(N = 10)Group 2: Sham Active
(N = 10)
+
Tragus Cymba EarlobeGroup
TargetSubjective Pain Rating
(Post-Stim)Pain QST Testing
(Post-Stim)
Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 6 of 9   channels of stimulation (auricular vagus, auricular trigeminal, and both). Two individual stimulation frequencies will 
be set: 15 Hz at cymba concha and 100 Hz adjacently anterior to tragus. The pulse duration will be set to 250 μs for 
all participants. The stimulation intensities delivered (in mA) will be a standardized 2X Perceptual Threshold. This 
means that all individuals will first have a perceptual threshold conducted, during which incremental increases and 
decreases in current intensity will be applied until the participant barely feels the stimulation. That is considered the 
perceptual threshold. All stimulation then will be delivered at 2X this value. Perceptual threshold will be conducted 
at the beginning of the taVNS intervention. This is how we have conducted stimulation at MUSC in prior IRB-
approved studies which have been safe and rated comfortable and not painful. Sham stimulation will be administered 
at identical parameters of cymba concha, however, the electrodes will be attached to the earlobe, which is not believed 
to have a high density of cranial nerve innervation. If the participant states that the stimulation intensity is 
discomforting or imperceivable in any of the stimulation groups, the researcher will gradually decrease until a 
comfortable stimulation intensity is achieved. The taVNS session will last for 30 minutes. 
 
12.0 Data Management  
All data will be stored in the Redcap database as well as in paper documentation. Information about the participants 
(including their identifiable private information) may have all their identifiers removed and used for future research 
studies or distributed to other researchers for future research without additional informed consent. After participation, 
RedCAP data will be downloaded in Excel format to the secure MUSC server. Paper documentation will be stored 
in locked cabinet within a locked office of the study team. In terms of publication, data will be published in aggregate 
form, so individual participants will not be identifiable in the final manuscript. No identifying information will be 
published.  
Confidentiality and Quality Control: All study personnel will complete Social-Behavioral-Educational research CITI 
training, and also complete in-lab training regarding data security practices. Study personnel will be trained in the 
IRB protocol. The investigator, and co-investigators will be available to monitor data collection to ensure quality, 
confidentiality, and adherence to the IRB protocol. 
All study’s procedures will take place at the MUSC [ADDRESS_704058] Neuroimaging Center. Regarding documentation, 
participant names will appear only on the IRB-approved Consent and HIPAA.  
The RESTORE registry (Pro#00037803), from which this study will recruit subjects, also serves as a data analysis 
tool by [CONTACT_247351]’s stroke recovery research 
community with a more complete registry with key stroke elements. Some subjects may have participated or will 
participate in other stroke related research studies at MUSC. Sharing data from this and other stroke research studies 
with RESTORE will allow for more targeted recruitment efforts in the future and could reduce the burden placed on 
subjects by [CONTACT_540154]. The third Aim of this study leverages 
this ability, as other studies will be better able to target their recruitment based on the information collected in these 
assessments. De-identified information/data will only be shared once study is completed. 
 
13.[ADDRESS_704059] subjects from undue risk require discussion. These include: 1) 
procedures used to obtain informed consent, 2) procedures used to ensure confidentiality of the subject data, and 3) 
procedures used to minimize possible risks associated with the laboratory procedures. Regarding informed consent, 
participants are fully advised on the research procedures to be used, the amount of time required of them, the possible 
risks and benefits of the procedures, their right to refuse participation in the study without prejudice, their right to 
terminate participation at any moment without prejudice, and the name [CONTACT_540155]. All subjects will be required to have the capacity to consent. Regarding confidentiality, subjects are 
informed that the information they provide will be kept strictly confidential, with access limited to the research staff. 
Participation in the study will be treated as confidential, as will all records. The identity of subjects will be protected 
with alphanumeric codes. All data will be kept in locked file cabinets or on secure servers designed for use and access 
by [CONTACT_333746].  
Version 2; June 28, [ADDRESS_704060] of recording and reporting unanticipated adverse events to the IRB. We will report any adverse event 
within 48 hours to the IRB. 
 
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects 
Participants will be informed during consenting that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time. They will 
be informed that they are not obligated to participate once the study is initiated and in particular will be reminded 
prior to taVNS/VNS stimulation they may discontinue stimulation and/or the experiment at any point. taVNS has 
been a very safe procedure and we do not anticipate subject withdrawal due to taVNS side effects. No participants in 
previous studies utilizing taVNS have been forced to withdraw for medical or physiological purposes, and we do not 
anticipate any issues during this study. If participants begin to experience ear pain, an attempt can be made on the 
other ear, as well as a reduction in the intensity of stimulation before termination would be required. We will be 
monitoring the stimulation session and if a patient is extremely sensitive to the device we might consider terminating. 
In that case, the participant and their guardian would be informed of the need for termination. 
 
15.0 Risks to Subjects 
Ear Stimulation: 
Ear stimulation is safe, however, there are some risks associated with stimulating the ear: There may be local 
discomfort. This will likely be temporary. In extreme cases, burns might occur. We will monitor any potential burns 
via direct communication with participants and will stop stimulation and advise subjects to apply vitamin E cream. 
The tissue surrounding the ear may be sensitive, sore, or feel slight numbness. Hopefully, this will be temporary and 
will go away after the stimulation is turned off. 
Safety in Case of Pregnancy: 
This protocol will exclude pregnant women. The risks of using taVNS with pregnant women are currently unknown. 
If in the screening and consent a patient is a woman of childbearing age, they will be tested prior to receiving any 
taVNS.  
Potential Headache, Dizziness, and Facial Pain: 
Ear stimulation might cause headaches or face pain, which should resolve shortly after treatment. 
Potential Decrease in Heart Rate: 
Ear stimulation may slow heart rate. In rare cases (less than 1%) decreased blood pressure or fainting may occur. We 
expect no significant changes in heart rate or blood pressure, or fainting to occur. For the initial sessions, all subjects 
will be stimulated while they are seated, never standing. We expect no significant changes in heart rate or blood 
pressure, but if this occurs, the study team will evaluate the situation and either decide that the patient should be 
dropped from the study, or do all sessions lying on a couch, or with lower doses.  
QST Pain Assessments:  
The Medoc pain assessment system has been used safely by [CONTACT_15957]-I [CONTACT_75931] and others for over a decade now. 
The pain is unpleasant but there are limits to the amount of pain, and there have been no adverse events over [ADDRESS_704061] to stop 
voluntarily. 
Unknown Risks: 
There is always the possibility of other risks for a relatively new technology. The Study team will let the participant 
know if they learn anything that might make the participant change their mind about participating in the study.  
Loss of Confidentiality: 
Version 2; June 28, [ADDRESS_704062] the research staff and ask. 
If there are significant new findings during the course of the study, they will be notified. 
 
18.0 Drugs or Devices  
tAN Device (Spark Biomedical Sparrow Ascent) 
tAN has been determined a non-significant risk determination of this device. We are using the Spark Sparrow Ascent 
tAN system outlined in this document, based on the FDA-cleared Sparrow System (K201873). IRB 1 has consistently 
given NSR status for all prior taVNS studies at MUSC, including studies in stroke patients (Badran), brain damaged 
newborns learning to feed (Jenkins, Badran), Parkinson’s Disease (Hinson, Badran) and healthy volunteers (Badran, 
Austelle).  
QST Pain Device (Medoc Pathway TSA2) 
Medoc’s TSA2 offers thermal stimulation in the full range from sensation to pain, in heat and cold, using one or two 
thermodes simultaneously. A wide variety of thermodes is available for each body site or stimulation profile. 
Excellent temperature control and fast rates make the device accurate, the test repeatable, and suitable for a great 
number of applications. Medoc has been developi[INVESTIGATOR_540148], pressure, and 
vibratory modalities for over 30 years. This system has been IRB-approved here at MUSC in prior work conducted 
by [CONTACT_24478]-Is (Badran, Borckardt). 
 
 
  
Version 2; June 28, 2024 
 Page 9 of 9   References 
BADRAN, B. W., PENG, X., BAKER-VOGEL, B., HUTCHISON, S., FINETTO, P., RISHE, K., 
FORTUNE, A., KITCHENS, E., O’LEARY, G. H. & SHORT, A. 2023. Motor Activated 
Auricular Vagus Nerve Stimulation as a Potential Neuromodulation Approach for Post-Stroke 
Motor Rehabilitation: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair , 
15459683231173357. 
BAO, S.-C., KHAN, A., SONG, R. & TONG, R. K.-Y. 2020. Rewiring the lesioned brain: electrical 
stimulation for post-stroke motor restoration. Journal of stroke,  22, 47. 
BITTAR, R. G., KAR-PURKAYASTHA, I., OWEN, S. L., BEAR, R. E., GREEN, A., WANG, S. & 
AZIZ, T. Z. 2005. Deep brain stimulation for pain relief: a meta-analysis. Journal of clinical 
neuroscience,  12, 515-519. 
BOON, P., VONCK, K., VANDEKERCKHOVE, T., D'HAVE, M., NIEUWENHUIS, L., 
MICHIELSEN, G., VANBELLEGHEM, H., GOETHALS, I., CAEMAERT, J. & CALLIAUW, 
L. 1999. Vagus nerve stimulation for medically refractory epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]; efficacy and cost-benefit 
analysis. Acta neurochirurgica,  141, 447-453. 
CHAKRAVARTHY, K., CHAUDHRY, H., WILLIAMS, K. & CHRISTO, P. J. 2015. Review of the uses 
of vagal nerve stimulation in chronic pain management. Current pain and headache reports,  19, 1-
9. 
DANG, T. T. H., ROWELL, D. & CONNELLY, L. B. 2019. Cost ‐effectiveness of deep brain 
stimulation with movement disorders: a systematic review. Movement disorders clinical practice,  
6, 348-358. 
HARRISON, R. A. & FIELD, T. S. 2015. Post stroke pain: identification, assessment, and therapy. 
Cerebrovascular diseases,  39, 190-201. 
KIM, J. S. 2014. Pharmacological management of central post-stroke pain: a practical guide. CNS Drugs,  
28, 787-97. 
KUMAR, B., KALITA, J., KUMAR, G. & MISRA, U. K. 2009. Central poststroke pain: a review of 
pathophysiology and treatment. Anesth Analg,  108, 1645-57. 
LEMPKA, S. F., MALONE JR, D. A., HU, B., BAKER, K. B., WYANT, A., OZINGA IV, J. G., PLOW, 
E. B., PANDYA, M., KUBU, C. S. & FORD, P. J. 2017. Randomized clinical trial of deep brain 
stimulation for poststroke pain. Annals of neurology,  81, 653-663. 
NAESS, H., LUNDE, L. & BROGGER, J. 2012. The effects of fatigue, pain, and depression on quality of 
life in ischemic stroke patients: the Bergen Stroke Study. Vascular health and risk management , 
407-413. 
PENG, X., BAKER-VOGEL, B., SARHAN, M., SHORT, E. B., ZHU, W., LIU, H., KAUTZ, S. & 
BADRAN, B. W. 2023. Left or right ear? A neuroimaging study using combined taVNS/fMRI to 
understand the interaction between ear stimulation target and lesion location in chronic stroke. 
Brain Stimulation,  16, 1144-1153. 
SCUTERI, D., MANTOVANI, E., TAMBURIN, S., SANDRINI, G., CORASANITI, M. T., BAGETTA, 
G. & TONIN, P. 2020. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_540149]-stroke pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Frontiers in pharmacology,  11, 587050. 
TREISTER, A. K., HATCH, M. N., CRAMER, S. C. & CHANG, E. Y. 2017. Demystifying poststroke 
pain: from etiology to treatment. PM&R, 9, 63-75. 
 