Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 1 Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752127]:    Efficacy of Enteral Glutamine in Red ucing Bloodstream Infections in SBS 
Infants  
Investigator:   Conrad R. Cole, MD  
 
Co-Investigators:   Samuel Kocoshis MD, Michael Helmrath MD, Andrew South MD  
 
 
I.  Abstract  
Short bowel syndrome (SBS) following massive bowel resection for various conditions, 
especially necrotizing entercolitis (NEC), is a devastating complication that affects neonates 
especially those delivered < 36 weeks gestation al age. These children are especially susceptible 
to recurrent blood stream infections (BSI), repeated hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] a dmissions and subsequent poor 
growth. All of these contribute to a very high burden on the primary caretakers and the health 
care system. Organ isms associated with recurrent BSI in these  children are predominantly gut 
related. However, there is still a lack of understanding of the intestinal microbial ecology of 
these children and whether it has a role in BSI, enteral feeds and ultimately growth. Glutamine 
(GLN) supplementation has been shown to decrease mucosal damage, lower rates of BSI and 
associated sep sis and improve positive nitrogen balance  in adults with SBS . In children, there is 
currently insufficient data to determine whether enteral GL N supplementation improves clinical 
outcomes in young infants with significant gastrointestinal resection leading to SBS. The overall 
purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_752128] i n children with SBS as a result of significant intestinal resection due to 
NEC , omphalocele, gastroschisis and intestinal atresia in the context of a rigorous, double -blind 
exploratory clinical trial with the following specific aims: Specific Aim 1:  To per form a double -
blind, randomized, placebo controlled, 6- months pi[INVESTIGATOR_752129] -
dependent SBS children due to NEC , omphalocele, gastroschisis  and/or atresia evaluating the 
efficacy of enteral GLN supplementation to decrease BSI and  serial serum concentrations of 
TNF -α, IL1 - β, IL -6 and IL -8; Specific Aim 2:  To assess the efficacy of [ADDRESS_1030008] as a method to improve somatic growth parameters (length velocity, weight 
velocity, head circumference and mid arm circumference) in Aim [ADDRESS_1030009] of 
BSI on growth parameters; Specific Aim 3: To comprehensively a ssess the gut lumenal 
microbiome (using state -of-the art molecular methods) in Aim [ADDRESS_1030010] treatment. This proposal will facilitate the development of  
a multicenter, multidisciplinary team from Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349], 
University of Michigan and University of Colorado to assess new methods for decreasing BSI 
and improving growth as well as to gain insights into the intestinal microbial ecology of SBS 
children.   
 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 2  
II. Purpose of Study  
 
This is a double -blind, randomized placebo -controlled pi [INVESTIGATOR_752130] (G LN) supplementation in 36 infants, ≤  12 months of age with parenteral 
nutrition (PN) -dependent short bowel syndrome ( SBS) due to massive small bowel resection for 
NEC , omphalocele, gastroschisis  and/or atre sia on improving weaning of PN and preventing 
infections . We intend to evaluate the effect of enteral feeding and GLN supplementation on the 
gut bacteria.  We will also recruit 12 age- matched controls to evaluate the normal gut bacteria. 
Investig ators at the University of Michigan and Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752131]  (18 patients and 6 controls will be recruited at each site) . We 
will estimate residual small and large bowel length and the presence, or absence of the ileocecal 
valve and colon by [CONTACT_752162] . Estimates of bowel length for gestational age have been previously published1,2. Data 
on parenteral or enteral GLN supple mentation (L -GLN or the dipeptide Alanyl -GLN) in infants 
have not shown consistent effects, pote ntially because these studies were under powered;  the 
dose of GLN was suboptimal or other factors . 
 
III. Background  
 
Significance  
Pediatric SBS is characterized  by [CONTACT_752163], 
energy, fluid, electrolyte or micronutrient balances when the child is on a conventionally 
accepted enteral diet3, 4. The use of PN is often required in SBS to provide nutrition and susta in 
life; unfortunately PN does not promote gut adaptation and also predisposes to BSI5, 6. 
Appropriate management with PN typi[INVESTIGATOR_752132], enhances weight 
gain and is associated with improved overall survival rates7. In infants, NEC is the major cause 
of surgical SBS; other causes include gastroschisis, midgut volvulus and intestinal atresia8, 9. 
Children with PN -dependent SBS exhibit a high rate of recurrent BSI 10. The quality of life 
burden and healthcare costs associated with  SBS in affected children is extremely high, in part, 
due to costs and complications of PN and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752133]11, 12. Healthcare costs in the 
first year of life in pediatric SBS patients routinely exceed $500,[ADDRESS_1030011] (>80%) of this expense, attributed to prolonged NICU stay, surgical 
procedures an d recurrent BSI12. The cost of home health care in children with SBS increases 
during each subsequent year of PN use8, 12. In light of the clinical importance o f pediatric 
SBS, the high healthcare -related costs, and the ineffectiveness of current therapy t o prevent 
BSI, new treatments to improve clinical outcomes are urgently required. Data to increase 
our understanding of the putative causes of BSI in this orpha n disease are also needed.  
 
Recurrent sepsis and prolonged PN are each predictors of increased morbidity and mortality in 
children with SBS13, 14. The very high rate of recurrent BSI in infants with SBS is presumably 
due to impaired gut and systemic immunity and gut barrier dysfunction. Translocation of 
indigenous intestinal microbes has been shown to occur in animal models of SBS, with the 
translocation being promoted by [CONTACT_752164], gut -associated immune 
dysfunction and gut barrier  dysfunction15, 16. The incidence of catheter sepsis is significantly 
higher in children with SB S than in those without SBS (7.8 vs. 1.3 per 1000 catheter days; 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 3 p<0.05) and enteric organisms being responsible for 62% of catheter sepsis in patients with SBS  
compared to only 12% in patients without SBS17.  
 
Preliminary data strongly supports the finding of increased BSI and predominance of 
enteric organisms in the bloodstream of febrile SBS infants8, 18. The SBS infants in our 
preliminary data also exhibit elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis 
factor -α, interleukin 1- β, interleuki n-6 and interleukin- 8) at enrollment vs. control subjects18. 
Previous studies in adults requiring chronic home PN also showed increased blood levels of 
TNF -α and IL-619.  
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_752134], SBS infants enroll ed in the NICHD Neonatal Research 
Network had poor growth indices (length and head circumference) and also exhibited a 
high rate of BSI8. These findings are similar to those previously repo rted for SBS children 
requiring long term PN20. Catabolic responses  due to BSI and elevated systemic cytokines are 
likely involved in the poor growth exhibited. However, the relationship between BSI and growth 
failure is conjectural. There are no previous rigorous therapeutic trials designed to decrease BSI 
and improve gr owth velocity in infants affected by [CONTACT_752165], as we here propose.  
 
GLN is a central amino acid in major metabolic processes and is also utilized as a major 
fuel/substrate by [CONTACT_752166], including the gut -associated 
immune sys tem21-24. During catabolic illness, skeletal muscle exports large amounts of GLN into 
the blood, and GLN -utilizing tissues, including gut mucosa, immune cells, and kidney markedly 
increase GLN uptake25. If stress persists, GLN requirements may exceed endog enous GLN 
production, and skeletal muscle and plasma GLN concentrations decline23. Numerous studies in 
animal models show that enteral or parenteral GLN supplementation with either the dipe ptide 
alanyl -GLN or free GLN, enhances gut mucosal growth, repair, and function, decreases gut -
origin sepsis and inflammation, and improves nitrogen balance in animal models of intestinal 
atrophy, injury, and adaptation 21, 22, [ADDRESS_1030012] requirements due to recurrent BSI and other stresses such 
as surgical trauma38. In a group of 69 premature, non- SBS, very low birth weight (VLBW 
<1500g birth weight) infants between ages [ADDRESS_1030013] supplement ation (0.3 
g/kg/day) for four months had a significant positive effect on growth indices (weight, length; mid 
arm, mid thigh and head circumferences)39. In a randomized, double -blind, contr olled single 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030014] had a decreased incidence of sepsis 
(p<0.05) with risk  of infection nearly 4- fold higher in controls38. In that study GLN was 
administered for a median of [ADDRESS_1030015] was 
administered to only 9 infants at a dose of 0.4g/kg/day up to [ADDRESS_1030016] 
supplementation (L -GLN or the dipeptide alanyl -GLN) in i nfants (and more limited data on 
enteral GLN in pediatric SBS). The reasons for this potentially include underpowered sample 
size, suboptimal dose of GLN (0.3g/kg/day -  0.5g/kg/day) or other factors. The recommended 
dose of protein administered to infants is 3.0- 3.5 g/kg body weight/day. The dose of parenteral 
GLN adminis tered to critically ill neonates in a previous NICHD -sponsored multicenter trial was 
20% of the total amino acid content of the parenteral nutrition and this GLN dose was well 
tolerated 45. We propose to administer enteral GLN at a dose of 0.6g/kg/day, whi ch is 
approximately 20% of the 3.0- 3.5g/kg total protein recommended intake. Doses of 0.5 g/kg/day 
of enterally administered L -GLN have been well tolerated in clinical trials in infants  46, 47. 
 
Innovation  
The available data on GLN outlined above supports the need for a rigorous, double -blind clinical 
study to obtain critically needed pi[INVESTIGATOR_752135]. This proposed study represents c ollaborative, multidisciplinary, multisite, 
comparative effectiveness clinical research. The rigorous nature of this trial of GLN 
supplementation in SBS infants is innovative compared to previous studies; our subject group is 
also more homogeneous, as we l imit enrollment to children with NEC , omphalocele, 
gastroschisis  and those with atresia as the primary cause of SBS. Our proposed design 
incorporates important clinical outcome measures (incidence of BSI and somatic growth 
parameters) to provide needed inf ormation on GLN efficacy in pediatric SBS. The data, in turn, 
will inform the design of subsequent definitive multicenter Phase III studies. In addition, to 
follow -up on our studies of GLN -induced upregulation of stool and mucosal sIgA in rat models 
of SBS27, we have measured stool sIgA in SBS children in a previous prosp ective trial and 
propose here to evaluate the impact of GLN on stool sIgA as a secondary index of enteral GLN 
efficacy.  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030017] a role in the immune 
conditioning of the gut, and may influence subsequent immune responses in neonates48. The 
intestinal microbiome may also be important for physiologic gut absorptive and barrier 
functions; small bowel bacterial overgrowth and/or altered luminal microbiota (e.g. due to 
anatomic disruptions after intestinal resection, dysmotility, stasis, etc.) may represent a 
potentially crucial, but as yet uncharacterized path opysiologic factor in SBS 49. The underlying 
disease (NEC), malnutr ition, and illness -associated immunodeficiency have been hypothesized 
to promote the proliferation of lumenal bacteria. Further, effects of altered nutrient intake in SBS 
on the microbiome are unknown. Therefore, in specific aim #3, we will comprehensively  
assess the gut lumenal microbiome in pediatric SBS patients versus controls to: 1) correlate 
alterations in lumenal bacteria populations with BSI risk; and 2) determine whether GLN 
supplem entation influences the gut microbiome and concomitant microbial pa thogenesis of 
BSI.  
 
Collaborators , Drs. Frank and Pace have develop ed molecular tools with which to study naturally 
occurring microbial communities without the requirement for preliminary culture 50-53. A 
number of these methods are centered on analysis o f bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA gene 
(rDNA) sequences (see Figure 1, below) which  vary from species to species and thus can be 
used as molecular ‘bar -codes’ for species identification54-58. rDNA can be PCR amplified with 
pan-bacterial primers from genomic DN A isolated directly from specimens, without need for 
prior culture of resident microorganisms (Figure 1, step A).  Advances in sequencing technology, 
such as the massively parallel GS -FLX p yrosequencing platform of [COMPANY_002] 454 Life Sciences, 
Inc. dramaticall y increased throughput compared to the previous generation of sequencers 
(Figure 1, step B).This platform was successfully deployed in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_752136].   
 
Figu re 1: Analysis of human microbiome through culture -independent rRNA  sequence 
analysis  
 
 
 
Quantitative 
analysis of 
the human 
microbiome 
data will be 
done as 
follows: DNA sequences will be  phylogenetically compared to rDNA sequence databases (e.g. 
GenBank w hich stores >2,000,000 16S entries) to relate newly generated rDNA sequences to 
those of known organisms and thereby [CONTACT_752167] (Figure 1, steps C and D). 
The results are a snapshot census of the microbial community within a specimen (Fi gure 1, step 
E) which provides a reference point from which physiol ogy and lifestyle can be inferred 59,60. 
Many rRNA -based methods demonstrated the merits of monitoring intestinal microbes to gain 
insights into how commensals contribute to gastrointestina l pathology, including antibiotic 

Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030018] supplementation may be useful in reducing the severity of weaning- related gastrointestinal 
infections, by [CONTACT_752168] 84, 
85. As a result of this we are proposing to evaluate as part of specific aim 1 the serum levels of 
anti-flagellin and anti -liposaccharide(LPS)  immunoglobulin (Ig) G levels in the infants with 
SBS. These antibodies are markers of response t o bacterial antigen and improve with advancing 
enteral nutrition 18. This proposal seeks to evaluate the impact of entral L -GLN on the mucosa’s 
immune response by [CONTACT_752169].  
 
IV. Duration of Study  
 
This anticipated duration to complete the study is 3 years (enrollment, analyses, and report 
writing).  Each subject will be monitored for 6 months  (± 1 month) . 
 
V.  Potential Benefits  
1. Duration of PN in patients with surgical  short bowel syndrome may  be decreased  
2. Incidence of central line infectio ns in these patients may  be decreased  
3. Improving overall nutrition and growth 
4. Improving the gut mucosal immunity with oral GLN  
 
VI. Potential Risks  
Potential r isks for GLN supplement ation:  
• Stomach pain  - 11%  
• Nausea  - 22%  
• Tenesmus  - 11%  
• Pancreatitis  - 11%  
• Constipation -  11%  
• Fever -  11%  
• Gastric Ulcer -  11%  
• Increased irritability  - 11%  
• Mild skin rash or itching -  11%  
• Hyperammoni mia in patients with renal and hepatic dysfunction -  11%  
• Laryngitis/Pharyngitis -  11%  
 
Other adverse events reported in the pr oduct information package  
• Gastrointestinal fistula in patients with Crohn’s disease -  11%  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 7 • Vaginal fungal infections – 11%  
• Psychiatric disorders – 11%  
• Pyelonephritis – 11%  
• Vascular disorder s- 11%  
 
Potential risks for L -alanine (placebo) : 
• Nausea and vomiting -  11%  
• Hyperammonimia in patients with renal and hepatic dysfunction -  11%  
 
Potential risks for L -Glutamine and L -alanine  
• Hyperosmolality of the feeds leading to increased stool output is a potential side 
effect of  L-Glutamine and L -alanine when added to formula. However, this has 
not been reported in previous trials  37-40, 47 , 86. The osmolality of L -glutamine is 
310 mosm/kg of water (data provided by [CONTACT_752170]).  
 
Potential risks  for blood draw:  
• Occurrence of discomfort and/or a bruise at the sit e of puncture  
• Less commonly, fainting 
• The formation of a clot or swelling in the vein and surrounding tissue  
• Bleeding from the puncture site  
• On rare occasions an infection may develop at the site where the blood is 
collected  
 
VII. Overall Risk Assessment  
The overall risk assessment is m inimal based on previous pediatric and adult studies. The 
potential long term benefits of reducing the duration of PN, decreasing central line infections and 
improving growth is greater than the potential risks.  
 
VIII.  Risk Category  
 Minimum  
 
IX. Methods  
 
A. Subject s and controls  Selection  
 
Inclusion criteria for a ge matched controls  (n=12: 6 per site ) 
• Males and females will be recruited as controls for this s tudy if they are ≤ 12 months of 
age (corrected for gestational age)  
• Normal small bowel length without any intestinal resection or primary intestinal disease  
• Not c urrently on TPN and if ever on TPN this should have been discontinued for at least 
4 weeks  
 
Exclusion criteria for age matched controls  
• Major congenital or chrom osomal anomalies  
• Inability to tolerate enteral nutrition / regular cow’s milk, breast milk or soy formula   
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 8 • History of liver/intestinal transplantation  
• Active milk protein allergy  
• Inflammatory bowel disease  
• Multiorgan failure  
 
Inclusion Criteria  for glutamin e and placebo group of SBS patients  (n=36; 18 per site )  
• Males and females ≤ 12 months of age  (corrected for gestational age)  
• Patients who  have undergone s mall bowel resection due to complications of or related to 
NEC , omphalocele, gastroschisis  or intestinal atresia  with known small bowel length  
• Patients who have been PN dependent fo r more than 42 consecutive days  (6 weeks)  and 
currently on TPN at time of enrollment . This would include patients who were off TPN 
for < 7 consecutive days . 
• Patients who have the ability to take partial enteral nutrition of  at least 5ml/hr   breast mi lk 
or elemental formula  ( Elecare®  is the preferred formula at both clinical sites but use of 
other elemental formula does not exclude the patient ) (via gastric or intestinal tube, or 
orally) to allow the appropriate dose of GLN (0.6 g/kg/day) or placebo ( L-alanine)  
• Signed informed consent for the use of GLN  or placebo  obtained  
 
Exclusion Criteria  for glutamine and placebo group of SBS patients  
• Major congenital or chromosomal anomali es 
• Inability to tolerate enteral nutrition that will preclude treatment with enteral GLN or  L-
alanine placebo for >2 consecutive weeks   
• Liver/intestinal transplantation  
• Multiorgan failure   
 
B. Withdrawal Criteria  
1. Patient  cannot comple te evaluation visit as sessments  
2. Patient  develops any of the exc lusion criteria detailed above  
3. Patient develops significant hepatic dysfunction (defined as INR > 2.[ADDRESS_1030019] 
serum bi lirubin level > 10 mg/dL)   
4. Parent (s)/legal guardian  are unwilling t o administer the GLN or pla cebo  at the 
required dosage  
5. Patient is lost to follow -up 
6. Patient has [ADDRESS_1030020]  
 
 
C. Dropouts  
 
Data collected from patients who voluntarily withdraw from the study or who are withdrawn 
from the study will be i ncluded in the final analysis  using intent to treat . Patient and control 
enrollment will continue until 32 patients complete all requested study requirements outlined. 
The reason for withdraw al will be documented.  
 
D. Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_752137] – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 9 An early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_752138] t he 
following adverse events occur:  
• The rate of BSI in SBS patients i n either the GLN supplementation or the placebo is an 
absolute 20% higher  compared to the historical rate in SBS patients . The rate of catheter 
associated BSI is assessed monthly in all SB S patients at both CCHMC and the 
University of Michigan as part of the current clinical improvement process , If the rate of 
the BSI is higher in either group by 20% then study enrol lment will be halted until further 
evaluation by [CONTACT_16627] ( DSMB ). 
• If two subjects develop the same  grade -3 adverse event (including liver function tests, 
coagulation profile)  related to the study medication that is irreversible upon  de-escalation 
(does not reverse after  10 days) or upon discontinuation of the study drug 
• Any subject develops a related grade -[ADDRESS_1030021]  
 
Potential toxicity will be assessed by [CONTACT_752171]  (Complete blood count, complete  metabolic profile ( Renal,  Calcium, 
Phosphorus, Magnesium, Liver panel, Total Protein, Al bumin) monthly .  Additional blood 
samples will be  done  in accordance with current in stitutional standards for monitoring chronic 
PN use in infants .  Plasma GLN levels  will be obtained at baseline and at 6 months .  
 
F. Evaluating compliance  
 
All of the subjects will be instructed to bring to the monthly visits, the containers containing the 
supplement supplied at the previous visit. The study team will count the remaining bags left 
over. We will also evaluate the diary provided to the families. Compliance will be eva luated 
based on the diary and the number of returned containers. Families a re expected to be 90% 
compliant. If the child/family  is less than 90% compliant, the family will receive additional 
counseling to identify reasons and how to attain this level of compliance. Children will remain in 
the study as long as they receive at leas t 70% of the expected amount for [ADDRESS_1030022] will be included in the analysis. Children who 
receive less than 70%  or more t han 120% of  the prescribed glutamine or placebo  will considered 
to be non- compliant.  The reason for non- compliance will be documented  and included in the 
final analysis . Average intake/day of glutamine by [CONTACT_752172].  
    
G.  Patient Recruitment and Consenting Process  
 
Patient Recruitment 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 10 A total of 36 patients with short bowel syndrome (SBS) ≤ [ADDRESS_1030023] colon not in continuity. Assuming a 10% dropout rate, it is expected that 32 SBS 
patients will complete the study.   
 
For Aim 3 of the study, an additional 12 infants  without SBS will be enrolle d as the non- SBS 
control patients.   Therefore, a  total of 48 patients will be enrolled across the two sites, 
University of Michigan and Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349].  
 
The study will be explained in detail by [CONTACT_752173].  These subjects will be 
recruited through the Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, the Department 
of Surgery, or the Division of Neonatology.  The prospective patients will be identified through 
the clinical staff with in all three divisions working collaboratively.  The clinical staff will 
initially inform potential subjects and families about the research study. The research staff will 
notify and obtain permission from the patient’s primary gastroenterologist, surgeon, or 
neonatologist before contact[CONTACT_752174].  
 
Subjects who drop out prior to drug initiation may be replaced with new subjects until target 
enrollment is achieved, as these will not have been given study medication. 
 
Consenting Process  
 
For those patients meeting inclusion criteria, the study purpose, procedures, costs, risks, benefits, 
and alternatives to participation will be thoroughly explained and presented to the patient and 
their family by [CONTACT_752175]/or investigator, and subjects will be 
screened for willingness to participate.  Subjects and parents will be explicitly informed that 
choosing not to participate will in no way  affect the quality of the  medical care that they will 
receive.  Once patients and families have had enough time to consider participation and have 
expressed a willingness to participate, consent  will be obtained from the parents or legal 
guardian.   
 
One copy of the  consent will b e given to the family and one will be retained in the study records.  
One copy will also be placed in the child’s medical record.   
 
Vulnerable Population  
 
This study will enroll children.  To protect this population from coercion or undue influence, 
conse nt will be obtained only after a full discussion of the research protocol a nd of the risks and 
benefits that may occur from participation.  Patients and parents will be explicitly informed that 
choosing not to participate will in no way affect the quality of the medical care that they will 
receive.  
 
H.  Study Procedures  
 
Randomiz ation and study groups  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 11   
At the baseline visit, SBS subjects will be block randomized in a 1:1 scheme by [CONTACT_752176] 
(i.e the presence or absence of colon in continuity ) to rec eive either L -GLN powder or 
isonitrogenous, isocaloric placebo [L -alanine ( ALA)]. Randomization will be done by [CONTACT_752177]’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752139]. 
Distribution will be done by [CONTACT_145881]. The subjects, site investigators and study 
personnel at all sites will be blinded to the randomization.  Since patients will be on breast milk 
or Elemental formula ( Elecare®  being the preferred elemental formula at both institutions ; 
however use of other elemental formula does not exclude the patient from the study) , the 
randomization process will take into account whether breast milk or formula is been consumed 
by [CONTACT_58076]. T he research pharmacist will make decisions regarding randomization  
based o n the use of formula versus breast milk to ensure adequate distribution wit hin groups . 
 
Glutamine group:  Infants randomized to the GLN group will receive L -GLN  administered 
enterally at a dose of 0.6g/kg body weight/day (0.3g/kg/dose) in 2 divided daily doses for 6 
months (figure 2). GLN will be dissolved in water , breast milk  or formula and administered to 
the subject orally or through their enterostomy tube approximately every 12 hours  (twice a day) . 
This can be administered as a bolus or a continuous infusion lasting a maximum of 2 hours. We 
will use NutrestoreTM (Emmaus Medic al, Inc.), a commercially available, FDA approved pure L -
GLN product in the study. In the event that this is not available we will use commercially 
available 100% USP grade L -GLN. T he minimal volume L -GLN will be dissolved i n at least 10 
ml of water, breas tmilk or formula . 
    
 
Placebo group:  Infants in the placebo group will receive ALA at a dose of 0.6g/kg body 
weight/day in 2 divided doses  (0.3g/kg/day twice a day) , exactly as out lined above for the GLN 
group. 
ALA is a non- essential  amino acid and will b e used as the placebo in this study because it is a 
nutritional supplement without any known impact on gastrointestinal permeability or local effect 
on the mucosa  or infections . It will balance out the administration of an amino acid (L -GLN) to 
the study population.   
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030024]/Placebo groups -Visits to clinical research site /clinic: baseline, days 3 0, 60, 90, 120, 
150 and 180:  Infants will be evaluated at the clinical research site at baseline, 30 ( ± 7 days ), 60 
(± 7 days ), 90 (±  7 days ), 120 (±  7 days ), 150 (±  7 days ) and 180 (±  7 day s) after the baseline 
visit (figure 2).   There will be a 7 day grace period before and after the desired clinic visit dates.   
 
Approximately, t wo wee ks prior to the all of the visits (except baseline) , the site coordinator w ill 
mail a detailed 3- days food record to the family. This form will be returned for analysis of oral 
diet and fluid intake, including formula and tube feeding intake (see below). D uring each visit, 
the following procedures will be performed with data ente red without subject identifiers into the 
case report form:  
 
1. Complete medical history (including information on BSI) : Gestational age, age at 
diagnosis of NEC , omphalocele, gastrosc hisisor atresia. age at surgery, type of surgery, 
dates/age for BSI events,  types of organisms cultured (genus and species) and 
susceptibility to antibacterials ;  
2. Anthropometric measurements of weight, length, mid arm circumference  and head 
circumference i n duplicate , when possible  (see Aim 2);  
3. Enteral nutrition assessment: The subject’s usual nutrient intake (PN, solid and liquid oral 
diet provided by [CONTACT_752178], supplements and/or tube feedings) will be assessed by [CONTACT_752179]. All of the primary caregivers will receive a 3- days’ food 
record to complete about 1- [ADDRESS_1030025] at each site and f lagellin and LPS specific IgG and f lagellin and LPS specific IgG and f lagellin and LPS specific IgG 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 13 will evaluate this form and the data will be entered into the ESHA Nutrient Analysis 
Program  to calculate t he enteral total caloric and protein intake. The mean daily intake of 
PN an d enteral nutrition calories and grams of protein and fat during the week prior to 
each evaluation visit will be determined and change (∆) in these variables from baseline 
will be c alculated. Enteral diet optimization will occur throughout the study as 
clinically indicated using our comprehensive feeding advancement principles and 
algorithm for SBS children, as previously outlined18. The percent of total energy and 
protein needs that  are met enterally will be calculated. PN will also be assessed for total 
calories and proportion of calories provided by [CONTACT_752180], protein and lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805].  
4. The family will be instructed on how to administer GLN and placebo. During the 
baseline visit, the initial teaching will be done and they will be provided with the 
premeasured powder . The dose (0.6g/kg/d (0.3g/kg/dose)  of GLN or ALA) will be 
measured out in the research pharmacy based on the weight of the child at the visit  into 
individual packets. Children hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752140]’s bedside to be administered by [CONTACT_752181].  At subsequent visits (except visit on day 180), this teaching will be repeated as the 
dose to be admi nistered will change based on the weight of the child. The family will also  
be given a weekly drug diary to complete in between visits. They will return the drug 
diary to the study staff during subsequent visits.  
5. During the initial visit, stool will be co llected into sterile containers and stored at - 80ºF 
until analysis for sIgA  and bacterial composition evaluation. It is anticipated that the 
majority of stool will be collected in clinic during the study visit.  If stool is collected in 
clinic, the stool will be stored immediately in the - 80ºF freezer without any need for 
DNA stab ilizer.   
If stool is not collected  during this visit , families will be instructed on how to collect stool 
for evaluation into a sterile container . They will put this in a storage b ag and kept cold 
until pi[INVESTIGATOR_752141].  
Patients already enrolled will be provided with a  sterile container with instructions to 
collect stool and bring in to the clinic visit for storage and analysis.  The family will be 
asked to collect stool 24- 48 hours before their  clinic visit  and put the stool in a sterile 
container which will be supplied to them by [CONTACT_3476]. They will put this in a 
storage bag and keep  cold.  They will  bring the sample to the clinic  visit.  RNAlater may 
be used with samples when samples are unable to  be obtained within 24 hours of the 
clinic visit.   
 
Stool sIgA analysis: sIgA will be determined by [CONTACT_752182] 27,64.  
 
During baseline visit and visit on day 180 the follo wing additional procedures will be done:  
Extra 2 ml of blood will be colle cted for plasma glutamine , proinflammatory cytokines  analysis , 
flagellin and LPS specific IgG levels .  
 
During a BSI  the following procedure will be done: stool collection for bacte rial analysis and 
sIgA measurement. Extra 2 ml of blood will be collected f or flagellin and LPS specific IgG 
levels.  The blood will be obtained as soon as possible when the patient is being investigated for a 
suspected CA -BSI. In the event that the epi[INVESTIGATOR_752142] a CA -BSI the 
samples will not be evaluated.  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 14 All bacterial isolates obtained during the study from patients will be saved at their respective 
institutions (CCHMC and University of Michigan) until the end of the study in the e vent further 
work with them is required. 
 
Plasma glutamine analysis:  Plasma  GLN will be performed using quantitative ion exchange 
chromatography65. 
 
Proinflammatory cytokine evaluation: Analysis will be performed utilizing Luminex xMAP 
technology (Austin T X) as previously described66, 67. 
 
Measurement of  Flagellin and Lipopolysac charide-  specific Immunoglobulin G  level : This 
will be done using enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) as previously described 18, 87 -88. 
 
Safety evaluation:  The study coordina tor will contact [CONTACT_752183] s erious adverse events  on days 15(±7 days) , 45 (± 7 days) , 75 ( ±7 days) , 105 
(±7 days) , 135 (± 7 days) and 165 (± 7 days) .  There will be a [ADDRESS_1030026].    If hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057], 
the safety evaluation will occur with the primary caregiver (bedside nurs e or parent) .   
 
Additional safety precautions : If while enrolled in the study the patient develops multiorgan 
failure or requires  vasop ressors, the study drug will not be administered.  
  
Clinical GI endoscopy  
Patients with short bowel syndrome/Intestinal failure may have clinical indications for 
gastrointestinal endoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. The se indications include:  
- Gastrointestinal bleeding  
- Persistent feeding intolerance leading to failure to advance enteral feeds  
When the patient is scheduled for a clinically indicate d gastrointestinal endoscopy, duodenal 
fluid (approximately 1 ml) will be a spi[INVESTIGATOR_38105] a sterile container . An additional tissue biopsy 
will also be obtained . 
Patients will not have GI endoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_752143].  
 
The samples  of duodenal fluid and additional tissue collected will be stored in -  80º C freez er. 
They will subsequently be sent for bacterial composition evaluation  at the University of 
Colorado using pyrosequencing techniques described below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 15  
 
 
 
The following ta ble summarizes Study Procedures:  
 
Study Procedures Table  for GLN/Placebo gr oup 
 
 Screening 
and 
Consent  Baseline  
(Day 0)  Day 
15 30 
day 
visit Day 
45 60 
day 
visit Day 
75 90 
day 
visit Day 
105 120 
day 
visit Day 
135 150 
day 
visit Day 
165 180 
day 
visit 
(final 
visit) When 
clinically 
indicated  
Signed informed 
consent   
X               
Medical History   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Physical 
Examination   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Blood collection for 
glutamine ,   
proinflammatory 
cytokines (TNF -α, 
IL-1β, IL -6, IL-8)  and 
Antiflagellin and 
Anti-LPS IgG  
(2 ml))   X            X X (During 
suspected  
or 
confirmed  
BSI) 
Weight, length mid 
arm and head 
circumference 
velocities   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
Nutritional intake 
evaluation   X  X  X  X  X  X  X  
stool collection for 
bacterial and sIgA 
analysis   X  X  X  X  X  X  X X (During 
suspected 
or 
confirmed
BSI) 
Instruction on how 
to measure & 
administer 
GLN/placebo   X  X  X  X  X  X    
3-day food record 
completed by [CONTACT_5569]     X  X  X  X  X  X  
Phone interview    X  X  X  X  X  X   
Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_752144] (~1 
ml) and 1 additional 
biopsy from the 
duodenum   
             X 
 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 16  
 
 
 
Study procedures of control group:    
Healthy age -matched infants (n=12; 6 at each site ) will have serial stools collected on 4 
occasi ons, each separated by 60 days [ baseline, days 60(±15) , 120(±15)  and 180(±15 )]. This is 
abbreviated comp ared to the study subjects. 
 
A week prior to the scheduled date of stool collection, families will receive a brief medical 
questionnaire and stool container. They will be instructed to complete the questionnaire and send 
in with the stool specimen.  
 
They will be provided with a sterile container with instructions to collect stool and bring in to the 
clinic for stor age and analysis. They will be asked to collect stool on the day of the next 
anticipated clinic visit, put the stool in a sterile container (whi ch may contain RNAlater ) which 
will be supplied to them by [CONTACT_3476]. They will put this in a storage bag, keep cool   and 
bring the sample to the clinic visit.     
 
Parents/Primary caregivers drop off stool specimen to the research team at the study s ite or will 
arrange with the team for the specimen to be collected from their homes . 
Study Procedures Table for Control group  
 
 Screening 
and 
Consent  Baseline  
(Day 0)  60-day 
visit 120-day 
visit 180-day 
visit 
(final 
visit)  
Signed informed consent  X X    
Medical History/questionnaire   X X X X 
stool collection for bacterial and 
sIgA analysis   X X X X 
 
I.  Data Col lection  
 
Demographic and clinical information will be collected whenever clinical data are available via 
uniform baseline and follow up clinical  data extraction forms to ensure accuracy and 
consistency.  The essential demographic information includes age a t diagnosis, gender, race and 
ethnicity, birth history and past medical history.  The clinical information includes  bowel length, 
dates and type  of surgeries, nutrition data (formula type, amount, weaning foods, parenteral 
nutrition type and amount), infec tion type  (genus, species and susceptibility to antibacterials) 
date in fection is diagnosed)  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752145]. 
 
J.  Compensation 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 17 Participants will receive $10 for every stool collected for analysis  during study participatio n.  
Subjects will receive study medication , clinical supplies, and laboratory evaluations related to the 
study free of charge.    
 
 
 
X.  Assessme nt of Efficacy  
 
Hypothesis 1:  Enteral GLN supplementation in infants with SBS after massive bowel resection 
for NEC will decrease BSI, and thereby [CONTACT_752184].  
 
Specific Aim 1:  To perform a double -blind, rando mized, placebo controlled, 6- months pi[INVESTIGATOR_752146] (0.6g/kg) vs. isocaloric, isonitrogenous alanine (placebo) treatment in PN -
dependent SBS children due to NEC to evaluate the efficacy of GLN to decrease:   a) BSI 
(primary endpoint) and b) serial serum concentrations of TNF -α, IL1 - β, IL -6 and IL -8 
(secondary endpoint). The primary outcome is the incidence of BSI during the [ADDRESS_1030027] supplementation.  BSI is defined as laboratory- confirmed, culture -proven bloodstream 
infections that meet the Centers for Disease Control an d Prevention (CDC) definition68, 91.  This 
allows for the distinction between cat heter related -BSI and other causes of BSI.  
 
Secondary outcomes: 1) Plasma  proinflammatory cytokine levels (TNF -α, IL -1β, IL -6, IL -8); 2) 
readmissions and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_217816] s tay; 3) proportion of nutrition delivered enterally versus 
parenterally; 4) stool sIgA levels; 5) Plasma  glutamine.  
 
Expected results: We expect that that the SBS children on enteral GLN supplementation will 
have significantly fewer BSI and greater decline  in blood cytokine levels during the period of 
therapy.   
 
Hypothesis 2:  Enteral GLN supplementation will improve somatic growth parameters in Aim 1 
patien ts.  
 
Specific Aim 2:  To assess the efficacy of [ADDRESS_1030028] on somatic 
growt h parameters [length velocity (primary endpoint), weight velocity, mid arm circumference 
and head circumference] in Aim [ADDRESS_1030029] of BSI on  these growth parameters.  
 
The primary outcome for specific aim #2 is length velocity.  Secondary outc omes are growth 
parameters of weight mid arm circumference and head circumference velocities. These are 
clinically relevant growth parameters identified  by [CONTACT_752185]8.  
 
Data collection : During CNC /clinic visits (baseline, days 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180) as 
described above, each child will have weight, length mid arm circumference and head 
circumference measured in duplicat e. These measurements will be done by  a trained  member of 
the study staff  at each center. The individual at each site will be trained to perform these 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030030] methods previously described69, 70. Institutional scales, 
length boards and measuring tapes will be used  at each center.  
 
Expected results: We expect that SBS children on enteral GLN supplementation will have more 
rapid grow th as measured by [CONTACT_752186]. The group with no BSI or decreased BSI (2 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]) during the study period is expected to have a greater increase in growth parameters 
compared to the group with > 2 BSI.  
 
 
Hypothesis 3 : The gut lumenal microbiome is altered in pediatric SBS versus non- SBS controls, 
correlates with BSI and is altered by [CONTACT_752187] N supplementation. 
 
Specific Aim 3:  To comprehensively assess the gut lumenal microbiome (using state -of-the art 
molecular methods) in Aim 1 SBS patients v ersus non- SBS, age -matched control subjects 
(primary endpoint), to correlate major bacterial dynamics  present in the lumen with BSI due to 
specific microbes and to explore whether the gut lumenal microbiome is altered by [CONTACT_752188].  
Primary outc ome: Increased K. pneumonia and  E. faecalis  in the gut microbiome of SBS 
infants with BSI.  
Secondary  outcome:  Alteration in other commensals in the gut lumenal microbiome of SBS 
infants.  
 
Subjects: Infants r ecruited in specific aim 1 (n=48 – subjects - 36; controls - 12)  
Healthy age matched infants (n=12)  will be recruited from the Gastroenterology and s urgery 
clinics .  
 
Sample Procurement:  Stool samples (~500 mcg), will be obtained from infants’ diapers or 
ostomy bags. Stool specimens will be  collected p rospectively during visits at baseline, days 30, 
60, 90, 120, [ADDRESS_1030031] ed whenever the patient has a BSI.   
The controls (12 healthy infants) will have serial stools collected on 4 occasions, each separated 
by 60 days (baseline , days 60, 120 and 180).   
It is anticipated that stool samples will be collected during the clinic v isit. All stool samples will 
be sco oped into a stool container  and stored immediately in a - 80°C freezer. For samples 
collected at home, subjects will be instructed to collect in a container  containing RNAlater  tissue 
reagent . This will be stored in a cold  at home and when delivered to the study team will be  store d 
in -80°C  freezer  until processed. RNAlater provides immediate stabilization of DNA, RNA, and 
protein in samples at room temperature. This preserves the in vivo profile of DNA, RNA, and 
proteins, allowing reliable downstream analysis. Stabilized samples  can be transported at 15 –
25°C for up to 7 days, or stored at 2–8°C for up to 12 months. For longe r storage, stabilized 
samples  can be archived at –80°C.  
Small bowel fluid and tissue procurement: If the patient is scheduled for a clinically indicated 
gastrointestinal endoscopic procedure ; duodenal fluid (~1 ml) will be aspi[INVESTIGATOR_752147].  Specimens will then be stored at - 80°C within 10 minutes of 
obtaining until processing. They  will subsequently be sent for bacterial composition evaluation  at 
the University of Colorado using pyrosequencing techniques descri bed below. 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 19  
Genomic DNA Preparation:  Total genomic DNA will be prepared from specimens using a 
robust  protocol that entails chemical and mechanical disruption of cells, which is performed in a 
HEPA- filtered, UV -sterilized PCR hood71-74. Sham extractions ar e performed in parallel to detect 
contaminated reagents.  Broad -Range PCR: DNA lysates are subjected to PCR with pan -
bacterial 16S rDNA primers (27FYM+3 and 338R), yielding libraries of PCR amplicons 
representative of all bacteria in a specimen74, 75. Trip licate PCR reactions will be performed and 
amplicons pooled for each sample. To alleviate representat ional bias in PCR amplicon libraries, 
we will determine empi[INVESTIGATOR_752148]- range rDNA Q -PCR.  High 
throughput DNA Pyros equencing : Subject PCR amplicon libraries will be sequenced using the 
high- throughput Genome Sequencer™ FLX pyrosequencing platform of [COMPANY_002]/454 Life 
Sciences, Inc., available through the University of Colorado’s Consortium for Comparative 
Genomics. Barcoded PCR primers will be used to multiplex ~200 libraries per pyrosequencer 
run76-79. Approximately 5000 rRNA gene sequences will be determined for each sample library, 
which based on our preliminary studies will comprise a comprehensive census of the resident 
microbes. Additional sequences will be screened if coverage is less than 95%79-81.  
 
XI. Assessment of Safety     
 
A DSMB will monitor the study for the occurrence of adverse events  (both serious and 
otherwise).  A significant increase in the rate of adverse events would be cause f or concern for 
the safety of participants in the study.  Information on adverse events will be presented in several 
ways:  (1) listings of serious adverse events with accompanying narrative summary by [CONTACT_978]: (2) 
summaries of adverse events by [CONTACT_82856].  This information will be 
presented to the DSMB.  
 
Interim monitoring reports for the DSMB will include, but will not be limited to, such  
tabulations as:   
 
      1.   Frequency of BSI  and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] 
2. coagulation studies  
3. liver profile s 
4. renal profiles  
5. Frequency of adverse events   
 
The DSMB will meet at the start of the study, then after [ADDRESS_1030032] received treatment. 
Subsequent meet ings will be at the discretion of the chair  given the expected speed of 
recruitment and study medica tion administration.  
 
The DSMB chair (or designee) will be asked to review SAE reports within 48 hours after initial 
receipt of the information by [CONTACT_20603](s), to review the PIs assignment of SAEs as related 
or unrelated to treatment, to confirm th e grading of any toxicities . This will also be reported to 
the site IRB  and the study sponsor . 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030033] (DSMB).  An investigator in this study will not be a 
member of the DSMB.  Members of the DSMB will receive safety data approximately every [ADDRESS_1030034] 
of vital signs, AEs, and laboratory evaluations.  A cumulative listing of patient withdrawal s, dose 
adjustments, and serious adverse events (SAEs) will also be reviewed.  DSMB members will be 
notified of all SAEs reported expeditiously to regulatory authorities.   
 
[CONTACT_45262] E. Heubi, Division of Gastroenterology, will act as the chair of the DSM B. There will be 
2 other members appointed to the DSMB: a  statistician  ([CONTACT_752205] sell) and a 
neonatologist  ([CONTACT_752206]) , who are not involved in the conduct of the study.  [CONTACT_752207]  will serve as the safety officer for this study . The safety officer is not a member of the 
DSMB  and he is an expert on glutamine metabolism and use in c hildren with chronic and persistent 
diarrhea.  
 
 
Study Monitoring  
 
An investigationa l new drug (IND)  application was submitted by [CONTACT_941] P I for the use of L -GLN in 
the management of infants with SBS. An independent monitor from the CCHMC Clinical Trials 
Office  will conduct routine independent monitoring visits that shall occur one or more times 
during the period after study initiation but before study closeout. Guidelines for scheduling 
monitoring visits shall be determined according to the stage of development , complexity of the 
study, the rate of subject accrual and other factors. Monitoring visits are conducted for routine 
monitoring only and are intended to e nsure that the protocol and applicable regulatory 
requirements are being followed, that subjects' rights and safety are protected, and to confirm 
data integrity and quality. 
 
XII. Adverse Events  
 
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient participating in this trial.  
An adverse event can be an unfavorable and/or unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, syndrome or disease associated with or occurring during the use 
of an investigational product whethe r or not considered related to the investigational product.   
 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is one t hat: 
 
1. results in death  
2. is life threatening  
3. requires an inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752149]  
4. is a persistent or significant inca pacity or substantial disruption of ability to conduct 
normal life functions  
5. is a congenital anomaly/ birth defect  
6. is an event that doe s not meet the above criteria but may jeopardize the patient or may 
require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030035] (IRB) Requi rements, the Investigator will report serious adverse 
events to the IRB Office within the time period required at each institution (at CCHMC this is 
outlin ed in  research policy R -18).  All other adverse events that are not serious will be reported 
to the I RB at the time of continuing review, per IRB requirements.   
 
 
AE’s require prompt  (within 7 days after knowledge of the problem) reporting to the 
IRB when  meeting the following criteria:  
• Any unanticipated problem involving risk to subjects  
• Deviations from  or changes to , the protocol to eliminate immediate hazards to the 
trial participants  
• Changes increasing the risk to subjects and/or significantly affecting the conduct 
of the trial.  
• All adverse drug reactions that are both serious and unexpected  
• New infor mation that may adversely affect the safety of the subjects or conduct of 
the trial.  
 
These events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_752189] 7 calendar days of the sponsor’s initial receipt of the information if 
characterized as fatal or life- threatening.  Non- fatal or non- life threatening events 
must be reported in 15 calendar days  or at the time for annual review (reporting will 
be based on the FDA criteria for reporting AEs) . In addition, these events are to be 
reported to the IRB  based on IRB reporting guidelines.  . 
 
Recording of Adverse Events  
 
Adverse event recording will begin after administration of study medication.   
 
Diagnostic and therapeutic non- invasive and invasive (i.e. surgical) procedures will 
not be reported as adverse events. However, the medical condition for which the 
procedure was performed must be reported if it meets the definition of an adverse 
event, unless it is pre -existing (prior to initiating GLN ). 
 
Medical conditions/diseases present before starting drug are only considered adverse 
events if they worsen after s tarting treatment.  
 
Symptoms of the original or targeted disease are not to be considered adverse events 
in this treatment.  The following symptoms are indicative of underlying disease and 
will not be reported as adverse events:  Malabsorption, growth fai lure, liver disease 
and BSI. 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030036] if the rate is higher than 20% o f 
what is standard for the center.  
 
As far as possible, each adverse event will be assessed by [CONTACT_752190] (start and end dates), the severity grade (mild, moderate, 
severe, life- threatening, fatal), its relationship to th e drug (unrelated, unlikely to be 
related, possibly, probably and definitely related), the action(s) taken, the outcome 
(i.e. resolved, resolved with seque lae, continuing), gravity (SERIOUS or NOT 
SERIOUS), and expected/unexpected on the basis of drug inse rt. 
 
Grading (Severity) of Adverse Events  
 
Each adverse event will be graded to describe its intensity according to the Severity 
scale listed for each AE f ound on the  
 NCI’s Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version 4.0.    
 
Relationship to Dr ug 
 
For all adverse events that occur while the patient is on drug, the relationship to the 
drug must be assessed by [CONTACT_752191] s cale: 
 
1 = not related    
2 = unlikely    
3 = possibly related   
4 = probably related   
5 = definitely  related   
 
For Grade > 3 adverse reactions which are possibly (3), probably (4) or definitely (5) 
related to the drug, study medication should be disconti nued as described above. 
 
Please note: For safety data analysis, not related and unlikely are considered “not 
attributable;” possible, probable and definite are considered “attributable.”  
Assessment of relationship to drug must be carried out by [CONTACT_752192] 5- point scale above.  
 
Gravity (Seriousness) of Adverse Events  
 
Each adverse event is to be classified by [CONTACT_752193].   
 
Follow -Up after Adverse Events  
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 23 All adverse events will be followed until they are resolved or the patient’s 
participation in the treatment ends (i.e., until a final report is completed for that 
patient).  
 
In addition, all SAEs and those non serious events as sessed by [CONTACT_752194] (i.e. possibly, probably, definitely related to the drug) will continue to be 
followed even after the patient’s participation in the treatment is over. Such events 
will be followed for [ADDRESS_1030037] treatment. Reso lution of such events is to be 
documented in the CRF.  
 
Expedited Reporting  
 
SAE’s require expedited r eporting when meeting the following criteria:  
• Serious  
• Unexpected  
• At least possibly related to the study agent or other protocol specific activity 
 
Serious Adverse Events meeting the above criteria are required to be reported to the FDA as 
follows:  
• If chara cterized as fatal or life- threatening, within 7 calendar days of the sponsor’s initial 
receipt of the information  
• If non -fatal or non- life threatening, within [ADDRESS_1030038], depending on the distribution of 
the variable.  For c ategorical data, frequencies and percentages in each group will be presented.  
Comparisons will be ma de using Fisher’s exact test. These tests will be conducted at the two -
sided, 5% level of significance. In addition, demographic and baseline data for the control group 
will be summarized and presented as described above.  The statistical analysis plan for each aim 
is presented below.  
Aim 1 Hypothesis :  Enteral GLN supplementation in infants with SBS after massive bowel 
resection for NEC will decrease BSI, and thereby [CONTACT_752184]. 
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030039] 
supplementation.  BSI is defined as laboratory- confirmed, culture -proven bloodstream infections 
that meet  the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) definition69. To compare the 
incidence of BSI d uring the [ADDRESS_1030040] supplementation. Therefore the 2 groups will be compared using 
the Fisher’s Exact test at the one -sided 10% level of significance which will indicate a significant 
trend .  As an additional analysis, time to first BSI will be displayed using Kaplan- Meier (K -M) 
curves. The log -rank test will be used to test f or differences in curves between treatment groups. 
Patients will be censored if they exit the study prior to having their first BSI. As a further 
exploratory analysis, time to multiple -event analyses techniques will be used to compare groups 
where the mult iple events represent multiple epi[INVESTIGATOR_752150].  
 
Secondary outcomes include the following and will be tested at the two- sided 5% level of 
significance:   
1) Plasma proinflammatory cytokine levels: TNF -α, IL1 -β, IL -6, and IL -8. Change from 
baseline values at 180 days will be computed for cytokine  levels . Change from baseline 
to 180 days values will also be calculated for the fl agellin and LPS IgG  levels. 
Appropriate transformations of the data (e.g. log) will be done prior to calculating change 
from baseline in order to meet the assumptions of the analyses (i.e. normality, equal 
variance).  Analysis of covariance techniques will be used to compare  the change from 
baseline scores of the treatment groups. Covariates included in the analysis will be  
baseline value, age, gender, ostomy status, feeding type (formula, breast milk).  
2) Length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752151]: For length of hospit al stay, 
treatment groups will be compared using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. For number of 
readmissio ns, either a Wilcoxon Rank Sum test or a Chi -Square test for homogeneity will 
be used to compare groups, depending on the variability of the number of readmissions.   
3) Stool sIgA levels: Treatment groups will be compared using the random effects repeated 
measures analysis of covariance. The response variables for each of the parameters will 
be change from baseline. The time points included in the analyses wil l be 30, 60, 90, 120, 
150, [ADDRESS_1030041] -baseline. If required to meet the assumptions of the analyse s 
(normality, equal variances), appropriate transformations will be used. Treatment groups 
will be compared at each individual time point using appropriate  contrasts and the error 
term from the repeated measures model. Covariates will include baseline valu e, age, 
gender, ostomy status, feeding type (formula, breast milk).  
4) Proportion of nutrition delivered enterally versus parenterally:  The statistically analysis 
approach for this endpoint will be the same as for the Stool sIgA levels discussed above.  
Transformations appropriate for proportions may be used, if necessary, to meet 
assumptions of the analyses. 
5) Plasma glutamine: The statistical analysis approac h for this endpoint will be the same as 
for the proinflammatory cytokine levels discussed above.  
6) Impa ct of level of compliance on outcome will be evaluated for a dose effect analysis.  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 25 Aim 2 Hypothesis : Enteral GLN supplementation will improve somatic growth parameters in 
Aim 1 patients.  
7) The two treatment groups will be compared using the random effects re peated measures 
analysis of covariance for the following parameters:  length velocity, weight velocity, 
mid arm circumference and head circumference. Lengt h velocity and weight velocity will 
be analyzed as the post baseline scores. Mid arm circumference an d head circumference 
will be analyzed as change from baseline. The time points included in the analyses will 
be 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, [ADDRESS_1030042] -baselin e. If required to meet the assumptions of the 
analyses (normality, equal variances), appropriate transformations will be used (e.g. log).  
Treatment groups will be compared at each individual time point using appropriate 
contrasts and the error term from t he repeated measures model. Covariates will include 
baseline value, age, gender, ostomy status, feedi ng type (formula, breast milk). For length 
velocity and weight velocity, the baseline value will be the baseline length and weight 
values.  
To evaluate the impact of BSI on the growth parameters listed above, point biserial 
correlation coefficients will be constructed overall and within each treatment group and 
tested to determine significance.  
  
Aim 3 Hypothesis: The gut luminal microbiome is altered in ped iatric SBS versus non- SBS 
controls, correlates with BSI and is altered by [CONTACT_752195]. 
 
8) Intestinal microbial groups (e.g., species, genera) will be correlated with the treatment or 
control arms of the GLN supplementation trial and with bact eria identified during any 
diagnosed BSI.  The frequency of rRNA sequences will be interpreted as the  relative 
abundances of organisms in samples  of stool and standardized by [CONTACT_752196] . 
Bacteria present in specimens will be preliminarily  identif ied by [CONTACT_752197]ïve 
Bayesian Classifier Tool of the Ribosomal Database Project82.83. The strength of 
association of individual microbial groups with treatment arms and/or main outcome 
measures will be measured by [CONTACT_752198]-
parametric Kruskal -Wallis test. Experimental reproducibility and inter - and intra -
individual similarities in microbial populations will be assessed by [CONTACT_752199] -abundance -based Morisita -Horn index81, . In all st atistical 
analyses 2 -sided p -values less than 0.05 will be considered statistically significant. 
Resu lts will be corroborated through the phylogeny- based UniFrac  metric, which 
assesses population- wide differences in microbial lineages between different gro ups of 
subjects (SBS vs. control) 82. Stool -associated bacteria collected at BSI incidence will be 
compared to the species identified on blood culture to determine whether intestinal 
bacteria are potential sources for BSI. Alternatively, absence of particu lar species from 
the stool at the time of BSI diagnosis will indicate that lack of specific bacterial species 
from the stool predisposes to BSI. Tissue samples collected during endoscopy or surgery 
and intestinal fluid aspi[INVESTIGATOR_752152]. 
Patterns will also be reviewed to assess for relationships to enteral feeding rate.  
 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030043] been used and demonstrated in 2 published studies by [CONTACT_752200]/co -investigators 89, 90. 
 
 
Sample size  
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_752153] 
a future definitive study.  The power of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_752154] a trend toward improvement 
in BSI rates.  For this study, we defined “trend” as a significant improvement tested at the one -
sided, 10% level of significance. A total of 18 patients per treatment group will be enrolled in the 
study.  Assuming a 10% dropout rate, it i s expected that [ADDRESS_1030044] 85% 
power to detect a trend if the true BSI rates are 75% versus 30% BSI rate at the one -sided 10% 
level of sig nificance.  This calculation is based on the Fisher’s exact test for two proportions. 
A sample size of [ADDRESS_1030045] 80% power to detect a 
geometric mean ratio of 2.0 for the two treatment groups for the proinfl ammatory cytokines 
assuming a coefficient of variation of 0.7 using a two- sided, 5% level of significance test.      
We anticipate applying for a follow up R01 /U01 to attract other centers that will allow a larger 
more definitive study regarding the use of  GLN in pediatric SBS . 
 
IX.   Data Management  
 
Each subject will be given a unique identifier. Only members of the study team will be able to 
link this ide ntifier to the subject. No patient identifiers will be published.  The specific data items 
to be captu red will be stored in a secure area that will be a locked filing cabinet or in a password 
protected electronic file.  
 
REDCap ( Research Electronic Data Capture ) is a secure, web -based application designed 
exclusively to support data capture for research st udies. This application will be used for data  
entry during the study. REDCap provides: 1) an intuitive interface for data entry (with data 
validation); 2) audit trails for tracking data manipulation and export procedures; 3) automated 
export procedures for  seamless data downloads to common statistical packages ( SPSS, SAS, 
Stata, R ); and 4) procedures for importing data from external sources   
 
Deidentified sa mples and data will be retained until all the final data analysis and publication.  
Data/specimens/ identifier  will be destroyed at the earliest opportunity consistent with the 
research plan.   
 
Unused plasma, stool and mucosal tissue will be deidentified and stored for future analysis if the 
participant provides consent for this purpose. These will be used in the future for further analysis 
of bacterial DNA analysis as newer methods are developed in the field of pyrosequencing, 
nutrition metabolism and microb ial DNA analysis.  
 
X.  Financing  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 27 Funding is by [CONTACT_18121]/NIDDK under the R -21 mechanism  (Grant # 1R21DK088027 -  01A1)   
pending IRB approval. The Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and the CCTST  will also 
provide ancillary support . GLN will be provided by [CONTACT_752201].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
XI. References  
1. Touloukian RJ, Smith GJ. Normal intestinal length in preter m infants. J Pediatr Surg. 
1983;18(6):720- 723 
2. Struijs MC, Diamond IR, de Silva N, Wales PW. Establishing norms for intestinal length in 
children. J Pediatr  Surg. 2009;44(5):933- 938 
3. Cole CR, Ziegler TR. Small bowel bacterial overgrowth: a negative factor in  gut adaptation in 
pediatric SBS. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2007;9(6):456- 462 
4. Buchman AL, Scolapio J, Fryer J. AGA technical review on short bowel syndrome a nd intestinal 
transplantation. Gastroenterology. 2003;124(4):1111- 1134 
5. Quiros -Tejeira RE, Ament ME, R eyen L, Herzog F, Merjanian M, Olivares -Serrano N, Vargas 
JH. Long- term parenteral nutritional support and intestinal adaptation in children with short 
bowel syndrome: a 25- year experience. J Pediatr. 2004;145(2):157- 163 
6. D'Antiga L, Dhawan A, Davenport M, Mieli- Vergani G, Bjarnason I. Intestinal absorption and 
permeability in paediatric short -bowel syndrome: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 
1999; 29(5):588- 593 
7. Kocoshis SA. Short bowel and long life: no longer mutually exclusive. J Pediatr. 
2004;145(2):147- 148. 
8. Cole CR, Hansen NI, Higgins RD, Ziegler TR, Stoll BJ, for the Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
Neonatal Research Network. Very low birth weight preter m infants with surgical short bowel 
syndrome: incidence, morbidity and mortality, and growth outcomes  at 18 to 22 Months. 
Pediatrics. 2008;122(3):e573- 582 
9. Wales PW, de Silva N, Kim J, Lecce L, To T, Moore A. Neonatal short bowel syndrome: 
population- based estimates of incidence and mortality rates. J Pediatr Surg. 2004;39(5):690- 695 
10. Buchman AL, Moukarzel A, Goodson B, Herzog F, Pollack P, Reyen L, Alvarez M, Ament ME, 
Gornbein J. Catheter -related infections associated with home parenteral nutrition and predictive 
factors for the need for catheter removal in their treatment. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 
1994;18(4):297- [ADDRESS_1030046] Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2003;17(6):931- 942. 
12. Spencer AU, Kovacevich D, McKinney- Barnett M, Hair D, Canham J, Maksym C, Teitelbaum 
DH. Pediatric short -bowel syndrome: the cost of comprehensive care. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2008;88(6):1552- 1559.  
13. Andorsky DJ, Lund DP, Lillehei CW, Jaksic T, Dicanzio J, Richar dson DS, Collier SB, Lo C, 
Duggan C. Nutritional and other postoperative management of neonates with short bowel 
syndrome correlates with clinical outcomes. J Pediatr. 2001;139(1):27- 33. 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 28 14. Sondheimer JM, Cadnapaphornchai M, Sontag M, Zerbe GO. Predicting the  duration of 
dependence on parenteral nutrition after neonatal intestinal res ection. J Pediatr. 1998; 132(1):80-
84. 
15. Schimpl G, Feierl G, Linni K, Uitz C, Ozbey H, Hollwarth ME. Bacterial translocation in short -
bowel syndrome in rats. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 1999;9(4):224- [ADDRESS_1030047], Wommack E, Deitch EA. Immunosuppression and intestinal bacterial overgrowth 
synergistically promote bacterial translocation. Arch Surg. 1988;123(11):1359- 1364. 
17. Kurkchubasche AG, Smith SD, Rowe MI. Catheter sepsis in short -bowel syndrome. Arch Surg. 
1992;127(1):21- 24 
18. Cole CR, Frem JC, Schmotzer  B, Gewirtz  AT, Meddings JB, Gold BD, Z iegler TR. The rate of 
bloodstream infection is high in infants with shor t bowel syn drome: relationship with small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth, enteral feed ing, and inflammatory and immune responses. The 
Journal of Pediatrics. 2010 156(6):941- 7, 947.e1  
19. Ling  PR, Khaodhiar L, Bistrian BR, Keane -Ellison M, Thibault A, Tawa N. Inflammatory 
mediators in patients receiving long- term home parenteral nutrition. Dig Dis Sci. 
2001;46(11):2484- 2489  
20. Goulet O, Baglin- Gobet S, Talbotec C, Fourcade L, Colomb V, Sauvat F, J ais JP, Michel JL, Jan 
D, Ricour C. Outcome and long- term growth after extensive small bowel resection in the 
neonatal period: a survey of 87 children. Eur  J Pediatr Surg. 2005;15(2):95- 101 
21. Windmueller HG. Glutamine utilization by [CONTACT_343655]. Adv Enzymol Relat Areas Mol 
Biol. 1982;53:201- 237. 
22. Newsholme EA, Crabtree B, Ardawi MS. Glutamine metabolism in lymphocytes: its 
biochemical, physiological and clinical importance. Q J Exp Physiol. 1985;70(4):473- 489. 
23. Stehle P, Zander J, Mertes N, Albers S, Puchstein C, Lawin P, Furst P. Effect of parenteral 
glutamine peptide supplements on muscle glutamine loss and nitrogen balance after major 
surgery. Lancet. 1989; 1(8632):231- 233. 
24. Ziegler TR, Young LS, Benfell K, Scheltinga M, Hortos K, Bye R, Morrow FD, Jac obs DO, 
Smith RJ, Antin JH, Wilmore DW. Clinical and metabolic efficacy of glutamine -supplemented 
parenteral nutrition after bone marrow transplantation. A  randomized, double -blind, controlled 
study. Ann Intern Med. 1992;116(10):821- 828. 
25. Chen K, Nezu R, Sa ndo K, Haque SM, Iiboshi Y, Masunari A, Yoshida H, Kamata S, Takagi Y, 
Okada A. Influence of glutamine -supplemented parenteral nutrition on intestinal amin o acid 
metabolism in rats after small bowel resection. Surg Today. 1996;26(8):618- 623 
26. Ziegler TR, Eva ns ME, Fernandez -Estivariz C, Jones DP. Trophic and cytoprotective nutrition 
for intestinal adaptation, mucosal repair, and barrier function. Annu Rev Nutr . 2003;23:229- 261. 
27. Tian J, Hao L, Chandra P, Jones DP, Willams IR, Gewirtz AT, Ziegler TR. Dietary gl utamine 
and oral antibiotics each improve indexes of gut barrier function in rat short bowel syndrome. 
Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009;296(2) :G348- 355 
28. Newsholme P. Why is L -glutamine metabolism important to cells of the immune system in 
healt h, postinjury, surgery or infection? J Nutr. Sep 2001;131([ADDRESS_1030048]):2515S -2522S. 
29. Khan J, Iiboshi Y, Cui L, Wasa M, Sando K, Takagi Y, Okada A. Alanyl -glutam ine-
supplemented parenteral nutrition increases luminal mucus gel and decreases permeability in the 
rat small intestine. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1999;23(1):24- 31. 
30. Jonas CR, Gu LH, Nkabyo YS, Mannery YO, Avissar NE, Sax HC, Jones DP, Ziegler TR. 
Gluta mine and KGF each regulate extracellular thiol/disulfide redox and enhance proliferation in 
Caco -2 cells. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2003;285(6):R1421- 1429. 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/[ADDRESS_1030049] S, Chuncharunee S, Wanikiat P, Archararit N, Santanirand P. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_52081]: 
effects of parenteral glutamine dipeptide supplementation on neutrophil functions and prevent ion 
of chemotherapy- induced side -effects in acute myeloid leukaemia patients. J Int Med Res. 
2008;36(6):1383- 1391.  
32. van der Hulst RR, van Kreel BK, von Meye nfeldt MF, Brummer RJ, Arends JW, Deutz NE, 
Soeters PB. Glutamine and the preservation of gut integri ty. Lancet. 1993;341(8857):1363- 1365  
33. Houdijk AP, Rijnsburger ER, Jansen J, Wesdorp RI, Weiss JK, McCamish MA, Teerlink T, 
Meuwissen SG, Haarman HJ, Thijs LG , van Leeuwen PA. Randomised trial of glutamine -
enriched enteral nutrition on infectious morbidity in patients with multiple trauma. Lancet. 
1998;352(9130):772- 776 
34. By[CONTACT_752202], Morrissey TB, Nattakom TV, Ziegler TR, Wilmore DW. Growth hormone, 
glutamine, and a modified diet enhance nutrient absorption in patients with severe short bowel 
syndrome. JPEN J Pare nter Enteral Nutr. 1995;19(4):296- 302. 
35. By[CONTACT_752202], Wilmore DW, Iyer K, Dibaise J, Clancy K, Robinson MK, Chang P, Gertner JM, 
Lautz D. Growth hormone, glutam ine, and an optimal diet reduces parenteral nutrition in patients 
with short bowel syndrome: a prospe ctive, randomized, placebo -controlled, double -blind clinical 
trial. Ann Surg. 2005;242(5):655- [ADDRESS_1030050] Rev. 2005(1):CD001457. 
37. van den Berg A, van Elburg RM, Vermeij L, van Zwol A, van den Brink GR, Twisk JW, 
Nieuwenhuis EE, Fetter WP. Cytokine responses in very low birth weight infants receiving 
glutamine -enriched enteral nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2009;48(1):94- 101 
38. Neu J, Roig JC, Meetze WH, Veerman M, Carter C, Millsaps M, Bowling D, Dallas MJ, 
Sleasman J, Knight T, Auestad N. Enteral glutamine supplementation f or very low birth weight 
infants decreases morbidity. J Pediatr. 1997;131(5):691- 699. 
39. Korkmaz A, Yurdakok M, Yigit S, Tekinalp G. Long- term enteral glutamine supplementation in 
very low birth weight infants: effects on growth parameters. Turk J Pediatr. 2007;49(1):37- 44. 
40. Duggan C, Stark AR , Auestad N , Collier S, Fulhan J, Gura K, Utter S, Teixeira -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] A , 
Donovan K, Lund D. Glutamine supplementation in infants with gastrointestinal disease: a 
randomized, placebo- contr olled pi[INVESTIGATOR_201834] l. Nutrition. 2004;20(9):752- 756. 
41. Grover Z, Tubman R, McGuire W. Glutamine supplementation for young infants with severe 
gastrointestinal disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007(1):CD005947  
42. Rhoads JM, Argenzio RA, Chen W, Rippe RA, Westwick JK, Cox AD, Berschneider HM, 
Brenner  DA. L -glutamine stimulates intestinal cell proliferation and activates mitogen -activated 
protein kinases. Am J Physiol. 1997;272(5 Pt 1):G943- 953. 
43. Basuroy S, Sheth P, Mansbach CM, Rao RK. Acetaldehyde disrupts tight junctions and adherens 
junctions in hum an colonic mucosa: protection by [CONTACT_752203] L -glutamine. Am J Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005;289(2):G367- 375. 
44. Seth A, Basuroy S, Sheth P, Rao RK. L -Glutamine ameliorates acetaldehyde- induced increase in 
paracellular permeability in Caco -[ADDRESS_1030051] Liver Physiol.  
2004;287(3):G510- 517 
45. Poindexter BB, Ehrenkranz RA, Stoll BJ, Wright LI, Poole WK, Oh W, Bauer CR, Papi[INVESTIGATOR_5829] L, 
Tyson JE, Carlo WA, Laptook AR, Narendran V, Stevenson DK, Fanaroff AA, Korones SB, 
Shankaran S, Fine r NN, and Lemons JA for the NICHD Neonatal Research Network. Pediatrics 
2004; 113:1209- 1215 
46. Lunn PG, Campbell D, Elia M. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 1998;57:106A  
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 30 47. Williams EA, Elia M and Lunn PG American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2007; 86:421- 427 
48. Kelly D, King T, Aminov R. Importance of microbial colonization of the gut in early life to the 
development of immunity. Mutat Res. 2007; 58- 69. 
49. Kaufman SS, Loseke CA, Lupo JV, Young RJ, Murray ND, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_752155], Vanderhoof JA. 
Influence of bacterial overgro wth and intestinal inflammation on duration of parenteral nutrition 
in children with short bowel syndrome. J Pediatr. 1997;131(3):356- 361 
50. Pace NR. A molecular view of microbial diversity and the biosphere. Science. 1997;276:734-
740. 
51. Relman DA. Detection an d identification of previously unrecognized microbial pathogens. 
Emerg Infect Dis. 1998;4(3):382- 389. 
52. Frank DN, Pace NR. Gastrointestinal microbiology enters the metagenomics era. Curr Opin 
Gastroenterol. 2008;24(1):4- 10. 
53. Peterson DA, Frank DN, Pace NR, Gordon JI. Metagenomic approaches for defining the 
pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases. Cell Ho st Microbe. 2008;3(6):417- 427. 
54. Relman DA, Loutit JS, Schmidt TM, Falkow S, Tompkins LS. The agent of bacillary 
angiomatosis. An approach to the identificat ion of uncultured pathogens. N Engl J Med. 
1990;323(23):1573- 1580. 
55. Wilson KH, Blitchington R, Frothingham R, Wilson JA. Phylogeny of the Whipple's -disease -
associated bacterium. Lancet. 1991;338:474- 475. 
56. Relman DA, Schmidt TM, MacDermott RP, Falkow S. Ident ification of the uncultured bacillus 
of Whipple's disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 1992;  327(5):293- 301. 
57. Anderson BE, Dawson JE, Jones DC, Wilson KH. Ehrlichia chaffeensis, a new species 
associated with human ehrlichiosis. J Clin Microbiol. 1991;29(12):2838- 2842. 
58. Frank DN, St Amand AL, Feldman RA, Boedeker EC, Harpaz N, Pace NR. Molecular -
phylogenetic characteri zation of microbial co mmunity imbalances  in human inflammatory bowel 
diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104(34):[ZIP_CODE]- [ZIP_CODE]. 
59. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT , Eckburg PB, Turnbaugh PJ, Sam uel BS, Gordon JI, Relman DA, 
Fraser -Liggett CM, Nelson KE. Metagenomi c analysis of  the human distal gut microbiome. 
Science. 2006;312(5778):1355- 1359. 
60. Turnbaugh PJ, Backhed F, Fulton L, Gordon JI. Diet -induced obesity is linked to marked but 
reversible alterations in the mouse distal gut microbiome. Cell Host Microbe. 2008; 3(4):213- 223. 
61. Young VB, Schmidt TM. Antibiotic -associated diarrhea accompanied by [CONTACT_115636]- scale alterations 
in the composition of the fecal microbiota. J Cli n Microbiol. 2004;42(3):1203- 1206. 
62. Komanduri S, Gillevet PM, Sikaroodi M, Mutlu E, Keshavarzian A. Dysbiosis in pouchitis: 
evidence of unique microfloral patterns in pouch inflammation. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 
2007;5(3):352- 360. 
63. Gophna U, Sommerfeld K, Gophna S, Doolittle WF, Veldhuyzen van Zanten SJ. Differences 
between tissue- associated intestinal microfloras of patients with Crohn's disease and ulcerative 
colitis. J Clin Microbiol. 2006;44(11):4136- 4141  
64. Scholtens PA, Alliet P, Raes M, Alles MS, Kroes  H, Boehm G, Knippels LM, Knol J, 
Vandenplas Y. Fecal secretory immunoglobulin A is increased in heal thy infants who receive a 
formula with short -chain galacto -oligosaccharides and long- chain fructo -oligosaccharides. J. 
Nutr. 2008; 138:1141- 1147. 
65. Deyl Z, H yanek J, Horakova M. Profiling of amino acids in body fluids and tissues by [CONTACT_752204]. J Chromatogr. 1986;379:177- 250 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 31 66. Deyl Z, Hyanek J, Horakova M. Profiling of amino acids in body fluids and tissues by [CONTACT_752204]. J Chromatogr. 1986;379:177- 250. 
67. Skogstrand K, Ekelund CK, Thorsen P, Vogel I, Jacobsson B, Norgaard- Pedersen B, Hougaard 
DM. Effects of blood sample handling procedures on measurable inflammatory markers in 
plasma, serum and dried blood spot samples. J Imm unol Methods. 2008;336(1):78- 84. 
68. Horan TC, Andrus M, Dudeck MA. CDC/NHSN surveillance definition of health care- associated 
infection and criteria for specific types of infections in the acute care setting. Am. J. Infect. 
Control 2008; 36: 309- 332  
69. Groenewo ld WG, Tilahun M. Anthropometric indicators of nutritional status, socioeconomic 
factors and mortality in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_752156]. J Biosoc Sci. 1990;22(3):373- 379. 
70. Leleiko NS, Luder E, Fridman M, Fersel J, Benkov K. Nutritional assessment of pediatric 
patients admitted to an acute -care pediatric service utilizing anthropometric measurements.  
JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 1986;10(2):166- 168 
71. Frank DN, Feldman RA. Molecular -phylogenetic strategies for characterization of uncultured 
pathogens. In:  Tibayrenc M, ed. Encyclopedia of Infectious Diseases: Modern Methodologies : 
Wiley; 2007. 
72. Frank DN, S pi[INVESTIGATOR_752157], Davis W, Wagner E, Lyons E, Pace NR. Culture -independent 
molecular analysis of microbial constituents of the healthy human outer ear. J Clin Microbiol. 
2003;41(1):295- [ADDRESS_1030052] Environ Microbiol. 
2006;72(10):6707- 6715.  
74. Frank JA, Reich CI, Sharma S, Weisbaum JS, Wilson BA, Olsen GJ. Critical evaluation of two 
primers commonly used for ampl ification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes. Appl Environ Microbiol. 
2008;74(8): 2461- 2470.  
75. Weisburg WG, Barns SM, Pelletier DA, Lane DJ. 16S ribosomal DNA ampli fication for 
phylogenetic study. J Bacteriol. 1991;173(2):697- 703 
76. Frank DN. BARCRAWL and BARTAB: soft ware tools for the design and implementation of 
barcoded primers for highly multiplexed DNA sequencing. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009;10:362. 
77. Binladen J, Gilbert MT, Bollback JP, Panitz F, Bendixen C, Nielsen R, Willerslev E. The use of 
coded PCR primers enables high- throughput sequencing of multiple homolog amplification 
products by 454 parallel sequencing. PLoS ONE. 2007;2:e197. 
78. Hamady M, Walk er JJ, Harris JK, Gold NJ, Knight R. Error -correcting barcoded primers for 
pyrosequencing hundreds of samples in multiplex. Nat Methods. 2008;5(3):235- 237. 
79. Kemp PF, Aller JY. Bacterial diversity in aquatic and other environments: what 16S rDNA 
libraries can tell us. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2004(47):161- 177. 
80. EstimateS:  Statistical Estimation of Species Richness and Shared Species from Samples  
[computer program]. Version 7.[ZIP_CODE]. 
81. Chao A, Chazdon RL, Colwell RK, Shen T -J. A new statistical approach for assessin g similarity 
of species composition with incidence and abundance data. Ecology Letters. 2005;8:148- 159. 
82. Lozupone C, Knight R. UniFrac: a new phylogenetic method for comparing microbial 
communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005;71(12):8228- 8235. 
83. Van Zwol A,  Moll HA, Fetter WP, van Elburg RM. Glutamine -enriched enteral nutrition in very 
low birth weight infants and allergic and infectious diseases at age 6 years of age. Pediatr. 
Perinat. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_752158], 2011; 25: 60- 66 
Protocol – Glutamine  
Version:  5/1/14 32 84. Ewaschuk JB, Murdoch GK, Johnson IR, Madsen KL , Field CJ . Glutamine supplementation 
improves intestinal barrier function in a weaned pi[INVESTIGATOR_752159]. Br. J. Nutr 
2011 18: 1- 8.  
85. Zhong X, Zhang XH, Li XM, Zhou YM, Li W, Huang XX, Zhang LL, Wang T. Intestinal 
growth and morphology is associated with increase in heat shock protein 70 expression in 
weaning pi[INVESTIGATOR_752160]. J. Anim Sci 2011, June (E pub ahead 
of print).  
86. Atia A, Buchman AL, Treatment of cholera -like diarrhoea with oral rehydration. Ann Trop Med 
Parasitol 2010; 104 (6):465- [ADDRESS_1030053] JR, Leader LM, Jones DP, Gewirtz  AT. Detectable serum flagellin a nd 
lipopolysaccharide and upregulated antif lagellin and lipopolysaccharide immunoglobulins in 
human short bowel syndrome. Am. J. Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2008; 294: R402- 410. 
88. Gewitz AT, Navas TA, Lyons S, Godowski PJ, Madara JL. Cutting edge: bacterial flagellin 
activates basolaterally exp ressed TLR5 to induce epi[INVESTIGATOR_752161]. J 
Immunol 2001; 167:1882- 1885. 
89. Frank DN, Robertson CE, Hamm CM, Kpadeh Z, Zhang T, Chen H, Zhu W, Sartor B, Boedeker 
EC, Harpaz N, Pace NR, Li E. Disease phenotype and genotype are associate d with shifts in 
intestinal associated mircobiota in inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 
2011; 17: 197- 184 
90. Frank DN, Feazel LM, Bessesen MT, Price CS, Janoff EN, Pace NR. The human nasal 
microbiota and staphylococcus aureus carriage. P LoS One 2010; 17:5:e10598 
91. Mermel LA , Allon M, Bouza E, Craven DE, Flynn P, O’Grady NP, Raad II, Rijnders BJA, 
Sheretz RJ, Warren DK. , Clinical practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of 
intravascular catheter - related infections: 2009 Update of the infectious diseases society of 
America.  
 
 