Study Title: Robotically Augmented Mental Practice for Neuromotor Facilitation  
Document Title: Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
NCT: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Document Date: 08/25/2023  
Protocol  
 
This study consists of experiments on two non- consecutive days in the Human Neuromuscular 
Physiology Laboratory located in the Biological Sciences/Applied Physiology Building of Georgia 
Tech. If subjects qualify and agree to take part in this study, subjects will be asked to read and 
sign the consent form. The whole procedure will last about [ADDRESS_1131952] day will serve as familiarization with the same tasks as the second day. Subjects will perform the 
following experiment.   
 Individuals will sit upright and relax their hands and shoulders. The right shoulder will be fixed 
with pads to the upper arm to prevent shoulder flexion/extension movement. The ri ght hand and 
forearm will be rested on a plate hidden below a table. The robotic prosthesis will be placed on 
the table as one would normally place own arm on the table. There will be no physical connection between the hand and the robotic prosthesis.  
 
Subjects will activate a pair of t he front portion of the shoulder muscles and the upper part of the 
chest muscles for  making  a graspi[INVESTIGATOR_817482]. For making a 
releasing movement of the prosthesis , subject s will activate a pair of the back portion of the 
shoulder muscles and the back muscles . Muscle activity will be recorded with two small sensors 
on each muscle. Subjects  will practice activation of each muscle pair while watching the signal 
on a monitor.  In each pair, a clearer signal will be used for controlling the robotic digits.  
 Healthy subjects (N = 18) : 
Healthy subjects will perform the following tasks A -F. [A: Rest] Subjects will relax their muscles 
without physical or cognitive effort while gazing at the t urned- off monitor. [B: Robotic action 
observation] Subjects will relax their muscles and focus on observing the computer -controlled 
grasp and release actions (2 s in each movement) of the robotic hand. [C: Visual MI] Subjects 
will relax their muscles and perform conventional visual mental imagery (MI). With the guidance of audio instruction, the subjects will imagine the grasp and release motions with the right arm for 2 s in each motion in their mind. There will be no proximal muscle contraction. [D: 
Kines thetic MI] The same MI procedure as Task C will be performed, except that the subjects 
will focus on the kinesthetic sensation that they would feel with the imagined motions. [E: 
Robotic -Hand Interaction (see below detailed description)] Subjects will perf orm robotic -hand 
interaction  for grasp and release motions with the activation control of the proximal muscles . 
During this task, subjects will  also imagin e the kinesthetic sensation that they would feel with the 
corresponding motions with the right arm. [ F: Virtual -Hand Interaction] Subjects will perform 
Task E with visual feedback of virtual robot actions in 2D on a monitor. [G: Robotic -Hand 
Interaction without MI] S ubjects will perform Task E without MI. As a reaction task, subjects will 
flex the index finger as soon as they hear an auditory cue. 
 
Post -stroke subjects  (N = 4) : 
Tasks C [Visual MI], E [Robotic -Hand Interaction ], and A [Rest] above will be performed by [CONTACT_447] -
stroke subjects with right -side hemiparesis who can volitionally activate fingers and proximal 
muscles. As a reaction task, subjects will flex the index finger as soon as they hear an auditory 
cue. The data on p ost-stroke subjects will be obtained to test the feas ibility of the  Robotic -Hand 
Interaction and observe potential trends. The data will not be used for statisti cal a nalysis.  
 
Robot -Hand Interaction with and without MI (Task E and F above):  
An individual will use proximal muscle contractions to flex and extend the robotic prosthesis 
digits for performing a grasp -release task. 1) Grasp. The individual will activate the proximal 
muscles as if for a retrieving motion (the back portion of the shoulder muscles and the back 
muscles) for [ADDRESS_1131953]. 2) Release. The individual will relax the above- activated proximal 
muscles and activate the proximal muscles as if for a reaching motion (the front portion of the shoulder muscles and the top portion of the chest muscles) for [ADDRESS_1131954] 
During the  above- mentioned tasks, brain stimulation (called TMS ) will be applied over  the motor 
cortex in the left hemisphere. The TMS procedure will follow the one used in our previous 
studies. A TMS coil will be placed over a precise point on the scalp where we will stimulate the 
brain to make the muscle move. We will tell the subject when the stimulation portion of the procedure is about to begin. The first part of the procedure will be to find the area of the brain that controls muscles. We will position the TMS coil on the head and will give the subject a series of stimulations (called magnetic pulses). Once we find the spot that controls the muscles, we will find the least amount of stimulation needed to activate the resting muscles. The second 
part of the procedure will be to evoke muscle contraction w ith TMS at rest and during the tasks 
described above. We will apply single -pulse and paired- pulse TMS with 5 -second intervals or 
more. Peak -to-peak amplitude of the motor evoked potential (MEP) will be determined. 
 
Reaction time test  
Subjects will be  asked to exert finger flexion force with their index finger as soon as they hear 
an auditory cue for the reaction task. In this test, the focus was on immediacy, and there will be  
no instruction on the amount of force to produce. The audio cue timing will  be randomly varied 
during the middle 60% during the flexion and extension phases of the artificial or imaginary 
finger.  Reaction time, maximal rate of force development, peak EMG, and peak force will be 
determined.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
Statistical analysis will be peformed on data from [ADDRESS_1131955] analysis of  variance (ANOVA) with repeated 
measures on task, followed by a posthoc Bonferroni -corrected pair -wise comparison, when 
appropriate. If the assumption of sphericity is violated, the variables will be with the Friedman 
test, followed by [CONTACT_10079]- rank test when appropriate. The alpha value of 0.05 will 
be used to determine the significance. The alpha value will be corrected for repeated 
comparisons.  
 