 
  1 
7/17/14  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dietary Salt in Postural Tachycardia Syndrome  
 
NCT0154711 7 
 
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_78800] M. Garland, PhD  
Department  of Pharmacology  
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine  
AA3228 MCN  
Nashville , TN [ZIP_CODE] -2195  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Satish R. Raj, MD, MSCI , Marcus C. Ferguson  PhD, C. Victor  Nwazue MD,  David Robertson, MD , 
Italo Biaggioni MD, Cyndya A. Shibao MD, Alfredo Gamboa MD, Luis Okamoto MD, Amy Arnold 
PhD, Mary Ginnie Farley, Sachin Y. Paranjape BS,  Bonnie K. Black, RN  NP 
Division of Clinical Pharmacology  
Vanderbilt Un iversity School of Medicine  
Nashville, TN [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  2 
7/17/14  
 Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Excl usion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investig ational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Costs and Compensation to Participants  
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
10.0  Study With drawal/Discontinuation  
11.0  Statistical Considerations  
12.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
13.[ADDRESS_948551] Retention  
 
 
  3 
7/17/14  
 1.0 Background  
 
Assumption of upright posture leads to major hemodynamic changes, including a decrease in 
cardiac output and stroke volume and an increase in heart rate.  There is substantial pooling of 
blood in the lowe r extremities, the buttocks, and in the splanchnic vascular beds that  is felt to 
be responsible for much of the heart rate increase that occurs with standing.   Blood pooling 
lessens  the absolute blood volume in the heart and central circulation, leading t o activation of 
low and high -pressure baroreceptors, causing activation of the sympathetic nervous system and 
withdrawal of the parasympathetic nervous system.  In conditions of low baseline blood 
volume, cardiovascular responses to standing are more drama tic.   
 
Angiotensin II (ANG II) is synthesized from angiotensinogen via the sequential actions of renin 
and angiotensin -converting enzyme (ACE). Renin catalyzes the rate -limiting ste p in this 
pathway. Renin secretion is stimulated by a fall in NaCl concent ration at the macula densa, a 
decrease in arterial pressure, and an increase in sympathetic tone. ANG II stimulate s sodium 
reabsorption  in the proximal tubule, causes arteriolar vaso constriction, and stimulates 
aldosterone production, thereby [CONTACT_698630].   
 
Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS) occurs in approximately 500,000 Americans, 
predominantly in young women.  POTS is  a chronic 
condition of consistent orthostatic tachycardia (> 30 bpm 
increase) and symptoms that are worse on standing but 
relieved by [CONTACT_698631]. Orthostatic symptoms include 
palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814], lightheadedness, chest pains, dyspnea, 
tremulousness, blurred visi on, and mental clouding.   
When studied in balance on 150 mEq sodium/day, m any 
patients with POTS have a low plasma volume.  
Furthermore, POTS patients have inappropriately low 
plasma renin activity and aldosterone for their level of 
hypovolemia.  
 
Physician s often prescribe a high -sodium diet for the treatment of POTS. The ration ale behind 
this approach is that sodium in the diet will help subjects to retain fluid, and thereby [CONTACT_698632]/or blood pressure.  We have p reliminary evidence that a hig h-salt diet raises 
plasma volume (as determined by [CONTACT_698633]) and blunts the tachycardia with 
standing. This treatment is also felt to decrease symptoms in some patients with POTS . We will 
now use the DAXOR BVA -[ADDRESS_948552] a 
blunted plasma volume expansion in resp onse to a high -sodium diet and assess the influences 
of dietary sodium on components of the renin -angiotensin -aldosterone systems.  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
Patients with POTS ma y not adequately expand their plasma volume in response to a high-
sodium d iet. Mechanisms involved in the regulation of plasma volume, such as the renin -
angiotensin -aldosterone system and renal DA, may be impaired in POTS and may respond 
inappropriately to  changes in dietary sodium. The purpose of this study is to determine (1) 
whether a high dietary sodium level appropriately expands  plasma volume in POTS;  (2) whether 

 
  4 
7/17/14  
 plasma renin activity and aldosterone are modified appropriately by [CONTACT_698634]; and ( 3) whether patients with POTS have improvements in their  orthostatic 
tachycardia and symptoms as a result of a high dietary sodium level .  
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
In an unpublished study (Biaggioni et al., Vanderbilt U niversity) comparing [ADDRESS_948553] on the orthostatic change 
in heart rate in some patients with POTS. The orthostatic tachycardia was diminished in the 
moderate sodium diet (30 ±3 bpm)  compared with the low-sodium diet  (53±7 bpm). In another 
small unpublishe d study, we fed POTS patients diets consisting of 10 mEq/day sodium (low), 
150 mEq/day sodium (normal) and 300 mEq/day sodium (high) for 5 days each. Our 
preliminary findings in 5 pa tients indicated greater orthostatic tachycardia in the low -salt diet 
(43±12 bpm) than with either a normal (29 ±9 bpm) or high -salt diet (29 ±10 bpm).  
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion:  
• Diagnosed with postural tachycardia syndrome by [CONTACT_698635]  
• Increase in heart rate ≥30 beats/min with pos ition change from supi[INVESTIGATOR_357622] (10 minutes)  
• Chronic symptoms consistent with POTS that are worse when upright and get 
better with recumbence  
• Age between 18-50 years old  
• Non-smokers  
• Premenopausal patients with POTS and healthy v olunteers  
• Only female participants are eligible.  
• Since 80 -90% of POTS patie nts are female, and there can be differences in 
measures with the menstrual cycle, including a small number of males might 
introduce a significant amount of noise.   
• Able and willin g to provide informed consent  
 
Exclusion:  
• Smokers  
• Overt cause for postural tachycardia, i.e., acute dehydration  
• Significant cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, or hematological disease by [CONTACT_698636]  
• Pregnant (p ositive pregnancy test ) or breastfeeding  
• Hyperte nsion defined as supi[INVESTIGATOR_698617]>1 45/95 mmHg  off medications or needing 
antihypertensive medication  
• Other factors which in the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_698618], including poor compli ance during previous s tudies or an 
unpredictable schedule  
• Unable to give informed consent  
 
 
 
 
  5 
7/17/14  
 5.0 Enrollment /Randomization  
 
The participants with POTS will be recruited from patients referred to the Vanderbilt University 
Autonomic Dysfunction Center. Healthy vo lunteers will be recru ited from a population of 
previous participants in autonomic studies, through the ResearchMatch.org database, and 
through advertising and emails around the Vanderbilt community.  
 
When contact[CONTACT_698637], the inve stigator will describe  the complete 
protocol.  The participants will then be given a written informed consent form that has been 
approved by [CONTACT_161229].  The subject will be given adequate time 
to read the consent form, ask q uestions, and if satis fied by [CONTACT_698638], sign the form.  
Consent or refusal to participate in this study will not affect medical care.  No modifications or 
waiver of the elements of consent will be necessary in the execution of this study.  Consent 
procedures will take plac e in the Autonomic Dysfunction Center at Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center.  
 
Randomization tables will be used to determine whether the 10 mEq sodium/day or 300 mEq 
sodium/day diet will be consumed first.   Both diets will be comple ted on each subject 
(randomized crossover study), so all of the below study procedures (after screening) will be 
repeated.  
 
6.0 Study Procedures  
6.1 Screening and Pre -Admission   
6.1.1  Healthy Controls Subjects  
• Consent obtained (with signature)  
• History and physical exami nation  
• Orthostatic vit al signs  
• Meet with dietician  
6.1.2  POTS Patients  
• Patients will often be identified from a prior assessment at the Vanderbilt Autonomic 
Dysfunction Center, so screening visit might not be in person  
• Consent obtained (phone, email and signatur e) 
• Withdraw medication s prior to admission  
• Research Nurse and study physician will be available by [CONTACT_698639].  
 
6.2 Study Day 1  
• Admit to CRC (POTS patients only; healthy volunteers will do initial pa rt as 
outpatients)  
• Start 150 mEq Na+/day diet (POTS patients as inpatients; healthy control subjects with 
CRC provided outpatient diet)  
• Start a 24h urine collection (for Na+, K+, Cr, fractionated catecholamines)  
• Blood work  
• BMP (for Na+, K+, Cl-, Cr) 
• CBC 
• Serum -hCG pregnancy te st 
 
6.3 Study Day 2  
 
  6 
7/17/14  
 • Complete 24h urine  
• Start STUDY DIET (10 mEq Na+/day or 300 mEq Na+/day in a random order) after 3 
meals of 150 mEq Na+/day are complete; water ad lib  
• Blood volume – carbon monoxide rebreathing  
• We will measure blood vol ume.  Subject  will be asked to sit 
comfortably with their legs flat for about 30 minutes breathing 
through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], and we will measure the total amount of 
hemoglobin (protein in the blood that carries oxygen) and myoglobin 
(protein in the muscle that  transports oxygen int o the muscle cell) in 
their body.  The procedure is called carbon monoxide (CO) 
rebreathing .  During this procedure,  one teaspoon of blood will be 
taken before and after a small amount of CO (equivalent to sitting in 
a smoky room for ~3 hours) has been abs orbed into the bloodstream .  
The concentration of CO in the blood is measured . 
• A valve is used to switch the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_698619] a self -contained 
“rebreathing” circuit initially containing 100% oxygen.   The 
rebreathing circuit is a cl osed system from which  the subject  will 
breathe in and out during the test.  It contains a carbon -dioxide (the 
waste product in the air of exhaled  breath) absorber so that the air 
that the subject  breathe s in will always be 100% oxygen.  A small 
amount (ab out 1 tablespoon) of C O is introduced into the rebreathing 
circuit and rebreathed for 10 minutes.  A venous blood sample (about 
1 teaspoon) is then taken and another larger dose of CO is introduced 
into the circuit (approximately 100 ml or about one -half c up) and 
again, rebreat hed for 10 minutes.  A final blood sample (about 1 
teaspoon) is taken and the test is completed.  
 
 
6.4 Study Day 3  
• Continue STUDY DIET; water ad lib  
 
6.5 Study Day 4  
• Continue STUDY DIET; water ad lib  
 
6.6 Study Day 5  
• 24h Holter combined ECG monit or and BP monitor put on subject  
• Continue STUDY DIET; water ad lib  
 
6.7 Study Day 6  
• Admit to CRC in afternoon (healthy control subjects only as POTS patients will already 
have been admitted to the CRC)  
• Continue STUDY DIET; water ad lib  
• Remove 24h Holter combin ed ECG monitor and BP monitor from subject  
• Start a 24h urine collection (for Na+, K+, Cr, fractionated catecholamines)  
• NPO after midnight for study next day  
 
6.8 Study Day  7 (BIG DAY)  
• Awaken early (~6am) to void  (still collecting 24h urine ) 
 
  7 
7/17/14  
 • Patient returns to bed 
• IV catheter inser ted 
 
• Posture Study  (in morning; between 7 -8am ideally)  
• Blood pressure and heart rate will be measured while supi[INVESTIGATOR_698620] 30 minutes  
• We will draw 3 tablespoons of blood in each body position  to measure 
hormones that regulate bloo d pressure and blood volume  
• Estradiol and progesterone levels to verify the subject’s phase of menstrual cycle  
• Serum/plasma aliquots for future an alysis  
• Subjects will rate symptoms during supi[INVESTIGATOR_698621] (VOSS)  
• Total Blood Volume (DAXOR)  
• using injection of iodinated I -131 tagged human serum albumin nominally 25 
micro -Ci of radiation  
• blood  samples drawn through IV catheter before injection and for ~[ADDRESS_948554]-injection  (total – 25 ml)  
• This wi ll be done after supi[INVESTIGATOR_445323], but  before standing the subject up  
• Late breakfast  
• Wait ≥1h hour post breakfast  
 
• Autonomic Function Test with C ardiac Output and Brief Tilt  
• Tests of how the involuntary nervous system is working  
• We w ill measure : 
• heart rat e using an electrocardiogram  
• blood pressure  using a cuff around one arm and/or  finger  
• the shift of fluids  in the body (body impedance)  
• Cardiac out put will be measured by [CONTACT_698640] d out. 
This will be done using the acetylene rebreath ing test.  For this last test, 
subject will breathe normally for about 5 minutes through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_698622] a bag. This bag will contain ai r and small amounts of the 
inactive gasses methane and acetylene.  
• The autonomic functio n tests  include asking  the subject to breathe deeply 
for two minutes and breathing as fast and as hard as they can for [ADDRESS_948555] pressure 
for 15 seconds , and placing one hand in ice water for 1 minu te.   
• The subject will  be tilted up to 60 -75 degrees head -up tilt for up to 10 
minutes to measure the changes in heart rate and blood pressure and  
symptoms with uprigh t challenge.  
• All these tests are meant to stimulate the autonomic nervous system to 
produce changes in blood pressure and heart rate of short duration that 
reflect how well the involuntary nervous system is working.  
• Blood volume – carbon monoxide rebreath ing 
• We will measure blood volume.  
•  Subject  will be asked to sit comfortably with their legs flat for about 30 
minutes breathing through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], and we will measure the total 
amount of hemoglobin (protein in the blood that carries oxygen) and 
myoglobi n (protein in the muscle that transports oxygen into the muscle 
 
  8 
7/17/14  
 cell) in their body.  The procedure is called carbon monoxide (CO) 
rebreathing .  During this procedure,  one teaspoon of blood will be taken 
before and after a small amount of CO (equivalent to  sitting in a smoky 
room for ~3 hours) has been absorbed into the bloodstream .  The  
concentration of CO in the  blood is measured . 
• A valve is used to switch the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_698619] a self -contained 
“rebreathing” circuit initially containing 100% oxygen.   Th e rebreathing 
circuit is a closed system from which the subject  will breathe in and out 
during the test.  It c ontains a carbon -dioxide (the waste product in the air 
of exhaled  breath) absorber so that the air that the subject  breathe s in will 
always be 100 % oxygen.  A small amount (about 1 tablespoon) of CO is 
introduced into the rebreathing circuit and rebreathed  for 10 minutes.  A 
venous blood sample (about 1 teaspoon) is then taken and another larger 
dose of CO is introduced into the circuit (approximate ly 100 ml or about 
one-half cup) and again, rebreathed for 10 minutes.  A final blood sa mple 
(about 1 teaspoon ) is taken and the test is completed.  
 
• Lunch  
• Exercise Capacity Test (in the afternoon)  
• At least 2 hours after lunch  
• Will estimate maximal oxygen c onsumption (VO 2 max)  
• This test will be conducted on a stationary bicycle  
• Effort will be  gradually increase wh ile expi[INVESTIGATOR_698623].  
• The test will last approximately 30 m inutes and be conducted in the CRC.  
• A mouthpie ce with a one -way rebreathing valve attached to a breathing 
tube will be used to collect  air samples during th e exercise test. 
Essentially, subjects will breathe room air through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], and then 
exhale  the air into a tube that connects to a machine (metabolic cart). 
This machine analyzes carbon dioxide and oxygen content, which allows 
us to calculate the am ount of oxygen they are using under resting and 
exercise conditions.  
• A test will be considered valid and fin ished when two of the following 
three conditions are met:  
• (1) predicted maximal heart rate is obtained,  
• (2) the respi[INVESTIGATOR_698624] s 1.15 or higher,  
• (3) oxygen consumption plateaus.  
• Verbal encouragement will be given to help subjects achieve a valid 
exercise test.  
• To assess  VO2 max directly, an individual’s expi[INVESTIGATOR_698625].  
• The workload will  be gradually increased on the bike by [CONTACT_698641]. As the workload increases, oxygen consumption also increases. 
Throughout the tes t period exhaled air will be collected. When subjects 
can no longer continue, the test w ill be stopped.  
• Blood  pressure will be measured at the end of each resistance -stage. 
Heart rate data will be recorded continuously.  
 
  9 
7/17/14  
 • Before and after completing the ex ercise test, subjects will be required to 
complete a “warm -up” and “cool -down” session i ncluding stretching 
exercises.  
• Saline Bolus (optional)  
• Subject can receive an optional 2L saline bolus IV to prepare them for 
discharge to home  
• Study Phase Completed  
• Discharge Subject to home  
 
Schedule patient for 2nd Study phase and repeat all above (exce pt screening).  
 
7.[ADDRESS_948556] of the 
duration of their medication withdrawal .  If necessary, medicatio ns will be restarted.  Healthy 
subjects  will not be allowed to participate in this study if they routinely take medication that 
alters blood pressure or heart rate.  
 
The study diets  may not taste good and may be unpleasant to eat.  
 
There are minor risks an d discomforts associat ed with blood sampling .  We will insert a 
plastic catheter into the vein to allow drawing blood while minimizing  repeated sticks during the 
study.   This may cause a brief period of pain and possibly a small bruise at the site.  
Occasi onally, a person feels  faint when their blood is drawn.  There is a small risk of bleeding 
after removal of the catheter and possibly a bruise at the site, which can be  prevented by [CONTACT_698642].  Rarely, an infection develops which can be  treated.   
 
Blood pre ssure cuff:   Some may find it uncomfortable to hold their arms with an inflated cuff 
placed around the forearm, or finger, in a relatively fixed p osition, or have the cuff inflated 
frequently.  
 
Electrodes : Sticky patches will be put on your chest and your  limbs to record electrical activity 
from the heart or for the body impedance measurements.  This might be uncomfortable.  This 
can occasionally c ause a rash.  
 
There might be lightheadedness, dizziness, tremor, headache, or nausea dur ing the tilt table 
test. These symptoms usually resolve rapi[INVESTIGATOR_698626].  
 
As part of this research study, participants will receive a small amount of  radioactive 
substance  (nominally 25 microCi, but usually less) called Iodine -131. The radiation dose that 
they will receive from each procedure is about the same amount that they would receive over a 
period of four months from  natural background radiation . This procedure will be performed a 
maximum of [ADDRESS_948557] 10 
hours at 60 C.  Experts believe that th is treatment kills the encapsulated viruses (like HIV and 
Hepatitis C). Recent studies h ave shown that the ris k of getting a disease from human blood 
 
  10 
7/17/14  
 products such as this is extremely small.  However, some individuals may not want to receive 
human blood p roducts for religious or other ethical concerns.    
 
Immersing extremities in ice water:  Immersing extremities  in ice water is sometimes 
painful.  
 
Acetylene rebreathing test:  Subjects  may find breathing through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_698627]. There are no repo rted side effects from using these gasses in the rebreathing 
device.  
 
Body impedance:  There is no known risk a ssociated with the measurement of heart’s 
pumpi[INVESTIGATOR_698628]; however this can be an 
inconvenience.  
 
Exerci se test . The risks involved in this exercise test may include abnormal blood pressure, 
fainting, irregular hea rtbeat, and in the most rare instances, heart attack, or even death. Every 
effort will be made to minimize these risks by [CONTACT_698643]. Participants will be encouraged to inform the study investigator  if they feel 
dizzy, ill -feeling, or other symptoms, during or after the test.  
 
24-hour urine collection. Collecting urine for 24 hours might be a n inconvenience. We try to 
make it more convenient by [CONTACT_198818] a collecti on device and/or provi ding a urinal 
for their use.  
 
We cannot foresee any other risks, but there may be previously unknown or unforeseen risks.  
By [CONTACT_698644] t females to participate, we will eliminate any risks these procedures 
might have for a pregnant woman.  
 
8.0 Costs  and Compensation to Participants  
8.1 Costs to Participants  
Study related materials will be provided to the participants without charge.  The 
Inpatien t stays will be covered by a grant from the Vanderbilt Institute of Clinical and 
Transla tional Research (VICTR ), and the assay and testing costs will be covered by [CONTACT_698645].  The participants will be responsible for their own travel expenses to come to  
Vanderbilt and any extraneous expenses related to their time in Nashville.  
 
8.2 Participant  Compensation  
Particip ants will be compensated at a rate of $500 for the entire study ($150 for each 
phase and an extra $200 at completion).  Upon request, some subject s may receive the 
compensation amount in the form of a gift card instead of a check.  
 
 
 
 
9.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
 
 
  11 
7/17/[ADDRESS_948558] one co -investigator will review data from subjects enrolled in this study on a bi -
monthly basis.  
 
Adverse events will be monitored on an o ngoing basis by [CONTACT_6283]. S atish Raj and Victor Nwazue  (both of 
whom will be responsible for tracking adverse events in this study).  Any adverse event of a serious or 
greater nature will be reviewed immediately with the P.I.   
 
The adverse event will be descri bed with the following  information: description of the event; outcome of 
the event; duration of the event; relationship to study procedure; requirement, if any, for tre atment or 
intervention; and outcome.  
Adverse events will be graded according to the foll owing scale:  
0 = No ad verse event or within normal limits  
1 = Mild adverse event (transient and mild in nature, and no treatment is necessary)  
2 = Moderate adverse even t (some intervention and treatment are necessary, but participant 
completely recovers  
3 = Severe adverse event  (an event that results in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], disability, or death or is life -
threatening)  
 
The investigator will state his opi[INVESTIGATOR_698629] a reasonable possibility that the 
event or experience is elated to a procedure perfo rmed as part of this s tudy.  Serious adverse 
events will be reported in writing to the Vanderbilt IRB within 72 hours of occurrence.  All study 
adverse events will be s ummarized once a year, as part of the annual review report to the IRB  
 
10.0  Study Withdrawal/ Discontinuation  
 
The investigators or Vanderbilt may stop participants from taking part in this study at any time if it is in 
their best interest, if they do not follow  the study rules, or if the study is stopped.  
 
Participants are free to withdraw from th is study at any time.  We will cease to collect study information 
at the time of withdrawal of consent.  Withdrawal of consent or refusal to participate will not prejud ice 
their health care.  
 
11.0  Statistical Considerations  
11.1  Statistical Analysis Plan   
The primar y statistical analysis  will focus on the increase in plasma volume from  
low sodium (10 mEq Na+/day) to a high sodium (300 mEq Na+/day) diet between POTS patients and 
control subjects. Secondary endpoints will include the magnitude of suppression of aldoste rone (from 
low sodium to high-sodium diet s), and a reduction in orthostatic tachycardia and orthostatic symptoms 
(VOSS) in POTS patients with the high-sodium diet . We w ill develop repeated measures analyses of 
covariance to evaluate the  two treatment group s (low vs. high-sodium  diets). In these experiments, 
data collection will be balanced and we are primarily concerned with estimating marginal effects in our 
target popu lation. For this reason, our method of choice will be generalized estimating equations ( GEE).  
For well balanc ed data, this approach has  the great advantage that the Huber -White sandwich estimator 
of the parameter variance covariance matrix is unaffected b y the choice of the working variance -
covariance matrix. This can make these analyses con siderably more robust than other methods. We will 
include an indicator covariate for the study drug order in the statistical models. Each outcome will be 
the dependent variable in a GEE model with indicator variables used to designate high or low-sodium 
diets and patient groups . Also, interactions terms will be included in our models if appropriate. Such 
 
  12 
7/17/[ADDRESS_948559] ots (one dimensional s catter plots). Outliers will be 
reported if sufficiently extreme and the data will be transformed if the raw data are sufficiently skewed.  
In ord er to determine the effectiveness of a high-sodium diet  in patients with low plasma volu mes we 
will also perfo rm a secondary analysis restricted to patients who have a plasma volume deficit (i.e. 
plasma volume less than expected for height, weight and gend er) at the initial screening exam. We will 
use the xtgee program of Stata for these anal yses.   
 
Data will be entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet or a CTSA generated, HIPAA compliant Research 
Data Capture (REDCap) web -based database 52. SPSS for Win dows (version 17.0), Stata 11.0 , and R 
(www.r -project.org) will be used for data analysi s. The sample size cal culations were performed using 
the software package PS Power and Sample Size Calculations version 3.0.1 53. A co -investigator on this 
grant, Willi am Dupont , Ph.D., Professor of Biostatistics at Vanderbilt University, will be primarily  
responsible for the s tatistical analyses of this study.  
 
11.2  Sample Size  
There are no data available on the plasma volume change when changing diet from 10 mEq Na+/day to  
300 mEq Na+/day. We estimated our required sample size from our prior paper documenting  a plasma 
volume defic it of 354±193 ml in female POTS patients 11.  We estimate that difference in augmentation 
of plasma volume might account for 50 -60% of this deficit  (~200 ml). A sample size of [ADDRESS_948560] 90% power to detect a difference  in mean plasma volume  change of [ADDRESS_948561] deviation is 200 ml using a two -sided, Student’s t -test with alpha=0.05. We propose 
to enroll 30 subjects in each group to allow for data loss and drop -out. 
 
12.0  Privacy/Confidentiality I ssues  
 
All the investi gators have completed Vanderbilt training in compliance with the HIPAA regulations.  
Every effort will be made to protect and respect patient conf identiality and privacy within the limits of 
HIPAA.  Research data will be entered into a password -protected d atabase.  The Principal Investigator’s 
Assurance Statement has been submitted with the proposal.  
 
 
13.[ADDRESS_948562] may be kept indefinitely.  
 
 