Document  date:  07/18/2023  
 
Impacts  of mitochondrial -targeted  antioxidant  on leg function,  leg blood  flow and skeletal  muscle  
mitochondrial function in peripheral artery disease patients: full study protocol and statistical 
analysis plan  
 
NCT# 03506633  
3 
3 2 
3 Study  protocol   
Participants  
Patients with PAD (n  = 13, 7 males and 6 females) were  recruited for study participation. 
Disease  staging,  claudication  history,  and ankle -brachial  index  of <0.90  were  determined  by 
[CONTACT_641293] -report and by [CONTACT_675899], and all participants were classified as Fontaine 
stage IIa and IIb (16). Participants were also required to have a stable BP, lipid, and/or diabetes 
regimen for ≥ 6 wk prior to participation, and all females wer e postmenopausal (no menses for 
≥ 12 consecutive months). Participants were excluded from the study if they had a history of 
pain at rest  (Fontaine  stage  III) and/or  tissue  loss due to PAD (Fontaine  stage  IV), limited  walking  
capacity due to conditions oth er than PAD, or renal disease.  Participants  were  asked  to withhold  
medications (at  least  12 h prior to the visits)  for ≥ 24 h (17). Participants were  also asked  to track  
what  they consumed  the day before  their first visit so they could  consume the  same  foods  prior 
to their second  visit. In addition,  participants  were  requested  to not alter their dietary  habits  during  
the [ADDRESS_913783] and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 
All participants provided written, informed consent prior to beginning the study. This study was 
registered with https://clinicaltrials.gov/ ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
Design  
 
This study  used  a randomized,  double -blinded,  placebo -controlled,  crossover  design  
with a washout period of 14 days between the 2 study visits (Fig. 1) . Participants were randomly 
assigned to receive either 80 mg of MitoQ or placebo. In a previous study, MitoQ  showed 
pharmacokinetic behavior at doses of 80 mg (1mg/1kg), resulting in plasma maximal 
concentration of 33.15 ng.ml, which is safe for humans. Additionally, administration of 20 
mg/1kg of mitoQ was shown to have no toxicity in previous research. The dos e in this study 
was considerably lower than this amount. These findings led us to believe the recommended 
[ADDRESS_913784] consisted of tapi[INVESTIGATOR_675897]. Participants were  informed that we were researching the 
effects of commercially available juice and pi[INVESTIGATOR_675898]; 
therefore, they  were not aware  that the capsules  were  PL. All  assessments  were  performed  
after an overnight  fast and at the same  time of day (9:00 AM  ± 1 h). Anthropometric 
measurements were obtained upon arrival at both  visits. Following anthropometrics, baseline 
experimental measurements were conducted, after which the MitoQ supplement or PL were 
consumed. All experimen tal measurements were repeated ~ 1 h  following  ingestion. All data 
analyses were performed in a blinded manner.  
Anthropometrics  
 
Anthropometric  measurements  included  height,  body  mass,  and body  composition.  
Height was  measured  using  a stadiometer  (nearest  0.5 cm). Body  mass  was measured  using  a 
standard scale (nearest 0.1 kg), and body mass  index was  calculated by [CONTACT_675900] (kg/m^2). Body fat percentage was assessed using bioelectrical 
impedance analysis  in duplicate  to the nearest 0.1%  (HBF – 306C, Omron  Healthcare, Lake  
Forest,  IL), and the average of the 2 measures was recorded as the body fat percentage.  
Resting  heart  rate and blood  pressure  
 
 Participants  sat for 15 min in a quiet  and temperature -controlled  room.  Resting  heart rate 
and BP were  assessed  in duplicate  using  an automated  sphygmomanometer  (HEM  – FL 31, 
Omron Healthcare, Lake Forest, IL). The two measurements were taken with 5 min separating 
each measurement, and the average of the 2 was recorded as the resting heart rate and BP.   
Endothelial  function  
 
Endothelial  function  was assessed  using  brachial  artery  flow-mediated  dilation  (FMD)  
and popliteal artery FMD using a Doppler ultrasound (Terason uSmart 3300, Terason Division 
Teratech  Corporation,  Burlington,  MA),  rapid  inflation  cuff system  (E20  Rapid  Cuff and cuff 
model SC5,  D.E. Hokanson,  Bellevue,  WA),  and a 3-lead electrocardiogram  system  ([ADDRESS_913785]) as previously  described  (22). Briefly, 
for both brachial  and popliteal  assessments,  the rapid  inflation  cuff was placed  just distal  to the 
antecubital fossa  and just distal  to the popliteal  fossa,  respectively  (22). For both assessments,  
resting  arterial diameter was recorded  with the ultrasound probe ~ 1 -2 cm proximal to  the rapid -
inflation cuff for 5  min (22). The cuff was inflated  to a pressure  of 250 mmHg  after baseline  
diameter  was obtained and remained inflated for 5 min (22). The cuff was then deflated  and the 
reactive hyperemic arterial  response  was recorded  continuously  on R-wave  trigger  for 5 min (22). 
Data  were  analyzed using an image capturing and automated edge -detection software 
(Vascular Imager, Vascular Research  Tools  6, Medical  Imaging  Applica tions,  Coralville,  IA) as 
previously  described  (22). The relative artery diameter changes were calculated as previously 
described (22).  
Walking  capacity  and skeletal  muscle  oxygen  utilization  capacity  
 
Maximal walking capacity was assessed on a standard treadmill (Lode, B.V, Groningen, 
The Netherlands)  using  the modified  Gardner  protocol  (22, 24). Participants  were  asked  to notify 
the test administrators about their onset of claudication (the exact moment their leg pain starts) 
and to walk as long as they could  tolerate  even  if the claudication  persisted  (maximal  walking  
time and distance). The test was ended once patients could not tolerate their symptoms (i.e., 
severe claudication).  
 Gastrocnemius oxygen utilization capacity was measured with a portable near-infrared 
spectroscopy  (NIRS)  unit (Artinis  PortaMon,  Einsteinweg,  The Netherlands)  and Oxysoft  
software (v.  [IP_ADDRESS],  Einsteinweg, The  Netherlands)  during  the exercise  testing  as previously 
described (22). Briefly, the NIRS device was adhered to the gastrocnemius, at the approximate 
location where the participant felt the most pain, using a commercially available double -sided 
adhesive and  a commercially  available  black  bandage  to prevent  extraneous  light from reaching  
the device (15,  22). NIRS  data were  collected  continuously  at a frequency  of 10 Hz and used  to 
3 3 
3 
3 estimate  the change in tissue saturation (StO 2), deoxygenated hemoglobin concentration 
([HHb]) and oxygenated hemoglobin concentration ([O 2Hb]) at resting baseline and during the 
walking test.  Upon  walking  test completion,  the participant  stood  in a resting  standing  position  
and a thigh  rapid inflation cuff (cuff model SC10, D.E. Hokanson, Bellevue, WA) was placed on 
the thigh ~ 3 -4 centimeters  proximal  to the knee  on the limb with the NIRS  device.  The cuff was 
inflated  to ~ 250- 260 mmHg  for 5 min to deoxygenate  the tissue  with the same  rapid  inflation  
cuff system  used  for FMD (22, 25). The cuff pressure was released after 5 min, and the peak 
hyperemic response following  cuff release  was used to determine  the 100%  oxygenation  level 
for each  participant  and was used to calculate normalized [HHb] (22, 25). The raw NIRS data 
were reduced to 1 Hz files and exported to Microsoft Excel files for later analysis.  
Autonomic function  
Autonomic nervous system function was measured using heart rate variability. Participants 
wore  a simple heart rate monitor (Suunto Smart Sensor, Suunto, Vantaa, Finland). The 
researcher assisted  the participant with putting on the heart rate monitor. The p articipant was 
positioned in  a supi[INVESTIGATOR_435945] a padded examination table for [ADDRESS_913786] repeated  measures  analysis  of variance  
(ANOVA)  [group  (MitoQ and  PL) x time (before  and after supplement  intake)]  was used  to 
compare  the changes  between MitoQ  and PL intake within and between groups on the 
dependent variables. When a significant main effect or interaction was found, paired t-tests 
were used for post-hoc comparisons for the normally distributed variables, and paired samples 
Wilcoxon tests were u sed for non -normally distributed variables. Based on a power calculation 
from a previous study, a sample size of a minimum of total 14 (n = 7 per group) would allow for 
80% power to detect differences between FMD  between  MitoQ vs.  PL (26). Associations  
between  dependent  variables  were  assessed  using Pearson’s  product -moment  correlation  
coefficient.  Effect  size analyses  were  conducted  using  Cohen’s d and interpreted as 0.[ADDRESS_913787] size (2 2, 27).  All 
analyses were performed using SPSS 26.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY). Descriptive characteristics are 
presented as Mean ± SD, and all other data are presented as Mean ± SE. Statistical 
significance was set to p < 0.05.