“Effect of Prazosin and Naltrexone on Personalized Script Induced Alcohol Craving in Individuals with 
Alcohol Use Disorders with and without Comorbid PTSD”  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
PaN Study Protocol  (8-17-2020) 
 
Design Overview  
 This is a [ADDRESS_459766] craving. After passing an initial telephone scre en, 
participants are seen for an in -person eligibility appointment that includes a physical and psychiatric 
examination, labs, and self -report measures.  One hundred twenty i ndividuals who meet study 
inclusion/exclusion criteria  will enter the medication p hase of the study within 14 days of the initial assessment  
initiating prazosin/placebo as well as 50mg naltrexone/placebo treatment. Randomization is blocked by 
[CONTACT_547], PTSD status, and desire to abstain vs. desire to cut down. Prazosin is titrated to thre e times daily 
dosing (9 am: 4mg; 3pm : 4 mg; 9pm : 8mg) at the end of two weeks. Naltrexone is taken once daily 50 mg/day 
with no titration schedule . The stable dose of both medications continue s for four more weeks  and medication 
compliance is evaluated thr ough pi[INVESTIGATOR_367728]. On approximately day 42 
participants come into the lab for the craving inductions  (there is a two -week window after day 42 in which 
participants may still be seen if scheduling issues arise) . The ord er of the craving inductions is 
counterbalanced , and their administration separated in time by [ADDRESS_459767] 
oriented craving items from the Desire for Alcohol Questionnaire . Participants are then assisted in returning 
their craving levels to baseline prior to debrief ing. They are all  offered DoD, VA,  or community referrals to 
treatment. Both prazosin and naltrexone can b e safely discontinued without tapering.  
 
Setting, Recruitment, Participants , and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Study Setting : 
There are three VAPS study sites including the Seattle Division  VA, the American Lake Division VA, 
and the Mt Vernon CBOC VA . Clinical backup in case of emergencies  is available at all sites.  
Participants and Recruitment:  
Potential s ubjects are Veterans with a DSM -V Alcohol Use Diso rder (AUD) recruited from the VA , the 
community,  and other local alcohol treatment programs via letter s, flyers,  VA TV monitors , and advertising in 
the local media. Potential Veteran subjects will also be identified via Corporate Data Warehouse or VISTA 
fileman pull.  
CDW/VISTA fileman : Access to the Corporate Data Warehouse  is used  to identify Veterans in the 
VAPSHCS area with an ICD -10 code for an active alcohol use disorder or a positive VA mandated alcohol 
screen  (AUDIT -C) and without exclusionary diagnoses and/or medications. We retrieve potential participants’ 
names and current mailing addresses and, a fter reviewing key information regarding additional 
inclusion/exclusion criteria in CPRS, we mail those who are likely eligible a recruitment letter with an “opt out” 
card. A $[ADDRESS_459768] and do not call the study are contact[CONTACT_367732] s left to ascertain whether they are interested in learning more about the study and possibly 
completing the telephone screen.   
Alcohol Clinical Reminder flag : IRB approval is in place to add the study as a treatment referral 
option for patients who screen  positive on the annual AUDIT -C clinical reminder so that providers can discuss 
the study with patients at the time of screening and communicate with study staff regarding patients who are 
interested in learning more about the study.  
We anticipate conduct ing approximately 1500 telephone screens and enrolling approximately 240 
participants, approximately 70 of whom will fail to meet the study inclusion/exclusion criteria during the initial 
screen , and an additional [ADDRESS_459769] recently consumed alcohol (see inclusion/exclusion criteria below) and want either to 
abstain or reduce their alcohol consumption.  
 
Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria:  
To move on from the in -person screening appointment, the following Inclusion/Exclusion criteria need 
to be met:  
Inclusion:  To be enrolled in the study participants need to m eet the following inclusion criteria: Veteran 
of the U.S. military  or National Guard Reserve ; current AUD by [CONTACT_2681] -V criteria; > 14 drinks per week for 
females OR > [ADDRESS_459770] two week s immediately prior to in-person screening  OR 3+ binge drinking days  in the  last month as 
defined by 4+ SDUs for females and 5+ SDUs for males ; at least mild alcohol craving as assessed by [CONTACT_367733]  (PACS; score > 10) at baseline ; age 18 -80; English fluency and literacy; 
trying or planning to try to cut down on or abstain from alcohol; good general medical health, and capable of 
giving informed consent.  
Exclusion Criteria:  The following characteristics exclud e potential participants from being randomized into the 
study: DSM -IV* diagnosis of an uncontrolled psychiatric disorder with psychotic symptoms or cognitive 
impairment; if taking psychiatric medication, NOT  on a stable dose for at least 30 days prior to r andomization; 
any suicidal ideation in the past [ADDRESS_459771] year ; homicidal 
ideation with plan and intent  in the  past 30 days ; PHQ -9 endorsement of hopelessness or self -harm/SI and/or 
sum score ≥ 19 on items 1 -9; any use of prazosin or naltrexone past 30 days; currently taking disulfiram or  
acamprosate OR planning to take any of these medications  (including prazosin  or naltrexone)  during the 8 
weeks of the study; current moderate or greater  level of substance use disorder  (past 30 days) on any 
psychoactive substance other than alcohol, nicotine, or cannabis; current diagnosis of any opi[INVESTIGATOR_367729] , OR use of any amphetamine or opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -containing medications during the prev ious 
30 days; UDA screen positive for amphetamine, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]; significant acute or chronic medical illness including 
unstable angina, recent myocardial infarction, history of congest ive heart failure, preexisting hypotension (sys 
<100) or orthostatic hypoten sion (sys drop of > 20 mmHg; after two minutes of standing, or any drop 
w/dizziness); insulin -dependent diabetes mellitus; chronic renal or hepatic failure; pancreatitis; Meniere’s  
disease; benign positional vertigo or narcolepsy; liver enzymes aspartate a minotransferase (AST), cirrhosis, 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), gamm a glutamyl transferase (GGT), > 8 x the upper limit of normal or total 
bilirubin >2 mg/dL (in the absence of G ilbert’s disease); allergy or previous adverse reaction to naltrexone, 
prazo sin, quinazolines, or other -1 adrenergic blockers or use of other -1 adrenergic blocker; women who 
are pregnant, breastfeeding, or of childbearing potential and not using a cont raceptive method judged by [CONTACT_367734]; legal involveme nt that could interfere with study participation including being  court 
ordered for treatment ; signs or symptoms of withdr awal at time of initial consent , or any participation in an  
experimental drug study or any addiction study past 30 days  (See Appendix 1  for Initial Inclusion/Exclusion 
Checklist) . 
 
*DSM -IV criteria are used to determine these aspects of eligibility because we d id not have access to the new 
DSM -5 criteria for these  disorders  at the start of the study . 
 
Additional Inclusion/Exclusion Criter ia:  
To proceed to randomization participant lab values will need to indicate that it is safe for them to take 
the study medications (See Appendix 1 for Additional Inclusion/Exclus ion Checklist).  
 
Study Visits  and Procedures  
Telephone Screen : Interested ca llers are provided an overview of the study procedures  either immediately if 
they reach someone when they call or their call is returned in two to three business days . Those who re main 
interested undergo a 15 -20 minute telephone screen to ascertain basic i nclusion/exclusion criteria  under a 
waiver of documentation of consent . Those who are eligible and remain interested are scheduled for an in -
person screening assessment.  Please see  the attached Study Flow Chart for a schematic overview of study 
activities.  
Consent , Screening Assessment , and IVR Initiation  (Visit 1 ; Study Day 1 ):  
Consent Procedures:  During Visit 1 ( Study Day 1 ) the Study Clinician ( Advanced Registered Nurse 
Practiti oner (ARNP) , Physician Assistant (PA),  or physician ) explain s the study in d etail by [CONTACT_367735] , and if the individual is interested in proceeding,  written informed consent  and HIPAA 
authorization  is obtained .  
 Participan ts are then asked to complete the UCSD brief assessment consent quiz to insu re adequate 
comprehension  of the consent and study procedures . If any items on the consent quiz are missed, the 
information pertaining to the items in question are reviewed and tho se items are re-administered. This measure 
is used to ensure that the potent ial participant can read well enough to be able to adequately read the written 
directions regarding the medication regimen and other study activities. If the clinician determines t hat the 
potential participant is likely to have adequate cognitive capacity to participate safely in the study, she/he 
review s the quiz items missed and re -administer those items. If one or more of these items are missed again, 
the person is deemed unable to adequately understand study procedures , and the interview will be termina ted. 
Those who able to answer the items correctly move on to the screening assessment.  
Screening Procedures:  The Study Clinician administer s the substance use disorders section of  the Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)  to confirm DSM -V AUD and to assess for other potential 
substance use disorder diagnoses , any suicidal ideation in the past [ADDRESS_459772] 30 days  (see Study 
Instrume nts Table  below for an overview of assessment measures and materials). Recent drinking will be 
determined during the AUD assessment to determine whether participants meet drinking inclusion 
requirements. Presence of at least mild craving will be assessed v ia the self -report instrument “Pennsylvania 
Alcohol Craving Scale (PACS);” a score of at least 10 is required . Participants undergo a complete medical 
history and a physical examin ation with the Study C linician. Participants who are found to be in good med ical 
health from the initial exam complete the Clinic ian-Administe red PTSD Scale for DSM -5 (CAPS ) –to determine 
current PTSD diagnostic status. Participants complete a self-report demographic questionnaire that include s a 
forced choice item regarding their  goals for their alcohol use over the next month (i.e., no change, reduce or 
cut down on amount of drinking, abstain completely). Those who indicate no desire to change their drink ing are 
excluded from the study.  
 Those who are found to be initially eligib le are asked to complete a short battery of self-report  
measures regarding craving , PTSD symptom severity , and characteristics that may moderate response to 
prazosin and naltrexone .  
Data Capture:  The interview  data are recorded on paper or entered directl y into an ACCESS database 
and self -report measures are entered online into a Survey Monkey form. Research staff remain in the room 
with participants while they complete the self -report measures  to ensure that they do not leave the Survey 
Monkey website . Note: there are paper forms available in the event there is a problem with either the ACCESS 
or Survey Monkey systems or if a participant prefers to complete measures off -line. 
Labor atory Procedures:  Women of childbearing potential provide urine for a pregna ncy test  at screening and 
again at week s 4 and 8 . Laboratory evaluation of blood samples include s CBC, routine liver function tests, and 
routine serum chemistries. Specimens are al so sent to a lab in Minnesota, MedTox, for assessment of the 
alcohol biomark er phosphatidylethanol – Peth. The lab procedure differs slightly by [CONTACT_367736]:  
Seattle  VA: The Clinical Research Unit (CRU) draw s the blood samples and ship the specimens  to MedTox . 
Either the Clinical Research Unit (CRU) or study staff deliver the remaining vial(s) to the Seattle VA lab for 
processing . Study participants are escorted by [CONTACT_367737].  
American Lake  VA:  Clinical  Studies Unit staff (CSU) draws the blood samples and ships the specimens to  
MedTox. A  member of the Clinical Studies Unit (CSU) or study staff deliver s the remaining vial(s) to the lab for 
processing. Study participants are escorted by [CONTACT_367738] a ro om in the CSU at the end of the initial study 
visit.  
Mt. Vernon  CBOC VA :Blood specimens are  drawn by [CONTACT_367739] -site lab.  Specimen s are then 
transported to the Seattle VA via a courier service.  Mt Vernon CBOC VA specimens for MedTox  are held at an 
identified location in the Seattle VA lab and then pi[INVESTIGATOR_367730] (CRU) staff to be shipped 
to MedTox.  
 
Safety and Comfort Call by [CONTACT_367740]  (Safety and & Comfort Call #1) : The RC calls the participant the next 
business day follow ing the initial screen to assess any symptom exacerbation stemming from the visit, to 
provide support.  
 
Randomization, Baseline Assessment , and Initial Medication Administration (Visit 2 ; Study Day 8 ):  
Randomization:  In this double -blind, double -dummy des ign participants are randomized to one of four 
study conditions: prazosin + naltrexone; prazosin + naltrexone placebo;  naltrexone + prazosin placebo,  and 
double placebo. Randomization is blocked by [CONTACT_547], PTSD status, and alcohol consumption goal (abstent ion 
vs. reduction). Random assignment to study condition is conducted by [CONTACT_367741]. The Research Pharmacist distribute s study medications 
appropriate to the randomization condition. The Research Pharmacist will have no contact [CONTACT_20688]. 
Study medica tions will have been prepared ahead of time and will be available at Study Visit 2.  
Baseline Assessment:  Approximately o ne week after the screening visit (Study Day 8) the RC or Study 
Clinician  contacts  each participant to inform her/him as to whether she/ he continues to fit the study inclusion 
criteria. Note: If issues arise while attempting to contact  [CONTACT_3445] , there may be up to an additional week 
between the initial screen an d the baseline appointment. At the outset of this visit, blood pressure and 
suicidality are rescreened to ensure that participants are safe to start the study medications. Those that are 
eligible and wish to continue are asked to complete the Form -[ADDRESS_459773] 
three months. They also complete the Script Preparation Form to provide details for the craving induction 
paradigm  (see below) . They also complete a battery of self -report measures as well as complete the two 
craving m easures ( Desire for Alcohol Questionnair e and Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale) again.  
Form -[ADDRESS_459774] involved 
craving or consumption meant to lead to or e nhance positive emotional reactions in a situation  or that pertain 
to desire d effects of alcohol (e.g., feeling high, intoxicated, “good,” etc.) . These materials are used by [CONTACT_367742] , personalized , imaginal craving inductions using a stan dard format that portray s each 
experience in the second person, present tens e, and incorporat es between five and seven different visceral 
and muscular reactions.  The imaginal scene lead s the person through the situation up to the acquisition of the 
alcohol  and bringing the drink to her/his lips (but not consuming it). Each inducti on is 1 minute long 
(approximately 214 words) and is recorded in a neutral tone by [CONTACT_367743] n [ADDRESS_459775]  will be examined,  including  family 
history of AUD, age of onset of drinking and A UD, drinking motives, depression, PTSD severity , anxiety 
sensi tivity,  emotional reactivity, disinhibition/impulsivity,  and sensitivity to reward and punishment. They also  
complete the Stroop, another measure of impulsivity, which is administe red by [CONTACT_367744] . 
Medication Administration:  Upon completion  of the questionnaires the Study C linician meet s with the 
participant and orient s him/her to the medication regimen . A two-week supply of the study medications  loaded 
into a 14-day, 3-compartment Mediset is provided along with written instructions with vis uals (i.e., pi[INVESTIGATOR_367731]) regarding dosing . Safety precautions regarding the medications are reviewed and participants 
are reminded to call the study telephone number s hould they experience any concerning side -effects or have 
any questions.  The two-week prazosin titration schedule detailed in Table 1 is followed. Naltrexone does not 
require a titration period; participants are instructed to take the naltrexone/matched pl acebo capsule at the 9pm 
dosing time.  Participants are given a pre -printed i ndex -size card with study contact [CONTACT_367745] (i.e., 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]).  
Titration Schedule.  
Prazosin 
Dosing:  9 AM  3 PM  9 PM  Naltrexone 9 PM  
Dosing:  
Days 1 -2   1 mg 50mg  
Days 3 -4 1 mg 1 mg 1 mg 50mg  
Days 5 -7 2 mg 2 mg 2 mg 50mg  
Day 8 -10 2 mg 2 mg 8 mg  50mg  
Day 11 -14 4 mg 4 mg 8 mg  50mg  
Day 15 -42 4 mg 4 mg 8 mg 50mg  
 
Study Clinician Safety and Comfort Call (Safety and Comfort Call #2): The Study Clinician call s each 
participant the day immediately following the initial dose of study medications to assess whether any 
concerning side effects were experienced , including any  suicidal ideation .  
Vital Signs and Adverse Events Checks (Visits 3 -7; Safe ty Calls # 3 & 4):  
In-person Visits:  To assure that participants are tolerating the study medications they are scheduled for 
five brief visits after the initial medication adminis tration visit and bef ore the final visit. Study days 12, 19, 29, 
36, and 42 are the target ( + 3 days) days for these in -person visits. At each of the in -person visits , sitting and 
orthostatic BP and HR are obtained. Participants are queried for adverse eve nts using the open -ended 
question “How have you been feeling since you were last here?” Any elicited adverse events are recorded and 
rated for severity, duration, action taken, and relate dness to study medication . 20 mmHg drop in systolic BP 
accompanied by  [CONTACT_80355], lightheadedness or syncope at time of measurement  or blood press ure systolic 
reading <[ADDRESS_459776] tolerated 
dosage or medication disconti nued and study participation terminated as clinically appropriate.  When the 
titration is adjusted, new study medications are requested from the pharmacy immediately and dispensed 
before the participant leaves.   
In addition, participants complete a brief ba ttery of measures to assess depression, anxiety,  pain, and 
sleep  and wake disturbance  at each in -person visit . Participants are administered the PHQ -9 to screen for 
depression and suicidal ideation; the PHQ -9 was adapted for a one week timeframe.  
Safety C alls: Study days 16 and 22 will be the target ( + 3 days) days for the telephone calls  2 and 3. 
Participants are queried for adverse events using the open -ended question “How have y ou been feeling since 
we last saw you in the research clinic ?” If safety con cerns are apparent, participants are either be told to 
discontinue study medications or to adjust their dosing . An in-person study visit is scheduled as soon as 
possible in either case.  The PHQ -[ADDRESS_459777] with study staff.  
Final Assessment and Craving Induction (Visit 8; Study day 42):  
Final Visit Timing:  Participants  are scheduled to come back for their final visit approximately 7 weeks 
after their screening visit (Note: if scheduling difficulties arise there may be up to a two -week delay following 
the target end of the medication period in completing the final visit) .  
Final Assessment:  Participants will complete the CAPS , PHQ -9, PROMIS meas ures,  Form -90 (adapted 
for the 7-week time interval) , and the Stroop  with the study RC or Study Clinician , as well as  the same paper -
and-pencil measures collected at Visit 2  and du ring the weekly visits . They then undergo the two craving 
inductions in coun terbalanced order  (see below) . At the conclusion of the craving induction procedures , the 
Study Clinician check s the participants’ vital signs and adverse events as per Visits 3 -7, and questions will be 
answered about medication discontinuation. Level of c raving is reassessed and if the participant indicates a 
strong desire to actually drink, the Study Clinician will work with him/her to identify alternatives or ways of 
drinking mod erately. Laboratory evaluation of blood samples is repeated and again includ es CBC, routine liver 
function tests, and routine serum chemistries. Specimens are sent to a lab in Minnesota, MedTox, for 
assessment of the alcohol biomarker phosphatidylethanol – Peth. The same blood draw procedures indicated 
above for Visit [ADDRESS_459778] before the craving induction  depending 
on scheduling and room availability. At the end of th e appointment  participants are thoroughly debriefed, and 
provided  community or VA referrals for alcohol treatment . This portion of the visit may be conducted by [CONTACT_367746].  
Craving Induction Procedures:  At approximately 1pm or lat er participants are oriented to the craving 
induction procedures by [CONTACT_43038] y RC or Study Clinician . Participants are seated in a comfortable chair in a 
quiet, undecorated room and fitted with headphones. The craving inductions are presented in counterbala nced 
order. Immediately prior to the first induction participants  rate their  current craving using the abbreviated  Desire 
for Alcohol Questionnaire (DAQ).  Current positive and negative affect are also assessed  with the PANAS . 
Participants are then be instructed to  close their eyes and imagine that they are in the situation they are about 
to hear. Their personalized reward oriented or relief oriented craving scene is played over the headphon es. At 
the end of the scene the participants imagine the scene for an additi onal three minu tes following which they 
are asked to complete the same ratings as before. Participants then relax for [ADDRESS_459779].  
 
Study Medications  
Prazosin : Prazosin HCl or identical matched placebo capsules are dispensed as 1, 2, and 4 mg 
capsules prepared by [CONTACT_367747] -Ross  Pharma cy, a compounding pharmacy in Seattle. A 25mg riboflavin trace will 
be added  to each capsule to evaluate medication compliance.  
 Naltrexone : [ADDRESS_459780] bo capsules prepared by [CONTACT_367747] -Ross  
Pharmacy (tablets are ground and the n compounded with the 25mg riboflavin trace).  
 
Procedures for Maximizing Re search Integrity  
 Maintaining the Study Blind:  Only the VAPSHCS research pharmacist will have access to the 
randomization schedule, and she will have no contact [CONTACT_367748]. The blind may be broken by [CONTACT_367749], but the information will not be shared 
with study staff except in the event of clinically significant safety concerns.  
 Maximizing Retention:  We update contact [CONTACT_367750] .  
Participan ts will be paid $[ADDRESS_459781]/ Variables  Study Phase  Purpose  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria and Blocking Factors  
Demograp hic information  V1 sample description, blocking (gender)  
Medical history in terview  V1 exclusion  
Medical Exam  V1, V8  exclusion ; safety  
Lab values  V1, V8 exclusion ; safety  
MINI International Psychiatric Interview  (DSM -V AUD 
& SUD  onset of drinking  and alcohol problems  as well 
as recent drinking ; DSM -IV Psychosis; suicidality, 
homicidality)  V1 inclusion and exclusion  
Alcohol use goal  (embedded in MINI AUD)  V1 inclusion, blocking, treatment moderator  
Desires for Alcohol Questionnaire (DAQ)   V2, V [ADDRESS_459782]  V1, V8  blocking  
Penn Alcohol Craving Scale  V1, V2, V8  inclusion  
Clinic ian-Administered PTSD Scale For DSM -5 
(CAPS)  V1, V8  blocking, treatment moderator (Aim 3)  
Tracking  
Contact [CONTACT_982]  V1-V7 retention  
Primary Outcomes  
Alcoho l Biomarker (Peth)  V1, V8  outcome  
Alcohol Craving (DAQ ) V8 outcome (Aim 2)  
Alcohol use  V8 outcome (Aim 2)  
Reward Craving for Craving Inductions from DAQ  V8 outcome (Aim 1)  
Relief Craving for Craving Inductions from DAQ  V8 outcome (Aim 1)  
Hypothesized Moderators  
State Trait Anxiety   V1, V8 moderation (Aim 3)  
Anxiety Sensitiv ity Inventory  V1, V8 moderation (Aim 3)  
Sensitivity to Reward/Punishment Scale  V1, V8  moderation (Aim 3)  
PHQ -9 Depression  V1-V8 moderation (Aim 3) ; safety  
Family History of AUD  V2 moderation (Aim 3)  
Drinking Motives (Card Sort)  V2, V8  moderation (Aim 1) 
Secondary Measures  (Descriptive and/or Exploratory)  
AUDIT  V1 sample description  
Drinking Motives Questionnaire  V1, V8  sample description  
Obsessive Compulsive Drinking Scale  V1, V2, V 8 sample description  
Form -90 (alcohol)  V2, V8 sample description  and outcome  
   
   
Positive and Negative Mood States  IVR, V [ADDRESS_459783]  V2 – V8 sample description  
PROMIS Sleep quality  V2 – V8  sample de scription  
PROMIS Wake Disturbance  V2 – V8 sample description  
PROMIS General Distress; Anxiety  V2 – V8 sample description  
Important People Inventory  V2, V8  sample description and  possible moderator  
Craving Induction Preparation  
Script Preparation Form  V2 provide details  for craving inductions  
Medication Management / Safety Checks  
Adverse Events Checklist  and Vital Signs  All clinical data  for medication management  
PHQ -9 Suicid e item (#9)  All Phone Calls  safety  
   
Data Safety Monitor/Research Monitor  
In accordance with DODI 3216.02, the research monitor, Joseph Reoux, MD, has the authority to stop 
this research protocol in progress, remove individual human subjects from the res earch protocol, and take 
whatever steps are necessary to protect the safety and well -being of human subjects until the IRB can assess 
his report. [CONTACT_367759] is responsible for promptly report his observations and findings to the IRB or other 
designated offi cial. He may also have direct contact [CONTACT_367751] n ecessary to evaluate 
their safety and to make recommendations for any needed care or actions. 
 
Data Management   
Jane Shofer,  M.S., a biostatistician from the University of Washingt on, will analyze  the study data. 
Because [CONTACT_367760]  is not a VA employee, the study d ata will be temporarily transferred to her laptop for 
analysis . [CONTACT_367760] w ill have the study data for one year. After one year, [CONTACT_367760] will delete them from her 
laptop. All data transfers will be made using methods approved by [CONTACT_367752].  
The transferred data will not  have any ident ifying information connected with t hem. They will be raw 
data numbers only identified by a study code number. Inadvertent disclosure of any of these data will not have 
any impact on participants, as a third party would not be able to discern what the data are. The study 
crosswalk , the bridge between the study code  and participant’s name, will be kept in the project folder in the 
VA secure network ( \\R01PUGHSM03.R01.MED.VA.G OV\Research \Simpson \IVR_Studies \[ZIP_CODE] (AA -PaN 
Study) \11 - Tracking & Databases) and w ill not be shared with [CONTACT_367760] . 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
Statistical analysis w ill focus on three primary  outcomes  and a secondary outcome (average drinks per 
drinkin g day). The three p rimary outcomes are Percent Drinking Days (PDD), Percent Heavy Drinking Days 
(PHDD), and craving score s from PACS . The Form -90 will be used to gather drinking data for the three months 
prior to receipt of study medi cation as well as  the six-weeks of study medication. This information w ill be used 
to compute PDD, PHDD, and average d rinks per drinking day . Heavy drinki ng is defined as five or more drinks 
or four or more drinks in a day for men and women, respectively . 
Hypotheses w ill be tested using intent -to-treat (ITT) linear mixed effect analyses. Specifically, 
differences in outcome measures from pre -treatment throu gh the study medication phase will be estimated 
using linear mixed effects regression of outcome (the dependent variable ) on treatment by [CONTACT_367753] (the independent fixed effects). Study visit w ill be modeled as categorical (post - vs. pre -treatment). 
Study participant w ill be modeled as a random effect. Model results w ill be summarized with e stimated 
marginal mean s at pre - and post -treatment for each treatment group , within -group mean change from pre -
treatment  and mean difference in change by [CONTACT_19313] . The latter set of means will also be presented as 
standardized effect sizes calculated using th e standard deviati on of the outcome at baseline as the 
denominator. Hypothesis testing for the overall difference in change in outcome by [CONTACT_3148] w ill be carried out 
using the likelihood ratio test for the significance of the study visit by [CONTACT_367754]. All  means will 
be accompanied by [CONTACT_367755], and all mean differences will also be presented with 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs), whic h will be adjusted for the four sets of differences estimated corresponding to the four 
treatment grou ps using the singl e-step method . 
Exploratory analyses w ill be carried out to separate the effect of the treatment from the effect of the pre -
treatment lev els of each outcome on the estimates of post -treatment change in outcomes by [CONTACT_1583] a pre -
treatme nt ou tcome by [CONTACT_367756]. Descriptive analyses w ill be carried out to summarize 
clinical outco mes at the last week of study. Lower ris k drinking w ill be defined using NIAAA guidelines; for men 
this mean s exceeding neither [ADDRESS_459784] week w ill also be computed. Addit ionally, both the raw 
mean PDDs and PH DDs w ill be computed for each week of study medication and plotted by [CONTACT_367757]. Type 1 error will be  set at .05 for each outcome. Analyses w ill be carried 
out using R 3.6.2 , and the packages lme4, emmeans and tidyverse.  
Descriptive information pertaining to study visit attendance, medication adherence , participant safety, 
adverse events, and medication adjustments will be  provided by [CONTACT_367758].  
 