Care After Pregnancy Study (CAPS) : Engaging Women in Postpartum Care  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
STUDY 19040312  
 
Study protocol and statistical analysis (10/31/2019)  
  
STUDY PROTOCOL  
We propose to conduct a three -arm randomized controlled trial (RCT) enrolling eligible women 
on the postpartum floors to either 1) attention control arm, 2) pre -scheduled postpartum visit 
arm, or 3) Healthy Beyond Pregnancy study arm. We designed the trial  as a RCT given concern 
for confounding by [CONTACT_744865], that might not be adequately addressed by [CONTACT_744866] . 
 
Study Population : We will enroll women with a Pennsylvania Medicaid product who received 
prenatal care and delivered at Magee Womens Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (MWH) of the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_357194] . 
 
Exclusi on criteria:  We will exclude women who delivered prior to 24 weeks, women with an 
intrauterine fetal demise or neonatal death, and women without text -enabled phones. We will 
also exclude women who had a tubal ligation postpartum as they are unlikely to use  additional 
birth control, our primary study outcome . 
 
Recruitment :  
Participants will be recruited over 8 months from the postpartum floors at MWH. A research 
coordinator will recruit all p atients to maintain fidelity of the intervention and approach to the 
control arm. This is the approach we used in our successful pi[INVESTIGATOR_86234]. Postpartum 
nurses will be informed about the study, however, in an effort to minimize contamination of  our 
attention control arm providers involved in postpartum care will not receive education about the 
goals of our study. (We will not meet with providers ahead of time to emphasize that we are 
trying to increase attendance at the postpartum visit with our  study as this could change usual 
care by [CONTACT_744867]. Instead we inform providers that we are doing a study to engage 
women in postpartum care but not emphasize the goals of the study. ) 
 
Randomization Procedures : After confirmation of eligibility, wom en will be approached for 
informed consent. Consented participants will be randomly assigned to one of the study arms. 
Allocation will be in a 1:1:[ADDRESS_1018978] confirm the participant’s 
eligib ility status before an intervention assignment is provided. Sealed randomization envelopes 
will be provided to the clinical site as a backup in the event that the randomization system is not 
accessible. Trial personnel will open the next sequentially numbe red randomization envelope 
and then record the information in the randomization log . 
 
Study Arm s 
Attention Control Group : 
If randomized to the attention control arm participants will receive discharge instruction from the 
postpartum nurses per usual care. We will ask them to provide us with an SMS number. This 
will enable collection of self -reported breastfeeding duration (see section ascertainment of 
outcomes) as well as texts on general infant care. These texts are educational in nature and no 
data will b e collected. They will receive a total of two texts on general infant care in the first 
month postpartum. This increased attention to the control arm mirrors the attention received by 
[CONTACT_744868] a 
general increased level of contact [CONTACT_386417]. A usual care arm would only receive written 
discharge instructions from a postpartum nurse. We will also inform them that if they answer 
80% of the breastfeeding questions at six month s postpartum they will receive a $[ADDRESS_1018979] . 
 
Healthy Beyond Pregnancy : 
If randomized to the Healthy Beyond Pregnancy arm the research coordinator will provide the 
participant with a tablet and stylus and direct them to the Healthy Beyond Pregnancy webs ite. 
Women will complete the program in their postpartum rooms at Magee prior to discharge. All of 
the steps described below happen in the postpartum room and take roughly [ADDRESS_1018980] ronic survey that 
assesses a participant’s self -identified postpartum concerns. Women are presented the 
following list of issues: (1) Postpartum Contraception (2) Breastfeeding Support (3) Postpartum 
Mood (4) Bowel and Bladder Function after Delivery (5) S exual Activity after Delivery (6) 
Optimizing Inter -pregnancy Health (7) Follow up after Pregnancy Complications such as 
Gestational Diabetes or Hypertension (8) Follow up after Pregnancy Complicated by [CONTACT_4834] C 
(9) Vaccinations. The results of this surv ey will be collected. (Survey is uploaded. ) 
 
Women are then immediately presented with at least [ADDRESS_1018981] be addressed, 
regardless of the woman’s self -identified needs. Specifically for women with a pregnancy 
complicated by [CONTACT_30150], preterm birth, or hypertension they will view videos about 
the implications of these pregnancy complications. If a participant indicates she is not interested 
in any of the postpartum domains on her survey, she will be shown the videos on contraception 
and breastfeeding . 
 
The education videos were filmed with professional actors who reflect the age and racial make -
up of our population. They were designed to incre ase all levels of awareness about important 
postpartum issues women face using language at an 8th grade level. Each video is less than [ADDRESS_1018982] the option . 
 
After completing the survey and watching the ir videos, the Healthy Beyond Pregnancy 
generates an individualized passport for postpartum care. This passport for care lists the 
women’s self -identified postpartum needs as well as issues that should be prioritized based on 
her health history. As above t his include information about follow up needed for women with 
gestational diabetes, preterm birth, or hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. The individualized 
passport for postpartum care will be printed out and given to the woman. It will not become part 
of her medical record. (We have uploaded the Mock -Up for the Passport to Health. ) 
 
The coordinator will stay in the room to assist the participant with the website and ensure that 
the participant completes the program. After the participant schedules her po stpartum visit, she 
will receive a print out that includes the date and time of her appointment, a copy of her 
commitment statement as well as a reminder of the $[ADDRESS_1018983] simply states that the patient is committing to coming to her 
postpartum visit and she will electronically sign it. We will also inform her that if she answers 
80% of the breastfe eding questions at six months postpartum she will receive an additional $[ADDRESS_1018984]. (The commitment contract can be viewed on the attached mock -ups in the 
supplementary file. ) 
 
Note the study team is working with outpatient clinic to identify available appointment times for 
women to schedule. The HBP program securely emails the schedulers in the outpatient clinic to 
communicate which visits have been scheduled in real time . 
 
Once completing the program, women can go back into the program and watch other videos 
either while in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_88072]. They cannot  re-take the survey or change the date of 
their visit. We are not tracking which videos women go back into watch . 
 
Usual Care with Pre -scheduled Postpartum Visit : 
If randomized the  usual care with pre -scheduled visit arm, participant will schedule their 
postpartum visit with the study coordinator. They will then receive discharge information per 
usual care. We will also collect her SMS number and inform her that if answers 80% of the 
breastfeed ing questions by [CONTACT_744869] $[ADDRESS_1018985] breastfeeding data. These 
texts will go out a 1 week, 4 week, 12 weeks and 6 month s postpartum. (This breast feeding 
form is attached below.) We will also collect basic demographic and medical history  on all 
patients after enrollment . 
Primary outcome: The primary outcome of this trial is the use of an effec tive contraceptive 
method at 3 and 6 months . 
 
Definition of effective contraception use after delivery: We will determine the proportion of 
women who utilize a non -barrier birth control method of their choice at [ADDRESS_1018986] effective by [CONTACT_262415]. All other methods are 
classified as effective or highly effective(98). We will also determine the proportion of women 
who utilize a non -barrier birth control method at 6 months postpartum . 
 
Definition of breastfeeding duration and other breastfeeding outcomes: We will determine the 
proportion of women who are providing any infant feeds with breast mild at 3 and 6 months. We 
will also determine the proportion of mothers exclusively breastfeeding at all time points -- 1 
week, 4 weeks, 12 weeks (3 months), and 6 months. Finally, we will estimate the total duration 
of breastfeeding . 
 
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  
Analyses for all study outcomes will be conducted according to the intention -to-treat principle.   
 
For dichotomous outcome s (e.g. use of  effective contraception at 6 months) , chi-square 
statistics will be used to compare event rates by [CONTACT_744870]  (yes/no) with an alpha -level=0.0 5. Proportions , the relative risk, and the 
absolute risk dif ference will be estimated, and 95% confidence intervals will be calculated. 
Multivariable logistic regression analysis will be used to adjust for observed group imbalances 
and factors  known to be associated with the outcome  (see potential confounders above) as a 
sensitivity analysis. Multivariate models will also be used to elucidate the roles of demographic 
factors including race and relevant clinical factors as predictors.  There will be some missing 
data for the trial outcomes. Parallel a nalyses will be performed on imputed datasets as a 
sensitivity analysis. Multiple imputation of the missing outcome dat a will be conducted under 
alternative scenarios assuming that the data are missing at random conditional on specified 
participant charact eristics and that they are missing not at random.   
 
For event history type outcomes ( e.g. total duration  of feeding human milk  or duration of 
effective contraception use ) time from delivery will be analyzed using interval -censored survival 
analysis methods  using a two -sided test with alpha=0.0167 (103). The estimated event  rates at 3 
and 6  months, the difference between assigned treatment groups, and the corresponding 
confidence intervals will b e presented.   
 
For outcomes with repeated measures (breast/chest feeding at multiple time points) g eneralized 
linear mixed -effects modeling with li near contrasts will be used to examine the effect of 
treatment assignment on the longitudinally  assessed outcome  over time , with treatment group 
assignment as a between -subject factor, time as a within -subject factor, and an interaction 
between treatment g roup and time . Given the level of measurement and distribution of the 
dependent variable, an appropriate error structure and link function will be selected . For 
example, since provision of human milk is assessed as a binary variable, a binomial error 
struc ture will be assumed and a logit link will be applied . Random effects for participants will 
also be included. Fixed and/or time -dependent covariates may be included secondarily to adjust 
for group imbalances and variables related to the dependent variables  based on the literature or 
data screening results. Standard fit criteria (e.g., AIC and BIC) will be used to identify the best -
fitting repeated measures covariance structure. F -tests will test the main and interaction effects 
included in the model. Indivi dual regression parameters will be estimated with confidence 
intervals. For each model, residual analyses will be conducted to identify sources of model 
misspecification, outliers, and influential observations. Sensitivity analyses will be performed to 
discern the impact of influential cases on modeling results. Linear contrasts will be specified in 
the repeated measures models to test whether Healthy Beyond Pregnancy  demonstrate s 
greater improvements in breast/chest feeding  outcomes compared to attention c ontrol  or pre -
scheduled visit arm at each time point . 
 
 
 