Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 1 Cyclooxygenase-2-Inhibitor Combination Treatment for Bipolar Depression: Role of Inflammation and 
Kynurenine Pathway Biomarkers 
 
 
ABSTRACT   A chronic sub-threshold pro-inflammatory  status may interfere with the ability of an antidepressant to exert its 
full therapeutic action in bipolar diso rder (BPD) patients whose depression  has failed to respond or remit. 
Additionally, a pathological shunt in the kynurenine path way may be involved in these delayed or diminished 
responses to antidepre ssant monotherapy.  
 We propose a placebo-controlled study to treat bipolar de pressed patients not responsive to antidepressant 
monotherapy with the well-known antidep ressant escitalopram in combinati on with the anti-inflammatory agent 
celecoxib. We hypothesize that co mbination treatment will result in au gmented treatment responses. We also 
expect to see greater numbers of remitters in response to escitalopr am + celecoxib combination therapy 
compared to escitalopram monotherapy.   BACKGROUND  Burden of Bipolar Depression In bipolar disorder I and II, the depressive phase dominates over ma nic or hypomanic symptoms and most 
adversely affects the quality of life. In the natural cour se of bipolar I disorder (BPD), depressive symptoms 
occur in 31.9% of the weeks, a nd hypomanic/manic sympto ms occur in 8.9% of the weeks the patient 
experiences symptoms (Judd et al, 20 02). In bipolar II disorder, depressi ve symptoms occur in 50.3% of the 
weeks and hypomanic/manic symptoms in 1.3% of the weeks (Judd et al, 2003). Amongst [ADDRESS_1158004] anley Foundation Bipolar Network, 25% were ill with depressive 
symptoms averaging 214 days/year and 40% were ill w ith depressive symptoms averaging 120 days/year (Post 
et al, 2003a). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_833810], mean time depresse d was 3-fold higher than 
manic time. 62.8% of patients had 4 or  more epi[INVESTIGATOR_11114]. It was co ncluded that in bipolar patients’ 
depressive symptoms pose a greater burden for treatment than mania (Post et al, 2003b). The suicide rate is 
highest in patients with bipolar diso rder. It occurs most frequently af ter severe and recurrent depressive 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (Tondo et al, 2003). Regarding response to anti depressant treatment, bi polar depressed patients 
generally respond more poorly than patients with major depression. In a st udy comparing response to 
antidepressant treatment of bipolar depressed patients versus that of patients with major depression, the non-
response rate was 1.6 times higher in bipolar depressed patients. In anot her study, failure to respond to anti-
depressant therapy was reported to be 3.4 times more common in bipolar depressed patients (Ghaemi et al, 
2004). The reasons for the above observati ons are not clear. However, prompt diagnosis and specific therapeutic 
strategies are critical fo r the successful manageme nt of bipolar disorder.  
 Role of Inflammation For decades our understanding of the pathophysiology of  affective disorders and the development of 
antidepressant medications have been almost solely guided by [CONTACT_833834]. While monoamine-based antidepressants have  proven suitable as a mainstay treat ment for most cases, their prolonged 
intervals to achieve symptom control,  and the high percentage of non-remitters in both unipolar and bipolar 
depression have remained insurmoun table attributes of these medica tions. New and innovative treatment 
strategies are therefore n eeded. Meanwhile, there has been an impre ssive accumulation of knowledge about pro-
inflammatory compounds (e.g., cytokines, chemokines, C -reactive protein) contribu ting to the pathophysiology 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 2 of depression. This has led to the fo rmulation of the Cytokine Theory of Depression (Ur et al, 1992; Dantzer et 
al 2008; Leonard and Song, 1996; Miller et al, 2009).  There are numerous reports (Drexha ge et al; Drexhage et 
al; Kim et al, 2007; Kim et al , 2002; Maes et al, 1995; Rapa port et al, 1999; Su et al, 2002; Tsai et al, 1999; Tsai 
et al, 2001) linking the immune system , in particular cytokines and C-r eactive protein (CRP), to bipolar 
disorder.  There is additional evidence that the persis tent pro-inflammatory status found in depression may 
delay, diminish, and even thwart antidepressant response. Furthermore, a persistent pr o-inflammatory status is 
likely increases the risk for depressed patients to deve lop serious and potentially li fe-threatening complications 
such cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease.   
 There is an interaction between cyto kines and serotonergic tr ansmission involving the me tabolism of tryptophan 
and modulation by [CONTACT_833835]. This interacti on in the CNS occurs in part through the enzyme 
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (I DO). IDO catabolizes trypt ophan to kynurenine. K ynurenine metabolism has 
been implicated in the pathophys iology of depression, especia lly the chronicity of the disorder (Myint and Kim, 
2003). The involvement of the NMDA receptor in manic rela pse of patients with bipolar I disorder was first 
proposed by [CONTACT_833836] (Hoekstra et al, 2006). The up-regula tion of the initiating step of the 
kynurenine pathway has been demonstrated in postmortem  anterior cingulate cortex  from individuals with 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (Miller et al, 2006). A lower plasma tryptophan index, lower neuroprotective 
kynurenic acid and higher tryptophan br eakdown has been observed in bipolar  patients compared to controls 
(Myint et al, 2007a; Myint et al, 2007b). Our unpublished data also indi cates that the kynurenine/tryptophan 
ratio in major depression may serve as an indicator of response to add-on treatment with the cyclooxygenase-[ADDRESS_1158005] icated in the pathogenesis of athe rosclerosis and cardi ovascular disease 
(Koenig et al, 2001; McIntyre et al 2 007; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_833811], 2000). E ndothelial damage of the cerebral vasculature is 
postulated to contribute to the development of an entity referred to as Vascular Depr ession, which presents with 
many typi[INVESTIGATOR_833812]. Studies have shown that pro-in flammatory cytokine s are over-expressed 
in many stress-related disorders, incl uding depression (Leonard et al, 1999; Tsao et al, 2006; von Kanel et al 
2006).  
 Interestingly, depressed patients with or without cardiovascular disease have  been shown to exhibit elevations 
in pro-inflammatory biomarkers (Dinan et al, 2009; Koenig et al, 2001; Meyer et al 2008). The pro-
inflammatory cytokines TNFalpha, IL1be ta, and IL6 have consistently been found to be elevated in the plasma 
of depressed subjects (Himmerich  et al, 2006;Tsao et al, 2006; Tulugu et al, 2003), and elevated IL-[ADDRESS_1158006] been associated with an increased  prevalence of major depressi on (O’Brien et al, 2007). 
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is secreted in re sponse to stress, induces the release of other pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and has been implicated in the pathophysiology of MDD and in the effects of antide pressant treatment (Liciono 
et al, 1999). These observations have le d to the postulation that depressive illness is a diseas e of inflammation 
in response to chronic psychologica l stress (Koenig et al, 2001).  
  Anti-Inflammatory Therapy in Depression: Ex isting Studies with Add-On Celecoxib  
The presence of a pro
-inflammatory st ate in bipolar disorder and the usef ulness of anti-inflammatory treatment 
was the topic of a recent major review article (Berk et al , 2010). There have been 3 clinical studies describing 
the positive effects of vari ous antidepressant agents with add-on cel ecoxib therapy. Each study independently 
concluded that administration of a C OX inhibitor enhances the efficacy of the antidepressant. In some instances 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 3 non-responders remitted. All studies underscore the safety of celeco xib when used in doses up to 400 mg/day 
for 8 weeks.   
 Study No. 1:  In a double-blind, randomized, pl acebo-controlled study, celecoxib + reboxetine was administered 
to MDD patients to determine if 6 weeks of comb ination therapy would resu lt in improved outcomes as 
compared to reboxetine monotherap y. Celecoxib was titrated from 200 mg/d  to 400mg/d over 3 days. Subjects 
receiving reboxetine + celecoxib showed a significantly greater antidepressant response by [CONTACT_5875]-5 than subjects 
on reboxetine + placebo. Safety issues  were assessed by [CONTACT_6270]-reporting. No laboratory measurements were 
performed to assess hematologic or cardiovascular issues th at might have arisen with drug combination. 
Mueller et al, 2006.   Study No. 2: In a double-blind, randomized, placebo-c ontrolled study, add-on celecoxib or placebo was 
administered for 6 week s to non-responsive bipolar patients experien cing depressive or mixed epi[INVESTIGATOR_833813] s of multiple mood stabilizers, atypi[INVESTIGATOR_346422], antidepressants, and 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651]. A statistically signifi cant improvement (p= 0.03) was noted in the first week of treatment with 
add-on celecoxib in those who completed treatment. Th is pi[INVESTIGATOR_833814] (n=23 for 
completers). The study did not measure drug levels or  inflammation biomarkers. The overall finding was a 
better outcome in patients tr eated with celecoxib add-on.  Nery et al, 2008. 
 Study No. 3:  In a double-blind, rand omized, placebo-controlled study, 40 acutely depressed MDD subjects 
were treated with fluoxetine + placebo or fluoxetine + celecoxib for 6 weeks. At 6 weeks of treatment, patients 
receiving combination therapy showed statistically more improvement th an patients receiving monotherapy. 
The celecoxib add-on was well-tolerated in study patients.  Plasma levels of fluoxetin e were monitored and no 
significant drug-drug interactions in metabolism were noted. No inflammation biom arkers were measured. 
Akhondzadeh et al, 2009.   Using Celecoxib Instead of Another NSAID   
There are more preliminary reports using CBX as an add-on treatment for depres sion than any other add-on 
NSAID strategy. Additionally, as a COX-2 inhibitor CBX la cks the substantive anti-platelet effects associated 
with other NSAIDs on the US market which are non-sele ctive mixed COX-1/COX-2 inhi bitors, such as aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] 
(Riondino et al, 2008). Using CBX allows for reasonable co nfidence that changes (i.e., in biomarkers) could not 
result from indirect effects on platelets or coagulation. Furthermore, due to pharmacokinetic reasons the 
analgesic effects of CBX take effect slower than other NSAIDs. Having a 3-hour interval between medication 
ingestion and effect onset decreased the likeliness that a cue can be perc eived by [CONTACT_102],  thereby [CONTACT_833837].   In addition to  these pharmacological issues, the use of  CBX also rests on basic sc ience findings linking COX-2 
up-regulation to depression. Pro-infla mmatory cytokines are k nown to activate the HPA axis and exert profound 
effects on central monoaminergic tran smission (Besedovsky et al, 1991), a nd at least three of them (IL-1β , IL-6 
and TNFα) are acted upon by [CONTACT_833838]. While there are multiple isoforms of COXs, the main focus of the field has 
been on COX-2 because it is the isoform that is cytokine-induced  through NFkappaB-dependent mode 
(Funakoshi-Tago et al, 2008). Stressors such as depression up-regulate transc ription factor NFkappaB, which is 
mediator of pro-inflammatory cytokines in monocytes (Miller et al , 2009). Moreover, the predominant reaction 
of COX-2 is conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). In creased P
GE2 in saliva, serum, and 
CSF of depressed patients has previo usly been described (Lieb et al, 1983 ; Calabrese et al, 1986). Since PGE2 
stimulates IL-[ADDRESS_1158007].  
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 4  
The up-regulation of PGE2 has also been described in response to different physic al, psychological, or mixed 
trauma experimental paradigms like so cial crowding, immobilization, or cold  restraint stress in animals.  
 Furthermore, there is evidence that up-regulation of COX-2 can enhance glutamater gic neurotransmission. Sang 
(2007) demonstrated that PGE2 gl yceryl ester (PGE2-G), a major C OX-[ADDRESS_1158008] that COX-2 has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative 
disorders such as Parkinsonism, Multiple Sclerosis, Al zheimer’s disease a nd traumatic brain injury. According 
to contemporary theories, depressive states are also neurodegenerative (Lie b et al, 1983; Calabrese et al, 1986; 
Yang et al, 2008). Taken together, ther e is a strong body of literature s uggesting that COX-2 up-regulation in 
depression may pose a serious risk not  only for the mood disorder itself,  but also for the emergence of 
neurodegeneration at late r time points in life. 
 Pro-Inflammatory Biomarkers: Anticipated Effect of Celecoxib Add-On  
CBX inhibits COX-2 and its end-products (i.e. PGE2).  Funakoshi-Tago et al. (2008)  demonstrated that CBX 
significantly inhibits TNF α-induced NF-kappaB activation by [CONTACT_833839] p65 
NF-kappaB subunit. In a study of patients with osteoa rthritis randomized to either CBX or aceclofenac, CBX 
potently inhibited PGE2 concentrations and down-regul ated both COX-2 mRNA and protein expression at the 
synovial membrane (Alvarez-Soria et  al, 2006). In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of CBX 
(200 mg BID) of patients with severe coronary ar tery disease undergoing stable background therapy with 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_636884], 2 weeks of treatment with CBX led to a marked reduction in two pro-inflammatory agents: 
CRP and oxidized LDL (Chenevard et al, 2003). Muller et al (2004) used add-on CBX (400 mg/d) with an 
antipsychotic, risperidone. Thei r study monitored soluble TNF α receptor levels before and during 5 weeks of 
treatment. CBX add-on led to signifi cantly better-than-placebo responses  in the total PANSS scores for 
schizophrenia improvement at weeks 2, 3, and 4 (Leona rd et al, 1999). Finally, th ere are no major drug-drug 
interactions expected between CBX and ESC ba sed on having common cytoch rome P450 enzymes.  
 Pro-Inflammatory Biomarkers: Predictive Valu e with Respect to Antidepressant Response  
Studies indicate that plasma le vels of pro-inflammatory biomarkers could be predictive of tr eatment response or 
non-response. Lanquillon et al (2000) studied MDD inpatients before and af ter treatment with  amitriptyline. 
Untreated MDD patients had overall hi gher levels of plasma CRP, TNF α, and IL6 than control patients. MDD 
patients fell into three groups duri ng treatment: responders, no n-responders, and drop-outs. Non-responders had 
the highest IL-6 values before treatment.   O’Brien et al (2007) compared patien ts at the end of a failed 6-week tr ial on an SSRI with patients who had 
previously failed an SSRI but were eut hymic at time of blood dr awing (due to switch to venlafaxine or SSRI 
augmentation with lithium). This study found SSRI-resistan t patients have significantly higher levels of TNF α 
and IL6 compared to euthymic treatment responders.   Yoshimura et al (2009) compared TNF α and IL6 levels befo
re and after treatment in antidepressant treatment 
responders and non-responders. High IL6 levels before and after treatment was i ndicative of non-responders, 
regardless of the agent used.   After  6 weeks of SSRI treatment, Dinan et al (20 09) divided depressed patie nts into two groups: SSRI non-
responders and SSRI-responders. Omega-3 fatty acid, eicosa pentanoic acid (EPA) was shown to be a state 
marker. EPA competes with arachidonic acid (AA) as  a substrate for cyclooxygenase -2 (COX-2). These studies 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158009] been de scribed and reviewed (Le onard 2000 and Mendelson 2000) 
in the literature over the past decade s. Studies have reported decreased pl atelet aggregation in response to 
serotonin, but Shimbo et al. (202) reporte d a significant increase in platelet reactivity to serot onin in depressed 
patients. Whyte et al. (2001) demons trated that depressed patients w ith the serotonin-transporter-linked 
promoter region l/l genotype have increased platelet activation compared  to both depressed patients without this 
genotype and non-depressed control s ubjects. These authors hypothesize that  persons with this polymorphism 
are likely to experience higher mort ality rates. More recent evidence s hows that certain pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (e.g, TNFalpha, IL-6) reduce serotonergic transmission by [CONTACT_833840] (IDO) and shunting tryptophan away from the synthesis of serotonin. Taken together, these 
findings strongly indicate that genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_833815]-associat ed cardiovascular morb idity and mortality (White et al., 2001).  
 Salivary Cortisol Testing Recent evidence suggests that a pr olonged inflammatory response can lead to dysregulation of the 
hypothalamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-adrenal axis, pot entially due to pro-inflammatory modulators such as TNF-a and IL-6 
(Straub et. al, 2011). HPA axis dysfunction has the potential to lead to an overall increase in secretion of 
cortisol and disruption of the well-est ablished diurnal rhythm of cortisol, a glucocorticoid released in response 
to stress (Zunszain et. al, 2011). Evidence suggests that vari ation of the HPA axis and subsequent alterations in 
cortisol levels may be associated with the depressive phase in bipolar patients (Van der Werf-Eldering et. al, 2012). Obtaining cortisol through salivary collection has shown to be an effective, non-invasive method for evaluating the HPA axis, and research shows that there is a strong correlation between  salivary and blood levels 
of cortisol (Marques et. al, 2010).   HYPOTHESES AND SPECIFIC AIMS  HYPOTHESIS:  The pro-inflammatory state of BPD subjects can  delay, diminish or even thwart antidepressant 
monotherapy. Combination therapy of  escitalopram + celeco xib will result in impro ved treatment outcomes 
(faster action, augmented response, a nd/or higher remission rates) for treatment-resistant BPD subjects. 
Response to antidepressant treatment in BPD subjects will be proportional to  the change in pro-inflammatory 
status before and after treatment.  
SPECIFIC AIM #1: Determine if combined pharmacotherapy of escitalopram + celecoxib will result in 
improved affective responses compared to escital opram + placebo. Scores from the Short-Form McGill 
Pain Inventory will be used to control for variation in  depression that could be attributed to the relief of 
physical pain resulting from administration of celecoxib.   SPECIFIC AIM #2:  Determine whether combined pharmacot herapy of escitalopram + celecoxib 
causes any pharmacokinetic drug-drug interaction or poses safety/tolerability issues in terms of 
gastrointestinal bleeding or cardiovascular health . Clinical and laboratory assessments will be made 
throughout treatment and an advers e events inventory will be completed at each visit.  
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 6 SPECIFIC AIM #3: Determine the blood concentration of pro-in flammatory biomarkers of all subjects 
before and after treatment. Deter mine whether there is a correlation between blood concentration of  
pro-inflammatory biomarkers a nd the psychiatric effe ctiveness of the combined treatment.  
 
SPECIFIC AIM #4: Quantify the specific anti-inflammatory  action of celecoxib by [CONTACT_833841]2. PGE2 concentr ations will be measured from the blood of all subjects before and 
after treatment. 
 
HYPOTHESIS:  A chronic pro-inflammatory state leads to endothelial dysfunction, arterial stiffness, and dis-
regulation of the autonomic nervous system with sustai ned sympathetic activation a nd diminished vagal tone.  
 SPECIFIC AIM #5: Determine whether endothelia l dysfunction is present in BPD subjects and if this 
dysfunction will respond favorably to the combined treatment of escitalopram + celecoxib. The detection will be accomplished by [CONTACT_833842], velocity and heart rate velocity.  
 HYPOTHESIS: A pathological shunt in the kynurenine pathway exists in BPD patients who fail to remit on 
antidepressant treatment. This shunt in terferes with the ability of an an tidepressant agent to exert its full 
therapeutic action.  
 
SPECIFIC AIM #6: Determine the nature of the kynurenine path way in all subjects before and after 
treatment.  
  
HYPOTHSESIS:   A genetic polymorphism identified in the 5-HT-transporter-linke d promoter region may 
predispose subjects to depression and associated cardiovascular risk. 
 
SPECIFIC AIM #7:   Genotype the serotonin transporter le ngth polymorphic region (5-HTTLPR) on all 
subjects to determine if the 5HTTLPR alleles associate with bipolar depression, inflammation 
biomarkers, heart rate variability  and endothelial dysfunction.  
 
 STUDY ENDPOINTS  The primary endpoints pertain to the main hypothesized outcome: namely, a significantly better-than-placebo 
mood response for escitalopram + celecoxib that  is not related to al tered pain perception.  
 The HAM-D rating scale (17 items from the 21-item scale)  will be the main measure of clinical improvement.  
Onset of response is defined as the day of treatment when  a 30% decline in the initial  (day 0) HAM-D score is 
recorded and is maintained for two c onsecutive weeks. Treatment response is defined as a 50% reduction in the 
initial HAM-D score occurs. Symptom remission is  defined as a HAM-D score of 7 or less.  
 I. Primary Endpoint We seek to establish whether the combination therapy of  escitalopram + celecoxib will augment antidepressant 
efficacy compared to escitalopram therapy alone as demonstrated by:  
 a significantly earlier gr oup response (earlier dec line in HAM-D scores) 
 a more robust group improve ment in HAM-D scores at  8 weeks of treatment 
 more patients with symptom remission than in  the escitalopram + pl acebo group at 8 weeks 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 7 II. Secondary Endpoint 
We seek to determine whether there is  a reduction in pro-inflammatory bi omarkers at end of treatment in 
patients randomized to receive the combination treatment. Three key pro-inflammatory biomarkers (TNFalpha, hsCRP and VEGF) shown to be robustly elevated in depressed patients will be measured. Baseline values will be compared to age and sex matched controls from a normative dataset of hea lthy subjects. We wi ll also attempt 
to subtype BPD patients by a median split into two groups  (high and very high) according to their baseline 
biomarker levels.    III. Second Tier Exploratory Endpoints Our “second tier endpoints” are explorat ory in nature. Our study is not powered for them since existing data in 
the literature is insufficient to calculate an accurate sample size  for these endpoints.   
 
1. We will seek to establish whether a specific psychiat ric symptom profile may be associated with the 
anticipated differen tial mood improvement in response to escitalopram + celecoxib or escitalopram + 
PBO. To that end, additional rati ng instruments have been included (over and above the HAM scales) 
and detailed assessments will be made of sympto m profiles obtained from the rating instruments. 
 
2. We will assess the safety and tolerability of the comb ination treatment by [CONTACT_833843] (e.g., CBC, PT, PTT). 
 
3. Assessment of the efficacy of ce lecoxib by [CONTACT_833844]2 response to assess the extent of COX-2 
inhibition.  
4. An assessment of blood levels of escitalopram and cel ecoxib will tell us if these two agents interfere or 
promote each other’s upt ake and/or clearance. 
  STUDY DESIGN  This is a 10-week, randomized, doub le-blind, two-arm, placebo-cont rolled study. The study includes a 
screening visit, a 1-week washout phase, a 1-week place bo run-in phase and an 8-week flexible dose phase. A 
minimum of [ADDRESS_1158010] if there is  a medical safety issue.  
 At the screening visit, subjects will undergo a psychiatri c interview. The diagnosis of Bipolar Depression (BPD) 
will be established in this examination using portions of the MINI. The study will be explained to all subjects. If 
a subject meets inclusion criteria, he or she will be asked to review the co nsent form and agree to 
participate. Subjects who meet the screening criteria and sign the IRB-approved consent form will undergo 
comprehensive assessments in order to quant ify depression and asso ciated symptoms.   
At the end of the screening visit, su bjects will be instructed how to tape r the antidepressant they have been 
taking over the course of one week. A one-week taper is  sufficient for all antidepressant medications except 
fluoxetine. Subjects taking fluoxetine w ill undergo a two-week taper/wash-out. After the taper, all subjects will 
return for a second visit to be placed on a 1-week single-blind placebo ru n-in. At the second screening visit, the 
subject will provide a saliva sample prior to undergoing assessments. Subjects will be instructed how to take 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353] (escitalopram placebo 10mg/day a nd celeco
 xib placebo 400mg/day) until th e next visit one week later. Due 
to the fact that a one-week placebo run-in may be insuffic ient for some patients to reliably establish whether or 
not they are placebo responders, there w ill be an option to extend the placebo run-in for one additional week, at 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158011].  
 At the Baseline visit, subjects will be reassessed for depr ession and associated symptoms. If subjects continue to 
score 18 or higher on the 17-it em HAM-D scale, they will be randomized  to receive escitalopram + celecoxib, 
or escitalopram + placebo in an assign ment ratio 1:1. Subjects will then go on to complete assessments at Week 
1, Week 2, Week [ADDRESS_1158012] for 20 minutes  in the exam room, and 
provide a saliva sample prior to undergoing any assessm ents. Terminated subjects w ill be offered conventional 
care at the same institution.   It is our desire to observe the diurnal nature of cor tisol levels in saliva by m easuring the patient’s salivary 
cortisol levels at a time point prio r to treatment and post treatment. At ea ch of these two time points, we would 
collect saliva from the patient  at five times during th e day: upon awakening, approximately [ADDRESS_1158013] co mplete 8 weeks of active medication to be considered 
study completers. We plan to enroll approximately 80 patients in antici pation of a 10% drop-out rate. The drop-
out rate is based on our experience with  our patient population over the past [ADDRESS_1158014] in  the analysis (LOCF). There are no 
healthy controls in this study because we alread y possess normative, untreated data for comparison. 
  SUBJECT SELECTION   I. Target population We propose to study bipolar depressed s ubjects (BPD) whose depression has failed to remit following one or 
more adequate trials with an antidepressant, or who ar e experiencing a breakthrough de pressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_833816] a mood stabil izer and/or an atypi[INVESTIGATOR_833817]. Manic/hypomanic symptoms 
must have responded adequately to a mood stabilizer other than lithium. Subjects will be maintained on a mood 
stabilizer and/or atypi[INVESTIGATOR_833818] e proposed study. Subjects who are maintained on lithium 
will not be included since there is a potent ial adverse interaction with celecoxib.  
 The following eligibility criteria are designed to select subjects for whom  protocol treatment is considered 
appropriate. All relevant medical a nd non-medical conditions s hould be taken into consideration when deciding 
whether this protocol is suita ble for a particular subject. Re-screenings may be permitted at the discretion of the 
PI.   II. Inclusion Criteria  
 Male or female of any ra ce and 18 - 65 years of age at  time of screening visit. 
 Diagnosis of BPD I or II (DSM-IV-TR (296.52, 296.53, 296.89) without significant co-morbid secondary 
medical or psychiatric diagnoses. 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 9  Depressive symptoms that failed to  remit in response to antidepressa nt therapy OR current breakthrough 
depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_833819] a mood stabilizer and/ or an atypi[INVESTIGATOR_123123]. 
 Managed mania/hypomania with a m ood stabilizer other than lithium, or an atypi[INVESTIGATOR_67128]. 
 A minimum score of 18 on the Hamilton Depression Scale ( HAM-D), 17-item. 
 Willingness to institute light s-out at 11:00pm hours on the nights before blood drawings. 
 
 III. Exclusion Criteria  
 Any abnormal findings on the physical exam , ECG, blood/urine or  minor infections. 
 Abnormal results on liver or bone marrow function as indicated by [CONTACT_833845]. 
 Any pre-existing physical pain condition, including fibromyalgia. 
 History of peptic ulcer complicated  by [CONTACT_647114], hemorrhage, or obstruc tion; symptoms of peptic ulcer 
within 4 weeks of enrollment date. 
 Substance abuse or dependence during the preceding 12 months. 
 Clinically significant hypertension, an emia, liver disease, kidney disease, arthritis, diabetes, recurrent 
migraines, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], stroke, gum diseas e, autoimmune disease. Based on the judgment of the PI, a risk 
assessment should be done if a subject meets any of this clinical criteria bu t is otherwise suitable.  
 Current use of lithium.  
 Current use of a stimulant. 
 Current use of any anticoagulant agents. 
 Current use of nicotine-containing su bstances. Subjects who stop using nicotine-containing substances more 
than 1 month prior to assessment may be considered for the study. 
 Certain steroids including use of ho rmonal birth control and any system ic or topi[INVESTIGATOR_11930]  
(hormone replacement ther apy will be allowed). 
 Unwillingness to refrain from H2 recept or antagonists, non-aspi[INVESTIGATOR_480375], ginko biloba, vitamin E or fish 
oils, or aspi[INVESTIGATOR_199021] 81 mg/day.   
 Sensitivity or allergy to the study medications. 
 Need to receive agents that are contraindicated in combination with celecoxib or escitalopram. 
 Unwillingness to fast and abstain from caf feine on mornings of blood drawings. 
 A sleep disorder other than insomnia or hypersomnia as a distinct symptom of MDD. 
 Inability to commit to the follow-up v 
isits between 8:30am and 12:00pm.  
 
IV. Randomization Criteria  
 Subjects must not have res ponded or remitted as measur ed by [CONTACT_51664]-D 17 after 1 week of treatment with 
single-blind placebo.  
 V. Criteria for Temporary Suspension of Study Participation Pending Clarification 
 HAM-D 17 score of less than 18 at Baseline visit, indicative of a placebo responder.  
 Subject attempts suicide or seriously deteriorates. 
 Develops signs or symptoms suggestive of an ul cer or kidney disease or other serious illness. 
 Develops elevated blood pressure, creatinin e, potassium, or decr eased hematocrit.  
 Requires corticosteroids,  warfarin, ticlopi[INVESTIGATOR_5325], or  any anticoagulant. 
 Takes more than 4 doses per week of any of the following: Vitamin E or fish oils (at doses > 600 IU/day), 
non-aspi[INVESTIGATOR_833820] (>81 mg/day). 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158015] Termination 
 Subject attempts suicide or seriously deteriorates; if so, appropriate care will be provided. 
 Develops serious complications of an ulcer, such as gastrointestinal bleeding, perforation, or obstruction.  
 Engages in behaviors or develops  any condition that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_63718] s makes it medically unsafe or 
inappropriate to remain in the study. 
 
  STUDY TREATMENTS AND COMPLIANCE   Subjects who meet the eligibility criteria will receive one week of single-blinded esc italopram placebo + single-
blinded celecoxib placebo. Subjects who continue to me et eligibility at randomization will receive open-label 
escitalopram (beginning at 10mg/day)  + double-blinded treatment of celecoxi b (fixed at 400mg/day) or placebo. 
Escitalopram doses may be optimized based on efficacy and tolerability over the 8 weeks of active treatment. 
Subjects will be randomized according to a fixed a ssignment ratio of 1:1 (escitalopram + celecoxib: 
escitalopram + placebo). Assignment to groups is ba sed on a pharmacy generated randomization code. 
 I. Compliance  To ensure compliance, participants be asked to return all unused medication at the following visit. The returned capsules will be counted. Additionally, blood concentrations of escitalopram and celecoxib will be determined 
at Baseline, Week [ADDRESS_1158016] ID X       
MINI X        
HAM-D/HAM-A/MADRS X* X* X  X X X X 
CGI/CSSRS/AdverseEvents/CSULGIE X  X X X X X 
Self-Assessment Packet   X X X X X 
Dispense Study Medication  PBO X X X X X 
Physical Exam X      X  
Drug Screen and Pregnancy Test X      X  
Routine Clinical Labs X      X  
Research Blood Draw   X   X X 
CBC/PT/PTT Monitoring X    X X X 
Pulse Wave Analysis   X   X X 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158017] Velocity     X       X 
Saliva Sampling  X X X X X X 
 
*HAM-D only.  Routine Clinical Labs include comp lete blood count, complete metabolic panel, lipid profile and thyroid 
function.  The following assessments are included  in the self-assessment packet:  
 Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) 
 Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) 
 State/Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) 
 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_833821] (STAXI) 
 International Physical Activity Questionnaire (I-PAQ) 
 Quality of Life and Enjoyment Questionnaire (QLES-Q) 
 The Short-Form McGill Pain Inventory (MPI) 
 Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-14) 
 Subjects will be treated as outpatients for a total of ten weeks. Subjects must  complete at least six weeks to be 
regarded as completers. If a su bject chooses to withdraw fr om the study on or after six weeks of treatment, he or 
she will be asked to complete end-of-study assessments at  that time. Those results will be carried forward for 
the purpose of data analysis.  Subjects will not receive any other type of therapeutic  intervention (e.g., psychothera py) during participation in 
the study. Such options may be offered to them at the conclusion of the study, if appropriate. 
 Subjects who complete the study and respond favorably will remain under the care of  the LUMC physician, if 
they wish.   ASSESSMENTS  
 I. Psychometric Data Collection Instruments Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)   Hamilton Rating Scales for Depressi on (HAM-D) and Anxiety (HAM-A)  
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI); Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  MADRS-Montgomery Asberg Depr ession Rating Scale (MADRS) 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)  State/Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_833821] (STAXI) 
Inventory of Clinically Significant U pper and Lower GI events (CSULGIE)  
Short-Form McGill Pain Inventory (MPI) Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-14) Quality of Life and Enjoyment Questionnaire (QLES-Q) International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ)  
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158018] 
dose in the evening preceding the morning blood draw. Plasma, serum and buffy coat will be immediately separated and frozen at -80°C for future analysis.   Measurement of Plasma Pro -Inflammatory Biomarkers 
These measures will be obtaine d from blood drawn at Baseline, Week 4 and Week 8 using the Randox 
Technologies “Evidence InvestigatorTM ” system. This compact Biochip arra y system is comprised of a super-
cooled Charge Coupled Device (CCD ) camera and unique image processing software. This Biochip technology 
has been validated using blood samples from our prel iminary studies. Several cytokines, chemokines and 
growth factors can be analyzed simu ltaneously using microliter volumes of plasma. The results produced by [CONTACT_833846]. This 
assay will be completed in an LUMC lab.   Measurement of Serum Kynurenin es and the Tryptophan Pathway 
These measures will be obtained from blood drawn at Baseline, Week 4 and Week 8. The measurement of 
tryptophan and kynurenines has been  established in the Psychoneur oimmunology (PNI) Laboratory of the 
Psychiatric Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_833822], Muni ch using Ultra Performance Liquid Ch romatography – Mass Spectrometry 
(UPLC-MS) methodology. The method ha s been standardized by [CONTACT_833847] [ADDRESS_1158019] MOODINFLAME. The measured 
metabolites are: tryptophan, kynuren ine, kynurenic acid, 3-hydroxykynurenine,  3-hydroxyanthranillic acid and 
quinolinic acid. This assay will be completed by [CONTACT_833848], [LOCATION_013].  
Measurement of Blood Levels of  Celecoxib and Escitalopram 
These measures will be obtained fro m blood drawn at Baseline, Week [ADDRESS_1158020] an d reliable method uses LipoPolySacchari de (LPS) stimulation and a special 
Cremophor EL-EtOH vehicle to solubili ze and assay PGE2. The method is rapid and eliminates COX-[ADDRESS_1158021] using aspi[INVESTIGATOR_833823] e thromboxane synthase inhi bitor (TXBSI). This assay will be completed in 
an LUMC lab.   Monitoring of Possibility  of Bleeding Diathesis 
These measures will be obtained from blood drawn at Week 2, Week 4, and Week 8. Since the combination of 
an SSRI and a COX-2 inhibitor has th e potential to induce bleeding diathe sis, a complete blood count (CBC), 
prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) will be evaluated. Prothrombin Time and aPTT 
testing are performed on the Sysmex CA-7000 analyzer  utilizing the scattered light detection method. The 
analyzer irradiates red light (660 nm) onto a mixture of blood plasma and reagent and detects the change in 
turbidity (when the fibrinogen is transf ormed into fibrin) as the change in scattered light. A curve is generated, 
plotting time against the amount of scattered light. This sample will  be processed by [CONTACT_833849].   III. SphygmoCor® Assessments 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 13 All SphygmoCor® measures will be obtained using the non-invasive Sp hygmoCor® device (SCOR-Vx, AtCor 
Medical Pty, Ltd) equipped with the most recent software (v9.0, AtCor Medical, West Ryde, Australia). 
Brachial blood pressure will be recorded at the same session using a standard method. 
 Pulse Wave Analysis to Quantify Arterial Stiffness  
Subjects will undergo the Pulse Wave Analysis at Baseli ne, Week [ADDRESS_1158022] analysis (PWA) is 
a non-invasive, FDA-approved technique that allows for the assessment of arterial  stiffness. Pulse wave 
measurements have been established as prognostic markers of car diovascular morbid ity and mortality 
(Papaioannou et al, 2007; Weber et al, 2007). These wave  indices may also serve as prognostic markers of 
response to therapy (Weber et al, 2007; Williams et al, 2006). A portabl e tonometric probe is positioned over 
the maximal arterial pulse of the ar tery under study. A minimum of twenty sequential pressure waveforms must 
be recorded. SphygmoCor® Software ge nerates mean peripheral and corres ponding central and aortic pressure 
waveforms using a validated transfer function. Intra- and inte r- observer reproducibility of these measures has 
been established in various populations (Papaioannou et al, 2007; Wilkinson et al, 2 002).  Resting wave form 
will be recorded using standard PWA technique, as desc ribed by [CONTACT_475001] (2006) an d Rybakowski et al (2006). 
 Albuterol Challenge to A ssess Endothelial Function 
Subjects will undergo the Albuterol Challenge at Baseline and Week 8 to assess endothelium-dependent vasodilation. Albuterol (2 x 200 μg) will be given by [CONTACT_320703] a sp acer device. The subject will be asked 
to slowly inhale for [ADDRESS_1158023] (Hayward et al, 2002; Wilkin son et al, 2002). Pulse Wave Analysis will be performed at 0, 5, [ADDRESS_1158024] Velocity is PWV computed by [CONTACT_19915].   Heart Rate Variability 
Subjects will undergo the Heart Rate Va riability assessment at Baseline and Week 8. This technique allows for 
the assessment of sympathetic/para sympathetic imbalance in depressi on, which may be central to the 
development of cardiovascul ar disease secondary to de pression. HRV is a natural physiological function of a 
healthy heart capable of respondi ng and adapting to changing de mands of life circumstances.  
 IV. Safety Assessments and Adverse Events Monitoring 
A complete physical examination with  clinical laboratory assessments wi ll be performed at enrollment and 
termination. Bleeding diathesis monitori ng will be completed w ith higher frequency, as outlined in the schedule 
of events. Any negative clinically si gnificant changes from the entry examina tion will be recorded as adverse 
events.  
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 14 Adverse event (AE) monitoring will formally occur after weeks 1, 2, 4, and [ADDRESS_1158025] 
questioning and the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).  All adverse events will be monitored un til stable regardless of when the event takes place. If the event occurs at 
the end of the study, it will be referred to the subject’s  primary care physician and/or psychiatrist for continued 
treatment and/or follow-up.     ADVERSE EVENTS REPORTING  All AEs will reported, regardless of whether the event seems related to the study drug s escitalopram and/or 
celecoxib. Study staff will also report AEs spontaneously reported by [CONTACT_5363]/or observed by [CONTACT_15228]. 
Information that will be  collected includes: 
 
 A description of the event 
 Start and stop date 
 Action taken with regards to investigational product 
 Outcome 
 If the AE causes the patien t to discontinue the study 
 A statement reporting if the AE meets criteria for a Serious A dverse Event or not (see below) 
 The investigator’s assessment of the causal relationship between  the event and the study drug 
 Intensity of the AE 
o mild (awareness of sign or symptom, but easily tolerated) 
o moderate (discomfort sufficient to cause interference with normal activities) 
o severe (incapacitating, with inabil ity to perform normal activities) 
 All serious adverse events (SAE) will  be documented and reported to appr opriate regulatory bodies. All adverse 
events will be summarized in a report at intervals re quested by [CONTACT_833850].  
  ETHICS AND EVALUATION OF RISKS  I. Consent Process Overview Each subject will be presented the Informed Consent Form  after meeting criteria for inclusion. Subjects will be 
asked to read the Informed Consent Form carefully. S ubjects will be told about the effects of celecoxib and 
escitalopram. Subjects will be told that  their participation in this study co uld benefit patients with BPD in the 
future. Subjects will also be informed  of potential risks and discomforts. Any subject who appears incapable of 
providing informed consent (e.g., due to cognitive impairmen t) will not be enrolled. Subjects will be informed 
that they can decline to participat e in the study without penalty or loss of treatment. Subjects will also be 
informed may withdraw from the study prior to analys is of their data. Following a thorough resolution of any 
questions, the subject will be aske d to sign the consent form if he or she agrees to participate. 
 II. Evaluations of Benefi ts and Risks/Discomforts 
Each subject will be given a medical and psychiatri c evaluation. Subjects who r eceive active treatment may 
experience greater improvement or po ssible remission of their mood disorder, as well as improved biomarker 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 15 levels and arterial compliance as  measured by [CONTACT_147273]. To compensate  for time spent and inconvenience 
experienced during the study, a predetermin ed compensation fee will be given.  
     
Physical risks to subjects are minimal. Discomfort may result from the blood drawing. There may be bruising at 
the needle site. Certain individuals may feel light-headed during venipunc ture. Venipuncture will be performed 
when the subjects are sitting or recu mbent to avoid injury. Discomfort may be experienced due to tedious 
questionnaires and interviews.  Side effects listed in the Physician’s Desk Reference fo r albuterol include hoarsenes s, headache, tremors, and 
palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814]. A hypersensitivity reaction to the drug has been  reported in very rare case s.  To avoid this risk, 
subjects will be asked if they have had previous exposure to albuterol, and if they displayed a hypersensitivity 
reaction.  If any adverse r eactions are noted after the first administ ration, the subject will receive no further 
exposure to the drug.  Discontinuation of subjects’ current antidepressant medicatio n is unlikely to lead to worsening of depression or 
suicidal thoughts because eligible participants are onl y those who are already depr essed whose depression has 
not responded despi[INVESTIGATOR_833824] t depressive symptoms with antidepr essant medication.  Subjects will be 
seen one week after beginning the wash-out phase a nd one week after beginning the placebo run-in, allowing 
study staff  to frequently assess the subjects’ mental status while not on any antidepressan t therapy in the 
unlikely event that subjects begin to feel more depressed or suicidal.  Subjects will also be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_833851].  If in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_833825], the patient will be withdrawn from the study and provided treatment as a ppropriate.  Should this oc cur the subject will be 
responsible for the costs of treatment.    III. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks The rights to privacy for part icipation in this research and safety of  confidential informa tion are paramount.  
These rights will firstly be protected through coding of data  and storage of research re cords in a locked room.  
Records that contain identifiable subject information will be stored either in locked  cabinets or on a locked 
computer in secure electronic files.  These records will be kept confidential to the fullest extent permitted by 
[CONTACT_2371].   OTHER STUDY DRUG CONSIDERATIONS   I. Safety Issues of Celecoxib and SSRIs There are potential risks associated with taking escita lopram. The most commonly re ported side effects of 
escitalopram are dizziness, drowsiness, and light-heade dness.  Less commonly reporte d side effects include: 
headache, dry mouth, constipation, change in appetite, sweating, palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814], upset stomach, abdominal pain, 
weight gain, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], insulin resistance, muscle tw itching, and abnormal movements of the face.  At the 
doses we are using, most of the side effects experien ced by [CONTACT_833852].   
  Celecoxib is the only coxib availabl e in the US, but carries a FDA-manda ted black-box warning for increased 
cardiovascular risk. The FDA issued this warning ba sed on numerous observational studies and randomized 
clinical trials on cardiovascular risks associated with all COX-2 inhibitors, but the degree of this risk varies 
substantially among the different COX-2 inhibitors. Rofecoxib was re moved from the market several years ago, 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158026]. As  far as we know, their biomolecular 
targets (COX-2 and serotonin transporter) do not have sh ared affinities. Escitalopram has low potential for 
clinically significant interactions. Studies in vitro have shown that the biotransform ation of escitalopram to its 
demethylated metabolites depends on three parallel pathways (cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C19, 3A4 and 2D6).  
Celecoxib, on the other hand, is metabolized by 2D6. Ne vertheless, since we know it is common practice to 
combine celecoxib with antidep ressants, mostly in non-psychiatric settings, we conducted an internal review of 
all prescriptions of celecoxib in combination with an antidepressant throughout L oyola Medical Center during 
2009. The results are presented in summa ry form below. As shown, escitalopram represented 19.2 % of all 
prescriptions of an antidepressant co -prescribed with celecoxib. No adverse ev ents were recorded in a total of 
224 cases receiving the combin ation at our institution. 
  
Situations Resulting in Combination No. Cases Serious Adverse Events from Combo 
Primar y treatment of mood disorder  21 0 
Primary treatment was the antidepressant for other than mood disorder  17 0 
Primar y treatment for pain (2nd depression?) [ADDRESS_1158027]-sur gery 6 0 
Cardiovascular disease present 38 0 
GI disease present 10 0 
Reason unspecified for combination treatment 104 0 
Total  224* 0 
 *Of all the incidents of antidepressant  co-prescriptions with celecoxib in 2009, escitalo pram was the agent co-
prescribed 19.2 % of the time.  There were no serious adverse events reported due  to any antidepressant in 
combination with celecoxib at Loyola Medical Center in 2009. 
 NSAIDs are known to carry a risk of gastrointestinal bl eeding. However, this is mostly a property of COX-1 
inhibitors. Escitalopram may also impose a minor risk of prolonged bleed ing through its platelet serotonin 
depletion property. Because of this property, we will mon itor platelets during treatment. However, the risk of 
bleeding appears very low when the odds ratios published in a recent review article is considered (Loke 2008). 
The odds ratios of gastrointestinal  bleeding were summarized from all pr ior studies of SSRIs alone, NSAIDs 
alone, and SSRIs + NSAIDs. A meta-analysis was perfo rmed on published papers representing a total of 
153,000 patients. The article also obtained 161 potentiall y relevant private company reports covering four 
SSRIs – fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertralin e, and escitalopram – in regard to  adverse event frequencies involving 
GI hemorrhage. The article also assembled all post-marke ting reports of adverse events submitted to the FDA or 
to the Canadian Adverse Events Data base. From this large database they  concluded that the odds ratio of 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_833826] 2.36. By [CONTACT_2163], the odds ratio of developi[INVESTIGATOR_833827] 3.16. Finally, the odds ratio of  developi[INVESTIGATOR_833828]: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 17 SSRI and an NSAID was 6.33. However, it is important to real ize this was for all  NSAIDs combined. COX-2 
inhibitors were found to be involve d in only a fraction of the total NS AID+SSRI adverse event cases producing 
GI bleeding. A much lower rate of bleeding risk is expe cted in our study because the median ages and durations 
of treatment in the review exceed those of the Loke review (median age 66 years,  median length of drug 
exposure 25 weeks). Also, the studies assembled were not  limited to the 400 mg/d dose of celecoxib we will 
prescribe. Therefore, developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a bl eeding diathesis from the combination treatment should be very low: we 
estimate no more than [ADDRESS_1158028] be considered. To underscore 
the point, the Sequenced Treatment A lternatives to Relieve Depression mu lti-center study found that 80% of 
2,876 outpatients with MDD complain of painful physical  symptoms (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_833829] , 1984; Husain et al, 2007; 
Leuchter et al 2009).  None of the previous studies on celecoxib excluded  patients with active physical pain or 
sought to quantify the pain dimension during treatment. As a result, we feel it is important to control for and 
evaluate pain perception. Therefore, subjects with a pr e-existing pain condition will no t be enrolled in the study. 
Furthermore, we will use the Short-Form McGill Pain I nventory to assess the visit-to-visit pain perception of 
subjects.    
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 18 DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL METHODS 
 I.  Statistical Analysis Specific Aim 1 is to determine if combined pharmacother apy of escitalopram + celec oxib will result in earlier 
and/or improved affective responses compared to esci talopram + PBO. Additionally, Specific Aim 1 seeks to 
control for pain perception in this analysis. For this aim,  the patients in the two trea tment arms will be compared 
on HAM-D, HAM-A, MADRS, BDI, and BAI scores. This w ill be accomplished with an analysis of covariance 
conducted at weeks 1, 2, 4 and 8. Baseline mood scores a nd McGill Pain Inventory scores will be used as 
covariates. In addition, the number of patients who are and are not classifi ed as remitters at week 8 (those 
having a HAM-D score of 7 or less) will be tallied and cross-referenced with treatment group (escitalopram + 
celecoxib or escitalopram + PBO). The frequencies in the resulting 2-by-[ADDRESS_1158029] of multiple regression analysis. Week 8 HAM-D scores will be the 
criterion variable. The regression equa tion will include predictor terms for baseline HAM-D scores (to control 
for pre-existing differences in mood ) , baseline TNF-alpha values, a dichotomous variable for study group 
(escitalopram+celecoxib vs. escitalopram+PBO), and th e product of baseline TNF-alpha and study group.  It 
will be the statistical significance of  the last term (the product) that tests the inflammation-by-study group 
interaction. This analysis will be repeated with hsCRP. Third, the cha nge in inflammation across the eight 
weeks of therapy will be correlated with the change in depres sion scores. The difference in HAM-D scores from 
week 8 and baseline will be correlated with the diffe rence in TNF-alpha and then hsCRP using the Pearson 
Correlation Coefficient. This will be  done for patients in the monotherapy group and then for those in the 
combination therapy group. The same analysis will be repeated using HAM-A, MADRS, BDI and BDI.  
 For Specific Aim 4, the effectiveness of celecoxib in inhibiting PGE2 wi ll be analyzed by [CONTACT_833853]2 
scores at week-8 for patients in the two treatment groups with an analys is of covariance using baseline PGE2 
scores as a covariate. We anticipate that the adjus
 ted mean for PGE2 at  week-8 will be lower for patients 
receiving celecoxib than that for patients receiving PBO. 
 An approach for statistical analys is of Specific Aims 5, 6, and 7 is  currently under development.   
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158030] 
drops out after completing 6 weeks on active medication (after randomization), we wi ll use the last observation 
carried forward (LOCF method) to analyze the data.  If  a subject has completed at least one week on active 
medication after randomization, but drops out of the study at any time between week-1 and week-8, s/he will be 
included in the intent-to-treat analysis. Since this project seeks to provide proof-of-concept in bipolar 
depression, and is therefore explorat ory in nature, we propose the tests of significance use a 0.[ADDRESS_1158031] our desired level of statistical significance to be in 
line with the number of tests so that th e family wise Type I error rate could be held at 5%. This issue will be 
considered in the future.   II.  Determination of Sample Size Although a number of tests of statistical significance are planned for the proposed study, our required sample 
size is being based upon the primary outcome  of treatment effect (S pecific Aims 1).  In l ooking at differences in 
mean HAM-D scores from the studies by [CONTACT_833854]. [ADDRESS_1158032] 
sizes of an antidepressant + anti-inflammatory agent ove r an antidepressant + placebo at week [ADDRESS_1158033] size will be about 0.60 for 
escitalopram + celecoxib over escitalopram + PBO.  As noted earlier, we anticipate that the drug combination 
will lead to a therapeutic response that  is earlier than what is normally seen  at week-[ADDRESS_1158034] will increase 
over the course of the study. The increas ing separation between the different tr eatment groups is similar to what 
was found in the studies mentioned above which observed rising treatment eff ects during the course of therapy. 
From this, our computations indicate that a sample size of 45 patients per group w ill provide 80% power for an 
analysis of covariance to detect an effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_1158035] to attri tion will be replaced.  
  References 
Adams, MD. et al. Complementary DNA sequencing: expressed sequence tags and human genome project. 
Science  252, 1651-1656 (1993) 
 Akhondzadeh S, Jafari S, Raisi F, Nasehi AA, Ghoreishi A, Salehi B , et al  (2009). Clinical tr ial of adjunctive 
celecoxib treatment in patients with major depressi on: a double blind and pl acebo controlled trial. Depress 
Anxiety  26(7): 607-611. 
 Akhondzadeh S, Tabatabaee M, Amini H, Ahmadi Abha ri SA, Abbasi SH, Behnam B (2007). Celecoxib as 
adjunctive therapy in schiz ophrenia: a double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. Schizophr Res  
90(1-3): 179-185.  Alvarez-Soria, M.A. et al. Long term NSAID treatme nt inhibits COX-2 synthesis in the knee synovial 
membrane of patients with osteoarthritis: differential proinflammatory cytokine profile between celecoxib and 
aceclofenac. Ann Rheum Dis  65, 998-1005 (2006).16476713 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 20 Berk M, Conus P, Kapczinski F, Andreazza AC, Yucel M, Wood SJ , et al   (2010). From neuroprogression to 
neuroprotection: implicati ons for clinical care. Med J Aust  193 ([ADDRESS_1158036]): S36-40. 
 
Besedovsky, HO. et al. Cytokines as modulators of the hypothal amus-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-adrenal axis. J Steroid Biochem 
Mol Biol  40, 613-618 ([PHONE_17378] 
 Bresee CJ, Delrahim K, Maddux RE, Dolnak D, Ahmadpour O, Rapaport MH (2006). Th e effects of celecoxib 
augmentation on cytokine levels in schizophrenia. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol  9(3): 343-348. 
 Calabrese, JR. et al. Depre ssion, immunocompetence, and pros taglandins of the E series. Psychiatry Res 17, 41-
47 ([PHONE_17379]  Chenevard, R. et al. Selective COX- 2 inhibition improves endot helial function in coronary artery disease. 
Circulation  107, 405-409 (2003).12551863 
 Chrapko, WE, P. Jurasz, M.W. Radomski, N. Lara, S.L. Arch er and J.M. Le Mellédo, Decreased platelet nitric 
oxide synthase activity and plasma ni tric oxide metabolites in major depre ssive disorder, Biol Psychiatry 56 
(2004) 129 - 134.  Cleeland, CS. & Ryan, K.M. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann Acad Med Singapore  
23, 129-138 ([PHONE_17380]  Cooke, JP, The pi[INVESTIGATOR_833830], Can J Cardiol [ADDRESS_1158037] B (2004) 7B - 15B. 
 M. Crilly, C. Coch, M. Bruce, H. Clark and D. Wil liams, Indices of cardiovascular function derived from 
peripheral pulse wave analysis using radial applana tion tonometry: a measuremen t repeatability study, Vasc 
Med 12 (2007) 189-197.  Dantzer R, O'Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelle y KW (2008). From inflammation to sickness and 
depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci  9: 46-56.  
 Dinan, T. et al. Investig ating the inflammatory ph enotype of major depressi on: focus on cytokines and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids. J Psychiatr Res  43, 471-476 (2009).18640689 
 Drexhage RC, Knijff EM, Padmos RC, Heul-N ieuwenhuijzen L, Beumer W, Versnel MA , et al  (2010). The 
mononuclear phagocyte system a nd its cytokine inflammatory networks in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. 
Expert Rev Neurother  10(1): 59-76. 
 Drexhage RC, van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L, Pa dmos RC, van Beveren N, Cohen D, Versnel MA , et al   
(2010). Inflammatory gene expression in monocytes of pa tients with schizophrenia: ov erlap and difference with 
bipolar disorder. A study in natu ralistically treated patients. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol : 1-13. 
 Elgün S and H. Kumbasar, Increased serum arginase activity in depressed patients, Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Ps ychiatry 24 (2000) 227 - 232. 
 Funakoshi-T
ago, M. et al. Celecoxib potently inhibits TNFalpha-induced nuclear translocation and activation of 
NF-kappaB. Biochem Pharmacol  76, 662-671 (2008).18644347 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 21 Garcia-Bueno, B., Madrigal, J.L., Perez-Nievas, B.G. & L eza, J.C. Stress mediators regulate brain prostaglandin 
synthesis and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activation after stress in rats. Endocrinology  
149, 1969-1978 (2008).[ADDRESS_1158038] KJ, Ko JY, Baldassano CF, K ontos NJ, Baldessarini RJ (2004). Antidepressant 
treatment in bipolar ve rsus unipolar depression. Am J Psychiatry 161(1): 163-165. 
 Giles, TD. Aspects of nitric oxide in  health and disease: a focus on hypert ension and cardiovascular disease, J 
Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) 8 (2006) 2 - 16.  Gjeilo, KH., Stenseth, R., Wahba, A., Lydersen, S. & Klep stad, P. Validation of the brief pain inventory in 
patients six months after cardiac surgery. J Pain Symptom Manage  34, 648-656 (2007).17629665 
 Halaris, A., H. Zhu, Y. Feng and J.E. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_833831]> Plasma ag matine and platelet imidazoline receptors in depression, 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 881 (1999) 445-451.  Hayward, CS M. Kraidly, C.M. Webb and P. Collins, As sessment of endothelial function using peripheral 
waveform analysis: a clin ical application, J Am Co ll Cardiol 40 (2002) 521-528. 
 Himmerich, H, E.B. Binder, H.E. Künzel, A. Schuld, S. Lucae, M. Uhr, T. Pollmächer, F. Holsboer and M. Ising, Successful antidepressant thera py restores the disturbed interplay between TNF-alpha system and HPA 
axis, Biol Psychiatry 60 (2006) 882 - 888.  
Hoekstra R, Fekkes D, Loonen AJ, Pepplinkhuizen L, Tuinier S, Verhoeven WM (2006). Bipolar mania and 
plasma amino acids: increas ed levels of glycine. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 16(1): 71-77. 
 
Husain, M.M. et al. Pain in depression: STAR*D study findings. J Psychosom Res  63, 113-122 
(2007).17662746  Judd LL, Akiskal HS, Schettler PJ, Coryell W, Endicott J, Maser JD , et al  (2003). A prospective investigation 
of the natural history of the long-term weekly  symptomatic status of  bipolar II disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry  
60(3): 261-269.  Judd LL, Akiskal HS, Schettler PJ, Endicott J, Maser J, Solomon DA , et al  (2002). The long-term natural 
history of the weekly symptomati c status of bipolar I disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 59 (6): 530-537. 
 Kim YK, Jung HG, Myint AM, Kim H, Park SH (2007) . Imbalance between pro-inflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines in bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord  104(1-3): 91-95. 
 Kim YK, Suh IB, Kim H, Han CS, Lim CS, Choi SH , et al  (2002). The plasma levels of interleukin-12 in 
schizophrenia, major depressi on, and bipolar mania: effe cts of psychotropic drugs. Mol Psychiatry  7(10): 1107-
1114.  Koenig, W. Inflammation and coronary heart disease: An overview.  Cardiol Rev. 9 (2001): 31-35  Lanquillon, S., Krieg, J.C., Bening-Abu-Shach, U. & Vedder, H. Cytokine production and treatment response in 
major depressive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology  22, 370 - 379 (2000) 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 22 Laufer S, Greim C, Luik S, AyoubSS, Dehner F (2008). Human whole blood assay for rapid and routine testing 
of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  (NSAIDS) on cyclo-oxygenase-2 activity. Inflammopharmacology   
16: 155-161.  
 Leonard BE and Song, C. Stress, depression, and the role  of cytokines, Adv Exp Med Biol 461 (1999) 251-265. 
 Leuchter, A.F. et al. Painful physi cal symptoms and treatment outcome in major depressi ve disorder: a 
STAR*D (Sequenced Treatment Alternat ives to Relieve Depression) report. Psychol Med , 1-13 
(2009).19493369   Liciono, J and ML Wong, The role of inflammatory mediators in the biology of ma jor depression: central 
nervous system cytokines modulate bi ological substrate of depressive sy mptoms, regulate stress responsive 
systems, and contribute to neurotoxicity and neuroprotection.  Mol Psyc hiatry 4 (1999) 317-327. 
 Lieb, J., Karmali, R. & Horrobin, D. Elevated levels of prostaglandin E2  and thromboxane B2 in depression. 
Prostaglandins Leukot Med  10, 361-367 ([PHONE_17381] 
  Maes, M, Bosmans E, Calabrese J, Smith R, Melt zer HY (1995). Interleukin-2 and interleukin-6 in 
schizophrenia and mania: effects of  neuroleptics and mood stabilizers. J Psychiatr Res  29(2): 141-152. 
 Maes, M, Van der Planken, A. Van Gastel, R. Desnyder, Blood Coagulation and platel et aggregation in major 
depression.  J Affect Di sord. 40 (1996) 35-40. 
 Manning, JS (2005). Burden of i llness in bipolar depression. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry  7(6): 
259-267.  Marques, A., Silverman, M., & Sternberg, E. (2010). Evaluation of stress symptoms by  [CONTACT_478549]: Measurements of neuroimmune biomarkers in  the sweat, heart rate 
variability and salivary cortisol. Neuroimmunomodulation, 17 (3), 205-208. 
 McEniery, CM, S. Wallace, I.S. Mackenzie, B. McD onnell, Yasmin, D.E. Newby, J.R. Cockcroft and I.B. 
Wilkinson, Endothelial function is asso ciated with pulse pressu re, pulse wave velocit y, and augmentation index 
in healthy humans, Hypertension 48 (2006) 602-608.  McIntyre, A, A. Gendron and A. McIntyre, Quetiapi[INVESTIGATOR_833832], comorbid anxiety, a nd residual depressive symptoms: a 
randomized, placebo-controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], Depress Anxiety 24 (2007) 487-494.  Meyer, JM, V.G. Davis, D.C. Goff, J.P. McEvoy, H.A. Na srallah, S.M. Davis, R.A. Rosenheck, G.L. Daumit, J. 
Hsiao, M.S. Swartz, T.S. Stroup and J.A. Lieberma n, Change in metabolic syndrome parameters with 
antipsychotic treatment in the CATIE Schizophrenia Tr ial: prospective data from phase 1, Schizophr Res 101 
(2008) 273-286  Miller CL, Llenos IC, Dulay JR, Weis S (2006). Upregulation of the initiating step of the kynurenine pathway 
in postmortem anterior cingulate cortex from individuals with schi zophrenia and bipolar disorder. Brain Res  
1073-1074: 25-37. 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 23  
Miller AH, Maletic V, Raison CL ( 2009). Inflammation and its discontents : the role of cytokines in the 
pathophysiology of major depression. Biol Psychiatry  65: 732-741. 
 Miller, G.E., Rohleder, N. & Cole, S.W. Chronic interp ersonal stress predicts activ ation of pro- and anti-
inflammatory signaling path ways 6 months later. Psychosom Med  71, 57-62 (2009).19073750 
 Müller N, Krause D, Dehning S, Musil R, Schennach-Wolff R, Obermeier M , et al   (2010). Celecoxib treatment 
in an early stage of schizophrenia: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of celecoxib 
augmentation of amis ulpride treatment. Schizophr Res 121 (1-3): 118-124. 
 Müller N, Riedel M, Schwarz MJ, Engel RR (2005). Clin ical effects of COX-2 i nhibitors on cognition in 
schizophrenia. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci  255(2): 149-151. 
 Müller N, Schwarz MJ, Dehning S, Douhe A, Cerovecki A, Goldstein-Muller B , et al  (2006). The 
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor celecoxib has therapeutic effe cts in major depression: results of a double-blind, 
randomized, placebo controlled, add-on pi[INVESTIGATOR_392543]. Mol Psychiatry  11(7): 680-684. 
 Müller N, Strassnig M, Schwarz MJ, Ulmschneider M, Riedel M (2004a).  COX-2 inhibitors as adjunctive 
therapy in schizophrenia. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 13(8): 1033-1044. 
 Müller N, Ulmschneider M, Scheppach C, Schwarz MJ, Ackenheil M, Moller HJ , et al  (2004b). COX-2 
inhibition as a treatment approach in  schizophrenia: immunological consid erations and clinical effects of 
celecoxib add-on therapy. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci  254(1): 14-22. 
 Myint AM, Kim YK (2003). Cytokine-s erotonin interaction through IDO: a neurodegeneration hypothesis of 
depression. Med Hypotheses 61(5-6): 519-525. 
 Myint AM, Kim YK, Verkerk R, Park SH, Scharpe S, Steinbusch HW, et al  (2007a). Tryptophan breakdown 
pathway in bipolar mania. J Affect Disord  102(1-3): 65-72. 
 Myint AM, Kim YK, Verkerk R, Scharpe S, Steinbusch  H, Leonard B (2007b). Kynurenine pathway in major 
depression: evidence of impaired neuroprotection. J Affect Disord  98(1-2): 143-151. 
 Nery FG, Monkul ES, Hatch JP, Fonseca M, Zunta-Soares GB, Frey BN , et al (2008). Celecoxib as an adjunct 
in the treatment of depressive or mixed epi[INVESTIGATOR_833833] : a double-blind, randomized, placebo-
controlled study. Hum Psychopharmacol  23(2): 87-94. 
 Nicholson, A, H. Kuper
 and H. Hemingw ay, Depression as an ae tiologic and prognostic fact or in coronary heart 
disease: a meta-analysis of 6362 events  among 146 538 participants in 54 obser vational studies, Eur Heart J 27 
(2006) 2763-2774.  Nutt, D, S. Argyropoulos, S. Hood and J. Potokar, Gene ralized anxiety disorder:  a comorbid disease.  , 
European Neuropsychopharmac ology 16 (2006) s109-s118 
 O'Brien, SM., Scully, P., Fitzgerald, P., Scott, L.V. & Dinan, T.G. Plasma cytokine profiles in depressed 
patients who fail to respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy. J Psychiatr Res  41, 326 - 331 
(2007) 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/[ADDRESS_1158039] analysis: implications for studies with repeated 
measurements, J Hypertens 25 (2007) 1678-1686.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_833831], JE H. Zhu, S. Madakasira, P. Pazzaglia, C. Li ndsay DeVane, N. Goldman and A. Halaris, Elevated P-
selectin on platelets in depression: response to bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394], J Psychiatr Res 34 (2000) 397 – 404 
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_451318], I., Spence, N., Cobb, J. & Katsikitis, M. The Il lness Behavior Questionnaire as an aid to clinical 
assessment. Gen Hosp Psychiatry  6, 123-130 ([PHONE_17382] 
 Post RM, Denicoff KD, Leverich GS , Altshuler LL, Frye MA, Suppes TM , et al  (2003a). Morbidity in 258 
bipolar outpatients followed for 1 ye ar with daily prospective ratings  on the NIMH life chart method. J Clin 
Psychiatry 64 (6): 680-690. 
 Post RM, Leverich GS, Altshuler LL, Frye MA, Suppes TM, Keck PE, Jr., et al  (2003b). An overview of recent 
findings of the Stanley Foundation Bipolar Network (Part I). Bipolar Disord 5(5): 310-319. 
 Rapaport MH, Delrahim KK, Bresee CJ, Maddux RE , Ahmadpour O, Dolnak D (2005). Celecoxib 
augmentation of continuously il l patients with schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry  57(12): 1594-1596. 
 Rapaport MH, Guylai L, Whybrow P ( 1999). Immune parameters in rapid cycling bipolar patients before and 
after lithium treatment. J Psychiatr Res  33(4): 335-340. 
 Riedel M, Strassnig M, Schwarz MJ, Muller N (2 005). COX-2 inhibitors as  adjunctive therapy in 
schizophrenia: rationale for use and evidence to date. CNS Drugs  19(10): 805-819. 
 Riondino, S. et al. Lack of biologic al relevance of platelet cyclooxygenase-2 dependent thromboxane A2 
production. Thromb Res  122, 359-365 (2008).18295304 
 Rybakowski, JK, A. Wykretowicz, A.  Heymann-Szlachcinska and H. Wyso cki, Impairment of endothelial 
function in unipolar and bi polar depression, Biol Psyc hiatry 60 (2006) 889 - 891. 
 Sang, N., Zhang, J. & Chen, C. COX- 2 oxidative metabolite of endoca nnabinoid 2-AG enhances excitatory 
glutamatergic synaptic transmis sion and induces neurotoxicity. J Neurochem  102, 1966-1977 (2007).17539917 
 Satriano, J, Arginine pathways  and the inflammatory res ponse: interregulation of nitric oxide and polyamines: 
review article., Amino Ac ids 26 (2004 Jul) 321 - 329. 
 Selley, ML, Increased (E
)-4-hydroxy-2- nonenal and asymmetric dimethylargini ne concentrations and decreased 
nitric oxide concentrations in the pl asma of patients with major depressi on, J Affect Disord  80 (2004) 249 - 256. 
 Straub, R., Buttgereit, F., & Cutulo, M. (2011). Alteration of the hypoth alamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-ad renal acid in 
systemic immune diseases: A role  for misguided energy regulation. Clinical and Experimenal Rheumatology , 
5(68), 23-31.   
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 25 Su KP, Leu SJ, Yang YY, Shen WW, Chou YM, Tsai SY  (2002). Reduced production of interferon-gamma but 
not interleukin-[ADDRESS_1158040]  71(1-3): 205-209. 
 
Tan, G., Jensen, M.P., Thornby, J.I. & Shanti, B.F. Va lidation of the Brief Pain Inventory for chronic 
nonmalignant pain. J Pain  5, 133-137 (2004).15042521 
 Tondo L, Isacsson G, Baldessarini R (2003). Suicidal behavior in bipol ar disorder: risk and prevention. CNS 
Drugs  17(7): 491-511. 
 Tsai SY, Chen KP, Yang YY, Chen CC, Lee JC, Singh VK , et al  (1999). Activation of i ndices of cell-mediated 
immunity in bipolar mania. Biol Psychiatry  45(8): 989-994. 
 Tsai SY, Yang YY, Kuo CJ, Chen CC, Leu SJ (2001). Effe cts of symptomati c severity on elevation of plasma 
soluble interleukin-[ADDRESS_1158041] 64(2-3): 185-193. 
 Tsao, CW, Y.S. Lin, C.C. Chen, C.H. Bai and S.R. Wu, Cytokines and serotonin transporter in patients with 
major depression, Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 30 (2006) 899 - 905.  Tuglu, C, S.H. Kara, O. Caliyurt, E. Vardar and E. Ab ay, Increased serum tumor necr osis factor-alpha levels 
and treatment response in major depressive disorder, Psychopharmacology (B erl) 170 (2003) 429 - 433. 
 Ur, E, White, PD, Grossman A (1992). Hypothesis: cytokines may be activate d to cause depressive illness and 
chronic fatigue syndrome. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci  241:  317-322. 
 van der Werf-Eldering, M., Ri emersma-van der Lek, R., Burg er, H., Holthausen, E.,  
Aleman, A., & Nolen, W. (2012). Can variation in hypothalamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-ad renal (hpa)-acis activity explain 
the relationship between depression a nd cognition in bipolar patients?. Plos One , 7(5), [ZIP_CODE]. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0037119   von Känel, R, U. Hepp, B. Kraemer, R. Traber, M. Keel, L. Mica and U. Schnyder, Evidence for low-grade 
systemic proinflammatory activity in patients with posttraumatic stress diso rder, J Psychiatr Res 41 (2006) 744-
752.  Weber, T, J. Auer, G. Lamm, M.F. O'Rourke and B. Eber , Arterial stiffness, central blood pressures, and wave 
reflections in cardiomyopathy-imp lications for risk stratifica tion, J Card Fail 13 (2007) 353-359. 
 Weber, T, R. Maas, J. Auer, G. Lamm, E. Lassnig, M. Rammer, M.F. O'Rourke, R.H. Boger and B. Eber, Arterial wave reflections and determinants of endoth elial function a hypothesis ba sed on peripheral mode of 
action, Am J Hypertens 20 (2007) 256-262.  Wilkinson, IB, I.R. Hall, H. MacCallum, I.S. Mackenzie, C.M. McEniery, B.J. van der Arend, Y.E. Shu, L.S. MacKay, D.J. Webb and J.R. Cockcroft, Pulse-wave analysis: clinical evaluati on of a noninvasive, widely 
applicable method for assessing endo thelial function, Arterioscler Th romb Vasc Biol 22 (2002) 147-152. 
 
Wilkinson, IB, H. MacCallum, J.R. Cockcroft and D.J. Webb, Inhibition of basal nitric oxide synthesis 
increases aortic augmentation index and pulse w
ave velocity in vivo, Br  J Clin Pharmacol 53 (2002) 189-192. 
 
Version date: 1/10/2013 
 
Version date:  01/10/2013 
Page 26 Williams, B, P.S. Lacy, S.M. Thom, K. Cruickshank, A. Stanton, D. Collier, A.D. Hughes, H. Thurston and M. 
O'Rourke, Differential impact of blood pressure-lowering drugs on central  aortic pressure and clinical 
outcomes: principal results of the Conduit Artery Function Evaluation (CAFE) study, Circulation 113 (2006) 
1213-1225.  Yang, H. & Chen, C. Cyclooxygenase-2 in synaptic signaling. Curr Pharm Des  14, 1443-1451 
(2008).18537667  Yoshimura, R. et al. Higher plasma interleukin-6 (IL -6) level is associated with SSRI- or SNRI-refractory 
depression. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry  33, 722-726 (2009).19332097 
 Zunszain, P., Anacker, C., Cattaneo, A., Ca rvalho, L., & Pariante, C. (2011).  
Clucocorticoids, cytokines and br ain abnormalities in depression. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and 
Biological Psychiatry , 35(3), 722-729. 
  