 
 
Official Title:  COVID -19 Serologic Strategies for Skilled Nursing Facilities (CERO)   
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Study Number:  20-[ZIP_CODE]  
Document Type:   Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Date of the 
Document:  • August 16, 2021  
 
 1  
       
 
 
 
 
COVID -19 Serology Strategies in Skilled Nursing Facilities  
(CERO) 
 
Protocol  
 
Version 3.1 
Updated as of 8/11/21 
 
 
x          
 
          
 2 A. SPECIFIC AIMS: COVID -19 SEROLOGIC  STRATEGIES FOR SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES  
The COVID -19  pandemic is a public health crisis that has been particularly devastating for older persons with 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia (ADRD), especially those living in close congregant environments.1,2,[ADDRESS_333674] proportion of COVID -19 deaths in many states has been in skilled nursing facilities (SNF),5 in which 
over 60% of residents have ADRD.[ADDRESS_333675], their professional caregivers, and their family members.  
A main strategy for monitoring COVID -19 in SNFs focuses on PCR testing. Asymptomatic infection 
challenges our ability to achieve isolation practices without complete isolation of all residents, yet the optimal protocol for such testing is unclear. Currently, PCR specimens are obtained through nasopharyngeal swabs; an 
uncomfortable procedure that is especially challenging to conduct in ADRD residents with a propensity for 
agitation. Additional problems with PCR testing include suboptimal sensitivity, making viral screening insufficient 
for infection control.
[ADDRESS_333676] utilized a combined COVID -19 PCR /serology (antibody) testing- based strategy to 
dictate resident -staff assignments to decrease risk of exposure from COVID -19. Blood samples to obtain 
serology status and emerging saliva- based PCR tests also have the potential advantage of being less 
burdensome to obtain than nasal swabs from ADRD patients. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_273067]-[ADDRESS_333677] does not indicate a lack of protection. (Current commercially available 
serologic testing does not detect antibody formation derived from being vaccinated.)  Specifically, we propose 
to pair residents and staff based on the followin g three conditions: 1) completed vaccination; 2) prior COVID -19 
PCR positive testing; and 3) positive serology, if available. We will pair COVID -19 negative residents with 
antibody -positive /PCR- negative staff and COVID- 19 antibody -positive /PCR- negative residents with antibody -
negative/PCR negative staff. For our pairing strategy, having a completed vaccination is equivalent to prior 
positive PCR or positive serology. The main clinical outcome of this novel staff -assignment strategy will be a 
reduced COVI D-[ADDRESS_333678] representation––Terrence Cardinal Cooke and Mary Manning Walsh of [LOCATION_001] City, NY. To ensure the highest likelihood of successful implementation, we propose a 
phased approach to this research, reflected in following three specific aims:  
1. Develop a staff -resident assignment protocol based on vaccination, history of positive PCR COVID -[ADDRESS_333679] 
and positive COVID -19 se rology testing  (whe n applicable) . This strategy will be feasible, scientifically sound, 
and acceptable to key stakeholders, particularly residents with ADRD and their families using the following 
approaches: 1) Semi -structured interviews (one- on-one interviews) including administrators, clinical leaders, 
front-line staff, residents and family members; additionally, because of the increase in staff stress ––both work -
related and personal ––we are interested in understanding how mental health issues may influence attitudes 
about new programs and changes in usual practice. Therefore, we are includ ing a brief mental health 
assessment for unit staff only  and 2) Panel of experts familiar with the NH environment including: industry 
leaders, infection disease specialist, dementia expert, health equity expert, and bioethicist. We will develop 
protocols for: 1. Staff -resident assignments, 2. Serology  (if applicable)  or PCR testing and vaccination and 3. 
Implementation monitoring.   
 3 2. Employ a testing protocol based on vaccination, PCR, or serologic testing in each of the two SNFs among 
staff and residents to establish their baseline status and three and six months later using on- going surveillance 
testing.   
3. I mplement a SNF- unit staffing assignm ent strategy pairing COVID -19 negative and positive residents with 
staff based on protocols developed in Aim 1. To ascertain feasibility for a larger trial we will measure: i. COVID -
19 resident incidence (primary outcome); ii. COVID -19 staff incidence; and  iii. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273068] -19. 
We will assess implementation by: 1) % intended staff assignments achieved; 2) reasons for success/failure; 
and 3) intervention acceptability using exit interviews with staff, residents, and family members, with parti cular  
focus on the impact of the intervention on ADRD residents and their families. 
IMPACT Establishing vaccine effectiveness in an older and frail population  is an ongoing effort . In the meantime, 
more immediate strategies to address rapid spread and excessive mortality due to COVID -[ADDRESS_333680].8 Residents of skilled nursing facilities (SNF) where ADRD is highly prevalent have been most 
impacted, as a high- risk population living in close congregant quarters, requiring frequent need for personal care, 
with inadequate testing needed for thoughtful isolation practices and inadequate personal protective equipment 
to limit spread.9,[ADDRESS_333681] self -prevention 
behaviors further increasing risk for themselves and others. Social isolation and wearing masks are certain to 
create confusion for those cognitively challenged. M oreover, communication through a mask is further 
exacerbated11 when dementia is accompanied by [CONTACT_255378], a common co- occurring condition.12 Other 
isolation strategies are needed. As of May 11th, over 30% nursing homes in [ADDRESS_333682] one 
documented case (2,949 of 9,395).[ADDRESS_333683] – a facility in King County, Washington when 
the first index case was identified on February 28th, 2020. By [CONTACT_11711] 18th [ADDRESS_333684] -dates the period of high disease prevalence in March and April.15 
 
Suspected asymptomatic spread also appears to be high in these settings,8 which requires a more rigorous 
approach for isolation of affected residents from those who are not and removal of staff with identified infections. 
Some facilities such as those in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (where ADRD prevalence is high) are engaged in frequent testing of 
resident s and staff, a practice which leads to isolation of all affected residents, and reductions in personal care. 
This approach also results in cessation of meaningful activities and harmful social isolation, further compounded by [CONTACT_273076]. While the heightened risks for SNF residents are indisputable, less attention has 
 [ADDRESS_333685] 
been high among nursing staff resulting in fear in delivering care and reluctance to even come to work. To 
address staff shortages, CMS has waived the requirements (42 CFR 483.35(d)16,[ADDRESS_333686] met training and certification requirements under  
483.35(d).[ADDRESS_333687] 
arise from changed routines, unfamiliar faces shrouded in masks, and more difficult communication due to hearing loss from a lack of facial expression/lip reading. An experienced staff to manage these challenges and who are not out of work due to COVID -19 illness becomes an even more critical need.  
 C. INNOV ATION 
This study is innovative for several reasons: 1) a resident -staff cohorting strategy based on a) completed 
vaccination; b) prior COVID -19 PCR positive testing; and c ) positive serology  has to our knowledge, never been 
utilized for infection control in any healthcare setting: 2) although stakeholder -influenced study designs have 
been increasingly utilized, employing a multi -stakeholder approach to design a facility -specific testing and 
cohorting strategy is highly innovative and ensures a greater engagement and fidelity across all involved sectors; 
3) a detailed implementation design to capture values, changing attitudes, structural and cultural barriers to a 
testing and cohorting strategy is also innovative and will greatly serve larger trials and best practice 
disseminations; 4) comparing primary outcomes and infection rates between those with and without ADRD is 
novel; and 5) the use of smartphone based technology to facilitate proper cohorting while increasing fidelity is highly innovative and ensures greater capture of deviations from the intended approach.  Additionally, this 
approach can benefit facilities  in their eff ort to increase contact -monitoring amongst staff and residents.    
 D. METHODS  AND APPROACH  
D.1. Overview: This one -year cluster -randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_273069]. We have 
engaged two NYC facilities as the sites of the proposed study,  where (Phase 1: AIM 1 – one month) we will 
convene all stakeholders (leadership, staff, residents, and their families) and engage a panel of experts to create a feasible, scientifically sound protocols for staff -resident assignments  based on serology  (if applicable), 
vaccination and PCR testing protocols, and Implementation monitoring. In the second phase (Aim 2 – two 
months), we will identify four units (average 40 residents per unit) in each facility. We will stratify the two NHs and then within each SNF, randomly allocate two units to the intervention arm and two units to the control arm 
(we have confirmed homogeneity across these four units in each SNF supporting no need for further 
stratification). We will conduct baseline serology and/or  PCR COVI D-19 tests from residents and staff on all four 
units in each SNF.  
In phase 3 (Aim 3 – s
 ix months), we will introduce the staffing assignments based on 1)  completed vaccination; 
2) prior COVID -19 PCR positive testing; and/or  3) positive serology  in the two intervention units, while in control 
units will employ usual staffing assignments currently in practice in the facilities  and only introduce the “concept 
of” a cohorting strategy . COVID -19 PCR testing will occur in all eight units with a regular frequency  (testing 
frequency changes based on government guidelines) and whenever an individual is symptomatic. The primary outcome will be incidence of COVID -19 infection in residents and as secondary outcomes will include the 
incidence of COVID- 19 infections in staff and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273070] -19-related symptoms among 
residents. Implementation assessment will include: 1) proportion of designated staff assignments achieved and reasons for successes and failures; and 2) intervention acceptability using exit stakeholder interviews, with a 
focus on the experience of ADRD residents. Although the analyses will compare intervention and control units 
on the primary outcomes of infection incidence and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], we do not anticipate either event rate to be 
large enough to reach statistical significance at traditional levels of probability. As real -world management of 
COVID -[ADDRESS_333688] emerge that is less invasive 
than the nasopharyngeal swab, we will adopt it into our protocol. Currently no staff member who tests positive 
 5 for COVID -19 is allowed to work. Thus, staff -resident assignments will be based on 1) complet ed vaccination; 
2) prior COVID -19 PCR positive testing; and 3) positive serology  (when possible)  among staff and residents.   
D.2. Setting and Participants: We are conduct ing the proposed trial in two nursing facilities in NYC: Mary 
Manning  Walsh (MMW) and Terrence Cardinal Cooke (TCC). Both facilities operate under the umbrella of the 
ArchCare Organization, a non- profit corporation that owns and operates five nursing facilities in addition to other 
older age care services. [CONTACT_200443] and his team have been  actively engaged in a research study ( SLUMBER  
R01NR016461- 01) in these facilities and others that involves staff education to promote better sleep, work that 
has led to smartphone- based educational reinforcements, which will support the proposed intervention. Both 
facilities care for a large proportion (>60%) of residents with dementia. Both facilities are also are diverse: 20% 
LatinX in MMW and 25% African American in TCC and there are [ADDRESS_333689] week in April (the highest nursing 
home death rate in [LOCATION_001] State at that time) and TCC had more than 20. Both facilities are currently 
mandating weekly testing of all staff and are conducting their first -wave resident tests for all residents and anyone 
with symptoms. Plans for repeated resident testing will follow CDC guidelines, which are expected to evolve over the next few months. Intervention participants include four groups: leadership, staff, residents and family. 
For leadership and family, they will participate in the institution’s effort to develop a strategy for reducing COVID -
19 infections by [CONTACT_273077], staff assignment strategies and ongoing feedback based on periodic process data collection, analysis and reports. Staff and residents will follow the guidelines and requirements of the facility, which will be implemented on two units as a quality improvement initiative.  
 D.3. Methods for Aim 1:  
Aim 1: To develop a staff -resident assignment protocol based on  1) completed vaccination; 2) prior COVID -19 
PCR positive testing; and 3) positive serology  (when possible)  that is feasible,  scientifically sound, and 
acceptable to key stakeholders, particularly residents with ADRD and their families using the following 
approaches: 1) Facility -specific semi -structured one-on-one interviews  including administrators, clinical leaders, 
front-line staff, residents and family members;  brief mental health survey for unit staff only, as an important 
potential covariable,  and 2) Panel of experts familiar with the NH environment including: industry leaders, 
infection disease specialist, dementia expert, health equity expert, and bioethicist. We will develop protocols for: 
1. Staff- resident assignments, 2. Serology (if applicable) and PCR testing, and 3. Implementation monitoring. 
D.3.a. Stakeholder meetings: All meetings will be recorded and transcribed with permission of meeting 
par
ticipants. At the earliest period of study, we will hold two leadership meetings that include both leaders at the 
organization level and individual facility level. Leaders will include Senior Vice President, Chief Medical Officer, 
Chief Information Officer, facility -level Medical Directors and Nursing Directors as well as any oth er ind ividuals 
to be invited at the discretion of ArchCare. At the facility level, Chief Medical Officer, Director of Nursing, and 
unit-level leadership will attend two initial meetings and then will meet weekly , bi-weekly  or monthly thereafter. 
These meetings will address: 1) unit selection; 2) viral testing (PCR and Serology) strategies; 3) marketing 
approaches for residents and families; 4) staff education strategies for implementation; 5) current in -facility data 
collection and staffing strategies; 6) data retrieval strategies (e.g., from electronic health records)  for completed 
vaccination, PCR or serology tests  7) use of an external smartphone application to facilitate cohorting methods 
and monitoring; and 8) human subject consent strategies.   
 The rationale for two initial leadership meetings is: 1) the need for brevity (shorter meetings), ensuring logisti cal 
feasibility; 2) bidirectional information giving to ensure greatest collaboration and grounding in the intervention; and 3)  anticipated need for follow- up based on questions that arise from the first meeting or subsequently needed 
revisions in the planned protocol. Weekly meetings with unit leadership including individual staff members, as 
needed will review most recent data on infection rates, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and process measures focused on 
intervention fidelity. Leadership will hold family informational meetings and solicit feedback prior to study initiation 
and resident meetings on the units where a staff - assignment strategy will be implemented. We  anticipate that 
resident meetings will be conducted individually and not as groups given the likelihood that congregant meetings will not be allowed. Additional meetings with stakeholder groups will occur no less frequently than monthly and may be brief weekly “check -ins” as needed. We will (with permission) record all meetings if possible and take 
notes. No attendee identifiers will be included.  
 
We will conduct semi -structured  one-on-one interviews  in-person or  using a WebEx or Zoom meeting structure. 
When necessary or most expedient, w e will conduct individual telephone- based interviews. Whereas our goals 
 [ADDRESS_333690] where permissible and regardless of that 
determination, we will take detailed notes. In addition to documenting key decisions, we believe that some o f the 
deliberations will reveal and highlight key perspectives and sensitivities that will need to be considered and will inform not only this strategy but future SNF- level intervention strategies that require an abrupt departure from 
usual practice.  
 D.3.b. Expert Panel Meetings: We will convene a Panel of Experts familiar with the NH environment that will  
include two industry leaders, an infection disease specialist, a dementia expert, health equity expert, and a bioethicist. The bioethicist, dementia expert, and health equity expert will be drawn from the Cores and Teams 
of the IMPACT Collaboratory. We will meet with our Expert Panel prior to study initiation and quarterly over the 
year of study.  
 
D.4. Methods for Aim 2:  
Aim 2: Employ a protocol based on 1) completed vaccination; 2) prior COVID -19 PCR positive testing; and 3) 
positive serology  (if applicable)  in each of the two SNFs among staff and residents to establish their baseline 
status and three and six months later using on- going surveillance testing.  
D.4.a. Testing Protocol and Data Entry: The facility will conduct periodic PCR testing based on CDC guidance 
and w i
ll test additionally based on individual symptom or exposure -related concerns. Modifications to the testing 
strategy will be based on collaboration between facility leadership and our infectious disease expert. Given the 
discomfort of a deep nasopharyngeal swab, we will use, if deemed acceptable at the time the pi[INVESTIGATOR_273071], a saliva- based PCR test to identify active infection and the frequency of testing will be based on a 
collaborative decision between our infection disease expert ([CONTACT_273083]) and facility leadership.  Collection of 
completed vaccination and/or prior COVID -[ADDRESS_333691] successfully used this approach in other nursing home 
studies focused on depres sion care.
18 For any resident moving into an intervention unit , the default status will 
be ‘COVID- 19 negative ’ until vaccination completion records or  prior COVID -[ADDRESS_333692] results will be maintained at the level of the individual resident and 
labeled for easy recognition by [CONTACT_273078]. Weekly meetings between study team, the facility designated 
data manager, and staff leadership for each intervention unit (n=4) will ensure data accuracy and quality.  
 
D.4.b. Subject Consent and Regulatory Issues: All human subjects concerns will be reviewed and approved  
by [CONTACT_273079]’s Advarra Central Institutional Review Board and Data Safety and Monitoring 
Board. To meet our timeline, these approvals need to be sought as soon as possible.  For Aim 1, we will obtain 
consent from participants to take notes and audio record while clearly stating that there will be no subject 
identifiers. Aim [ADDRESS_333693] a 
modified consent process (e.g., opt -out, verbal consent) from Advarra IRB  but recognize that this may also 
require individual written consent. We will follow all rules and sensitivities with regard to the need for legally authorized representatives in the absence of subject capacity to consent.   
 7 
 
D.5. Methods for Aim 3:  
Aim 3: Implement a SNF unit staffing assignment strategy pairing COVID -19 negative and positive residents  
with staff based on protocols developed in Aim 1 in intervention units and introduce a “concept of” cohorting 
strategy in the control units, meaning these units will follow regular facility policy and will not receive staff -resident 
assignments . To ascertain feasibility for a larger trial we will measure:  i. COVID -19 resident incidence (primary 
outcome); ii. COVID -19 staff incidence; and iii. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273068] 19. We will assess implementation 
by: 1) % intended staff assignments achieved; 2) reasons for  success/failure; and 3) intervention acceptability 
using exit interviews with staff, residents, and family members, with particular focus on the impact of the 
intervention on ADRD residents and their families.  
D.5.a. Randomization of Units: 40- bed  facility units are the unit of randomization and we will randomize within  
individual SNFs to select each intervention unit. Should we identify specific unit -level characteristics that are not 
consistent across  units (we have been assured there are none) and may influence our outcomes (such as 
median age, other demographics or unit size) we will conduct a stratified randomization. We recognize there may be some contamination between staff/residents between intervention/control units but will do our best and 
monitor this “contamination” as one of our implementation fidelity outcomes.   
 
D.5.b. Staff -Resident Assignment Strategy: Within individual intervention units, we will pair care- partners  
(staff) with individual residents, based on 1) completed vaccination; 2) prior COVID -19 PCR positive testing; and 
3) positive serology  (if applicable) . For serology testing,  antibody negative will be paired with antibody positive 
as well as antibody -positive with anti -body positive if the frequency of antibody -positive residents and staff is 
high. Prior known COVID -[ADDRESS_333694] between two or more 
antibody -negative and unvaccinated individuals (and no history of positive PCR) will be restricted such that no 
antibody negative, unvaccinated individual (and no history of positive PCR) will intentionally interact with  another 
antibody -negati ve, unvaccinated person  (and no history of positive PCR), regardless of individual  type (resident 
or staff). We anticipate that high staffing ratios (more residents with fewer staff) that require the responsibility of one staff person to care for several residents will present considerable challenges to achieving full fidelity, particularly on overnight shifts. Although strict cohorting is a primary implementation goal,  we anticipate less 
than perfect fidelity. Nonetheless, we believe that any reduction in unnecessary exposure will reduce the risk of disease transmission and may lead to meaningful outcomes. Ensuring greatest fidelity will require full 
engagement of clinical leaders (nursing leads) at the unit level but these leaders will require real -time data for 
making staffing decisions. These data should also be available to front -line staff so that there is less opportunity 
for misinformation or lack of information t o inform decisions.  
 
D.5.c. Staff -Resident Assignment Decision -Making Tool: Dependent on stakeholder meetings we will 
propose a data- driven decision- making tool built on a smartphone compatible REDCap platform. We have built 
REDCap applications for registry enrollment (NIH/NIA ELM) Research Collaborative 1R24AG063725; Chodosh-
MPI), educational event feedback and community -based research recruitment (NIH/NIA ADRC P30- AG008051-
26; Chodosh- ORE Core Leader), and a nursing staff behavioral support decision- aid ( SLUMBER  
R01NR016461- 01). Our detailed cohort data is smartphone compatible and interfaces with Tableau© for be st 
data visualization to support in- the-moment decision- making. Data capture will be either direct linkage to the 
laboratory testing site or a facility -identified data manager for data entry. Our tool will identify residents and staff 
by [CONTACT_273080], type date of test, and test results. We will create a stratification strategy that will include a list of residents by [CONTACT_4113] -[ADDRESS_333695] of staff who are “cleared” to care for those individuals based on mutual 
test-derived classifications. Data from  the two intervention units will be combined to increase the flexibility of 
cross- unit staffing when shortages require staff to work on units that are not their usual work location. We will 
also consider additional serologic testing for staff members who might “float” onto the intervention units. During 
the study period we will pursue an independent software application that does not require a University -based 
software system (REDCap) with an eye towards broader feasibility and dissemination should our findings warrant 
a larger multi -site clinical trial and national dissemination.  
  E. ANALYSES:  
 8 Data Elements Overview: Data includes both quantitative and qualitative measures. Our quantitative main  
outcome measures are the number of new COVID -19 detected infections over time, and number of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273072]. PCR data will be collected at baseline and compared to determine incidence (although 
we expect that this number/ proportion to be quite low). Incident infection data will be entered and collected 
through the REDCap tool described above as will serologic data. We will collect data on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273073]. We will also collect data on fidelity with respect to testing compliance and cohorting. All test results will be maintained in a database that is  available to facility and unit 
leadership with identifiers to enable an active and flexible staffing strategy. These same test results will be available to our study team but without identifiers. We will collect qualitative data using notes from stakeholder 
meetings and transcribed recordings where permissible. We will gather additional data from exit interviews with 
representatives of each stakeholder group.  
We will collect incidence rates for PCR and serologic results as detailed in Section D .4.a. Other  variables we will 
collect include using Minimum Data Set (MDS) 3.0 for: resident age, race/ethnicity, gender, function (ADL) ,comorbidities  as well as measures that look into anxiety, depression levels, functional disabilities, 
cognitive performance, among  others.  Data will be requested from three time points 1) pre- COVID -19 (1 year 
before) 2. COVID -19 (as of February 2020) and 3) post- COVID (present time). Staff data will include: age, 
race/ethnicity, gender, and zip code of residence. We will examine differences in outcomes comparing those 
with and without ADRD within intervention and control units. A protocol for obtaining laboratory data either from 
the facility -related clinical lab or directly from the facility will be established following our first leadership meeting. 
Should rapid tests with on- site interpretation become available, we will create a protocol to ensure accurate and 
timely data capture working with leadership at the unit level. We will use unique identifiers to ensure resident/staff 
confi dentiality within our database,  but the facility managers will require identifiers to achieve their staffing 
strategy using the database and for making best and timely decisions about resident staffing. We will include in 
our REDCap database a tool for listing, by [CONTACT_273081], daily staff/resident assignments. Should unit managers 
want to use another method for monitoring assignments, we will request a daily fax or email of those 
assignments. Each facility medical director at will ensure compliance with data capture.  
 
E.1. Quantitative Analyses: The ultimate goal of developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a serologic strategy is to reduce COVID -[ADDRESS_333696] the study.  
 
The COVID -19 analysis will be conducted at the level of the nursing home unit using this model:  
Y
i ~ Poisson (λ i) 
log (λ i) = β 0 + β 1Ti + log  (Ri) 
 
Yi  is the number of incident cases for nursing home unit i , i ∈ [1, 2, … , 8] . Ti is an intervention indicator, T i = 1 if 
unit i is using the serologic strategy,  Ti = 0 otherwise. Ri is the total number resident- days for unit over the 6-
month  observation period. The parameter  λi represents the modeled mean for site, and  λi ⁄ Ri is the incidence 
rate, represented as the number of infections per resident -day. β1 is the effect of interest: the incidence rate ratio.  
We will assume an uninformative prior distribution for  β1. The model for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_273074]. Both analyses will be conducted using the latest version of R, which is currently 4.0.0 (R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). 
 
E.2. Qualitative Analyses: Overview of Qualitative Methodology : This project includes qualitative data from  
key stakeholder meetings and interviews about: 1) perceptions of the testing program and implementation 
strategies; 2) perceptions about staff -resident assignment strategies; 3) barriers/facilitators toward program 
implementation and sustainability  including the impact of staffing changes on resident behaviors for those with 
ADRD. Because much of this work is implementation and feasibility -specific, meetings will often be both 
information giving and soliciting of other details, e.g., how is testing being conducted currently. We will use focus 
 9 
group and semi -structured interview guides for these meetings consisting of open- ended questions and probes 
to focus while allowing participants to speak freely. The meeting guides will be adapted from tools used in the 
formative phase to assess acceptability of the intervention and feasibility of strategies.  
 
E.2.a. Qualitative Analysis Plan: The qualitative data will be analyzed using content thematic analysis.[ADDRESS_333697]. Dic kson, an expert in qualitative 
and mixed methods research will oversee all phases of the qualitative analysis including the data integration 
phases. Preliminary analysis will include a line- by-line review yielding clusters of data that we will label into brief 
headings. We will derive codes from these data linked to meeting/interview questions and coding categories. 
We will summarize coding categories within -cases, then across cases, subsequently cross -classified to yield a 
rich descriptive analysis. 21 Finally, we will identify emerging themes both within and across coding categories; 
and verify a review of data fit. For the key stakeholder meetings/interviews, we will analyze data site by [CONTACT_273082] -specific data as well as overarching themes. In the final analysis stage, we will 
integrate qualitative and quantitative site/unit -specific data to describe implementation barriers and facilitators. 
We anticipate that the qualitative data will also reveal factors that influence understanding (e.g., interpretation of 
serology results, what constitutes meaningful and at -risk contact). In the final analytic phase, we will use 
informational matrices, a type of joint display [ADDRESS_333698] Collaboratory including, bioethics, dementia, 
health equity, implementation, stakeholder concerns, and pragmatic statistical design. We will meet 
periodically with Collaboratory experts for ongoing advice and specific direction where needed.  
 
 
 
 
 10 References  
 
1. Wang H, Li T, Barbarino P, et al. Dementia care during COVID -19. The Lancet 2020; 395:1190 -1.  
2. U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Nursing Home Data Compendium 2015 Edition. Available 
at: https://www.cms. gov/Medicare/Provider -Enrollment -and-Certification/ 
CertificationandComplianc/Downloads/ nursinghomedatacompendium_508 -2015.pdf. Accessed June 17, 
2020.   
3. Iaboni A, Cockburn A, Marcil M, et al. Achieving Safe, Effective, and Compassionate Quarantine or Isolation of Older Adults With Dementia in Nursing Homes. The American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 
[Internet] 2020. Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available from: https://www -sciencedirect -
com.ezproxy.med.nyu.edu/science/article/pii/S1064748120303262   
4. Grabowski DC,  Mor V. Nursing Home Care in Crisis in the Wake of COVID -19. Accessed 2020 Jun 10.  
Available from: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2766599 
JAMA.  Published online May   
22, 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8524   
5. True S, Claxton G, Chidambaram P.  COVID -19 and Workers at Risk: Examining the Long -Term Care  
Workforce [Internet]. KFF. 2020. Accessed 2020 Jun10. Available from: https://www.kff.org/report -
section/covid -19-and-workers -at-risk-examining -the-long -term -care -workforce -tables/ 
6. Lippi G, Simundic A- M, Plebani M. Potential preanalytical and analytical vulnerabilities in the 
laboratory diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19). Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory 
Medicine (CCLM) 2020; 58:1070- 6.  
7. H arris -Kojetin L SM, Lendon JP,  Rome V, Valverde R, Caffrey C. Long -term care providers and services 
users in the [LOCATION_002], 2015 -2016. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics [In ternet]. 2019. 
Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_03/sr03_43 -508.pdf   
8. Cipriani G, Fiorino MD. Access to Care for Dementia Patients Suffering From COVID -19 [published 
online ahead of print, 2020 Apr 17]. Am J Geria tr Psychiatry . 2020; S 1064- 7481(20)[ZIP_CODE]- 1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2020.04.009   
9. M
cMichael, Temet M et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_273075] -19 in a Long -Term Care Facility in King County, 
Washington. The New England journal of medicine 2020; 21:381   
10. Kimball A, Hatfield KM, Arons M, et al. Asymptomatic and Presymptomatic SARS- CoV-2 Infections in 
Residents of a Long -Term Care Skilled Nursing Facility — King County, Washington, March 2020. 
MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2020; 69:377 -81.  
11. Chodosh J, Weinstein BE, Blustein J. Communicating with patients through medical masks. Submitted BMJ June 2020.   
12. Hardy CJ, Marshall CR, Golden HL, et al. Hearing and dementia. J Neurol . 2016;263(11):2339- 2354. 
doi:10.1007/s00415 -016- 8208-y  
13. Abrams HR, Loomer L, Gandhi A, Grabowski DC. Characteristics of U.S. Nursing Homes with COVID -19 
Cases. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society [Internet]. 2020. Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available 
from: https://www.mdlinx.com/journal- summary/characteristics -of-us-nursing -homes -with- covid-19-
cases/VFRpE9YUiVJMbjtMUjvUI   
14. Yourish K, Lai KKR, Ivory D, Smith M. One -Third of All U.S. Coronavirus Deaths Are Nursing Home 
Residents or Workers [Internet]. The [LOCATION_001] Times 2020. Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/intera ctive/2020/05/09/us/coronavirus -cases -nursing -homes -us.html   
15. Chidambaram P. State Reporting of Cases and Deaths Due to COVID- 19 in Long -Term Care Facilities. 
[Internet]. Kaiser Family Foundartion (KFF). 2020. Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available from: https://w ww.kff.org/coronavirus -covid -19/issue -brief/state -reporting -of-cases -and-deaths -due-to-covid -
19-in-long -term -care -facilities/   
16. Levitt AF, Ling SM. COVID -19 In the  Long -Term Care Setting: The CMS Perspective [published online 
ahead of print]. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2020; 10.1111/jgs.[ZIP_CODE].  
 11 17. COVID -19 Emergency Declaration Blanket Waivers for Health Care Providers [Internet ]. Centers 
for Medicaid and Medicare Services. Accessed 2020 Jun 10. Available from: 
https://www.cms.gov/files/document/summary -covid -19-emergency -declaration -waivers.pdf  
18. Chodosh J, Price RM, Cadogan MP, et al. A Practice Improvement Education Program Using a 
Mentored Approach to Improve Nursing Facility Depression Care -Preliminary Data. Journal of the 
American Geriatrics Society 2015; 63:2395- 9.  
19. Sandelowski M. Combining Q ualitative and Quantitative Sampling, Data Collection, and Analysis 
Techniques in Mixed -Method Studies. Research in Nursing & Health 2000;23(3):246 -55. 
20. GmbH AtSSD. ATLAS.ti: The Qualitative Data Analysis & Research Software. 2017.  
21. Ayres L KK, Knafl KA. Wit hin-case and across -case approaches to qualitative data analysis. Qualitative 
health research 2003;13(6):871 -83.  
22. Creswell JW, Clark VLP. Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research: SAGE Publications, Inc 2017.  
23. Creswell JW. Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five Approaches: 
SAGE Publications, Inc 2012.  