 
 
 
 
Utilizing a mobile health (mHealth) application to improve hypertension 
monitoring and self -management in an underserved community: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_341683]  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
February 8, [ADDRESS_422835]  
Monitoring and self -management are important components of effective chronic disease 
care and improved patient outcomes. With the rapid development of integration of mobile 
health technology (mHealth) into health care delivery services, mHealth intervention 
provides a great opportunity to improve the efficiency of chronic disease management. 
However, little is known about whether mHealth i ntervention s can effectively impact the 
health and health care outcome s in underserved population s. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_341684]  a mobile -based health intervention in an urban 
underserved community with a high incidence of hypertension. It is hypothesized that 
patients with hypertension will experience  improved  outcomes due to  the use of a mHealth  
application compare d with patients who are not using the application. The findings from 
this study will advance our understanding  of the utility of mHealth intervention s among  
underserved population s and generate  evidence to support th is new health care delivery 
approach in underserved urban communities.    
 
Key words:  mHealth, hypertension, monitoring, self -management, underserved  
community  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Specific Aims  
This study will examine the effectiveness of a mHealth application to enhance  hypertension 
monitoring and self‐management at an urban nurse‐managed community health center. 
The specific aims are to determine 1) whether hypertensive patients who are randomized 
to receive eit her the standard care plus the mHealth  intervention or stan dard care will 
show differences in blood pressure (BP) control, 2) whether hypertensive patients who 
receive the standard care plus the mHealth  intervention will show differences in patient‐
centered outcomes as compared to  those  recei ving existing standard care only . 
Accordingly, the follow hypotheses will be evaluated:  
 
1. Hypertension patients using the mHealth application exhibit a greater decrease in 
blood pressure and better maintenance over a [ADDRESS_422836] care.  
 
Patients receiving the i ntervention are expected to show greater BP decrease over 6  
months, g reater maintenance of BP at  6 months, reduced hospi[INVESTIGATOR_85284], greater BP 
monitoring adherence, and are expected to improve health behaviors associated with 
better patient‐centered outcomes such as better health -related quality of life, greater self‐
efficacy and optimism about BP control, as compared to those receiving standard care only.    
 
Background and Significance  
Hypertension is the leading risk factor for cardiovascular disease and stroke, impacting 
more  than 348,000 Americans in 2009  (CDC, 2012) and causing nearly 1000 deaths each 
day (Go et al. 2013). Approximately 31% (75 millio n) of American adults have high blood 
pressure, but only about half of these individuals have their conditio n under effective 
control (CDC, 2012). In additio n, significant ethnic/racial and socioeconomic disparities 
persis t in hypertension patients. The prevalence of hypertension in African Americans is 
among the highest in t he U.S.; African Americans also have the highest rates of uncontrolled 
essential hyper tension in this country.  It has also been reported that African -Americans 
from lower socioeconomic classes are more likely to develop hypertension than other 
groups (Cooper, et al. 2000). The New Jersey  Department of Health and Senior Service 
(2010) estima ted that 29% (53,286) of the Newark adult population has high blood  
pressure.  Unlike acute disease s that may be amena ble to short -term intervention s, 
hypertension requires long -term monitoring, self -management, behav ior changes, and 
adherence to a medicati on regimen. The ability to help high -risk populations to constantly 
mon itor, self -manage, control, and improve their condition plays a crucial role in 
successfully managing and preventing this particular chronic disease. Mobile  Health 
technology (mHealth) has the potential to contribute significantly to hypertension 
management by [CONTACT_341690] -management among hypertension patients.  
 
 
mHealth is defined by [CONTACT_38375] (WHO) as “medi cal and public health 
practices supported by [CONTACT_341691], such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devic es, 
personal digital assistants (PDA), and other wireless devices” (WHO, 2011, p.6). Naturally, 
people use  mobile devices to communicate, but techno logies like this have powerful 
unintended outcomes (Morten, 1936).  In the case of mobile devices, health monitoring 
practices can be recorded in real -time and then self -reported. Depending on when, where,  
why and how people use their mobile devices, self -reported, real -time he alth data can 
become a valuable unintended outcome of mobile device. Through this technology, 
individuals within geographically -specified target groups may voluntarily reveal 
information that is otherwise incredibly challenging to ga ther. For example, in a [ADDRESS_422837] patterns of the disease, and 
provide improved and timely educa tional programs to the targeted populations, thereby 
[CONTACT_341692] a nd treatment strategies.  Other research evidence 
also suggests that mHealth may be beneficial in weight loss treatment  (Duncan et al, 2011 ; 
Spring et al. 2013 ), physical activity involvement (Hurling e t al, 2007; Consolve et al, 2006 ), 
asthma control (Anhoj et al, 2004; Britto et al, 2012; Massoudi & Rothemich 2012) and 
diabetes management (Faridi et al, 2008; Vahatalo et al, 2004).  
 
Furthermore, Smith (2014) reports that more African Americans in this co untry use mobile 
phones than do Caucasians: 92% of African Americans own a cell phone, of which 56% own 
a smartphone. Additionally, t ext message use is common  among people of varying health 
insurance statuses (PricewaterhouseCooper’ s Health Research Institute, 2010). Together, 
these f acts provide enough evide nce to suggest that the mHealth platform may be able to 
penetrate the urban underserved community in which this study will be conducted.  
 
Existing  Gaps between mHealth Applications and  Underserved Population s 
Contextual gap : underuse  of mHealth in underserved population s 
According to  the NIH’s Seventh Report of the Joint National  Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC 7, 2004), life style  
modification and monitoring for blood pressure are among the necessary steps in 
hypertension therapy.  At that time , electronic ally based  support systems, such as 
computer‐based and PDA based technologies, were believed to be potential tools for  
hypertension  treatment. The prevalence of mHealth  in the past decade has realize d some of  
this potential. Even though mHealth  has been  promoted by [CONTACT_341693] s, the study of mHealth  in clinical context s targeting  
underserved populatio ns has not been  widely reported. To begin  addressing th is gap, the 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation funded a $500,[ADDRESS_422838] s of th is gap. The propos ed study is an  
attempt to bridge the gap in a cli nical setting.  
 
Measurement gap : AMBP vs. self -measurement in hypertension treatment  
 
The JNC 7 specifically pointed out that two types of measurement, the  Ambulatory Blood 
Pressure (AMBP) , and self‐measurement, are important components  for accurate ly 
measur ing blood pressure. The characteristics of mHealth  provide meaningful clinical 
measurement to address both a 24 ‐hour automatic measurement for AMBP and an easy 
access measurement by [CONTACT_1962]. The effectiveness of mHealth to fulfill these 
measurements  is yet to be determined.  
 
Behavioral gap: mHealth and patient s’ motivation in hypertension treatment  
Hypertension treatment is effective only when the  patient is motivated (JCN7, 2004). A 
motived patient is willing to monitor his or her  blood pressure, chang e his or her  life style, 
and take necessary med ications . How the use of mHealth  motivates patients’ active 
participation remains unknown and needs to be explored. The provision of accessible 
feedback to patients coupled wit h support f or behavioral change should, in theory, both 
motivate and support improved patient outcomes.  
 
Possible outcomes and implications for future research  
The integration of mobile technology and self -management of chronic diseases such as 
hypertension and diabetes presents the perfect opportunity for innovations in health care 
delivery.  However, it has proved challenging to integrate underserved populations into 
emerging healthcare strategies.  This study will demonstrate that the mHealth intervention 
can p rovide a fast, reliable and inexpensive communication mechanism between health 
care providers and their underserved patients, which will help to integrate them into 
emerging innovations in health care delivery and reduce health and health care disparities.  
Specifically, this mHealth application study will not only make real -time patient monitoring 
feasible in underserved communities, but it can also help optimize the use of limited 
medical resources in these settings, adding to the promise of the nurse -mana ged 
community healthcare model by [CONTACT_341694]. The results of 
this study will provide the initial data required to apply for future researc h funds from the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), which has announced funding opportunities in 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_341685].  
 
Research Design and Methods  
Study  Design  
This study w ill have two phases. In Phase 1 , a pi[INVESTIGATOR_341686] a randomi zed controlled trial 
(RCT) will be utilized to e xamine BP decline and BP maintenance  with 30 participants 
assigned either to standar d care and treatment (a control group) or to the standard care 
plus mHealth  (the intervention group). In Phase 2 , improved quality of life, patient self‐
efficacy, greater t reatment adherence, reduced hospi[INVESTIGATOR_85284] .   
 
 
 
Setting and Sample  
 
The proposed study will take place at the Jordan and Harris Community Health Center 
(J&HCHC) in Newark, NJ. The J&HCHC is a nurse -managed, community -directed health 
center providing health services for a vulnerable, underserved population in the city of 
Newark. This center is utilized by [CONTACT_341695].  The great majority of these residents are low -income African 
Americans.   
 
The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_341687] 30 patients ([ADDRESS_422839] care plus mHealth intervention group) is approximately 10% of the 
approximate sample size we hope to incorporate into future mHealth studies (TCD 
Guidelines, 2010).   
 
Eligible study participants will be defined as 1)18 -64 year-old residents of on e of the three 
housing developments, and 2) subjects who have been documented with uncontrolled 
ambulatory blood pressure (BP ), and whose 24 -hour ambulatory BP  measur es 140/90 mm 
Hg or higher for eithe r of the two numbers . Eligible nurses will be defined as nurse s who 
are currently working at J&HCHC. Patients  will be recruited from J&HCHC via Community 
Health Workers (CHWs). Children (under age 18) and pregnant woman are excluded  in this 
study.  
 
Study  Procedures  
Based on the J&HCHC’s current practices, all hypertensive patients are required to visit the 
nurse for their regular hypertension monitoring every week. Therefore, all participants in 
this study  will be asked to visit J&HCHC once a week for the  6-month period as usual. The 
standard follow -up group will receive the typi[INVESTIGATOR_341688], which 
consisted of nursing assessment, medication management, patient education, follow up and 
continuing care. While the mHealth group will be  askto  use iHealth BP7 -Wireless Blood 
Pressure Wrist Monitor on a daily basis at home, while also visiting the J&HCHC once a 
week to receive regular hypertension care for the 6 -month period. Furthermore, all study 
participants will be  asked to complete the Medic al Outcomes Study 36 -Item Short - Form 
Health Survey (SF -36) and Medication Adherence Self -Efficacy Scale (MASES) in -person at 
the beginning and the end of the study.  
 
In this study, a FDA 510K approved device, iHealth BP7 -Wireless Blood Pressure Wrist 
Moni tor (iHealth Lab Inc.) will be utilized for the mHealth group. This is a fully automatic 
wrist -cuff blood pressure monitor that uses the oscillometric principle to measure blood 
pressure and pulse rate. The monitor works with a mobile app to test, track, and share vital 
blood pressure data. There are no physical risks associated with using the device to 
monitor blood pressure at home. Besides the FDA 510K approval, iHealth BP7 -Wireless 
Blood Pressure Wrist Monitor has also CE medical certification (Europe)  and ESH 
Certification (European Society of Hypertension). iHealth BP7 -Wireless Blood Pressure 
Wrist Monitor works with both Apple and Android devices. IHealth MyVitals is an 
 
application that is downloadable for free at both the Apple Store and Google Play . It 
automatically tracks and analyzes key health vitals all in one place. The measurements 
taken by [CONTACT_341696]7 -Wireless Blood Pressure Wrist Monitor are automatically stored in an 
easy to read format. It also provides instant access to patient measuremen ts and allows 
patients to see how they are doing and even set optimal goals.  
 
Each iHealth BP7 -Wireless Blood Pressure Wrist Monitor user receives a free cloud service 
account.  When patients measure their BP, the BP vital data is then stored and backed up 
securely into the iHealth cloud through their account. The patient and/or healthcare 
provider can log into the cloud account from any device and access the data, regardless of 
where the measurement was taken. Healthcare providers can also create master acc ounts 
through which they can access all users’ data held under their care. This allows healthcare 
providers to monitor their patients’ blood pressure remotely and intervene in a timely 
fashion.  
 
The research team will hold three training sections prior to the start of the study in order 
to train all the mHealth group participants how to appropriately use the device and 
monitor their BP. Two nurses and six CHWs will also receive training on how to access the 
mHealth group participants’ data in the iHealth cl oud account. In addition, the research 
team will do home visits or telephone calls for both group participants each week during 
the study period to assure the study participants followed the study protocol.  
  
 
 
References  
 
Anhoj, J. & Moldrup, C. (2004). Feasibility of collecting diary data from asthma patients through 
mobile phones and SMS (short message service): response rate analysis and focus group evaluation 
from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Journal of Medical Internet Research  6(4) , e42.  
 
Britto, M.T., Munafo, J.K., Schoettker, P.J., Vockell, A.L., Wimberg, J.A. & Yi, M.S. (2012). Pi[INVESTIGATOR_341689] -controlled text messaging reminders. Clinical Pediatrics , 
51(2), 114 -121.   
 
CDC (2012). Vital signs: awareness an d treatment of uncontrolled hypertension among 
adults —[LOCATION_002], 2003 –2010. MMWR , 61(35); 703 –709. Retrieved May 28, 2014, 
from, 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6135a3.htm?s_cid=mm6135a3_w  
 
Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., & Landay, J. A. (2006). Design requirements for 
technologies that   encourage physical activity. Retrieved November 17, 2014, from, 
http://dub.washington.edu/djangosite/media/papers/paper0552 -consolvo.pdf  
 
Cooper R., Cutler, J. et. al (2000). Trends and disparities in coronary heart disease, stroke, 
and other CVD s in the [LOCATION_002]: findings of the national conference on CVD prevention. 
Circulation , 102(3), 137 -147.  
 
Duncan, M. J., Janke, E. A. et al. (2011). PDA+:  A personal digital assistant for obesity 
treatment – An RCT testing the use of technology to en hance weight loss treatment for 
veterans. BMC Public Health , 11:223.  
 
Faridi, Z., Liberti, L., Shuval, K., Northrup, V., Ali, A. & Katz, D.L. (2008). Evaluating the 
impact of mobile telephone technology on type 2 diabetic patients’ self -management: the 
NICHE pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 14(3), 465 -469.  
 
Go, S. A., Mozaffarian, D., Roger, V.L., Benjamin, E.J., Berry, J.D., et al (2013). Heart disease 
and stroke statistics —2013 update: a report from the American Heart Association . 
Circulation , 127:e6 –e245. Retrieved June 10, 2014, from, 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/127/1/e6  
 
Healthy New Jersey 2010, Trenton, NJ: New Jersey Department of Health and Senior 
Services. Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved September 02, 2014, from 
http://www.state.nj.us/health/chs/hnj2020 / 
 
Hurling, R., Catt, M., Boni, M.D., Fairley, B.W., Hurst, T., Murray, P., Richardson, A.  & Sodhi, J. 
S. (2007).  Using internet and mobile phone technology to deliver an automated physical 
activity program: randomized controlled trial. Journal of Medica l Internet Research , 9(2), e7.  
 
 
Merton, K. R. (1936). The unanticipated consequences of purposive social action. American 
Sociological Review ,1(6), 894 -904.  
 
NHLBI (2004). The seventh report for the Joint National Committee on Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure. Washington, DC: National 
Institutes of Health. Retrieved September 1, 2014, from  
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/guidelines/express.pdf  
Ogedegbe, G., Mancuso, C. A., Allegrante, J. P., & Charlson, M. E . (2003). Development and 
evaluation of a medication adherence self -efficacy scale in hypertensive African -American 
patients. Journal of Clinical Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] , 56(6), 520 -529.  
 
PricewaterhouseCooper’s Health Research Institute (2010). Healthcare unwired: new 
business models delivering care anywhere. HRI Consumer Survey 2010. Retrieved June 12, 
2014, from http://www.mo bilemarketer.com/cms/lib/9599.pdf  
 
Smith, A. (2014).African Americans and technology use: a demographic portrait. 
Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Retrieved June 10, 2014, from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/01/06/african -americans -and-technology -use/  
 
Spring, B., Duncan, M. J. et al (2013). Integrating technology into standard weight loss 
treatmen. JAMA intern Medial Medicine , 173(2), 105 -111.  
 
Trinity College Dublin (2010). Guidelines for preparing a research proposal . TCD, Dublin.  
 
Vahatalo, M. A, Virtamo, H. E., Viikari, J. S., & Ronnemaa, T. (2004). Cellular phone 
transferred self -blood glucose   monitoring: prerequisites for positive outcome. Practical 
Diabetes International , 21(5), 192 -194.  
 
World Health Organization (2011). mHea lth: new horizons for health through mobile 
technologies, Global Observatory for eHealth series – Volume 3, WHO, Geneva. Retrieved 
June 10, 2014, from http://www.who.int/goe/publications/goe_mhealth_web.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 