 
 
Study Protocol for Human Subjects Research  and Statistical Analysis Plan  
Efficacy of a Web -Based Alcohol Intervention for High School Students  
January 27, 2021  
 

ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 1 
 
DIVISION OF RESEARCH  & ECONOMIC DEVELOPM ENT 
Office of Research Compliance | Institutional Review Board  
(phone) [PHONE_1718] | (fax) [PHONE_1719] 
[EMAIL_1382]  | MS 1138  
 
 
EXPEDITED/ FULL BO ARD  PROTOCOL APPLICATION   
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• The a pplication must  be typed.  Handwritten applications will not be accepted.  
• Spell check will not work  on this application. P roofread before submitting.    
• SUBMIT COMPLETED APPLICATION AND ALL SUPPORTING  APPENDICES TO: [EMAIL_1383]  
• The second page must be signed by [CONTACT_70634]:  
 Email —[EMAIL_1382]  (as a scanned PDF);  
 Campus Mail —Mail Stop 1138;  
 Mail —Office of Research Compliance, [ADDRESS_76966], Riverfront Hall 311, Boise, ID [ZIP_CODE]- 1138; or  
 Fax—[PHONE_1719] 
 
SECTION A: General Information  
1. Project  Title:  Efficacy of a Web -Based Alcohol Intervention for High School Students (Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70609])  
 
2. Anticipated Start Date:  7/1/2017  Anticipated End Date:  6/30/2019  
 
3. PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (PI)  (Refe r to the IRB PI [INVESTIGATOR_70610]. IRB staff will confirm your eligibility. Graduate thesis or 
dissertation students MUST list an eligible PI [INVESTIGATOR_70611]-investigator)  
 Name:  [CONTACT_70652]:   Full [CONTACT_70658]  
 
  If you fall into any of the titles in the grey box below, you must have an eli gible PI [INVESTIGATOR_70612] -Investigator . 
  Adjunct Faculty   Visiting Faculty  
  Instructor/Lecturer   Staff  
  Graduate Student —Thesis   Graduate Student —Dissertation  
 Department:  Counselor Education  Phone:   6-2646  
 E-mail:   [EMAIL_1384]  
 Roles and responsibilities in this study:  
As the Principal Investigator, I will be overseeing th e entire project including the participant recruitment, 
collection of data, supervision of the research team, analyzing data, reporting data at conferences, and writing 
manuscripts for publication.  
 CITI Training Completed:   Social & Beha vioral Researchers   Biomedical Researchers  
 
4. CO-INVESTIGATOR  (IRB staff will confirm your title with the directory.)  
 Name:  [CONTACT_70653]:        
 Department:  Social Work  Phone:  6-3970  
 E-mail:  [EMAIL_1385]  
 Roles and responsibilities in this study:  
As co -investigator, [CONTACT_70659] will assist in overseeing participant recruitme nt, data collection, and 
implementation of the intervention program.  [CONTACT_70659] will also assist in analyzing data, reporting data at 
conferences, and writing manuscripts for publication.  
 CITI Training Completed:   Social & Behavioral Resea rchers   Biomedical Researchers  
 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page [ADDRESS_76967] add itional research personnel (Co -Investigator s, key personnel, student research assistants, etc.)?  
  NO 
  YES  
 To list additional investigators and/or k ey personnel, complete and attach an ADDITIONAL PERSONNEL  form.  
 
6. Is this research supported in whole or in part by a grant or contract?  
  NO 
  YES:  
 Sponsor Name:  [CONTACT_70654] [INVESTIGATOR_70613]:  Diana Doumas  
 Grant Title/Contract:  Efficacy of a Web -Based Alcohol I ntervention for High School Students  
 Project Period:  From:  7/1/2017  To: 6/30/[ADDRESS_76968] Summary Attached  
 OSP Proposal Number (if known):  this grant is pending - it has received a sc ore in funding range - IRB 
required for JIT information for Advisor Council meeting in May 
2017  
 
7. Has this protocol previously been considered by [CONTACT_70635]’s IRB?  
  NO 
  YES:  IRB Number:        Date Approved:        
 
 
SECTION B: Financial Conflict of Interest Disclosure  
Conflicts of interest must be disclosed in accordance with the Boise State Conflict of Interest and Commitment Policy #1110 .  
1. Do any investigators (PI , Co-Investigator ) or research team members (key personnel) have any relationship or 
equity interest with any institutions or sponsors related to this research t hat might present or appear to present a 
conflict of interest with regard to the outcome of the research?   
  NO POTENTIAL CONFLICTS EXIST  
  YES:  
2. Name [CONTACT_60696](s) with the potential COI:         
  This potential conflict has been disclosed to the Boise State Conflict of Interest Office via the electronic 
disclosure form: https://web.boisestate.edu/confli ctofinterest/app.html . 
  This conflict has not been disclosed to the Boise State COI Office.  
 
 Note: If a significant  conflict of interest exists, you must also attach  the Boise State COI Committee approved 
management plan.  If you have questions about conflicts of interest, contact [CONTACT_70636] (208) 426 -1252.  
 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 3  
 
SECTION C: Signatures  
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_70614]   
I certify that the information provided in this application is complete and accurate.  As the principal investigator, I have ultimate 
responsibility for the conduct of this study, the ethical performance of the project, the protection of the rights and welfar e of human 
participants, and strict adherence to any stipulations designated by [CONTACT_1201].  I accept and will conform to all federal, state, and 
institutional provisions concerning the protection of human participants in research.  I will ensure all personnel involved i n the 
research will be appropriately trained for  all procedures used in this project.   
 
I agree to conduct the research involving human participants as presented in this protocol application as approved by [CONTACT_70637] (IRB), and am qualified to perform the procedures desc ribed herein.  I will submit any proposed 
changes/modifications for review and approval before they are implemented.  I agree to notify the IRB and Office of Research 
Compliance of any adverse events that may occur during the study.  I also assure that I w ill follow through with the storage and 
destruction of data as outlined in the protocol.  I understand that Boise State owns the research data.  If I choose to trans fer to 
another institution, I will need departmental approval to take the data with me.  
 
If I am a graduate student investigator on this research application, I further agree to meet with my faculty advis er on a regular 
basis to discuss the progress of the study.  I agree to meet with my faculty adviser to solve protocol issues as they arise.   
 
I understand that data collection (including recruitment) is not permitted until final approval is granted by [CONTACT_1201].  
 
Diana Doumas     3-8-17  
Principal Investigator (PRINT)   Signature   [CONTACT_70655]-Investigator/Faculty Advi sor Assurance and Acknowledgement  
I certify I have read this protocol application and that the information is complete and accurate.  I ensure that the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_70615]. I understand that I will be included in all email correspondence related 
to the protocol application including questions from the IRB committee and approval notifications.  
 
I further agree to meet with the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a regular basis to monitor the progress of the study. I agree to be available 
and to personally supervise the student investigator in solving problems as they arise.  I will arrange for an alternate Co -Investigator  
to assume responsibility if I become unavailable, as when on sabbatical leave or vacation, and will notify the IRB of this change.  I 
assure that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_70616].  
 
Susan Esp     3-8-17  
Co- Investigator (PRINT)   Signature   [CONTACT_70656], Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 4  
SECTION  D: Review Category  
Indicate the applicable review category  for your research : 
  FULL BOARD Review:  
 Any research or training project involving the use of human participants which does not fall into an 
exempt or expedited review catego ry must be submitted for full board IRB review.  Research involving 
more than minimal risk requires full board review.  
 
  EXPEDITED Review  (Indicate category (ies)  below):  
 
 1. Clinical studies of drugs and medical devices only when condition (a) or (b) is met.  
  a. research on drugs for which an investigational new drug application (21 CFR Part 312) is not required.  
(Note: Research on marketed drugs that significantly increases the risks or decreases the acceptability of 
the risks associated with the use of the product is not eligible for expedited review).  
  b. research on medical devices for which (i) an investigational d evice exemption application (21 CFR Part 
812) is not required; or (ii) the medical device cleared/approved for marketing and the medical device is 
being used in accordance with its cleared/approved labeling.  
 
 2. Collection of blood samp les by [CONTACT_25877], heel stick, ear stick, or venipuncture as follows:  
  a. from healthy, nonpregnant adults who weigh at least 110 pounds.  For these participants, the amounts 
drawn may not exceed 550 ml in an 8 week period and collection may not occur more frequently than 2 
times per week; or  
  b. from other adults and children1 considering the age, weight, and health of the participants, the collection 
procedure, the amount of blood to be collected, and the frequency with which it will be collected.  For 
these participants, the amount drawn may not exceed the lesser of [ADDRESS_76969] ion of biological specimens for research purposes by [CONTACT_25878].  
  Examples: (a) hair and nail clippi[INVESTIGATOR_59787] a nondisfiguring manner; (b) deciduous teeth at time of 
exfoliation or if routine patient care indicates a need for extraction; (c) permanen t teeth if routine 
patient care indicates a need for extraction; (d) excreta and external secretions (including sweat); (e) 
uncannulated saliva collected either in an unstimulated fashion or stimulated by [CONTACT_70638] a dilute citric solution to the tongue; (f) placenta removed at delivery; (g) amniotic 
fluid obtained at the time of rupture of the membrane prior to or during labor; (h) supra-  and 
subgingival dental plaque and calculus, provided the collection procedure is not more i nvasive than 
routine prophylactic scaling of the teeth and the process is accomplished in accordance with accepted 
prophylactic techniques; (i) mucosal and skin cells collected by [CONTACT_59846][INVESTIGATOR_59788], skin swab, or 
mouth washings; (j) sputum collected after saline mist nebulization.  
 
 4. Collection of data through noninvasive procedures (not involving general anesthesia or sedation) 
routinely employed in clinical practice, excluding procedures involving x -rays or microwaves.  Where 
medical devices are employed, they must be cleared/approved for marketing.  (Studies intended to 
evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the medical device are not generally eligible for expedited 
review, including studies of cleared medical devices for new  indications.)  
  Examples: (a) physical sensors that are applied either to the surface of the body or at a distance and do 
not involve input of significant amounts of energy into the subject or an invasion of the subject’s privacy; 
(b) weighing or testing sensory acuity; (c) magnetic resonance imaging; (d) electrocardiography, 
electroencephalography, thermography, detection of naturally occurring radioactivity, 
electroretinography, ultrasound, diagnostic infrared imaging, doppler blood flow, and echocardio graphy; 
(e) moderate exercise, muscular strength testing where appropriate given the age, weight, and health of 
the individual.  
 
 5. Research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) that have been collected, or will 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 5 be collected solely for nonresearch purposes (such as medical treatment or diagnosis).  (NOTE: Some 
research in this category may be exempt from the HHS regulations for the protection of human 
participants.  45 CFR 46.101(b)(4).   This listing refers only t o research that is not exempt.)  
  
 6. Collection of data from voice, video, digital, or image recordings made for research purposes.  
 
 7. Research on individual or group characteristics or behavior (including, but not limited to, research on 
perception, cognition, motivation, identity, language, communication, cultural beliefs or practices, and 
social behavior) or research employing survey, interview, oral history, focus group, program evaluation, 
human factors evaluati on, or quality assurance methodologies.  (NOTE: Some research in this category 
may be exempt from the HHS regulations for the protection of human participants.  45 CFR 46.101(b)(2) 
and (b)(3).  This listing refers only to research that is not exempt.)  
 
 8. Continuing review of research previously approved by [CONTACT_70639]:  
  a. where (i) the research is permanently closed to the enrollment of new participants; (ii) all participants 
have completed all research -related interventions; and (iii) the research remains active only for long -
term follow -up participants; or  
  b. where no participants have been enrolled and no additional risks have been identified; or  
  c. where the remaining research activities are limited to data analysis.  
 
 9. Continuing review of research, not conducted under an investigational new drug application or 
investigational device exemption where categories two (2) through eight (8) d o not apply but the IRB has 
determined and documented at a convened meeting that the research involves no greater than minimal 
risk and no additional risks have been identified.  
 
SECTION E:  Purpose  
1. Provide a summary of the purpose of your project.  I nclude information about the background and rationale for 
the study and goal(s) of the proposed study.  Use language understood by a person unfamiliar with this area of 
research.  Specific jargon should be avoided or explicitly explained.  
Underage drinking and the negative associated consequences represent a significant problem in the United 
States.  Drinking in adolescence significantly increases the risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_70617] m ultiple negative interpersonal, academic, legal, and neurocognitive 
consequences. A significant body of literature supports the use of brief interventions based on social norming 
theory and motivational enhancement models to reduce heavy drinking and the a ssociated consequences 
among college students.  Recent reviews of the literature also indicate brief interventions are effective when 
delivered in a web- based format. In spi[INVESTIGATOR_70618],  application of evidence -based interventions is limited.  Further research examining the 
efficacy of brief interventions delivered to seniors through the high school curriculum is warranted. The 
proposed project will address this gap by [CONTACT_70640] a web -based intervention for this high 
school age group.  
 
The goal of this study is to reduce underage drinking. This study builds upon research conducted over the past 
five years in the school district. We evaluated the efficacy of a web- based inte rvetnion, eCHECKUP TO GO (San 
Digo State University Research Foundation, n.d), shown to be effective with college students (Doumas, Kane, 
2011; Doumas, Workman, Smith, 2011; Doumas, Workman, Navarro, 2011; Doumas, Haustveit, 2010; Doumas, 
Anderson, 2009). Results of this evaluation with 9th grade students  were promising, but results were not 
sustained over time.  Because high school seniors' drinking patterns are more similar to those of college 
students than 9th grade students, this approach may be more us eful with high school seniors. We evaluated 
this hypothesis with pi[INVESTIGATOR_70619] 2015- 2016.  Results suggest that the 
eCHECKUP TO GO was effective in reducing risk factors associated with alcohol use (Doumas, Esp, Trull , & 
Shearer, 2017) and alcohol use (Doumas, Esp, Flay, & Bond, in press) at a short -term follow -up. 
 
The proposed study extends the literature by [CONTACT_70641] a 
longer follow -up period, as well as examining mediators and moderators of interveniton effects .  All 12th 
grade students at the two participating school sites will be given the opportunity to participate in the study. 
All participants will complete an assessment packet containing questionnaires including  demographic 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 6 informaiton, the quantity and frequency of their drinking,  beliefs about both the quantity and frequency of 
their peers' drinking, alcohol beliefs and expectancies , problems associated with drinking, personality 
characteristics, and future goa ls  (see attachment 1). Classrooms within the high school school s will be 
randomly assigned to the following groups: eCHECKUP TO GO and control group.   
 
 What is your research question? State your hypothesis.  
The project  is designed to eval uate the following hypothesis:  P articipants in the eCHECKUP TO GO 
intervention condition will report a reduction in their quantity of alcohol consumption and alcohol -related 
consequences relative to those in the control group. We are also interested in me chanisms of change (e.g. 
changes in estimates of peer drinking and/or drinking expectancies) and if this program is more effective for 
some students than others (e.g. gender , baseline drinking status, social -emotional maturity , college -bound 
status ). 
 
 What will you do with the results of your study (e.g. contributing to generalizable knowledge, publishing, 
sharing at conference, etc.)?  If this project is only for internal evaluation or to complete a class assignment, IRB 
may not be required.  Please cont act the ORC for additional information.  
Results of this study will be presented at conferences via oral or poster presentations and through publication 
in peer -reviewed journals. In addition a project summary report will be sent to the partipating school s and/or 
school  district.  
 
SECTION F: Participant Population  
1. Provide a description of the participant population  you intend to recruit and collect data from .  Describe the 
characteristics of the participant population such as gender, age ranges, ethnic background and health status, as 
applicable to the research . 
 Participants (12th grade students; N = 1000) will be recruited from Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70620].  All 12th grade students will be given the opportunity to participate in the study.    
 
We anticipate the demographics to be as follows: 
47% male; 53% female  
Ages 16 -18 
91% Caucasian,  .03% African American, . 05% Asisan American, .002% Native American, . 06 % Hispanic and . 01% 
other  
 
We anticipate the student participants will be healthy.  
 
2. Will your research  involve vulnerabl e populations , such as children or adolescents under the age of 18, pregnant 
women, prisoners or cognitively , economically, or educationally  impaired participant s? 
  NO   YES (indicate population):        
 If yes, describe additional safeguards planned to protect the rights and welfare of this population (s): 
Student participants recruited to this research study will be approximately 1000 high school seniors (ages 
16-18) from Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70621]. Classrooms within the 
school s will be randomized to intervention or assessment -only control conditions. Participants will be 
recruited from classes. A letter will be sent by [CONTACT_70642]. Parents will be asked to return consent forms using a self -addressed stamped 
postcard. Students will be invited to participate in the research study during class. Those students who 
decline participation will participate in an alternate academic activity under the supervision of the 
teacher. Consent procedures will be the same for minors and [ADDRESS_76970] requires parental consent for 18 year old students.  
 
The surveys will ask student participants about their own alcohol use/non- use and any negative 
consequences, attitudes and beliefs about alcohol use, reasons for using alcohol use, norms for alcohol 
use, personality characteristics, future plans, and demo graphic information. Similar procedures have 
been used in previous research with 9th grade students  and high school seniors without adverse incident. 
Psychological risks posed by [CONTACT_70643].  Items include thoughts and feelings that may be private and personal behavior such as alcohol 
use. These questions may make participants uncomfortable, or be perceived as an intrusion on their 
privacy. Although it is important to consider there potential risks, and it is important to point out the 
potential for these risks, we have not observed any indications of these risks materializing in all of our 
previous research using procedures similar to those we will use in the proposed study.  
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page [ADDRESS_76971] risks posed by [CONTACT_70644], we will take the following step s: 1) participants will be assured that they 
are free to refrain from answering any questions they do not wish to answer; 2) all data will be identified 
only by a unique personal identifier (PIN), which will be randomly generated for study purposes; 3) a 
master list of names and code numbers will be stored in locked file cabinets under the supervision of the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_70622]. Data will be retained on computers with 
restricted and password protected access, without links to the master code list. All data based on this 
research will be reported in aggregate form.  
 
3. Will you be  recruiting  students  from a class that you teach? (See IRB guidelines  for using your own students.)  
  NO   YES 
 If yes, explain why this population is necessary to the study, and how you will ensure participants do not feel 
coerced to partici pate.  Coercion is a significant concern.  
      
 
4.  Will you be  recruiting  employees who report to you?  
  NO  YES  
 If yes, explain why this population is necessary to the study, and how you will ensure participants do not feel 
coerced to participate.  Coercion is a significant concern.  
      
 
5. Indicate any exclusion criteria for participant s. 
There are no exclusion criteria for recruitment other than not meeting inclusion c riteria  other than not being a 
senior at one of the two school sites .  
 
6. How many participant s do you anticipate are needed for this research?  
We anticipate a 45% response rate (students with parental acitve consent , student assent, and who are 
present the day of data collection)  - this will yeild 450 student participants in this study which will provide a 
large enough sample to adequately power this study.  
 
SECTION G: Recruitment  and Informed Consent  
1.  Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_70623]:  
 Recruitment Scripts  (what will be said to participant s during recruitment)  
 Recruitment Emails  
 Cover Letters  
 Flyers  
 Advertisements  
 Other:       
  
2. Who will recruit potential participants?  
We have recruited Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70624]. Participants will be recruited through the high schools from 12th grade classes. Student participants’ 
names will be obtained from the registrar’s list of seniors, which have the names, street addresses, and 
current phone numbers for all students. This information can be obtained directly from the registrar’s 
computer databa se. Recruitment letters to parents will be sent directly from the school.  
 
3. Describe how, when, and where individuals will be first contact[CONTACT_70645] (e.g. , face -to-face, email, flyers, advertisements, phone ca ll, etc.) . 
A pre -notification  letter will be sent by [CONTACT_70646]. A second letter will 
be sent explaining the study, include the consent form and a project -addressed stamped envelope for return 
of the cons ent form.  A reminder letter and consent form with project -addressed stamped envelope will be 
sent to parents who do not return the initial consent form. All letters will be sent to parents’ permanent 
addresses, provided to us via the registrar's office. Additionally, letters with consent form with a project -
addressed stamped envelope will be sent home with students.  
 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 8 Students with parental consent will be invited to participate in the research study during class. Students will 
be given an assent form whic h will address the voluntary nature of participation, participants’ rights, the risks 
of participation, the availability of referral options outside the study for help with alcohol use prevention or 
treatment, data retention and storage information, protec tions for and limits to confidentiality, a description 
of the interventions, and procedures for reporting complaints and/or adverse events to the investigators and 
to the University Human Subjects Review Committee. Participants will be given a copy of the consent 
document. Students who elect not to participate will be given an alternative academic activity to complete 
under the supervision of the teacher during the assessment and intervention class periods.  
 
4. Are you are directly emailing or mailing participants ? 
  NO 
  YES 
 If yes, how are you obtaining emails and/ or mailing addresses?  
   Participants' parents will be mailed, although r ecruitment letters to parents will be sent directly from 
the school , not from Boise State .  Student participants’ names will be obtained from the registrar’s list of seniors, 
which have the names, street addresses, and current phone numbers for all students. This information can be 
obtained directly from the registrar’s co mputer database.  
 
RECRUITING BOISE STA TE STUDENTS  
Recruiting Boise State students may require additional internal and departmental permission s, in addition to IRB 
approval. It is the PIs responsibility to obtain these permissions before moving forward w ith recruitment. The Boise State 
Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs  (VPSA) provides guidelines  for sending mass emails to students. It is the 
PI’s responsibility to be familiar w ith these guidelines and any additional departmental, college or unit processes.  
5. Are you re cruiting Boise State students ? 
  NO, skip to #6  
  YES: 
 Indicate which students or employees you are targeting:  
       
   Approval(s) obtained and attached , if applicable.  
 
6.  Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_70625]:  
 Informed Consent Form  
 Cover Letter  
 Web -based Cover Lett er 
 Assent Form  
 Parent/Guardian Informed Consent Form  
 Verbal Consent Script  
 Debriefing Statement  
 
7. Are you requesting an alteration or waiver to any informed consent requirements , including documentation of 
informed consent (signed consent)?  
  NO  YES  
 If YES, complete the section below .  If NO, skip to question 4. 
 
INDICATE THE TYPE OF  WAIVER YOU ARE REQU ESTING:  
 I am reques ting to waive the required documentation of informed consent (i.e. waive obtaining the signature [CONTACT_70657] -based survey, telephone survey, mailed survey, etc. ). COMPLETE SECTION A  
 
 I am requesting to waive or alter the req uired elements of the informed consent process. COMPLETE SECTION B  
 
 SECTION A   
 Check the box next to the condition that best fits your research study and justify how your research study meets 
that condition.  If waiving the signature, you must still s ubmit a verbal script or cover letter for participants that 
addresses the eight required elements of consent as stated in 45 CFR 46.116 (a)(1 -8).    
  CONDITION 1   
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page [ADDRESS_76972] linking the participant  and the research would be the c onsent document and the principal risk 
would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality.  Each participant  will be asked whether the 
participant  wants documentation linking the participant  with the research, and the participant ’s wishes w ill 
govern.   
  Justify why your study meets this condition:   
       
 
  CONDITION 2   
  The research presents no more than minimal risk to the participant  and involves no procedures for which 
written consent is normally req uired outside the research context (i.e. no questions are being asked that could 
result in potential embarrassment, personally or professionally.)   
  Justify why your study meets this condition:   
       
  
 SECTION B   
  I am requesting to waive the informed consent process.   
  
  I am requesting alteration  of the informed consent process.  
Describe which elements of consent will be altered and/or omitted:  
      
 You must justify your request to waive or alter the informed consent process in accordance with each of the following 
four criteria established under 45 CFR 46.116 (d) (1 -4).  Provide supporting information for ALL FOUR  criterion:  
 1. The research involves no more than minimal risk to  the participant s. 
 Justify:        
 2. The waiver or alteration will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the participant s. 
 Justify:       
 3. The research could not practicably be carried out without the waiver or alteration.  
 Justify:       
 4. Whenever appropriate, the participant s will be provided with additional pertinent information after 
participation.  (If a debriefing statement is used, submit a copy with this application.)  
 Explain:       
 
8. Describe the consent process .  Do not answer, “see attached consent form,” as this does not describe the 
process of obtaining informed consent.  Describe how, when and where the informed consent process will take 
place and who will obtain informed consent.  
A pre -notification  letter will be sent by [CONTACT_70646]. A second letter will 
be sent explaining the study, include the consent form and a project -addressed stamped envelope  for return 
of the consent form.  A reminder letter and consent form with project -addressed stamped envelope will be 
sent to parents who do not return the initial consent form. All letters will be sent to parents’ permanent 
addresses, provided to us via the registrar's office. Additionally, letters with consent form with a project -
addressed stamped envelope will be sent home with students.   
 
9. If the participants are not able to give legal consent  (e.g., minors) , explain how  assent will be secured.   
Students will be invited to participate in the research study during class. Students will be given an assent form 
which will address the voluntary nature of participation, participants’ rights, the risks of participation, the 
availability of ref erral options outside the study for help with alcohol use prevention or treatment, data 
retention and storage information, protections for and limits to confidentiality, a description of the 
interventions, and procedures for reporting complaints and/or adv erse events to the investigators and to the 
University Human Subjects Review Committee. This will be presented by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Susan Esp. It will be clearly stated 
to the participants that participation is voluntary. Students who elect not to participate will be gi ven an 
alternative activity to complete during the assessment and intervention class periods.  
 
10. Into what languages will the consent be translated?  (NOTE: Translated consent documents must be reviewed 
and approved by [CONTACT_70647].)  
None  
 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 10 11. If your research involves collecting a combination  of demographic data (e.g., a combination of gender, age, 
race, and ethnicity) that may make a participant identifiable, you must inform the participants the following: 
“For this research proj ect, the researchers  are requesting demographic information.  Due to the make -up of 
Idaho’s population, the combined answ ers to these questions may make an individual person identifiable.  The 
researchers  will make every effort to protect your  confidential ity.  However, if you are uncomfortable answering 
any of these questions, you may leave them blank.”   
 
If applicable, indicate where and how participants will be informed of this.  
This information will be included in the informed consent and assent.  
 
SECTION H: Data Collection  
1. Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_70626] .  Check all that apply .  
 Questionnaire/Survey  (attach questions)  Videotapi[INVESTIGATOR_70627]  (attach questions  and scripts ) Audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_70628]  (attach questions  and scripts ) Using direct quotes  
 Reviewing Medical /Education  Records  Deception  
 Other:        
 
2. Indicate all biomedical procedures that apply to your research:   
 Physical Activity  Body Mass Index  
 Venipu ncture  X-rays 
 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  Anthropomorphic evaluations  
 Electrocardiograms (EKGs)  Intravenous catheter insertion  
 Collection of bl ood samples by [CONTACT_25877], heel stick, ear stick or venipuncture  
 Other:        
 
3. If applicable, describe the procedures being performed already for diagnostic or treatment purpose.   
N/A  
 
4. What are you going to ask participants to do?  Provide a step -by-step description of each procedure, including 
the freq uency and duration of each procedure.  This question is mandatory  and may not  be skipped.  
Applications missing this section will not be accepted.  
All student participants will be asked to complete an online survey during class time. This will  take no longer 
than 20 minutes. Participants in the classrooms randomly assigned to the intervention group will be asked to 
complete an online intervention program which will occur during class time. The program involves a 
comprehensive assessment of the participant's drinking and drinking -related behaviors, followed by 
[CONTACT_70648]. The program will take about [ADDRESS_76973]? (i.e., explain where you are distributing 
surveys, conducting interviews, etc.)  
Onsite at Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70629].  
 
6. Does your study include plans to conduct  research at an externa l site ? (i.e., off Boise State campus. For example, 
an elementary school, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], prison , etc. ) 
 YES  NO 
 If YES, indicate the external site(s) and you must attach an acknowledgement (letter or email) indicating 
you ha ve permis sion to use their facility and personnel .   
Capi[INVESTIGATOR_70630], Boise, ID  and Boise High School, Boise, ID  
 
 If YES, does your study include plans to conduct research at external sites that are engaged in the research?  
If so, will  that site’s IRB approve this  research  or will it rely upon the BSU IRB? 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page [ADDRESS_76974] the study.  
 
7. Will monetary or other compensations be offered to the participants  (e.g. , gift certificates, raffle, cash payment 
or class extra credit?)   
 YES  NO 
 If YES, identify the amount of compensation and method of payment.  Explain how participants  would earn 
compensation if their participation is anonymous.  If students are offered extra credit, you must provide 
other options to fulfill the research component  if they do not wish to participate.  
Classroom incentives will be given to classrooms with at least a 60% response rate. These w ill include a 
$100 gift certificate to the teacher for classroom supplies and a pi[INVESTIGATOR_70631].  
 
SECTION I: PARTICIPANT PRIVACY  
Privacy  refers to persons during data collection .  It is the control over the extent, timing, and circumstances of sharing oneself 
(physically, behaviorally, or intellectually) with others (e.g., surveys are completed in the privacy of their own home; interviews 
will be done in a location of their choosing where it is unlikely they will be overheard).  
1. Describe the provisions to protect the privacy of the participants during the data collection procedures .   
Participants will complete all questionnaires and the intervention on a computer situated so no other person 
can see the computer screen. The parti cipants will be given a code number to use during each assessement. 
The research staff will have a master list that links the code number to the participant. Once the [ADDRESS_76975] will be destroyed.   
 
SECTION J: CON FIDENTIALITY OF DATA  
CONFIDENTIALITY : Confidentiality refers to how DATA  is handled after collection .  It is the treatment of information already 
revealed and states that there is an expectation that it will not be divulged to others in ways that are inco nsistent with the 
understanding of the original disclosure without permission (e.g., data is secured on a password- protected computer or locked 
file cabinet, data is de -identified or coded, only the researchers have access to the data).  
1. Provide details  as to how you plan to protect the data while on site and during travel (e.g. from data 
collection site back to  the office). When t raveling (especially overseas) or just with portable devices, data 
security is vital, especially if the device or data is los t or stolen. Address the storage and security of electronic 
data as well as any physical data, such as paper consent forms or surveys , during travel.  
All data will be collected via online surveys  -  it will not be transported as it is electro nic. 
 
2. Describe how you will maintain confidentiality of the data after it has been collected, including measures to 
protect the identity of the participants and their responses  (coding procedures, encryption, etc.) .  
Confidentiality of da ta will be maintained through the use of a code number. All data collected through 
electronic means will be delivered directly to the research database upon completion of the survey. The 
master list of volunteer names and their corresponding code numbers w ill be confidential and will only be 
accessible by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_70632]. After completion of the post -intervention surveys, the master 
list will be destroyed.  
 
3. Where will you store the data? A copy of the data must  be kept within the camp us departm ental area, not 
stored at home. OIT offers virtual servers and storage for BSU researchers, click  for more details.  Describe 
procedures for both electronic and hard copy data.  
Survey data are collected online and will be kept on a password protected computer in a locked office. The 
data will be stored on a password protected computer in a locked office at Boise State and will be kept for a 
minimum of three years.  
 
4. Who will hav e access to the data?   
Only members of the research team will have access to the data through permission from the PI.  
 
5. In w hat format will the data be stored  (e.g., paper  or electronic copy )? 
The data will be stored in ele ctronic format.  
 
SECTION K: Risks and Benefits  
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 12 1. What are the risks and inconveniences to the participants ?  Describe all known anticipated psychological, 
physical, sociological, financial, economic risk to participants : 
 Examples include, but are not limited to:  
 Loss of confidentiality  
 Identifiable links to individual participant s 
 Feeling guilty for lying in study requiring deception  
 Emotional stress or discomfort (describe be low)   
 No physical, psychological, legal or economic risks or consequences to the participants are 
anticipated. Any potential psychological risks posed by [CONTACT_70649]. Items in clude thoughts, feelings, and personal difficulties that 
may be private and personal behavior such as alcohol and other drug use. These questions may 
make participants uncomfortable, or be perceived as an intrusion on their priva cy. Participants are 
also asked to report on potentially illegal behaviors, such as drinking under the legal drinking age 
or driving after drinking. However, there is no risk of coercion of individuals, as individuals are free 
to delete the invitation emai l should they choose to do so and may discontinue involvement in the 
study at any time.  
 Physical injury  or discomfort (describe below)   
              
 Other : 
       
 
2. How will you minimize these risks and their impact to the participant s? 
The primary procedure for guarding against this risk is to fully inform them of their right  to refuse to 
participate in any portion of the study or to discontinue the study altogether. [CONTACT_70660] is a Licensed 
Clincial Professional Counselor and will be with the students during all assessments and the online 
intervention will also be prepared to respond in an appropriate and caring manner to any querries by a 
participant. Participants will also be provided information about follow -up counseling services.  
 
3. Describe how you are able to identify and handle the risks above.  Provide a brief d escription of  all relevant 
training, experience, education, and credentials.   
The intervention will be administered by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Susan Esp who is a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor and is 
fully trained and licensed to work with students ex periencing distress and provide appropriate resources for 
participants. In addition, this project is similar to several projects conducted by [CONTACT_70650] [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Susan Esp with 
no adverese events. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -I have extensive experience working with this pop ulation.   
 
In addition, program staff are licensed mental health professionals and are trained to manage any crisis that 
might occur. [CONTACT_70661] is a licensed psychologist with over [ADDRESS_76976] a plan in 
case of emergency (e.g. , the researcher will carry a cell phone, etc.).  
If a participant were so distressed as to represent a harm to themselves, the participant  would be walked to 
school counselor's office where arrangements would be made to have the police escort the participant to an 
appropriate facility for a n evaluation. [CONTACT_70660] is a Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor -  she will be 
administering the survey and intervention and is trained to evaluate and manage crisis situations. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_70633].   
 
5. What are the potential direct benefits to the research participant s? (This may not be applicable to your 
research.)  
Participants in the study who are using alcohol may decrease their drinking. Interventions s uch as those used 
in this study have been shown in the literature to decrease high- risk drinking  and alcohol initiation. Thus, 
participating in this study has the potential to positively impact  students , including those  who are at high- risk 
for alcohol -related consequences.   
 
6. What are the potential broader benefits of the study?  
n addition to benefits for participants, the development and implementation of intervention programs for 
high school students has the potential for reducing the s erious public health problem of underage drinking and 
the negative associated consequences. Given the relatively high rates of heavy drinking in high school, the 
relationship between high school drinking and drinking in college students and non- college att ending young 
ORC Form, Revise d 11.03.15  
FOR ORC USE ONLY  DATE RECEIVED:  PROTOCOL #:  
 Page 13 adults, and the relationship between underage drinking and the development of alcohol use disorders, 
dissemination of efficacious intervention programs has the potential for significant societal benefits. Given the 
potential benefit to both individual participants and society, the risks of participation are outweighed.  
 
SECTION L: Unanticipated  Problems/Adverse Events  
Unanticipated  Problem : includes any information that is unexpected, related or possibly related to the research, or 
indicates  that participant s or other individuals may be placed at greater risk of harm than initially anticipated by [CONTACT_5040]. 
 
Adverse  Event : Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human participant , including any abnormal sign 
(for example, abnormal p hysical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the 
subject’s  participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the subject’s participation in the 
research.  
 
If an unanticipated problem or adverse event should occur, you must immediately complete and submit the IRB 
Incident Report  Form to [EMAIL_1386], and contact [CONTACT_70651]  
[PHONE_1718].  
 
 
Statistical Analysis  Plan 
To identify  reductions in alcohol use and negative alcohol -related consequences among high school 
seniors over the duration of the study, we will evaluate each outcome using analysis of variance in a linear 
or generalized linear mixed model framework, with random effects of repeated observations on students, 
students nested in classes, periods or teachers, and within school. We will address the appropriateness of 
the model for non- normal outcomes and apply the appropriate distribution as necessary, and we will 
assess models for the necessity of all random effects using AIC C. The fixed effects will include treatment 
(intervention, control), time (baseline, 6 -weeks, and 6- months), and their interaction.  
 