JDP T
herapeutics Inc.,  Cetirizine  Injection Protocol No: ETTAU -03
DISCL
OSURE  
REDA CTED PROTOCOL  
The information contained in the following document is the property of JDP Therapeutics Inc. 
and should not be shared or used for any purpose other than which i t was provided.  Certain 
information has been redacted from this document pursuant to 42 CFR 11.48(a)(5). 
Confidential Commercial Information (CCI)
 
 
     
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
CONFIDENTIAL   
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 2 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR’S  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  [ADDRESS_67099]  14 
6.4.2 Rationale for Selection of the Dose of  cetirizine  injection 14 
6.4.3 Randomization and Maintenance of  Study  Blind  15 
6.4.4 Breaking the  Study  Blind  15 
6.4.5 Concomitant  Medications/Rescue  Drugs  15 
6.5 Clinical and  Safety  Evaluations  16 
7. Clinical/Efficacy Outcome  and Measures  16 
7.1 Primary Clinical  Efficacy Measure  16 
7.2 Key Secondary  Clinical/Efficacy Measures  16 
7.3 Other  Clinical/Efficacy Measures  [ADDRESS_67100]  Records  19 
9.3 Investigator’s Files/Retention  of Documents  19 
10. Sample Size and Statistical  Methods  19 
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 3 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
10.1 Determination of  Sample Size 19 
10.2 Statistical and Analytical Plans  20 
10.2.1 Patient/Subject Disposition and Analysis  Populations  20 
10.2.2 Patient/Subject Characteristics  20 
10.2.3 Medical/Surgical History and Physical  Exam  Findings  20 
10.2.4 Concomitant  Therapy  20 
10.2.5 Safety  Assessment  20 
10.2.6 Primary  Efficacy  Assessment  21 
10.2.7 Key Secondary  Efficacy Analyses  21 
10.2.8 Other  Efficacy  Analyses  21 
11. Ethics  21 
11.1 Local Regulations/Declaration  of Helsinki  21 
11.2 Ethical  Review  21 
11.3 Informed Consent  21 
11.3.1 Protocol  Signatures  22 
11.3.2 Publication Policy 22 
12. References  23 
 
ATTACHMETS    Protocol Attachment A.  Study Schedule  
Protocol Attachment B.  Symptom Score and Sedation Score   
Protocol Attachment C.  24 hour and 48 hour follow -up questions   
Protocol Attachment D.  Declaration of Helsink   
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67101] of Abbreviations  
 
AE Adverse Event/Adverse Experience  
AUC inf Extrapolated Area Under the Plasma Concentration Time Curve to  infinity  
CFR Code of Federal Regulations  
CI Confidence Interval (confidence limits)  
CIOMS  Council for International Organizations of Medical  Sciences  
CIU Chronic Idiopathic Urticaria  
Cmax  Maximum Observed Plasma Concentration  
CONSORT  Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials  
CRF Case Report Form  
CRO  Contract Research Organization  
DCC Data Coordinating Center  
DMID  Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, NIAID,  NIH  
DSMB  Data Safety and Monitoring Board  
DSMC  Data Safety and Monitoring Committee  
ETTAU  Efficacy Trial for the Treatment of Acute Urticaria  
ED Emergency Department  
FWA  Federal -Wide Assurance  
GCP Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IEC Independent or Institutional Ethics Committee  
IND Investigational New Drug  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
ISM Independent Safety Monitor  
JAMA  Journal of the American Medical Association  
MedDRA ©  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
N Number (typi[INVESTIGATOR_19737])  
NCI National Cancer Institute, NIH  
NDA  New Drug Application  
NEJM  New England Journal of Medicine  
NI Non -inferiority  
NIAID  National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,  NIH  
NIH National Institutes of Health  
OCRA  Office of Clinical Research Affairs, DMID, NIAID,  NIH  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
OHSR  Office for Human Subjects Research  
ORA  Office of Regulatory Affairs, DMID, NIAID, NIH  
PHI Protected Health Inform ation  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_62335]/Serious Adverse Experience  
SD Standard Deviation  
SMC  Safety Monitoring Committee  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
 
Tmax  Time of maximum measured plasma concentration; if it occurs at more than one time point, Tmax is defined as  
the first time point with this value 
WHO  World Health Organization  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 5 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR’S ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
 
I have read and understand this protocol, agree to conduct the study as outlined herein, 
and provide the necessary assurances that this study will be conducted according to all stipu lations of the protocol, complying with the obligations and requirements of clinical 
investigators and all other requirements listed in 21 CFR part 312 and all applicable local, state, and federal regulations and ICH  guidelines.  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_62336] (print)  
Date  
Name [CONTACT_62387]., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 6 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
 
1. Protocol  Summary  
 
Title : 
A Phase III, multi -center, double blind, randomized, active controlled clinical trial to evaluate the Non- Inferiority 
comparing Cetirizine Injection 10 mg to Diphenhydramine Injection, 50 mg, for the treatment of acute urticaria.  
 
Phase : 
Phase III  
 
Population : 
Males or females aged 18 years and older, with acute urticaria requiring treatment in Emergency Departments, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], Urgent Care Centers and Allergy Clinics will be included in this study.  
 
Number of Patients and Number of Sites : 
Approximately 256 patients, and approximately 20 sites  
 
Study Duration : 
Approximately 48 hours.  
 
Study Medications:  
Investigational Product : 
Cetirizine injection, 10 mg/mL – a single 1 mL injection via intravenous slow push (~2 minutes)  
 
Comparator : 
Diphenhydramine injection, 50mg/mL – a single 1 mL injection via intravenous slow push (~2 minutes)  
Objectives : 
Primary Objectives:  
1. The primary objective  of this study  is to establish  the non- inferiority  of Cetirizine  injection with  respect 
to Diphenhydramine injection in reducing patient reported pruritus severity score at 2 hours after 
treatment  of acute  urticaria.  
 
Secondary Objectives:  
The secondary objectives will assess, for each treatment group, the following parameters:  
1. Record  the frequency  of patient’s  return  to treatment  center  after discharge  (i.e. 2nd visit  within  ~24 
hours after  discharge)  
2. Record  and compare  sedation  scores  between  treatments  
3. Record  and compare  time -to-discharge  between  treatments.  
4. Record  and compare  changes  in patient  reported  pruritus  severity  score  at [ADDRESS_67102]  and compare  Extent  of Urticaria/Erythema  scores,  and their  changes  from  baseline  at various 
time  points  after  treatment.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 7 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
6. Document  the percentage  of patients  experiencing  adverse  events  (AEs)  or serious  adverse  events 
(SAEs)  from the study  drugs.  
7. Document  the percentage of patients  requiring  rescue  medication,  e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_238],  bronchodilators, 
steroids,  etc.,  and the reasons  for the use of rescue  drugs.  
8. Record  symptom  recurrence  rate  and additional  symptoms  occurrence  within  ~24 hours  and/or  ~[ADDRESS_67103]  the need for medication  after  discharge.  
 
 
Description of Study Design : 
 
This will be a multicenter, parallel group, randomized, double -blind, active controlled, Phase III clinical study of 
cetirizine injection, 10 mg/mL, compared to diphenhydramine injection, 50 mg/mL (Benadryl or generic 
equivalent), in approximately 256 patients (1:1 ratio) with acute urticaria requiring treatment in Emergency 
Departments, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], Urgent Care Centers, Allergy Clin ics, and etc.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 8 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
2. Background and Rationale  
 
Urticaria  (hives)  is a vascular  reaction  of the skin marked  by [CONTACT_62351],  slightly  elevated 
patches (wheals) that are erythematous and almost always associated with severe pruritus. Acute urticaria is 
often  part  of the acute  allergic  reactions,  for examples:  about  90% of anaphylaxis  patients  and most  angioedema 
patients have urt icaria symptoms at the same time; acute urticaria can also be the only symptom in an acute 
allergic reaction.   Individual lesions usually resolve without scarring in less than 24 hours.  Acute urticaria eruption rarely lasts more than several days, but so metimes it may recur over the course of several weeks, but 
less than 6 weeks.  [Note:  Chronic  urticaria is defined as urticaria with  recurrent  epi[INVESTIGATOR_62337] 6
 
weeks (1, 2), which is not the patient population of this protocol.]  
 
The development of urticaria is often an isolated event without systemic manifestations. Sometimes, it may be a 
prelude to the development of an anaphylactic reaction. If any features of anaphylaxis (e.g. hypotension, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1506], stridor, gastrointes tinal distress, swallowing problems, joint swelling, joint pain) develop, 
immediate medical intervention is required.
 
 
Acute urticaria, frequently a symptom of acute allergic reactions, is common in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62338],  such as antibiotics,  intravenous  (i.v.)  contrast  media,  aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248]/NSAIDS, 
anesthetics, blood material, opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438], muscle relaxants, chemotherapy agents, etc . Acute urticaria, frequently a 
symptom  of acute  allergic  reactions,  is also common  in emergency  rooms  and allergy  clinics,  mostly  food  allergies 
(seafood, nuts, etc.), exercise induced allergy, latex allergy, bee stings, etc. In these conditions, antihistamines 
injections (such as diphenhydramine injection) are usually used together with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238], steroids, or other medications  for severe  cases,  or used alone  for less severe cases.
 
 
In the 2009 US National Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62339] (3), it was noted that almost [ADDRESS_67104]  common  symptom  associated  with  acute  allergic  reactions  treated  in the emergency  department  (ED)  (4, 5, 6). 
 
The management of acute urticaria in the ED is usually not dependent on the underlying etiology. Most cases of 
acute urticaria respond to pharmacotherapy, with antihistamines being first -line treatment(7). To provide rapid 
relief of the symptoms and associated pruritus, the parenteral route is preferred, but the only antihista mine  
available for intravenous administration is diphenhydramine injection. Consequently, during the US National 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62340] 2008 and December 2009, 
diphenhydramine was used over 4 million times during pa tient visits to the ED (3). Unfortunately, 
diphenhydramine (a short acting antihistamine) causes sedation, impairs mental performance, and results in  
unwanted anticholinergic  effects  (e.g.:  urinary  retention,  dry mouth/eyes,  etc.)  in a large  percentage  of patients 
(8, 9, 10, 11) all of which complicate patient management and ED discharge. In contrast, cetirizine, a second 
generation  antihistamine,  is associated  with  a lower  rate  of sedation,  a 24-hour  duration of action,  and is devoid  
of anticholinergic effects (10, 11, 12, 13) and other sides effects associated with diphenhydramine.  
 
Development  work for cetirizine  injection  10 mg/mL  was initiated  by [CONTACT_62352] 2009.  Several  clinical  trials  have  been 
conducted to  date:  
 
- Relative  bioavailability  of cetirizine  injection has been  investigated  in the pharmacokinetics  & tolerability 
study (study # CTN -P0-741) via IV and IM, against the oral tablet of cetirizine. This study was greatly 
successful. It demonstrated that the AUCs between cetirizine tablet (Zyrtec) and the injection are 
equivalent, and C max of the cetirizine injection is about 3.5 times of that of the tablet. In addition, JDP’s 
Cetirizine  injection did not cause  significant  adverse  events.  
 
- A 2nd relative  bioavailability  study  (Study  # CTN -P1-571) on cetirizine  injection 10 mg, via IM injection,  was 
also successful  without  any significant  adverse  events.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 9 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
- A pi[INVESTIGATOR_62341] ( ETTUAU -02) with a similar study design as the current study ETTAU- 03 was 
conducted as a preparation  for the current  study  to streamline  recruiting,  IRB process,  and IND,  etc. ETTAU - 
02 demonstrated a similar efficacy in acute urticaria symptom score reductions while in treatment centers 
between  the two treatment  groups  (Cetirizine  injection and diphenhydramine  injections),  demonstrated an 
earlier patient discharge from treatment centers with the cetirizine group, and also demonstrated a lower sedation  levels  and symptom  recurrence  rate  with  the cetirizine  group,  etc.
 
 
Since  acute  urticaria,  frequently  a symptom  of an acute  allergic  reaction,  is an acute  condition  and typi[INVESTIGATOR_62342]  (ED)  and urgent  care  centers,  it is not feasible  to conduct  a placebo  controlled  clinical 
trial on actual patients. Therefore, non -inferiority clinical trials have been suggested by [CONTACT_62353]. Currently, Diphenhydramine injection is the standard of care for this condition (although not specifically indicated for the condition), and is the most commonly used antihistamine injection for acute urticaria. It  is either used alone for moderate or mild cases, or as an adjunct therapy with other medications for 
severe  cases.  Therefore,  diphenhydramine  injection  is proposed  as an “active  comparator”  for a phase  III clinical 
trial.
 
 
The present  study  will confirm  the primary  endpoint  and secondary  endpoints  via the multi -center,  double  blind, 
randomized,  active  controlled  study  design  to evaluate  the efficacy  Non -Inferiority  comparing  Cetirizine  Injection 
[ADDRESS_67105] 
to Diphenhydramine injection in reducing patient reported pruritus severity score at 2 hours after treatment of acute urticaria.
 
 
3.2 Secondary  Objectives  
The secondary objectives will assess, for each treatment group, the following parameters:  
1. Record  the percent  of patients  who  return  to treatment  center  after  discharge  (i.e. 2nd visit  within  ~24 
hours after  discharge)  
2. Record  and compare  sedation  scores  between  treatments  
3. Record  and compare  time -to-discharge  between  treatments.  
4. Record  and compare  changes  in patient  reported  pruritus  severity  score  at [ADDRESS_67106]  and compare  Extent  of Urticaria/Erythema  scores,  and their  changes  from  baseline  at various 
time  points  after  treatment.  
6. Document  the percentage  of patients  experiencing  adverse  events  (AEs)  or serious  adverse  events 
(SAEs)  from the study  drugs.  
7. Document  the percentage  of patients  requiring  rescue  medication  prior  to discharge,  e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_238], 
bronchodilators,  steroids,  etc.,  and the reasons  for the use of rescue  drugs  
8. Record  symptom  recurrence  rate  and additional  symptoms  occurrence  within  ~24-[ADDRESS_67107]  the need for medication  after  discharge.  
 
4. Study  Design  
This is a multi -center, parallel group, randomized, double -blind, active controlled, phase III clinical trial of  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 10 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
cetirizine injection 10 mg/mL versus diphenhydramine injection 50 mg/mL (Benadryl or generic equivalent) in 
approximately  256 patients  (1:1 ratio)  who  either  present  to Emergency  Departments,  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600],  allergy  clinics  or 
Urgent Care Centers with acute urticaria, or developed acute urticaria following allergen challenge at an Allergy 
Clinic.  
 
The objectives and purpose of the study will be described to subjects presenting at the participating clinical centers. If a subject agrees to participate in the study, an informed consent form (ICF) will be signed by [CONTACT_62354]. After consent is 
received, the study investigator or designee will verify all inclusion and exclusion criteria to ensure patient eligibility and capture all baseline da ta such as baseline urticarial symptom scores, vital signs, age, previous 
medical history, cause of the symptoms (if known), and prior medication use, including all medication taken prior to coming to the facility. Once these data have been collected, the patient will be randomized to receive either cetirizine injection or diphenhydramine injection. The time that the study medication is administered will be recorded in the source documents and/or in the eCRF.
 
 
Just before the study medication is administered, the study investigator or designee will record the following baseline data: vital signs, the extent of urticaria and erythema, the severity of pruritus by [CONTACT_4676], and the level of sedation by [CONTACT_4676]. See Attachment B  for detailed description of symptom assessment. The same measures will 
be assessed again at 1 hour and/or 2 hours after the injection, and/or at the Time of “Readiness for Discharge” which can happen at any time after the [ADDRESS_67108] 2 hours. At these same time intervals, participating patients will be asked to self -rate (recorded by [CONTACT_464]) the severity  of 
their pruritus and their level of sedation.  The patient’s responses will be recorded by [CONTACT_093]/designee on the designated Source Document or eCRF) as “patient assessment scores”. The time that the investigator/designee determines that patien t is physically and mentally fit to be discharged from the center 
(Time of “Readiness for Discharge”), , will be recorded in the source documents. If the Time of “readiness for discharge” happens longer than 20 minutes from the previous assessment, then the “readiness for discharge assessment” should be done. If the Time of “readiness for discharge” happens within 20 minutes of the previous assessment and the symptom score does not change from the previous assessment, then the “readiness for discharge” asse ssment is not needed, because the previous assessment can be treated as the “readiness for 
discharge assessment”.
 
 
Site staff should ensure that the patient has appropriate transportation to their destination; under no circumstances should a study participant be permitted to drive themselves if the sedation score is at “1” or higher.  The time that the patient actually leaves the treatment center is also recorded.
 
 
Before  discharge,  patients  will be instructed that  a member  of the site staff  will telephone  them  at approximately 
the same time or the next convenient time (e.g.: if patient is discharged at 3 am, the site staff will telephone the patient at ~8 am) the following day, and the day after (i.e. ~24 hours, and ~48 hours later) to ask them a few short questions to follow up on the treatment of their acute urticaria (See attachment C ). Patients will be asked 
to provide  contact  [CONTACT_62355]  a telephone  number  for them  to 
call in the event  that  they  are not contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. Patients  will also be instructed to call this number  to report  any AEs 
or SAEs  they  may  have  experienced.
 
 
The decision to discharge the patient (Time of “Readiness for Discharge”) can be taken by [CONTACT_737]/designee provided the following criteria are met:
 
 
1) Symptoms  of the acute  allergic  reaction  have  been  effectively  treated  based on investigator/designee’s 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649] ( Note: if rescue drugs are used, patients are deemed not effectively treated by t he study drug, 
but effectively  treated  by [CONTACT_62356]. ) 
2) Patient  is alert  enough (sedation  scores  = 0) to understand Discharge  Instructions  
3) Based  on the investigator’s  judgment,  the patient  is fit to be discharged  
J D P T hera pe utics I nc., Cetirizi ne I njecti o n  Pr ot oc ol N o: E T T A U -0 3  
S p o n s or: J D P  C o nfi d e nti al  E T T A U -0 3  1 1  of 3 1  
 C O N FI D E N TI A L   
  
 
N ot e:  
i)  If p ati e nt is fit t o b e disc h ar g e d, b ut n ot al ert e n o u g h t o driv e h o m e w h e n t h e s e d ati o n sc or e is at “ 1” or hi g h er, 
h e/s h e m a y b e k e pt f or a m axi m u m of 5 h o urs (t o m a k e it pr actic al f or r es e arc h p ers o n n el). B ut a p pr o pri at e 
arr a n g e m e nt  m ust  b e  d o n e,  s uc h  as:  c all  f or  a t axi,  arr a n g e  a fri e n d  or  r el ativ e  t o  h el p  driv e,  or  as k  p ati e nt  t o  st a y  i n 
t h e  w aiti n g  r o o m  u ntil  s e d ati o n  g o es  a w ay,  etc.  
 
ii)  St a n d ar d  disc h ar g e  i nstr ucti o n  s h o ul d  b e  giv e n.  If  m e dic ati o ns  ar e  pr escri b e d  at  disc h ar g e,  i nstr uct  p ati e nts  t a k e 
t h e m “ as  n e e d e d”  
 
iii)  I n  t h e  ev e nt  if  t h e  s y m pt o ms  w er e  n ot  eff ectiv ely  tr e at e d,  p ati e nts  will  b e  tr e at e d  f oll o wi n g  t h e  st a n d ar d  of  c ar e  b y 
att e n di n g  p h ysici a n.  
 
iv)  If  “ Ti m e  of  R e a di n ess  f or  Disc h ar g e”  h a p p e ns  pri or  t o  t h e  2 h o ur  ass ess m e nt,  t h e  “ p ati e nt  Pr urit us  Sc or e”  m ust  b e 
Z er o,  ot h er wis e  t h e  p ati e nt  h as  t o  b e  k e pt  i n  t h e  tr e at m e nt  c e nt er  f or  at  l e ast  2 h o urs.  
 
All  A Es  a n d  S A Es  t h at  ar e  r e p ort e d  aft er  t h e  p ati e nt  si g ns  a n  I C F  will  b e  r ec or d e d  i n  t h e  s o urc e  d oc u m e nts  a n d/ or 
c a pt ur e d i n t h e  C R F.  
 
St u d y pr oc e d ur es a n d t h eir ti mi n g ar e s u m m ariz e d i n t h e St u d y Sc h e d ul e, Pr ot oc ol Att ac h m e nt A . 
 
5.  St u d y  P o p ul ati o n  
 
S u bj ects w h o m e et all of t h e i ncl usi o n crit eri a a n d n o n e of t h e e xcl usi o n crit eri a a n d h a v e si g n e d a n I C F will b e 
eli gi bl e f or st u d y p artici p ati o n.  
 
5. [ADDRESS_67109] u d y o nl y if t h e y m e et all of t h e f oll o wi n g crit eri a:  
1)  M al e  or  f e m al e  p ati e nts  wit h  a di a g n osis  of  ac ut e  urtic ari a  w h o  n e e d  tr e at m e nt  wit h  a nti hist a mi n e  t o 
all e vi at e t h eir  s y m pt o ms;  
2)  1 8 y e ars of a g e or  ol d er;  
3)  B e  willi n g  a n d  a bl e  t o  giv e  i nf or m e d  c o ns e nt;  
4)  P ati e nts  wit h  a P ati e nt  r at e d  Pr urit us  S e v erit y  Sc or e  ≥ 1  
 
N ot e : 
 P ati e nts w h o, i n t h e o pi [INVESTIGATOR_9384] o n of t h e i n v esti g at or, h a v e ac ut e urtic ari a c a us e d b y a r e acti o n t o a 
m e dic ati o n  ( e. g.  a nti bi otics,  N S AI Ds,  etc.)  t h at  t h ey  ar e  c urr e ntl y  t a ki n g,  b ut  w h o  c a n st o p  t h e  m e dic ati o n 
aft er  pr es e nti n g  t o  t h e  sit e  m a y  b e  i ncl u d e d  i n  t h e  st u d y.  
 P ati e nts  o n  r e g ul ar  m e dic ati o ns  f or  c hr o nic c o n diti o ns  m a y  b e  i ncl u d e d  i n  t h e  st u d y.  
 P ati e nts  pr es e nti n g  wit h  a n gi o e d e m a  i n  a d diti o n  t o  ac ut e  urtic ari a  ar e  als o  eli gi bl e  t o  p artici p at e.  
 If  p ati e nts  pr es e nt  ac ut e  urtic ari a  t o g et h er  wit h  a n a p h yl axis,  aft er  a n a p h yl axis  sy m pt o ms  h a v e  b e e n 
all e vi at e d,  t h es e  p ati e nt  c a n als o  b e  i ncl u d e d  i n  t h e  st u d y  as  l o n g  as  urtic ari a  still  pr es e nts.  
 A n y  p ati e nts  w h o  m e et  t h e  i ncl usi o n/ excl usi o n  crit eri a  m a y  b e  c o nsi d er e d  f or  p artici p ati n g  i n  t h e  st u d y, 
i ncl u di n g  h o m el ess  (if  c a n b e  r e ac h e d  f or  f oll o w  u p  b y  p h o n e),  h a n dic a p p e d,  etc . 
 
 
5. [ADDRESS_67110] u d y if t h e y m e et a n y of t h e f oll o wi n g crit eri a:  
1)  R ec ei pt  of  a n  i n v esti g ati o n al  dr u g  or  d e vic e,  wit hi n  t h e  p ast  3 0  d a ys;  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 12 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
2) Patients  in whom  an antihistamine  may be contraindicated  (e.g. narrow  angle  glaucoma,  symptomatic 
prostatic  hypertrophy);  
3) Patients  who,  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1072],  may  not tolerate  an IV injection of diphenhydramine  50 
mg, or cetirizine 10  mg; 
4) Receipt of any antihistamine (H1 antagonist) within the past 2 hours regardless of the route of 
administration,  e.g. diphenhydramine,  cetirizine,  loratadine,  fexofenadine,  levocetirizine,  desloratadine;  
5) Receipt  of an H2 antagonist  within  the past  2 hours;  
6) Receipt  of doxepin within  the past  2 hours;  doxepin is an antidepressant,  but it also has antihistamine 
properties;  
7) Receipt  of steroids  by [CONTACT_50906],  IV, IM, or inhalational  routes  route  within  the past  4 hours  to manage  an 
acute allergic  reaction;  
8) Receipt  of epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]  (Epi[INVESTIGATOR_62343])  within  the past  20 minutes;  
9) Anaphylaxis  prior  to the acute  anaphylactic  symptoms  having  been  treated.  
10) Has known  allergy  to hydroxyzine,  cetirizine  or levocetirizine,  or diphenhydramine;  
11) Pregnancy  or breastfeeding;  
12) Patients  who  have  an acute  allergic  reaction  to medication  they  are taking  (e.g.  antibiotics,  NSAIDs,  etc.) 
and who  cannot  stop  the medication;  
13) Patients  who,  based on their  medical history  or in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1072],  have  chronic  urticaria, 
hereditary  angioedema,  urticaria  refractory  to antihistamines,  or dermatological  disease  that  interferes 
with  evaluation  of a therapeutic  response;  
14) Any condition  that  in the view  of the investigator  makes  the subject  unsuitable  for enrollment  in this 
study;  
15) Major  medical or psychiatric  illness,  other  than acute  urticaria,  at the time  of presentation;  
16) Inability  to provide  informed  consent.  
17) Patients  on concomitant  p-glycoprotein  inhibitors  
 
5.[ADDRESS_67111] the right to withdraw from the study at any time for any reason without compromising their 
clinical  management. The investigator  also has the right  to withdraw  subjects  from the study  if he/she  feels  it is 
the best interest of the subject, or if the subject is uncooperative or non -compliant. The discontinued patients 
will be followed  to resolution  of any ongoing  AEs.  
 
Reasons for discontinuation include:  
• Violation  of Inclusion  or Exclusion  criteria  found after  the study  medication  has been  administered  
• The investigator,  patient,  or the health  care  professional  performing  assessments,  become  un-blinded to 
the study  medication  for whatever  reason;  
• The investigator decides that the patient should be withdrawn. If this decision is made because of a 
serious  adverse  event,  the study  drug,  if any,  is to be discontinued and appropriate  measures  are to be 
taken.  The investigator  will notify  the Sponsor  immediately;  
• Administrative  decision  by [CONTACT_62357].  All patients  will be discontinued  from 
the protocol  and notified  of the reasons  for the discontinuation;  
• The subject  may  withdraw  from  the study  for any other  reason,  including  withdrawal  of consent.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 13 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
 
An excessive rate of withdrawal can make the study results difficult to interpret. Any patient who discontinues 
for a reason other than the occurrence of an adverse event will be replaced by [CONTACT_62358].  
 
The reason for any discontinuation will be fully documented on the Source Document and/or CRF.  
 
Should a patient decide to withdraw, every effort will be made to complete and report all study observations, particularly the 24 hour and/or 48 -hour follow -up, as thoroughly as possible. The investigator/designee should 
contact [CONTACT_62359], or through a personal visit if necessary, to de termine as completely as 
possible the reason for the withdrawal.
 
 
Note:  
- After discharge, two follow -up phone calls are planned at ~24 hours and ~48 hours. However, sometimes 
patients do not like to answer phone calls. It is possible only one follow -up can be obtained. In this case, this 
patient  is not considered as discontinued  or as protocol  deviation.  
 
- If rescue medication is needed very shortly after study drug administration (e.g. within ~10 - 15min), this 
indicates  that  the patient  might  have  or develop  into anaphylaxis.  This  patient  should  be withdrawn from 
the study,  because  he/she  should  have  been  excluded  during  screening.  
 
 
6. Treatment  
 
6.[ADDRESS_67112] 
should read and sign an ICF prior to any study procedures being performed. This study involves a comparison of two injectable products: cetirizine injection, 10 mg/mL, and diphenhydramine injection, 50 mg/mL, both administered during a ~[ADDRESS_67113] procedur e at each treatment center related to i.v. 
diphenhydramine. Subjects will receive pre -randomized treatment drugs of one of the following:
 
 
• Cetirizine,  10mg/mL;  a single  1 mL injection via intravenous  slow  push over  a period  of ~2 minutes  
• Diphenhydramine,  50mg/mL;  a single  1 mL injection  via intravenous  slow  push over  a period  of ~2 
minutes.  
 
6.2 Materials and Supplies  
Treatment drugs (Investigational drug and Control) will be pre -randomized and blinded before arriving at each 
investigational site.  A drug dispensing log will be kept current and will contain the following information:  
• The identification  of the subject  to whom  the drug  was dispensed  
• The date,  quantity,  and lot number  of the drug  dispensed to the subject  
 
Drug inventory and accountability records (Test Article Accountability Log) will be maintained at each site. A monitor or designated site staff will reconcile drug inventory and review accountability records. Any unused vials of cetirizine will be returned to the sponsor or destructed on site per sponsor request. Study drugs are to be stored at room temperature.
 
 
6.3 Method  of Assignment  to Treatment  
 
Approximately 256 patients will be randomized to either one of two treatment groups in a 1:[ADDRESS_67114] in blocks of four will be generated centrally by [CONTACT_456]/or CRO for each site.
 
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67115] identifier number. This identifier number (“Subject Number” or “Subject  Identification Number”)  will be used on all subject  documentation. Subject  Numbers  will be assigned  in
 
ascending sequential order. The Subject Number will consist of two digits (site number) followed by [CONTACT_62360] (subject number), e.g. 02 -009 (the 9
th patient enrolled at site #2).  
The randomization number (Treatment Number) for each subject with its Subject Number will be allocated at 
baseline and entered in the source document or eCRF, after verifying the inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
6.[ADDRESS_67116]:  cetirizine  injection,  a single  1.0 mL injection  (10 mg/mL)  given  by [CONTACT_62361] (~2 minutes).
-Control  Product:  IV diphenhydramine,  a single  1.0 mL injection (50 mg/mL)  given  by [CONTACT_62362] (~2  minutes).
6.4.[ADDRESS_67117]  
IV diphenhydramine is the only antihistamine injection available for the treatment of acute urticaria.
The approved indication for IV diphenhydramine is as follows:  
For amelioration of allergic reactions to blood or plasma, in anaphylaxis as an adjunct to epi[INVESTIGATOR_62344], and for other uncomplicated 
allergic conditions of the immediate type when oral therapy is impossible or contraindicated(14). 
6.4.2 Rationale  for Selection  of the Dose  of cetirizine  injection  
The recommended dose of oral cetirizine is 10 mg (Zyrtec®/Reactine® Prescribing Information). This dose has 
been shown to strongly inhibit the wheal and flare caused by [CONTACT_62363]. The onset of 
this activity after a single 10 mg ora l dose occurs within one hour in 95% of subjects.  
Although direct  comparisons  between  IV diphenhydramine  and IV cetirizine  in the medical literature  are lacking, 
the generally  recommended doses  to manage  acute  allergic  reactions  are 50 mg and 10 mg, respectively  (11). 
Furthermore, cetirizine, 10 mg oral tablet is commonly used to treat acute urticaria by [CONTACT_62364](11,12). Cetirizine 
10 mg is also the Reference Listed Drug (RLD) dose specified by [CONTACT_1622].  
CCI
CCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67118] comparison study between IV cetirizine 10 mg and IV diphenhydramine 50 mg in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_62345] (ETTUAU -02) with  a similar  study  design  as the current  study  (ETTAU -03) as a preparation  for 
the current  study  to streamline  recruiting,  IRB process,  and IND,  etc. ETTAU -02 demonstrated a similar  efficacy  in 
acute urticaria symptom score reductions while in the treatment centers between the two treatment groups (Cetirizine  injection  10 mg and diphenhydramine  injection),  demonstrated an earlier  patient  discharge  time  from 
treatment centers with the cetirizine group than the diphenhydramine group, and also demonstrated a lower symptom recurrence rate with the cetirizine group within ~24 hours after discharge than with the diphenhydramine group, etc.  The 10 mg Cetirizine dosage in an injection form was shown to be similarly effective  as diphenhydramine  injection  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_62346],  and thus was selected  for the current  study.
 
 
 
6.4.3 Randomization  and Maintenance  of Study  Blind  
 
This will be a double -blind study; the investigator, the patient, and any health care professional involved in 
patient management or outcome assessment will remain blinded. Both cetirizine injection and IV diphenhydramine are presented as a clear aqueous solution in [ADDRESS_67119] label of each vial for both the Investigational drug cetirizine and the comparator diphenhydramine. To further maintain blinding, the randomized medication can be drawn up into a syringe for administration by a staff member who is not involved in patient management or outcome assessment. The healthcare professional involved in patient management and outcome assessment is completely blinded.
 
 
Treatment drugs (Investigational drug and Control) will be pre -randomized and blinded at 1:1 ratio by [CONTACT_62365], according to the randomization schedule (see Section 6.3 ), prior to being delivered to each 
investigational site. At the investigational site, the trial randomization code will remain secure at all times, but may be accessed in the event of an emergency.
 
 
6.4.[ADDRESS_67120] be reported to the Sponsor, 
CRO, the Medical Monitor and/or the Project Manager in a timely fashion. The time, date, the reason and who broke the blind, must be documented in the source documents and/or will be captured in the eCRF.
 
 
If the investigator, patient, or health care professional performing the assessments, is unblinded for whatever reason,  the patient  will be included in all analyses  of the study  results,  but a replacement  patient  will be recruited 
by [CONTACT_16018].  No assigned  Subject  ID Numbers  will be reused  for any subjects.
 
 
6.4.5 Concomitant  Medications/Rescue  Drugs  
To ensure  optimal  patient  management,  additional  medications,  e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_238],  steroids,  or etc.,  may  be given 
during  the study  if deemed  necessary  by [CONTACT_093]/designee.  However,  if without  medical  complication,  all 
effort should be made to have the patient complete at least the 1 hour assessments prior to administration of the rescue  medication.  If rescue  medication  is needed very  shortly  after  study  drug  administration  (e.g. within
 
~10 -15min), this indicates that the patient might have anaphylaxis. This patient should be withdrawn from the 
study, because he/she should have been excluded during screening.  
 
 
The product label of the rescue drugs should be followed to determine the appropriate dose.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 16 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
The identity, dose, frequency and route of administration of all medications being taken prior to study enrolment 
will be recorded, as well as all concomitant medications administered during the study (rescue drug).  
 
6.[ADDRESS_67121] one dose of study medication will be included in all analyses and safety analyses.  
 
7. Clinical/Efficacy  Outcome and Measures  
 
7.1 Primary  Clinical  Efficacy  Measure  
 
The primary clinical efficacy outcome measure is the 2 -hour patient rated Pruritus Severity Score 
Reduction/Change  from Baseline  (D2) as defined under  Attachment  B, comparing  between  the two treatment 
groups.  
 
7.2 Key Secondary  Clinical/Efficacy  Measures  
 
The following key secondary clinical or efficacy measures will be assessed for each patient:  
1) The need  to return  to treatment  center  after  study  discharge  (i.e. 2nd visit  within  approximately ~24 
hours after  discharge)  
 
2) Time  spent  at the treating  center  (time  from  treatment  administration  to Readiness  for discharge)  
 
7.3 Other Clinical/Efficacy  Measures  
The following other clinical or efficacy measures will be assessed for each patient:  
1) Pruritus treatment success (% of patients), defined as a patient who had the Pruritus Severity Score 
Reduction of at least  1 unit for the 2-hour  patient  rated  Pruritus  Severity  score  from  Baseline  (D2) as 
defined under  Attachment  B, comparing  between  the two treatment  groups.  
2) Patient  rated  pruritus  severity  scores  reduction/change  from  baseline  (D1 & D3) at 1 hour  and at “time 
of discharge”  
3) Sedation  Scores,  at baseline,  1hr, and/or  2hr, and/or  Readiness  for Discharge  (B2)  
4) Physician  rated  Extent  of Urticaria/Erythema  Scores  and their  reduction/change  from  baseline  at 1 hour, 
2 hours  and “time  of discharge”  (C1, C2, C3).  
 
5) Use of rescue  medication,  e.g. epi[INVESTIGATOR_238],  bronchodilators,  steroids,  etc.,  and the reasons  for the use 
of rescue  drugs  
 
6) “Effectively  treated”  based on investigator’s  opi[INVESTIGATOR_62347]. 
 
7) Symptom  recurrence  and additional  symptom  occurrence  within  ~24 - 48 hours  after  patient  discharge 
from treatment  centers.  
 
8) The need  for prescribed medication  within  ~24-48 hours  after discharge.  
 
9) The need  for additional  medication,  including  any over -the-counter  medications,  within  ~24 -48 hours 
after  discharge.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 17 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
10) Ability  of returning  to normal  activity  after discharge  
 
 
8. Safety  Evaluations  
 
The safety population is defined as all patients who received study medication. Investigators are responsible for 
monitoring the safety of patients who are participating in this study and for alerting the Sponsor of any event 
that seems unusual, even if this event may be considered as an unanticipated benefit to the patient. The inves tigator is responsible for the appropriate medical care of patients during the study.
 
The investigator remains responsible for following through an appropriate health care option for adverse events that are serious or that caused the patient to discontinue  before completing the study. The patient should be 
followed until the event is resolved or explained. Frequency of follow -up is left to the discretion of the 
investigator.
 
In this study, safety will be evaluated by [CONTACT_62366] 2 8 days following treatments and 
by [CONTACT_62367].
 
 
8.1 Adverse  Events  
 
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a patient administered a pharmaceutical product, without  regard  to the possibility  of a causal  relationship  to the treatment.  Cases  of pregnancy  should be reported 
for tracking purposes. Lack of drug effect is not an adverse event in clinical trials because the purpose of the clinical trial  is to establish  a drug  effect.
 
Prior to enrollment, study site personnel will note the occurrence and nature of each patient’s medical condition(s) in the appropriate section of the source document or CRF (Medical History).
 
If a patient experiences an adverse event after the informed consent document is signed, the event will be 
recorded as an adverse event in the Source Document and/or CRF. All AEs encountered will be described in the source documents and/or in the CRF.
 
The se verity of the event will be classified according to the following terms:  
• Mild:  symptom  is manifest  but is tolerated.  
• Moderate:  normal  activity  affected.  
• Severe:  severe  effect  or inability  to work  or necessary  to discontinue  the study  medication  
The causality will be classified as:  
• Not related : Any adverse  event  which  is not related  to the product  being  studied.  
• Possible : Any adverse event which can be caused by [CONTACT_62368], but for 
which  another  explanation  can be found – for example,  the existence  of a concomitant  treatment or 
concurrent  disease(s)  – or for which  the relation  in time  is not obvious.  
• Probable : Any adverse event which can be caused by [CONTACT_62369]. The 
relationship in time is suggestive (for example, if the event disappears when the treatment is 
interrupted). Another  explanation  is less probable  – for example,  the existence of a concomitant 
treatment  or concurrent  disease(s).  
• Not-assessable : It is impossible  to attribute  the event  to any of the categories  above,  because  the 
information obtained is insufficient, incomplete or contradictory. Additional information is necessary  to determine  the causal  relati onship with  the product  being  studied.
 
If a subject is discontinued as a result of an adverse event, study site personnel must clearly document the 
circumstances leading to any such discontinuation of treatment, in the source document and/or on the CRF.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67122] been caused by [CONTACT_5257].  
8.2 Serious Adverse  Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any experience that suggests a significant hazard, contradiction, side effect or 
precaution. Study site personnel must report immediately to the Sponsor by [CONTACT_62370] t hat results in one of the following outcomes, or is significant for any other 
reason:  
• death
• initial or prolonged inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]
• a life-threatening  experience (that  is, immediate  risk of dying)
• persistent  or significant  disability/incapacity
• congenital  anomaly/birth  defect
All SAEs must be reported to the Sponsor (or to the Sponsor’s designated person) within 24 hours of the 
Investigator’s knowledge of the event. Notification can be made by [CONTACT_24648]:  
The Investigator/designee must provide the following information, as a minimum: the subject number in the 
study, the nat ure of the event, the date of onset of the event and the relationship with the study treatment 
according to the information available at the time of reporting.  
An SAE occurring after a subject is discontinued from the study will be reported regardless of causality to the study medication or a protocol procedure. Should an investigator be made aware of any SAE occurring any time after the active reporting period, it must be promptly reported to the Sponsor or designate.
 
8.[ADDRESS_67123] at arrival at the treatment center, at baseline (just prior to treatment 
administration) at 1 hr and/or [ADDRESS_67124] treatment and at the time of discharge.
 
9.Data  Quality  Assurance
To ensure accurate, complete, and reliable data, the Sponsor or CRO will do the following:  
• Provide  instructional  material  to the study  sites,  as appropriate.
• Sponsor an Investigator/coordinator training session to instruct the investigators and study
coordinators.  This  session  will give  instruction  on the protocol,  the completion  of the source
document,  CRFs,  and study  procedures.
o Make  periodic  visits  to the study  site.
o Be available  for consultation  and stay  in contact  [CONTACT_62371],
CCICCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 19 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL  email, telephone, and/or fax.  
o Review  and evaluate  the source  document  and/or  CRF data  and use standard  computer
edits  to detect  errors  in data  collection.
o Conduct  a quality  review  of the database.
• Verify  the quality  of the data.
In addition, the Sponsor representative will periodically check a sample of the patient data recorded against 
sour c
e documents at the study site. The study may be audited by [CONTACT_62372] (MQA) and/or 
regulatory agencies at any time. Investigators will be given notice before an MQA audit occurs.  
9.[ADDRESS_67125]  Data  Entry  and Computerized  Systems  
An electronic data capture system may be used in this trial. Some or all of a patient’s data may be directly 
entered  into the system  on an eCRF  at the time  that  the information  is obtained. In instances  where eCRF is not 
feasible, data may be recorded manually directly to the Source Document first; then later transferred to the 
eCRF.  Monitored  and verified  data  will subsequently  be transferred  to the sponsor.  
9.[ADDRESS_67126] assure that the subjects’ anonymity will be maintained and that their identities are 
protected from unauthorized parties. On the source document, CRFs or other documents submitted to the Sponsor,  subjects  should n ot be identified  by [CONTACT_62373],  but by [CONTACT_62374].  The Investigator  should 
keep  a subject  enrolment  log reconciling  subject  codes  and subject  names. The Investigator  should maintain  all 
subject  related  documents  in strict  confidence.
 
9.3 Investigator’s  Files/Retention  of Documents  
The Investigator must maintain adequate and accurate records to enable the conduct of the study to be fully 
documented and the study data to be subsequently verified. These documents should be class ified into two 
different separate categories, namely Investigator Study File and Patient Clinical Source Documents.  
The Investigator must keep these two categories of documents on file for the duration required by [CONTACT_21482], after completion or dis continuation of the study. After that period of time the documents may be 
destroyed, in accordance with local regulations.  
10.Sample  Size and Statistical Methods
10.[ADDRESS_67127] 
deviation is expected to be around A minimum sample size of  subjects per arm is needed to provide 
90% coverage  probability  (90% power)  that  the width of the 95% confidence  interval  of the treatment  differences 
will remain within  if cetirizine is to be non -inferior to diphenhydramine. 
 the sample size of per treat me nt arm is recommended for a total 
enrollment of subject s  to ensure sufficient numbers of completers at 2 hrs. The sample size estimation was 
performed  using  
CCI CCI
CCI
CCI
CCICCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 20 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
10.2 Statistical  and Analytical  Plans  
 
10.2.1 Patient/Subject Disposition  and Analysis  Populations  
The disposition of all subjects, including those who discontinued, will be summarized by [CONTACT_19313], using counts and 
frequencies in each population. Subjects will be categorized into the following analysis populations:  
 
• Intent -To-Treat (ITT) Population : Includes any subject who was randomized and given a Subject ID 
Number with intent  to treat with one of the blinded study drugs. All efficacy and non- inferiority 
analyses  will be performed  on the ITT population with  subjects  grouped by [CONTACT_62375].  
 
• Safety Population (SAF) : Includes any subjects in the ITT population who actually receives a blinded 
study drug, regardless whether or not they complete all assessments, withdraw or are discontinued by [CONTACT_093].  All safety  summaries  will be performed  on the SAF population with  subjects  grouped by 
[CONTACT_62376].
 
• Per Protocol  Population (PP) : Includes  subjects  in the SAF population who  complete  all necessary 
assessments without any incidence that would potentially affect the ability to objectively assess treatment  response  (e.g. discontinuation,  protocol  deviation,  use of rescue  medication,  etc.).
 
 
10.2.2  Patient/Subject  Characteristics  
 
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize participant demographics and baseline characteristics by [CONTACT_1570]. Characteristics such as weight, height and/or age will be summarized as continuous variables with means, SD, medians, minimums and maximums. Demographics, such as ethnicity and/or race will be summarized as counts and frequencies. The ITT population will be used to summarize baseline characteristics and demographics by [CONTACT_1570].
 
 
10.2.3  Medical/Surgical  History  and Physical Exam  Findings  
Upon arrival subjects will be asked about their medical/medication and surgical histories, and allergy history. This info rmation will be used in the event that it may help to explain any adverse reactions or other unexpected 
outcomes. The findings will be provided in data listings, but will not be tabulated and summarized by [CONTACT_1570].
 
 
10.2.[ADDRESS_67128] WHO -Drug Coding Dictionary for anatomical therapeutic class (ATC) and preferred medication 
names and summarized by [CONTACT_62377]. The SAF population (safety population) will be used to summarize all concomitant therapi[INVESTIGATOR_62348].
 
 
10.2.5  Safety  Assessment  
 
Safety parameters include assessment of adverse events (A Es) throughout the study. The safety analysis set will 
include all patients who received the study medication. All safety data will be displayed and analyzed ‘as randomized’ using descriptive statistical methods such as incidence rates. Events occurring more than once in the same patient will be counted only once. No formal inferential analysis is planned for safety comparisons.
 
 
AEs will be coded for system organ class (SOC) and preferred terminology using the latest MedDRA coding dictionary. Incidences of  AEs will be summarized as counts and frequencies within the SOC and preferred terms 
for each treatment group. The SAF population will be used to summarize all AEs by [CONTACT_1570].
 
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 21 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL  Vital signs will be summarized as continuous data with means, SD, medians, minimums and maximums for each 
vital sign for each assessment time, by [CONTACT_1570].  
10.2.6  Primary  Efficacy Assessment  
All patients who received the study medication will be included in the full set analyses (FAS) the analyses.  
The primary clinical outcome measures of D2 as defined under Attachment B , will be summarized for each study 
group in cross classified tables for the 2 -hour assessment.  
The hypothesis is defined as: the D2 score for the investigational drug is not worse than the comparator at the 2 - 
hour time point, based on 95% confidence interval . See the stat istical analysis 
plan for details.  
10.2.7  Key Secondary  Efficacy Analyses  
Key secondary clinical outcomes as detailed under Section 7.2  will be summarized using descriptive statistics 
(frequencies, proportions, means, standard devi ation, median and/or range, etc.). Inferential treatment 
comparisons will be performed for each outcome with adjustments made for multiplicity as described in the statistical analysis plan.
 
10.2.8  Other Efficacy  Analyses  
Other clinical outcomes as detailed under  Section 7.3  will be summarized using descriptive statistics (frequencies, 
proportions, means, standard deviation, median and/or range, etc.).  No inferential treatment comparisons will be made on these outcomes.
 
11.Ethics
11.1 Local  Regulations/Declaration  of Helsinki  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of  
Helsinki (1996)  and that are consistent with “Good Clinical Practice” ICH Tripartite Guideline (January 1997) and 
the applicable laws and regulations of the country in which the research is conducted, whichever affords the greater protection to the individual.
 
11.2 Ethical  Review  
It is t he understanding of the Sponsor that this protocol (and any amendment) as well as appropriate consent 
procedures, will be reviewed and approved by a Research Ethics Board (REB/IRB). This Board must operate in accordance with the current Federal regulations. A letter or certification of approval will be sent by [CONTACT_62378], and also whenever subsequent modifications to the protocol are made.
 
11.3 Informed Consent  
It is the responsibility of the Investigator, or a person designated by [CONTACT_737] (if acceptable by [CONTACT_1295]), to obtain written informed consent from each individual participating in this study after adequate explanation of the aims, methods, objectives and potential hazards of the study. It must also be explained to the subjects that they are completely free to refuse to enter the study or to withdraw from it at any time for any reason. Appropriate forms for obtaining written informed consent will be provided by [CONTACT_62379].
 
CCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67129]  be completed 
appropriately. If new safety information results in significant changes in the risk/benefice assessment, the 
consent form should be reviewed and updated if necessary. All subjects (including those already being treated) should be informed of the new information, given a copy of the revised form and asked to give their consent to 
continue in the  study.
 
 
11.3.1  Protocol  Signatures  
 
After  reading  the protocol,  each  investigator  will sign two protocol  signature  [CONTACT_62388]  (Page  5 of the Protocol).  
 
11.3.2  Publication  Policy  
 
The Publication Policy will be addressed in the Research and Financial agreement, and all details outlined in the 
agreement will apply to this protocol.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 23 of 31  
 CONFIDENTIAL   
  
 
12. References  
 
1. Kaplan  AP, Greaves,  M. Pathogenesis  of chronic  urticaria.  Clin Exp Allergy;  2009  ;39: 777-787 
2. Frigas  E, Park  M.A.  Acute  urticaria and angioedema:  diagnostic  and treatment  considerations. Am J Clin 
Dermatology;  2009; 10: 239-250 
3. National Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62339]: 2009 Emergency Department Summary 
Tablesa=v&q=cache:gvyu34jAfOIJ: www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/nhamcs_emergency/2009_ed_web_tables.  
pdf+national+hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]+ambulatory+medical+care+survey[PHONE_1156]+emergency+department+summary&hl=en& 
gl=ca&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEESgDP5OTVY6CDN_XqvW3m32WMkQhnPbh5dJh8u0quP3uRI05tZHuQrPlgsrqidvB 
H_jNLUclR_7WuBAIIBJy4yY33xcg3NchuXWUOnKcgkEDGQds8 -She91S59w0j -DL- 
NzStOGq&sig=AHIEtbQW7x57INfnud0QvmmimCyBJTSguQ  Accessed  October  28th  2012  
4. Simonart,T  et al. Particularities  of urticaria seen  in the emergency  department. Eur J Emerg  Med  1994;  1; 80- 
82 
5. Gupta  R, et al. Increasing  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62349]:  analysis  of national 
admissions  data.  BMJ:  2003;  327,  1142- 1143  
6. Champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394],  R.H et al. Urticaria  and Angio -Edema  a Review  of 554 patients. Br. J. Derm:  1969,  81, 588-597 
7. Zuberbier,T  et al. EAACI/GALEN/EDF/WAO  Guideline:  definition,  classification  and diagnosis  of urticaria. 
Allergy  2009;  64: 1417– 1426  
8. Gengo,  F, et al. The pharmacodynamics  of diphenhydramine -induced drowsiness  and changes  in mental 
performance. Clin Pharmacol Ther 1989;45:1  5-21 
9. Kay,  G et al. Initial and Steady -State  Effects  of Diphenhydramine  and Loratadine  on edation,  Cognition, 
Mood,  and Psychomotor  Performance.  Arch  Intern  Med. 1997;157:2350 -2356  
10. Kay,  G. The effects  of antihistamines  on cognition  and performance. J Allergy  Clin Immunol  2000;  105:S622-7  
11. Banerji,  A, et al. Diphenhydramine  versus  nonsedating  antihistamines  for acute  allergic  reactions:  A literature 
review. Allergy Asthma Proc 2007 28:418 – 426 
12. Park,  J. et al. Comparison  of cetirizine  and diphenhydramine  in the treatment  of acute  food -induced allergic 
reactions.  J Allergy  Clin Immunol:  128;  1127 -1128  
13. JDP Therapeutics Inc., Clinical Study Report No CTN- P0-741. Date of Report: 2011/09/11. Protocol Title: 
Single  Dose Crossover  Pharmacokinetics  Study  of Cetrizine  Injection at 5 mg and 10 mg Intravenous  doses 
and 10 mg Intramuscular dose compared to oral Cetrizine 10 mg tablets in healthy male and female  
volunteers. Fasting  state  
14. JDP Therapeutics Inc., Clinical Study Report No CTN -P4-427 (ETTAU -02). Date of Report: 2015/02/06. 
Protocol  Title:  Multicenter  pi[INVESTIGATOR_62350]  i.v. 
administration  of cetirizine  injection  10 mg, to i.v. injection  of diphenhydramine  injection  50 mg, for the 
treatment  of acute  urticaria  associated  with  an acute  allergic  reaction.  
15. Benadryl®  (Diphenhydramine  Hydrochloride  Injection,  USP)  [ADDRESS_67130]  Information  Sheet.  
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67131]  
4 Hr FU  
Informed consent  X 
Inclusion/exclusion  criteria  X 
Demographics  X 
Medical and Surgical History  X 
Vital signs  X X X X X 
Study Medication 
Administration  X 
Extent of urticaria/erythema)1X X X X 
Pruritus Severity Score2X X X X 
Sedation Score2X X X X 
Time of Discharge  X 
Concomitant  medication  X X X X X X 
Adverse events  X X X X X X 
Follow -up Q&A Sheet  X 
Record patient self -reported 
AEs X 
1 Assessed only by [CONTACT_62380]  
2 Assessed by [CONTACT_62381]., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  
CONFIDENTIAL  Confidential  ETTAU -03 25 of 31  Protocol Attachment B 
Symptom Scores  
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 26 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL  
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCICCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  Confidential  ETTAU -03 27 of 31  
CONFIDENTIAL  
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCICCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
CCI
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  
CONFIDENTIAL  Confidential  ETTAU -03 28 of 31  Protocol Attachment D 
Declaration of Helsinki  
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION DECLARATION OF HELSINKI  
Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects  
Adopted by [CONTACT_941] 18th WMA General Assembly, Helsinki, Finland, June 1964, and amended by [CONTACT_941]: 
29th WMA General Assembly, Tokyo, Japan, October [ADDRESS_67132] WMA General Assembly, Washington 2002 (Note of Clarification on paragraph 29 added) 55th WMA General Assembly, Tokyo 2004 (Note of Clarification on Paragraph 30 added)
 
59th WMA General Assembly, Seoul, October 2008  
A. INTRODUCTION
1. The World Medical Association (WMA) has developed the Declaration of Helsinki as a statement of ethicalprin
ciples for medical research involving human subjects , including research on identifiable human material and
data.  The Declaration  is intended  to be read  as a whole  and each of its constituent  paragraphs  should  not be
applied  without  consideration  of all other  relevant  paragraphs.
2. Although the Declaration is addressed primarily to physicians, the WMA encourages other participants in medicalresea
rch involving  human subjects  to adopt  these  principles.
3. It is the duty of the physician to promote and safeguard the health of patients, including those who are involvedin medic
al research.  The physician's  knowledge and conscience  are dedicated  to the fulfilment  of this duty.  
4. The Declaration of Geneva of the WMA binds the physician with the words, “The health of my patient will be myfirst
 consideration,” and the International Code of Medical Ethics declares that, “A physician shall act in the
patient's  best  interest  when  providing  medical care.”
5. Medical progress is based on research that ultimately must include studies involving human subjects.  Populations
that  are underrepresented  in medical  research  should  be provided  appropriate  access  to participation  in research.
6. In medical research involving human subjects, the well -being of the individual research subject must take
precedence over all other  interests.  
7. The primary purpose of medical research involving human subjects is to understand the causes, development andeffec
ts of diseases and improve preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic interventions (methods, procedures an d
treatments). Even the best current interventions must be evaluated continually through research for their safety,
effectiveness,  efficiency,  accessibility  and quality.
8. In medical practice  an d in medical  research,  most  interventions  involve  risks  and burdens.
9. Medical research is subject to ethical standards that promote respect for all human subjects and protect theirhealt
h and rights. Some research populations are particularly vulnerable and need special protection. These
include those who cannot give or refuse consent for themselves and those who may be vulnerable to coercion or
undue influence.
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  
CONFIDENTIAL  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67133], incentives for subjects and provisions for treating and/or co mpensating subjects who are harmed as a consequence of 
participation in the research study. The protocol should describe arrangements for post- study access by [CONTACT_62382].
 
 
15. The research protocol must be submitted for consideration, comment, guidance and approval to a research ethics committee before the study begins. This committee must be independent of the researcher, the sponsor and any other undue i nfluence. It must take into consideration the laws and regulations of the country or countries in 
which the research is to be performed as well as applicable international norms and standards but these must not 
be allowed to reduce or eliminate any of the protections for research subjects set forth in this Declaration. The 
committee must have the right to monitor ongoing studies. The researcher must provide monitoring information to the committee, especially information about any serious adverse events. No change to the protocol may be made without  consideration  and approval  by [CONTACT_942].
 
 
16. Medical research involving human subjects must be conducted only by [CONTACT_62383]. Research on patients or healthy volunteers requires the supervision of a competent and appropriately qualified physician or other health care professional. The responsibility for the protection of research subjects must always rest with the physician or other health care professional and never the research subjects, even though they have given consent.
 
 
17. Medical research involving  a disadvantaged  or vulnerable population  or community  is only  justified if the research 
is responsive to the health needs and priorities of this population or community and if there is a reasonable 
likelihood  that  this population  or community  stands  to benefit  from  the results  of the research.  
 
18. Every medical research study involving human subjects must be preceded by [CONTACT_62384].  
 
19. Every  clinical  trial must  be registered in a publicly  accessible  database before  recruitment  of the first subject.  
 
20. Physicians may not participate in a research study involving human subjects unless they are confident that the risks involved have been adequately assessed and can be satisfactorily managed. Physicians must immediately 
stop a study when the risks are found to outweigh the potential benefits or when there is conclusive proof of positive and beneficial  results.
 
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Sponsor: JDP  
CONFIDENTIAL  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67134]’s freely -given informed consent, preferably in writing. If 
the consent cannot be expressed in writing, the non -writt en consent must be formally documented and 
witnessed.
 
 
25. For medical research using identifiable human material or data, physicians must normally seek consent for the 
collection, analysis, storage and/or reuse. There may be situations where consent would be impossible or 
impractical to obtain for such research or would pose a threat to the validity of the research. In such situations 
the research  may  be done only  after  consideration  and approval  of a research  ethics  committee.  
 
26. When seeking informed consent f or participation in a research study the physician should be particularly cautious 
if the potential subject is in a dependent relationship with the physician or may consent under duress. In such situations the informed consent should be sought by [CONTACT_62385].
 
 
27. For a potential research subject who is incompetent, the physician must seek informed consent from the legally 
authorized representative. These individuals must not be included in a research study that has no likelihood of benefit for them unless it is intended to promote the health of the population represented by [CONTACT_62386], the research cannot instead be performed with competent persons, and the research entails  only 
minimal risk and minimal burden.
 
 
28. When a potential research subject who is deemed incompetent is able to  give assent to decisions about 
participation in research, the physician must seek that assent in addition to the consent of the legally authorized 
representative.  The potential  subject’s  dissent  should  be respected.  
 
29. Research involving subjects who are ph ysically or mentally incapable of giving consent, for example, unconscious 
patients, may be done only if the physical or mental condition that prevents giving informed consent is  a 
necessary characteristic of the research population. In such circumstances  the physician should seek informed 
consent from the legally authorized representative. If no such representative is available and if the research 
cannot be delayed, the study may proceed without informed consent provided that the specific reasons for 
invo lving subjects with a condition that renders them unable to give informed consent have been stated in the 
research protocol and the study has been approved by a research ethics committee. Consent to remain in the research  should  be obtained  as soon  as poss ible from  the subject  or a legally  authorized  representative.
 
 
30. Authors, editors and publishers all have ethical obligations with regard to the publication of the results of research. Authors have a duty to make publicly available the results of their research on human subjects and are accountable for the completeness and accuracy of their reports. They should adhere to accepted guidelines for ethical reporting. Negative and inconclusive as well as positive results should be published or otherwise made 
publi cly available.  Sources  of funding,  institutional  affiliations  and conflicts  of interest  should  be declared  in the
 
JDP Therapeutics Inc., Cetirizine Injection  Protocol No: ETTAU -03 
Spons or: JDP  
CONFIDENTIAL  Confidential  ETTAU -[ADDRESS_67135] 
current  proven  intervention,  except  in the following  circumstances:  
• The use of placebo, or no treatment, is acceptable in studies where no current proven intervention 
exists;  or 
• Where for compelling and scientifically sound methodological reasons the use of placebo is necessary to 
determine the efficacy or safety of an intervention and the patients who receive placebo or no 
treatment will not be subject to any risk of serious or irreversible harm. Extreme care must be taken to 
avoid abuse of this  option.  
 
33. At the conclusion of the study, patients entered into the study are entitled to be informed about the outcome of 
the study  and to share  any benefits  that  result  from  it, for example,  access  to interventions  identified  as beneficial 
in the study  or to other  appropriate  care  or benefits.  
 
34. The physician must fully inform the patient which aspects of the care are related to the research. The refusal of a 
patient to participate in a study or the patient’s decision to withdraw from the study must never interfere with the patient -physician  relationship.
 
 
35. In the treatment of a patient, where proven interventions do not exist or have been ineffective, the physician, 
after seeking expert advice, with informed consent from the patient or a legally authorized representative, may use an unproven intervention if in the physician's judgement it offers hope of saving life, re -establishing hea lth or 
alleviating suffering. Where possible, this intervention should be made the object of research, designed to evaluate its safety and efficacy. In all cases, new information should be recorded and, where appropriate, made 
publicly  available.
 