Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Evaluation of Extended Wear Technology  
 
 
V 2.0  
December 20, 2021  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of Extended Wear Technology  
[ADDRESS_203538] two years due to discomfort or feedback, migration or poor 
sound quality (due to poor fit) rate the investigational Lyric4 devices with a fitting 
modificat ion as more comfortable   than the conventional Lyric4 devices.    
There are no secondary objectives.  
3 Description of the investigational device  
The Lyric4 device is an analog hearing instrument that is deeply inserted in the ear canal. 
It consists of an electronic module and two seals, a medial and lateral, glued onto the 
electronic module.  Currently, the Lyric4 is available in seven non -custom sizes: XXS, XS, 
S, M, L, XL,  and XXL. The investigational device is made of the same c omponents of the 
commer cially available Lyric4 device, but with a fitting modification which may allow for 
an improved fit for narrower ear canals and  increase the size options.   
4 Design of the clinical investigation  
This will be an interventional, single group design with two conditions (Lyric4 and Lyric4 
with fitting modification) where subjects will wear the currently available Lyric device in one 
ear and the investigational  device in the opposite ear for two weeks; and then switch ears  
for two additional weeks.  Subjects will be blinded as to which device is in each ear.  
[ADDRESS_203539].  
7 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria:  Hearing loss N2 -N4 (mild to moderate)  
   Hearing impairment: Any  (conductive or sensorineural)  
   Population: Adults  
   Minimum Age: 18 years  
   Maximum Age: 90 years  
Other:   Previous Lyric users who rejected or cancelled Lyric trials or  
  subscriptions due to discomfort, feedback, migration, or poor sound  
  quality due to  fit issues.  
Exclusion criteria:  Participants who can only wear a size XXS Lyric will be excluded as  
  even an XXS investigational device would likely not be any more  
  beneficial than a conventional XXS Lyric4 device.  
   Asymmetrical hearing loss  
   Other diagnosis that may cause fluctuations in hearing (i.e. Meniere’s 
  disease)  
   Unable to tolerate the physical fit of a Lyric device  
   Inability to be seen for 4 lab visits   
8 Measurements and procedures  
Investigation related procedures:  
Study Procedure  Impact on subject  Standard of  care?  
Audiogram; may be 
done if most recent 
audiogram is more 
than 12 months  old Assesses hearing loss  Yes 
Cerumen 
management  Clears ear canal of wax  Yes 
Ear mold impression; 
may be done for 
future analysis of ear 
shape  Takes custom impression of ear  Yes 
 
All analysis of the results will occur at the conclusion of the study. All study data will be 
stored digitally. The data will be collected from the participants using paper 
questionnaires and  then be stored in a n excel file for analysis. Collection of the 
questionnaire results will occur on an ongoing basis. The lead investigator will scan the 
paper questionnaires and send them to the study manager via email. All original copi[INVESTIGATOR_174311], at which point they will be mailed to the study manager. Only authorized 
research personnel at the sponsor site will have access to the study res ults. 
[ADDRESS_203540] statistical criteria for termination.  
The experiment performed within this study is designed to evaluate the efficacy and 
effectiveness of new fitting characteristics to the Lyric extended -wear hearing technology 
as compared to the commercially available Lyric device. The stat istical hypothesis is that 
average ratings of wearing comfort with the new technology will be equivalent to or better 
than the commercially available technology. A qualitative analysis of the questionnaires 
will be used for data analysis. Qualitative data will be collected as a question, response, 
and anonymous participant ID for all participants at each device fitting and removal.  
Due to the exploratory nature of this investigation, an informal exploration of the data will 
be performed at the conclusion of  the trial. No further statistical analysis is planned.  
All safety related events will be constantly monitored by [CONTACT_174314]. Evaluation of any SAE, SADE, or 
UADE will be conducted promptly  using Sonova’s standard medical device referral 
protocol.  Confirmed UADEs will be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_203541] will be replaced if possible.  Fit with Lyric devices  Provides prescriptive 
amplification  Yes 
Questionnaires; will 
be completed after 
each home trial for 
both devices  Assesses subjective relating to 
the investigational device/feature  No –These questionnaires were 
designed for this specific study. 
They are not validated for clinical 
outcomes.  
 
[ADDRESS_203542] approximately 8 w eeks. The expected duration for 
participation by [CONTACT_174315] 4 -5 weeks.  
11 Data Handling and Management  
Study data is recorded both with paper and with electronic Case Report Forms (p/eCRF). 
For each enrolled study participant a CRF is maintained. All CRFs are kept current to 
reflect the subject’s status at each phase during the course of study. Particip ants cannot 
be identified in the CRF by [CONTACT_174316]. All study team members are authorized for the CRF entries and it is 
assured that any authorized person can be identified both for pCRFs  and eCRFs. If 
pCRFs are used, the investigator’s acronym as well as the subject ID is filled in and data 
are entered into an electronic file for analysis by [CONTACT_174317]. In case of a self -evident corrections, either the 
subject does it by [CONTACT_174318]/sentence with a single horizontal line and by [CONTACT_174319].  
Source documen ts for this investigation include, audiograms, ALPs fitting files, Lyric 
history, including prior adverse events, appointment checklists, and paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_174312].  
All paper data will be stored in a locked filing cabinet at the Pho nak Audiology Research 
Center (PARC). All electronic data files will be encrypted and stored on secure research 
computers. All identifying data will be stored at the site . De-identified data will be shared , 
if necessary,  with production to cross -check the quality of scans/im pressions, and with 
partners at Sonova Switzerland.  
The identifiable data will be destroyed as soon as the final analyses have been 
completed. The de -identified data will be kept for seven years after the publication of 
results. When the data  are destroyed, paper records will be shredded by [CONTACT_174320]. Electronic data will be encrypted as de -identified NOAH packages, 
where applicable, to be shared with Sonova Switzerland.  
[ADDRESS_203543] the rights, safety and well -being of human 
participants under emergency circumstances may proceed without prior approval of th e 
sponsor and the EC – such deviations will be documented and reported to the sponsor 
representative (Study Manager) and the EC as soon as possible. Apart from that the 
investigator is not allowed to deviate from this study plan unless that deviation does not 
influence the investigation data.  
 
14 Device accountability  
The sub -investigator at site or authorized designee  will keep records documenting the 
following in a written process:  
• Names of participants who received, used, returned, or disposed of device  
• Date of receipt, identification, and quantity of each investigational device (batch/serial 
number or unique code)  
• Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5695] (if applicable)  
• Date(s) of use  
• Participant identification  
[ADDRESS_203544] appointment, the investigator will hand the consent form to 
the participant in a private setting and grant sufficient time to read the whole form. The 
consent form contains detailed information about incentives and reimbursement. Any 
questions will be answered and the participant will be given sufficient time to decide 
whether or not they want to participate in the study. After the participant signed two 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_79642], the researcher will sign both copi[INVESTIGATOR_174313].  
In case of changes to the procedures described in the consent form, the participant will 
be informed at the beginning of an appointment.  
Informed Consent will only be obtained by [CONTACT_174321].  
16 Adverse events, adverse device effects and device deficiencies  
 Device deficiencies and all adverse events (AE)  including all serious adverse events 
(SAE)  are collected, fully investigated and documented in the source document and 
appropriate case report form (CRF) during the entire investigation period, i.e. from 
participant’s informed consent until the last protocol -specific procedure, including a safety 
follow -up period (ISO_14155, 2020)  
Evaluation of any SAE, SADE, or UADE will be conducted promptly using Sonova’s 
standard medical device referral protocol.   
In the event of an adverse event, the investigation manager will make contact [CONTACT_174322] [INVESTIGATOR_874] [ADDRESS_203545] received notice of the event.  
A causal relationship  towards the medical device or investigation procedure should be 
rated as follows:  
Not related:  The relationship to the device or procedures can be excluded.  
Unlikely: The relationship with t he use of the device seems not relevant and/or the event 
can be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_5748], but additional information may be 
obtained.  
Possible: The relationship with the use of the investigational device is weak but cannot 
be ruled out complet ely. Alternative causes are also possible.  
Probable: The relationship with the use of the investigational device seems relevant 
and/or the event cannot be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_5748].  
Causal relationship: The serious event is associated with the investigational device or 
with procedures beyond reasonable doubt.  
Device deficiencies that might have led to an SAE are always related to the medical 
device.  
The causality assessment of the SAE will be conducted according to MDCG 2020 -10/1 
Safety Reportin g in Clinical Investigations of Medical Devices under Regulation (EU) 
2017/745.  
The reporting of Serious Adverse Events and Device Deficiencies follows the Regulation 
(EU) 2017/745 and the MDCG 2020 -10/1 Safety Reporting in Clinical Investigations of 
Medic al Devices under Regulation (EU) 2017/745.  
17 Vulnerable Populations  
The investigation does not include any vulnerable populations.  
18 Suspension or premature termination of the clinical  investigation  
The clinical investigation will be suspended or prematurely terminated if the feature 
and/or investigative device malfunctions or if the participants or researchers are 
exposed to safety risks other than those outlined in this document. These events may 
include but are not limited to – natural disaster, widespread outbreak of illness, 
compromised structure of the investigation site, etc.  
19 Publication policy  
The clinical investigation will be registered in clinicaltrials.gov, a publicly accessible 
database, as required by [CONTACT_20008].  
 The results of the clinical investigation will be documented internally in a study report with 
the possibility of an on line publication.  