 Randomized Trial of Patient-Reported Outcome Measurement in Heart Failure Clinic (PRO-HF Trial)  Version [ADDRESS_514816] of routine assessment of patient-reported heath status among outpatients with heart failure on heart failure health status one year later.  Secondary objectives include evaluating the following:   - Changes in heart failure therapy patterns  - Changes in healthcare utilization (testing, clinic visits, acute care visits)   - Patient experience  - Concordance between clinician and patient perception of patient health status  Study Design This randomized clinical trial evaluates the routine assessment of patient-reported heath status, using the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire-12 (KCCQ-12) among adult outpatients with heart failure. Any patients being seen in the heart failure clinics are eligible for enrollment. Patients will be enrolled via secure email or telephone call. They will be randomized in a 1:[ADDRESS_514817] with clinical management. Heath status surveys will not be integrated into clinical care for patients in the usual care arm.   In a subset of the total study, we will compare clinician perception of patient health status and patient experience across the two arms. Number of Participants Minimum of 1,200 participants will be randomized;  [ADDRESS_514818] Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] & Clinics adult heart failure clinic Inclusion Criteria Adult heart failure clinic visit Exclusion Criteria None Intervention Participants randomized to KCCQ assessment will complete a KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514819]-randomization Secondary Endpoints Treatment patterns at 12 months: • Rates of guideline-directed therapy use • Dose of guideline-directed medical therapy • Advanced heart failure therapy evaluation • Cardiovascular testing  Healthcare resource use at 12 months: • Heart failure clinic visits (in-person and televisits) • Heart failure telephone encounters (other than visits) • Emergency department visits • Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] (heart failure and non-heart failure)  Other Outcomes of Interest in Sub-Study • Clinician perception of health status • Patient experience	Assessment Schedule • Baseline KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514820] clinic visit • Repeat KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514821]-randomization  Sub-study: • Patient experience survey • Clinician evaluation of patient health status  Study Duration Patients will be enrolled for [ADDRESS_514822] clinic visit after one year. Patients without a follow-up visit within 15 months, will be contact[CONTACT_408103]. Statistical Considerations A sample size of 1,200 randomized participants has 95% power to detect a mean difference in KCCQ-12 of 5 between arms (72 in KCCQ arm versus 67 in usual care; SD ~24) and an 80% power to detect a mean difference in KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514823] Research Repository   
 
 6 2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  Patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures are being increasingly emphasized by [CONTACT_408104]. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services now include the measurement of patient-reported health status as a quality measure. While these measures capture patient symptoms accurately and have been shown to be highly prognostic, the feasibility and impact of PRO assessment among heart failure patients is unknown. There are no prior studies evaluating the effect of collecting this data on patient experience or quality of care. This study aims to fill those gaps. Understanding the effect of PRO assessment on patient outcomes will determine the overall utility of the data collection. Although PRO assessment is low-cost and low-risk for a given patient, a systematic collection of PRO data and reporting is costly and shifts resources away from other potentially important interventions. There is currently a large gap in the evidence whether routine assessment of heart failure PROs improves clinical care. Determining whether PRO collection improves health-related quality of life or increases the use of guideline-recommended therapi[INVESTIGATOR_408092]. This knowledge will help weigh the benefits and costs of integrating PRO collection into clinical practice. Finding that PRO assessment leads to a significant improvement in quality of life will promote broader adoption of PRO assessment in clinical care. This could lead to an important reduction in the morbidity and mortality of heart failure. Finally, the trial will provide critical preliminary data for a multicenter trial that will verify these findings in a larger, broader sample.   
 
 [ADDRESS_514824] on heart failure health status in 1 year among outpatients with heart failure who are randomized to routine KCCQ-12 assessment vs. usual care.  SECONDARY AIMS The secondary aims of this trial are to compare the following outcomes at 1 year in participants randomized to KCCQ-12 or usual care: • Rates of guideline-directed therapy use • Dose of guideline-directed medical therapy • Advanced heart failure therapy evaluation • Cardiovascular testing • Heart failure clinic visits (in-person and televisits) • Heart failure telephone encounters (other than visits) • Emergency department visits • Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] (heart failure and non-heart failure)   Additional aims include comparing the following outcomes between participants randomized to KCCQ-12 or usual care: • Patient experience • Clinician perception of patients’ heart failure heath status     
 
 [ADDRESS_514825] adult heart failure clinic.  5.3 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  5.3.1  Inclusion  • Clinic visit in Stanford adult heart failure clinic o In-person o Telehealth 5.3.[ADDRESS_514826] from the study team.  Patients without an email response (confirming or declining participation) will be contact[CONTACT_408105]. Patients who neither decline or enroll will be contact[CONTACT_5143] a few days before the visit. They have the ability to consent or decline further communication during the telephone encounter. Individuals who do not respond via telephone may also be contact[CONTACT_9134]. We aim to enroll at least 1,[ADDRESS_514827] estimates. If the trial fails to enroll 1,200 patients by 6 months, we will discuss reducing the trial enrollment versus extending enrollment with the IRB and the National Institute of Health (the trial sponsor). 6.3 Randomization We will randomize patients using a secure online randomization module on REDCap. Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_408106] a block sizes of 2 and 4. Randomization occurs automatically via the online platform after a patient consents. Following randomization, the patient either receives the usual care KCCQ survey via REDCap or notification of an upcoming KCCQ survey via MyHealth for those in the KCCQ arm. 6.4 KCCQ-12 Completion: KCCQ Assessment Arm 6.4.1 Index Visit 
 
 12 For the KCCQ assessment arm, the KCCQ-12 will be collected before each heart failure clinic visit (in person and tele-visit). For patients who consent online, the KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514828] not to. 6.4 KCCQ-12 Completion: Usual Care  6.4.[ADDRESS_514829] one year after randomization. All patients with clinic visits between 12-15 months after their initial visit will be assigned the KCCQ-12. The data will be collected similar to the manner described above. Patients will be messaged regarding KCCQ-12 completion one week before their clinic visit. Patients who do not complete the 
 
 13 KCCQ-12 will be able to complete the survey in clinic during the check-in process. Patients who do not complete the survey within 15 months (either due to not having a clinic visit between 12-15 months or not completing the survey in clinic) will be contact[CONTACT_408107]. Among patients without clinic visits, we will ask additional questions regarding their medications and other heart failure therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  6.6 Sub-study: Clinic Experience Surveys Approximately 600-patient subset will also be enrolled in a sub-study. This will involve one brief survey, conducted either in-person, via telephone or online, regarding their overall experience during clinic.  The substudy participants will be selected based on the month of enrollment. Three of the six enrollment months will automatically enroll patients in the substudy. After each clinic visit during the sub-study months, participants will receive an email notification to complete their Clinic Experience Survey if they have not already completed the survey in-person. They will receive a subsequent phone call following the email if the survey remains incomplete.  6.7 Sub-study: Clinician Perception of Health Status A related sub-study will ask clinicians regarding their perception of patient health status. All heart failure clinicians will undergo informed consent and enrollment. Clinicians who are caring for the 600-patient sample described above (section 6.6) will be asked a brief set of questions regarding their perception of their patient’s health status. Each treating clinician will also be consented given their involvement in the sub-study.  6.8 Data Storage For the KCCQ assessment arm, the KCCQ-12 responses will be stored in REDCap, a secure research database. For patient responses collected via telephone, those responses will be transcribed directly to the database. At the end of the study, all trial data will be stored on a secure hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272670] (Stanford Medicine Box) that is HIPAA-compliant and approved for patient-level data including personalized health information and personally identifiable information. Patient identifiable information and personalized health information, however, will not be stored. Each patient will be given a non-identifiable study code, and all dates will be coded based on an index date. 
 
 [ADDRESS_514830]’s adult heart failure clinic will be eligible. Eligibility will be based on the clinic schedule.  8.[ADDRESS_514831]-randomization. The survey will be distributed on paper but also be available online. The clinician perception of health status survey is shown in Appendix C.  8.3 Other Baseline Clinical Data Baseline clinical values of the following will be extracted from the EHR using structured data elements: • Demographic characteristics (age, sex, race, ZIP) • Vital signs, average over prior 3 months o Systolic/diastolic blood pressure over previous 3 months o Heart rate over previous 3 months o Respi[INVESTIGATOR_697] o Oxygen saturation • Most recent BMI • Comorbidities using diagnosis coding o Diabetes mellitus o Hypertension 
 
 16 o Hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] o Chronic kidney disease o Cerebrovascular disease o Liver disease o Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease o Peripheral vascular disease o Chronic lung disease o Major psychiatric disease o Cognitive dysfunction o Smoking status o Cancer • Prior procedures o Implantable cardiac defibrillator o Cardiac resynchronization therapy o Valve repair/replacement o Coronary artery by[CONTACT_4897] o Percutaneous coronary intervention o Right heart catheterization • Lab Results o NT-Brain natriuretic peptide o Creatinine o Hemoglobin o Hemoglobin A1c o White blood count o Blood urea nitrogen • Echocardiography results o Left ventricular ejection fraction o Right ventricular systolic pressure o Left ventricular internal diameter during diastole o Right ventricular systolic function, qualitative o Left atrial volume o Average E/e’ o Mitral regurgitation, qualitative o Tricuspid regurgitation, qualitative o Tricuspid regurgitation peak velocity o Estimated right ventricular systolic pressure o Left ventricle posterior wall thickness o Left ventricle septal thickness • Medications (specific drug and dose) o Beta-blocker o Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor 
 
 [ADDRESS_514832] o Long-acting nitrates o Hydralazine o Loop diuretics o Other diuretics o Digoxin o Statin o Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248] o Other antiarrhythmic agents o Other blood pressure medications o NSAIDs o Bronchodilators o Inhaled steroids o Oral steroids • Prior Stanford Cardiology Clinic (specific to the affiliated clinician’s clinic) o Date of last clinic visit o Number of clinic visits since 2018 • Other Healthcare utilization o Number of total Stanford clinic visits since 2018 (tele-health and in-person) o Prior cardiovascular diagnostic tests  § Electrocardiogram § Echocardiogram § Stress test  § CT Coronary Angiogram § Invasive coronary angiography) o Number of health system ED visits since 2018 § Heart failure related § Non-heart failure related o Number of health system hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408093] 2018 § Heart failure related § Non-heart failure related  8.[ADDRESS_514833] assessment (KCCQ-12 assessment) or EHR structured data elements. The following will be assessed between 12-[ADDRESS_514834]-randomization: • KCCQ-12 • Medications, as listed above 
 
 18 • Procedures, as listed above in addition to the following: o Left ventricular assist device o Cardiac transplant • Transplant or LVAD workup initiation • Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] o Heart-failure o Non-heart failure • ED Visits o Heart-failure o Non-heart failure • Clinic Visits o Heart failure clinic (tele-visit and in-person) o Non heart failure • Telephone Encounters o Heart failure clinic • Referrals o Palliative medicine o Psychiatry o Other referrals	
 
 19 9. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS AND ANALYSIS PLAN 9.1 Primary Analysis and Statistical Power The primary effectiveness outcome is the difference in KCCQ-12 overall summary score after one year of follow-up. Scores will be compared using mixed effects linear regression with adjustment for baseline KCCQ-12 score and a random intercept for the treating clinician. The primary analysis will be limited to patients with follow-up scores. Baseline covariate adjustment can substantially improve the precision of the statistical estimate. This has been previously shown to improve statistical power even in randomized trials with baseline covariate balance (as modeled below in the statistical power analysis).1-3 The covariate used for adjustment of the primary analysis (baseline KCCQ) has been selected due to the moderate association with follow-up health status.  As a secondary analysis, we will repeat the analysis with adjustment for other baseline characteristics (age and left ventricular ejection fraction) that have also been previously shown to be associated with health status.4-[ADDRESS_514835] found an average KCCQ score of approximately 67. With 1,200 patients, with 20% loss to follow-up, we estimate a 97% power to detect a difference of 6, a 90% power of a mean difference of 5 in the KCCQ-12, and 73% power for a mean difference of 4 in the KCCQ-12. As discussed above, the statistical power should be amplified with baseline covariate adjustment. We assumed baseline KCCQ-12 would explain approximately 35% of the variance in the final KCCQ-12. With baseline adjustment, we estimate approximately 55% power for a mean difference of 3 in the KCCQ-12 and 81% power for a mean difference of 4. This was estimated by [CONTACT_408108]. Multiple sensitivity analyses to account for missing data will be conducted. First, potential assumptions around mortality will be explored. The primary analysis assumes the collection of KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514836] follow-up KCCQ-12 score using observed patient characteristics (including baseline KCCQ) via multiple imputation. This assumes the data is missing at random. The second approach conservatively assumes patients with missing data have worse outcomes by [CONTACT_408109]-12 value in the trial. These sensitivity analyses will assess the robustness of the findings. As secondary analyses, we will compare domain scores (physical limitation, social limitation, quality of life) and the clinical summary score across arms. For these models, we will adjust for baseline domain score and include random intercepts for the treating clinician.   9.[ADDRESS_514837] based on likely differences in symptom reporting or treatment patterns: • Age • Sex • Left ventricular ejection fraction • Charlson comorbidity index (marker of disease comorbidity) • Baseline KCCQ-12 score	 • Prior heart failure/cardiomyopathy diagnosis • Baseline use of recommended therapi[INVESTIGATOR_408094] (KCCQ assessment) along with stratification at the median value. Binary characteristics (e.g. sex) will also be interacted with the randomization allocation.  We will also evaluate the primary analysis among the subgroup with a history of heart failure/cardiomyopathy and a baseline KCCQ-12 score of <100. Secondary Outcomes Secondary outcomes will include evaluating the effect of KCCQ assessment on heart failure therapy use and healthcare resource utilization. Details regarding each outcomes are listed above in the “Study Outcomes” section. Each secondary outcome will be evaluated using multivariable regression with adjustment for prespecified patient characteristics: age, left ventricular ejection fraction, baseline therapy/utilization, and Charlson Comorbidity Index. A standard regression model will be selected based on the distribution of the outcome. Therapy use (a binary outcome) will be evaluated using multivariable logistic regression. Therapy doses (ordinal outcome) will be evaluated using an ordinal regression model (including no therapy as the base category). The number of medication changes each visit (a count outcome with a high frequency of no medication changes) will be evaluated using a zero-inflated negative binomial model. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408095] a zero-inflated negative binomial model. Clinic visits (count outcomes without a high frequency of zero events) will be evaluated using a standard negative binomial model. For each model, an indicator variable for allocation to the KCCQ assessment arm will be included. The coefficient on this variable represents the effect of PRO collection. Each model will be adjusted for the baseline rate (e.g. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408096]) or baseline treatment (e.g. baseline therapi[INVESTIGATOR_408097]) to improve model precision. Each of the secondary outcomes will be analyzed for the subgroup with a history of heart failure/cardiomyopathy and a baseline KCCQ-12 score of <100. For secondary outcomes of treatment intensity (clinic visits, therapy rates, and testing), we will also evaluate if the association between baseline KCCQ-[ADDRESS_514838], we will evaluate the proportion of explained variation of KCCQ-OSS via the clinician’s NYHA score in each arm using linear regression.  Second, we will define concordance by [CONTACT_408110]-12 or the patient experience survey.  For question 1 of the clinician survey (NYHA Class), we will approximate patient estimation of NYHA category using their KCCQ-OSS score: KCCQ-OSS ≥80 – NYHA Class I, ≥60 to < 80 – NYHA Class II,  ≥30 to <60 – NYHA Class III, and <30 – NYHA Class IV.  Question 2 of the clinician survey (quality of life) will be linked to the quality of life domain score. We will classify the response “none” as equivalent to a domain score>80, “mildly” as a score of ≥60 to <80, “moderately” as a score of ≥30 to <60 and <30 as “severely.” Question 3 of the clinician survey evaluates symptom frequency of edema, dyspnea, orthopnea, and fatigue on a 4-point ordinal scale with a 5th option of “I don’t know.” The following is the mappi[INVESTIGATOR_408098]-12 responses and the clinician survey: Edema KCCQ Never over past [ADDRESS_514839] ordinal responses with linked questions as described above. For these questions, we will classify concordance as “concordant” if the categories match, “neither concordant or discordant” if the response categories differ by 1, and “discordant” if the response categories differ by >1. For question 5, we will classify as concordant or discordant. We will compare concordance between arms for each of these questions using mixed effects ordinal logistic regression with random intercepts for the treating clinician.  
 
 [ADDRESS_514840] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645] 10.1  Electronic Data Capture (EDC) System   EHR data will be extracted via the STARR registry and kept on the REDCap system. After data extraction, patients will be de-identified and labeled with a study ID number. Linkage between the medical record number and study ID will be kept separately as a locked file and only be available to the data analyst.   10.[ADDRESS_514841] University computer network is protected by a firewall.  Participants will be identified by [CONTACT_34161], to ensure participant anonymity. No participant identifiers will be used in the presentation of data. Study records that might identify participants will be kept confidential as required by [CONTACT_2371]. Except when required by [CONTACT_2371], participants will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300], personal identification number (e.g. social security number, social insurance number), address, telephone number, or any other direct personal identifier in study records.  10.3  Training  All investigational site staff authorized to enter the study data will receive training on the EDC system.  10.4 Records Retention   Study records will be maintained by [CONTACT_408111] a period of six (6) years following the expi[INVESTIGATOR_408099], whichever is longer. 
 
 [ADDRESS_514842] information for the study team to report concerns related to assessment.   The independent safety monitors will be Kelsey Flint, MD, Assistant Professor (Cardiovascular Medicine) at University of Colorado and [CONTACT_408116] at Swedish Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408100], Washington. [CONTACT_99774] is an advanced heart failure specialist. She is also a health services researcher with experience evaluating heart failure health status. [CONTACT_11515] is also an advanced heart failure specialist with experience in clinical research. He also has detailed experience with the Stanford cardiology clinics, having completed his cardiology fellowship at Stanford. They will review issues raised by [CONTACT_408112].  Adverse events or serious adverse events related to KCCQ assessment are very unlikely. Potential adverse events detected by [CONTACT_408113] [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a continuous basis. Potential adverse events will also be reported to the Stanford University IRB committee and the NIH Program Officer. As a second step, the PI, IRB committees, and the independent safety monitors will review adverse events to evaluate if the events were caused by [CONTACT_25234].  
 
 [ADDRESS_514843] be approved by [CONTACT_1201]. Notwithstanding the need for approval of formal protocol amendments, the investigator is expected to take any immediate action required for the safety of any participant included in this study, even if this action represents a deviation from the protocol. In such cases, the IRB will be informed.   
 
 26 13. REFERENCES 1.	Hernandez	AV,	Steyerberg	EW,	Habbema	JD.	Covariate	adjustment	in	randomized	controlled	trials	with	dichotomous	outcomes	increases	statistical	power	and	reduces	sample	size	requirements.	J	Clin	Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].	2004;57(5):454-460.	2.	Canner	PL.	Covariate	adjustment	of	treatment	effects	in	clinical	trials.	Control	Clin	Trials.	1991;12(3):359-366.	3.	Tsiatis	AA,	Davidian	M,	Zhang	M,	Lu	X.	Covariate	adjustment	for	two-sample	treatment	comparisons	in	randomized	clinical	trials:	a	principled	yet	flexible	approach.	Stat	Med.	2008;27(23):4658-4677.	4.	Heidenreich	PA,	Spertus	JA,	Jones	PG,	et	al.	Health	status	identifies	heart	failure	outpatients	at	risk	for	hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408101].	J	Am	Coll	Cardiol.	2006;47(4):752-756.	5.	Joseph	SM,	Novak	E,	Arnold	SV,	et	al.	Comparable	performance	of	the	Kansas	City	Cardiomyopathy	Questionnaire	in	patients	with	heart	failure	with	preserved	and	reduced	ejection	fraction.	Circ	Heart	Fail.	2013;6(6):1139-1146.	6.	Pokharel	Y,	Khariton	Y,	Tang	Y,	et	al.	Association	of	Serial	Kansas	City	Cardiomyopathy	Questionnaire	Assessments	With	Death	and	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_408102]:	A	Secondary	Analysis	of	2	Randomized	Clinical	Trials.	JAMA	Cardiol.	2017;2(12):1315-1321.	7.	Khariton	Y,	Hernandez	AF,	Fonarow	GC,	et	al.	Health	Status	Variation	Across	Practices	in	Outpatients	With	Heart	Failure:	Insights	From	the	CHAMP-HF	(Change	the	Management	of	Patients	With	Heart	Failure)	Registry.	Circ	Cardiovasc	Qual	Outcomes.	2018;11(4):e004668.	8.	Gallagher	AM,	Lucas	R,	Cowie	MR.	Assessing	health-related	quality	of	life	in	heart	failure	patients	attending	an	outpatient	clinic:	a	pragmatic	approach.	ESC	Heart	Fail.	2019;6(1):3-9.	9.	Stehlik	J,	Rodriguez-Correa	C,	Spertus	JA,	et	al.	Implementation	of	Real-Time	Assessment	of	Patient-Reported	Outcomes	in	a	Heart	Failure	Clinic:	A	Feasibility	Study.	J	Card	Fail.	2017;23(11):813-816.	   
 
 27 Appendices  Appendix A: Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire-12  
    Rev. 2012-04-11 Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire (KCCQ-12)  The following questions refer to your heart failure and how it may affect your life. Please read and complete the following questions. There are no right or wrong answers. Please mark the answer that best applies to you.  1. Heart failure affects different people in different ways. Some feel shortness of breath while others feel fatigue. Please indicate how much you are limited by [CONTACT_119014] (shortness of breath or fatigue) in your ability to do the following activities over the past 2 weeks. Activity Extremely Limited Quite a bit Limited Moderately Limited Slightly Limited Not at all Limited Limited for other reasons or did not do the activity a. Showering/bathing O O O O O O b. Walking 1 block on level ground O O O O O O c. Hurrying or jogging (as if to catch a bus) O O O O O O  [ADDRESS_514844] swelling in your feet, ankles or legs when you woke up in the morning? Every morning [ADDRESS_514845] 2 weeks, on average, how many times has fatigue limited your ability to do what you wanted?  All of the time Several times per day At least once a day [ADDRESS_514846] 2 weeks, on average, how many times has shortness of breath limited your ability to do what you wanted? All of the time Several times per day At least once a day [ADDRESS_514847] 3 pi[INVESTIGATOR_384824]?  Every night [ADDRESS_514848] 2 weeks, how much has your heart failure limited your enjoyment of life?  It has extremely limited my enjoyment of life It has limited my enjoyment of life quite a bit It has moderately limited my enjoyment of life It has slightly limited my enjoyment of life It has not limited my enjoyment of life at all O O O O O   [ADDRESS_514849] it is right now, how would you feel about this?  Not at all satisfied Mostly dissatisfied Somewhat satisfied Mostly satisfied Completely satisfied O O O O O   [ADDRESS_514850] your lifestyle? Please indicate how your heart failure may have limited your participation in the following activities over the past 2 weeks.  Activity Severely Limited Limited quite a bit Moderately limited Slightly limited Did not limit at all Does not apply or did not do for other reasons a. Hobbies, recreational activities O O O O O O b. Working or doing household chores O O O O O O c. Visiting family or friends out of your home O O O O O O  1 2 3 4 5 6  
 
 29 Appendix B: Clinic Experience Survey  This survey is to evaluate your experience at your recent cardiology clinic visit. Using the 5-item scale below each question, please indicate how much you agree with the following statements by [CONTACT_408114] :   1.) My clinician listened to me carefully:  O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  2.) My clinician understood symptoms related to my heart: O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  3.) My clinician showed respect for what I had to say:  O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  4.) My clinician and I agreed on how I was doing overall: O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  5.) My clinician spent enough time with me:  O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  6.) My clinician explained things in a way that was easy to understand: O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  7.) I understand the importance of taking the treatments recommended by [CONTACT_408115]:  O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree    
 
 30 8.) My goals regarding treatment and those of my clinician are aligned: O Completely agree O Somewhat agree O Neither agree nor disagree O  Somewhat disagree O  Completely disagree  9.) What has the biggest impact on your quality of life? O Heart Failure O Other Cardiovascular Problems O Other Medical Problems O  Heart Failure and Other Medical Problems Equally O  Non-medical Reasons  O  None of the Above   10.) In terms of your overall quality of life, how do you expect your heart failure health status to change over the following year: O Significant Improvement O Mild Improvement O Remain Stable O Mild Worsening O Significant Worsening     
 
 31 Appendix C: Clinician Perception of Health Status Survey   You saw _________________ in clinic today. We have five questions regarding your perception of their heart failure health status (please circle all answers).  1.) What is their current [LOCATION_001] Heart Association functional class? ° NYHA Class I  ° NYHA Class II  ° NYHA Class III  ° NYHA Class IV   2.)  How much does heart failure impact their overall quality of life? ° None  ° Mildly  ° Moderately  ° Severely   3.)  How frequently did they have the following symptoms in the last two weeks?  Edema ° None ° Once ° More than once, but not daily ° Daily ° I Don’t Know Orthopnea ° None ° Once ° More than once, but not daily ° Nightly ° I Don’t Know Fatigue ° None or once ° More than once, less than daily ° Daily ° Frequently each day ° I Don’t Know Shortness of breath ° None or once ° More than once, less than daily ° Daily ° Frequently each day ° I Don’t Know  4.) In terms of their overall quality of life, how do you expect their heart failure health status to change over the following year: O Significant Improvement O Mild Improvement O Remain Stable O Mild Worsening O Significant Worsening  5.) What has the biggest impact on your patient’s quality of life? O Heart Failure O Other Cardiovascular Problems O Other Medical Problems O  Heart Failure and Other Medical Problems Equally O  Non-medical Reasons  O  None of the Above     