[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Randomized Clinical Trial Evaluating the Efficiency and 
Safety of Holmium Laser with Moses Technology versus 
SuperPulsed Laser System with Thulium Laser  on Renal 
and Ureteral  Stones  
 
Princip al Investigator : Stephen Nakada, MD  
Co-Investigator : Margaret Knoedler, MD ; Shuang Li , PhD ; Kristina Penniston, PhD  
Affiliation : University of Wisconsin -Madison, School of Medicine and Public Health, 
Department of Urology  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Randomized Clinical Trial Evaluating the Efficiency and Safety of Holmium Laser with Moses 
Technology versus SuperPulsed Laser System with Thulium Laser on Renal and Ureteral Stones  
 
LEAD RESEARCHER:  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_533489], MD [EMAIL_10216]  
Co-Investigators  
Margaret Knoedler, [EMAIL_10217]  
Shuang Li; [EMAIL_10218]   
Kristina Penniston, [EMAIL_10219]  
Sarah Best : [EMAIL_10220]  
Sean Hedican:  [EMAIL_10221]  
 
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:  
Version 3, 8/30/2021  
 
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
1 6/14/2021  Initial IRB review modification requests  Yes 
2 7/22/2021  Change of protocol  No  
3 8/30/2021  Change of protocol  No  
    
    
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol [ADDRESS_692909] Summary  
This is a prospective randomized controlled trial designed to assess the efficiency of 
Lumenis® Pulse™ P120H holmium laser system with the Moses technology  (holmium laser with 
Moses) versus the Soltive™ SuperPulsed Laser System  with the  thulium fiber laser technology  
(thulium laser) , in fragmentation of upper tract urinary stones during ureteroscopy with laser 
lithotripsy. Specifically, we will compare procedural time, intra -operative parameters and stone 
free rates. Laser litho tripsy is a surgical procedure performed during stone surgeries. Both 
lasers are FDA approved and  clinical ly used in the [LOCATION_002] . Currently, at University of 
Wisconsin, we are using the holmium laser with M oses during ureteroscopi[INVESTIGATOR_533490]. At our institution, we perform approximately [ADDRESS_692910] stone disease is increasing. According to the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, as of 2012, 10.6% of men and 7.1% of women in the 
[LOCATION_002] are affected by [CONTACT_533492] .i This has led to an increased demand on 
Urologists for efficient and safe surgical treatment of stone disease. Over the past two decades, 
ureteroscopy with laser lithotripsy has become the treatment of choice for most ureteral and 
renal stones globally .ii The holmium laser is considered the gold standard for laser lithotripsy.iii 
Holmium laser lithotripsy with Moses and the thulium laser are new technologies meant to 
improve the efficiency of laser lithotripsy . Both are FDA approved treatment modalities for 
stone disease . Two i n vitro studies have compared Moses versus thulium and shown that 
thulium has higher ablative volumes then the holmium laser with Moses, but no clinical trials  
have compared the two treatment modalities.iv,v In this study, we are going t o conduct a 
prospective, randomized clinical trial to determine whether there is a difference in procedural 
time , intraoperative parameters  or stone free rate  between the Holmium laser with Moses and 
the thulium laser. This is significant as this may lead to shorter overall operative times, which 
may result in decreased operative costs and complications. vi,vii 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol [ADDRESS_692911] -operative parameters . Our clinical practice is to treat urinary stones until the stone is 
reduced to fragments ≤ 2 mm in size. This is determined by [CONTACT_533493]  (A 200 micron 
fiber will be used with both groups ), to visually estimate the size of the resultant fragmen ts.viii  
The secondary objective is to compare the primary and secondary outcomes when 
stratified by [CONTACT_533494]. This will allow us to explore the efficiency between Moses and thulium 
laser  on treating large vs. small stones. Previous literature suggested tha t stone size was 
associated with operative time.ix Patients will be separated based on the size of their stones: 3-
10 mm or 1 1-20 mm and then randomized to holmium laser with Moses or thulium laser. 
Patients will be randomized into the groups by a ratio of 1:1. 
Research Design and Methods  
This study will be a randomized trial comparing ureteroscopy with laser lithotripsy with 
the Lumenis® Pulse™ P120H holmium laser system with the Moses technology  (holmium laser 
with moses)  versus the Soltive™ SuperPulsed La ser System  with the thulium fiber laser 
technology  (thulium laser) . The primary objective is  to compare the procedural time ( minutes). 
We will keep strict timing from the minute the ureteroscope is inserted into the patient to the 
time the ureteroscope  has been removed. The following information will be collected as 
secondary outcomes: (1) stone free rate; (2) total operative time  (minutes) ; (3) 
fragmentation/dusting time  (minutes, total time to fragment the stone, including the laser was 
in use and tim e of pedal pauses) ; (4) lasing time  (minutes, time the laser was in use, not 
including pedal pauses ); (5) total energy used  (kilojoules, kJ ); (6) laser efficiency  (mm per 
minute) ; (7) number of times the laser pedals are pressed  (left, right, and total ped al presses) ; 
(8) stone analysis; (9) complications ; (10) quality of life survey (WISQOL short form) both pre -
operatively and post -operatively and ( 11) physician evaluation of the laser.  Physicians will 
complete a one page survey at the end of the case evaluating the laser  (survey included as 
attachment) . A total of 3 clinic visit s (i.e.,  pre-operative visit,  the stone surgery, and one post -
operative visit ) will be  needed for this study. Stone parameters (i.e. size, location , Hounsfield 
units, presence of hydronephrosis , stone volume ), demographic information, co -morbidities, 
and post -operative parameters will be collected from the medical record.  
Number of Participants  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
Approximately 164 patients will be enrolled (see Data Analysis for sample size 
justification).  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Patients at least 18 years of age, and less than 89 years old.  
2. Patients with renal or ureteral urinary stones who require endoscopic treatment in 
the outpatie nt operating room  
3. Patients ’ stone size  in a single renal unit of [ADDRESS_692912].  
7. Non -English speaking, v ulnerable patients such as lacking of decision -making 
capability, prisoner , adult unable to consent, will not be enrolled.  
Recruitment methods  
Patients who are to be scheduled for laser lithotripsy treatment of urinary stones as outpatients 
will be approached for study participation.  During patients’ pre -operative clinic visit, e ligibility 
screening (by [CONTACT_533495]’ medical record that is relevant for inclusion/exclusion criteria) 
will occur before recruitment. If patients meet the inclusion criteria, t hey will be initially 
approached by a study team member who also works i n the urology clinic ( i.e., the surgeon 
inform s the patient  that there’s a research study they may be eligible for, and asked if they 
want to learn more about it).   
 
No other recruitment materials will be used in this study. H olmium laser with Moses or thulium 
laser to treat stones is our routine care. Patients have been informed about the laser lithotripsy 
treatment before they schedule their surgery. We will only recruit patients from  the outpatient 
OR, so this will not inclu de patients who come in emergently through the Emergency 
Department.  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
No compensation will be provided to participants.  
 
 
Consent Process  
A study team member who is affiliated with the patient’s clinical care (e.g., the surgeon) will 
initially approach the patients who are scheduled for laser lithotripsy treatment of urinary 
stones. (i.e., informed that there’s a research study they may be el igible for, and asked if they 
want to learn more about it).  
If the patient is interested in the study, a member of the research team will approach him/her 
for enrollment.  Consent process will be conducted face to face. Participants will be provided a 
written consent form in person.  No waiting time is expected between informing the prospective 
participant  and obtaining the consent.  
Consent will take place during patients’ pre -operative clinic visit. If patients are 
interested and there is not enough tim e to consent the patient in urology clinic, study 
information will be sent home with the patient and the patient will then be consented 
before their surgery in a private room (pre -operative  room). Pre -operative room  
provides 1 -1 1/[ADDRESS_692913] the consent 
process before surgery anesthesia.  
All information about the study will be provided, and ample time will be made available 
for the participants to consider participation in the study.  
 
Patient Randomization  
Patients will be randomized (ratio 1:1) at the time of enrollment  to be treated with either the 
holmium laser with Moses or the thulium laser.  We will use Permuted Block Randomization 
(stratified by [CONTACT_533494] 3 - 10 mm or 11 -20 mm)  (block size 4) .  
 
Study  Procedures  
1. The study team member s review patients’ medical record during patients’ pre -
operative clinic visit to see whether patients meet inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
2. If patients meet the inclusion criteria, a  study team member who is affiliated with 
the patient’s clinical care (e.g., the surgeon) will initially approach the patients who 
are scheduled for laser lithotripsy treatment of urinary stones. (i.e., informed that 
there’s a research study they may be eligible for, and asked if they want to learn  
more about it).  
3. If the patient is interested in the study, a member of the research team will 
approach him/her for enrollment.  
4. Patients will be asked to fill out a WISQOL short form at their pre -operative visit. 
This is standard of care for all stone pati ents in clinic .  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
5. Patients ’ total stone size (pre-operative CT) will be calculated and divided into two 
groups. Those with stones 3-10 mm and those with stones 1 1-20 mm. They will then  
be randomized to either the holmium laser with Moses or the thulium laser  
(randomization ratio 1:1) group.  
6. Patients will undergo stone surgeries with the laser that they are randomized to. A 
200 micron fiber will be used with both machines. The patient’s stone(s) will be 
treated in accordance with  our routine clinical pra ctice of fragmenting stone into 
small pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928] (≤ 2mm). One stone fragment will be collected for stone analysis if the 
patient does not already have a stone analysis on file  (this is also standard of care) . 
The faculty surgeon s will perform all surgeries.  We are unable to blind the surgeon 
to the laser used as the laser fibers and laser machines appear and sound different.  
7. Procedural  time as well as other information (see study design for the detail 
information) is collected.  
8. After surgery, the patients will all have at least an abdominal x -ray within [ADDRESS_692914] scan has not already been completed (this is the standard of care) . 
They will also be asked to fill out a WISQOL short form at their one-month follow up 
appointment. Otherwise, they will continue on our normal postoperative pathway. 
Postoperative complications will be collected.  
 
Comparison of usual care and study procedures  
 Compared with our routine care, t he only interventions imposed on subjects as a result 
of this  study are (1) pre -procedural randomization to laser lithotripsy with either holmium laser 
with Moses or thulium  laser , and ( 2) the use of patient  & surgery  information  collected  in 
describing our results. All the other activities are part of our routine clinical practice. 
Participation in the study will require a pre -operative CT abdomen without contrast, which is 
standard of care, as well as at least an abdominal x -ray post oper atively which is also standard 
of care. Four surgeon will perform the ureteroscopy (i.e., Nakada, Best, Hedican, Gralnek, and 
Knoedler). During surgery, p atients’ stones will be treated in accordance with our routine 
clinical practice of fragmenting stones  into small pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928] (<2 mm). Surgeons will use a [ADDRESS_692915] 
the discretion to switch to a different fiber (ex. 150 micron thulium fiber)  if they feel it is 
necessary durin g the case  (if the surgeon changes the fiber during the surgery, the data will be 
analyzed separately) . A stone fragment will be collect ed for stone analysis if the patient does 
not have one on file. This is our standard of care suggested by [CONTACT_533496].x All patients 
enrolled will undergo routine post -operative follow up including clinic appointments and 
imaging evaluation ( with at least  an abdominal x -ray).  An abdominal x -ray is used for follow up 
of nephrolithiasis and provides significantly less radia tion, and it is our routine care. However, if 
the patient already ha s a CT completed  by [CONTACT_6591] -up visit , an x-ray is not needed.  
WISQOL short form will be administered during the pre -operative appointment and at the post -
operative appointment, which i s standard practice in our clinic.  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol [ADDRESS_692916] patients’ information from 
patients’ medical records  for their routine medical care .  
 
Study Intervention  
 Holmium laser with Moses  and thulium lasers will be used for this study . Both are FDA 
approved lasers for the treatment of urinary calculi through an endoscope. The holmium laser 
with Moses emits two separate laser pulses with a short time interval between them. The first 
pulse divides the water between the laser fiber tip and the stone and the second pulse hits the 
stone unobstructed.xi The goal is to increase stone ablative volume and decrea se retropulsion 
of the stone. The thulium laser has a different wavelength then the holmium laser with Moses 
and thus has slightly different energy properties. It has also been shown to increase ablative 
volume and decrease retropulsion without any safety concerns.xii The holmium laser with 
moses is currently the most common laser used  at our institution for treatment of urinary 
stones . The thulium laser has been used at our institution on a trial basis previously and will be 
available soon for use on a daily  basis for surgical cases at ou r institution.  There is no learning 
curve associated with the thulium laser. The two lasers have similar specifications; the two 
fibers are the same size and will interact with the instruments (ureteroscopes) similarly.  
Study  Timelines  
For each patient, the study duration is from consent to the one -month post -operative 
clinic visit. Patients will be on study for approximately [ADDRESS_692917] -operative follow up including clinic appointments and imaging 
evaluation. Any complications will be recorded, reported, and treated appropriately.  
There is a risk that your information could become known to some one not involved in 
this study, which might make you uncomfortable.   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol [ADDRESS_692918] the discretion to transition 
to a different laser for patient safety reasons  (The data will be analy zed as an intention -to-treat 
analysis ). All patients enrolled will undergo routine post -operative follow up including clinic 
appointments and imaging evaluation. Any complications will be recorded, reported, and 
treated appropriately.  
Regular inquiries of study flow, pertaining to patient recruitment, randomization, and 
adverse events will be scheduled to occur after the first week and subsequently every two 
weeks. The lead researcher, [CONTACT_533499] , will be responsible for the inquiries.  Any adverse 
events will be monitored as per standard protocol in clinical use. A comparison of adverse 
events between groups (e.g., to determine whether those assigned to the thulium laser group  
are experiencing more frequent or serious adverse effects) w ill be included. No significant 
adverse events are anticipated for the lasers , as they are routinely used in urology practice.  
Any adverse events or unanticipated problems will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_533491]. In addition, members of  the study team will be performing these procedures and 
will monitor the patient during treatment for any signs of complications.  
 
Date Management and Confidentiality   
All electronic data will be stored on a HIPAA compliant department server which is maintained 
on password and firewall -protected computers in locked offices of the Department of Urology, 
located in a security -protected building. Data to be analyzed after e xtraction. All paper records 
(such as WISQOL) will be saved in a locked office /cabinets of IRB approved study staff . Only key 
personnel listed on this study will have access to this information. All data analysis files will be 
devoid of direct patient iden tifiers. Direct i dentifiers will be destroyed at study closure or at the 
time of publication.  De-identified data will be stored for potential future studies that have 
proper approval.  
 
Since we have 5 surgeons participating  in this study, we will use university -based cloud service 
(such as OneDrive) to temporarily save the enrollment log. Study team member will use their 
Net ID to access the enrollment log. The enrollment log is completely deidentified. Only 
participant ID (suc h as 101, 102) and the laser each participant is randomized to are saved in 
the enrollment log. Once we complete data collection, we will permanently delete it from  the 
cloud.  
 
Share of results  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
Some of the information collected for this study will go in t he patient’s  medical record. 
This includes the results of the one -month post -operative image, stone analysis, stone 
surgery, and all clinic visits information  as these are being conducted as standard of 
care . All other information from research  specific  procedures will NOT go in the 
patient’s  medical records.  
We only publish aggregated results. No individual results will be shared.  We will not 
share the data with outside institution s.  
 
Economic burden to participants  
This study does not place financial  burden to patients. The study interventions are our 
routine clinical practice to treat stones. It will be same as they are not involved in this 
study.  
The cost of the two laser treatments are equivalent .  
 
Data Analysis  
The data collected will be analyze d as an intention -to-treat analysis. Statistical analyses 
will include T -test and, if appropriate, Chi -square tests (e.g., for categorical data) , and two -way 
MANOVA . Patient demographics and stone characteristics will be summarized as appropriate as 
contin uous variables (mean and standard deviation) or categorical variables (frequency, 
percentage).  To compare the two groups, continuous variables such as procedural time, total 
OR time , WISQOL etc.,  will be analyzed using T test and two-way MAN COVA (stratified by [CONTACT_533497] 3 - 10 mm or 1 1-20 mm ). The surgeon will be controlled as a covariate . Categorical 
variables such as stone free rate will be analyzed using chi -square.  
We plan to enroll 164 patients in this study. Patients will be stratified int o two groups 
according to their stone size ( 3-10 mm or 1 1-20 mm) and then randomized to either holmium 
laser with Moses or thulium laser. The stone size is defined as the largest stone  size (largest 
diameter on pre -operative CT) , if patients have multiple stones.  Previous literature suggested 
stone size is associated with operative time.ix A significance level of 0.[ADDRESS_692919]. Group sample sizes of 33 and 33 achieve 80% 
power to detect a significant di fference between the means when the mean difference is 4.[ADDRESS_692920] deviation of 6.5 minutes . We also decide to increase the sample size 
by 25%  (41 patients per group) . This will allow for the possibility that the randomization  scheme 
is intra -operatively abandoned for some reason (e.g., equipment failure), that the  planned 
procedure was unable to be completed for some reason , as determined by [CONTACT_533498] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol 2021 -0695  
charge of the case, and/or that the patient – after his/her procedure – wishes to withdraw  from 
the study and exclude his/her information from our analysis.  
 
i Scales CD Jr, Smith AC, Hanley JM, Saigal  CS; Urologic Diseases in America Project. Prevalence 
of kidney stones in the [LOCATION_002]. Eur Urol. 2012 Jul;62(1):[ADDRESS_692921] Two Decades: A Systematic Revi ew. J Endourol 2017 Jun;31(6):547 -556.  
iii Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL, et al: Surgical Management of Stones: American Urological 
Association/Endourological Society Guideline, PART II. J. Urol. 2016.  
iv Andreeva V, Vinarov A, Yaroslavsky I, et al . Preclinical comparison of superpulse thulium fiber 
laser and a holmium:YAG laser for lithotripsy. World J Urol. 2020 Feb;38(2):[ADDRESS_692922] of temporal pulse shape on urinary stone 
phantom retropulsion rat e and ablation efficiency using holmium:YAG and super -pulse thulium 
fibre lasers. BJU Int. 2020 Jul;126(1):[ADDRESS_692923] and clinical outcomes of 
percutaneous nephrostolithotomy. J Urol. 2009 Aug;182(2) :586-90. 
vii Schuster TG, Hollenbeck BK, Faerber GJ, Wolf JS Jr. Complications of ureteroscopy: analysis of 
predictive factors. J Urol. 2001 Aug;166(2):538 -40. 
viii Patel, Nishant , et al. Accuracy of endoscopic intraoperative assessment of urologic stone 
size.  Journal of Endourology  28.5 (2014): [ADDRESS_692924] on outcomes: retrospective results 
over 6.5 years. Ther Adv Urol 2020;12:1756287220934403.  
x Pearle MS, Goldfarb DS, Assimos DG et al: Medical management of kidney stones: AUA 
Guideline. J Urol 2014;  192:  316.  
xi Kronenberg P, Somani B. Advances in lasers for the treatment of stones: A systematic review. 
Curr Urol Rep 2018;19:45.  
xii Traxer O, Dymov A, Rapoport L, et al. Comprehensive clinical study of super pulse tm fiber 
laser for treatment of stone disease. J Urol . 2019;201(supplement 4).                                                             