Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 1 of 72  
 
TITLE PAGE 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE RP-BP-EF003: A Randomized, Double-Bl ind, Placebo-Controlled, 
Flexible-Dose Titration Study of Methylphenidate Hydrochloride 
Extended-Release Capsules (Aptensio XR®) in Children Ages 4 to 
Under 6 Years Diagnosed with A ttention Deficit-Hyperactivity 
Disorder (ADHD) 
 
PROTOCOL NO. RP-BP-EF003, version 2.0, Protocol Dated February 15, 2018 
 
DRUG Methylphenidate Hydrochlorid e Extended Release Capsules, MPH-
MLR (Aptensio XR®) 
 
INDICATION Treatment of Attention Deficit-Hyperac tivity Disorder (ADHD) in 
Children [ADDRESS_937358] Coventry, RI [ZIP_CODE]  
COORDINATING INVESTIGATORS Ann Childress, M.D. Scott Kollins, Ph.D.  
IND NO. #104,[ADDRESS_937359] & Appendices for details 
 
   GCP Statement:  This study will be performed in co mpliance with Good Clinical Practices 
(GCP) guidelines, including the ar chiving of essential documents. 
 
Confidentiality Statement:  This confidential document  is the property of Rhodes 
Pharmaceuticals L.P., Coventry, Rhode Island.  No information contained herein may be 
disclosed without prior written a pproval of Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P.
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 12 of 72  
 
SYNOPSIS  
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
Title of Study: Protocol RP-BP-EF003 : A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Flexible-
Dose Titration Study of Methylphenidate Hydroc hloride Extended-Release Capsules (Aptensio XR®) in 
Children Ages 4 to Under 6 Years Diagnosed with Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)  
Coordinating Investigators: [CONTACT_171276] C. Childress, Center for Psychiatry a nd Behavioral Medicine Inc., Las Vegas, NV; 
[CONTACT_455814] H. Kollins, Professor, Vice-Chair, Director, Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, 
[ADDRESS_937360], Duke University, Durham, NC [ZIP_CODE] 
Study Drug:   Aptensio XR
® 10 mg capsules, AP Aptensio XR® 15 mg capsules, Aptensio XR® 20 mg capsules,    
Aptensio XR® 30 mg capsules, Aptensio XR® 40 mg capsules 
Enrollment:  Up to 150 subjects  
Number of Study Centers :  Up to 10 
Duration of Open Label Phase :  Six Weeks 
Duration of Double-Blind Phase:  Two Weeks 
Objectives:  The objectives of this study are to evalua te the efficacy and safety of Aptensio XR® in 
treating ADHD in children ages 4 to under 6 years.  
Primary Efficacy Objective 
 The primary objective of this study is to establish that an optimal dose of Aptensio XR® will 
result in a significant reduction in ADHD symptoms compared with placebo in children ages 4 to 
under 6 years. 
 The primary efficacy measure is the comparison of the two treatment groups (optimized dose vs placebo) using the change in ADHD-RS-IV Total Score during the double-blind phase, i.e. the change from end of open label phase to end of double blind phase. 
Secondary Efficacy Objectives 
 As with the primary efficacy objective, seconda ry efficacy objectives will primarily focus on the 
double-blind treatment period. 
 Secondary efficacy measures will include the comparison of the two treatment groups (optimized dose vs placebo) using the following: 
 The change in ADHD-RS-IV hyperactivity/impulsivity and inattention subscales during the double-blind phase 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 13 of 72  
 
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
 The change in CGI-S during the double-blind phase 
 The CGI-I at the end of the double-blind phase (this CGI-I evaluates the change from end of 
open label phase to end of double blind phase) 
 The change in Conners EC BEH-P(S) during the double-blind phase. 
Safety Evaluation 
 Collect spontaneously reported adverse events 
 Assess Blood Pressure, Pulse, Height and Weight, ECG, Clinical Laboratory Values 
 Assess suicidality using the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS)  
 Assess changes in sleep (quantity and qualit y) patterns using the Child Sleep Habits 
Questionnaire (CSHQ)  
Design and Investigational Plan: This randomized, double-blind, flexible-dose, placebo- controlled, parallel group study is designed to 
evaluate Aptensio XR
® compared to placebo in preschool age children with ADHD. Male and female 
children ages 4 years, 0 months to 5 years, 8 months with a diagnosis of ADHD (combined, inattentive or 
hyperactive/impulsive) will be enrolled.  
There will be 6 phases in this study: a screening phase of up to 4 weeks, which will include washout if 
applicable, an enrollment & parent training phase lasting 2-4 weeks, an eligibility phase of up to 2 weeks 
to determine eligibility for the open-label phase, a 6-week open-label dose titration phase, a 2 week 
double-blind phase for Aptensio XR® responders, and a two-week follow-up call after study completion 
or early discontinuation to assess for ongoing a dverse events and concomitant medications. 
Up to [ADDRESS_937361] completed the double-blind phase, no 
additional subjects will be enrolled in the trial.  S ubjects who are already enrolled at that time will be 
allowed to complete the trial. 
Phase 1: Screening The screening /washout period can last up to 4 weeks. 
Phase 2: Enrolment & Parent Training 
Eligible subjects will be enrolled in the study at Vi sit [ADDRESS_937362] up to 90 minutes. The frequency of parent training sessions may be >4 days - <10 days 
apart. Families are expected to co mplete all 4 sessions of behavioural training within a 4 week period. 
With consultation from the medical monitor/coordina ting PI’s, parents will be allowed to skip the 
behaviour management phase if the primary caregiver has participated in behaviour management therapy 
in the last 12 months with minimal benefit and/or  the subject’s ADHD symptoms are severe enough to 
warrant moving immediately to the medication phase of the trial. 
Phase 3: Eligibility for Open Label Phase At Visit 6, eligibility to continue to the open-label phase will be determ ined.  Subjects who have less than 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 14 of 72  
 
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
a 30% improvement on the ADHD-RS-IV and a Clinical Global Impression-Improvement (CGI-I) of 3 
(minimally improved or less) will undergo medical screening.   
Subjects who are eligible to continue to the ope n-label phase based on lack of improvement of ADHD 
symptoms and medical criteria will start open-label tr eatment.  Up to 2 weeks may elapse between Visits 
6 and 7 to allow for laboratory results to be obtained. However, the interval between visit 6 and 7 can be 
<[ADDRESS_937363] and ECG results are available. 
Phase 4: Six-week Open-Label Phase Subjects will begin Aptensio XR
® 10 mg at the morning following Visit 7.  At weekly visits (Visits 8-
13), dosing may be maintained or increased until an op timal dose or the maximum dose is reached.  The 
ADHD-RS-IV rating scale will be used to determine optimal dose. An optimal dose is a dose that 
produces a reduction of ADHD symptoms of at least 30%  from Visit 7 with a CGI-I of “much improved” 
or “very much improved” with tolerable side effects.  Subjects who meet improvement criteria but may benefit from additional dose increases, may have thei r dose further optimized. If a higher dose is not 
tolerated, subjects may step down one dose level. 
Phase 5: Two-week Double-Blind Phase  
Subjects who have ≥ 30% response on the ADHD-RS-IV and a CGI of “much” or “very much improved” 
at the end of Visit [ADDRESS_937364] optimal dose of Aptensio XR
® or placebo.   
Subjects who have a ≥50% worsening of symptoms on the ADHD-RS-IV from Visit 13 and a CGI-I of  6 
or 7 (much worse or very much worse) at Visit 14 will be eligible to discon tinue the double-blind phase 
and enter the open-label extension study at investig ator discretion after completing end of study (Visit 
15) procedures.  
 At Visit 15, subjects will complete the double-blin d phase and complete end of study procedures. 
Phase 6: Follow-up Phone Call 
 A follow-up phone call will occur approximately tw o weeks after treatment discontinuation to 
assess for ongoing adverse events and concomitant medications. 
Proposed Statistical Analysis: 
The primary analysis will be an analysis of th e change in ADHD-RS-IV Total Score during the double 
blind phase, comparing the change of subjects on placebo to the change of subjects on their optimal dose 
of Aptensio XR®. 
The primary efficacy population is the Evaluable population which includes all randomized subjects who were administered double-blind study medication, who completed ADHD-RS-IV assessments at the end 
of the open-label phase and at the end of the dou ble-blind phase, and who did not have any major 
protocol violations.  The Intent to Treat population will include all randomized subjects who were administered any double-blind study medication. 
The primary efficacy measure will be the ADHD-RS-I V Total Score.  The primary analysis will be a 
two-way analysis of variance (terms for site and treatment) using each subjects’ change in ADHD-RS-IV 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 15 of 72  
 
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
Total Score during the double-blind phase.  Tr eatment will have two values, Aptensio XR® and placebo. 
Statistical tests will be two-sided and p-values less than  or equal to 0.05 will be considered statistically 
significant.    The primary efficacy analysis will u se the Efficacy population, and the same analysis will 
be repeated with the ITT population. 
Secondary efficacy measures will be the ADHD-RS-IV hyperactivity/impulsivity and inattention 
subscale scores, CGI-S, CGI-I, and Conners EC BEH-P(S). Analysis of the ADHD-RS-IV subscale scores and the Conners EC BEH–P(S) score will be the same as for ADHD-RS-IV Total Score.  Analysis 
of the change in CGI-S from end of open label versus  to end of double blind will be a Mantel-Haenszel 
test stratified on site.  Analysis of CGI-I at end of double blind phase (comparing end of double-blind to 
end of open-label) will be a Mantel Haenszel test stratified on site. 
All treatment-emergent adverse events will be summarized by [CONTACT_690968]. Separate 
analyses will be done for the open-label phase and for the double-blind phase. 
Diagnosis and Main Criteria for Inclusion:  
1. Male and female subjects ages 48 months to 68 months inclusive at time of consent 
2. Meets DSM-5 criteria for ADHD, combined, hype ractive/impulsive or inattentive presentation 
made during a clinical interview by [CONTACT_690969]-Sads-
Present and Lifetime Version (K-SADS-PL) 
3. ADHD symptoms must have been present for at least six months 
4. Age- and sex-adjusted ratings of  ≥ 90th percentile Total Score on the ADHD-RS-IV Preschool 
Version (rated over past six months) 
5. Score of <[ADDRESS_937365] a score of ≥4 on the Clinical Global Impressions Severity (CGI-S) at Visit 2 (subjects 
who are granted a waiver to by[CONTACT_690970] (and do not have a visit 2) are still qualified 
to continue in the study based on their CGI-S score at screening) 
7. Estimated IQ ≥[ADDRESS_937366], Second Edition (KBIT -2) 
8. The subject has a parent or legal guardian who w ill give written informed consent for the subject 
to participate in the study 
9. Subject and parent or legal guardian must  be able to speak and understand English 
10. Subject must live with primary caretaker/rater and have been living with primary caretaker for at 
least [ADDRESS_937367] be willing and able to comply with 
all requirements of this protocol 
12. Systolic and diastolic blood pressure be low the 95th percentile for age and gender  
Exclusion Criteria : 
1. The subject has had a lack of response to a trial of adequate dose and duration of MPH or intolerance to previous MPH treatment 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 16 of 72  
 
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
2. The subject is using any other current psychotropic medication except clonidine, guanfacine, 
atomoxetine and /or stimulants or has taken an i nvestigational drug in the [ADDRESS_937368] has a history of chronic vocal or motor tics or Tourette’s syndrome 
8. The subject has any clinically signi ficant ECG abnormalities at screening 
9. The subject has any major medical conditions that would interfere with involvement in a study or 
could be affected negatively by [CONTACT_690971] 
10. The subject has chronic medical illnesses including  a seizure disorder (excluding a history of 
febrile seizures), severe hypertension, untreated thyroid disease, known structural cardiac abnormalities, serious arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy,  glaucoma, or a family history of sudden 
death 
11. History (in the past 12 months) or presence of  clinically significant cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, renal, hepatic, gastrointes tinal, pulmonary, immunological, hematological, 
endocrine, or neurological disease that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_690967]/she participates in the trial or could confound study results 
12. Family history (parent or sibling) of structural cardiovascular disease 
13. Current or recent (past 12 months) history of drug abuse in someone living in the subject’s home 
14. Current symptoms or history of major psychiatric illness (for example schizophrenia, psychosis, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder , depression, severe anxiety disorder, obsessive 
compulsive disorder or autistic spectrum disorder) in addition to ADHD that requires treatment with additional medication or, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], would contraindicate study participation 
15. History or presence of suicidal ideation or significant self-injurious behavior 
16. The subject shows evidence of current physical, sexual, or emotional abuse 
17. Both biological parents of the subject have a history of bipolar disorder 
Ethics: 
This study will be conducted in compliance with Standa rd Operating Procedures of the Contract Research 
Organization (CRO), designed to ensure adherence to Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines as 
required by [CONTACT_716]: 
1. Declaration of Helsinki, 1964 (“Recommendations Guiding Physicians in Biomedical Research Involving Human Patients”) and all its accepted am endments to this date concerning medical 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals L.P. February 15, 2018 
RP-BP-EF003 v2.0: Efficacy of Aptensio XR®   in ADHD Children 4 to Less Than  6 Years of Age Page 17 of 72  
 
Name [CONTACT_66030]: 
Rhodes Pharmaceuticals LP Individual Study Table Referring to Part of the Dossier (For National Authority Use only) 
Name [CONTACT_2756]: Aptensio XR
®   Volume:  
Name [CONTACT_3261]: Methylphenidate Hydrochloride Page:  
research in humans 
2. ICH Guideline for GCP (CPMP/ICH/135/95) of th e European Agency for the Evaluation of 
Medicinal Products, Committee for Proprietary Me dicinal Products, International Conference on 
Harmonization of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use 
3. US Code of Federal Regulations dealing with clinical studies (21 CFR §50 and 21 CFR §56 
concerning Patient Consent and IRB regulations) 
Independent Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board 
The study protocol, amendments, and informed consent form (ICF) will be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_84771] (IRB) for each study site  in accordance with the [LOCATION_002] Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) regulations set forth in 21 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §50 and 
21 CFR §56.   
Subject Informed Consent The informed consent forms (ICF) will be reviewed  and approved by [CONTACT_9906]. The Investigator will 
conduct a brief interview over the tele phone or in person and then meet w ith prospective participants and 
their parent or legally authorized representative to  discuss the study and to give written informed consent 
to take part in the study if they choose to participate. Subject’s parent or legally authorized representative 
will provide a signature [CONTACT_690973], and willingness to participate in the study. Documentation of assent will be required by [CONTACT_690972]. Only after consent and assent have been provided 
would initial psychiatric and medical evaluations be conducted.   
 