 
Vibratory Stimuli: A Novel Rehabilitation Method for Preventing Post -
Traumatic Knee Osteoarthritis  
 
 
 
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
Document Date : 10/14/2019   
 
1 
 PROTOCOL TEMPLATE: INTERVENTIONAL STUDY  
 
Complete Title:  Vibratory Stimuli: A Novel Rehabilitation Method for Preventing Post- Traumatic Knee 
Osteoarthritis   
Short Title:  Vibration and Knee Osteoarthritis  
Drug or Device Name(s):  whole body vibration, local muscle vibration  
FDA IND/IDE (if applicable): IDE granted by [CONTACT_11604] -Chapel Hill Biomechanical IRB (IRB# 15 -0838)  
Sponsor:  US Department of Defense  
Protocol Date:  5/18/2015 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
2 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Table of Contents  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  2 
Abbreviations and Definitions of Terms  ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
Protocol Synopsis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  4 
1 BACKGROUND  AND RATIONALE  .......................................................................................................................... 6 
2 STUDY OBJECTIVES ................................................................................................................................................ 9 
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  ....................................................................................................................................... 9 
4 STUDY PROCEDURES  ........................................................................................................................................... 10 
5 STUDY EVALUATIONS AN D MEASUREMENTS  ................................................................................................... 13 
6 STATISTICAL CONSIDER ATIONS  .......................................................................................................................... 14 
7 STUDY INTERVENTION (DEVICE OR OTHER IN TERVENTION)  ............................................................................ [ADDRESS_354782] Heelstrike transient  
LMV  Local muscle vibration  
OA Osteoarthritis  
vGRF  Vertical ground reaction force  
WBV  Whole body vibration  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
4 
 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
 
Study Title  Vibratory Stimuli: A Novel Rehabilitation Method for Preventing 
Post -Traumatic Knee Osteoarthritis   
Funder  US Department of Defense  
Clinical Phase  Phase II 
Study Rationale  Anterior cruciate ligament injury and reconstruction surgery (ACLR) 
dramatically increase the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_290809] (OA). Individuals with ACLR possess deficits in quadriceps muscle function and proprioception (joint position sense) that alter knee joint loading during tasks such as walking in manners that contribute to development of knee OA. Vibratory stimuli enhance quadri ceps 
function and proprioception and may, therefore, reduce the risk of knee OA. The purposes of this study are to 1) evaluate and compare the effects of whole body vibration (WBV) and local muscle vibration (LMV) on quadriceps function, knee joint proprio ception, 
and walking gait biomechanics in individuals with ACLR and 2) identify characteristics that determine the efficacy of WBV and LMV for improving quadriceps function, knee joint proprioception, and walking gait biomechanics in individuals with ACLR.  
Study Objective(s)  Primary  
• To determine the effects of WBV and LMV on quadriceps 
function, proprioception, and gait biomechanics in individuals ACLR  
• To compare the effects of WBV and LMV on quadriceps 
function, proprioception, and gait biomechanics in individuals ACLR  
• To identify  factors that predict the effects of LMV and WBV on 
quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait biomechanics in individuals ACLR
 
Test Article(s)  WBV or LMV delivered at a frequency of 30Hz and intensity of 2 g 
Study Design  
 This preclinical investigation will utilize a single -blind randomized 
controlled experimental design whereby 75 individuals with primary unilateral ACLR will be  randomly assigned to WBV, LMV, and Control 
groups.  Stratified randomization into 3 groups of e qual size (n = 25) 
will be  performed using a computer generated randomization 
algorithm to ensure stratification with respect to age  and time since 
ACLR .
 
Subject Population  
key criteria for Inclusion 
and Exclusion:  Inclusion Criteria 
1. Subjects age 18 -35 
5 
 2. Undergone primary unilateral ACLR within 6 months to 5 
years of participation  
3. Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) self -
report survey Pain subscale score > 53.1 and Symptom 
subscale score > 44.[ADDRESS_354783] 20 minutes 3x per week  
5. Quadriceps central activation ratio < 95%  
Exclusion Criteria  
6. History of ACL gra ft rupture  
7. History of neurological disorder  
8. History of musculoskeletal injury to either leg within the [ADDRESS_354784]’s participation will last approximately [ADDRESS_354785] 3 years.  
Study Phases  
Screening  
Study Treatment  
Follow -Up   (1) Screening : screening for eligibility and obtaining consent and (2) 
Intervention : study intervention/experimental treatment.   Phase 2 
will involve 2 testing sessions separated by [CONTACT_3450] 1 week.   
Efficacy Evaluations  1. Gait biomechanics (vertical ground reaction force linear and instantaneous loading rates, peak internal knee extension 
moment, peak internal knee valgus moment)  
2. Somatosensory function (knee joint position sense error)  
3. Quadriceps function (isometric peak torque)  
Statistical And Analytic 
Plan Pre-Post change scores for each of the primary outcomes will be 
compared between groups via one -way ANCOVA  
DATA AND SAFETY 
MONITORING PLAN David Berkoff, MD from the UNC -Chapel Hill Department of 
Orthopaedics will serve as the Research Monitor for this 
investigation. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_290810] a summary report during each quarter of the funding period that details information detailing enrollment, verification of informed consent, 
and adverse event documentation.  The Research Monitor’s primary responsibilities relate to the proper conduct of the investigation and the welfare of the subjects who are involved.  As such, [CONTACT_290849] will have the authority to suspend research associated with the project in the event of violations of study protocol.
 
 
6 
  
1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Introduction  
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common cause of medical discharge from military service during 
peacetime and the second most prevalent cause during armed conflict, ranking it as one of the largest military “force subtractors”.
[ADDRESS_354786] -traumatic OA in military personnel.2  Knee injuries comprise 19% of all injuries 
sustained during military training3 and 15% of all non -combat injuries during deployment.[ADDRESS_354787] prevalent type of injury leading to battlefield evacuation, and Rivera et 
al.2 reported that 100% of knee injuries sustained during combat resulted in OA.   
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury dramatically increases the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_290811].5  ACL 
injury also accelerates knee OA development, as radiographic evidence of OA has been identified as 
early as 5 years following injury.6  While surgical reconstruction (ACLR) is the standard of treatment and 
improves joint stability, ACLR does not reduce the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_290811].[ADDRESS_354788] -traumatic knee OA .   
 
Impulsive/high rate joint loading  contributes to the development of 
knee OA.
8, 9  Quadriceps dysfunction/weakness is a highl y common, 
lingering complication associated with ACLR and other traumatic knee 
injuries that is caused by a neuromuscular phenomenon known as arthrogenic muscle inhibition (AMI).
10  Because the quadriceps 
functions as a shock absorber in the  early stance phase during walking 
and running gait, quadriceps dysfunction results in impulsive loading of the knee joint as evidenced by [CONTACT_290822].
11, 12  Given the 
repetitive nature of gait and its integral role in human locomotion, 
this impulsive loading contributes to deve lopment of OA.8, 9  Recent 
evidence suggests that that quadriceps dysfunction associated with ACLR results in joint space narrowing, a radiographic indicator of knee OA.
13  Individuals with traumatic 
knee injuries also display sensor y/proprioceptive deficits14, [ADDRESS_354789] -traumatic knee OA (Figure 1).   
 
1.[ADDRESS_354790] or Intervention  
Whole Body Vibration (Power Plate pro5)  
Local Muscle Vibration (prototype stimulator –  IDE granted by [CONTACT_11604] -Chapel Hill Biomedical Institutional 
Review Board)  
 
1.[ADDRESS_354791] that the underlying neural deficiencies (i.e. AMI) are 
not addressed by [CONTACT_290823].10, 19, [ADDRESS_354792] (local muscle vibration -  LMV) 
and ind irect (whole body vibration -  WBV) vibratory stimuli enhance quadriceps function in individuals 
with non -pathological knees,21-23 and may minimize the negative effects of AMI.  We demonstrated that 
LMV enhances quadriceps function in healthy individuals,23 and that both WBV and LMV produce 

7 
 equivalent improvements in quadriceps function following experimental knee joint effusion (i.e. 
simulated knee trauma) in healthy individuals.[ADDRESS_354793] that vibratory stimuli may improve 
quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait biomechanics (e.g. impulsive loading) following traumatic knee injuries, potentially reducing the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_290812] e OA .   
 Our preliminary data and findings reported by [CONTACT_29091]
14, 25, 26, [ADDRESS_354794] yet to be 
investigated.   
 
Clinical application of WBV  may be limited, as these devices require a fixed location, permit limited types 
of rehabilitation exercises due to the restricted space of the device (~5 ft2), and may be cost -prohibitive 
(as much as $10,000).  However, LMV can be integrated into a portab le, cost -effective device (~$250) 
for use in a variety of rehabilitation tasks and settings.  LMV may also be more effective, as it is applied 
directly to the quadriceps, thus it is less susceptible to dampi[INVESTIGATOR_290813].
[ADDRESS_354795] 
similar effects on quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait biomechanics in individuals with 
traumatic knee injuries.  
The results of this investigation will provide “proof of concept” regar ding the utility of WBV and LMV for 
prevention and management of knee OA, and will advance our understanding of the development and 
progression of this disease. Traditional rehabilitation and treatment methods have been only moderately effective due to the  fact that AMI limits the efficacy of quadriceps strengthening by 
[CONTACT_290824]. Therefore, the results of this investigation may promote the development of improvements in patient care by [CONTACT_290825] a shift in the treatment of knee pathol ogies 
(i.e. by [CONTACT_290826]). As knee OA adversely affects quality of life, the improved ability to treat and prevent knee OA resulting from this investigation would lead to improvements in quality of life. This information would also inform the development of a larger, long -term clinical trial to evaluate 
these effects on the long -term health and clinical outcomes in individuals who are afflic ted with knee OA 
or are at heightened risk for development of post- traumatic knee OA. These outcomes would have a 
direct impact on the substantial burden of knee OA on the US health care system.  
 
Exercise in general, including rehabilitation exercise, carries the risk of injury, pain, and soreness/discomfort. However, the tasks subjects will be asked to perform in this investigation are common to activities of daily living and rehabilitative exercise (i.e. quadriceps contractions, squatting, and walking), and strength training, and do not present increased risk of adverse events compared to these same risks when these activities are performed outside the laboratory setting (i.e. rare). The risk of subjects experiencing mild discomfort for a brief period of time (less than 1 second) during the 
electrical stimulation used for the Quadriceps Function Assessment is very common. However, this discomfort will immediately cease, and subjects will be familiarized with the electrical stimulation before 
[ADDRESS_354796] the proposed RESEARCH STRATEGY.  Each study is described below.   
1. LMV enhances quadriceps function sev eral minutes 
following application .  We  evaluated the effects of LMV on 
quadriceps activity in healthy individuals with non-
pathological knees  (n=22).23  Quadriceps activity 
(electromyographic amplitude) was measured during maximal isometric contractions prior to and immediately, 5, 15, and 30 minutes following LMV or a Control condition (no vibration).  A custom -built device identical 
to what we have pro posed was used to deliver the LMV 
stimulus. LMV enhanced quadriceps activity, and this 
effect persisted for several minutes following application (Figure 2).  These findings support our 
hypothesis that LMV enhances quadriceps function for a sustained perio d of time .  It is likely that these 
healthy individuals were subject to a “ceiling effect” regarding improvements in maximal quadriceps 
activity.  This suggests that LMV has a robust neuromuscular effect, thus we anticipate that individuals with knee patho logies who possess deficits in quadriceps function (e.g. ACLR) will realize larger 
improvements in quadriceps function compared to the healthy individuals in this preliminary study.     
 
2. WBV and LMV enhance quadriceps function similarly in individuals wit h simulated knee trauma . We 
evaluated the effects of WBV and LMV on quadriceps function in healthy individuals with simulated knee 
trauma (n=43).24  The underlyi ng cause of quadriceps dysfunction, AMI,  is attributable to sensory 
information that signals pathology including pain, inflammation, swelling, and damage to mechanoreceptors.
31  AMI can also be induced experimentally by [CONTACT_290827]/effusion.32  Quadriceps function was assessed via the central 
activation ratio (CAR).  CAR quantifies an individual’s ability to voluntarily activate a muscle, and is an 
indicator of AMI.  A detailed description of this method is provided in the RESEARCH STRATEGY below.  
Following pre -test measures, 60mL of saline was 
injected into the knee joint space to induce AMI. Subjects we re then exposed to WBV, LMV, or no 
vibration (Control), and quadriceps function was reassessed post -intervention.  The interventions and 
methods for assessing quadriceps function utilized in this preliminary study are identical to those proposed in the RES EARCH STRATEGY .  CAR improved 
significantly with WBV (+8.3%) and LMV (+5.9%), but not in the Control group (+0.7%).  While both forms of vibration improved quadriceps function, this improvement did not differ between LMV and WBV.   Additionally, subjects w ho experienced the greatest inhibitory effects of effusion displayed the greatest 
improvements in quadriceps function with vibratory stimuli. These findings support our hypothesis that WBV and LMV may enhance quadriceps function similarly in individuals wi th knee pathology .  We 

9 
 anticipate that individuals with “real” knee pathologies (as opposed to the acute, simulated trauma in 
this preliminary investigation) will realize substantially larger improvements in quadriceps function due to the chronic nature of their quadriceps dysfu nction.     
   
3. Treatment modalities that improve proprioception may reduce impulsive loading .  We evaluated the 
effects of stochastic resonance electrical stimulation (SR) on proprioception and gait biomechanics in individuals with knee OA  (n=52).
27, 28  Impulsive loading was quantified from the loading rates of the 
peak vertical ground reaction force (vGRF) and heel 
strike transient (HST).  The HST is a  rapid, transient 
rise in the vGRF which occurs shortly following ground 
contact [CONTACT_290828].
11, [ADDRESS_354797], decreased quadriceps/hamstring coactivation, and decreased impulsive loading (Figure 4).  These findings demonstrate that modalities that improve proprioception potentially reduce impulsive loading.  We a nticipate that WBV and LMV will both improve 
proprioception in individuals who have undergone ACLR, thus altering gait biomechanics in manners that would reduce the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_290811].     
 
[ADDRESS_354798]- traumatic knee OA.  The objectives of this proposal  are to 1) determine the acute effects of 
WBV and LMV on quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait bio mechanics in individuals who have 
experienced traumatic knee injury (ACLR); 2) compare the efficacy of LMV and WBV for these purposes; 
and 3) identify factors which predict the efficacy of these modalities.   
 
3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN  (brief overview)  
3.[ADDRESS_354799] undergone ACLR will be randomly assigned to WBV, LMV, and Control groups (Figure 5).  This convenience sample will include individuals recruited from two local orthopaedic clinics (UNC Department of Orthopaedics and Triangle Orthopaedic Associates), local rehabilitation clinics, and the University population, as well as veterans recruited from the Veterans Affairs Medi cal Center in nearby 
[CONTACT_290829], NC.  Quadriceps function, proprioception, and 
walking gait biomechanics will be assessed prior to and 
following vibratory treatments (LMV or WBV) or a Control intervention.  The WBV and LMV groups will 

10 
 receive a single session of vibratory stimuli which we previously demonstrated to enhance quadriceps 
function.23, 24  The Control group will perform identical procedures, but no vibratory stimulus will be 
applied.    
3.2 Allocation to Treatment Groups and Blinding (if applicable)  
Stratified randomization into 3 groups of equal size (n = 25) will be performed using a compute r 
generated randomization algorithm.  This algorithm will ensure stratification with respect to age  and 
time since ACLR.   
 
3.[ADDRESS_354800] ’s participation will last 
approximately 3 hours and 45 minutes over approximately 2 weeks.  
  
3.4 Study Population  
We will recruit subjects who meet the following criteria:  
1) age 18 -35 years  
2) undergone unilateral ACLR within 5 years prior to participation  
3) at least [ADDRESS_354801] -ACLR  
4) no history of ACL graft rupture or revision surgery  
5) no history of neurological disorder  
6) no history of injury to either leg within 6 months prior to participation (other than the initial ACLR)  
7) Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) self -report survey Pain subscale score > 53.1and 
Symptom subscale score > 44.9  
8) cleared by a physician for return to physical activity, and currently physically active, participating in at least [ADDRESS_354802] risk of ACL injury
33 but is unlikely to 
possess idiopathic/non -traumatic knee OA.[ADDRESS_354803]- ACLR interval (6 months -5 years) will ensure that 
subjects are outside the acute inflammatory phase and reduce the likelihood that they have already developed post -traumatic knee OA.  A history of graft rupture or bilateral ACLR may infer inadequ ate rehabilitation or 
flawed surgical procedures, and may alter the dependent variables.  Neurological disorders, acute orthopaedic injuries, and high -level pain and symptoms in the ACLR limb may also influence the dependent variables.  The 
criterion value s for the KOOS subscale scores are based on reference values obtained from more than 4,[ADDRESS_354804] -ACLR.
35  Lastly, sedentary individuals may develop knee OA via other mechanisms 
(e.g. compromised waste -nutrient exchange) rather than the hypothesized loading mechanisms.  
Though highly prevalent, not all individuals display quadriceps dysfunction following ACLR.10, [ADDRESS_354805] followed immediately by [CONTACT_290830].  In the event that subjects do not possess 
quadriceps dysfunction (i.e. CAR < 95%),10, 38 they will be excluded from the investigation.  These procedures 
will ensure that we enroll the targe t population.   
 
4 STUDY PROCEDURES  (what will be done)    
[ADDRESS_354806] with the testing procedures, and establish pa rameters necessary for the subsequent testing sessions to 
expedite data collection. Upon reporting to the laboratory for Session 2, subjects will perform a 5 
minute warm up on a stationary cycle ergometer at a self -selected pace to reduce the likelihood of  
injury. They will then be fitted with motion capture markers and electromyography (EMG) electrodes 
followed by [CONTACT_290831]. They will then perform the respective intervention to which they have been assigned, followed by [CONTACT_447] -test measures of the 
aforementioned assessments. Procedures for Session 3 will be identical with the exception that the Proprioception/Sensory Assessment described below will be performed prior to and following the interventions. Sessions 2 and 3 will be separated by 1 -week washout periods, and the order of these 
sessions will be counterbalanced.  
 
4.1 Screening/Baseline Visit procedures  
Gait Biomechanics Assessment  
Subjects will walk forward along a 6m (~20 ft) walkway at a comfortable, self -selected “fast” speed while 
biomechanical data are collected.27, 39, [ADDRESS_354807] 5 practice trials will be performed during the 
familiarization session (Session 1) to determine the average preferred speed and ensure subjects can 
consistently strike a force plate mounted in the walkway with the test limb without notice ably altering 
their gait (i.e. “aiming” for the force plate).  Gait speed will be monitored via an infrared timing system to ensure each trial is within ±10% of the preferred speed.  Kinematics (knee motion patterns), kinetics (knee joint moments and groun d reaction forces) and lower extremity muscle activity (quadriceps and 
hamstrings EMG) will be sampled during each trial. Subjects will perform 5 valid trials from which gait biomechanical variables will be averaged for statistical analysis.  
 EMG electrod es will be placed over the back (hamstrings muscles) and front (quadriceps muscles) of the 
thigh via adhesive interfaces.  Electrode placement sites will be shaved, lightly abraded, and cleansed with isopropyl alcohol to improve adhesion to the skin and signal quality.  Motion capture markers will 
be secured on the trunk and pelvis, and the thigh, shank, and foot segments via double -sided tape.  All 
mea surement hardware will be further secured via hypoallergenic tape.     
 
Quadriceps Function Assessment  
Subjects will be seated on a device used to measure muscle strength called an isokinetic dynamometer.  
Straps will be used to secure the torso, thigh, an d lower leg to the device with the knee in 60 ° of flexion.  
The moveable arm of the dynamometer will be fixed in place.  Two adhesive stimulating electrodes will 
be placed on the anterior thigh over the quadriceps muscle.  Subjects will be asked to contrac t the 
quadriceps maximally and as quickly as possible by “kicking out” against the dynamometer in response 
to a visual (light) stimulus while torque data are sampled.  An investigator will view the torque data in real time and apply an electrical stimulus to the quadriceps after the torque reaches a maximal plateau.  This electrical stimulus will consist of a 10 pulse train, pulse duration of 0.6ms, delivered at a frequency of 100Hz, and an intensity of 125V.  The electrical stimulator will be isolated from fluctuations in 
building’s electrical power supply via a stimulus isolation unit.  These methods and stimulus characteristics replicate those of previous investigations conducted in healthy
41-43 and pathological20, 44 -
12 
 46 populations, including the recent investigations conducted in our laboratories noted abov e.  
Quadriceps AMI will be quantified via peak torque (PT), rate of torque development (RTD), and the 
central activation ratio (CAR) during these maximal contractions.   Measuring the CAR involves applying 
an electrical stimulus to a maximally contracting muscle (superimposed burst) which activates all the 
muscle’s motor units.  The ratio of torque resulting from the superimposed burst to the maximal voluntary torque represents the level of inhibition.
[ADDRESS_354808] 2 practice trials to 
become familiar and comfortable with these procedures.  Three trials will then be recorded from which 
PT, RTD, and CAR will be averaged for statistical analyses.  
 
Proprioception/Somato sensory Assessment  
Proprioceptive/Somatosensory function will be assessed via a partial weight -bearing joint repositioning 
task.28, 47   Subjects will be positioned supi[INVESTIGATOR_72301] a sliding platform that will be reclined 75° relative to the 
vertical (Figure 5, Appendix A).  This platform will permit unrestricted knee motion, but will control 
extraneous factors that influence joint position sens e assessment during weight- bearing such as 
postural sway and trunk position.  Subjects will be blindfolded, and each trial will begin with the knee in full extension, and subjects will flex the knee to a prescribed angle (reference angle) by [CONTACT_290832].  This angle will be maintained for 5s after which the subject will return to full knee 
extension, and will then attempt to replicate the reference angle.  The absolute difference between the reference angle and the reproduced angle will be  calculated and averaged across 5 trials for statistical 
analyses.  Knee joint angles will be assessed via an electrogoniometer placed over the knee and secured using hypoallergenic double -sided tape.    
 
We will also measure vibratory perception threshold  (VPT), a more clinically feasible assessment of 
somatosensory function.  Deficits in VPT have been identified in individuals with knee pathologies and 
are associated with impulsive loading during gait.
18, 48  VPT is measured using a device called a 
biothesiometer which vibrates at varying amplitudes that are controlled by [CONTACT_093].  VPT will be assessed by [CONTACT_290833][INVESTIGATOR_100758], medial (tibial) and lateral (fibular) malleoli, and 1
st metatarsophalangeal joint.18, 48  The 
amplitude of the vibration will be increased gradually, and subjects will verbally indicate the point at which they consciously perceive the vibratory stim ulus, and the corresponding amplitude will be 
recorded as VPT.  Three trials will be performed at each site and averaged for statistical analysis.     
 
Self-Report Surveys  
The International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Form (IKDC), Knee In jury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), and Tegner Activity Scale self -report surveys will be used to 
document subjects’ knee trauma history, current symptoms, and functional ability.  The IKDC and KOOS 
have been demonstrated as valid indicators of knee function and clinical outcomes in individuals with 
knee pathologies,49, 50 while the Tegner scale is a valid indicator of physical activity level in these 
individ uals.51  These surveys will be administered electronically via Qualtrics .   
 
4.2 Intervention/Treatment procedures   
Vibratory Interventions  
All interventions will be performed with subject standing on a WBV device in approximately 40 ° of knee 
flexion, but the WBV device will only be “on” for the WBV group.  Subjects assigned to the WBV group will receive a vibratory stimulus (30Hz, 2 g) applied for [ADDRESS_354809] between exposures.  Subjects in the LMV group will receive an identical stimulus (30Hz, 2 g) via a custom- built vibrator secured over the distal anterior thigh.  We have previously 
[ADDRESS_354810] same procedures with the exception that no vibratory stimulus will be applied.  All 
interventions will be conducted by a graduate research assistant, and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1318] b linded to group 
assignment.   
 
4.3 Follow - up procedures  (by [CONTACT_41995])  
None  
 
4.[ADDRESS_354811] Completion/ Withdrawal procedures  
Subject participation in the study will be complete when he/she has completed Session 3.  Subjects will 
receive prorated monetary compensation at this time.  
 
4.6 Screen failure procedures  
All subjects will provide informed consent prior to engaging in the screening procedures.  Potential subjects who complete the screening session but do not meet the inclusion criteria will be thanked for their time and excluded from further participation.  
 
5 STUDY EVALUATIONS AND MEASUREMENTS (how measurements will be made)   
See 4.1 Screening/Baseline Visit procedures  
 
5.[ADDRESS_354812] ID# to which their personal 
information will not be linked. Deidentified data files (e.g. gait biomechanics data trials) will be stored 
and backed up in numerous password -protected locations including compute rs in the Neuromuscular 
Research Laboratory, external hard drives, and the UNC -CH Research Computing Mass Storage System.  
 David Berkoff, MD from the UNC -Chapel Hill Department of Orthopaedics will serve as the Research 
Monitor for this investigation. [CONTACT_290850] possesses both the research ethics and medical expert[INVESTIGATOR_290848]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_290810] a summary report during each quarter of the funding period detailing the information that is necessary for [CONTACT_290851] off to perform his 
duties. These duties will include ensuring subjects meet the enrollment criteria, verifying the informed 
consent process for each subject, and monitoring adverse events. A detailed description of the Research 
Monitor's duties and authori ties (i.e. conditions under which the Research Monitor can suspend 
research activities) has been uploaded in IRBIS.   
Prior to analysis, the data will be screened for outliers (values more than 3 sd beyond the mean) and 
evaluated for normality via the Shaprio- Wilk test, visual inspection of the histograms, and evaluation of 
the ratios of the skewness and kurtosis statistics to their standard errors to ensure quality.   
14 
 The 5 -minute warm -up prior to testing is designed to reduce the risk of muscle sorene ss and/or injury 
during testing. The electrical stimulator used for the Quadriceps Function Assessment will always be 
connected to a stimulus isolation unit to ensure that the subject is isolated from fluctuations in the 
building's power supply. Any safety  concerns (i.e. musculoskeletal injury) would likely be recognized 
immediately during testing, but subjects will be instructed via the informed consent document that they should inform UNC Student Health Services or their personal physician in the event th at they experience 
lingering issues after leaving the laboratory.  
 
All members of the research team involved with data collection are certified in CPR and First Aid. These individuals will monitor subjects for adverse events during testing, and will refer  any individuals who 
experience adverse events to the Stallings -Evans Sports Medicine Center (located in the building 
adjacent to Fetzer Hall where the Neuromuscular Research Laboratory is located), UNC Student Health 
Services, or Emergency Medical Service s depending on the nature and severity of the adverse event.
 
 
[ADDRESS_354813] 
assessment will serve as the primary endpoint.   
6.2 Statistical Methods  
 
Specific Aim 1:  To determine the effects of WBV and LMV on quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait 
biomechanics in individuals with ACLR.    
Analyses for Aim [ADDRESS_354814] change scores for quadrice ps function, 
proprioception, and gait biomechanics as  dependent variables in separate statistical models.  Mean 
change scores will be compared across groups (WBV, LMV, and Control) via one -way analysis of 
covariance (ANCOVA).  Dunnett’s procedure will be u sed to evaluate each the least -squares means for 
each of the intervention arms (WBV and LMV) versus control in a relatively powerful manner while 
controlling the overall significance level at two- sided 0.05.  The corresponding pre -test values for each 
depe ndent variable will be managed as a covariate in these models to increase precision of the 
treatment effects, as well as to account any random imbalances among the groups with respect to these 
pre-scores.  Other covariates would include variables with rand om imbalances across the groups 
measured at the pre -test.  
 The number of individuals who display HST prior to and following the intervention (or control) will be compared via McNemar’s test.  This analysis produces a χ
2 statistic for paired samples (i.e.,  the 
proportion with HST at pre -test vs. post- test, separately for each group).     
 
Specific Aim 2:  To compare the effects of WBV and LMV on quadriceps function, proprioception, and gait 
biomechanics in individuals with ACLR.   
Aim [ADDRESS_354815] change scores for each dependent 
15 
 variable, adjusted for covariates, will be tested for the pairwise comparison of  WBV versus LMV at the 
two-sided 0.05 significance level.  
 
Specific Aim 3:  To identify  factors that predict the effects of LMV and WBV on quadriceps function, 
proprioception, and gait biomechanics in individuals with ACLR.    
Aim [ADDRESS_354816] values separately for quadriceps func tion, proprioception, 
and the KOOS.  We hypothesize that individuals with greater quadriceps dysfunction and proprioceptive deficits combined with lower KOOS scores (i.e. greater pain, symptoms, etc.) will display greater improvements. Separately for each dependent variable, these variables will then be placed into a stepwise multiple regression model (starting with a forward selection step).  In this way, the variable with the strongest relationship with the change score will be entered first, followed by [CONTACT_290834] (after adjusting for the first), etc.    The model selection will stop when no additional variables are identified to enter to leave the model at the 0.[ADDRESS_354817]  a wide net to include relevant candidate terms.  Next, we will examine each of 
these terms, one -at-a-time, as an independent variable in another regression model where the change 
score is the dependent variable; an indicator term for the intervention (WBV  vs. LMV) will also be 
included as an explanatory variable, as well as the interaction between the intervention indicator and the candidate term.  The initial focus will be on the significance of the interaction term, as this will determine whether the effect of the candidate term is homogeneous (reflected by [CONTACT_105] -significance of the 
interaction at the 0.05 level) across the interventions, or not.  If the test is non -significant, the interaction 
term will be removed and the model refitted; the candidate term  is then assessed from this model 
regarding its ability to predict the homogeneous effect of LMV and WBV on the corresponding dependent variable.  If the interaction test is instead statistically significant, then the interaction term is retained in the mo del, and statistical contrasts will be constructed to estimate and test the separate 
effects of the candidate term by [CONTACT_65237].  
 
6.[ADDRESS_354818] scores as the  covariate.  These analyses indicate that a sample of 45 -63 subjects (15 -21 per 
group) would provide statistical power of 0.80 for α = 0.05 to identify significant overall ANCOVA models for CAR ( f = 0.48) and peak torque (f  = 0.41), where f  is the effect s ize calculated as the square root of the 
ratio of the between -group sum of squares and the error sum of squares.  Further, these preliminary 
data generated the pairwise effect sizes presented in the table below calculated using the following 
equation:  
 
 Effect Size=  [∆WBV  (or ∆LMV ) - ∆Control ]
Pooled Standard Deviation      
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_354819] sizes given in Table 2 was calculated for one -tailed independent t- tests.  
These estimates indicate that a sample of 39 -78 subjects (13- 26 per group) would provide statistical 
power of 0.80 for α = 0.05 to evaluate pairwise  comparisons between the Control group and each 
vibratory intervention (i.e. Aim 1).  In contrast, 194 subjects (97 per group) would be necessary to 
provide adequate power to identify the relatively small effect sizes for comparing the two vibratory interv entions (i.e. Aim 2).  The associated mean differences in CAR between WBV and Control and 
between LMV and Control were 8.26% and 5.86%, respectively, while the difference between LMV and WBV was only 0.68%.  Similarly, the associated mean differences in pe ak torque between WBV and 
Control and between LMV and Control were 0.29 N/kg and 0.20 N/kg respectively, while the difference between LMV and WBV was only 0.04 N/kg.  These data suggest that the small mean differences in the dependent variables between WBV  and LMV, even when powered sufficiently, are not likely clinically or 
physiologically relevant.  Therefore, we will recruit a sample of 75 individuals (25 per group) to address the proposed specific aims.  This sample size will provide adequate power to d emonstrate similar 
improvements in quadriceps function with WBV and LMV.   
 
7 STUDY INTERVENTION (drug, device or other intervention details ) 
7.1 Whole Body Vibration  
Whole body vibration will be delivered in this investigation via a commercially available device (Power 
Plate  pro5) .  This device oscillates in the vertical dimension at a frequency of 30 Hz and acceleration of 
2g. 
  
7.2 Local Muscle Vibration  
The local muscle vibration stimulator to be used in this investigation is a custom -built  prototype 
develop ed in collaboration with the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering at North Carolina 
State University as part of a collaborative grant to be used explicitly for the purposes of the proposed 
study.   As of 5/13/2015, this device has been used to enhance muscle function via the exact intervention 
proposed for this study in more than [ADDRESS_354820] audio speaker that is coupled 
with a frequency generator through an amplifier that causes it to vibrate in the anterior -posterior 
direction (i.e. into the quadriceps muscle). Thi s vibratory stimulus is similar to the mechanics of a reflex 
hammer when evaluating the tendon -tap/knee -jerk reflex clinically in that it creates rapid changes in 
quadriceps length, thus exciting the muscle via the muscle spi[INVESTIGATOR_290814].  Vibration frequency is held 
17 
 constant at 30Hz as determined by [CONTACT_290835], and the acceleration is 
constrained to 2 g via feedback provided to the controller unit from an accelerometer mounted on the 
oscillator.  
 
8 STUDY INTERVENTION ADMINISTRATION (if applicable)   
This preclinical investigation will utilize a single -blind randomized controlled experimental design 
whereby 75 individuals with primary unilateral ACLR will be  randomly assigned to WBV, LMV, and Control 
groups.  S tratified randomization into 3 groups of equal size (n = 25) will be  performed using a computer 
generated randomization algorithm to ensure stratification with respect to age  and time since ACLR .  All 
individuals involved with data collection and analysis will be blinded to group allocation.  
 
[ADDRESS_354821]. Berkoff possesses both the research ethics and medical expert[INVESTIGATOR_290848]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_290810] a summary report during each quarter of the funding period that details information necessary for him to perform the following responsibilities:  
 1. Enrollment data  
a. # of subjects (total and per group)  
i. The Research Monitor will be unblinded to group, but the PI [INVESTIGATOR_290815].  
ii. Groups will be identified by [CONTACT_32819] (e.g. Group 1 = Control, etc.) in reports generated 
by [CONTACT_978], and the Research Monitor will be pr ovided a key to decode group membership by [CONTACT_290836].  
iii. The Research Monitor will evaluate enrollment data to ensure the enrollment rate is consistent with the project timeline (i.e. 30 subje cts per year for Years 1 and 2; 15 for Year 3).  
 
b. The Research Monitor will verify subjects meet the enrollment criteria  
i. Relevant data regarding the inclusion/exclusion criteria (e.g. age, KOOS scores, CAR, time since ACL reconstruction surgery, etc .) will be entered in an electronic data management 
system (Epi [CONTACT_5628], Centers of Disease Control and Prevention). This system is capable of generating spreadsheets for data organization. These spreadsheets will be provided to the Research Monitor to permit  verification of the enrollment criteria.  
 2. Verify consent  
a. Data entry in Epi [INVESTIGATOR_290816] a given 
subject’s data to verify (yes/no) that written informed consent was obtained. This individual will  also 
be required to enter his/her initials in Epi [INVESTIGATOR_290817]. The Research 
Monitor will verify that each subject has been consented based on these data contained in the quarterly report.  
18 
  
3. Monitor adverse events  
a. Subje cts will be monitored for adverse events by [CONTACT_290837], and 
will be instructed to inform the research team immediately if they experience adverse events after leaving the laboratory. Information related to adverse events will be entered in Epi [INVESTIGATOR_290818].  
i. Adverse Event? (yes/no)  
1. If yes, was there appropriate follow up by [CONTACT_84048]?  
a. Subjects will be contact[CONTACT_11252] 1 day of identification of an adverse event and again 
after 1 week. The dates of follow up by [CONTACT_290838] 
[CONTACT_5628].  
2. Appropriate documentation sent to UNC -CH Biomedical IRB?  
a. The dates of submission, IRB response, and resolution will be documented in Epi [CONTACT_5628].  
3. The Research Monitor will determine if the adverse event is associated with participation in the study using the UNC -CH Biomedical IRB decision tree 
(http://research.unc.edu/fi les/2012/11/ccm3_018993.pdf ). Documentation (e.g. 
description of the adverse event, symptoms, etc.) will be sent to the Research Monitor for 
evaluation of risk which will be used to determine the following:  
a. Severity of the adverse event as per US Depar tment of Health and Human Services 
guidelines ( http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/advevntguid.html#AA )?  
b. Is this a recurring problem (i.e. multiple adverse events of the same type)?  
c. Is this adverse event specific to one of the interventions?  
 
Authorities  
The Research Monitor’s primary responsibilities relate to the proper conduct of the investigation and the welfare of the subjects who are involved. As such, [CONTACT_290849] will have the authority to suspend research associated with the project when any of  the following occurs:  
1. Enrollment criteria are inconsistent with those specified in the research protocol in [ADDRESS_354822] in any  quarter of the funding period  
3. Failure by [CONTACT_290839] -CH Biomedical 
IRB guidelines  
4. Multiple adverse events are reported (3+) in a given quarter of the funding period  
5. Multiple adverse ev ents are reported within a given intervention group (5+) across the entire 
funding period  
 
Any subjects who experience adverse events will be referred to UNC Student Health Services, the Stallings -Evans Sports Medicine clinic (located in the building adja cent to Fetzer Hall where the 
Neuromuscular Research Laboratory is located), or Emergency Medical Services depending on the nature and severity of the adverse event. All individuals involved with data collection are certified in CPR and First Aid.  
 
[ADDRESS_354823] ID# to which their personal information 
will not be linked. Deidentified data files (e.g. gait biomechanics data trials) will be stored and backed up in  
numerous password -protected locations including computers in the Neuromuscular Research Laboratory, 
external hard drives, and the UNC -CH Research Computing Mass Storage System.   
[ADDRESS_354824] 
recruitment script and will be allowed to ask any questions pertaining to the investigation. Individuals 
who are interested in participating will be provided the PI’s contact [CONTACT_290840] [INVESTIGATOR_290819]. Additionally, subjects will be recruited via informational flyers posted on the UNC -CH campus and in local 
rehabilitation clinics, including the Durham VA Medical Center, and via an informational email posted on the UNC -CH server. Subjects will also be recruited from UNC Orthopedics (Jeff Spang, MD) and Triangle 
Orthopaedic Associates (Jeff Solic, MD). All subjects must receive physician approval to return t o regular, 
unrestricted physical activity to be eligible for participation. Drs. Spang and Solic will provide subjects with information regarding participation in the study following the subject’s clinical visit at which this approval is obtained. [CONTACT_290852] (joint appointment at Durham VA Medical Center) will serve in this 
same capacity for recruiting subjects from the Durham VA Medical Center. We will also submit a request 
to the Carolina Data Warehouse for Health to generate a list of patients with ACL reconstruction within 
the past [ADDRESS_354825] potential subjects via telephone, letter/US Mail, or email depending on the available 
contact [CONTACT_290841]’s interest in participating in the study. [CONTACT_290853] will 
perform similar retrospective chart reviews at Triangle Orthopaedic Associates to identify potential 
subjects. The Healthy Control cohort for this investigation will con sist of volunteers from the faculty, 
staff, and student populations at UNC -CH and the surrounding area. Potential subjects will be recruited 
verbally from classes following approval by [CONTACT_290842]. At this time, potential subjects will be read 
a standard recruitment script and will be allowed to ask any questions pertaining to the investigation. 
Individuals who are interested in participating will be provided the PI’s contact [CONTACT_290843] [INVESTIGATOR_290820].  
 
Drs. Spang and Solic each perform approximately 50 ACLR procedures annually, and each of their orthopaedic practices (UNC Orthopaedics and Triangle Orthopaedic Associates, respectively) performs 
more t han 200 ACLR procedures annually. The Durham VA Medical Center performs approximately 10 
ACLR procedures each year in veterans who meet the inclusion criteria. These data indicate that as many 
as 1,230 potential subjects will be available for recruitment v ia our clinical collaborations during the 
funding period (410/year x 3 years). Additionally, we will perform retrospective chart reviews in each of 
these clinical settings to identify potential subjects. Lastly, we will also recruit potential subjects from  
local rehabilitation clinics and from the University community. As part of ongoing research in our 
laboratories we have recruited 40+ individuals in the past year who meet these criteria from the 
University community alone without taking advantage of the aforementioned clinical collaborations that 
have been established for the project or targeting local rehabilitation clinics. As such, we are highly confident that we can recruit the necessary sample for the investigation.  
 
[ADDRESS_354826] are answered prior to providing written informed consent.  Drs. Blackburn (PI), Padua (Co -Investigator), and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_98429] (co -investigator), and 
all research assistants will be obtaining consent.  As the PI [INVESTIGATOR_290821], these individuals will be informed that their 
participation or the lack thereof will not influence their academic standing. Similarly, UNC -CH employees 
will be informed that their participation or the lack thereo f will not influence their employment status. 
Lastly, subjects recruited from orthopaedic and rehabilitation clinics will be informed their clinical care will not be influenced by [CONTACT_290844].  
 
13 PLANS FOR PUBLICATION  
We intend to  draft 3 primary manuscripts for publication that will detail, respectively, 1) the effects of the 
interventions on gait biomechanics, 2) the effects of the interventions on somatosensory function, and 3) patient 
characteristics that influence the efficacy  of the interventions.  
 
14 REFERNECES   
1. Patzkowski JC, Rivera JC, Ficke JR, Wenke JC. The changing face of disability in the US Army: the Operation 
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom effect . J Am Acad Orthop Surg 20(Suppl 1): S23 -30, 2012.  
2. Rivera JC, Wenke JC, Buckwalter JA, Ficke JR, Johnson AE. Posttraumatic osteoarthritis caused by [CONTACT_229660]: the primary source of disability in warriors . J Am Acad Orthop Surg 20 (Suppl 1): S6 4-9, 2012.  
3. Wilkinson D, Blacker S, Richmond V, Horner F, Rayson M, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_94053] A, Knapik J. Injuries and injury risk factors 
among British army infantry soldiers during predeployment training . Inj Prev 17: 381- 387, 2011.  
4. Hauret KG, Taylor BJ, Clemmons NS,  Block SR, Jones BH. Frequency and causes of nonbattle injuries air 
evacuated from operations Iraqi freedom and enduring freedom, U.S. Army, 2001 -2006 . Am J Prev Med 38([ADDRESS_354827]): S94 -107, 2010.  
5. Friel NA Chu CR. The role of ACL injury in the development of posttraumatic knee osteoarthritis . Clin Sports Med 
32(1): 1- 12, 2013.  
6. Suomalainen P, Järvelä T, Paakkala A, Kannus P, Järvinen M. Double -bundle versus single -bundle anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction: a prospective randomized study with 5 -year results . Am J Sports Med 40(7): 
1511- 8: PMID: 22691456, 2012.  
7. von Porat A, Roos EM, Roos H. High prevalence of osteoarthritis after an anterior cruciate ligament tear in male 
soccer players: a study of radiographic and patient relevant outcomes . Ann Rh eum Dis 63(3): 269- 273, 2004.  
8. Ewers BJ, Jayaraman VM, Banglmaier RF, Haut RC. Rate of blunt impact loading affects changes in retropatellar cartilage and underlying bone in the rabbit patella.  J Biomech 35(6): 747- 55, 2002.  
9. Yang KH, Boyd RD, Kish VL,  Burr DB, Caterson B, Radin EL. Differential effect of load magnitude and rate on the 
initiation and progression of osteoarthrosis. in Proceedings of the 35th Orthopaedic Research Society Annual Meeting. 1989. Las Vegas, NV. 
10. Hart JM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_98429] B, He rtel J, Ingersoll CD. Quadriceps activation following knee injuries: a systematic 
review . J Athl Train 45(1): 87 -97, 2010.  
11. Mikesky AE, Meyer A, Thompson KL. Relationship between quadriceps strength and rate of loading during gait in women . J Orthop Res  18(2): 171 -5, 2000.  
12. Jefferson RJ, Collins JJ, Whittle MW, Radin EL, O'Connor JJ. The role of the quadriceps in controlling impulsive 
forces around heel strike . Proc Inst Mech Eng H 204(1): 21- 8, 1990.  
13. Tourville TW, Jarrell KM, Naud S, Slauterbeck JR, Johnson RJ, Beynnon BD. Relationship between isokinetic strength and tibiofemoral joint space width changes after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction . Am J Sports 
Med 42(2): 302- 311, 2014.  
[ADDRESS_354828] of early whole- body vibration therapy on 
neuromuscular control after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: A randomized controlled trial.  Am J 
Sports Med 41(4): 804- 814, 2013.  
15. Reider B, Arcand MA, Diehl MH, Mroczek K, Abulencia A,  Stroud CC, Palm M, Gilbertson J, Staszak P. 
Proprioception of the knee before and after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction . Arthroscopy 19(1): 2- 12, 
2003.  
16. Holla JF, van der Leeden M, Peter WF, Roorda LD, van der Esch M, Lems WF, Gerritsen M, Vo orneman RE, 
Steultjens MP, Dekker J. Proprioception, laxity, muscle strength and activity limitations in early symptomatic 
knee osteoarthritis: results from the CHECK cohort . J Rehabil Med 44(10): [ADDRESS_354829], Burr DB. Proprioception, gait kinematics, and rate of 
loading during walking: are they related? J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 5(4): 379 -87, 2005.  
18. Shakoor N, Lee KJ, Fogg LF, Wimmer MA, Foucher KC, Mikolaitis RA, Block JA. The relations hip of vibratory 
perception to dynamic joint loading, radiographic severity, and pain in knee osteoarthritis . Arthritis Rheum 
64(1): 181- 6, 2012.  
19. Hurley MV, Jones DW, Newham DJ. Arthrogenic quadriceps inhibition and rehabilitation of patients with extensive traumatic knee injuries . Clin Sci (Lond) 86(3): [ADDRESS_354830], Hart JA, Miller MD. Quadriceps muscle activation and radiographic osteoarthritis following ACL revision . Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc 19(4): 634 -640, 2011.  
21. Tihanyi TK, Horvath M, Fazekas G, Hortobagyi T, Tihanyi J. One session of whole body vibration increases voluntary muscle strength transiently in patients with stroke . Clin Rehabil 21(9): 782 -93, 2007.  
22. Luo J, McNamara BP, Moran K. Influen ce of resistance load on electromyography response to vibration training 
with sub -maximal isometric contractions . Int J Sports Sci Eng 1(1): 45 -54, 2007.  
23. Pamukoff DN, Ryan ED, Blackburn JT. The acute effects of local muscle vibration frequency on peak torque, rate of torque development, and electromyography J Electromyogr Kinesiol (In Review)2014.  
24. Blackburn JT, Pamukoff DN, Sakr M, Berkoff DJ. Whole body and local muscle vibration reduce quadriceps arthrogenic inhibition Arch Phys Med Rehabil (In Re view)2013.  
25. Moezy A, Olyaei G, Hadian M, Razi M, Faghihzadeh S. A comparative study of whole body vibration training and conventional training on knee proprioception and postural stability after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction . Br J Sports Med  42(5): 373- 378, 2008.  
26. Brunetti O, Filippi [CONTACT_68460], Lorenzini M, Liti A, Panichi R, Roscini M, Pettorossi VE, Cerulli G. Improvement of posture 
stability by [CONTACT_290845] . Knee Surg Sports 
Traumatol Arthrosc 14(11): [ADDRESS_354831] of stochastic resonance electrical stimulation and knee sleeve on impulsive loading and muscle co -contraction during gait in knee  osteoarthritis . Clin Biomech 
(Bristol, Avon) 26(8): [ADDRESS_354832], Weinhold PS. Stochastic resonance electrical stimulation to improve proprioception in knee osteoarthritis . Knee 18(5):  317-22, 2011.  
29. Qin J, Chow SK, Leung K, Cheung W. The effect of low -magnitude high -frequency vibration on protecting 
cartilage degradation on anterior cruciate ligament transection -induced osteoarthritis rat model. in Orthopaedic 
Research Society Annua l Meeting. 2013. San Antonio, Tx.  
30. Rubin C, Pope M, Fritton JC, Magnusson M, Hansson T, McLeod K. Transmissibility of 15 -hertz to 35 -hertz 
vibrations to the human hip and lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]: determining the physiologic feasibility of delivering low -level 
anab olic mechanical stimuli to skeletal regions at greatest risk of fracture because of osteoporosis . Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Phila 
Pa 1976) 28(23): 2621- 7, 2003.  
31. Rice DA McNair PJ. Quadriceps arthrogenic muscle inhibition: neural mechanisms and treatment perspectives . 
Sem in Arthritis Rheum 40(3): 250 -66, 2010.  
32. Palmieri- Smith RM, Kreinbrink J, Ashton -Miller JA, Wojtys EM. Quadriceps inhibition induced by [CONTACT_290846] a single -legged drop landing.  Am J Sports Med  35(8): 
1269- 75, 2007.  
33. Griffin LY, Albohm MJ, Arendt EA, Bahr R, Beynnon BD, Demaio M, Dick RW, Engebretsen L, Garrett WE, Jr., Hannafin JA, Hewett TE, Huston LJ, Ireland ML, Johnson RJ, Lephart S, Mandelbaum BR, Mann BJ, Marks PH, 
[ADDRESS_354833] anterior cruciate ligament injuries: a review of 
the Hunt Valley II meeting, January 2005 . Am J Spo rts Med 34(9): 1512- 1532, 2006.  
34. Losina E, Weinstein AM, Reichmann WM, Burbine SA, Solomon DH, Daigle ME, Rome BN, Chen SP, Hunter DJ, 
Suter LG, Jordan JM, Katz JN. Lifetime risk and age at diagnosis of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in the US . 
Arthrit is Care Res (Hoboken) 65(5): 703 -11, 2013.  
35. Ageberg E, Forssblad M, Herbertsson P, Roos EM. Sex differences in patient -reported outcomes after anterior 
cruciate ligament reconstruction: data from the Swedish knee ligament register . Am J Sports Med 38(7) : 1334-
42, 2010.  
36. Ageberg E, Thomee R, Neeter C, Silbernagel KG, Roos EM. Muscle strength and functional performance in 
patients with anterior cruciate ligament injury treated with training and surgical reconstruction or training only: a two to five -year followup . Arthritis Rheum 59(12): 1773 -9, 2008.  
37. Chen CH, Chuang TY, Wang KC, Chen WJ, Shih CH. Arthroscopic anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction with quadriceps tendon autograft: clinical outcome in 4 -7 years . Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc  14(11): 1077 -
85, 2006.  
38. Lynch AD, Logerstedt DS, Axe MJ, Snyder -Mackler L. Quadriceps activation failure after anterior cruciate 
ligament rupture is not mediated by [CONTACT_290847] . J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 42(6): 502 -10, 2012.  
39. Huang SC, Wei I P, Chien HL, Wang TM, Liu YH, Chen HL, Lu TW, Lin JG. Effects of severity of degeneration on gait 
patterns in patients with medial knee osteoarthritis . Med Eng Phys 30(8): 997- 1003, 2008.  
40. Mundermann A, Dyrby [INVESTIGATOR_609], Andriacchi TP. Secondary gait changes in  patients with medial compartment knee 
osteoarthritis: increased load at the ankle, knee, and hip during walking . Arthritis Rheum 52(9): 2835 -44, 2005.  
41. Krishnan C Williams GN. Quantification method affects estimates of voluntary quadriceps activation . Muscle 
Nerve 41(6): 868 -74, 2010.  
42. Miller M, Holmback AM, Downham D, Lexell J. Voluntary activation and central activation failure in the knee 
extensors in young women and men . Scand J Med Sci Sports 16(4): [ADDRESS_354834] of subcutaneous tissue thickness . J 
Electromyogr Kinesiol 21(1): [ADDRESS_354835] Physiol 98(6): [ADDRESS_354836], Herzog W. Influence of active release technique on quadriceps inhibition and strength: a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] . J Manipulative Physiol Ther 27(6): 408 -13, 2004.  
46. Farquhar SJ, Chmielewski TL,  Snyder -Mackler L. Accuracy of predicting maximal quadriceps force from 
submaximal effort contractions after anterior cruciate ligament injury . Muscle Nerve 32(4): 500- 5, 2005.  
47. Collins AT, Blackburn JT, Olcott CW, Dirschl DR, Weinhold PS. The effects o f stochastic resonance electrical 
stimulation and neoprene sleeve on knee proprioception . J Orthop Surg Res 4: 3, 2009.  
48. Shakoor N, Agrawal A, Block JA. Reduced lower extremity vibratory perception in osteoarthritis of the knee . 
Arthritis Rheum 59(1): 1 17-21, 2008.  
49. van Meer BL, Meuffels DE, Vissers MM, Bierma- Zeinstra SMA, Verhaar JAN, Terwee CB, Reijman M. Knee Injury 
and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score or International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Form: 
Which Questionnaire Is Most Usef ul to Monitor Patients With an Anterior Cruciate Ligament Rupture in the 
Short Term? Arthroscopy 29(4): 701- 715, 2013.  
50. Wang D, Jones MH, Khair MM, Miniaci A. Patient -reported outcome measures for the knee.  J Knee Surg 23(3): 
137-51, 2010.  
51. Briggs KK , Lysholm J, Tegner Y, Rodkey WG, Kocher MS, Steadman JR. The reliability, validity, and responsiveness 
of the Lysholm score and Tegner activity scale for anterior cruciate ligament injuries of the knee: 25 years later.  
Am J Sports Med 37(5): 890- 7, 2009.  
52. Portney LG Watkins MP, Foundations of Clinical Research: Applications to Practice . 3rd ed. 2009, Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice -Hall, Inc.  
53. Blackburn JT, Pamukoff DN, Sakr M, Berkoff DJ. Whole body and local muscle vibration reduce quadriceps 
arthrogenic inhibition Arch Phys Med Rehabil (In Review)2014.  
23 
  