 
 
RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
  
Low Frequency Electrical Stimulation of the Fornix in Intractable Mesial Temporal Lobe 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE)  
 
 
GWU IRB Reference number: { 111239}  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_447532] , MD   Phone: (202) 741- 2719 
Study Coordinator:  Radwa Aly                                           Phone: ([PHONE_9349] 
         
Sponsor: George Washington U niversity  Medical Center  
  
 
TITLE:  Low Frequency Electrical Stimulation of the  Fornix in Intractable Mesial Temporal 
Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE)  
 
 
SYNOPSIS:   
 
Title  Low Frequency Electrical Stimulation of the Fornix in Intractable Mesial Temporal Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE) 
Purpose  • Develop a dual -site, multidisciplinary clinical research protocol to 
evaluate the safety and tolerability of low frequency electrical 
stimulation of the fornix in patients with intractable Mesial Temporal Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE)  
• Enroll up to 16 participants at one center into a single blinded study 
to evaluate the safety and tolerability of low frequency stimulation of the fornix (LFSF) in intractable MTLE.  
• Secondary aims will assess psychiatric changes, seizure frequency 
changes, and quality of life.  
Study Design Single- site, Single -blinded, multi-dose protocol 
Sample Size  The study will recruit up to 16 participants 
Study Sites 2 
Participant 
Selection 
Criteria  Inclusion Criteria:  
 
• Participants are between the ages of 18 -65 years of age 
 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 2 of 41 • Participants must have had a non -invasive video -EEG monitoring 
revealing seizure semiology and ictal EEG consistent  with unilateral  
or bilateral MTLE 
 
• Participants must have tried and failed two trials of antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_132385] (AEDs)  
 
• Participants may have lesional or non lesional hippocamp i, as 
evidenced by [CONTACT_447585]. 
 
• Participants are prescribed and taking at least one A ED at the time 
of study entry 
 
• Study participants will have intractable (MTLE) with a seizure 
frequency of at least 1/month averaged over the preceding 6 months 
prior to enrollment, including maximum seizure -freedom periods of 
no more than 60 days. 
 
• Participants must have a platelet count greater than 125,000 per cubic 
millimeter and prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial 
thromboplastin time (aPTT) within normal limits at the visit prior to 
surgery 
 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
 
• Progressive neurological or medical diseases, such as brain tumors or neur odegenerative disease or cancer  
 
• Non-compliance with antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_447533]  
 
• Any condit ions interfering with electrode implantation  
 
• Any non- epi[INVESTIGATOR_122174] 
 
• Inability or unwillingness to complete neuropsychological tes ts or 
complete seizure diaries  
 
• Current drug or alcohol use or dependence that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_356451], would interfere with a dherence to study 
requirements 
 
• Pregnant, or planning to become pregnant*  
 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 3 of 41 • Participation in another research trial where the participant was 
treated with another investigational drug or device within 30 days 
prior to enrollment of study 
 
• IQ showing a General Ability Quotient of less than 70 . The score 
excludes the contribution of working memory and processing speed 
(which are areas of cognitive functioning that are vulnerable to 
numerous influences including seizures, fatigue and effects of 
AEDs).  
 
• Inability or unwillingness of individual or legal 
guardian/representative to give written informed consent 
 
• Participants who have changes to their antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_447534] (as they will need to repeat the basel ine 
phase)  
 
• Subjects with history of status epi[INVESTIGATOR_447535] 
 
• History of psychiatric illness necessitating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] 
 
• Subjects who have any of the following implanted devices: 
aneurysm clips, cardiac pacemaker or defibrillator, cochlear implant, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], DBS, or vagal nerve stimulator. 
 
• Co-morbid conditions that would interfere with study stimulation 
activities or response to treatment, which may include:  
o Neoplasm with life expectancy < 5 years  
o Severe chronic pulmonary disease 
o Local, systemic acute or chronic infectious illness 
o Life threatening cardiac arrhythmias  
o Severe collagen vascular disorder  
o Kidney failure or other major organ system failures  
 
 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 4 of 41 Specific Aims  
   
Statistical Analysis  
The statistical methods to be used to analyze the primary and secondary aims of the trial:  
Primary outcome: 
Because we are assessing AVLT score at multiple instances within subjects (i.e. repeated measures), we will use generalized estimating equations (GEE) to test for statistically significant changes in AVLT score, controlling for within- subject correlation.  Post-stimulation AVLT scores 
will be entered into the GEE model as the dependent variable values, and stimulation intensity levels and stimulation frequency levels will be viewed as fixed factor levels.    Pre-stimulation 
AVLT score will also be entered as an independent variable.   Primary statistical aim: Assess whether or not stimulation at each combination of frequency levels 1hz or 5hz and crossed with intensity levels 2mA, 4mA, or 8mA leads to reduce AVLT score by [CONTACT_447586] a priori- defined minimum  clinically -significant change of [ADDRESS_569250]-hoc, we will reassess statistical significance of stimulation -induced changes in AVLT 
score using alternative GEE correlation matrix structures (stationary and autoregressive).   The 
missing completely at random (MCAR) assumption will be explored such as through logistic regression models, to assess if missing -ness of a d ata value may be related to previously observed 
AVLT scores from a same subject, or the experimental factors.   Mixed models, such as random 
intercept, will be fit as well, which will be important if the missing at random (MAR) assumption appears more plausible, and inferential results compared with GEE -based findings, and with 
models that relax the MAR assumption, such as shared parameter models.  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 5 of 41  
Secondary analyses: The experimental design allows for estimation of carryover effects through 
implementation o f rest periods following each period of stimulation.  Using similar analytic 
approaches as above, we will test in an exploratory manner if there are differences in AVLT scores between rest periods following stimulation and the control period.  This will give insight into 
whether carryover effects after two months of rest differ by [CONTACT_447587].  
 
The statistical basis for the sample size calculation:  
Based on published findings  15, 17, we define clinically significant change in AVLT score to be 
a reduced score of at least one standard deviation.   Based on our own available longitudinal test 
data, we estimate the expected standard deviation (SD) of AVLT score to be at most ten points, and within- subject correlation of AVLT to be 0.65. Using these values (SD  and within- subject 
correlation), for the six contrasts of interest, we estimate a minimum sample size to be able to detect with 80% power under two- sided Type I error alpha = 0.0083 (Bonferroni correction for 6 
tests).   Simultaneous Type I error will be 0 .05, and a 20% dropout will be supposed.  Preliminarily, 
we project a need for approximately 16 subjects.  Please note that these projections will be more 
carefully derived for the full application, such as via simulation. 
 
Background and Significance  
  
PART 1: REPORT OF PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS  
 
General Introduction 
 
Temporal Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447536] 3 million people in the [LOCATION_002], with associated health care costs of $12.5 
billion/year. Focal seizures originate from one spot in the brain, called the seizure focus. If focal seizures are medically intractable, patients should und ergo an evaluation for epi[INVESTIGATOR_58741]. The 
evaluation aims at identifying the seizure focus, but surgical removal is done only if the seizure focus is in an area that is not essential for speech, movement, memory, or other important functions. Mesial tem poral lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE) is the most common form of focal epi[INVESTIGATOR_447537] # [ADDRESS_569251] of temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (TLE) is intractable, posing high risks of cognitive 
decline and increased mortality, in addition to social, psychological, and economic burdens.  
The hippocampus, an elongated structure within the temporal lobe, is crucial for memory 
processing, but is also the source of most temporal lobe seizures. In patients with intractable TLE, resection of the temporal lobe, including the hippocampus, has higher chances of stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_447538], but with the obvious risk of memory decline, especially in patients with normal brain MRI, including intact -looking hippocampi (non- lesional MTLE). Deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) offers a new thera peutic avenue for patients who are not good surgical 
candidates, as it aims  to decrease or stop seizures, but preserve or improve memory. 
Importance of the problem  
 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447539], unprovoked seizures caused by [CONTACT_447588]. Seizures may manifest as a variety of symptoms ranging from transient fear and 
sensory phenomena to loss of consciousness and convulsions. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447540] 3 million people in the U.S., with associated health care costs of $12.5 billion/year  (Begley, Famulari et al. 2000). While 60- 70% of all patients with epi[INVESTIGATOR_447541]  (Schmidt 2009) , drug treatment is often ineffective in mesial 
temporal lobe ep ilepsy (MTLE)  (Bartolomei, Wendling et al. 2001; Pallud, Devaux et al. 2008) , 
and medically -intractable epi[INVESTIGATOR_447542] a burden that is equivalent to that of 
breast and lung cancer, according to the World Health organization (Engel, Wiebe et al. 2003).  
 
MTLE, the most common cause for intractable focal epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]  (Engel 1996) and the most frequent 
indication for epi[INVESTIGATOR_58741] (Benifla, Otsubo et al. 2006) , results in psychiatric co morbidities  
(Schmidt 2009), cognitive decline, and increased mortality (Langfitt and Wiebe 2008)  with 
associated momentous social and economic burdens (Campos and Wiebe 2008) . MTLE originates 
from the hippocampus, a structure that is critical to memory function. A prospective, randomized clinical trial showed that when participants with MTLE fail initial medication trials, continued medical therapy can achieve seizure freedom in only 8%, whereas surgical resection of the temporal lobe, including the hippocampus, renders 58% of participants seizure free  (Wiebe, Blume 
et al. 2001).  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 7 of 41  
The significant benefit of surgery  (Wiebe, Blume et al. 2001; Clusmann, Schramm et al. 2002) , 
however, must be weighed against the risk of postoperative memory dysfunction. The risk of 
memory decline after hippocampal resection depends on the structural integrity of the hippocampus and its degree of contribution to memory function prior to surgery, typi[INVESTIGATOR_447543]. Thus, a non -lesional hippocampus on MRI and 
good preoperative memory function exclude MTLE participants from temporal lobectomy because of the high- risk of postoperative memory decline (Trenerry, Jack et al. 1993; Bell, Rao et al. 2009) . 
This underlies the need to pursue an intervention that will control disabling hippocampal seizures without adversely disrupting mem ory functioning.  
 Deep Brain Stimulation  
In recent years, deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been established as an effective treatment for 
movement disorders, and has proven to be a safe and effective treatment over the long term (Witt, Daniels et al. 2008).  In addition to the treatment of movement disorders, pain syndromes, and psychiatric disorders, deep brain stimulation also has the possibility of becoming an innovative 
treatment for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (Krauss and Koubeissi 2007). With about one -third of patients with epi[INVESTIGATOR_447544] a wide variety of 
anticonvulsive drugs, there continues to be great interest in using deep brain stimulation for 
treatment of intractable epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (Al -Otaibi, Hamani et al. 2011). While the success of DBS in 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_447545], it must be noted that most DBS trials in epi[INVESTIGATOR_447546] (HFS), often in the range of 100 Hz or more  (Fisher, Uematsu et al. 1992; 
Velasco, Carrillo -Ruiz et al. 2005; Velasco, Velasco et al. 2007; Velasco, Velasco et al. 2007; 
Fisher, Salanova et al. 2010). Thus, stimulation at frequencies of <10 Hz continues to be a potentially efficacious, uninvestigated method for treating epi[INVESTIGATOR_002].  
Mechanisms While HFS has multiple possible mechanisms of action including activation of efferent 
projections, reducing deleterious signals in neural circuits by [CONTACT_175404] “information content”, and activation of presynaptic inhibitory inputs  (Dorval, Russo et al. 2008), Low frequency stimulation 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 8 of 41 (LFS) has been shown to inhibit abnormal excitatory activity by [CONTACT_447589] (Fujii, Saito et al. 1991; Albensi, 
Ata et al. 2004; Schrader, Stern et al. 2006; Yang, Jin et al. 2006), or increasing GABA –mediated 
inhibition (Kinoshita, Ikeda et al. 2005). Moreover, LFS of either the kindling focus (Velise k, 
Veliskova et al. 2002)  or areas that participate in seizure spread  (Yang, Jin et al. 2006)  delays 
seizure development in the amygdaloid kindling model, which is a model of recurrent hippocampal seizures in rats that result from electrical kindling of the a mygdala. Even in fully kindled animals, 
preemptive LFS at the kindling focus dramatically decreases stage 5 seizures (Goodman, Berger 
et al. 2005). Finally, LFS of the ventral hippoca mpal commissure (a white matter tract that 
connects the hippocampi) reduces seizures in a genetic model of epi[INVESTIGATOR_447547] (Kile, Tian et al. 
2010), as well as in the amygdaloid kindling model in rats(Rashid, Pho et al. 2011).  
In addition to animal data  (Albensi, Ata et al. 2004; Goodman, Berger et al. 2005; Kile, Tian et al. 
2010) , the efficacy of LFS has been suggested in humans  (Yamamoto, Ikeda et al. 2002; Schrader, 
Stern et al. 2006)  and illustrated in our preliminary data. LFS is attractive for clinical 
implementation since the duty cycle of the stimulation is very low implying less electric current 
injection - with less charge density on target tissue and electrodes - and longer battery life. This 
has led to a trial of short term low -frequency stimulation of the fornix (LFSF) in patients with 
intractable MTLE (see proof -of-principle data), and we are currently ready to further advance the 
development of this new therapy for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002].   Thus, the current proposal is a classic translational research project, demonstrating a clear path from the laboratory to bedside. If successful, this new therapy will be of great value to patients 
with medically intractable MTLE. The proposed phase I study will lay the groundwork for a larger randomized, controlled clinical trial that will assess efficacy as a primary measure. Our preliminary results suggest that LFSF is safe and tolerable, and could have a remarkable therapeutic effect. This procedure is indicated for use in patients who have intractable mesial temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (defined as failure of 2 antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_285397]) and who have normal brain 
MRI  or evidence of hippocampal sclerosis. 
 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 9 of 41 The investigation will be conducted at George Washington University. This  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447548]. It is  a 
multidisciplinary program  consisting of adult epi[INVESTIGATOR_447549], neurophysiologists, advanced care 
nurses, and neurosurgeons, including experts in Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS).   
The primary site at George Washington University, in Washington DC has a large referral base 
from on -site internal medicine, family medicine, and general neurology clinics, and multiple off 
site clinics.  
Proof of Principle Data  
 
The preliminary data included in the original submission has been updated, analyzed and 
published in the Annals of Neurology. We have included a PDF copy of that paper as part of the current amendment. Additionally, below are the information and figures that summarize the preliminary data of two subjects that have completed the current protocol under this IDE.  
 
Figure 1 : Subject 101 baseline history  
 

 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 10 of 41  
Figure 2 : Subject 101 baseline and follow -up seizure frequency, QOLIE -31 and RAVLT scores  
 
 
Figure 3 : Subject 102 baseline history  
 

 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 11 of 41  
Figure 4 : Subject [ADDRESS_569252] common applications of DBS are for essential tremor and movement disorders. DBS for essential tremor was approved by [CONTACT_13229] 1997 and DBS for Parkinson’s disease in 2002.  A summary of the adverse events that occurred in the prospective trials used to support the indications of Parkinson’s disease and essential tremor is provided. The summary is limited to adverse events that would be expected with DBS in general.  
 
 The conclusions drawn from Parkinson’s studies in 160 patients with 289 DBS implants was that the preclinical and clinical testing provided reasonable assurance that the Activa Parkinson’s Control System is safe and effective when used in accordance with its labeling.  The conclusions from the essential tremor DBS study involving 424 patients with 464 DBS implants (Activa Tremor Control System) was that the DBS system was well tolerated by [CONTACT_447590] a safety profile that was similar to the approved indication for Parkinson’s disease. We expect less adverse effects in the proposed trial since the intended DBS frequencies are low (1 or 5 Hz) as opposed to the high frequencies used in movement disorders. 

 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 12 of 41  
Research Design and Methods  
  
PART II: INV ESTIGATIONAL PLAN  
Purpose 
Low frequency stimulation is an attractive, uninvestigated method for treatment of intractable 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]. Preliminary animal and human data suggest safety and remarkable efficacy of LFS in epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]. In addition, the duty cycle of L FS is very low, implying less electric current injection, 
with less charge density on the target tissue and electrodes, and longer battery life. The current project is a classic translational, single blinded, randomized research project, demonstrating a clear path from the laboratory to bedside. If successful, this new therapy will be of great value to patients with medically intractable MTLE.  
The primary aim of the current proposal is to evaluate safety and tolerability, in terms of neuropsychological effe cts, of low frequency electrical stimulation of the fornix (LFSF) in 
participants with medically -intractable MTLE. Secondary aims include evaluation of psychiatric 
changes, seizure frequency, and quality of life during LFSF. 
The study will: 
• Develop a multi disciplinary clinical research protocol to be conducted at The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC  to evaluate the safety and tolerability of low 
frequency electrical stimulation for treatment of intractable Mesial Temporal Lobe 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE)  
• Enroll up to 16 participants over one site into a single -blinded study to evaluate the safety 
and tolerability of low frequency electrical stimulation of the fornix ipsilateral to the epi[INVESTIGATOR_447550].  
The secondary outcome measures will include:  
1. To standardize the implantation, hippocampal evoked potential recording, and current 
determination procedures in preparation for the next protocol phase 
2. Assess the effects of LFSF on psychiatric symptoms using standardized measures 
3. Evaluate seizure reduction by [CONTACT_447591], changes in secondarily generalized seizure frequency, an d changes in seizure free days 
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569253] of the participan t, DBS systems can/will be removed, or stimulation settings on the 
DBS system can be turned off as to return the participant to their baseline status before their 
participation in the trial.  Participants may also be terminated from the study if lost to fo llow up or 
at the discretion of the physician.   
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
 Inclusion Criteria:   
• Participants are between the ages of 18 - 65 years of age 
• Participants must have had a non -invasive video- EEG monitoring revealing seizure 
semiology and ictal EEG consistent  with unilateral or bilateral MTLE 
• Participants must have tried and failed two trials of antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_006] (AEDs)  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 14 of 41 • Participants may have lesional or non lesional hippocampi, as evidenced by [CONTACT_447592] t wo years. 
• Participants are prescribed and taking 1 -4 AEDs at the time of study entry  
• Study participants will have intractable MTLE with a seizure frequency of at least 1 /month 
averaged over the preceding 6 months prior to enrollment, including maximum seiz ure-
freedom periods of no more than 60 days. 
• Participants must have a platelet count greater than 125,000 per cubic millimeter and 
prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) within normal limits at the visit prior to surgery  
 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
• Progressive neurological or medical diseases, such as brain tumors or neurodegenerative disease or cancer.  
• Non-compliance with antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_447551]  
• Any conditions interfering with electrode implantation  
• Any non- epi[INVESTIGATOR_122174].  
• Inability or unwillingness to complete neuropsychological tests or complete seizure diaries.  
• Current drug or alcohol use or dependence that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_91382], would interfere with adherence to study requirements.  
• Pregnant, or planning to become pregnant*  
• Participation in another research trial where the participant was treated with another 
investigational drug or device within 30 days prior to enrollment of study.  
• IQ showing a General Ability Quotient of less than 70 . The score excludes the contribution 
of working memory and processing speed (which are areas of cognitive functioning that 
are vulnerable to numerous influences including seizures and fatigue and effects of AEDs).  
• Inability or unwillingness of individual or legal guardian/representative to give written 
informed consent. 
• Participants who have changes to their antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_447552] 
(as they will need to repeat the baseline phase) . 
• Subjects with history of status epi[INVESTIGATOR_447535]. 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 15 of 41 • History of psychiatric illness necessitating hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].  
• Subjects who have any of the following implanted devices: aneurysm clips, cardiac 
pacemaker or defibrillator, cochlear i mplant, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], DBS, or vagal nerve stimulator. 
• Co-morbid conditions that would interfere with study stimulation activities or response to 
treatment, which may include: 
o Neoplasm with life expectancy < 5 years  
o Severe chronic pulmonary disease  
o Local, systemic acute or chronic infectious illness 
o Life threatening cardiac arrhythmias  
o Severe collagen vascular disorder  
o Kidney failure or other major organ system failures  
 
*Risk to Pregnancy: Women who are pregnant cannot take part in the study. Women who become pregnant during the study may be withdrawn from the study and will continue with standard clinical care as indicated. If participants are female and become pregnant or are pregnant there may be risk to them or to the embryo or fetus.   Informed Consent  Before any screening procedure is performed, a signed informed consent will be obtained from 
each participant.   The informed consent form will incorporate Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) -compliant wording, by [CONTACT_447593] (PHI) by [CONTACT_447594].  
The details of research study purpose and design will be explained verbally to the potential participant by [CONTACT_447595]. A written informed consent form will be given to the participant in order to be read and understood, and the participant will be given sufficient time to thoroughly read and review the document. The participant will be encouraged to take the informed consent document home to discuss with family members or medical care providers.  Each participant will be given ample opportunity to inquire 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 16 of 41 about details of the study with members of the research team and to read and understand the 
consent form before signing it.  
Consent will be documented by [CONTACT_19201] a dated signature [CONTACT_366104].  A participant 
may not be admitted to the study unless informed consent of the participant  has been obtained.  A copy of the signed informed consent document will be provided to the participant to keep for their records upon completion.  
Each participant’s signed informed consent document will be kept on file by [CONTACT_9532]/research team for possible inspection by [CONTACT_12721]. 
Only qualified investigat ors and members of the research team associated with the protocol, who 
are certified in Human subjects Protections according to the local  IRB’s policies and procedures, 
will obtain consent from all participants.  Informed consent will be obtained from all participants 
who meet the inclusion criteria.  Individuals will only be included if they have the ability to provide informed consent.   
All participants are expected to be able to complete the informed process and provide their own 
written signature [CONTACT_447617] e document. The consent form will describe the purpose of the study, the 
procedures to be followed, and the risks and benefits of participation. A copy will be given to each participant and this fact will be documented in the participant’s record.  
The int ent is not to specifically target illiterate or non -English speaking individual.  However, as 
these individuals may very well be part of the recruitment pool and may have the ability to provide informed consent, the study team will have provisions for incl uding these individuals if eligible 
for participation.  
Provisions for inclusion of illiterate individuals:  The Informed Consent Form will be read to the illiterate participants in the physical presence of a non- study staff third party witness, who would 
then sign the consent acknowledging that the participant was informed about participating in the 
research and agreed to participate. Any individual who does not appear to fully understand the purpose of the study will be excluded. 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 17 of 41 Provisions for inclusion o f non- English speaking individuals: Participants who do not speak 
English will be given an informed consent document written in a language understandable to them.  
Translated consent documents for populations that are non- English speaking will be submitted  to 
the IRB for review and approval.  The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_447553]. 
When informed consent is obtained from non- English speaking partici pants using a translated 
consent form all the following will be done: A translator who is fluent in both English and the 
language of the participant will be present if the person obtaining consent does not speak the language of the participant. 
The consent  document will be signed and dated by [CONTACT_2299]. The consent document will be 
signed and dated by [CONTACT_447596]/or, if the person obtaining consent does not 
speak the participant’s language, by [CONTACT_447597].  
Participant Privacy: Participant will not be identified (by [CONTACT_2300], street address, social security 
number, etc.) in any manner outside of  The George Washington University.  If the study results 
are published, no information will be included that can identify participants. All participant 
interactions will take place in a private area with only study staff present.  
Study Phases  
The study design will consist of the following five (5) phases listed below.  It is important to note 
that the underlined steps will have already been completed as part of the standard, routine clinical 
care,  rather than for research.  Confirmation that the underlined items listed below have been 
completed will be done during an evaluation of the participant’s case history and medical record: 
I. Recruitment and Enrollment Phase  
a. Review of participant case history and medical record for verification of the 
following:  
i. Completion of seizure protocol brain MRI  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 18 of 41 ii. FDG- PET Scan  if needed to optimize placement of intracranial electrodes 
as determined by [CONTACT_7880] [INVESTIGATOR_447554].  
iii. Neuropsychological Testing  
iv. Ictal Recording during Video EEG Monitoring  
b. Verification of inclusion/excision criteria  
c. Signing of Informed Consent Document  
II. Baseline Phase (Approximately 3 Months)  
a. Assessment of Baseline Seizure Frequency with Completion of Seizure Calendar  
b. Neuropsychological Testing (if I.a.iii, above, did not include such key tests as RAVLT)  
c. Psychiatric Testing  
d. Quality of Life Evaluation (QOLIE -31) Questionnaire  
III. Depth Electrode/DBS Electrode Implantation and Re covery Phase  (It is important to 
note that the underlined steps will be completed as part of the standard, routine clinical 
care,  rather than for research)  
a. Implantation of diagnostic depth electrodes  
b. Implantation of the DBS lead  
c. Evaluation in Epi[INVESTIGATOR_80315] (Approximately 5-10 days)  
i. Confirmation of hippocampal seizure onset  
ii. Removal of depth electrodes  
iii. Connection of forniceal leads subcutaneously to implantable pulse 
generators  
IV. Randomization and Blinded Stimulation Phase (Approximately 12 month s) 
a. Randomization of participants to a stimulation group of either 1 Hz or 5 Hz (see 
Fig. 1)  
b. Neuropsychological Testing  
c. Psychiatric Testing  
d. Quality of Life Evaluation Questionnaire  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 19 of 41 e. Assessment of Seizure Frequency with Completion of Seizure Calendar  
f. Adverse Event Assessment  
V. Long Term Follow up Phase (Approximately 12 months)  
a. Quality of Life Evaluation Questionnaire  
b. Assessment of Seizure Frequency with Completion of Seizure Calendar  
c. Adverse Event Assessment  
 
Phase I: Recruitment and Enrollment  
Potential sur gical candidates are reviewed on a weekly basis during a multidisciplinary epi[INVESTIGATOR_447555].  Participants will be chosen as 
potential candidates by [CONTACT_458], [CONTACT_447618], during this patient care 
conference at The George Washington University. 
Routine care of patients with intractable epi[INVESTIGATOR_447556] 
(EMU) for characterization and localization of seizures. Medically -intractable patients are then 
presented at the weekly multidisciplinary Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447557], attended by [CONTACT_447598][INVESTIGATOR_447558].  For the proposed research protocol, we expect to recruit up to 16 participants at one  site over the course three years (see power analysis). However, the total 
length of the study, from the enrollment of the first participant to the conclusion of procedures for the final participant will span approximately [ADDRESS_569254] follow up is expected to be one year, but the whole study (recruiting 16 subjects) will be expected to take [ADDRESS_569255], routine clinical care, rather than for research:  
• Video -EEG monitoring with scalp electrodes, with the recorded se izures and interictal 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_447559] 
• MRI showing lesional or intact-looking hippocampus on the seizure-onset side 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 20 of 41 • Neuropsychological Testing suggesting intact memory function 
• Quality of Life in Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] 31 (QoLIE-31) 
• Seizure frequency of 1/month to 10/day as demonstrated by a seizure diary  averaged over [ADDRESS_569256] intractable unilateral or bilateral MTLE.  Phase II:  Baseline Phase:  
Enrolled participants will then enter into the baseline phase prior to implantation; this phase will last for approximately two months.  Participants will be given a seizure calendar and specific written and verbal instructions on how to complete the calendar in order to properly assess their seizure frequency, prior to implantation.   
Participants will complete their calendars accordin gly and will submit to a member of the research 
team for review by a study physician prior to implantation.  Participants will also undergo the 
following during the baseline phase: 
• Neuropsychological testing (if not performed in Phase 1) 
• Psychiatric testin g 
• Quality of life in Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447560] -31 Assessment  
• Concomitant Medication Assessment  
These items will be reviewed by [CONTACT_447599]. 
 Phase III: Implantation  
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569257] of care for all surgical candidates.  
Intervention, Administration, and Duration:  
As per routine clinical care, the invasive evaluation of participants with non -lesional MTLE aims 
at confirming the seizure -onset zone in the hippocampus. All participants will have undergone 
video- EEG monitoring with scalp electrodes, with the recorded seizures and interictal epi[INVESTIGATOR_447561]. Since these participants have non-lesional or lesional hippocampi, 
depth electrode implantation will aim at investigating whether the seizure onset zone is indeed in the hippocampus versus othe r clinically silent cortical regions with secondary propagation to the 
mesial temporal lobe.  
The stimulating electrodes will be implanted unilaterally in the fornix during the same clinically -
indicated surgery for depth electrode implantation. Only one de pth electrode with multiple contacts 
will be implanted in the fornix unilaterally. If recorded seizures in the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_80315] 
(EMU) show onset in the hippocampus, the forniceal leads will be connected subcutaneously to subclavicular stimulators. Thus, there will be only one lead and one implantable pulse generator per patient. 
Thus, implanted regions will include, in addition to the amygdala and hippocampus, areas with 
known connectivity with the hippocampus, such as the posterior cingulate gyrus, basal frontal 
cortex, insula, temporal neocortex, and the temporo-occipi[INVESTIGATOR_447562]. 
In all participants, Leksell frames will be placed and brain MRIs obtained in the frame. The images 
will be exported to a computer that aids in digital planning of electrode implantation (e.g. the iPlan workstation - Brainlab, Inc. Westchester, IL, [LOCATION_003]). Participants will be brought to the operating 
room and the areas of the intended incisions clipped and draped in a sterile manner for each electrode. A twist drill used to make a small hole through which electrodes will be advanced to 
target regions under f luoroscopic guidance and secured with an anchor bolt.  
 Monitoring depth electrodes will be ones used routinely for monitoring (e.g. platinum -iridium 
cylinders measuring 1.1 mm in diameter and 2.3 mm in length, evenly spaced at 5 mm intervals - 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 22 of 41 Adtech, Racine, WI, [LOCATION_003]). Each depth electrode probe contains a number of contacts, often 12, 
facilitating recordings from both deep and superficial cortical areas. During this same clinically -
indicated surgery, Medtronic Model 3389DBS leads (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, U.S.A.) will 
be introduced into the fornix by a rigid introducer hooked to a wire loop at the tip. These leads comprise four contacts at the implanted tip, 1.5 mm long and spaced 0.5mm apart (Figure  5). Only two of these four contacts will be selected  for connection to the pulse generator.  
 
Figure 5 : Model [ADDRESS_569258] narrow (0.5 mm) spacing between each of the four electrodes at the distal 
end, providing electrodes spread over 7.5 mm.  
 
 Prior to 
enrollment   Visit 1  Visit 2  Visit 3  Visit 4  Visit 5  Visit 6  Visit 7  Visit 8  Long 
Term 
Follow 
Up 
  Baseline 
Phase  
(3 months)  Implantation 
and 
Recovery  Month 
1 Month 
3 Month 
5 Month 
7 Month 
9 Month 
11 Month 
13 Months 
14-25 
Procedures  
Seizure Protocol 
Brain MRI  X           
FDG PET Scan  X           
Neuropsychological  
Testing  X     X  X  X  
Intracarotid 
Amobarbital 
Procedure (IAP)  X           

 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 23 of 41 Video EEG 
Monitoring  X           
Eligibility Criteria  X           
Informed Consent  X           
Medical History  X           
Seizure Calendar   X  X X X X X X X X 
Psychiatric Testing   X    X  X  X  
Quality of Life in 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] -31 
Questionnaire   X  X X X X X X X X 
AE Review    X X X X X X X X X 
Electrode 
Implantation    X         
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447563]  
(5-10 days)    X         
Randomization     X        
Device 
Interrogation and 
Programming     X X X X X X X  
Figure 6 : Study flowchart  
 
 
Stimulation Parameters:  
For safety purposes, we will ensure that charge density does not exceed Q max= 30μC/cm2, which 
is the maximum charge density that is considered safe by [CONTACT_8415] (Kuncel and Grill 20 04). For the 
proposed project, we will be using Model 3389 DBS leads (Figure 5), which are shaped like a 
cylinder with a length of 1.5 mm and diameter of 1.5 mm with an inter -electrode distance of 0.5 
mm. This model allows similar settings and inter -electrode  distance to those used in our 
preliminary studies (if electrodes 0 and 3 are chosen), but will also allow wider activation, if the need emerges to optimize hippocampal evoked responses.  
Wider activation can be achieved if two continuous electrodes are st imulated and a third electrode 
is chosen as a reference. For the intended lead model, the surface area in contact [CONTACT_447600] A = 2π (0.15/2) x 0.15 = 0.07cm
2. If total biphasic pulse duration is 0.2msec, then phase duration 
is 0.1msec. Q max/area = 30 x 10-6 C/cm2 = (0.1 x 10-3 sec) x I (A)/ 0.07 cm2, yielding a maximum 
safe current of I = 21 mA. Thus, the maximum intended current of 8 mA/phase is a safe current.  
 
Handling of Study Interventions:  
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569259] for consistency ( 2 Hz, voltage 
equivalent to 2- 8 mA, for 50 sec) and the evoked responses will be recorded in the hippocampus. 
If no evoked potentials are recorded, then the location of the forniceal electrode will be adjusted 
under X -ray gu idance until hippocampal evoked potentials are elicited. A head CT scan will be 
obtained post -operatively and the locations of the depth electrodes will be verified by [CONTACT_3252]-
registration of pre -surgical volumetric brain MRI with post- surgical volumetric brain  CT (e.g. 
using Brainlab, Inc. Westchester, IL, [LOCATION_003]). 
The patient will then be transferred to the EMU where Electrocorticographic (ECoG) recordings 
will take place. ECoG channels will be amplified, filtered (0.1- 300 Hz), and recorded digitally 
with a sampl ing frequency of 1- [ADDRESS_569260] wall 
in the infraclavicular fossa.  
The Activa SC Model [ZIP_CODE] is a multi -program device that delivers stimulation through one lead. 
The stimulation settings are stored in programs consisting of a specific combination of pulse  width, 
rate, and amplitude settings acting on a specific electrode combination. This device is 
commercially available investigational device for DBS. Its power source is 4.5 Amp hours, hybrid combined silver vanadium oxide cell with nominal voltage of 3.2 V.   
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 25 of 41 Phase IV: Randomization and Blinded Stimulation Phase  
One month following the implantation phase, participants will return to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_447564] a stimulation group where their stimulation parameter settings will be placed at either 5Hz or [ADDRESS_569261] approximately 2 months.  The participant will be blinded to the frequency setting of their DBS system, to either 2 Hz or 5 Hz, and to the intensity setting of their system to 0, 2, 4, 
or 8 mA.  
Participants will c omplete one block of stimulation (2 months), and then proceed into a non-
treatment block for a washout of a carryover effect (i.e., where all settings will be placed at 0) for 
approximately 2 months.  In full, participants will cycle through 6 alternating blocks, 3 treatment stimulation and 3 non- treatments (Figure 7). During the treatment stimulation blocks, stimulation 
will be delivered 4 hours on, 4 hours off on a 24 hour cycle.  In the event that a participant 
experiences ≥ 90% seizure reduction in firs t three months, they will remain at [ADDRESS_569262].  
 
Figure 7: An overview of the study design. According to standard clinical practice, the presurgical evaluation will 
include a seizure -protocol brain MRI, a brain FDG -PET scan, neuropsychological testing, Intracarotid 
Amobarbital Procedure (IAP), and ictal recordings d uring video -EEG monitoring with scalp electrodes. An ictal 
SPECT scan is also done in some patients. Patients with presumable MTLE and normal brain MRI will be recruited. 
Seizure calendars will be given and baseline seizure frequency assessed for two months before implantation surgery. 
The patients will be monitored in the Epi[INVESTIGATOR_80315] (EMU) for approximately 1 week, and if 
hippocampal seizure onset is confirmed, a pulse generator will be implanted and connected to the forniceal lead. Randomization will occur one month later into 2 Hz or 5 Hz groups. The patients will be blinded to the frequency (f 
= 2 Hz vs. 5 Hz) and to the current intensity (I = 0, 2, 4, or 8 mA). Every treatment block (I > 0 mA) will be followed 
by a no -treatment block (I = 0  mA) for washout of carry over effect. All DBS will use a 4 -hours -on, 4 -hours -off 

 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 26 of 41 schedule. Arrowheads indicate times for neuropsychological testing. Anti -epi[INVESTIGATOR_447565].  
 
Participants will r eturn for research related follow up visits at the following time points:  
• Month 1 (post- implantation)  
• Month 3 
• Month 5 
• Month 7 
• Month 9 
• Month 11 
• Month 13 
During the research related visits at the above time points, participants will undergo the following procedures/tests:  
• Adverse Event Evaluation(every visit) 
• Neuropsychological Testing ( prior to enrollment and at months 5, 9, and 13) 
• Device Interrogation and programming (every visit) 
• Review of Seizure Calendars (every visit)  
• Psychiatric Evaluation (at baseline, months  5, 9, and 13)  
Phase V: Long Term Follow up Phase  
Participants will be evaluated on a long term basis, where they will no longer be blinded to their 
stimulation settings.  Stimulation parameters can be adjusted by a member of the research team as clinically indicated.  Participants in the long term follow up phase will be contact[CONTACT_447601] a member of the research team to discuss any adverse events that may have occurred, any issues pertaining to the implanted stimulation s ystem, any seizures and the participants ’ overall 
quality of life while at home.   
Neuropsychological Tests  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 27 of 41 The primary outcome is safety and tolerability of LFSF in participants with intractable MTLE as 
regards memory function.  Stimulation of the fornix has been found to improve memory function in patients with Alzheimer’s disease (Laxton, Tang-Wai et al. 2010). These authors implanted DBS leads in the anterior fornix and hypothalamus, and source imaging demonstrated that stimulation activated regions that are part of Papez circuit. Our preliminary data confirm these findings with much stronger evidence than source imaging: direct intracranial recordings confirmed short -latency evoked potentials in 
the hippocampus, and longer -latency ones in the posterior cingulate gyrus (Fig. 2). Further, we 
have found a slightly higher mental -status examination score during LFSF. In the planned project, 
more detailed neuropsychological testing w ill be done. 
 Memory functioning will be measured using the Rey Auditory- Verbal Learning Test 
(RAVLT) (Rey 1964) . In this test, the examiner reads a [ADDRESS_569263] at a fixed rate and requires 
the examinees to repeat as many words as they can remember after each presentation; the list is presented 5 times (Trials 1 -5), and the sum of the [ADDRESS_569264] (List B) and again 30 minutes later (Delayed Free Recall), followed immediatel y by a Recognition Trial 
(discriminating the original 15 targets from 50 distractors).  
 Verbal learning tests have been used extensively to measure adverse changes following left and right temporal resection for medically refractory TLE, and the RAVLT has been shown to be more sensitive than its counterpart, the [LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test (Loring, Strauss et al. 2008) . 
Furthermore, repeated RAVLT  testing has been shown to be resistant to retest effects in clinical 
trial paradigms, even when repeated one week apart over 6 consecutive weeks (Fastenau, Hankins et al. 2001; Fastenau, Hankins et al. 2002; Beglinger, Ahmed et al. 2003; Beglinger, Gaydos et al. 2005).  All participants will complete the forms in sequence (beginning with Form 1 and continuing through Form 6) across 6 data collection points (pre -stimulation baseline and at the end of each 2 -
month treatment block).  The specific outcome variables will be RAVLT Sum of Trials 1 -5 and 
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569265] 
reliability coefficients for computing reliable change indices corrected for practice (RCI -p) using 
a method developed in part by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Hans Lüders, (Chelune, Naugle et al. 1993), which has been 
shown to be among the most accurate methods for quantifying individual change on 
neuropsychological tests (Temkin, Heaton et al. 1999). 
Endpoints and Outcomes:  
 
Primary Outcome:  
The primary outcome is safety and tolerability of LFSF in participants with intractable MTLE as 
regards memory function. 
Secondary Outcomes:  
PSYCHIATRIC HEAL TH: Since LFSF is expected to activate limbic structures, we will assess the 
effects of LFS on psychiatric symptoms using standardized measures that are known to be sensitive 
to changes to surgical treatment of TLE.  Primary psychiatric outcome will be eva luated with the 
rater- administered Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) (Overall and Gorham 1962), which has 
been used to assess global psychopathology in mood, anxiety and psychotic disorders related to 
TLE (Glosser, Zwil et al. 2000). The BPRS will be complemented with the Hamilton Depression 
and Anxiety Scales, as well as the Modified Scale for Suicidal Ideation.  
 
Electrode implantation in the fornix is technically feasible . We have successfully implanted depth 
electrodes in the fornix in [ADDRESS_569266], we plan to implant Model 3389 DBS leads using the same technique of stereotactic implantation. These leads are inserted routinely for DBS in patients with Parkinson’s disease. A secondary aim of this trial is to standardize the implantation, the evoked 
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569267] ON SEIZURE FREQUENCY : We expect LFSF to result in seizure reduction based on our 
preliminary data and a number of studies (Yamamoto, Ikeda et al. 2002; Albensi, Ata et al. 2004; 
Goodman, Berger et al. 2005; Schrader, Stern et al. 2006; Kile, Tian et al. 2010)  For outcom e 
measures, we will use (1) total percentage of seizure frequency change, (2) change in secondarily generalized seizure frequency, and (3) change in seizure- free days.  
 Q
UALITY OF LIFE: We will use QOLIE [ADDRESS_569268] either before admission for a planned diagnostic evaluation, or during the admission for a patient who is already admitted for workup or treatment.  All patients who will be screened for this study will be logged into the Case Report Form (CRF) Screening Log.  If a patient is deemed ineligible, then the reason for exclusion will be documented.  
Early Termination/Withdraw from Study:  
Participants who discontinue study intervention early will be asked to return to the study site for a 
final follow -up visit.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_172155] a final physical and check for adverse events.  The 
coordinator will collect any information related to monitoring and reporting of adverse experiences 
for follow -up on participants once they have notified the study staff or PI [INVESTIGATOR_447566].   
Risks and Side Effects: 
 
Risk Analysis  
Risks  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 30 of 41 The general risks associat ed with DBS for temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_447567]’s 
disease, dystonia, essential tremor and OCD.  In addition, the risk profile may also be simila r to 
chronic pain, Tourette’s, and major depression. The potential risks for any DBS procedure are divided into three categories.  These risk categories include those associated with surgical implantation of the DBS lead and pulse generator, risks associat ed with the implanted device, and 
risks associated with the programming of the device.  
General surgical risks associated with DBS implantation include hemorrhage, paralysis, coma and 
or death, stroke, seizures, infection, allergic reaction, leaking of fluid surrounding the brain, temporary and or permanent neurological complications, pain at the surgery sites, and headaches. 
The risks associated with implanted devices include those which are mechanical, electrical, 
software, and others related to device sy stem failure.  Other risks include battery failure, electrical 
shock, and reactions to the various components of the device.  The lead extension or lead may shift/move after being implanted in the body, which would require a surgical intervention to adjust .  
Side effects which are related to stimulation are most commonly reversible by [CONTACT_447602].  In addition to reprogramming, the system can also be turned OFF, with the intensity placed at 0 V, and the patient will return to their baseline state.  A recent summary of the risks profile for DBS in movement 
disorders included suicidal ideation, depression, gastrointestinal disturbances, nausea, muscle 
weakness (partial paralysis), jolting or  shocking sensation, numbness, paresthesia, facial flushing, 
motor contraction, dizziness, changes in vital signs, hyperactivity or euphoria, pain or discomfort, headache pain, restlessness, weight gain or loss, speech and visual difficulties, blurred or double vision, changes in energy levels, mood changes, unusual taste or smell sensations, and cognitive and or behavioral changes. 
The profile of potential adverse events associated with using DBS as a therapeutic option are well 
defined, therefore any change in the clinical status of a patient during the course of the research trial is likely to be detected early by [CONTACT_447603].  In addition, these clinical events will be screened for and monitored during the follow- up research visits.   
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 31 of 41 Serious Adverse Events 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any undesirable experience or untoward medical occurrence 
associated with the use of a medical product (Title 21 CFR Part 312) that: 
• Leads to death  
• Leads to one of the following: 
o Life threatening illness or injury  
o Required inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
o A permanent impairment of a body structure or a body function 
o Medical or surgical procedure to prevent permanent impairment or damage to a body structure or function  
Unan ticipated Adverse Device Effects  
An adverse device effect (ADE) is any serious adverse effect on the health or safety or any life 
threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with the device or stimulation therapy if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in to application; or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of participants (21 CFR 812.3): 
• The implanted components (lead, extension, neurostimualtor)  
• The lead/extension tract or neurostimualtor pocket 
• The burr hole site  
An event will not  be considered related to the device when it is the result of:  
• A preexisting medical condition  
• A medication  
Device Malfunction  
A device malfunction is a failure of a device to meet its performance specifications or other performance as intended.  Performance specifications include all claims made in the labeling for 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 32 of 41 the devices.  The intended performance of a device refers to the intended use for which the device 
is labeled or marketed (21 CFR 803.3)  
Documentation of Adverse Events  
All AE’s from the time the study informed consent is signed through the final study visit will be 
recorded an AE’s on the study event log; each event being documented separately.  All AE’s and 
SAE’s will be followed until:  
• AE is resolved and has returned to normal/baseline or has stabilized  
• Participant has withdrawn from the study  
• AE is judged by [CONTACT_223653] 
• Study closure 
[CONTACT_447619] will serve as the Point of Contact [CONTACT_447604]. All SAEs from GW will be reported to the GW IRB within [ADDRESS_569269] (IRB) during the annual reporting period at George Washington University . 
All adverse events, which include serious adverse events, will be categorized as follows:  
• Surgical/Procedure- Related : Associated with surgical implantation of the depth 
electrodes and Deep Brain Stimulation system  
• Device Related : caused by [CONTACT_447605]  
• Therapy Related : caused by [CONTACT_447606]  
• Disorder Related : an event that might reasonably be attributed to the participants 
underlying disease state,  
For those events that are determined to be related to stimulation therapy or device specific, the sponsor/investigator will report the strength of the relatedness using the following terms:  
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 33 of 41 • Definite: The event is resolved with reprogramming of the stimulation parameters and is 
confirmed by [CONTACT_447607]  
• Probable : The event resolves upon reprogramming of the stimulation parameters and 
cannot be reasonable explained by [CONTACT_447608]  
• Possible : The event may have been produced by [CONTACT_87755]’s clinical state, 
however, the effect of stimulation cannot be ruled out  
Reporting of Serious Adverse Events 
Serious adverse events (SAE), including all death, both at GW and all participating sites must be 
reported to the GW IRB within [ADDRESS_569270] learns of the event and 
in accordance with the IRB SAE reporting requirements at George Washington University . 
Investigators should attempt to determine, whether the SAE  is related to the stimulation system or 
the therapy.   
The sponsor will report the available information on all SAE’s to the FDA within [ADDRESS_569271] a great deal of expertise with the 
management of epi[INVESTIGATOR_447568].  The va rious inclusion/exclusion put forth in 
the research protocol have been designed to select only those participants who will most likely 
benefit from this study as well as excluding those with higher risks. Study participants will be closely monitored after the implantation of the stimulation system by [CONTACT_447609][INVESTIGATOR_447569].  In addition, study participants will be monitored in units that are staffed specifically with personnel who are experienced and equipped to care for the complex nature of each participant’s neurological status.  
If during titration, symptoms develop that affect the participant safety or the participant quality of life, stimulation parameters will be immediately adjusted.  If the adjustment does not relieve the problem, and the participant’s symptoms persist, stimulation will be discontinued.   
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 34 of 41 Participants may also terminate from the study if they wish at any time.  Those who also enroll in 
the research study may also wish to discontinue (turn OFF) their stimulation for any reason.  DBS systems will also be surgically removed if the research participant asks for removal.  In addition, research participants who prematurely withdraw or removed from the research study due to the occurrence of an adverse event will be followed (e.g., telephone contact, and/or follow -up visits, 
etc.) until resolution of the event occurs. 
Monitoring Plan and Description  
The data management for this study will maintain a level of data integrity and confidentiality that 
will provide optimum adherence to all [ADDRESS_569272] the events of the study, confirm the compliance of the protocol, and produce accurate data that is appropriate in demonstrating study results.  
Research staff and study coordinators at George Washington University will perform primary data collection based on source documents from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1332]. Paper case report forms (CRF’s) will be used to collect study data.  Study coordinators/research staff will complete all appropriate sections of the CRF’s.  The study sponsor/PI [INVESTIGATOR_447570]’s and verify the information recorded is  consistent with medical records and other 
source documents.  Study research staff will correct all identified errors or incomplete entries on 
the CRF’s.  Final CRF’s will be reviewed and signed by [CONTACT_458]. 
Per FDA Code of Federal Regulation, part 812.46, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_447571] -investigators at George Washington University are conducting all research 
related activities in compliance with their institutional rules and regulations, in addition to adhe ring 
to the approved research protocol.  
All research related information from the second site will be relayed to the principal investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_2394] a per participant enrollment status; in addition to all screening and enrollment logs and adverse event information. 
Investigator Training  
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569273] (DSMB) will be established by [CONTACT_447610] (21 CFR 812.46).  Members of the clinical trial DSMB, who will have specific background expertise in their medical and/or scientific field, will be chosen as members.   
Members of the board can advise the sponsor and make recommendations on the continuing safety 
of enrolled participants, as well as the continuation of validity and scientific soundness of the 
ongoing research trial.  The members will function in their capacity under the approved charter; 
this charter w ill also be submitted, reviewed, and approved by [CONTACT_447611]. Corresponding minutes and recommendations made to the sponsor by 
[CONTACT_447612].  
Regulation and Ethical Conduct of the Research Study  The study will be conducted according to the clinical investigational plan submitted, by [CONTACT_447613], parts 50, 54, 56, and 812 of the FDA CRF.   
 
  
 
IRB # [ADDRESS_569274] all procedures in accordance 
with their signed investigational agreement.  
Benefits:   
 
Potential Benefits  
Low Frequency Stimulation of the Fornix (LFSF) aims  to reduce seizures in patients with 
intractable mesial temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] (MTLE) , thus offering an additional therapeutic option 
besides resective surgery, which is irreversible. .   
Study Justification  
The study is justified by [CONTACT_447614]- intractable 
MTLE have. In addition, Low frequency stimulation has been shown to be safe and effective in 
animals and in our preliminary data in huma ns, justifying the translation into a clinical trial.   
Costs to Subjects:  
 
There are no costs to subjects for participating in this study,  
 
Conflicts of Interest:  
 
None  
Confidentiality:  
 
All records will be kept confidential.  Paper records will be kept in locked file cabinets in the office 
of the study coordinator.  No name s will be published in any publications resulting from this 
research.  
 
Subject Compensation:  
No financial compensation will be provided.  
 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 37 of 41 Facilities and Equipment  
 
Device Sales Information  
 
This study is an investigator initiated/sponsor initiated research study, utilizing devices which are 
commercially available for an unapproved indication.  Those participating in the research study will not be charged f or the device while participating in the study, and research participants will 
not be paid to participate in the study.  The approval and conduction of the research study does not involve the sale or commercialization of the therapeutic use of the devices.   
 
Device Labeling  
 Per the right of reference letter, all labeling information will be provided by [CONTACT_447615], Inc.    Device Location  The stimulators are implantable devices and remain with participants involved. The study is based at George Washington University.    
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 38 of 41 References & Lite rature Cited   
  
 
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th edition T ext Revised .Washington, DC, 
American Psychiatric Association.  
Al-Otaibi, F. A., C. Hamani, et al. (2011)."Neuromodulation in epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]." Neurosurgery69(4): 957 -
79. 
Albensi, B. C., G. Ata, et al. (2004). "Activation of long- term synaptic plasticity causes 
suppression of epi[INVESTIGATOR_447572]." Brain Res 998(1): 56 -64. 
Bartolomei, F., F. Wendling, et al. (2001)."Neural networks involving the medial temporal structures in temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."ClinNeurophysiol 112(9): 1746-60. 
Begley, C. E., M. Famulari, et al. (2000). "The cost of epi[INVESTIGATOR_447573]: an estimate from population-based clinical and survey data." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 41(3): 342-51. 
Beglinger, L. J., S. Ahmed, et al. (2003). "Neuropsychological practice effects and change detection in people with schizophrenia." Schizophr Res 62(1-2): 191-4. 
Beglinger, L. J., B. Gaydos, et al. (2005). "Practice effects and the use of alternate forms i n serial 
neuropsychological testing." Arch ClinNeuropsychol 20(4): 517-29. 
Bell, M. L., S. Rao, et al. (2009). "Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447574] a normal MRI." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] . 
Benifla, M., H. Otsubo, et al. (2006). "Temporal lobe surgery f or intractable epi[INVESTIGATOR_58826]: 
an analysis of outcomes in 126 children." Neurosurgery59(6): 1203-13; discussion 1213-4. 
Campos, M. G. and S. Wiebe (2008). Epi[INVESTIGATOR_58741]: access, costs, and quality of life. Textbook 
of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447575]. H. Luders, Informa Healthcare: 223-229. 
Chelune, G., R. I. Naugle, et al. (1993). "Individual change after epi[INVESTIGATOR_58741]: Practice effects and base- rate information." Neuropsychology7(1): 41 -52. 
Clusmann, H., J. Schramm, et al. (2002). "Prognostic factors and outc ome after different types of 
resection for temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."J Neurosurg97(5): 1131-41. 
Dorval, A. D., G. S. Russo, et al. (2008). "Deep brain stimulation reduces neuronal entropy in the MPTP- primate model of Parkinson's disease." J Neurophysiol 100(5 ): 2807-18. 
Engel, J., Jr. (1996). "Introduction to temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5612] 26(1): 141-50. 
Engel, J., Jr., S. Wiebe, et al. (2003). "Practice parameter: temporal lobe and localized neocortical 
resections for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]: report of the Quality Stan dards Subcommittee of the American Academy 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 39 of 41 of Neurology, in association with the American Epi[INVESTIGATOR_447576]." Neurology60(4): 538-47. 
Fastenau, P. S., W. T. Hankins, et al. (2001). "Content validity of f ive alternate forms for six 
established neuropsychological tests." Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology16: 824. 
Fastenau, P. S., W. T. Hankins, et al. (2002). "Effects of alternate forms on retest effects in clinical 
testing." Journal of the International N europsychological Society7 : 151. 
Fisher, R., V. Salanova, et al. (2010). "Electrical stimulation of the anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 51(5): 899-908. 
Fisher, R. S., S. Uematsu, et al. (1992). "Placebo -controlle d pi[INVESTIGATOR_447577]."Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 33(5): 841-51. 
Fujii, S., K. Saito, et al. (1991). "Reversal of long- term potentiation (depotentiation) induced by 
[CONTACT_447616]1 neurons of guinea pig hippocampal slices." Brain 
Res555(1): 112-22. 
Glosser, G., A. S. Zwil, et al. (2000)."Psychiatric aspects of temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_447578]."J NeurolNeurosurg Psychiatry68(1): 53 -8. 
Goodman, J. H., R. E. Berger, et al. (2005). "Preemptive low- frequency stimulation decreases the 
incidence of amygdala-kindled seizures." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 46(1): 1 -7. 
Kile, K. B., N. Tian, et al. (2010). "Low frequency stimulation decreases seizure activity in a mutation model of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330]51(9): 1745-53. 
Kinoshita, M., A. Ikeda, et al. (2005)."Low -frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation 
for sei zure suppression in patients with extratemporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002] -a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]." Seizure 14(6): 
387-92. 
Krauss, G. L. and M. Z. Koubeissi (2007)."Cerebellar and thalamic stimulation treatment for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."ActaNeurochirSuppl 97(Pt 2): 347 -56. 
Kuncel, A. M. and W . M. Grill (2004)."Selection of stimulus parameters for deep brain 
stimulation."ClinNeurophysiol 115(11): 2431- 41. 
Langfitt, J. T. and S. Wiebe (2008)."Early surgical treatment for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]." CurrOpi[INVESTIGATOR_447579] 21(2): 
179-83. 
Laxton, A. W., D. F. Tang- Wai, et al.  (2010). "A phase I trial of deep brain stimulation of memory 
circuits in Alzheimer's disease." Ann Neurol 68(4): 521-34. 
Loring, D. W., E. Strauss, et al. (2008). "Differential neuropsychological test sensitivity to left temporal lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]."J IntNeuropsycholSoc 14(3): 394-400. 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 40 of 41 McNair, D. M., M. Lorr, et al. (1992).Profile of mood states.Educational and Industrial Testing 
Service. San Diego. 
Overall, J. E. and D. R. Gorham (1962)."The brief psychiatric rating scale." Psychol Rep 10: 799-
812. 
Pallud, J., B. Devaux, et al. (2008). "[Changes in spontaneous epi[INVESTIGATOR_447580] a model of chronic mesial temporal lobe 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]]."Neurochirurgie 54(3): 135-40. 
Rashid, S., G. Pho, et al. (2011)."Low Frequency Stimulation Decreases Seizure Frequency in a 
Rat Model of Temporal Lobe Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]." IEEE Xplore : 642 - 645  
Rey, A. (1964). L’examenclinique en psychologie.Paris, Presses Universitaires de [LOCATION_009].  
Schmidt, D. (2009). "Drug treatment of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]: options and limitations. " Epi[INVESTIGATOR_41744] 15(1): 
56-65. 
Schrader, L. M., J. M. Stern, et al. (2006). "Low frequency electrical stimulation through subdural 
electrodes in a case of refractory status epi[INVESTIGATOR_7397]." ClinNeurophysiol 117(4): 781-8. 
Temkin, N. R., R. K. Heaton, et al. (1999). "Detecting significant change in neuropsychological test performance: a comparison of four models."J IntNeuropsycholSoc 5(4): 357 -69. 
Trenerry, M. R., C. R. Jack, Jr., et al. (1993). "MRI hippocampal volumes and memory function before and after temporal lobectomy." Neurology 43(9): 1800-5. 
Velasco, A. L., F. Velasco, et al. (2007). "The role of neuromodulation of the hippocampus in the treatment of intractable complex partial seizures of the temporal lobe."ActaNeurochirSuppl 97(Pt 
2): 329-32. 
Velasco, A. L., F. Velasco, et al. (2007). "Electrical stimulation of the hippocampal epi[INVESTIGATOR_447581]: a double-blind, long- term follow -up study." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 48(10): 1895-903. 
Velasco, F., J. D. Carrillo- Ruiz, et al. (2005). "Double -blind, randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_447582]." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 46(7): 1071-
81. 
Velisek, L., J. Veliskova, et al. (2002). "Low -frequency stimulation of the kindling focus delays 
basolateral amygdala kindling in immature rats." NeurosciLett 326(1): 61 -3. 
Wiebe, S., W. T. Blume, et al. (2001). "A randomized, controlled trial of surgery for temporal -
lobe epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]." N Engl J Med 345(5): 311-8. 
Witt, K., C. Daniels, et al. (2008). "Neuropsychological and psychiatric changes after deep brain 
stimulation for Parkinson's disease: a randomised, multicentre study." Lancet Neurol 7(7): 605 -14. 
 
  
 
IRB # 111239 Version 5.0 17Dec2016  Page 41 of 41 Yamam oto, J., A. Ikeda, et al. (2002). "Low -frequency electric cortical stimulation has an 
inhibitory effect on epi[INVESTIGATOR_447583]." Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 43(5): 491 -5. 
Yang, L. X., C. L. Jin, et al. (2006). "Unilateral low -frequency stimulation of central pi[INVESTIGATOR_447584]." Neuroscience138 (4): 
1089-96. 
 
 
 
 