Protocol Title:  Healthy  Kids Pi[INVESTIGATOR_609675]-PIs: Amanda  Staiano, PhD, Corby [CONTACT_9195], PhD
Co-Investigators: John Apolzan,  PhD
Medical Investigator: Daniel Hsia, MD
Sponsor: Internal  funds 
Protocol Version Date:  8/15/2017
Objectives
Specific Aims
The current pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], entitled Healthy Kids Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] & feasibility  study to demonstrate  the 
feasibility and acceptability of using an mHealth approach (i.e. intervention delivered over smartphone, 
iPad/Tablet, or desktop/laptop) to promote healthy behaviors and healthy  weight  among children and 
their parents. 
We will recruit up to 30 parent-child  dyads into the intervention, where  the designated child is between 
the ages of 6 and 10 years old, has a BMI percentile ≥ 85, free of diseases that affect metabolism, body  
weight, and food intake, including diabetes, HIV/AIDS, and cancer, and where the designated parent has 
a smartphone  and is willing to use it for the intervention,  including accessing the HealthTracker.
The primary outcome variable is acceptability/feasibility of the mHealth approach which will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_609680]. Secondary outcomes  will be 
change in BMIz in children and change  in body  mass of the participating parent.   The  primary aim of the 
study is:
Aim 1: to determine  if an mHealth approach  to promote healthy behaviors and healthy  weight  among 
children and their parents will be utilized  by [CONTACT_609681] 6-10 year old overweight/obese  children.
Number of Subjects  and Subject Timeline
We plan to enroll up to 30 parent/child dyads over 1 year. Each  parent/child dyad will participate in this 
study for approximately  3-[ADDRESS_808303] 1, 2018. 
Setting
All evaluations and study  procedures involving children and parents will be conducted off-site including 
at a local  YMCA or other  community locations or in the participant’s home.   The intervention will be 
conducted via remote counseling  sessions  delivered over  the parents’ Internet-connected device.  
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/[ADDRESS_808304] childhood obesity at the 
population level, and many families face barriers related to scheduling  conflicts and transportation. 
Mobile health  (mHealth) approaches promise to overcome barriers to the translation and dissemination 
of effective  interventions and offer the ability  to remotely monitor patients’ progress and deliver 
treatment. Indeed,  our multidisciplinary team  of behaviorists, dietitians, and physical activity experts  at 
Pennington Biomedical Research Center has shown that it is feasible to deliver mobile phone based 
interventions to parents that target  their child’s behavior and that when these programs  are based on 
behavioral theory, they can be effective. 
This protocol  is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] & feasibility study that will provide data  on acceptability, feasibility,  and 
estimates of effect size for an R01 submission. The R01 submission will test the efficacy of a family-
based weight  management intervention (FWM) to reduce obesity in 198 children aged  6 to 10 years and 
their obese parents using two delivery  modalities:   in-person (n=84) vs. mHealth (n=84),  compared to a 
health education control  (n=30) group,  over  two years. The mHealth intervention will include  remote  
behavioral counseling and include remote tracking of body  weight, physical  activity, and food  intake. 
The overall  goal is to leverage  mHealth to reduce  childhood obesity in a way that is both effective and 
acceptable for wide dissemination.
Sample Size Justification
This protocol  is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] & feasibility study that will provide data  on acceptability, feasibility,  and 
estimates of effect size for an R01 submission. A sample size of up to 30 dyads will provide sufficient 
data for feasibility and acceptability.
Planned Statistical Analyses
To determine  if this mHealth approach to promote healthy behaviors and healthy weight  among  
children and their parents will be utilized  by [CONTACT_609681] 6-10 year old overweight/obese  children, 
descriptive statistics will be used to examine  adherence and scores  on the treatment acceptability and 
treatment satisfaction surveys.
To obtain preliminary estimates of effect sizes, we will use mixed model  analyses  using  an intent-to-
treat approach. Model selection criteria using Akaike  information criterion (AIC) will be employed  to 
determine the best set of covariates, including, but not limited to, baseline demographic (e.g., sex, race) 
and anthropometric variables.  T-tests  based  on the least  squared means  derived  from the model are 
used to test the treatment effects. Responses  such as change in body mass (kg and percent  for the 
parents; BMIz for the children), physical  activity, energy intake and diet quality, and treatment 
satisfaction and burden,  will all be used in the mixed effect model and we will specifically include  race 
and sex in the model to test if biological variables, such as sex, are associated with the outcomes. 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/[ADDRESS_808305]:
Be 6-10  years  of age
Have at least one participating parent. 
Have a BMI percentile  > 85
Be physically capable of exercise
Be free of diseases that affect metabolism, body weight, and food intake, including type  1 or 
type 2 diabetes,  HIV/AIDS, and cancer 
To be eligible for the study, the parent  must:
Have a smart phone
Be willing to use the smartphone  for the mHealth intervention, including  accessing  the 
HealthTracker
Exclusion criteria  for the child include:
Significant  cardiovascular disease  or disorders via self-report from parent
Other significant medical problems that would  prevent  them  from engaging in regular physical 
activity.  
Visits/Procedures
Below are the procedures that will be completed during study participation:
Procedure Screening/
BaselineIntervention End of Study
Follow-up
Assessment of or by [CONTACT_609682] x
Consent x
Height/Weight x x
Questionnaire (Medical  History Survey) x
Acceptability Survey x
Pedometer (daily) x
RFPM (monthly) x
Treatment Satisfaction Survey x
Assessment of Child
Orientation Presentation x
Assent x
Height/Weight x x
Questionnaire (Lifestyle Survey,  Treatment 
Satisfaction Survey)x x
Pedometer (daily) x
RFPM (monthly) x
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/[ADDRESS_808306] study and other recent  
pediatric studies.
Telephone Screen
We will perform an initial telephone screen  to determine if the potential  participant appears to meet 
eligibility criteria.  Individuals deemed eligible  from the telephone screen will then be scheduled for a 
screening visit and will receive the consent/assent form by [CONTACT_6968].
Screening/Baseline Visit
The screening visit will occur at a local YMCA or other  community locations or in the participant’s  home.  
Participants will be formally oriented  to the study by [CONTACT_609683],  
goals, procedures, participant flow,  and timeline.  A parent will sign an informed consent.  Participants 
ages 9-10  will sign a written assent form.  Participants  ages 6-8 will provide a verbal assent for 
participation.  Parents will complete a program acceptability survey and complete  a medical history 
questionnaire for their child.  Children  will complete the Lifestyle Survey. Height and weight  
measurements will be taken for both the child and parent.   If they  meet initial inclusion criteria based on 
the information  collected, the parent/child dyad will meet with an interventionist  to conduct  or 
schedule an initial face-to-face counseling session.
Follow-up Assessment Visit
Parent-child dyads will return to a local YMCA  or other community locations  or in the participant’s home 
for a follow-up  visit at 14-[ADDRESS_808307] their height  and weight  measured  and complete  surveys.  
Procedures
Program Acceptability/Treatment Satisfaction Surveys
Parents will complete a survey assessing program acceptability at screening and a survey assessing 
treatment satisfaction at the final assessment visit. 
Medical History
Parents will completea  medical  history questionnaire for their child.
Lifestyle Survey
Children will complete  a lifestyle survey assessing sleep, dietary and physical activity habits, and media  
use.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/[ADDRESS_808308]  0.1 cm and 0.1 kg.
Intervention
Parent/child dyads  will attend remote counseling sessions  (each approximately 30 minutes)  delivered 
over their Internet-connected device (e.g. smartphone,  iPad/tablet, laptop, or desktop computer).  A  
Pennington Biomedical counselor  will deliver the lesson, review progress based on the objectively 
measured data  available  on the HealthTracker;  more detail below),  and provide  individualized advice  
and problem-solving  strategies for the parent and the child.  Counselors will attempt to meet face-to-
face with  parents  for the initial  intervention session.  Eight lessons will be delivered electronically via 
smartphone, iPad/tablet, laptop,  or desktop computer. Over  the course of the 14-[ADDRESS_808309] via smartphone (most interactions will be via FaceTime,  Skype,  
or phone, but email and text communication will also occur). Each  lesson  will include an interactive 
component for the parent and child related to healthy eating and active play,  as well as an interactive 
parenting training  component. The lessons are based on the family treatment methods that effectively 
promote child  and parent weight loss that is sustained for 10 years (Epstein et al., 1990;  Epstein et al., 
1981).
The parent lessons  are framed around these guiding principles: 1) weight  and activity monitoring; 2) 
behavioral contracting with  a goal of modeling appropriate strategies; 3) review of progress and 
problem-solving to address poor adherence to behavioral goals; and 4) food  monitoring  and goal  setting 
for nutrient intake. Specific lessons will focus  on how  to motivate the child and how to manage  non-
compliance including praise and reward,  positive  reinforcement, selective  ignoring,  contracting, pre-
planning for meals  and physical activity, shapi[INVESTIGATOR_277617], modeling, changes to the home 
environment, and facilitating social support  for behavior change  (Newton et al., 2011;  Staiano  et al., 
2017). The dietary approach will employ food  monitoring and goal setting  for nutrient intake following  
the Traffic Light Diet, an effective  approach  for children  and their  parents  within a clinically supervised, 
multi-component weight management program (Epstein et al., 1990).  Foods are categorized as green, 
yellow, or red based  on caloric density, and children and parents  are given a goal to stay within a 
prescribed daily  calorie range and to eat no more than  four red foods each week. We will work with  the 
parent to make systemic changes to what is served  and how it is prepared  in the home, focusing on 
preparation methods  that decrease energy  density  and dietary fat, such as baking rather than frying 
foods. The physical activity  approach will introduce free or inexpensive activity options and address  
barriers to physical activity. Counselors will work with parents to increase  opportunities for play and 
activities that they and their  children enjoy.  We successfully used  these lessons in prior  and ongoing  
pediatric trials  (Staiano  et al., 2017; Williamson  et al., 2005; Williamson et al., 2006) and have updated 
them over  time. Specific targeted psychosocial constructs include increasing quality of life through 
active play and improving eating attitudes through modeling and introduction of healthy  foods.
The HealthTracker is Internet-based  software that allows us to deploy the intervention as an EMI 
(Ecological Momentary Intervention)  and Just in Time Adaptive Intervention (JITAI). The HealthTracker 
serves as the “hub”  of intervention delivery for the counselors and participants,  and it promotes 
treatment fidelity, ongoing communication and progress reviews between the remote counseling  
sessions, and structures intervention delivery  for the counselors. Further, the HealthTracker remotely 
collects objective data, namely body weight,  in near real-time and these data  are used to facilitate  
behavior change  during the mHealth intervention, consistent with  learning theory.  The intervention is 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017
based on the theory of planned behavior and the theory of reasoned actions (Ajzen,  1991) by [CONTACT_609684]’ behavioral goals are clearly defined, 
self-efficacy is promoted,  and behavior is regulated through objective data.  The intervention also 
incorporates aspects  of social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1988) by [CONTACT_609685],  clear outcome expectations, and goal setting. Though the counselor and 
participant’s relationship is remote and relies on communication technology, counselors are able  to 
deploy motivational interviewing techniques to address decreases in motivation,  which are inevitable in 
longer-term interventions (Patrick  & Williams, 2012).
Component Frequency mHealth (HealthTracker with Virtual Counseling)
Lesson & 
Material Delivery
      Weekly (Wk 1-4)
Biweekly  (Wk 6-14)Counselor delivers 8 lessons  to the child and parent  during 
remote counseling  sessions over video  chat or phone call. 
Body Weight  
     Daily (parent)
Weekly (child)Sent automatically from the Body Trace Scale in the home to 
the HealthTracker.
Within minutes, the Weight Graph for the parent with  
individualized target weight zones are available for the parent 
and counselor  on HealthTracker.
Children  will be asked  to weigh  weekly, therefore the child  
weight graph  will be sent  remotely to the parent  once  per 
week.
Physical Activity 
     (steps/day)
   Weekly The Steps  Graph  for the parent,  including individualized 
steps/day target, are available for the parent  and counselor on 
HealthTracker.
The step graph for the children will be sent remotely to the 
parent once  per week
Food Intake 
     (kcal/day)
     Monthly, 
with ~1 week of data  
per monthWeight graphs  will be continually used a proxy for adherence 
to energy intake targets. For nutrient information,  parent 
captures own and child’s food images  using Remote Food 
Photography. Images are automatically transmitted via the 
SmartIntake app.50,51
The intervention largely  is based on our previous successes with an mHealth weight  management 
intervention for adults called “SmartLoss” (Martin  et al., 2015; Martin et al., 2016). SmartLoss is an 
EMI and JITAI that promotes behavior change via the real-time capture of objective body  weight and 
activity (step) data from  participants’ home environment. These data are wirelessly transferred  to the 
Internet where they are graphed in relation to 
the individual participant’s weight and step 
goals by [CONTACT_609686] (these graphs 
are also available  for the counselor, see Figure).  
One cornerstone of SmartLoss is the ability to 
objectively quantify adherence to energy intake  
goals based on observed body weight. To 
achieve this aim,  we developed and validated 
differential energy balance  equations (Thomas 
et al., 2010) that predict weight change over 
time for an individual  based on a prescribed 
energy intake  target. Our software  generates 
individual weight graphs that display  the expected  amount of weight loss over time,  and the model  
Weight Graph  Zone of Adherence (Parent).
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017
also generates upper and lower bounds around predicted weight loss. As shown in Figure 3, this 
creates a “zone of adherence”  and a participant’s body weight is plotted over time in relation to this 
zone. The participant is considered adherent to the diet if their weight falls within the zone; hence, 
change in weight serves  as a proxy for energy intake/dietary adherence. This graphical feedback is 
used by [CONTACT_609687].  
Customization of the HealthTracker and the Intervention.  The HealthTracker will be accessible  24 
hours per day by [CONTACT_609688] (including mobile devices),  
and the data  in the HealthTracker are available in near real-time. Parents will interact with the 
HealthTracker to review  their  step  and weight  graphs.
Weight Graphs  
Children and parents assigned to the mHealth  
intervention will each receive a Body Trace  scale  that 
wirelessly and automatically transmits their  data to a 
website. Parents will be asked to weigh  daily  and 
weigh their  child weekly, unless contraindicated due 
to anxiety, etc. The HealthTracker will plot the 
parent’s weight on a graph (Figure 3). The child’s 
weight graph is delivered remotely each week and will 
be plotted  two ways, with  the counselor seeing both 
plots and the parent only being able to see one plot 
(access to HealthTracker  is password  restricted).
 As illustrated in the upper panel of Figure 4, the 
parent will see their child’s weight in pounds plotted 
on a graph  that has a zone  of adherence that is flat 
over time  and consistent with our recommendations 
to attenuate weight gain and reduce BMIz compared 
to the control group. The initial zone for the child will 
be set at their  current weight ±3 pounds (we recognize  
this is an arbitrary  zone, though we used a similar 
guideline in the DRIVEE  study  successfully).  As noted  earlier  and illustrated in the lower  panel  of Figure 
4, two safety criteria are evaluated  by [CONTACT_609689]-time via the HealthTracker to identify  
children who might decrease body mass  too much  and/or  too quickly.  Specifically, children will be 
identified who:  1) lose > 0.20  BMIz  in any four-week  period,  or 2) obtain  a BMIz < 0.25  which 
corresponds to the 60th BMI percentile. The weight  graphs  are available  in real-time  to the parents  (and 
their children), and parents will receive  copi[INVESTIGATOR_609676]’s most  recent graphs every time 
they are contact[CONTACT_609690].
Physical Activity
The child’s daily activity  (steps/day) will be tracked with a pedometer. The parent will be asked to 
document their child steps daily.  The counselor plots the child’s daily step data in relation to their 
individual goals. These step graphs are then  used to help promote adherence to participants’  activity  
goals. The pedometer  has low participant burden and is worn on the waist.  The parent and child’s step  
Figure 4. Weight Graph  Zone of Adherence  
(Child).
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017
graph will be available weekly during the interventions sessions and will be delivered to the parents on 
the same schedule  as the weight graph. 
Food Intake
The weight graphs serve as a proxy  measure  of energy intake. Hence,  recommendations  to change 
energy intake  will be guided by [CONTACT_4317]’ body weight in relation  to their individual  zone. The 
Remote Food Photography Method (RFPM) and SmartIntake smartphone app,  however, will also be 
used by [CONTACT_609691], portion  sizes, shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_285821], and food  choices  to 
maximize the likelihood  that the parents  can adhere to their and their  child’s energy  intake  goals.  Food 
image data from family meals (e.g., breakfast, dinner, afternoon and evening  snacks) are extremely  
helpful in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_609677], particularly since these data  are captured and 
transmitted to the study team in real-time.  
RFPM data are collected with  the SmartIntake app by [CONTACT_609692]  (and  plate  waste after meals). The app has barcode scanning capabilities and a Price 
Look-up (PLU) number entry system to easily identify foods in the images. The app also has text and 
voice message capability,  allowing participants to easily record food descriptors  that are automatically 
tagged to the food image.  The SmartIntake app sends participants’ food images to a Pennington 
Biomedical server where  the images can be viewed on an Internet-based platform by [CONTACT_609693]-time (and/or  analyzed  to calculate energy and nutrient  intake).  The RFPM  includes  
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA)  methodology  to promote  data quality and completeness  by 
[CONTACT_609694].  
Data Safety Monitoring  Plan
The proposed research  risks  are no greater than that ordinarily  encountered  in daily life or during the 
performance of routine physical or psychological  examinations or tests (i.e. minimal  risk).  Therefore, 
the protocol does not warrant the establishment  of an independent Data  and Safety Monitoring Board 
(DSMB). This Data and Safety Monitoring plan  describes  the safety monitoring procedures for the 
proposed study, including a description of how  often and to whom serious and unexpected adverse 
events will be reported.  The plan will help ensure the safety of all participants. The PIs will communicate 
via electronic submission to the IRB all unanticipated  problems as defined by [CONTACT_609695]  (SAEs) to the medical investigator within 24 hours.  All  less serious adverse events will be 
reported to the medical investigator within 3 days  of occurrence. 
1)Measurement and reporting of subject accrual, adherence to inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, protocol adherence, and rates  of study completion  – Review of subject accrual, 
adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria and study procedures as listed in the protocol,  
and rates of study completion will occur  every two months. These data will be reviewed  
by [CONTACT_45210].  
2)Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004] – Data  on subject accrual and completion rates will be synthesized  and 
evaluated yearly to determine if the study should be terminated. One of the most  likely 
reasons for early  termination is the failure to recruit or retain  participants; therefore,  
these data  will be evaluated yearly to determine  if failure to recruit or attrition is 
jeopardizing the ability  to empi[INVESTIGATOR_609678]. 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017
3)SAEs  will be monitored  quarterly by [CONTACT_609696],  to ensure 
proper SAE reporting and to regulate procedures to protect participant safety.
Data Management and Confidentiality  
The Ingestive  Behavior Laboratory and Pediatric  Obesity and Health  Behavior Laboratory will have 
primary responsibility for data  collection, data management, manual  data  entry, and data analysis. All 
electronic data will be stored  in the secure  Pennington database, with access given to only necessary, 
HIPAA-certified staff.  All hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_609679] a secure, locked cabinet  at Pennington 
Biomedical Research Center.  Data  collected  at the sites will be securely transported to PBRC. Access to 
data files can be made only with permission of the Principal Investigators.  Data will be stored for [ADDRESS_808310] is otherwise  received.  Participants may be withdrawn  from the study at 
the discretion of the study PIs.
Risks/Benefits to Subjects
The proposed research  risks  are no greater than that ordinarily  encountered  in daily life or during the 
performance of routine physical or psychological  examinations or tests (i.e. minimal  risk). The risks for 
physical, psychological, social, or legal harm are minimal for the testing procedures planned for this 
study.  Our research staff members have  performed  all testing procedures in many studies with  no 
serious adverse  events.  There may be risks associated with changing dietary intake, but these will be 
mitigated by [CONTACT_609697]. Children and parents  will be asked  to 
gradually increase their physical activity during the intervention. Risks to individuals who  increase 
physical activity are rare, but could include:  temporary shortness of breath similar to moderate exercise, 
muscle soreness the following day, dizziness, fainting, blood pressure elevation, irregular heartbeat or 
heart attack, mild irritation  of the skin from the wearable  step  measuring devices used to measure 
physical activity. In addition to the risks listed above, participants may experience  a previously unknown  
risk or side effect. Risks associated with study procedures will be continually  assessed  and monitored  
throughout the study by [CONTACT_473].
Compensation for Research-Related  Injury 
No form of compensation for medical treatment or for other  damages  (i.e., lost wages,  time lost from  
work, etc.) will be available for this research  study. In the event  of injury or medical illness resulting  from 
the research procedures,  participants will be referred to a treatment facility.  
Compensation 
The total compensation for the study  is $125 to be paid by [CONTACT_9434].  The child can earn up to $50 and the 
parent can earn up to $75 for completion of the study.  Both the child and the parent will each receive 
$25 for completing the Screening/Baseline assessment. The child will receive  $25 and the parent  will 
receive $50 for completing the end of study  follow-up  assessment. 
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017
References
Ajzen I. The theory of planned behavior.  Organ Behav Hum Decis Process. 1991;50:179-211.
Bandura A. Organizational application of social  cognitive theory. Aust J Manag. 1988;13:275-302.
Barlow SE, Expert  C. Expert committee recommendations regarding the prevention, assessment,  and 
treatment of child  and adolescent overweight and obesity: summary report. Pediatrics. 
2007;[ADDRESS_808311] 4:S164-192.
Centers for Disease  Control and Prevention.  How  much  physical activity do adults  need? 2014. Available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/basics/adults/. Accessed February 10, 2017.
Colley RC, Janssen  I, Tremblay MS. Daily  step target to measure adherence to physical activity guidelines 
in children. Med  Sci Sports Exerc. 2012;44(5):977-982.
Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical Activity  Guidelines  for Americans.  2008.
Epstein LH, Valoski A, Wing RR, McCurley J. Ten-year  follow-up of behavioral, family-based treatment  for 
obese children. JAMA. 1990;264(19):2519-2523.
Epstein LH, Wing RR, Koeske R, Andrasik F, Ossip DJ. Child and parent  weight loss in family-
based behavior modification  programs.  J Consult Clin Psychol. 1981;49(5):674.
Hall KD, Butte NF, Swinburn BA, Chow  CC. Dynamics of childhood growth and obesity: Development and 
validation of a quantitative mathmatical model. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2013;1(2):97-105.
Henes ST, Cummings DM, Hickner RC, Houmard JA, Lolasa, KM, Lazorick  S, Collier DN. Comparison  of 
predictive equations and measured  resting energy expenditure among obese youth  attending a 
pediatric healthy  weight  clinic:  One size does not fit all. Nutr  Clin Pract. 2013;28(5):617-624.
Martin CK, Gilmore LA, Apolzan JW, Myers CA, Thomas  DM, Redman LM. Smartloss: A personalized  
mobile health intervention for weight management  and health  promotion. JMIR mHealth and 
uHealth. 2016;4(1):e18.
Martin CK, Miller AC, Thomas DM,  Champagne CM, Han H, Church T. Efficacy of SmartLoss,  a 
smartphone-based weight loss intervention: Results from a randomized  controlled trial. Obesity. 
2015;23:935-942.
Martin CK, Correa JB, Han H, Allen HR, Rood  JC, Champagne CM, Gunturk BK, Bray GA. Validity of the 
Remote Food Photography Method  (RFPM) for estimating energy and nutrient  intake  in near  
real-time. Obesity.  2012;20(4):891-899.
Newton RL, Martin CK, Williamson DA, Sothern M, Han H, Webber LS. Accelerometry  measured ethnic 
differences in activity in rural adolescents. J Phys Act Health.  2011;8(2):287-295.
Patrick H, Williams GC. Self-determination theory its application to health  behavior and 
complementarity with motivational interviewing.  Int J Behav Nutr  Phys Act. 2012;9(18).
Physical Activity Advisory Committee. Physical Activity Advisory Committee Report. 2008.
Staiano AE, Beyl RA, Hsia  DS, Katzmarzyk PT, Mantzor S, Newton  RL, Jarrell  A, Tyson  P. Step tracking 
with goals  increases children’s weight loss in a behavioral intervention.  Childhood  Obesity 2017. 
ePub ahead of print. 
Thomas DM, Das SK, Levine JA, Martin CK, Mayer L, McDougall  A, Strauss  BJ, Heymsfield SB. New fat free 
mass - fat mass  model for use in physiological energy balance  equations. Nutr  Metab. 
2010;7(39).
Tudor-Locke C. Steps  to better cardiovascular health: How many steps does it take to achieve  good 
health and how confident are we in this number? Curr Cardiovasc Risk Rep. 2010;4(4):271-276.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/[ADDRESS_808312].  2005;10(3):193-203.
Williamson DA, Walden HM, White MA, York-Crowe  E, Newton RL Jr, Alfonso A, Gordon S, Ryan D. Two-
year internet-based randomized controlled  trial for weight  loss in African-American girls. 
Obesity. 2006;14(7):1231-1243.
Pennington Biomedical IRB FWA 00006218
Approved 08/24/2017