 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Web-Based Intervention to Reduce Alcohol Use in Veterans with 
Liver Disorders Funding Agency: VA HSR&D  
Principal Investigator/Study Chair: Keith Humphreys, 
PhD Co -Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_20177], PhD 
November [ADDRESS_19011]  
 
 
 
 
 
As many as 80% of Veterans with the hepatitis C virus (HCV) engage in harmful 
drinking. This is a major he alth challenge given that even light and moderate alcohol 
consumption can worsen the course and consequences of HCV and can be a barrier to 
receiving antiviral therapy. In response, the VA Uniform Mental Health Services Package has 
made it a priority that HCV and other ambulatory clinics provide evidence -based mental health 
services to all Veterans engaging in harmful drinking within two weeks (but preferably the 
same day as the clinic visit). Our CREATE partners, the VA Office of Mental Health Services, 
VA Operations (10N), and the VA Office of Public Health, are strongly committed to achieving 
this standard throughout the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). However, the cost and 
organizational challenges to meeting this mandate in HCV clinics are enormou s, but may be 
surmountable through the use of self -directed technology that minimizes demands on scarce 
staff time.  
 
The primary objective of this study is to implement and evaluate a web -based brief 
alcohol intervention (BAI) for treating Veterans with HC V and seeking care at two VA HCV 
clinics - Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System (VAPAHCS) and San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center (SFVAMC).  This study will have three aims: First (Aim 1) , we 
plan to assess patient, provider, and system factors that may impact the initial adoption of this 
intervention in two VA HCV clinics. These data will result in the development of a protocol for 
the initial implementation of the web -based BAI at our two study sites. A secondary aim will 
involve obtain ing patient and provider feedback on an existing web -based BAI (see www.bmi -  
aft.org , VA Intranet Only) to help inform its redesign for use with this population. Second (Aim 
2), we will implement and examine the effectiveness of a web -based BAI in two HCV clinics to 
reduce alcohol consumption in Veterans with HCV at three - and six -months post -treatment.  
Third (Aim 3) , we will conduct a budget impact analysis to estimate t he short -term costs (1 -3 
years) of adoption and diffusion of the web -based BAI and the trajectory of health care 
spending for study participants.  
Updated  Nov 1,[ADDRESS_19012] of all abbreviations used in the protocol and their associated meanings  
 
 
 
VHA: Veterans Health Administration  
 
VAPAHCS: Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System 
SFVAMC: San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center 
HCV: Hepatitis C Virus  
BAI: Brief Alcohol Intervention 
SUD: Substance Use Disorder 
MI: Motivational Interviewing 
TAU: Treatment -as-usual  
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  4 of 37   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents  
Protocol Title  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  5 
1.0 Study Personnel  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  5 
2.0 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  7 
3.0 Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................... 11 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  ................................ ................................ ..............................  11 
5.1 Study Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  15 
5.2 Study Design  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  15 
5.3 Recruitment Methods.  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  19 
5.4 Informed Consent Procedures  ................................ ................................ ...........................  21 
5.5 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................  21 
5.6 Study Evaluations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  21 
5.7 Data Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  26 
5.8 Withdrawal of Subjects ................................ ................................ ................................ ....... 29 
6.0 Reporting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................... 29 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................ .............................  31 
8.0 Communication Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 32 
9.0 References  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................... 32 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  5 of 37  Protocol Title: Web -Based Intervention to Reduce Alcohol Use in Veterans with Hepatitis C  
 
 
 
1.0 Study Personnel  
 
Principal Investigator/Study Chair  
 
Keith Humphreys, PhD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System  
HSR&D Center for Health Care Evaluation 
[ADDRESS_19013] (152 -MPD)  
Menlo Park, CA [ZIP_CODE] -
1207 650 -493-5000 x23336  
[EMAIL_345]  
 
Co-Principal Investigator:  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_20177], PhD  
Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System  
Center for Mental Healthcare and Outcomes Research (CeMHOR) 
[ADDRESS_19014]  
North Little Rock, AR 
[ZIP_CODE] 501 -257-1068  
[EMAIL_346]  
 
Co-Investigators:  
 
Wei Yu, PhD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System  
HSR&D Health Economics Resource Center 
[ADDRESS_19015] (152 -MPD)  
Menlo Park, CA [ZIP_CODE] -
1207 650 -493-5000 
x22816157  
[EMAIL_347]  
 
Ramsey Cheung, MD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System 
[ADDRESS_19016]. Building 5 
Palo Alto, CA [ZIP_CODE] -1207  
[PHONE_316] x66482  
[EMAIL_348]  
 
Updated  Nov 1,[ADDRESS_19017]  
San Francisco, CA [ZIP_CODE] -1545  
[PHONE_317] x2958  
[EMAIL_349]  
 
Ruth C. Cronkite, PhD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System  
HSR&D Center for Health Care Evaluation 
[ADDRESS_19018] (152 -MPD)  
Menlo Park, CA [ZIP_CODE] -1207 
[PHONE_316] x22811  
[EMAIL_350]  
 
Hildi Hagedorn, PhD 
Minneapolis VA Medical 
Center One Veterans Drive 
Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE] -2309  
[PHONE_318] x3875  
Hildi.Hagedor [EMAIL_351]  
 
Steven Asch, MD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System  
HSR&D Center for Health Care Evaluation 
[ADDRESS_19019] (152 -MPD)  
Menlo Park, CA [ZIP_CODE] -1207 
[PHONE_316]  
[EMAIL_352]  
 
 
Consultants/Collaborators:  
 
Megan Oser, PhD  
Brigham and Women ’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] [ADDRESS_19020]  
[LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE] -6110  
[PHONE_319]  
[EMAIL_353]  
 
 
Susan Frayne, MD  
VA Palo Alto Health Care System  
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  7 of 37  HSR&D Center for Health Care Evaluation 
[ADDRESS_19021] (152 -MPD)  
Menlo Park, CA [ZIP_CODE] -1207 
[PHONE_316] x23369  
[EMAIL_354]  
 
 
2.0 Introduction  
 Background and Rationale  
Rates of alcohol misuse are high among individuals with HCV which can worsen 
health outcomes. Alcohol misuse is common among individuals with the Hepatitis C Virus 
(HCV) and refers to a range of consumption behaviors from risky drinking (i.e., consuming 
alcohol above National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism guidelines for daily use; 
NIAAA, 2011) to alcohol use disorders (Bradley et al., 2006). Prevalence rates of alcohol 
misuse among persons with HCV in the U.S. range from 27% -43%, while rates of HCV 
infection among those with an alcohol use disorder range from 18% -54% (Nguyen, Jamal, & 
Morgan, 2007). Alarmingly, 80% of Veterans with HCV have a history of documented alcohol 
abuse or dependence (El -Serag et al., 2002) which is substantially higher t han in Veterans with 
other chronic health conditions (e.g., diabetes; Banerjea et al., 2007). Thus, it is critical to 
implement feasible interventions into VA HCV clinics to increase access to services that reduce 
alcohol consumption in this population.  
Alcohol misuse can worsen HCV disease progression through at least two pathways.  First, 
alcohol misuse is the primary cause of cirrhosis and liver transplantation in the U.S. (Hutchinson 
et al, 2005; Szabo, 2007; Wong et al., 2000), with even light and moder ate alcohol consumption 
contributing to liver fibrosis in some (Monto et al., 2004). Second, alcohol consumption is a major 
barrier to receipt of antiviral therapy among Veterans with chronic HCV infection as any level of 
alcohol use may render a Veteran i neligible for antiviral therapy. For example, many VHA HCV 
clinics require patients to be abstinent or demonstrate substantial reductions in alcohol use for a 
6-month period prior to receiving treatment (Cheung et al., 2006). Alcohol consumption may also 
reduce the effectiveness of antiviral therapy through biochemical and/or immune regulatory 
pathways (Nguyen et al., 2007; Peters & Terrault, 2002), and decrease the likelihood that patients 
will successfully complete a course of treatment (Anand et  al., 200 6). Nonadherence to antiviral 
therapy is particularly problematic as new, more effective treatments emerge for HCV (Jacobson 
et al., 2011). Therefore, alcohol misuse is an important modifiable predictor of HCV disease 
progression in some, as well as a comm on and important modifiable barrier to receipt of antiviral 
therapy.  
Improving access to treatment for alcohol misuse is a VHA health care priority.  
VHA’s Uniform Mental Health Services Handbook mandates that medical settings provide 
evidence -based assessm ent and treatment to Veterans with a substance use disorder (SUDs). 
At a minimum, VHA mandates that medical clinics (including HCV clinics) provide screening and 
brief intervention for Veterans engaging in harmful consumption and that this be completed 
within 1 to 14 days (VHA, 2008). This is particularly important for HCV clinics where alcohol 
misuse can interfere with treatment eligibility and potentially worsen disease progression.  
Furthermore, the Uniform Mental Health Services Handbook recommends that medical 
clinics adopt counseling strategies based on motivational interviewing (MI) as this approach can 
optimize treatment engagement (OIG, 2009). Thus, it is a priority among our project partners, 
OMHS, Mental Health Operations (10NC), and Office of Publ ic Health, to improve access to 
these services and to do so using high value strategies for reducing alcohol use among 
Veterans with HCV. The VA Office of Public Health has made major efforts to train providers to 
do BAIs face -to-face, but has found that f ew staff actually do so, increasing Public Health ’s 
Updated  Nov 1,[ADDRESS_19022] over 
several weeks. BAIs typi[INVESTIGATOR_20178]: a brief (5 -minute) assessment and 
personalized feedback. The assessment component collects information on frequency and 
quan tity of alcohol use, frequency of binge drinking, potential consequences of engaging in 
harmful drinking patterns, and motivation (or readiness) to engage in treatment (Butler & 
Correia, 2009; Squires & Hester, 2004; Hester et al., 2005). The assessment da ta are then used 
to generate a personalized feedback report that provides age - and gender -matched normative 
comparisons of alcohol use, a description of self -reported consequences of alcohol use, and 
feedback  on the person ’s degree of motivation to change alcohol or substance use (Williams et 
al., 2009).  
BAIs that utilize web -based assessment and feedback are considered motivational 
interventions in that they are designed for persons who are ambivalent toward changing their 
alcohol use, a population which includes most individuals engaging in alcohol misuse who are 
not currently seeking treatment (Squires & Hester, 2004). BAIs enhance motivation to change 
by [CONTACT_20210] (Dunn, 2003). They instead focus on presenting 
information, such as negative consequences associated with harmful drinking (Vasilaki et al., 
2006) and normative drinking comparisons (Williams et al., 2009), that helps build  a person ’s 
own motivation to change.  The information contained in personalized feedback can enhance 
motivation by [CONTACT_20211] (Squires & Hester, 2004) and eliciting the 
person ’s own perceptions, values, and reasons for change (Hettema et al., 2005; Vasilaki et 
al., 2006).  
Further, correcting misperceptions about normative drinking patterns is thought to 
influence alcohol use in two ways. First, an individual compares their personal alcohol 
consumption to normative perception about what others actually do (e.g., how much the 
average adult drinks). Second, the person uses the ir perceptions about other alcohol use as a 
benchmark for their own consumption patterns (Borsari & Carrey, 2001). Heavy drinkers often 
associate with other heavy drinkers and thus have an inaccurate perception of how much most 
people drink. Thus, BAIs wer e developed to help reveal discrepancies (a key concept in 
motivational interviewing;  Rollnick et al., 2008)  between a person’s  normative perceptions of 
alcohol use and actual consumption among age - and gender -matched peers (Hester et al., 
2005; Neighbors et al., 2004; Nye et al., 1999). By [CONTACT_20212],  personal benchmarks of “normal” alcohol use are typi[INVESTIGATOR_20179] (Neighbors et al., 2004). Thus, given that BAIs  are 
directly based on the principles of MI, they are well -positioned to support our partners in the 
implementation of the Uniform Mental Health Services Handbook SUD treatment guidelines 
which specifies a need for increased access to MI -based counseling a pproaches in medical 
settings.  
BAIs are effective for civilian populations and can be delivered using various 
mediums. BAIs result in significant reductions in alcohol consumption among civilian adults 
and college students (Fleming et al., 1997; Hester et al., 2005, Kaner et al., 2007; Kypri et al., 
2004; Kypri et al., 2008; Butler & Correia, 2009; Neighbors et al., 2004), with some evidence 
suggesting they may also be effective in active duty military populations (Williams et al., 2009). 
BAIs have been use d to good effect in a variety of clinical settings, including primary care and 
HCV clinics (Dieperink, et al., 2010), For example, Dieperink et al., evaluated a face -to-face BAI 
delivered by [CONTACT_20213] n and improved 
rates of antiviral treatment eligibility in a small sample (N = 47) of HCV -positive Veterans.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_20180], face -to-face administration of BAIs is relatively resource 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  9 of 37  intense. Some HCV clinics are unable to adopt such reso urce intensive treatment models and 
in such cases need an alternative evidence -based approach to treating alcohol misuse such as 
a BAI administered via the web.  
BAIs can be delivered in various forms, including face -to-face (Dieperink et al., 2010) 
and sel f-administered via computer (Butler & Correia, 2009; Neighbors et al., 2004; Kypri et al., 
2004), with no reduction in efficacy. Kypri et al. (2004) randomized college students presenting 
to a student health center to receive either a 10 -15 minute web -base d intervention consisting of 
a brief assessment of alcohol use followed by [CONTACT_20214] -only (i.e., 
information pertaining to alcohol facts and effects). Compared to the education only group, 
participants receiving the web -based BAI s howed greater improvements in outcomes, including 
reductions of 26% on total ethanol consumption, 37% less epi[INVESTIGATOR_20181], and 
30% less alcohol -related personal problems at six -weeks post -treatment. These results are 
consistent with more recent  studies (e.g., Kypri et al., 2008; Neighbors et al., 2004) 
demonstrating that web -based BAIs that incorporate brief assessment and personalized 
feedback are considerably more effective than education -only and produce similar sized 
treatment effects for al cohol consumption as those found with provider -delivered brief 
interventions. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_20182]. Demands on staff time and clinic resources, as well as 
logistica l barriers including disruptions in efficient clinic processes often prohibit HCV clinics 
from adopting provider -delivered BAIs. Thus, this study proposes a radically different approach 
that is easier to implement in HCV clinics and, if successful, could b e disseminated by [CONTACT_20215]. We will attempt to surmount the barriers posed by [CONTACT_20216], lack of staff time and interest by [INVESTIGATOR_1312] -versioning, implementing, and evaluating an 
inexpensive, high value web -based BAI for Vetera ns with HCV.  
 
Significance  
Veterans with HCV report extremely high rates of current or prior alcohol use disorders 
(80%) and even higher than those reported in other chronically ill Veteran populations. Alcohol 
consumption is particularly problematic among  this population as it can negatively impact 
eligibility for antiviral therapy and worsen HCV disease progression in some patients.  
Unfortunately, despi[INVESTIGATOR_20183], person -delivered BAIs are 
not always implemented in HCV cl inics due to many barriers (e.g., scarce provider time, limited 
clinic resources, and logistical concerns). As a result, there is a gap in care for HCV -positive  
Veterans who would likely experience improved health if they reduced or eliminated their 
alcoho l use.  
In response, VHA has highlighted the provision of screening and brief intervention for 
alcohol misuse in medical settings (including HCV clinics) as a national health care priority. 
The VHA Uniform Mental Health Services Handbook mandates that outpa tient medical settings 
provide evidence -based screening and treatment for Veterans presenting with SUDs and do so 
within a relatively short time frame. The handbook also strongly recommends that clinics adopt 
interventions based on the principles of motiva tional interviewing to optimize treatment 
engagement. Our CREATE partners, OMHS, Mental Health Operations, and the VA Office of 
Public Health, are committed to meeting this health care mandate nationwide and have 
partnered with our project team to help re -design, implement, and test the effectiveness of low - 
cost, high value innovative approach to delivering BAIs in HCV clinics.  
We anticipate that our study will show that web -based BAIs are a low -cost, effective, 
and feasible approach for reducing alcohol c onsumption in VA HCV clinics, and by [CONTACT_20217] (e.g., surgery). We expect that participants in the 
web- based BAI condition will experience greater reductions in alcohol consumption frequency 
and quantity, and improvements in secondary outcomes such as higher rates of antiviral 
treatment eligibility. We also expect that Veterans in the experimental condition (web -based BAI 
plus treatment -as-usual [TAU]) will demonstrate increased referral and engagement to SUD 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  10 of 37  specialty care when compared to those receiving TAU only. In addition, we anticipate showing 
that self - directed technology can overcome traditional barriers to implementing person -
delivered BAIs in HCV clinics, thereby [CONTACT_20218]’  access to these services within 
medical settings which is a major objective of OMHS, the VA Office of Mental Health Operations 
(10N), and VA Office of Public Health.  
The Office of Mental Health Operation, OMHS, and the VA Office of Public Health 
consider this intervention  affordable and scalable because of its modular and self -directed 
nature, and are interested in rolling it out across VA if it proves effective. Our findings will 
support OMHS and Mental Health Operations (10NC) in implementing the Mental Health 
Uniform Be nefits Package by [CONTACT_20219], low -cost intervention for treating alcohol 
misuse in HCV clinics. This study will also help optimize the implementation and sustained 
adoption of this intervention by [CONTACT_20220] (a) evidence -base d 
recommendations for optimizing the adoption of the web -based BAI within this clinic setting, 
and (b) a budget impact analysis which will provide an estimate of the short -term budget 
implications of implementing this technology into HCV clinics nationwide . This study may also 
provide an alternative, evidence -based approach to treating alcohol misuse in other VA 
medical settings such as primary care and surgery. Furthermore, OMHS and Mental Health 
Operations (10NC) is interested in improving access to these  services by [CONTACT_20221]. Finally, our 
partners find this study valuable because it enhances the link between the Office of Mental 
Health Services and Office of Public Health.  
 
Population Rationale  
This study will include both Veterans receiving care at VA HCV clinics and report any 
level of alcohol in the last [ADDRESS_19023] the services they receive at the VA. In addition, all 
participants will be informed that they may withdraw from participation at any time without  any 
consequences. Informed consent will be explained in a manner that is understandable to all.  
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  11 of 37  3.0 Objectives  
 
Objectives:  
The primary objective of this study is to implement and evaluate a web -based brief 
alcohol intervention (BAI) for treating Veterans with HCV and seeking care at two VA liver 
clinics - Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System (VAPAHCS) and San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center (SFVAMC).  This study will have three aims:  
First (Aim 1) , we plan to assess pat ient, provider, and system factors that may impact 
the initial adoption of this intervention in two VA HCV clinics. These data will result in the 
development of a protocol for the initial implementation of the web -based BAI at our two study 
sites. A second ary aim will involve obtaining patient and provider feedback on an existing 
web- based BAI (see www.bmi -aft.org , VA Intranet Only) to help inform its redesign for use 
with this population.  
Second (Aim 2) , we will implement and examine the effectiveness of a web -based BAI 
in two liver clinics to reduce alcohol consumption in Veterans with liver disease at three - and 
six- months post -treatment. Also, a formative evaluation will be conducted to identify potential 
anda ctual influences on the progress and effectiveness of the initial implementation efforts 
that may impact the likelihood that the web -based BAI will be adopted at both sites.  
Third (Aim 3) , we will conduct a budget impact analysis to estimate the short -term 
costs (1 -3 years) of adoption and diffusion of the web -based BAI and the trajectory of health 
care spending for study participants. We will estimate the budgetary impact fr om the VA ’s 
perspective using a one year time horizon, without discounting. We will  use costs of the 
intervention and the subsequent health spending for participants during their enrollment in the 
study (six -months) and six - months after enrollment for a total of one year.  
 
Hypotheses:  
We anticipate that our study will show that web -base d BAIs are a low -cost, effective, 
and feasible approach for reducing alcohol consumption in VA liver clinics, and by [CONTACT_20217] (e.g., surgery).  
Specifically, we hypothesize that compared to patients in treatment -as-usual (TAU), 
participants in the web -based BAI plus TAU condition will demonstrate - H1: greater reductions 
in the number of drinking days, average drinks per drinking day, and percentage of heavy 
drinking days; H2: greater improvements in health status, psychological distress, knowledge 
about liver disease and alcohol use, antiviral treatment eligibility, satisfaction and perceived 
effectiveness with treatment; and H3: increased utilization of VA and n on-VA outpatient SUD 
care at three - and six -months post -treatment.  
In addition, we anticipate showing that self -directed technology can overcome 
traditional barriers to implementing person -delivered BAIs in liver clinics, thereby [CONTACT_20222]’  acces s to these services within medical settings which is a major objective of 
OMHS, the VA Office of Mental Health Operations (10N), and VA Office of Public Health.  
 
 
 
 
4.0 Resources and Personnel  
 
This four year study will be based at two sites - the (a) VA P alo Alto Health Care  
System , VA HSR&D Center for Health Care Evaluation and Liver Clinic, and (b) San 
Francisco  VA Medical Center , Liver Clinic. This study will also collaborate with the VA 
Women ’s Healt h Practice -Based Research Network to provide technica l expertise relevant to 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  12 of 37  administrative functions (e.g., Central IRB) and enhance our team ’s ability to oversample for 
women and optimize retention of women participants in our study.  
The PI, VAPAHCS and SFVAMC Co -I’s, and study coordinators from each site will 
have access to protected health information. De -identified information will be utilized when 
possible in data analysis. Study coordinators at both sites, will be involved in recruiting 
subjects and obtaining informed consent for Aims [ADDRESS_19024] udy. For Aim 1, study 
coordinators at both sites will administer the interviews with patients and providers. For Aim 
2, the study coordinators at VAPAHCS and SFVAMC will administer the web -based BAI to 
Veterans randomized to the treatment condition at base line, along with the assessment survey 
to all Veteran participants at baseline (in -person interview), and [ADDRESS_19025] -
treatment (phone interview). Data analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Is, and 
supported by [CONTACT_20223] s taff as detailed below.  
 
 
Keith N. Humphreys, Ph.D., Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Humphreys will oversee all aspects of the proposed project in partnership with our 
partners, The VA Office of Mental Health Services, Office of Mental Health Operations (10N), 
and VA Office of Public Health. He will supervise study personnel; coordinate data collection 
protocols, staff training, develop study procedures; and take responsibility for data analysis 
and the dissemination of findings. He will also co -lead development  of the qualitative 
interviews and protocol, and participate in conducting interviews with staff and patients. He 
will ensure that the study protocol and all human subjects and data security regulations are 
followed. [CONTACT_20262] will also be responsible for communicating and supporting our partners in 
interpreting the policy and health care implications of our study findings.  
 
Michael A. Cucciare, Ph.D.; Co -Principal Investigator – not VA Palo Alto  
[CONTACT_20263] ’s role will be to provide guidance to the study team on research methods used 
throughout the study, as well as on statistical analyses and interpretation. In years [ADDRESS_19026]. 
Cucciare will co -lead the development of the qualitative interviews and developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] r ecruitment 
protocols to be used at the VAPAHCS and SFVAMC for Aims 1 and 2. He will co -lead the 
development of the coding manual that will provide a framework for analyzing the de -identified 
content of both interviews (along with [CONTACT_20264]). He will al so participate in the qualitative 
analyses of the de -identified content (along with Drs. Cronkite and Hagedorn), and co -lead 
efforts to prepare reports for dissemination of findings. In years [ADDRESS_19027]. Cucciare will 
provide guidance to the study coordin ators regarding participant recruitment, study logistics 
and coordination at both sites, formative evaluation process (e.g., site visits, interviews with 
staff), follow -up interviews with participants, and database management and analysis (along 
with Dr. C ronkite).   [CONTACT_20263] will be able to access identifiable data, but it is unlikely he will 
need to.  
 
Ruth Cronkite, Ph.D., Biostatistician Co -Investigator  
[CONTACT_20265] will be responsible for guiding the statistical and data analysis procedures, and 
guiding the analysis of the qualitative data.  
 
Wei Yu, Ph.D., Health Economist Co -Investigator  
[CONTACT_20266] will direct the economic study including working with the Office of Mental Health 
Operations to collect VA health care utilization and cost data. He will als o lead the Budget 
Impact Analysis of the web -based BAI. [CONTACT_20266] will be assisted by a HERC statistical analyst at 
30% FTE in year 4 and a research assistant at 20% FTE in years [ADDRESS_19028]. Cheung ’s role, [CONTACT_20267] will 
provide the study team with guidance to ensure that disruptions to clinic flow will be minimized.  
 
 
Hildi Hagedorn, Ph.D. Co -Investigator - not VA Palo Alto  
[CONTACT_20268] will guide the development of our research methodology including the formative 
evaluation plan, interpretation of the de -identified qualitative data gathered from interviews 
with patients and staff, site visits, and clinic observations, and s tructure of our hybrid type [ADDRESS_19029]. Asch will provide guidance on the re -design of the web -based BAI (e.g., suggestions for 
content, strategies for integrating patient and provider feedback into the re -designed version). 
He will also provide guidance on developi[INVESTIGATOR_20184] -structured interviews to be used with 
patients and staff working within the HCV clinic settings, and formulating an implementation 
plan based on obtained feedback from interviews. He will help us develop our initial 
implementation plan and co -develop our formative evaluation protocol. [CONTACT_20269] will also help 
guide the selection of outcomes measures, data interpretation, and the dissemination of 
findings to our CREATE partners –VA Office of Mental Health Operations (10N), VA Office of 
Mental Health Services, and VA Office of Public Health.  
 
Ann Combs, MHA, Research Health Science Specialist at VAPAHCS  
[CONTACT_20270] will serve in the role of Project Manager and st udy coordinator for the proposed 
study. She has experience managing large scale clinical trials. During the first year of the 
project, she will work alongside the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigators to help prepare study recruitment 
including the development of recrui tment protocols, assist with coordinating patient and provider 
interviews, and development of site specific Human Subjects requirements at the SFVAMC. 
She will also work closely with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Investigators to conduct qualitative interviews, 
work with the textual data derived from the interviews in the development of coding manuals, 
and applying  these manuals to the interview transcripts. Upon completion of the interviews, [CONTACT_20271] will work with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20185] - 
versioned BAI with the web developer. In years [ADDRESS_19030] goals and management plans (i.e., for recruitment, intervention 
delivery, and data collection at intake and follow -ups) at the VAPAHCS.  She will be responsible 
Updated  Nov 1,[ADDRESS_19031] at SFVAMC  
In years 2 -4, s/he will be responsible for coordinating recruitment and conducting baseline and 
follow -up assessments for patients recruited from the SFVAMC HCV clinic, coordinating data 
collec ted from site visits (including but not limited to scheduling site visits and transcribing 
textual data collected from interviews conducted in Aim 2). S/he will also support the Project 
Manager in database management and meeting all VA Central and local si te Human Subjects 
requirements.  
 
 
Research Health Science Specialist, Statistical Analyst at the Health Economics Resource  
Center  
This person will provide database management and assist [CONTACT_20272] in data analyses and 
preparation of economic reports to th e study team.  
 
Susan Frayne, M.D., MPH, Consultant  
[CONTACT_20273] will work with the study team in years 1 and 2 to develop recruitment protocols that 
help ensure the oversampling of women in the study and that promote retention of women in 
the study protocol.  The PBRN administrative team (under the leadership of [CONTACT_20273]) will also 
provide technical expertise relevant to administrative functions, such as the Central IRB 
application process, OMB waiver request process, multi -site subject tracking systems, mul ti-
site data security systems, and strategies for coordinating efforts with local clinical staff. PBRN 
core staff has expertise in all of these functions, and are highly qualified to assist [CONTACT_20274].  
 
 
 
 
  
Megan Oser, Ph.D. Consultant – not VA Palo Alto  
[CONTACT_20275] has substantial expertise in the flow and logistics of VA hepatitis C clinics and will help 
guide the development of an initial implementation strategy, instrument selection, data analysis, 
and interpretation.  
 
* not VA Palo Alto = all non -Palo Alto or SFVA research staff will only receive de - 
identified data to examine in accordance with the Common Rule and HIPAA.  
 
 
 
5.[ADDRESS_19032] (e.g., VA is under a tight 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  15 of 37  research funding cap) and study coordination concerns (e.g., less resources needed to 
manage study sites with close locations). Obviously, no two clinics in the VA system can fully 
represent all the realities of care and patients nationall y, but it is possible to document 
carefully the characteristics of the selected clinics so that contextual features that may affect 
generalizability are known.  Accordingly, we will measure both site specific and general 
characteristics that can be used to  inform the research questions posed by [CONTACT_20224]. 
Specifically, data gathered from qualitative interviews will inform the initial implementation and 
re-versioning of a web - based BAI for use at both study sites. We will then use a randomized, 
hybrid (type 1) design with patient level clinical outcome data and formative evaluation data 
collected to examine the  effectiveness of the web -based BAI (Curran et al., 2008) at both 
sites.  
“Hybrid  design s” integrate formative evaluation into experimental desig ns to identify 
factors that impact the effectiveness of implementation efforts (Stetler et al., 2008). Formative 
evaluation will be conducted and consist of site visits, clinic observations, and provider 
interviews to identify potential and actual influenc es on the progress and effectiveness of the 
initial implementation efforts that may impact the likelihood that the web -based BAI will be 
adopted at both sites.  
Finally, a budget impact analysis will estimate the costs of adoption and diffusion of the 
BAI f or Veterans with HCV and the trajectory of health care spending for these patients. We 
will estimate the budgetary impact from the  VA’s perspective using a one year time horizon, 
without discounting. We will use costs of the intervention and the subsequent  health spending 
for participants during their enrollment in the study (six -months) and six - months after 
enrollment for a total of one year.  
 
Aim 1 (Year 1)  
To address Aim 1, we will conduct qualitative semi -structured interviews with Veterans 
and clinic staff at both sites to achieve two objectives: (a) identify patient, provider, and system 
factors that serve as potential facilitators or barriers to the initial adoption of a web -based BAI 
as an intervention for reducing alcohol consumption, and (b) obtai n patient and provider 
feedback on the content and presentation of a web -based BAI to help inform its redesign for 
use with Veterans with HCV and consuming any level of alcohol. Re -versioning the existing 
intervention will increase its usefulness and adopt ability among HCV providers and patients 
with HCV by [CONTACT_20225]. Interviews 
with providers and patients will be conducted over the phone.  
 
Risks and Benefits  
There are no anticipated risks associ ated with participation in Aim [ADDRESS_19033] semi -structured (audio -recorded) 
interviews, over the telephone, with both patient (N = 30, 15 per site) and provider (N=10, 5 per 
site) participants to help inform both the initial implementation and the re -versioning of the web - 
based BAI for two VA HCV clinics. Patients will include men and women veterans who have 
been diagnosed with HCV, attend the HCV clinic at VAPAHCS or SFVAMC, and are currently 
using any level of alcohol.  Patients with evidence of active psychosis, dementia, and/or 
terminal illness will be ineligible to participate.  Providers from HCV clinics at VAPAHCS or 
SFVAMC will be eligible to participate.  
 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  16 of 37   
Aim 2 (Years 2 -3) 
Our second aim is to implement a re -versioned web -based BAI in two liver clinics and 
to evaluate the implementability  and effectiveness of this intervention to reduce alcohol 
consumption in Veterans with liver disorders at three - and six -months post treatment. To 
achieve Aim 2, we will conduct a randomized controlled trial utilizing a hybrid (Type 1) design 
with patient -level clinical outcome data and formative evaluation data collected (Curran et al., 
2008). Participants will be randomized to one of two treatment conditions –(a) web -based BAI 
plus treatment -as- usual (TAU) or (b) TAU only. We will also conduct a formativ e evaluation to 
determine the feasibility and challenges of implementing the web -based BAI into liver clinics.  
 
Method for Randomization  
We plan to use a stratified permuted block design for randomizing participants where 
participants are stratified by [CONTACT_20226] e (Palo Alto or San Francisco) and baseline severity of alcohol 
use (alcohol dependent, not alcohol dependent). Four randomization strata will be used:  not 
alcohol dependent (Palo Alto), alcohol dependent (Palo Alto), not alcohol dependent (San 
Francisco) , and alcohol dependent (San Francisco). Within each stratum, we will construct 
blocks of consecutive patients that vary randomly in size (either 8 or 12 participants). Each 
block will contain equal quantities of assignments to the two study arms arranged (permuted) 
in random order.  A random mixture of block sizes of [ADDRESS_19034] staff 
will not be blinded to the as signed treatment condition.  
 
Web-Based BAI Content  
Participants in the experimental condition will receive a web -based BAI which follows 
the general approach that has proven to be effective in previous studies. The BAI consists of 
two components (a) a brie f computerized assessment and (b) a personalized feedback report. 
The domains that are assessed in the BAI, and on which Veterans received personalized 
feedback are: (a) typi[INVESTIGATOR_20186]; (b) lifetime negative consequences of alcohol 
use; (c) ri sk factors for unsafe drinking (e.g., combat experience, history of sexual assault, 
using drugs/alcohol to cope with symptoms of PTSD); (d) past 90 day use of illicit drugs, and 
(e) willingness to change alcohol use. Assessment information is entered into the BAI computer 
program directly by [CONTACT_102]. Our prior work demonstrated that the assessment portion of the 
BAI takes approximately 10 -20 minutes to complete.  
Once patients complete the assessment portion of the BAI, an individualized feedback 
report is generated for them to print out and review on their own.  A study coordinator will be 
responsible for guiding participants through the study protocol including making sure patients 
print out the feedback report and answering any patient questions that m ight arise. The 
personalized feedback report was developed using the principles of motivational interviewing  
and consists of the following elements – a summary report of patients ’ weekly use of alcohol  
and/or other substances; normative fe edback on their alcohol use with respect to their age - 
matched peers; estimates of the consequences of their alcohol use on their health, finances,  and 
time spent  “under the influence ”; a chart indicating their peak blood alcohol content (BAC ) on a 
day within the past [ADDRESS_19035]; psychoeducation on the physiological 
effects of various BAC values and factors that increase/decrease BAC; social consequences of 
alcohol and other substance use; any reported risk factors for increasing th e social/health 
consequences of using alcohol; and a summary of their self -reported motivation to change their 
alcohol consumption.  
 
Treatment -as-Usual (TAU)  
TAU in this study consists of brief education (delivered face -to-face) about the health 
effects of  alcohol consumption on HCV disease progression (e.g., fibrosis, cirrhosis, viral 
load). When indicated, education is delivered by a liver clinic provider (e.g., physician 
assistants and mental health providers) and typi[INVESTIGATOR_20187] [ADDRESS_19036] 
commonly delivered form of TAU at both clinics. At the discretion of the assessing provider, 
Veterans may be encouraged to seek further assessment and treatment depending on the 
severity of alcohol use (e.g., abuse or dependence). These services mig ht consist of 
educational classes and outpatient mental health. Participation in these services is not 
considered TAU and will be measured at each follow -up assessment.  
 
Formative Evaluation Plan  
We will utilize a well -established formative evaluation protocol that will include two site 
visits (to each study site) and interviews with staff (at each site) at three -month post initial 
implementation (e.g., Curran et al., 2008). This protocol will help our team identify potential 
and actual influences on th e progress and effectiveness of the initial implementation efforts 
that may impact the likelihood that the web -based BAI will be implemented and sustained at 
both sites.  
The formative evaluation will consist of two site visits in which the research team wi ll 
conduct observations that will focus on clinic policies, norms, and staff -patient relationships 
(especially related to screening and treating current alcohol use and use of the web -based 
BAI).  
Updated  Nov 1,[ADDRESS_19037]  of “scheduled ” observations 
where the study coordinators will observe intake interviews, screening efforts for  alcohol use, 
educational presentations, and referral of patients reporting current alcohol use to the web -based 
BAI. St udy staff will also perform informal observations of patient flow, and staff  
and staff -patient relationships in central clinic locations (e.g., nurses ’ station). The primary  
objective of these site visits is to generate writ ten, revised summaries of clinic flow, 
processes for utilizing the web -based BAI, and recommendations for improving the sustained 
adoption of this intervention based on information collected through observations and 
interviews.  
 
Risks and Benefits  
There ar e minimal anticipated risks associated with participation in Aim [ADDRESS_19038] often provided education within the clinic setting about the harmful 
effects of alcohol on liver disorders. Therefore, the receipt of education is considered TAU in 
this proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. In addition to receiving education, it is up to th e discretion of the 
provider to  recommend further  assessment and treatment for the Vete ran indicating active 
alcohol use. The decision  for referral is based on the Veteran’ s willingness and interest in 
further assessment and treatment and severity of alcohol use gathered while meeting with 
the patient. For example, at the San Francisco liver  clinic, providers may recommend 
patients contact [CONTACT_20227] (e.g., one -hour 
educational course titled  “Rethinking Drinking ”). 
Participants randomized to the experimental condition (BAI plus TAU) will then 
complete the web -based BAI. They will also be asked to print out an individualized feedback 
report and review the report on their own (see Personalized Feedback Report sample in 
Appendix A).  Participants randomized to the TAU only condition will complete the assessment 
battery and be provided a Patient Resource Sheet containing Human Subjects approved VA 
(e.g., Toll Free Hotline to the VA Palo Alto ’s Addiction Consultation and Treatment) and non -
VA resources (e.g., website to Alcoholics Anonymous meeting sched ule). All Veterans 
participating in this study   will receive the Patient Resource Sheet to help encourage them to 
seek additional assessment and treatment.  
In the event that a Veteran participant verbally expresses interest in seeking additional 
care to o ur study staff, we will arrange additional meetings between the Veteran and his/her 
HCV clinic provider to discuss additional treatment options. Since our team is co -located 
(located within the same clinic as the liver clinic providers administering the br ief education), 
we can help facilitate this meeting in a number of ways including walking the patient back to 
the provider office and/or contact[CONTACT_20228]. It wi ll also be explained (by [CONTACT_20229]) to the 
participant that they may (should they choose) share the contents of their individualized 
feedback report with any provider.  
 
Study Population  
In collaboration with our co -investigators at each study site, [CONTACT_20276] 
(Director, VAPAHCS HCV clinic) and [CONTACT_20277]  (Director, SFVAMC HCV clinic), 
Veterans (N = 340) diagnosed with liver disease and currently consuming any level of alco hol 
will be recruited to participate. Drs. Cheung and Monto  provided estimates of patient flow 
through each clinic per year and estimates of the percentage of patients reporting any level of 
alcohol consumption during their visit. Based on these estimates,  we a nticipate a sufficiently 
large patient pool from which we may recruit eligible participants. We also estimate, based on 
national VHA patient demographic data, that approximately 2 -5% of clinic patients will be 
women. We  will over sample for women pati ents in both study clinics utilizing expertise (in 
recruiting women for research studies) of the Practice Based Research Network (PBRN) based 
Updated  Nov 1,2016  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  19 of 37  at Palo Alto (under the leadership of [CONTACT_20278], also a consultant) and San Francisco. 
This will increase o ur ability to conduct at least exploratory, hypothesis generating sub group 
analysis in women.  
The study sample will be drawn from a population of Veterans who currently receive VA 
liver clinic services. Veterans presenting to liver clinics who report engaging in any level of 
alcohol use within the prior 30 days will be recruited for the study. Additional criteria for 
inclusion include: (a) a liver disorder  diagnosis, (b) not presently in treatment for a substance 
use disorder, and (c) no evidence of active psychosis, dementia, and/or terminal illness. The 
study will be conducted in liver clinics located at the VAPAHCS and SFVAMC. We estimate that 
we will  need 170 individuals per condition at baseline for a total sample of 340 across both 
sites, with one half in the experimental condition and TAU condition at each site (i.e., n=85 per 
condition at Palo Alto, n=85 per condition at San Francisco).  
For the formative evaluation, study staff will also perform informal observations of patient  
flow, and staff and staff -patient relationships in central clinic locations (e.g., nurses ’ station).  
Secondly, we will conduct interviews with 10 clinic staff members (5 at each study  site) that 
help us identify possible barriers and facilitators to the sustai ned adoption of the web -based 
BAI at both study clinics. The study coordinators will conduct these interviews with providers 
(N = 10) following the same general recruitment and interview approach as outlined for Aim 1.  
 
Aim 3 (Year 4)  
To achieve Aim 3, the  budget impact analysis will estimate the costs of adoption and 
diffusion of the web -based BAI for Veterans with HCV and the trajectory of health care 
spending for these patients. We will estimate the budgetary impact from the  VA’s perspective 
using a one year time horizon, without discounting (Mauskopf et al., 2007). We will estimate 
the costs of the intervention and the subsequent health spending for participants during their 
enrollment in the study (six months) and [ADDRESS_19039] the  patient ’s social security number. We will link the 
social security number to the VA scrambled social security number so that we can extract their 
VA utilization and cost data. We will collect utilization and cost data from randomization throug h 
one year for each participant.  Data will be gathered from a variety of sources.  
 
 
5.2 Recruitment    Methods  
 
Aim 1  
 
Interviews will be conducted, over the telephone, with patients (N= 30, 15 per site) and  providers 
(N = 10, 5 per site). A rolling recruitment strategy will be used resulting in one -on-one phone 
interviews until enrollment is complete. Patient participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_20230] a 
study flyer provided to them by [CONTACT_20231], or posted in an exam room or clini c 
research bulletin board. Patients may then contact [CONTACT_20232] a phone number listed on the 
study flyer. Veterans will be screened for eligibility by [CONTACT_20233], and those eligibl e will schedule a phone interview with the 
research staff. Patients with evidence of active psychosis, dementia, and/or terminal illness will 
be ineligible to participate. Patient participants will be reimbursed $50 for their participation.  
All providers w orking in the HCV clinics at each site will be eligible to participate in 30 
minute interviews conducted over the telephone. An interdisciplinary group of 10 providers (10  
at each clinic) work at each of the two HCV clinics included in our study. We will f ocus our 
efforts on recruiting a minimum of 5 providers at each site including physicians, clinic nurses 
(RN, LVN), and mental health staff given their involvement at different points in the screening 
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19040] interested providers to schedule a thirty -minute, 
one- on-one semi -structured interview over the phone that will be conducted by [CONTACT_20234]. Participating clinics will be offered their c hoice of text books published by [CONTACT_20235] a continuing medical education tool in recognition of their 
participation.  
 
Aim 2  
 
We estimate that we will need 170 individuals per condition at baseline for a total sample  
of 340 acro ss both sites, with one half in the experimental condition and TAU condition at 
each site (i.e., n=85 per condition at Palo Alto, n=85 per condition at San Francisco).  
Veterans will be recruited through provider referral, flyers posted in both liver study 
clinics, and through the use of administrative records (CPRS and CDW) at both sites. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Is will educate providers at each site about the study in their monthly meetings. Study 
staff will present a brief overview of the study objectives, criteria  for Veteran participant 
eligibility, and low -response options (e.g., contact[CONTACT_20236]) for referring 
potential participants to the study. The research team will also provide flyers describing the 
study (e.g., describing participant eli gibility and study team contact [CONTACT_3031]) throughout 
each of the study clinics.  We will place flyers in exam rooms, waiting rooms, and at clinic 
check -in desks. We will also provide flyers to clinic staff (e.g., nurses and mental health staff) 
to be giv en to eligible patients during the exam and subsequent psychosocial assessment.  
Finally, in collaboration with our Co -Is, participants will also be recruited through the 
use of administrative records obtained through CPRS and CDW. Specifically, we plan to  
identify patients who have completed a scheduled visit  during the prior week and mail them a 
letter (signed by [CONTACT_20237]) describing the study, eligibility criteria, and a 
phone number for contact[CONTACT_20238].  
Our research team has extensive experience using these recruitment strategies to 
good effect. For example, study Co -Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Cucciare is currently conducting 
an HSR&D funded randomized clinical trial in a VA primary care clinic examining the effect of a 
web-based BAI on alcohol consumption among Veterans with alcohol misuse. His study is 
utilizing the above recruitment strategy with excellent results. For example, his [MC] study (n = 
160 to date) currently has an 80% recruitment rate among eligible particip ants, and an 85 -90% 
three - and six -month follow up rate (Cucciare et al., 2011). We will also take advantage of and 
utilize recruitment and retention strategies that are well -established among HSR&D 
investigators at the Center for Health Care Evaluation fo r use in the present study.  
Patients agreeing to participate will be asked to complete an assessment at baseline 
and again at three - and six -months post -treatment. Baseline interviews will be conducted in 
person by [CONTACT_464], with both follow -up assessme nts conducted via telephone. Participants 
will be reimbursed $50 (for a possible total of $100) for their participation after completion of 
the baseline assessment, and $[ADDRESS_19041] the  patients ’ social security number. We will link the  
social security number to the VA scrambled social security number so that we can extract their  
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19042] data from randomization through 
one year fo r each participant. Data will be gathered from a variety of sources.  
 
5.3 Informed Consent Procedures  
 
Aim 1  
 
Informed consent will be obtained verbally over the phone by [CONTACT_20239]/providers call our study team in response to a study flyer. We will request a Waiver 
of Documentation of Informed Consent to obtain permission from patients and providers to 
participate in the study and to consent to audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  Informed consent will be obtained before 
interviews are conducted by [CONTACT_20240]. Patients with evidence of active psychosis, dementia, 
and/or terminal illness will be ineligible to participate.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_19043] of the study conditions on patient outcomes. Also, patients with evidence 
of active psychosis, dementia, and/or terminal illnes s will be ineligible to participate.  
 
Aim 3  
 
Participants who provide informed consent for Aim 2 will also be asked for permission to  use their 
social security numbers, which addresses data access for Aim 3.  
 
 
5.4 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
The study sample  will be drawn from a population of Veterans who currently receive 
VA services and providers in two VA Liver Clinics. Veterans presenting to HCV clinics who 
report engaging in any level of alcohol use within the prior 30 days will be recruited for the 
study. 
Additional criter ia for inclusion include: (a) a  liver disease diagnosis, (b) not presently in 
treatment for a substance use disorder, and (c) no evidence of active psychosis, dementia, 
and/or terminal illness. Any provider responsible for direct patien t care at either study site 
Liver Clinic will be eligible to participate in Aim 1.  
 
 
5.[ADDRESS_19044]. Eligible 
participants interested in the study will be asked their permission to be contact[CONTACT_426] a study 
coordinator (who will also determine eligibility) to schedule an  interview. All providers working in 
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19045] information on CFIR domain A –the outer and inner setting in which care 
occurs. Questions in this domain will collect information on the broader social and cultural 
context (o uter) and more specific clinic processes (inner) that may affect the adoption of a web - 
based BAI as a potential intervention for Veterans with HCV and active alcohol use. Questions  
concerning the outer setting will focus on such factors as: (a) life circu mstances (e.g.,  “To what  
extent do life circumstances influence your willingness to openly discuss alcohol use with your 
provider? ”) and (b) involvement/impact of other people (e.g., “How do what other people think 
about you affect your willingness to talk  about alcohol use with your provider? ”,). Questions 
concerning the inner setting will include: (c) patient centeredness of the health care setting 
(e.g.,  “To what extent to you feel the clinic in which you receive care takes your needs and 
preferences int o account? ”) and (d) access to resources (e.g., “To what extent do you feel you 
have access to options for supporting you in reducing your alcohol consumption? ”). 
Part II will collect information on CFIR domain B - the characteristics of individuals involv ed 
in the care process. Questions in this domain will assess patient and provider characteristics  
that may influence HCV  patients ’ willingness to discuss their alcohol use and receive care 
when  appropriate. Example questions will focus on such factors as ( e) communication (e.g., 
“Are there ways in which your provider talks to you that affects/influences your willingness to 
discuss alcohol use?”); (f) awareness of the consequences of drinking (e.g., “What do you 
know about alcohol ’s effect on your health?”);  (g) importance of feedback (e.g., “What type of 
feedback is (or was) most influential in understanding the health effects of drinking? ”); (h) 
decision to change (e.g.,  “To what extent does changing your eligibility for antiviral treatment 
impact you intere st in seeking care for your alcohol use? ”); and (i) readiness to use a web -
based BAI (e.g., “Describe your degree of openness to interacting with a BAI delivered by [CONTACT_20241]. ”, “What factors influence your interest/willingness to interact with a self -administered  
BAI? ”). 
Part III will focus on CFIR domain C - intervention characteristics involved in the care 
process. Patient participants will be presented content from several evidence -based 
approaches for addressing alcohol use including: (a) brief advi ce, (b) brie f alcohol counseling 
(e.g., VHA  brief alcohol counseling performance measure), (c) brief alcohol interventions (e.g., 
assessment and feedback [BAI]), and (d) referral to specialty SUD care. Patient participants 
will be asked for feedback and re actions to the content of these care strategies, their format, 
and general presentation. If participants have been exposed to these approaches before in 
their interactions with providers, they will be asked for their reactions to and experiences with 
them.  Patient feedback on these care strategies (and responses to questions in Parts I -II) will 
be used to help inform the re -versioning of the web -based BAI. For example, these interviews 
may yield rich information regarding patient preferences on types of spe cialty SUD programs 
(e.g., outpatient mental health) and approaches to the referral process (e.g., direct provider 
prescription, preference for the  “hallway handoff ”) that will inform the manner in which we 
integrate this information into the web -based BAI. 
 
Provider Interviews. Provider interviews will follow the same general strategy as the patient 
interviews with question development guided by [CONTACT_20242]. (2005) and  
Felker et al. (2006) describing factors critical in providers ’ adoption of innovative, evidence -based 
health care practices  
 
Part [ADDRESS_19046] of open -ended questions that gather information on CFIR domain A - the outer 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  23 of 37  and inner setting in which care occurs. Questions will gather data on the outer setting by  
[CONTACT_20243][INVESTIGATOR_20188] (a) policy factors that may influence care (e.g.,  “How do  patient/provider 
ratios impact your ability to provide counseling to HCV -positive patients with active alcohol use?, 
What impact does your clinic policy for responding to active al cohol use  have on your ability to 
counsel HCV -positive patients?) and (b) social influences (e.g.,  ”To what  extent do social 
influences [peers or managers] facilitate or hinder open discussion of alcohol use with your 
patients?). Questions concerning the i nner setting will assess such factors as (c)  the clinic 
environment and available resources (e.g.,  “To what extent do physical or other  resource factors 
facilitate or hinder your ability to have open discussions of alcohol use with your patients? ”) and 
(d) availability of time (e.g., “What preparatory steps are needed to provide effective counseling 
for alcohol use in this population? ”). 
Part II will collect information on CFIR domain B - the characteristics of individuals involved  in the 
care process, incl uding providers ’ knowledge (e.g., “What do you know about the  guidelines for 
screening and treating alcohol use in Veterans with HCV? ” ) (f) skills (e.g., “To what extent do 
you feel like you have sufficient skill to identify active alcohol use with your p atients? ”); (g) beliefs 
about their own capabilities (e.g., “What do you think will happen if you provide alcohol  
counseling to a patient? ” ); (h) motivation and goals (e.g., “How much do you want to provide 
alcohol counseling [or referral to a web -based BAI] when indicated? ” ); (i) memory, attention, and 
decision process (e.g.,  “Describe any situations in which you chose not  to provide alcohol  
counseling in response to active alcohol consumption. ”, “To what extent would  an alternative to 
provider -deliver ed counseling, such as a self -administered BAI, help support you in addressing 
alcohol use in your patients? ”); (j) emotions (e.g., “To what extent do emotional factors facilitate 
or hinder open discussion of alcohol use with your patients? ”) and (k)  readi ness to adopt a web -
based BAI (e.g.,  “Describe your level of interest/willingness to  recommend a web -based BAI to 
patients reporting active alcohol use. ” , “Describe your clinics level of readiness to adopt a web -
based BAI as a potential intervention for r educing alcohol consumption”. ).  
Part III of the interview will collect data on CFIR domain C - intervention characteristics 
involved in the care process. Providers will be asked to give their perceptions on current 
guidelines for treating alcohol use in HCV clinics and availability of treatment o ptions at their 
facility. For example, potential assessment domains include: (k) perceptions about existing  
guidelines (e.g.,  “What do you think about current guidelines for addressing alcohol  
consumption in your clinic?”  and “How effective/ineffective do you feel these guidelines are in 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_20189]? ”) and (l) perceptions about and  
availability of treatment options for alcohol use (e.g.,  “How do you feel about existing 
treatment  options for your patients reporti ng active alcohol use? ”). In addition, providers will 
be asked to provide their reactions to the following treatment options: brief physician advice, 
the VHA brief alcohol counseling performance measure, brief alcohol interventions (e.g., 
assessment and fe edback [BAI]), and referral to specialty SUD care, which (along with 
responses to questions in Parts I -II) will inform the re -versioning of the web -based BAI.  
 
Aim 2  
 
Veteran participants will be randomized into the experimental condition or TAU.  
Participants in the experimental condition will receive a web -based BAI which follows the 
general approach that has proven to be effective in previous studies. The BAI consists of two 
components (a) a brief computerized assessment and (b) a personalized fe edback report 
(also see section 5.1).  
All participants will receive an assessment at baseline, and follow up at 3 - and 6 -months.  
The assessment consists of the following topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]: demographics, liver disorder diagnosis and 
treatment  eligibility, patient sati sfaction, primary and secondary outcomes.  
 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  24 of 37  Assessment Instruments  
(a) Demographics . Characteristic such as age, gender, and previous or current 
involvement with inpatient/outpatient VA (or non -VA) substance use disorder (SUD) treatment 
or mental health care pr ograms will be collected from the patient and through administrative 
records (CPRS and CDW). We will also assess current (or past) participation in a self -help SUD 
program such as Alcoholics Anonymous. We will assess possible exposure to these various 
forms of substance abuse treatment during the three - and six -month follow up periods.  
(c) Patient satisfaction. We will use a brief patient survey that we developed from our  
preliminary work to assess  patients ’ satisfaction with both treatment conditions. This sur vey 
will ask patients to respond to a series of statements regarding their satisfaction with the  
interventions received (e.g.,  “I felt comfortable disclosing my alcohol use to a computer  
program”; “My provider helped me understand how alcohol use may worse n liver 
disorder(s). ”). This assessment will be completed by [CONTACT_20244] (and upon completion of the web -based BAI for patients assigned to the 
experimental condition).  
 
Primary Outcomes.  
(d) Alcohol quantity and frequency. Reduction in alcohol use will be measured using the 
30-day Time Line Follow -Back instrument (TLFB; Sobell & Sobell, 1992). The TLFB is a 
calendar that provides visual cues to aid persons in retrospective recall of drinking behavior. It 
uses  “cues”(e.g., holidays, birthdays) to help a participant recall drinking behavior (e.g.,    
frequency and quantity of alcohol use) and has been shown to be reliable and accurate when 
administered individually over the telephone (Sobell et al., 1996). Based on recommendations 
from the alcohol treatment literature we will assess the ( a) number of drinking days, (b) mean 
number of drinks per drinking day, and (c) percentage of heavy drinking days in the prior 30 
days as our primary outcomes (D ieperink et al., 2010; Gastfriend et al., 2007). These 
outcomes will be measured by [CONTACT_20245] (30 -days prior) to 
data collected at three - and six -month follow -up (30 days prior).  
 
Secondary Outcomes.  
(e) Consequences of alcohol u se. The Short Index of Problems (SIP -3months) is a 
brief, 15 -item version of the Drinker Inventory of Consequences (DrInC) which assesses 
alcohol - related problems over the prior 3 -months (Woolard et al., 2004). The SIP has sound 
psychometric properties (K enna et al., 2005).  
(f) Symptoms of psychological distress. Symptoms of psychological distress will be 
measured using the Brief Symptoms Inventory (BSI). The BSI instrument provides an 
overview of a patient's symptoms and their intensity at a specific point in  time (Derogatis & 
Melisaratos, 1983). The reliability, validity, and clinical utility of the BSI instrument are well -
established.  
(g) Health status. The Short Form -12 (SF -12) is a 12 -item health survey based on the 
Medical Outcomes Study 36 -item Short -Form He alth Survey (SF -36) designed to assess two 
component health status summary scales (physical and mental component summaries) in 
the general U.S. population (Ware et al., 1996). The SF -[ADDRESS_19047] v alidity (Luo et al., 2003).  
(h) Seeking/receiving additional care. We will measure the degree to which Veteran 
participants seek additional SUD care over the course of the three - and six - month follow up 
periods. We will assess whether Veterans seek out outpat ient/inpatient care of a substance  
abuse problem within or outside the VA system. We will also assess whether Veterans 
access self -help care outside the VA such as attending a meeting at Alcoholics Anonymous.  
(i) Depressive symptoms. The Patient Health Questio nnaire -9 (PHQ -9) is a 9 -item 
depression scale based on the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual Fourth Edition (American 
Psychiatric Association, 2000). Items are scored (and summed) from 0 (not at all) to 3 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  25 of 37  (nearly every day), with severity of symptoms rangi ng from 0 to 27. The reliability and validity 
of the PHQ -9 are well established (Kroenke et al., 2001).  
(j) Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The Copi[INVESTIGATOR_20190] (CRI; Moos, 1993) will be used to assess  
participants ’ use of approach and avoidance copi[INVESTIGATOR_20191] (e.g.,  
antiviral therapy). The CRI asks participants to identify their most significant stressor over the 
past 12 months, and then complete 48 items that describe specific copi[INVESTIGATOR_20192].  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_20193] 0 (not at all) to 3 (fairly often). The CRI 
comprises 8 subscales (e.g., problem solving) that have strong internal consistencies (Moos, 
1993, 2002).  
(k) Knowledge of HCV. This is a 16 -item assessment of HCV knowledge based on 
patient education develo ped by [CONTACT_20246] C Resource Center (2011). Total knowledge 
will be derived from percent of the questions answered correctly (ranging from 0 – 100%). 
Accuracy of HCV knowledge will be defined as percentage of correct answers with higher 
percentages r eflecting more accurate HCV knowledge.  
(l) Social norms. Two questions will assess perceived quantity and frequency of alcohol  
consumption among participants ’ peers (i.e., descriptive norms, e.g.,  “How many drinks on one  
occasion do men/women your age consume ?” [frequency], while a 10 -item measure will be 
used to assess concerns about harmful alcohol use (injunctive norms; Williams et al., 2009).  
(m) Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI ). Section J, Alcohol Abuse and 
Dependence will measure the leve l of alcohol consumption over the past 30 days among 
participants. This is a 12 -item assessment, with items rated from 0 (not at all) to 4 (extremely). 
This questionnaire will assess the presence of an alcohol use disorder (AUD) among 
participants.  
 
Format ive Evaluation Plan  
We will utilize a well -established formative evaluation protocol that will include two 
site visits (to each study site) and interviews with staff (at each site) at three -month post 
initial implementation (e.g., Curran et al., 2008).  
At the first site visit study staff will spend a day in each clinic reading program policy 
manuals and meeting with clinic directors. The latter will provide an opportunity to pose more 
focused questions on clinic policies (especially related to screening and  treating current 
alcohol  use). The meetings will be used to gauge clinic directors ’ support for the project as 
initial  implementation will occur approximately one -year after funding notification. Therefore, it 
will be  important to reassess clinic director s’ current attitudes and beliefs, and answer any 
questions on  the implementation process. When necessary we will provide brief, evidence 
summaries on the effectiveness of web -based BAIs and advocate VA practice guidelines for 
screening and treating alcohol  use or misuse when appropriate.  
For the second site visit, approximately three -months after the initial visit (and post - 
implementation), Co -Investigator (Asch) and site coordinator will complete a second three -day 
visit to each study site. This second vi sit will include observations of program operations and 
conducting interviews with clinic staff. First, we will conduct observations that will focus on 
clinic policies, norms, and staff -patient relationships (especially related to screening and 
treating cu rrent alcohol use and use of the web -based BAI). Observations will be both formal 
and informal. The former will consist  of “scheduled”  observations where the Co -I or study 
coordinator  will observe intake interviews, screening efforts for alcohol use, educa tional 
presentations, and referral of patients reporting current alcohol use to the web -based BAI.  
Study  staff will also perform informal observations of patient flow, and staff and staff -
patient  relationships in central clinic locations (e.g., nurses ’ station). Second, we will conduct 
interviews  with 10 clinic staff members (5 at each study site) that help us identify possible 
barriers  and facilitators to the sustained adoption of the web -based BAI at both study clinics. 
The study  coordinators will conduc t these interviews with providers (N = 10) following the 
same general recruitment and interview approach as outlined in Aim 1.  
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19048] the  patient ’s social security number. We will link the  
social security number to the VA scrambled social security number so that we can extract their 
VA utilization and cost data. We will collect utilization and cost data from rando mization through 
one year for each participant.  Data will be gathered from a variety of sources.  
OMHO will provide our team with a subset of a larger OMHO global data set that 
includes VA SUD patient level utilization data. In doing so, they will effectiv ely be contributing 
staff time of two FTE data analysts for years [ADDRESS_19049].  
(a) VA Utilization Data. The Office of Mental Health Operations (OMHO) uses the VA 
National Patient Care Database and the Patient Treatment Files (PTF), and Decision Support 
System Files (DSS) to characterize q uantity and type of SUD and mental health care received 
by [CONTACT_20247]. The OMHO databases include information on number of outpatient 
visits, residential care received, pharmacotherapy, psychoeducation and psychotherapy 
receipt, and use of deto xification services. OMHO will provide the project team with utilization 
data for patients included in the effectiveness study (i.e., Aim 2).  
(b) VA Cost Data.  Using the DSS, OMHO will provide costs associated with each of 
the care elements described in the u tilization data sets.  
(c) Non-VA Care -Utilization and Cost Data (paid for by [CONTACT_20248]) . Because VA 
patients may obtain approved health care outside the VA system during the study period, 
the cost of such care must be taken into account. We will use the Fee Basis fil e to capture 
all care provided outside the VA and paid for by [CONTACT_20248].  
 
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19050] qualitative semi -structured (audio -recorded)  interviews with 
both patient (N = 30, 15 per site) and provider (N=10, 5 per site) participants to help inform both 
the initial implementation and the re -versioning of the web -based BAI for two VA HCV clinics. 
Interviewing both patients and providers will allow us to better understand the patient, provider, 
and system factors that serve as potential facilitators 
or barriers to the adoption of a web -based BAI. Sampling from both clinics will provide information 
on similarities and differences across both si tes in HCV care and adoption of a web -based BAI.  
All interviews will be audio recorded by [CONTACT_9137]. The recordings may then 
be sent via a secure, encrypted online server to a medical transcription company for 
transcribing. The transcription pr ocess will occur as soon after each interview as possible. 
Audio data and de -identified transcript data will be maintained on the secure server at 
VAPAHCS in a folder accessible only to those study staff who are involved in data processing 
and analysis.  
Supervision and quality review of the de -identified interview notes will be provided by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Cucciare and Co -Is [Drs. Hagedorn and Cronkite]. Template analysis (also known as thematic 
coding) will be used to identify themes in the textual data (King, 1998). T he study coordinator 
and Co -I [CONTACT_20263] will engage in the initial analysis of de -identified interview data. 
Following recommendations by [CONTACT_20249], the analysis process will initially be structured by [CONTACT_20250] r interviews. The study coordinator and 
[CONTACT_20263]  will consult regularly throughout data collection to discuss insights and 
unexpected responses from participants which may alter how some topi[INVESTIGATOR_20194].  
After the interviews and transcriptions are complete, the study coordinator and [CONTACT_20279] will begin developi[INVESTIGATOR_20195]. Codebook 
development will be an iterative process. Codebooks will be initially developed based on  close 
readings of 30% of patient (n = 9) and 40% (n = 4) of provider transcripts. Themes that emerge 
from the patient and provider interviews will be continuously integrated into their respective 
codebooks. We anticipate that the final set of themes will consist of both themes defined a 
priori and new themes that emerge from each set of interviews. Upon completion of the initial 
version of the codebooks, the study coordinator and [CONTACT_20263] will discuss the application of 
the codebooks to each set of int erviews. This process will involve practicing applying the 
codebooks to a single patient and provider interview. When agreement is reached, the study 
coordinator and [CONTACT_20263] will code a random sample of 20% of patient (n = 6) and 20% of 
provider (n =2 ) interviews to establish inter rater reliability. Once reliability is established (80% 
agreement), we will proceed to code the remaining portion of the patient and provider 
transcripts. Throughout the coding process, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Cucciare will regularly  discuss 
emerging themes, changing conceptualizations of existing themes, and to prevent drift. They 
will also consult intermittently with the other Co -Is and consultants to discuss emerging themes 
and conceptualizations. After data coding is complete, dat a analysis will begin, focusing on the 
frequency of code occurrence (by [CONTACT_20251]) and patterns of code co -occurrence for 
each set of interviews.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_19051] size of .35 to .40 (range is .15 to .67) on alcohol 
consumption outcomes in response to the web -based BAI (Kypri et al., 2004 Kypri et al., 2008 
Neighbors et al., 2004). Assuming a power of 80% o f detecting an effect size of .35, an alpha 
level of .05, a [ADDRESS_19052], a correlation of .5 between repeated measures of an outcome 
variable, and a 20% attrition rate at 6 months, we estimate that we will need 170 individuals 
per condition at baseline f or a total sample of 340 across both sites, with one half in the 
experimental condition and TAU condition at each site (i.e., n=85 per condition at Palo Alto, 
n=85 per condition at San Francisco).  
 
Data Analysis  
Prior to any regression modeling, we will fi rst examine the sample distributions of each 
outcome variable and predictor variable to help us identify any possible errors in the data (e.g. 
coding errors). One of the benefits of our proposed use of generalized linear mixed model 
(GLMM) regression analy ses is that is can accommodate a variety of conditional distributions 
for each outcome variable. Given that we will randomly assign participants to each condition, 
we expect the two groups to be comparable on baseline demographics and outcome variables 
at baseline.  Nevertheless, we will conduct independent groups t -tests or chi -square analyses 
to check for any differences between the two groups on demographic characteristics and 
baseline outcome assessments. If differences are found between groups on any v ariables, we 
will control for those variables in subsequent analyses. Next, we will use generalized linear 
mixed -model (GLMM) regression analyses to compare the two conditions on our primary and 
secondary outcomes (Raudenbush et al., 2001; Singer et al., 2 003). The primary hypothesis 
that the slope of drinking outcomes over [ADDRESS_19053].  Random intercepts will be included to account 
for possible correlation among repeated measurements due to patient -specific latent factors. 
We will  exam ine further constraints on the covariance structure and choose the final model by 
[CONTACT_20252] -of-fit. We will also examine the distribution of the outcome variables and 
associated random error components, choose appropriate link and variance functio ns 
(McCullagh & Nelder, 1991), and review any outliers.  
 
Examining Mediators and Moderators  
Prior studies show that the effectiveness of web -based BAIs is at least partly due to the 
correction of misperceptions about normative alcohol use (i.e., social norms; Borsari & Carey, 
2001; Neighbors et al., 2004). Therefore, we will test whether changes in social norms (e.g., 
descriptive and injunctive norms) mediate the effect of the web -based BAI on alcohol 
consumption. Following the recommendation of Baron and Kenny (1986), we will conduct a 
series of analytic steps (using regression models) to determi ne mediation: (a) we will test the 
effect of both intervention conditions on alcohol consumption; (b) the effect of intervention 
conditions on social norms; (c) the effect of social norms on alcohol consumption controlling 
for intervention condition; and ( d) the effect of intervention condition on alcohol consumption 
after controlling for social norms. In addition, we will examine potential moderators (e.g., 
severity of alcohol use, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], psychological distress) that may impact the effectiveness of 
interv ention condition on treatment outcome. This analysis will help us determine whether the 
effectiveness of the intervention(s) is impacted by [CONTACT_20253] -up. 
 
Missing Data Prevention, Detection, and Adjustme nt 
We will make every effort to prevent missing data at each assessment by [CONTACT_20254] a response rate as possible. Baseline data will be collected during an in -person interview 
and follow -up assessments will be conducted as telephone interviews by s tudy site 
Updated  January  20, [ADDRESS_19054] been trained to cover all questions and obtain as complete data as 
possible while respecting the  patient ’s right to not answer specific questions. Based on 
previous follow -up studies of SUD patients conducted at our Center, we do not expect rates of 
missing data on any one variable to be greater than 5% at each assessment over and above 
missing data due to attrition, nor do we expect missing data to be systematically related to 
certain outcome variables. Nevertheless, given o ur plan to use an intent -to-treat approach that 
includes all patients who are randomized in our GLMM regressi on models, we will use multiple 
imputation. Multiple imputation procedure yields more efficient, accurate, and reliable 
inferences than ad - hoc met hods of handling missing data (such as list wise deletion or mean 
substitution) (Shafer, 1997 Shafer et al., 2002; Little & Rubin, 2002).  
 
Formative Evaluation Data Analysis  
The Co -PI ([CONTACT_20263]) and study coordinator will compi[INVESTIGATOR_20197] -identified notes 
collected from observations made from both site visits to generate written summaries of clinic 
characteristics and pi[INVESTIGATOR_20198]. We will pursue a rapid analysis 
(e.g., Sobo et al., 2005) of interview data (collected from site vi sit 2) to ensure quick translation 
of provider feedback to actionable revisions to the initial implementation plan. The study 
coordinator will listen to all interview tapes within two weeks of returning from the second site 
visit. The Co -PI ([CONTACT_20263]) and study coordinator will compi[INVESTIGATOR_20199] -identified interview and 
observation notes, and create barrier and facilitator tables which will be commented on and 
revised by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Cucciare, site directors, and our Co -Is (Hagedorn, Cronkite, Asch), 
who are experts in qualitative analysis and implementation science. From these data we will 
develop barrier/facilitator summary tables to inform revisions to the initial implementation plan. 
These data will inform actionable next steps which include providing  further education to site 
staff and drafting locally -customized implementation strategies (e.g., placement of the 
intervention within clinic, suggestions for modifying point in care in which it is utilized) (Curran 
et al., 2008). Upon completion of the su mmary tables, the study team will conduct a more 
comprehensive analysis of the interview tapes. Analysis of Interview data will facilitate 
manuscript preparation.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_19055] analysis of the intervention, comparing all health care costs for each arm of the study, 
including the costs of the intervention (e.g. providing the web -based BAI). Consistent with 
guidelines (Mauskopf et al., 2007), we will not include costs of developi[INVESTIGATOR_20200]. Assuming also, that the BAI may impact both immediate decisions 
about alcohol use as well as decisions about other health care in the near future, we will analyze 
all health care utilization and costs incurred within the [ADDRESS_19056] care or treatment at the VA.  
 
 
 
6.1 Reporting  
 
The Data Safety and Monitoring Plan will capture Serious Adverse Events (SAEs), i.e., death, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  It will also capture Advers e Events (AEs), i.e., suicidal or homicidal ideation, 
expression of severe distress, other serious psychiatric or medical symptoms. The Data Safety 
and Monitoring Plan will utilize the following categories in determining the severity of an event:  
 
A. Classifi cation of Event Severity: Events will be labeled according to severity which is 
based on their impact on the patient.  An Event will be termed 'mild' if it does not have a 
major impact on the patient, 'moderate' if it causes the patient some minor inconven ience, 
and 'severe' if it causes a substantial disruption to the patient's well -being.  
 
B. Event Attribution Scale: Events will be categorized according to the likelihood that they are  
related to the study intervention. Specifically, they will be labeled eith er definitely, probably, 
possibly, or unrelated to the study intervention.  
 
C. Expected Risks: This study includes no invasive procedures or medications. All changes
 to patients' treatment will be known to their liver care team.  
 
We will use collected data to  compare rates of SAEs between the control and intervention 
teams. Specifically, we will compare control and intervention serious adverse event rates and 
their attribution quarterly on three outcomes: Admissions for alcohol detoxification (with 
diagnoses),  all other hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and Deaths (with diagnosis).  
 
In addition, we anticipate that we may encounter AEs in the following domains.  These are 
described in greater detail below.  
 
(1) Breach of confidentiality associated with reporting suicidal or homicidal intent to 
appropriate authorities or health personnel  
 
(2) Severe distress as indicated by: (a) an increase of more than one standard deviation from 
their mean score on the PHQ -9 during follow -up assessments, (b) patient verbal report of a 
serious ps ychiatric distress at follow -up, (c) patients reporting significant distress due to the 
content of the self -report measures, or (d) patients reporting significant distress due to the 
content of the brief alcohol intervention.  In each case, the research pe rsonnel will consult with 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20201]'s distress is significant enough 
to warrant an AE.  
 
(3) Suicidal ideation will be indicated by: (a) self -report of significant suicidal ideation on the 
PHQ -9, or (b) verba l report of thoughts of suicide.  Even for those who report suicidal ideation 
on the PHQ -9, determination of suicidality will be based on a combination of the self -report 
information and the interaction between the research personnel and the participant. T he 
research personnel will be trained to identify and address suicidal ideation in patients. If the 
patient articulates thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, the study team member will ask the 
patient to elaborate on recent suicidal thoughts/behavior (e. g., does the patient have a suicide 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  31 of 37  plan). The situation will be based on the patient's responses and whether the study team 
member perceives that the patient is in immediate danger (e.g., an active plan  verbalized).  
Study personnel will follow establishe d safety protocols and contact [CONTACT_20255]. Also, the study co -PIs [CONTACT_20264] and [CONTACT_20263] are well - suited to 
manage clinical situations involving the expression of intent to harm oneself as they are both 
licensed  clinical psychologists in the State of [LOCATION_004]  
 
(4) Homicidal ideation will be indicated by [CONTACT_20256] a specific individual.  The study does not directly ask about homicidal 
ideation but this informat ion may be provided by a participant during an interaction with study 
team members. This protocol will be similar to that for suicidal ideation.  Specifically, the 
research personnel will be trained to identify and address homicidal ideation in patients. I f the 
patient articulates thoughts of hurting others, the study team member will ask the patient to 
elaborate on his/her thoughts/behaviors (e.g., does the patient have a plan or specific 
target?). The situation will be based on the patient's responses and  whether the study team 
member perceives that the patient or someone else is in immediate danger.  Study personnel 
will follow established safety protocols and contact [CONTACT_20257]. Also, the study co -PIs [CONTACT_20264] and  [CONTACT_20263] are well -suited to 
manage clinical situations involving the expression of intent to harm another person as they 
are both licensed clinical  psychologists in the State of [LOCATION_004]  
 
(5) Given the study population, it is possible that participants will report other serious 
psychiatric or medical symptoms.  Research staff will be trained to monitor significant 
abnormal behavior and/or report that the patient perceives him/herself to be in imminent need 
of medical treatment. If it is determined that t he patient requires immediate care, the research 
staff will coordinate access to appropriate services.  
 
Both [CONTACT_20264] and [CONTACT_20263] hold Ph.D.s  in clinical psychology and have 
treated patients who have mental health and alcohol use disorders.  In the event of other 
forms of medical care being the subject of a patient safety decision, [CONTACT_20264] will seek 
the advice of Co -Investigator Ramsey Ch eung, M.D., Chief of Hepatology at the VA Palo Alto, 
Co- Investigator Alexander Monto , M.D. of the San Francisco VA and/or consultant Steven 
Asch,  M.D. of the Palo Alto VA.  All three physicians have extensive experience caring for 
Veterans who have liver disorders. These five project staff members will be available to 
consult with other project staff and/or to speak with the participant if any concerning events 
arise.  
Triggers to action will be the participant's expression of severe distress, suicidal or 
homicidal ideation, and/or other serious psychiatric or medical symptoms. Research staff will be 
trained and prepared for situations in which a participant expresses severe distress. 
Specifically, all project staff will have been trained on VA's suicide ris k assessment and 
response guidelines, including the capability of directly connecting suicidal participants to the 
24-hour VA suicide hotline, as well as arranging with local psychiatry crisis management staff to 
assess and potentially hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20202].  Subsequent to any part icipant's expression of 
severe distress, ideation, or other serious symptoms, project staff will make all reasonable 
attempts to re -contact [CONTACT_20258] -being until the acute situation is 
resolved.  
Research staff will also be trained and prepared for situations in which a participant 
not currently in addiction treatment report s severe alcohol misuse, e.g., a  blackout, delirium 
tremens, alcohol -related injury).  Such individuals will be protected by h aving pro ject staff 
provide a referral to substance use disorder treatment at the VA closest to where they are 
residing. If the VA is rejected by [CONTACT_20259], project staff will utilize 
SAMHSA's (the federal agency within HHS that funds most non -VA substance use disorder 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  32 of 37  treatment) online substance abuse treatment facility locator to provide a referral.  
 
 
7.0 Privacy and Confidentiality  
We will use Protected Health Information (PHI) for this study only. PHI will not be 
disclosed to anyone  outside of the PI, VA Palo Alto and VA San Francisco Co -Is, and 
research team members involved with data collection and management.  
All PHI and final data collected for this study will be managed and housed at the 
Center for Health Care Evaluation (CHCE),  located on the VA Palo Alto campus (in Menlo 
Park).  Regarding computers and relevant technology, the CHCE has the following: a 
centralized server and mass data storage device that is fire -walled, encrypted, and backed -up 
daily; two information technology specialists to ensure data security and integrity;  networked 
personal computers for all personnel; and statistical, publishing and database software for 
data management and analysis. Relevant to data storage and safety, CHCE has access to 
local Windows Ac tive Directory Domain Controllers, a UNIX NIS Server and Network 
Appliance  storage facilities. These resources allow large amounts of research data to be 
stored and analyzed within a secure environment, while still connected to VA computing 
resources. Netw ork infrastructure and connectivity are maintained by [CONTACT_20260] (SCARF) that serves CHCE and the VA's Cooperative Studies 
Program Coordinating Center (CSPCC), HERC, and the Program Evaluation and Resource 
Center.  
All PHI an d related data collected for this study will be managed and housed using 
standard CHCE protocols for housing such data. For example, all paper and hard copy 
records will be kept in a locked cabinet in a locked room in building 324. Only authorized 
research  staff will have the key to the locked cabinet. All electronic records will be kept on 
maintained, encrypted VA servers housed in building 324. All files and folders will be 
password protected. The ISO/PO will be notified within one hour if data loss or mi suse is 
discovered.  
 
 
 
 
8.0 Communication Plan  
The research team will regularly meet to discuss the study’s  progress and address any 
adverse events or unanticipated issues. The study coordinators at VAPAHCS and SFVAMC 
will be in continuous communication as  they coordinate screening and data collection and 
management. Both will also be in direct communication with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Keith Humphreys and 
Co-PI [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Michael Cucciare to remain up to date on the study protocol and to ensure that any 
serious adverse events  or unanticipated problems are reviewed and documented appropriately. 
Both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -PI ([CONTACT_20280]) will provide training to study staff in consent form 
procedures and will work with both sites to inform them of updates to the study.  
 
 
9.0 References  
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  
(4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.  
 
Anand, B., Currie, S., Dieperink, E., Bini, E., Shen, H., Ho, S., & Wright, T. (2006). Alcohol 
use and  treatment of Hepatitis C virus: Results of a national multicenter study. 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  33 of 37  Gastroenterology, 130, 1607 -16. 
 
Banerjea, R., Sambamoorthi, U., Smelson, D., & Pogach, L. M. (2007). Chronic illness with 
complexities:  mental illness and substance use among Veteran clinic users with diabetes. 
The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 33 (6), 807 -821 
 
Baron, R., & Kenny, D. (1986).The moderator -mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research. Journal of  Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173 -1182.  
 
Borsari, B. & Carey, K.B. (2001).  Peer influences on college drinking: A review of the research.  
Journal of Substance Abuse, 13 , 391 -424. 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  34 of 37   
Bradley, K., Williams, E. C., Achtmeyer, C. E., Volpp, B., Collins, B. J., & Kivlahan, D. R. 
(2006). Implementation of evidence -based alcohol screening in the Veterans Health 
Administration.  
American Journal of Managed Care, 12 (10), 597 -606. 
 
Butler, L H.,  & Correia, C. J. (2009). Brief alcohol intervention with college student drinkers: 
face-to-face versus computerized feedback. Psychology of Addictive Behavior, 23 (1), 163 -
167. 
 
Cheung, R., Cunnigham, B., & Cooper, A. (2006). Effectiveness of a screening program for 
hepatitis C. Digestive Diseases & Sciences, 51(5), 976-81. 
 
Cucciare, M. A. (2011, August). Implementing a brief alcohol intervention in VA primary care.  
Symposium presented to the 5 th VHA Mental Health Conference, Baltimore, MD.  
 
Cucciare, M.A., & Ghaus, S. (in press). A web -based intervention for alcohol misuse in VA 
primary care. Psychiatric Services.  
 
Curran, G. M., Mukherjee, S., Allee, E. & Owen, R. R. (2008). A process for developi[INVESTIGATOR_20203]: QUERI Seri es. Implementation Science, 3, 17. 
 
Damschroder, L. J., Aron, D. C., Rosalind, K. E., Kirsh , S. R., Alexander, J. A., & Lowery, J. C. 
(2009). Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice: a 
consolidated framework for advancing implementation science. Implementation Science, 4 
(50), 543 -555. 
 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Inspector General. (April 6, 2009). Healthcare 
inspection: implementat’ion of VHA s uniform mental health services handbook. Report no. 
08- [ZIP_CODE] -105. Retrieved October 14, 2011 at www.va.gov/oig/54/reports/VAOIG -08-[ZIP_CODE] -  
105.pdf . 
 
Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration. (September 11, 2008). 
Uniform mental health s ervices in VA medical centers and clinics. VHA Handbook 1160.01. 
Retrieved October 14, 2011 at 
http://www.va.gov/vhapublications/ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID=1762  
 
Derogatis , L. R., & Melisaratos, N. (1983). The brief symptoms inventory: an introductory report.  
Psychological Medicine, 13( 3), 595 -605. 
 
Dieperink, E., Ho, S. B., Heit, S., Durfee, J. M., Thuras, P., & Willenbring, M. L. (2010). 
Significant reductions in drinking  following brief alcohol treatment provided in a hepatitis C 
clinic. Psychosomatics, 51, 149-156. 
 
Dunn, C. (2003). Brief motivational interviewing interventions targeting substance abuse in the 
acute care medical setting. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 8 (3), 188 -196. 
 
El-Serag, H., Kunik, M., Richardson, P., & Rabeneck, L. (2002). Psychiatric disorders among 
veterans with Hepatitis C infection. Gastroenterology, 123, 476-82. 
 
Felker, B. L., Chaney, E., Rubenstein, L. V., Bonner, L. M., Y ano, E. M., Parker, L. E., et al. 
(2006). Developi[INVESTIGATOR_20204]. 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  35 of 37  Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 8, 12-16. 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  36 of 37  Fleming, M. F., Barry, K. L., Manwell, L. B ., Johnson, K., London, R. (1997). Brief physician 
advice for problem alcohol drinkers: a randomized trial in community -based primary care 
practices. Journal of the American Medical Association, 277, 1039 -1045.  
 
Gastfriend, D. R., Garbutt, J. C., Pettinati , H. M., & Forman, R. F. (2007). Reduction in heavy 
drinking as a treatment outcome in alcohol dependence. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment, 33 , 71-80. 
 
Hester, R. K., Squires, D. D., & Delaney, H. D. (2005). The D’rinker s Check -up: 12 -month 
outcomes of a controlled clinical trial of a stand -alone software program for problem 
drinkers. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 28, 159-169. 
 
Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005). Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology, 1, 91-111. 
 
Hutchinson, S., Bird, S., & Goldberg, D. (2005). Influence of alcohol on the progression of 
hepatitis C virus infection: a meta -analysis. Clinical Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 3, 1150 -
59. 
 
Jacobson, I. M., McHutchison, J. G., Dusheiko, G., Di Bi sceglie, A. M., Reddy, K. R., et al. 
(2011). Telaprevir for previously untreated chronic hepatitis C virus infection. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 364 (23), 2405 -2416.  
 
Kaner, E. F. S., Beyer, F., Dickinson, H. O., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_20205], E., Campbell, F., et al. Eff ectiveness of 
brief alcohol interventions in primary care populations. Cochrane database of Systematic 
Reviews 2007 , Issue 2, Art. No.: CD004148. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004148.  
 
Kenna, G. A., Longabaugh, R., Gogineni, A., Woolard , R. H., Nirenberg, T. D., Becker, B., et 
al. (2005). Can the short index of problems (SIP) be improved? Validity and reliability of the 
three - month SIP in an emergency department sample. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66 (3), 
433-437. 
 
King, N. (1998). Te mplate analysis. In G. Symon, & C. Cassell (Eds.), Qualitative methods and 
analysis in organizational research (pp. 119 -134). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
 
Kroenke, K., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., & Williams, J. B. (2001). The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depre ssion 
severity measure. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 16 (9), 606 -613. 
 
Kypri, K., Langley, J. D., Saunders, J. B., Cashell -Smith, M. L., & Herbison, P. (2008). 
Randomized controlled trial of web -based alcohol screening and brief intervention in pri mary 
care. Archives of Internal Medicine, 168 (5), 530 -536. 
 
Kypri, K., Saunders, J. B., Williams, S. M., McGee, R. O., Langley, J. D. et al. (2004). Web - 
based screening and brief intervention for hazardous drinking: a double -blind randomized 
controlled tr ial. Addiction, 99, 1410 -1417.  
 
Little, R. J. A., & Rubin, D. B. (2002). Statistical analysis with missing data (2nd ed). [LOCATION_001]: 
Wiley -Interscience.  
 
Lou, X., Lynn, G. M., Kakouras, I., Edwards, C. L., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_20206], R., et al. (2003). Relaibility, 
validity , and reponsiveness of the short form 12 -item survey (SF12) in patients with back pain. 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], 28 (15), 1739 -1745.  
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  37 of 37  Mauskopf, J. A., Sullivan, S. D., Annemans, L. et al. (2007). Principles of good practice for 
budget impact analysis: report of the ISPOR Task Force on good research practices --budget 
impact analysis. Value Health, 10 (5), 336 -347. 
 
McCullagh, P., & Nelder, J. A. (1991). Generalized linear models (2 nd edition). CRC Press: 
Boca Raton, Fl.  
 
Michie , S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., Walker, A., (on behalf of the 
psychological theory group) (2005). Making psychological theory useful for implementing 
evidence based practice: a consensus approach. Quality & Safety In Health Care, 1 4, 26-33. 
 
Monto, A., Patel, K., Bostrum, A., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_20207], S., Pockros, P., McHutchinson, J.G., & Wright, T.L. 
(2004). Risks of a range of alcohol intake on hepatitis C -related fibrosis. Hepatology, 39, 
826- 34. 
 
Moos, R. H. (1993). Copi[INVESTIGATOR_20190]: Adult Form manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.  
 
Moos, R. H. (2002). The Life Stressors and Social Resources Inventory and the Copi[INVESTIGATOR_20208]: An annotated bibliography (2nd ed.). Palo Alto, CA: Department of 
Veterans Affairs , Center for Health Care Evaluation.  
 
Neighbors, C., Larimer, M. E., & Lewis, M. A. (2004). Targeting misconceptions of descriptive 
drinking norms: Efficacy of a computer -delivered personalized feedback intervention. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psyc hology, 72, 434-437. 
 
Nguyen, T., Jamal, M., & Morgan, T. (2007). Alcohol abuse and chronic Hepatitis C. Current 
Hepatitis Reports, 6, 119-24. 
 
Nye, E.C., Agostinelli, G., & Smith, J.E. (1999). Enhancing alcohol problem recognition: A self - 
regulation mode l for the effects of self -focusing and normative information. Journal of Studies 
on Alcohol, [ADDRESS_19057], J., Hodgson, R., Copello, A., Wilton, S., Slegg , G., on behalf of the [LOCATION_006]ATT Research 
Team. (2009). To what factors do clients attribute change? Content analysis of follow -up 
interviews with clients of the [LOCATION_006] Alcohol Treatment Trial. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment, 36 , 49-58. 
 
Peters, M. & Terraul t, N. (2002). Alcohol and Hepatitis C. Hepatology, 36, S220 -25. 
 
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. (2002). Hierarchical linear models: applications and data 
analysis methods.  (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.  
 
Rollnick, S., Miller, W. R., & Butl er, C. C. (2008). Motivational interviewing in health care: 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_9988]. [LOCATION_001]: The Guilford Press.  
 
Rosenheck, R., Frisman, L., & Neale, M. (1994). Estimating the capi[INVESTIGATOR_20209]. Administration and Policy in Mental Health, 21 (6), 
493- 509. 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  38 of 37  Rubenstein, L. V., Mittman, B. S., Yano, E. M., & Mulrow, D. C. (2000). From understanding 
health care provider behavior to improving health care: the QUERI framework for quality 
improvement. Medical Care , 38([ADDRESS_19058] 1), I129 -I141.  
 
Scott, C. K., (2004). A replicable model for achieving over 90% follow -up rates in longitudinal 
studies of substance abusers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 74, 21-36. 
 
Shafer, J. L. (1997). Analysis of inc omplete multivariate data. [LOCATION_001]: Chapman & Hall.  
 
Shafer, J. L., & Graham, J. W. (2002). Missing data:  Our view of the state of the 
art.  Psychological Methods, 7, 147-177. 
Sheehan, D.V., Lecrubier , Y., et al (1998). The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric 
Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric 
interview for DSN -IV and ICD -10. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry . [ADDRESS_19059] 20:22 -33 
 
Singer, J. D., & Wil lett, J. B. (2003). Applied longitudinal data analysis: modeling change and 
event occurrence.  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press.  
 
Smith, M., & Cheng A. (2010). A Guide to estimating wages of VHA employees –FY2008 
update. Menlo Park, CA: Health Economics R esource Center, VA Palo Alto Health Care 
System.  
 
Sobell, L. C., Brown, J., Leo, G. I., & Sobell, M. B. (1996). The reliability of the Alcohol 
Timeline Followback when administered by [CONTACT_20261]. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 42, 49-54. 
 
Sobe ll, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline follow -back: A technique for assessing self - 
reported alcohol consumption (pp. 207 -224). In R. Litten and J. Allen, Editors, Measuring 
alcohol consumption, The Humana Press Inc., Rockville, MD.  
 
Sobo, E. J. (20’05). 
Parents  perceptions of pediatric day surgery risks: unforeseeable  
complications, or avoidable mistakes? Social Science and Medicine, 60, 2341 -2350.  
 
Squires. D. D., & Hester, R. K. (2004). Using technical innovations in clinical practice: The 
’drinker s check -up software program. Journal of Clinical Psychology/ In session, 60 , 159 -169. 
 
Stetler, C. B., McQueen, L., Demakis, J., & Mittman, B. S. (2008).  An organizational 
framework and strategic implementation for system -level change to enhance research -based 
practice: QUERI Series. Implementation Science, 3, 30. 
 
Szabo, G. (2007). Moderate drinking, inflammation, and liver disease. Annals of 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] , 17(Suppl 5) , S49 -S54. 
 
VA Hepatitis C Resource Center (2011). Hepatitis basics. Retrieved, October 27, 2011 at  
http://www.hepatitis.va.gov/provider/index.asp  
 
Vasilaki , E. I., Hosier, S. G., & Cox, W. M. (2006). The efficacy of motivational interviewing as 
a brief intervention for excessive drinking: a meta -analytic review. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 41 (3), 
328-335. 
 
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  39 of 37 
 Ware Jr, J., Kosinski, M., & Keller, S. D. (1996). A 12 -item short -form health survey:  
Updated  January  20, 2015  Protocol  HCV -BAI Page  40 of 37  construction of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity . Medical Care, 34 (3), 220 - 
233. 
 
Williams, J., Herman -Stahl, M., Calvin, S. L., Pemberton, M., & Bradshaw, M. (2009). 
Mediating mechanisms of military web -based alcohol intervention. Drug Alcohol Dependence, 
100, 248- 257. 
 
Wong, J., McQuillan, G., McHutchinson, J., & Poynard, T. (2000). Estimating future Hepatitis 
C morbidity, mortality, and costs in the [LOCATION_002]. American Journal of Public Health, 
90(10), [ADDRESS_19060], R., Kenna, G., Longabaugh, R., Karolczuk, K., Nirenberg, T., Minugh, A. et al. 
(2004). Alcohol assessment vali dity and reliability of (SIP -ER) Short Index of Problems. 
Academic Emergency Medicine, 11 (5), 546.  
 