 
15-859H, Miramontes, Form BC, 10 -21-15, NS  
vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1  
 
 
 
 
COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : A Randomized Control Equivale nce Study of Emergency                                            
Medical Services Use of Isopropyl A lcohol Aromatherapy Versus Ondansetron for 
Treatment of Pre -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_740376] : NCT 02618343  
 
IRB Approval Date : 10/21/[ADDRESS_1012015] / Project Summary  Provide a succinct and accurate description of the proposed 
research. State the purpose/aims. Describe concisely the research 
design and methods for achieving the stated goals. This section 
should be understandable to all members of the IRB, scientific and  
non-scientific.   
DO NOT EXCEED THE SPACE PROVIDED . 
Purpose/Objectives : Nausea is a common symptom encountered in the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) environment that is 
often treated with oral or intravenous anti -emetic medications.  Research Design/Plan : This will be a randomized equivalence study 
comparing the reduction in a patient’s reported level of nausea after treatment with either Ondansetron or Isopropyl Alcohol  
Methods : Patients who report nausea and/or vomiting in the normal evaluati on and care of after calling 911 for Emergency Medical 
Care will be offered enrollment in the study.  A short script will be attached to the outside of each study packet providing information 
about the study and its risks and benefits. Verbal or written (wa iver of informed consent will be requested) permission will be 
obtained to start randomization. If the patient agrees to enroll then the study packet will be opened and utilized.  All Advanced Life 
Support Ambulances in the San Antonio Fire Department will have sealed numbered opaque boxes or envelopes with either: 70% 
Isopropyl Alcohol swabs or ondansetron .  Six Visual Nausea Severity Scoring cards will be provided with a marking pen to record 
timed nausea levels before and upon arrival to the Emergency Dep artment and [ADDRESS_1012016].  
Clinical Relevance : This treatment has not been studied in the unique environment encountered by [CONTACT_740381] -Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_111483]. If this treatment is found to be effective, it many offer  a very simple, extremely inexpensive and non -invasive (basic life 
support) approach for the treatment of nausea.  
 
 
 
Item [ADDRESS_1012017] experimental 
and/or clinical findings 
leading to the formulation 
of your study.   
For research involving 
unapproved  drugs, describe 
animal and human studies.   
For research that involves 
approved drugs or devices, 
describe the FDA approved 
uses of this drug/device in 
relation to your protocol.  Nausea is a common symptom encountered in the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) environment that 
is often treated with oral or intravenous anti -emetic medications.  Post -operative patients with  modern 
anesthesia techniques and processes still have a 20 -30% incidence of Nausea and/or vomiting.  Nausea is 
a complicated symptom that is tough  to arise from the vomiting center in the lateral reticular formation 
in the brainstem. Afferent inputs form the cerebellum, higher cortical centers, the vestibular apparatus, 
the glossopharyngeal nerve and the vagal nerve inputs contribute to the proces s of the perception of 
nausea.  Chemoreptors in the Chemoreceptor Trigger Zone (CTZ) are located on the brain su rface and are 
highly vascularized leading to increased exposure to neurotransmitters such as Serotonin (5 -HT-3), 
histamine (H1) acetylcholine and dopamine.  Blocking such neurotransmitter stimulation with targeted 
medications such as antihistamines or 5 -HT-3 antagonis ts such as Ondansetron.  
 
Nausea is a common symptom encountered in the Emergency Medical Services (EMS) environment that 
is often treated with oral or intravenous anti -emetic medications.  Many patients do not respond well to 
this therapy, and EMS services that have only basic life support (BLS) capabilities may not have any good 
treatment currently.  Additionally, because of the configuration of modern day ambulances, the patient 
is transport in a rear facing position in the patient compartment  with very limited view of the 
environment.  This method of transport frequently causes motion sickness.  
 
Motion sickness is though t to be c aused by [CONTACT_740382], visual, other proprioceptive inputs and in hibition of the vestibular cerebellum. Common 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_740377], benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], tricyclic antidepressants and or scopolamine. [ADDRESS_1012018] shown Isopropyl Alcohol (IPA) 70% aromatherapy to be as effective as 
Ondansetron with a more rapid onset of nausea relief.  This therapy was performed by [CONTACT_101939] a folded 
saturate d 70% IPA pad under the nares with the patient inhaling the vapors .  The patient is simply  
instructed to take three deep breaths through their nose.   In animal experiments , toxicity from 
inhalation of IPA is very low at doses allowable by [CONTACT_740383] . 
Dermal application of IPA is routinely used by [CONTACT_740384], or blood 
draw.  
 
Item 4 
Purpose and rationale  
Insert purpose, objectives 
and research 
questions/hypotheses here.  
 If you cut and paste from 
another document, make 
sure the excerpted material 
answers the question  Insert purpose: IPA Therapy may offer a  very inexpensive, easy to administer , and effective alternative to 
medication therapy for nausea and vomiting in the prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_740378]  5 
Study Population(s) Being Recruited  
 
In your recruitment plan, how many 
different populations of prospective 
subjects do you plan to target?  
Provide number: 1  
  
 
Identify the criteria for inclusion : 
 
 Identify the criteria for exclusion : 
 
15-859H, Miramontes, Form BC, 10 -21-15, NS  
vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4 e.g., a population can be individuals 
with type 2 diabetes controlled with diet 
and/ or a population of healthy controls .  
Or a population can be individuals 
attending an education program, etc.  
 
List each different population  on a 
separate row and provide a short 
descriptive label :   
(e.g., normal -healthy, diabetics, 
parents, children, etc.)  
 
To add rows use copy & paste  
EMS patients complaining of nausea  Adults (non -pregnant) age 18 years or older 
with a symptom of nausea and/or vomiting 
requiring treatment by [CONTACT_108140]  •Children not yet 18 years of Age  
•Prisoners or those under arrest  
•Patients known or suspected to be Pregnan t  
•Clinical Intoxication  
•Patients unable to provide informed 
consent  
•Recent Upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_740379]  
•Inability to follow instructions  
•Inability to inhale through Nares  
 
 
Item 6 
Research Plan / Description of the Research Methods  a.  Provide a comprehensive narrative  describing the research methods .   
Provide the plan for data analysis  (include as applicable the sample size calculation) . 
 Step -by-Step Methods :  
 
RECRUITMENT AND RANDOMIZATION PROCESS  
Patients who report nausea and/or vomiting in the normal evaluation and care of after calling 911 for Emergency Medical 
Care will be offered enrollment in the study.  
A short script will be attached to the outside of each study packet providing information about the study. Verbal (waiver of 
documentation informed consent will be requested) permission will be obtained  to start randomization. If the patient 
agrees to enroll then the study packet will be opened and utilized.  
 
PROCEDURES AND LOGISTICS  
All Advanced Life Support Ambulances in the San Antonio Fire Department will have sealed numbered opaque boxes or 
envelop es with either:  
 
• Three large 2 ply 70% Isopropyl Alcohol swabs  
OR 
• Ondansetron (Zofran) 4mg for IV/IM use  (standard of care)  
 
These study packets will have similar weight, shape and contour despi[INVESTIGATOR_740380]. If needed, props may be includes to 
make packages similar in weight, contour or sound when shaken so as to not reveal its true contents. The goal is to enroll 
at least [ADDRESS_1012019]. The treatment protocol for each arm will be:  
 
70% Isop ropyl Alcohol  
1. Mark Time and Visual Nausea Severity Score [ADDRESS_1012020] as per usual procedures.  
10. Complete Paramedic evaluation tool.  
11. Envelope or box, with Consent, score cards and Paramedic evaluation tool will be returned to Medic Officer on 
duty and a new study packet will be replaced.  
12. Used Study Packet s will be collected by [CONTACT_740385] 4mg IV/IM (standard of care)  
1. Mark Time and Visual Nausea Severity Score [ADDRESS_1012021] as per usual procedures.  
10. Complete Paramedic evaluation tool.  
11. Envelope or box, with Consent, score cards and Paramedic evaluation tool will be returned to Medic Officer on 
duty and a new study packet will be replaced.  
12. Used Study Packets will be collected by [CONTACT_32366].  
 
 
 
Data Analysis Plan : A secure excel spreadsheet tool will be used to abstract data from t he research data collection 
documents and the EMS electronic patient care record. The patient will only be identified by [CONTACT_388958], 
incident number, age (if greater than 89 age will be indicated by <89 years), sex and date of service in the database and on 
all study packet materials.  All relevant time intervals and Visual Nausea Severity Scores will be recorded for enrolled 
patients. Time to treatment will be compared between the two arms of the study as well as changes in Visual Nausea 
Seve rity Scores.  Treatment failures requiring additional Ondansetron will be characterized. Paramedic will be asked to 
evaluate the treatment provided for ease of use, time needed to complete the treatment and their impression of 
effectiveness of the assigned  treatment.  T -test and confidence intervals will be utilized to determine statistical 
significance.  
 
 
 
15-859H, Miramontes, Form BC, 10 -21-15, NS  
vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6 Item 7 Risks Section:  
Complete the following table to describe the risks of all research procedures  listed in Step 2, Institutional  Form  (items 28 -34).  Do not list risks of Routine  care 
procedures here.   
 ☐ N/A, Risks are described in the informed consent document – do not complete this table.  
Research procedures  
 
example:  
• History and physical  
• Questionnaire  
• Laboratory tests  
 
Add or delete rows as needed  Risks  
 
List the reasonably expected risks  
under the following categories as appropriate : 
Isopropyl Alcohol  Serious and likely;  
o none  
Serious and less likely;  
o none  
Serious and rare;  
o none  
Not serious and likely;  
o dizziness, nausea, abdominal pain  
Not serious and less likely  
o hypotension  
Ondansetron(standard of care)  Serious and likely;  
o none  
Serious and less likely;  
o none  
Serious and rare;  
o decrease in urine output, uncontrolled twisting movements of the neck, trunk, arms, or legs (Dystonia), death,  
Not serious and likely;  
o confusion, dizziness, blurred vision, fixed position of the eye, hiccups, redness of the skin, fast heartbeat, fever, 
headache, shortness of breath, weakness,  
Not serious and less likely  
o none  
 
 
 
 