Understanding Quality of Life in High Digital Device Users who are Treated with 
Systane Hydration PF  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
                                                 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
                                                
                                              November 19th, 2021  
 
Andrew Pucker, O.D.,PhD, Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_155270], AL [ZIP_CODE]  
Page 1  of 5
FOR206 Version Date: 03/21/2021CONSENT FORM TO  BE PART OF A RESEARCH  STUDY
Title of Research: Understanding Quality of  Life in High Digital Device Users who are Treated 
with a Preservative Free Artificial  Tear   
UAB IRB Protocol #: IRB-30007063
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_154159] D. Pucker,  OD, PhD
Sponsor: ALCON RESEARCH,  LTD
General Information You are  being asked to take  part  in a research study.  This  research study is 
voluntary, meaning  you do not have to take part  in it.  The procedures, risks, and 
benefits are fully described further in the consent  form.
Purpose The purpose of  the study is  to determine  the effect of a preservative free artificial 
tear on dry eye symptoms  and visual quality of life in patients who have Digital  
Eye Strain (DES).
Duration & Visits You will be in this study for  [ADDRESS_687284] visit.  You will 
then be  switched to the  other  group  at the second visit.  Both dispensing  methods 
contain the same artificial tear. 
Risks The risks  of this study do not exceed that  of a normal  eye exam.  The use of  all eye 
drops comes with a  risk of eye irritation or an allergic  reaction; however, allergic 
reactions with  these drops are very  rare.
Benefits You may  not benefit directly  from this study, but knowledge gained from this 
study could  potentially help future persons suffering  from eye discomfort or DES.
Alternatives The only alternative to this study is to not take part in this study and to  continue  
with your regular eye care.
Purpose of the Research  Study
We are  asking you to take part in a research study. Although the use of  digital  devices has greatly improved 
many aspects of modern life, heavy  use of digital devices can  lead  to the development of a condition known as  
Digital Eye  Strain (DES). DES is a condition where patients experience symptoms such as glare, trouble with 
focusing, visual blur, fatigue, eye discomfort  and dryness  as well  as an overall lower quality of life. This study 
plans to determine if  symptoms associated DES can be  reduced  or alleviated with  the use of  a preservative  free 
artificial tear.  This study will also compare two ways to dispense these  drops (unit-dose vs.  multi-dose).  We 
plan to enroll a total  of [ADDRESS_687285].  
Pucker.
UAB IRB
Approved
18-Jun-2021
Page 2  of 5
FOR206 Version Date: 03/21/2021Study Participation &  Procedures
If you agree to participate in this study, you  will be asked to come in for [ADDRESS_687286] about 1 hour each. You will be asked  to complete surveys  used  to gauge  eye comfort and 
health, and you will be asked complete the below  procedures in  the listed order. The testing listed below is 
often included in a typi[INVESTIGATOR_529078]. 
Study Visit 1
Subject History,  Eligibility,  Informed Consent: You will be asked to complete  a screening survey to verify 
that you are eligible for the study.  We will also fully explain  this study  to you and let you decide if you 
would like to participate. 
Impact  of Dry Eye on Daily  Life (IDEEL) Questionnaire: We will ask you to complete a self-administered 
survey to understand how common daily  activities are affected by [CONTACT_529081]. 
Visual  Acuity: We will  evaluate your ability to read the  eye chart.  
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  eye health. 
Randomization: We  will place you by [CONTACT_529082]. Both  dosage options contain 
the same artificial tears. You will also be educated  how to use  the eye drops  each day. 
Eye Drop Log:  You will be given a paper daily log to record the time and number  of drops used  each day 
and eye comfort throughout  the day. We ask that you use the drops at least  [ADDRESS_687287] the duration and type of digital  device used each day, and you will be asked to return 
this log at your next study visit. 
Study Visit 2 
Impact  of Dry Eye on Daily Life (IDEEL) Questionnaire:  We will  ask you to complete a self-
administered survey  to understand  how common daily  activities  are affected by [CONTACT_529081]. 
Visual  Acuity: We will  evaluate your ability to read the  eye chart.  
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  eye health.
Drop Survey: You  will be asked to complete an investigator-developed  survey to  help understand your 
perception of  the eye drops and dosage method.  
Crossover:  You  will be placed in the  opposite  dosage group, and you  will be educated how to use  the 
drops each day.
Eye Drop  Log:  You will be given a paper daily log to record the time and number  of drops used  each 
day and eye comfort throughout the day. We ask that you use the drops at least [ADDRESS_687288] the duration and type of digital device used each day, and you will be 
asked to return this log at your  next study  visit.  
Study Visit 3 
Impact  of Dry Eye on Daily Life (IDEEL) Questionnaire:  We will  ask you to complete a self-
administered survey  to understand  how common daily  activities  are affected by [CONTACT_529081]. 
Visual  Acuity: We will  evaluate your ability to read the  eye chart.  
Slit-Lamp Biomicroscope: We will use a lighted  biomicroscope to document  your  eye health
Drop Survey: You  will be asked to complete an investigator-developed  survey to  help understand your 
perception of  the eye drops and dosage method.  
Completion: The examiner  will reveal the contents of the eye drops. You will  then be compensated for 
your time, and you will  be released from the study.  
Risks and Discomforts
Page 3  of 5
FOR206 Version Date: 03/21/2021This study  does not involve any inherent  risks or discomforts, though there is a chance that you may find the 
drops to  sting  slightly upon instillation. This is a common and accepted issue  with  eye drops; however, it is 
unlikely since these drops are designed to improve eye comfort. If you  find any  of the eye tests or  the drops to 
be uncomfortable, you  will be allowed to stop the study at any time. There is also a risk of  breach of 
confidentiality; however, every reasonable  precaution has been  taken to  avoid this  potential  risk. 
Benefits
You may  not benefit directly  from taking  part  in this study. However, knowledge gained from this  research will 
help the medical community  better  understand if preservative free artificial tears can  help reduce or alleviate 
the symptoms associated with DES. 
Alternatives
Your alternative is  to not  participate in this study. 
Confidentiality and Authorization to Use and  Disclose  Information for Research  Purposes
Federal regulations give  you certain rights  related to your health information. These include the right to know 
who will be able to get the  information and why  they may be able to  get it. The study doctor must get your 
authorization (permission)  to use  or give out any health information that might identify  you.
What protected health information may be used and/or given to others?
All medical information,  including but  not limited to information  and/or  records of  any diagnosis or treatment  
of disease or condition, which  may  include  sexually  transmitted diseases (e.g., HIV, etc.) or  communicable  
diseases, drug/alcohol  dependency, etc.; all  personal identifiers, including  but not limited to your name, social 
security number, medical record number,  date of birth, dates of service, etc.;  any past, present,  and future 
history, examinations,  laboratory results, imaging  studies and  reports  and treatments of any kind, including but 
not limited  to drug/alcohol  treatment, psychiatric/psychological treatment; financial/billing information,  
including but not limited  to copi[INVESTIGATOR_139442]; any other information related to  or collected for  use in 
the research study, regardless  of whether the information  was collected  for research or non-research (e.g., 
treatment) purposes; records about  any study drug you  received or about  study devices used; and consent 
forms from past studies that might be in your medical  record.
Who may use  and give out  this information?
Information about  your health may be used and given  to others by [CONTACT_139473]. They might see 
the research information during and after the study.
Who might get this information?
All individuals/entities listed in the informed consent document(s), including but not  limited  to, the physicians,  
nurses and staff and others performing services related to the research  (whether  at UAB or  elsewhere). Your 
information may also be  given to the sponsor  of this research. “Sponsor” includes  any persons or  companies 
that are working for or with the sponsor, or are owned by  [CONTACT_456], or  are providing support to  the sponsor 
(e.g., contract research organization).
Information about  you and your health which might identify  you may be  given to:
the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP)
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) agencies
Page 4  of 5
FOR206 Version Date: 03/21/2021Governmental agencies in other countries
Governmental agencies to whom certain diseases (reportable diseases) must be reported
 the University of Alabama at Birmingham - the physicians, nurses  and staff working  on the research  
study (whether at UAB or  elsewhere); other operating  units of  UAB, UAB Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], UAB  Highlands  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], as necessary  for their operations; the UAB  IRB and  its staff of UAB and its billing  agents
ALCON RESEARCH, LTD
Why will  this information be used and/or given to others?
Information about  you and your health that might identify  you  may be  given to  others to carry out the  
research study. The sponsor  will analyze and  evaluate  the results of the study. In addition, people from the 
sponsor and its consultants will be visiting the  research site. They will follow how the study is done, and they  
will be  reviewing your  information  for this purpose.
What if I decide not to give permission to use and give out my health information?
By [CONTACT_50841], you are giving  permission  to use and give out  the health  information listed  above 
for the purposes described above. If  you refuse to give permission, you  will not be  able  to be in this  research.
May I review or copy  the information obtained  from me or created about me?
You have the right  to review and copy  your health  information. However, if you decide to  be in this study  and 
sign this permission form, you will not be allowed to look at or copy  your  information until after  the research  is 
completed.
May I withdraw or revoke  (cancel) my permission?
Yes, but this permission will not stop automatically. The use of your personal health information will  continue 
until you  cancel your permission.
You may  withdraw or take away your permission to use  and  disclose your  health information at any  time. You 
do this by [CONTACT_529083]. If you withdraw your permission, you will not be  able  to 
continue being in this study.
When you withdraw  your  permission, no new health  information which might identify you will be  gathered 
after that date. Information that  has already been  gathered may still be used  and given to  others.  This would 
be done if it  were  necessary for the  research to be reliable.
Is my health  information protected after it has  been given to others?
If you give permission to give your identifiable health information to  a person or  business, the  information may 
no longer be protected. There is a risk that  your information will be  released to  others. Including others 
outside of  UAB, without  your permission.
Voluntary Participation and Withdrawal
Whether or not you  take part in this study is your choice. There  will be no penalty if  you  decide not  to be in it. 
If you decide not to be in the study, you will not lose any benefits  you  are otherwise owed.
You are  free to withdraw from this study at any  time.  Your  choice to  leave the  study  will not affect your 
relationship with this institution. However, you should return to see  the study  doctor for  safety reasons  so you 
can be taken  off the  study drug  and  referred for follow-up care. Contact [CONTACT_529084].
Page 5  of 5
FOR206 Version Date: 03/21/2021You may  be removed from the study without your consent if  the sponsor ends the study, if  the study doctor 
decides it is not in the  best interest of your health, or if you are not following the study rules.
If you are a UAB student or  employee, taking  part in this research is not  a part of your UAB class  work or 
duties. You can refuse to enroll or withdraw after enrolling  at any time before  the study  is over, with  no effect 
on your class standing, grades, or job  at UAB. You will not be offered  or receive  any special  consideration  if you 
take part  in this  research.
Cost of Participation
There will be no cost  to you for taking part  in this study.  
Payment for Participation
You will be paid $[ADDRESS_687289] at the completion of  this  study  to compensate you  for the time 
that you  devoted  to this study. Ask the study staff about the method  of payment that will  be used for  this 
study (e.g.,  check, cash, gift  card, direct deposit).
New Findings
You will be told by [CONTACT_529085].
Questions
If you have any questions, concerns,  or complaints about the research or a research-related injury including  
available treatments, please contact [CONTACT_39635]. You  may contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Andrew D. Pucker at  (205) 975-
9938 or after hours by [CONTACT_529086] [EMAIL_10104].
If you have questions about  your rights as a  research participant, or  concerns  or complaints about the 
research, you  may contact  [CONTACT_529087] (OIRB) at  ([PHONE_553]  or toll free at  [PHONE_3138]. 
Regular hours for  the OIRB are 8:00  a.m. to 5:[ADDRESS_687290] read  (or been read)  the information provided  above and agree to  
participate in this study. You will receive a copy  of this signed consent form.
Signature [CONTACT_529092]:  
[INVESTIGATOR_154159] D. Pucker, OD, PhD, FAAO1 
 
 
Co-Investigators:  
Chris Lievens, OD, MS, FNAP, FAAO2 
Gerald McGwin, Jr., MS, PhD1 
Quentin X.  Franklin, BS1 
Gregory S. Wolfe, OD, MPH, FNAP, FAAO2,[ADDRESS_687291]  
Birmingham, AL [ZIP_CODE]  
[EMAIL_10104]  
(920) 579- 2900  
 
Southern College of Optometry2 
Memphis, TN  
 
Center for Eye and Health Outcomes3 
Memphis, TN  
   
 
  
I. INTRODUCTION & RATIO NALE  
 
Extensive computer use is no longer an employment -specific  challenge. Use of digital devices in work, home, 
and leisure settings is now the norm , and it is now socially expected.[ADDRESS_687292] greatly improved many aspects of modern lif e, the pervasive use of digital 
devices has caused  some patients to develop a condition known as Digital Eye Strain (DES) . DES has been 
reported to be as high as 93% the population depending upon how the condition is defined, and its severity has been found to increase with increased digital device time.
1, 2 DES is a condition where patients experience 
symptoms such as glare, accommodative dysfunction, defocus, fatigue, discomfort, and dryness from digital 
device  use,2 and t hese dry eye symptoms may also result in decreased quality of life.3 While dryness 
symptoms in DES are likely multifactorial (e.g., contact [CONTACT_19584], systemic disease s tatus), much of the dryness 
symptoms in DES are probably due to tear film evaporation secondary to having a reduced number of blinks 
per minute while using digital devices.[ADDRESS_687293] become an accepted D ES treatment.2  
 
Systane Hydration PF is a recently released  preservative -free artificial tear that is able to supplement the 
ocular surface’s moisture while simultaneously soothing the eye . Systane Hydration PF has  HydroBoost 
technology , which is thought to enhance the drop’s effectiveness by [CONTACT_529088] e 
drop retention . While Systane Hydration PF should in theory improve  the symptoms and subsequently the 
quality of life of patients who have DES , this clinical application has yet to be tested. This drop furthermore is 
available in both unit -dose and multi- dose options; however, it is unclear i f patient perceive a difference 
between the two dispensing  methods. Therefore, the primary purpose of this study is to recruit  patients who 
have DES and to treat them with Systane Hydration PF and determine how regular use of this drop impac ts a 
patient’s ocular surface symptoms and overall quality of life.  This study will secondarily compare the two 
dispensing  methods to determine if patients prefer one method over the other.  
 II. SPECIFIC AIM  
 
Aim: Determine the effect of Systane Hydration PF on dry eye symptoms  and visual quality of life in 
subjects  who have Digital Eye Strain (DES) .  
Hypothesis  1: Systane Hydration PF will significantly improve IDEEL Work  scores in heavy digital device 
users ( ≥ 8 hours of wear/day ).  
Hypothesis 2: Subjects will report higher ease of use satisfaction when using multi -dose Systane Hydration 
PF compared to unit -dose Systane Hydration PF.  
 III. STUDY DESIGN  
 Subjects  
This two-week, three -visit study will be conducted at the University of Alabama at Birmingham (Birmingham, 
AL, [LOCATION_003]) . A total of 30 subjects will be recruited since this is a descriptive study. Subjects will be recruited from 
each site via clinic records, email, and fliers.  Adult (>18 years) patients  who answer ye s to the following two 
questions  and use digital devices (e.g., computers, tablets, or smart phones) ≥ 8 hours/day will be recruited:  
“Are your eyes  dry, irritated, or itch y or do they burn while using a digital screen, like a computer or 
smartphone ? Yes or No  
 
“Eye fatigue is the physical discomfort of your eyes after spending periods of time throughout the day in front 
of a digital screen, like a computer or smartphone.”[ADDRESS_687294] e ye fatigue based upon the this definition? 
Yes or No  
Subjects will also be required to have a Work Impact of Dry Eye  on Daily Life (IDEEL ) score  ≤[ADDRESS_687295] an Ocular Surface Disease Index 
(OSDI) score between  13 and 32 (inclusive)  to ensure that they have mild to moderate dry eye symptoms .6, [ADDRESS_687296] known systemic health conditions tha t are thought to alter tear film physiology (e.g., Sjö gren's 
syndrome), have a history of ocular surgery within the past [ADDRESS_687297] History, Eligibility, Informed Consent: Subjects will be asked to complete a  screening survey at the 
first study visit to verify that they are eligible for the study.  All relevant ocular, systemic, and surgical history will 
be gathered via a que stionnaire developed by [CONTACT_473].  This questionnaire  will also ask about digital 
device usage and eye comfort while using digital devices . The subjects will complete the OSDI questionnaire, 
and they will be required to have a score between 13 and 32 (inclusive). The subject will be asked to complete 
the Work IDEEL, and they will be required to have a  score ≤80. Non -eligible subjects will be dismissed at this 
time or rescheduled depending upon the reason for ineligibility.  Eligible subjects will be enrolled, consented, 
and requested to sign a privacy document.   
 2. Impact of  Dry Eye  on Daily Life (IDEEL)  questionnaire: The full Impact on Daily  Life segment of the  IDEEL  
questionnaire will be self -administered electronically to understand how quality o f life and common daily 
activities are affected by [CONTACT_529089] (e.g., computer work, near work).
10 
 3. Visual Acuity: T he subject’s visual acuity will be measured with a Bailey -Lovie high -contrast (logMAR) chart 
or equivalent. If the patient is unable to read the 20/40 letters (0.3 logMAR), the investigator will pi[INVESTIGATOR_529079]’s unaided or presenting refractive error correction to determine the subject’s visual potential.  
 
4. Slit -Lamp Biomicroscopy: The investigator will use a slit -lamp biomicroscope to document normal and/or 
remarkable findings of the anterior eye structures: eyelashes (blepharitis), eyelids, conjunctiva, and cornea. 
Eyelids will be graded base d upon a grading scale that was developed by [CONTACT_473].  
 
5. Subject Randomization:  The examiner will use an electronic randomization system to place the subject in the 
Systane Hydration Multi -Dose group or the Systane Hydration Unit -Dose group. Subjects will be required to use 
their allocated drop two to  four times per day  in each eye . 
 
6. Subject Compliance:  Subjects will be given a daily  log to record the time and number of drops used each day ; 
these data will be used to determine drop compliance for each dispensing method . They will also be asked to 
record the duration and type of digital device use  each day .  
 
Visit 2  
 
1. Testing : Subjects will be asked to repeat the IDEEL  and clinical tests described above at this visit. The 
compliance log will likewise be collected at this visit  and a new one will be given .  
 2. Drop Application Satisfaction Survey:  An investigator developed survey will be created based upon the 
glaucoma literature to understand patient satisfaction related to applying Systane Hydration via the Unit- Dose 
and Multi -Dose options.  
 3. Subject Crossover : Subjects will be switched to the opposite treatment group. No washout period will be 
needed because all subjects will be using  Systane Hydration; they will just be applying the drop via the alterative 
dispensing  method for the second week of the study. Sub jects will be required to use their allocated drop two 
to four times per day  in each eye .  
 
Visit 3  
 
1. Testing:  Subjects will be asked to repeat the IDEEL  and clinical tests described above at this visit. The 
compliance log will likewise be collected at this visit.  
 
2. Drop Application Satisfaction Survey:  An investigator developed survey will be created based upon the 
glaucoma literature to understand pat ient satisfaction related to applying Systane Hydration via the Unit- Dose 
and Multi -Dose options.  
 3. Study Completion:  The examiner will reveal the study details to the subjects ( Systane Hydration PF ). The 
subject will be compensated for their time, and they will be released from the study at this time.  
 Data Management  & Analysis  
 
Surveys and all data will be collected via a secured web service (REDC ap) at the time of the study visit. Gerald 
McGwin , Jr, MS, PhD, Professor and Vice Chairman in the Department of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_529080], will perform the statistical analyses. All data will be analyzed with  SAS Version 9.4 
(SAS; Cary, NC, [LOCATION_003]). ANOVA, T-tests,  and chi -square tests will be used when comparing variables. If the 
assumptions of these tests cannot be met suitable alternative statistical tests (e.g., Wilcoxon Rank Sum Test, 
Fisher’s Exact Test) will be used instead.  The questionnaire data will furthermore be pre sented in a table that 
will describe the frequency by [CONTACT_529090].  
 Training of Study Personnel  
 Prior to enrolling any subjects  all clinical examiners will participate in a meeting run by  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pucker . This full  
investigator meeting will ensure that all study investigators are performing the procedures in the same manner.  
Data from each investigator’s first subject will also be monitored for quality control before sites are allowed to 
enroll additional subjects.   IV. Study Timeline  
 
  [ADDRESS_687298] Lens & Anterior Eye .   
 VI. Conclusions  
 This project will provide some of the first data related  to the quality of life of patients who have DES  who are  
heavy digital device use rs. It will likewise  provide insights into to the usefulness of Systane Hydration PF in 
patients who have DES , and it will provide some of the first guidance related to dosing methods of dry eye 
treatments . Ultimately, after completion of this  study, clinicians will have a better understanding of the 
symptomatology surrounding  DES and how Systane Hydration PF affects these symptoms . 
 VII. References  
 
1. Sheppard AL, Wolffsohn JS. Digital eye strain: prevalence, measurement and amelioration. BMJ Open 
Ophthalmol  2018;3:e000146.  
2. Coles -Brennan C, Sulley A, Young G. Management of digital eye strain. Clin Exp Optom  2019;102:18-
29. 
3. Paulsen AJ, Cruickshanks KJ, Fischer ME, et al. Dry eye in the beaver dam offspring study: 
prevalence, risk factors, and health- related quality of life. Am J Ophthalmol  2014;157:[ADDRESS_687299] lens & anterior eye : the journal of the British Contact [CONTACT_529091] 
2021;44:[ADDRESS_687300] of ocular surface  symptoms on quality of life in a United 
States veterans affairs population. Am J Ophthalmol  2012;153:1061 -1066 e1063.  
6. Schiffman RM, Christianson MD, Jacobsen G, Hirsch JD, Reis BL. Reliability and validity of the Ocular 
Surface Disease Index. Arch Opht halmol  2000;118:615- 621. 
7. Dougherty BE, Nichols JJ, Nichols KK. Rasch analysis of the Ocular Surface Disease Index (OSDI). 
Investigative ophthalmology & visual science 2011;52:8630 -8635.  
8. Sullivan BD, Crews LA, Sonmez B, et al. Clinical utility of objective tests for dry eye disease: variability 
over time and implications for clinical trials and disease management. Cornea 2012;31:1000- 1008.  
9. Bron AJ, Evans VE, Smith JA. Grading of corneal  and conjunctival staining in the context of other dry 
eye tests. Cornea 2003;22:640- 650. 
10. Fairchild CJ, Chalmers RL, Begley CG. Clinically important difference in dry eye: change in IDEEL-
symptom bother. Optom Vis Sci  2008;85:699- 707. 