Study Protocol  Document Cover Page  
 
Official Title of the Study: Home -based Approaches for Subacute Low Back Pain in Active Duty: 
Randomized, Controlled Trial  
 
NCT Number: NCT 03502187 
 Date of Document: April 17 , 2018 
  
Home -based approaches for subacute low back pain in Active Duty: Randomized control trial  
Objective  
The overall objective  of this project is to compare three home- managed treatment regimens for 
subacute low back pain: Progressive Exercise Plan (PEP), NMES core strength training and standard 
primary care management (PCM).  Each of the treatment arms will be supplemented by [CONTACT_651625] a group receiving standard PCM  alone. Our central hypothesis is that the NMES core 
strength training alone and PEP alone will show significantly greater improvements in muscle strength, 
pain, mobility/function, daily activity , and quality  of life (QOL) than PCM alone in military members with 
low back pain lasting three to twelve weeks.  
Design  
This study is a randomized clinical trial with repeated measures over time to compare the effects of NMES and PEP on strength, mobility, symptoms, and QOL in military members with subacute LBP to the effects of a standard primary care management. All groups will participate in the standard primary care 
management protocol; all groups will have an intensive 9 -week program.  
Participants will be randomly  assigned to 1) NMES core strength training plus PCM, 2) PEP plus PCM and 
3) standard primary care management (PCM) .  We will not randomize participants until after the pre -
treatment assessment has been completed. Participants will be familiarized with the  test procedures 
prior to baseline testing, and then assessed again at 3, 6 and 9 weeks. The primary outcome measures 
are lower back muscle strength, activity, and mobility; and the secondary measures are symptoms/pain 
and QOL.  
Methods  
Intervention : The rationale for the number of weeks of intervention and the number and timing of 
assessments is based on our previous work. NMES was found to increase strength after [ADDRESS_874575] with 
participants during the 9 weeks of t he study (baseline – week 9) either by [INVESTIGATOR_2993] -person clinic visits, phone 
checks, text messaging or email.  
Standard Primary Care Management (PMC) : All participants will receive standard primary care 
management for subacute LBP. Primary Care Management follows  the clinical practice guidelines for low 
back pain. Service members are to stay as active  as possible and progressively increase their activity. 
Medications prescribed begin with paracetamol and NSAIDs as first -line drugs. Second -line drugs include 
antide pressants, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], tramadol, and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]. All participants will receive an information 
sheet on LBP advising then to remain active and use self -care options such as heat application. To 
provide an attention control, the PMC only group will receive  weekly communication from the study 
coordinator regarding pain and medication usage.  
Progressive Exercise Program (PEP): The primary goal of PEP is to reduce back pain, disability, and 
improve trunk flexibility, strength, and endurance through controlled,  gradual, progressive back 
exercises. PEP teaches muscle strengthening exercises and self -management strategies to promote back 
fitness. The PEP sessions provide the participant with a standardized self -management framework for 
performing the exercises at home. PEP is performed every other day/week for about ~1 hour over a 
period of 9 weeks. PEP consists of 3 sequential phases with each phase lasting 3 weeks. As the 
participant progresses through each phase, the exercises become progressively more difficult  and 
intense, focusing on back stretching and strengthening that progressively load and unload the lumbar 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_651618]/extension exercises. During the baseline visit, participants will be provided a handout and given a demonstration of the Pha se 1 exercises to be performed at home for 3 weeks. The 
participant will perform a return demonstration to be sure of proper form and performance of the exercises. At each return 3 -week visit, the same parameters (described above) will be used to teach 
Phase 2 and 3. The PEP group will perform 31 exercise sessions for 60 minutes on alternating days. Pain 
status will be assessed at each visit.  
Data collection:   Variables and Their Measurement  
Clinical and Demographic Variables : Information will be collecte d on age, sex, co -morbidities, 
medication use, use of assistive aids, symptom duration, history of  injuries/trauma, changes in 
frequency, duration and intensity of training, previous surgeries, imaging studies and other self -care 
methods currently being u sed to improve pain and/or mobility. Height and weight will be measured 
without shoes with the head held horizontal and chin parallel to the floor while standing on a flat surface using a calibrated balance beam scale and stadiometer; they will be used to calculate body mass index (BMI: weight in kg divided by [CONTACT_554320]). Resting blood pressure (B/P) will be measured in triplicate in a seated position. The lowest of three blood pressure measurements will be 
recorded. Resting heart rate will be measured using the radial pulse over 1 minute's duration.  
Outcome Measures : The primary measures to be studied are lower back  muscle strength, 
physical activity, and mobility; secondary measures are symptoms of LBP  and QOL.  
Assessment of Torso Muscle  Strength : The strength of torso flexion and extension muscles will 
be measured using a modified version of the U of Michigan strength test system (Workability Systems, 
West Chester, Ohio) and a Chattanooga-Baseline® HandDynamometer - Digital LCD Gauge - ER™ 300 lb 
capacity (DJO Global, Chattanooga, Vista, CA [LOCATION_003]). For trunk flexion, the participant will stand upright in the testapparatus with buttocks against the padded board and the superior edge set at the level of the iliac crest. The participant is strapped to the apparatus by a canvas belt placed snugly around the chest and under the arms horizontal to the force -measuring dynamometer secured to the apparatus frame. 
For measurements of trunk extension, the participant stands upright with their lower anterior abdomen against the padded board at the iliac crest level. The belt is placed snugly around the posterior back and runs under the arms horizontal to the dynamometer.  
Participants will be instructed to pull against the belt as forcefully as they can w ithout injuring 
themselves and not to use their arms for support; thus, the force exerted will be by [CONTACT_651626]. For each test, participants will perform two maximal efforts maintaining each voluntary isometric exertion for [ADDRESS_874576]; the highest value of the two trials will be accepted 
in kilograms. All subjects will be given the visual analog scale (VAS) for pain to quantify pain during testing. Reproducibility of maximum exerted forces by [CONTACT_651627] a m ean of 22% 
extension and 13% flexion. Intra -individual performance ratios differed by a mean of 20% for extension -
to-flexion. A reasonable percent variance for strength -testing.  
Assessment of Mobility and Physical Activity: Mobility will be measured by [CONTACT_651628]: [ADDRESS_874577]. Additional 
physical activity measures will be the monitoring of steps walked and energy expenditure. After 
completing the tests, a VAS for pain will be administered to quantify pain during the effort.  
The 2 -minute push -up and sit -up tests will be completed in accordance with the Army APFT 
protocol, and are similar to that described by [CONTACT_104632]. Starting in a prone position, the participant is 
posit ioned with their hands on the ground (shoulder width apart), toes in contact [CONTACT_651629], spi[INVESTIGATOR_651619], elbows and hips in extension. The body moves as a single rigid unit and is lowered to the ground until elbows are at 90° angle. The bo dy is then returned to the starting position by 
[CONTACT_651630]. A push -up is counted if the elbows were brought to flexion of 90° 
or greater and then return to full extension, while keepi[INVESTIGATOR_651620]. The number of push -ups performed in [ADDRESS_874578] tests trunk flexion and 
abdominal endurance. Starting in a supi[INVESTIGATOR_2547], the knee joints are flexed at a 90° angle, with fingers 
behind the head, soles of the feet and shoulder blad es in contact [CONTACT_651629]. With the command to 
begin, the upper body is raised forward by [CONTACT_651631]. A sit -up is 
counted if the hands are behind the head, bringing the base of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_99682] a vertical position and the n 
returning the shoulder blades to the floor. The number of repetitions performed in [ADDRESS_874579] will assess back extension and endurance.  Participants will be 
asked to lie in a prone position while holding the trun k in 15° of extension(sternum off the floor) for as 
long as they are able. A small pi[INVESTIGATOR_651621]. Participants will be asked to maintain maximum flexion of the cervical spi[INVESTIGATOR_651622]. The time during which the subject keeps the upper body straight and horizontal is 
recorded. For subjects who experience no difficulty in holding the position, the test is stopped after 300 
seconds (5 minute).  
The [ADDRESS_874580] ( 6-MWT) measures the distance a participant walks at a “fast” pace 
over a 6 -minute period. Participants will “walk as quickly as you can” with  the opportunity to stop and 
rest if required. This test measures functional capacity of walking. Normal reference for healthy adults 
on the  6-min walk distance has been  published.  
Physical Activity Measures: Physical activity will be measured using the Fitbit Charge 2 (San 
Francisco, CA). The Charge [ADDRESS_874581] similar validity and reliability. In our personal experience comparing the Charge to the Jawbone and the well val idated Digiwalker, we found very similar accuracy 
of steps. Subsequently, the device will be worn daily for 9 weeks.  
Assessment of Symptoms of Low Back Pain: Pain associated with daily activity (walking, sitting, 
standing, bending, sport, resting, work) and body functions (pain, sleep, bending, leg weakness, loss of feeling) will be measured by [CONTACT_651632] (CBPS), also known as Aberdeen LBP scale, a 19 -item back pain specific self-report questionnaire. Scores range from 0 to 100 wit h higher 
scores indicating greater disability.  
LBP- related disability and functional limitation will be measured by [CONTACT_212853] 
(ODI), a well standardized outcomes questionnaire that is LBP -specific  for activities of daily living and 
degree of disability. The [ADDRESS_874582] validity in comparison to other pain and disability measures.  
The Visual Analog Scale (VAS) of pain will be used to assess pain at rest and after activ ity. Participants 
will complete this scale following the push -ups, sit -ups, [ADDRESS_874583]. 
This VAS pain subscale is a 100 -mm horizontal line index with descriptive anchors at each end. At the far 
left (0.0 cm) is “no pain”  and at the far right (10 cm) is “worst possible pain”. The participant is 
instructed to place a vertical line at some point between the anchors to describe his/her level of pain.  
Assessment of Quality of Life (QOL): The SF -12v2 Health Survey will be used  to determine each 
participant’s overall health- related quality of life. It is a shorter version of the MOS 36 -item Short Form 
Health Survey (SF -36) demonstrating similar reliability and maintaining the eight health domains with 
one or twoquestions per dom ain. This widely used multidimensional scale has two summary scores for 
physical and mental health as well as eight subscale scores . In addition, depressive symptoms will be 
measured by [CONTACT_554325][INVESTIGATOR_651623], a self -administered 
questionnaire  that contains 20 items.  
Compliance/Adherence to Treatments: Compliance/adherence to the interventions will be 
measured at multiple levels. Adherence to the standard PCM protocol, PEP and NMES will be computed 
as the number of home  sessions reported on the participant’s log divided by [CONTACT_651633]  (daily). Adherence to NMES back training will be defined as the number of sessions 
achieved in each phase divided by [CONTACT_651634]. The Recov ery Back system has a 
hidden internal compliance timer that records the amount of time the stimulator was used. This time will be compared to the training logs. Individual NMES reliability will be assessed from the total 
stimulation time recorded in the stimulator compliance monitor and by [CONTACT_651635].  
Study population:  
To obtain a sample size of 13 5 adults with subacute LBP  (45 per group), we will draw upon Active 
Duty members  and Reserve/National Guard members on active duty status through the physical therapy 
clinic, family practice clinic and satellite clinics at BACH. All racial, ethnic, and gender groups will be recruited for the study.  Active duty members who meet eligib ility criteria and agree to participate in the 
study will be asked to participate.   
Inclusion Criteria  
 The study will be open to all active duty personal who are:  
- Active Duty at time of diagnosis .  
-  LBP greater than 3 weeks and less than 12 weeks since the onset of the epi[INVESTIGATOR_651624] ;  
- age ≥18 and < 45 years ; and  
- ability to provide freely given informed consent.  
 
 Exclusion Criteria  
Those who might be at risk of adverse outcomes from the study interventions will be excluded. 
This includes individuals with 
- Eecurrence of LBP that is less than 3 months from prior epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] ;  
- A significant co -morbid medical condition (such as severe hypertension, neurological disorder 
or pacemaker/defibrillator) in which NMES strength training or unsupervised  exercise is 
contraindicated and would pose a safety threat or impair ability to participate ;  
- Previous back surgeries ;  
- Inability or unwillingness to participate in an exercise or strengthening program;  
- Pregnancy;  
- Vision impairment, where participant is classified as legally blind;  
- Unwillingness to accept random assignment; or  
- A score of 23 or greater on the Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_2557] -Depression scale (CES- D). 
 
 
Statistical Methods  – See Statistical Analysis P lan.  
 