 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title:  The Wise App Trial for Improving Health Outcomes in PLWH  
Study ID: [REMOVED]    
Document Dat e: 6/17/2021  
 
 
 
The United  States  (US) HIV epi[INVESTIGATOR_507144] a significant  public  health  challenge  affecting  1.2 
million  Americans  1. Persons  living  with HIV (PLWH)  confront  a range  of psychological  and behavioral  
challenges,  including  adherence  to medication  regimens,  accessing  healthcare  services,  changes  in quality  of 
life, stigma,  uncertainty  about  physical  and psychological  decline,  and death  2. At the same  time,  the US HIV 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_507145]  3-5. 
Antiretroviral  Therapy  (ART)  adherence  is central  to therapeutic  success  for PLWH . Strict  
adherence  to ART is key to sustained  HIV suppression,  reduced  risk of drug resistance,  improved  overall  
health,  quality  of life, and survival  6 as well as decreased  risk of HIV transmission  7-10. Achieving  adherence  to 
ART is a critical  determinant  of long-term health  outcomes  in HIV-infected  patients.  For many  chronic  
diseases,  such  as diabetes  or hypertension,  drug regimens  remain  effective  even  after treatment  is resumed  
following  a period  of interruption.  In the case  of HIV, however,  loss of virologic  control  as a consequence  of 
non-adherence  to ART may lead to emergence  of drug resistance  and loss of future  treatment  options.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_507146].  Currently  only about  25% of PLWH  
in the US are virally  suppressed,  supporting  the urgent  need  for interventions  to engage  people  in the HIV care 
continuum  and improve  ART adherence  11.The shift to simpler  regimens  alone  is insufficient  for optimal  
adherence  12. 
mHealth  is the use of mobile  devices  -- such  as cellular  phones,  tablets,  smartphones  and other  
wireless  devices  -- for the delivery  of health  services  and information  13. The ubiquitous  nature  of mobile  
technologies  in daily  life creates  opportunities  for health  behavior  management  tools  that were  not 
previously  possible  14. mHealth  can rapi[INVESTIGATOR_507147] -related  behavior  and transform  
patients’  decision -making  about  their health  13. Smartphones  can house  mHealth  applications  (apps)  designed  
to be used  by [CONTACT_507172],  behavioral  prompts,  reminders,  illness  monitoring  and 
self-management  programs  that extend  far beyond  the limits  of a physical  clinic.  The potential  for information  
and communication  technology,  such  as mobile  apps,  to enhance  medication  adherence  through  the provision  
of support  (information,  education,  reminders,  etc.) for behavior  change  has been  well-documented  over the 
last decade  15-22. A growing  body  of research  confirms  the benefits  of empowering  healthcare  consumers  with 
information  and decision -making  support  23-25. Patient  participation  in their health  leads  to increased  patient  
satisfaction  as well as positive  changes  in adherence  patterns  translating  into improved  clinical  outcomes  26-28. 
Individuals  who use mobile  apps  to manage  their health  may perceive  these  tools  as more  private,  potentially  
increasing  patients'  willingness  to disclose  non-adherence  and seek  support  tools  29,30. 
mHealth  also has the potential  to bridge  a divide  in healthcare  delivery  among  underserved  
racial  and ethnic  minority  groups.  The use of mobile  technology  has made  a huge  impact  on 
communication,  access,  and information/resource  provision  to minority  and underserved  populations  31. Nearly  
2/3 of Americans  are now smartphone  owners,  particularly  those  from racial/ethnic  minority  and low 
socioeconomic  groups  32. Furthermore,  emerging  evidence  suggests  that underserved  populations  use 
smartphones  as their primary  method  for accessing  the Internet  33. The use of mHealth  can reduce  geographic  
and economic  disparities  and personalize  healthcare  34,35, which  can be particularly  relevant  to PLWH  since  a 
majority  of them  are from underserved  and minority  groups  3-5. 
mHealth  has the potential  to be an efficacious  tool for improving  the health  of PLWH.  mHealth  
tools  can promote  the management  and prevention  of chronic  illnesses,  such  as HIV [ADDRESS_654326]  missed  doses  long after they occur.  All of these  methods  are assessed  on an intermittent  basis,  such  
that missed  doses  are detected  several  weeks  to months  after they occur,  which  can lead to treatment  failure  
and drug resistance  39. Real-time medication  adherence  monitoring  can allow  for the detection  of adherence  
lapses  and initiation  of interventions  to resume  treatment  prior to the development  of virologic  rebound  and 
drug resistance,  which  has not previously  been  possible  40. STUDY  PURPOSE  AND  RATIONALE  
CleverCapTM Lite, a smart  pi[INVESTIGATOR_507148],  (Compliance  Meds  Technologies,  North  Miami  Beach,  
[LOCATION_012])  communicates  dosing  behavior  in real-time by [CONTACT_507173] a patient  identifier  and date-time stamp  
over existing  cellular  networks  when  the container  is opened  to take medications.  Because  cellular  network  
coverage  is becoming  ubiquitous,  the technical  infrastructure  now exists  for real-time adherence  monitoring  in 
resource -limited  settings.  A similar  device,  called  The Wisepi[INVESTIGATOR_507149],  was pi[INVESTIGATOR_507150] a small  sample  
(N=10)  of PLWH  in Africa  and shown  to be useful  for providing  real-time adherence  counseling  in PLWH  41. 
The Wisepi[INVESTIGATOR_507151]-depressants  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Mohr  (Co-I) on 
this proposed  project  42. 
The Wise  App will motivate  and engage  participants  over  time. Although  mHealth  technology  may 
be promising,  several  studies  have  shown  that adherence  to mHealth  interventions  is low and decreases  over 
time 43, even  though  these  studies  showed  a significant  effect  on health  outcomes  44. Therefore  there  is a need  
for strategies  that motivate  people  to use, and keep  using,  the technologies  offered.  Gamification,  the use of 
game -like rewards  and incentives,  paired  with desired  behaviors,  is one such  strategy  that can be used  to 
increase  motivation  to sustain  habits  of individuals  over time 45. Companies  have  widely  accepted  and adopted  
gamification  as a means  to increase  initiation  and retention  of desired  behaviors  46. In fact, it has been  
estimated  that 60% of health  initiatives  in workplaces  now include  gamification  elements  47. PatternHealth  
Technology’s  HealthStar  mobile  app, referred  throughout  this protocol  as “The Wise  App,”  will use persuasive  
games  to motivate  end-users  48. End-users  can set health  and fitness  goals  and use persuasive  gaming  to help 
meet  the goal.  In the case  of the Wise  App, participants  will set goals,  have  a tally bar, and receive  reminders  to 
motivate  them  to complete  their goals.  
mHealth  tools,  including  mobile  apps,  for PLWH  have  not been  well-developed  or evaluated.  
Currently  there  are a number  of mHealth  apps  for PLWH  [ADDRESS_654327]  been  developed  by [CONTACT_507174]-users  (PLWH)  or healthcare  providers  regarding  desired  content  and features  of a 
mobile  app. Of the limited  number  of studies  specifically  focused  on mobile  apps  for PLWH,  one study  identified  
the preferences  for a mobile  app in HIV positive  young  mothers  50, but did not rigorously  evaluate  the app    
after its development.  In another  study,  researchers  developed  a mobile  app consisting  of a music  program       
to improve  adherence  to ART for adult  PLWH,  but did not engage  the intended  end-users  in the development   
of the intervention  51. Although  mobile  phone  apps  are increasingly  being  used  for the care of HIV and         
other  sexually  transmitted  diseases,  most  available  apps  have  failed  to attract  user attention  and positive  
reviews.  In a review  of existing  HIV apps,  researchers  found  that apps  were  infrequently  downloaded  (median  
100 to 500 downloads)  and not highly  rated  (an average  customer  rating  3.7 out of 5 stars).  Based  on this 2012  
review,  less than 0.3%  of the more  than 29,000  health -related  apps  available  for iPhone  and Android  
consumers  were  dedicated  to HIV/STD  information  and prevention49. 
Our proposed  study  is timely  and relevant  since  there  is currently  a dearth  of evidence  on the use of 
mHealth  interventions  for improving  health  outcomes  in PLWH.  Of the relevant  research  including  text 
messaging  to support  HIV care,  studies  have  largely  been  developed  and tested  outside  the US in low and 
middle  income  countries  52. Two systematic  reviews  on the use of text messaging  for treatment  adherence  in 
PLWH  have  been  conducted,  but the studies  were  focused  on populations  outside  the US 37,52. In another  
systematic  review  on the use of health  tools  for PLWH,  all of the US studies  in the review  focused  on the use 
of mobile  technology  as a data collection  tool for targeting  smoking  cessation  in PLWH  53. 
Given  the dearth  of useful  and likeable  apps  54, the need  for improving  medication  adherence  in PLWH  
and the great  promise  that mHealth  holds,  we propose  to test a smartphone  app linked  to a smart  pi[INVESTIGATOR_507152] (The Wise  App)  for PLWH  targeting  ART adherence  and guided  by a rigorous  and 
relevant  theoretical  framework55. The feasibility  of the Wise  App is supported  by [CONTACT_507175] U.S. with persons  from underserved  groups  being  more  likely  to 
own a smartphone  and more  likely  to use a smartphone  (as compared  to a computer)  to access  the Internet.  
The current  trial is significant  in representing  one of the first principled  and systematic  efforts  to build a  
mHealth  app intervention  based  on user-centered  design  work  and linked  to a smart  pi[INVESTIGATOR_507153].  Our proposed  study,  based  on our empi[INVESTIGATOR_507154] 56-61, uses  
rigorous  methods  and a theory -based  approach  [ADDRESS_654328] a mHealth  intervention  (Wise  App)  for 
improving  ART adherence  for PLWH.  
 
 
 
The goal of this study  is to test the efficacy  of The Wise  App for improving  health  outcomes  (as measured  by 
[CONTACT_507176])  in PLWH.  Our secondary  outcomes  are: (a) healthcare  access  (b) technology  STUDY  DESIGN  
 
 
acceptance  (c) technology  use. Table  1 presents  and overview  of the design,  participants  and data analysis  
plan for each  aim. 
 
 
Table 1. Overview  of Design, Methods, Participants, and Data  Analysis  
Aim Design/Methods  Participants  Data Analysis  
1 Cognitive  
Walkthrough,  and 
user testing using  
think -aloud protocol  Cognitive Walkthrough: human - 
computer  interaction experts  
(N=5); User  testing: PLWH  (N=30)  Quantitative and qualitative summary of heuristic  
violations; thematic  analysis  of think -aloud  
protocol, quantitative summary of mouse clicks,  
time, etc.  
2 Randomized  
controlled design  PLWH  
(N=200; intervention=100,  control  
n=100)  for 6 months  Descriptive statistics; Linear  regression  model  
2b In-depth Interviews  PLWH  
(N=100; intervention group  only) Qualitative coding of in-depth interviews  related  
to CleverCap  device; thematic  analysis  to 
examine CleverCap experience and acceptability  
3 Descriptive: focus  
groups  Focus  groups:  
Participants  in the intervention arm 
of the RCT (N~50)  Descriptive, thematic  analysis  to examine post - 
intervention perceptions  related to The  Wise App  
use, usefulness  and impact on overall health  
3b Descriptive: focus  
groups  Focus  groups:  
Participants  in the control arm of 
the RCT (N~60)  Descriptive, thematic  analysis  to examine post - 
intervention perceptions  related to the Fitness  
Tracker  use, usefulness  and impact on overall  
health  
3c Descriptive: in -
depth interview  In-depth interview:  
Participants in the intervention and 
control arms of the RCT (N~20)  Descriptive, thematic  analysis  to examine 
perceptions  related to the recruitment process  
and research participation  to the RCT  
 
C. Aim 1: Build  a functional  app for HIV self-management  linked  to a smart  pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] (Wise  App)  for PLWH  
and assess  its usability  
 
C.1. Intervention  Components.  
Medication  adherence  can be monitored  using  the CleverCapTM Lite bottle,  which  emits  a cellular  signal  when  
it is opened,  allowing  for near real-time acquisition  of data regarding  patient  pi[INVESTIGATOR_507155].  The 
CleverCapTM Lite adherence  monitor  (see Compliance  Meds  Technologies,  North  Miami  Beach,  [LOCATION_012])  
communicates  dosing  behavior  in real-time by [CONTACT_507173] a patient  identifier  and date-time stamp  over 
existing  cellular  networks  when  the container  is opened  to take medications.  
 
The primary  intervention  component  will include:  
• Medication  Reminders  – Reminders  will be tailored  to participants’  
medication  schedule  (Figure  1). To avoid  notification  fatigue,  a cellular  signal  
is sent to the phone  when  the servers  detect  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_507156],  which  
prevents  the launching  of the reminder  notifications  on the phone.  The app will 
launch  an in-phone  pop-up alert before  a scheduled  dose  time is missed.  If the 
Wise  App does  not receive  notification  that the pi[INVESTIGATOR_507157],  
additional  reminders  will be launched  on the phone  after the scheduled     
dose,  asking  the patient  to taken  their medication.  
Additional  app components  are listed  below  and organized  according  to 
Fogg’s  Functional  Triad:  Figure 1.  Medication  
Schedule  
 
  
 
 
Figure 2.  Mobile  App 
Screen  of User  
History  • Missions  (Tool)  – Missions  are intended  to help users  keep  track  of activities  they enjoy.  
This feature  will display  a checklist  of tasks  participants  aim to complete  (e.g. go to the 
gym,  text/email  a friend,  etc.) 
• Fitness  Tracker  (Medium)  – This feature  will allow  users  to track  their daily steps.  Each  
user will receive  a fitness  tracker,  which  will be synced  to the Wise  App. A daily step goal 
will be set for all users  and progress  will be tracked  on the app, allowing  users  to see the 
effects  of their physical  activity.  
• History  (Medium)  – Informed  by [CONTACT_507177],  users  will be able to 
view their medication  adherence  over time through  a graphical  representation  (Figure  2). 
The CleverCapTM Lite dispenser  uses  cellular  technology  to transmit  information  on time of 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_507156].  Users  will also be able to view trends  of step goals  and other  app 
features.  
• Games  (Medium)  – Wise  App supports  two types  of gamification:  1) A virtual  pet that 
reacts  to a user’s  medication  adherence,  and 2) Challenges  that can be designed  to 
award/deduct  points  to users  based  on select  activities  completed  (Figure  3). 
 
• Chat  (Social  Actor):  This feature  will allow  study  participants  to anonymously  chat 
with other  users  under  specific  discussion  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  To ensure  privacy  protection,  
only study  participants  will be a part of this chat and all posts  will need  to be 
approved  by [CONTACT_507178].  
• Testimonials  of Lived  Experiences  (Social  Actor)  – Videos  of PLWH  who share  their 
experiences  which  has the potential  to provide  social  support.Videos  will include  Figure 3.  Mobile  App 
Screen  of Challenges  
topi[INVESTIGATOR_507158] a new diagnosis,  living  with HIV for [ADDRESS_654329]  two types  of 
usability  assessments:  A) Cognitive  Walkthrough  and B) End-User  Usability  Testing.  
C.2.1.  Cognitive  Walkthrough:  
 
The purpose  of a CW evaluation  is to evaluate  the ease  with which  users  can perform  a task with little or no 
formal  instruction  or informal  coaching.62 The CW has historically  been  conducted  by [CONTACT_507179]63 
and it is highly  structured  with a goal of understanding  a technology’s  learnability.64 A CW session’s  input  
should  include  1) a detailed  design  of the user interface  2) a task scenario  3) explicit  assumptions  about  the 
user population  4) the context  of use and 5) a sequence  of actions  that would  allow  the user to successfully  
complete  the task.62 For the purposes  of this study,  we chose  the tasks  outlined  in the procedures  section  to 
analyze.  
There  are four steps  in the context  of a task that the user will need  to complete  using  scenarios:  1) The user 
would  set an end goal to be accomplished,  2) The user would  inspect  available  actions  on the user screen  
(e.g. menu  items,  buttons,  etc.),  3) The user would  select  one of those  actions  as the next step that leads  to 
the end goal,  and 4) The user would  perform  the action  and evaluate  system  feedback  for evidence  that 
progress  is being  made  toward  accomplishment  of the user’s  goal.  
 
Sample : Five informaticians  will be recruited  as usability  experts  with training  in human -computer  interaction  
and who have  published  in the field of informatics.  We will recruit  the evaluators  through  direct  contact  [CONTACT_507180]/or  Weill  Cornell  Medical  College,  both of which  have  large  
cadres  of informatics  researchers.  
 
Procedures : Each  of usability  experts  will be provided  with a beta version  of the Wise  App, a Clever  Cap,  and 
a fitness  tracker  to conduct  the study.  Each  expert  will be provided  with a set of user scenarios  utilizing  the 
Wise  App. The expert  will be asked  to simulate  a novice  user and assess  a user interface  by [CONTACT_507181]  a user would  go through  to effectively  accomplish  each  of the high-level tasks  within  the 
app. While  they are performing  the tasks  required  for the scenarios,  the expert  will be asked  to say aloud  what  
they are thinking,  seeing  and trying  to do and will be asked  to explicitly  document  each  step that they deem  
necessary  to successfully  complete  each  task in the user scenarios,  if needed.  The expert  will then asked  to 
answer  aloud  the following  four questions  for each  of the tasks  identified  in the user scenarios:  1) Will the user 
try and achieve  the desired  effect?,  2) Will the user notice  that the correct  action  is available?,  3) Will the user 
associate  the correct  action  with the desired  effect?,  and 4) Will the user notice  that progress  is being  made  
toward  the final goal?.  The process  will be recorded  using  Morae  software™  (Techsmith  Corporation,  Okemos,  
MI),[ADDRESS_654330]  and analyze  the audio  recording  and screen  shots  that are 
captured  during  the heuristic  evaluation.  Participants  will also complete  an electronic  survey.  Participants  will be 
compensated  $150.00  for their time.  
 
Data  Analysis : Verbal  commentary,  answers  to the four questions  from the CW, and screen -recordings  from 
the Morae  software  will be reviewed  and evaluated  to determine  if any potential  usability  concerns  have  been  
identified.  If there  are positive  answers  to all of the questions,  then it can be determined  that there  are not any 
usability  concerns  at this stage;  if there  is a negative  answer  to any of the four questions,  the specified  action  is 
not free of usability  problems.64 Specific  comments  and recommendations  will be discussed  by [CONTACT_507182].  
C.2.2.  End-User Usability  Testing:  
We will conduct  usability  testing  to examine  task performance  by [CONTACT_507183]-users,  persons  living  with HIV 
(PLWH).  It is intended  to identify  usability  problems  and any potential  obstacle  to their effective  use of the Wise  
App. This is an iterative  process  that involves  testing  the system  and then using  the test results  to change  it to 
better  meet  users’  needs.  
 
Sample : 30 PLWH  will be recruited  to identify  usability  concerns  within  the Wise  App. Of the 30 PLWH,  15 will 
be iPhone  users  and 15 will be Android  users.  In usability  testing  the minimum  percentage  of problems  
identified  rose from 82% up to 95% when  the number  of users  was increased  from 10 to 20.66 
 
Procedures : Participants  will be provided  with a beta version  of the Wise  App, a Clever  Cap,  and a fitness  
tracker.  They  will be also provided  with the same  set of user scenarios  used  for CW by [CONTACT_106971].  Each  
participant  will be asked  to perform  tasks  which  should  closely  mirror  the intended  end users  of the app. Each  
participant  will be also encouraged  to verbalize  their thoughts  about  the tasks  they are performing.  The 
process  will be audio - and screen -recorded  using  Morae  software™  (Techsmith  Corporation,  Okemos,  MI).65 
After  the usability  evaluation,  participants  will be asked  to complete  an online  survey  including  a demographic  
questionnaire  and user satisfaction  assessment  via Qualtrics®.  Participants  will be compensated  $25.00  for 
their time.  
 
Data  Analysis : The analysis  will be based  on the Morae  recordings  of user sessions,  transcriptions,  and notes.  
[CONTACT_194881]  will search  for critical  incidents  which  will be characterized  by [CONTACT_194845],  silence,  and repetitive  
actions.  [CONTACT_194881]  will review  these  incidents  in detail  using  Morae  software.  The incidents  identified  and      
the users’  written  comments  will be summarized.  Content  analysis,  a technique  for making  replicative  and    
valid inferences  from data,  will be performed  by [CONTACT_507184]. Schnall’s  supervision.  The 
comments  will be categorized  according  to the positive  characteristics,  negative  characteristics,  and 
recommendations  made  by [CONTACT_112479].  Results  from the user satisfaction  assessment  will be analyzed  using  SPSS  
(IBM,  Armonk,  NY) to calculate  the descriptive  statistics  to complement  the findings  from the usability  
assessment  in which  the PLWH  will be using  the Wise  App. Using  the findings  from these  activities,  we will 
refine  the components  of the app for use in the RCT (Aim 2). 
 
D. Aim 2: Evaluate  the impact  of the Wise  App on medication  adherence  in underserved  PLWH  
D.1. Design  Overview.  
A randomized  controlled  trial will be conducted  with 200 PLWH  over 6 months.  Participants  will be randomly  
assigned  to the Wise  App (intervention)  or a control  arm. 
Details  on the differences  between  the two groups  can be 
found  in Table  2. 
D.2. Eligibility  Criteria  for Participants.  
Participants  must  be at least  [ADDRESS_654331]  of our participants,  as can be seen  from our preliminary  
work,  are from racial  and ethnic  minority  groups.  
To comply  with the AHRQ  Policy  on the Inclusion  of 
Priority  Populations  (NOT -HS-03-010),  our study  participants  
are chronically  ill, inner -city, low-income  and minority.  We anticipate  that about  40% of our study  participants  
will include  women.  
In addition,  participants  must  report  past 30 days  adherence  of 80% or less as measured  using  the 
Visual  Analogue  Scale  (VAS)  67 (Appendix)  or have  a viral load of over 400 copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]/mL.  Exclusion  criteria  are: 
participation  in any other  mobile  app study  for PLWH,  not including  text messaging  studies,  and any clinical  
problems  that would  not allow  someone  to use a cell phone.  Prior to participating  in any study  procedure,  
participants  must  voluntarily  provide  informed  consent.  
D.3. Recruitment  Plan.  
We will post flyers  at each  of the recruitment  sites listed  below  and will provide  compensation  for time that it 
takes  to complete  the study  questionnaires.  The flyer will have  the name,  contact  [CONTACT_6227],  and e-mail for the 
study  coordinator.  PLWH  from these  sites are almost  exclusively  from low socioeconomic  backgrounds.  If we 
are unable  to recruit  participants  after posting  flyers,  we will then hand  distribute  flyers  to potential  participants  
in the waiting  rooms  of our sites.  We will also be using advertisements through social media that will lead 
users to a short Qualtrics survey, The Wellness Study Interest Survey, asking for contact [CONTACT_507185]. The purpose of this short survey is to attract mor e individuals towards our study, 
provide them with necessary study -related information, and to determine initial eligibility before a staff 
member reaches back out to screen for enrollment eligibility. Our main  sites for recruitment  are those  where  
we have  previously  conducted  our studies  (HRSA  H97HA08483,  NINR  P30NR010677 -03S1  and CDC  
U01PS003715 -01).  
1) The Comprehensive  Health  Program  at Columbia  University/NewYork -Presby[CONTACT_380976][INVESTIGATOR_507159],  HIV specialty  care and care coordination  services  to over 2,000  PLWH.  95% of individuals  are 
of either  Black  or Latino  background  and women  represent  half of the overall  population.  In addition,  the 
program  has   [ADDRESS_654332]. 
Olender  (Co-I) is an attending  physician  at the Clinic.  
2) AIDS  Service  Center  (ASC)  is a community  based  organization  for PLWH  and persons  at risk for HIV. ASC 
has more  than [ADDRESS_654333]  greater  than 80% power  to detect  a less than 10% difference  in 
adherence  to ART medications  between  the Wise  App and the control  group.  We assume  a 25% attrition  
rate by [CONTACT_507186].  The power  calculations  are based  on the analysis  of main  outcome,  
ART adherence.  All calculations  are based  on 2-sided  test with alpha  at 0.05 level.  Our calculations  are 
based  on the assumption  that each  person  is on a once  daily regimen  and the adherence  rate is ≤ 80% at 
baseline.  
Many  of our participants  will be on regimens  that are two or three  times  per day which  will provide  greater  
power  for our study  since  we have  a greater  number  of measurements  (e.g.,  180 for once  daily vs. 360 for 
twice  daily regimen).  To illustrate,  if the adherence  rate for the control  group  does  not change,  we will have  
90.7%  power  to detect  a 6% increase  in ART adherence  for the intervention  group  (e.g.,  from 80% to 86% at STATISTICAL  PROCEDURES  Table  2. Comparison  of Intervention  vs. 
Control  Group  
 Intervention  Control  
The Wise  App 
• Medication  
reminder  
• Step  Goal  
reminder  ✓ 
✓ ✓ 
 
 
✓ 
CleverCapTM Lite 
dispenser  ✓ ✓ 
 
the end of the trial).  If the adherence  rate for the control  group  increases  4%, from 80% to 84% at the end of 
the trial, we will have  88.6%  power  to detect  a 5% difference  in adherence  between  the intervention  and 
control  group.  In this case,  the intervention  group’s  adherence  rate increased  an additional  5% (or 
4%+5%=9%)  from 80% to 89% at the end of the trial. 
D.5. Baseline  Screening  and Assessment.  
Potential  study  participants  will complete  a phone  screening  that assesses  eligibility.  If eligible,  participants  will 
attend  a baseline  session  described  below.  
D.6. Randomization.  
Study  participants  will be randomized  (1:1) to Wise  App intervention  or control  arm. We will use a variable  
permuted  randomized  block  design  68 where  the block  size itself is randomly  selected  (i.e., blocks  of four to 
eight).  The advantage  of the permuted  block  design  is that treatment  assignment  is pre-determined  before  the 
trial begins  and then assignment  remains  static  throughout  the course  of the trial 69. Participants  will be 
randomized  based  on the use of computer -generated  random  numbers  at baseline.  The randomization  
database  will be stored  on a password  protected  computer  at Columbia  University  and will only be accessible  
to [CONTACT_194881].  
D.7. Procedures.  
Upon  enrollment  in the study,  participants  will come  to the study  site, Columbia  University  School  of Nursing  to 
complete  consent  forms.  Following  informed  consent,  study  participants  will complete  a number  of baseline  
questionnaires  including  socio -demographic  characteristics,  physical  health  measurements,  behavioral  data,  
health  status  and social  desirability  (See  Table  3) 70. Survey  instruments  will be collected  through  Qualtrics,  a 
secure,  Web-based  application  designed  to support  data capture  for research  studies,  providing  an intuitive  
interface,  audit  trails,  and automated  export.  Qualtrics  is a free service  offered  through  Columbia  University  
Medical  Center.  
Following  the complet ion of the baseline  study  instruments,  study  participants  in both arms  will be given  a 
CleverCapTM Lite dispenser  and trained  on how to use it, as well as a fitness  tracker  that will be synced  to 
Wise  App. Study  participants  in both arms  will be trained  by [CONTACT_507187]. Those  in the intervention  group  will receive  medication  reminders  while  those  in the 
control  group  will receive  reminders  about  completing  their step goal.  Participants  in both arms  will be given  a 
document  that includes  contact  [CONTACT_507188],  information  about  compensation,  study  
reminders,  and will also receive  a telephone  call from a research  assistant  [ADDRESS_654334] to reach participants will 
also be sent scheduling reminders  through the Qualtrics system  and e ncrypted e -mails  from the study’s 
secure CUMC e -mail address.   
Token  of appreciation:  Participants  will be given  $40 at the baseline  visit, $50 + up to an extra  $25 for app 
challenges  completed  at the 3 month  visit, and $60 + up to an extra  $25 for app challenges  completed  at the 6 
month  visit (up to a total of $200  for participation)  and for providing  a blood  sample  (or recent  lab results)  for 
viral load/  CD4 testing  and completion  of study  questionnaires.  Participants will also have the option to have 
the cost of their transportation to and from the study site paid for, through a  ridesharing service.  
D.8. Operationalization  of Outcome  Measures.  
The primary  outcome  will be ART adherence,  measured  by [CONTACT_507189].  The CleverCapTM 
dispenser  will automatically  record  each  time a participant  opens  the dispenser.  We will collect  adherence  data 
each  day from the start to the end of trial (day 1 to 6 months),  and it is a count  response  (number  of times  
taking  medication  each  day).  Frequency  of app use will be counted  each  time a participant  opens  the app. 
 
Table 3. Study  Measures  
 Tool Measurement  Time Points  
Demographic Variables and Potential Confounders  
Socio - 
demographic  
characteristics  Gender, age, education, income, employment, health insurance,  
housing  Baseline  
Behavioral Data  Use of condoms, tobacco, alcohol, substance use  Baseline, [ADDRESS_654335]  Vital Sign71; Short  Test of Functional Health Literacy in  
Adults (S -TOFHLA) 72 Baseline  
Health Status  RAND -36; Symptom  Distress  Module;73 PROMIS -29;74 Self- 
Management  Scale75   Baecke Questionnaire  for the Elderly76 Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Social  
Desirability  Social  desirability  scale70 Baseline  
Mental Health  Patient  Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9);77 Mood  Disorder  
Questionnaire  (MDQ);78 Prodromal Questionnaire  (PQ-16);[ADDRESS_654336] measurements  Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Housing Status  Housing Status  Assessment Tool  Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Primary Outcome  
ART Adherence  Primary  Measure:  
CleverCapTM Lite Dispenser  Daily 
CASE  Adherence  Index81 Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
CD4 and viral load Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Secondary  Outcomes  
Health  Care  
Access  Number  of Primary Care Visits  Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Engagement  with Health care Provider  Scale  Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Caregiver  Survey  6 months  
System Use  Automated Log Files  Ongoing  
Technology  
Acceptance  Health -ITUES;82 PSSUQ;83 Perceived Ease of Use and  Potential  
Usefulness Questionnaire84; eHEALS:  the Health  Literacy Scale85 
Trust in Health Information  Sources  Baseline, 3 and 6 months  
Physical Activity  
Measures  Neighborhood Environment Survey, Social Capi[INVESTIGATOR_507160], & Self- 
Efficacy Scale  6-months  
 
We will also use additional  measurements  of medication  adherence  to validate  the findings  from the 
CleverCapTM Lite dispenser.  We will do blood  draws  at baseline,  3 and 6 months  to measure  CD4 and viral 
load data on each  study  participant;  alternatively,  participants  will be given  the option  of providing  recent  lab 
results  of their CD4 and viral load data The blood draw at baseline will also be tested for  genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007],  GSA  chip 
and qPCR,  Hormone  blood  levels  (Estrogen  and FSH),  and cytokine  blood  levels  (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, 
IL-10, IL-13, TNFα,  and CRP).  The genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_507161],  cytokine  blood  level and CRP,  and 
hormone  blood  tests  will only be collected  once  during  the course  of the study,  at Baseline  or at the 6-month  
follow -up if not completed  at Baseline.  The genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007], GSA chip and qPCR will be performed by [CONTACT_507190].  We will also ask participants  to complete  the Center  for 
Adherence  Support  Evaluation  (CASE)  Adherence  Index,  a simple  composite  measu re of self-reported  
antiretroviral  therapy  (ART)  adherence  81. The CASE  Adherence  Index  consists  of three  unique  adherence  
questions.  Past research  has shown  that the CASE  Adherence  Index  correlated  strongly  with the three -day 
self-reported  adherence  data (p<0.001)  and was more  strongly  associated  with HIV outcomes,  including  a 1-
log decline  in HIV RNA  level (maximum  OR = 2.34;  p<0.05),  HIV RNA < 400  copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]/ml  (maximum  OR = 2.33;  
p<0.05)  and performed  as well as the three -day self-report  when  predicting  CD4 count  status.  The CASE  
Adherence  Index  is an easy  to administer  instrument  that provides  an alternative  method  for assessing  ART 
adherence  in clinical  settings.  Items  are scored  such  that higher  values  indicate  better  adherence,  and the 
maximum  total score      is 16. Scores  of 11 or higher  on this index  indicate  good  adherence  (Cronbach’s  α= 
0.79)  86. 
Our primary  outcome  is ART adherence . The CleverCapTM Lite dispenser  is our objective  measure  of 
ART adherence  and the CASE  Adherence  index  as a subjective  measure.  We are including  the subjective  
measure  since  there  is potential  bias in that participants’  in the control  group  may not use the device  or may 
not use the device  for the entire  study  period.  
We will assess  for contamination  between  the study  groups  at the end of the trial by [CONTACT_507191] [ADDRESS_654337]  data on app use through  automated  log files so there  will not be 
response  burden  associated  with this measure.  
Secondary  Outcome  Measures:  Our measures  are listed  in Table  3 and included  in the Appendix.  
D.9. Data  Analysis.  
We will use intention -to-treat principles  for the primary  outcome  analysis.  Intention  to treat implies  all subjects  
are considered  in analyses.  The outcome  variable  y_i will be the total number  of times  the CleverCapTM Lite 
dispenser  is opened  at day t (from  day 1 to day 180) for person  i, so y_i follows  binomial  distribution  with 
parameter  of p_i and n where  p is probability  of taking  medication  (adherence  rate) and n is number  of 
medications  to take each  day. We use a generalized  linear  mixed  model  (GLMM)  with logit link function  to 
analyze  adherence  rate. The basic  form of the model  is: log (p_i/(1 -p_i ))=β_0+β_1×t+β_2×t×INT+μ_i.  In the 
model,  μ_i is person  level random  effect  and follows  normal  distribution.  This model  is also called  individual  
growth  model.  Independent  variable  INT is an indicator  for intervention  group  (INT=1  for the intervention  group  
and INT=0  for the control  group).  Regression  parameter  β_1 is change  in adherence  rate for the control  group  
and β_2 is the difference  in change  in adherence  rate between  the intervention  group  and the control  group.  
This model  can include  personal  level factors  as covariates  so we can test for potential  confounding  by 
[CONTACT_70235]  (i.e., age, gender,  and health  literacy)  in this model  and inspecting  for changes  in the point  estimate  
of the relation  between  study  group  and adherence.  
We will use GLMM  for analyzing  secondary  outcomes.  In our analysis  of the surveys  related  to the SDT 
framework,  the variable  time (t) will be at 3 time points  (baseline,  3 month,  and 6 month)  and the link function  
will be identified  for continuous  outcomes.  In the analysis  of app use, the unit of analysis  will be at daily level for 
each  participant,  and system  use will be analyzed  using  a GMMM  with log link function  (Poisson  model).  
For the analysis  of CD4 and viral load,  we will analyze  difference -in-difference  using  GLMM  with identity  or log 
link function  when  these  variables  are treated  as continuous  outcomes.  Viral load will also be treated  as a 
binary  outcome  (detectable  vs. undetectable)  and analyses  of viral suppression  will use the GLMM  with logit 
link. In a secondary  “as treated”  analyses,  missing  adherence  and viral load data will be ignored.  The genotype 
analysis will be run by [CONTACT_507192]. Finally,  we  will assess  the 
relationship  between  adherence  (independent  variable)  and virologic  suppression  (dependent  variable)  using  
GLMM  logistic  regression  and including  missing  viral load as detectable.  This model  will include  personal  
level factors  as covariates  so we can test for potential  confounding  by [CONTACT_70235]  (i.e., age, gender,  and 
health  literacy)  in this model  and inspecting  for changes  in the point  estimate  of the relation  between  study  
group  and adherence.  
 
E. Aim 2b: Assess  the acceptability  of the CleverCapTM dispenser  through  In-depth  interviews,  which  
will focus  on the individual  experience  of PLWH  with the device.  
 
E.1. Sample.  At the 3-month  follow -up visit, semi -structured  in-depth  interviews  will take place  with participants  
in the intervention  group.  These  participants  will be the same  participants  from the intervention  study  arm, if 
they choose  to participate  (N=100)  
 
E.2. Procedures.  The in-depth  interviews  will be approximately  20-[ADDRESS_654338]  engages  with the CleverCap  device,  
which  captures  our primary  measure  for change  in medication  adherence.  Some  of the questions  the 
questionnaire  will include  are: 1) Please  tell me a little bit about  your experience  using  the electronic  pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586],  
2) What  have  you used  in the past for storing  and receiving  reminders  about  your medications?  How does  this 
compare?  3) What  are some  of the things  that you like about  using  your pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586]?  4) What  do you dislike  
about  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586]?  5) How has the pi[INVESTIGATOR_507162]  6) If a friend  asked  you 
about  your experience  using  the clevercap,  how would  you describe  your experience  so far? and 7) At the 
completion  of this study,  would  you want  to keep  using  the device,  why or why not? 
 
The team  will adhere  to qualitative  research  processes  to ensure  the credibility,  confirmability,  
dependability,  and transferability  of the qualitative  data from these  analyses90. To support  the credibility  of the 
data,  we will conduct  peer debriefing  and triangulate  findings  across  multiple  data sources  (surveys,  focus  
group  data).  In addition,  we will use “member  checks,”  i.e., sharing  of initial  data interpretations  with participants  
to ensure  accurate  interpretations.  Triangulation  of findings,  along  with reflexivity,  will enhance  the confirmability  
of the interpretations.  The investigators  will carefully  record  an audit  trail and keep  extensive  field notes           
to facilitate  transferability  of study findings  into other  contexts.  
 
E.3. Data  Analysis.  All in-depth  interviews  will be transcribed  verbatim  and then coded.  The development  and 
application  of a coding  scheme  is an integral  component  of the data analysis  process.  It enables  the systematic  
examination  and interpretation  of the data related  to the primary  analytic  foci. The coding  scheme  is 
conceptualized  as a multilevel  structure.  At the highest  level are the primary  analytic  foci coded  as headings.  
Specific  aspects  or dimensions  of the headings  are assigned  core codes.  Specific  aspects  or dimensions  of the 
core codes  are assigned  sub codes.  We use ATLAS.ti,  a software  program  for qualitative  analysis,  to facilitate  
the analysis.  
The following  7 steps  will be used  to develop  the coding  scheme:  
Step 1: Identify  the principal  issues  discussed  by [CONTACT_290009].  
Step 2: Construct  definitions  of the primary  analytic  themes.  
Step 3: Develop  and apply  core codes  and sub-codes  to the initial  set of interviews.  
Step 4: Develop  a provisional  coding  scheme.  
Step 5: Test and refine  the provisional  coding  scheme.  
Step 6: Reconcile  coding  differences  and construct  an updated  and final coding  scheme.  
Step 7: Apply  the coding  scheme  to the full data set and assess  inter-coder  reliability.  
After  all transcripts  have  been  coded,  we will extract  and examine  the content  of text segments  linked  to core 
codes  and sub-codes  relevant  to understanding  the technology  acceptance  of the CleverCap  and barriers  and 
facilitators  to its use. Based  on the coded  data,  we will propose  ways  in which  certain  themes  are analytically  
related.  A careful  examination  of the coded  text will reveal  the associations  among  these  themes,  and may lead 
to more  refined  data searches.  Once  we establish  patterns  of relationships  among  themes  and issues,  we      
will identify  participants’  accounts  that support  or refute  these  patterns.  Identifying  and accounting  for cases  that 
deviate  from an interpretative  pattern  enables  us to test and confirm  the pattern’s  validity  and robustness.  
Schnall  has done  extensive  work understanding  technology  acceptance  with particular  emphasis  on end-users’  
needs  91-94 
 
E.4. Triangulation  of Findings.  The research  team  will use the findings  from our quantitative  data analysis  of 
medication  adherence  and technology  acceptance  in Aim 2 to understand  use and perceived  usefulness  of the 
CleverCap.  Field  notes  and transcripts  will be analyzed  by [CONTACT_507193]™  (QSR  International,  
Victoria,  Australia)  software.  Participants’  statements  will be captured  using  memoing  and then sorted  into the 
following  categories  of interest:  predisposing,  enabling  and reinforcing.  These  activities  will result  in a greater  
understanding  of the use of the CleverCap  based  upon  the predisposing,  enabling,  and reinforcing  factors  
identified  in the in-depth  interviews.  Each  interview  recording  will be transcribed;  transcripts  will be analyzed  by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Schnall,  who is experienced  in qualitative  analysis  and a research  assistant.  The research  team  is 
experienced  with these  methods  91,95-97. 
 
F. Aim 3: Assess  PLWH  perceptions  of the predisposing,  enabling,  and reinforcing  factors  for Wise  
App use through  theoretically -guided  focus  group  sessions.  
F.1. Sample.  Post-intervention,  we will conduct  five focus  group  sessions  with approximately  8-10 participants  
per group.  Focus  group  participants  will be drawn  from the intervention  study  arm (N~50).  
F.2. Procedures.  The focus  groups  will be 60-90 minutes  in length.  We will include  $30 reimbursement  for 
participants’  time.  Following  completion  of the informed  consent  process,  all focus  group  sessions  will be 
audio -recorded.  The PI, who has conducted  focus  groups  for a number  of studies  in the past,  will convene  the 
groups  with the study  participants  and will act as a facilitator  93,96,98,99. The focus  group  guide  will be informed  
by [CONTACT_210464],  reinforcing,  and Enabling  Constructs  in Evaluation  (PRECEDE)  portion  of the PRECEDE - 
PROCEED  Mode l of health  program  planning  and evaluation  100. The integration  of these  frameworks  for 
application  in HIT implementation  evaluation  has been  proposed  by a number  of authors  as a strategy  for 
assessing  predisposing,  enabling,  and reinforcing  factors  for use and acceptance  of HIT 97,99,101.The following  
structured  questions  related  to Wise  App use will be posed:  1) What  are some  of the ways  that your overall  
health  might  benefit  through  the implementation  and dissemination  of the Wise  App (reinforcing  factors)?  2) 
What  do you perceive  as barriers  to implementation  and use of the Wise  App?  (predisposing  factors)  3) What  
do you perceive  as barriers  to implementation  and use of the Wise  App?  (predisposing  factors)  4) What  are 
your ideas  about  strategies  for overcoming  these  barriers?  (enabling  factors).  
The team  will adhere  to qualitative  research  processes  to ensure  the credibility,  confirmability,  
dependability,  and transferability  of the qualitative  data from these  analyses90. To support  the credibility  of the 
data,  we will conduct  peer debriefing  and triangulate  findings  across  multiple  data sources  (surveys,  focus  
group  data).  In addition,  we will use “member  checks,”  i.e., sharing  of initial  data interpretations  with participants  
to ensure  accurate  interpretations.  Triangulation  of findings,  along  with reflexivity,  will enhance  the confirmability  
of the interpretations.  The investigators  will carefully  record  an audit  trail and keep  extensive  field notes           
to facilitate  transferability  of study  findings  into other  contexts  
F.3. Data  Analysis.  All focus  groups  will be transcribed  verbatim  and then coded.  The development  and 
application  of a coding  scheme  is an integral  component  of the data analysis  process.  It enables  the systematic  
examination  and interpretation  of the data related  to the primary  analytic  foci. The coding  scheme  is 
conceptualized  as a multilevel  structure.  At the highest  level are the primary  analytic  foci coded  as headings.  
Specific  aspects  or dimensions  of the headings  are assigned  core codes.  Specific  aspects  or dimensions  of the 
core codes  are assigned  sub codes.  We use ATLAS.ti,  a software  program  for qualitative  analysis,  to facilitate  
the analysis.  
The following  7 steps  will be used  to develop  the coding  scheme:  
Step 1: Identify  the principal  issues  discussed  by [CONTACT_4317].  
Step 2: Construct  definitions  of the primary  analytic  themes.  
Step 3: Develop  and apply  core codes  and sub-codes  to the initial  set of interviews.  
Step 4: Develop  a provisional  coding  scheme.  
Step 5: Test and refine  the provisional  coding  scheme.  
Step 6: Reconcile  coding  differences  and construct  an updated  and final coding  scheme.  
Step 7: Apply  the coding  scheme  to the full data set and assess  inter-coder  reliability.  
After  all transcripts  have  been  coded,  we will extract  and examine  the content  of text segments  linked  to core 
codes  and sub-codes  relevant  to understanding  the technology  acceptance  of the Wise  App and barriers  and 
facilitators  to its use. Based  on the coded  data,  we will propose  ways  in which  certain  themes  are analytically  
related.  A careful  examination  of the coded  text will reveal  the associations  among  these  themes,  and may lead 
to more  refined  data searches.  Once  we establish  patterns  of relationships  among  themes  and issues,  we      
will identify  participants’  accounts  that support  or refute  these  patterns.  Identifying  and accounting  for cases  that 
deviate  from an interpretative  pattern  enables  us to test and confirm  the pattern’s  validity  and robustness.  
Schnall  has done  extensive  work understandi ng technology  acceptance  with particular  emphasis  on end-users’  
needs  91-94 
F.4. Triangulation  of Findings.  The research  team  will use the findings  from our quantitative  data analysis  of 
medication  adherence  and technology  acceptance  in Aim 2 to understand  use and perceived  usefulness  of the 
Wise  App. For example,  if a participant  uses  the app component  of appointment  reminders  but does  not score  
well on the Health  Care  Climate  Questionnaire,  then further  exploration  through  the focus  group  sessions  will 
be conducted  to determine  whether  the appointment  reminder  component  is improving  health  behaviors.  
Field  notes  and transcripts  will be analyzed  by [CONTACT_507193]™  (QSR  International,  Victoria,  
Australia)  software.  Participants’  statements  will be captured  using  memoing  and then sorted  into the following  
categories  of interest:  predisposing,  enabling  and reinforcing.  These  activities  will result  in a greater  
understanding  of the use of the Wise  App based  upon  the predisposing,  enabling,  and reinforcing  factors  
identified  in the focus  groups.  Each  focus  group  recording  will be transcribed;  transcripts  will be analyzed  by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Schnall,  who is experienced  in qualitative  analysis  and a research  assistant.  The research  team  is 
experienced  with these  methods  91,95-97. 
 
G. Aim 3b: Assess  PLWH  perceptions,  experience,  and satisfaction  on the use of the Fitness  Tracker  
that was synced  to the HealthStar  app through  focus  group  sessions.  
 
G.1. Sample.  Post-intervention,  we will conduct  up to eight  focus  group  sessions  with approximately  8-12 
participants  per group.  Focus  group  participants  will be drawn  from the control  study  arm (N~60).  
 
G.2. Procedures.  The focus  groups  will be 60-90 minutes  in length.  We will include  $30 reimbursement  for 
participants’  time.  Following  completion  of the informed  consent  process,  all focus  group  sessions  will be 
audio -recorded.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_507163] a number  of studies  in the past,  and her 
research  team  members  who are pre/post  docs  will convene  the groups  with the study  participants  and will act 
as a facilitator  93,96,98,99. This will be an optional  activity  for participants  in the control  group.  This focus  group   
will be to understand  participant’s  experience,  perception  and satisfaction  on the use of the fitness  tracker  
which  was synced  to the HealthStar  app during  the 6 month  duration  of the study.  Some  of the prompts  in the 
focus  group  include:  1) What  are some  of the things  that you liked about  using  the fitness  tracker  syncing  to the 
Healthstar  app?  2) Please  describe  your experience  using  the fitness  tracker.  3) Please  describe  your 
experience  monitoring  your daily activity.  4) How do you think  that your physical  activity  (i.e., daily step goal 
completion)  changed  after using  the fitness  tracker  for 6 months?  5) What  are some  of the ways  that your 
physical  activity  may change  through  the use of the HealthStar  app linked  with the fitness  tracker?  (Focus  
groups  guide  included  as attachments  entitled  “WiseApp  Fit Bit Focus  Group  Guide“)  
The team  will adhere  to qualitative  research  processes  to ensure  the credibility,  confirmability,  
dependability,  and transferability  of the qualitative  data from these  analyses90. We will use “member  checks,”  
i.e., sharing  of initial  data interpretations  with participants  to ensure  accurate  interpretations.  The investigators  
will carefully  record  an audit  trail and keep  extensive  field notes  to facilitate  transferability  of study  findings  into 
other  contexts  
G.3. Data  Analysis.  
Each  focus  group  recording  will be transcribed.  Transcripts  will be analyzed  independently  for content  by 
[CONTACT_507194].  
 
H. Aim 3c: Assess  PLWH  perceptions and experience  on the recruitment process and  research 
participation to WiseApp study through  in-depth interview . 
 
H.1. Sample.  We will conduct  in-depth interview  with 20 participants . Interview  participants  will be drawn  from 
both control  and intervention  arms. 
 
H.2. Procedures.  The in-depth interview  will be 30 minutes  in length.  We will include  $20 reimbursement  for 
participants’  time.  Following  completion  of the informed  consent  process,  all interviews  will be audio -recorded.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_507164] a number  of studies  in the past,  and her research  team  members  who 
are pre/post  docs  will convene  the groups  with the study  participants  and will act as a facilitator  93,96,98,99. This will 
be an optional  activity  for participants.  This in-depth interview   will be conducted  to understand  participant’s  
experience  and perception  on the recruitment process and research partic ipation . Some  of the questions  in the 
interview  include:  1) How comfortable were you with the recruitment  and screening process for the study ? 
2) How would you modify the recruitment process to improve it or make it easier ? 3) Please describe your 
experience in the enrollment process . 4) Would you prefer the recruitment and enrollment process to be 
online or in -person? 5) What motivated you to participate in this research study ? (Interview guide  included  as 
attachments  entitled  “WISEAPP_Interview Guide on Recruitment “) 
The team  will adhere  to qualitative  research  processes  to ensure  the credibility,  confirmability,  
dependability,  and transferability  of the qualitative  data from these  analyses90. We will use “member  checks,”  
i.e., sharing  of initial  data interpretations  with participants  to ensure  accurate  interpretations.  The investigators  
will carefully  record  an audit  trail and keep  extensive  field notes  to facilitate  transferability  of study  findings  into 
other  contexts . 
 
H.3. Data  Analysis.  
Each  interview  recording  will be transcribed.  Transcripts  will be analyzed  independently  for content  by [CONTACT_507195].  
 
 
 
 
The study  protocol  will be reviewed  and ultimately  receive  approval  of the Columbia  University  Medical  Center  
(CUMC)  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB).  As a principal  investigator  (PI) of a number  of funded  studies  for 
persons  living  with HIV, [CONTACT_194881]  has experience  securing  IRB approval  with this special  study  population.  
Risks  to Human  Subjects  
a. Human  Subjects  Involvement,  Characteristics,  and Design  
Characteristics  of Subject  Population:  
We anticipate  two categories  of research  subjects  in our study:  1) persons  living  with HIV/AIDS  and 2) experts  
in human  computer  interaction.  
Persons  living  with HIV/AIDS  in this study  will be recruited  from the HIV clinic  at CUMC/NewYork -Presby[CONTACT_507196][INVESTIGATOR_507165].  
There  is no more  than a minimal  risk associated  with any of the proposed  study  activities.  The study  
activities  meet  the general  definition  found  in Subpart  A (46.102 ) that the probability  and magnitude  of harm  
or discomfort  anticipated  in the research  are not greater  in and of themselves  than those  ordinarily  
encountered  in daily life or during  the performance  of routine  physical  or psychological  examinations  or tests.  
Following  IRB approval,  all study  participants  will provide  informed  consent  prior to their participation  in this 
study.  RISKS,  BENEFITS  & MONITORING  
b. Sources  of Materials  
Subjective  data (e.g.,  health  status,  quality  of life) and system  use will be obtained  from subjects  for the 
specific  research  purposes  of this study.  
b.1. Access  to Individually  Identifiable  Private  Information  about  Human  Subjects  
Access  to individually  identified  private  information  about  human  subjects  will be limited  to research  team  
members  who collect  and manage  the data,  the project  coordinator,  and the PI. De-identified  data will be 
accessible  by [CONTACT_194863].  
c. Potential  Risks  
The risks of participating  in this study  are few. Some  of the questions  on the questionnaires  may make  the 
subject  uncomfortable  or upset,  but the subject  is free to decline  to answer  any questions.  Participation  in 
research  can involve  loss of privacy.  Information  about  the subject  will be handled  as confidentially  as possible.  
All study  data will be maintained  in a completely  secure  and HIPAA  compliant  environment.  All CUMC  servers  
have  HIPAA  compliant  security.  All signed  consent  forms  and payment  receipts  used  in this study  will be kept in 
locked  files so only the investigators  will have  access  to the files. 
Adequacy  of Protection  against  Risks  
a. Recruitment  and Informed  Consent/Assent  
Recruitment  for participation  in the study  will occur  following  approval  by [CONTACT_315301]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_507166],  explain  the purpose  of the study,  answer  any questions,  and obtain  written  consent  from 
the participants.  
Patients  who agree  to participate  will sign a consent  form.  Recruitment  strategies  will be developed  in 
collaboration  with clinics  and community  centers.  Potential  risks and strategies  for managing  risks will be 
carefully  explained  as part of informed  consent  procedures.  All HIPAA  requirements  will be applied  to this 
study.  The study  plan,  advertisements  or recruitment  letters,  lay description  of the study  and all consent  forms  
will be submitted  to the IRB at CUMC  following  proposal  acceptance  and prior to study  initiation.  [CONTACT_194881]  
will be responsible  for obtaining  IRB approval  for this study.  
b. Protections  against  Risks  
This study  will be submitted  to the IRB of CUMC  before  starting  the study.  We will be careful  to ensure  that no 
coercion  occurs  during  the recruitment  periods  by [CONTACT_507197].  All participants  will be screened  to assess  for study  eligibility.  
Should  any physical  or psychological  manifestation  be exhibited  at any time during  the study,  [CONTACT_194881]  will 
consult  with her co-investigators  regarding  clinical  situations  as they arise.  If an urgent  clinical  situation  should  
arise,  [CONTACT_194881]  or designee  will access  an urgent  appointment  at the HIV clinic  at NewYork -Presby[CONTACT_507196][INVESTIGATOR_507167].  [CONTACT_194881]  will complete  an adverse  event  form and report  to the 
CUMC  IRB. If there  are any serious  adverse  events,  they will be reported  within  48-72 hours  to the 
National Institute of Health (NIH), AHRQ  and the CUMC  IRB. 
Patient  volunteers  will be told that they can withdraw  from study  at any point  without  any effect  on their 
healthcare  treatment  or status  as patients.  During  the usability  testing,  the participants  might  become  frustrated  
with the system;  however,  all efforts  will be made  to provide  a comfortable  environment.  Data  will be stored  in 
password -protected  computers  or double  locked  file cabinets.  All reported  data will be de-identified.  
Non-participation  will not affect  patients’  medical  care in any way. Each  group  of participants  will be made  
aware  of the nature  of the questions  prior to consenting  to participate,  but nonetheless  may become  upset  by 
[CONTACT_507198].  Participants  may opt to omit or not answer  any questions  at any time.  
There  are no benefits  to participants.  However,  if a previously  unrecognized  problem  is observed,  the 
participant  may access  appropriate  services  for evaluation  and treatment.  
Subjects  will be informed  of the potential  risks in the consent  form.  All subject  names  and medical  data will be 
kept confidential,  and all data will be identified  only by a code  number.  The list matching  names  and code  
numbers  will be kept locked  in the PI's office  and will be destroyed  at the end of the study  period.  
Loss  of confidentiality . All study  data will be stored  in password  protected  computers  or file cabinets  in locked  
offices.  All research  team  members  will pass  the protection  of human  subjects  and research  HIPAA  exams  and 
sign a protocol -specific  conflict  of interest.  
All procedures  have  been  designed  to protect  each  participant's  privacy  and allow  for anonymous  participation.  
All study  data will be maintained  in a completely  secure  and HIPAA  compliant  environment.  All CUMC  servers  
have  HIPAA  compliant  security.  
Potential  Benefits  of the Proposed  Research  to Human  Subjects  and Others  
This study  has not been  designed  for the direct  benefit  of its participants.  However,  there  are a number  of ways  
in which  they may derive  benefit.  The proposed  research  will inform  the delivery  of care for persons  living  with 
HIV. The knowledge  gained  will contribute  to the body  of knowledge  regarding  the use of health  information  
technology  for improving  the lives of persons  living  with HIV. 
Importance  of the Knowledge  to be Gained  
The research  has the potential  to improve  patient -centered  outcomes  for persons  living  with HIV. 
 
Data  Safety  and Monitoring  Plan  
The Data  and Safety  Monitoring  Plan for the proposed  study  incorporates  the Policies  on Data and Safety  
Monitoring  specified  by [CONTACT_507199].  Data  safety  and monitoring  will be the responsibility  of the PI. 
This trial does  not pose  more  than minimal  risk and therefore  requires  the establishment  of a Data  and Safety  
Monitoring  Board  (DSMB).  
 
The project  team  will meet  weekly  during  the project  period  and minutes  will be taken.  All adverse  events  will 
be reported  per the requirements  of the CUMC  IRB. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_507168] a timely  fashion:  
a. Unanticipated  problems  or unexpected  serious  adverse  events  that may be related  to the study  protocol  
(within  48-72 hours)  
b. IRB-approved  revisions  to the study  protocol  that indicate  a change  in risk for participants  
c. A summary  of recommendations  made  by [CONTACT_507200]  
d. Notice  of any actions  taken  by [CONTACT_507201] a small  group  of experts  from the Columbia  University  School  of Nursing  and 
Case Western School of Nursing  (at least  2 members  who are independent  of the protocol)  who will review  
data from this study.  The DSMB  will be comprised  of Drs. Larson  (Associate  Dean  for Research),  Arcia  
(Columbia  University  School  of Nursing  faculty)  and Webel (Case Western University School of Nursing faculty) 
who will review  the data every  six months  and meet  once  a year since  the study  procedures  are of minimal  
risk to study  participants.  During  their yearly  monitoring,  the DSMB  will assess  participant  recruitment,  
intervention  effects,  and potential  adverse  events.  The Board  will create  an action  plan if concerns  arise.  All 
adverse  events  will be reported  per the CUMC  IRB, the NIH and the AHRQ.  In addition,  an external  advisory  
board  for the project  will meet  in person  annually  at CUMC  and will review  progress  on enrollment,  the study  
outcomes,  and progress  on the project.  
1. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention.  HIV in the Unites  States:  At A Glance.  2015;   
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/overview/ataglance.html . Accessed  February  25, 2016.  
2. Remien  RH, Mellins  CA. Long -term psychosocial  challenges  for people  living  with HIV: let's not forget  
the individual  in our global  response  to the pandemic.  AIDS.  Oct 2007;[ADDRESS_654339]  5:S55 -63. 
3. Center  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC).  HIV Among  Latinos.  2014;   
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/racialEthnic/hispanicLatinos/facts/inde x.html . Accessed  June  11, 2014.  
4. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC).  HIV Among  African  Americans.  2014;   
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/risk/racialEthnic/aa/facts/ . 
5. Hall HI, Song  R, Rhodes  P, et al. Estimation  of HIV incidence  in the United  States.  JAMA  : the journal  
of the American  Medical  Association.  Aug 6 2008;300(5):[ADDRESS_654340].  Dec 1 2006;[ADDRESS_654341]  1:S149 -155. 
7. Cohen  MS, Chen  YQ, McCauley  M, et al. Prevention  of HIV-1 Infection  with Early  Antiretroviral  
Therapy.  New England  Journal  of Medicine.  2011/08/11  2011;365(6):493 -505. 
8. Attia S, Egger  M, Muller  M, Zwahlen  M, Low N. Sexual  transmission  of HIV according  to viral load and 
antiretroviral  therapy:  systematic  review  and meta -analysis.  AIDS.  Jul 17 2009;23(11):1397 -1404.  
9. Montaner  JS, Lima  VD, Barrios  R, et al. Association  of highly  active  antiretroviral  therapy  coverage,  
population  viral load,  and yearly  new HIV diagnoses  in British  Columbia,  Canada:  a population -based  
study.  Lancet.  Aug 14 2010;376(9740):[ADDRESS_654342], Santos  GM, et al. Decreases  in community  viral load are accompanied  by [CONTACT_507202].  PLoS  One.  2010;5(6):e11068.  
11. US Department  of Health  and Human  Services.  The National  HIV/AIDS  Strategy  Washington  DC: The 
White  House;2010.  
12. Hanna  DB, Hessol  NA, Golub  ET, et al. Increase  in single -tablet  regimen  use and associated  
improvements  in adherence -related  outcomes  in HIV-infected  women.  J Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr.  
Apr 15 2014;65(5):587 -596. 
13. Kumar  S, Nilsen  W, Pavel  M, Srivastava  M. Mobile  Health:  Revolutionizing  Healthcare  Through  Trans - 
disciplinary  Research.  Computer.  2013;46(1):28 -35. 
14. Estrin  D, Sim I. Health  care delivery.  Open  mHealth  architecture:  an engine  for health  care innovation.  
Science.  Nov 5 2010;330(6005):759 -760. 
15. Balas  EA, Austin  SM, Mitchell  JA, Ewigman  BG, Bopp  KD, Brown  GD. The clinical  value  of 
computerized  information  services.  A review  of 98 randomized  clinical  trials.  Arch Fam Med.  May 
1996;5(5):271 -278. 
16. Lewis  D. Computer -based  approaches  to patient  education:  a review  of the literature.  J Am Med Inform  
Assoc.  Jul-Aug 1999;6(4):272 -282. 
17. Wantland  DJ, Portillo  CJ, Holzemer  WL, Slaughter  R, McGhee  EM. The effectiveness  of Web-based   
vs. non-Web-based  interventions:  a meta -analysis  of behavioral  change  outcomes.  J Med Internet  Res. 
Nov 10 2004;6(4):e40.  
18. Nguyen  HQ, Carrieri -Kohlman  V, Rankin  SH, Slaughter  R, Stulbarg  MS. Supporting  cardiac  recovery  
through  eHealth  technology.  J Cardiovasc  Nurs.  May-Jun 2004;19(3):200 -208. 
19. Nguyen  HQ, Carrieri -Kohlman  V, Rankin  SH, Slaughter  R, Stulbarg  MS. Internet -based  patient  
education  and support  interventions:  a review  of evaluation  studies  and directions  for future  research.  
Comput  Biol Med.  Mar 2004;34(2):95 -112. 
20. Eysenbach  G, Powell  J, Englesakis  M, Rizo C, Stern  A. Health  related  virtual  communities  and 
electronic  support  groups:  systematic  review  of the effects  of online  peer to peer interactions.  BMJ.  May 
15 2004;328(7449):1166.  
21. Brennan  PF, Aronson  AR. Towards  linking  patients  and clinical  information:  detecting  UMLS  concepts  
in e-mail.  J Biomed  Inform.  Aug-Oct 2003;36(4 -5):334 -341. 
22. Brennan  PF, Caldwell  B, Moore  SM, Sreenath  N, Jones  J. Designing  HeartCare:  custom  computerized  
home  care for patients  recovering  from CABG  surgery.  Proc AMIA  Symp.  1998:[ADDRESS_654343] 1984;141(10):[ADDRESS_654344]  appropriate  use of medical  care.  Healthc  Forum  J. Jan- 
Feb 1996;39(1):[ADDRESS_654345]  of a self-care education  
program  on medical  visits.  JAMA  : the journal  of the American  Medical  Association.  Dec 2 
1983;250(21):[ADDRESS_654346]  better  
outcomes?  J Am Soc Nephrol.  Dec 1998;9([ADDRESS_654347]):S141 -144. 
27. Renders  CM, Valk GD, Griffin  SJ, Wagner  EH, Eijk Van JT, Assendelft  WJ. Interventions  to improve  the 
management  of diabetes  in primary  care,  outpatient,  and community  settings:  a systematic  review.  
Diabetes  Care.  Oct 2001;24(10):1821 -1833.  
28. Wagner  EH, Austin  BT, Von Korff  M. Improving  outcomes  in chronic  illness.  Manag  Care  Q. Spring  
1996;4(2):[ADDRESS_654348], Bronstone  A, Chesney  MA, Hecht  FM. Computer -assisted  self-interviewing  (CASI)  to 
improve  provider  assessment  of adherence  in routine  clinical  practice.  J Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr.   
Dec 15 2002;[ADDRESS_654349]  3:S107 -111. 
30. Johnson  MO, Chesney  MA, Goldstein  RB, et al. Positive  provider  interactions,  adherence  self-efficacy,  
and adherence  to antiretroviral  medications  among  HIV-infected  adults:  A mediation  model.  AIDS  
Patient  Care  STDS.  Apr 2006;20(4):258 -268. 
31. Lenhart  A, Hitlin  P, Madden  M. Teens  and Technology.  2005;   
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2005/Teens -and-Technology/06 -Communications -Tools -and-   
Teens/17 -Cell-phone -text-messaging -emerges -as-a-formidable -force .aspx?r=1 . Accessed  March  28, 
2010.  
32. Smith  A. US Smartphone  Use in 2015.  Washington,  DC: Pew Research  Center;2015.  
33. Duggan  M. Cell Phone  Activities  2013.  PewResearch  Internet  Project  2013;   
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/19/cell -phone -activities -2013/ . Accessed  August  26, 2014.  
34. Akter  S, Ray P. mHealth  - an Ultimate  Platform  to Serve  the Unserved.  Yearbook  of medical  
informatics.  2010:94 -100. 
35. Klasnja  P, Pratt W. Healthcare  in the pocket:  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_507169] -phone  health  interventions.  
J Biomed  Inform.  Feb 2012;45(1):[ADDRESS_654350]  RP, Beckwith  CG. Using  Mobile  Health  Technology  to Improve  
HIV Care  for Persons  Living  with HIV and Substance  Abuse.  AIDS  research  and treatment.   
2013;2013:194613.  
37. Horvath  T, Azman  H, Kennedy  GE, Rutherford  GW. Mobile  phone  text messaging  for promoting  
adherence  to antiretroviral  therapy  in patients  with HIV infection.  Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev. 
2012;3:CD009756.  
38. Nieuwlaat  R, Mistry  N, Haynes  R. Mobile  text messaging  and adherence  of patients  to medication  
prescriptions:  A txt a da keeps  da doctr  awa?  JAMA  Internal  Medicine.  2016.  
39. Parienti  J-J, Das-Douglas  M, Massari  V, et al. Not All Missed  Doses  Are the Same:  Sustained  NNRTI  
Treatment  Interruptions  Predict  HIV Rebound  at Low-to-Moderate  Adherence  Levels.  PLoS  ONE.  
2008;3(7):e2783.  
40. Bangsberg  DR, Deeks  SG. Spending  more  to save  more:  interventions  to promote  adherence.  Ann 
Intern  Med.  Jan 5 2010;152(1):54 -56; W-13. 
41. Haberer  JE, Kahane  J, Kigozi  I, et al. Real-time adherence  monitoring  for HIV antiretroviral  therapy.  
AIDS  Behav.  Dec 2010;14(6):1340 -1346.  
42. Mohr  DC, Montague  E, Stiles -Shields  C, et al. MedLink:  a mobile  intervention  to address  failure  points  
in the treatment  of depression  in general  medicine.  Paper  presented  at: Proceedings  of the 9th 
International  Conference  on Pervasive  Computing  Technologies  for Healthcare2015.  
43. de Vette  F, Tabak  M, Dekker -van Weering  M, Vollenbroek -Hutten  M. Engaging  Elderly  People  in 
Telemedicine  Through  Gamification.  JMIR  Serious  Games.  2015;3(2):e9.  
44. Huis in 't Veld RM, Kosterink  SM, Barbe  T, Lindegård  A, Marecek  T, Vollenbroek -Hutten  MM. Relation  
between  patient  satisfaction,  compliance  and the clinical  benefit  of a teletreatment  application  for 
chronic  pain.  Journal  of Telemedicine  and Telecare.  September  1, 2010  2010;16(6):322 -328. 
45. King D, Greaves  F, Exeter  C, Darzi  A. ‘Gamification’:  Influencing  health  behaviours  with games.  Journal  
of the Royal  Society  of Medicine.  2013;106(3):[ADDRESS_654351] a Fad?  2013;  http://mashable.com/2013/05/17/gamification -  
buzzword/ . Accessed  February  20, 2015.  
47. Ferguson  B. Games  for Wellness —Impacting  the Lives  of Employees  and the Profits  of Employers.  
Games  for Health  Journal.  2012/06/01  2012;1(3):[ADDRESS_654352], Pi[INVESTIGATOR_507170]  Y. Personalised  gaming:  a motivation  and overview  of literature.  Proceedings  
of The 8th Australasian  Conference  on Interactive  Entertainment:  Playing  the System;  2012;  Auckland,  
New Zealand.  
49. Muessig  KE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_121779], Legrand  S, Hightow -Weidman  LB. Mobile  phone  applications  for the care and 
prevention  of HIV and other  sexually  transmitted  diseases:  a review.  Journal  of medical  Internet  
research.  2013;15(1):e1.  
50. Ramanathan  N, Swendeman  D, Comulada  WS, Estrin  D, Rotheram -Borus  MJ. Identifying  preferences  
for mobile  health  applications  for self-monitoring  and self-management:  focus  group  findings  from HIV- 
positive  persons  and young  mothers.  Int J Med Inform.  Apr 2013;82(4):e38 -46. 
51. Holstad  M, Ofotokun  I, Farber  E, et al. There's  an App for That!  Promoting  Antiretroviral  Medication  
Adherence  in Rural  Georgia:  The Music  for Health  Project.  Journal  of Mobile  Technology  in Medicine.  
2013;2(4s):18 -18. 
52. Catalani  C, Philbrick  W, Fraser  H, Mechael  P, Israelski  DM. mHealth  for HIV Treatment  & Prevention:  A 
Systematic  Review  of the Literature.  Open  AIDS  J. 2013;7:17 -41. 
53. Free C, Phillips  G, Galli L, et al. The effectiveness  of mobile -health  technology -based  health  behaviour  
change  or disease  management  interventions  for health  care consumers:  a systematic  review.  PLoS  
Med.  2013;10(1):e1001362.  
54. IMS Institute  for Healthcare  Informatics.  Patient  Apps  for Improved  Healthcare:  From  Novelty  to 
Mainstream.  2013.  
55. Fogg  BJ. Persuasive  Technology:  Using  Computers  to Change  What  We Think  and Do. Science  \& 
Technology  Books;  2002.  
56. Schnall  R, Bakken  S, Carballo -Dieguez  A, Brown  Iii W, Iribarren  SJ. Usabilty  Evaluation  of a Prototype  
Mobile  App for Health  Management  for Persons  Living  with HIV NI2016;  2016;  Geneva,  Switzerland.  
57. Schnall  R, Bakken  S, Rojas  M, Travers  J, Carballo -Dieguez  A. mHealth  Technology  as a Persuasive  
Tool for Treatment,  Care  and Management  of Persons  Living  with HIV. AIDS  Behav.  Jun 2015;[ADDRESS_654353]  2:81-89. 
58. Schnall  R, Higgins  T, Brown  W, Carballo -Dieguez  A, Bakken  S. Trust,  Perceived  Risk,  Perceived  Ease  
of Use and Perceived  Usefulness  as Factors  Related  to mHealth  Technology  Use. Stud Health  Technol  
Inform.  2015;216:467 -471. 
59. Schnall  R, Mosley  JP, Iribarren  SJ, Bakken  S, Carballo -Dieguez  A, Brown  Iii W. Comparison  of a User- 
Centered  Design,  Self-Management  App to Existing  mHealth  Apps  for Persons  Living  With HIV. JMIR  
Mhealth  Uhealth.  Sep 18 2015;3(3):e91.  
60. Schnall  R, Rojas  M, Bakken  S, et al. A user-centered  model  for designing  consumer  mobile  health  
application  (apps).  J Biomed  Inform.  Feb [ADDRESS_654354], Bakken  S. Use of Design  Science  for Informing  the 
Development  of a Mobile  App for Persons  Living  with HIV. AMIA  Annu  Symp  Proc.  2014;2014:1037 - 
1045.  
62. Polson  PG, Lewis  C, Rieman  J, Wharton  C. Cognitive  walkthroughs:  a method  for theory -based  
evaluation  of user interfaces.  International  Journal  of Man-Machine  Studies.  1992/05/01/  
1992;36(5):741 -773. 
63. Georgsson  M, Kushniruk  A. Mediating  the Cognitive  Walkthrough  with Patient  Groups  to achieve  
Personalized  Health  in Chronic  Disease  Self-Management  System  Evaluation.  Stud Health  Technol  
Inform.  2016;224:146 -151. 
64. Jaspers  MW. A comparison  of usability  methods  for testing  interactive  health  technologies:  
methodological  aspects  and empi[INVESTIGATOR_215104].  Int J Med Inform.  May 2009;78(5):340 -353. 
65. TechSmith.  Morae  Usability  and Web Site Testing:  TechSmith  Corporation.  1995;   
http://www.techsmith .com/products/morae/default.asp . 
66. Faulkner  L. Beyond  the five-user assumption:  benefits  of increased  sample  sizes  in usability  testing.  
Behav  Res Methods  Instrum  Comput.  Aug 2003;35(3):379 -383. 
67. Chesney  MA, Ickovics  JR, Chambers  DB, et al. Self-reported  adherence  to antiretroviral  medications  
among  participants  in HIV clinical  trials:  the AACTG  adherence  instruments.  Patient  Care  Committee  & 
Adherence  Working  Group  of the Outcomes  Committee  of the Adult  AIDS  Clinical  Trials  Group  
(AACTG).  AIDS  Care.  Jun 2000;12(3):255 -266. 
68. Altman  DG, Bland  JM. Treatment  allocation  in controlled  trials:  why randomise?  BMJ.  
1999;318(7192):1209 -1209.  
69. Hedden  Sl, Woolsen  RF, Malcolm  RJ. Randomization  in substance  abuse  clinical  trials.  Substance  
Abuse  Treatment,  Prevention,  and Policy.  2006;1:6.  
70. Reynolds  WM. Development  of reliable  and valid short  forms  of the marlowe -crowne  social  desirability  
scale.  Journal  of Clinical  Psychology.  1982;38(1):119 -125. 
71. Weiss  BD, Mays  MZ, Martz  W, et al. Quick  Assessment  of Literacy  in Primary  Care:  The Newest  Vital 
Sign.  The Annals  of Family  Medicine.  November  1, 2005  2005;3(6):[ADDRESS_654355] of functional  health  literacy  in adults:  a new 
instrument  for measuring  patients'  literacy  skills.  J Gen Intern  Med.  Oct 1995;10(10):537 -541. 
73. Marc  LG, Wang  M-M, Testa  MA. Psychometric  evaluation  of the HIV symptom  distress  scale.  AIDS  
care.  03/12  2012;24(11):1432 -1441.  
74. Viney  R, Norman  R, Brazier  J, et al. An Australian  discrete  choice  experiment  to value  eq-5d health  
states.  Health  economics.  Jun 2014;23(6):729 -742. 
75. Webel  AR, Asher  A, Cuca  Y, et al. Measuring  HIV self-management  in women  living  with HIV/AIDS:  a 
psychometric  evaluation  study  of the HIV Self-management  Scale.  J Acquir  Immune  Defic  Syndr.  Jul 1 
2012;60(3):e72 -81. 
76. Hertogh  EM, Monninkhof  EM, Schouten  EG, Peeters  PHM,  Schuit  AJ. Validity  of the Modified  Baecke  
Questionnaire:  comparison  with energy  expenditure  according  to the doubly  labeled  water  method.  The 
International  Journal  of Behavioral  Nutrition  and Physical  Activity.  2008;5:30 -30. 
77. Kroenke  K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_91219], Williams  JBW.  The PHQ -9: Validity  of a Brief Depression  Severity  Measure.  
Journal  of General  Internal  Medicine.  2001;16(9):606 -613. 
78. Hirschfeld  RMA.  The Mood  Disorder  Questionnaire:  A Simple,  Patient -Rated  Screening  Instrument  for 
Bipolar  Disorder.  Primary  Care  Companion  to The Journal  of Clinical  Psychiatry.  2002;4(1):9 -11. 
79. Ising  HK, Veling  W, Loewy  RL, et al. The Validity  of the 16-Item Version  of the Prodromal  
Questionnaire  (PQ-16) to Screen  for Ultra  High Risk of Developi[INVESTIGATOR_507171]- 
Seeking  Population.  Schizophrenia  Bulletin.  2012;38(6):1288 -1296.  
80. Diagnostic  and statistical  manual  of mental  disorders  : DSM -5. Fifth edition.  Arlington,  VA : American  
Psychiatric  Publishing,  [2013]  ©2013;  2013.  
81. Mannheimer  SB, Mukherjee  R, Hirschhorn  LR, et al. The CASE  adherence  index:  A novel  method  for 
measuring  adherence  to antiretroviral  therapy.  AIDS  care.  2006;18(7):853 -861. 
82. Schnall  R, Cho H, Liu J. Health  Information  Technology  Usability  Evaluation  Scale  (Health -ITUES)  for 
Usability  Assessment  of Mobile  Health  Technology:  Validation  Study.  JMIR  Mhealth  Uhealth.  
2018;6(1):e4.  
83. Lewis  JR. Psychometric  Evaluation  of the PSSUQ  Using  Data  from Five Years  of Usability  Studies.  
International  Journal  of Human –Computer  Interaction.  2002/09/01  2002;14(3 -4):463 -488. 
84. Davis  FD. Perceived  usefulness,  perceived  ease  of use, and user acceptance  of information  
technology.  MIS quarterly.  1989:319 -340. 
85. Norman  CD, Skinner  HA. eHEALS:  The eHealth  Literacy  Scale.  Journal  of medical  Internet  research.  
2006;8(4):e27.  
86. Gwadz  M, Cleland  CM, Applegate  E, et al. Behavioral  intervention  improves  treatment  outcomes  
among  HIV-infected  individuals  who have  delayed,  declined,  or discontinued  antiretroviral  therapy:  a 
randomized  controlled  trial of a novel  intervention.  AIDS  Behav.  Oct 2015;19(10):1801 -1817.  
87. Haberer  JE, Robbins  GK, Ybarra  M, et al. Real-Time  Electronic  Adherence  Monitoring  is Feasible,  
Comparable  to Unannounced  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_15833],  and Acceptable.  AIDS  and Behavior.  February  01 
2012;16(2):375 -382. 
88. Hall J, Bond  C, Kinnear  M, McKinstry  B. Views  of patients  and professionals  about  electronic  
multicompartment  medication  devices:  a qualitative  study.  BMJ Open.  2016;6(10).  
89. Pellowski  JA, Kalichman  SC, White  D, Amaral  CM, Hoyt G, Kalichman  MO. Real-time medication  
adherence  monitoring  intervention:  Test of concept  in people  living  with HIV infection.  The Journal  of 
the Association  of Nurses  in AIDS  Care  : JANAC.  2014;25(6):646 -651. 
90. Guba  EG. Criteria  for assessing  the trustworthiness  of naturalistic  inquiries.  Educational  
Communication  and Technology  Journal.  1981;29(2):[ADDRESS_654356]  with context - 
specific  links to meet  the information  needs  of case  managers  for persons  living  with HIV. Int J Med 
Inform.  Aug 2012;81(8):[ADDRESS_654357]  
(CCR)  in HIV/AIDS  care.  Stud Health  Technol  Inform.  2009;146:[ADDRESS_654358] Clin Inform.  2012;3(4):356 -366. 
95. Wantland  D, Odlum  M, Schnall  R, et al. Barriers  and Facilitators  to Use of a Continuity  of Care  
Document  (CCD)  in HIV/AIDS  Care:  Persons  Living  With HIV/AIDS  (PLWH)  and Health  Care  Provider  
Perspectives.  AMIA  Annual  Symposium  Proceedings.  2009.  
96. Schnall  R, Clark  S, Olender  S, Sperling  JD. Providers'  Perceptions  Of The Factors  Influencing  The 
Implementation  Of The [LOCATION_001] State  Mandatory  HIV Testing  Law In Two Urban  Academic  
Emergency  Departments.  Academic  emergency  medicine  : official  journal  of the Society  for Academic  
Emergency  Medicine.  2013;20(3):279 -286. 
97. Odlum  M, Gordon  P, Camhi  E, Schnall  R, Teixeira  P, Bakken  S. Perceptions  of predisposing,  enabling,  
and reinforcing  factors  influencing  the use of a continuity  of care document  in special  needs  PLWH.  J 
Health  Care  Poor  Underserved.  Nov 2012;23(4):1457 -1476.  
98. Okoniewski  AE, Lee YJ, Rodriguez  M, Schnall  R, Low AF. Health  information  seeking  behaviors  of 
ethnically  diverse  adolescents.  J Immigr  Minor  Health.  Aug 2014;16(4):652 -660. 
99. Schnall  R, Cimino  JJ, Currie  LM, Bakken  S. Information  needs  of case  managers  caring  for persons  
living  with HIV. J Am Med Inform  Assoc.  May 01 2011;18(3):305 -308. 
100. Green  L, Kreuter  M, Deeds  S, Partridge  K. Health  education  planning:  A diagnostic  approach.  . 
Mountain  View,  CA: Mayfield;  1980.  
101. Kukafka  R, Johnson  SB, Linfante  A, Allegrante  JP. Grounding  a new information  technology  
implementation  framework  in behavioral  science:  a systematic  analysis  of the literature  on IT use. J 
Biomed  Inform.  Jun 2003;36(3):218 -227. 