 
 
Negative Pressure Wound 
Therapy for Prevention of 
Wound Infection after  Heart 
Surgery  
 
NCT# 02020018 
 
September 23, 2016 
 
Page 1 of 2 
IRB [ZIP_CODE].001 rev. 20090612 
 
IRB Protocol Template 
 
 
Title:   Negative pressure wound therapy for prevention of wound infection after 
heart surgery  
 
Protocol Version/Date: September 23, 2016 
IRB#:    16-007901 (Original 13-001832)    
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_96602], Sameh M.D. 
 
Abstract:     
Wound-related complications after median sternotomy are importa nt problems associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality, and lead to increase costs secondary to increase length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_96603].  Risk factors include : chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), smoking, diabetes, bilateral harvest of the int ernal thoracic artery, and, in particular, 
obesity have been identifi ed as major risk factors.  Breakdown of skin sutures facilitates entry of bacteria into 
the deeper layers and presents the initial step in the developm ent of the majority of wound infections after 
median sternotomy. This theory may explain why the risk of wound infection is part icularly high in obese 
patients, because the shear and tr action forces on skin sutures are high. Negative pressure wound therapy 
have been used in different speci alities to treat infected or o pen wounds, and has been proven to be of great 
benefit in multiple studies. Its use as a primary prevention ha s not been the routine after cardiac surgery in 
high risk patients. We hypothesiz e that negative pressure wound  dressing application on clean skin 
immediately after suturing in the operating room for 6-7 days w ill prevent skin br eakdown in the early periods 
after surgery and will decrease the incidence of wound related complications and infection. This may lead to 
a change in practice when dealing with high risk individuals. T he purpose of this study was to compare a 
new commercially available negative pressure wound therapy (NPW T) system (Prevena Incision 
Management System; KCI, San Antonio, Tex) and conventional ster ile dry wound dressing in a high-risk 
group (ie, obese patients), wit h special regard to wound compli cations and infections. 
Of note the “Prevena incision m anagement system” is an FDA-approved device with 510K clearance. 
 Schematic Design of the Study: There will be two groups: the firs t will include “Prospective n on-
randomized” part which will include patients who agreed to part icipate and have wound VAC applied to their 
incision postoperatively for 6-7 days (this information was col lected under  IRB 13-0 [ZIP_CODE]).  The second 
group will include “retrospective chart review” for standard wo und care after heart surgery with no wound 
VAC.        
Aims:   
Comparing the outcome of negativ e pressure wound therapy and co nventional sterile dressing for high risk 
patients undergoing open heart s urgery through median sternotom y  
 
Methods  
Description of Recruitment Methods:   
How will subjects be identified?   
Chart review and cardiac surgery database 
How will subjects b e contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]?     
Follow-up routine postoperative visits and chart reviews   
Recruitment Materials (if applicable):   Chart review  
Subject Population: 
  Number: [ADDRESS_106628] ive portion will include the remaining 650 patients.  
                           Gender:   
Male  450    
 
Page 2 of 2 
IRB [ZIP_CODE].001 rev. 20090612 
Female  500 
  Ages:  18  to 100 years 
Inclusion Criteria:     
 B M I > 3 0  
 Severe COPD 
 Steroid-dependent 
 Type-I diabetes (insulin-dependent) 
 Heart and lung transplant patients 
 Preoperative tracheostomy  
 Undergoing median sternotomy for open heart surgery between 20 13-2014 
Exclusion Criteria:  
 Thoracotomy 
 Type-II diabetes 
 B M I < 3 0  
Step-by-Step Schedule (include all pr ocedures, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] – attach a table or flow cha rt if there are multiple 
procedures or visits and indicate the window of number of days in which the participant may ret urn for follow-up visits):  
N/A 
Biospecimen (types, number, volume, processing, storage):   
N/A Plan for Dose Modification if Toxicity occurs (if applicable):    
N/A 
 Statistical Considerations 
 Endpoints   Primary:  wound infection   
  Secondary:  wound breakdown 
                                                    Length of s tay 
                                                    Re-operatio n 
                                                    Mortality d ue to mediastinitis  
 Protocol form, page 2 
 
Human Safety Aspects 
Risks :  Minimal risk study  
Individual Subject Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869] (if applicable):          
DSMB (if applicable):  
Members:    
      
Charter:    
       
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_96604] (if applicable):       
      
Questionnaires that ask about Depression (if applicable)  
Included in study?    Yes 
   No  ▀If “Yes”, state the plan  of management for subjects wit h possible 
depression: 
      
 
 
 