Page 1 of 6 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Title: A Phase 2, Randomized, Double -BLInd, Placebo -
Controlled Study of UBEnimex in  
Patients with Pulmonary ARTerial HYpertension (WHO Group 
1) (LIBERTY)  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
Document date: 10/11/202 0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 6 
 Protocol:  
Objectives  
The p rimary  objective for the study is to  obtain long -term safety and tolerability data for 
ubenimex in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).  
Methodology  
This proof -of-concept study was designed as a Phase 2, multicenter, randomized, 
double -blind,  placebo -controlled study comparing ubenimex (150 mg 3 times daily [TID]) 
with placebo in patients  with PAH who have a WHO/[LOCATION_001] Heart Association  
Functional Classification  (WHO/NYHA -FC) of II or III.  
Eligible patients must have been on a stable dosage of at least 1 approved PAH -
specific therapy  before Screening and were willing to remain on the same dosage 
throughout the study.  The treatment period is 24 weks , with 4 weeks  follow -up period . 
Approximately 60 patients were planned to be enrolled in the study. Patients were 
randomized 2:1 to  receive either ubenimex 150 mg TID (total daily dose of 450 mg) or 
matching placebo TID. Study  drug was administered orally for 24 weeks. Eligible 
patients were stratified by [CONTACT_17933] -specific  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17930] (1 versus 2 or more).  
The primary endpoint for clinical efficacy was change from baseline to Week 24 in 
pulmonary  vascular resistance (PVR), as assessed by [CONTACT_17934] (RHC). Secondary efficacy endpoints included 6 -
minute wa lk distance (6MWD) and  Borg dyspnea score assessments; changes in NT -
proBNP, WHO/NYHA -FC status, and disease  severity (clinical worsening); and QoL 
assessments using CAMPHOR.  
Steady -state PK characteristics of ubenimex were determined using plasma ubenimex  
concentrations  measured from serial blood samples at Week 4. Safety was evaluated 
by [CONTACT_12902] (AEs), clinical laboratory test results, physical  
examination s, electrocardiograms (ECGs), and vital sign measurements. In addition, an 
independent  data safety monitoring board (DSMB) consisting of 2 expert PAH clinicians 
and a biostatistician  conducted regular safety reviews.  
Patients who completed Stu dy EIG -UBX-001 treatment through to Week 24 were 
eligible to enroll in  an open -label extension study, EIG -UBX-002. Eligibility for EIG -UBX-
002 was assessed at the  Week 24 visit in EIG -UBX-001; if the patient was eligible and 
enrolled in EIG -UBX-002, treatm ent with open -label ubenimex was initiated. Patients 
who did not enter the open -label extension study  attended a follow -up visit.  
Inclusion Criteria  
A patient was included in this study if he or she met all of the following criteria:  
1. Male or female, 18 -75 years old.  
Page 3 of 6 
 2. Has a diagnosis of WHO Group 1 PAH.  
3. Right heart catheterization performed at Screening with results that are:  
a. Mean pulmonary arterial press ure ≥25 mmHg (at rest) and  
b. Pulmonary venous hypertension (measured as pulmonary capi[INVESTIGATOR_17931] (PCWP) ≤15 mmHg. If PCWP is not available, then mean left 
atrial pressure or left ventricular end -diastolic pressure ≤15 mmHg in the 
absence of left at rial obstruction. and  
c. Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) ≥300 dyn•s/cm5 (3.75 Wood units)  
4. Has WHO/NYHA -FC of II or III.  
5. Be on stable dose of at least one of the following PAH -specific therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: 
endothelin receptor antagonist, an agent acting on the nitri c oxide pathway 
(phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor or soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator), 
and/or a prostacyclin or prostacyclin analog.  
6. Has a 6 -minute walk distance that is ≥150 and ≤[ADDRESS_16848] a ventilation -perfusion scan that rules out thromboe mbolic disease.  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Exclusions  Related to Cardiovascular Disease  
1. History of uncontrolled hyperten sion 
2. Persistent hypotension at Screening.  
3. Evidence or history of left -sided heart disease and/or clinically significant cardiac 
disease in which pulmonary hypertension is more likely WHO Group 2.  
4. Acute decompensated heart failure within 1 month of Screenin g. 
5. Recent initiation (<8 weeks from Screening) or planned initiation of 
cardiopulmonary rehabilitation exercise program.  
• Exclusions Related to Pulmonary Disease  
6. Newly diagnosed with PAH and not on PAH -specific therapy.  
7. Pulmonary hypertension due to:  
a. Uncorr ected congenital systemic -to-pulmonary shunt.  
b. Pulmonary veno -occlusive disease and/or pulmonary capi[INVESTIGATOR_17932]  
c. Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn  
Page [ADDRESS_16849] and/or parenchy mal lung disease.  
9. Chronic infection related to tuberculosis or fungal or mycobacterial disease.  
• Exclusions Based on Other Medical Conditions  
10. Chronic infections including, but not limited to tuberculosis (TB), hepatitis B virus 
(HBV) or hepatitis C virus (H CV). 
11. History of portal hypertension or chronic liver disease, including positive serology 
for infection with HCV and/or HBV.  
12. Evidence of active infection requiring intravenous or oral antibiotics within 4 
weeks of Screening.  
13. Body mass index ≥35.[ADDRESS_16850] 5 years, except nonmelanoma skin cancer 
and ce rvical carcinoma in situ treated with curative intent.  
16. Neuropsychiatric disorders/symptoms or psychological conditions.  
17. Pregnancy or breast -feeding  
18. Prior treatment with B cell or lymphocyte -depleting agents (eg, rituximab, 
Campath)  
• Exclusions Based on Conc omitant Medication Use  
19. Concurrent regular use of another leukotriene pathway inhibitor, including over -
the-counter medications or herbal remedies.  
• Exclusions Based on Laboratory Values  
20. Significant/chronic renal insufficiency.  
21. Transaminases (alanine transam inase, aspartate transaminase) levels >3 × 
upper limit of normal (ULN) and/or bilirubin level >2 × ULN.  
22. Absolute neutrophil count <1500 mm3.  
23. Hemoglobin concentration <9 g/dL at Screening.  
24. Hepatic dysfunction as defined by [CONTACT_2751] -Pugh Class B or C  
Dose and Mode of Administration  
150 mg  administered orally three times a day  (at 8 ± 2 h intervals), with or without food.  
Duration of Treatment  
Page 5 of 6 
 Duration of treatment was 24 weeks. Total study participation lasted up to 32 weeks (4 
weeks for  screening, 24 weeks for treatment, and 4 weeks for follow -up). 
Criteria for Evaluation  
All endpoints were change s from baseline to Week 24, and  comparisons were made 
with placebo.  Primary efficacy endpoint  is the c hange in PVR.  Secondary efficacy 
endpoints included 6 -minute walk distance (6MWD) and Borg dyspne a score 
assessments; changes in NT -proBNP, WHO/NYHA -FC status, and disease severity 
(clinical worsening); and QoL assessments using CAMPHOR.  
Safety Endpoints  included t reatment -emergent (TE) AEs: TEAEs, TE serious adverse 
events (SAEs), treatment  related  TEAEs, treatment -related TE SAEs and deaths, 
TEAEs leading to early  discontinuat ion of study treatment, TEAEs leading to dose 
reduction, changes in vital  signs, clinical laboratory findings, ECGs.  
 
Statistical Methods  
Efficacy Analyses  
The analyses of the primary and secondary endpoints were performed using the 
following two  stratif ication factors as covariates: (1) the number of PAH therapi[INVESTIGATOR_17930] (1 vs 2 or more) and  (2) etiology: PAH associated with connective tissue 
disease [CTD] vs PAH not associated with CTD.  All tests were conducted at the 0.05 
level of significance.  
Primary endpoint —The change from Baseline to Week [ADDRESS_16851] for  depa rtures from normality, the data were log -
transformed before analysis (and hence the endpoint was  the ratio change from 
baseline). An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used with treatment, the  
stratification factors, and baseline PVR in the model. The adj usted placebo -adjusted 
treatment effect  with its 95% confidence interval and p -value will be  presented.  
Secondary endpoints —Change in exercise capacity as determined by [CONTACT_941] 6 MWD —
because of departure from  normality, analyzed nonparametrically using rank -based 
ANCOVA.  Change in Borg dyspnea score  is analyzed using ANCOVA with treatment, 
the stratification factors, baseline Borg dyspnea score, and baseline PVR in the model.  
Chan ge in WHO/NYHA Functional Classification —analyzed using logistic regression  
with treatment, the stratification factors, baseline WHO/NYHA -FC, and baseline PVR in  
the model.  Time to clinical worsening —analyzed by [CONTACT_17935]. Patients not 
experiencing  clinical worsening were censored on their last day of treatment. The model 
included  treatment, the stratification factors, and baseline PVR.  Results for each of the 
3 subscales of the CAMPHOR  questionnaire were analyzed using A NCOVA with 
treatment, the stratification factors,  the respective scale baseline, and baseline PVR in 
Page 6 of 6 
 the model.  Change in disease biomarkers BNP/NT -proBNP  is analyzed using ANCOVA 
with treatment, the stratification factors, baseline BNP/NT -proBNP, and baseline PVR in 
the model.  
Safety Analyses  
AEs, deaths, concomitant medications, vital signs, electrocardiogram data, and 
laboratory data  will be  listed for each patient and summar ized by [CONTACT_1570]. 
Adverse events were coded  using MedDRA version 18.1.  