The Role of Vasopressin in the Social Deficits of Autism  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
January 11, [ADDRESS_1184491] -Squares General Linear  
Models (LS -GLMs) in JMP Pro 13 and SAS 9.4 for Windows (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).  
Efficacy analyses will be guided by [CONTACT_38074] -study aims which included: 1) testing for treatment 
main effects on the primary and secondary outcome measures; and 2) testing whether 
pretreatment blood -based biological measures predicted who benefited from tre atment. To 
minimize the risk of false discovery, we will first identify a robust model using our primary 
outcome measure (i.e., change in the SRS -2 T-Score), and then apply that model to all other 
outcomes. P<0.[ADDRESS_1184492]-hoc tests will be Bonferroni corrected to maintain a family level of P<0.05 (as detailed 
below).  
 
The initial model  will included sex, ethnicity, weight, IQ, and bl ood collection time as blocking 
(control) factors. Pretreatment SRS -2 T-Score will be  included as a blocking factor to account for 
the range of possible improvement, and thus reduce possible floor or ceiling effects. Finally, we  
will include  treatment condition (i.e., AVP or Placebo) to test our ma in hypot hesis, and 
pretreatment blood AVP concentration and pretreatment blood neurop eptide receptor gene 
expression (expressed as an AVPR1A -to-OXTR ratio to account for w ithin-individual 
differences in expression) as measures of endogenous AVP function that might  predict treatment 
efficacy. As we administered two different AVP doses according to age, d ose will be nested 
within treatment condition to explicitly test for an overall effect of AVP treatment,  and 
secondarily to control for any dose -related effects. We will also test  for treatment 
conditi on×biological measure and dose×biological measure interactions, as pretreatment 
biological  measures should generally only predict treatment outcome in the drug -treated 
individuals. Finally, beca use the SRS is a parent re ported measure, we will collect  SRS scores at 
two pretreatm ent time points to identify the reliability of an individual participant’s scores. This 
will enable  us to use Weighted Least -Squares General Linear Model (WLS -GLM) analyses 
whenever parent -reported  measures are assessed. WLS ideally uses the inverse of the variance of  
a mean estimate as the weight , which we will be able to obtain directly from our two 
pretreatment SRS scores.  
  
Non-significant int eractions will be removed in order to avoid confounds  of marginality for the 
main effects, and to di stinguish blocking factors . We will tested dose ne sted within treatment 
condition and pretreatment blood AVP concentration as main effects, and the interaction of 
pretreatment blood AVP concentration with dose -nested -within -treatment condition. Thus, the 
model will contain the biologically and experimenta lly essential variables, regardl ess of 
significance. We will further test  the robustness of this model by [CONTACT_851909] d or excluded and if WLS -GLM is  not 
employed. Effect sizes will be  calculated as ηp2 (partial eta -squared), as appropriate for co mplex 
linear models. Equivalent Cohen’s d will be  provided for main effects where justifiable. The 
same model will be applied to all secondary outcome measures with the exception that the 
basel ine, pretreatment behavioral measure will be  replaced to match the outcome variable. For 
child performance measures, LS-GLM, not WLS -GLM, will be used . For CGI -I, in which there 
is no baseline pretreatment  measure, the model will  not include a baseline con trol. Effect sizes 
for these secondary outcome  
measures will  likewise be calculated as ηp2.  
 
To minimize the risk of fal se discovery from multiplicity , we will first test  the total score  
for each instrumen t, and then only test  subscales if the total scores  are significant. Subscales  
will be  Bonferroni -corrected for multiple comparisons. The ass umptions of WLS -GLM 
(linearity, homogeneity of varianc e, and normality of error) will be confirmed post-hoc and 
suitable  transformations will be applied as needed . Post-hoc tests will be  performed as planned 
contrasts and further Bonferroni -corrected for multiple comparisons. We will test  
our first aim by [CONTACT_851910].  
 
Fisher ’s exact Test will be  used to test for differences between treatment conditions for  
participant characteristics and concomitant medications. χ2 Likelihood Ratio will be  used to test  
whether parents are  able to accurately ascertain the treatment condition to w hich their child has 
been  randomized. Pears on’s correlation coefficient will be  used to test the relationship between  
change from baseline in parent -reported SRS T-Score and clinician evaluated CGI -I Score in 
AVP  treated participants. One -way LS -GLMs will be used to test the c hange from baseline 
between the AVP and Placebo treatment groups following [ADDRESS_1184493] -treatment b ottle weights between 
treatment conditions. Suitab le transf ormations will be  applied as needed.  