Page 1 of 9 
 Living Well Together Randomized Controlled Trial –  General Protocol  
Updated January 1, [ADDRESS_184523] is the result of well -established community -based partnership in a medium -sized city 
(population 600,000) that had over three years working together prior to applying for the RCT’s funding, 
with multiple involved agencies collaborating on other projects for even more years. The partnership 
included representatives from a university, a community health center, a religious organization 
providing supplies to food pantries, a non -profit focused on financial security for families , university 
extension services , and physical activity programing for youth and adults. Prior to the R CT, this group 
designed, obtained funding for, and implemented the pi[INVESTIGATOR_158925] R CT is based. A steering 
committee, called the Living Well Together Partnership, comprised of representatives from all partner 
organizations , meets quarterly and corresponds by [CONTACT_158930].  
2. RCT 
This RCT involves  two arms, Education Only group (control) and the Health Coach group 
(intervention). Participants in the  Education Only group re ceive  educational materials on health family 
diet and activity (We Can booklets) and  quarterly new sletters . In addition,  they receive resource 
screen ings at baseline and [ADDRESS_184524]’s 
screening questionnaire , and referrals to appropriate basic -needs resources.  
Those in the Health Coach group  received guidance from an assigned Health  Coach , in which up to 5 
in-person visits and 4 phone visits were completed within a 12 -month period. MI  was used during these 
sessions to help set goals based on the family’s health needs and priorities. The Health Coach group 
participants received the same res ource screening and newsletters  as the Education Only group, but 
they also received additional resourc es to help their family's needs based on their goals made with the 
Health Coach.  
Primary outcomes based o n the 12 -month intervention are separated by [CONTACT_158931] x Adult and Index  
Child. For the Index Adult the primary outcome s are  changes  from baseline to 12 -months in 1) BMI 
(kg/m2), 2) the average minutes of moderate to vigorous activity , and 3) average h ours of sedentary 
time per day . For the Index  Child the pri mary outcomes are change from baseline to 12 -month s on 
sedentary time and minutes of moderate to vigoro us activity per day  and score on the Family Nutrition 
and Physical Activity tool (FNPA). In comparison to the Education Only group, we hypothesize d that at 6, 
12, and 18 months, families participating in the Health Coach group will demonstrate 1) a reduction in 
BMI for Index  Adults, 2) an increase in minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity and a decrease 
in sedentary time for both Index Adults an d Index  Children as measured by [CONTACT_62867], and 3) a 
reduction in the number of obesity risk behaviors and an increase in the number of obesity prevention 
behaviors among Index  Children as measured by [CONTACT_158932].  
 
3. Participants  
3.1. Inclusion and exclu sion criteria 
Index  Adult and Index  Child dyads were enrolled in the RCT if they met the following inclusion 
criteria: 1) Index  Adult was 18 years or older; 2) Index  Adult was not pregnant at  the time of enrollment; 
3) Index  Adult was a pare nt or guardian of a child who was  between the ages of 6 and 12 years old; 4) 
Page 2 of 9 
 Index  Child was living with parent/guardian at least 5 out of the 7 days on average (80% of the time); 5) 
Index  Adult must have lived within  the county or the Ind ex Child must attend the local public schools  6) 
Index  Adult must have  had a BMI of 30 or above (clinically obese); 7) Index Adult must  have  been able to 
converse in English or Spanish; 8) Index Adult and Index Child could not have been on specific 
medicat ions that are associated with weight gain or loss or have certain medical conditions that would 
make it difficult for them to participate (exceptions were made for certain medications if participants ’ 
weight had been stable on that medication of more than 3 months) ; and 9) Index Adult must not have  
had significant physical limitations to exercise (must be able to at least walk the equivalent of one city 
block with an assistive device).  
Other individuals in the family were involved with the intervention, su ch as the Primary Food 
Preparers  (PFPs) and other children in the household ages 2 to 18 (Non -Index Children) . These 
individuals  were not subject to any inclusion/exclusion criteria; however, it was preferred they have the 
ability to converse in English or Spanish. There was no inclusion or exclusion criteria for household 
income. Individuals who previously participated in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_48085] t study and individuals from the same 
household were not eligible to participate. Families t hat did not meet these criteria  were not enrolled 
but encouraged to contact [CONTACT_158933].    
4. Recruitment/randomization sch eme, phone screening  
Recruitment for the RCT occurred for 28 months  on a rolling basis.  To accommodate the varied 
background of participants, intervention materials were  provided in English and Spanish  (our target 
population ). Though eligibility criteria d id not include income recruitment sites were cho sen to primarily 
target low- income families.  
The two primary, and most successful, recruitment sites for enrolled participants were 
unemployment  seminars  and food pantries , both brick -and-mortar and mobile l ocations . At these 
seminars  a clip board was circulated through the audience and interested persons could leave their 
name [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_158934] a screening via phone at a later time. Research staff 
were  also available after the seminars to answer any questions. At food pantry sites, intervention staff 
recruited in -person for four days a month, with a rotating schedule between the four largest pan tries  
within the pantry network . Interested individuals were asked to fill out and return a “Consent to 
Contact” form to intervention staff at the recruitment tables. A scale was provided in a private area for 
interested individuals to weigh themselves to see about preliminary eligibility  if their weight was 
unknown.  
Similar recruitment strategies were completed at community or school events  which catered to 
large numbers of low -income families . Monday Mail Folders, or similar systems, within elementary 
schools allowed flyers to be distributed to children within the district , who attend schools with high 
number s of free and reduced lunch recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] . At the  non-profit center focused on financial security for 
families , the Community Resource Specialist was housed and provided on -site recruit  of participants 
seeking the c enter’s assistance. All  organizations at the c enter had intervention brochures and referred 
clients to the Community Resource Specialist , which may have  contributed  to some of the participants 
actively seeki ng participation in  the study . Promotional materials were available in the waiting areas at  
other community partner locations. Healthcare providers (e.g., physicians, physician assistants, nurses 
or outreach workers) were used to reach eligible adult patients  at the communit y health center.   They 
provided these adults with intervention information and obtained contact [CONTACT_158935]. Posters and brochures in the clinic  
encourage d adults with children to contact [CONTACT_158936]. This did not prove to be a 
Page 3 of 9 
 primary recruitment strategy, which was attributed to lack of communication between clinicians and 
intervention staff and priorities within the clinic for patient  care  over research .  
Individuals that were recruited or who filled out a “Consent to Contact” form were contact[CONTACT_158937] a phone eligibility screening. The phone screener went through the list 
of eligibility questions with the  potential participant, and individuals were excluded if not meeting study 
criteria. Individuals who met study criteria provided contact [CONTACT_158938], and the Index Child for the fam ily was chosen via a computer randomizati on program from all 
eligible 6 to 12 -year -old children within the household, if there were multiple children within this  age 
range. The family was scheduled to meet with a Data Collector at their home or a participant -chosen 
community location (i.e. a private conference room at the library or at the community health center ). 
  
5. Data collection visits  
Data Collectors  reviewed informed consent documents and obtained written consent of the Index 
Adult  for themsel f and their child  and written assent of the Index Child at the time of the baseline 
interview. There were two Index Child assent forms used based upon the age of the child (ages 6 -9 and 
ages 10 -12) to align with standard reading comprehension levels. When the family includ ed a Primary 
Food Preparer different than the Index Adult another written consent was obtained. All Non -Index 
Children (children ages 2 to 18 that resided within the household) were listed on another consent form 
in which the Index Adult could consent to them having limited participation in the study.  
Data is collected on primary and secondary outcome measures at  baseline, 6 -month, 12 -months, 
and 18 -months. Data collection include s the Index  Adult, the Primary Food Preparer (if different than 
the Index  Adult), and the Index  Child plus limited data on other Non -Index  Children. Data Collectors 
collect  height, weight , waist circumference, blood pressure measures, and questionnaire data on the 
Index  Adults and the Primary Food Preparer. The Index  Adults also answer questionnaires regarding the 
Index  Child. Height and weight measures are  collected for the Index  Child, and the same measures are  
taken for the Non -Index  Children if they wished to participate. At baseline and 12 -month visits, the 
Index  Adult and the Index  Child are fitted with accelerometers to measure physical activity. 7 to 10 days  
later the Data Collector  calls  the Index  Adult to complete a one- week recall for themselves regarding 
physical activity, and the Index  Child also completes  a one -week recall if they a re between the ages of 
10-12. The accelerometers are  then returned for data processing via mail o r pi[INVESTIGATOR_158926] -person by [CONTACT_158939]. If there is  not a minimum of 5 days of wear -time to analyze, the Index  Adult and/or the 
Index  Child may be asked to wear the accelerometers for additional days to make up for the lost days.  
6. Community Resource Mobilization, Randomization  
Prior to randomization into intervention or control arms, the Community Resource Specialist met 
with enrolled families in -person or by [CONTACT_158940] 
(appendix - screener documenta tion form) and referred families to community resources to meet 
identified needs. These needs would otherwise present barriers to overall health. The Community 
Resource Specialist also assisted the Health Coaches in mobilizing resources for families. This study staff 
member  was a community college employee who perform ed a similar function for the college and the 
resource center for w orking families. Health coaches follow ed-up with families to gauge resource 
utilization and encourage appropriate use, and als o connect ed them  to specific resources linked to their 
goal attainment. Direct contact [CONTACT_158941]. Types of resources include d education, diet, exercise, and financial and other 
support.  
Page 4 of 9 
 Families were stratified (by [CONTACT_158942]- identified race/ethnicity of the Index Adult) and 
randomized to the Health Coach group or the Education Only group in a 1:[ADDRESS_184525] ors were blinded to group assignment.  
 
7. Study Conditions  
7.1. Intervention (Health Coach group)  
Participants  in the intervention group were assigned  a Health Coach by [CONTACT_158943] (English or Spanish) and Health Coach workload . The initial 
Health Coach visit was scheduled by [CONTACT_158944], allowing 
active engag ement to continue throughout all portions of the study. The Health Coach guided families 
through a process to choose realistic meaningful goals for change  using motivational interviewing and  
utilizing SMART framework  for making goals . First, the coach and the family explore d current behaviors, 
values, ambivalence toward change, and perceptions of family members ’ ability to change. Then, they 
discuss ed improvements the family want ed to make in diet, physical activity  or other related items (such 
as sleep) , motivations for change, and goals. Each family member w as given  a chance to suggest goals, 
and the Health Coach helped them set realistic goals. The family chose one or two goals and specific 
actions to achieve those goals. Family members were  asked to gauge how important the stated goals 
were  and how achievable the actions seem. If family members perceive d the goals or actions to be 
unimportant or unachievable, the goals may have been revised until the majority agree d or the parents 
made  a final decision. F amily members sign ed an action plan listing the goal and steps to achieve it. For 
families who had  difficulty identifying goals, the Health Coach assist ed them in developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a menu of 
options to consider  or their goal could be to continue the discussion wi th family about current 
behaviors, values and thoughts regarding change.  As the family achieve d the  initial goals, the Health 
Coach encouraged them to set additional goals, including both diet and physical activity. Families were 
encouraged to share their goals with health care providers, family, and friends to gain support. The 
Health Coach and the family discuss ed resources needed to achieve these goals (e.g. equipment, 
information), and this information guided resource referrals.  
Families were scheduled to meet with their Health Coach in their home or a participant -chosen 
community location  to reduce barriers  to participation. They met  at baseline, 1 ½, 3, 6, 9 , and 12 months 
for Health Coach sessions to help set lifestyle  goals. Home visits allowed for m ore involvement from all 
family members within the household, as encouraged by [CONTACT_158945]. The Health Coach follow ed 
up by [CONTACT_1555] 2 weeks , 4 ½, 7 ½ and 10 ½ months and as needed over the 12 -month intervention. 
These follow- ups allowed discussion  of successes or difficulties, problem -solving, help with resource 
needs, and provided motivational support . Families were encouraged to engage as many family 
members as possible on the follow -up phone calls by [CONTACT_158946]. 
All Health Coach visits were based on MI. MI is a behavioral counseling approach designed to help 
people identify motivations for change, establish goals relevant to their values and motivations, and 
increase self- efficacy for achieving those goals. MI  addresses the challenge  of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_158927]’s specific challenges and environment. MI, which is based on social- cognitive 
theory (self -efficacy), self- determination theory and the empowerment paradigm, uses four techniques 
to support change: 1) expression of empathy, 2) development of a discrepancy (enhance participant 
Page 5 of 9 
 awareness of inconsistencies between behavior and values), 3) rolling with resistance (acknowledging 
ambivalence as part of the change process), and 4) supporting client self- effic acy (expression of the 
possibility of participant change and reinforcement of participant’s ability to choose). Health Coaches 
were trained on MI -based communication skills specific to goal setting and actions related to  increasing  
fruit and vegetable cons umption, reducing sugar -sweetened beverage consumption, increasing sleep, 
reducing stress, and reducing screen time  for promoting healthy weights in adults and children. To 
maintain fidelity, all Health Coach sessions were taped unless the Index Adult expl icitly stated they did 
not wish for the sessions to be taped. From the taped sessions, 20% of  sessions were scored  using the 
OnePass coding system . For further validity, 20% of those initially scored by [CONTACT_158947] a seco nd reviewer.  
Following initial goal setting through MI , the Health Coach , with assistance from the Community 
Resource Specialist , linked participants to community resources to meet needs that would otherwise 
present barriers to goal attainment. We utilized  our Community Partners to break these barriers. Two 
examples of this were the fresh food boxes and gym memberships provided to the Health Coach group. 
If families chose “Eating More Fruits and Vegetables” as their goal or expressed interest in needing more 
healthy food for their families, we provided fresh and canned fruits and vegetables during the first 6 
months (2 servings/person/day) of the intervention. These food boxes were provided  through a local 
food pantry network  and their volunteers . Informatio n regarding sustainable sources of healthy foods 
through the pantry network and its affiliates was also distributed to participants. Families that chose 
“Physical Activity” are  linked to goal- appropriate resources, such as the low or no cost programs offer ed 
by [CONTACT_158948] a 4 -month free membership to partner  YMCA ’s for all members of the 
household. Health Coaches followed -up with families to gauge resource utilization and encourage 
appropriate use of these services.  In addition to the specified  resources, the Health Coach group also 
received identical newsletters as the Education Only group.  
7.1. Control (Education Only group)  
Participants in the Education Only group received the “We Can” family nutrition and activity 
booklets and quarterly 4 -page ne wsletters containing children’s games,  physical activity ideas,  healthy 
recipes, and information on community events. Each newsletter also included a raffle in which 
participants could fill out an  updated contact [CONTACT_158949] t he study staff for 
a chance to win a gift card to a local retail store. The newsletters were distributed in both English and 
Spanish based on the family’s language preference. The Education Only group also received an initial 
resource screen and follow -up phone call using the Community Resource Specialist’s screening 
questionnaire (APPENDIX #) and referrals to appropriate basic -needs resources.  This was repeated at [ADDRESS_184526] 30 minutes after arrival. Measurements were taken in a rotating order, separating them with 
another sort of measurement (i.e. taking weight measurement #1, then height measurement #1, then 
weight measurement #2, etc.) to limit repeated mistakes. A mistake is more likely to be caught if 
Page 6 of 9 
 measurements are separated by [CONTACT_158950]. Our general poli cy was that results 
were not be said out loud or given to the participants unless they specifically ask for them. If a 
participant asked for a result, it was be provided to them in values or units that are understandable (i.e., 
converting kilograms to poun ds). Accelerometer data was collected only at baseline and [ADDRESS_184527] stadiometer. All 
hair accessories were removed, and hair was taken o ut from buns/braids/corn rolls/etc. (or compressed 
if not possible and noted). Participants stood in bare feet or socks with their heels of both feet together. 
The position of the heels, the buttocks, shoulder blades, and the back of the head contact[CONTACT_158951] (Figure?). Depending on the overall body conformation of the individual, all points may not  
have  touch ed.  In such a case, the participant’s trunk was vertical above the hip , and the arms and 
shoulders were  relaxed. Their head was  posit ioned in the Frankfurt horizontal plane.  The head is in the 
Frankfurt horizontal plane when the line from the ear canal to the lower border of the orbit of the eye is 
parallel to the floor and perpendicular to the vertical backboard. The participant was asked to take a 
deep breath and hold it, and then the headboard firmly on top of the head with sufficient pressure to 
compress the hair. The measurement was recorded to the last completed 0.[ADDRESS_184528] 
clothes and ha d removed any heavy clothing and accessories and shoes. After making sure the 
participant was centered on the scale, standing still, with both feet fully on the scale, the participant’s 
weight was recorded to the last completed 0.[ADDRESS_184529] 
circumference was measured using a Gulick tape measure so it would ensure the same amount of 
tension is placed on the tape measure each time a measurement is taken. Data Collectors began by 
[CONTACT_158952] t on one side of the participant’s hip and drew a horizontal line just above the 
uppermost border of the right ilium with a water -soluble  marker and then crossed the line to indicate 
the midaxillary line of the body.  These markings were repeated on the ot her side of the participant’s 
body.  The participant was to be standing with a relaxed, natural posture with feet close together and 
shoulders slightly rounded. The Data Collector, standing on the participant’s side, placed the measuring 
tape around the tr unk in a horizontal plane at the level marked on the right side of the trunk. The tape 
contact[CONTACT_158953], and the 
participant’s waist circumference to the last completed 0.1 cm was recorded.  
Blood pressure is the only measurement that need ed to be taken once, unless a concerning result 
was obtained during this measurement.  Blood pressure was measured with either an Omron Automatic 
Page 7 of 9 
 Blood Pressure Monitor (if the participant has an arm  circumference between 9 and 17 inches) or a Life 
Source Extra Large Arm Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor (if the participant has an arm circumference 
between 16.5 and 23.5 inches). Before taking the blood pressure measurement, the Data Collector 
waited [ADDRESS_184530] of the Index  Adult 
and Index  Child during baseline and 12 -month data collection visits.  The participants were instructed to 
wear the accelerometers continuously for one week. The accelerometer s are waterproof and thus did 
not need to be removed for any reason. After the participants wore the monitors for 7 days, they both 
(if the Index  Child is between the ages of 10 and 12 years) completed a questionnaire (Global Physical 
Activity Q uestionnaire for the Index  Adult and the Physical Activity Questionnaire for Children for the 
Index  Child) via interview with the Data Collector over the phone.  These questionnaires assessed level 
of physical activity during the same time the monitor is w orn, so that the accelerometer data can be 
compared to the self -reported data.  
8.3. Questionnaire measurements  
Index  Adul ts are assessed on dietary intake and physical activity via questionnaires. For dietary 
intake,  validated food -frequency questions  are administered  to monitor intake of fruits, vegetables, and 
fats (NHIS 2000 ), sweetened drinks (NHIS 2005), and fast food (EAT study). Physical activity 
questionnaires  include the Global Physical Activity Questionnaire  (GPAQ), which provide  contextual data 
to complement accelerometer data and provide information as to where activity is taking place (i.e., 
domains). The GPAQ will be calibrated with the accelerometer to improve data accuracy  in a one -week 
post -data collec tion phone visit.  Other data is collected, including demographic information, income and 
food insecurity information, medication usage and dose changes, health history information, substance 
use, depression screen,  and related questions.  
Index Child ren are  assessed on dietary intake, physical activity, and screen time. These 
questionnaires are given to the Index Adults, and they answer the questions as proxy for the children. 
The Family Nutrition and Physical Activity tool (FNPA)  is used, which is a  child e nvironmental measure 
developed in partnership with the American Dietetic Association to characterize behaviors related to 
childhood obesity . Validation shows a [ADDRESS_184531] food and TV, and increasing 
family meals, family physical activity, and fruits and vegetables. The scale allows us to compare families 
who choose different goals and resources.  Additional validated parent questionnaire s were used to 
Page 8 of 9 
 assess child screen time , NCI quantitative FV screener  and other dietary measures  including sugar -
sweetened beverages . 
The Primary Food P repa rer (PFP)  of the household (who may be the Index Adult or a different 
household member) completes a validated survey on the availability of fru its and vegetables in the 
house and  a questionnaire on how often the family eats together inside and outside the home or brings 
in take -out food . If the PFP is not the Index Adult they complete  the same dietary measures as the Index 
Adult . Other exploratory measures  include collecting BMI on the non -Index Adult PFP and other children 
residing within the household.   
9. Data Analysis Plan  
The trial design includes three factors: 1)  two treatment groups (control, intervention), 2) four time 
points (0, 6, 12, and 18), and 3) two age groups (adult, child).  Each variable will be summarized by 
[CONTACT_103317] s, including mean, standard deviation and quartile at each time point (separately by 
[CONTACT_158954]). Index  Adults and I ndex Children will be analyzed separately.  Outcomes have 
repeated measures at multiple time -points. The primary analysis compa res the change in primary 
outcomes from baseline to [ADDRESS_184532] 
deviations  Difference  80% 
powera Assuming 30% 
dropout  Source  
Adults BMI change  Intervention 2.29b 
Control 2.28  1 kg/m2 65 per 
group  92 per group  Wadden (2011)136  
Adult Accelerometer  Intervention 101.9c  
Control  77.7  35-minutes  82 per 
group  117 per group  Napolitano 
(2010)137  
Children Accelerometer  59.4 for bothd 30-minute   50 per 
group  71 per group  Robertson 
(2011)138  
FNPA  5.1 for bothe 2 points  81 per 
group  116 per group  Ihmels (2009)[ADDRESS_184533] 
b Pi[INVESTIGATOR_158928] 6 months showed a SD 1.98 –  We used Wadden’s numbers to be conservative  
c The intervention group had baseline and 12-month SD’s of 44.[ADDRESS_184534] possible baseline- 12 
month SD’s (101.9 intervention, 77.7 control)  
d Table 1 reported baseline-to -9 months Cl’s. From these, we computed a 0-9 month SD of 59.4 to use for the 0-12 
month change  
e For those with income <$25,000. Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_158929] a simi lar number of SD 5.4 for change at 6 months  
Based on these  power calculations, a target of 260 families was to be recruited to account for 
dropout prior to randomization, following randomization, and throughout all timepoints of the 
intervention.  
Page 9 of 9 
  