HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)   HRPO Protocol 
1)Protocol Title  (Version # and/or Version Date)
The Emotions and Decisions of Couples, #12-433, v. 06/13/2018  
2)IRB Review History
N/A 
3)Objectives
The proposed study is an experimental comparison of the effects of alcohol on arousal and
emotion -regulation between 112 Distressed Violent (DV)  and 112 Distressed Nonviolent (DNV)  
partners. One partner from each DV couple will be pseudo -randomly selected and yoked to a 
DNV partner of the same sex and a relationship satisfaction within a five -point range for 
participation in the experiment. To test the overall hypothesis that over -arousal is a mechanism 
through which alcohol is associated with increases in the frequency and severity of IPV, the 
selected partners will participate in a counter -balanced placebo session and alcohol 
administration session during which EEG, psychophysiology and pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193623].  
Specific Aim 1:   To determine if normal increases in arousal after alcohol exposure is 
potentiated by [CONTACT_193650] (DV) partners compared 
to distressed nonviolent (DNV) partners. Hypothesis 1a: DV and DNV partners will experience 
comparable alcohol related increases in arousal. Hypothesis 1b:  DV partners will demonstrate 
greater arousal increases by [CONTACT_193651]. Hypothesis 1c:   DV 
partners will experi ence greater arousal when exposed to alcohol and evocative partner stimuli 
than DNV partners.  
Specific Aim 2:   To determine if alcohol induced arousal interferes with DV partners’ 
ability to regulate emotion in response to evocative partner stimuli compa red to DNV partners. 
Hypothesis 2a:  Emotion regulation during evocative stimuli will be reduced compared to neutral 
stimuli. Hypothesis 2b:  Emotion regulation during evocative stimuli will be reduced by [CONTACT_131128]. 
Hypothesis 2c:  DV partners will be less able  to regulate emotion during evocative stimuli than 
DNV partners. Hypothesis 2d: Alcohol will interfere with DV partners’ ability to regulate 
emotion during evocative stimuli compared to DNV partners.  
4)Background
Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a signif icant public health problem that exacts a toll on 
medical and mental health care, social services and criminal justice systems. IPV is estimated to 
cost the [LOCATION_002] $8.3 billion dollars annually.  These costs include $6.2 billion for physical 
assault s, $460 million for rape, $461 million for stalking and $1.[ADDRESS_230158] lives 
(Max, Rice, Finkelstein, Bardwell & Leadbetter, 2004). There are approximately 22.[ADDRESS_230159] an estimated 
10 million Americans (Kessler, Molnar, Feurer & Appelbaum, 2001; Potter, Sacks, Kresnow & 
Mercy, 1999). National surveys reveal that nearly one third of couples will experience physical 
aggression at some point in their relationship and 16% of couples will experience IPV in any 
given year (Straus & Gelles, 1986). Furthermore, alcohol use is present in most instances of IPV 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  (57% to 70% of IPV incidents) ; during conflict, instances of physical aggression are more likely 
to occur than verbal aggression if one or both partners have used alcohol (Leonard & Quigley, 
1999);  and more severe IPV incidents occur during heavier drinking  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (e.g., binge 
drinking; El -Bassel et al., 2004; Foran & O’Leary, 2008; Graham, Bernards, Wilsnack, & Gmel, 
2011; Kantor & Straus, 1989; Pan, Neidig & O’Leary, 1994; Testa & Leonard, 2001). Relatedly, 
in a sample of newlywed couples, alcohol use le d to more severe and more mutually violent 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (Testa, Quigley & Leonard, 2003).  In fact, in the 2013 New Mexico Intimate Partner 
Death Review Team Annual Report of Calendar Year 2010 found that 70 percent of perpetrators 
were under the influence of alcohol at the time of the murder and 25 percent of victims were 
consuming alcohol at the time of the incident (NMIPVDRT, 2013).  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_193624], mental health, and physical consequences of IPV, we 
are woefully inadequate at effectively intervening with this problem, and currently, there are no 
effective interventions (Babcock, Green, & Robie, 2004; Sartin, Hansen & Huss, 2006). We 
argue that part of the field’s inability to effectively intervene in or treat IPV is because we lack 
an inte grated understanding of the constituent processes involved in IPV. There are two apparent 
elements of IPV, conflict induced arousal and alcohol use that, based on basic research of these 
processes, over -arousal would appear to negatively affect an individu al’s ability regulate one’s 
emotions during highly aroused states. We argue that the best way to investigate the effect of 
these processes on incidents of IPV is to examine the neural, physiological and behavioral 
mechanisms of emotion -regulation during hi ghly aroused states.  
Behavior of Distressed Violent Couples and Arousal.  Distressed violent (DV) couples 
engage in several unique dyadic and affective patterns that escalate conflict, physiological 
arousal, and distinguish them from distressed nonviolent  (DNV) couples. DV couples are more 
likely to engage in negative reciprocity,  which is the tendency to continue or escalate negative, 
and corrosive ( evocative ) behavior once it begins ( Cordova, Jacobson, Gottman, Rushe & Cox, 
1993) . They also display abnormal demand -withdraw patterns  (Babcock et al., 1993; Berns, 
Jacobson & Gottman, 1999; Christensen & Heavey, 1990) . In a demand -withdraw pattern, 
individuals in a demanding role generally want more intimacy or closeness in an interaction and 
individuals in the withdrawing role generally want greater autonomy or separateness. In typi[INVESTIGATOR_193625] -withdraw patterns, one person of the dyad is usually in the demanding role and the other 
partner is in the withdrawing  role (e.g., in divorcing couples). In DV couples,  however, the 
partners alternate these roles, and all  requests for closeness or intimacy (regardless of who is 
making them at the time) are met by [CONTACT_50987].  This is a process that evokes chronic 
frustrat ion and fear in the partners, and is a dynamic that lays the foundation for high conflict, 
power struggles, and clinging and hypervigilant responses (Babcock, Jacobson, Gottman & 
Yerington, 2000; Mikulincer, 1998).   
DV couples also express higher levels of negative affect, such as contempt and 
belligerence , which escalate conflict beyond that seen in DNV couples (Gottman et al., 1995).  
Compared to DNV  couples , DV couples become more psychologically abusive, emotionally 
aggressive and increasingly physiol ogically aroused as their conflict continues because of these 
patterns (Babcock et al., 1993; Frye & Karney, 2006; Gottman, et al., 1995; Jacobson, et al., 
1994).  Furthermore, verbal aggression and physical aggression are highly correlated in couples 
(Lund eberg, Stith, Penn & Ward, 2004) with 94% of those reporting physical aggression also 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  reporting verbal aggression (Shook, Gerrity, Jurich & Segrist, 2000).   DV couples also have 
difficulty disengaging from conflict once it begins without escalating to phys ical aggression due 
in part to their highly aroused state (Ekman, 1984; Frye & Karney, 2006; Gottman, 1994; 
Jacobson, et al., 1994; Margolin, John & Foo, 1998; O’Leary, 1999) .  These findings suggest that 
DV couples are unable to regulate their emotional r esponses in the face of evocative conflict. 
Furthermore, partners in relationships whose conflict chronically generates such arousal become 
hypervigilant to potentially threatening and escalating interactions , and are more likely to 
misattribute threat pot ential to relatively neutral or positive acts (Gottman, 1994) .  These 
findings also  suggest a sensitization process whereby [CONTACT_193652] a progressive amplification of the arousal response to the partner’s 
behavior.    
Arousal  and Aggression.  Hostile aggression is widely conceptualized as being 
impulsive, anger driven, unplanned and occurring as a result of some sort of provocation or 
aggressive cue. Arousal is thought to influence aggression in some important  ways. First, arousal 
can strengthen a dominant action tendency, meaning that if a person is instigated to aggress at 
the time arousal occurs, heightened aggression can result. Second, arousal can result from 
irrelevant sources (e.g., alcohol, exercise), t hus producing anger -motivated aggressive behavior 
if the person is provoked. Thirdly, arousal is an aversive physiological state that motivates 
aggression the same way that other aversive stimuli, such as pain, do (Anderson & Bushman, 
2002; Zillmann, 1983 ).  Furthermore, l aboratory examinations of arousal and hostile aggression 
show over-arousal  is the state most likely to facilitate emotionally aggressive or violent acts 
(Scarpa & Raine, 1997)  and that  arousal will remain high when the provocation is perceived as 
being deliberate or intentional, much like the conflict of DV couples (Zillmann & Bryant, 1974; 
Zillmann & Cantor, 1976; Zillmann, Johnson, & Day, 1974; Zillmann, Katcher, & Milavsky, 
1972). While IPV may appear on the surface t o be higher towards females, this is likely due to a 
reporting bias rather than any real difference in the gender of the aggressor.  In fact, meta -
analytic studies of gender differences in aggressive behavior found that there are no gender 
differences in a ggressive behavior  when males and females are in aroused states (Knight, 
Guthrie, Page, & Fabes, 2002).  This finding is consistent with the IPV literature of over 150 
studies showing gender symmetry in IPV (Straus, 2006).  
Alcohol’s Effect on Neurophysiological and Psychophysiological Arousal.  Low to 
moderate alcohol exposure has been shown to lead to neurophysiological and 
psychophysiological responses consistent with increased arousal.  Although alcohol is considered 
a pharmacological depressa nt, during the absorption phase, also known as the ascending limb  of 
intoxication, and at peak Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC), alcohol is actually arousing 
(Levenson, Sher, Newman, & Newlin, 1980; Schwartz et al., 1981).  Electroencephalography 
(EEG) investigations of EEG frequencies aligned with a continuum of consciousness have found 
that during the ascending limb of intoxication, and at peak Blood Alcohol Concentration (BAC) , 
alcohol is associated with increases in fast frequencies ( beta and alpha; al ertness and vigilance, 
and wakefulness, respectively ) and decreases in slow frequencies ( theta and delta ; drowsiness, 
and sleep, respectively; Sanz -Martin et al., 2011) .  This pattern of increases in fast frequencies 
and decreases in slow frequencies are  traditionally associated with cortical arousal and an 
activated state (Andreassi, 2000; Coult, 1998; Matousek & Petersen, 1983; Neidermeyer, 1998;; 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
 
(0.05)  
 Schwarz et al., 1981)  and has been considered to be an index of arousal in both animals and 
humans (Hernandez -Gonzales at al., 2008; Sanz -Martin et al., 2011).  
 
Experimental administration of l ow to moderate alcohol (BAC up to .09g%) has also 
been shown to produce increases in pulse rates and finger pulse volumes, faster heart rate (HR), 
lower interbeat interval  (i.e., lower heart rate variability), and higher skin conductance level 
(Burish, Maisto, & Shirley, 1982; Levenson, Sher, Grossman, Newman & Newlin, 1980). As 
with EEG, all of these psychophysiological changes with alcohol exposure are consistent with a 
physiologically aroused state (Burish, Maisto, & Shirley, 1982; Levenson, Sher, Grossman, 
Newman & Newlin, 1980).  Similar to experimental studies of arousal and aggression, 
experimental studies of the conditions under which alcohol is related to aggression  also find that 
alcohol is associated with aggressive behavior only under conditions of provocation and 
frustration (see Exum, 2006 for review).  Furthermore, experimental manipulation of alcohol limb 
effects (i.e. ascending vs. descending limb) have provide d evidence of increased aggressive 
tendencies on the ascending limb compared to the descending limb, thus providing further 
evidence of the role of alcohol induced arousal playing a potential role in IPV (Giancola & 
Zeichner, 1997).  
 
In summary, the curren t application is investigating over -arousal as a mechanism through 
which alcohol is related to the increase in the frequency and severity of IPV. The experimental 
literature would suggest that the cortically and psychophysiologically arousing effects of al cohol 
during the ascending limb of intoxication and at peak BAC are compounded by [CONTACT_193653]’ distinct conflict patterns leading to an increase in IPV. In addition, the 
literature suggests that DV couples’ have difficulty regulating emotion in highly aroused states, 
and may be even less able to do so after alcohol use.  This research will be used to inform the 
development novel interventions for IPV where, currently, no effective interventions exist.  
 
5) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Screening:  Advertisements  will invite interested couples to contact [CONTACT_193654] (for those without internet access) or direct participants to secure 
online eligibility screening via  eSurvey . This service is provided by [CONTACT_193655] . Participa nts will provide informed consent for screening via either method. 
During screening, eligible couples will be informed of the video -taped couple interaction, 
asked to refrain from using illicit drugs or alcohol for at least [ADDRESS_230160] (e.g. driver’s 
license) to verify that they are at least 21 years of age at their initial session. Once 
eligibility criteria are assessed, participants will receive a full written i nformed consent 
document.  
This study will recruit DV couples who experience violence only within the family. IPV 
of individuals also violent outside the family appears to be more related to their antisocial 
tendencies rather than the dyadic processes of f amily -only violent couples (Gottman et 
al., 1995). Because of this, participants will be screened for antisocial and generally 
violent behavior, and excluded from the study.  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  Participants: – Recruitment and screening will occur at the couple level. 
Partic ipants will be a convenience sample of 112 DV couples and 112 DNV couples 
residing in the greater Albuquerque, NM metro area. Eligible couples will be 1) English -
speaking, 2) heterosexual  or homosexual , 3) between the ages of 21 and 45, and will 
provide in formed consent. Because this is a study of the role of alcohol in IPV, all 
participants (DV & DNV) must 4) be in a distressed relationship (Revised Dyadic 
Adjustment Scale score below 47), 5) consume at least one to two alcoholic drinks per 
sitting each we ek for females and three to four alcoholic drinks for males, 6) report two 
binge drinking epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (>4 drinks for males, >3 drinks for females) in month prior to 
assessment, 7 ) be married or cohabitating for at least six months, 8) both partners must be 
willing to participate, 9) must have a breath alcohol level of 0.0 g% at all visits. DV 
couples must have a history of at least mild physical aggression in the past six months 
(e.g.,twisted partner’s arm or hair).  Participants will be excluded if they are/h ave 1) 
currently separated, 2) an order of protection in place, 3) facing violence -related criminal 
charges, 4) currently in a domestic violence shelter, 5) evidence of psychosis or severe 
personality disturbance, 6) pregnant, 7) taking a medication contra indicated for use with 
alcohol, 8) currently taking insulin or oral hypoglycemic medication, 9) an AUDIT score 
greater than 1 9 indicating alcohol dependence , 10) illicit drug use (except marijuana), or 
11) provide a positive UA at first emotion -regulation session. Participants will be
screened for psychosis and severe personality disturbance using the SCID II psychosis
and personality screeners. The age range reflects legal drinking age and age range used in
other studies of alcohol and IPV (Eckhardt, 2007). The minimum length of relationship is
to obtain a representative sample of DV couples. DV relationships are exceptionally
unstable and dissolve at rates many times that of DNV relationships (Gortner et al.,
1997). It is feared that older DV relationships may not be representative of DV
relationships (e.g., less violent, Cui et al., 2013).
Adults unable to consent, individuals who are not yet adults, pregnant women and prisons 
will be excluded.  
6)Number of Subjects  (Recruitment T arget)
Two hundred twenty -four (112 Distressed Violent and 112 Distressed NonViolent) couples will 
be enrolled in the study. We will screening 1200 couples in order to obtain the number to be 
enrolled in the study.   
7)Recruitment Methods
Recruitment will be conduct ed using strategies discussed in Holtzworth -Munroe et
al. (1992)  for recruiting distressed violent couples (e.g., advertising for distressed 
couples)  and will be conducted at the couple leve l. The Albuquerque, NM metropolitan 
area has a population of approximately 900,000, which is sufficiently large for the 
recruitment of a specialized sample. No recruitment will take place in domestic violence 
shelters, court mandated treatment settings, or t hrough court referrals. Evidence suggests 
that individuals recruited from these locations are more likely to be generally violent 
(violence outside the family), have severe personality disturbances (antisocial personality 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  disorder), and have involvement in  other criminal activity  (1992) . Participants will be 
recruited via advertisements placed throughout the Albuquerque Metro area, local 
newspapers, online forums,  list serves , radio spots and television interviews . In addition, 
advertisements will be placed  on ResearchMatch.org. Because of concerns about an 
invasion of privacy and the sensitivity of the data collected in this study, flyers will refer 
to generic aspects of relationship dissatisfaction and alcohol consumption.   
In advertising for couples who d rink alcohol weekly we have determined that this 
statement on the recruitment flyer or ad is selecting, almost exclusively, for individuals 
who have an alcohol use disorder or who are alcohol dependent, and therefore ineligible 
for our study. We are reques ting permission to also place advertisements that do not 
include th e “drink alcohol weekly”  aspect of the inclusion criteria  in the ad . The ad will 
continue to indicate that participants may consume alcohol during one or both 
experimental session , and we w ill continue screen for alcohol use  consistent with our  
inclusion criteria (AUDIT score no greater than 1 9 and two binge epi[INVESTIGATOR_193626]) . (Please see the attached versions of the advertisement for the recruitment script  
and for how posted flyer s will appear .)  
Potential participants may endorse drinking levels making them ineligible for the 
study (AUDIT greater than 1 9). Such individuals will be given feedback regarding the 
drinking measures, and given referral information by [CONTACT_193656]. Fink. 
Following NIH guidelines, this referral will be an active referral. The staff member will 
present such individuals with a menu of options, provide a suggestion about a treatment 
option that is a good match, and will offer to call the facility and  make an appointment 
for the individual.  
8)Study Timelines
Participation in this study by [CONTACT_193657] a total of eight (8) hours over 
three sessions.  Session one, the Stimuli Acquisition  Session , will take two (2) hours and 
both partners of each  couple will participate. Sessions two and three, the Emotion -
Regulation Sessions , will be either a placebo or alcohol administration session.  
Participation in the placebo session will take one (1) hour. Participation in the alcohol 
administration session  will take five (5) hours. The emotion -regulation and response 
inhibition  tasks lasts approximately 30 minutes in each of the experimental sessions.  The 
additional time in each session accounts for study set -up (attaching electrodes, etc.) and 
detoxification from alcohol in the alcohol -administration experimental session.  
We antic ipate enrolling study participants for two years and primary data analysis 
will be complete six months after the last participant is enrolled.  
9)Study Endpoints
The study will be terminated if it is determined that the study procedures have
resulted in a vi olent argument where physical aggression, including throwing or hitting 
the partner with an object that could inflict pain or injury, has occurred between three or 
more couples.  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  10) Research Setting
The UNM Clinical and Translational Science Center houses [CONTACT_193700]’s laboratory  where the 
study will be conducted.   
11) Study Methods
Screening : Advertisements  will invite interested couples to contact [CONTACT_193658] (for those without internet access) or direct participants to secure online eligibility 
screening via REDCap. This service is provided by [CONTACT_193659]. Parti cipants 
will provide informed consent for screening via either method. During screening, eligible 
couples will be informed of the video -taped couple interaction, asked not to use alcohol for at 
least [ADDRESS_230161] (e.g. driver’s license) to verify that they are at least [ADDRESS_230162] greater than 
"feeling somewhat negative" p rior to leaving the research site.  Participants will also be informed 
that they are free to withdraw any information provided during the study, including erasing 
portions of the video recording.  Should a participant make this request, it would result in the 
exclusion of the couple from further procedures and participation in the study as their video -
taped communication discussion will be used at stimuli in subsequent study phases.  
Note that participants who are deemed ineligible for participation will be given a list of 
area resources for assistance with relationship distress and/or partner violence, including 
procedures for filing for an order of protection. Participants will be required to bring a current 
state issued identification card (e.g. driver’s l icense) to verify that they are at least [ADDRESS_230163] someone other than their 
partner (e.g., friend or family member) pi[INVESTIGATOR_193627]. Alternatively, 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  participants will be provided with taxi vouchers if they need transportation back to their home 
address following detoxification. Female participants will provide a urine sample for a pregancy 
test before the alcohol administrat ion condition and the placebo condition (to maintain blindness 
of participants to condition). The female partner will be excluded from the study if the test 
reveals she is pregnant.  
Stimuli Acquisition Session : Self-report instruments of relationship functioning, alcohol 
consumption, impulsivity, executive functioning and state/trait anger will be administered to 
both partners of each couple type (DV, DNV) separately. (Data from partners not selected for the 
emot ion-regulation task will be preserved for future dyadic data analyses.) Partner stimuli for use 
in the emotion -regulation task will be acquired via the researcher facilitated Couple’s Problem 
Inventory (CPI). The CPI [INVESTIGATOR_193628] a 
laboratory setting. It is important to note the purpose of the researcher facilitated CPI [INVESTIGATOR_193629] a laboratory setting. 
Any emotional carry -over from the self -report measures will only facilitate this process. Pa rtners 
will be directed to discuss the topic and attempt to reach a resolution.  
Stimuli Acquisition: Video cameras will be focused on the face of each partner to capture 
the content of the partner’s speech as well as the partner’s facial expressions durin g the 
discussion of a disagreement using two Canon VIXIA HF R400 video cameras. To ensure that 
there are not experimenter -introduced differences in the evocative stimuli used between groups 
in the subsequent experimental sessions, and to ensure we choose s ufficiently arousing partner 
displays, stimuli selected will be according to the hierarchy of the Specific Affect (SPAFF) 
coding system (e.g., contempt, belligerence, criticism, defensiveness, stonewalling, respectively). 
It is important to note that confl ict intensity differences likely naturally exist between DV 
couples and DNV couples (see Significance). Our method will ensure, however, that there are no 
experimenter introduced differences in the stimuli selected. Inter -rater reliabilities will be 
calcul ated on 50% of the videos and coders retrained to criterion if necessary. DV couples 
display at least [ADDRESS_230164] violent 
partner will be selected for participation. DV partners will be matched and yoked to a DNV 
partner of comparable distress.  
Emotion -Regulation Sessions : The selected partners (DV, DNV) will return to the laboratory on 
two separate occasions for the completion of the emotion -regulation sessions of the study. Once 
participants are prepped for biopotential recording, t hey will be administered either an alcohol 
beverage or placebo beverage (counter -balanced alcohol and placebo conditions; see below for 
procedures).  
Alcohol Condition Protocol  - Participants will receive a mixed drink (juice and 100 -proof 
vodka) intended to raise their blood alcohol concentration (BAC) to a target dose of 0.08g% 
using a standard formula for calibrating the alcohol doses to achieve the target BACs.68 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  Specifically: Alcohol dose (g) = ((10 * BAC * TBW)/0.8) + (10 * MR * (DDP + TPB)) * 
(TBW/0. 8). Participants will be asked to drink the beverage within 10 minutes to ensure that they 
remain on the ascending limb or reach peak BAC during the 25 -minute experimental task. After 
completion of the experimental task, participants will continue to be br eathalyzed every 15 
minutes and when their BAC is less than 30 mg/dl (.03%), they will be excused.  
Placebo Condition Protocol  - Procedures will be identical to the alcohol condition, 
except participants will consume a volume of juice equivalent to that co nsumed in the alcohol 
condition with a small amount (~3 ml) of alcohol floated on top of the juice and misted with 
vodka to produce the taste and smell of alcohol. Participants will then complete the emotion -
regulation task while biopotential data are coll ected.  
EEG, Psychophysiology and Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193630] - EEG and 
psychophysiology data will be collected using the BrainVision actiCHamp [ADDRESS_230165] a 5 -minute baseline measurement prior to 
administration of alcohol or placebo beverage. After beverage administr ation data will be 
collected for the duration of the emotion -regulation task (see below). To reduce confounding 
results due to artifacts, EEG signals will be examined for contamination by [CONTACT_193660]. Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) analysis will be applied to 6 -10 second epoch 
samples (corresponding to the delivery of stimuli) allowing for [ADDRESS_230166] 
subtraction with the spectral graph ranging from 0 to 30Hz at 0.5Hz -resolution.  FFTs will be 
performed using E EGLab software to calculate 1) Absolute power (AP; power density of each 
frequency band expressed in microvolts squared; mV2/Hz); 2) Relative power (RP; proportional 
contribution of each band to the total power across 1 – 30Hz). AP and RP will be transform ed 
into Fisher’s z -scores for statistical analyses. Skin conductance (SC) will be collected using the 
BrainVision GSR module with leads placed on the left index finger and left middle finger. SC 
will be recorded to collect a 5 -minute baseline (as with EEG)  measurement and for the duration 
of the emotion -regulation task and time -locked to evocative stimuli. SC data will be subjected to 
detrending and transformed to Fisher’s z -scores for statistical analysis. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_193631], and an EKG in Lead II position. 
As with EEG, baseline measures will be collected, and time locked to evocative events. EKG 
data will be quantified as respi[INVESTIGATOR_25570] (RSA) which is a unique measure of 
paras ympathetic activity and self -regulatory ability. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_193632]’s z -scores for statistical analysis. Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193633] 1000 system high speed camera by [CONTACT_193661] (see sample data). Corneal 
reflection will be recorded at 250 Hz. The left and right pupil diameter measures will be 
averaged offline and baseline measures (1 sec prior to trial onset) will be subtracted. The 
difference between the maximum diameter during the t rial and the baseline diameter will be 
calculated and transformed to Fisher’s z -scores for statistical analysis. E -prime will control the 
flow of the emotion regulation task and generate timestamps to denote conditions for which all 
biopotential data can b e analyzed.  
Emotion Regulation Task  -The proposed approach for studying emotion regulation has 
been used in several previous studies,69 but we will utilize participant -tailored stimuli (video 
clips of partner’s evocative behavior). During viewing, partici pants will be instructed to 1) 
experience the emotion they associate with the video (WATCH), or 2) to suppress the feeling of 
emotion (DON’T REACT). In the WATCH condition, participants will be instructed to let their 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  emotional experience occur naturally, and to pay attention to how they feel during the clip. In the 
DON’T REACT condition, participants will be instructed to attempt to suppress any feelings of 
emotion so as to prevent an observer watching physiological recordings from knowing that an 
emotiona l response has occurred. In both conditions, participants will be asked to indicate their 
corresponding emotional state using a slider (clicking and dragging with a mouse) on a 
continuous rating scale anchored by “very negative” (1) and “very positive” (10 0). A total of 50 
unique video clips between 4 and 8 seconds in length will be used in the task; 25 evocative and 
25 neutral. Each stimulus will be presented twice: once in the WATCH condition and once in the 
DON’T REACT condition. On each trial, participa nts will view a blank screen (1 second), 
fixation cross (1.5 sec), blank screen (.5 sec), the instruction (WATCH or DON’T REACT; 1.5 
sec), the video clip (4 -8 sec), and a blank screen (up to 2.5 seconds). The total amount of time 
required for the task will  be approximately 25 minutes.  Ratings obtained during the emotion 
regulation task will be averaged across stimulus type and regulation condition for the placebo 
and alcohol sessions for statistical analysis.  
Participant Remuneration:   Each p articipant will be paid $[ADDRESS_230167] the opportunity to earn $40 for his/her participation in the 
Stimuli Acquisition Session  ($80 total) . The partner invited back for the  Emotion -Regulation 
Sessi ons will have the  to earn $100 for his/her participation in the Alcohol beverage Emotion -
Regulation Session  and $20 in the Placebo beverage Emotion -Regulation Sessions  for a total of 
$200 per couple. Participants will receive remuniration in the form of V isa or similar gift cards.  
12) List of Appendices
Scale Purpose  Scale Name  [CONTACT_193691]/Source  Population  
Screening  SCID -I & II Psychosis 
& Personality Screener  
Revised Dyadic 
Adjustment Scale  
Alcohol Use Disorders 
Identification Test  Identification & exclusion of psychosis & antisocial 
personality disorder;55 
Screening relationship satisfaction scale;56  
Identification & exclusion of problem drinking; [ADDRESS_230168] Demographic 
Form  Demographic Data; project developed  N/A Couples  
Stimuli Acquisition  Couple’s Problem 
Inventory  
Discussion of Area of 
On-going 
Disagreement  
Specific Affect Coding 
System  Scale to identify clear, current & emotionally 
salient area to discuss; obtain conflict intensity as 
covariate;[ADDRESS_230169] communication; SPAFF; 59 N/A 
N/A 
N/A Couples  
Couples  
Couples  
Relationship 
Functioning  / Conflict 
Processes  Dyadic Adjustment 
Scale  
Conflict Tactics Scale -
[ADDRESS_230170] ionnaire  
Timeline Follow -back 
Interview  Relationship satisfaction scale;[ADDRESS_230171] resolution 
behaviors including physical aggression;61 
Demand -withdraw pattern questionnaire;[ADDRESS_230172] 6 mos (this 
project)  .96 
.95 
.80 
N/A Couples  
Couples  
Couples  
Couples  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
 
(0.05)  
  
Experimental Tasks:   
Plain Vanilla Task - The Plain Vanilla Task is a physiologically non -demanding task 
used to collect resting heart -rate variability data.  In this task, the participant simply watches a 
computer screen for five minutes while it changes colors and reports how many times the screen 
turned blue.  While the p articipant is watching the screen psychophysiological measurements of 
heart rate variability are collected.  This task will only be completed during one individual 
session before any alcohol is consumed.  
 
Emotion -Regulation Task  – The approach for studying emotion regulation described 
below has been used in several previous studies of emotion regulation (e.g. Dan -Glauser & 
Gross, 2011).  While this approach has used pi[INVESTIGATOR_193634], the 
methods from these  studies will guide the current design.  
Participants will view a video comprised of their partner’s contemptuous, belligerent, 
critical, defensive, stonewalling and neutral behavior from the previous couple session.  During 
this time physiological measurem ents will be collected including galvanic skin response (GSR), 
heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], and heart rate variability (inter -beat interval).  Baseline measures will be 
taken where the participant sits quietly for five minutes.  
While viewing the video clips, participants will be given instructions to 1) experience the 
emotion they associated with the video (WATCH), or 2) to suppress the feeling of emotion 
(DON’T REACT).  In the WATCH condition, participants will be shown video clips and are 
instructed to let e motional experience to occur naturally, and to pay attention to how they feel 
during the clip.  In addition, participants are instructed to record their feelings using a continuous 
visual analogue scale.  In the DON’T REACT condition, participants are inst ructed to attempt to 
suppress any feelings of emotion so as to prevent an observer watching physiological recordings 
from knowing that an emotional response has occurred.   
A total of [ADDRESS_230173] Coding System .  Each stimulus will be presented twice: 
once in the WATCH condition and once in the DON’T REACT conditio n.   Flooding Quest.  Assesses tendency to become physiologically 
over-aroused during partner conflict  .[ADDRESS_230174] 6 mos. 
(this project);63 
Assess subjective feelings of alcohol intoxication; 
SHAS;64 
Assess self -reported sensitivity to alcohol.  
 
Assesses symptoms associated with ascending 
and descending limbs of intoxication  .86 
 
.96 
 
N/A 
 
N/A Individuals who 
drink alcohol  
Individuals who 
drink alcohol  
Individuals who 
drink alcohol  
Individuals who 
drink alcohol  
Individual Variables  UPPS -P Impulsive 
Behavior Scale  
State Trait Anger 
Expression Invent ory-2 
Behavior Rating 
Inventory of Executive 
Function -Adult Version  
 Assess impulsivity moderation of alcohol & IPV; 
used to obtain impulsivity as covariate;65 
Anger expression -out & anger expression -in for 
anger as emotional state & trait.  
Self-report measure of executive functions  as 
covariate ;[ADDRESS_230175] and diseased 
adults  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  On each trial, participants will view a blank screen (1 second), fixation cross (1.5 sec), 
blank screen (.5 sec), the instruction (WATCH or DON’T REACT; 1.5 sec), the video clip (4 -8 
sec), and a blank screen (up to 2.5 seconds).  In addition, during t he video presentation, a 
continous rating scale with the anchors very negative and very positive will be presented, and 
participants will be asked to indicate with a slider on the scale (by [CONTACT_193662] a 
mouse) how they currently feel.  The scale slider will be set to the middle of the screen before 
each trial begins.  The total amount of time required for the task will be approximately 25 
minutes.  
Response Inhibition Task – To measure response inhibition, we will use a variant of the stop 
signal task (Aron & Poldrack, 2006), which relies on estimating the time it takes an individual to 
engage inhibitory processes to overcome a prepotent response tendency.  The stop signal task 
and other response inhibition tasks have been used in several pre vious studies of alcohol -induced 
disinhibition, with heavy drinkers showing enhanced stop times and enhanced inhibition errors 
after consumption of alcohol at a variety of alcohol doses.  During the task, participants are 
presented arrows that point to the  left (<) or to the right (>), and must make speeded responses 
indicating a left or right pointing arrow.  However, on some trials, a tone is presented, signaling 
that participants should withhold their response.  The task automatically adjusts the timing of the 
tone in order obtain approximately 50% correct responses (i.e. non -responses).  The total time 
required for the task is 15 minutes.   
13) Data and Specimen Banking   N/A
14) Data Management
Questionnaire Data  - Documents pertaining to demographic information, tactics used in 
conflict resolution between the partners, relationship satisfaction and stability, and alcohol 
sensitivity and consumption will be collected electronically via REDCap and saved on secure 
servers housed at the CTSC.  (Please see above table for a description of the questionnaire data.)  
Before collection, q uestionnaire data will be identified by [CONTACT_193663]. The benefit of electronic data collection is two-fold.  First, t he immediate de -
identification of the data allows it to be retained after the completion of the study . Second, it is in 
data base form and does not require data entry.  
Psychophysiological Data  - Psychophysiological d ata will initially be collected using  
laboratory computers .  After each participant completes a laboratory procedure, the collected 
data will be transferred and saved to secure servers housed at  the CTSC .  Access to the servers is 
password protected and only author ized study personnel will be granted access.   
Video Data  - We request continued permission to keep the digital copi[INVESTIGATOR_193635], impart significant scientific value.  Blurring, distorting or destroying these 
videos would prevent us from accomplishing these goals and those of the current study.  To 
ensure that the participant can make a fully informed consent regarding this, the cons ent form 
clearly states that the videotapes a) will show the participant’s faces, b) will be kept indefinitely, 
and c) can and will be destroyed if the participant expressly requests that this be the case, which 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  is completely within their right.  The digit al videos will be delinked from identifying 
information, as described above.  We understand that there is some question as to whether the 
videotapes themselves contain identifying information. Thus, increased caution must be imposed 
on the storage of these  data. To this end, we will store the video  data only in electronic form, on 
a different secured server than the rest of the study data, to prevent the implications of a potential 
server breach.    
A master list of participant information and participant I D codes will be kept on a password 
protected computer in a locked room separate from any data collection computers  (CTSC, Suite 
3145, G) .  The purpose of this is to be able to contact [CONTACT_193664].  This list will be destroyed at the conclusion of data collection for this 
study.  
Data Analysis Plan: Preliminary analyses will be performed to ensure no violation of the 
assumptions of normality, linearity and homoscedasticity. Appropriate transformations (e.g. log 
transform of positively skewed data) will be performed prior to data analysis.  Data will be 
analyzed according to the aims of the study.  
Specific Aim 1:   To determine if normal increases in arousal after alcohol exposure is 
potentiated by [CONTACT_193665].   We will conduct a 2 (beverage condition: alcohol vs. placebo) x 2 (stimulus: 
evocative vs. neutral) repeated measures ANOVA with a between -subjects factor (p artner type: 
DV vs. DNV). To test whether alcohol increases overall arousal ( Hypothesis 1a ), we will 
examine the main effect of alcohol vs. placebo on arousal variables, collapsing across partners 
and stimuli during the WATCH condition as alcohol should ef fect the arousal of both partner 
types equally. To test whether DV partners are more aroused by [CONTACT_193666] ( Hypothesis 1b ), we will test the interaction effect of partner type and stimulus 
type, collapsing across alcohol a nd placebo conditions. Finally, to test the hypothesis that alcohol 
induced increases in arousal above placebo will be greater for evocative than neutral stimuli 
(Hypothesis 1c ) for DV vs. DNV partners, we will test the three -way interaction in the 2 (DV v s. 
DNV) x 2 (alcohol vs. placebo) x 2 (evocative vs. neutral) repeated measures ANOVA. 
Specifically, this contrast will examine the effect of partner type when comparing stimuli type 
(evocative) to beverage condition (alcohol) on arousal and provides a cri tical control given that 
conflict intensity may differ between DV and DNV couples. The [ADDRESS_230176] interaction (Hyp1c) will 
allow us to be able to determine whether the change in arousal between alcohol and placebo 
sessions for the evocative stimuli differs betw een couple types. The arousal level of evocative 
stimuli is matched between alcohol and placebo sessions, thus allowing for a controlled 
examination of alcohol -induced increases in arousal for evocative stimuli across DV and DNV 
couples.  
Specific Aim 2:  To determine if alcohol induced arousal interferes with DV partners’ 
ability to regulate emotion in response to evocative partner stimuli compared to DNV 
partners.   All hypotheses will be tested using a 2 (beverage condition: alcohol vs. placebo) x 2 
(stim ulus: evocative vs. neutral) x 2 (regulation condition: WATCH vs. DON’T REACT) 
repeated measures ANOVA with a between -subjects factor (partner type: DV vs. DNV). Testing 
specific interactions within the overall model will test each hypothesis. If the ages of the DV and 
DNV partners are significantly different, ANCOVAs will be conducted as age may further 
moderate the relationships tested in Aim 2. To test the hypothesis that emotional regulation 
during evocative partner stimuli will be reduced compared to r egulation during neutral stimuli 
(Hypothesis 2a ), we will test the 2 (evocative vs. neutral) x 2 (WATCH vs. DON’T REACT) 
interaction term, collapsing across partner type in the placebo condition. To test the hypothesis 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  that emotion regulation during evocat ive partner stimuli will be reduced by [CONTACT_131128], ( Hypothesis 
2b) we will test the 2 (evocative vs. neutral) x 2 (WATCH vs. DON’T REACT) interaction term 
collapsing across partner type in the alcohol condition. To test the hypothesis that DV partners 
are les s able to regulate emotion during evocative stimuli than the DNV partners ( Hypothesis 
2c), we will test the 2 (DV vs. DNV) x 2 (evocative vs. neutral) x 2 (WATCH vs. DON’T 
REACT) in the placebo condition. Finally, to test the hypothesis that alcohol interf eres with the 
ability to regulate emotion for DV partners compared to DNV partners ( Hypothesis 2d ), we will 
test the 2 (DV vs. DNV) x 2 (alcohol vs. placebo) x 2 (evocative vs. neutral) x 2 (WATCH vs. 
DON’T REACT) interaction.  
15) Provisions to Monitor the D ata to Ensure the Safety of Subjects
1.The experienced and qualified professionals responsible for determining serious adverse
events in the proposed study “Emotions and Decisions of Couples” will be the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_6254] -
Investigator  for the study Brandi Fink, Ph.D. and Eric Claus, Ph.D.  [CONTACT_193701] has experience
with both oral and intravenous alcohol administration and will work with [CONTACT_193702] to identify any
adverse events.
Any serious adverse events that do occur during the course of the study will immediatel y be 
reported to the University of New Mexico Human Research Protections Office as an adverse 
event.  
2. Monitoring of the occurrence of adverse events will occur after each study session and one
week after the last study session. Monitoring of adverse events will be conducted via a telephone
call to each partner  the day following a study session and to ea ch partner , again, one week after
the completion of all study sessions.  The purpose of this monitoring is to ensure that study
sessions were not responsible for violent arguments between the partners. Objectivity in
assessing adverse events will be ensure  by [CONTACT_193667]. Additionally, a PI [INVESTIGATOR_48105] -up with
the partners to confirm the details of such an event.
Because this study also involves an alcohol administrat ion procedure, we also have protections 
surrounding the consumption of alcohol and will be monitoring this for adverse events, as well.  
First, participants must be weekly drinkers and must have reported at least two binge drinking 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_193636] (>4 drinks for males, >3 drinks for females) ; therefore, the study 
will not use alcohol -naïve participants , but individuals who routinely reach the level of blood 
alcohol concentrations that will be obtained during the study procedures . Secondly, th e 
participants must remain in the laboratory until their blood alcohol concentration falls to between 
.02% - .04%. Note that this level is within the recommended range (.02% - .04%) for safe release 
of participants based on the NIH National Institute on Al cohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) 
guidelines (http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/Resources/ResearchResources/job22.htm ). Also consistent 
with NIAAA guidelines, release will require two consecutive readings of a BAC of .03% or 
below. During detoxification participan ts will be seated in a private room, given refreshments, 
and the choice of a variety of TV or movie comedies to view while their BAC is descending. 
Should a participant insist on leaving the lab before their BAC reaches .03%, the researchers will 
again cal mly discuss the reasons for requiring the participant remain in the laboratory (e.g., 
physical safety of participant, etc.). If this is futile and the participant continues to insist on 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  leaving, the participant will be allowed to do so. If the participant is attempting to leave via 
driving his/her own vehicle, the police will be called and notified. This procedure will be 
disclosed to participants during the informed consent.  
3.On a yearly basis, the PIs will file a report to HRRC that contains all advers e events that
occurred in the prior year.  The study will be terminated should it be determined that study
procedures resulted in violent arguments in three or more couples.
4. All female participants will be required to take a urine -based pregnancy test on any day in
which they will participate in the experimental conditions (placebo and alcohol). If a participant
tests positive for pregnancy, she will not be allowed to continue with the study and will be paid
at a prorated rate.
5. The P I and collaborators  for the study will always be present or on call while participants are
undergoing administration of alcohol.
6. The study will involve administering alcohol to participants, and will be done in accordance
with NIAAA guidelines for administering alcohol in human studies
(www.niaaa.nih.gov/Resources/ResearchResources/job22.htm) . All participants will be [ADDRESS_230177]  drinks and peak blood alcohol range in plain English, and will also
be informed about the length of time required to participate in the study and for their blood
alcohol levels to return to safe levels (<.03g%).  Participants will be instructed not to dri ve to
appointments. Once the experiment is completed, participants will be directed to a private
assessment room that is near a bathroom that can be monitored easily by [CONTACT_99699].
Participants will also be provided with snacks and water after par ticipating. Before participants
will be allowed to leave the CTSC laboratory, two consecutive breath alcohol concentration
readings that are .03g% or below will be required.  Finally, participants will be compensated
with a gift card payment of $40 after t he placebo session and $100 after the alcohol session. The
alcohol session payments include the time during which the participant is decreasing to .03g%.
7.Referral to treatment: We are excluding participants who meet DSM -IV criteria for alcohol
depen dence based on an initial phone screen. If participants meet diagnostic criteria for alcohol
dependence at the laboratory visit, however, they will be provided with an active referral
consisting of a research staff contact[CONTACT_193668].
The study does not have a follow -up phase so we will not monitor increases in alcohol use over
time.
8.All data is coded with a unique subject number  and only trained study staff will review
identifiable data . All data after initial entry into the study is coded based on the unique subject
number, which de -identifies the data.  Although a master list with links to subject identities will
be kept for the duration of the study, this list will be maintained on a separate password  protected
computer, thus making the risk of identification of a participant very unlikely. Participants’
digitized videos will be given a unique subject number and will be maintained on secure serves
housed at the CTSC. Digitized videos will be destroyed at the completion of the study unless the
couple has (both partners) have granted the [CONTACT_193702] permission to retain the videos for training
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  of research staff in the SPAFF only. The people who will have access to the data include 
members of the research tea m. Identifiable data will not be shared with investigators outside of 
the research team. The data is also available to the HRRC and other regulatory agencies for audit 
purposes only.  
9.The research proposed is not a Phase III clinical trial, so does not  require an independent data
and safety monitoring board.
16) Withdrawal of Subjects
The participants may withdraw from th e study at any time without it affecting access to referral 
information.  Participants may also request not to participate in the video -taped discussion of a 
disagreement, or request that the video -recorded  discussion of a disagreement be deleted. 
Participants will be advised, however, that this will result in them being excluded from the 
remaining sessions of the study. Also, if a participant decide s to discontinue his or her 
participation after they have consumed alcohol, he or she  will be required to remain in the 
laboratory until their blood alcohol concentration (BAC) falls to .[ADDRESS_230178] s on leaving bef ore his/her BAC falls to at least .03, and he/she is in own vehicle, study 
staff will be required to notify the authorities.  Participants will be informed of this stipulation 
during the informed consent process.  
The investigators have the right to end any participant’s participation in this study if it is 
determine d that the participant no longer qualif ies to take part, do es not follow study procedures, 
or if it is in best interest  of the participant , that of the participant’s partner, or the study’s best 
interest to stop your participation.  The Principal Investigator s may stop the study at any time.  
17) Risks to Subjects
Risks Associated with Study Participation:   
1. There is an uncommon risk of boredom or intrusiveness pertaining to the completion of
measures pertaining to the couples’ relationship functioning and drinking.
2. There is a common risk of some participants becoming slightly intoxicated that may lea d to
temporary impairment in motor coordination as a result of consuming alcohol.
3. There is a common risk of discomfort to participants in discussing an area of ongoing
disagreement with their partner.
4. There is a rare, but serious risk of partner violence occurring after participating in the
discussion of an area of disagreement and after viewing task stimuli in subsequent visits.
5. There is also a rare, but serious risk of a loss of confidentialit y and privacy that includes the
identification of participants by [CONTACT_193669], an invasion of privacy, social and economic
risks, alterations in relationships with others that are to the disadvantage of the participant,
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  embarrassment, loss of respect  of others, labeling with negative consequences or diminishing the 
participant's opportunities and status in relation to others.   
6. There is also the risk of unanticipated risks.
Protection Against Risks Associated with Study Participation:   
1. To  protect against the risk of boredom or intrusiveness, we will provide breaks to the
participants during the completion of study measures. The interviewers are also trained in
discussing sensitive material with clinical research participants. If a particip ant finds a topic
uncomfortable, they will be able to skip those questions or discontinue their participation.
2. To protect against the risk of adverse outcomes for participants as a result of consuming
alcohol, participants may discontinue their parti cipation at any time, however, they will not be
allowed to leave until after their BAC is below .03, consistent with NIH/NIAAA guidelines.  In
addition, because we are recruiting couple s in which both partners consume alcohol,  alcohol will
not be administ ered to alcohol naïve participants as this would entail and unknown level of risk.
Participants will also be provided with a detailed list of substance abuse providers and research
staff will assist in arranging an appointment with the participant's top c hoice of treatment facility,
if desired by [CONTACT_2299].
3. and 4. To protect against the aforementioned risk of discomfort resulting from the discussion
of disagreement and the risk of partner violence as a result of the experimental procedure, we
will follow to procedures described by [CONTACT_193670]., 1995, except we will extend the
procedures to the males in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Both partners will separately complete an adjective
checklist at the conclusion of each laboratory visit to assess the danger ousness of the situation.
If any partner indicates he or she is feeling any negative emotion other than "feeling somewhat
negative" the partner will be interviewed separately and the PI, a clinical psychologist with over
eight years of working with violen t couples, will use interviewing techniques to soothe the
partner.  UNM Campus Police will be informed of the study and will be on call within two
minutes of the laboratory in the event they are needed.  All participants (male and female) will
also be give n referrals to shelters, resources for obtaining legal representation and instructions on
filing for orders of protection.  Lastly, we will call each participant the night after each study
procedure and one week after the last study visit to ensure that ou r study procedures did not lead
to violent arguments. A violent argument is any argument resulting from participation in the
study that leads to the use of physical aggression between partners, to include throwing or hitting
the partner with an object.
5. To protect against the risk of loss of confidentiality and privacy, study recruitment materials
will not identify the study as being one involving partner violence.   Study recruitment materials
(see attached) will recruit for couples in unhappy relatio nships who drink at least weekly.  In
additon, to protect against a breach of confidenitality of study materials, including the viewing of
incorrect partner stimuli, all couples will be given a numerical code unique to each couple and
that indicates the pa rtner (e.g., participant 100 -01, 100 -02 = couple 100, partner 01 and partner
02).  Furthermore, all collected measures will be identified only by [CONTACT_193671].  Video images will be
immediately labeled with the couple and participant numerical code. The video images will be
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  encrypted and saved on secure and HIPAA compliant servers through  the UNM HSC 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences . Furthermore, to prevent inadvertent 
presentation of partner stimuli to the wrong partner of a couple, research assis tants will be 
required to sign off on a “Participant Stimuli Verification Form” that he or she has viewed the 
experimental program and has verified that the  correct stimuli is being presented to the correct 
partner. A second research assistant will also view the experimental program , and  counter -sign 
the form ensuring that stimuli is correct. The list linking the numerical ID code to the 
participant's identif ying information will be maintained separately from study material.  
18) Potential Benefits to Subjects
The possible direct benefits to participants from participating in the study is referral to resources 
which may be helpful to them in ending violence in th eir relationships.  The benefits to society 
are much greater, however. Currently there are NO EFFECTIVE INTERVENTIONS for partner 
violence (Babcock, Green & Robie, 2004). This is largely because current treatments target 
behavior that has been socially det ermined, not scientifically determined.  This study is one in a 
series that will identify targets of intervention for partner violence which will be the first step in 
the development of effective interventions for partner violence.  
19) Vulnerable Populations
N/A
20) Multi -Site Research
N/A.  All work will be conducted at UNM Health Science Center.
21) Community -Based Participatory Research /Field Research
N/A.  Research is experimental and will be conducted in [CONTACT_193702]’s laboratory
housed in the CTSC .
22) Sharing of Results with Subjects /Incidental Findings
At this time, our behavioral study procedures do not lend themselves to the discovery 
of incidental findings. At the conclusion of the study procedures, all participants will be 
informed of the study hypotheses.   
23) Resources Available
Drs. Fink and Claus, as well as their collaborators have conducted studies that use 
overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_193637], including the measurement of 
psychophysiological responses (i.e. pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193638], skin conductance and heart rate 
variability), and measurement of acute alcohol effects on executive control. First, [CONTACT_193703] has published couples research examining the effects of intraindividual responses to 
relationship distress and their effects on depressive symptoms. She has also published 
behavioral methods for improving adaptive behavioral displays of couples in therapy 
sessions that improve generalization and utilization of new skills outside of therapy. In 
addition, [CONTACT_193702] has published st udies in which skin conductance response, and heart 
rate variability were the dependent variables. [CONTACT_193701] has conducted both oral and 
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  intravenous route alcohol administration studies to examine how individual differences in 
alcohol induced impairment re lates to subjective measures of sensitivity to the effects of 
alcohol (R21 -AA020304). [CONTACT_193704] has published pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193639], and has shown differences in pupil diameter in response to individually 
salient stimuli. As seen in Figure 2, pupil diameter was increased, an indication of 
increased arousal, during the recognition of the salient stimuli. Finally, [CONTACT_193705] has 
published research using nearly all common techniques associated with human autonomic 
system functioning, a nd has applied them to assessments of cognitive and affective 
control.  
In addition, [CONTACT_193702] is a Clinical Psychologist with extensive training  and experience 
in psychological assessment, and the conduct of prospective, longitudinal, substance use 
disorder s treatment outcome and program evaluation studies. She also has received 
additional training in advanced statistical methods such as, dyadic data analysis 
techniques, Multi -Level Modeling and Structural Equation Modeling and am also trained 
in the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) and Specific Affect Coding System (SPAFF) 
for the coding of dyadic behavior. [CONTACT_193702]’s most recent training as a postdoctoral fellow 
on an NIAAA Institutional Research Training Grant provided me with additional training 
and exp ertise to study on the effects of alcohol on the dyadic behavior of couples. [CONTACT_193703] also has experience developi[INVESTIGATOR_193640] (FAIR) , partner violence treatment 
program for  the Second Judicial District Court in Albuquerque, NM and a substance 
abuse treatment program for recipi[INVESTIGATOR_193641] (TANF), 
currently being pi[INVESTIGATOR_193642], New Mexico.  
Equipment :  The UNM Clinical and Translation al Science Center houses [CONTACT_193702]’s laboratory 
and contains updated equipment and IT capabilities including high -speed IT links to 
collaborating institutions such as the Mind Research Network (MRN), imaging and data analysis, 
neuropsychological testing roo ms, a server room, and secure data storage. The UNM Clinical 
and Translational Science Center has furnished [CONTACT_193702]’s laboratory will all necessary software 
and equipment for conducting her program of research including furniture, computers, 
electroenceph alography (EEG), psychophysiological and eye -tracking equipment. EEG and 
psychophysiological data will be collected using the BrainVision actiCHamp 64 -channe, DC 
amplifier, 24 -bit biopotential system. Skin conductance, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], heart rate and heart rat e 
variability will be collected using the BrainVision GSR module, respi[INVESTIGATOR_193643], 
respectively. Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193644] 100 Plus high speed camera 
system by [CONTACT_193661].  
Please see attached CTSC Resources Att achment for further resource explanation. 
24) Prior Approvals /Attachments Requiring S ignatures
The current application is a protocol modification of an existing approved protocol 
(HRPO #12 -433) and does not require prior approval from other entities.  
25) Confidentiality
Please refer to Section 14 (Data Management) and Section 17 (Protection Against Risk  
for Participation) for the procedures for maintaining confidentiality.   
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  In addition, we have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the Department of 
Health and Human Services via the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism .Because this  is a study involving couples, NIAAA was concerned that if one 
partner revealed study participation in a court setting that the CoC would no longer be in 
effect and would not be able to protect participants from forced release of study 
participation. Per t he request of NIAAA, we have worked with the UNM Legal Counsel 
to amend the consent form to include a statement indicating that “Your signature [CONTACT_193692], 
under any circumsta nces, any raw data including videos to participants.”  
26) Provisions to Protect the Privacy of Subjects
Recruitment:  To protect against the risk of loss of confidentiality and privacy, study 
recruitment materials will not identify the study as being one invo lving partner violence.   
Study recruitment materials (see attached) will recruit for couples in unhappy 
relationships who drink at least weekly.   
Consent:  As described above, each partner will be participate in an informed consent 
procedure in a private  interview room or [CONTACT_193702]’s laboratory in the CTSC to ensure that 
“eavesdroppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]” or observation by [CONTACT_105] -study team members is not possible.  An 
additional protection to protect the privacy of study participants is that all participants 
will be greated by  [INVESTIGATOR_13701] a research assistant in the lobby [CONTACT_193672].  
Data Collection:  Data collection will occur in a private interview room or [CONTACT_193702]’s 
laboratory in the CTSC.  Only trained members of the research team are permitted acce ss 
to any participant data.  
27) Compensation for Research -Related Injury
In the consent form, participants will be informed that UNM HSC will provide emergency  
treatment at their cost and that no commitment is made by [CONTACT_193673].  Participants will also be informed in  
the consent form that i n the event that they have an injury or  illness that is caused by [CONTACT_193674],  reimbursement for all related costs o f care will be sought from their  
insurer, managed care plan, or  other benefits program. If they do not have insurance, they will be  
informed that they may be responsible for these costs. Participants will also be responsible for  
any associated co ‐payments o r deductibles required by [CONTACT_38279].   
Economic Burden to  Subject s 
N/A.  
•List any costs to participants (or their 3rd party payer); include any charges for study
procedures, visits, or drug/devices.
Ensure that the cost section of the consent form reflects the costs that are covered by [CONTACT_193675] (or 3rd party payer) are responsib le.
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  Research Procedures  Number of 
Samples/Procedures  Responsible Party  
Study  3rd Party Payer 
or Participant  
Standard of Care Procedures  Number of 
Samples/Procedures  Responsible Party  
Study  3rd Party Payer 
or Participant  
28) Consent Process  (including waiver request for HIPAA, waiver of
HIPAA for recruitment only, Waiver of Informed Consent, and Alteration
of Informed Consent )
Consent  
The PI, co -investigator or other research associate will be responsible for 
obtaining informed consent. The consenting process  process will be conducted for 
each partner separately and in separate rooms in [CONTACT_193702]’s laboratory and in an 
additional interview room in the CTSC. The language used in the consent form 
will be easy to understand, participants will be  reminded that they are free to not 
participate, or discontinue participation at any time during the study.  If, however, 
it is during the alcohol adminsitration condition the participant must wait until 
their BAC is .[ADDRESS_230179] greater than "feeling somewhat negative" prior to leaving the research site.  
Participants will also be informed that they are free to withdraw any information 
provided during the study, including erasing portions of the v ideo recording.  
Should a participant make this request, it would result in the exclusion of the 
couple from further procedures and participation in the study as their video -
recorded  communication discussion will be used at stimuli in subsequent study 
phases. 
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent :  Review the “ CHECKLIST: Waiver 
or Alteration of Consent Process  (HRP -410)” in the Click IRB L ibrary  to ensure 
you have provided su fficient information for the HRRC  to make these 
determinations.  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  N/A 
Waiver o f Wri tten Documentation of Consent :  Review the “ CHECKLIST: 
Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -411)” in the Click IRB 
library  to ensure you have provided sufficient information for the IRB to make 
these determinations.  
N/A 
HIPAA  Authorization  
The identifiers collected during the course of this study will be participant name, 
and a contact [CONTACT_193676].  Digital video 
images of participants will also be collected .  The PHI collected in this study 
includes participant questionnaire answers, neurophysiological responding and 
computer task responses.  
Waiver of HIPAA  authorization :   Review th e “CHECKLIST: HIPAA Waiver of 
Authorization (HRP -441)”  in the Click IRB library  to ensure you have provided 
sufficient information for the IRB to make these determinations.  
N/A 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
N/A 
Planned Emergency Research Consents  
N/A 
Cognitively Impaired Adults / Adults Unable to Consent/  Use of a Legally 
Authorized  Representative (LAR)  
N/A 
29) Drugs or Devices
No experimental drugs or devices are used in this study.  All devices have been approved for the 
collection of research data.   EEG  and psychophysiological data will be collected using the 
BrainVision actiCHamp 64 -channe, DC amplifier, 24 -bit biopotential system. Skin conductance, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], heart rate and heart rate variability will be collected using the BrainVision GSR 
module, re spi[INVESTIGATOR_193643], respectively. Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_193645] 100 Plus high speed camera system by [CONTACT_193661].  All equipment is approved for 
research data collection.  
HRP -503 - TEMPLATE PROTOCOL  05.07.2015 
(0.05)  Drugs:   Please respond to all questions in this section  and include a completed 
and signed Drug Attachment form.  
N/A. No experimental drugs are being used in this study.  
Medical Devices :  Please respond to all questions in this section . 
N/A. There are no expe rimental medical devices being used in this study.  The equipment 
being used is approved for experimental research  use. 
Humanitarian Use Device  (HUD) : 
N/A.   
Remember to sa ve the completed protocol as a W ord document so that if changes are 
required, you can submit them as track changes with a new version number and/or 
version date.  
Please review the IRB Submission Checklist in the IRB Library  to ensure you have all 
required documents for your IRB submission.  
The University of New Mexico  
Consent to Participate in Research  
The Emotions and Decisions of Couples  
June 13, [ADDRESS_230180].  Approximately 224 couples will ta ke part in this study at the University of 
New Mexico.  
This form will explain the study to you, including the possible risks as well as the possible benefits of 
participating.  This is so you can make an informed choice about whether or not to participate  in this study.  
Please read this Consent Form carefully.  Ask the investigators or study staff to explain any words or 
information that you do not clearly understand.  
What will happen if I participate?  
If you agree to be in this study, you will be asked to read and sign this Consent Form.  After you sign the 
Consent Form, the following things will happen:   
1.You and your partner will complete several questionnaires asking you about various aspects of your
relationship and the alcohol that you drink.
2.You will then participate in an interview with the researcher about areas of disagreement in your
relationship.  With the researcher you will choose one or two areas of disagreement to talk about with your
partner while this discussion is video -recorde d.  We call this the “ couple’s  session.”
3.After you complete the couple’s session, you or your partner will be asked to return to the laboratory two
more times. We call these the “individual sessions.” If you are the person chosen to participate in th e
individual sessions, the following things will happen: We will remind you to please not use any drugs or alcohol
for 24 hours prior to your individual sessions.   You will be given a breathalyzer at the beginning of each
session. During each of these indi vidual sessions, you will either drink an alcoholic beverage or a nonalcoholic
beverage after which you will complete several computer tasks.
a.During the alcohol session you will be asked to consume a mixture of alcohol and juice at a
dose that  is int ended to achieve a maximum target breath alcohol concentration (BAC) of up to
.08mg%. The  volume of beverages will depend on your body weight, age and height. You will be
asked to consume  the beverage given to you within [ADDRESS_230181] before each individual session.   
c.  One computer task involves watching a computer screen change colors, another computer 
task involves you viewing video clips of your partner from your previous couple’s session  
discussion of a disagreement , and another computer task that involves you making decisions 
based on the instructions you receive.   
 
d. During these computer tasks, we will also be using electrodes to collect various measures 
from you like  brain waves,  heart rate, pulse, breathing rate and how much your skin perspi[INVESTIGATOR_6054].   
 
e. If you drank alcohol during one or both of the individual sessions, you will be required to 
remain in the labo ratory after the experiment until your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) falls 
to .03.  We will provide you with movies or TV programs to watch while we are waiting for this 
to happen.   
 
f.  If you did not drive yourself to the session, y ou will also be required to have a friend or 
relative (not your partner) pi[INVESTIGATOR_193646].  This is to make sure you 
are safe after consuming alcohol.    
 
4.  Also, research staff will telephone you the day after your couple’s , the day after the individual study 
sessions , and  one week after the last study visit  to ensure that you remain safe.  
 
Participation in this study will take a total of eight (8) hours over a period of three (3) days.  The first couples 
session will take approximately two (2) hou rs, and depending on the type of beverage that you consume in the 
individual sessions, the individual sessions may take up to five (5) hours. We ask that you allow five (5) hours 
for the completion of the individual sessions.  
 
What are the possible risks o r discomforts of being in this study?  
Every effort will be made to protect the information you give us.  There is, however,  an uncommon risk of 
boredom or intrusiveness due answering questions about your relationship and drinking.  There is a common 
risk o f some participants becoming slightly intoxicated that may lead to temporary impairment in motor 
coordination as a result of consuming alcohol.  There is also a common risk of discomfort to participants in 
discussing an area of ongoing disagreement with th eir partner.  There is a rare, but serious risk of partner 
violence occurring after participating in the discussion of an area of disagreement , after viewing task stimuli in 
subsequent visits , and after consuming alcohol .  There is also a rare, but serious  risk of a loss of confidentiality 
and privacy that includes the identification of participants by [CONTACT_193669], an invasion of privacy, social 
and economic risks, alterations in relationships with others that are to the disadvantage of the participan t, 
embarrassment, loss of respect of others, labeling with negative consequences or diminishing the participant's 
opportunities and status in relation to others.  There may also be risks that we cannot anticipate.  
 
How will my information be kept confiden tial?  
Your name [CONTACT_193693] a locked office at UNM and 
secure servers at the UNM Health Sciences Center , available only to the authorized members of this research 
team for the duration of the study.  For any information entered into a computer, the only identifier will be a 
unique study identification (ID) number.  Any identifying information and any record linking that information 
to the study ID numbers will be destroyed when the study is completed , approximately two year s from now .  
Information resulting from this study will be used for research purposes and may be published; however, you 
will not be identified by [CONTACT_193677].  
 
No one other than this study’s resea rch staff will have access to your video -recorded discussions of a 
disagreement.  Because research study’s often take years to complete, analyze  and interpret the results, by 
[CONTACT_193678].  We would also like permission 
to use your video -recordings in training other research staff in our research team. The video -recordings will 
not be used to train staff outside of our research team .  If you give us permission and change your mind later, 
pleas e contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Fink in writing at the address below and your video -recordings  will no longer be used for 
training . Please be advised that your partner must also agree to the video -recordings be ing used in training 
research staff in order for us to use them.  If your partner does not want his or her video -recording to be used, 
we will not use your video -recording either.  
 
_____ Yes, I agree to allow my videos to be used for training purposes.  I understand that individuals being 
trained to use these interviews  will be able to see my face.  __________ (participant initials)  
 
_____ No, I do not agree to allow my videos to be used for training purposes.  __________ (participant initials)  
 
 
We would also like to ask your permission to contact [CONTACT_193679].  By [CONTACT_193680] (e.g., email, phone, etc.), you will allow a trained research 
staff member to contact [CONTACT_193681].  You have no 
oblig ation to participate in any future study.  Declining to initial below or provide contact [CONTACT_193682] r esearch study. Your contact [CONTACT_193683]. Fink at the address 
below.    
 
_____ Yes, I agree to allow the research staff to contact [CONTACT_193684]. __________ 
(participant initials)  
Preferred contact [INVESTIGATOR_12183]:  Phone:  _________________ _____________ ________  
     Mail:     ________________ ___________ ___________  
     Email address:  ___________ ___________ __________  
_____ No, I do not wish to be contact[CONTACT_193685].  __________ (participant initials)  
 
 
Information from your participation in this study may be reviewed by [CONTACT_193686], and by  [CONTACT_193687] (HRRC)  which provides regulatory and 
ethical oversight of human research.  There may be times where we are required to share your information.  
Your name [CONTACT_193694] .  If, however, we feel that you or 
someone else is in imminent danger or if we learn of a child in danger we will notify the appropriate 
authorities.   
 
What are the benefits to being in this study?  
There may be no direct benefit to you from being in this  study.  Your participation may help find out 
information about couples with severe relationship conflict that will lead to better treatments for them.  You 
will also receive referral information that may be helpful in stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_193647].  
 
What other choices do I have if I don’t participate?  
Taking part in this study is voluntary so you can choose not to participate. Refusal to participate in this study 
will not involve any penalty to you or loss of benefits to which you are o therwise entitled to receive.  
 
Will I be paid for taking part in this study?  
Each partner will be paid $ 20 per hour for his/her participation for a total of $ [ADDRESS_230182] at the conclusion of each study session  in which you participate . 
 
What will happen if I am injured or become sick because I took part in this study?  
If you are injured or become sick as a result of this study, U niversity of New Mexico Health Sciences Center 
(UNM HSC)  will provide you with emergency treatment at your cost.  
 
No commitment is made by [CONTACT_193688] (UNMHSC) to provide free 
medical care or money for injuries to participants in this study.  
 
In the event that you have an  injury or illness that is caused by [CONTACT_138949], reimbursement 
for all related costs of care will be sought from your insurer, managed care plan, or other benefits program.  If 
you do not have insurance, you may be responsible for the se costs.  You will also be responsible for any 
associated co -payments or deductibles required by [CONTACT_123864].  
 
It is important for you to tell the investigator immediately if you have been injured or become sick because of 
taking part in this study.  If you have any questions about these issues, or believe that you have been treated 
carelessly in the study, please contact [CONTACT_193687] (HRRC)  at (505) 272 -
1129 for more information.  
 
Can I stop the study once I begin?  
Yes.  You can withdraw from this study at any time without affecting your access to referral information.  You 
can also re quest not to participate in the video -recorded session or request that your video -recording be 
deleted.  Please be advised, however, that this will result in you and your partner being excluded from the 
remaining sessions of the study.  Also, if you decide  to discontinue your participation after you have consumed 
alcohol, you will be required to remain in the laboratory until your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) falls to 
.03mg%  or below.  You will still be required to have a friend or relative (other than  your partner) pi[INVESTIGATOR_193648].  If you insist on leaving before your BAC falls to at least .03 mg% , we will be required to notify 
the authorities.  
 
The investigators have the right to end your participation in this study if they determine that  you no longer 
qualify to take part, you do not follow study procedures, or if it is in your best interest, that of your partner, or 
the study’s best interest to stop your participation.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_193649].  
Participa nts will be informed of any new findings during the course of the study that may influence their 
decision to participate.  
 
Certificate of Confidentiality  
 
We will do everything we can to keep others from learning about your participation in this study. To further 
help us protect your privacy, we have obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from the [LOCATION_002] 
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).  
 
With this Certificate, we cannot be forced (for example by [CONTACT_193689]) to disclose  information 
that may identify you in any federal, state, local, civil, criminal, legislative, administrative, or other 
proceedings. The researchers will use the Certificate to resist any demands for information that would identify 
you, except to prevent serious harm to you or others, and as explained below.  
 
You should understand that a Certificate of Confidentiality does not prevent you, or a member of your family, 
from voluntarily releasing information about yours elf, or your involvement in this study.  
 
If an insurer or employer learns about your participation, and obtains your consent to receive research 
information, then we may not use the Certificate of Confidentiality to withhold this information. This means 
that you and your family must also actively protect your own privacy.  
 
Again, and as mentioned above, you should understand that we will in all cases, take the necessary action, 
including reporting to authorities, to prevent serious harm to yourself, child ren, elderly persons or others. For 
example, in the case of child abuse or neglect.  
 
A Certificate of Confidentiality does not represent an endorsement of the research study by [CONTACT_193690].  
 
Refusal to Sign  
If you choose not to sign this Consent Document and authorizatio n for the use of your health information, you 
will not be allowed to take part in the research study.  
 
What if I have questions or complaints about this study?  
If you have any questions, concerns or complaints at any time about the research study, Brandi C . Fink, Ph.D., 
or her associates will be glad to answer them at ([PHONE_4191] , Monday through Friday, 9:00a.m. to 5:00p.m.  
If you would like to speak to someone other than the research team, you may call the UNM HRRC office at 
(505) 272 -1129.  The HRRC is a group of people from UNM and the community who provide independent 
oversight of safety and ethical issues related to research involving human participants.  
 
What are my rights as a research participant?  
If you have questions regarding your rights as a research participant, you may call the Human Research 
Protections Office (HRPO) at (505) 272 -1129 or visit the HRPO website at 
http://hsc.unm.edu/som/research/hrrc/ . 
 
Consent and Authorization  
You are m aking a decision whether to participate in this study.  Your signature [CONTACT_193695] (or the information was read to you). Once again, you should understand that we 
will in all cases, take the necessary action, incl uding reporting to authorities, to prevent serious harm to 
yourself, children, elderly persons or others, as in the case of child abuse. Your signature [CONTACT_193696], under any c ircumstances, any raw 
data including videos to participants.  By [CONTACT_123865], you are not waiving any of your legal 
rights as a research participant.  
 
I have had the opportunity to ask questions and all questions have been answered to my s atisfaction.  By 
[CONTACT_123865], I agree to participate in this study and give permission for my health 
information to be used or disclosed as described in this Consent Document.  A copy of this Consent Document 
will be provided to me.  
 
 
__________________________________                 _______ ____________________________ /____________  
Name [CONTACT_125587] (print)                                 Signature [CONTACT_193697]  
 
I have explained the research to the participant and answered all of his/her questions.  I believe that he/she 
understands the information in this Consent Document and freely consents to participate.  
 
__________________________________                 _________________________ __________/____________  
Name [CONTACT_193698] (print)                   Signature [CONTACT_193699]  