Executive Functioning in TBI From Rehabilitation to Social Reintegration: COMPASS  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  (D0637 -R) 
 
August 7, 2015  
1 
Title: Executive Functioning in TBI from Rehabilitation to Social Reintegration: COMPASS  
Grant: 1I01RX000637 -01A3  
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
Study  Summary  
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major health problem that leads to deficits in executive function, a term us ed for the 
cognitive operations responsible for planning, decision making, and other aspects of goal management. Executive 
functions are akin to the self -regulation processes by [CONTACT_92491], behaviors, and emotions 
in order to id entify, prioritize, and meet goals. 0F1 After TBI, which often affects the frontal regions of the brain and their 
connections, self -regulation processes become disordered and behavior may lose its goal -directed quality. 1F2 This, along 
with other cognitive, physical, and behavioral deficits that follow TBI, contributes to injured Veterans’ reduced ability to 
return to work or school and to regain satisfactory personal lives. Our understanding of the neurological disabling impact 
of TBI on executive function i s necessary for both the accurate diagnosis of impairment and individual -tailoring of 
rehabilitation processes aimed at recovery of independent function in returning service members. 2F3 
 
Goal -setting and goal management concepts are part of the “natural la nguage” of rehabilitation. However, 
collaborative goal -setting between clinician/case manager and client can be difficult because of the cognitive deficits that 
follow TBI, and because clients with TBI have heterogeneous problems and diffuse goals that are  difficult even for 
experienced clinicians to address. It might be argued that re -training returning Veterans with TBI how to self -manage their 
goals, with appropriate help and support, would essentially treat deficits in executive function. Such treatment  would have 
multiple benefits: Practical, real -life goals would be achieved, and injured Veterans would re -learn the skills needed to 
manage their own goals in the future. A structured approach to goal self -management would foster greater independence 
and self-efficacy, help clients to gain insight into goals that are realistic for them at a given time, and help clinicians and 
clients to work more effectively as true collaborators.  
 
The COMPASS  (Com munity Participation through Self-Efficacy  Skills Developme nt) program aims at developi[INVESTIGATOR_92466] a novel patient -centered intervention framework that can be utilized as a platform for VA community re -
integration comparative effectiveness research. The COMPASSgoal intervention will be developed and implemented  to 
meet these needs. COMPASSgoal will   integrat e principles and best practices of goal self -management. Goal setting is a 
core skill in self -management training by [CONTACT_92492]. 3F4 One important mechanism of action of this program appears to be its positive effect on self -
efficacy, or confidence in one’s ability to attain goals and solve problems. 4F5  
 
The study goal is to gather data on the efficacy of a novel appro ach to psychosocial rehabilitation for Veterans with 
executive function impairment due to traumatic brain injury (TBI), and to explore over time, through relevant measures, 
Veteran responsiveness to intervention. Veterans with mild TBI will be randomized i nto two groups: the COMPASS 
(Com munity Participation through Self-Efficacy Skills Development) goal -management intervention group and the 
supported discharge group.  
 
[ADDRESS_102352]-
injury from the TBI program at the DC VAMC over the three -year period of the study. The operational definition of  
executive dysfunction/ inclusion into the study is based on both clinical diagnosis by a study physician and a  standardized 
executive dysfunction measure, the Frontal Systems Rating Scale ( FrSBe score), such that a total score or any of the 3 
subscale scores < 1 SD compared to the normative score  would indicate executive dysfunction sufficient to include in the 
study. The treatment phase for the Veterans enrolled in the intervention group will continue for two consecutive months  (8 
weekly sessions) . Each participant in the intervention and control group will be assessed  at baseline (enrollment), post -
intervention, and at [ADDRESS_102353] -treatment  follow up.  
 
The COMPASS patient -centered intervention framework then can be utilized as a platform for VA community reintegration 
comparative effectiveness psychosocial research.
2 
Hoge CW, McGurk D, Thomas JL, Cox AL, Engel CC, Cas tro CA.   
Mild traumatic brain injury in U.S. Soldiers returning from 
Iraq. N Engl J Med . 2008;358(5):453 -63.  
SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
The study main objective  is to determine whether Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi 
Freedom /Operation New Dawn  (OEF/OIF /OND ) Veterans with executive dysfunction due to traumatic brain 
injury (TBI) will benefit from a novel goal self -management intervention ( Com munity Participat ion through Self-
efficacy  Skills Development, COMPASSgoal) compared to Veterans who receive case management support 
representing the current standard of care  enhanced  by [CONTACT_92493] . [ADDRESS_102354] are:  
 
Study  Specific Aim 1: To develop, implement, and evaluate a new goal self -management  
intervention (COMPASS) for Veterans with executive dysfunction due to mTBI , and to investigate  how 
executive functioning is linked to the performance of everyday tasks and comm unity  functioning.  
 
Study Hypotheses :  
Study Hypothesis 1:   Participants in the COMPASSgoal group will have higher TBI self -efficacy  and higher 
community integration scores over time than participants in the supported  discharge group matched on 
executive d ysfunction score;  
Study Hypothesis 2 :  Individual psychosocial profile  (emotional status, resilience, and level of post-traumatic  
stress disorder, PTSD) will mediate the responsiveness to the  COMPASSgoal intervention, measured through 
the standardized exp erimental performance of everyday tasks , in Veterans with impaired executive function 
due to TBI.  
 
Research Plan  
BACKGROUND AND SIGNI FICANCE  
 
BACKGROUND.  Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a direct cause of long -term cognitive disability in returning 
Veteran s. 5F6 TBI is also an established risk factor for psychological health and community re -integration. 3,
6F7 
Studies emphasize the dramatic impact of neurological injuries among OEF/OIF /OND  active duty troops (s ee 
Figure 1 ). There is mounting evidence to suggest 
that executive dysfunction due to central nervous 
system (CNS) insult causes both short -term and 
long-term consequences resulting in poor goal -
directed behavior 7F8,
8F9,
9F10,
10F11,
11F12 and significant decrea se in 
independent functioning in both soldiers and 
returning Veterans. Given the necessity for 
operational effectiveness in the battlefield 
environment, executive function symptoms become 
significant for the military because they jeopardize 
active duty tro ops’ executive function for crucial 
decision making. 3,
12F13,
13F14 At the same time, while 
remaining undetected, neurological problems cause 
poor self -management skills resulting in 
maladjustment and low qualit y of life in returning 
military Veterans.3,
14F15 In this study we will use the  
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement  
Act of 2004 definition of the traumatic brain injury that describes it as “...an acquired injury to the brain caused 
by [CONTACT_92494], resulting in total or partial functional disability or psychosocial impairment , or 
both, that adversely affects a person’s professional and educational performance in one or more areas , such 
as cognition; language; memory; attention; reasoning; abstract thinking; judgment; problem -solving; sensory, 
perceptual, and motor  abilities; physical functions; information processing; and speech. The term does not 
3 
apply to brain injuries that are congenital or degenerative, or to brain  injuries induced by [CONTACT_92495].” 15F16 The 
exposure to stressors from combat including explosive blasts and loss or injury to self or comrades can lead to 
significant problems when translating back to civilian life p ost-combat. 16F17,
17F18 Due to advances in medicine and 
body armor, soldiers are surviving blasts or explosions that may have previously resulted in severe injury or 
death during combat.  Following the US defense causality report in November 2009 ,  the Instit ute of Medicine 
updated its statistics to show that “casualty -to-wounded ratios have been found for OEF as 1:5.52 and for OIF 
as 1:7.2318,
18F19 compared with 1:2.6 in Vietnam and 1:1.7 in World War II 18,
19F20.”  
 
Many Veterans returning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan Operation Enduring Freedom (OEF) , Operation 
Iraqi Freedom (OIF) , and Operation New Dawn (OND) may have experienced TBI, 20F21 the significance of which 
is underscored by a national study, undertaken by [CONTACT_92496], to gage the impact of TBI on the lives of Veterans and their families. 21F22  
Even if there are no othe r co-existing physical impairments, TBI and PTSD  are enough to significantly hinder a 
Veteran’s successful progression into active community participation and employment. Physical factors 
affecting community re -integration in Veterans with polytrauma and t raumatic brain injury include pain, PTSD -
related anger, and depression. Among psychosocial factors that affect community functioning in returning 
Veterans are social isolation, poor problem -solving of everyday difficulties, and lack of motivation to change .  
 
 
EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONIN G SYSTEM IN TBI: A M ULTIFACTORIAL MODEL  
 
Executive dysfunction is the core condition underlying neurologic impairments resulting from central nervous 
system (CNS) insult such as traumatic brain injury,[ADDRESS_102355] feature of CNS degenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s disease. 24F25  As a central clinical syndrome, 
executive  functioning is defined as a network of processes that are responsible for initiating, guiding, and 
regulating psychomotor, cognitive, emotional, and behavioral functions, particularly, during active and novel 
problem -solving.11,
25F26,
26F27  
 
EXECUTIVE SYSTEM: NE UROANATOMICAL - NEUROCOGNITIVE DIMEN SION  
 
Executive processes are thought of as part of the system that acts in a supervisory capacity in the overall brain 
hierarchy 27F28 and provide for purposeful, goa l-directed behavior. 28F29,
29F30,
30F31 There is a plethora of neurologic and 
behavioral data demonstrating that individual performance processes are deeply involved with changes in what 
can be named the executive functional system (EFS) (see Figure 2 below ). 31F32,
32F33 Recent studies emphasize that 
executive processes do not have a single neuroanatomical representation in the central nervous system,10,
33F34 
rather they present as patterns merging different brain structures (e.g., the brain’s prefrontal zone and li mbic 
system) and their peripheral counterparts (e.g., motor apparatus). Existing interlinkages in the brain -peripheral 
system are currently explored by [CONTACT_92497], magnetic -resonance imaging (MRI) and a more precise assessment, 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). 34F35 The conceptual definition of the EFS proposes two major subsystems: the  
central executive subsystem , 35F36 that includes higher level processes such as selec tive attention, working 
memory, and decision -making capacity10 and the peripheral executive subsystem , composed mainly of 
psychomotor processes associated with central executive performance. 36F37,
37F38 Executive functioning can break 
down at any stage in the  behavioral sequence be it volition control, planning, purposeful behavior, or effective 
performance. 38F39 Deficiencies in self -initiated behaviors may result from neurological damage to the frontal -
subcortical or fronto -limbic circuitry ( see areas C and D,  Figure 2 ), 39F40,
40F41 to the right hemisphere, or in diffuse 
neurologic conditions ( see area A, Figure 2 ). 41F42 The dorsal prefrontal cortex is critical to allocating attentional 
resources involved with working memory tasks, 42F43 or to the attentional control ler 43F44 – a system responsible for 
maintaining and switching attention. 44F45  
 
 Cognitive and psychomotor goal -directed activity   
4 
Motor performance is an 
instrumental component of the 
executive functional system.32,33  
In the classic methodology of 
motor examination tasks 
developed by [CONTACT_92498]45,
45F46 the ability to copy 
hand movements paced by a 
metronome 46F47  was found to be 
sensitive to frontal damage and 
to temporal lesions ( see area C, 
Figure 2 ). Inability to move 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_92467] a repetitive or 
mixed -movement sequence, 
combined with errors and 
perseverations, was found to be 
characteristic of patients with left 
hemisphere lesions ( see area B, 
Figure 2 ). 47F48  Motor regulation 
deficits are often associated with 
withholding responses, 48F49 based  
on a “go/no -go” rule where a  
Figure 2. Central -Peripheral Dysregulation in Executive                            subject should respond only to  
Functional System (EFS)               one of two presented signals  
                   (see area A, Figure 2 ).31                                                                                       
Patients with subcortical involvement display executive  dysfunction that includes impairments in cognitive                         
flexibility, memory recall, and psychomotor slowing. 49F50,
50F51,
51F52  Impairment of executive p rocesses often presents 
the major challenge in individual ability to perform activities of daily living (ADLs), 52F53 management of disability, 53F54 
and community reintegration. 54F55  
 
EXECUTIVE SYSTEM: TB I, PTSD AND COMMUNIT Y RE -INTEGRATION  
 
There is an overl ap of symptoms between TBI and PTSD.  This issue is most pertinent in the chronic TBI 
population where there are higher rates of PTSD .  Sustaining  any kind of physical injury is known to increase a 
person’s risk for PTSD. 55F56  There are several symptoms th at are found in  both PTSD and TBI, such as deficits 
in attention and memory, irritability, and sleep disturbance. However in the acute assessment of TBI, some of 
the distinguishing symptoms such as headache, dizziness, balance problems, and nausea/vomiting  may help 
to elucidate TBI from PTSD. Another distinguishing factor is the history that is obtained from the patients about 
the course of events before, during, and after the traumatic event. Loss of consciousness (LOC ) and post -
traumatic amnesia are less common in PTSD and is the distinguishing historical factor to diagnose mild and 
moderate TBI.   
 
Research has suggested a range of post -injury cognitive, somatic, and behavioral symptoms including 
headache, anxiety, dizziness, and memory difficulties immedi ately following TBI, 56F57,
57F58,
58F59 as well as decreased 
educational attainment and limitations in work performance. 59F60,
60F61 The effects of cognitive and behavioral 
impairment on independence and societal participation following TBI is well established.  At the same time the 
gaps between research and everyday life continue to exist. As the recent report on the needs of returning 
IOF/OEF Veterans, published by [CONTACT_941] U.S. Institute of Medicine, indicates, “little research has been conducted 
to evaluate whether service members who undergo third location decompression (that is, for service members 
to have time with their comrades and peers in a restful situation and prepare themselves for going back to their 
families and communities) have better outcomes than thos e who do not.”[ADDRESS_102356] national survey s of 
OIF/OEF com bat Veterans enrolled in the Department of Veterans Affairs health care system, Sayer and 
colleagues (2009) 61F62 explored the prevalence and types of community re -integration problems faced by [CONTACT_92499], while assessing preferences f or interventions to promote adaptation to civilian life. 
Stratified Poisson regression was used to determine whether the number of community reintegration problems 
and the number of services of interest were associated with the presence of probable PTSD, g ender, or race. 
An estimated 25% to 56% of the population had some to extreme difficulty in social functioning, productivity, 
community involvement, and self -care domains. At least one third reported divorce, dangerous driving, 
increased substance use, and  anger control problems since returning from deployment. An estimated 41% had 
probable PTSD and each type of reintegration problem was more prevalent among Veterans with probable 
PTSD. The vast majority (96%) of Iraq/Afghanistan veterans expressed interest  in services to help them 
readjust to civilian life. The most commonly preferred ways to receive reintegration service or information was 
at a VA facility, through the mail, and over the internet. Interest in self -help techniques and yoga/meditation 
was pa rticularly common. 62F63   Penk and colleagues (2010) 63F64 in their VHA comparative effectiveness study 
discussed the need for research that identifies ways to aid Veterans with dual diagnoses attain competitive 
jobs.  Community re -integrations tools were fou nd to be key to the effectiveness of employment programs 
providing Veterans not only with income -earning work but also with skills  to help them secure employment . 
 
INTERNATIONAL CLASSI FICATION OF FUNCTION , DISABILITY AND HEA LTH (ICF)  
 
In C OMPASSgoal, we will consider  function and disability , as well as  activity and participation (including 
employment), based upon the widely -used International Classification of Function, Disability, and Health (ICF) 
framework 64F65 developed under the auspi[INVESTIGATOR_92468] . Through this inclusive approach, 
we will best be able to document the natural process of recovery in TBI, including the occurrence of 
accelerated recovery, thereby [CONTACT_92500] b enefit. 
At each assessment time point, participants (and their families and/or caregivers, if appropriate) will complete 
validated, standardized scales that capture outcomes in four central domains as defined by [CONTACT_52511]: 
function, health, participati on, and employment. The ICF presents an interaction of several basic concepts in 
disability that is widely used as a methodological tool for  studying  physical disability in general and TBI in 
particular. Relevant to the present project’s conceptual integra tion is the ICF proposed model of contextual 
(personal and environmental) factors as they relate to the individual health  condition.65     
 
OPERATIONAL DEFINITI ON OF EXECUTIVE FUNC TIONING  
 
The operational de finition of executive dysfunction/ inclusion into the study is based on both clinical diagnosis 
by a study physician and a standardized executive dysfunction measure, the FrSBe score, such that a total 
score or any of the 3 subscale scores < [ADDRESS_102357] of neurological injuries among OEF/OIF active duty 
troops, as well as difficulties that such impairments pr esent for returning service members. 3,6,13,[ADDRESS_102358] on executive function is necessary for both the accurate 
diagnosis of impairment and individual -tailoring of rehabilitation processes aimed at recovery of independent 
function. 3,18,
65F66    
 
Significance and Alignment with RR&D Priority Area: The proposed study directly supports the RR&D main 
goal to maximize functional recovery in Veterans as well as such additional goals  as: 
Topic area 1:  integrating the Veteran back into work and society ( Hypothesis 1 ) 
Topic area 2:  developi[INVESTIGATOR_92469]  
(Hypothesis 2) 
 
The proposed goal self -management intervention COMPASSgoal promises to be effective for service members 
and their families, as well as for the civilian population, by [CONTACT_92501] -making due to 
executive dysfunction, facilitation of clinical behavioral monitoring, and promotion of the e ffectiveness of 
[ADDRESS_102359] two inter-related hypothes es. Hypothesis 1  is explored 
through a randomized controlled trial (RCT)  testing the efficacy of a newly developed intervention  
COMPASSgoal in 110 young to middle aged Veterans with mild TBI  assigned to intervention goal self -
managem ent or supported discharge groups.  Hypothesis 2 is aimed at studying the multilevel relationships 
between four set of variables (neurological, psychological, behavioral , and social) measured repeatedly for the 
duration of the project. Assessments for the V eterans with mTBI  involved with  the project will be performed at 
baseline (pre -intervention for the COMPASSgoal group), 2 months after enrollment (or post -intervention for the 
COMPASSgoal group), and [ADDRESS_102360] -intervention/follow up.  
 
Overall Study Po pulation  
 
One hundred and ten Veterans with residual deficits in executive function due to mild TBI will be recruited from 
the TBI clinics at the DC VAMC over the three -year period of the study. Severity of TBI will be determined by 
[CONTACT_92502] c linician using the VHA TBI Comprehensive Evaluation electronic template. 66F67 The 
Frontal Systems Rating Scale (FrSBe)  will be used to identify individuals with differing levels of executive 
dysfunction . The operational definition of executive dysfunction/ inclusion into the study is based on both 
clinical diagnosis by a study physician and a standardized executive dysfunction measure, the FrSBe score, 
such that a total score or any of the 3 subscale scores < [ADDRESS_102361] by [CONTACT_92503].  If the potential 
participant’s medical record has  no documentation of mental health evaluation within the year prior to 
enrollment, the M.I.N.I. Neuropsychiatric Interview will be administered for exclusionary screening purposes. .  
 
  
We will make every effort to balance the sample by [CONTACT_654], gender, and ed ucation following the study inclusion -
exclusion criteria. Based on previous studies conducted with the VA population in the Greater Washington 
Area, we expect that approximately 10% of the study participants will be female, and 70% will be African -
American . The total number of study participants (N = 1 10) accounts for a 2 0% attrition rate in a neurologically -
disabled population due to their health condition and related problems.  
 
Inclusion -exclusion criteria  
 
One hundred and ten medically stable individuals  with various levels of TBI severity  who are not currently 
evaluated at weekly meetings by [CONTACT_92504] -related skilled therapy 
management  will be enrolled into the study according to the following inclusion and exclusion c riteria:  
 
  Table 1. Study inclusion -exclusion criteria  
 Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
 
 
 
COMPASS: 
community re-
integration  study  TBI of at least mild severity using 
criteria related to disturbance of 
consciousness  
(VHA TBI Comprehensive 
Evaluatio n screening tool)  Unable to provide informed consent and 
no proxy available  
Obtained informed consent  
 Severe impairment of language or day -
to-day memory  that would preclude 
participation in a verbally -based therapy  
Males or females of working age, 
between the ages of 18 and 55  Life expectancy of less than 36 months  
7 
Medically stable with physician 
approval to participate  Severe multiple trauma (as judged by 
[CONTACT_92505]/or 
investigators that is too severe to 
participate in this stud y) such as severe 
burns, serious organ damage, 
amputations, multiple fractures.  
Ability to comprehend and 
communicate in English at a 6th 
grade level  History of  substance abuse severe 
enough to cause neurologic damage, 
pre-morbid history of neurologic disease 
(e.g., stroke)  
Executive dysfunction as identified 
by [CONTACT_92506] 
(FrSBe) and/or other study 
assessments  (see Table 2)  Prior history of known bipolar disorder 
or schizophrenia or severe psychiatric 
illness as determined by [CONTACT_92507] .  The 
MINI assessment  will be administered if 
no clinical judgment is on record within 
year prior to enrollment.  
 
 
POWER AND SAMPLE SIZ E CALCULATION  
 
Sampling   
 
During revision, we reversed our changes for the selecti on criteria following reviewers ’ suggestion to refocus 
our efforts on Veterans with mild TBI . The TBI clinic is held on a daily basis at the DC VAMC.    This clinic 
evaluates 150 -200 new Veterans per year who are identified with a positive TBI screen.  Cur rently, the positive 
TBI diagnosis rate is approximately 50% for the DC VAMC site.  In addition, other Veterans with known TBI are 
referred to the clinic resulting in additional 50 -100 referrals per year. Frequency of follow -up visits is 
determined on an i ndividualized basis. In addition to the Veterans with TBI who are hospi[INVESTIGATOR_92470], many Veterans seen at the Richmond Polytrauma Rehab Center and discharged to the 
Washington DC Metro area are then seen in the DC VAMC TBI clinic. Ever yone who consents to the study will 
be examined using the FrSBe. It is estimated that 50 -75% of Veterans with mild TBI, have impaired decision -
making/executive dysfunction and will be eligible and willing to participate in the study.  
 
Power and sample size  calculation   
 
110 participants with executive dysfunction due to diagnosed TBI will be randomized into the COMPASSgoal 
intervention or supported discharge groups , as assessed via the VHA TBI Comprehensive Evaluation 
screening tool.    Participants in the supported discharge group will not receive the intervention , but will receive 
usual care provided by [CONTACT_92508] . Participants in the 
intervention group will receive 8 goal self -management sessions  over a period of approximately 10 weeks . We 
don’t expect a significant change from post -intervention  to [ADDRESS_102362] for comparisons of mean change in  the Community Reintegration of  Service  members  
(CRIS ) subscale from pre - to post -intervention  between two groups . 
 
Hypothesis:  
H0: μ1= μ2 where μ1= mean change in CRIS subscale from time 1 to time 2 in self -management  
group and μ2= mean change in CRIS subscale from time 1 to time 2 in supported dischar ge group  
H1: μ1≠ μ2  
Power Calculation: PASS (Power Analysis and Sample Size Software, Kaysville, UT, 2008) was  
used for the power calculation. The primary outcome of this study is the frequency of social  
interactions measured via  the Extent of Participatio n subscale of the CRIS..[ADDRESS_102363] with assumption of normality. The 
level of significance was set  at 0.05 and power was set at 90%. The effect size and standard de viation used for 
the power  calculation were estimated based on a previous VA study and clinical judgment .744 subjects in each 
8 
group, for a total of 88 subjects will provide 90% power to test an effect size of  0.71 with a SD of 7 for 
difference in CRIS subs cale score between groups with α=0.05  (two sided) . After  adjustment for 20% loss to 
follow -up, we will recruit [ADDRESS_102364] at t he DC VAMC  in Washington , DC either face -to-face or over the VA 
Telehealth System  (see Study Algorithm, Figure 5) . All research procedures, including assessments, may be 
completed over the phone , not including informed consent .  Over the [ADDRESS_102365] been diagnosed with 
MTBI . All participating Veterans will undergo a battery of tests measuring executive function, real -world 
performance, TBI self -efficacy, emotional status and PTSD resilience, community integration , and quality of 
life. Each will receive additional screening of TBI and executive dysfunction to determine intervention eligibility. 
COMPASSgoal investigators will discuss each participating Veteran with his/her VA case manager.  
Subsequently, Veterans will be randomized to intervention and control gro ups. The former will receive the  
COMPASSgoal self-management intervention developed to support vulnerable transitions identified during the 
first [ADDRESS_102366] -, and 3 months following completion of the 
COMPASSgoal intervention or supported discharge process.  Data will be modeled longitudinally and on multiple 
levels to identify vulnerable trans itions and predictors of community integration/participation outcomes. 
Findings will form the basis for clinical practice guidelines.  
 
Figure 5. COMPASS Study Algorithm                                                                           
 
Recruitment Process  

[ADDRESS_102367]. Alexander Libin (PI), [CONTACT_92540] ( Co-PI; Polytrauma 
Clinic Director , and their clinical associates. Consecutive patients approaching discharge from multi -
disciplinary care who meet the incl usion/exclusion criteria will be notified of the study and approached for 
informed consent.  If necessary, participants will be recruited using recruitment flyers. Following consent 
procedures, individuals agreeing to participate in the study will be asked  a series of screening questions to 
ensure that they have met all inclusion/exclusion criteria. In addition, study investigators will take special 
precautions to ensure that potential study participants fully understand the consent form  and authorization f or 
the release of Protected Health Information  (e.g., by [CONTACT_92509] - see details in  the Human Subjects section).  
 
Screening for exclusion -inclusion criteria  
 
Potential participants will be approached at least three months after TBI for informed consent. The results of 
the VHA TBI Comprehensive Evaluation electronic template will be reviewed following IRB approved and 
HIPAA compliant data collection procedures.  The first data collection wi ll take place within the first [ADDRESS_102368] in the DC VAMC TBI database or through the TBI Case Manager, the 
study PI  [INVESTIGATOR_7706] -PI ([CONTACT_92541])  or treating physician will speak with the TBI patient and family , as 
appropriate to each Veteran’s circumstances,  about the study. In addition, the treating physician will introduce 
the research team to the families of patients.  Special care will be taken to ex plain the nature of the study and 
all risks/benefits to the individual in language that is appropriate for his/her comprehension level. Once written 
consent has been obtained, subjects will be assigned a de -identified study number for data collection purpo ses 
by [CONTACT_978].  
 
Testing setting  
 
For both standard and computerized testing, participants will be provided with a quiet room, a desk, and a 
chair. We will make every effort to standardize testing conditions.   Assessments will be audio recorded for 
quality control purposes.  
 
Patient retention and PI [INVESTIGATOR_92471]’s prior experiences, we are confident in the success of study recruitment and retention 
procedures. In addition, we will be using a motivational technique that previ ously proved to be very useful in 
participant recruitment and retention. An IRB approved Certificate of Participation  (Thank You letter)  template 
will be used to provide participants and family members with appreciation for participation in the study in 
comprehensible, “layman” language. This will not only keep participants engaged with the study, but will also 
potentially create a study atmosphere that will motivate them to bring other potential participants to the study to 
benefit from the same experience .  
 
To encourage ongoing patient engagement b etween assessment sessions T2 and T3, Veterans will receive  
IRB-approved Engagement Templates as reminder s of COMPASS participation.  This will remind participants 
that they are enrolled in the COMPASS  study  without providing information that may influence study variables.  
Further, participants who initially engaged with the study team, but are lost to follow -up will also receive a n 
IRB-approved  Follow -up Letter asking them to contact [CONTACT_92510]. S ee Appendix 4 for the letter templates . 
 
Overall rational e for the assessment model  
 
While assembling the study assessment battery we considered the following rules: a) relevance of the 
proposed measure to the study S pecific Aim and Hypotheses; b) the balance of the proposed measures by 
10 
modes of expression and assessment quality (self -reported assessment vs. experimental technique vs. 
observation by a clinician or a family member); c) the possibility of premorbid execu tive functioning evaluation 
and sequential charting of executive function over time as it returns to the estimate; and d) possibility of linking 
performance at the baseline with executive performance over time, using reliable change models to determine 
if the change meets criteria for some a priori "recovery threshold".    
 
Included in Table 2 below and Appendix 1 ( Assessment Schedule ), core TBI measures were suggested by [CONTACT_92511]/or were used in community integration TBI s tudies while 
implementing a multilevel approach to data analysis. The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke (NINDS), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR), the De fense Centers of Excellence for Psychological Health and 
Traumatic Brain Injury (DCoE), and the Defense and Veterans Brain Injury Center (DVBIC) have co -
sponsored this scientific initiative to develop common data elements (CDEs) for TBI research.  
 
In accor dance with the study Specific Aim, we also considered psychosocial  individual assessment s that  
capture the subjective aspects of recovery including resilience, amount of stress (PTSD), functional capacity, 
emotional status (including depression and anxiety  levels), TBI self -efficacy, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and life 
satisfaction.  These measures have proved external validity and are commonly used in TBI studies (see Table 
2, Assessment Schedule).   The behavioral assessment focuses on individual performance of real -world tas ks. 
The community integration measures focus on different aspects of societal participation and individual 
productivity including educational attainment and employment.   These measures also have good construct 
validity, test -retest reliability, and importa ntly, they are sensitive to change.   Most measures employ alternate 
forms or demonstrate low practice effect which makes them appropriate for repeated administration.  We are 
also aware that  the types of measures included are complementary such that "recove ry" on the objective 
measures might not reflect "recovery" on the subjective measures.   
 
STUDY ASSESSMENT SCH EDULE  
 
Assessments will be performed at baseline (termed as "pre -intervention" for the COMPASSgoal group), 2 
months (or post -intervention for the i ntervention group), and 3 months follow up for both intervention and 
supported discharge groups. Participants involved with the COMPASSgoal intervention (see relevant section 
below) will receive [ADDRESS_102369] ed through an IRB-approved letter . 
 
 
Table 2: Multifactorial Executive Functioning, Psychological, Behavioral, and Community 
Integration Measures  (for a detailed description see Appendix 1, Assessment Schedule )  
NOTE. Table 2 was significantly revised; therefore changes are not italicized . 
Domain  Test Description  Study Protocol  Time  
Cognitive 
functioning 
and TBI 
severity  
 TBI screening  
(VHA TBI 
Comprehensive 
Evaluation 
screening tool)  Reliable measure for 
detecting cognitive 
impairment in service 
members . If the 
Veteran does not 
have a CT BIE 
available in the 
medical record, 
questions 6 -8 will be 
collected by [CONTACT_2717] -Screening for 
exclusion  * 
[ADDRESS_102370] Description  Study Protocol  Time  
approved member of 
the Polytrauma team.  
Executive 
dysfunction  
 FrSBe** 80, 82  Frontal systems 
Behavioral Scale, 46 -
items . Both self -report 
and Family -report.  Executive 
dysfunction due 
to TBI  10 min  
 
 
Demographic 
Information  Patient Information 
Form  8 questions about 
demographics  Collected once 
during 
exclusionary 
screening  5 minutes  
Mental Health  MINI International 
Neurop sychiatric 
Interview (MINI)  
7.0.[ADDRESS_102371] traumatic stress 
disorder, alcohol 
dependence/a buse, 
substance 
dependence/abuse, 
psychotic and mood 
disorders, anorexia 
nervosa, bulimia 
nervosa, generalized 
anxiety disorder, and 
antisocial personality 
disorder.   Determination of 
mental health 
disorders in 
absence of 
clinical judgment 
within past yea r.  [ADDRESS_102372] 
(Part A and B)  
This is a measure of 
cognitive processing 
speed, mental 
sequencing, visual 
search and motor  
speed and consists 
of two components: 
Part A and Part B. 
Part A requires t he 
subject to connect  
[ADDRESS_102373] 
(COWAT)  
This is a measure of 
word generation and 
is considered an 
executive functioning 
measure. Letter  
Fluency req uires the 
person to generate 
words that start with 
a specific letter. 
Category Fluency  
requires generation 
of words from within 
a specific category 
(e.g., animals). Each 
trial lasts for  
one minute and the 
score is based on the 
number of words 
provided.  Executive 
dysfunction due 
to TBI  [ADDRESS_102374] to trauma  Measure of 
individual 
abilities to 
manage TBI 
consequences  5 min  
Emotional 
status and 
resilience  
  
 BSI-18 assessment    Paper -and-pencil 
scale that consists of 
18 items; [ADDRESS_102375] (PCL)  
 Presence of PTSD 
symptoms. PCL is a 20 
item self -report scale, 
updated for DSM -V.  Stress signs: 
intrusive 
thoughts, 
avoidance 
behavior, arousal 
symptoms  5 min  
Community 
Reintegration for 
Service Members 107 – items assessing  
Extent of Participation,  
Perceived Limitation in  Veteran -specific 
measure utilizing 
[ADDRESS_102376] Description  Study Protocol  Time  
(CRIS, Fixe d Form; 
Resnik L.)  81, 82,83,84 ** Participation, and 
Participation 
Satisfaction  scales  
Social participation 
via ICF qualifi ers: 
return to work and/or 
to school as defined 
by [CONTACT_92512]/educational 
attainment confirmed 
by a family 
member/immediate 
caregiver  or other 
reliable source.  Categorical 
variables  * 
 *Tests performed by [CONTACT_92513]   
** If patients participate in the recruitment assessment within [ADDRESS_102377] as part of the routine evaluation of Veterans referred with suspected TBI.  Staff performing 
all outcome assessments will be blinded  to group assignment throughout the study, and participants will be 
asked at each assessme nt not to reveal their group assignment to data collectors.  
 
 
GOAL SELF -MANAGEMENT INTERVENT ION (COMPASSgoal ) DEVELOPMENT  
 
The purpose of the study is to develop and implement an innovative treatment program called COMPASSgoal 
which will teach goal self -management to Veterans with executive dysfunction due to TBI. This will include a 
systematic, written protocol for therapi[INVESTIGATOR_41259] “user -friendly” materials for clients, to be used in individual  
treatment with clients with TBI. This treatment protocol will b e used to guide Veterans and their therapi[INVESTIGATOR_92472], setting, and tracking progress towards goals throughout the study timeframe.  
 
As an aid to developi[INVESTIGATOR_92473], focus groups and semi -structured interviews will be  held 
with Veterans with mTBI who come from a variety of backgrounds . The purpose of these interviews  and focus 
groups  is to assure that the content and format of the COMPASS intervention is broadly relevant to both 
Veterans’ goals in the context of their lived experiences .. The focus groups and interviews will be audio 
recorded. Focus group/interview scripts are found in Appendix 2.  
 
As another aid to developi[INVESTIGATOR_92473], focus groups and semi -structured interviews will be 
held with VA cl inicians from practices representative of how the VA delivers services nationwide.  The purpose 
of these interviews and focus groups is to assure the content and format of the COMPASS intervention in 
broadly relevant to the constraints of clinicians’ pract ice across VA service environments.  The focus groups 
and interviews will be audio recorded.  Focus group/interview scripts are found in Appendix 2.  
 
In addition to the modifications described above, we will conduct a recruitment assessment prior to 
implem enting the intervention.   This portion of the study will not be audio recorded.  The assessment will be 
part of routine clinical treatment and participation is mainly a release of records. In this assessment, we will 
document the approximate number (and th us, proportions) of new patients presenting for clinic serv ices 
(without keepi[INVESTIGATOR_92474]). Among this consecutive series of new 
patients, we will use an informed consent process to invite participation in a single, b rief testing session, for 
those who screen positive for mild TBI, but do not have documented serious mental health co -morbidity (e.g., 
schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, clinically significant PTSD). Thus, these latter participants will 
grossly rese mble those who might be invited into the COMPASS trial on discharge from rehabilitation team 
14 
treatment. Following informed consent, these participants will be given the main measure used for inclusion in 
the in tervention study, the FrSBe,  the primary outco me measure, the CRIS , and a short interview . Total 
participation is expected to take no more than 30 minutes and may be done either in person or by [CONTACT_92514] (these [ADDRESS_102378] their routine clinical data (age, gender, presenting symptoms, severity of TBI, records 
from the current epi[INVESTIGATOR_92475]) used as needed to correlate with the psychometric findings (without 
personal identifiers attached).  
 
The rati onale for this recruitment assessment  is as follows. The FrSBe is a self -report measure of executive 
dysfunction that was developed orig inally to measure neurobehavioral symptoms in dementia. It has been 
carefully validated and normed, and has favorable psychometric characteristics. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_92476] a 
relevant measure for TBI by [CONTACT_92515] g Group, it has been 
used little in studies of mild TBI in Veterans , which is the target population of the investigation. One study 
(Schiehser et al., 2011) administered the pre - and post -onset versions of the FrSBe to 71 non -combat military 
personnel who were <[ADDRESS_102379] -injury scores were elevated, especially on apathy and executive dysfunction. However, 
on average, even the elevated scores were within the norma l or borderline ranges . 69F70 This reinforces the need 
to examine the distribution of FrSBe scores in a sample of Veterans with remote mTBI and to relate specific 
score elevations to other sources of symptom report. The only other study examining FrSBe score s exclusively 
in mild TBI sustained in adulthood did show scale elevations in a non -military convenience sample of 76 
persons presenting with symptomatic, self -reported mild TBI years after injury; actual TBI severity could not be 
determined in most cases and symptom exaggeration could not be rul ed out . 70F71 Thus, from prior literature we 
cannot predict with certainty (1) whether our current inclusion criterion of ≥ SD on any FrSBe subscale is overly 
restrictive, overly inclusive, or appropriate for this population; nor can we judge (2) the proportion of avai lable 
participants who would meet this criterion, which has important implications for our ability to meet recruitment 
benchmarks within the study time frame. The proposed assessment  will enable us to determine the sensitivity 
of the FrSBe to mild TBI sust ained months or years prior to intervention and, by [CONTACT_92516], will help us to plan how to recruit adequate 
numbers of Veterans into the trial.  
 
The CRIS, our primary outcome m easure, is equally important to assess  in this sample in order to address the 
following objectives: (1) Determine the time needed to administer the measure, which is quite lengthy. 
Recently, the CRIS was converted to a computer -adapted (CAT) version which may substantially reduce 
particip ant burden . 71F72 Before starting the assessment , we will contact [CONTACT_92517]/ or validated short forms are available; (2) Verify that this measure, too, is sensitive 
to the c ommunity integration problems experienced by [CONTACT_92518]. The CRIS has been validated thus 
far on Veterans with severe, mixed type injuries; homeless Veterans; and those with mental health diagnoses 
such as depression and PTSD, but not in our targe t population; (3) Derive preliminary data on the relationship, 
if any, between the FrSBe and the CRIS measures. Reid -Arndt et al. (2007) found that the FrSBe predicted 
community integration only weakly. 72F73 However, that study used the Community Integratio n Questionnaire, a 
measure with known psychometric difficulties.  
 
Conceptual Framework  
  
The proposed new interventional framework, COMPASSgoal, aims at addressing unmet needs of OIF/OEF 
Veterans for successful return to civilian life. 3,8-14 Employing the proven elements from self -management 
training and other goal management programs successfully implemented with civilian clinical populations, 
COMPASSgoal will guide participating Veterans, their families, and rehabilitation specialists through the process 
of negotiating goals, establishing hierarchies of long -, mid -, and short -range goals, and developi[INVESTIGATOR_92477], measurable ways of tracking progress. A s kill that will be emphasized is the ability to break 
distal, or long -term goals, into proximal or short -term goals, and to use one’s performance on proximal goals to 
modify the distal ones as necessary. 73F74  Other specific components to be incorporated int o the COMPASSgoal 
protocol include three over -arching self -regulation strategies that have been shown in meta -analyses to be 
effective: goal manipulations; arousal management (both relaxation and increasing arousal/ motivation); and 
[ADDRESS_102380]. 74F75 A meta -cognitive technique called “mental contrasting” —simultaneously considering both 
the positive aspects of the goal state with the negative aspec ts of one’s current state —will also be employed. 75F76 
Finally, self -monitoring skills will be incorporated as these also have a strong evidence base. 76F77 
 
Procedures and Implementation  
 
The COMPASSgoal intervention will be developed  with the assistance of the study Chief TBI Rehabilitation 
Research Consultant,  Tessa Hart, PhD. [CONTACT_92542] is a recognized expert on executive function/ dysfunction after 
TBI, and its treatment. 77F78,
78F79,
79F80,
80F81,
81F82,
82F83,
83F84,
84F85,
85F86,
86F87,
87F88,
88F89,
89F90,
90F91,
91F92,
92F93,
93F94  She is also an expert in the process of developi[INVESTIGATOR_92478], 94F95,
95F96 and is leading an NIH -funded [ADDRESS_102381] team will participate in VA TBI clinic weekly meetings discussing potential participants , Veterans 
nearing discharge,  to approach  for informed consent.  
Each client in the intervention group will receive up to 90 minutes per week of  treatment, call ed goal self -
management intervention, which will follow the written protocol. This treatment will be conducted by [CONTACT_92519].  In the course of these weekly sessions, each client will develop his or her goal planner. The 
planner is conceived as  a portfolio containing the written materials generated during goal planning with various 
tabs for long - mid-, and short -term goals and activities relating to them -- and all the materials designed 
collaboratively with each client for goal tracking.  Depend ing on the individual client’s comfort with and access 
to technology,  materials may be managed through a secure online portal . The goal planner will be updated 
weekly during intervention sessions .  
 
Significant others (spouses or other close friends/ relat ives) will be invited to participate in the assessments 
and the sessions at the discretion of each participant, in order to provide support outside of treatment for 
implementing the procedures learned in each session. They will also be asked to answer the FrSBe Family -
Rating questionnaire on the behalf of their family member/significant other.   If family members/significant 
others are not physically present to consent and answer the FrSBe family member assessment, the Veteran 
will be asked to provide a mail ing address and phone number for a family member/significant other.  The family 
member/significant other will be mailed a letter with the contact [CONTACT_19292], asking him or 
her to call the study team.  The letter will also state that the  family member/significant other will receive a call 
from the study team in [ADDRESS_102382] the team.  An opt -in/opt -out form will be 
included in the letter to be returned to the study team.  A waiver of informed consent and HIPAA w aiver have 
been submitted to the IRB for approval.  
 
Note about the Manual: The COMPASS Advisor will have a certain amount of flexibility when it comes to 
implementing the manual in order to tailor the program to participants and individualize the approach.   The 
following are appropriate adaptations that the COMPASS Advisor is authorized to implement:  
1. Flexibility in presenting information while maintaining structure to fit the natural flow of the sessions.  
For example, because this is a verbally -based thera py, the Advisor may find that an individual Veteran 
directs the session toward discussing the brain graphic before discussing the COMPASS graphic.  This 
represents a change the order of the  information presented in the  sessions, but not a change in the 
protocol or structure of the manual.  The same information will be provided  each time , albeit in a 
different order.  If the Advisor finds he or she consistently has to change the order in numerous 
sessions, the change will be implemented for all participants and this will be reported to the IRB.   
2. If the Advisor and the participant run short on time in a session, parts of the session may be covered in 
the first few minutes of the next session.  For example, if the participant has to leave Session [ADDRESS_102383] suits the participant  can be 
implemented in the meetings .  For example, if the COMPASS Advisor finds a Vete ran reacts better to 
the term “goal” as opposed to “objective,” the Advisor can use the words that are most appropriate to 
the situation  throughout the intervention with that particular Veteran .  If the Advisor finds that a series of 
Veterans react more po sitively to particular words that differ from the wording in the manual, the 
change will be implemented for all participants and this will be reported to the IRB.  
 
Updates to forms and homework sheets for the Veteran will be submitted to the IRB before bei ng implemented 
in the manual.   If changes to the manual are so significant to change the nature of the intervention, the manual 
will be submitted to the IRB as well.  Cumulative changes will be submitted to the IRB  upon request.  
 
Integration of the COMPASSgoal Intervention with the VA Individualized Rehabilitation and Community Re -
Integration Care Plan  
 
To successfully implement the proposed intervention as a complementary service to participating Veterans 
with TBI, the study staff will  employ the framewor k developed in the VHA Handbook5  1172.04, Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation: Individualized Rehabilitation and Community Re -Integration Care Plan (2010). 
This Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Handbook defines procedures for development and implemen tation 
of the Individualized Rehabilitation and Community Reintegration Care Plan for Veterans and military Service 
members who receive inpatient or outpatient rehabilitative care for functional deficits or needs related to 
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) and  polytrauma. The COMPASSgoal protocol will interplay at each phase of 
development and implementation with the procedures for Individualized Rehabilitation and Community 
Integration Care Plans specified by [CONTACT_92520].  
  
Research staff will undergo intensive training during months 9-11 of Year 1  and receive ongoing relevant 
education. Supervision of the COMPASSgoal staff involved with the intervention delivery  is the responsibility of 
the PIs and study consultant, who will  also provide mentoring regarding specific medical, family, and 
community issues as needed. Initially, daily meetings  among the research team will be held to address 
operational, procedural, and scheduling issues. These meetings will decrease to weekly con sultations to 
address difficult cases and share successful management strategies and new resources. Data collection will 
be regularly verified and audited by [CONTACT_9137].   
 
Supported Discharge (Control) Group activities  
 
Participants randomized i nto the supported discharge group, serve as controls for the intervention group and 
will not receive the COMPASSgoal intervention. It was suggested by [CONTACT_92521] w ith the COMPASS control group to offset the 
possible effects of the additional time and attention devoted to participants in the COMPASS group models.   
 
To address this issu e, we held a special meeting at the DC VAMC with the TBI Case Manager s, Social 
Worker, and the study ’s newly added PI (Joel Scholten, MD). The result of the meeting was a propos al to 
structure  communication procedures for the Veterans involved with the COMPASS control group through the  
increase and standardiz ation  of the intensity and d uration of their interactions with the research team acting as 
Case Managers.  Each control group participant will receive additional prompts to address just -in-time concerns 
as documented in the ir treatment plans . This strategy will  result in increased fre quency of the phone calls and 
other means of contact.  
 
Veterans enrolled in the control group will be contact[CONTACT_92522].  During t he point of 
contact, the Veteran in the supported discharge group will answer the Mayo -Portland Adaptability Inventory -4 
17 
Participation Index (M2PI).  The test will be a self -report by [CONTACT_92523].  The M2PI [INVESTIGATOR_92479], when the Veteran is 
discharged from team treatment, and [ADDRESS_102384] Secure Messaging, 
he or she will only be contact[CONTACT_47605] a phone call , which will be audio rec orded to enable discourse 
analysis as in the intervention group .  If the Veteran feels more comfortable interacting through secure 
messaging and is enrolled in myHealtheVet, he or she will receive a se cure message with the M2PI [INVESTIGATOR_92480] a s the phone call.  In addition control subjects will receive case management support as 
requested upon initiation by [CONTACT_92524] (standard practice).  Please see Appendix 3 for the M2PI [INVESTIGATOR_92481]/phone call script.  
 
Data Collections and Storage  
Data will be collected into an Access Database and analyzed through SPSS on the VINCI server.  If data is 
downloaded from VINCI to share with non -VA collaborators, the data will be deidentified.  VINCI will be used to 
upload and store data, but no data will  be requested from the national databases supplied through VINCI.  The 
following information comes from VINCI:  
“VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI)  
The VA Informatics and Computing Infrastructure (VINCI)  is a major informatics initiative of  the Department 
of Veterans Affairs (VA) that provides a secure, central analytic platform for performing research and 
supporting clinical operations activities. It is a partnership between the VA Office of Information Tec hnology 
(OI&T) and the Veterans  Health Administration Office of Research and Development (VHA ORD). VINCI 
includes a cluster of servers for securely host ing suites of databases integrated from select national VA data  
sources . VINCI servers for data, applications and virtual sessions are ph ysically located at the VA Austin 
Information Technology Center (AITC), located in Austin, [LOCATION_007]. This secure enclave with 105 high -
performance servers and 1.5 petaby[CONTACT_92525] -speed data storage has multiple layers of security  and disaster 
recovery  to pr event data loss.  
 
To e nsure the protection of Veteran  data, VINCI maintains compliance with the guidelines set forth by 
[CONTACT_92526] (VHA) Handbook 1200.12, Use of Data and Data Repositories in VHA 
Research , and all other applicable VA an d VHA policies and regulations. In addition, VINCI has undergone all 
security certification activities in support of obtaining an Authorization to Operate (ATO). Access to VINCI 
resources are approved in accordance with the requirements of National Data Sy stems (NDS), VHA Handbook 
1200.12, Use of Data and Data Repositories in VHA Research, and all other applicable VA and VHA policies 
and regulations. All data transferred from VINCI is subject to audit for compliance.  
 
VA-credentialed r esearch or operations staff are granted  access to study -specific data along with tools for 
analysis and reporting in the secure, virtual working environment through a certified VHA network computer 
within the VA .  If not working within a VA or VHA hosted office environment cont aining VA network access, 
researchers may apply for and then access VINCI through an approved Virtual Private Network (VPN) and 
Remote Desktop application. The remote computing environment enable s data analysis to be performed 
directly on VINCI servers, offering a number of advantages: uniform security standards for access; a common 
point of entry for all investigators who use the data; tools for analysis and reporting; tighter and more 
consistent control of data quality ; and the ability to standardize and update terminology and format as 
technology and methodology improve.  
 
Data Collection  
VA provides care to V eterans at over 1,[ADDRESS_102385] system known as the Veterans Information System 
Technology Architecture (VistA). VistA provides a longitudinal view for patients receiving care nationwide 
including diag nose s, procedures, medications , labs, physiologic measurements, and text notes and repo rts. VA 
[ADDRESS_102386] over  20 million 
Veterans historically. The aggregate content of these 130 VistA systems includes 2.3 billion documents (e.g., 
Progress Notes, Discharge Summaries, Reports) accumulating at a rate of 696,000 each day; 6.2 billion lab 
values (+1.5 million each day), 3 .4 billion orders (+ 845,000 each day) , and 1.7 billion medication 
administrations  and prescription fills  (+390,000 each day).  
 
Data are aggrega ted from individual VistA systems  to the VA Corporate Data Warehouse  where it is modeled 
and prepared for use. Data published by [CONTACT_92527] (DSS) , Inpatient and Outpatient 
Medical SAS (MedSAS) , VA Health Economics  Resource Center (HERC ) cost data, Vital Status and VA -CMS 
linked data files maintained by [CONTACT_92528] (VIReC), CDC National Death Index VA -
linked data, and several other specialty data sets can be requested through VINCI. VA National Data Services 
and other data stewards regulate the right to use the data, but  VINCI facilitates the process. When study 
requests  are approved, project -specific data are extracted from source databases and placed in SQL tables 
accessible only to the research team and VINCI data ma nagers . 
 
Storage of Study Data  
Study data will be kept in accordance with the Department of Veterans Affairs Record Control Schedule 10 -1 
(RCS 10 -1). Storage and transfer of any Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or Protected Health 
Information (PHI ) must be done  in accordance with applicable VA  and VHA policies and directives, state and 
federal regulations, and applicable statutes including the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability ACT 
(HIPAA). Unless explicitly requested and approved by d ata stewards, all sensitive patient data must remain on 
VINCI project servers and only aggregate data without PII / PHI may be transferred from VINCI. Any desired 
change in data storage location or transfer requires amending the original data request with an updated of 
disposition of study data. The amendment must be approved by [CONTACT_92529].  
 
Violations of data policy or approved use of data will be subject to full penalty of law, which may include 
suspension of access privileges, reprimand, suspension from work, demotion, removal, and criminal and civil 
penalties.  
 
Upon completion of the research project, the study principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_92482] (ISO), and in accordance wi th VA policy, will ensure that, study data containing 
sensitive, confidential information will be returned to the VA, sanitized and removed from all servers, desktops, 
removable storage devices, etc.  
 
Data Access  
Only study team personnel explicitly author ized by [CONTACT_92530]. The study 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_92483]. VINCI data managers and VA OI&T personnel 
not under the purview of the study principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_92484], network, processors, firewall and 
software in the VINCI environment, including access rights granted to study personnel.  
 
When study personnel are no longer part of the research team, the study principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_92485] t erminate that person’s access to all study data and notify the VA Information Security 
Officer of such action. No sensitive patient data may be shared with anyone who does not have a VA 
appointment. All study team personnel with access to sensitive patient  data must stay current on required VA 
information security and privacy policy trainings.  
 
Data Storage Location  
Study data stored on VINCI servers is located at the Austin Information Technology Center, [ADDRESS_102387]., Austin, TX [ZIP_CODE] -0001. The specif ic server where the data are stored within the VINCI environment will be 
chosen by [CONTACT_92531]. The server name [CONTACT_92539].  
 
Specialized S oftware  
All software used to access sensitive patient data, whether provided by [CONTACT_92532], or developed by [CONTACT_3476], 
will run in virtual desktop sessions on VINCI servers within the Austin Information Technology Center.” 98F99 
[ADDRESS_102388] three major types of data assessed at times 1 -3 (baseline/pre -intervention, 2 
months/post -intervention, and 3 months follow up): community integration parameters including educational 
attainment and employment,  individual characteristics such as PTSD; TBI self -efficacy, emotional status, 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], performance of real -world tasks, resilience and life satisfaction , and neuropsychological parameters 
including overall cognitive and executive functioning. Though we hav e removed the physical function 
assessments from future data collection, previously collected data on physical function may still be used for 
data analysis and subsequent publication and presentation purposes. The primary outcome will be the change 
in the three ma jor type s of parameters from pre - to post -intervention. Depending upon the hypothesis being 
tested (see Specific Aims section), participants will be stratified according to level of executive functioning, 
severity of conditions secondary to TBI (PT SD, level of functioning, emotional status), or degree of societal 
participation.  Dependent variables will include TBI -self-efficacy, community integration indices, educational or 
work attainment as defined by [CONTACT_92533], and life satisfaction.  B oth objective (e.g. executive 
performance) and subjective (e.g., perceived TBI self -efficacy) data will then be obtained based on repeated 
measures over the three -year period.  Multiple regression models will be fitted to explore continuous primary 
and sec ondary outcomes differentiating between groups at each time point and changes at the intra -individual 
and inter -individual levels over time. For  categorical outcomes (e.g., low /high executive performance, or work 
status such as unemployed /employed , part-time/full-time), unconditional logistic and/or multinomial regression 
models will be implemented.  
 
The basic testing of the hypotheses will involve ANOVA test and  repeated measures ANOVA test. Bonferroni 
adjustments will be made to account for multiple test ing.  
 
Hypothesis 1 : Outcome Variables Main Effects for Community Re -integration Factors   
This algorithm is based on the assumption that an interaction between the intervention group and control 
groups can be modeled as a fixed effect. An LMM will then be used to evaluate whether the intervention had 
an effect at any time point or whether the intervention influenced change (growth, trajectory) in the outcome 
over the course of the study. The following will be considered for the analytical strategy:  
 
o ANOVA, Repeated -measures ANOVA as well as MANCOVA will be used to compare the effect of the 
COMPASSgoal intervention vs. supported discharge group determined via baseline assessment. 
ANOVA will be used to compare the change from pre - to post -intervention between the two groups. 
Furthermore, i n order to analyze the main effect of the COMPASSgoal intervention  over time , a two -way 
repeated measures parametric ANOVA, as well as a non -parametric repeated measures Friedman 
ANOVA, will be performed, using the baseline ti me point, levels of TBI self -efficacy, or real -world tasks 
performance as the dependent variables. The levels of the repeated measures factor correspond to the 
number of assessments: baseline (pre -intervention) and [ADDRESS_102389] in TBI self -efficacy between the intervention and supported discharge groups 
while accounting for a specified covariate: level of exe cutive impairment  as defined by [CONTACT_92534] . In the 
case of non -normal residuals, we will use a nonparametric repeated measures approach. In the case of 
missing data, an LMM, which uses a maximum likelihood estimate to correct for unequal number of 
measures per subject, will be employed.  
o We will use Linear mixed models to control for potential confounding variables and baseline values will 
be utilized as a covariate. These models will allow for the additional control of potential within subjects 
clusters. These clusters, though not part of the formal hypothesis testing but by[CONTACT_92535], will allow for conceptualization of additional future hypotheses.   
 
Hypothesis 2: Psychosocial Profile as Mediator of the Reponsiveness to the Intervention Over Tim e 
Course  
[ADDRESS_102390] 
missing data points. Furthermore, linear mixed models (LMM) control for confounding effects of other 
repeatedly measured covariates while accounting for the correlation among repeatedly measured outcomes. 
SAS PROC MIXED will be used to estimate a LMM for each outcome of interest. For categorical outcomes, 
generalized estimating equations (GEEs) will be used to evaluate trends over time while accounting for the 
dependency among the repeatedly measured outcomes. GEEs will be solved using SAS PROC GENMOD.  
 
Also for Hypothesis 2 analysis the following will be cons idered:  
o Linear mixed models (LMM) will be used to control for confounding effects of other repeatedly 
measured covariates while accounting for the dependency among the repeated measured outcomes 
and covariance matrix.  
o We will construct a model which only includes the repeated measures variables to obtain means, 
variances, and covariances.  
o We will add time -invariant variables such as treatment group into the multi -level model (MEME) to 
predict the change over time in executive dysfunction and associated re al-life task performance. 
Therefore, this method will allow us to address individual growth, identify latent trajectories of growth, 
relate the observed changes to pre -existing differences between TBI subjects, and determine treatment 
effects.  
 
Then, we wi ll use linear growth curves to assess individual differences as well as group differences by 
[CONTACT_43638] a two -stage LGM. At the second stage, we will construct a model that only includes the repeated 
measures variables to obtain means, variances, and covari ances. At stage three, we will add time -invariant 
variables such as age, gender, and education into the model to predict change over time in executive function 
and real - world performance. We will also be able to refine our model at any level by [CONTACT_92536]. The obtained covariance structure will allow us to draw inferences with 
regards to linear increases or decreases in executive dysfunction and real -world performance over time. 
Therefore, this method will all ow us to address individual growth, identify latent trajectories of growth, and 
finally, relate the observed changes to pre -existing differences between TBI subjects.  
 
Missing Data  
Rigorous methods to address loss to follow -up and missing data  will also li kely be of importance.  As in 
many studies  with vulnerable populations , participant dropout or censoring  may be informative.  For example, 
sicker patients and those with sub -optimal treatment results may opt to discontinue participating or providing 
sample s or questionnaire responses. Thus, the probability of missing outcome data may be dependent on 
covariate data and, hence, "non -ignorable."  To assess the probable type of missing data, baseline covariates 
among patients with and without missing data will be compared.  If missing data are judged as Missing 
Completely at Random  (MCAR), the typi[INVESTIGATOR_92486] a complete case analysis, recognizing a 
loss of precision.  The exception to this strategy will be when considerable data (i.e. >15%) a re missing on a 
particular covariate that is judged to be critical for inclusion in the analysis. In this instance, imputation by 
[CONTACT_92537]; these simple approaches perform well when the 
overall percent of mi ssing data is low. In rare instances when the percentage of missing data is not low (i.e. 
>15%), more sophisticated multiple imputation methods may be employed.  Imputation methods will not be 
used to fill in values for missing outcome data.  
 
COMPASS PROJE CT TIMELINE AND EVALUATION  
Program evaluation (Years 1 -3) 
 
Ongoing program evaluation will begin in Year [ADDRESS_102391] of program 
21 
progress on a bi -annual basis, to ensure that feedback from Veterans with TBI will be considered in the 
ongoing evaluation and implementation of the program. Year 3 will be dedicated to refining the COMPASS 
program and working towards implementation of the program outside of the DC VAMC and the greater 
Washington, DC community  (see Figure 7) .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

[ADDRESS_102392] during 
the subsequent 26 months. An interim analysis of data (both qualitative and quantitative) will take place [ADDRESS_102393] following the preparative and early intervention phases 
(approximately 8 months into the study). A Clinical Practice Guideline will be a deliverable completed during  
the final quarters of the last year of the COMPASSgoal project.  
 
 
Knowledge Translation: Dissemination and Utilization of Study Results  
 
COMPASS staff and the DC VAMC public relations office will work together to ensure that objectives are me t 
and information gained from this study is translated directly back to clinical services at DC VAMC through a 
variety of mechanisms. Appropriate Knowledge Tools for the given audience will be determined and will 
include, but not be limited to 4 peer -revie wed publications, 4 national presentations, and integration into 
existing websites. All of this information will be shared with the Psychological Health and Community 
Integration office at the VA RR&D in Washington, DC.  
 
Potential Utilization of COMPASS fi ndings for My Health eVet application  
 
Myhealth eVet. (www.MyH ealth e.va.gov), a self -help/management tool has been available but very much 
underutilized. One of the reasons for this is that MyHealth eVet, the online, VA personal health record (PHR), is 
still i n a developmental stage with new functionality accruing in an incremental fashion. At present, 
MyHealtheVet allows Veterans to download self -entered health information to share with both VA and non -VA 
providers as a print or electronic text file. If a Vete ran has authenticated his or her identity in person at a VA 
Medical Center, portions of his/her VA (VistA) medical record that have been “abstracted” to MyHealtheVet can 
also be downloaded. This information is referred to as the “Blue Button” data set. The re is no mechanism for 
Veterans to “delegate” (e.g., share electronically in a secure manner) their MyHealtheVet information to health 
care providers and other trusted individuals. They are, therefore, on their own if they want to leverage the 
benefits of MyHealtheVet for health surveillance and coordination of care. Survey data collected from the 
general public, 100F101a randomized controlled trial of PHR effectiveness 101F102 and the experience of a large managed 
care provider 102F103 show that interaction with c are providers motivates individuals to use available personal health 

23 
tools. At present, MyHealtheVet does not provide interactive self -management functions. COMPASSgoal differs 
from MyHealtheVet in that it is a guided intervention in which health care prov iders engage Veterans, offer goal 
management exercises and provide personalized feedback. The Department of Veterans Affairs Innovation 
Initiative ( http://www.va.gov/vai2/ ) issued a request for proposals in the sprin g of [ADDRESS_102394] staff (at no 
increase to budget). [CONTACT_92543] is a doctoral candidate in compu ting technology in education exploring use 
of technology to enhance self -management and engagement of health teams to promote continuity of care. 
She is presently MedStar National Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s knowledge translation and disparities fellow and 
chairs the Knowledge Translation and Training Committee at NARRTC.  
 
 
Future steps and plans for continuing support  
 
The proposed project may be regarded as a first stage project in which the efficacy of the method is 
demonstrated, and the efficiency of each  component is tested. The next phase, which will follow this study, 
would involve the development of several projects aimed at exploring the mechanisms underlying successful 
vs. non -successful adaptation of Veterans to everyday life, as well as routes for transferring the ongoing 
delivery of intervention to the daily routine of community dwelling Veterans with TBI.  
 
The proposed study will prepare the field of creating supportive care environments for necessary future studies 
on the utilization of best clin ical practice guidelines for the everyday life of Veterans and their families. Clinical 
and applied research will concentrate on the utility of goal self -management interventions in routine care in 
both home and institutional settings, such as VA hospi[INVESTIGATOR_92487].  These studies will also 
examine the cost benefits of this approach, which are expected to be substantial because the approach will 
lessen the time health service providers (e.g., TBI case managers or TBI social workers) must devote  to their 
clients. In the basic research venue, studies need to explore the links between neuroanatomical structure, 
executive function, and everyday problem -solving in the context of both comparative effectiveness 
interventional research. This research wo uld help not only to improve quality of life for Veterans with TBI and 
other neurological deficits, but would also have important social benefits, such as training relatives and 
immediate caregivers on how to engage their loved ones in meaningful, healthy,  and productive activities.  The 
methodology proposed could be utilized with technology -based and other non -pharmacological interventions to 
better understand the needs and preferences of different clinical populations with chronic illnesses, or physical, 
cognitive, and behavioral disabilities (i.e., persons with PTSD, substance abuse, disturbing behaviors, etc.).  
This particular extension may elucidate the commonalities and differences among various clinical groups, and 
provide additional tools to improve  individual care of returning Veterans.  
 
REFERENCES  
                                                        
1 Locke E, Latham G. Building a practically useful theory of goal setting and task motivation. Am Psychol . 2002;57(9):705 -
717. 
2 Hart T, Jacobs HE. Rehabilitat ion and management of behavioral disturbances following frontal lobe injury.  J Head 
Trauma Rehabil . 1993;8:1 -12. 
3 Tanielian T, Jaycox LH, Adamson DM, Metscher KN. Introduction. In: Tanielian T, Jaycox LH, eds. Invisible Wounds of 
War:  Psychological and Cognitive Injuries, Their Consequences, and Services to Assist Recovery . Santa Monica, 
Calif: RAND; 2008:3 –17. 
4 Lorig K, Holman H. Self -management education: History, definition, outcomes, and mechanisms. Ann Behav Med . 
2003;26(1):1 -7. 
5 Lorig K, Holman H . Self -management education: History, definition, outcomes, and mechanisms. Ann Behav Med . 
2003;26(1):1 -7. 
6 Nelson LA, Yoash -Gantz RE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_92488], Campbell TA. Relationship between processing speed and executive 
functioning performance among OEF/OIF Veter ans: Implications for post deployment rehabilitation. Head Trauma 
Rehabil. 2009;24(1):32 –40. 
[ADDRESS_102395], Fraser R. Vocational Interventions and Supports Following Job Placement for Persons With 
Traumatic Brain Injury. J Voc Rehabil.  2010; 32(3):[ADDRESS_102396] . The Components of Executive Functioning in Traumatic Brain Injury . 
J Clin Exp Neur opsychol.  2005;27(8):1022 -32. 
9 Hanks RA, Rapport LJ, Millis SR, Deshpande SA. Measure s of executive functioning as predictors of functional ability 
and social integration in a rehabilitation sample.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil.  1999;80(9):1030 -7. 
10 Anderson V, Jacobs R, Anderson PJ, Eds. Executive Functions and the Frontal Lobes: A Lifespan Perspective (Studies 
on Neuropsychology, Neurology and Cognition). Psychology Press;2008.  
11 Grafman, J. Executive Functions. In: Parasuraman R, Rizzo M, Eds. Neuroergonomics: The b rain at work . Oxford 
University Press;2007:[ADDRESS_102397] J . Cognitiv e functioning ten years following traumatic brain injury and rehabilitation. 
Neuropsychology.  2008;22(5):618 -25. 
13 Zeitzer MB , Brooks JM . In the line of fire: traumatic brain injury among Iraq War Veterans. AAOHN J.  2008;56(8):347 -
53. 
14 Hoge CW , Castro CA , Messer SC , McGurk D , Cotting DI , Koffman RL . Combat duty in Iraq and Afghani stan, mental 
health problems and barriers to care. US Army Med Dep J.  2008;7 -17. 
15 VHA Handbook 1172.04. Department of Veterans Af fairs. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. Individualized 
Rehabilitation and Community Reintegration Care Plan. Washington, DC; May 3, 2010.  
[ADDRESS_102398] of 2004. 34 Code of Federal Regulations §300.7(c)(12).  
[ADDRESS_102399]-traumatic  stress disorder: challenges from provider perspective. J Rehabil Res 
Dev. 2009;46(6):703 -16. 
18 IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2010. Returning Home from Iraq and Afghanistan: Preliminary Assessment of  
Readjustment Needs of Veterans, Service Members, and Their Families. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.  
19 DOD. 2010. Defenselink Casualty Update . http://www.defenselink.mil/news/casualty.pdf  
(re-accessed May 10, 2011).  
20 Leland, A., and M. -J. Oboroceanu. 2009. American War and Military Operations Casualties:  
Lists and Statistics, Updated September 15, 2009 . Washington, DC: Congressional Research  
Service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/RL32492.pdf (re -accessed May 10, 2011).  
[ADDRESS_102400] -Related Injuries (PT/BRI) QUERI. 
http://www.queri. research.va.gov/ptbri/default.cfm . Accessed May 10, 2011.  
22 RAND. Center for Military Health Policy Research. Traumatic Brain Injury Study. 
http://www.r and.org/multi/military/traumatic -brain -injury.html . Accessed  May 8, 2011.  
23 Arzaga D , Shaw V, Vasile AT . Dual diagnoses: The person wi th a spi[INVESTIGATOR_92489] a concomitant brain injury. SCI 
Nurs. 2003;20(2):[ADDRESS_102401]: a measure of executive function in a sample of people with stroke. Am J 
Occup Ther . 2008;62(4):446 -55. 
25 Plotnik M, Giladi N, Hausdorff JM. Bilateral coordination of gait and Parkinson's disease: the effects of dual tasking.  J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry.  2009;80(3):347 -50.  
26 Luria AR . Higher Cortical Functions in Man . Basic Books, Inc., Publishers, [LOCATION_001];1996.  
27 Rabbitt P, ed. Methodology of Frontal and Executive Function . Psychology Press;1998.  
28 Burgess PW, Shallice T. Response suppression, initiation and frontal lobe lesions. Neuropsychologia. 1996;34:[ADDRESS_102402]:Pergamon Press;1967.  
30 Lezak MD. Executive Functions and Motor Performance. In: Lezak MD, Howieson DB, Loring DW, with Hannay JH, 
Fischer JS, Eds. Neuropsychological As sessment Fourth Edition. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press;2004.  
31 Goldberg E. The Executive Brain: Frontal Lobes and the Civilized Mind. Oxford University Press;2001.  
32 Libin A. Mental Hierarchy Principles: Bridging Universal and Unique in Mind -Body Resea rch. Psychol J Russian Acad 
Sciences . 2008a;29:10 -35.  
33 Libin, A. Differential Psychology: on the Crossroad of American, European, and Russian Traditions . 5th ed. Eksmo 
Education, Moscow; 2008b:580.  
34 Baddeley A. Working Memory, Thought, and Action (Oxford Psychology Series). Oxford University Press;2007.  
35 Niogi SN, Mukherjee P, McCandliss BD. Diffusion tensor imaging segmentation of white matter structures using a 
Reproducible Objective Quantification Scheme (ROQS).  Neuroi mage . 2007;35(1):166 -74. 
36 Laine M, Tuokkola T, Hiltunen J, Voroby[CONTACT_92538] V, Bliss I, Baddeley A, Rinne JO. Central executive function in mild cognitive 
impairment: a PET activation study.  Scand J Psychol . 2009;50(1):33 -40. 
37 Ziv I, Avraham M, Dabby R, Zoldan J, Djaldetti R, Melamed E. Early -occurrence of manual motor blocks in Parkinson's 
disea se: a quantitative assessment. Acta Neurol Scand.  1999;99(2):106 -111. 
38 Heitger M, Anderson T, Jones R.  A role for instrumented motor assessment in clinical assessment and outcome 
prediction after mild head injury. 6th World Congress on Brain Injury. Melb ourne, Australia, May 6 -8, 2005.  
39 Lezak, MD. The problem of assessing executive functions. Int J of Psychology.  1982;17:281 -297. 
25 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
40 Stuss, D. Biological and psychological development of executive functions. Brain Cogn. 1992 ;20:8–23. 
41 Scott SH. Optimal fee dback control and the neural basis of volitional motor control. Nat Rev Neurosci.  2004;5:532 -546. 
42 Gibb W. Neuropathology of Parkinson's Disease and related syndromes, in Parkinson's Disease . Cedarbaum J, 
Gancher S,Eds. W. B. Saunders: Philadelphia. 1992; 361-376. 
43 Koechlin E, Corrado G, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38588] P, Grafman J. Dissociating the role of the m edial and lateral anterior prefrontal cortex in 
human planning.  Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2000;97(13):7651 -6. 
44 Baddley AD, Hitch GJ (1974) Working memory In: Bower G, Ed. The psychology of learning and motivation . [LOCATION_001]: 
Academic Press Vol VIII;47 -90. 
45 Goldberg E, Ed. Contemporary Neuropsychology and the Legacy of Luria Taylor & Francis. Psychology Press;1990.  
46 Christensen  AL. Luria's neuropsychological investigation. Munksgaard; 2nd edition 1984.  
47 Jason GW. Manual sequence learning after focal cortical lesions. Neuropsychologia , 1985;23:483 -496. 
48 Harrington DL, Haaland KY. Hemispheric specialization for motor sequencing: abnormalities i n levels of programming. 
Neuropsychologia.  1991;29(2):147 -63. 
49 Raskin SA, Borod JC, Tweedy JR.  Set-shifting and spatial orientation in patients with Parkinson's disease.  Clin Exp 
Neuropsychol.  1992;14(5):801 -21. 
50 Riederer P, Wuketich S. Time course of nigrostriatal degeneration in Parkinson's disease. A detailed study of influential 
factors in human brain amine analysis. J Neural Transm.  1976;38:277 -301. 
51 Grafman J, Holyoak KJ, Boller F, Eds. Structure and Func tions of the Human Prefrontal Cortex . [LOCATION_001] Academy of 
Sciences;1995.  
[ADDRESS_102403] University Press:2000.  
53 Fisher AG. The assessment of IADL motor skills: An application of many faceted Rasch analyses. Am J Occup Ther.  
1993;47: 319–329. 
54 Cicerone KD. Rehabilitation of executive function impairments.  In: HighWH, Sander AM, Struchen MA, Hart KA, Eds. 
Rehabilitation for traumatic brain injury. [LOCATION_001] : Oxford University Press;2005:71 -87. 
55 Levine B, Robertson IH, Clare L, et al. Rehabilitation of executive functioning: an experimental -clinical validati on of goal 
management training. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2000;6:299 -312. 
56 Hoge CW , Castro CA , Messer SC , McGurk D , Cotting DI , Koffman RL . Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental 
health problems, and barriers to care. N Engl J Med.  2004;351(1):[ADDRESS_102404] University Press:[ADDRESS_102405] -Traumatic Stress Disorder: A Systematic Review of the Evidence. 
2009.  
[ADDRESS_102406]. Polytrauma Rehabilitation. In: Frontera 
WR, Silver JK, Rizzo TD, ed. Essentials of Physical Me dicine and Rehabilitation -2nd Ed. Philadelphia, PA: 
Saunders.  
60 Shames J , Treger I , Ring H , Giaquinto S . Return to work following traumatic brain injury: trends and chall enges. Disabil 
Rehabil.  2007;29(17):[ADDRESS_102407]. The Veterans Health Administration's (VHA's) Polytrauma Sy stem of Care 
for mild traumatic brain injury: costs, benefits, and controversies. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2009;4 -13. 
62 Sayer NA, Noorbaloochi S, Frazier P, Murdoch M, Carlson K, Gravely A, Baines A. Reintegration Problems and 
Treatment Preferences among Vet erans Returning from Iraq and Afghanistan with and without Probable PTSD. 
Paper presented at: VA HSR&D National Meeting; 2009 Feb 12; Baltimore, MD.  
[ADDRESS_102408] -Deployment Injury among  Combat 
Veterans. Poster session presented at: Society for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_92490]; 2009 Jun 
25;(2)Anaheim, CA.  
64 Penk W , Drebing CE , Rosenheck RA , Krebs C , Van Ormer A , Mueller L . Veterans Health Administration Transitional 
work exper ience vs. job placement in veterans with co -morbid substance use and non -psychotic psychiatric 
disorders.  Psychiatr Rehabil J.  2010 Spring;33(4):297 -307. 
65 World Health Organi zation. International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2001.  
66 MacGregor AJ, Dougherty AL, Baker DG, Golomb BA. Prevalence and psychological correlates of traumatic 
brain injury in Operation Ira qi Freedom. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2010;25(1):1 -8. 
67 GAO -08-276 VA Health Care: Mild Traumatic Brain Injury  Screening, Washington, DC, 2008.  
68 Sheehan D, Janavs J, Harnett -Sheehan K, Sheehan M, Gray C, Lecrubier, Y, Weiller, E, Hergueta T, Allgulander C, 
Kadri N, Ba ldwin D, Even C. (2014). M.I.N.I. MINI INTERNATIONAL NEUROPSYCHIATRIC INTERVIEW 7.0.  
69 Resnik LK, Clark MA, Borgia M. Telephone and face to face methods of assessment of Veterans’ community 
reintegration yield equivalent results. BMC Med RES Methodol ; 2011 ; 11:98.  
70 Schiehser DM, Delis DC, Filoteo JV, Delano -Wood L, Han SD, Jak AJ et al. Are self -reported symptoms of executive 
dysfunction associated with objective executive function performance following mild to moderate traumatic brain injury? J 
Clin Exp N europsychol ; 2011; 33(6): 704 -14. 
26 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
71 Reid-Arndt SA, Nehl C, Hinkebein J. The Frontal Behaviour Scale (FrSBe) as a predictor of community integration 
following a traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj  2007; 21 (13 -14): [ADDRESS_102409] (CRIS -CAT). BMC Med Res Methodol ; 2012; 12:145.  
73 Reid-Arndt SA, Nehl C, Hinkebein J. The Frontal Behavio ur Scale (FrSBe) as a predictor of community integration 
following a traumatic brain injury. Brain Inj  2007; 21 (13 -14): 1361 -9. 
74 Donovan J, Williams K. Missing the mark: Effects of time and causal attributes on goal revision in response to goal -
performan ce discrepencies. J Appl Psychol . 2003;88(3):379 -390. 
75 Meyers A, Whelan J, Murphy S. Cognitive behavioral strategies in athletic performance enhancement. In: Hersen RM, 
Eisler RM, Miller PM, eds. Progress in Behavior Modification. [LOCATION_001]: Academic Press ; 1996:137 -164. 
76 Oettingen G, Pak H, Schnetter K. Self -regulation of goal setting: Turning free fantasies about the future into binding 
goals. J Pers Soc Psychol . 2001;80(5):736 -753. 
77 Meyers A, Whelan J, Murphy S. Cognitive behavioral strategies in athle tic performance enhancement. In: Hersen RM, 
Eisler RM, Miller PM, eds. Progress in Behavior Modification. [LOCATION_001]: Academic Press; 1996:137 -164. 
78 Hart T, Jacobs HE. Rehabilitation and management of behavioral disturbances following frontal lobe injury. J Head 
Trauma Rehabil.  1993;8:1 -12. 
79 Hart T, Giovannetti T, Montgomery M, Schwartz M. Awareness of errors in naturalistic action following traumatic brain 
injury.  J Head Trauma Rehabil . 1998;13:16 -27. 
80 Schwartz M F, Montgomery MW, Buxbaum LJ, Lee SS, Car ew TG, Coslett HB, Ferraro M, Fitzpatrick -DeSalme E, Hart 
T, Mayer N. Naturalistic action impairment in closed head injury.  Neuropsychology.  1998;12:13 -28. 
81 Schwartz MF, Buxbaum LJ, Montgomery MW, Fitzpatrick -DeSalme E, Hart T, Ferraro M, Lee SS, Coslett  HB. 
Naturalistic action production in right hemisphere stroke.  Neuropsychologia . 1999;37:51 -66. 
82 Giovannetti T, Libon D, Hart T.  Awareness of naturalistic action errors in dementia.  J Int Neuropsychol Soc.  
2002;8:633 -644. 
83 Hart T, Hawkey K, Whyte J: U se of a portable voice organizer to remember therapy goals in traumatic brain injury 
rehabilitation: A within -subjects trial. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2002;17:556 -570. 
84 Sherer M, Hart T, Nick TG, Whyte J, Thompson RK, Yablon SA: Early impaired self -awarenes s after traumatic brain 
injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.  2003;84:168 -176. 
85 Hart T, Sherer M, Whyte J, Polansky M, Nov ack T. Awareness of behavioral, cognitive and physical deficits in acute 
traumatic brain injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabi l. 2004;85:1450 -1456.  
86 Hart T, Sherer M, Whyte J, Polansky M, Novack T. Awareness of behavioral, cognitive and physical deficits in acute 
traumatic brain injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.  2004;85:1450 -1456.  
87 Lehtonen S, Stringer AY, Millis S, Boake C, Englander J, Hart T, High W, Macciocchi S, Meythaler J, Novack T, Whyte 
J: Neuropsychological outcome and community re -integration following traumatic brain injury: The impact of 
frontal and non -frontal lesions. Brain Inj . 2005;19:239 -256. 
88 Kim J, Whyte J, Hart T, Vaccaro M, Polansky M, Coslett HB. Executive function as a predictor of inattentive behavior 
after traumatic b rain injury. J Int Neuropsychol Soc . 2005;11:434 -445. 
89 Sherer M, Hart T, Whyte J, Nick TG, Yablon SA. Neuro -anatomic basis of impaired self -awareness after traumatic brain 
injury: Findings from early computed tomography. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2005;20:287 -300. 
90 Hart T, Whyte J, Kim J, Vaccaro M. Executive function and self -awareness of “real -world” behavior and attention deficits 
following traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil . 2005;20:333 -347. 
91 Hart T, Seignourel PJ, Sherer M. A longitudinal stu dy of awareness of deficit after moderate to severe traumatic brain 
injury. Neuropsychol Rehabil . 2009;19:161 -176. 
92 Bagiella E, Novack T, Ansel B, Diaz -Arrastia R, Dikmen S, Hart T, Temkin N. Measuring outcome in traumatic brain 
injury treatment trials: R ecommendations from the TBI Clinical Trials Network. J Head Trauma Rehabil , in press.  
93 Hart T, Schwartz MF, Mayer N. Executive function: Some current theories and their applications.  In: Varney NR, 
Roberts RJ, Eds. Evaluation and Treatment of Mild Trauma tic Brain Injury.  Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, 1999;133 -148. 
94 Hart T. Cognitive rehabilitation. In: Frank RG, Rosenthal M, Caplan B, Eds., Handbook of Rehabilitation Psychology, 
2nd Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association,  2010;285 -300. 
95 Hart T. Treatment definition in complex rehabilitation interventions. Neuropsychol Rehabil . 19:824 -840, 2009.  
96 Hart T. Treatment definition in experience -based rehabilitation research. Methodology paper for Neuro -Cognitive 
Rehabilitation Research Network, www.ncrrn.org, posted June, 2007.  
97 Hart T, Evans J. Self -regulation and goal theories in brain injury rehabilitation. J Head Trauma Rehabil , 2006;21:142 -
155. 
98 Hart T, Bagiella E. Design and implementation of clinical trials in rehabilit ation research. Archives of Physical Medicine  
              and Rehabilitation , in press . 
99 VINCI Description for IRBs. VA Informatics and Computer Infrastructure – VINCI Central. Department of Veterans 
Affairs. Retrieved October 28, 2014 from http://vaww.vinci.med.va.gov/vincicentral/Overview.html .  
[ADDRESS_102410] University Press, 
2002.  
101 Lake Resear ch Partners. (2010, April). Consumers and health information technology: A national survey. Oakland, CA: 
[LOCATION_004] Healthcare Foundation. Available from http://www.chcf.org/publications/2010/04/consumers -and-health -
information -technology -a-national -survey  
102 Grant, R.W., Wald, J.S., Schnippe r, J.L., Gandhi, T.K., Poon, E.G., Oray, E.J.,  & Middleton, B. (2008). 
 Practice -linked online personal health records for type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial. 
Archives of Internal Medicine, 168( 16), 1776 -1782.  
103 Chen, C., Garrido, T.,  Chock, D., Okawa, G., & Liang, L. (2009). The Kaiser Permanente electronic health record: 
Transforming and streamlining modalities of care. Health Affairs, 28(2), 323 -333. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.2.323  
 