 1A Behavioral Slow-Breathing Exercise Pr ogram for Female Overactive Bladder  
 
(Public title:  Controlling Urgency through Relaxation Exercises-- CURE) 
 
Protocol Version 1.3 
 
   
 
Investigators Alison Huang, MD, MAS 
Leslee Subak, MD Deborah Grady, MD, MPH 
Wendy Mendes, PhD 
Eric Vittinghoff, PhD  
Data safety monitor  Andy Avins, MD  
Data management Mike Schembri, BS 
 
Research staf f Ann Chang– Project Coordinator 
Lisa Abinanti – Project Coordinator Traci Coggins-Plaut – Clinic/Recruitment Coordinator 
Sarah Jorgensen – Clinic/Recruitment Coordinator 
Sponsoring agency 
 National Institute on Aging 
Sponsor Representative/Program Office rMarcel Salive, MD 
Date April 4, 2016 
 
 2TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
A. Synopsis………….……………………………… ……………………………………………………………….. 3 
 
B. Specific Aims………………………………………………………………………………………………...…… 4  C.  Background and Justificati on…………………………………………………………………………………… 4 
 
D. Research Design and Met hods………………………………………………………………………………… 5 
 
 D.1 General Study Design ……………………………………………………………...………………..… 5  
D.2 Study Population and Eligibility Criteria………………………………………………...…………….. 6 
 D.3 Recruitment and Consent………… ………………………………………….………………………… 7 
 D.4 Interventions, Randomization, and Blinding………………………………….………………………. 8  
D.5 Measurements……………………………………………………………………………………...….. 10 
 D.6 Study Visits and Procedures ………………………………………………………………………..... 15 
 D.7 Adherence, Discontinuation, and Reimbursement..……………………………………………..… 18  
D.8. Potential Risks and Safety M onitoring……………………………… ……………………….……… 19 
 
D.9 Data Management Plan……… ……………………………………………………………….....…… 22 
 D.10 Statistical Considerations……………………………………………………………………….…….. 23 
    
Appendix A: Summary of Measures & Procedures……………………..…… …………………...………… 27 
 
References Cited………………………………..………………………………………………………………. 28 
 
   
 
  
 
 3A.   SYNOPSIS 
 
Overactive bladder (OAB), a syndrome defined by [CONTACT_80806], frequent trips to the 
bathroom, and in some cases involuntary urine leakage, affects up to one in five adult women and can 
have a profound effect on women’s day-to-day activities and quality of life.  Existing treatments for OAB, such as anti-cholinergic medications, are associated wi th multiple side effects or have other limitations 
that limit their usefulness or result in high rates of discontinuation.  Because OAB is associated with 
increased levels of self-reported anxiety and perceived stress, as well as abnormalities in autonomic 
nervous system control that are linked with anxiety  disorders, behavioral interventions that decrease 
anxiety and improve autonomic nervous system control offer a potentially novel approach to treating this 
condition.   
We previously examined the feasibility of teachi ng women with OAB symptoms to practice slow-paced 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], a behavioral technique that involves slowing the resting breathing rate to 5 to 10 breaths per 
minute to improve autonomic balance.  Women were assigned to practice slow-breathing exercises for approximately 15 minutes a day at home for 6 w eeks using a small, commercially-available guided-
breathing device that is currently FDA-approved for treatment of other conditions associated with autonomic nervous system imbalance (i.e., hypertension).  In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], recruitment of women was 
rapid, completion of home slow-breathing exercise sessions was high, and participants randomized to the 
slow-breathing intervention showed a promising trend toward reduction in OAB-related urine leakage compared to usual care. 
To rigorously evaluate the effects of this intervention on female OAB syndrome, we propose to conduct a 
12-week randomized controlled trial, in which 160 women with OAB symptoms will be randomized to: 1) use a standard guided-breathing device to practice slowing their breathing rate to [ADDRESS_88094] 15 minutes per day, or 2) use an identical-appearing control device that plays relaxing, non-rhythmic music while monitoring their spontaneous breathing rate.  All women will complete symptom diaries and questionnaires to monitor the severity and impact of their OAB symptoms, undergo measures 
of autonomic function, and complete questionnaires about anxiety and stress.   
Our goals are to: 1) determine whether the proposed slow-breathing exercise program is effective in 
reducing the severity of OAB symptoms in women; 2)  determine whether this slow-breathing intervention 
is effective in improving autonomic  nervous system control and exami ne change in autonomic function as 
a mediator of treatment effects on OAB; and 3) det ermine whether this slow-breathing intervention is 
effective in improving anxiety symptoms and explore im provement in anxiety as a mediator of treatment 
effects on OAB.  This study has the potential to signifi cantly advance treatment of OAB in women, as well 
as change current research paradigms regarding this widely prevalent health problem. 
 4B.  SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
We will conduct a rigorous 12-week randomized controlled trial in which 160 women with overactive bladder 
(OAB) syndrome will be assigned to: 1) use a standard guided-breathing device to slow their respi[INVESTIGATOR_80753] [ADDRESS_88095] 15 minutes per day at home, or 2) use an identical-appearing control device that does not guide their breathing but plays relaxing, non-rhythmic music while monitoring their spontaneous breathing pattern.  Our aims are:  
Aim 1:  To determine whether a device-guided slow-breathing exercise program can reduce the 
frequency and severity of OAB symptoms in women.    
Compared to controls, we hypothesize that women randomized to practice slow breathing for at least 15 
minutes per day for 12 weeks will report a more than 20% greater reduction in frequency of any voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80754] (measured by a validated voiding diary), in addition to greater improvements in frequency of ot her OAB symptoms and quality-of-life impact of OAB 
symptoms (measured by [CONTACT_80807]). 
Aim 2:  To determine whether this slow-breathing intervention can improve autonomic nervous 
system control in women with OAB, and explore change in autonomic control as a mechanism of 
treatment effects on OAB symptoms.   
Compared to controls, we hypothesize that women randomized to practice slow-breathing will demonstrate 
significantly improved autonomic co ntrol as measured by [CONTACT_5019]-frequency heart rate variability and pre-ejection 
period parameters, and that treatment effects on OAB symptoms will be at least partly mediated by 
[CONTACT_80808]. 
Aim 3: To determine whether this slow-breathing intervention can improve anxiety-related symptoms 
in women with OAB, and explore changes in anxiety as a mediator of treatment effects on OAB 
symptoms.   
Compared to controls, we hypothesize that wom en with OAB randomized to practice slow-breathing 
exercises will report significant improvement in anxiety-related symptoms (as measured by [CONTACT_80809]), and that treatment effects on OAB sympto ms will be at least partly mediated by [CONTACT_80810]. 
 
 
C.   BACKGROUND & JUSTIFICATION  
Nearly one in five adult women suffer from overactive bladder, a syndrome characterized by [CONTACT_73280], strong 
urges to void, increased frequency of daytime or nocturnal voiding, and in many cases involuntary leakage of urine when women are unable to get to the toilet in time.
1-3  Among women in the community, OAB is 
associated with sleep disruption, social isolation, decreased work productivity, sexual dysfunction, and depression.
2-9 When further complicated by [CONTACT_80811] (i.e., urgency incontinence), OAB can 
also lead to falls and fractures, increased caregiver burden, and loss of ability to live independently, with potentially devastating consequences for quality of life.
10-[ADDRESS_88096] a randomized trial of a mindfulness-based slow-breathing 
technique that has previously been shown to decrease anxiety and improve autonomic control.  Women with 
OAB will practice slow-breathing exercises at home  using a commercially-available guided-breathing device 
that requires limited individual instruction, is relatively inexpensive, and is FDA-approved for treatment of hypertension—another chronic condition associated with both autonomic dysfunction and anxiety.  To enable 
rigorous evaluation of efficacy, women will be random ized to: 1) use a standard guided-breathing device to 
practice slowing their respi[INVESTIGATOR_80753] 5 to 10 breaths per minute (BPM) for a minimum of 15 minutes per 
day (consistent with recommended use of the device to treat hypertension), or 2) use a visually-identical control device reprogrammed to promote breathing at a normal resting rate of [ADDRESS_88097] surgery, cancer, irradiation, or major 
neurologic disease, and are not receiving other medical treatments for OAB.  Participants will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio to: 1) practice slowing their resting respi[INVESTIGATOR_80753] [ADDRESS_88098] 15 minutes/day at home using a portable guided-breathing device; or 2) use an identical-appearing control device that plays non-rhythmic music while monitoring their spontaneous breathing pattern.  Women will be told that they are enrolling in a study of two types of relaxation therapy for OAB, and that we do not know which, if either, is effective in treating OAB.  All women w ill also receive a usual care pamphlet providing basic 
 6information about pelvic floor muscle exercises, and other traditional self-management strategies for OAB.   
Participants will return to the clinic at [ADDRESS_88099] use of their devices and at 6 and 12 weeks to 
provide outcomes data; they will also complete a mail-in packet [ADDRESS_88100] of OAB symptoms measured by [CONTACT_80812].  To address Aim 2, we will asse ss for improvement in autonomic nervous system 
control using several physiologic measures (heart rate variability, pre-ejection period) and explore change in autonomic control as a mechanism of treatment effect s on OAB.  For Aim 3, we will assess changes in 
anxiety-related symptoms using validated  questionnaires and assess whether these mediate treatment effects 
on OAB.  
 
D.2 Study Population and Eligibility Criteria 
Overview: Participants will be ambulatory women who have frequent OAB symptoms, report no prior complex 
urologic history, are not currently using other OAB tr eatments, and are willing to use the breathing device. 
Inclusion criteria 
1) Women aged 21 years or older who are able to walk to the bathroom without assistance 
2) Report recurrent epi[INVESTIGATOR_80755] (sudden or strong urges to urinate) beginning at least 3 months 
prior to screening  
3) Able to record all voiding and incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80756] a screening 3-day voiding diary29,30 and rate the 
severity of urgency associated with each epi[INVESTIGATOR_29807] a validated urgency severity scale31 
4) Document at least [ADDRESS_88101] moderate sensation of urgency (using the above validated urgency severity 
scale) 31 
5) Willing to refrain from initiating other treatments that may affect voiding pattern during the trial period 
Exclusion criteria 
1) Use of anticholinergic OAB medications or other medications known to affect urinary function (i.e., 
diuretics, tricyclic antidepressants) within 1 month of screening 
2) Current urinary tract infection (detected via screening dipstick urinalysis or urine culture) or a history more 
than [ADDRESS_88102] infections in the preceding 1 year 
3) Prior history of lower urinary tract surgery, pelvic cancer, or pelvic irradiation; or other pelvic or abdominal 
surgery within 6 months of screening 
4) History of interstitial cystitis, fistula in the bladder or rectum, or congenital or childhood defect leading to 
chronic urinary incontinence, retention, or other chronic urinary symptoms 
 75) Known history of major neurologic conditions likely to have major or permanent effects on bladder 
function such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828], or Parkinson’s disease  
6) Use of bladder botulinum injections, electrostimu lation, or other invasive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_80757] 3 months of screening   
7) Formal pelvic floor rehabilitation or other formal behavioral therapy for bladder symptoms involving a 
physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_80758] 3 months of screening 
8) Started, stopped, or changed dosage of a psychoactive medication likely to affect anxiety (SSRIs/SNRIs,  
tricyclics) within 3 months of screening, or plans to start, stop, or change dosage during the trial 
9) Resting blood pressure (average of 2 measures) less than 100/60 at screening (women with baseline low 
blood pressure may theoretically be at increased risk of hypotension with use of RESPeRATE) 
10) Resting breathing rate already below 10 breaths/minute before treatment (as measured during run-in) 
11) History of chronic pulmonary disease likely to interfere with breathing exercises (e.g., emphysema) 
12) Currently pregnant, gave birth within the past 3 months, or planning pregnancy during the study period 
13) Unable or willing to sign an informed consent, fill out questionnaires, or undergo study procedures 
 
 
D.[ADDRESS_88103] community-based media efforts (newspaper notices, radio advertising, brochures in local clinics, talks to lo cal community groups, notices in churches), social 
media/networking sites and direct recruitment from physi cian offices (specifically in gynecology, primary care, 
and alternative medicine clinics).  Recruitment efforts will be based at the UCSF Women’s Health Clinical Research Center at the Mt. Zion campus at  300 Frank Ogawa Plaza, in Oakland, CA, where coordinators will bring equipment needed for measurements to a rented private office.  To facilitate recruitment, UCSF 
Women’s Health Clinical Research Center includes 2 rooms that are staffed by [CONTACT_80813], recruiters, and research assistants.  
D.3.2   Informed consent & documentation 
Before entering the study, all study procedures, time requirements, risks and potential benefits will be 
explained to each potential study participant using t he information in the UCSF IRB-approved informed 
consent form.  The potential study participant will be given adequate time to read the informed consent document and ask questions. Eligible participants who choos e to enter the study will sign the inform consent 
form and Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) form prior to beginning study treatment.  Each participant will be given a copy of the signed documents and the original will be a part of the research 
 [ADDRESS_88104].  All study-specific data will be kept confidential and stored in locked files at the clinical center.  
 
D.4 Interventions, Randomization, and Blinding 
D.4.1    Overview of interventions  
Participants in this trial will use RESPeRATE, a sm all, commercially-available guided-breathing device 
manufactured by [CONTACT_80814], Ltd. that is currently FDA-approved for treatment of mild hypertension.  The 
RESPeRATE device includes a belt-type respi[INVESTIGATOR_80759]’s chest over the clothing, along with a small computerized box that generates musical tones transmitted through attached earphones.  Using the belt-type sensor, the device first senses the user’s spontaneous respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], while playing quiet, relaxing, non-rhythmic music.  The device then begins to play distinct musical tones to guide the user in slowing her respi[INVESTIGATOR_80760].  In the proposed clinical trial, women will be 
randomized to receive either: 1) a st andard, active RESPeRATE device that 
guides the user in breathing at a rate slower than 10 BPM, or 2) an identical-appearing control device that does not pace respi[INVESTIGATOR_80761], non-rhythmic music.  Participants in both groups will be instructed to use their devices for at least 15 minutes per day for 12 weeks. 
D.4.2   Active intervention  
Participants who are randomized to the active intervention group will receive an 
active RESPeRATE device at the baseline visit that is programmed to pace respi[INVESTIGATOR_80762] 10 BPM (identical to current FDA-approved use of the device fo r treatment of hypertension).  After reading the device 
instructions, the participant will be asked to place the belt-like elastic strap respi[INVESTIGATOR_80763].  The participant will then place the headphones on the ears and breathe normally until the device recognizes her normal respi[INVESTIGATOR_697].   
After sensing the participant’s normal respi[INVESTIGATOR_3323], the active device will begin to play a distinct musical 
tone to prompt inspi[INVESTIGATOR_23735] a second tone to prompt ex pi[INVESTIGATOR_1516].  The device will first synchronize its tones to 
the user’s spontaneous respi[INVESTIGATOR_3323], and then gradually increase the timing and duration of its tones to guide the user in slowing her respi[INVESTIGATOR_80764].  The participant will be 
instructed to simply try to match her inspi[INVESTIGATOR_80765].  Participants will be asked to use the RESPeRATE device for at least [ADDRESS_88105] data on: a) the  time, date, and number of 
sessions in which it was used; b) duration of time for each practice session; c) average and range of respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]; d) data quality (i.e., percent time that breathing was detected by [CONTACT_42565]), e) amount of time 

 9that the participant succeeds in slowing respi[INVESTIGATOR_80766] 10 BPM in each session, and f) the percentage 
of time that the participant’s breathing pattern follows the device’s musical tones.  Participants will be instructed to use RESPeRATE for at least 15 minutes per day for a total of 12 weeks.   
D.4.3    Control intervention  
Participants who are randomized to the control group will a control RESPeRATE device that does not pace 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], but plays relaxing, non-rhythmic music while monitoring participants’ spontaneous breathing rate at 
home.  RESPeRATE devices can be re-programmed by [CONTACT_80815], Ltd., and re search staff will re-program devices as needed at 
participants’ baseline visits. The control device will look ex actly like the active RESPeRATE device, except that 
the device will not play musical tones synchronized to  inspi[INVESTIGATOR_32715], but will play quiet, non-
rhythmic music while monitoring spontaneous breathing.   
Like participants in the active group, participants in the control group will be asked to use their devices for at 
least [ADDRESS_88106] data on: a) time, date, and number of sessions in which it was used; b) duration of time for each session; c) average and range of respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], and d) data quality (i.e., percent time that breathing was detected by [CONTACT_42565]).   
This control device will control for the fact that participants will be sitting still and relaxing while wearing the 
RESPeRATE device breathing sensor belt for at least 15 minutes per day.  It will also allow collection of data on spontaneous breathing pattern in the control group and monitoring of adherence to use of the control intervention.   
D.4.4   Randomization   
Randomization to either the active or control device will be performed by [CONTACT_80816] a 1:1 ratio, using 
randomly permuted blocks of 2, 4, and 6.  Following a brief run-in period in which women use the control device and complete other eligibility assessment procedur es, women will be randomized either to: 1) receive a 
new active RESPeRATE device that paces respi[INVESTIGATOR_80767] a slow rate, or 2) continue using a control device that 
monitors spontaneous breathing rate while playing non-rhythmic music. Sealed, opaque envelopes will be prepared by [CONTACT_80817]. When a participant fulfills study 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, the next sequentia l envelope will be opened by [CONTACT_80818] a participant case report form.   A subset of the randomization envelopes will be assigned to the Oakland Satellite office. 
D.4.5  Blinding 
Because of the behavioral nature of the treatment inte rventions, study participants cannot be fully blinded to 
treatment assignment.  However, several steps will be taken to minimize possible bias arising from lack of 
blinding.  Participants will be told that they are participating in a study of two different types of relaxation therapy, slow-paced respi[INVESTIGATOR_80768]-listening, for treatment of overactive bladder symptoms.  They 
will be told that the investigators do not yet know whether one form of therapy is more effective than the other 
 10in controlling bladder symptoms (which is true).  All participant materials will be developed to avoid giving 
participants the impression that slow-paced respi[INVESTIGATOR_80769]-
listening in controlling overactive bladder.  Information lis ted on clinicaltrials.gov and other public registries will 
also avoid implying that one form of therapy is more effective than the other.   
When interacting with participants, study staff will refer to the R ESPeRATE device as the “CURE study 
relaxation device” rather than a “RESPeRATE device,” since the control device will used differently from a 
standard, commercially-available RESPeRATE device.  Participant-oriented study materials will also refer to the device as a “relaxation device” and avoid refe rring to either RESPeRATE or Intercure Ltd. 
The primary outcome, change in frequency of voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80770], will be assessed using 3-day voiding diaries, which are likely to be more resistant to bias than other types of self-report measures.  Although clinical staff responsible for conducting study visits will not be blinded to treatment assignment (so that they can assist participants with problems using their RESPeRATE devices), the study investigators will be blinded to treatment assignment., A subset of voiding diaries from both the [ADDRESS_88107] expected concomitant use of these techniques with slow-paced respi[INVESTIGATOR_80771]. 
 
D.5      Measurements 
D.5.1    Overactive bladder symptoms (assessed at baseline, 6 weeks, and 12 weeks, and 24 week mail-in) 
A.   Frequency of voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80772], change in frequency of any voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80773] a moderate sensation of urgency, will be assessed using a validated 3-day voiding diary.
29,[ADDRESS_88108] each time they experience a sense of urgency, void in the toilet, or leak urine over 3 days.  They will also rate the severity of urgency associated with each of the above epi[INVESTIGATOR_72785] a validated severity scale (the Indevus scale): a) none, b) mild—urgency that is easily tolerated, c) moderate—urgency that interferes with activities, c) severe—extreme urgency that abruptly stops activities).
31  Urgency that results in 
urine leakage (incontinence) will be assumed to be severe.   
B.   Frequency of other OAB symptoms 
Data abstracted from voiding diaries will also be used to assess secondary voiding outcomes, including 
 11change in frequency of the following additional OAB symptoms: 1) urgency-type incontinence; 2) any 
voiding or incontinence associated with severe urgency, 3) total daytime or nighttime voiding 
(regardless of association with urgency).   
Diary data will also be used to calculate an Overactive Bladder Symptom Composite Score (OAB-
SCS), in which points are assigned for each epi[INVESTIGATOR_80774] (5 points each), urgency-associated voiding (2 to 4 points depending on the severity of urgency), and non-urgency-associating voiding (1 point).
[ADDRESS_88109] of OAB will 
be assessed using several validated, self-administered, structured-item questionnaires, including:  
1) Overactive Bladder Questionnaire (OAB-Q), a 33-item measure of the bothersomness and impact of 
multiple OAB symptoms (such as urgency, incontinence, nocturia) along a 100-point scale33  
2) Urgency Severity and Impact Questionnaire (USIQ), a 13-item measure of the severity and impact of 
urgency validated specifically in patients with OAB34,35  
3) Urogenital Distress Inventory Short Form (UDI-6), a 6-item measure of the bothersomeness of 
multiple urinary symptoms, including urgency and incontinence;36 scores range from    
4) Patient Perception of Bladder Condition (PPBC),37,38 a single-item assessing patient’s overall 
perception of their bladder problems using a 6-point Likert scale 
5) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI),39,40 an 18-item validated questionnai re evaluating sleep quality, 
sleep latency, sleep efficiency, and sleep problems over  a one-week period.   A global sleep quality score 
ranging from 0 to 21 can be derived from the PSQI, with higher scores reflecting poor sleep quality. 
D.5.2    Autonomic nervous system measures  (assessed at baseline and 12 weeks) 
A.  Heart rate variability: Heart rate variability (i.e., fluctuation in instantaneous heart rate that results from 
autonomic influences on the sinus node) is a well-est ablished measure of over all autonomic balance, and a 
validated marker of risk for adverse outcomes of other chronic conditions associated with autonomic 
dysfunction such as coronary disease and heart failure 41.  In particular, the high frequency (0.12-0.40 Hz) 
component of heart rate variability provides a reliable marker of parasympathetic  autonomic activity, based 
on autonomic blockade studies showing that heart rate variability in the high frequency range is influenced 
by [CONTACT_80819] 42-44.  Measurements will be obtained at baseline and 
[ADDRESS_88110]. site only  using a Biopac MP150 monitoring system (Santa Barbara, CA), according to protocols established by [CONTACT_80820] 
45.  Specifically, two electrocardiograph (ECG) electrodes will be attached to participants’ 
torso/chest, and a 20-minute continuous ECG recording will then be taken with the participant in the seated position.  Prior to measurement, women will be queried about any history of cardiac arrhythmias that could influence heart rate variability interpretation. To minimize diurnal variation, recordings will be obtained in the same 2-hour time of day at both visits.  Women will sit in a quiet, ambient-temperature room, and will also be asked to abstain from tobacco or alcohol for 24 hours prior to recording.   For 10 minutes during recording, they will also be asked to perform two computer-based stress tasks designed to assess vagal 
reactivity and sympathetic nervous  system activity.  Data will be analyzed using Mindware software 
(Gahanna, OH), which will calculate multiple time domain heart rate variability parameters (e.g., mean heart rate, standard deviation of N-N interval, square root of mean squared difference of successive N-N 
 12intervals), as well as frequency domain heart rate variability parameters reflecting the distribution of heart 
rate variability over different frequencies (e.g., high frequency (0.12-0.40 Hz), low frequency (0.04-0.12 Hz), and low frequency/high frequency ratio). 
B.  Pre-ejection period: Pre-ejection period (i.e., PEP, or, the time period during which the left ventricle of the 
heart contracts while the aortic and mitral valves are still closed) is an established measure of sympathetic  
autonomic activity that can be measured non- invasively using impedance cardiography 42,44.  Using the 
same Biopac MP150 monitoring system used to assess heart rate variability (see above), cardiac impedance measurements will be obtained at baseline and at [ADDRESS_88111] tetrapolar electrode system will be attached to 
each participant while in the seated position (two inner electrodes placed at the xiphisternal joint and the base of the neck, outer electrodes place 3 cm dista lly to the inner electrodes).  Impedance cardiogram 
recordings will be obtained by [CONTACT_80821].  Prior to measurement, women will be queried about any history of heart murmurs suggesting heart valve 
abnormalities that could influence pre-ejection period interpretation. Cardiac PEP will be determined by [CONTACT_80822] (assessed by [CONTACT_80823]) and the B point of the dZ/dt  wave (measured by [CONTACT_80824]).   Standard Mindware software will be used to 
generate the dZ/dt waveform by [CONTACT_80825]-to-minute ECG and impedance data for each subject.  
D.5.3.  Anxiety and perceived stress (assessed at baseline, 6 week, 12 weeks, and 24-week mail-in) 
Validated self-administered questionnaires will be used to gather additional information about somatic and cognitive anxiety, depression, and perceived stress. 
A. Somatic anxiety: Somatic anxiety (i.e., the affect ive component of anxiety believed to be related to 
autonomic physiological arousal response) will be meas ured using the trait component of the Spi[INVESTIGATOR_80775] (STAI), a 20-item self-administered measure validated in both clinical and 
psychiatric populations, including patients with bladder symptoms.47,48  Scores range from 20 to 80, with 
higher scores indicating greater somatic anxiety. 
B. Cognitive anxiety: Cognitive anxiety (i.e., the mental  component of anxiety associated with fear of failure) 
will be measured by [CONTACT_80826][INVESTIGATOR_80776] (HADS), a validated self-administered 
questionnaire that includes a 7-item Anxiety Subscale49 shown to be sensitive to change in incontinence 
trials.50 Scores range from 0 to 21, with higher scores indicating greater anxiety. 
C. Depressive symptoms: Depressive  symptoms will be assessed by [CONTACT_80827][INVESTIGATOR_33547], a 20-item measure that has been widel y used in clinical trials, including trials of bladder 
interventions, and is sensitive to change.51 Total scores range from 0 to 60, with higher scores indicating 
greater likelihood of depression. 
D. Perceived stress: Perceived stress will be assess ed using the Cohen Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), a 10-
item self-administered questionnaire assessing subjective feelings and thoughts related to perceived stress 
in the past month, validated in a probability sample of the [LOCATION_002].52  Scores range from 0 to 40, with 
higher scores indicating greater perceived stress. 
 13D.5.4    Respi[INVESTIGATOR_80777]’ RESPeRATE devices.  
The RESPeRATE device automatically collects data on respi[INVESTIGATOR_80778].  A dditionally, the active RESPe RATE device collects data on 
effectiveness of slow-paced respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516] (minutes of breat hing in each session in which the respi[INVESTIGATOR_80779] 10 BPM) and device ‘followness’ (percent time that breathing was synchronized with the guiding tones).  Data are downloaded directly from the device, providing an objective and blinded measurement of respi[INVESTIGATOR_80780].  Decrease in respi[INVESTIGATOR_80781] ‘followness’ indicates that a participant has successfully paced her respi[INVESTIGATOR_80767] a lower rate without holding her breath, and is associated with improvement in blood pressure in prior research 
53. 
D.5.5    Actigraphy  (assessed at baseline and at [ADDRESS_88112]. site only) 
To complement subjective data on sleep quality assessed by [CONTACT_63496], actigraphy data will be collected over a 3-day period prior to the Baseline and 12 Week visits using the Motion Logger actigraph (Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc., Ardsley, NY), a small device that designed to be worn on the wrist. This wrist actigraph contains a pi[INVESTIGATOR_80782] (sensitive to 0.003 g and above), a microprocessor, 32K RAM memory, and associated circuitry.  The orientation and s ensitivity of the accelerometer are optimized for highly 
effective sleep-wake inference from wrist activity.
54,[ADDRESS_88113] data in three modes 
simultaneously: the zero-crossing mode, which has been rigorously validated for sleep-wake activity,[ADDRESS_88114] data on the following covariates at screening/baseline to provide 
information on eligibility, characterize the study cohort, provide evidence that treatment groups were comparable at baseline, and guide statistical adjustments in the unlikely situation that groups are not balanced at baseline: demographics (date of birth, race/ethnicity, education, relationship/marital status), urologic history 
(age of onset of OAB, past urologic surgery, prior treatment of OAB, past response to treatment for OAB), current medications (including psychoactive drugs), gynec ologic history (gravidity, parity, menopausal history, 
hysterectomy, oophorectomy), health-related habits (tobacco  and alcohol use, physical activity), and selected 
co-morbid chronic health conditions (such as diabetes). Height, weight, and seated resting blood pressure, 
heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_80783].  Women will undergo urinalysis testing at baseline to assess for urinary tract infection or hematuria, and to rule out pregnancy. 
D.5.[ADDRESS_88115] of RESPeRATE is a decrease in blood pressure to symptomatic 
levels, resting blood pressure will be measured twice in the dominant arm at each study visit, and treatment with RESPeRATE will be discontinued in women with average blood pressure <90/50, and in those with blood pressure <100/60 as well as symptoms suggestive of  hypotension such as dizziness.  If a participant 
experiences dizziness while using RESPeRATE, she will also  be asked to come to the clinic and practice using 
RESPeRATE under supervision, with blood pressure m easured at the beginning and end of practice.  In 
 14published trials of RESPeRATE including a total of 492 participants,56-63 blood pressure lowering was 
contingent on higher blood pressure at baseline, such t hat use of the device in participants with systolic blood 
pressure <[ADDRESS_88116] on blood pressure; no symptomatic hypotension was reported. 
Other unexpected side effects will be assessed using st andardized adverse event or serious adverse event 
forms.  At each phone and in-person contact, participants will also be asked about any negative changes in 
their health.  An adverse event will be defined as any undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition that 
occurs after starting therapy, whether considered related to the study intervention or not.  According to standard practice, adverse events will be classified as mild, m oderate, or severe.  Events that result in death or 
disability, are life threatening, or cause hospi[INVESTIGATOR_80784]. 
 
D.6 Study Visits and Procedures 
This clinical trial involves 5 in-person study visits (Screening, Baseline, 1-Week, 6-Week, and 12-Week) and 2 
telephone visits (3-Week and 9-Week) over a 12-week period.  Additionally, women will complete daily RESPeRATE practice sessions at home, and will complete voiding diaries at home at 3 timepoints over this 
12-week period.  There is also a 24-week mail-in assessment, in which women will complete an additional voiding diary and packet of questionnaires and return them to study staff by [CONTACT_2319]. 
Study Visits will be conducted in outpatient research facilities associated with the UCSF Women’s Health 
Clinical Research Center at [ADDRESS_88117] on t he Mt. Zion campus, where two side-by-side office/exam 
rooms are equipped with all equipment needed to collect study measurements, or at 300 Frank Ogawa Plaza, in Oakland, CA, where coordinators will bring equipm ent needed for measurements to a rented private office. 
D.6.1    Telephone Screening  
Women who respond to study advertisements and notic es by [CONTACT_80828] a general overview of the study and, if still interested, will complete a brief telephone survey to determine 
initial eligibility (age, severity of OAB, current an d past OAB treatment, exclusionary conditions, availability 
during the study time period, and willingness to participate).  Eligible respondents will be invited to attend a clinic screening visit and will be asked to bring all medications to the visit. 
D.6.[ADDRESS_88118] infection of hematuria, as well 
as to rule out pregnancy.   
If eligible to continue, participants will be given a demo RESPeRATE run-in device and taught how to use it.  At 
the screening visit, the participant will open the box containing the device, sensor strap, earphones, and batteries.  After brief instruction (<5 minutes), the research assistant will assist the participant in correctly starting and using the device, answering any questions and making sure the participant is comfortable with device use.  The participant will be instructed to place the belt-like elastic strap respi[INVESTIGATOR_80785], place the headphones on the ears, and breathe normally until the device recognizes her normal respi[INVESTIGATOR_80786].  Each participant will then be asked to use their device to listen to relaxing music for at least [ADDRESS_88119] data on: a) time, dat e, and number of sessions in which it was used; b) 
duration of time for each session; c) average and range of respi[INVESTIGATOR_80787]; and d) data quality (i.e., percent time that breathing was detected by [CONTACT_42565]).  Women will be told to use their run-in RESPeRATE devices for at least [ADDRESS_88120] 3 days during the run-in period, women will also complete daily voiding diaries, which will be used to further assess women’s compliance and to collect data on baseline severity of overactive bladder symptoms.  Women will also be asked to wear a wrist actigraph while they complete their voiding diaries, push a button on the actigraph to indicate when they go to bed and when they get up each night, and complete a simple sleep diary over this same 3-day period. 
D.6.4    Baseline/Randomization Visit 
A baseline visit will be scheduled one to two weeks after the screening visit and completion of the run-in 
procedures.  Participants will return with their completed voiding diary, the demo RESPeRATE run-in device, and the wrist actigraph and sleep diary.  Diary data will be abstracted, and data from the run-in device and the actigraph will be downloaded.  Those who are non-adherent to RESPeRATE practice or the diary will not be eligible to continue.  Blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_80788]-measured; participants who have a blood pressure <100/[ADDRESS_88121] overactive bladder symptoms during the treatment period.   
Participants will also undergo non-invasive measurement of resting heart rate variability and pre-ejection 
period using the BIOPAC MP150 monitoring device at this visit (if they are randomized).  They will complete questionnaires assessing condition-specific quality of  life and anxiety and perceived stress symptoms. 
D.6.5   Follow-up Visit (1 week)  
After one week of treatment, participants will return to the clinic for early follow-up, bringing their RESPeRATE active or control devices.  Downloaded RESPeRATE dev ice data will be securely transferred to the study 
database.  The study coordinator will review adherence with use of the active or control device, assess for side effects of treatment, and answer any questions.  For safety monitoring, blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_80789].  Adverse events will be recorded on standardized forms.  
Each participant will also be given a new, blank voiding diary to complete for 3 days before her 6-week visit. 
D.6.6   Follow-up Visit (6 weeks)  
After [ADDRESS_88122] recorded all voiding and incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_17767] a 3-day period and indicated whether these epi[INVESTIGATOR_80790], mild, moderate, or severe urgency.  Data from RESPeRATE devices will be downloaded before the device is returned to the participant.  Blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_80791].  Adverse events will be recorded on standardized forms.  Participants will complete the same self-administered questionnaires about condition-specific quality of life and anxiety and stress given at baseline visit.   
 
D.6.7    Follow-up Phone Call (9 weeks) 
After [ADDRESS_88123] participants by [CONTACT_80829], assess for side effects, and answer any questions.  At the participant’s 
request, or if there is a safety concern, this visit may also be conducted in person.   Participants will be 
reminded that to start completing their next voiding diary at least [ADDRESS_88124] actigraph and sleep diary. Participants will complete the same self-administered questionnaires that were given at the baseline and 6-week visits.  They will also complete a close-out questionnaire about their satisfaction with the study interventions and procedures.  Physical exam 
measures of blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_80792].  Participants will also undergo repeat assessment of heart rate variability and impedance cardiography. Participants will receive instructions and materials for completing and returning the 24-week mail-in voiding diary and questionnaire packet. 
D.6.9   24-Week Mail-In 
Twelve weeks after returning their guided-breathing devices, women will complete a final voiding diary and set 
of questionnaires and mail it back to study staff, using a pre-addressed, pre-stamped envelope. 
D.6.10   Time commitment 
Telephone screening will require approximately 15 minutes.  The screening clinic visit will require up to one 
and a half hours.  The baseline clinic visit will require approximately two hours.  The 6-week follow-up visit will 
require one and a half hours.  The final (12-week) visit will require approximately two hours.  The one-week and 8-week follow-up telephone calls will each require between [ADDRESS_88125] complete voiding diaries at four timepoints in the study (baseline, 6 
weeks, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks), adding another [ADDRESS_88126] also complete a mail-in questionnaire packet at 24 weeks, adding another 30 minutes at this timepoint.  The total estimated time required of participants at home is therefore 22 and a half hours. In summary, this 12-week 
study will require a total of 30 hours of participants’ time, including [ADDRESS_88127] information incl uding address, phone number(s), fax number(s), and email 
 18address will be obtained.  We will also request contact [CONTACT_80830].  The study team will encourage retention by [CONTACT_80831], maintaining a friendly and efficient clinical center environment, and encouraging excellent staff-participant rapport.  All identifying information will be kept confidential, appropriately secured and destroyed at the end of the trial.  
D.7.[ADDRESS_88128] 15 minutes per day.
  Study staff will ascertain reasons for non-
adherence and attempt to help participants find ways to improve adherence.  However, participants who are non-adherent with study interventions will still be urged to attend all study visits and complete all study measurements as planned.  
D.7.3   Adherence to study visits  
All participants will be urged to attend all study vi sits and complete all study measurements as planned. 
However, participants can discontinue participation in the study at any time.  Participants who miss a visit will 
be contact[CONTACT_80832]. Participants who state that they no longer desire to participate in the trial will be asked to undergo final study measurements and complete a close-out questionnaire if possible.  
D.7.4   Discontinuation of interventions 
The study interventions will be discontinued in women with average blood pressure <90/50 or in those with 
blood pressure <100/60 as well as symptoms suggestive of hypotension such as dizziness.  If possible, the final outcome measurements will be obtained in all participants who discontinue the intervention.  
D.7.5    Participant reimbursement 
Each participant will receive a $[ADDRESS_88129] at the Baseline Visit and at the Week 6 Visit, a $[ADDRESS_88130] after 
the Week 12 Visit, and a $[ADDRESS_88131] after returning their mail-in packet at 24 weeks.  Participants will therefore receive a total of $120 in gift cards of their choice for their participation in the study.  We will also provide parking voucher stickers for participants who wi sh to park in the UCSF Women’s Health Clinical 
Research Center garage for their study visits. 
 
D.8 Potential Risks and Safety Monitoring 
D.8.1    Potential risks of study procedures  
 19A. Paced respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]:  RESPeRATE is a commercially-available guided-breathing device (Costco, Amazon) 
that is FDA-approved for treatment of mild hypertension and widely used without a prescription.   Risk to 
participants from use of RESPeRATE is minimal; in c linical trials that incl uded over [ADDRESS_88132] of RESPeRATE on blood pressure decreases with lowe r baseline blood pressure such that it does not 
lower blood pressure in persons with baseline less than about 120 mmHg systolic.  
B. Music-listening: There are no known risks to participants associated with use of the RESPeRATE control 
device for music-listening. Although the music-listening control is designed to be relaxing and pleasant, it is possible that participants randomized to the control group may find this music to be unappealing or irritating. 
C. Questionnaires and diaries: Although the information participants provide on data collection forms and 
diaries is confidential, some participants may feel embarrassed at having to answer questions, especially those related to incontinence symptoms or depression and anxiety symptoms.  Completion of diaries and questionnaires will involve slight inconvenience in time and effort.   
D. Physical exam measurements:  There are no dire ct risks associated with undergoing measurement of 
height, weight, blood pressure, and heart rate at study visits, although some participants may experience this as inconvenient or unpleasant. 
E. Heart rate variability and impedance cardiography:  Heart rate variability and cardiac impedance 
measurements will be obtained using a non-invasive  BIOPAC MP150 electronic monitoring system.  The 
only adverse effect that may result from these measurement s is mild skin irritation at the site of the ECG or 
cardiac impedance electrodes, which generally disappears within 24 hours of removing the electrodes.  Although noninvasive, measurement of heart rate variability and cardiac impedance may be experienced by [CONTACT_80833].  Women will need to lift their shirts (but not remove their brassieres or underwear) for placement of the electrode sensors.  They will also need to complete two brief computer-based tasks (approximately 5 minutes in duration each) that may be perceived as psychologically stressful while undergoing Biopac measurements. 
F. Computer-based concentration task :  Participants will perform two ty pes of brief, computer-based mental 
concentration tasks while undergoing heart rate variability and cardiac impedance measurements, including a visual attention and tracking task directed at assessing vagal withdrawal and a navigation task designed to assess sympathetic reactivity. Some participants may perceive these tasks to be stressful or annoying. 
G. Wrist actigraphy:  There is no risk of injury from the wrist actigraph device to measure sleep activity though 
participants may find it mildly inconvenient to wear a wrist device for [ADDRESS_88133] risks   
 20Women with low blood pressure (<100/60) at the scr eening or baseline visit will be excluded from the study. 
Participants will undergo repeat blood pressure measurement at each follow-up clinic visit (1 week, 6 weeks, 
and 12 weeks) and will be instructed to come to the study clinic to have their blood pressure re-measured if they develop dizziness, fatigue, or other symptoms suggestive of orthostasis.  Use of RESPeRATE will be discontinued in participants with blood pressure <90/50, or in those with blood pressure <100/[ADDRESS_88134] whether the event resolved or continues. 
Serious adverse events will be defined as those that are life threatening, require overnight hospi[INVESTIGATOR_80793], or cause disability or deat h. Serious adverse events will be recorded on separate 
forms that note the potential relationship to the study interventions (i.e., no, unlikely, possible, probably, definitely), the time course of the event, and any medications or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_80794].  Any participant deaths will be reported within [ADDRESS_88135], to the Data and Safety Monitor (see below), and to the NIA program officer.  All other serious adverse events that are unanticipated and potentially rela ted to the study interventions or procedures will be 
reported within [ADDRESS_88136], the Data and Safety Monitor, and the NIA program officer.  In the setting of severe or serious a dverse events, the study 
investigators may decide to terminate participants’ involv ement in the trial prior to their expected termination 
date, if early termination is thought to be necessary to safeguard the health of participants.  
D.8.[ADDRESS_88137] of the study and safety of participants  will be evaluated by [CONTACT_80834] (DSM), [CONTACT_80857], Seni or Investigator at Kaiser Permanente of Northern [LOCATION_004].  [CONTACT_80858] 
is a clinical researcher with experience in clinical trials, research ethics, and statistics. The DSM will 
 21periodically review the conduct and outcomes of the study and provide feedback to the investigators, with 
particular attention to protecting the safety of study participants.  The DSM is independent of the institution and the investigators participating in the study and has no financial ties to the outcome of the study.  
Prior to initiation of the trial, the DSM will review and approve the study design and plans for recruitment, 
adherence, interventions, data quality, and safety monitoring.  At periodic intervals during the course of the trial, the DSM will evaluate the adequacy and timeliness of participant recruitment, evaluate the ability of the trial to reach stated goals, review adherence to visits and protocols, assess data quality and timeliness, evaluate the safety of participants, provide a report to the investigators and the IRB on the scientific progress 
of the trial and the safety of participants, make recommendations to the investigators on continuation, termination, or other modifications of the trial, and consider factors external to the study (i.e., new scientific or therapeutic developments) when relevant to  the safety of the participants or the ethical conduct of the trial. 
The DSM will periodically review aggregate and unblinded trial data after 30, 60, 90, and 120 participants 
complete the 6-week visit.  An emergency meeting may also be called b y the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_80795].  Each review will include an assessment of the adequacy and timeliness of participant recruitment, adherence to the visit and intervention protocols, data quality and timeliness, adverse effects, and participant safety.   
Given that the study is of short duration, no assessment  of interim efficacy will be done, and the study will not 
be stopped or altered for unexpected efficacy or lack of efficacy.  Interim reports for the DSM will be prepared 
by [CONTACT_80835]’s Health Clinical Research Center, and sent to the DSM at least 5 days prior to a pre-scheduled meeting or conference call.  A copy of the interim reports will be retained in a locked, confidential file by [CONTACT_9288].  
After each interim review, the DSM will provide a signed statement that indicates whether the study should 
continue, terminate, or be altered based on ability to meet study recruitment and data quality goals and participant safety. He will include any recommendations for changes to the protocol if necessary to enhance 
participant safety or potentiate the ability of the trial to answer the research hypotheses.  This statement will be 
provided to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_80796].  All materials, discussions, and proceedings of the DSM process will be completely confidential.  
 
 
D.9 Data Management Plan 
D.9.1   Overview 
Data will be entered, managed, edited and secured by [CONTACT_80836] (DMG) which 
enables simple real-time electronic data entry, ensures timely identification and resolution of data discrepancies, and facilitates the transformation of data to SAS for viewing, reporting, and analyses.  Most of the forms and database management modules required for the proposed trial have already been developed and used in previous studies. 
 22D.9.2   Data collection & editing 
Machine-readable data forms created with Teleform® software and available for printing at the clinical site 
from the study website will be completed by [CONTACT_80837] a standard fax machine.  The data forms are received at the DMG as electronic images and are evaluated 
automatically for duplication errors or incomplete scanned images and verified manually by a staff member using Verifier software. This is an important step in which possible misinterpretations in the automated input of data are corrected (e.g. misreading a particular text entry).  As each form is verified, the data are written to a pre-defined Microsoft SQL Server database.  All of t he original form images can be viewed via the password-
protected study website.  Every hour, preprogramm ed error-checking programs scan incoming forms for 
completeness, data ranges and logic sequences. The results of the error-checking procedures are posted to the study web site where clinical site personnel m onitor successful transmission of forms and address any 
errors that have been detected. Thus, data cleaning is an ongoing process throughout the trial facilitating rapid analysis of results after the final participant visit.  
D.9.[ADDRESS_88138] reports that are made available on 
the study website automatically, including recruitment reports comparing goal versus actual recruitment rates; adherence reports comparing the number of expected visits to actual visits; participant retention reports indicating the number of participants active, completed, lost, etc.  
D.9.4   Computer & data security 
The UCSF DMG follows standard operating procedures for computer system security in compliance with 
established standards for Information Technology Security.  The network is privately maintained, hardware fire-walled and none of the workstations or database se rvers can be directly addressed from outside the Local 
Area Network.  All study data will be stored on Microsoft SQL servers that are backed-up nightly to disk and mirrored to a “failover” site at a co-location facility in San Francisco.  In addition, back-up copi[INVESTIGATOR_80797], CA by [CONTACT_80838], Inc. to protect study data in case of a natural disaster in 
the San Francisco Bay Area.  All servers are housed in a state-of the-art secure server room with controlled access.  All servers are protected from viruses by  [CONTACT_80839] 4.x, Groupshield, and 
VirusScan Enterprise 7.x (McAfee, Santa Clara, CA).  This software automatically checks for virus signature [CONTACT_80856]’ FTP and HTTP sites once an hour.   
 
D.10 Statistical Considerations 
D.10.1 Statistical analysis plans 
Aim 1: To determine whether a device-guided slow-breathing exercise program can reduce the frequency 
 23and severity of OAB symptoms in women. 
Expected outcomes:  Compared to controls, women randomized to slow breathing will demonstrate a more 
than 20% greater reduction in frequency of voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80798], as well as greater reductions in other OAB symptoms and in impact of symptoms.  
The primary outcome will be change in the frequency of any voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80770] (measured over 3 days using the validated voiding diary and urgency scale
29-31) from baseline to [ADDRESS_88139] to adherence with use of the active or control interventions.  For additional confirmation of treatment effects on this primary outcome, we will also use ANCOVA models to examine treatment effects on frequency of other OAB symptoms, including 1) urgency 
incontinence, 2) voiding or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_80799] a severe sensation of urgency, 3) total 
daytime and nighttime voiding (regardless of whether they are associated with urgency), and 4) Overactive Bladder Symptom Composite Scores, as  well as on scores on validated urinary symptom 
bother and impact questionnaires (i.e., the OAB-Q, USIQ, UDI-6, PPBC, and PSQI).  Outcomes will be transformed if Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152]-Wilk tests for normality of the residuals from initial models are significant at p <0.01.  In secondary analyses, if treatment benefits are detected at [ADDRESS_88140]-treatment using data from the 24-week mail-in diary and questionnaires, and assess for dose response in treatment effects based on duration and cumulative time of treatment exposure (see the “Additional statistical issues” section below).   
Aim 2: To determine whether this slow-breathing intervention can improve autonomic nervous system control in women with OAB, and explore change in autonomic control as a mechanism of treatment effects on OAB symptoms. 
Expected outcomes: Women randomized to practice slow-breathing will demonstrate significantly improved 
autonomic control as measured by [CONTACT_5019]-frequency heart ra te variability and pre-ejection period parameters, 
and that treatment effects on OAB symptoms will be at least partly mediated by [CONTACT_80840].  
Secondary outcomes include 12-week change in autonomic control as assessed by [CONTACT_80841] (RSA) and pre-ejection period (PEP), as  the purest available measures of parasympathetic 
and sympathetic function.  Treatment effects on each of these measures will initially be estimated using ANCOVA models, first to examine effects on resting parameters, followed by [CONTACT_80842]-to-stress change (i.e., reactivity) while adjusting for baseline levels of each parameter.  Treatment effects will again be examined by [CONTACT_80843], according to treatment assignment, and without 
regard to adherence.  Autonomic parameters will transfo rmed as necessary if their distributions appear 
significantly skewed.  We will then assess for medi ation of treatment effects on OAB symptoms by 
[CONTACT_80844]. This will involve fitting an initial model that includes both autonomic parameters and anxiety symptoms (as described below in the statistical plan for Aim 2), then extracting coeffici ents for each of the hypothesized mediating pathways. 
 24Aim 3: To determine whether this slow-breathing intervention can improve anxiety-related symptoms in 
women with OAB, and explore changes in anxiety as a mediator of treatment effects on OAB symptoms.    
Expected outcomes: Women with OAB randomized to pr actice slow-breathing exercises will report 
significant improvement in anxie ty-related symptoms (as measured by [CONTACT_80845]), and 
treatment effects on OAB symptoms will be at le ast partly mediated by [CONTACT_80846]. 
Additional outcomes will include change in anxiety symptoms from baseline to 12 weeks, measured by [CONTACT_80847], HADS, PSS, and BDI questionnaires. Intervention effects will again be estimated using ANCOVA, adjusted for baseline questionnaire scores.  Anxiety symptom outcomes will be transformed as necessary if their distributions appear skewed.  To assess for mediation of treatment effects on the primary outcome by [CONTACT_80848] (as well as autonomic parameters as noted in the statistical plan for Aim 2), we will use structural equation modeling as outlined above).   
D.10.2    Sample size estimates 
Sample size is calculated based on parameter estimates derived from prior trials conducted by [CONTACT_4520], such as BRIDGES and PRIDE:
 64,65 a) mean baseline frequency of urgency- associated voiding 
or incontinence epi[INVESTIGATOR_4101] 12; b) mean reduction in frequency in controls of 30%; c) standard deviation (SD) of change in urgency-associated voiding or incontinence frequency of 5.8 and d) correlation between baseline and follow-up values of 0.59.  We assume that a clinically significant effect in the primary outcome would be a net reduction in the active group of more than 20% than that of controls.  Under these assumptions, a sample size of 160 (80 per group) would provide 80% power in 2-sided tests with type-I error of 5% to detect between-group differences of >20% in the active vs. control arm.  This accounts for reduction in the residual variance achieved by [CONTACT_80849], as well as loss to follow-up of 15%.  In comparisons of changes in secondary outcomes (other OAB symptoms, impact scores, anxiety, and autonomic parameters), 
the sample will provide 80% power in 2-sided tests with type-I error of 5% to detect differences of 0.[ADDRESS_88141] correlation of outcomes, assumed to fall in the range of 0.4 to 0.8. 
D.10.3  Drop-out rates 
Given that the proposed trial is of short duration, dropout levels are expected to be low (i.e., less than 15%).  
The assumption of non-informative dropout will be examined by [CONTACT_80850]-
randomization characteristics of dropouts and non-dropouts.  If dropout is differential between groups, analyses will be adjusted for maldistributed variables.  In a sensitivity analysis, we will also use multiple 
imputation of missing outcomes, in conjunction with standard methods for calculating summary estimates, confidence intervals, and p-values.
[ADDRESS_88142] procedure to assess for a dose response in duration of treatment without inflating type-I error:[ADDRESS_88143] estimates will be 
considered only if the interaction with the subgroup is significant at p<0.05.  
  
 26Appendix A: Summary of Measures & Procedures at Study Visits   
 
Measures 
Telephone  
Screening 
Screening 
Clinic Visit  
Run-in 
period* 
Baseline 
Clinic Visit  
1week 
 Clinic Visit  
3-week 
Phone Call  
6-Week 
Clinic Visit  
9-week 
Phone Call  
12-week 
Final Visit 
24-week 
Mail-in 
Brief telephone screening interview X         
Informed consent and HIPAA documentation  X         
Demographic, medical & surgical history  X         
Review of current and past medications  X       X   
Alcohol and tobacco use questionnaires  X         
Height and weight measurement  X       X   
Heart rate and blood pressure measurement  X  X X  X  X  
RESPeRATE control device run-in   X         
Review of 3-day voiding diary    X   X  X X 
Overactive Bladder Questionnaire     X   X  X X 
Urgency Severity & Impact Scale     X   X  X X 
Urogenital Distress Inventory    X   X  X X 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_80800]-Trait Anxiety Inventory     X   X  X X 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620]     X   X  X X 
Perceived Stress Scale     X   X  X X 
Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6326]    X   X  X X 
Randomize to active versus control device    X        
Self-management OAB pamphlet distributed    X        
Heart rate variabilit y measurements    X     X  
Impedance cardiography measurements    X     X  
3-day wrist actigraphy    X     X  
Sleep diary (to accompany actigraphy)    X     X  
Adverse events assessment    X X X X X X  
Downloading of RESPeRATE device data    X X  X  X  
Satisfaction questionnaire         X   
 
  
 27REFERENCES CITED 
 
 
1. Teleman PM, Lidfeldt J, Nerbrand C, Samsioe G, Mattiasson A. Overactive bladder: prevalence, risk 
factors and relation to stress incontinence in middle-aged women. BJOG. Jun 2004;111(6):600-604. 
2. Stewart WF, Van Rooyen JB, Cundiff GW, et al. Prevalence and burden of overactive bladder in the 
[LOCATION_002]. World J Urol. May 2003;20(6):327-336. 
3. Sexton CC, Coyne KS, Thompson C, Bavendam T, Chen CI, Markland A. Prevalence and effect on 
health-related quality of life of overactive bladder in  older americans: results from the epi[INVESTIGATOR_80801]. J Am Geriatr Soc. Aug 2011;59(8):1465-1470. 
4. Oh SJ, Ku JH, Choo MS, Yun JM, Kim DY, Park WH. Health-related quality of life and sexual function 
in women with stress urinary incontinence and overactive bladder. Int J Urol. Jan 2008;15(1):62-67. 
5. Sand PK, Appell R. Disruptive effects of overac tive bladder and urge urinary incontinence in younger 
women. Am J Med. Mar 2006;119([ADDRESS_88144] 1):16-23. 
6. Coyne KS, Margolis MK, Jumadilova Z, Bavendam T, Mueller E, Rogers R. Overactive bladder and 
women's sexual health: what is the impact? J Sex Med. May 2007;4(3):656-666. 
7. Wu EQ, Birnbaum H, Marynchenko M, Mareva M, W illiamson T, Mallett D. Employees with overactive 
bladder: work loss burden. J Occup Environ Med. May 2005;47(5):439-446. 
8. Coyne KS, Sexton CC, Kopp ZS, Ebel-Bitoun C, Mils om I, Chapple C. The impact of overactive bladder 
on mental health, work productivity and health-related quality of life in the [LOCATION_006] and Sweden: results from 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_80802]. BJU Int. Nov 2011;108(9):1459-1471. 
9. Sexton CC, Coyne KS, Vats V, Kopp ZS, Irwin DE, Wagner TH. Impact of overactive bladder on work 
productivity in the [LOCATION_002]: results from Epi[INVESTIGATOR_80802]. Am J Manag Care. Mar 2009;15([ADDRESS_88145]):S98-
S107. 
10. Brown JS, Vittinghoff E, Wyman JF, et al. Urinary incontinence: does it increase risk for falls and 
fractures? Study of Osteoporotic Fractures Research Group. J Am Geriatr Soc. Jul 2000;48(7):721-725. 
11. Langa KM, Fultz NH, Saint S, Kabeto MU, Herzog AR. Informal caregiving time and costs for urinary 
incontinence in older individuals in the [LOCATION_002]. J Am Geriatr Soc. Apr 2002;50(4):733-737. 
12. Thom DH, Haan MN, Van Den Eeden SK. Medically  recognized urinary incontinence and risks of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], nursing home admission and mortality. Age Ageing. Sep 1997;26(5):367-374. 
13. Carriere I, Fourrier-Reglat A, Dartigues JF, et al. Drugs with anticholinergic properties, cognitive 
decline, and dementia in an elderly general population: the 3-city study. Arch Intern Med. Jul 27 
2009;169(14):1317-1324. 
14. Chapple C, Khullar V, Gabriel Z, Dooley JA. The e ffects of antimuscarinic treatments in overactive 
bladder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Urol. Jul 2005;48(1):5-26. 
15. Fox C, Richardson K, Maidment ID, et al. Anticholinergic medication use and cognitive impairment in 
the older population: the medical research council cognitive function and ageing study. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. Aug 2011;59(8):1477-1483. 
16. Geller EJ, Crane AK, Wells EC, et al. Effect of anticholinergic use for the treatment of overactive 
bladder on cognitive function in postmenopausal women. Clin Drug Investig. Oct 1 2012;32(10):697-
705. 
17. Hartmann KE, McPheeters ML, Biller DH, et al. Treatment of overactive bladder in women. Evid Rep 
Technol Assess (Full Re p). Aug 2009(187):1-120, v. 
18.
 Diokno A, Yuhico M, Jr. Preference, compliance and initial outcome of therapeutic options chosen by 
[CONTACT_80851]. J Urol. Nov 1995;154(5):1727-1730; discussion 1731. 
19. Burgio KL, Robinson JC, Engel BT. The role of biofeedback in Kegel exercise training for stress urinary 
incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Jan 1986;154(1):58-64. 
20. Wyman JF, Fantl JA, McClish DK, Bump RC. Comparat ive efficacy of behavioral interventions in the 
management of female urinary incontinence. Co ntinence Program for Women Research Group. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol. Oct 1998;179(4):999-1007. 
21. Perry S, McGrother CW, Turner K, Leicestershire MRCISG. An investigation of the relationship 
between anxiety and depression and urge incontinenc e in women: development of a psychological 
model. Br J Health Psychol. Sep 2006;11(Pt 3):463-482. 
 2822. Waetjen LE, Ye J, Feng WY, et al. Association between menopausal transition stages and developi[INVESTIGATOR_80803]. Obstet Gynecol. Nov 2009;114(5):989-998. 
23. Knight S, Luft J, Nakagawa S, Katzman WB. Comparisons of pelvic floor muscle performance, anxiety, 
quality of life and life stress in women with dry overactive bladder compared with asymptomatic women. 
BJU Int. Jun 2012;109(11):1685-1689. 
24. Lim JR, Bak CW, Lee JB. Comparison of anxiety between patients with mixed incontinence and those 
with stress urinary incontinence. Scand J Urol Nephrol. 2007;41(5):403-406. 
25. Im HW, Kim MD, Kim JC, Choi JB. Autonomous ner vous system activity in women with detrusor 
overactivity. Korean J Urol. Mar 2010;51(3):183-186. 
26. Choi JB, Kim YB, Kim BT, Kim YS. Analysis of heart rate variability in female patients with overactive 
bladder. Urology. Jun 2005;65(6):1109-1112; discussion 1113. 
27. Hubeaux K, Deffieux X, Ismael SS, Raibaut P, Amar enco G. Autonomic nervous system activity during 
bladder filling assessed by [CONTACT_80852]. J Urol. Dec 2007;178(6):2483-2487. 
28. Liao WC, Jaw FS. A noninvasive evaluation of aut onomic nervous system dysfunction in women with 
an overactive bladder. Int J Gynaecol Obstet. Jul 2010;110(1):12-17. 
29. Locher JL, Goode PS, Roth DL, Worrell RL, Burgio KL. Reliability assessment of the bladder diary for 
urinary incontinence in older women. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Jan 2001;56(1):M32-35. 
30. Brown JS, McNaughton KS, Wyman JF, et al. Measuremen t characteristics of a voiding diary for use by 
[CONTACT_80853]. Urology. Apr 2003;61(4):802-809. 
31. Nixon A, Colman S, Sabounjian L, et al. A validated patient reported measure of urinary urgency 
severity in overactive bladder for use in clinical trials. J Urol. Aug 2005;174(2):604-607. 
32. Zinner N, Harnett M, Sabounjian L, Sandage B, Jr., Dmochowski R, Staskin D. The overactive bladder-
symptom composite score: a composite symptom score of toilet voids, urgency severity and urge urinary incontinence in patients with overactive bladder. J Urol. May 2005;173(5):1639-1643. 
33. Coyne KS, Matza LS, Thompson CL, Kopp ZS, Khullar V. The responsiveness of the Overactive 
Bladder Questionnaire (OAB-q). Qual Life Res. 2005;14(3):849-855. 
34. Lowenstein L, FitzGerald MP, Kenton K, et al. Evaluation of urgency in women, with a validated 
Urgency, Severity and Impact Questionnaire (USIQ). Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct. Mar 
2009;20(3):301-307. 
35. Lowenstein L, Rickey L, Kenton K, et al. Reliability and responsiveness of the Urgency Severity and 
Life Impact Questionnaire (USIQ). Int Urogynecol J. Feb 2012;23(2):193-196. 
36. Uebersax JS, Wyman JF, Shumaker SA, McClish DK, Fantl JA. Short forms to assess life quality and 
symptom distress for urinary incontinence in women: the Incontinence Impact Questionnaire and the Urogenital Distress Inventory. Continence Program for Women Research Group. Neurourol Urodyn. 
1995;14(2):131-139. 
37. Coyne KS, Matza LS, Kopp Z, Abrams P. The validation of the patient perception of bladder condition 
(PPBC): a single-item global measure for patients with overactive bladder. Eur Urol. Jun 
2006;49(6):1079-1086. 
38. Matza LS, Thompson CL, Krasnow J, Brewster-Jordan J, Zyczynski T, Coyne KS. Test-retest reliability 
of four questionnaires for patients with overactive bladder: the overactive bladder questionnaire (OAB-
q), patient perception of bladder condition (PPBC), urgency questionnaire (UQ), and the primary OAB 
symptom questionnaire (POSQ). Neurourol Urodyn. 2005;24(3):215-225. 
39. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272]: a 
new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res. May 1989;28(2):193-213. 
40. Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, 3rd, Monk TH, Hoch CC, Yeager AL, Kupfer DJ. Quantification of su
bjective 
sleep quality in healthy elderly men and women usi ng the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI). Sleep. 
Aug 1991;14(4):331-338. 
41. Malik M, Bigger JT, Camm AJ, al. e. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North 
American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology - Heart rate variability: Standard of measurement, physiological interpretation and clinical use. Circulation. 1996;93:1043-1065. 
 2942. Cacioppo JT, Berntson GG, Binkley PF, Quigley KS, Uchino BN, Fieldstone A. Autonomic cardiac 
control. II. Noninvasive indices and basal re sponse as revealed by [CONTACT_80854]. 
Psychophysiology. Nov 1994;31(6):586-598. 
43. Berntson GG, Bigger JT, Jr., Eckberg DL, et al. Heart rate variability: origins, methods, and interpretive 
caveats. Psychophysiology. Nov 1997;34(6):623-648. 
44. Berntson GG, Cacioppo JT, Binkley PF, Uchino BN, Quigley KS, Fieldstone A. Autonomic cardiac 
control. III. Psychological stress and cardiac response in autonomic space as revealed by 
[CONTACT_80855]. Psychophysiology. Nov 1994;31(6):599-608. 
45. Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology and the North American Society of Pacing and 
Electrophysiology. Heart rate variability; standards of measurement, physiological interpretation and 
clinical use. Circulation. 1996;93:1043-1065. 
46. Sherwood A, Allen MT, Fahrenberg J, Kelsey RM, Lovallo WR, van Doornen LJ. Methodological 
guidelines for impedance cardiography. Psychophysiology. Jan 1990;27(1):1-23. 
47. Barnes L, Harp D, Jung W. Reliability Generalization of Score son the Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593]-Trait Anxiety 
Inventory. Educational and Psychological Measurement. 2002;62(4):603-618. 
48. Quek KF, Low WY, Razack AH, Loh CS, Chua CB. Reliab ility and validity of the Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593]-Trait 
Anxiety Inventory (STAI) among urological patients: a Malaysian study. Med J Malaysia. Jun 
2004;59(2):258-267. 
49. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_56105]. Acta Psychiatr Scand. Jun 
1983;67(6):361-370. 
50. Rogers R, Bachmann G, Jumadilova Z, et al. Effi cacy of tolterodine on overactive bladder symptoms 
and sexual and emotional quality of life in sexually active women. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor 
Dysfunct. Nov 2008;19(11):1551-1557. 
51. WW E, C M, C S, A T, M Y. Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_6328]: Review and revision 
(CESD and CESD-R). In: ME M, ed. The Use of Psychological Testing for Treatment Planning and 
Outcomes Assessment . 3rd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum; 2004:363-377. 
52. Cohen S, Williamson G. Perceived stress in a probability sample of the [LOCATION_002]. In: Sapacapam 
S, Oskamp S, eds. The social psychology of health: Claremont Symposium on applied psychology . 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1988. 
53. Gavish B. Device-guided breathing in the home setting: Technology, performance, and clinical 
outcomes. Biological Psychology. 2010;84:150-156. 
54. Cole RJ, Kripke DF, Gruen W, Mullaney DJ, Gillin JC. Automatic sleep/wake identification from wrist 
activity. Sleep. Oct 1992;15(5):461-469. 
55. Ancoli-Israel S, Clopton P, Klauber MR, Fell R, Mason W. Use of wrist activity for monitoring 
sleep/wake in demented nursing-home patients. Sleep. Jan 1997;20(1):24-27. 
56. Altena MR, Kleefstra N, Logtenberg SJ, Groenier KH, Houweling ST, Bilo HJ. Effect of device-guided 
breathing exercises on blood pressure in patients with hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Blood Press. 2009;18(5):273-279. 
57. Meles E, Giannattasio C, Failla M, Gentile G, Capra A, Mancia G. Nonpharmacologic treatment of 
hypertension by [CONTACT_15206][INVESTIGATOR_80804]. Am J Hypertens. Apr 2004;17(4):370-374. 
58. Schein MH, Gavish B, Baevsky T, et al. Treating hypertension in type II diabetic patients with device-
guided breathing: a randomized controlled trial. J Hum Hypertens. May 2009;23(5):325-331. 
59. Schein MH, Gavish B, Herz M, et al. Treating hypertension with a device that slows and regularizes 
breathing: a randomised, double-blind controlled study. J Human Hypertension. 2001;15:271-278. 
60. 
Grossman E, Grossman A, Schein MH, Zimlichman R, Gavish B. Breathing-control lowers blood 
pressure. J of Human Hypertension. 2001;15:263-269. 
61. Elliot WJ, Izzo JL, Jr., White WB, et al. Graded blood pressure reduction in hypertensive outpatients 
associated with use of a device to assist with slow breathing. J Clin Hypertens. 2004;10:553-559. 
62. Anderson DE, McNeely JD, Windham BG. Regular slow -breathing exercise effects on blood pressure 
and breathing patterns at rest. J Hum Hypertens. Mar [ADDRESS_88146] of device-guided breathing 
exercises on blood pressure in hypertensive patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Hypertens. Jan 2007;25(1):241-246. 
 3064. Sultana CJ, Campbell JW, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_80805], Sivinski L, Rimm AA. Morbidity and mortality of incontinence 
surgery in elderly women: an analysis of Medicare data. Am J Obstet Gynecol. Feb 1997;176(2):344-
348. 
65. Subak LL, Wing R, West DS, et al. Weight loss to treat urinary incontinence in overweight and obese 
women. N Engl J Med. Jan 29 2009;360(5):481-490. 
66. Schafer JL. Multiple imputation: a primer. Stat Methods Med Res. Mar 1999;8(1):3-15. 
67. Rom DM, Costello RJ, Connell LT. On closed test procedures for dose-response analysis. Stat Med. 
Aug 15 1994;13(15):1583-1596. 
 
 