  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
1 
  
 
Research Protocol Narrative  
Improving Psychosocial Functioning in Older Veterans with PTSD  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
ID: D1832 -W 
 
Date: 6/18/2021 (Version 5)  
 
 
  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
2 
 Research Protocol Narrative  
Improving Psychosocial Functioning in Older Veterans with PTSD  
Anica Pless Kaiser, PhD (PI), Avron Spi[INVESTIGATOR_25827], PhD, Denise Sloan, PhD, Jennifer Moye, PhD, Joan Cook, 
PhD, and Dawne Vogt, PhD  
 
(1)  Rationale  
 
(a)  Statement of the Problem.   Evidence suggests that stressors associated with aging (e.g., 
retirement, incr eased medical problems, bereavement) can exacerbate PTSD symptoms. Older 
Veterans with partial and full PTSD are likely to have comorbid physical and medical problems, take 
multiple medications, and be more socially isolated than younger Veterans. All of t hese factors 
likely contribute to greater functional impairment and decreased quality of life. Given the prevalence 
of PTSD and comorbid mental and physical problems among older Veterans, it is important to 
develop interventions that assist older Veterans in regaining fuller, more satisfying functioning and 
quality of life.  
 
(b)  Hypotheses or Key Question.   This study involves the development of an intervention for older male 
Veterans with PTSD. This study will be conducted in several phases. 1) Interventi on development , 
2) Conducting focus groups to help us better understand impairments in older Veterans with PTSD 
and to help us modify the pro posed intervention modules , 3) Conduct pi[INVESTIGATOR_644259], and 4) Conduct intervention groups and support group controls to evaluate 
the utility of the developed intervention. Primary outcomes are psychosocial functioning and quality 
of life, with PTSD and depressive symptoms as secondary outcomes. A complementary objective is 
to improve attitudes toward mental health treatment and to increase readiness for change and 
engagement in evidence -based psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], as appropriate. Results from this study will 
provide feasibility data for future development and testing of the intervention protocol.  
 
Focus group research questions :  
• To what extent do Veterans indicate that the proposed intervention modules address 
important areas of impairment?  
• Within each intervention module, what areas do Veterans view as most and least important?  
• In what ways do Veterans think the material from e ach module should be presented?  
• Are there any additional areas that are important to address in the intervention protocol?   
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_644260] :  
• Is the intervention feasible as conducted with older Veterans with PTSD?  
• Are Veterans satisfied with the intervention?  
• Do Veterans comply with assignments (e.g., monitoring forms)?  
Comparison Phase research questions:  
• Compared to support group participants, do intervention group participants experience 
greater increases in psychosocial functioning a nd quality of life and reductions in PTSD and 
depressive symptoms?  
• Are pre -post changes maintained at 1 and 6 month follow -up?  
 
(c)  Specific Objectives.    
 Aim 1: Develop a group -based intervention for older Veterans with PTSD that targets areas of 
psychosocial functional impairment.  
 Aim 2:  Conduct focus groups with older Veterans with PTSD and revise the intervention.  
Aim 3: Implement pi[INVESTIGATOR_644261]. Examine feasibility, acceptability, 
retention, and satisfaction.  
Aim 4: Implement and evaluate the intervention protocol. Compare intervention against support 
group control. Consult expert panel and finalize intervention protocol.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
3 
  
 
(2)  Background and Significance  
 
(a) Background.    
The demographic profile of Veterans in the [LOCATION_002] is changing, with increasing numbers of 
Veterans advancing into older age. As of 2010, there were nine million U.S. Veterans who were at 
least [ADDRESS_862476] troops being activated 
and deployed. An important mental  health issue for aging Veterans is posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). As defined by [CONTACT_92678]  – Fifth Edition 
(DSM -5)2, PTSD is a disorder that can develop after a person experiences an extremely stressfu l or 
traumatic event. Symptoms include intrusions (e.g., distressing memories, dreams, flashbacks), 
avoidance of reminders of the trauma (e.g., avoiding thoughts, people, situations), negative 
alterations in cognition or mood (e.g., negative beliefs or emo tional state, feeling detached, inability 
to experience positive emotions), and hyperarousal (e.g., irritable behavior, hypervigilance, 
exaggerated startle). Symptoms must onset or increase following the trauma and last for at least 
one month, and also cau se clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning. Older 
Veterans are seeking treatment for PTSD from the VA in increasing numbers3, and for some, it is 
for the first time. Given the aging of the approximately 7.6 million Veterans who served during the 
Vietnam era, and the many more Veterans who will be reaching their older years in coming 
decades, it is important to develop and provide treatments that will meet the needs of older 
Veterans with PTSD.  
Estimates of the prevalence of current PTS D in adults age 60 and older range from 0.6 to 
4.5%.4 Among older Veterans seeking mental health treatment, estimates of current PTSD are 
higher, 37 -80%.5 Some older Veterans may experience symptoms of PTSD but not meet the full 
diagnostic criteria. The pe rcentage of older adults with sub -syndromal levels of PTSD symptoms 
range from 7 -15%6-8, and those with partial or sub -syndromal PTSD also experience related 
difficulties. Although many definitions of partial PTSD exist, for the purposes of the current pro ject, it 
will be defined to include endorsement of a criterion A event, at least one intrusion symptom (cluster 
B), one avoidance symptom (cluster C), one symptom related to negative alterations in cognition or 
mood (cluster D), one symptom related to alte rations in arousal or reactivity (cluster E), and the 
experience of distress or impairment in functioning (criterion G).[ADDRESS_862477] that stressors associated wi th aging (e.g., retirement, 
increased medical problems, bereavement) can exacerbate PTSD symptoms.9-[ADDRESS_862478] comorbid physical and medical 
problems, take multiple medications, and be more socially isolated than younger Veterans.13 All of 
these factors likely contribute to greater functional impairment problems and  decreased quality of 
life in this population. Given the prevalence of PTSD symptoms and common comorbid problems 
(such as difficulties in psychosocial functioning) among older Veterans, it is important for VA to 
develop and disseminate interventions that assist these Veterans in regaining fuller, more satisfying 
psychosocial functioning and enhancing their quality of life.  
There are several evidence -based trauma -focused psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (EBPs) for PTSD that 
target a reduction in PTSD symptoms, such as Prol onged Exposure (PE)14 and Cognitive 
Processing Therapy (CPT).15 Evidence also suggests that more generalized cognitive -behavioral 
therapy (CBT) is effective; a meta -analysis conducted by [CONTACT_644319] 56% 
of those enrolled in PTSD trea tment and 67% of those who completed it no longer met criteria for 
PTSD.[ADDRESS_862479] been tested in RCTs with older Veterans. There is 
accruing evidence that PE can be delivered effectively with older Veterans.17 However, not al l 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862480] 
the emotional or cogni tive resources or copi[INVESTIGATOR_644262] -
affective processing of trauma.20 Furthermore, Veterans may refuse trauma -focused treatments 
because they believe they are not “ready” to engage in this type of treatment. Providers  have stated 
that they do not have enough clinical time to administer these treatments. In such instances, 
Veterans are often referred to skills -based treatment programs as a precursor, as an adjunct to 
CPT or PE, or instead of these other interventions.[ADDRESS_862481] 
prevalent concern reported was anger, followed by [CONTACT_72251], nightmares , and feeling 
isolated. About 20% of the sample identified a goal of improving relationships (trust, 
communication) and improving copi[INVESTIGATOR_644263].22 In summary, we need to expand the array of 
evidence -based treatments for individuals with PTSD that a ddress some of the limitations of current 
treatments. In particular, we need to develop treatments that are suitable for older adults, target 
quality of life more broadly (versus symptom reduction in particular), and are amenable to those for 
whom more int ense trauma -focused treatments are not suitable. In addition, it may be that 
participation in a pre -treatment intervention that provides an introduction to mental health treatment 
more generally, teaches symptom management skills, and provides information about available 
interventions, would increase some Veterans’ willingness to engage in further treatment for PTSD.  
Recovery -Oriented Conceptual Framework for Development of Psychosocial 
Intervention  
The theoretical model used to frame the proposed study is recovery -oriented23 and is based 
on the hypothesis that psychoeducation and skill building can significantly reduce functional 
impairment associated with PTSD. Although the recovery model is often applied to addictions or 
severe mental illness, it is also a useful framework for viewing change within other mental health 
disorders such as PTSD. Recovery is “ a process of change through which individuals improve their 
health and wellness, live a self -directed life, and strive to reach their full potential (SAMHSA).”24 
Further, re covery is typi[INVESTIGATOR_644264] a process rather than an outcome or a cure. This model 
acknowledges that many people experience mental health conditions chronically and report 
symptoms that wax and wane over time. Recovery is based on continual growth and im proved 
functioning.  
At SAMHSA’s [ADDRESS_862482] pi[INVESTIGATOR_644265]. Areas of functional impairment associated wi th PTSD include social, 
interpersonal, occupational, educational, and physical health. Specifically, DSM -5 documents that 
PTSD is often associated with problems in social and familial functioning, problems at work, and 
lower educational and occupational ac hievement.2 Common comorbid psychological problems 
include depressive disorders, anxiety, sleep problems, and substance abuse and dependence. 
Thus, there are a number of psychosocial functioning domain deficits associated with PTSD to 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
5 
 serve as potential ta rgets for intervention. Improving psychosocial functioning in individuals with 
chronic disease has been linked to decreased depression25, less loneliness26, more support, and 
less use of health care resources.27 Domains of psychosocial functioning (e.g., i nterpersonal 
relationships, social activity, communication skills, regulation of anger, behavioral activation, stress 
management) are the focus of the intervention to be developed in the current study. The importance 
of community and peer support delineate d in the recovery model will also be incorporated into the 
group -based intervention for older Veterans with PTSD   
In summary, by [CONTACT_2329] a recovery -oriented conceptual model, the intervention developed in 
this project will fill the gap regarding improvement  of psychosocial functioning for older Veterans 
with PTSD symptoms. This model will guide the focus of the intervention toward restoring 
psychosocial functioning and helpi[INVESTIGATOR_644266].  
Applying a Recovery -Oriented F ramework to PTSD  
The nature and course of PTSD can be variable, and several trajectories are commonly 
discussed in the literature. In the aftermath of a traumatic experience, individuals can experience an 
initial increase in symptoms, followed by [CONTACT_355771] r ecovery from those symptoms. Others experience 
relatively mild symptoms and maintain a healthy (or resilient) trajectory. Still others can have no 
symptoms, or their symptoms remain at low levels until months or years following the traumatic 
event when sym ptoms increase, often in response to a specific trigger or change in functioning. A 
chronic trajectory, in which a person develops symptoms that are maintained over a long period of 
time, can also occur (See Figure 1).[ADDRESS_862483] increased difficulties 
with work, social functioning, and physical health problems, as well as lower quality of life. Among a 
sample of older adults and  Veterans, Chopra and colleagues (2014) documented both chronic and 
fluctuating courses of PTSD over the course of one year and found that those who met criteria for 
PTSD had worse mental health -related quality of life.30 VA Cooperative Study 420 compared two 
group treatments for Vietnam Veterans: trauma -focused group therapy and present centered group 
therapy.  
 
In the three cohorts examined, the effect of trauma -focused therapy was stronger in one, the effect 
of present centered therapy was stronger in another, and there were no significant differences by 
[CONTACT_644320]. However, 40% of the sample showed a clinically significant decline in 
PTSD severity on the Clinician -Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) at [ADDRESS_862484] array of definitions and measures used to 
Time since eventPTSD SymptomsChronic
Delayed
Recovery
Resilience
Figure 1.  Trajectories of PTSD Symptomatology over time
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862485] that evidence linking social ties to 
health is as strong as the  epi[INVESTIGATOR_644267]. 
Social isolation is associated with higher levels of psychological distress and loneliness as well as 
with poor overall health and well -being.34 From a recovery standpoint, social supp ort has been 
shown to mediate the relationship between recovery initiation and long -term maintenance; research 
also demonstrates that poor social support detrimentally impacts recovery and places individuals at 
risk for relapse.35A specific difficulty link ed to decreased quality of life among those with PTSD 
symptoms, and perhaps particularly relevant for older Veterans, is having problems with 
psychosocial functioning.[ADDRESS_862486] on each of the psychosocial domains discussed above, is stress. Stress 
management strategies often include discussion of sleep, relaxation, exercise, and diet. 
Psychoeducation around the nature of sl eep and common sleep problems, as well as introduction 
to and implementation of sleep hygiene strategies can be quite beneficial.46 Finally, getting anyone 
(including older adults and Veterans) to make and maintain behavioral changes that promote 
healthier  living and decrease stress is difficult. Depression is often comorbid with PTSD and 
especially relevant for older Veterans who tend to isolate from others. Older adults and Veterans 
face multiple challenges (e.g., retirement, physical ailments) that requi re important life changes. As 
such, it is particularly important, psychosocially and medically, for older adults and Veterans to 
make certain lifestyle changes to reduce stress and depression (often targeted using behavioral 
activation.)47 
In summary, psyc hosocial domains such as poor social functioning (e.g., isolation, lack of 
social support), interpersonal dysfunction (e.g., poor communication strategies), anger, problems 
associated with stress and depression, are associated with PTSD symptom severity an d contribute 
to impairment and decreased quality of life among Veterans. Thus, it is important to develop 
strategies to help Veterans improve in these areas. This is especially important for older Veterans 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862487] long histories of dysfunctional interpersonal relationships.  
Interventions that Improve Quality of Life for Persons with PTSD   
Perlman and colleagues48 developed a 15 -week group intervention to improve quality of life 
through physical and behavioral activation exercises emphasizing self -care, social interactions, 
physical activity, and relaxation exercises. The intervention was implemented with 83 Veterans who 
attended a mental health intake ( regardless of psychiatric diagnosis). Veterans improved on 6 out of 
8 subscales of the SF -36; the largest effect sizes were found for domains of social and emotional 
functioning (Cohen’s d = .34 -.38). Subjective ratings of overall wellness also improved.    
Other interventions have been developed to target some PTSD symptoms that do not 
always improve with exposure therapy, such as social skills difficulties, relationship problems, and 
anger management issues.49 For example, Beidel  and colleagues50 presented the results of a 
randomized controlled trial that examined the efficacy of a multi -component cognitive -behavioral 
intervention, called Trauma Management Therapy (TMT), to reduce symptoms of PTSD and 
improve quality of life among  male combat Veterans. There were two groups in this study, one 
received exposure therapy (14 sessions of exposure and 14 sessions of psychoeducation and 
supportive therapy), and the other received exposure therapy plus social and emotional 
rehabilitation training (TMT; 14 sessions of exposure and 14 sessions of social and emotional skills 
training). B oth groups demonstrated improvement in PTSD symptoms and social functioning at 
post-treatment, but only the TMT group had significant increases in frequency a nd duration of social 
activities, and only after the social and emotional rehabilitation sessions. Neither group showed 
improvement on global ratings of anger or quality of life.  
Interventions that Improve Psychosocial Functioning  
Anger management interv entions have successfully reduced anger and aggression in 
several populations51, including combat Veterans with PTSD.39,[ADDRESS_862488] to share difficult feelings 
and situations. Additionally, a group is an ideal environment in which to model appropriate 
interpersonal behaviors and provide feedback on adaptive ways of handling difficult issues.53  
In summary, with regards to psychosocial functioning, there is some s upport to be gained 
from the scientific literature to inform interventions. Given the reciprocal relationship between PTSD 
symptoms (such as emotional numbing, anger, and withdrawal) and lower social support, 
researchers have recommended that mental health  practitioners include interpersonal skills training 
in treatment for Veterans. Additional recommendations include working with Veterans to maintain 
existing social supports as well as forming new ones.38  
Interventions that Improve Psychosocial Functionin g and Quality of Life for Older 
Adults and Veterans  
Catten and colleagues26 conducted a systematic literature review to determine the 
effectiveness of interventions targeting social isolation in older adults. They reviewed 30 
intervention studies, about a half of which were randomized control trials and 17 were group 
interventions. Overall, effective interventions were group -based and targeted specific groups of 
people. Strategies used in the group interventions included education, discussion, self -help, 
exercise, and skills training. Five out of nine group interventions that utilized education 
demonstrated a significant decrease in social isolation. Several groups that focused on increasing 
social support were successful in decreasing social isolation among  group members. Components 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
8 
 of these interventions included encouraging participants to organize social activities, increasing 
intra-personal resources, and improving communication skills.   
Silverstein and Parker56 conducted interviews with a nationally re presentative sample of 
older adults [from Sweden (N = 324) in 1981 and 1992] to determine factors that influenced change 
in their quality of life. Participants were questioned about [ADDRESS_862489] with family, and for those who had developed functional impairment. Thus , for 
those older adults who had some impairments or interpersonal difficulties, engagement in enjoyable 
activities appeared to buffer some of the potential negative consequences of these problems.  
 
     (b)   Significance.    
This project will provide val uable information about an intervention designed to enhance 
psychosocial functioning and quality of life, and reduce distress, among older male Veterans with 
PTSD.  Specifically, the completion of this project will result in: 1) the development of a brief g roup 
intervention to improve psychosocial functioning among Veterans, 2) a greater understanding of 
psychosocial impairment within this population (through focus groups with Veterans ), 3) the 
provision of aid to several groups of Veterans with PTSD and the  collection of feasibility data, and 
4) testing the effectiveness of the group intervention protocol against support group controls.  
 
 (c)   Relevance to Veterans Health.   
Older Veterans are seeking treatment for PTSD from the VA in increasing numbers3, and for some, 
it is for the first time. Given the aging of the approximately 7.6 million Veterans who served during 
the Vietnam era, and the many more Veterans who will be reaching their older years in coming 
decades, it is important to develop and provide t reatments that will meet the needs of older 
Veterans with PTSD. Given the prevalence of PTSD symptoms and common comorbid problems 
(such as difficulties in psychosocial functioning) among older Veterans, it is important for VA to 
develop and disseminate in terventions that assist these Veterans in regaining fuller, more satisfying 
psychosocial functioning and enhancing their quality of life. This intervention will contribute to the 
work being done to fill this gap, as it involves the development of an interv ention geared toward 
improving functioning and quality of life among older Veterans with PTSD.  
 
 (3)  Work Accomplished   
 
(a) The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644268] -onset stress among older combat 
Veterans (at VA [LOCATION_011]). Late -onset stress symptomatology is a phenomenon that occurs among 
older combat Veterans without histories of stress -related disorders who start to reminisce, wit h or 
without associated distress, about their past experiences as they age. As part of studying this 
process, focus groups with older combat Veterans were conducted to gain an understanding of their 
perceptions and experiences of aging and the effects of m ilitary service in their lives. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644269], planning, and facilitation of these focus groups. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644270]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644271] a large scale validation study that involved 
recruitment, telephone screening, and collection of mail surveys to examine corr elates of late -onset 
stress among older combat Veterans ( now in the data analysis phase ). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644272], mainly within a substance abuse clinic setting. In 
addition, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644273] a psychoeducational discussion group for older Veterans with late -onset stress.  Along 
with a Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_644351], and several colleagues, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644274], and we recently completed data collection from the first group of older 
combat Veterans .Veterans reported benefiting from this group, and we had an 100% retention rate 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862490].  
Experience/competence of key collaborators  
Trauma, PTSD and Health among Older Veterans, Lifespan Developmental Perspective, 
Research Design and Analysis – [CONTACT_644352][INVESTIGATOR_644275]. A vron Spi[INVESTIGATOR_644276], trauma, PTSD, personality, 
mental health and well -being, and the longitudinal effects of health and disease on cognitive aging 
for over [ADDRESS_862491]. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_644277] -cited 
papers on PTSD in older men in which they address the long -term effects of combat and refer to 
military service as a “hidden variable” in the study of aging men.57 In this study, among the 1,210 
Veterans of World War II and the Korean War who participated, PTSD prevalence ranged from 0% 
to 12.4%. World War II Veterans who experienced moderate to heavy combat were 13.[ADDRESS_862492]. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_644278] -
director of the Stress, Health, and Aging Research Program (SHARP), a multidisciplinary group of 
researchers who investigate the effects of combat and other stressful or traumatic events on physic al 
and mental health over the lifespan. In this role, [CONTACT_156547][INVESTIGATOR_644279], stress, and trauma 
on long -term health.  
  [CONTACT_156547][INVESTIGATOR_644280] a 
large sample of male Veteran VA ambulatory care patients. Of those exposed to traumatic events, 
24% screened positive for PTSD. Those with PTSD reported having more medical problems than 
those wi thout. Veterans with PTSD had lower health status on all domains assessing quality of life 
than participants with depression and those with neither disorder. Veterans seeking mental health 
treatment reported worse health status than Veterans not in treatme nt. However, those who had 
received mental health treatment in the past were similar in health status to those who did not seek 
mental health treatment, suggesting that receiving mental health treatment may alleviate some of the 
negative effects of PTSD on  health.[ADDRESS_862493] 
progress and has created a website to provide researchers with information about military service 
variables in publically available longitudinal datasets that can be used to address relevant research 
questions . A book that portrays the long -term effects of military service on aging using data derived 
from these datasets is under development.  
Effective Mental Health Treatments for Older Veterans with PTSD, Adaptation of   
Interventions, and Family Functioning a mong Older Veterans with PTSD – [CONTACT_644353]. Joan Cook is an Associate Professor in the Department of Psychiatry at Yale School of 
Medicine and a Research Affiliate of the VA’s National Center for PTSD. She has written extensively 
about the state o f the literature and the need for additional research that examines assessment and 
treatment of older adult trauma survivors and Veterans with PTSD. She has described the limited 
research on treatment for PTSD in older adults, and has noted that supportive  and cognitive -
behavioral group interventions have been successfully applied in this population. She has also 
outlined several issues for consideration when working with older adults, such as the 
appropriateness of exposure therapy, issues regarding conduc ting traditional psychotherapy in 
traumatized Veterans with moderate to severe cognitive impairment, the effects of aging -related 
physical health and role changes, and adjustments to the pace and modality of treatment.[ADDRESS_862494]. Cook has conducted research examining differences between older Veterans with PTSD 
and those without PTSD. Among a sample of older World War II former Prisoners of War (POWs), 
Cook and colleagues found that those with PTSD reported more relationship problems, issues with 
adjustment, and communication difficulties than did former POWs without PTSD.[ADDRESS_862495]. Cook 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862496] to only exa mining symptom 
improvement.32 In a study she conducted involving a supportive/cognitive behavioral group 
intervention for older combat Veterans with PTSD, pre -post Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist  
symptom changes were not significant. However, parti cipants and their family members reported 
significant improvement in the Veterans’ interpersonal functioning, copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], and social 
interactions. Thus, suggestions for future research on interventions with older Veterans emphasized 
the importance of fo cusing on some of these types of outcomes: symptom management, 
stabilization, initiation and maintenance of new activities, improvement in interpersonal relationships, 
perceptions of improvement, and reduction of maladaptive copi[INVESTIGATOR_644281] l isolation. 
Additionally, reports of family members and clinicians (in addition to Veteran self report) were 
acknowledged as essential.  
  [CONTACT_8367] has also conducted research identifying barriers to mental health providers’ 
adoption of evidence -based psy chological treatments. Cook and colleagues surveyed over 1,600 
North American psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_644282] a new clinical intervention. Themes that emerged included: clinician attitudes, client 
characteristics, contextual or institutional factors, training issues, and other issues. The barrier most 
often cited was insufficient time for training, learning, and practicing new treatments.60 Knowledge of 
such barriers and potential solutions to these ba rriers will help to guide the development and future 
implementation of the intervention protocols designed in the current study.  
Implementation of Interventions with Older Veterans within the Geriatric Mental Health  
Clinic of VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare system – [CONTACT_644354]. Jennifer Moye has expertise in geropsychology, implementation of interventions with 
older Veterans, and research methodology. [CONTACT_644355] founded the Geriatric Mental Health Clinic at 
VA [LOCATION_011] and has subsequently recruited geropsy chologists to direct clinical services and training 
programs. VA [LOCATION_011] is one of the leading programs in geropsychology training. [CONTACT_644355] has 
taught psychotherapy with older Veterans to interns and fellows for more than [ADDRESS_862497]. Moye has participated in a number of projects focused on mental health 
treatment in complex geriatric populations including a 9 -site randomized trial of me ntal health 
outreach and treatment for under -treated Veterans and a 5 -site randomized trial of care 
management for older Veterans with dementia. She has received VA RR&D funding to study 
interacting emotional and physical concerns in older cancer survivors  including an observational 
cohort study and a randomized clinical trial. This work focuses in particular on the interaction of 
combat -related PTSD and late life stressors including cancer. [CONTACT_644355]’s recent published work in 
this area has integrated quali tative and quantitative methods to describe quality of life issues in these 
older veterans including  PTSD/anxiety, posttraumatic growth, values/goals, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_644283].61,62 [CONTACT_644355] has also written about the diagnosis, prevalence, course, risk and protective 
factors, assessment, and treatment of Veterans with  PTSD in the setting of medical illness.63 In this 
paper, the authors described how various aspects of cognitive beh avioral therapy, such as cognitive 
restructuring, relaxation training, psychoeducation, and pharmacological management are all helpful 
components of treatment.  
Intervention Outcome Research within the National Center for PTSD – [CONTACT_644356]. Denis e Sloan has expertise in clinical trial research and methodology, treatment for 
PTSD, and protocol development. In a randomized clinical trial, [CONTACT_77533] and colleagues evaluated 
a brief (5 session) written exposure therapy intervention for PTSD.[ADDRESS_862498] -intervention. Between group differences were large ( g = 3.5 and 2.2) at 6 week and 3 
month follow -up assessments, respectively, indicating that the written exposure group displayed 
larger reductions in PTSD symptoms than the no treatment group.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862499]. Sloan recently conducted a meta -analysis examining the efficacy of group treatments for 
PTSD.65 Sixteen studies were included in the meta -analysis; among studies comparing group 
treatment for PTSD against a comparison condition (e.g., supportive therapy), there was a small 
significant ef fect size ( d = .24). Within -group effect sizes ranged from small to very large. Effects for 
groups of men were smaller than for women or mixed -gender groups, and studies with combat 
Veterans displayed smaller effect sizes than did studies with other trauma  populations (e.g., MVA). 
[CONTACT_77533] and colleagues emphasize the importance of measuring other aspects of change, such as 
social functioning, in addition to PTSD symptomatology.  [CONTACT_77533] is currently the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644284]. One study is examining the efficacy of a cognitive behavioral group 
treatment for PTSD compared to a support group control. The other study explores whether a brief 
treatment for PTSD is equally efficacious in comparison to a more intensive, evidence -based 
treatment  for PTSD.  
Focus Group Development, Facilitation, and Analysis – [CONTACT_644357]. Dawne Vogt has multiple areas of research expertise; of particular importance to this 
project, she focuses on risk and resilience factors for PTSD as well as issues related to interpersonal 
functioning and resilience in Veterans. [CONTACT_644358] has nearly [ADDRESS_862500].  
  
 (4)  Work Proposed  
Although some studies have demonstrated e fficacy for improving psychosocial functioning 
among Veterans with PTSD50 and well -being among Veterans48, there have not been any rigorous 
studies to our knowledge that demonstrate improvement in these areas for older Veterans with 
partial or full PTSD an d reduced quality of life. In addition to functional domains described above, 
there are several areas of psychosocial functioning (e.g., problems related to stress, activity 
limitations, and depression), that may be beneficial to include in a therapeutic i ntervention for older 
Veterans. The purpose of this project is to develop an intervention to improve psychosocial 
functioning and quality of life for older Veterans with partial and full PTSD. This project will develop 
a group protocol geared toward restor ing older Veterans to better, fuller functioning. Focus groups 
will be conducted with older Veterans with PTSD to gain additional understanding of functional 
impairments and preferences for the proposed intervention modules.  
 Proposed Intervention  
The intervention protocol will be developed following consultation with an expert panel. The 
intervention will be modified following focus groups with older Veterans with PTSD, and this revision 
will be approved by [CONTACT_644321]. Each module in the intervention protocol will present didactic 
information, provide skills training, and will utilize role plays to facilitate rehearsal and skill 
application and generalization. Between -session work will be assigned, and participants will be 
provided with feedback. Based on the research reviewed above, we will incorporate several topic 
areas into the intervention. For example, the intervention protocol will contain modules that provide 
anger management strategies, communication skills, and education about interpersonal 
relationships and social support. In addition, psychoeducation about behavioral activation and 
stress management (discussion of common sleep problems and sleep hygiene techniques, 
relaxation strategies, as well as the benefits  of exercise and healthy diet changes) will be included. 
All modules will be based on manuals used within the PTSD Clinic at VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare 
System, with additional modifications included based on supporting literature , such as applicable 
components o f TMT. These modules will be enhanced with information and examples relevant for 
older Veterans. Veterans will be taught about the ways in which disability and decreased autonomy 
can influence thoughts and perceptions as well as mood – which in turn affect s the experience of 
stress, depression, and verbal and nonverbal communication. The connection between such aging -
related changes and interpersonal functioning will be reviewed. Another modification will involve a 
discussion about copi[INVESTIGATOR_644285] -related stressors, such as bereavement, caretaking an 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862501] will provide data to support the potential efficacy of the 
intervention protocol (compared to  support group controls) and serve as pi[INVESTIGATOR_49452] a VA Merit 
application that involves a more rigorous randomized clinical trial (RCT) of the intervention.  
 
Research Design and Methods:  
Design Overview : The purpose of this project is to develop an int ervention to improve 
psychosocial functioning and quality of life for older Veterans with PTSD. This project will develop, 
implement, and evaluate a group protocol geared toward restoring older Veterans to better, fuller 
functioning. This project adds to t he existing knowledge by [CONTACT_6310] a program of resources (the 
group protocol) with a unique population: older Veterans with PTSD. The developed group protocol 
will be compared against a support group intervention for Veterans (see Table 1 for a timeline of 
proposed research activities).  
 
This project will be completed over several phases (see Figure below).  
 
 
 
 
Phase IA (Develop Protocol):   
Consult with the expert panel to review the initial intervention plan and to further assess areas of 
dysfunction and impairment for older Veterans with PTSD. Areas identified using this process will 
further inform protocol development.  In this phase, the intervention protocol and finalization of 
assessment measures will take place, guided by [CONTACT_644322]. The protocol will be a 
brief (~10 session) group -based intervention designed to improve psychosocial functioning and 
quality of life. Components of the group intervention for Veterans with PTSD include likely domains 
of psychosocial functioning such as anger management, communication skills, social activity, 
interpersonal relationships, stress management and behavioral activ ation. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_644286] -
behavioral interventions for improving anger management skills include psychoeducation about 
anger and the anger response, differences between aggressive, assertive, and passive behaviors, 
presenting the rationale for and demonstra tion of how to monitor anger levels, and relaxation skills 
training. Communication skills training often involves education about verbal and non -verbal 
communication, active listening, and use of “I” statements. Regarding interpersonal relationships, 
techn iques for improving communication strategies, with loved ones in particular, may be included, 
as well as didactic information about the importance of social support and increasing engagement in 
social activities. Some interventions have successfully includ ed sessions in which facilitators 
encourage and assist group members in problem -solving barriers to engaging in social activities.26 In 
the stress management module, areas such as sleep hygiene, relaxation, exercise, and dietary 
changes will be included. T he behavioral activation module will include information about increasing 
Phase IA  
• 
Consult expert  
panel 
• 
Develop  
protocol  
Phase IB  
• 
Conduct focus groups  
• 
Revise intervention  
protocol  
• 
Consult expert panel  
Phase II  
• 
Conduct pi[INVESTIGATOR_466159]  
• 
Revise protocol  
 
 
 
Phase III  
• 
Conduct intervention  
& support groups  
• 
Consult expert panel  
• 
Merit submission  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
13 
 motivation for behavior change, goal -setting, and strategies for engaging in activities and decreasing 
depression. The VA Office of Patient Centered Care and Cultural Transformation has developed 
“Components of Proactive Health and Well -being” to illustrate how each area of self -care is 
connected. Materials from these approaches will be modified for use in the current study. The use of 
psychosocial self -report assessment measures will  be supplemented with ratings indicative of 
psychosocial functioning, such as use of anger management strategies, monitoring of 
communication and relaxation techniques used, weekly social activity ratings, and time spent with 
friends and relatives.  
Proced ure: Using the areas identified by [CONTACT_644321], the initial group intervention 
modules will be modified. Educational materials to be included in the intervention will be developed 
(using existing manualized components as a starting point). A facilitat or manual will likely be 
developed, as well as handouts for participants to be given at each session and between -session 
assignments.  
 
Phase IB (Development and Facilitation of Focus Groups):   
The research team will finalize the focus group guide (see atta ched), review recruitment strategies, 
and design the focus group sessions. Focus groups allow the researcher to understand the focal 
concept(s) from the perspective of the population being studied.[ADDRESS_862502] effective mode of delivering the 
material. Information learned from focus groups will be used, along with feedback from the expert 
panel, to inform revision of the intervention protocol.  
Procedure:  Two focus groups will be held at VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System and facilitated by 
[CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]  a trained research technician. Six to [ADDRESS_862503] in the study and receive a 
return call. All potential focus group participants will b e administered the Primary Care PTSD Screen 
for DSM -5 (PC -PTSD -5)67 over the telephone. Note: this is a change from the original protocol, 
which indicated that potential participants would be administered the PTSD module of the 
Structured Clinical Intervie w for DSM Disorders (SCID)68. This change was made because it 
was determined that a PTSD screen would be sufficient for focus group participants, and to 
reduce participant burden. In addition, the PC -PTSD -5 has demonstrated excellent diagnostic 
accuracy an d compares with a structured diagnostic interview67.  Veterans who meet eligibility 
criteria will be invited to participate in a focus group. Focus group participants will receive a $75 
compensation for time and travel (i.e., up to two hours in a focus gro up and completing assessment 
measures plus travel to and from the VA [LOCATION_011] facility). Focus groups are expected to last 
approximately 1.5 to 2 hours, including informed consent. Veterans will be consented as a group, 
with the option of being consented on an individual basis if requested (we will have another room an 
RA could take the individual Veteran for consent). Veterans will be given the opportunity to ask 
questions before signing the consent form.  During the focus group visit, participants will comp lete 
self-report measures of demographics, PTSD symptomatology (the Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Checklist -5)69, and psychosocial functioning (the Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning)70 (see 
attached measures).The facilitators will begin by [CONTACT_644323]. Participants will be asked not to use their  names to protect the anonymity of their 
responses. Focus groups will be audio -recorded to facilitate data analysis and interpretation. 
Potential participants will be informed of the intent to audio -record the focus groups when they are 
contact[CONTACT_387532] t elephone screening. Potential participants who do not agree to be audio -recorded 
will be excluded from the study. Once the focus groups have been conducted, each participant will 
be contact[CONTACT_644324].  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
14 
 Data  Analysis Plan:  Several different approaches can be taken to analyze focus group data, 
and the choice depends on the goals of the analysis.71 While some researchers develop a transcript 
of focus grou ps and use a popular qualitative data analysis package, such as QSR International’s 
NVivo 10 program72, simple coding of transcripts is an economical alternative for a smaller study 
such as this one.73 Therefore, we will apply a general inductive approach74 that involves developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] 
a transcript of each focus group and coding themes identified in this transcript. For the purposes of 
this study, the themes are content areas covered within the proposed intervention modules. Two 
individuals, one of whom was phy sically present during the focus groups and another research 
assistant, will listen to the recordings and review the transcripts of each focus group and identify 
themes. Separate coders (research assistants) trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_644287]. Coders will listen to the recordings once and review the transcripts twice. First, they will 
simply listen to the recording and read the transc ript to become familiar with the flow of the 
conversation and the topi[INVESTIGATOR_644288]. On the second review of the transcript, coders will 
mark up the transcript each time they see an identified theme, thus documenting where it was 
discussed. Coders wi ll also be instructed to mark up the transcript if they identify additional themes 
not included among the previously identified list. Next, the coders will meet to discuss their review of 
the recordings and transcripts. To the extent that coders are in agr eement on examples of identified 
themes, quotes relevant to each of the key constructs will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602]. Disagreements regarding 
which themes quotes fit into will be resolved through discussion between the coders. In the event 
that an agreement cannot be r eached, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644289].  As 
recommended by [CONTACT_644325]68, newly nominated themes and ongoing refinements of 
conceptualizations of key themes will be incorporated in the subsequent focus group. The 
informatio n in the final compi[INVESTIGATOR_644290]. 
Once coding of focus group transcripts has been completed, we will be able to address our research 
questions. After the transcripts are marked up by [CONTACT_644326], e ach sentence identified will be sorted 
by [CONTACT_644327]. Information gleaned from review of these materials will be used to a) 
assist us in determining what existing content will be most important to include and emphasize in 
intervention modules;  b) identify additional content to address in intervention modules; and c) 
provide examples within the modules to increase face validity of the intervention.  Finally, we will 
identify any areas of difference between themes identified by [CONTACT_644328].  
 
Phase II (Conduct Pi[INVESTIGATOR_466161], Revise Protocol):   
Activity 1:  Conduct two pi[INVESTIGATOR_644291]. These groups will be 
used to pi[INVESTIGATOR_644292], and to identify any changes needed. Additionally, 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_644293]. This phase will also 
provide information about how best to minimize drop out; strategies deemed to be useful will be 
implemented in Phase III.  
Activity 2:  Revise Veteran intervention protocol as indicated by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_10299], as well as by [CONTACT_644329].  
Recruitment and Participant Characteristics:  
• Veteran participants will be recruited from: a) flyers posted at each VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare 
System campus, b) flyers and information given to clinicians within the PTSD cl inics and 
the Geriatric Mental Health Clinic, c) contact[CONTACT_644330], and d) a volunteer roster of Veterans who have previously 
sought services through the National Center for PTSD and the PTSD cl inic and agreed to 
participate in future studies.  
• Approximately 10 participants will be recruited (target group membership is 8 participants) 
per group.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  See human subjects document.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
15 
 Procedure:  Veterans recruited by [CONTACT_644331] a return call. Veterans obtained via the PTSD clinic (who have indicated interest in 
research) will be called.  Research staff will also mail recruitment le tters to Veterans who have 
received care in the VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System or have an appointment scheduled in relevant 
clinics (e.g. Behavioral Medicine, Audiology, Pain, Physical Therapy) as indicated in the electronic 
medical records system, and have b een identified as over age 60.  Veterans recruited from the roster 
will receive a letter describing the study and a postcard that can be returned if participants do not 
wish to be contact[CONTACT_644332]. Those V eterans who 
indicate interest or who do not return the postcard may be called and screened to see if they are 
eligible to participate. A HIPAA waiver has been submitted to collect PHI (month/year of birth , name, 
and last 4 of SSN  will be asked during the screening call) prior to completion of ICF and HIPAA. If 
potential Veteran participants are interested in the study and meet preliminary eligibility criteria 
during the screening call, they will be invited to attend an in -person a ppointment with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a 
trained research staff member . Research staff will access CPRS to identify exclusionary criteria, 
such as current treatment for PTSD, diagnosis of a psychotic disorder or currently experiencing 
psychotic symptoms, being hospi[INVESTIGATOR_644294], or 
having a diagnosis of dementia or other severe cognitive disorder.  At the baseline  appointment, 
Veterans will be administered the PTSD questions from the SCID  along with additional assessment  
measures. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644295] a determination of eligibility. 
Veterans who are eligible to participate in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_644296].  
Two pi[INVESTIGATOR_644297] s with Veterans will be conducted during this phase. Groups will be 
audio -recorded. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644298] a psychology trainee or research staff to facilitate 
groups in this study phase. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644299] -workshops  prior to 
conducting groups in which all intervention materials will be reviewed and discussed. Several 
assessment measures will be completed at the start of each session (see Assessment section). At 
the end of each session, Veterans will complete satisfac tion ratings and provide feedback. Group 
facilitators will also provide ratings and feedback at the end of each session.  
The intervention developed as part of this project is conceptualized as being the first stage in a 
stepped care approach. As such, Vet erans will be recruited from the PTSD and Geriatric Mental 
Health Clinics if they are: new patients, established patients who have declined or dropped out of 
more structured trauma -focused therapy, have partial PTSD, or if they are deemed inappropriate for  
trauma -focused therapy due to health impairments. Following post -group assessments, if any 
participants are still reporting significant symptoms and distress and indicate interest, they may be 
referred to other groups within one of the VA clinics or to tr auma -focused  EBPs such as Prolonged 
Exposure or Cognitive Processing Therapy or other EBPs (e.g., CBT for Insomnia). Veterans will be 
provided with descriptions of a variety of evidence -based treatment options, and will be given 
referrals as appropriate. Veterans’ attitudes about mental health treatment and readiness to change 
will be examined before and after group participation.  
Groups will be conducted during regular business hours. [CONTACT_644359] (the PI) is a licensed 
clinical psychologist, and wil l be available during screening calls, baseline and follow -up 
assessments, and during group sessions in case of a clinical emergency. If needed, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644300] a risk assessment with a patient, and if it is determined that immediate ca re is 
needed, will walk the participant down to urgent care. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644301] (e.g., the Veteran’s crisis line , suicide prevention coordinator numbers ) 
available. In the event that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644302], another licensed 
provider will be asked to provide coverage.  
For each group session attended w e will provide compensation ($10) for travel expenses, as is 
consistent with attendance at clini cal appointments for service -connected conditions through VA.  
Starting with the second pi[CONTACT_158793], a booster or follow -up session will be scheduled for 1 to 3 
months following the end of the 9 -session group. The purpose of this session is to check -in with  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
16 
 group members, discuss treatment gains and current symptoms, and to provide referrals and 
resources as appropriate.  Veterans will also receive $10 for attending this session.  
Research Questions:  
• Is the intervention feasible as conducted with older Veter ans with PTSD?  
• Are Veterans satisfied with the intervention?  
• Do Veterans comply with assignments (e.g., monitoring forms)?  
Data Analysis Plan:  Baseline demographics (e.g., age, race, service era) will be summarized. To 
evaluate feasibility, we will descrip tively examine recruitment and retention characteristics, such as 
ease of recruitment, number of sessions attended by [CONTACT_4317], and study attrition. Secondly, we 
will examine compliance and satisfaction measures, such as participant and clinician ratin gs and 
participant feedback to gain a better understanding of the effectiveness of the groups in facilitating 
change and teaching group members about included concepts. Participant commitment will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_644333], compliance w ith assignments, and level of participation 
in group sessions. Participants’ open -ended comments provided at the end of each session will be 
coded and categorized into themes, which will then be used to inform changes to the protocol as 
appropriate.  
 
Phase  III (Conduct Groups to Compare Intervention against Support Group):   
Activity 1:  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644303], c ompare the revised intervention 
protocol for older Veterans with PTSD against a support group control, and conduct three groups 
with the revised intervention protocol and three support groups, both among older Veterans with 
PTSD. Outcomes will be compared between intervention and support groups.  
Activity 2:  After the groups are completed, the group intervention protoco l will be revised 
according to group member and facilitator feedback. The expert panel and mentors will be consulted 
prior to final revision of the protocol.  
Activity 3:  Following data analysis, a manuscript detailing the results of the study will be 
prepared. In addition, final revisions will be made to the intervention protocol according to group 
member and facilitator feedback, expert panel suggestions, as well as lesso ns learned in this phase 
of the study. To evaluate the utility of the intervention in preparing Veterans for trauma -focused 
therapy, utilization of mental health treatment will be assessed at the six month follow -up.  
Finally, data collected as part of thi s study will be used as pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299] (including effect size 
estimates for power calculations) in the development of a possible VA Merit award submission to 
conduct a RCT of the group intervention.    
Recruitment and Participant Characteristics:  
• For both the  intervention and support groups, recruitment of Veteran participants will be 
conducted in the manner used in Phase II.   
• For all groups, approximately 14 participants will be recruited (target group membership is 10 
participants per group).  
Inclusion/Exc lusion Criteria:  For both the intervention and support groups, inclusion/exclusion criteria 
for Veteran participants will be the same as used in Phase II of this study. In addition, participants of 
Phase II will be excluded from participation in Phase III.  
Procedure:  This procedure will be the same as followed in Phase II. Those Veterans who are 
eligible to participate will be randomized in groups of 3 (block randomization) to participate in either 
an intervention group or a support group. Three interventio n groups and support groups will be 
conducted during this phase. All groups will be conducted by d octoral level psychologists or 
psychology trainees or research staff who the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644304]. Given that this is a small study, 
there is a limited number  of available group facilitators, and therapeutic allegiance effects are not 
expected, group facilitators will conduct either intervention groups or support groups. All groups will 
be audio recorded. Several assessment measures will be completed at the sta rt of each session. At 
the end of each session, Veterans will complete satisfaction ratings and provide feedback. Veterans 
in both conditions (intervention and control) will be given between -session assignments that will be 
collected. Fidelity to the inter vention and support group protocols will be monitored by a doctoral 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862504] who is not part of the study team and is familiar with cognitive -behavioral 
interventions for PTSD. Each group session will be digitally recorded, and the monitor will l isten to a 
randomly selected sample (20% of the sessions) and complete a fidelity monitoring form. Group 
facilitators will also provide ratings and feedback at the end of each session. Following the last 
session, Veteran participants will be asked to compl ete post -group assessment measures. Veterans 
will be asked to complete follow -up assessments at one month and six months, either via postal mail 
or in person.  
Consistent with the recruitment method followed in Phase II, Veteran participants for both the 
intervention and support groups will be recruited from the PTSD and Geriatric Mental Health Clinics 
if they are new patients, if they are established patients but have declined or dropped out of more 
structured trauma -focused EBPs, if they have partial PTSD , or if they are deemed inappropriate for 
trauma -focused therapy due to health impairments or other reasons. The same procedure will be 
followed as in Phase II after the six month follow -up. Specifically, Veterans will be presented with 
descriptions of a v ariety of evidence -based treatments, including trauma -focused EBPs, and 
provided with referrals should they request them. Attitudes toward treatment and readiness for 
change will also be assessed. In addition, the VA electronic medical records will be revi ewed to 
document enrollment and completion of mental health treatment at the six month follow -up.  
Groups will be conducted during regular business hours. [CONTACT_644359] (the PI) is a licensed 
clinical psychologist, and will be available during screening  calls, baseline and follow -up 
assessments, and during group sessions in case of a clinical emergency. If needed, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644300] a risk assessment with a patient, and if it is determined that immediate care is 
needed, will walk the par ticipant down to urgent care. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644301] (e.g., the Veteran’s crisis line, suicide prevention coordinator numbers) 
available. In the event that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644302], an other licensed 
provider will be asked to provide coverage.  
For each group session attended w e will provide compensation ($10) for travel, a practice that is 
consistent with VA policy to reimburse for travel expenses for VA appointments for service -
connect ed conditions.  
After the final session, a booster or follow -up session will be scheduled for 1 to 3 months 
following the end of the 9 -session group. The purpose of this session is to check -in with group 
members, discuss treatment gains and current symptoms, and to provide referrals and resources as 
appropriate.  Veterans will also receive $10 for attendi ng this session.  
 
 
Procedures implemented during the Coronavirus Pandemic  
 
In light of the current COVID -19 pandemic, we will be transitioning all study -related  in-person  procedures to 
a virtual telehealth format, as follows:  
 
Procedure  
 
Recruitment  
Veteran recruitment will remain the same as described above in Phase III for in -person groups.  
 
Obtaining Consent & Baseline Appointment s 
Veterans who indicate interest in the study will receive a screening call from a study staff member. A 
revised HIPAA waiver has been submitted to allow the collection of PHI (month/year of birth, name, 
email, and last 4 of SSN) during the screening call, prior to completion of the combined ICF/HIPAA . 
This is different from the previously approved HIPAA waiver, as we are collecting each Veteran’s 
email address in order to send them the link to the video appointments , as well as replacement study 
materials as  needed (please see page 18 ). If potential Veteran participants are interested in the 
study and meet preliminary eligibility criteria during the screening call, they will be  sent an envelope 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
18 
 in the mail with a cover letter,  the ICF/HIPAA document , and all baseline measures except  the SCID . 
A pre -addressed, stamped envelope  will be included to facilitate return of all documents to study 
staff. It will be emphasized over the phone during the screening call that participants sh ould not 
begin the baseline measures until they have completed the informed consent documents with study 
staff.   
 
A telehealth appointment (using a platform such as VVC or Webex or telephone) will be scheduled 
with the Veteran to review the consent forms and surveys.  Veterans will be given the opportunity to 
ask questions about study participation during the informed consent process. Participants will be 
reminded to put the signed consent documents and surveys in the pre -addressed, stamped 
envelope t o be mailed back to study staff. At the end of the informed consent review call, a second 
appointment will be scheduled with the participant to complete the PTSD interview questions from 
the SCID. Participants will be reminded that the next appointment can not be completed until the 
consent forms and survey documents have been received. If a session has been scheduled but the 
documents have not been received, the session will be rescheduled. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a trained study staff 
member will conduct the PTSD interv iew questions from the SCID via telehealth (video or 
telephone). Participants will be given the opportunity to ask any questions they have before and after 
the completion of the SCID questions.  
 
Once the SCID is completed and all forms are reviewed by [CONTACT_415856], the participant will be 
informed if they are eligible to participate in the group sessions, and if so, will be added to the list for 
randomization to study condition . Veterans will be compensated $20 after completion of the SCID 
appointment.  
 
Group Sessions  
Groups will be conducted using a telehealth platform  that has options for video and telephone -only 
participation (such as WebEx) . Participants will be sent email invitations that contain links to join the 
sessions. Video sessions will start [ADDRESS_862505] , or another l icensed clinician will be available by [CONTACT_644334].  Veterans will receive $10 per session that they 
attend. Payments will be mailed via check through the agent cashier  at two t imepoints: after session 
4, and after session 9 .  
 
Prior to the start of group sessions, participants will be sent a package of all assessments to be 
completed in sessio ns, along with a pre -addressed, stamped envelope . Assessment measures will 
be clearly labeled with Veteran ID, session #, and whether the measure is to be completed at the 
start or at the end of the group session. During each session, group leaders will facilitate the 
completion of measures at the start and the end of each group ses sion, and participants will be 
asked to indicate when they have finished measures and placed them in the  included  envelope  to be 
returned at the end of the [ADDRESS_862506] -group assessment 
measures  (which will be mailed to them) . The follow -up booster session will also be conducted over 
a telehealth platform.  Veterans will be asked to complete follow -up assessments at approximately 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
19 
 one month and six months  via postal mail.  Appropriate clinical referrals will be provided following the 
end of study participation.     
 
Technical Assistance  
 Study staff may provide some technical assistance via telephone to participants at different 
points during their involvement in the study. Veterans who meet all telephone screening criteria 
other than “Has access to a home computer or device that will allo w telehealth delivery of the 
intervention utilizing secure audio/video platforms (e.g. VVC, Webex) may receive assistance in 
connecting to secure platforms in order to determine if the home devices are sufficient to meet this 
criteria. Study staff may assi st participants in connecting to complete the Informed Consent and 
baseline appointment process. Study staff may also assist participants prior to and following 
randomization to ensure that they are able to access the remote systems and utilize devices to 
participate in the group interventions. This assistance may include provision of telephone numbers 
and websites for VA technical support, methods to request VA -provided tablets, and trial sessions 
to work through potential issues (such as where to place ca meras, how to maximize audio clarity, 
how to ensure privacy for the session, etc.).  
 
Use of Email  
 Study staff may use e -mail to send remote access instructions or previously approved group 
handouts or measures to participants as needed (e.g. if postal mai ling is delayed or participants ask 
for additional copi[INVESTIGATOR_014]). Standard VA -approved language indicating that Veterans should not reply to 
these e -mails will be included in each e -mail.  
 
 
Research Questions:   
• Compared to support group participants, do intervention group participants experience 
greater increases in psychosocial functioning and quality of life and reductions in PTSD and 
depressive symptoms?  
• Are pre -post changes maintained at 1 and 6 month follow -up?  
 
Data Analysis Plan:   Baseline demographics (e.g., age, race, service era) will be summarized for 
each condition (intervention and suppor t groups). Descriptive statistics will be presented for all 
outcome variables. Prior to analyzing the data, the adequacy of randomization will be checked and 
any factors that are unbalanced between groups will be controlled for in group comparisons. Data 
will be analyzed using SPSS and Mplus. Change in primary outcomes (psychosocial functioning and 
quality of life) will be evaluated from pre - to post -intervention and at 1 and 6 month follow -ups. We 
will also evaluate change in secondary outcomes (e.g., PTSD  and depressive symptoms). 
Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM)[ADDRESS_862507] drop -outs to determine any 
group differences. For our primary and secondary outcom es, we will specify a random intercepts and 
random slopes model in which Time, Condition, and the Condition x Time interactions will be 
included as predictors. Time will be coded by [CONTACT_266099] (baseline, post -group, follow -
ups) and modelled as a  random effect to allow for individual differences in trajectories of change. We 
will examine between group effect sizes (e.g., Hedges g73) for the intervention compared to the 
support group at post -group and follow -up assessments. Additionally, we will lo ok at the portion of 
each group (intervention versus comparison) who experienced reliable change on primary outcomes. 
Given the developmental nature of this study, results may be used to provide preliminary data for a 
subsequent trial. 
 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
20 
 Assessments and Participant Compensation:  
Focus group participants will be contact[CONTACT_644335]. Veterans who participate in the focus 
groups will be compens ated $75 for their time and participation.  
All Veterans who participate in Phase II and Phase III (intervention group pi[INVESTIGATOR_644305]) will complete a structured diagnostic interview, 
baseline assessme nts, satisfaction ratings of each session, and post -group assessments. Phase III 
participants will complete one and six month follow -up assessments. Participants will be 
remunerated for their time and inconvenience. Baseline assessments (including the SCID  questions) 
are estimated to take about 90 minutes and participants will be compensated $[ADDRESS_862508]-group and follow -up assessments are estimated to take 1 hour and participants will be 
compensated $35 for each assessment they complete (Phase III participants will receive $40 for 
completion of the six month follow -up). Additionally, all participants in Phases II and III will be 
remunerated $10 to cover travel expenses for each group session they attend. Thus, Veterans who 
participate in Phase I I could receive up to $1 55 total and Veterans who participate in Phase III could 
receive up to $[ADDRESS_862509] to be recompleted; otherwise, both the SCID and the 
measures will be re -administered. In the event that this is the case, we will pay participants $20 f or 
their recompletion of the baseline.  
 
Measures  (see Table 2)  
Note: This proposal is being written after publication of DSM -5 but prior to the release of 
appropriately updated assessment measures. Revised versions of all assessment measures that are 
available at the time the study is conducted will be used.  
Phase IA : This is the protocol development phase. No participants will be enrolled or assessment 
measures collected during this phase.  
Phase IB : Prior to being invited to participate in the focus group s for Veterans, potential participants 
will be screened over the telephone with the PC-PTSD -5. 
 
All focus group participants will be contact[CONTACT_644336] -ended questions to gather feedback and allow  participants a chance to share 
comments they may not have felt comfortable disclosing during the focus groups themselves.  
Phases II and III : Prior to being invited to participate in intervention and control groups, Veterans will 
attend an in -person appointment at VABHS. During this appointment, they will be administered the 
PTSD module from the SCID67 and several additional measures. 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
21 
  
 
Table  1. Timeline of Study Activities  
 Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Activities by [CONTACT_644337]  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Phase IA (Develop Protocol)                      
1. Consult with expert panel  x                    
2. Develop intervention protocol  x x                   
3. Consult with mentors and with expert panel  x x                   
4. Finalize intervention protocol    x                  
Phase IB (Focus Groups)                      
5. Consult with expert panel     x                 
6. Develop focus group guide     x                 
7. Recruit and screen participants for focus 
groups      x                
8. Conduct focus groups       x x              
9. Analyze focus group data        x x             
Phase II (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_644306] )                     
10. Recruit and screen participants for 
intervention groups         x x            
11. Conduct intervention groups          x x x          
12. Consult with mentors and expert panel; 
revise protocol             x x        
13. Analyze pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]             x x        
Phase III (Compare Intervention & Support 
Groups)                      
14. Recruit/screen participants for groups             x x        
15. Conduct intervention and support gr oups             x x x x      
16. Conduct follow -up assessments               x x x x    
17. Consult with mentors and expert panel; 
revise protocols                x x     
18. Data analysis                x x x    
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862510] -Group (Phases II and III), 
and at Follow -Up Assessments (Phase III):  
 
The Veterans Rand 12 -item Health Survey  (VR-12).[ADDRESS_862511] component scores: the physical component score (PCS) and the mental 
component score (MCS). The component scores are standardized T -Scores ( M = 50, SD = 10) and the 
population standard for this measure was recently updated.77 
The Quality of Life Inventory  (QOLI).78 The QOLI is a 32 item self -report measure that assesses lif e 
satisfaction across 16 life domains (e.g., health, work, recreation). For each domain, the respondent rates 
how important the domain is on a 0 -2 scale and how satisfied he or she is in this area of life on a 7 -point 
scale. Satisfaction scores on the meas ure are weighted based on the respondent’s rating of the importance 
of the life domain in order to achieve a total score. The measure was validated across a number of 
samples, including psychiatric inpatient and outpatient VA samples. Test -retest reliabili ty was excellent 
over a one -month interval ( r = .91) as was the internal consistency of the measure (alphas ranged from .86 -
.89). The measure also demonstrated convergent and discriminant validity with other measures of life 
satisfaction.  
The Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning  (IPF).[ADDRESS_862512] 30 days. Items are rate d on a 7 -point scale ranging from 0 
(“never”) to 6 (“always”). The IPF yields a total score and scores for seven subscales: romantic 
relationships, family, work, friendships and socializing, parenting, education, and self -care functioning. 
Respondents have  the option to skip sections that do not apply to them. The IPF has excellent internal 
consistency reliability (overall alpha = .93) and the scale correlates with other self -report measures of 
quality of life and functional impairment, such as the QOLI ( r = .59).   
 
Measures to be Completed by [CONTACT_644338]:  
Phase II : Veteran participants will be asked to monitor or rate their use of various strategies  at the 
beginning of each group session . For example, participants will be asked to report on social activities and 
time spent with friends and family and to rate their use of anger management strategies, copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110], and 
relaxation strategies. Several additional behavioral ratings will also be  administered. Participants will be 
asked about the number of nightmares, flashbacks, and hours slept the previous week. They will also be 
asked about frequency of anger outbursts and will provide a rating of their current distress. As a global 
process mea sure, participants will be asked to rate the extent to which they are doing better or worse than 
the previous session. Additionally, they will be asked to provide satisfaction ratings at the end of each 
group session. Satisfaction will be rated using sever al items (e.g., how relevant did today’s group feel to 
you?) with Likert -type response scales (e.g., 1 = not at all  to 4 = very). In addition, Veteran participants will 
be given the opportunity to provide open -ended comments at the end of each session. Par ticipant 
treatment engagement will be evaluated by [CONTACT_644333], compliance with assignments, 
and level of participation in group sessions.  
Phase III : The measures used in this phase will be the same as used in Phase II, except that the s cales 
used at baseline and post -group will also be administered at follow -up assessments (one and six months).  
 
Limitations to be Addressed in Current Study  
As with any study that evaluates a treatment outcome intervention, it is important to anticipate a nd 
attempt to minimize problems related to drop -out. For each of the group interventions (pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], intervention, 
and support groups), several precautions will be taken to minimize drop -out. Group members will receive a 
schedule at the start of the group with  the dates and times of each group session. Participants will also be 
given a binder in which to keep all group -related materials. The group schedule will be put in the front of 
this binder. At the end of each group session, all members will be given an ap pointment card with the 
details of the next group session date, time, and location (as well as contact [CONTACT_644339]) on it. Additionally, participants will receive weekly reminder calls from one of the group 
  
Version 5: 6/18/[ADDRESS_862513] ions 
of feasibility and satisfaction with/acceptance of the developed intervention protocol. Additionally, it will 
provide preliminary comparisons between the intervention protocol and support groups and provide effect 
size estimates and information about the group size needed for larger studies. The data gathered from this 
study will serve as pi[INVESTIGATOR_49452] a larger randomized clinical trial to be conducted in the future.  
Another limitation of the current study is that it is focused on older male Veterans  with PTSD. Future 
research may use the intervention protocol developed in the current study to test the effectiveness with 
other populations (such as with older women Veterans or with younger Veterans with PTSD).  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 
24 
 Table 2. Assessment Measures  
 Veteran Pi[INVESTIGATOR_466161] (Phase II)  Veteran Intervention/Support Groups (Phase III)  
 
Domain   
Screening   
Baseline  All Group 
Sessions  Post-
Group   
Screening   
Baseline  All Group 
Sessions  Mid-
Group  Post-
Group  Follow Up 
Assessments  
Screening            
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM Disorders 
(SCID) – PTSD Questions only   
x     
x      
Primary Outcome            
The Quality of Life Inventory (QOLI)   x  x  x   x x 
The Inventory of Psychosocial Functioning (IPF)   x  x  x   x x 
Veterans RAND 12-item Health Survey (VR -12)  x  x  x   x x 
Additional Outcome            
Depression, Anxiety, Stress Scales (DASS -21)  x  x  x   x x 
Sense of Mastery   x  x  x   x x 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist (PCL)   x  x  x   x x 
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI -II)  x  x  x   x X 
Other            
Endorsed and Anticipated Stigma Inventory 
(EASI)    
x   
x   
x    
x  
x 
University of Rhode Island Change Assessment 
Scale (URICA)    
x   
x   
x    
x  
x 
Satisfaction ratings    x    x    
Activity/Skills use monitoring forms    x    x    
Behavioral PTSD ratings    x   x   x x 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 25 k.  Human Studies Section   
 
(1) Risk to subjects  
 
(a) Human subjects involvement and characteristics.  All participants included in the current 
study will be male Veterans. Focus groups with Veterans : Veterans who already receive 
care through VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System will be recruited as participants for this part 
of the study. Veterans from the communit y may also be recruited for this study.  Two 
focus groups with Veterans will be held, each with up to 10 Veterans. Approximately 20 
Veterans will be recruited to participate in these focus groups. Veteran participants will 
be recruited from a) flyers posted  at each VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System location, b) 
flyers and information given to clinicians within the PTSD clinics, the Geriatric Mental 
Health Clinic, and medical clinics, and c) word of mouth from other participating 
Veterans. Inclusion criteria:  Veter ans need to be male and at least [ADDRESS_862514] 3 on the PC -PTSD -5.  
Exclusion criteria: Veterans who are diagnosed with a psychotic disorder or have 
psychotic symptoms, have been hospi[INVESTIGATOR_644307], or have a  diagnosis of dementia or other severe cognitive disorder. 
Women will be excluded from participation, since this study focuses on older male 
Veterans. Potential participants will also be excluded if they do not agree to be audio 
recorded.  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_644308] : Veterans who already receive care through VA 
[LOCATION_011] Healthcare System, as well as Veterans from the community may be recruited as 
participants for this part of the study. Two pi[INVESTIGATOR_644309] 10 Veterans 
each will be conducted during this phase. Approximately 2 8 participants will be recruited 
for these groups. Veteran participants will be recruited from a) flyers posted at each VA 
[LOCATION_011] Healthcare System location, b) flyers and information given to clinicians within 
the PTSD clinics, the Geriatric Mental Health Clinic, and medical clinics, c ) contact[CONTACT_644340], d ) word of 
mouth from other p articipating Veterans, and e) a roster of Veterans who have sought 
services through the VA National Center for PTSD and have indicated consent to be 
contact[CONTACT_366743]. Inclusion criteria : Veterans need to be at least [ADDRESS_862515] one intrusion  
symptom (cluster B), one symptom of avoidance (cluster C), one symptom related to 
negative alterations in cognition or mood (cluster D), one symptom related to alterations 
in arousal or reactivity (cluster E), and report of impairment in functioning (clus ter G; 
DSM -5). Exclusion criteria : Veterans who are in current treatment for PTSD, are 
diagnosed with a psychotic disorder or have psychotic symptoms, have been 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_644310], or have a diagnosis of 
dementia or other severe cognitive disorder. Veterans will be asked not to join therapy 
groups or other interventions for the duration of their participation in the study. Potential 
participants will also be excluded if they do not agree to be audio recorded . 
 
Comparison condition - Intervention and support groups for Veterans : Veterans who 
already receive care through VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System , as well as community -
based Veterans who do not use the VA, may be recruited as participants for this part of 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 26 the study. Three intervention groups of up to 14 Veterans each, as well as three 
comparison support groups will be conducted during this phase. Approximately 84 
participants will be recruited for these groups. Veteran participants will be recruited from 
a) flyers posted at each VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System location, b) flyers and information 
given to clinicians within the PTSD clinics, the Geriatric Mental Health Clinic, and 
medical clinics, c ) contact[CONTACT_644341] d ) word of mouth from other participating Veterans, and e) a roster of Veterans 
who have sought services through the VA National Center for PTSD and have indicated 
consent to be contact[CONTACT_366743]. Inclusion criteria : Veter ans need to 
be at least 60 years old to be eligible to participate in the study. For both intervention 
and support groups, participants (who will be assessed with the PTSD questions from 
the SCID prior to being invited to participate), must endorse a milit ary-related criterion A 
event, at least one intrusion symptom (cluster B), one symptom of avoidance (cluster C), 
one symptom related to negative alterations in cognition or mood (cluster D), one 
symptom related to alterations in arousal or reactivity (clus ter E), and report of 
impairment in functioning (cluster G; DSM -5). Exclusion criteria : Veterans who are in 
current treatment for PTSD, are diagnosed with a psychotic disorder or have psychotic 
symptoms, have been hospi[INVESTIGATOR_644311] p sychosis within the past 
year, or have a diagnosis of dementia or other severe cognitive disorder. Veterans will 
be asked not to join therapy groups or other interventions for the duration of their 
participation in the study. Potential participants will al so be excluded if they do not agree 
to be audio recorded. In addition, Veterans who participated in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_644312].  
 
(b) Sources of materials.  
Focus group participants will pr ovide data in the form of audio recordings that will be 
transcribed, demographic information, and responses to survey measures. Veterans 
participating in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_644313] (intervention 
and support groups) will provide data in the form of self -report assessment measures 
collected during and after group participation. Veteran participants will be recruited using 
data from a roster of Veterans who have sought treatment through the VA National 
Center for PTSD or PTS D clinic. This roster is an electronic database maintained by [CONTACT_644342] – Behavioral Science Division. Participant entry into the 
database is done on a voluntary basis and written consent for future contact [CONTACT_644343] d. 
 
(c) Potential risks.  The potential psychological, physical, social or other risks to Veterans 
who participate in the proposed study are minimal. Veteran focus group participants will 
be discussing domains of psychosocial functioning that they view to be pr oblematic for 
themselves or for other Veterans. Additionally, Veterans who participate in the 
intervention groups will be asked to complete psychological and psychosocial 
assessment measures and discuss areas of difficulty for them. There is a slight chanc e 
that Veterans discussing these issues may experience some psychological discomfort 
when reflecting on such experiences.  [CONTACT_644359] (the PI), as a trained clinical 
psychologist, will be able to provide thorough assessment in the event of a participa nt’s 
adverse reaction to focus group participation. In addition to [CONTACT_644359], another 
licensed clinical psychologist will be available during each of the focus groups. If a 
Veteran becomes distressed and it is clinically appropriate, the Veteran wil l be allowed to 
leave the group and speak with the available  psychologist. If clinically appropriate, the 
Veteran will participate for the remainder of the focus group and [CONTACT_644359] will 
speak with him individually as the group is over  to assess d istress and any other clinical 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 27 needs. Appropriate intervention and/or referral for treatment can be provided, if needed. 
No other known physical, social or legal risk associated with participation in the proposed 
research project is identified.  
 
(2)  Adequ acy of Protection from Risks  
 
(a) Recruitment and informed consent.  
Issues related to recruitment and obtaining informed consent are relevant to the proposed 
study. For recruitment details, see the above section. For the focus groups, informed 
consent will be  obtained by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pless Kaiser or a trained research technician prior to the 
start of the focus group. For Veterans who participate in an intervention or support group, 
informed consent will be obtained by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Pless Kaiser, a psychology trainee, or trained 
research technician at the assessment session held prior to the start of the groups.  
Informed consent will be obtained from all study participants prior to participation, 
according to the guidelines established by [CONTACT_4707] (IRB) at VA  
[LOCATION_011] Healthcare System. Following the completion of the informed consent form, the 
consent form will be given to the research technician for photocopying for the participant 
copy. All participants who decline the study or do not meet study criteria will  be given 
appropriate feedback and referrals for other treatment as needed (e.g., to one of the 
psychology clinics at VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System).   
 
(b) Protection against risk. The primary risk associated with the proposed study includes 
psychological distr ess resulting from increased focus on psychosocial problems during 
the assessment, focus group, and/or intervention sessions.  To address this potential risk, 
[CONTACT_644359], a trained clinical psychologist, is in a good position to provide further 
evalua tion of a participant’s distress. This evaluation may include contact [CONTACT_4490] a 
participant’s current healthcare providers, including mental health professionals, if 
needed. [CONTACT_644359] will also be in a good position to make referrals for further 
evalua tion and/or treatment, and to ensure that such consults are placed on the 
participant’s behalf. Study staff will immediately report any serious adverse events to [CONTACT_644360], and she will, according to standardized procedures, report them to the IRB 
within the required timeframe. In addition, all participants will be provided with [CONTACT_644361]’s contact [CONTACT_3031], and encouraged to establish contact [CONTACT_644344]. All other incidents (e.g., theft of loss of data), will be  reported in 
accordance with VA policy. Efforts will be made to protect confidentiality. Focus group 
members will be asked not to discuss information about other individuals in the group 
outside of the group setting. Participants will be asked not to state  their names when 
speaking in order to protect confidentiality on the audio recordings of the focus group 
sessions. Study staff will immediately report any serious adverse events to the PI. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_1318], according to standardized procedures, report them to the IRB within the required 
timeframe. The confidentiality of the data that is gathered from participants (audio 
recorded group sessions, telephone screen data, survey measures) will be protected 
through secure storage of such media in a locked cabinet in [CONTACT_644359]’s office that 
is kept locked when unattended. Data will be de -identified by [CONTACT_644345] (all 18 HIPAA identifiers) prior to data analysis. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_644314] -identified datas ets as needed. Once research staff are no 
longer working on the study, they will be removed from the protocol. All information kept 
electronically, including digital recordings of focus groups, will be kept behind the VA 
firewall on a secure server in a re stricted access computer file. Records will be destroyed 
in accordance with the VA Record retention schedule 
(www1.va.gov/VHAPUBLICATIONS/RCS10/rcs10 -1.pdf).  Records will be destroyed, 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 28 when applicable, in a manner in which they cannot be retrieved. Additi onally, all 
information will be de -identified for the purposes of analysis and dissemination of 
findings.  
  
(3)   Potential benefits to subjects and others  
 The proposed study is consistent with the overall mission of the VA, which assures that 
all persons cared for in the VA healthcare system can reliably count on prompt and 
appropriate treatment of psychological distress. The proposed study seeks to develop , 
implement, and evaluate a psychosocial intervention for older Veterans with PTSD. The 
efficacy of the intervention developed will be compared to support group controls. The 
intervention has the potential to reduce problems related to psychosocial functio ning and 
PTSD, and to improve quality of life for older Veterans with PTSD symptoms. This 
intervention will address the missions of the VA and the VA National Center for PTSD 
and directly address the care of older participants with PTSD symptoms, a high pr iority 
problem within the VA.  
 
In addition, this study will provide valuable research data on interventions that are 
effective with older Veterans with PTSD, an understudied population. Aging in the 
context of PTSD is a high priority research area within t he VA National Center for PTSD. 
The data collected during the course of this study will help to inform the future 
development and refinement of the intervention protocol to help improve psychosocial 
functioning and quality of life among older Veterans with  PTSD symptoms. Thus, there is 
substantial potential for the proposed study to benefit Veterans who participate in the 
current study as well as to indirectly help others who experience psychosocial problems 
related to PTSD.  
 
(4)     Importance of knowledge  to be gained  
Given the aging of our Nation’s Veterans, it is important to develop and provide 
interventions that will help those with partial and full PTSD manage their symptoms and 
improve their lives. One area that is affected by [CONTACT_644346]. There are 
several evidence -based trauma -focused interventions for PTSD, such as Prolonged 
Exposure and Cognitive Processing Therapy. There is some evidence to sugg est that 
these interventions are helpful for older Veterans. However, not all Veterans engage in or 
are offered these types of interventions (for various reasons), and among those who do, 
some do not improve and others drop out. Thus, additional types of i nterventions designed 
to reduce symptoms and enhance quality of life and functioning are needed for this 
population. The intervention to be developed may be able to serve as a pre -treatment 
intervention, increasing readiness for change and attitudes toward  treatment among older 
Veterans. The focus groups conducted as part of this study, in concert with 
recommendations from the expert panel, will guide the revision of the development 
intervention. Thus, this study will produce an intervention informed by [CONTACT_644347], will be used in future phases of the study to test the effectiveness of 
the intervention.  
 
(5)  Resources  
 
(a)  Research Space : 
(1) The VA National Center for PTSD (NCPTSD) is a VA Center of Excellence for research 
and education on the prevention, understanding, and treatment of PTSD. The proposed 
research will take place in the Behavioral Science Division (BSD) of the NCPTSD, 
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 29 located at the Jamaica Plain campus of the VA [LOCATION_011] Healthcare System (VABHS). 
The Jamaica P lain campus is conveniently located, with several public transportation 
alternatives (subway and bus lines) within a few blocks of the medical center. 
Additionally, parking is free for visitors, and there are shuttles that run from the medical 
center to ot her VA medical centers and outpatient clinics. Thus, the site of the proposed 
study is easily accessible for potential participants. BSD is under the direction of [CONTACT_644362], Associate Chief of Staff for Research, Executive Director, and is well -
staffed by [CONTACT_447636], post -doctoral fellows, psychology interns, research 
technicians, and support staff.  The Principal Investigator (PI), [CONTACT_644359], has a 
dedicated office for her ongoing program of research on the 12th floor of the VABH S 
medical center in BSD.  Space will be provided to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_644315]. The PI’s office includes locked file cabinets which will be used to store screening 
forms, interview data, digital recordings of focus groups, and assessment f orms. The 
Division’s office space includes networked computers and printers as well as duplication, 
fax, scanning, and mailing facilities.  Additional space will be made available to house 
research staff (i.e., the Research Technician) hired for the projec t. The NCPTSD also 
has office space and conference rooms that can be reserved and used for conducting 
focus groups with Veterans.     
 
(c) Other Research Resources:  
(d)  The backbone of the NCPTSD computer operations is a fiber optic local area network for 
the mo re than [ADDRESS_862516] onto the Internet, as well as to a mirrored 
FTP server that allows secure transfer of large files to/from outside computers. The 
system also provides secure remote access capabilities through a Virtual Private Network 
(VPN), which is used by [CONTACT_644348].  All of the NCTPSD workstations are recent -
vintage Windows -based PCs. Each year, the NCPTSD obtains [ADDRESS_862517] available features and specifications to maintain technological currency.  Printing  
is predominately centralized through six high -speed laser and color printers. Windows -
compatible software of various types is available to all staff via the network.  Specific 
examples of the software include MS Office Suite (word processing, spreadsheets , 
database administration, graphics, and presentations), Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop for 
digital image manipulation, EndNote for reference and bibliography development, and 
Adobe Acrobat for PDF file manipulation.  Examples of available statistical pac kages 
include SPSS, SAS, LISREL, MPlus, EQS, AMOS, and HLM.  Staff have access to VA 
subscriptions to electronic databases for research, including PsycInfo service for literature 
searches and PsycArticles for full text electronic access to journals publish ed by [CONTACT_644349]. Both of these resources can be accessed directly 
from the LAN and remotely via VPN.  In addition, through the NCPTSD’s affiliation with 
[LOCATION_011] University School of Medicine, there is electronic and physical acc ess to journal 
articles, books, databases, and other references. The VA electronic library also provides 
full text on a wide array of journal articles and interlibrary loan is available.  
 
 (n)  Publications /Presentations  from Last Funding Period (as applicable) .  None.  
 
 (o)  Literature Citations (as applicable) .   
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 30 1. [LOCATION_002] Census Bureau. “Summary File.” 2010 American Community Survey. 
U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey Office, 2013.  
2. American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th Ed.). Wash ington, DC: Author.  
3. Rosenheck. R. A., & Fontana, A. F. (2007). Recent trends in VA treatment of post -
traumatic stress disorder and other mental disorders. Health Affairs, 26 , 1720 -1727.  
4. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_58628], R. H., Goldstein, R. B., Southwick, S. M., & Grant, B. F. (2011). Prevalence 
and Axis I comorbidity of full and partial posttraumatic stress disorder in the United 
States: results from Wave 2 of the National Epi[INVESTIGATOR_354248]. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25 , 456 -465.  
5. Blake, D. D., Keane, T. M., Wine, P. R., Mora, C., Taylor, K. L., & Lyons, J. A. (1990). 
Prevalence of PTSD symptoms in combat veterans seeking medical treatment. Journal 
of Traumatic Stress, 3 , 15-27.  
6. Glaesmer, H., Gunzelmann, T., Braehler, E., For stmeier, S., & Maercker, A. (2010). 
Traumatic experiences and post -traumatic stress disorder among elderly Germans: 
Results of a representative population -based survey. International Psychogeriatrics, 22 , 
661-670.  
7. Schnurr, P. P., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2152], A., Vielhauer, M. J., Findler, M. N., & Hamblen, J. L. (2002). 
Trauma in the lives of older men: Findings from the Normative Aging Study. Journal of 
Clinical Geropsychology, 8, 175-187.  
8. van Zelst, W. H., de Beurs, E., Beekman, A. T. F., Deeg, D. J. H., & van Dyck, R.  
(2003). Prevalence and risk factors of posttraumatic stress disorder in older adults. 
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 72, 333-342.  
9. Floyd, M., Rice, J., & Black, S. R. (2002). Recurrence of posttraumatic stress disorder 
in late life: A cognitive agin g perspective. Journal of Clinical Geropsychology, 8 , 303 -
311.  
10. Kaup, B. A., Ruskin, P. E., & Nyman, G. (1994). Significant life events and PTSD in 
elderly World War II veterans. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 2 , 239 -243.  
11. Davidson, J. R ., Kudler, H. S., Saunders, W. B., & Smith, R. D. (1990). Symptom 
and comorbidity patterns in World War II and Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 31 ,162–170.  
12. Yaffe, K., Vittinghoff, E., Lindquist, K., Barnes , D., Covinsky, K. E., Neylan, T., Kluse, 
M., & Marmar, C. (2010). Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and risk of dementia among 
U.S. veterans. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67, 608 -613.  
13. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2152], A., III, Hankin, C. S., Mansell, D., & Kazis, L. E. (2006). Posttraumatic stress 
disorder and health status: The Veterans Health Study. Journal of Ambulatory Care 
Management, 29 , 71-86.  
14. Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., Cahill, S. P., Rauch, S. A., Riggs, D. S., Feeny, N. C., & 
Yadin, E. (2005). Randomized trial of prolonged exposure for posttraumatic stress 
disorder with and without cognitive restructuring: Outcome at academic and community 
clinics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73 , 953 -964.  
15. Monson, C. M., Schnurr, P. P., Resick, P. A., Friedma n, M. J., Young -Xu, Y., & 
Stevens, S. P. (2006). Cognitive processing therapy for veterans with military -related 
posttraumatic stress disorder . Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74 , 989 -
907.  
16. Bradley, R., Greene, J., Russ, E., Dutra, L., &  Westen, D. A. (2005). A 
multidimensional meta -analysis of psychotherapy for PTSD. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 162 , 214 -227.  
17. Thorp, S. R., Stein, M. B., Jeste, D. V., Patterson, T. L., & Wetherell, J. L. (2012). 
Prolonged exposure therapy for olde r veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20 , 276 -280.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 31 18. Schottenbauer, M. A., Glass, C. R., Arnkoff, D. B., Tendick, V., & Gray, S. H. (2008). 
Nonresponse and dropout rates in outcome studie s on PTSD: review and 
methodological considerations. Psychiatry, 71 , 134 -168.  
19. Cook, J.M., Dinnen, S., Simiola, V., Thompson, R., & Schnurr, P.P. (2014). VA 
residential provider perceptions of dissuading factors to the use of two evidence -based 
PTSD tr eatments. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 45 , 136 -142.  
20. Becker, C. B., & Zayfert, C. (2001). Integrating DBT -based techniques and concepts 
to facilitate exposure treatment for PTSD. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 8 , 107 -122.  
21. Ha mblen, J. L., Bernardy, N.C., Sherrieb, K, Norris, F. H., Cook, J. M., Louis, C. A., 
& Schnurr, P. P. (in press). VA PTSD clinic director perspectives: How readiness guides 
provision of evidence -based PTSD treatment. Professional Psychology: Research and 
Practice.  
22. Rosen, C., Adler, E., & Tiet, Q. (2013). Presenting concerns of veterans entering 
treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 26 , 640 -643.  
23. Sheedy, C. K., & Whitter, M. (2009). Guiding Principles and Elements of Recovery -
Oriented Systems of Care: What Do We Know From the Research? HHS Publication 
No. (SMA) 09 -4439 . Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, Substance 
Abuse and Me ntal Health Services Administration.  
24. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). (2012, 
March 23). SAMHSA’s working definition of recovery updated. Retrieved December 10, 
2013.  
25. Kocsis, J. H., Schatzberg, A., Rush, J., Klei n, D., Howland, R., Ginwesch, L., Davis, 
S., & Harrison, W. (2002). Psychosocial outcomes following long -term, double -blind 
treatment of chronic depression with sertraline vs placebo. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 59 , 723 -728.  
26. Cattan, M., White, M.,  Bond, J., & Learmouth, A. (2005). Preventing social isolation 
and loneliness among older people: A systematic review of health promotion 
interventions. Ageing and Society, 25 , 41-67.  
27. Sobel, D. S. (1995). Rethinking medicine: Improving health outcomes  with cost -
effective psychosocial interventions. Psychosomatic Medicine, 57 , 234 -244.  
28. Bonanno, G. A. (2005). Resilience in the face of potential trauma. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 14 , 135 -138.  
29. Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet , E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). 
Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 52 , 1048 -1060.  
30. Chopra, M. P., Zhang, H., Pless Kaiser, A., Moye, J. A., Llorente, M. D., Oslin, D. W., 
& Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2152],  A., III (2014). PTSD is a chronic, fluctuating, disorder affecting the mental 
quality of life in older adults. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22 , 86-97.  
31. Schnurr, P. P., Friedman, M. J., Foy, D. W., Shea, T., Hsieh, F., Lavori, P. W., 
Glynn , S., … & Bernardy, N. C. (2003). Randomized trial of trauma -focused group 
therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60, 481-489.  
32. Cook, J. M, & O’Donnell, C. (2005). Assessment and psychological treatment of 
posttrauma tic stress disorder in older adults. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and 
Neurology, 18 , 61-71.  
33. Van Orden, K. A., Stone, D. M., Rowe, J., McIntosh, W. L., Podgorski, C., & Conwell, 
Y. (2013). The senior connection: design and rationale of a randomized trial of peer 
companionship to reduce suicide risk in later life. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 35 , 117 -
126.  
34. Walters, R., Cattan, M., Speller, V. and Stuckelberger, A. (1999). Proven Strategies 
to Improve Older People’s Health . Eurolink Age, London.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 32 35. Humphreys, K., Mankowski, E. S., Moos, R. H., & Finney, J. W. (1999). Do 
enhanced friendship networks and active copi[INVESTIGATOR_644316] -help groups 
on substance abuse? Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 21 , 54–60.  
36. McFall, M. E., Wright, P. W., Donovan, D. M., & Raskind, M. (1999). 
Multidimensional assessment of anger in Vietnam veterans with posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Comprehensive Psychiatry , 40, 216 -220.  
37. Gavlovski, T., & Lyons, J. A. (2OO4). Psychological sequelae of combat violen ce: A 
review of the impact of PTSD on the veteran's family and possible interventions. 
Aggression and Violent Behavior, 9 , 477 -501.  
38. Ray, S. L., & Vanstone, M. (2009). The impact of PTSD on veterans’ family 
relationships: An interpretative phenomenolog ical inquiry. International Journal of 
Nursing Studies, 46 , 838 -847.  
39. Chemtob, C. M., Novaco, R. W., Hamada, R. S., Gross, D. M., & Smith, G. (1997). 
Anger regulation deficits in combat -related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress , 10, 17-36.  
40. Jakupcak, M., Conybeare, D., Phelps, L., Hunt, S., Holmes, H. A., Felker, B., 
Klevens, M., & McFall, M. E. (2007). Anger, hostility, and aggression among Iraq and 
Afghanistan War veterans reporting PTSD and subthreshold PTSD. Journal of T raumatic 
Stress, 20 , 945 –54.  
41. Teten, A. L., Miller, L. A., Stanford, M. S., Petersen, N. J., Bailey, S. D., Collins, R. 
L., Dunn, N. J., & Kent, T. A. (2010). Characterizing aggression and its association to 
anger and hostility among male veterans with  post-traumatic stress disorder. Military 
Medicine, 175 , 405 –10.  
42. Forbes, D., Parslow, R., Creamer, M., Allen, N., McHugh, T., & Hopwood, M. (2008). 
Mechanisms of anger and treatment outcome in combat veterans with posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Journa l of Traumatic Stress, 21 , 142 -149.  
43. Orth, U., & Wieland, E. (2006). Anger, hostility, and posttraumatic stress disorder in 
trauma -exposed adults: a meta -analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
74, 698 –706.  
44. Kulkami , M., Porter, K. E., & Rauch, S. A. (2012). Anger, dissociation, and PTSD 
among male veterans entering into PTSD treatment. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 26 , 
271-278.  
45. Forbes, D., Creamer, M., Hawthorne, G., Allen, N., & McHugh, T. (2003). 
Comorbidity as a predictor of symptom change after treatment in combat -related 
posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 191 , 93–99.  
46. Rybarczyk, B., Lund, H.G., Garroway, A.M., & Mack, L. (2013). Cognitive behavioral 
therapy for insomni a in older adults: Background, evidence, and overview of treatment 
protocol. Clinical Gerontologist, 36 , 70-93.  
47. Lewinsohn, P.M., Antonuccio, D.O., Breakenridge, J.S., & Teri, L. (1984). The copi[INVESTIGATOR_644317]: A psychoeducational interventi on for unipolar depression. 
Eugene, OR: Castalia Publishing Company.  
48. Perlman, L., Cohen, J. L., Altiere, M. J., Brennan, J. A., Brown, S. R., Mainka, J. B., 
& Diroff , C. R. (2010). A multidimensional wellness group therapy program for veterans 
with comorbid psychiatric and medical conditions. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice, 41 , 120 -127.  
49. Frueh, B. C., Turner, S. M., & Beidel, D. C. (1995). Exposure  therapy for combat -
related PTSD: A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 15, 799–817.  
50. Beidel, D. C., Frueh, B. C., Uhde, T. W., Wong, N., & Mentrikoski, J. M. (2011). 
Multicomponent behavioural treatment for chronic combat -related posttraumati c stress 
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 25 , 224 -231.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 33 51. Beck, R., & Fernandez, E. (1998). Cognitive behavioral therapy in the treatment of 
anger: A meta -analysis. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 22 , 63–74.  
52. Ger lock, A. A. (1994). Veterans’ responses to anger management intervention. 
Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 15 , 393 –408.  
53. Taft, C. T., Creech, S. K., & Kachadourian, L. (2012). Assessment and treatment of 
posttraumatic anger and aggression: A review. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development, [ADDRESS_862518], J. M., Monson, C. (2011). Trauma, PTSD, and 
partner violence in military families. In: S. MacDermid, S. Wadsworth, & D. Riggs, 
editors. Risk and resili ence in U.S. military families (pp. 195 -212). [LOCATION_001] (NY): 
Springer.  
55. Eckhardt, C. I., Barbour, K. A., Davison, G. C. (1998). Articulated thoughts of 
maritally violent and nonviolent men during anger arousal. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psycho logy, 66 , 259 –69.  
56. Silverstein, M., & Parker, M. G. (2002). Leisure Activities and Quality of Life among 
the Oldest Old in Sweden. Research on Aging, 24, 528 -547.  
57. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2152], A., III, Schnurr, P. P., & Aldwin, C. M. (1994). Combat -related posttraumatic  
stress disorder symptoms in older men. Psychology and Aging, 9 , 17-26.  
58. Cook, J. M., O’Donnell, C., Moltzen, J. O., Ruzek, J. I., & Sheikh, J. I. (2005). Clinical 
observations in the treatment of World War II and Korean War veterans with combat -
relate d PTSD. Clinical Gerontologist, 29 , 81-93.  
59. Cook, J. M., Riggs, D. S., Thompson, R., Coyne, J. C., & Sheikh, J. I. (2004). 
Posttraumatic stress disorder and current relationship functioning among World War II 
ex-Prisoners of War. Journal of Family Psyc hology, 18 , 36-45.  
60. Cook, J. M., Biyanova, T., & Coyne, J. C. (2009). Barriers to adoption of new 
treatments: An internet study of practicing community psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_11437]. Administration 
and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research, 36 , 83-90.  
61. Hilgeman, M. M., Moye, J., Archambault, E., Billings, R. L., Karel, M. J., Gosian, J., & 
Naik, A. D. (2012). In the Veterans voice: Psychosocial needs after cancer treatment. 
Federal Practitioner, 29 , 51S -59S. `  
62. Naik, A. D., Martin, L. A ., Karel, M., Wachen, J. S., Mulligan, E., Gosian, J. S., 
Herman, L. I., & Moye, J. (2013). Cancer survivor rehabilitation and recovery: Protocol 
for the Veterans Cancer Rehabilitation Study (Vet -CaRes). BMC Health Services 
Research, 13 , 93-103.  
63. Frenc h-Rosas, L. N., Moye, J., & Naik, A. D. (2011). Improving the recognition and 
treatment of cancer -related posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Psychiatric 
Practice, 17 , 270 -276.  
64. Sloan, D. M., Marx, B. P., Bovin, M. J., Feinstein, B. A., & Gallagh er, M. W. (2012). 
Written exposure as an intervention for PTSD: A randomized clinical trial with motor 
vehicle accident survivors. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 50 , 627 -635.  
65. Sloan, D. M., Feinstein, B. A., Gallagher, M. W., Beck, J. G., & Keane, T. M. (2013). 
Efficacy of group treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: A meta -
analysis. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 5 , 176 -183.  
66. Vogt, D. S., King, D. W., & King, L. A. (2004). Focus groups in psychological  
assessment: Enhancing content validity by [CONTACT_644350]. 
Psychological Assessment, [ADDRESS_862519], M. B., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B.W. (2002). Structured Clinical 
Interview for DSM -IV-TR Axis I Di sorders, Research Version, Patient Edition . (SCID -I/P) 
[LOCATION_001]: Biometrics Research, [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute.  
  
Version 5: 6/18/2021 34 70. Rodriguez, P., Holowka, D. W., & Marx, B. P. (2012). Assessment of posttraumatic 
stress disorder -related functional impairment: A review. Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development, 49 , 649-666.  
71. Kreuger, R. A., & Casey, M. A. (2009). Focus groups: A practical guide for applied 
research (4th Ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
72. NVivo qualitative data analysis software; QSR International Pty Ltd. Version 10,  
2012.  
73. Frankland, J., & Bloor, M. (1999). Some issues arising in the systematic analysis of 
focus group interviews. In R. S. Barbour & J. Kitzinger (Eds.), Developi[INVESTIGATOR_644318]: Politics, Theory, and Practice . London: Sage.  
74. Thomas, D.R. (2006). A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative 
evaluation data. American Journal of Evaluation, 27 : 237.  