  
FWA #[ADDRESS_999635]  
New Hyde Park, NY [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: [PHONE_15221]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
To: Divyesh Sejpal MD  
[ADDRESS_999636]  
MANHASSET, NY  [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 From:  Hallie Kassan, MS, CIP  
Director, Human Research Protection Program  
 
Date:  December 06, 2016  
  
RE: IRB #:  HS15 -0674  
 Protocol Title:  PROSPECTIVE EVALUATION OF RESIDUAL BILE DUCT STONE 
DETECTION BY [CONTACT_731811]:  December 06, 2016  
 Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:  December 05, [ADDRESS_999637].  Sejpal : 
This is to advise you that the Progress Report submission received December 06, [ADDRESS_999638] on December 06, 2016 and the 
following determination was made:  
Expedited Approval  for the following:  
1. Proto col ( Versio n date 11/14/16)  
2. Informed Consent ( Version date 12/6/16)  Re -Consent is not required  
3. The appropriate documentation has been submitted for  the removal of Peter Stein.  
4. The appropriate documentation has been s ubmitted to add Molly Stewart; she is not approved to 
obtain informed consent.  
5. The following investigators are authorized to participate on this study and obtain informed 
consent: Divyesh Sejpal, Benley George, Larry Miller, Arvind Trindade, Calvin Lee,  Sumant 
Inamdar, and Anil Vegesna.   
This study qual ifies for expedited review per:   45 CFR 46.110(9) – Continuing review of research, not 
conducted under an IND application or IDE where categories 2 -8 don’t apply, but the IRB has 
determined and documented at a convened meeting that the research involves no greater than minimal 
risk and no additional risks have been identified.  
 
All conditions of approval previously established by [CONTACT_731812]. The Institutional Review Board -  will be notified of this action.  
 

NOTE:  This approval is subject to recall if at any time the conditions and requirements as 
specified in the IRB Policies and Procedures are not followed:  
1. Using only IRB -approved consent forms, questionnaires, letters, advertisements, etc. in your 
research.  
2. Submitting any modifications made to the study for IRB review prior to the initiation of changes except when necessary, to eliminate apparent, immediate hazards to the subject.  
3. Reporting unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others.  
4. Renewing the study at the interval set by [CONTACT_4707].  You should submit 
a progress report to the Institutional Review Board at least two months prior to expi[INVESTIGATOR_469882].  Failure to receive notification that it is time to renew do es not relieve you of your 
responsibility to provide the IRB with the Progress Report in time for the request to be processed and approved prior to your expi[INVESTIGATOR_320].  
5. Prior to implementation, any changes made to studies utilizing TAP must have COPP, as well as IRB approval.  
  
IMPORTANT REMINDER:  The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors 
(ICMJE) requires registration of clinical research studies meeting specific guidelines prior to publication.  Please see ICMJE requirements for registration of clinical trials at http://www.icmje.org/.  Our organization account is in the name [CONTACT_731823] . To register 
your trial:  http://prsinfo.clinicaltrials.gov/. You must register your trial PRIOR TO ENROLLING SUBJECTS.   
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 1 of 21  
RESEARCH PROTOCOL 
 
 
Protocol Title:  PROSPECTIVE EVALUATION OF RESIDUAL BILE DUCT 
STONE DETECTION BY [CONTACT_731813]: [INVESTIGATOR_731806], MD 
Primary Contact [CONTACT_5627]: George Benley 
Primary Contact [CONTACT_7626]: [PHONE_15222] 
Primary Contact E-mail: [EMAIL_13951]  
Date Revised: 11/14/2016 
IRB Number: HS15-0674 
 
 Guidelines for Preparing a Research Protocol 
 Instructions:  
 You do not need to complete this document if you are submitting an Application for 
Exemption  or Application for a Chart Review .   
 Do not use this template if: 
o  Your study involves an FDA regulated  product.  In this case, use the Clinical 
Trial Protocol Template. 
o Your study has a protocol from a sponsor or  cooperative group.  In this case, use 
the Protocol Plus .   
o Your study is a registry or repository for data and/or samples, In this case, use 
Protocol Template – Registry Studies.  .   
 If a section of this protocol is not applicable, please indicate such. 
 Do not delete any of the text contained within this document. 
 Please make sure to keep an electronic copy of  this document.  You w ill need to use it, if 
you make modifications in the future.   
 Start by [CONTACT_731814] e table above, according to these rules: 
o Protocol Title:  Include the full protoc ol title as listed on the application. 
o Investigator:  include the principal investigator’s name [CONTACT_407098] 
o Date Revised:  Indicate the date at which the protocol was last revised 
o IRB Number:  Indicate the assigned I RB number, when known.  At initial 
submission, this row will be left blank.   
 Once the table information in entered, proceed  to page [ADDRESS_999639] of the 
form. 
  
 Continue to next page to begin entering information about this study  
    

Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 2 of 21  
1.  PREVIOUS STUDY HISTORY 
 
Has this study ever been reviewed and re jected/disapproved by [CONTACT_84965]? 
 
 No   Yes   if yes, please explain:  
 
 
2. BRIEF SUMMARY OF RESEARCH 
 The summary should be written in language intelligible to a moderately educated, 
non-scientific layperson .  
 It should contain a clear statement of th e rationale and hypothesis of your study, a 
concise description of the methodology, with an emphasis on what will happen to the 
subjects, and a discussion of the results.  
 This section should be ½ page 
 
 
Gallstone disease affects over 20 million Americans.1   Among patients 
with gallbladder disease, the prevalence of  choledocholithiasis (stones in the bile 
duct) is estimated to be 10-20% 2, 3 Endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is consid ered the standard of care for removing 
stones in the bile duct utilizing a variety of conventional methods  including biliary 
sphincterotomy, sphincteroplasty, extr action balloon, retrieval basket, and 
mechanical lithotripsy.  After removal of stones from the bile duct, an occlusion 
cholangiogram is usually performed to confirm complete bile duct clearance.  
However, cholangiogram can miss residual st ones in 11- 30% of cases  - especially 
in the setting of a dilated bile duct, larg e stones, severe pneumobilia, juxtapapi[INVESTIGATOR_731807], primary sclerosing cholangi tis, and after lithotripsy (mechanical, 
electrohydraulic, or laser).4-[ADDRESS_999640] implication 
with the need for repeat imaging and/or procedures. 
 
 
3. INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND MATERIA L/PRELIMINARY STUDIES AND 
SIGNIFICANCE 
 Describe and provide the results of previous  work by [CONTACT_69063], including 
animal studies, laboratory studies, pi[INVESTIGATOR_101122], pre-clinical and/or clinical studies 
involving the compound or d evice to be studied.  
 Include information as to why you are conduc ting the study and how the study differs 
from what has been previously researche d, including what the knowledge gaps are. 
 Describe the importance of the knowledge expected to result 
 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 3 of 21 Peroral cholangioscopy (POC) provides dire ct visualization of the bile duct 
during ERCP and its benefits are well documented in numerous published studies.  POC has been described for therapy of difficult to remove biliary stones utilizing electrohydraulic lithotripsy or laser lit hotripsy with success rates of >90%.
8-10  POC 
has also been used for evaluation of indeterminate filling defects and to assess for residual stones missed with cholangiogra m.  In a multicenter study evaluating POC 
for a variety of indications, 11% (7/66) of  patients had bile duct stones identified 
only by [CONTACT_731815].
4 In a study of patients with primary 
sclerosing cholangitis, 30% (7/23) of patie nts were found to have stones with POC 
that were missed with cholangiography.[ADDRESS_999641] 
stones found with POC in comparison to balloon-cholangiography; they found that 24% (26/108) of patients had residual ston es seen with POC that were missed with 
balloon-cholangiography.
[ADDRESS_999642] th at traditional cholangioscopes are fragile, 
cumbersome to use, and usually require tw o endoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_731808].  
A recent single operator semi-disposable cholangioscope, SpyGlass ([LOCATION_011] Scientific, Natick, Massachus etts), has addressed those concerns and has been 
shown in a studies to be a useful tool in  visualizing the bile ducts and performing 
therapeutic maneuvers for biliary stones.
4,11 
 
 
4. OBJECTIVE(S)/SPECIFIC AIMS AND HYPOTHESES 
 A concise statement of the goal (s) of the current study.  
 The rationale for and specific objectives of the study.  
 The goals and the hypothesis to be tested should be stated . 
 
This is Prospective, single center study (One IRB, Two hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]: North 
Shore University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] [NSUH] and Long-Island Jewish Medical Center [LIJ]) 
The primary goal of the study is to  assess if POC will enhance the 
diagnostic yield in the detection of resi dual biliary stones th at are missed during 
conventional ERCP.  Residual bile duct stones  can especially be seen in the setting 
of bile duct dilation, histor y of recurrent abnormal liver  function tests, and after 
lithotripsy (mechanical, electrohydraulic, or laser). Missed biliary stones can lead 
to recurrent biliary symptoms, panc reatitis, and cholangitis. POC after 
conventional ERCP can be a useful diagnos tic tool to confirm complete extraction 
of bile duct stones, and thus lead to decreased morbidity and decreased cost by 
[CONTACT_731816]. 
Primary Endpoint: 
The primary end point is to detect th e presence of any stones seen during POC 
that were missed during conventional ERCP  
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 4 of 21 Secondary Endpoints: 
a. Identify the change in management after finding stone on POC e.g. balloon 
sweep, stent placement, etc. 
Identify the recurrence of biliary obstructive symptoms and/or imaging suggestive 
of recurrent (missed) stones which will be  assessed with phone call at [ADDRESS_999643] THE HUMAN RESEARCH 
 Explain the feasibility of m eeting recruitment goals of th is project and demonstrate a 
potential for recruiting the required number of suitable subjects within the agreed 
recruitment period 
o How many potential subjects do you have access to? 
 Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the trial are 
adequately informed about the protocol and their trial related duties and functions 
 
Every year more than [ADDRESS_999644] 
completed the necessary trainings for participation. All involved personnel will be informed of any changes in the protocol  either through email or in person by [CONTACT_42020]-coordinator or the PI.  
 
 
6.  RECRUITMENT METHODS 
 Describe the source of potential subjects 
 Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects 
 Describe any materials that will be used to recruit subjects.  A copy of any 
advertisements (flyers, radio scripts, etc.) should be submitted along with the 
protocol.  
 If monetary compensation is to be offered, this should be indica ted in the protocol 
 
All consecutive patients with suspected or  documented bile duct stones who satisfy 
eligibility criteria and who consent for part icipation in the study will be included in 
the study.  The source of potential subj ects is the endoscopy suites at NSUH and at LIJMC. 
Majority of patients who were scheduled for standard of care ERCP procedure 
already have either documented or su spected presence of bile duct stones. 
There are no advertisements for the recrui tment as all the patients approached for 
consent are already scheduled for standard of care procedures.  
There is no monetary compensati on for participation in the study.  
 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 5 of 21  
7.  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA 
 Describe the characteristics of the su bject population, includi ng their anticipated 
number, age, ranges, sex, ethnic background, and health status. Identify the criteria 
for inclusion or exclusion of any subpopulation.  
 Explain the rationale for the involvement of special classes of subjects, such as 
fetuses, pregnant women, children, prisoners or  other institutionaliz ed individuals, or 
others who are likely to be vu lnerable.   You cannot include these populations in your 
research, unless you indicate  such in the protocol 
 Similarly, detail exclusionar y criteria: age limits, special populations (minors, 
pregnant women, decisionally impaired), us e of concomitant medications, subjects 
with other diseases, seve rity of illness, etc. 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
1. Patients above the age of 18. 
2. Patient receiving ERCP as standard of care for suspected or documented 
choledocholithiasis as assessed by [CONTACT_10980]:  
1. Abnormal imaging on ultrasound, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), CT 
scan, or MRCP suggestive of choledocholithiasis 
2. Clinical signs and symptoms suggestiv e of choledocholithiasis such as 
jaundice, abdominal pain, pruritis, pancreatitis, and/or cholangitis 
3. Abnormal liver function tests suggest ive of choledocholithiasis (eg: 
serum bilirubin > 1.5 and/or  elevat ed alkaline phosphatase levels)  
3. In addition to one or more of the abov e inclusion criteria, patient must also 
satisfy one or more of the following:  
1. Mechanical lithotripsy, electrohydraulic  lithotripsy, or laser lithotripsy 
performed for therapy of bile duct stones. 
2. Bile duct > 12mm on prior te sts (any portion of duct) 
3. History of recurrent abnormal LFTs  with negative cholangiogram.  
4. Positive EUS or MRCP for biliary stones with a negative 
cholangiogram  
 
Exclusion criteria 
1. Patients less than [ADDRESS_999645] of care. 
3. Patients who had the following surgerie s - Billroth II surgery, Roux-en-Y 
Gastric by[CONTACT_4897], a nd Whipple’s surgery. 
 
 
 
8.  NUMBER OF SUBJECTS 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 6 of 21  Indicate the total number of s ubjects to be accrued locally.   If applicable, distinguish 
between the number of subjects who are expected to be pre-screened, enrolled 
(consent obtained), randomized and co mplete the research procedures. 
 If your study includes different cohorts, incl ude the total number of subjects in each 
cohort. 
 If this is multisite study, include tota l number of subjects ac ross all sites.   
 
Number of patients: 100 who unde rgo POC in NSUH and in LIJMC 
 
 
  
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 7 of 21 9.  STUDY TIMELINES 
 Describe the duration of an individuals parti cipation in the study 
 Describe the duration anticipated  to enroll all study subjects 
 The estimated date of study completion 
 
The duration of the individua l participation in the study is [ADDRESS_999646] of care procedure for a phone follow-up. Proposed duration of study:  1 year (enrollment 9 months + follow-up phone call at 
[ADDRESS_999647]-procedure). Estimated date of study completion is December 2016.  
 
 
10.  ENDPOINTS 
 Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints 
 Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints  
 
Primary Endpoint: 
The primary end point is to detect th e presence of any stones seen during POC 
that were missed during conventional ERCP  
Secondary Endpoints: 
b. Identify the change in management after finding stone on POC e.g. balloon 
sweep, stent placement, etc. 
c. Identify the recurrence of biliary ob structive symptoms and/or imaging 
suggestive of recurrent (missed) stone s which will be assessed with phone 
call at 3 months after procedure.  
 
 
11.  RESEARCH PROCEDURES 
 Include a detailed description of all pro cedures to be performed on the research 
subject and the schedule for each procedure. 
 Include any screening procedures for e ligibility and/or baseline diagnostic tests 
 Include procedures being performed to mon itor subjects for safety or minimize risks 
 Include information about  drug washout periods 
 If drugs or biologics are being administe red provide information on dosing and route 
of administration 
 Clearly indicate which procedures are only being conducted for research purposes. 
 If any specimens will be used for this research, explain whether they are being 
collected specifically for research purposes.   
 Describe any source records that will be used to collect data about subjects 
 Indicate the data to be collect ed, including long term follow-up 
Version Date: 11/14/[ADDRESS_999648] of care procedure/s:  
ERCP will be performed with ca nnulation of the bile duct and 
cholangiogram to identify any biliary stone s. If stones are identified, they will be 
removed with conventional methods includ ing sphincterotomy, sphincteroplasty, 
balloon extraction, basket retrieval, and/or lithotripsy.  An occlusion 
cholangiogram will be performed to confirm duct clearance (usually performed by [CONTACT_731817]. Then, 
based on clinical decision and inclusion cr iteria, the cholangioscope (Spyglass) will 
be inserted through the channel of the e ndoscope and into the bile duct.  Any 
residual stones will be documented followe d by [CONTACT_731818] e.g. 
stone extraction, lithotripsy, stent placement, etc.  
All patients with suspected cholecho doliathiasis potentially meeting the 
Inclusion criteria will be enrolled in the study.This is the reason for taking the 
consent before hand when the patient is  not sedated. However if on clinical 
judgment during the procedure, the physicia n decides not to perform the POC then 
the subject will be deemed as screen fa ilure and will not be counted towards the 
final results of the study. 
Research procedures:   
1. Document the number of subjects w ho did and did not have any missed 
stones as identified by [CONTACT_731819]. 
2. Document the number of stones missed if there were any. 
3. Document clinical management after finding a stone.(eg: balloon sweep, 
lithotripsy, stent placement, etc.) 
4. Follow-up contact [CONTACT_6635] ≈3 months after the ERCP 
procedure if he/she is enrolled a nd had undergone cholangioscopy with 
Spyglass to document any recurrent stones/procedures /interventions. 
5. Medical history will be obtained either directly from the patient or from 
the patient medical records which may also include questions about 
prior problems with medications us ed for sedation or other unusual 
medication reactions. 
6. De-identified ERCP, endoscopic, EUS and SpyGlass images and/or 
video recordings may be collected for review, analysis, presentations 
and publications.  
 
 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 9 of 21  
12.  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
 Describe how your data will be used to test the hypotheses.  
 State clearly what variables will be tested and what stat istical tests will be used. 
 Include sample size calculations.  
 If this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], state which variables will be examined for hypothesis 
generation in later studies.  
 
Statistical Considerations: 
Specific Aims: 
1. To estimate the proportion of subjects with missed stones on conventional 
ERCP. 
2. To identify changes in management  after finding a stone on POC. 
Endpoint Variables: 
1. Missed stones: Patients will be considered to have missed stones on 
conventional ERCP, if, after ERCP, one or  more stones are seen with POC.  
2. Change in management: any maneuver or combination of maneuvers 
performed after a missed stone (e.g. ball oon extraction of stone, lithotripsy 
of stone, stent placement, etc.) 
3. Recurrent stones within 3 months after POC, and documentation of 
cholecystectomy as applicable. 
Statistical Methods: 
1. The proportion of subjects with missed stones will be estimated, along with 
the associated exact 95% binomial confidence interval. 
2. Change in management will be described by [CONTACT_731820].  This analysis will be restricted 
to subjects with missed stones.  
3. The proportion of subjects with recu rrent stones will be estimated, along 
with the associated exact 95% binomial confidence interval. 
Sample Size Justification: 
The proposed sample size is based on  feasibility and availability of 
resources.  The proposed enrollment period fo r this study will be one year, and it is 
estimated that approximatel y 140 subjects meeting the quali fication criteria will be 
seen during the enrollment period at the part icipating sites. It is expected that 
nearly all of these patients will consent to pa rticipate. Due to the screen failure rate 
of approximately 30% till date we want to  enroll a total of 140 subjects to account 
for the screen failures. 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 10 of 21  
Based on literature cited earlier, it is  estimated that between 11% and 30% 
of these patients will have stones identified on POC that were missed by 
[CONTACT_731821]. The following table gi ves the 95% exact binomial confidence 
intervals for the proposed sample size of 100 subjects, if the percent with missed 
stones is 10%, 20% and 30%. (For example, if [ADDRESS_999649] missed stones, the 
estimated percent with missed stones is  20% and the associated 95% exact 
binomial confidence interval is 12.7% to 29.2%).  Total Number of 
Subjects in 
Study Number of 
Subjects with 
stone seen on POCPercent of 
Subjects with 
stone seen on POC95% Exact 
Binomial 
Confidence Interval 
 100 
 10 10.0% 4.9% - 17.6%
20 20.0% 12.7% - 29.2%
30 30.0% 21.2% - 40.0%
 
  
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 11 of 21 13.  SPECIMEN BANKING 
 If specimens will be banked for future rese arch, describe where the specimens will be 
stored, how long they will be stored, how  they will be accessed and who will have 
access to the specimens 
 List the information that will be stored with each specimen, including how specimens 
are labeled/coded 
 Describe the procedures to release the speci mens, including:  the process to request 
release, approvals required for releas e, who can obtain the specimens, and the 
information to be provid ed with the specimens. 
 
N/A 
 
 
14.  DATA MANAGEMENT A ND CONFIDENTIALITY 
 Describe the data and specimens to be sent out or received.  As applicable, describe: 
o What information will be included in  that data or associated with the 
specimens? 
o Where and how data and specimens will be stored? 
o How long the data will be stored? 
o Who will have access to the data? 
o Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of data and specimens? 
 Describe the steps that will be taken to secure the data during storage, use and 
transmission. 
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_731809].  
All efforts will be made to ensure pati ent confidentiality and assurance of HIPAA 
compliance. Immediately after obtaining any images, subjects will be assigned a protocol specific unique code that will be  used for all further data management. A 
list matching the patient medical record number to the protocol specific unique 
code will be kept in a locked cabinet in office of the PI. The names of the patient 
will not be released to any outside organizations or to persons not involved with the study. They will not be revealed in writte n reports or publications detailing the 
research findings. However the inform ation may be released to regulatory 
authorities such as IRB, FDA etc. 
 
 
15.  DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN 
 
A specific data and safety monitoring plan is only required for greater than minimal risk 
research.  For guidance on creating this plan, please see the  Guidance Document  on the 
HRPP website. 
 
Part I – this part should be completed fo r all studies that require a DSMP.   
Part II – This part should be completed when your study needs a Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee (D SMB/C) as part of your Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan.   
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 12 of 21  
Part I:  Elements of the Da ta and Safety Monitoring Plan 
  Indicate who will perform the data and safety monitoring for this study.   
 Justify your choice of monitor, in terms of  assessed risk to the research subject’ s 
health and well being.  In studies where the m onitor is independent of the study staff, 
indicate the individual’ s cred entials, relationship to the PI, and rationale for selection 
 List the specific items that will be monitored for safety (e.g. adverse events, protocol 
compliance, etc) 
 Indicate the frequency at which accumulate d safety and data information (items listed 
in # above) will be reviewed by [CONTACT_3433] e monitor (s) or the DSMB/C.   
 Where applicable, describe rules which w ill guide interruption or alteration of the 
study design.   
 Where applicable, indicate dose selection pro cedures that will be  used to minimize 
toxicity. 
 Should a temporary or permanent suspension of  your study occur, in addition to the 
IRB, indicate to whom will you report the occurrence.   
 
N/A 
 
 
Part II:  Data and Safety Monitoring Board or Committee 
  
  When appropriate, attach a de scription of the DSMB.   
 Provide the number of members and area  of professional expertise.   
 Provide confirmation that the members of th e board are all independent of the study. 
 
N/A 
 
 
16. WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS 
 Describe anticipated circumst ances under which subjects wi ll be withdrawn from the 
research without their consent 
 Describe procedures fo r orderly termination 
 Describe procedures that will be followed when subjects withdraw from the research, 
including partial withdrawal from pro cedures with continued data collection .   
 
Consented patients will be withdrawn from participation and their data will not be 
used if the standard of care procedur es described in the protocol cannot be 
performed for any clinical reason such as inaccessibili ty of bile duct, early 
termination of procedure due to complic ations etc. The 3 month follow-up phone 
call will not be made if the standards of care procedures are not completed and data 
not collected.  
 
 
17. RISKS TO SUBJECTS 
 Describe any potential risks and discomforts to the subject (physi cal, psychological, 
social, legal, or other) and assess their likelihood and seriousness and whether side 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 13 of 21 effects are reversible. Wh ere appropriate, describe alternative treatments and 
procedures that might be adv antageous to the subjects.  
 Include risks to others , like sexual partners (if appropriate) 
 Discuss why the risks to subjects are reas onable in relation to th e anticipated benefits 
and in relation to the importance of the k nowledge that may reasonably be expected 
to result.  
 Describe the procedures fo r protecting against or mini mizing any potential risks, 
including risks to confidentiality, and assess their likely e ffectiveness.   
 
There is no additional health risk for th e participants of the study due to their 
participation in the study. However their medically required standards of care 
procedures have risks associated with them . If any of the risk s arise due to their 
standard of care procedures they will be  documented in the CRF for the purpose of 
data analysis.  
 
  
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 14 of 21  
18. RESEARCH RELATED HARM/INJURY 
 Describe the availability of medical or ps ychological resources that subjects might 
need as a result of anticipated problems that  may be known to be associated with the 
research. 
 If the research is greater than minimal risk , explain any medical treatments that are 
available if research-related injury occurs, who will provide it, what will be provided, 
and who will pay for it.    
There is no direct research related harm or  injury to the patient. All the procedures 
performed in the study are clin ically indicated procedures. The research part is the 
collection of data duri ng those procedures.  
 
 
19. POTENTIAL BENEFIT TO SUBJECTS 
 
 Explain what benefits might be derived from participation in the study, noting in 
particular the benefit over standard trea tment (e.g. a once-a-day administration 
instead of four times a day, an oral fo rmulation over an IV  administration).  
 Also state if there are no known benefits to  subjects, but detail the value of knowledge 
to be gained  
There is no direct benefit to the patien t due to participati on in the study.  The 
study increasing the knowledge about residua l stones which may help in planning 
and delivery of care for other patients w ith similar conditions in the future.
 
 
 
20. PROVISIONS TO PROTECT PRI VACY INTERESTS OF SUBJECTS 
 
 Describe the methods used to identify poten tial research subjects, obtain consent and 
gather information about subjects to ensure  that their privacy is not invaded.  
 In addition consider privacy protections t hat may be needed due to communications 
with subjects (such as phone messages or mail).   
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_731809].  
All efforts will be made to ensure pati ent confidentiality and assurance of HIPAA 
compliance. Immediately after obtaining any images, subjects will be assigned a protocol specific unique code that will be  used for all further data management. A 
list matching the patient medical record number to the protocol specific unique 
code will be kept in a locked cabinet in office of the PI. The names of the patient 
will not be released to any outside organizations or to persons not involved with the study. They will not be revealed in writte n reports or publications detailing the 
research findings. However the inform ation may be released to regulatory 
authorities such as IRB, FDA etc.
 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 15 of 21   
21.  COSTS TO SUBJECTS 
 
 Describe any foreseeable costs that subj ects may incur through participation in the 
research 
 Indicate whether research procedures will be  billed to insurance or paid for by [CONTACT_84386].    
There are no additional costs to the patie nts due to their participation in the 
research study. 
 
  
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 16 of 21 22.  PAYMENT TO SUBJECTS  
 
 Describe the amount of payment to subjects,  in what form payment will be received 
and the timing of the payments.   
 
There is no payment to the participants for their participation in this research study. 
 
 
23.  CONSENT PROCESS 
 
If obtaining consent for this study, describe: 
 Who will be obtaining consent 
 Where consent will be obtained 
 Any waiting period available between in forming the prospective participant and 
obtaining consent 
 Steps that will be taken to a ssure the participants’ understanding 
 Any tools that will be utilized during the consent process 
   Information about how the consent will be documented in writing.  If using a  
standard consent form, indicate such.   
 Procedures for maintaining informed consent.   
 
Only IRB approved personnel will  be obtaining the consent. 
Consent will be obtained in the endo scopy pre procedure waiting/preparation 
room. After explaining the research  the patients will be give n time to go through the 
research and the consenting process and then consent will be taken. A copy of the consent form will be given to the patient and another copy will be 
placed in the patient health records. Th e original signed consent form will be 
retained with the study team.  
 
 
In the state of NY, any participants under the age  of 18 are considered children.  If your 
study involves children, additional inform ation should be provided to describe: 
 How parental permission will be obtained 
 From how many parents will parental permission be obtained 
 Whether permission will be  obtained from individual s other than parents, and if 
so, who will be allowed to provide perm ission.  The process used to determine 
these individual’s author ity to consent for the ch ild should be provided 
 Whether or not assent will be obtained from the child 
 How will assent be documented 
 Whether child subjects may be expected to  attain legal age to consent to the 
procedures for research prior to the completion of their participation in the 
research.  If so, describe the process that will be used to obtain their legal 
consent to continue participation in the st udy.  Indicate what will occur if consent 
is not obtained from th e now-adult subjects.   
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 17 of 21  
No Children will be enrolled in this study. 
 
 
If the study involves cognitively impaire d adults, additional information should be 
provided to describe: 
 The process to determine whether an individual is c apable of consent 
 Indicate who will make this assessment 
 The plan should indicate that docum entation of the determination  and 
assessment will be placed in the medical record, when applicable, in addition to 
the research record. 
 If permission of a legally authorized representative will be obtained, 
o  list the individuals from w ho permission will be obtaine d in order of priority 
o Describe the process for assent of subj ects; indicate whether assent will be 
required of all, some or none  of the subjects.  If so me, which subjects will be 
required to assent and which will not. 
o If assent will not be obtained from  some or all subjects, provide an 
explanation as to why not 
o Describe whether assent will be documented and the process to document 
assent 
o Indicate if the subject could regain capacity and at what point you would 
obtain their consent for continue d participation in the study 
 
N/A 
 
 
If the study will enroll non-English speaking subjects: 
 Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by [CONTACT_84992] 
 Indicate whether or not consent forms will be translated into a language other 
than English 
 Describe the process to ensure that th e oral and written information provided 
to those subjects will be in that language 
 If non-English speaking subjects will be  excluded, provide a justification for 
doing so 
 
N/A 
 
 
24.  WAIVER OR ALTERATION OF TH E CONSENT PROCESS        N/A          
 
Complete this section if you are seeking an a lteration or complete waiver of the consent   
process. 
 Describe the possible risks of harm to th e subjects involved in this study and 
explain why the study involves no more than minimal risk to the subject:   
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 18 of 21  Explain why the waiver/ alteration will no t adversely affect the rights and welfare 
of subjects 
 Explain why it is impracticable to conduct this research if informed consent is 
required   
 If appropriate, explain how the subjects will be provided with additional pertinent 
information after participation.   If no t appropriate to do so, explain why.  
 
 
 
Complete this section if you are obtaining informed consent but you are requesting a 
waiver of the documentation of consent (i.e., verbal consent will be obtained). To 
proceed with a waiver based on these criteri a, each subject must be asked whether they 
wish to have documentation linking them to this study.  Only complete subsection 1 OR 
subsection 2.  
 
  SUBSECTION 1  
 Explain how the only record linking the s ubject to the research would be the 
consent document. 
 Explain how the principal risk of this study would be the potential harm resulting 
from a breach in the confidentiality 
 Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement 
regarding the research. 
 
 
 
SUBSECTION 2 
  Describe the possible risks of harm to th e subjects involved in this study and 
explain why the study involves  no more than minimal risk.   
 Confirm that the research only involves procedure for which consent is not 
normally required outside the research context.  
 Indicate whether or not subjects will be provided with a written statement 
regarding the research. 
 
 
 
. 
 
25. WAIVER OF HIPAA AUTHORIZATION      N/A       
 Complete this section if you seek to obtain a full waiver of HIPAA authorization to use 
and/or disclose protected health information.  
 Describe the risks to priv acy involved in this study  and explain why the study 
involves no more than minima l risk to privacy:   
 Describe your plan to protect identifiers from improper use or disclosure and to 
destroy them at the earliest time. 
  Indicate why it is not possible to s eek subjects’ authorization for use or 
disclosure of PHI. 
Version Date: 11/14/2016  Page 19 of 21  Indicate why it is not possibl e to conduct this research without use or disclosure 
of the PHI.   
 Indicate if PHI will be disclosed outside NSLIJ Health System, and if so, to whom.   
Note:  PHI disclosed outside NSLIJ He alth System, without HIPAA authorization 
needs to be tracked. Please see guida nce at www.nslij.com/irb for information 
about tracking disclosures. 
 
 
 
Complete this section if you seek to obtain a partial waiver of the patient’s 
authorization for screening/recruitment purposes  (i.e., the researcher does not have 
access to patient records as s/he is not part of the covered entity) 
Note: Information collected through a partial waiver for recruitment cannot be shared 
or disclosed to any ot her person or entity. 
 Describe how data will be collected and used:  
 Indicate why you need the PHI (e.g.PHI is required to determine eligibility, 
identifiers are necessary to contact [CONTACT_69073], other) 
 Indicate why  the research cannot prac ticably be conducted without the partial 
waiver (e.g. no access to medical records or contact [CONTACT_84993], no treating clinician to assist in recruitment of the study population, 
other) 
 
 
 
26.  VULNERABLE POPULATIONS: 
 
Indicate whether you will incl ude any of these vulnerable populations. If indicated, 
submit the appropriate appendix to the IRB for review:  
  Children or viable neonate 
  Cognitively impaired 
  Pregnant Women, Fetuses or neonates  of uncertain viability or nonviable  
  Prisoners 
  NSLIJ Employees, residents, fellows, etc 
  poor/uninsured 
  Students 
  Minorities 
  Elderly 
  Healthy Controls 
 If any of these populations are included in the study, describe addi tional safeguards that 
will be used to protect their rights and welfare.  
Some of the patients who were scheduled fo r their standard of care procedures may 
belong to one or more of the above checked  categories. We will not be specifically 
Version Date: 11/14/[ADDRESS_999650] erable populations for th e purpose of research. All 
participants will be approached for consenting if they meet the eligibility criteria. All 
the participants in the study will be given a unique code and none of the PHI will be used to individually identify the participants. For all data analysis only the given codes 
will be used. 
 
 
27.  MULTI-SITE HUMAN RESEARCH (COORDINATING CENTER) 
 
If this is a multi-site study where you are the lead investigator, de scribe the management 
of information (e.g. results, new information, unanticipated problems involving risks to 
subjects or others, or protocol modifi cations) among sites to protect subjects. 
N/A 
 
 
 
28.  REFERENCES/BIBIOGRAPHY 
 
Provide a reasonable list of references dire ctly related to the study. Any diagrams for 
new medical devices or brief reprints from journals might also prove useful. 
 
1. Everhart JE, Khare M, Hill M, Maurer KR. Pr evalence and ethnic differences in gallbladder 
disease in the [LOCATION_002]. Gastroenterology 1999; 117:632. 
2. Neuhaus H, Feussner H, Ungeheuer A, et al. Prospective evaluation of the use of endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiography pr ior to laparoscopic cholecyst ectomy. Endoscopy 1992;24:745-9. 
 
3. Lacaine F, Corlette M, Bismuth H. Preopera tive evaluation of the risk of common bile duct 
stones. Arch Surg 1980;115:1114-6.  4. Chen YK, Parsi MA, Binmoeller KF, Hawes RH, Pleskow DK, Slivka A, Haluszka O, 
Petersen BT, Sherman S, Devière J, Meisne r S, Stevens PD, Costamagna G, Ponchon T, 
Peetermans JA, Neuhaus H. Single-operator c holangioscopy in patients requiring evaluation of 
bile duct disease or therapy of  biliary stones. Gastrointest Endosc. 2011; 74(4):805-14.  
 
5. Awadallah NS, Chen YK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_731810] C, Antillon MR, Sh ah RJ.  Is there a role for cholangioscopy 
in patients with primary sclerosing cholangi tis?  Am J Gastroenterol. 2006; 101(2):284-91. 
 
6. Itoi T, Sofuni A, Itokawa F, Shinohara Y, Mo riyasu F, Tsuchida A.  Evaluation of residual 
bile duct stones by [CONTACT_731822]-cholangiography.  Dig 
Endosc. 2010; 22:S85-9. 
 
7. Maple JT, Ben-Manachem T, Anderson MA, et al .  The role of endoscopy in the evaluation of 
suspected choledocholithiasis.  Ga strointest Endosc. 2010; 71(1):1-8 
 
Version Date: 11/14/[ADDRESS_999651] stones.  Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 
2007;5:1333-8.  9. Arya N, Nelles SE, Haber GB, Kim YI, Kort an PK.  Electrohydraulic lithotripsy in 111 
patients: a safe and effective therapy for di fficult bile duct stones.  Am J Gastroenterol 
2004;99:2330-4  10. Farrell JJ, Bounds BC, Al-Shalabi S, Jacobs on BC, Brugge WR, Schapi[INVESTIGATOR_329485], Kelsey PB.  
Single-operator duodenoscope-assis ted cholangioscopy is an effective alternative in the 
management of choledocholithiasis not removed by [CONTACT_483831], including mechanical 
lithotripsy.  Endoscopy 2005;37:542-[ADDRESS_999652] disorders: a clinical feasibility  study. Gastrointest 
Endosc 2007; 65:832–841.  
   