 
 
 
 
ID: N2192 -P Novel Brain Signal Feedback Paradigm to Enhance Motor Learning After 
Stroke  
4/22/20 19 
  
 
Problem .  Stroke ( 795,000/year in the US  and 30 million existing stroke survivors in the 
world ) damages brain neural structures that control coordinated upper limb movement.  To most 
effectively target the brain damage, interventions should be directed so as to restore brain 
control serving coordination of peripheral neuromuscular function.  Current ly, there is a lack of a 
transformative intervention strategy.  Existing evidence shows that limited efficacy is exhibited in 
response to neural rehabilitation that is only peripherally -directed (limbs e.g.) or only directed at 
the brain.  One limitation o f exist ing non -invasive direct brain stimulation methods is that the 
exogenously applied stimuli are more gross than the known existing endogenous brain neural 
networks and activation patterns.  Therefore, it is reasonable to consider engaging and 
retraini ng existing brain function after stroke, i.e., neural feedback in a closed -loop, real -time 
paradigm, such that the stroke survivor receives information regarding brain activation, and 
uses that neural feedback in order to re -learn brain control of more nor mal coordinated 
movement.  One name [CONTACT_137340] a neural feedback system is brain -computer interface (BCI); 
new types of BCI systems have been tested for motor training (e.g., EEG, MEG); however, 
either these systems were invasive (implanted) or they have not  shown clinically efficacious 
results in motor recovery.   
Rationale.   In contrast, real time functional magnetic resonance imaging (rtfMIR) has 
recently shown the advantage of precisely identifying the location of brain activity for a variety of 
cognitive  and emotional tasks; but though precise in its location of brain function, rtfMRI is not 
practical in terms of cost and feasibility during motor learning that requires sitting and engaging 
the upper limb in complex motor tasks across multiple sessions.  I n contrast to rtfMRI, real time 
functional near -infrared spectroscopy (rtfNIRS) is not as spatially precise as rtfMRI, but rtfNIRS 
is a low -cost, portable solution to provide brain neural feedback during motor learning.  
Therefore, we will capi[INVESTIGATOR_137320] e unique advantages of each, by [CONTACT_137327] a hybrid, 
sequential motor learning protocol.  Through rtfMRI -guided learning, followed by [CONTACT_137328], we will engage the brain to enhance the effective signals for motor control.  In 
order to utilize Heb bian principles of learning, we will engage simultaneously both central 
effective signals (through neural feedback) and peripheral affective signals, by [CONTACT_137329] -triggered functional electrical stimulation (FES) assisted coordin ation practice, which 
produces peripherally -induced affective signals from muscle and joint receptors.  Thus, this 
combination intervention engages central nervous system, motor effective pathway training 
along with induction of affective signal production  (FES -assisted practice), all of which will be 
implemented within the framework of evidence -based motor learning principles.  
 
Aim and Hypothesis .   
This study aims to develop and test an innovative protocol for recovery of wrist extension after 
stroke, using a combination of rtfMRI, rtfNIRS, FES, and motor learning.  
Aim I.  Test the innovative coordination training protocol of combination rtfMRI/rtfNIR S central 
neural feedback and peripherally -directed, neurally -triggered FES -assisted coordination practice 
implemented within a framework of motor learning principles.  
Hypothesis 1.  Chronic stroke survivors will show significant improvement in upper limb f unction 
in response to the combined rtfMRI/rtfNIRS central neural feedback; peripherally -directed FES -
assisted coordination practice of wrist and finger extension; and whole arm/hand motor learning 
(Primary measure: Pre -/post -treatment change score in Arm Motor Abilities Test - function 
domain (AMAT - F); secondary measure: Pre/post -treatment change score in Fugl -Meyer upper 
limb coordination.  
 
Methods  
Design  
Single cohort feasibility test of new intervention protocol employing rtfMRI and rtfNIRS, FES, 
and motor learning for motor learning following chronic stroke.  
 
Subjects  
Subject criteria as follows:  
• Cognition sufficiently intact to give valid informed consent to participate.*  
• Sufficient endurance to participate in rehabilitation sessions.  
• Ability to follow 2 stage commands.  
• Medically Stable  
• Age > 21 years.  
• Impaired upper limb function as follows: impaired ability to flex and extend the wrist.  
• At least [ADDRESS_155906].  
• Passive ROM of wrist extension of at least 20 degrees.  
• At least [ADDRESS_155907] stroke.  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Metal implants, pacemaker, claustrophobia, inability to operate the MRI patient call 
button or any other contraindications for MRI.  
• Acute or progressive cardiac (including cardiac arrhythmias), re nal, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], 
neurological disorders or malignancy.  
• Active psychiatric diagnosis or psychological condition, or active drug/alcohol abuse.  
• Lower motor neuron damage or radiculopathy.  
• More than one stroke.  
• Pregnancy (discontinued from the study, if a wo man becomes pregnant).  
 * The combined scores for the Aid to Capacity Evaluation (ACE) and Mini -Mental Status 
Examination (MMSE) as follows:  
o MMSE 24 -30 + the ACE score that states 'definitely capable'  OR 
MMSE 17 - 23 + the ACE score that states 'probably c apable'  
 
Intervention  
 
Intervention:  Neural Feedback Training and Motor Learning  
  Real -time fMRI neural feedback training .   
Figure 1 provides  a schematic of our rtfMRI  system.  
MRI signal is transmitted to a second computer 
running Turbo Brain Voyager (B rain Innovation, 
Maastricht,  Netherlands) to analyze data and provide 
feedback signal.  We will use our custom software, to 
provide feedback to the rtfMRI user (MATLAB; 
Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, [LOCATION_003]).  Feedback values 
are transmitted to a laptop running Presentation 
software to display an updated feedback image to 
the participant.  Lag between MRI acquisition and 
feedback presentation is (2 -3s, current system ).   
 The s ubject is first scanned during wrist extension 
and then wrist flexion.  The directions to the subject 
are communicated through Presentation software 
synched with the scanner .  Figure [ADDRESS_155908] extension (white background panels).  
Off-line analyses are conducted to ascertain baseline brain activation patterns.  Next, the 
subject uses real time fMRI neural feedback for re -training wrist extension,  during which he/she Figure 1.  Real  Time fMRI Schematic:  Closed 
Loop Feedback Training Paradigm  
 

also sees the far right panel in Figure 2 (black background pa nel), which shows a ‘thermometer’ 
that reflects, for  example, whether the BOLD signal is being upregulated by [CONTACT_423], during 
wrist extension.    
 
Real time fNIRS neural 
feedback training.  Each 
participant’s structural MRI is 
loaded into a neuronavigation 
system (Brainsight TMS 
neuronavigation software, 
Rogue Research Inc.) in which 
a fiducial manipulandum is 
localized in 3D space via 
“stereoscopic” infrared 
cameras, co -registered to the 
3D structural MRI. Attaching the 
manipulandum to the fNIRS 
optode array transfers co -
registration of optode 
placements to the subject’s 
structural MRI .  The optode 
array is attached to a 24 -
channel Hitachi ETG -4000 fNIRS 
instrument  (Figure 3, schematic 
of ou r rtfNIRS system ).  We will 
use our custom software 
(Matlab; Mathworks Inc., Natick, 
MA, [LOCATION_003]) to acquire the fNIRS 
signal from the user, analyze in 
real time, and present feedback, 
utilizing the thermometer 
feedback consistent with the 
rtfMRI feedback prov ided.  
Feedback values are transmitted 
to a laptop running Presentation 
software to display an updated 
feedback image to the 
participant . 
 FES.   The rtfNIRS system  
acquires brain signal, which 
serves to identify when  FES is 
triggered  for wrist extension -
assist coordination practice.  We are using the Motionstim 8 stimulator (MEDEL GmbH, 
Hamburg, [LOCATION_013] ). Two unipolar electrodes of oval shape (4x6 cm) are placed on the wrist 
extensors and wrist flexors (PW, 300µ s; frequency , 20 Hz - 30 Hz ; amplitude , adjust ed for 
comfort).   
 Motor learning with FES (no brain neural feedback ).  The motor learning training is based , 
of course,  on assessment of muscle strength, coordination, muscle tone, and functional task 
performance.  As in standard clinical practice, from this assessment, a clear understanding is 
derived by [CONTACT_137330][INVESTIGATOR_541], regarding the impairments underlying the def icits identified, as 
well as the compensatory strategies employed.  The motor learning program begins at the Figure 2.  Visual Dir ections for rtfMRI -BCI User  
(Seen in the Scanner During Training of Brain Activation)  
 
Figure VV.  Panels with white background show directions for waiting (+), 
preparing to move, and move.  Panel with black background shows real time 
feedback regarding whether there was successful activation of targeted brain 
region.  
Figure 3. Real -time fNIRS Neurofeedback System With BCI -Triggered 
FES.  
 
 

‘challenge point’ of the learner, as in any learning plan of any type.  FES is used to assist in 
practicing more coordinated movements, until volit ional capability recovers sufficiently  for 
productive movement practice.  This assessment and treatment plan procedure are standard 
clinical neuro -rehabilitation practice, for which therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137321] i n their professional 
education.   
Specific motor ta sk assessment for initiation of motor learning for a given task .  Prior to 
assigning a motor task within the motor learning program, the motor task is assessed for the 
following characteristics:   
What percent of the normal range of movement is executed, v olitionally and independently;  
What percent of the motor task is executed with the support of verbal or tactile facilitation;  
What percent of the normal range of movement is executed, along with a motor assist device;  
Is a normal level of effort expended d uring the task (versus holding breath; abnormally tensing 
uninvolved muscles);  
Are motor compensatory strategies employed during execution of the entire duration of the 
motor task;  
Are motor compensatory strategies employed during execution of a portion of  the motor task;  
How many repetitions of the motor task can be performed in a row, with only a ‘beat’ in 
between, before the motor task is performed in an uncoordinated or incorrect fashion.  
These assessments determine at which point in the coordination hi erarch , the learner will begin.  
Progression of the motor learning program through the hierarchy of difficulty, is dependent upon 
iterative assessment, as is the case in standard clinical practice.  
Herarchy of motor task difficulty .  The hierarchy of motor  task difficulty has been developed 
and used successfully in prior work.  Motor task difficulty is progressed using a purposeful 
approach.  In order to illustrate treatment progression for the Motor Learning Protocol, it is first 
important to understand th e hierarchy of difficulty for the motor tasks underlying upper limb 
functional deficits after stroke.  We use a schema of increasingly difficult motor tasks that was 
developed and used successfully in prior work.  This hierarchy of task difficulty provides  
guidance for the starting point for training a given functional deficit or coordination deficit, as well 
as guidance for treatment progression of the motor tasks and task components that are 
impaired after stroke.  
 Training muscle activation within -synergy.   For one who is unable to activate a given 
muscle in any body position, the first treatment goal is to facilitate and elicit muscle activation on 
demand.  In a severely paretic muscle, activation is f irst elicited within a synergistic mass 
pattern, because in our prior work, we found that this is the easiest condition under which to 
obtain volitional muscle activation.  In this case, we begin with the subject in the sidelying 
position with the involved  limb, uppermost, and supported on an exercise board in the horizontal 
plane.  The limb is positioned within a synergistic pattern for the start position.  The clinician 
provides minimal assistance, withdrawing external manual or device assistance as soon as the 
patient begins to regain volitional control during practice.  As the subject recovers the ability to 
control muscle activation, motor task practice is progressed to more difficult body positions.  
 Training  isolated single joint movement within -synergy .  For training single joint 
movement, the subject practices isolated movement with the limb positioned so that the 
movement is practiced within a synergistic limb position.  
*** McCabe et al., Arch PM&R, 
 Training  isolated single joint mov ement, out -of-synergy .   The motor task goal is to 
achieve isolated single joint movement with the non -moving limb joints positioned in out of 
synergy positions.  As capability improves, the subject is progressed to more difficult positions.  
 Training mult iple joint movement out -of-synergy .   The motor task goal is volitional control 
of multiple joint movements, out -of-synergy.   
 Training  alternating joint movements .   In parallel with training described above, training 
can be conducted for control of alte rnating flexion and extension movement control.  The initial 
practice position can be sidelying.  The task is to alternate flexion and extension movements at 
a single joint, with the other limb joints in static neutral position.   
 Task Component Practice .   When the movements from above  are sufficiently coordinated, 
actual task component practice can begin.  Task components can be progressed through a 
variety of body positions (e.g., sitting/standing) and through more difficult conditions (different 
object weights and shapes, faster spee d performance).  
 Full Functional  Task Practice .   Full task practice is undergone, as soon as the subject is 
able to practice with closer -to-normal coordination of task components.   If necessary, each 
component is practiced separately, just before integra ting the components into the whole task 
practice.  During training, particular attention is allocated to the sequencing and grading of 
muscle contractions.  
Criteria for progression of motor task difficulty .  The criteria for progressing motor task 
difficu lty described in this section has been developed and used successfully in prior work.  Our 
protocol utilizes the following clinical practice paradigm: ‘test -treat-test’ within a given session, 
as well as a ‘re -test’ procedure at the beginning of the subseq uent session.  Standard clinical 
practice procedures of assessment, along with the assessment description provided above, 
provide information regarding the subject’s need for intervention at a specific level of motor task 
difficulty, the immediate response  to intervention (within the session), and the carry -over effect 
between sessions.  These standard clinical practice procedures are applied in the clinical testing 
and training of each task component within a given session.  The subject’s ability, to 
demon strate carry -over between the two sessions serves as the criterion for progression to the 
next level of difficulty for practice of a given task or movement component.  This information is 
not a formal outcome measure; rather, it is used to make treatment p rogression decisions, 
consistent with standard clinical rehabilitation practice. This information serves as criteria upon 
which to progress the functional training practice.   
 Motor task progression is standardized according to these specific guidelines. The motor task 
is progressed to a more difficult level if specific criteria are met, according to criteria derived 
from our past work.  
 
Measures  
  Primary  Measure, Aim 1, Hypothesis 1.   Function . The AMAT -F, a measure of 13 
complex, coordinated tasks used in everyday living  (coordination of movement  during functional 
tasks ).  The AMAT is reported as being sensitive to change, specifically for stroke survivors ; 
with high i nter-rater, test -re-test reliability ; and high h omogeneity of scores on the test 
dimension  of movement coordination within a function task .  Minimum clinically important 
difference  (MCID)  is .[ADDRESS_155909] .44 points is clinically 
significant.    
  Secondary  measure .  Impairment .  Coordination of i solated joint movement control will 
be assessed using the upper limb motor subscale of the Fugl -Meyer Coordination Scale (FM) , 
measuring isolated coordinated movements of single or multiple upper extremity joints .  The FM 
is a sensitive, reliable and valid  measure.  The MCID for the FM scale is 4.[ADDRESS_155910] 4.25 points is clinically significant.    
 
Data Interpretation:  Inspection of Descriptive Data   
 
Response to the innovative neural feedback combined treatment will be tested using the AMAT -
F as primary measure (pre -/post -treatment comparison)  and FM as secondary measure .  Due to 
the small sample size we will inspect descriptive data for any trend or gain that is clinically 
significant.  
 
C.  Recruitment  and Informed Consent  
The subjects to be enrolled in this study will be recruited (using posted flyers) from:  the MR 
VA Medical Center and the broader community.  Newspaper ads will be used to alert potential 
participants to the study.  Both the flyer and  the newspaper ad will be approved by [CONTACT_137331]/VA 
IRB.  Candidates will be consented for the study only after the IRB approves the consent form 
for the study.  The full IRB will approve the study materials, including the consent form.   
If the patient is int erested in learning more about the study, research staff  will provide 
additional information.  Patients admitted to the study will provide written  informed consent.  
The informed consent process will include a scheduled meeting time with the potential 
candidate and family member/caregiver/significant other. The meeting will be held in a room in 
which everyone can sit in chairs, see and hear each other clearly, and feel no reason to hurry.  
During the meeting the following will occur:  verbal description o f the study, including all content 
in the consent form; demonstration of the baclofen pump, and all the rehabilitation technologies; 
meeting a participating patient (if we have a participant who is available and has expressed a 
willingness to meet the pote ntial participant); time for questions throughout each portion of the 
informed consent process and a time for questions at the end of the session.  After the first 
information session, the blank consent form will be provided to the study candidate to take 
home for several days.  The research staff phone number will be provided to the patient and 
family.  Questions will be answered by [CONTACT_648].  Follow -up information sessions will be 
scheduled, as requested by [CONTACT_105130]/family members, or as needed by [CONTACT_941] r esearch staff 
member.    An appointment will be scheduled if the candidate expresses continued interest in 
the study.   Remaining questions will be answered.  Additionally, the candidate will be queried 
about understanding the study.  That is, the candidat e will be asked to describe the study in 
his/her own words.  In order to be accepted into the study, the candidate will be required to 
express understanding of each point in the consent form.  If the candidate then agrees to enter 
the study, he/she will si gn the consent form in the presence of a witness, the investigator will 
sign the consent form, and a copy of the consent form will be provided to the subject.   
 
D.  Potential Risks  
1. Device malfunction – There is a risk that the commercially available surface FES system will 
fail to operate properly.  
2. Electrical safety - There is a possibility of a shock hazard or of electrical burn.  
3.  Fatigue or muscle soreness.  
4.  Breach of confidentiality of subject identification.  
5.  Fatigue or discomfort during rtfNIRS neural feedback.  
6.  Fatigue and anxiety during rtfMRI neural feedback or MRI testing.  
E.  Protection Against Risks  
Because of the actions taken to minimize risks, the likelihood of the above risks is low.     
 
1. Device malfunction - There is the risk that the FES system will fail to operate properly.  
The stimulator is commercially available and used routinely in clin ical practice.  It was designed 
with safeguards in place that limit the stimulus amplitude, pulse width, and frequency.   
2. Electrical safety - There  is a possibility of a shock hazard or of electrical burn with the use of 
an electrical stimulation system .  The stimulus level is fixed within a threshold precluding shock 
hazzard.  Levels for the ranges of stimulation amplitude and pulsewidth that are used, are 
always used within the comfort of the subject.  These comforable levels are not great enough to 
cause tissue damage.  The treating therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137322] a given session.     
 
3.  Fatigue or muscle soreness.  For many stroke survivors, muscles in the involved limbs have 
not been used for a number of months or years.  As with any deco nditioned muscle, re -
conditioning can create some muscle soreness.  We have found in our prior work that we can 
preclude muscle soreness by [CONTACT_137332] -up of the exercise.  We routinely do 
not have reports of any muscle soreness from our subjects.  Fatigue can occur in subjects. 
Therefore, we have found that a finely incremented progression is best for activity level, 
including exercise.  The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137323] -verbal 
communication and querying su bjects as to their fatigue level.  The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_137324] a training protocol that is within the capability of a given subject, and providing 
frequent rests and a balanced session in order to achieve this.  
 
4.  Breach of confidentiality of  subject identification.  Our research data becomes anonymous 
after the subject is enrolled and assigned a study number.  Our clinical data contains identifiers.  
We maintain separate files of clinical data and research data.  We will take the following 
measures to ensure the confidentiality of subject identification:  
a)     A subject will be assigned a subject code number upon enrollment into the study;  
b)     Identifying information will be maintained in a spreadsheet that can be accessed only 
by [CONTACT_137333] (password protected);  
c)      In research data, the subject will be identified by [CONTACT_137334];  
d)    Clinical records that contain identifying information (including questionnaires and video) 
will b e maintained in a room that is locked and in a locked shelf, with key access only by [CONTACT_137335][INVESTIGATOR_137325].    
d)     Informed consents are stored in a room that is locked, and in a locked file cabinet with 
key access on ly by [CONTACT_137336].  
e)    The data will be maintained in accordance with VA policy.   
5.  rtfNIRS neural feedback.  For fNIRS experiments, the fNIRS equipment has  a CE 
certification and obeys the near infrared spectrum and power that is allowed under university 
and federal regulations.   This is a non -invasive method of acquiring brain signal from the 
surface of the head.  Application of fNIRS headset and optodes a re relatively quicker compared 
to other methods such as electroencephalography (EEG), and so, less intrusive to the user.  
The fNIRS headset can become uncomfortable for some, if worn too long.  The patient will be 
instructed that if he/she becomes fatigue d or uncomfortable during rtfNIRS neural feedback 
training, we should discontinue the session.  To preclude this situation, we will maintain cap -
wearing to less than 40 minutes.  Our team is well -experienced at discerning fatigue and 
discomfort and will en courage patients to discontinue at any sign of fatigue or discomfort.  
6.  rtfMRI neural feedback and testing.  In the MR scanner , some participants may 
experience some anxiety at  being in side the ‘tube’ of  the MRI  environment, and thus will be 
closely monitored for signs of anxiety . MR  scanners produce noise as part of the image creation 
process, and thus all subjects will  have their hearing protected by [CONTACT_137337]/or headphones, 
and head positioner that also serv es to reduce ambient noise. All scanning techniques involve 
only non -invasive  recording techniques, and the instrumentation meets all relevant safety 
standards. The structural and functional pulse sequences used in our protocols are 
manufacturer -provided,  and include inherent control of specific absorption rate (SAR) – 
prevention of exposure to  radio energy above FDA accepted limits. All our scans fall well below 
FDA SAR limits.  To ensure confidentiality, all references to specific individuals are removed 
from files  stored on computer volumes, and subjects are assured of complete confidentiality of 
all scan materials .  
 Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
Stroke is one of the principal causes of morbidity and mortality in adults in the developed 
world a nd the leading cause of disabili ty in all industrial countries . Stroke survivors can suffer 
several neurological deficits or impairments, such as hemiparesis, communication disorders, 
cognitive deficits or disorders in visuo -spatial perception. These impai rments have an enormous 
impact on patient’s life and considerable cost for health and social services. Even after 
completing standard rehabilitation, more than half (50 -60%) still experience some degree of 
motor impairment, and are at least partly dependen t on others in th eir activities of daily living. .  
Although some innovative rehabilitation strategies have shown potentia l in randomized 
control trials, available rehabilitation methods do not restore normal or close to normal motor 
function and quality of life in many  patients .  Traditional approaches towards motor rehabilitation 
of patients after stroke have utilized limb motor training, and more recentl y, limb training 
expected to produce experience -dependent plasticity that would control more normal motor 
function.  More recently, some have explored the use of more direct stimulation of the brain with 
technologies such as tDCS and TMS.  Research has sho wn that neither of these methods 
applied separately are optimally suited for movement recovery after stroke . Therefore, we are 
proposing an integrative approach, combining a novel BCI neural feedback approach, together 
with more traditional experience -depe ndent limb training.  
There has been great interest in brain -computer interface (BCI) technology to help 
improve the quality of life and restore motor function in people with motor disabilities. Over the 
past [ADDRESS_155911] use d 
electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalo graphy (MEG ), blood -oxygen -level 
dependent functional MR I, and near infrared spectroscopy .  However, these systems have 
either not been applied or not been clinically efficacious in producing motor recovery after 
stroke.    
Early results in the application  of BCI technology for recovery of motor function are 
promising, though mixed. Our p reliminary results  and that of others  have shown that individuals 
who have had a stroke could gain control of specific features in EEG signal s and MEG signals, 
and real -time fMRI signals .  We recorded EEG activity while the patients performed a r eaching 
task with affected arm , before and after a motor learning regimen.  EEG signal amplitude and 
latency measures showed improvements during the preparation phase of the reachin g task. We 
showed that healthy individuals and subcortical stroke patients can acquire control of the activity 
in the ventral Premotor Cortex (vPMC) through instrumental training, and that has a beneficial 
effect on motor cortical facilitation and also moto r performance in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_820] -force task.  However, 
others found in a randomized controlled trial, that BCI did not have an additive effect beyond 
robotic training, according to motor function measures.  Given the need for more efficacious 
interventions and the  promising, but mixed results from early studies of BCI, it is important to 
develop and test more sophisticated BCI systems for motor learning after stroke , a more precise 
brain neural feedback system  (Aim 1). 
Motor recovery after stroke is reported to be associated with structural and functional 
changes, such as neurite outgrowt h in the peri -legional regions , increased synaptogenesis , 
increased axonal sprouting, and increased excitability of neurons. One way to capi[INVESTIGATOR_137326]; in this manner, the shortcomings of a single technology can be 
compensated, as well.  We have used this strategy in prior work in order to satisfy the mot or 
learning principle of practicing movements that are as close to normal as possib le, which may 
guide newly sprouting axons to the appropriate cortical regions.  One promising combination of 
technologies is BCI for brain signal  neural feedback and functio nal electrical stimulation (FES) 
for movement -assistance practice and affective feedback.  There is some promising work 
showing that FES and motor learning can produce clinically significant gains .  In prior work, we 
showed the feasibility of BCI integrati on with fun ctional electrical stimulation .  Given the need 
and the advantages of each of the technologies of BCI and FES, along with the specificity of 
motor learning, it is critical to test the response to such a combined intervention protocol, 
according to motor recovery  (Aim I) .  
 DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING  
The major portion of the study will be conducted at the, the Malcom Randall Gainesville 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center.  One type of data acquisition and training will be conducted at 
the University of [LOCATION_012], McKnight Brain Institute, MRI Core Facility:  MRI, fMRI data acquisition 
and real time fMRI training.   
Subject health data and progression of upper limb function capability will be monitored 2 
– [ADDRESS_155912] to review and/or audit by [CONTACT_137338], who is independent of the study.  The time of the full study review is 
selected at random, but will occur at least once during the proposed work.  Consent forms are 
reviewed annually by [CONTACT_137339].  The IRB 
provides oversight of human protections issues for all studies conducted at the Medical Center.  
The currently proposed study will comply with the IRB regulations and procedures.  The study 
will not begin until IRB approval is awarded.  The study will submit patient data and summary 
findings to the IRB on an annual basis.  If an adverse event occurs, it will be reported directly to 
the IRB within [ADDRESS_155913] 48 subjects recruited into our research 
studies, 16% were women and 23% were minorities.  Men, women, minorities, and majority will 
be recruited using the same criteria.   
End of Human Subjects and Protection Do cument  