1 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
Unique Protocol ID 20150534  
 
Evaluation of the Efficacy of Vortioxetine for Postt raumatic Stress Disorder  
 
Miami  PIs: Philip Harvey, Ph.D.  
Miami Co-Investigators: Donald J. Newport, M.D, Dante Durand, M.D  
 
Emory Sub-Investigators : Boadie W.  Dunlop, M .D., Barbara Rothbaum, PhD, Kerry 
Ressler, MD, Ph.D.; Tanja Jovanovic, Ph.D.  
 
Version  8, January 22, [ADDRESS_626929]  
 Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a chronic and common anxiety disorder that follows 
exposure to an overwhelming traumatic event.  The majority of patients with PTSD also meet 
criteria for other psychiatric disorders and many attempt suicide. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_487884], 
little is known about the etiology or pathophysiology of this disorder. PTSD is responsive to pharmacological treatments such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), but response rates rarely exceed 60%, and even fewer patients (20- 30%) achieve clinical 
remission. Thus, there is a clear need to develop novel and improved therapeutics f or PTSD.  
 We will assess the efficacy of vortioxetine using a 12- week, double- blind, parallel -group, 
placebo- controlled trial of adults with PTSD.  Although Vortioxetine has not been approved by 
[CONTACT_487908] P TSD, it has been approved for the 
treatment of major depressive disorder  and its safety profile is well characterized. In addition to 
measures of symptomatic improvement in PTSD, we will also assess changes in cognitive function and quality of life.  Furthermore , we propose to investigate longitudinally  whether certain 
biological surrogate markers (neurophysiology, genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007], mRNA ) are predictive of treatment 
response . 
 II. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
1. Specific Aim 1 (Primary Aim) : To determine the efficacy of Vortioxetine  compared with 
placebo in improving PTSD symptoms.   
Hypothesis:  PTSD patient s randomized to acute therapy (12 weeks) with Vortioxetine  will show 
more improvement in PTSD symptoms compared to patients randomized to placebo, as 
determined by [CONTACT_487909] -Administered PTSD scale ( CAPS -5) score over 
the course of 12  weeks. 
 
2. Specific Aim 2 (Secondary Aim) : To determine the efficacy of Vortioxetine  in treating 
PTSD in terms of overall response rate.  
Hypothesis:  PTSD patients randomized to ac ute therapy ( 12 weeks) with Vortioxetine  will have 
a greater rate of treatment response compared to subjects randomized to placebo, as 
determined by [CONTACT_2669] 30% improvement from baseline in CAPS -5 total score and a Clinical 
Global Impression of Improvemen t (CGI- I) score of 1 or 2.  
 
2 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 3. Specific Aim 3  (Secondary Aim ): To determine the efficacy of Vortioxetine  in reducing 
depressive symptoms in PTSD patients.   
Hypothesis:   PTSD patients randomized to acute therapy with Vortioxetine  will show more 
improvement in depressive symptoms compared to subjects randomized to placebo, as 
determined by [CONTACT_487910] -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)  
score over the course of 12 weeks. 
 
4. Exploratory Aim 1: Startle:  To assess fear potentiation, condit ional discrimination 
(AX+/BX -), and fear inhibition using acoustic startle methodology in a classical 
conditioning paradigm in PTSD patients before and after treatment with Vortioxetine .   
Hypothesis:  PTSD subjects randomized to [ADDRESS_626930] improved fear 
inhibition as measured by [CONTACT_487911]+/BX- paradigm compared to baseline, while placebo subjects 
will not show improvement.  
5. Exploratory Aim 2 : Cognition, Functional Capacity, and Quality -of-Life: To assess 
neurocognitive performance (pr e- and post -treatment) with tests shown to be sensitive to 
PTSD (e.g. learning and memory, concentration and attention, and executive 
functioning).  In addition, to explore performance -based measures of everyday living 
skills, and measure quality -of-life a s indexed by [CONTACT_487912].   
Hypothesis:  Statistically significant changes detected for these variables will be correlated 
across domains.   
6. Exploratory Aim 3 : Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_487885] : To explore whether response to 
Vortioxetine  is associated with  certain candidate gene polymorphisms previously 
associated with PTSD, and whether treatment with Vortioxetine alters gene expression patterns differentially in treatment responders and non -responders . 
Hypothesis:  Polymorphisms of s pecific candidate genes previously identified as relevant to 
PTSD will be differentially distributed between responders and non- responders to vortioxetine.  
  
III. SIGNIFICANCE/BACKGROUND  
 
Significance of PTSD and Limitations of Current Pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_487886] a common chronic anxiety disorder that is often debilitating and follows exposure to an 
overwhelming traumatic event. PTSD occurs in approximately 8% -14% of the U.S. population 
(Breslau et al 1998; D avidson et al 1991; Kessler et al 1995) . Rates of PTSD among women in 
the US are higher than in men being approximately twice that of men 12% -18% (Breslau et al 
1998; Resnick et al 1993) .  
The burden of PTSD on individuals and society is significant. First, the majority of PTSD 
sufferers also meet the diagnostic criteria for several other psychiatric disorders (Breslau et al 1991; Resnick et al 1993), especially major depression (Koenen et al 2003; Neria and Bromet 
2000)  and many also attempt suicide (Davidson et al 1991) . Significant health problems are 
more likely to occur in individuals with PTSD than in those without PTSD, particularly hypertension, bronchial asthma, peptic ulcer (Davidson et al 1991), gastrointestinal problems 
(Leserman et al 1996) , increased rates of surgery, and visits to the physician (Solomon and 
Davidson 1997; Zoellner et al 1999) . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_487887], little is known about the etiology or pathophysiology of this disorder. Although disruptions in the hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_80560] (HPA) Axis, noradrenergic, and 
serotonergic systems have been proposed as neurobiological substrates in the development of 
PTSD, the exact underpi[INVESTIGATOR_487888].  
 U.S.-based practice guidelines for PTSD have recommended cognitive behavioral therapy 
(CBT) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) as first -line treatments (APA, 2004; 
3 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 VA/DoD 2003).  However, the [ADDRESS_626931] 
effects, limited efficacy in all 3 clusters of illness (avoidance/numbing, reexperiencing, and 
hyperarousal), and few patients develop remission (Davidson 2006a).  Many placebo- controlled 
trials of other medications in PTSD have failed, and even recent studies of approved medications (e.g. sertraline) have failed to show efficacy in specific subgroups of PTSD patients 
such as combat veterans  treated in Department of Veterans affairs clinics (Friedman et al. 
2007) . There is therefore a tremendous need to identify new medications that are efficacious for 
PTSD. Vortioxetine, with its muti -modal action at multiple serotonin receptor subtypes in 
addition to serotonin transporter inhibition, offers a novel approach to the treatment of this 
recalcitrant disorder.   
Progress in treating PTSD will also require better understanding of the biological characteristics 
associated with improvement during treatment.  As detailed below, this proposal will use state-
of-the-art biological and psychological phenotype measurements to identify moderators and 
mediators of outcomes with vortioxetine treatment. Through this proposal we are seeking to 
enhance treatment approaches for PTSD by [CONTACT_487913], vortioxetine, and 
to apply biological signatures to identify treatment prediction and response. The combined 
expertise across these sites makes for a unique and complementary research approach.  We 
are not aware of any other research team using these state- of-the-art biological approaches 
along with expertise in prospective treatment prediction to address these seminal questions in 
PTSD.     
 
IV. DRUG INFORMATION  
 
A. Investigational Drug: Vortioxetine   
Vortioxetine is a newly approved antidepressant with a unique pharmacologi cal profile.  It is a 
potent SSRI and, in addition,  has a high affinity for the 5HT 1D, 5HTT 3, and 5HT [ADDRESS_626932] moderate PTSD symptom severity as measured by a score ≥  [ADDRESS_626933] of the following:  
 
(1) Screening Phase and (if necessary) Medication -Washout:  Informed consent will be 
signed at the init iation of the screening phase.  As part of the informed consent process, 
participants will be asked whether they are willing to have their research assessments 
videotaped, and to indicate their  authorization for Audio/Video/Photography Recording on the 
[ADDRESS_626934], drug screen, psychiatric interviews, medical and psychiatric 
history, physical exam and electrocardiogram (EKG) . We will also draw the genotype sample at 
this visit for consenting subjects.  
 
If a patient is already taking medication for PTSD and has achieved therapeutic response, s /he 
will not be tapered off the effective medication(s) to participate in this study, and will not be 
eligible for the study.  Patients who are taking a  psychotropic medication that has proven 
ineffective for their PTSD symptoms will be tapered off the medication prior to randomization. 
Whenever possible, decisions to taper a patient’s medication for the purpose of study 
participation will be made  in conjunction with the patients’ prescribing physician. Patients  will be 
tapered off ineffective psychotropic medications over 7- 21 days, though patients on fluoxetine or 
protriptyline will be required to be off those  medications for 5 weeks prior to baseline. Risks 
associated with medication tapering will be discussed with the patient.  This washout process will 
be conducted and monitored by [CONTACT_138321]. 
 
(2) Study Period I – Pretreatment Testing (Days –7 to –1): Visit 1. During this study period, 
subject s will undergo surrogate marker testing (psychophysiology,  and neuropsychological 
testing ). These visits will be conducted over a 7- day period prior to the day of randomization, 
following the successful completion of all the screening procedures in Phase 1 above.   We 
anticipate that these procedures can be completed in 1 study visit ; however, we will be flexible 
to allow additional visits if required due to subject fatigue or time constraints.  
 
3) Study period II Treatment (Day 0 to 84): Visits 2  through 9. This is the 12-week period of 
double- blind placebo- controlled acute treatment.  At day 0, EKG for safety monitoring will be 
conducted. The baseline mRNA sample will be collected. All subjects who continue to meet 
eligibility criteria will be randomized t o one of two groups: Vortioxetine  or placebo. 
Randomization will be performed at a 1:1 ratio into two treatment groups , and both vortioxetine 
and placebo will be distributed to the patient in blister packs. If a participant is taking 10mg of vortioxetine they will be provided with 2 blister packs at each visit. If a participant is taking 
20mg, they will be prov ided with 4 blister packs.   Surrogate marker t esting for 
psychophysiology, mRNA, and neuropsychological testing will be repeated at the completion of  
the double -blind treatment.  Due to the amount of study procedures for certain study visits , we 
will allow study  visits to be done over two days.  
 
4) Follow -Up (Day 84  to 98): Visit [ADDRESS_626935] with transition of psychiatric care, if indicated.   
 
 
See the Schedule of Events chart at the end of this section for details of the procedures 
performed during each visit.  
 
B. Justification of Sample Size  
Power Analysis:  
 Samples of n= 60 (2 groups) are associated with reduced but adequate power .  Between group 
differences in change scores of d=. 70 are detectable with .80 power at p<.05.  Correlations of 
5 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 .33 between two variables are detectable with power=.80 in the full sample of 60.  Within 
treatment conditions (n= 30) correlations of r=. 50 are detectable with the same level of power.  
 
 
C. Informed Consent, Regulatory and Ethical Considerations  
The study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practices (GCP), 21CFR Parts [ADDRESS_626936] prior to any study procedures .  All 
potential subjects will be properly informed as to the purpose of the study and the potential risks 
and benefits known or that can be reasonably predicted or expected.  The subjects’ 
understanding of the study procedures will be tested in the form of oral questioning or written testing.  Investigators at each site will retain the original copy of the Informed Consent Form and HIPAA documents signed by [CONTACT_102], and duplicates will be provided to the patient.  
 
D. Screening Phase  
The screening procedure includes an extensive phone interview and, if eligible, a screening 
visit.  Clinical staff members (bachelor’s or masters -level research assistant, Ph.D., or M.D.) 
trained in DSM diagnostic interviewing will conduct an initial phone interview to determine likely 
diagnostic suitability.  If the patient is deemed preliminarily eligible for participation, s /he will 
then be invited for an in- person screening visit.  If the potential participant is deemed ineligible 
after the brief phone interview or expresses interest in alternatives to study participation, the phone interviewer will give appropriate referrals. Upon arrival at the research clinic, the principal investigat[INVESTIGATOR_1660] [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a trained delegate will briefly describe the details of the study procedures, risks 
and benefits, alternative treatments, and confidentiality of information. Potential participants will 
independently read and review the consent and HIPAA forms, and then the researcher obtaining consent will address any questions that the participant may have. Once the participant 
communicates  his or her thorough understanding of the study and decides that s /he wishes to 
participate, he/she will be asked to sign and date the form. No study procedures will occur prior 
to the conclusion of the informed consent process.    
 
After patients consent to participate, they will undergo several procedures, which will occur over  
1-2 visits. These include: (1) psych iatric interview by a research psychiatrist or psychologist; (2) 
a structured clinical interview (the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview, “ MINI ,” Modules 
A and C through P ); (3) administration of the CAPS -5, Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scal e 
(CSSRS), and Clinical Global Impression of Severity ( CGI-S); (4) completion of several self -
report instruments; (5) collection of blood samples for safety testing and genotype analysis , 
pregnancy testing (if indicated), urine sample [urinalysis, toxicological screen]; (6) EKG; and (7) 
physical examination.  
 
A clinical researcher  with specialized training in diagnostic assessment will perform the 
specified modules of the MINI  and the rating scales. Appropriately trained study staff will 
conduct all medical tests and obtain biological samples for the following laboratories: blood 
samples for serum chemistries,  liver funct ion panel, free T4, thyroid stimulating hormone, 
hepatitis B  surface antigen, hepati tis C antibody, serum pregnancy , gamma -glutamyl 
transf erase (GGT), and complete blood count  (CBC) , urinalysis and urine drug screen.  At the 
conclusion of the screening process, the patient will be contact[CONTACT_487914].  All patients who are eligible  will be schedule d for an in- person visit 
approximately one week after the initial evaluation. The participant will continue into Study 
6 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 Period I  at that time . If deemed ineligible for the protocol, a study physician will explain the 
reasons for disqualification , and these patients  will receive appropriate research or treatment 
referrals. If symptoms worsen significantly during this period, as determined by  [CONTACT_7357]’s assessment,  subjects will be removed from the study and given appropriate referrals 
after meeting with the study investigators.  Options would include referral to the resident 
psychopharmacology clinic or referral back to their treating physician.  
 
E. Study period I: Pre-Treatment  Testing  
During this testing phase, which will be scheduled within one w eek of the day of randomization , 
we will examine neurobiological surrogate markers involv ing psychophysi ology (startle) and 
neuropsychological testing.  
 
F. Study period II: 12-Week Randomized, Double -Blind, Placebo- Controlled Trial  
Study Period II is the 12-week double- blind treatment  period. On the day of randomization, an 
EKG and laboratory tests (blood samples for CPK and  a urine sample for  pregnancy  testing  will 
be collected . 
 
Patients will be assessed in- person weekly or every other week from Visit 2 through Visit 9,  
using self -report and clinician- administered measures to gauge changes in symptomatology 
(see Schedule  of Events chart below). In order to maximize patient retention and account for 
unpredictable schedules,  the treatment window  will consist of the target visit date plus/minus 2 
days  for Visit 2 through Visit 4 and plus/minus 3 days for Visit 5 through Visit 10. Patients  will be 
randomized at a ratio of 1:1 to receive either Vortioxetine at a starting dose of 10 mg /day  or 
placebo. Concurrent treatment with other psychotropic medication will NOT be permitted during the study with the exceptions of the hypnotics zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], zaleplon, and 
diphenyhdramine . Patients taking diphenydramine will be instructed not to take any doses of 
this medication for three days prior to the visits that involve Neuropsychological testing  or the 
Startle Task .  These hypnotics will be allowed up to 3 doses per week during the trial. The CBC , 
blood chemistries, serum pregnancy, thyroid function measures and  urinalysis will also be 
repeated at week 12.  At the end of this study period, the neurophysiology, neuropsychological, 
and mRNA measures  will be repeated. Patients will be  outpatients for the duration of the study.  
Due to the amount of study procedures f or certain study visits, we will allow study visits to be 
done over two days.  
 
Dosing of Study Medication:  All patients will be started on 10 mg vortioxetine/day (or placebo 
equivalent) dosed in the morning with food.  Patients experiencing sedation from t he medication 
may be switched to evening dosing at the discretion of the study psychiatrist.  If by [CONTACT_10585] 4 the 
patient has demonstrated inadequate benefit from the medication, the dose will be increased to 
20 mg/day.  Patients unable to tolerate the 20 mg/ d dose may be reduced to 10 mg/day  
between weeks 4 and 8.  Patients unable to tolerate 10 mg will be discontinued from the trial.  
The dose of study medication should remain stable for weeks 8- 12. 
Medication compliance will be  monitored by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_487889]. The patient will also maintain a medication diary to mark the date and time they took 
their medication . Women of child bearing potential will also use the diary to indicate the start 
date of their menstural cycles, as this information will inform analysis of the startle testing data.   
   
G. Follow -up 
7 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 After participants complet ing the 12 week randomized treatment phase, they will return to the 
clinic 14 days later (Visit 10) for  a follow- up evaluation.  All subjects who complete the trial or 
discontinue the study because of lack of response or side effects will receive assistance in 
transitioning to another care provider as clinically appropriate at the research site (if they choose to do so), or will be referred back to their referring physician.  Patients with clinically significant 
abnormal laboratory tests at Visit [ADDRESS_626937] those tests repeated at the follow -up visit.  
 
 
H. Early Termination from Protocol  
Medical or Administrative Reasons : Subjects will be te rminated early if any of the following 
occur:  (1) Intolerance to study drug in the dose range required by [CONTACT_1758]; (2) worsening of 
PTSD or depressive symptoms such that the subject’s safety is endangered (e.g. suicidality); (3) 
If patient becomes manic  or psychotic ; (4) a serious adverse event (SAE) that is either: i) 
considered by [CONTACT_1010], probably, or definitely  related to the study 
medication, or ii) places the subject at increased risk of harm if s/he  were to continue in the 
study.  
 Suicidal ideation is assessed at each study visit with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale (CSSRS), an instrument endorsed by [CONTACT_242576].  This brief instrument 
systematically tracks suicidal ideation and behavior (e.g., suicide attempts, wish to die, thoughts of suicide, and plan and intent), and classifies events according to the following categories : 
Suicidal events  – completed suicide, suicide attempt, preparatory acts toward imminent 
suicidal behavior and suicidal ideati on. Non-suicidal events – self-injurious behavior, no 
suicidal intent and other, no deliberate self -harm. Indeterminate or potentially suicidal events  
– self-injurious behavior, suicidal intent unknown. Subjects who are considered by [CONTACT_487915][INVESTIGATOR_487890].  
 
Poor Adherence:   Every effort will be made to encourage subject compliance with the dosage 
regimen as per the protocol.  A record of the supplies dispensed, taken and returned will be recorded at each visit.  Compliance will be monitored by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_10685]. Subjects who miss three or more consecutive days of Vortioxetine during the study are considered non- compliant an d will 
be counseled about need for adherence.  Patients found to miss three consecutive doses of study medication twice will be withdrawn from the study .  Non -adherent patients are classified 
as dropouts in the analysis.  
 
Drop -outs:  Drop -outs will be defined as randomized subjects lost to follow -up who do not 
complete the 12-week double -blind treatment period. Randomized subjects who drop out prior 
to completing one post -randomization efficacy assessment will not be included in the primary 
efficacy analysi s.   
8 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
  SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
Visit Number  S1 V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 V10 
Week   
(± 2 days for V2 -V4, ± 3 days for V5 -10)  -1 0 1 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 
Day   -7 0 7 14 28 42 56 70 84 98 
Informed consent  X           
Demographics/Hollingshead 
 
 X           
Vital signs  X X X X X X X X X X X 
Weight  X  X   X  X  X X 
Psych/Medical eval. by [CONTACT_28839]  X         X  
Physical examination  X         X  
12-lead EKG  
 X  X       X  
MINI  modules A, C -P X           
Dispense Study Drug & Diary    X X X X X X X   
Laboratory Tests             
  CBC X         X  
  Blood Chemistry  X         X  
  Liver Function Tests  X         X  
  GGT  X           
  Urinalysis  X         X  
  Urine drug screen  X           
  Serum Pregnancy  X         X  
  Urine Pregnancy    X         
  CPK   X       X  
  TSH, Free T4  X         X  
  Hepatitis B and C  X           
  Pharmacokinetics  
      X  X  X  
Psychiatric Measures             
  CAPS  and CGI X  X  X X  X  X  
  MADRS    X  X X  X  X  
  CSSRS  X  X X X X X X X X X 
E-TRIP  X           
  PCL-5/QIDS -SR   X  X X  X  X  
  CTQ & PDS Screen  X           
  PSQI    X   X  X  X  
  SDS X  X    X   X  
  Life Experiences Survey    X       X  
Safety Measures             
  PRISE/Con meds    X X X X X X X X X 
  FIBSER     X X X X X X X  
Explor atory Aim Testing             
  Startle Paradigm   X        X  
  Genotype /Methylation    X       X  
Neuropsych ological  Testing : 
BACS + UPSAB  
  X        X  
  mRNA    X       X  
 
9 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
  
I. Efficacy and Safety  Tests and Procedures  
1. Measures and Questionnaires  
See Appendix B  for a brief description of the rating scales.  
 
2. Blood and Urine Tests  for Safety  
2a. At the start of  the study , participants will undergo specific laboratory tests, as outlined in the 
Schedule of Events above. Blood tests include: complete  blood cell count (CBC) with 
differential, thyroid functioning (TSH),  and free thyroxine, fasting blood sugar,  liver function tests 
(LFTs) , including total bilirubin, a hepatitis panel, and a serum pregnancy test in women of child-
bearing potential. Partic ipants also undergo a urine toxicology screen, urine pregnancy test and 
urinalysis testing . Additional blood or urine tests for disallowed medications or drugs of abuse 
may be performed during the randomization phase at the discretion of the investigator.  
 
3.  Pharmacokinetics Testing  
3a. As outlined in the schedule of events, participants will undergo confirmatory  laboratory  
testing at visits 5, 7, and 9. Blood w ill be drawn and tested to confirm the level of Vortioxitine in 
the participant ’s system at th e time of their study visit.    
 
J. Exploratory Biological and Neuropsychological Assessments  
 
In addition to the treatment outcome goals, we will examine previously identified genetic risk 
factors for predictors of treatment response.  We will also examine SNPs associated with PTSD which meet genome- wide significance within an  ongoing cross -sectional n=8000 Genome Wide 
Association Study .  
 
Hypothesis 1: Based on our extensive prior experience in examining physiological markers of 
fear responding, we hypoth esize that trauma- exposed individuals with PTSD will exhibit a higher 
likelihood of responding to PTSD treatment if they display differential physiological signatures of PTSD (e.g. increased dark -enhanced startle and decreased extinction of fear), compared to 
those without these physiological signatures of PTSD.  
 
Hypothesis 2:  Based on our previous work in PTSD identifying significant cognitive and 
functional capacity deficits, we hypothesize that treatment of with vortioxetine will improve 
cognitive and fu nctional capacity.  
 
Hypothesis 3: Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_487891], we hypothesize that trauma- exposed individuals with PTSD will exhibit a higher 
likelihood of responding to PTSD treatment if they are carriers of risk alleles of the FKBP5, the 
ADCYAP1R1 gene and other genes (e.g., DAT, BDNF, COMT, CRHR1, 5 -HTTLPR, RGS2, 
GABRA2), compared to non- carriers of risk alleles.  We will also examine gene expression and 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_487892].   These will Abbreviations : CAPS = Clinician -Administered PTSD scale; CBC = Complete blood count; CGI I/S  = Clinical Global 
Impression Scale (improvement and severity); CSSRS = Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale; CTQ = Childhood 
Trauma Questi onnaire; EKG = Electrocardiogram;  ETRIP = The Emory Treatment Resistant Interview for PTSD ;  
FIBSER = Frequency, Intensity and Burden of Side Effects Rating; GGT = Gamma glutamyl transpeptidase; 
Hollingshead= Hollingshead 4 Factors of Social Status Scale; MADRS= Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale; PCL-5 =The Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist for DSM -5; PRISE = Patient Rated Inventory of Side Effects; PSQI 
= Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272];  PDS = Post -traumatic stress Diagnostic Scale;  PSSR = PTSD Symptom Scale Self 
Report; QIDS -SR = Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptoms; SDS = Sheehan Disability Scale; T4 = Thyroxine; TSH = 
Thyroid stimulating hormone;  
Notes : Patients who terminate early will complete the Visit 9 safety and efficacy procedure s. 
10 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 include differential mRNA expression and epi[INVESTIGATOR_18193] (methylation) marks identified 
pretreatment, previously associated with differential PTSD risk to identify how modulators of 
gene function relate to treatment response.   
 1. DNA  
We will draw DNA on all consenting subjects to evaluate whether carriers of identified 
risk alleles are associated with response or non- response to voritoxetine.  
 2. mRNA  
We will draw 12  mls of blood at baseline and at week 12 to evaluate the expression of 
HPA-related mRNA expression.   
 
3. Neurophysiology: Startle Testing  
3a. Conditioning sessions . The following methods will allow us to assess fear acquisition, 
and conditional discrimination (learned safety), as well as the s ubjects’ awareness of 
reinforcement contingencies in the experiment. The aversive stimulus (US) in these studies will be a [ADDRESS_626938] with an intensity of 80 p.s.i. directed to the larynx as described in similar 
human fear conditioning studies (Grillo n & Davis, 1997; Jovanovic et al. 2005).  A compressed 
air tank connected to polyethylene tubing and controlled by a solenoid switch will emit the airblasts. The conditioned stimuli (CS’s) used in the AX+/BX - session (A , B, C and X) will be 
different colored shapes; in the fear acquisition and extinction sessions the CS’s will be neutral 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_499]. The CS’s will be presented on a computer monitor. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_487893]. The stimuli will be presented using SuperLab 3.0 for Windows (Cedrus, Inc.) and synchronized with the psychophysiological data acquisition using a DIO card (Measurements Computing, Inc).  The psychophysiological data will be collected with 
Biopac MP150 (Biopac Systems, Inc.). Skin conductance will be acquired concurrently with acoustic startle.   
3b. Acoustic startle . The acoustic startle response (eyeblink component) will be measured 
via electromyography (EMG) of the right orbicularis oculi  muscle. Two 5 mm Ag/AgCl pre- gelled 
disposable electrodes will be positioned approximately 1 cm under the pupil and 1 cm below the lateral canthus. All resistances will be less than 6 kilo- ohms. EMG activity is acquired at a 
sampling rate of 1kHz, amplified and digitized. The startle probe (noise burst) will b e a 108 -dB 
[A] SPL, [ADDRESS_626939] awareness and US expectancy during each 
experimental session subjects will respond on a response keypad (SuperLab, Cedrus Corp. ) in 
coordination with the EMG startle response monitoring system (SR -LAB, San Diego 
Instruments).  During the fear conditioning sessions subjects will press a button marked “+” if they expect a CS to be followed by [CONTACT_36432], a button marked “ -“ if they do not expect a CS to be 
followed by [CONTACT_36432], and a button marked “0” if they are uncertain of what to expect.   
3d. Skin Conductance Level . The skin conductance level will be acquired at a sampling 
rate of 1 kHz using the GSR module of the Biopac system. Two 5 mm Ag/AgCl disposable 
electrodes filled with isotonic paste will be attached to middle phalanges of the second and 
fourth finger of the non- dominant hand.  
 
4. Neuropsychological Battery  
4a. Rationale and Test Descriptions. Cognitiv e function will be assessed by [CONTACT_487916] t of Cogniti on in Schizophrenia ( BAC-S) test battery with measures in: (1) list 
learnin g, (2) digit seq uenc ing task, ( 3) token  mot or task, (4) ver bal fluenc y, (5) tower of 
London t est, and (6) sym bol coding subtest. All BAC-S m easures will be administer ed at  
specifi ed time points, and t he total composite z-scor es will be compared to base line total 
composite z-scores. 
11 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 4b. Performance Based -Measures of Functional Capacity  
For the assessment of functional capacity , we will use instrument ation previously developed for 
use in schizophrenia: the UCSD performance- based skills assessment (UPSA; Patterson et al 
2001). The UPSA is the most widely used functional capacity measure in serious mental illness, 
but suffers from a lengthy assessment format (30 minutes),  high- level reliance on props, and 
geographic specificity. The UPSA -B involves role- play tasks similar in complexity to those that a 
community -dwelling person is likely to encounter. Administration requires an average of 10 
minutes. The U PSA-B’s two domains result in a summary score ranging from 0 to 100 and we 
will use the summary score as the dependent variable.  
 
K. Clinical Care  
 
1. Discontinuation from study  
At the end of the treatment trial or when a patient discontinues the study pr ematurely, the 
efficacy evaluations will be repeated. In addition, a physical exam, 12-lead EKG, vital signs, 
weight, and laboratory measurements will be obtained. Patients will also be assessed for adverse experiences. All subjects who complete the trial or discontinue because of lack of response or side effects will receive treatment as clinically appropriate and will then be referred 
for appropriate follow -up care.  
 
Patients may withdraw at any time, or may be withdrawn by [CONTACT_487917], intolerable adverse reactions occur, or mood or anxiety worsens to an extent that, in the clinicians’ judgment, further participation would put the patient at risk.  
 
Pregnancy  
The investigator will collect pregnancy information on any female subject who becomes pregnant while participating in this study.  Any female subject who becomes pregnant while 
participating will be withdrawn from the study.  The investigator will record pregnancy 
information on the appropriate form and submit it to [CONTACT_487930] at the University of Miami 
(Email: [EMAIL_9364]
  Fax: [PHONE_10148] ) and to [COMPANY_005] (Email:  
(takedasafetytgrd.com  iFax: [PHONE_10149] ) within [ADDRESS_626940]'s pregnancy.  
The subject will also be followed to determine the outcome of the pregnancy.  Generally, follow -
up will be no longer than [ADDRESS_626941] information listed in the Pregnancy section.  
  
2. Suicide risk among patients treated with antidepressants  
Subjects with major depressive d isorder or with depression as part of bipolar disorder may 
experience worsening of their depression and/or the emergence of suicidal ideation and 
behaviour (suicidality), whether or not they are taking antidepressant medications, and this risk 
may persist  until significant remission occurs.  This guidance is consistent with global class 
[ADDRESS_626942]’s presenting symptoms. To assess suicidal ideation and 
behaviors, the CSSRS will be used in this trial.  
 
The following symptoms, anxiety, agitation, panic attacks, insomnia, irritability, hostility 
(aggressiveness), impulsivity, akathisia (psychomotor restlessness), hypomania, and mania, have been reported in patients being treated with antidepressants for m ajor depressive disorder. 
Although a causal link between the emergence of such symptoms and either the worsening of 
depression and/or the emergence of suicidal impulses has not been established, consideration 
should be given to possibly discontinuing the investigational product in subjects for whom such symptoms are severe , abrupt in onset, or were not part of the subject’s presenting symptoms.  
 2. Provision of Clinical Care   
All subjects who complete the trial or discontinue the study because of lack of response or side 
effects will receive assistance in transitioning thei r care to another provider.  
 
VII. DATA ANALYSIS AND STATISTICAL PLAN  
 
A. Approach to Data Management  
Case report forms are developed from adaptations of NIH and industry -funded clinical trial 
protocols in PTSD. Study data will be recorded on paper forms and translated to a digital format 
without specific patient identifying information. Patient identifiers will be maintained in a 
separate code book that will be kept in a locked cabinet in the Principal Investigator’s office at each site. These data will preserved on site with periodic monitoring by [CONTACT_487918]. At the end of the study, the databases for the different sites will be merged.  Data will be entered 
sequentially and within a timely manner so that any queries for missing information can be resolved. 
 
B. General Statistical Considerations   
Possible risk factors/confounders: We expect the randomization procedure to equalize risk factors across treatment groups; however, we will produce summary statistics to explore any 
unexpected differences in the values of covariates in the treatment groups. While we do not 
expect differences in covariates in the treatment groups, it is very likely that the response 
groups will be different on some relevant clinical variables (e.g., comorbid conditions). However, these should affect only the analyses  that include treatment response, and not analyses such as 
group- related change in CAPS. Thus, we will formally assess response group differences in 
possible covariates of interest and incorporate any covariates identified that are considered both statistically and clinically relevant as additional main effects for the response- based analyses. 
Specific types of interaction effects, such as effect modifiers specified a priori, will be the subject of exploratory analysi s. 
 
Site effects : Our assumption for the analysis plan and power calculations is that the protocols 
will be implemented sufficiently comparatively to avoid significant site effects in the results. 
Given that the  randomization will be blocked by [CONTACT_3725], there is no reason to believe that the 
[ADDRESS_626943] of the proposed analyses.  
 Missing data:  For those subjects randomized who do not complete treatment, an intent -to-treat 
approach will be implemented using linear and categorical mixed model methods. More 
specifically, all participants who are randomized to treatment group and have baseline 
measures will be included in the analy sis. If the probability of a missing observation depends on 
either observed covariates in the model or the previous observations of the outcome variable 
(e.g. CAPS), these models will provide the correct conclusions (Little & Rubin, 2002). Any other 
missin g data would be the result of incomplete recording of information or refusal of a subject to 
give information. Thus, the assumption that missing data are in fact missing at random (MAR), or that other variables under consideration will contain enough infor mation to effectively model 
the outcome of interest, will be reasonable for these analyses.  
Therefore, in the case of missing predictor variables, simple or multiple imputation methods (Little and Rubin, 2002) will be sufficient to provide “fill- in” methods so we can perform analyses 
of the full data set. All analyses described below will be performed on the complete data sets that result from this process. We will compare dropout patterns between groups and if there are concerns of informative dropout and/ or informative intermittent missing data, we will perform 
sensitivity analyses to determine the effects of these assumptions on our main analyses (Molenberghs et al., 2004).  
 Analytic details: Continuous variables will be fit using SAS PROC MIXED, and categorical data 
will be fit using the gllamm add -on to Stata (Rabe- Hesketh et al; 2002). The gllamm method is 
preferred to SAS PROC GLIMMIX in that is a full likelihood method which uses numerical 
integration for the random effects rather than a partial likel ihood approximation. In addition, it 
provides empi[INVESTIGATOR_487894]. Prior to model 
fitting, we will examine the distributions of the continuous outcome variables using visual inspection of histograms and boxplots to identify potential outliers. If variables are not normally distributed or contain outliers, then log transformations will be considered or appropriate 
nonparametric procedures will be substituted for the analyses stated.  
 
Multiple outcome measures:  To address the possible increase in Type I errors due to multiple 
outcome variables, we have a prior i selected a single outcome measure (CAPS total) which will 
maintain the significance level (α) 0.[ADDRESS_626944] p- values by [CONTACT_487919] (Benjamini & 
Hochberg, 1995) a nd report both unadjusted and adjusted p-values. 
 Random effects:  Given that the majority of outcomes are behavioral in nature, we expect that 
there will be significant individual level variance that will need to be incorporated into the model. 
Thus our ov erall analysis approach will be to use linear 2- level mixed models or generalized 
linear mixed models, as appropriate, to analyze the repeated measures data with at least a 
random intercept to incorporate individual level variation. We will also incorporat e a random 
slope if necessary however, it is not always necessary in our experience, particularly with scales with a limited range such as MADRS.  
 
 
VIII. HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
[ADDRESS_626945] Recruitment  
Men and women between the ages of 18- 65 with a primary di agnos is of PTSD using the DSM -V 
criteria will be eligible for the study.  A total of 60 subjects will be randomized ( 30 to Vortioxetine 
and 30 to placebo).  These subjects will be enrolled at 2 sites, Emory University School of 
Medicine  and Miami  Miller School of Medicine .  Subjects will enter this study having been 
recruited through referrals from outpatient clinics, or referrals from other community clinics and 
community clinicians (psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers) in the greater Atlanta  and 
Miami regions.  In addition, we will advertise locally in newspapers and radio and will post 
recruitment messages on internet sites.   
 Subjects will meet all inclusion/exclusion criteria outlined below.  We will exclude subjects with 
history of bipolar disorder, psychosis, substance abuse or dependence that is current or existed 
3 months prior to screening, history of borderline intellectual functioning or mental retardation,  
and clinically significant suicidal risk.  We will exclude individuals with the following medical conditions, as evidenced by [CONTACT_487920]: cancer in past year, 
stroke, heart attack, angina, neurological disease (MS, epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], Parkinson’s), CNS lesions 
(head trauma), dementing illness, liver/kidney disease.  The completion of self -report scales and 
cognitive tests requires a level of understanding that may not be present in those with low IQ.  
Medical illnesses and use of medication that may interfere with biological, and possibly 
psychological assessments, a nd current suicidality that requires immediate clinical intervention 
will be exclusionary for participation.  
 
B. Inclusion/ Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion  
CRITERION                                                                    METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT  
1. Males and Females between the ages of 18 
and 65  History  
2. Fulfills DSM -5 criteria for primary diagnosis of 
PTSD.  MINI  
3. Willing and a ble to give consent  Clinical interview  
4. A negative urine toxicology  Urine toxicology  
5. For females of reproductive age, use o f an 
effective birth control method* for the duration 
of the study or abstinence.  History  
6. Duration of illness of PTSD for at least 3 
months  History  
7. An initial score at Screening, and Visit 2 
(randomization) of ≥ 28 on the CAPS-5 for 
PTSD Studies  CAPS -5 
*See specific criterion for effective birth control methods.  
 
Exclusion:  
CRITERION                                                                 METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT  
1.  Lifetime or curre nt diagnosis of schizophrenia 
or other psychotic disorder, dementia, bipolar 
disorder .    MINI  and Clinical Evaluation  
2.   Subject is currently participating in another 
clinical trial in which  s/he is or will be exposed to 
an investigational or non -inves tigational drug or Clinical Interview  
[ADDRESS_626946] has a prior unsuccessful trial of 
Vortioxetine at 20 mg/day or higher for 8 weeks or 
more  History  
4.   Current evidence or history of significant 
unstabl e medical illness or organic brain 
impairment, including stroke, CNS tumor, 
demyelinating disease, cardiac, pulmonary, 
gastrointestinal, renal or hepatic impairment that 
would likely interfere with the action, absorption, distribution, metabolism, or excretion of 
Vortioxetine.   History of moderate or more severe 
TBI will also be exclusionary.  Medical chart review, clinical 
interview, physical exam, and 
laboratory testing  
5.  Patients who in the investigator’s judgment 
pose a current suicidal or homicidal r isk Clinical Interview  
6. DSM -[ADDRESS_626947] has a documented history of hepato -
biliary disease including a history of, or positive 
laboratory results for hepatitis (hepatitis B surface 
antigen and/or hepatitis C antibody), AND  
clinically significant hepatic enzyme elevation, includ ing any one of the following enzymes 
greater than 3 times the upper limit of normal 
(ULN) value (ALT, AST, ALP), or  total bilirubin > 
1.[ADDRESS_626948], unless consistent with presumed or 
diagnosed Gilbert’s disease  History, Laboratory testing  
9. Subject has take n systemic corticosteroids 
within 2 weeks of the Randomization Visit  History  
10.  Treatment with any other psychoactive 
medication within 2 weeks of Visit 1, including all antidepressants, psychoactive herbal or nutritional treatment (St Johns Wort, SAM -e), lithium, other 
mood stabilizers, oral antipsychotics, depot antipsychotics within 12 weeks, beta blockers, thioridazine, pi[INVESTIGATOR_3924], opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], anxiolytics, and sedatives (with the exception of zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], 
eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123],  zaleplon , and diphenhydramine).  
Also any treatment with any medication that the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_26027].  History  
11.  Pregnancy or lactation*  Pregnancy test, assessment  
12. Subjects who, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1070], would be noncompliant with the visit 
schedule or study  procedures (e.g. illiteracy, 
planned vacations, or planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_487895]).  Interview/History  
1 6  
 
U p d at e d J a n u ar y 2 2, 2 0 1 9  
 13. A n y l a b or at or y a b n or m alit y t h at i n t h e 
i n v e sti g at or’ s j u d g m e nt i s c o n si d er e d t o b e 
cli ni c all y si g nifi c a nt ( bl o o d pr e s s ur e, E C G, T S H, 
L F T,  et c.)  L a b or at or y t e sti n g  
14.  P ati e nt s w h o ar e r e c ei vi n g e x p o s ur e -b a s e d 
p s y c h ot h er a p y t h at t ar g et s P T S D s y m pt o m s  Tr e at m e nt Hi st or y  
15. C urr e nt or pl a n n e d liti g ati o n or ot h er a cti o n s 
r el at e d t o s e c o n d ar y g ai n r e g ar di n g t h e tr a u m ati c 
e v e nt  I nt er vi e w  
16. S u bj e ct h a s cli ni c al e vi d e n c e of, or EKG 
r e s ult s i n di c ati n g a n y of t h e f oll o wi n g at eit h er 
s cr e e n or R a n d o mi z ati o n Vi sit u nl e s s r e p e at E KG 
s h o w s t h at t h e p ar a m et er h a d r et ur n e d t o wit hi n 
n or m al r a n g e b y t h e R a n d o mi z ati o n Vi sit:  
� Q T c > 4 5 0 m s e c  f or m e n, or >  4 7 5 m s e c f or 
w o m e n ; 
� A n y  c ar di a c c o n diti o n or E KG e vi d e n c e t h at t h e 
i n v e sti g at or f e el s m a y  p o s e a p ot e nti al s af et y 
c o n c er n.  E K G  
 
* A s er u m pr e g n a n c y t e st i s p erf or m e d d uri n g t h e s cr e e ni n g.  Si n c e t hi s t e st mi g ht n ot d et e ct t h e 
v er y e arl y st a g e of p r e g n a n c y (i. e. m a xi m u m of [ADDRESS_626949] a nt ati o n), w o m e n of c hil d -b e ari n g a g e ar e e x cl u d e d fr o m t h e st u d y if t h e y d o n ot u s e a n 
eff e cti v e birt h c o ntr ol m et h o d f or [ADDRESS_626950] u g.  A c c e pt a bl e m et h o d s 
of birt h c o ntr ol i n cl u d e:  s ur gi c al st erilit y; p o st m e n o p a u s al st at u s ( d efi n e d a s n o m e n s e s f or at 
l e a st 1 2 m o nt h s) ; a d o u bl e -b arri er m et h o d ( c o n d o m s pl u s di a p hr a g m); h or m o n al c o ntr a c e pti v e s 
pl u s si n gl e b arri er ( birt h c o ntr ol pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382] s, i m pl a nt s [ N or pl a nt] or i nj e cti o n s [ D e p o -Pr o v er a]), 
I ntr a ut eri n e D e vi c e (I U D), or a b sti n e n c e ( n o s e x u al a cti vit y).    
 
E. Ri s k s  
1. G e n er al   
B y a gr e ei n g t o p arti ci p at e i n t hi s st u d y, s u bj e ct s will b e t e m p or aril y f or g oi n g t h e o p p ort u nit y t o 
r e c ei v e r o uti n e cli ni c al c ar e i n t h e c o m m u nit y. T hi s will b e cl e arl y e x pl ai n e d t o all p ati e nt s, al o n g 
wit h t h e tr e at m e nt str at e gi e s t h at ar e g e n er all y u s e d i n p ati e nt s wit h P T S D. P ati e nt s will b e t ol d 
t h at st a n d ar d alt er n ati v e tr e at m e nt s e xi st f or P T S D.  
 
2. S cr e e ni n g a n d E v al u ati o n  
T h e ri s k s a n d di s c o mf ort s of t h e s cr e e ni n g a n d b a s eli n e e v al u ati o n s ar e mi ni m al. N o di s c o mf ort 
i s e x p e ct e d t o b e a s s o ci at e d wit h t h e p h y si c al e x a mi n ati o n or t h e cli ni c al i nt er vi e w. 
V e ni p u n ct ur e m a y b e a s s o ci at e d wit h t h e m o m e nt ar y di s c o mf ort of t h e n e e dl e sti c k, a s w ell  a s a 
s m all ri s k of h e m at o m a ( br ui s e). S u bj e ct s will b e e x p o s e d t o t h e di s c o mf ort of a n s w eri n g 
p er s o n al q u e sti o n s t h at t h e y m a y fi n d di str e s si n g.  
 
3. Dr u g -fr e e p eri o d a n d tr e at m e nt tri al  
Si n c e it i s u n k n o w n w h et h er t h e c a n di d at e i s eff e cti v e i n t h e tr e at m e nt of P T S D, p arti ci p ati o n i n 
t hi s tri al c o ul d d el a y p ot e nti all y eff e cti v e t h er a p y b y 1 2  w e e k s. T h er e m a y b e a si g nifi c a nt 
w or s e ni n g of s y m pt o m s a s t h e p ati e nt’ s m e di c ati o n s ar e b ei n g di s c o nti n u e d, d uri n g t h e dr u g -
fr e e p eri o d or d uri n g t h e st u d y it s elf. If t h e p ati e nt i s di s c o nti n u e d fr o m t h e st u d y d u e t o a 
w or s e ni n g of t h eir ill n e s s, t h e y will b e r ef err e d f or st a n d ar d c ar e.  
 
[ADDRESS_626951] to answering questions. We will not taper off medications that are clearly effective for the patient’s current depression or PTSD.  
 
Patients may withdraw at any time or be dropped from the study at the discretion of the investigator should medical contraindications to the assigned medication develop, if intolerable 
adverse reactions occur, if mood or anxiety worsens, or if in the clinician’s judgment the patient 
has worsened to such a degree that further participation would put the patient at risk. If stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_487896], participants will be exited from the 
study and appropriately monitored.   
 In the startle testing, participants will be exposed to a Lemon Prep mild abrasive skin preppi[INVESTIGATOR_487897]. It is possible that subjects may experience allergic responses 
to the ingredients of the lotion or gels.  
 
Risks Associated with Donation of Genetic Material   
There are no physical risks associated with participation in genetic studies, apart from those routinely associated with phlebotomy, which are minimal. Psychological and social/economic risks associated with genetics studies of the kind described here are difficult to define, and 
remain the subject of heated controversy in the ethics community. The major risk, to the degree 
that any exists, is that a breech of confidentiality regarding genetic studies that resulted in third parties finding out genetic information about a person could theoretically place a person at risk for loss of insurance, loss of employment, etc. because of genotype- based discrimination. To 
our knowledge, no person has ever suffered harm for the reasons just described as a result of participating in a genetics research study. Regardless, our written informed consent process 
goes over these risks carefully. In addition, subjects have the right to “withdraw” from the 
research by [CONTACT_487921]. Finally, all research records containing any 
subject- identifying information are stored under lock and key, or in secured computing 
environments. Personal identifiers are never associated directly with genotypes in the same data file —all genotype information is indexed only to de- identified subject codes. With these 
safeguards in place, we are confident the research is virtually without psycho -social- economic 
risk to subjects.  
 
G. Protection against Risk  
There are four areas in which safeguards to protect subjects from undue risk require discussion for study -related activities. These include the procedures used t o obtain informed consent, 
procedures used to ensure confidentiality of the subjects’ data, procedures used to minimize risks associated with study procedures, and risks associated with participating in the treatment study.  
 
Informed Consent  
In the consent  form and discussion with an investigator, subjects are advised fully of the 
procedures to be used, the amount of time required of them, the possible risks and benefits of the procedures, their right to refuse participation in the study without prejudice, their right to 
terminate participation at any moment without prejudice, and the name [CONTACT_487929].  
 Confidentiality of Subjects’ Responses  
18 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 In the informed consent form, subjects are told that the information they provi de and all findings 
will be kept strictly confidential, with access limited to the research staff at the research sites 
and the possible exception of state or federal regulatory personnel. All data will be carefully stored in a limited access, locked room.  No names will be associated with computer files or 
data, and no names will be associated with any published reports. Access to participant data will 
be limited to study staff, on an as -needed basis. Results are published as group data without 
the use of characteristics that would identify individual subjects. We quote information only by 
[CONTACT_29181], scientific reports, or publications, in order to maintain 
anonymity.  Confidentiality may need to be broken in certain cases, such as when the subjects’ 
safety is endangered.  
 Research Procedures  
We have described above the potential risks of the research procedures and the safeguards 
that will be used to minimize risks. Additionally, interviewers will receive training in the importance of study information confidentiality, and in how to manage any participant distress 
that may be associated with responding to research questions and interviews. Subjects will be 
observed closely during startle testing and the procedure will be stopped immediately if a subject indicates it is too aversive. Only one subject out of approximately [ADDRESS_626952] benefits to individual 
patients. Information obtained from the study will benefit society by [CONTACT_487922].  
 
I. Confidentiality of Data   
All electronic records will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371] .  Participants’ 
names and other personal identifying information will be stored in electronically secured 
databases at the study sites.  These databases are password protected and only study 
personnel will be given the password.  Results will be published  as group data without the use 
of characteristics that would identify individual subjects. The results of the genetic assessments will also be addressed in the same way.  
 
J.  Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
In compliance with local IRB guidelines, PIs will prepare a report annually that summarizes 
adverse event and protocol deviation data for the Data Safety Monitoring Board for the study.  
Each site will develop its own DSMB for the study.    
K. Adverse Event Monitoring  
Adverse events will be monitored throughout the study using the FIBSER and PRISE self -report 
forms, and through open -ended clinician inquiries. Monitoring will include assessment of 
19 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 intensity (mild, moderate, severe) and assessment of causality (drug related, not drug related). 
All events will be followed to resolution or stabilization. All serious adverse events (SAE) will be 
collected and reported as appropriate per each site’s IRB -requried reporting guidelines .  
 A serious adverse event is one that meets any of the following criteria:  
--Fat al or life threatening  
--Requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
--Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
--Congenital anomaly  
--Important medical event that may jeopardize the patient or require intervention to prevent a serious  outcome 
--Cancer  
 An Adverse Event is:  
--any abnormal laboratory test and felt to be clinical significant  
--exacerbation of chronic/intermittent pre- existing condition  
--New conditions detected or diagnosed  
--Signs, symptoms or clinical sequelae of a suspected interaction  
  The University of Miami as the lead site will establish a Data Safety Monitoring Committee 
(DSMC) for the duration of this study in order to oversee the safety of study participants in the 
study. As part of the Clinical Operations Committee, the principal investigators and sub -
investigators will be having conference calls monthly and will review all data and procedures on a monthly basis. Each site PI [INVESTIGATOR_487898], close monitoring of adverse events.   In addition, the 
investigators and study coordinators will evaluate the progress of the study, including periodic 
assessments of data quality and timeliness, participant recruitment, accrual and retention, 
participant risk versus benefit, performance of the various sites, and other factors that can affect 
study outcome. They will also consider factors external to the study, such as scientific or therapeutic developments that may have an impact on the safety of the participants or the ethics of the study.  
 
L.  Financial Responsibilities of Subjects  
[COMPANY_005] intends to supply Vortioxetine and matching placebo tablets and will finance all aspects 
of the study. The subjects will not bear responsibility for  any costs associated with study 
participation.  
 
M. Subject Compensation  
Participants will receive $ [ADDRESS_626953] screening,  in-office visit they attend, to compensate 
for their time and inconvenience in participating in the trial.  
 
N. Site Monitoring  
The Miami  lead coordinator will be responsible for ensuring uniformity of study procedures 
across the two sites. The University of Miami as the lead site will establish a Data Safety 
Monitoring Committee (DSMC) for the duration of this study in order to oversee the safety of study participants in the study. The Committee will consist of members of the University of Miami’s Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences. The committee will convene 
annually and will review the study activities by [CONTACT_487923] a combined report. The Emory 
site will report their adverse events and all necessary events to the Miami site in a timely manner prior to the Miami site submitting to the Miami DSMC. Any communication, including 
20 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 approval letters, from the DSMC will be distributed to the study sites and the study sponsor, as 
needed. The committee will also convene ad hoc as deemed necessary.  
 
Responsibilities of a DSMC : 
1.  The primary responsibility of the DSMC  is to review interim analyses of outcome data and to 
recommend whether the study needs to be changed or terminated based on these analyses.  
 
2.  The DSMC  reviews interim toxicity data.  
 
3.  The DSMC  reviews major modifications to the study prior to their implementation (e.g. 
termination, droppi[INVESTIGATOR_487899], increasing target sample size).  
  
 
IX. SOURCE OF RESEARCH MATERIALS   Blood will be collected and analyzed for the screening tests and genetic analyses. Urine 
samples will be collected and analyzed with a toxicology screen. We will also collect physical 
records in the form of questionnaires, phone screenings, and psychiatric interviews. We will request access to patient’s medical records only for reasons related to patient safety. Patient 
charts will be kept in locked file cabinets in the offices of each study site.  
 
Biological specimens are linked to the individual patient only through a unique research code. All documents that directly reveal the patient’s identity, such as signed consent forms, are 
stored in charts that are marked on  the outside only with the patient’s code number.  
21 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 Appendix A. Drugs Allowed (Y) and Drugs not Allowed (N) for Study Periods I and II  
Drug Class  
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_487900]  N N 
Amantadine  N N 
Analgesics (except narcotics)  Y N 
Anorexics  N N 
Antia nginal agents (except calcium channel 
blockers)  Y Y 
Antiarrhythmics  N N 
Anticholinergics  Y Y 
Anticholinesterase inhibitors  N N 
Anticonvulsants  N N 
Antidepressants  N N 
Antidiarrheal preparations  Y N 
Antiemetics  Y N 
Antihypertensives   N Y 
Antipsycho tics N N 
Benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651]  N N 
Buspi[INVESTIGATOR_5331]  N N 
Carbamazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  N N 
Chloral hydrate  N N 
Clonidine  N N 
Codeine  Y N 
Cough/Cold preparations  Y N 
Cyclosporine  N N 
DHEA  N N 
Ginko  N N 
Ginseng  N N 
Guanfacine  N N 
Loperimide  Y N 
Methyldopa  N N 
Metyrosine  N N 
Narcotics  N N 
Phenytoin  N N 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_3924]  N N 
Prazosin  N N 
Psychostimulants  N N 
Quinidine  N N 
Reserpi[INVESTIGATOR_050]  N N 
Rifampin  N N 
St. John’s Wort  N N 
Steroids (oral)  Y N 
Thyroid hormone supplementa N Y 
Tryptophan  N N 
aSubjects needing supplements must be on a stable thyroid supplement dose for at least 2 
weeks prior to Visit 1 .  
Subjects may use zolpi[INVESTIGATOR_6730], eszopi[INVESTIGATOR_11123], zaleplon , or diphenhydramine  up to 3 nights per week 
during the trial.   
22 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 Appendix B. Description of Scales  
Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS)  
The Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BACS)  is a clinician -rated instrument that 
measures  cognitive function. The domains of cognitive function that  are assessed by [CONTACT_487924], working memory, motor speed, attention, executive functions and verbal 
fluency. It is designed to require about 30 min of testing time . BACS A will be performed at V1 
and Version B will be peformed at V9.  
 
UCSD Performance -Based Skills Assessment - Brief Version (UPSA -B)  
The UCSD Performance- Based Skills Assessment (UPSA- Brief) is a role -play test designed to 
evaluate a person’s functional capacity in two selected areas of basic living skills. The UPSA -
Brief (UPSA -B) was developed as an abbreviated alternative to the full version  of the UPSA 
(Mausbach et al., 2007 ) and contains 2 of the original 5 subscales of the full UPSA (i.e., finance 
and communications subscales), which allows for shorter administration time (10 –15 minutes) 
and reduced reliance on testing props.  An UPSA -Brief Total Score (range = 0– 100) is then 
obtained by [CONTACT_487925].   
 Clinical Global Impressions Improvement Scale (CGI- I) and Severity Scale (CGI -S) 
 The CGI -I (Guy 1976)  is a clinician -rated instrument that measures the degree of the 
patient’s improvement. It is a 7- point scale where 1 = very much improved; 4 = no change; and 
7 = very much worse. Baseline for assessing improvement for the CGI -I ratings will be the 
patient’s clinical status at Visit 3. The CGI -S is a  similar clinician -rated instrument that measures 
the overall severity of the patient’s illness as compared to the overall study population. It is also 
a 7-point scale where 1= normal, not at all ill; 4 = moderately ill; and 7 = among the most 
extremely ill patients.  
 
Clinician -Administered PTSD Scale ( CAPS -5)  
 The CAPS is a structured clinical interview designed to assess the essential features of 
PTSD as defined by [CONTACT_9288] -5. The CAPS can be used to provide categorical ratings of 
diagnostic status as well as a quantitative index of symptom severity. The CAPS -[ADDRESS_626954] an integration of each symptom’s severity and frequency.  The total score 
range is 0- 80. Higher scores reflect a greater degree of symptoms severity.  
  
Childhood Trauma Questionnaire (CTQ)  
 The CTQ (Bernstein, 2003) is a 28- item s elf-report instrument that assesses childhood 
trauma in the following areas: physical, sexual and emotional abuse and physical and emotional neglect. Each item is rated on a scale of 1 (never true) to 5 (very often true). The 5 subscales are then totaled, with scores ranging from 5- 25 for each traumatic category.  
 Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS)  
 The CSSRS (Posner et al., 2007) is a brief, standardized, clinician- administered 
measure that uniquely assesses the essential information (behavior , ideation, lethality and 
severity) and distinguishes between suicidal occurrences and non- suicidal self -injury.  The 
CSSRS is composed of 3 questions addressing suicidal behavior and 5 questions assessing the severity.  
Emory Treatment Resistance Interview for PTSD (E -TRIP)  
 The E -TRIP (Dunlop et al. 2014) is a clinician administered measure that assesses the level 
of treatment resistance in an individual with PTSD by [CONTACT_487926] 
[ADDRESS_626955] adequate trials.  Frequency, Intensity, and Burden of Side Effects Rating (FIBSE R) 
 The FIBSER (Wisniewski et al., 2006) is a self -report measure used to quantify the 
overall side effect burden a patient is experiencing over the previous 7 days, used in combination with the PRISE. It uses 3 global ratings on a 7- point Likert -type scal e to estimate: 
1) the frequency of side effects; 2) the intensity of side effects the patient believes stem from the 
study treatment; and 3) the overall burden or degree of interference in day -to-day activities and 
functioning due to side effects.  The form takes less than 5 minutes to complete.  
 
Hollingshead Four Factor Index of Social Status  
      The Hollingshead is a self -report measure assessing the socio- economic status (SES) of the 
participant as well as the participant’s parents.  The participant indicates the level of education 
obtained by [CONTACT_487927], mother, and self using a scale ranging from 1 (less than 7
th grade 
completed) to 7 (Graduate degree); in addition, the occupation of each of the three people is also indicated along the scale, where 1 is equivalent to a farm or day laborer, and 9 is a senior manager or professional.  The raw scores obtained for each individual are weighted (and in the 
case of the parents, averaged), yielding total Hollingshead scores for the participant and the 
parent s. 
 
Life Experiences Survey  
 The LES (Sarason et al, 1978) is a [ADDRESS_626956] on their lives. From these responses it is possible to derive 
three life change scores: positive, negative, and total.  
 
Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)  
 The MADRS (Montgomery and Asberg 1979)  is a 10- item instrument used for the 
evaluation of depressive symptoms in adults and for the assessment of any changes to those 
symptoms. The estimated time to administer  this scale is 20 minutes. Each of the 10 items is 
rated on a scale of 0 to 6, with differing descriptors for each item. These individual item scores 
are added together to form a total score, which can range between 0 and 60 points.   
 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_487901] (PSQI)  
 The PSQI (Buysse et al., 1989) is composed of 19 self -rated questions and 5 questions 
rated by a bed partner (if available). The self -administered scale contains 15 multiple- choice 
items that inquire about frequency of sleep disturbances  and subjective sleep quality and 4 
write -in items that inquire about typi[INVESTIGATOR_405187], wake- up, sleep latency and sleep duration. The 
PSQI generates seven scores corresponding to sleep domains. Each component score ranges 
from 0 (no difficulty) to 3 (severe difficulty). The component scores are summed to produce a 
global score (Range 0- 21). A PSQI score >[ADDRESS_626957] for DSM -5 (PCL-5) 
 The PCL- 5 (Blevins et al. 2015) is a 20 -item self -report measure that assesses the 20 
DSM -5 symptoms of PTSD . All items are answered on a 5 point scale from 0 (not at all) to 4 
(extremely). Scoring can be done to measure overall symptom severity or cluster symptom 
24 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 severity by [CONTACT_487928]: Cluster B (items 1- 5), Cluster C 
(items 6 -7), Cluster D (items 8 -14), and C luster E (items 15- 20).  
 
The Patient Rated Inventory of Side Effects (PRISE)  
 The PRISE (Rush et al., 2004) is a 7- item self -report assessment of side effects in the 
following symptom domains: gastrointestinal, heart, skin, nervous system, eyes/ears, genital/urinary, sleep, sexual functioning, and other.  Each domain has multiple symptoms which may be endorsed, and for each domain the patient rates whether or not the symptoms are 
tolerable or distressing. The time frame evaluated is the past 7 days. The form takes less than 5 
minutes for the patient to complete.  
 
Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology -Self Report (QIDS -SR) 
 The QIDS (Rush et. al., 2003) is a 16- item self rated instrument designed to assess the 
severity of depressive symptoms present in the past seven days. The 16 items cover the nine 
symptom domains of major depression, and are rated o n a scale of 0- 3. Total score range from 
0 to 27, with ranges of 0- 5 (normal), 6- 10 (mild), 11 -15(moderate), 16- 20 (moderate to severe), 
and 21+ (severe).  
 
Sheehan Disability Scale (SDS)  
 The SDS (Leon et al 1997)  is a patient -rated instr ument designed to assess the impact 
of perceived problems on work productivity, social/leisure activities, and family life/home responsibilities. The Sheehan Disability Scale consists of 3 questions rated on a visual analog 
scale (0 to 10). Higher scores represent greater impairment of activity.  
 Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)  
 The MINI is an abbreviated neuropsychiatric diagnostic interview.  It examines all of the 
conditions that are included as both inclusion and exclusion criteria in this trial.  The MINI 
generates diagnoses with high reliability and is easy to train raters to administer with high fidelity. We will use modules A, and C through P in this study to evaluate the inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Module B for Suicidality will be excluded, as the CSSRS will be performed at 
screening and every study visit from randomization onward.  
25 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 REFERENCES  
 
American Psychiatric Association (2004): Practice guideline for the treatment of patients       
with acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 161 (11): 
suppl): 3- 31. 
Baker D, West S, Nicholson W, Ekhator N, Kasckow J, Hill K, Bruce A, Orth D, Geracioti T 
(1999): Serial CSF corticotropin- releasing hormone levels and adrenocortical activity in 
combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 156:585 –588. 
Bale TL, Contarino A, Smith GW, Chan R, Gold LH, Sawchenko PE, Koob GF, Vale WW, Lee 
KF (2000): Mice deficient for corticotropin- releasing hormone receptor -2 display anxiety -
like behaviour and are hypersensitive to stress. Nat Genet 24:410 -4. 
Bale TL, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_487902] R, Contarino A, Koob GF, Vale WW, Lee KF. (2002): Mice deficient for both 
corticotropi[INVESTIGATOR_487903] 1 (CRFR1) and CRFR2 have an impaired stress 
response and display sexually dichotomous anxiety -like behavior. J Neurosci 22:193 -9. 
Benjamini Y, and Hochberg Y. (1995) Controlling the False Discovery Rate: a practical and 
powerful approach to multiple testing. JRSS- B;57(1):289- 300. 
Bernstein DP, Stein JA, Newcomb MD, Walker  E, Pogge D, Ahluvalia T, Stokes J, Handelsman 
L, Medrano M, Desmond D, Zule W  (2003). Development and validation of a brief 
screening version of the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire. Child Abuse & Neglect 27  
169–190. 
Blevins, C. A., Weathers, F. W., Davis, M. T., Witte, T. K., & Domino, J. L. (2015). The 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Checklist for DSM -5 (PCL -5): Development and initial 
psychometric evaluation. Journal of Traumatic Stress , 28:489– 498. Bremner JD, Ra ndall 
P, Vermetten E, et al (1997b): Magnetic resonance imaging- based measurement of 
hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder related to childhood physical and 
sexual abuse--a preliminary report. Biol Psychiatry  41:23 -32. 
Breslau N, Davis GC, An dreski P, Peterson E (1991): Traumatic event s and posttraumatic 
stress disorder in an urban population of young adults. Arch Gen Psychiatry 48:216 -22. 
Breslau N, Kessler RC, Chilcoat HD, Schultz LR, Davis GC, Andreski P (1998): Trauma and 
posttraumatic stress disorder in the community: the 1996 Detroit Area Survey of Trauma. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 55:626 -32. 
Buysee DJ, Reynolds CF, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ (1989): The Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8326]: A new instrument for psychiatric research and practice. Psychiatry Res 28:193- 213. 
Coste SC, Kesters on R, Heldwein K, Stevens S, Heard A, Hollis J, Murray S, Hill J, Pantely G,  
Hohimer A, Hatton D, Phillips T, Finn D, Low M, Rittenberg M, Stenzel P, Stenzel -Poore 
M (2000): Abnormal adaptations to stress and impaired cardiovascular function in mice lackin g corticotropin- releasing hormone receptor -2. Nat Genet 24:403 -9. 
Dunlop BW, Kaye JL, Youngner C, Routhbaum B (2014): Assessing Treatment -Resistant 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Emory Treatment Resistant Interview for PTSD (E -
TRIP). Behavioral Science 4:511 -527.  
Daut R, Cleeland C, Flanery R (1983): Development of the Wisconsin Brief Pain Questionnaire 
to assess pain in cancer and other diseases. Pain  17(2):197- 210. 
Davidson JR, Hughes D, Blazer DG, George LK (1991): Post -traumatic stress disorder in the 
community: an epi[INVESTIGATOR_119262]. Psychol Med  21:713 -21. 
Davidson JR, Rothbaum BO, van der Kolk BA, Sikes CR, Farfel GM (2001) Multicenter, double-
blind comparison of sertraline and placebo in the treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Arch Gen  Psychiatry 58:485 -492. 
Davidson JR (2006a): Pharmacologic treatment of acute and chronic stress following trauma. J 
Clin Psychiatry [ADDRESS_626958] 2:34- 9. 
26 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 de Kloet CS, Vermetten E, Bikker A, Meulman E, Geuze E, Kavelaars A, Westenberg HGM and 
Heijnen CJ (2006/7 ) Leukocyte glucocorticoid receptor expression and immunoregulation 
in veterans with and without post -traumatic stress disorder. Molecular Psychiatry  12, 
443–453. 
First MB, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_487904], Gibbon M, Williams AR (2001): Structured Clinical Interview for DSM- IV 
Axis I Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition (SCID -I/P). [LOCATION_001] State 
Psychiatric Institute, Biometrics Research.  
Foa E, Riggs D, Dancu C, Rothbaum B (1993): Reliability and validity of a brief instrument for 
assessing posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Traumatic Stress 5:395- 399. 
Foa EB, Cashman L, Jaycox L, Perry K (1997). The validation of a self -report measure of post -
traumatic stress disorder: The Posttraumatic Diagnostic Scale. Psychological 
Assessment, 9: 445 -451. 
Foa EB, Tolin DF (20 00): Comparison of the PTSD Symptom Scale- Interview Version and the 
Clinician -Administered PTSD scale. J Trauma Stress 13:181 -91. 
Friedman M, Marmar C, Baker D, Sikes C, Farfel (2007): Randomized, double- blind comparison 
of sertraline and placebo for posttraumatic stress disorder in a Department of Veterans 
Affairs Setting. J Clin Psychiatry 68:711 -720. 
Goenjian AK, Yehuda R, Pynoos RS, Steinberg AM, Tashjian M, Yang RK, Najarian LM, 
Fairbanks LA. (1996): Basal cortisol, dexamethasone suppression of cortisol, and MHPG in adolescents after the 1988 earthquake in Armenia. Am J Psychiatry 153:929 -34. 
Grammatopoulos DK, Chrousos GP (2002): Functional characteristics of CRH receptors and 
potential clinical applications of CRH- receptor antagonists. Trends Endocrin ol Metab 
13:436- 44. 
Grillon C, Davis M (1997): Fear -potentiated startle conditioning in humans: explicit and 
contextual cue  conditioning following paired versus unpaired training. Psychophysiology  
34:451- 458. 
Grunhaus L, Zelnik T, Albala AA, Rabin D, Haskett RF, Zis AP, Greden JF (1987): Serial 
dexamethasone suppression tests in depressed patients treated only with 
electroconvulsive therapy. J Affect Disord 13:233 -40. 
Guy W (1976): ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology. Washington, DC: US 
Department of Health Education and Welfare, No. (ADM) 76- 338. 
Held K, Künzel H, Ising M, Schmid DA, Zobel A, Murck H, Holsboer F, Steiger A (2004): 
Treatment with the CRH1 -receptor -antagonist R121919 improves sleep- EEG in patients 
with depression. Psychiatr Res 38 :129-136. 
Hollingshead, AB (1975). Four factor index of social status. New Haven, CT: Department of 
Sociology, Yale University.  
Holsboer F (2003): Corticotropin- releasing hormone modulators and depression. Curr Opin 
Investig Drugs 4:46–50. 
Institute of Med icine (2007): Treatment of PTSD: An Assessment of the Evidence. 
http://www.iom.edu/Object.File/Master/47/391/PTSD%20Report%20Brief%20FINAL2.pd
f. Accessed Sept. 3, 2008.  
Jovanovic T, Keyes M, Fiallos A, Myers K, Davis M, Duncan E (2005): Fear potentiation a nd 
fear inhibition in a human fear -potentiated startle paradigm. Biol Psychiatry  57:1559-
1564.  
Kessler RC, Sonnega A, Bromet E, Hughes M, Nelson CB (1995): Posttraumatic stress disorder 
in the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry  52:1048 -60. 
Koenen KC, Lyons MJ, Goldberg J, et al (2003): A high risk twin study of combat -related PTSD 
comorbidity. Twin Res  6:218- 26. 
Künzel H, Zobel A, Nickel T, Ackl N, Uhr M, Sonntag A, Ising M, Holsboer F (2003): Treatment 
of depression with the CRH -1-receptor an tagonist R121919: endocrine changes and 
side effects. J Psychiatr Res 37:525 -533. 
27 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 Ladd C, Huot R, Thrivikraman K, Nemeroff C, Meaney M, Plotsky P (2000): Long- term 
behavioral and neuroendocrine adaptations to adverse early experience. Prog Brain 
Res 122: 81- 103. 
Leon AC (2000): Placebo protects subjects from nonresponse: a paradox of power. Arch Gen 
Psychiatry 57(4): 329- 30. 
Leserman J, Drossman DA, Li Z, Toomey TC, Nachman G, Glogau L (1996): Sexual and 
physical abuse history in gastroenterology practice: how types of abuse impact health 
status. Psychosom Med  58:4-15. 
Little RJA & Rubin DB (2nd ed.2002), Statistical Analysis With Missing Data , Technometrics  Vol 
45, #4, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, ISBN 0- 471-[ZIP_CODE] -5, xv + 381.  
Mausbach BT, Bowie CR, Harvey PD, et al . J Psychiatr Res.  Usefulness of the UCSD 
Performance- based Skills Assessment (UPSA) for predicting residential independence 
in patients with chronic schizophrenia. February 13, 2007; 
doi:10.1016/j.jpsychires.2006.12.008.  
Miller G, Chen E, Zhou E (2007): If it goes up, must it come down? Chronic stress and the 
hypothalamicpi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenocortical axis in humans. Psychol Bull 133:[ADDRESS_626959] MG, Mallinckrodt C, Carroll RJ 
(2004): Analyzing incomplete longitudinal clinical trial data. Biostatistics 5:445 -64. 
Montgomery SA, Asberg M (1979): A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. 
Br J Psychiatry 134:382 -9. 
Mueller KE, Barton CN. Approximate power for repeated measures ANOVA lacking sphericity.  
JASA, 1989; 84(406):549- 555.  
Nemeroff C, Widerlov E, Bissette G, et al. (1984): Elevated concentrations of CSF corticotropin-
releasing factor -like immunoreactivity in depressed patients. Science 226 (4680): 1342 -
1344.  
Nemeroff C, Bremner J, Foa E, Mayberg H, North C, Stein M (2006): Posttraumatic stress 
disorder: a state- of the science review. J Psych Research 40:1 -21. 
Neria Y, Bromet EJ (2000): Comorbidity of PTSD and depression: linked or separate incidence. 
Biol Psychiatry  48:878 -80. 
O’Brien PC, Flemin g TR. A multiple testing procedure for clinical trials. Biometrics.1979; 35:549-
556. 
Patterson T, Goldman S, McKibbin C, Hughs T, Jeste D (2001): UCSD performance- based 
skills assessment: development of a new measure of everyday functioning for severely 
mentally ill adults. Schizophr Bull 27:235 -245. 
Plotsky P, Thrivikraman K, Nemeroff C, Caldji C, Sharma S, Meaney M (2005): Long- term 
consequences of neonatal rearing on central corticotropin- releasing factor systems in 
adult male rat offspring. Neuropsychopharmacology 30(12):2192 -2204.  
Posner K, Oquendo MA, Gould M, Stanley B, Davies M (2007): Columbia classification 
algorithm of suicide assessment (C -CASA): Classification of suicidal events in the FDA’s 
pediatric suicidal risk analysis of antidepressants. A m J Psychiatry 164:1035 -1043.  
Rabe- Hesketh S, Skrondal, A., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1321], A.: Reliable estimation of generalized linear mixed 
models using adaptive quadrature. Stata Journal 2002; 2(1):1- [ADDRESS_626960] CL (1993): Prev alence of civilian 
trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder in a representative national sample of women. J Consult Clin Psychol 61:984 -91. 
Ribeiro SC, Tandon R, Grunhaus L, Greden JF (1993): The DST as a predictor of outcome in 
depression: a meta- analysis . Am J Psychiatry 150(11):1618 -29. 
Rothbaum B, Cahill S, Foa E, Davidson J, Compton J, Connor K, Astin M, Hahn C (2006): 
Augmentation of Sertraline with Prolonged Exposure in the Treatment of PTSD. Journal of Traumatic Stress 19:625- 638. 
28 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 Rush A, Fava M, Wisniewski SR, Lavori PW, Trivedi MH, Sackheim HA, Thase ME, Nierenberg 
AA, Quitkin FM, Kashner M, Kupfer DJ, Rosenbaum JF, Alpert J, Stewart JW, McGrath 
PJ, Biggs MM, Shores -Wilson K, Lebowitz BD, Ritz L, Niederehe G. (2004) Sequenced 
treatment alternatives  to relieve depression (STAR*D): rationale and design. Control Clin 
Trials  25:119 -142. 
Rush A, Trivedi M, Ibrahim H, Carmody T, Arnow B, Klein D, Markowitz J, Ninan P, Kornstein S, 
Manber R, Thase M, Kocsis J, Keller M (2003b): The 16- item Quick Inventory of 
Depressive Symptomatology (QIDS), Clinician- Rating (QIDS -C), and Self -Report (QIDS -
SR): A Psychometric Evaluation in Patients with  Major Depression. Biol Psychiatry 
54:573- 583. 
Sarason I, Johnson J, Siegel J. (1978): Assessing the impact of life changes: development of 
the Life Experiences Survey . J Consult Clin Psychol 45(5): 932- 946. 
Sautter F, Bissette G, Wiley J, Manguno- Mire G, Schoenbachler B, Myers L, Johnson J, 
Cerbone A, Malaspi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] D (2003): Corticotropin- releasing factor in posttraumatic stres s 
disorder (PTSD) with secondary psychotic symptoms, nonpsychotic PTSD, and healthy 
control subjects. Biol Psychiatry 54(12):1382 -8. 
Solomon SD & Davidson JR (1997): Trauma: prevalence, impairment, service use, and cost. J 
Clin Psychiatry  [ADDRESS_626961] 9:5- 11.Stein DJ, Ipser JC, Seedat S. Pharmacotherapy for post 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, 
Issue 1. Art. No.: CD002795 
Steckler T, Holsboer F (1999): Corticotropin- releasing hormone receptor subtypes and emotion. 
Biol Psychiatry 46:1480- 508. 
Stein D, Ipser J, Seedat S (2006): Pharmacotherapy for post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1): CD002795.   
VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline Working Group (2003). Management of Posttraumatic stres s 
(10QCPG/PTSD -04). Washington DC: Departments of Veterans Affairs and Defense; 
Office of Quality and Performance publication.  
Valdez GR (2006): Development of CRF1 Receptor Antagonists as Antidepressants and 
Anxiolytics: Progress to Date. CNS Drugs 20(11) :887-896.  
Van Pett K, Viau V, Bittencourt J, Chan R, Li H, Arias C, Prins G, Perrin M, Vale W, Sawchenko 
P (2000): Distribution of mRNAs encoding CRF receptors in brain and pi[INVESTIGATOR_487905]. J Comp Neurol 428:191- 212.  
Wisniewski SR, Rush AJ, Ba lasubramani GK, Trivedi MH, Nierenberg AA (2006): Self -rated 
global measure of the frequency, intensity and burden of side effects. J  Psychiatr Pract  
12: 71- 79. 
Yehuda R (2006): Advances in understanding neuroendocrine alterations in PTSD and their 
therap eutic implications. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1071:137 -166. 
Yehuda R, Keefe R, Harvey P, Levengood R, Gerber D, Geni J, Siever L (1995): Learning and 
memory in combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 152(1):137- 9.  
Zobel A, Nickel T, Kün zel H, Ackl N, Sonntag A, Ising M, Holsboer F (2000): Effects of the high-
affinity corticotropin- releasing hormone receptor [ADDRESS_626962] R121919 in major 
depression: the first 20 patients treated. J Psychiatr Res 34:171- 181. 
Zoellner LA, Foa EB, Brigidi BD  (1999): Interpersonal friction and PTSD in female victims of 
sexual and nonsexual assault. J Trauma Stress  12:[ADDRESS_626963] subtypes of PTSD: evidence from endocrine and gene 
expression studies. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2011 Sep;68(9):901- 10.  
Ressler KJ, Mercer KB, Bradley B, Jovanovic T, Mahan A, Kerley K, Norrh olm SD, Kilaru V, 
Smith AK, Myers AJ, Ramirez M, Engel A, Hammack SE, Toufexis D, Braas KM, Binder 
29 
 
Updated January 22, 2019  
 EB, May V. PTSD is associated with PACAP and the PAC1 receptor. Nature. 2011 Feb 
24;470(7335):492- 7.  
Mehta D, Klengel T, Conneely KN, Smith AK, Altmann A, Pace TW, Rex -Haffner M, Loeschner 
A, Gonik M, Mercer KB, Bradley B, Müller -Myhsok B, Ressler KJ, Binder EB. Childhood 
maltreatment is associated with distinct genomic and epi[INVESTIGATOR_487906]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 14;110(20):8302- 7.  
Klengel T, Mehta D, Anacker C, Rex -Haffner M, Pruessner JC, Pariante CM, Pace TW, Mercer 
KB, Mayberg HS, Bradley B, Nemeroff CB, Holsboer F, Heim CM, Ressler KJ, Rein T, Binder EB. Allele -specific FKBP5 DNA demethylation mediates gene- childhood trauma 
interactions. Nature Neuroscience. 2013 Jan;16(1):33- 41.  
Fani N, Gutman D, Tone EB, Almli L, Mercer KB, Davis J, Glover E, Jovanovic T, Bradley B, 
Dinov ID, Zamanyan A, Toga AW, Binder EB, Ressler KJ. FKBP5 and attention bias for 
threat: associations with hippocampal function and shape. JAMA Psychiatry. 2013 Apr;70(4):392- 400.  
Norrholm SD, Jovanovic T, Olin IW, Sands LA, Karapanou I, Bradley B, Ressler KJ.(2011) Fear 
extinction in traumatized civilians with PTSD: relation to symptom severity. Biological Psych. 15;69(6):556- 63.  
Jovanovic T, Ressler KJ. How the neurocircuitry and genetics of fear inhibition may inform our 
understanding of PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;167(6):648- 62. 
PMCID: PMC3603297.  
Jovanovic T, Norrholm SD, Blanding NQ, Phifer  JE, Weiss T, Davis M, Duncan E, Bradley B, 
Ressler K. Fear potentiation is associated with hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis 
function in PTSD. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2010 Jul;35(6):846- 57.  
Rothbaum BO, Kearns MC, Price M, Malcoun E, Davis M, Ressler  KJ, Lang D, Houry D. Early 
intervention may prevent the development of PTSD: a randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_487907]. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Dec 1;72(11):957- 63.  
Davidson J, Baldwin DS, Stein DJ, Pedersen R, Ahmed S, Musgnung J,  Benattia I, Rothbaum 
BO. Effects of venlafaxine extended release on resilience in PTSD: an item analysis of the CDRISC. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008 Sep;23(5):299- 303. 
Rothbaum BO, Killeen TK, Davidson JR, Brady KT, Connor KM, Heekin MH. Placebo- control led 
trial of risperidone augmentation for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor -resistant 
civilian PTSD. J Clin Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;69(4):520- 5.  
Rothbaum BO, Cahill SP, Foa EB, Davidson JR, Compton J, Connor KM, Astin MC, Hahn CG. 
Augmentation of sertraline with prolonged exposure in the treatment of PTSD. J Trauma 
Stress. [ADDRESS_626964];19(5):625- 38.  
Davidson J, Rothbaum BO, Tucker P, Asnis G, Benattia I, Musgnung JJ. Venlafaxine extended 
release in posttraumatic stress disorder: a sertraline- and  placebo-controlled study. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006 Jun;26(3):259- 67.  
Schwartz AC, Rothbaum BO. Review of sertraline in PTSD. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2002; 
3(10):1489- 99.  
  
 