 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 1  4/15/2016  
 UCCI -GI-002- PHASE I STUDY TO EVALUATE THE FEASIBILITY OF 
NEOADJUVANT STEREOTACTIC BODY RADIATION THERAPY FOR 
RESECTABLE AND/OR BORDERLINE RESECTABLE  ADENOCARCINOMA 
OF THE PANCREATIC HEAD AND/OR BODY  
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_389804], MD  
    Assistant [CONTACT_75133] of Radiation Oncology  
    University of Cincinnati  
 
Co-Investigators:   
    Syed Ahmad, MD  
    Kyuran Choe, MD  
    Tahir Latif, MD  
    Olugbenga Olowokure, MD  
    Nathan Schmulewitz, MD  
    Milton Smith , MD  
    Jeffrey Sussman, MD  
     
 
 
Statistician:   Changchun Xie, PhD  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 2  4/15/[ADDRESS_488538]  3 
Protocol Synopsis  4-6 
Schema  7 
I.     Objectives  9 
II.    Background  9-11 
III.   Rationale  11-14 
IV.  Methods  14-17 
V.   Study Population  17-18 
VI.  Risk/Benefit  18-19 
VII. Compensation  19 
VIII.Adverse  Events: List and Requirements  20 
IX.  Statistical Consideration  20-23 
X.   Data Reporting and Regulatory Considerations  23-24 
XI.  Correlative Studies  24-25 
XII. Measurement of Effects  25 
XIII.Response Criteria  26 
References  27-32 
Appendix I: Study Calendar  33 
Appendix II: EORTC QLQ 30  34-35 
Appendix III: EORTC QLQ PAN26  36-37 
Appendix IV: Karnofsky Performance Status Scale  38 
Appendix V: Definition of Menopausal Status  39 
Appendix VI: Postop  Course/Complication Datasheet  40 
 
      
 
            
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 3  4/15/[ADDRESS_488539] 
EUS  Endoscopic Ultrasound 
BED  Biologic Equivalent Dose  
GTV  Gross tumor volume 
ITV  Gross Tumor Volume  
PTV  Internal Target Volume 
QA  Planning Target Volume 
PPI  [INVESTIGATOR_389805]  
D1R  Dopamine Receptor  1
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 4  4/15/2016  
 PROTOCOL SYNO PSIS 
 
TITLE  PHASE I STUDY TO EVALUATE THE 
FEASIBILITY OF NEOADJUVANT 
STEREOTACTIC  BODY RADIATION THERAPY 
FOR RESECTABLE AND/OR BORDERLINE 
RESECTABLE  PANCREATIC 
ADENOCARCINOMA  
STUDY PHASE /DESIGN  Prospective, non -randomized phase I study  of 20 
patients  
INDICATION  Resectable and/or borderline resectable  
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas  
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE  To evaluate rates of acute (within 3 months of 
treatment) gastrointestinal toxicity following 
fractionated Linac based SBRT for pancreatic  
tumors. Toxicities of note include any grade 3 or 
greater gastrointestinal toxicity.  
 SECONDARY OBJECTIVES  To evaluate rates of late (> 3 months after 
treatment) gastrointestinal toxicity following 
fractionated Linac based SBRT for pancreatic   
tumors. Toxicities of note include grade 2 or 
greater gastritis, enteritis, fistula, or ulcer and any 
other grade 3 or greater gastrointestinal toxicity.  
 
To evaluate local progression f ree survival, overall 
survival and metastasis -free survival  rates after 
Linac based SBRT and subsequent resection in 
patients with resectable and/or borderline 
resectable  pancreatic adenocarcinoma  of the 
head and/or body . 
 
To develop and standardize Linac based SBRT 
delivery and dosimetric parameters.  
 
To estimate resection margin positivity (R0/R1) 
and pathologic complete response rate after 
neoadjuvant SBRT  
 
To evaluate pre - and post- SBRT patient reported 
quality of life (QOL)  
 
 TREATMENT  After 3 - 4 months of chemotherapy, patients will be 
enrolled to a single arm trial of stereotactic body 
radiotherapy (SBRT) in 5 fractions given over 15 
days.  They will then proceed to surgery after a 
break of 4 -6 weeks.   
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 5  4/15/2016  
  
INCLUSION CRITERIA  • Age >18 years.  
• Karnofsky Performance Status >70% (see 
Appen dix IV ). 
• Histologically confirmed pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma of the head and/or body; 
at least the majority of the histopathologic specimen must be identified as 
adenocarcinoma.  
• Pancreatic tumors must be considered at 
least borderline resectable and/or 
borderline resectable at time of treatment 
planning. Definition of resectable and/or 
borderline resectable: no metastases, less than 180 degree involvement of hepatic 
artery, superior mesenteric artery or celiac 
artery  
• No active infection requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
• If bilirubin > 2, patients must have a biliary 
stent placed prior to SBRT.  
• Patients must have acceptable organ and 
marrow function (see section “Inclusion 
Criteria, page 17-18).  
• Women who are not post -menopausal  (as 
defined in Appendix V ) should have a 
negative urine or serum pregnancy test. Women of childbearing potential must 
agree to use adequate contraception for 
the duration of study participation.  
• Ability to understand and the willingness to 
sign a written informed consent document. 
• Life expectancy > 3 months.  
• Patients  are to have received neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy prior to enrollment.  Approved regimens may  consist of [ADDRESS_488540] 
chemotherapy administration and start of 
SBRT   
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 6  4/15/2016  
  
EXCLUSION CRITERIA  • Presence of metastatic disease.  
• Infections requiring systemic  antibiotic 
treatment. 
• Unable to understand or unwilling to sign a 
written informed consent document. 
•  
PROCEDURES  Endoscopi[INVESTIGATOR_389806].  
STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  See statistics section.  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 7  4/15/2016  
  
 
SCHEMA  
 
Eligibility:  resectable or borderline resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas .  Definition of resectable: 
no metastases, less than 180 degree involvement of hepatic artery, superior mesenteric artery or celiac 
artery  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chemotherapy for  
3-4 months  
 
 
SBRT 6.6 Gy  
X 5 fractions  
 
 
Surgery  2-4 week break  
4-6 week break  Study Entry  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 8  4/15/2016  
 I.  OBJECTIVES 
 
Primary Objective 
• To evaluate rates of acute (withi n 3 months of treatment) grade 3  or  greater 
gastrointestinal toxicity.  
 
Secondary Objectives 
• To evaluate rates of late (> 3 months after treatment) grade 2 gastritis, enteritis, fistula, 
and ulcer, or any other grade 3 or greater gastrointestinal toxicity  
• To determine rates of local progression free survival, overall survival, and metastasis - free 
survival  in patients with resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma of the head and/or body undergoing neoadjuvant SBRT 
• To evaluate patient quality of life before and after Linac based SBRT.  
• To evaluate the margin positivity rate and pathologic complete response rate after Linac 
based SBRT.  
• To further develop standardization of Linac based SBRT delivery and dosimetric parameters . 
   
II.  BACKGROUND  
 
Natural History and Management of Pancreatic Cancer  
More than 40,000 individuals are diagnosed with pancreatic cancer ann ually in the [LOCATION_002]. 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_389807], five-year survival of patients with 
pancreatic cancer is still less than 5% (1). Clearly, more innovative treatments  are needed to 
improve survival in this group of pati ents.  
 
Surgical resection is considered to be the only potentially curative treatment option (2). However, 
the majority of pancreatic cancer patients do not have resectable and/or borderline resectable 
disease at presentation. More than 85% of patients hav e locally advanced or metastatic disease 
when initially diagnosed. 
 
Current Adjuvant Management of Resectable and/or borderline resectable Pancreatic 
Adenocarcinoma Among the minority of patients who are able to undergo surgical resection, low median survival 
rates and cure rates imply the presence of residual local and/or systemic microscopic disease 
that may be amenable to adjuvant therapy. The standard of care for adjuvant therapy is 
controversial. Adjuvant chemoradiation has been frequently studied due to high rates of positive margins and locoregional recurrences seen in surgical series. 
 
The benefit of 5-fluorouracil -based chemoradiation was first seen in a small , randomized trial 
performed by [CONTACT_389833] (GITSG) (2).  This study, published in 
1985, randomized patients to observation versus postoperative therapy with concurrent 5-FU and split-course radiation (40Gy), followed by [CONTACT_389834] s of adjuvant 5- FU. It showed a striking benefit 
in median survival and 5-year overall survival among patients undergoing chemoradiation despi[INVESTIGATOR_389808]-regional control among the two arms. The EORT C 
performed a simil ar study that enrolled  patients with either pancreatic or periampullary cancers, 
who were randomized postoperatively to observation or chemoradiation (split-course radiotherapy with concurrent 5-FU). This protocol also demonstrated a trend towards improved survival among 
patients with pancreatic cancer who received adjuvant chemoradiation (3, 4). Additionally, two 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 9  4/15/2016  
 large retrospective series, one from Johns Hopkins University (n=616) and one from the Mayo 
Clinic (n=472), have demonstrated median survival benefits consistent with the GITSG and 
EORTC studies (5, 6).  
 
The comparative benefit of chemotherapy and chemoradiation was challenged by [CONTACT_389835] (ESPAC) study, which randomized 541 patients with 
pancreatic adenocarcino ma who had undergone surgical resection to the following four treatment 
arms using a two-by -two factorial design: a) observation; b) concomitant chemoradiotherapy (20 
Gy in 10 fractions over 2 weeks) with 500 mg/m2 5- FU IV bolus during the first three day s of 
radiation therapy, repeated after a planned 2- week break without additional chemotherapy; c) 
chemotherapy alone (leucovorin 20 mg/m2 bolus followed by 5-FU 425 mg/m2 administered for 5 consecutive days repeated every 28 days for 6 cycles); and 4) chemoradiotherapy (as in arm 2) 
followed by [CONTACT_11553]. For the same subset randomized through the original two by [CONTACT_389836], chemotherapy alone demonstrated a trend towards improved survival alone (median 
survival 17.4 months) versus observation alone (15.9 months), but the difference was not 
statistically significant (p=0.19). The study authors concluded that there was no survival benefit for adjuvant chemoradiotherapy but that a potential benefit existed for adjuvant chemotherapy 
alone. Unfortunately, this trial had many flaws, including a questionable study design and lack of 
surgical/pathological/radiation quality control measures, rendering its results difficult to interpret. 
However, ESPAC does highlight the importance of adjuvant chemotherapy. 
 
While the above-mentioned adjuvant studies were being conducted, gemcitabine emerged as a 
more effective chemotherapy than 5 -FU in the setting of advanced disease  (8). Because of this, 
gemcitabine was evaluated in the post-operative setting. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 
(RTOG) reported on a phase III study of 518 resected pancreatic cancer patients randomized to 
either 5-FU or gemcitabine. Dosing for the 5-FU group consisted of continuous infusion (250 
mg/m2/d for 3 weeks), followed by 5 -FU continuous infusion (250 mg/m2/d) during radiation 
therapy (50.4 Gy in 1.8 Gy/fractions), followed by 2 cycles of 5-FU continuous infusion. Patients assigned to the gemcitabine arm received gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 weekly X 3, followed by 5-FU 
continuous infusion during radiation therapy, followed by 3 cycles of gemcitabine alone (9). 
Although there was a higher incidence of grade 3-4 neutropenia among patients in the 
gemcitabine arm, the median survival was 20.3 months for the gemcitabine-treated patients 
versus 16.3 months for 5-FU treated patients (p=.03). In the final manuscript, RTOG reported a 
survival benefit on multivariable analysis of 20.6 versus 16.9 months (p=.03) in favor of the gemcitabine chemotherapy arm, restricted to patients with cancer of the panc reatic head. The 
European CONKO -1 study recently published a phase III study of 354 resected patients 
randomized to observation or 6 months of gemcitabine chemotherapy (10). The primary endpoint 
of this study was DFS; patients in the treatment arm had a si gnificant improvement in DFS (13.4 
months v. 6.9 months, p<0.001). Further follow -up has shown a survival benefit to chemotherapy. 
 
From these studies, it is evident that a single standard adjuvant treatment approach for patients 
with resected disease has not yet been determined. However, given the above data, gemcitabine- or 5-FU based CRT (RTOG 9704) or gemcitabine/bolus 5-FU (CONKO - 1/ESPAC -3) can both be 
viewed as a reasonable standard of care in the adjuvant setting.  
Current Neoadjuvant Management of Resectable and/or borderline resectable Pancreatic 
Adenocarcinoma Among patients who have undergone surgery, pancreatic cancer exhibits a strong tendency to 
recur locally and to metastasize after a brief median time interval of approximately 13 months 
from surgical resection (11). Early relapse after curative surgery is likely explained by [CONTACT_389837] -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 10  4/15/2016  
 surgery, or by [CONTACT_389838], lymphatic  vessels, and peritoneal 
cavity due to surgical manipulation. Therefore, preoperative treatment of resectable and/or 
borderline resectable or borderline resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer has 
several potential benefits. 
 
First, patients who undergo surgery up front must wait at least 6-8 weeks after surgery for healing 
to occur before starting adjuvant CRT. Furthermore, 20-30% of patients are unable to receive 
planned adjuvant therapy due to surgical complications or inability to tole rate adjuvant therapy 
after surgery (12, 13). Thus, there is a potentially harmful delay in treatment of micrometastatic 
disease, which is thought to exist in a majority of resectable and/or borderline resectable patients. 
Neoadjuvant therapy avoids this delay, allowing for immediate treatment of micrometastatic disease. Second, approximately 30% of patients who undergo surgery have positive resection 
margins (11,14); if radial margins are examined, it appears that as many as 75% of resections are 
margin-positive (15). Any partial response to treatment reduces the tumor volume, potentially 
increasing the likelihood of an R0 resection while decreasing both the burden of microscopic 
residual disease and intraoperative tumor spi[INVESTIGATOR_4598]. Third, the resected tumor can serve as its own biological marker of treatment response; that is, an in vivo assessment of tumor chemo/radio-
sensitivity can be performed. Fourth, the undisturbed tumor microenvironment may permit better 
delivery of chemotherapy to the tumor through the vasculature. An intact vascular supply will also 
allow for better oxygenation of tumor, which may enhance the effects of radiation by [CONTACT_389839]. Fifth, without the prior trauma of surgery, the 
normal tissu e surrounding the tumor may better tolerate CRT, decreasing rates of treatment- 
postponing toxicities and allowing for higher -dose radiotherapy. Sixth, patients who experience 
disease progression prior to surgical resection despi[INVESTIGATOR_389809]. Finally, neoadjuvant CRT 
raises the possibility of downstaging unresectable and/or borderline resectable and borderline 
resectable and/or borderline resectable/unresectable and/or borderline resectable disease so that 
more patients ultimately are able to undergo potentially curative surgical resection.  
 
The main drawbacks of neoadjuvant treatment include: (a) possible delay of surgery due to 
complications of therapy, (b) the generally low response rate of advanced pancreatic cancer to 
multimodality treatments, and (c) the potentially higher surgical complication rate due to prior 
irradiation of tissue at the resection site. Encouragingly, no increase in surgical complications after neoadjuvant therapy has been reported to date (16-18). 
 
To date, no large randomized controlled trials  have studied neoadjuvant  therapy for resectable 
and/or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer, and the sample size of existing prospective series 
has been small (see table II). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_389810], results 
obtained to date have shown only modest improvements compared to surgery alone. Median 
survival and 2-year OS for patients receiving neoadjuvant therapy range from 8-23 months and 
from 27-40%, respectively (19-23), compared to 11-17 months and 15-31% for surgery alone (24,25). Meanwhile, adjuvant chemoradiation (CRT)  has produced a median survival of 27-44 
months and 2-year OS of 53-58% (26-28). Thus, while neither neoadjuvant nor adjuvant CRT have achieved major degrees of improvement in OS, both have been demonstrated to be slightly 
more  effective than surgery alone for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The current prevailing 
management strategy, therefore, is to combine neoadjuvant chemotherapy and/or radiation, surgical resection, and adjuvant chemotherapy and/or radiation to  achieve  the  highest possible 
rate of long- term survival, though no RCTs have yet been done to conclusively prove the efficacy 
of this regimen. 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 11  4/15/2016  
 III.  RATIONALE 
 
Rationale for Radiotherapy in Treatment of Pancreatic and Periampullary 
Adenocarcinomas 
Radiation therapy is a widely accepted treatment for pancreatic cancer. The Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG) carried out a series of landmark studies demonstrating the 
effectiveness of radiation therapy as both adjuvant and definitive treatment in pancreatic cancer 
(6,7). Modern radiation treatments have increasingly used conformal fields and dose escalation to 
enhance tumor control (8, 9). Efforts to increase radiation dose to the pancreatic tumor without 
risking normal tissue injury have generally required relatively  invasive techniques such as 
interstitial implantation of radioactive metals or intraoperative radiotherapy (IORT) (10, 29). 
Historically, the local control rates  for conventionally fractionated radiotherapy have  ranged from 
25-50%. Local progression of pancreatic cancers can result in considerable morbidity, including gastric outlet obstruction, biliary obstruction, and pain (30) .  
 Rationale for Fractionated Stereotactic Radiotherapy The mortality rate for pancreatic cancer approaches 100%. Current therapi[INVESTIGATOR_389811]. More effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_389812]. Several clinical trials have shown that Linac based SBRT has the potential to 
significantly improve progression-free survival  of patients with pancreatic tumors, which could 
translate into both more effective palliation and longer patient survival.  
 
Linac  based SBRT is delivered using linear accelerators and image-guided radiation therapy 
(IGRT). These machines combine a conventional high-energy linear accelerator with a kV imager 
capable of volumetric, cone beam CT (CBCT). Because of these innovations, it is possible to 
deliver highly accurate, stereotactic radiation treatments . 
 Koong et al. previously used the CyberknifeTM stereotactic radiosurgery system to demonstrate 
that a single dose of 25 Gy Linac based stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) was feasible for 
patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer (36). Furthermore, this dose of radiation resulted 
in near 100% progression free survival and effectively palliated symptoms related to the local 
growth of pancreatic tumors. Based on this study, the same group also completed a phase II 
study assessing the efficacy of combining a standard five- week course of chemoradiotherapy 
followed by a stereotactic radiosurgery boost to the primary tumor in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. In this cohort of 19 patients, 100% of tumors were without local 
progression at 1 year median follow -up. However, all patients eventually developed metastases .. 
 More recently, another phase II study treated locally advanced pancreatic cancer patients with 
gemcitabine followed by 25 Gy of Linac based SBRT delivered with Cyberknife and maintenance 
gemcitabine chemotherapy. In this study, the excellent progression free survival was confirmed from previous studies (81%).  The median overall survival was 11.4 months, median time to 
progression was 9.7 months and the 1 year survival was 50% (37). There were no significant 
acute GI toxicities however, of the 15 patients alive >6 months after Linac based SBRT, 7 (47%) 
experienced Grade 2 or greater GI toxicity, with 2 (13%) of the 15 experiencing Grade 3 or greater GI toxicity.  
 
A multi -institutional study (Johns Hopkins, Stanford, Memorial Sloan Kettering) of fractionated 
SBRT (6.6Gy x 5) in 70 patients with locally advanced or borderline resectable and/or borderline 
resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma has thus far shown very promising results.  Median overall 
survival of the locally advanced patients was 13.9 mo ( comparable to national standard) with 83% 
local control at 1 year.  Furthermore, patients reported improved global and pancreas specific 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 12  4/15/[ADDRESS_488541]-SBRT (Herman, ASTRO oral presentation, Sept 2013).  Rates of acute and late 
GI toxicity have been < 15% , Grade [ADDRESS_488542] gone to resection thus far, with no complications,  and 50% pathologic 
complete response rate, 90% negative margin resection rate,  and 80% node negative rates  
(Herman, personal communication).  Given these very encouraging pathologic results , while 
SBRT can be delivered faster and with fewer side effects than traditional fractionated 
radiotherapy, we are interested in fractionated SBRT for resectable and/or borderline resectable  
patients.   
 To date, Stanford has treated more than 150 patients with Linac based SBRT for locally 
advanced or borderline resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer , and this 
treatment has resulted in local control rates of >90% with acceptable acute GI toxicity. We predict 
that this treatment will not adversely impact patients’ quality of life. Although QOL measures have 
not been thoroughly studied among pancreatic cancer patients treated with Linac based SBRT, 
the majority of patients treated with Linac based SBRT appear to derive a clinical benefit as 
assessed by [CONTACT_389840], decreased fatigue, and increased weight. A single fraction of Linac based SBRT (25 Gy x 1) has resulted in excellent tumor control. However, close to 50% of these 
patients developed late duodenal toxicity within one year, primarily because of the proximity of 
the duodenum to the pancreas.  
 
Although we believe this schedule (5 Gy x 5 or 6.6 Gy x 5) will result in good tumor control and 
acceptable toxicity, the potential clinical efficacy of this short- course, hypofractionated regimen is 
unknown in resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreas cancer . The choice of this regimen 
as a potentially effective approach for resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreatic cancer 
treatment is based on the following observations : First, a similar schedule (5 Gy x 5) has been 
widely and efficaciously used in the neoadjuvant setting for rectal cancer, although a much larger 
field is used. Additionally, a series of patients with resectable and/or borderline resectable 
pancreatic lesions treated at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center strongly suggest that a 5-FU based chemoradiation regimen consisting of [ADDRESS_488543] reported on a neoadjuvant regimen delivering 5 Gy x 5 to the pancreatic 
tumor plus adjac ent lymph nodes using proton beam radiation (41). They  show this regimen to be 
safe, with no instances of dose limiting toxicity observed and only 4 of 15 patients developi[INVESTIGATOR_389813] 3 toxicity (no patients experienced grade 4 toxicity). Finally, in the multi -institutional study 
of patients with locally advanced or borderline tumors treated with 6.6Gy x [ADDRESS_488544] been no significant peri -operative complications 
seen with very encouraging pathologic res ults previously mentioned above  (Herman, personal 
communication).   
 
The phase I feasibility study outlined in this protocol proposes a 6.6 Gy x 5 fractionation schedule 
treating the region of tumor plus a 3 mm margin. These volumes will be substantially smaller than the regimens outlined above for rectal and pancreatic cancer, likely leading to a lesser degree of 
toxicity. Using the linear -quadratic formulation, the biologically equivalent dose (BED) of the two 
proposed fractionation schedules are given i n comparison to other commonly used schemes 
(table 1). The BED of the proposed 6.6 Gy x 5 schedule (BED early/late 54.8/105.6) closely 
approximates that of standard chemoradiation (BED early/late 60/83.3), but without concurrent chemotherapy and treating ( 0.3  cm vs.  ~2  cm).  Furthermor e,  the  proposed  6.6  Gy  x  5 
fractionation schedule has a much lower late BED (105.6 vs. 233.3) with a similar early BED (54.8 vs. 87.5) as the previous 25 Gy x 1 regimen that has resulted in higher toxicity . 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 13  4/15/2016  
 Table 1:  
 Nodes  Tx Concurrent 
Chemo  BED early  BED late  
   a/b=10  a/b=-3 
50.4 Yes 5-FU 60 83.3 
30 Gy/10  Yes Gemcitabine  39 60 
25 Gy/5  No No 37.5 66.7 
33 Gy/5  No No 54.8 105.6  
25 Gy/1  No No 87.5 233.3  
 
In this study, we will refine our current understanding of radiation tolerance of the pancreas and 
adjacent organs, thereby [CONTACT_321233]. 
 
The major benefit of Linac based SBRT/chemotherapy for  resec table and/or borderline resectable 
pancreatic tumors is improved local control  from improved sterilization of primary tumor and 
lymph nodes, and well as faster delivery with lower side effects . In addition, radiosurgical ablation 
of the tumor at the primar y site early after diagnosis can theoretically prevent distant seeding from 
the pancreatic tumor itself. Ultimately, these improvements in the treatment of pancreatic cancer 
may translate into an improved quality of life and overall survival.  
 Quality of l ife will be assessed using the European Organization for Research and Treatment in 
Cancer quality of life core cancer questionnaire with the pancreatic cancer module (EORTC QLQ -
C30/PAN26). The EORTC QLQ -C30 is a multidimensional, 30- item questionnaire, which 
assesses five functional scales (physical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social), three symptom 
scales (fatigue, pain, and nausea/vomiting), a global health/QOL scale, as well as 6 single items 
(42). The EORTC QLQ -PAN26 supplements the core questionnaire with 26 items specific for 
patients with pancreatic cancer (43,44). These instruments have been validated in patients receiving treatment for metastatic and resected pancreatic cancer and are sensitive to identify 
treatment related changes in quality of life. The quality of life of patients in this study will be 
compared to historical cohorts of patients treated with conventional chemoradiation at University 
of Cincinnati and other institution s. 
 
IV.  METHODS 
 
REGISTRATION PROCEDURES  
 
General Guidelines 
Subjects will be identi fied per the recommendation of S urgeons , Medical Oncologists, Radiation 
Oncologists  or GI Combined Modality Tumor Board or equivalent combined modality assessment.   
Subjects will be recruited  through self -referral and the advice of their attending physician. Patients 
will be enrolled prior to start of SBRT.  Patients  will  have chemotherapy ( 3-4 months ) for 
pancreas cancer prior to study enrollment.  
 
Registration Process 
A member of the research team (most li kely the research coordinator ) will enroll the patient into 
the trial. Consent will be obtained after a clear and thorough discussion between the patient and 
the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_389814]-investigators in clinic.  Any  patients that are deemed by 
[CONTACT_389841]-investigators to be mentally or physically incapable of consent will 
not be included in the study. 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 14  4/15/2016  
  
SBRT ADMINISTRATION AND RADIATION TREATMENT PLANNING  
 
Pre-Linac  based SBRT Tests, Procedures, and Planning 
 The following will be completed prior to Linac based SBRT: 
• Signed informed consent document. 
• Medical history and clinical examination. 
• CBC with differential, Chemistry Panel, CA19-9. 
• Gold fiducial seed placement percutaneously, intraoperatively, or under endoscopic 
ultrasound guidance, technique will be determined clinically.  Fiducial placement may be 
performed prior to enrollment. 
• Pathologic confir mation of malignancy.  (Core biopsies during gold fiducial placement as 
needed or optional) .  Patients are encouraged but not required to have tissue banked in 
UCCI Tumor Bank per Tumor Bank protocol . 
• Pancreas  protocol CT required; if patient allergic to contrast and allergy can not be 
premedicated with steroids prior to IV contrast, pancreas protocol MRI will be obtained 
• Baseline collection of EORTC QLQ C -30/ PAN26 QOL.  
 Fiducials 
Treatment on this protocol requires placement of 1-5 gold (99.9% pure, 1-5 mm length, or 
visicoils) fiducials for targeting purposes. The fi ducials will be used as surrogates for targeting the 
daily tumor position during treatment. The fiducials will be placed directly into the tumor and/or 
periphery under endoscopic ultrasound or CT guidance. When possible, clips or fiducials will also 
be placed in the proximal duodenum directly adjacent to the pancreatic tumor. Fiducials may be implanted prior to enrollment as this is an acceptable standard of care procedure for any patient 
receiving radiotherapy for pancreatic c ancer.  
 
If fiducials are not placed intraoperatively and/or prior to enrollment, placement will be done and 
is expected to be done on an outpatient basis. In rare occurrences when fiducials/clips cannot be 
placed, patients may be treated at the discretion of the P I. 
 
 Simulation Simulation should be done following placement of fiducials; however, this may vary and is at the 
discretion of the principal investigator.  Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], patients will be positioned supi[INVESTIGATOR_389815] -made for each patient.  Standard 
free-breathing CT and respi[INVESTIGATOR_696] -correlated 4- D pancreatic protocol CT will be obtained on each 
patient. The 4D -CT scan will be used for characterizing target motion during quiet respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. For 
more accurate tumor d elineation, an arterial phase pancreatic protocol CT may be obtained 
(typi[INVESTIGATOR_389816], 1.25 mm slices). Fiducial to fiducial  fusions between  
these  scans  should  be  utilized  whenever  possible.  The simulation sc an should include T4/T5 
to L5/S1 (upper abdomen).  IV and oral contrast must be used for simulation, unless the patient 
has an allergy that cannot be adequately premedicated. In these situations, the plan should be 
fused with an IV contrast CT scan or MRI (ideally in a similar treatment position).  Motion management can be addressed using respi[INVESTIGATOR_125344], breath-hold, respi[INVESTIGATOR_389817], or 
abdominal compression. Specialized compression belts may be utilized for som e patients. Each 
belt has an adjustable pressure cuff which can be used to reduce breathing motion.  Fluoroscopy 
is used to assess motion of implanted gold markers before and after compression.  The goal is to 
reduce motion from typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] 11-22 mm peak to less than 5 mm. If the fiducial  motio n cannot be 
decreased to 5 mm or less, then respi[INVESTIGATOR_389818]. Prior to 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 15  4/15/[ADDRESS_488545] start Linac based SBRT within 4 weeks of the simulation scan.  
 
Treatment Planning 
An SBRT treatment plan will be developed based on tumor geometry and location. Institutional 
standards for radiation quality assurance and radiation delivery will be utilized.  The tumor volume (GTV), as identified on the treatment planning CT, will be contoured by [CONTACT_389842] . The final GTV will be defined by [CONTACT_389843], respi[INVESTIGATOR_696] -correlated 4D -CT scan, pancreas protocol CT scan. 
These scans will be used to define the ITV (internal target volume). The final PTV(planning 
treatment volume) expansion will consist of an additional 2-3mm of margin expansion  of the 
primary tumor to generate the PTV primary , except if the margin results in expansion into the 
duodenum or stomach. In these cases, margin expansion is allowed to be non-uniform. The dose 
will be prescribed to the isodose line that completely surrounds the PTV  primary . It is 
recommended that 6-12 co -planar fields be used in the radiation treatment plan. A low dose 
clinical target volume will also be incorporated in the treatment volume called CTV vasculature. This customiz ed CTV volume covers the immediately abutting vasculature (SMA, celiac, SMV), 
the pathway of perineural spread to the root of the mesentery , and extrapancreatic tissue 
immediately adjacent to the primary tumor at the discretion of the radiation oncologist . A [ADDRESS_488546] be met: V15<9cc, V20<3cc. 
The duodenum (duo@PTV) as defined for these dosing parameters includes the entire 
duodenum on the same axial plane as the PTV and duodenum 1 cm above and 1 cm below the 
PTV. V15 and V20 are defined as the percent volume receiving 15 Gy and 20 Gy, respectively. 
The remainder of the normal tissues will be limited as follows: 
 
• Liver (excluding tumor): 50% should be limited to <12 Gy  
• Kidney: Combined volume for both should have 75% <12 Gy  
• Stomach and duodenum: V15<9cc and V20<3cc .  50% should be limited to <12 Gy (no 
more than 1 cc of proximal stomach can receive >33 Gy )  
• Spi[INVESTIGATOR_35406]: no more than 1cc can receive >8 Gy  
 
No more than 1cc of the PTV primary can receive >130% of the prescription dose (4290cGy for 
6.6Gy x 5 ). 
Greater than 90% of the PTV primary should receive 100% of the prescription dose (3300cGy for 
6.6Gy x 5)  
Greater than 90% of the PTV Vasculature should receive 100% of the prescription dose ( 2500 for 
5 Gy x 5)  
 If above constraints cannot be achieved, then 100% of the GTV must receive at least 25 Gy (an allowed minor deviation, which will be documented).  If this constraint cannot be met, the patient 
should be removed from the protocol.  
 
Linac based SBRT Treatment Delivery Patients will receive 5 fractions of  6.6 Gy delivered twice weekly, with each fraction separated by 
 
[CONTACT_389844] -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 16  4/15/2016  
 > 48 hours.  Radiotherapy will be delivered Monday - Friday at Precision Radiotherapy or Barrett 
Cancer Center.  Initial patient positioning will be based on volumetric kV (cone-bea m CT) imaging 
with shifts to bony anatomy as appropriate.  Orthogonal kV/MV or kV/kV projection imaging will 
be used to verify the location of the fiducials  prior to delivery of first treatment beam.  A  secondary 
shift based on the location of fiducials may be utilized, as indicated by [CONTACT_389845]. For free-breathing treatments, kV fluoroscopic images should be obtained to confirm the 
anticipated position of these fiducials during the entire respi[INVESTIGATOR_50126].  Active monitoring of 
treatment delivery accuracy will be accomplished using kV and/or MV projection imaging, either 
immediately before or during all (or a subset of) treatment fields.  
Patient-specific dosimetric quality assurance (QA) will be performed as per standard practice in 
the Department of Radiation Oncology at Universi ty of Cincinnati . 
 Post -Linac based SBRT Follow -Up 
Following Linac based SBRT, all patients will be monitored clinically and with serial imaging (CT scans and/or PET/CT if possible and as deemed necessary by [CONTACT_1963]).  A detailed 
medical history with physical examination and quality of life assessment will be performed at 4-6 
weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 9 months and 1 year after radiation treatment.  In years 2-5, the 
follow up interval will be ever y 3-6 months, as determined by [CONTACT_458]. Follow up 
intervals may also be more frequent as indicated clinically. A complete blood count (CBC) with 
differential, comprehensive chemistry panel, tumor marker studies, and quality of life asses sment 
will be performed at each follow -up interval.  
 GENERAL  CONCOMITANT  MEDICATION AND  SUPPORTIVE  CARE  GUIDELINES  
 
Anti-diarrheals and Anti-emetics 
For symptoms of diarrhea and/or abdominal crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007], patients will be instructed to take anti -
diarrheals. Additional antidiarrheal measures may be used at the discretion of the treating physician. Patients should be instructed to increase fluid intake to help maintain fluid and 
electrolyte balance during epi[INVESTIGATOR_119999].  For symptoms of nausea and vomiting, anti -
emetics will be given one hour prior to Linac based SBRT and for up to 5 days following Linac 
based SBRT on an as - needed basis. Additionally, patients will be instructed to increase fluid 
intake.  All patients will be prescribed proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which should begin by [CONTACT_389846] a minimum of 6 months following Linac based SBRT. 
 Other Concomitant Medications 
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_171295]'s well being may be given at the discretion of the 
investigator. Other concomitant medications should be avoided except for analgesics, chronic 
treatments for concomitant medical conditions, or agents required for life-threatening medical 
problems. Specifically, if the patient is being treated with chemotherapy, it is recommended that chemotherapy be discontinued at least one week prior to initiation of Linac based SBRT and that 
resumption of chemotherapy be delayed for at least one week following the conclusion of Linac 
based SBRT. In general, prescription of these medications will be presided over by [CONTACT_102]’s attending medical oncologist.  
 Supportive Care Guidelines 
All commonly accepted supportive care guidelines will be used. 
 
Use of Radioisotopes/Rad Machines 
Stereotactic radiotherapy will be performed using Linac based radiation machines. The radiation 
treatment plan will be designed to use multiple beams of radiation to concentrate large doses of radiation within a tumor. The Linac machines are equipped with cone beam CT imaging that can 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 17  4/15/2016  
 be used to deliver image -guided radiation therapy (IGRT). IGRT allows delivery of highly 
accurate, stereotactic radiation treatment. The use of cone beam CT images dur ing IGRT is 
considered standard of care treatment.  Uncertainties in tumor location are minimized because 
these machines have on - board, volumetric imaging for accuracy in initial patient setup; kV and 
MV projection imaging during treatment is used to moni tor delivery accuracy and/or make 
corrections to the patients’ position.  
 
V.  STUDY POPULATION 
 
PATIENT SELECTION  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Age >18 years. 
• Karnofsky Performance Status >70% (see Appendix IV ). 
• Histologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head and/or body ; at least the 
majority   of   the   histopathologic   specimen   must   be   identified   as adenocarcinoma 
as opposed to another histologic subtype. 
 
o *If histological confirmation of adenocarcinoma cannot be obtained by [CONTACT_9256], the 
following procedures may be employed: 
 Attempt a repeat biopsy to obtain a diagnosis.  
 Present the case at UC tumor board and if the candidate has one of the 
following: a rising CA 19-[ADDRESS_488547], and/or PET s can then the patient can be considered for treatment 
on protocol.  
 However, if these objectives cannot be met, the patient will not be a 
candidate.  
 
 
• Pancreatic tumor must be considered at least borderline resectable by [CONTACT_389847] -
disciplinary tumor board at the time of treatment planning.  
• Patients who have not received RT to the abdomen.  
• Patients must have acceptable organ and marrow function as defined below (within 2 
weeks prior to radiotherapy): 
• Leukocytes >3,000/µ L 
• Absolute neutrophil count >1,500µL 
• Platelets >100,000/µL 
• Total Bilirubin ≤2X normal institutional limits  
• AST(SGOT)/ALT(SGPT) <2.5X institutional upper limit of normal  
• Pre-menopausal women must have a negative serum pregnancy test  
• If bilirubin > 2, all patients must have a biliary stent placed prior to radiotherapy.  After stent placement, bilirubin must be <1.5x normal prior to study entry.  
• Creatinine ≤ institutional upper limit of normal  
OR 
• Creatinine clearance >60 mL/min/1.73 m2  for patients with creatinine levels above 
institutional normal  
• Ability to understand and  the  willingness  to  sign  a  written  informed  consent 
document. 
• Patients  are to have received neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to enrollment (3-4 months ). 
Approved regimens may consist of [ADDRESS_488548] chemotherapy 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 18  4/15/2016  
 administration and start of SBRT.  
• Patient must be able to have fiducials placed. If not, the tumor m ust be posterior and 
adjacent to the aorta and treatment will only be permitted at the discretion of the Principal 
Investigator.  
  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Children (< 18 years) are excluded because pancreatic tumors rarely occur in this age 
group. Furthermore, treatment requires a great deal of patient cooperation including the ability to lie still for several hours in an isolated room.  
• Uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to, ongoing or active infection (or 
infections requiring systemic antibiotic treatment), symptomatic congestive heart failure, 
unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that 
would limit c ompliance with study requirements. 
• Pregnant and breastfeeding women are excluded as are women of child -bearing potential 
who are unwilling or unable to use an acceptable method of birth control (hormonal or 
barrier method of birth control; abstinence) to avoid pregnancy for the duration of the 
study treatment. Should a woman become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while undergoing radiotherapy in this study, she should inform her treating physician 
immediately. 
• Women who are not post -menopausal (as defined in Appendix V ) and have a positive 
urine or serum pregnancy test or refuse to take a pr egnancy test.  
 
VI.  RISK / BENEFIT  
 
Risk Information 
It is difficult at this time to predict with confidence the percentage rate of complications from the 
proposed Linac based SBRT treatment. However, it is reasonable to extrapolate from the current 
experience with radiotherapy in and around the pancreas. Based upon prior phase I and phase II 
studies, we anticipate that the toxicities associated with this treatment will be acceptable.   
 
Toxicities commonly associated with such treatment include nausea, vomiting, fatigue, anorexia 
and weight loss. Severe side effects such as gastrointestinal (GI) obstruction, perforation, or 
hemorrhage are uncommon complications, occurring in <5% of patients undergoing standard 
radiation therapy for pancreatic cancer. Although we expect a comparable rate of complications 
with fractionated Linac based SBRT, it is important to note that vomiting, GI obstruction, GI 
hemorrhage, anorexia and weight loss are also commonly associated with pancreatic cancer 
progression. Clinical and radiographic assessments will be performed in an effort to identify these 
effects, ascertain their etiology and provide the most appropriate palliative measures. Hepatic and 
renal toxicity is not anticipated given the expectation of limited incidental irradiation of these 
organs. Complications, if any, will  be graded according to the CTCAE, National Cancer Institute, 
version 4.0. We will also utilize the RTOG scale for grading acute and chronic radiotherapy 
toxicities.  
 Duration of Study 
It is anticipated that this study will last approximately 36 months ( 24 months of accrual and 12 
months while cohort matures). 
 
Duration of Follow Up  
We estimate that most patients will remain a subject in this study for approximately one year .  
Patients will remain enrolled on this protocol for a maximum of 5 years or until patient withdrawal. 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 19  4/15/[ADDRESS_488549] c ompleted the 5 year follow -up will 
continue being followed for survival information until death. The administration of subsequent 
chemotherapy and/or other antineoplastic treatment following Linac based SBRT will be at the 
discretion of each patient’s attending medical  oncologist.  
 
Criteria for Removal from Study 
Patients will be removed from the study for any of the following reasons: death or patient 
withdrawal. The protocol director may also withdraw a patient from the study for one or more of 
the follow ing reasons:  failure of the patient to follow the instructions of the protocol study staff, 
the protocol director decides that continuing participation could be harmful to the patient, 
pregnancy (if applicable), the patient needs treatment not allowed in the study, the study is 
cancelled, other administrative reasons, or unanticipated circumstances. Patients that have been 
removed from or discontinue the study will be followed for survival information until death. 
 
Alternatives Alternative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_389819], standar d chemotherapy/radiation, upfront 
resection of pancreas tumor, palliative symptomatic relief, or no further treatment. Additionally, 
patients may choose to receive treatment  to improve quality of life but that may have no effec t on 
the growth of their cancer. The risks of chemotherapy and standard chemotherapy/radiation 
include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, bone marrow suppression, and sepsis.  The potential 
benefits of chemotherapy or  standard chemotherapy/radiation ar e prolonged survival.  The risk of 
pursuing no further  treatment is tumor progression or spread. 
 
VII.  COMPENSATION  
 
Subjects will not be paid to participate in the study. 
  
VIII.  ADVERSE EVENTS: LIST AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Adverse Events and Potential Risks List  
Based upon prior phase I and phase II studies evaluating the toxicities associated with Linac based SBRT for pancreatic cancer, we estimate that ≤20% of patients will experience  grade 2 or 
higher late GI toxicity within one year. Late GI toxicities are those events occurring more than 3 months after Linac based SBRT. Acute GI toxicities are those events occurring within 3 months 
following Linac based SBRT. The major toxicity i n this group of patients is the development of 
duodenal/gastric ulcers.  Most of these are  successfully managed medically.  However, Stanford 
has observed 2 cases of duodenal  perforation associated with Linac based SBRT in patients who 
did not undergo surgical resection of their tumors . We anticipate that because of refinements in 
radiation treatment planning techniques and because the dose will be divided over five treatments (as opposed to one), the biological equivalent and actual dose to the duodenum wi ll be less than 
prior studies. Furthermore, the Stanford observed perforations occurred in duodenal locations 
that are routinely removed with pancreaticoduodenectomy, and all of our patients are anticipated 
to go to surgery.  We anticipate that the risk of ulcer formation should be low  (< 5%)  in this study. 
Hepatic and renal toxicity is not anticipated given the expectation of l imited incidental irradiation 
of these organs .  
 Reporting of Serious of Unexpected Adverse Events 
All fatal events, both anticipated and unanticipated, must be reported to the UC IRB within a time 
period as specified by [CONTACT_389848] [INVESTIGATOR_389820], whether or 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 20  4/15/[ADDRESS_488550] be reported to the UC IRB, within a time period as specified by [CONTACT_389849] .  
 
 
IX.  STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
Study Overview  
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_389821]/or borderline resectable pancreas cancer  patients.  The feasibility demonstration will 
establish the infr astructure for future randomized phase II clinical trials in a single or multi -center 
setting. Twenty patients with resectable and/or borderline resectable pancreas cancer, confirmed 
by [CONTACT_7163] -disciplinary  radiologic review, will be enrolled and treated. The decision regarding 
whether this study demonstrates sufficient feas ibility to support a phase II study testing novel 
regimens in this disease population will be based on three key considerations:  
• The study can meet the accrual goal. 
• The proposed preoperative SBRT  will result in no more toxicity than has been establi shed 
previously in the borderline resectable and locally advanced setting by [CONTACT_389850] 3+ toxicities and treatment delay rate (> 4 weeks). 
• The completion rate of preoperative and operative therapy meets the goals.  
 
Sample Size 
A maximum of 20 patients will be enrolled if the trial completes accrual.  
 
Accrual time 
The anticipated monthly  accrual rate is approximately 1-2  patient s per month.  T he trial  is 
expected to accrue in approximately 24 months. 
 
Statistical Design for Primary Endpoints 
 
Primary Endpoints 
• The primary endpoint is the rate of acute (within 3 months of treatment) G3+ 
gastrointestinal toxicities as assessed by [CONTACT_3989] v4.0.  
 
Study Design and Decision Rules 
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the feasibility of conducting a study assessing the 
proposed regimen. The sample size of twenty patients with confirmed resectable or borderline 
resectable pancreas cancer  is selected based on financial and logistic considerations. However, 
we still propose decision rules based on testable hypotheses whenever possible. If, at the conclusion of the trial, none of the following stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_389822], we will conclude 
that the proposed regimen and trial design warrants further  phas e II study for assessing  SBRT 
followed  by [CONTACT_389851].  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 21  4/15/[ADDRESS_488551] been accrued, we will 
conclude the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility.  Thereafter, the accrual rate will be 
monitored bi -monthly. If at any evaluation time point, the accrual rate is less than 0.5 per month, 
we will conclude the study does not demons trate sufficient feasibility.  
 
Toxicity Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_389823]: 
 
• The toxicity rate is defined as the proportion of treated patients with resectable and/or 
borderline resectable pancreas cancer  who experience at least one grade 3+ adverse 
event, and is considered at least possibly related  to  the  preoperative  treatment (i.e. an  adverse  event with attribute specified as “possibly,” “probably,” or “definitely” related to 
SBRT). The toxicity r ate will be evaluated when the first 10, the first [ADDRESS_488552] 10 evaluable patients, if the toxicity rate is greater than 0.54 (> 5 patients exper ienced defined AEs), we will conclude 
the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility. Otherwise, continue accrual.  
o When toxicity data are available on the first 15 evaluable patients, if the toxicity 
rate is greater than 0.46 (> 6 patients experienc e defined AEs), we will conclude 
the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility. Otherwise, continue accrual.  
o When toxicity data are available on all 20 evaluable patients, if the toxicity rate is 
greater than 0.42 (>8 patients experience defined AE s), we will conclude the study 
does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility.  
 This decision rule based on a sample size of  [ADDRESS_488553] more 
than 80% chance to conclude the study does not demonstrate sufficient 
feasibility if the toxicity rate is  ≥ 50% and only have less than 17% chance 
to conclude the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility if the toxicity rate is ≤ 30%. 
o If [ADDRESS_488554] 10,  or after 10 patients , 40% or more treated 
patients experience treatment delay (> 4 weeks), we will  conclude the study does 
not demonstrate sufficient feasibility.  
 
Completion of Therapy Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_389824]:  
 
• If at least 6 patients among 20 evaluable patients complete all preoperative and  operative  
therapy  including  R0 or R1  resection,  we  will  conclude  the study  warrants further 
phase II study, provided that none of the other feasibility stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_389825]. 
 
• If [ADDRESS_488555] more than 80% 
chance to conclude the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility if the 
R0/R1 resection rate is ≤ 20% and only have less than 13% chance to conclude 
the study does not demonstrate sufficient feasibility if the R0/R1 resection rate is ≥ 
40%. 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 22  4/15/2016  
  
Analysis Plan 
All acute AE (within 3 months after treatment) and the maximum grade for each type of adverse 
events (including all adverse events and those that are possibly, probably or definitely related to 
study treatments) will be recorded for each patient. The frequency  tables will be reviewed to 
determine the patterns. Point estimate and confidence interval will be reported for binary 
endpoints.  
 
Supplementary Analysis Plans (Secondary Endpoints)  
All late AE and the maximum grade for each type of adverse events (includi ng all adverse events 
and those that are possibly, probably or definitely related to study treatments) will be recorded for 
each patient. The frequency tables will be reviewed to determine the patterns. Point estimate and 
confidence interval will be reported for binary endpoints .  All patients meeting the eligibility criteria 
and confirmed by [CONTACT_389852] a consent form and have begun any dose of treatment will be evaluable for the following secondary endpoints, unless otherwise specified.  
• The positive margin resection rate is defined as number of patients achieved R0 versus R1/R2 resection during surgery divided by [CONTACT_389853]. (R0= negative 
margin, R1= microscopi[INVESTIGATOR_389826], R2= macroscopi[INVESTIGATOR_389826]).  Point 
estimate and confidence interval of the rate will be reported. 
• The histopathologic response rate is defined as number of patients achieved CR or PR 
determined according to histopathologic examination during pre-operative chemo or 
chemoradiotherapy divided by [CONTACT_389853].  Point estimate and 
confidence interval of the rate will be reported. 
• Time to locoregional recurrence is defined as time from the date of registration to the date 
of the first documented locoregional  recurrence. The Kaplan-Meier methods will be used 
to estimate the median time, and event-free rate at specific time points (6 month, 12 
month, etc.). 
• Time to distant recurrence is defined as time from the date of registration to the date of 
the first documented distant r ecurrence. The Kaplan-Meier methods will be used to 
estimate the median time, and event -free rate at specific time points (6 month, 12 month, 
etc.).  
• Overall survival is defined as time from the date of registration to the date of the death due 
to all cause s. The Kaplan-Meier methods will be used to estimate the median time, and 
event-free rate at specific time points (6 month, 12 month, etc.). 
 Safety Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_389827], accrual will be temporarily suspended to the study, 
if at any time, we observe events considered at least possibly related to study treatment an 
adverse event with attribute specified as (“possible,”  “probably,”  or  “definite”)  that meet the 
following:  
• The rate of treatment-related deaths during treatment, or within the first [ADDRESS_488556] 10 patients , or after 10 patients , 20% or 
more of all treated patients. 
• We will also review grade IV and V adverse events deemed “unrelated” or “unlikely to be 
related” to verify their attribution and to monitor the emergence of a previously unrecognized treatment-related adverse event  
 
 
X.  DATA REPORTING / REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS 
 
Study Monitoring 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 23  4/15/2016  
 This study will be monitored by [CONTACT_389854].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_389828]’ study charts, reporting adverse 
events, assuring that consent is obtained and documented, and reporti ng the status of the trial in 
continuing renewals submitted to their IRB and trail monitoring group(s) as per UC protocol.  
There will be password-protected limited access to the database in order to maintain privacy (See 
Confidentiality below). 
 
Monitoring Plan 
UCCI DSMB will conduct  study audits  after enrollment of each 10 patients  to review subjects’ 
timely and complete enrollment, registration into the electronic database, and follow -up per study  
calendar.  More frequent monitoring will take place as needed. Trial monitoring with subject chart 
and trial binder reviews will be done by [CONTACT_389855] .   
 Data Entry and Compi[INVESTIGATOR_389829], the software and 
infrastructure being supplied by [CONTACT_389856].   Research Staff (Coordinators, Nurse, 
or Co -Investigators) will enter/scan subject data into Oncore, which will include:  
 
• Eligibility or Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
• Patient Demographics  
• Pre-Study Evaluation i ncluding H & P, Allergies, and Review of Systems  
• Surgical Procedures, with dates and findings (including EUS, biopsy (if needed), seed 
placement, and/or stent (if recommended)  
• Scan dates ( pancreas protocol CT)  
• Treatment planning date  
• Pre-Study Labs including hematology, chemistry, and tumor markers (CBC, CMP and CA 
19-9)  
• Radiation therapy dates and toxicities reported  
• Pre-study chemotherapy records including drugs, doses, and schedules  
• Surgery records including pathology reports (pathologic staging, margin status, histology), length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_389830].  
• Follow -up Evaluations including H&P, Review of Systems, and toxicities  
• Follow-up labs and dates  
• Completion of QOL questionnaires  
• Subject study withdraw al, date, and reason  
• Concomitant medications, specifically PPIs and anti -emetics, prescribed per protocol and 
if reportedly taken by [CONTACT_389857]. Only research personnel 
listed on this protocol will have access to this information. Only the patients unique IDN will be 
used. The patient’s name [CONTACT_389870]. The study data with identifiers will be kept at in Oncore.  
 
XI.  CORRELATIVE STUDIES  
 
Correlative studies to develop predictive and prognostic information will focus on molecular 
markers of interest in pancreatic cancer.  For all of the markers described below, tissue from both 
pre-treatment biopsies and post-resection specimens will be subjected to immunohistochemical 
(IHC)  analysis.  Funding for correlative studies will come from either pending grant applications or 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 24  4/15/[ADDRESS_488557] are:  
 
Hyaluranon- Tumor stroma microenvironment has been very important in pancreas canc er.  The 
interstitial pressure is very high, which limits the diffusion of chemo and blood flow in the tumor10. 
Hyaluronan (HA) is one component of the stroma thought to be responsible for this and HA can 
be evaluated by [CONTACT_4658].  Hyaluronan inhibitor (PEGPH20) is currently under investigation in 
metastatic pancreatic cancer and HA could potentially be used as a radiosenitizer. This would be a completely new mechanism of sensitization.  We would plan to evaluate HA concentration by 
[CONTACT_4658], and would consider decreased post-SBRT concentration as a preliminary indicator that 
SBRT has some synergy with HA inhibition warranting further study.  
 
D1R-DA acts as a neurotransmitter in the brain and as a hormone in the periphery. It binds to five G-protein-coupled receptors (DAR), grouped by [CONTACT_389858] D2-like (D2R, D3R 
and D4R) and D1-like (D1R and D5R). The D2R -like are classified by [CONTACT_389859], 
whereas the D1R -like stimulate cAMP. In addition to their distinct distribution and functions within 
the brain, several DAR subtypes are expressed in peripheral tissues, where they participate in the 
control of kidney, cardiovascular , immune and adipose functions ; DAR have also been detected 
in some adrenal, ovar ian, lung, and colon cancers .  
Drugs that affec t DA functions constitute one of the largest classes of pharmaceuticals. They are 
widely used as oral medications for Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, hyperprolactinemia, 
renal hypertension, erectile dysfunction and gastrointestinal motility disorders. Among these, Fenoldopam (Fen) is of particular interest. Fen is an FDA -approved, selective D1R agonist 
(Kd=2.3 nM) which does not penetrate the brain and does not activate D2R-l ike or adrenergic 
receptors . Fen is clinically used to treat severe renal hypertension, and has a wide margin of 
safety for normotensive patients, ca using only mild hypotension.   
D1R expression in breast cancer:
 Using rabbit 
monoclonal antibodies (mAb) with high selectivity for D1R, [CONTACT_389871] -Jonathan’s lab (UC Cancer Biology) has 
discovered robust D1R expression in several BCC . 
They  found moderate to strong D1R staini ng by 
[CONTACT_389860] ~30% of [ADDRESS_488558] Ben Jonathans lab.  
 
 
A
                                   
B
                                  
C
                                  
Fig 2: Examples of SCCHN primary tumors that stain 
strongly positive ( A) or negative (B) by [CONTACT_379516] D1R. C:  
Pie chart showing the D1R -staining distribution pattern 
of 27 SCCHN primary tumors.  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 25  4/15/2016  
 SapC -DOPS  
SapC -DOPS is a nanovesicle technology developed at CCHMC/UC with very promising results in 
pancreas cancer models.  A Phase I trial of this drug will begin at multiple sites including UC in the next 
2-3 months treating all solid tumors.  These vesic les are assembled from saposin C (SapC) and 
dioleylphosphatidylserine (DOPS) bind to phosphatidylserine (PS), preferentially expressed in cancer cell surfaces, and are internalized into tumor cells where they induce apoptosis.  [CONTACT_389872] (collaborator in 
Hema tology Oncology at UC) has shown that the vesicles target to surface exposed PS and decrease 
cell viability in human pancreatic cancer cells and in subcutaneous as well as orthotopic pancreas 
models.  
 
Synergistic tumor kill between SapC -DOPS and RT has been demonstrated in braincancer cells by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Qi and his collaborators.  In addition, Timmerman, et al. have demonstrated in an orthotopic lung cancer model that SBRT increases the extracellular expression of PS on tumor vessels from 4% to 26% using 
an antibody to PS called bavituximab.  Moreover in a radiation resistant animal lung model, they 
demonstrated that SBRT + bavituximab produced higher clinical and pathologic response rates than 
either alone.  This raises the possibility that SBRT may increase the effectiveness of SapC -DOPS in 
terms of tumor cell kill in in vivo  pancreas models.   
 
We plan to evaluate tumor expression of PS pre- and post- SBRT in human tissue.   In  pre-SBRT core 
biopsies specimens and post-SBRT resection specimens from the above mentioned UC investigator 
initiated “Phase I feasibility study of SBRT in resectable adenocarcinoma of pancreas”, we will plan to 
evaluate the tumor expression of PS by [CONTACT_389861] -DOPS .  
These stains and interpretati on will be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jiang Wang in Pathology and [CONTACT_389872]. 
 
 
 
Alternatively spliced Tissue Factor (asTF)  
Tissue Factor (TF) present in blood cells and plasma is referred to as blood-borne or circulating TF.  TF 
has been implicated in the pathogenesis  of several chronic disease states, most notably cardiovascular 
disease and cancer.  Full -length TF is an integral membrane protein while alternatively spliced TF can be 
secreted in a free form and features a unique C -terminal domain enabling its selective detection in bio-
specimens.  Recently, asTF was shown to circulate in the blood of metastatic breast cancer patients at concentrations exceeding 1 ng/mL (Kocaturk et al, PNAS 2013), and it promoted tumor growth and 
spread in an orthotopic model of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC, Unruh et al, Int J Cancer, 
2014).  asTF protein acts as a cell agonist driving angiogenesis, cancer cell proliferation, and monocyte 
recruitment via integrin binding.  It is not known whether circulating asTF may contribute to or serve as a 
biomarker in patients with solid cancers including PDAC.  We evaluated circulating asTF in healthy 
subjects and individuals with PDAC.  
 Samples of platelet poor plasma from 43 subjects were obtained from University of Cincinnati Cancer 
Institute’s Tumor Bank and Diagnostica Stago collections. Blood was drawn into tubes containing acid 
citrate dextrose (PDAC) or sodium citrate (healthy subjects), centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, 
and stored at -80°C until use.  Blinded asTF ELISA w as performed on platelet poor plasma samples 
(each in triplicate, 200 ul per well) as per the prototype-tailored procedure (Diagnostica Stago).  Samples with asTF concentrations ≥0.2 ng/mL were deemed positive. asTF concentrations are presented as mean±SD.  Kruskal -Wallis one-way analysis of variance was used to compare differences in 
concentration levels between the cohorts; Chi -Square and/or Fisher’s exact test were used to compare 
proportions.  
 
asTF protein was detectable in the plasma of 3/19 (15.8%) subjects in the healthy cohort (CORE Set 50, 
George King Bio-Medical) and 20/43 (46.5%) in the PDAC cohort; the proportion of PDAC patients 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 26  4/15/2016  
 positive for asTF was significantly higher compared to that in all other cohorts (p<0.01, Chi -Square test).  
The mean asTF concentrations in the cohorts were as follows: PDAC, 0.403±0.912 ng/mL; healthy 
subjects, 0.169±0.596 ng/mL; the differences between mean asTF levels in the cohorts did not reach 
significance.  Next, we evaluated asTF’s potential as a biomarker to hel p detect a more aggressive 
PDAC phenotype.  Among the 43 patients with PDAC, 36 were initially deemed resectable and 7 unresectable due to the presence of metastatic disease as determined by [CONTACT_389862]; following 
exploratory laparoscopic surgery, 11 out of 36 patients initially deemed resectable were deemed 
unresectable due to the presence of metastatic disease.  When the entire PDAC cohort was split into 
bona fide resectable (25) and unresectable (18) sub-cohorts, positivity for asTF was signific antly more 
prevalent in the unresectable sub- cohort irrespective of the results of initial evaluation and/or pre-
operative CA19-9 levels (asTF ≥0.2 ng/mL: 13 unresectable and 7 resectable patients; asTF<0.2 ng/mL: 
5 unresectable and 18 resectable patients, p=0.0059, Fisher’s exact test). 
 
Our findings suggest that asTF at levels ≥0.2 ng/mL occurs more frequently in the plasma of patients 
with PDAC compared to healthy subjects.  Further, PDAC patients whose plasma asTF levels were 
equal to or exceeded 0.2 ng/mL had a significantly lower chance to qualify for tumor resection, irrespective of initial pre-surgical diagnostic evaluation.  asTF may thus comprise a novel marker of 
aggressive PDAC phenotype with potential utility in patient stratification, warranting prospective 
evaluation of larger PDAC patient cohorts.  
 
Proposed research: prospective evaluation of asTF levels in circulation of patient with PDAC at 3 
time points pre  / post -SBRT (time point 0-14 days before surgery)  and post -operative.   Blood will 
be drawn in 3 ml sodium citrate tubes, ~1.[ADDRESS_488559] asma isolated, frozen until use, and 
assayed for asTF using ELISA as described above. We hypothesize that asTF levels will i) drop post-
SBRT, ii) further drop post-resection, and iii) rise either concomitantly or shortly before recurrence.  We 
also hypothesize that higher asTF levels at the onset and/or during the study will positively correlate with 
more aggressive disease and, consequently, poorer response to treatment. 
 
 
XII.  MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT  
 
Anti-tumor Effect 
Patients will be evaluated for anti -tumor effect by [CONTACT_6492] -up imaging (pancreas protocol CT and/or 
PET-CT imaging) as outlined above. All subsequent scans (post-treatment) will be compared to 
the same pretreatment CT that was used in conjunction with radiation treatment planning.  
Patients will be evaluable for toxicity and evaluable for objective response at the follow -up 
intervals specified above. 
 
Disease Parameters  
Pancreatic tumor response will be based upon standard radiographic criteria for the treated lesion 
and will be prospecti vely recorded in the UC secure database. Radiographic response of the 
pancreatic tumor by [CONTACT_389863]: 
 
• CR = complete disappearance of index lesion  
• PR = at least 30% decrease in the longest diameter of the index lesion  
• PD = more than 20% increase in the longest diameter of the index lesion  
• SD = does not meet criteria for PR or PD  
 
Local tumor progression will be defined as >=20% increased size on CT scan compared to a CT 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 27  4/15/[ADDRESS_488560] scan. Local and/or distant progression will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_389864]/CT  (if available) and CT scan as deemed by [CONTACT_35425].  
 
Methods for Evaluation of Measurable Disease 
Pancreas protocol CT scans (biphasic imaging, 1.25 mm cuts) and/or FDG PET- CT scans 
(optional and if recommended by [CONTACT_1963]) will be obtained at all follow -up intervals 
as described in the treatment calendar. 
 
XIII.  R ESPONSE CRITERIA 
 
Evaluation of Target Lesions 
Patients’ responses to therapy will also be evaluated clinically after completion of their Linac 
based SBRT. The following are clinical definitions for response: 
 
• CR = complete alleviation of pain or other symptoms thought to be related to the index 
lesion  
• PR = improvement, but not complete elimination, of pain or other symptoms thought to be related to the index lesion 
• PD = worsening of pain or other symptoms thought to be related to the index lesion SD = 
does not meet criteria for PR or PD  
• Radiographic response will be defined as outlined in section 11.1.2.  
 Evaluation of Non-Target Lesions 
Standard radiographic criteria will be utilized for non-target lesions.  Any  disease outside of the 
pancreas region will be considered metastatic disease. If possible a biopsy should be obtained to 
confirm metastasis.  
 
Evaluation of Best Overall Response 
This will be based upon the response of the treated lesion as described above.  
 Duration of Response 
The criteria for overall response will be the time between treatment and first sign of local 
progression or development of new metastatic disease.  
 
Response Review  
All responses will be reviewed independently by a board certified radiologist at the study’s 
completion. Each image will be reviewed by [CONTACT_978]. Simultaneous review of the patient’s chart will also occur at this time.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 28  4/15/[ADDRESS_488561] E, et al. Cancer statistics, 2007. CA Cancer J Clin 2007;57:43-66. 
Cameron JL, Riall TS, Coleman J, et al. One thousand consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies. 
Ann Surg 2006;244:10-5. 
 
2. Burris HA,3rd, Moore MJ, Andersen J, et al. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with 
gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: A randomized trial. 
J Clin Oncol 1997;15:2403-13. 
 
3. Heinemann V, Boeck S, Hinke A, et al. Meta-analysis of randomized trials: Evaluation of benefit 
from gemcitabine-based combination chemotherapy applied in advanced pancreatic cancer. BMC 
Cancer 2008;8:82. 
 
4. Loehr er PJ, Powell ME, Cardenes HR, et al. A randomized phase III study of gemcitabine in 
combination with radiation therapy versus gemcitabine alone in patients with localized, unresectable pancreatic cancer: E4201. Journal of clinical oncology 2008;26:abst. 4 506. 
 
5. Kalser MH, Ellenberg SS. Pancreatic cancer. adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy 
following curative resection. Arch Surg 1985;120:899-903. 
 
6. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. Further evidence of effective adjuvant combined radiation 
and chemotherapy following curative resection of pancreatic cancer. Cancer 1987;59:2006- 10. 
 
7. McGinn CJ, Zalupski MM. Combined-modality therapy in pancreatic cancer: Current status and 
future directions. Cancer J 2001;7:338-48. 
 
8. Ben-Josef E, Shields AF, Vaishampayan U, et al. Intensity -modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and 
concurrent capecitabine for pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2004;59:454-9. 
 
9. Willett CG, Del Castillo CF, Shih HA, et al. Long- term results of intraoperative electron beam 
irradiation (IOERT) for patients with unresectable pancreatic cancer. Ann Surg 2005;241:295-9. 
 
10. Oettle H, Post S, Neuhaus P, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine vs observation in 
patients undergoing curative-intent resection of pancreatic cancer: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2007;297:267-27. 
 
11. Klinkenbijl JH, Jeekel J, Sahmoud T, et al. Adjuvant radiotherapy and 5-fluorouracil after curative resection of cancer of the pancreas and periampullary region: Phase III trial of the EORTC 
gastrointestinal tract cancer cooperative group. Ann Surg. 1999;230(6):782-4. 
 
12. Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Sohn TA, et al. Six hundred fifty consecutive pancreaticoduodenectomies in the 1990s: Pathology, complications, and outcomes. Ann Surg. 1997;226(3):257-60. 
 
13. Neoptolemos JP, D unn JA, Stocken DD, et al. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapyand chemotherapy in  
resectable pancreatic cancer: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2001;358:1576–  1585. 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 29  4/15/[ADDRESS_488562] pancreatic cancer resections are R1 resections.  
Ann Surg Oncol. 2008;15(6):1651-60. 
 
 
 
15. Palmer DH, Stocken DD, Hewitt H, et al. A randomized phase 2 trial of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in resectable pancreatic cancer: gemcitabine alone versus gemcitabine combined 
with cisplatin. Ann Surg Oncol. 2007;14:2088-2096. 
 
16. Varadhachary GR, Wolff RA, Crane CH, et al. Preoperative gemcitabine and cisplatin followed by  
[CONTACT_35421]-based  chemoradiation  for  resectable  adenocarcinoma  of  the  pancreatic head.  J 
Clin Oncol. 2008;26:3487-3495. 
 
17. Evans DB, Varadhachary GR, Crane CH, et al. Preoperative gemcitabine-based chemoradiation 
for   patients with resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head. J Clin Oncol. 
2008;26:3496-350. 
 
18. Hoffman JP, Lipsitz S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_265803] T, et al. Phase II trial of preoperative radiation therapy and 
chemotherapy for patients with localized, resectable adenocarcinoma of the pancreas: an Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group Study. J Clin Oncol. 1998;16:317-32. 
 
19. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8190], Wolff RA, Janjan NA, et al. Preoperative paclitaxel and concurrent rapid- 
fractionation radiation for resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma: toxicities,  histologic respons e 
rates, and event-free outcome. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20:2537-254. 
 
20. White RR, Hurwitz HI, Morse MA, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation for localized adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Ann Surg Oncol. 2001;8:758-76. 
 
21. Moutardier V, Magnin V, Turrini O, et al. Assessment of pathologic response  after preoperative chemoradiotherapy and surgery in pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 
2004;60:437 -44. 
 
22. Yeung RS, Weese JL, Hoffman JP, et al. Neoadjuvant chemoradiation in pancreatic and 
duodenal carcinoma. A Phase II Study. Cancer. 1993;72:2124-213. 
 
23. Kalser MH, Ellenberg SS. Pancreatic cancer. Adjuvant combined radiation and chemotherapy 
following curative resection. Arch Surg. 1985;120:899-90. 
 
24. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Friess H, et al. A randomized trial of chemoradiotherapy and 
chemotherapy after resection of pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1200-121. 
 
25. Reni M, Passoni P, Bonetto E, et al. Final results of a prospective trial of a PEFG (Cisplatin, 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_14962], 5 -Fluorouracil, Gemcitabine) regimen followed by [CONTACT_389865]. Oncology. 2005; 68: 239-24.  
 
26. Reni M, Cereda S, Passoni P, et al. A randomized phase II trial of PEXG (cisplatin, epi[INVESTIGATOR_14962], capecitabine, gemcitabine) or PDXG (docetaxel) regimen in advanced pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:A462. 
 
27. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_389831], Kozarek RA, Traverso LW. Interferon-based adjuvant chemoradiation therapy after 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 30  4/15/2016  
 pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg. 2003;185: 476-48. 
 
28. 59. Crane CH, Beddar AS, Evans DB. The role of intraoperative radiotherapy in pancreatic 
cancer. Surg Oncol Clin N Am 2003;12:965-77. 
 
29. Willett CG, Czito BG, Bendell JC, et al. Locally advanced pancreatic cancer. J Clin Oncol  
2005;23:4538-44. 
 
30. Winter JM, Cameron JL, Olino K, et al. Clinicopathologic analysis of ampullary neoplasms in 450 
patients: implications for surgical strategy and long-term prognosis. J Gastrointest Surg. 
2010;14(2)379-87. 
 
31. Benhamiche AM, Jouve JL, Manfredi S, et al. Cancer  of the ampulla of Vater: results of a 20- 
year population-based study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000;12(1):75– 79. 
 
32. Abrams RA, Yeo CJ. Combined modality adjuvant therapy for  resected  periampullary pancreatic 
and nonpancreatic adenocarcinoma: a review  of studies and experience at The Johns Hopkins 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 1991-2003. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2004;13(4):621-38. 
 
33. Ross WA, Bismar MM. Evaluation and management of periampullary tumors. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2004;6(5):362-70. 
 
34. Talamini MA, Moesinger RC, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_242005], et al. Adenocarcinoma of the ampulla of Vater. A 28- year 
experience. Ann Surg. 1997;225(5):590– 599. 
 
35. Koong AC, Le QT, Ho A, et al. Phase I study of stereotactic radiosurgery in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol  Phys 2004;58:1017-21. 
 
36. Schellenberg D, Goodman KA, Lee F, et al. Gemcitabine chemotherapy and single -fraction 
stereotactic body radiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol 
Phys 2008.  
 
37. Chang DT, Schellenberg D, Shen J, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy for unr esectable 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer 2009;115:665-72. 
 
38. Chang BK, Timmerman RD. Stereotactic body radiation therapy: A comprehensive review. Am J Clin Oncol 2007;30:637-44. 
 
39. Timmerman R, Bastasch M, Saha D, et al. Optimizing dose and fractionati on for stereotactic body 
radiation therapy. normal tissue and tumor control effects with large dose per fraction. Front 
Radiat Ther Oncol 2007;40:352-65. 
 
40. Hong TS, Ryan DP, Blaszkowsky LS, et al. Phase I study of preoperative short-course 
chemoradiation wi th proton beam therapy and capecitabine for resectable pancreatic ductal 
adenocarcinoma of the head. Int J Radat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;79(1):151-7. 
 
41. Groenvold M, Klee MC, Sprangers MA, et al. Validation of the EORTC QLQ -C30 quality of life  
questionnaire through combined qualitative and quantitative assessment of patient- observer 
agreement. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 1997;50:441-50. 
 
42. Fitzsimmons D, Kahl S, Butturini G, et al. Symptoms and quality of life in chronic pancreatitis 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 31  4/15/2016  
 assessed by [CONTACT_389866] -C30 and QLQ -PAN26. Am J 
Gastroenterol 2005;100:918-26. 
 
43. Fitzsimmons D, Johnson CD. Quality of life after treatment of pancreatic cancer. Langenbecks 
Arch Surg 1998;383:145 -51. 
 
44. J. Kleeff, C. Reiser, U. Hinz , J. Bachmann, J. Debus and D. Jaeger et al., Surgery for recurrent 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Ann Surg 245 (2007), pp. 566– 572. 
 
45. C.J. Yeo, R.A. Abrams, L.B. Grochow, T.A. Sohn, S.E. Ord, R.H. Hruban, M.L. Zahurak, 
W.C. Dooley, J. Coleman, P.K. Sauter, H.A. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887], K.D. Lillemoe and J.L. Cameron, 
Pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic adenocarcinoma: postoperative adjuvant 
chemoradiation improves  survival.  A  prospective,  single-institution  experience, Ann Surg 
225(1997), pp. 621– 636. 
 
46. Gastrointest inal Tumor Study Group. Treatment of locally unresectable carcinoma  of  the 
pancreas: comparison of combined-modality therapy (chemotherapy plus radiotherapy) to 
chemotherapy alone. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1988;80:751– 5. 
 
47. Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group. A   multi -institutional  comparative  trial  of  radiation therapy 
alone and in combination with 5-fluorouracil for locally unresectable pancreatic carcinoma. Ann Surg. 1979;189:205– 8. 
 
48. Chauffert B, Mornex F, Bonnetain F, Rougier P, Mariette C, Bouché O, Bos set JF, et al. Phase III  
trial comparing intensive induction chemoradiotherapy (60 Gy, infusional 5-FU and intermittent cisplatin) followed by [CONTACT_389867]. Definitive r esults of the 2000-01 FFCD/SFRO study. Ann Oncol. 
2008;19:1592– 9. 
 
49. Loehrer PJ, Powell ME, Cardenes HR, Wagner L, Brell JM, Ramanathan RK, Crane CH, et al. 
A randomized phase III study of gemcitabine in combination with radiation therapy versus 
gemcitabine alone in patients with localized, unresectable pancreatic cancer: E4201 [abstract]. J 
Clin Oncol. 2008;26(Suppl 15):4506a. 
 
50. J.F. Griffin, S.R. Smalley and W. Jewell et al., Patterns of failure after curative resection of 
pancreatic carcinoma, Cancer 66 (1990), pp. 56 –61. 
 
51. G. Barugola, M. Falconi and R. Bettini et al., The determinant factors of recurrence following 
resection for ductal pancreatic cancer, JOP 8 (2007), pp. 132 –140. 
 
52. J. Westerdahl, A. Andren-Sandberg and I. Ihse, Recurrence of exocrine pancreatic cancer – local 
or hepatic?, Hepatogastroenterology 40 (1993), pp. 384– 387. 
 
53. S. Takahashi, Y. Ogata and H. Miyazaki et al., Aggressive surgery for pancreatic duct cell cancer: 
feasibility, validity, limitations, World J Surg 19 (1995), pp. 653– 659 [dis cussion 660].  
 
54. M. Kayahara, T. Nagakawa and K. Ueno et al., An  Evaluation  of  radical  resection  for 
pancreatic cancer based on the mode of recurrence as determined by [CONTACT_389868],Cancer 72 (1993), pp. 2118– 2123. 
 
55. Regine WF, Winter KA, Abrams RA, et al. Fluorouracil vs gemc itabine chemotherapy before and 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 32  4/15/2016  
 after  fluorouracil -based  chemoradiation  following  resection   of   pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a 
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299(9):1019-26. 
 
56. J.M. Hernandez, C.A. Morton, S. Al -Saadi, D. Villadolid, J. Cooper and C. Bowers et al., The 
natural  history   of   resected   pancreatic   cancer   without   adjuvant   chemotherapy, Am Surg 
76 (2010), pp. 480– 485. 
 
57. C. Sperti, C. Pasquali, A. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_389832] S. Pedrazzol i, Recurrence after resection for ductal 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, World J Surg 21 (1997), pp. 195– 200. 
 
58. C. Sharma, K.M. Eltawil, P.D. Renfrew, M.J. Walsh and M. Molinari, Advances in diagnosis, 
treatment    and    palliation    of    pancreatic    c arcinoma:    1990– 2010, World J Gastroenterol 
17 (2011), pp. 867– 897. 
 
59. Yeo CJ, Cameron JL, Lillemoe KD, et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for cancer of the head of the pancreas. 201 patients. Ann Surg. 1995;221:72-131.  
60. Geer RJ, Brennan MF. Prognostic indicators for survival after resection of pancreatic 
adenocarcinoma. Am J Surg. 1993;165:68-72.62.  
 
61. K. Ogawa, H. Shibuya, N. Uchida, H. Onishi, Y. Okuno, M. Myojin et al. and JROSG Working 
Subgroup of Gastrointestinal Cancer, Postoperative external beam radiotherapy for resected 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma: impact of chemotherapy on local control and survival, Anticancer 
Res 30 (2010), pp. 2959 – 2967. 
 
62. J.S. Cupp, A.C. Koong, G.A. Fisher, J.A. Norton and K.A. Goodman, Ti ssue effects after 
stereotactic body radiotherapy  using  cyberknife  for  patients  with  abdominal malignancies, Clin 
Oncol (R Coll Radiol) 20 (2008), pp. 69– 75. 
 
63. T. Zacharias, E. Oussoultzoglou, D. Jaeck, P. Pessaux and P. Bachellier, Surgery for recurrence of periampullary malignancies, J Gastrointest Surg 13 (2009), pp. 760– 767. 
 
64. R. Wilkowski, M. Thoma, C. Bruns, E. Dühmke and V. Heinemann, Combined chemoradiotherapy 
for isolated  local  recurrence  after  primary  resection  of  pancreatic cancer, JOP7 (2006), pp. 34–40. 
 
65. Chang DT, Schellenberg, D, Shen J, et al. Stereotactic radiotherapy for unresectable 
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. Cancer. 2009;115(3):665-72. 
 
66. Didolkar MS, Coleman CW, Brenner MJ, et al. Image-guided sterotactic radiosurgery for locally 
advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma results of first [ADDRESS_488563] Surg. 
2010;14(10):1547-58. 
 
67. M. Sarfaraz, CyberKnife robotic arm stereotactic radiosurgery, J Am Coll Radiol 4 (2007), pp. 563– 565. 
 
68. Ries LAG, Young JL, Keel GE, Eisner MP, Lin YD, Horner M -J (eds). SEER Survival Monograph; 
Cancer Survival Among Adults: US SEER Program, 1988– 2001, Patient and tumor 
characteristics. NCI, SEER Program, NIH Pub. No. 07-6215, Bethesda, MD, 2007.  
 
69. Bilimoria KY, Bentrem DJ, Ko CY, et al. Validation of the 6th Edition AJCC Pancreatic Cancer 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 33  4/15/2016  
 Staging System Report from National Cancer Database. Cancer 2007;110:738– 744. 
 
70. Riall TS. Nealon WH. Goodwin JS. Zhang D. Kuo YF. Townsend CM Jr. Freeman JL. Pancreatic 
cancer in the general population: Improvements in survival over the last decade. Journal of 
Gastrointestinal Surgery 2006;10(9):1212– 1224. 
 
71. White R. Lee C. Anscher M. Gottfried M. Wolff R. Keogan M. Pappas T. Hurwitz H. Tyler D. Preoperative chemoradiation for pati ents with locally advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreas. 
Annals of Surgical Oncology 1999;6(1):38– 45. 
 
72. Simon, R. Optimal two-stage designs for phase II clinical trials. Controlled Clinical Trials.  
1989;10:1-10. 
 
73. Lawless, J. Statistical Models and Methods  for Lifetime Data, John Wiley and Sons, 1982. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 34  4/15/2016  
 APPENDIX  I 
STUDY CALENDAR  
 
  
 
Pre-Study   
 
Pre-SBRT8  
SBRT Treatment9,10 Follow -Up 5 
(Post -Radiation Treatment)  
4-6 
weeks  4 
mos 63 
mos 9 
mos 123 
mos Yrs 2 -5 
Q 3-6 mos  
Initial Consult  X        
Demographics  X        
History / Physical Exam  X  X X X X X X 
Informed consent  X        
Biopsy  
(confirmed adenocarcinoma)  X        
Labs: CBC, CMP, CA19 -[ADDRESS_488564]-op complication 
assessment (appendix 6)     
X  
  
  
  
  
 
Negative Pregnancy Test7  X       
Seed Placement  
(EUS, CT, intraoperatively)   X       
         Simulation Scan   X       
Radiologic Evaluation  (CT)  X X2 X X X X X 
QoL Questionnaire   X X X4 X X4 X X 
AE Evaluation  X  X X X X X X 
Research tubes   X  
X11      
[ADDRESS_488565]/abdomen/pelvis, as per treating physician, required pre - and post -SBRT . 
[ADDRESS_488566] a +/- 30 day tolerance window. (ex. 6MFU may occur between 5-7 months)  
[ADDRESS_488567]-menopausal as defined in Appendix III.  
8 - Pre-SBRT procedures should be completed within 45 days of beginning treatment. 
9 - It is recommended that patients discontinue any chemotherapy one week prior to SBRT   
10 - Ideally al l 5 fractions should be delivered Monday through Friday; however, treatment may be delivered over 
[ADDRESS_488568] 2 fractions per week.  
11- Pre-surgery  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 35  4/15/[ADDRESS_488569] applies to you.  There are no “right” or “wrong” answers.  The information that you provide will remain 
strictly confide ntial.  
 
 Not 
at 
All A 
Little  Quite 
a Bit  Very 
Much 
Do you have any trouble doing strenuous activities, like carrying a heavy 
shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_22233] a suit case?  [ADDRESS_488570] any trouble taking a LONG walk?  [ADDRESS_488571] any trouble taking a SHORT walk outside of the house?  1 2 3 4 
Do you need to stay in bed or a chair during the day?  1 2 3 4 
Do you need help eating, dressing, washing yourself or using the toilet?  [ADDRESS_488572] week:  
Were you limited in doing either your work or other daily activities?  1 2 3 4 
Were you limited in persuing your hobbies or other leisure time activities? 1 2 3 4 
Were you short of breath?  [ADDRESS_488573] you had pain?  [ADDRESS_488574]?  [ADDRESS_488575] you had trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]?  [ADDRESS_488576] you felt weak?  [ADDRESS_488577] you lacked appetite?  [ADDRESS_488578] you felt nauseated?  [ADDRESS_488579] you vomited?  [ADDRESS_488580] you been constipated?  [ADDRESS_488581] you had diarrhea?  1 2 3 4 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 36  4/15/2016  
 Were you tired?  1 2 3 4 
 Not 
at 
All A 
Little  Quite 
a Bit  Very 
Much 
Did pain interfere with your daily activities? [ADDRESS_488582] you had difficulty in concentrating on things, like reading a newspaper or 
watching television?  1 2 3 4 
Did you feel tense?  1 2 3 4 
Did you worry?  1 2 3 4 
Did you feel irritable? 1 2 3 4 
Did you feel depressed?  [ADDRESS_488583] you had difficulty remembering things?  1 2 3 4 
Has your physical condition or medical treatment interfered with your FAMILY 
life?  1 2 3 4 
Has your physical condition or medical treatment interfered with your SOCIAL 
activities?  1 2 3 4 
Has your physical condition or medical treatment caused you financial 
difficulties?  [ADDRESS_488584] the number between 1 (Very Poor) and 7 (Excellent) that best applies to you.  
 
                    Very Poor                  Excellent  
How would you rate your overall HEALTH during the past week?  [ADDRESS_488585] week?  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 37  4/15/2016  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX II I 
  
 
 
EORTC QLQ –  PAN26  
 
Patients sometimes report that they have the following symptoms or problems.  Please indicate the extent to which you have 
experienced these symptoms or problems DURING THE PAST WEEK.  Please answer by [CONTACT_389869].  
 
 Not 
at 
All A 
Little  Quite 
a Bit  Very 
Much 
Have you had abdominal discomfort?  [ADDRESS_488586] a bloated feeling in your abdomen?  [ADDRESS_488587] you had back pain?  [ADDRESS_488588] pain during the night?  1 2 3 4 
Did you find it uncomfortable in certain positions (e.g. lying down)?  1 2 3 4 
Were you restricted in the TYPES of food you can eat as a result  
of your disease or treatment?  1 2 3 4 
Were you restricted in the AMOUNT of food you can eat as a result  
of your disease or treatment?  1 2 3 4 
Did food or drink taste different from usual?  [ADDRESS_488589] you had indigestion?  1 2 3 4 
Were you bothered by [CONTACT_134276] (flatulence)?  [ADDRESS_488590] you worried about your weight being too low?  1 2 3 4 
Did you feel weak in your arms and legs?  [ADDRESS_488591] dry mouth?  [ADDRESS_488592] you had itching?  1 2 3 4 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 38  4/15/2016  
 To what extent was your skin yellow? [ADDRESS_488593] frequent bowel movements? 1 2 3 4 
Did you feel the urge to move your bowels quickly?  [ADDRESS_488594] you felt physically less attractive as a result of your disease and treatment?  [ADDRESS_488595] you been dissatisfied with your body?  [ADDRESS_488596] you been troubled with side -effects from your treatment?  1 2 3 4 
Were you worried about your health in the future?  1 2 3 4 
Were you limited in planning activities, for example meeting friends, in advance?  [ADDRESS_488597] you received adequate support from your health care professionals?  1 2 3 4 
Has the information given about your physical condition and treatment been 
adequate?  [ADDRESS_488598] in sex?  [ADDRESS_488599] you felt less sexual enjoyment?  1 2 3 4 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 39  4/15/2016  
 APPENDIX  IV 
 
Karnofsky Performance Status  
 
Score   Description  
100  Normal, no complaints, no evidence of disease.  
90  Able to carry on normal activity; minor signs or symptoms of disease.  
80  Normal activity with effort; some signs or symptoms of disease.  
[ADDRESS_488600] of his/her needs.  
50  Requires considerable assistance and frequent medical care.  
40  Disabled, requires special care and assistance.  
30  Severely disabled, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374]. Death not imminent.  
20  Very sick, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374]. Death not imminent.  
10  Moribund, fatal processes progressing rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375].  
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 40  4/15/2016  
 APPENDIX V 
 
Definition of Menopausal Status 
 
Menopausal status will be defined according to the following criteria:  
 
Post-menopausal:  
 
• Woman 60 years of age or older  
• Woman aged 45-[ADDRESS_488601] 12 months prior to registration  
• Woman aged 45-59 years with cessation of menses for less than 12 months prior to  
• registration AND an FSH level in the postmenopausal range (or >34.4 IU/L if institutional range is 
not available)  
• Woman aged 45-[ADDRESS_488602] an FSH level  in the 
postmenopausal range according to institutional/laboratory standards (or 34.4IU/L if the 
institutional range is not available)  
• Prior bilateral oophorectomy  
• Woman younger than [ADDRESS_488603] had a prior hysterectomy (without bilateral 
oophorectomy) AND who have an FSH level in the postmenopausal range (or >34.4 IU/L if institutional range is not available)  
 
Pre- or peri -menopausal:   
 
• Not meeting definition for postmenopausal as outlined above.  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
UCCI -GI-002  
Amendment 4 Page 41  4/15/2016  
  