Title: Virtual  Neuroprosthesis:  Restoring  a  Sense  of  Touch  to  Amputees
Clinical  Trials  number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Protocol  and  Statistical  Analysis
August  18,  2021
SCH: INT: Virtual Neuroprosthesis: Restoring Autonomy to People Suffering from
Neurotrauma
1. Project  Summary:  The  goal  of  this  project  is  to  quantify  motor  task  performance  (tasks  reminiscent  of  everyday  life
such as  object  transportation,  arm  motion  and  reaching)  in  normal  subjects,  amputees  and  limb-absent  people  controlling  a
robotic  arm  and  hand.  Participants  are  subjected  to  a  virtual  loss  and  recovery  of  their  tactile  experience  via  modulation  of  a
noninvasive  haptic  feedback  system  attached  to  their  body,  to  mimic  the  experience  of  neural  plasticity  that  occurs  during
peripheral  nerve  regeneration.  We  hypothesize  that  trials  during  which  subjects  are  provided  with  more  accurate,  less  noisy
haptic  feedback  will  lead  to  stronger  and  more  timely  somatosensory  activity  as  measured  with  EEG  neuromarkers,  which  in
turn, will  lead  to  better  behavioral  performance  while  using  the  artificial  hand.  This  research  plan  is  minimally  intrusive  to
people  and  poses  only  minimal  risks  commonly  encountered  in  daily  activities.
2. Objectives:  Our  specific  aim  is  to  determine  the  optimum  conditions  that  promote  sensory  restoration  in  limb-absent
people,  with  the  development  of  adaptive  haptic  feedback  laws  and  protocols  that  mimics  the  experience  of  neural  plasticity.
3. Background  &  Rationale:  Toward  developi[INVESTIGATOR_606977]-smart  limb  prosthesis:  One  significant  challenge  for  people  who
use prosthetic  hands  is  the  inability  to  directly  feel  anything  that  is  grasped  by  [CONTACT_606981]  (grant  proposal  sections  1.2-3  for
detailed  rationale  and  references).  An  invasive  method  at  the  cutting  edge  to  reconnect  limb-absent  subjects’  sense  of  touch  is
through  direct  neural  feedback  with  an  implanted  electrical  stimulator  in  the  nervous  system  (grant  proposal  section  1.5).  This
has been  helpful  to  reconnect  a  severed  sense  of  touch  with  sensors  on  their  prosthetic  hands  (grant  proposal  section  1).  But
the self-organizing  process  of  peripheral  nerve  pathway  restoration,  which  is  well  studied  at  the  physiological  level  in  vivo,  is
complex  and  more  poorly  understood  at  the  functional  level  (grant  proposal  sections  1.4,  2.3,  2.5).  To  develop  restoration  of
haptic  sensation  in  users  of  prosthetic  hands,  two  important  questions  need  more  research:  how  does  the  functional  process  of
sensory  restoration  occur  in  people  with  damaged  peripheral  nerves  undergoing  regeneration?  And  to  what  extend  does
somatosensory  restoration  depend  on  the  action  of  the  person  and  its  corollary  pattern  of  afferent  action  potentials?  Answers
to those  questions  are  progressing  slowly  with  invasive  studies,  due  to  restrictions  placed  on  safety  and  ethics  while
experimenting  with  electrode  implantation  and  nerve  stimulation  in  vivo.  Our  proposed  virtual  neuroprosthesis  circumvents
those  limitations  by  [CONTACT_20998]  a  surrogate  regenerating  nerve  in  vitro .  Rats’  peripheral  neurons  are  cultured  in  microfluidic
chambers  and  then  subjected  to  trauma.  By  [CONTACT_606982],
subjects  contribute  to  the  regeneration  of  the  traumatized  neurons  in  vitro :  the  haptic  experience  that  their  actions  causes  is
sensed  by  [CONTACT_606983]-realistic  trains  of  action  potentials,  which  are  conveyed  to  the
cultured  nerves  to  stimulate  nerve  regrowth  electrotactically.  In  return,  impedimetric  and  microscopic  assessments  of  nerve
regeneration  are  used  to  modulate  the  quality  of  an  indirect  haptic  feedback  received  by  [CONTACT_19578]  (a  pressure-varying  cuff
actuator  applied  to  a  proximal  limb  site),  so  that  interaction  between  action  and  perception  can  be  studied  in  humans  while  in-
vitro  neurons  regenerate.  Subjects  are  never  in  direct  contact  [CONTACT_606984]  (the  state  of  cultured  nerve
regeneration  just  becomes  a  control  parameter  to  modulate  how  clearly  haptic  feedback  is  provided  to  the  subject,  with  poorly
regenerating  nerves  giving  rise  to  poor  haptic  feedback  and  vice  versa),  and  the  haptic  stimulation  is  entirely  noninvasive,
making  this  experimental  program  one  with  minimal  risks.  From  the  viewpoint  of  the  subject,  the  experiment  just  looks  like  a
psychophysics  study  during  which  tactile  information  is  varyingly  facilitated  or  impeded  during  task  performance.
4. Research  Plan:
(a) Study  Design  and  Timeframe  of  the  Study
The study  follows  an  experimental  research  plan  under  consideration  for  an  award  at  NIH  and  its  performance  is  planned  for
a duration  of  4  years.  All  experiments  are  conducted  on  the  Boca  Raton  Campus  of  [LOCATION_012]  Atlantic  University.  The  study
includes  a  fractional  factorial  experimental  design  with  repeated  measurements.
(b) Research  Methods
Over  one  or  multiple  days,  we  examine  neurobehavioral  processes  in  people  controlling  a  robotic  arm  and  hand  to  perform
simple  motor  tasks  (e.g.  fragile  object  transportation),  while  a  virtual  peripheral  nerve  regeneration  protocol  provides  users
Appendix 1a: Basic Protocol Format. FAU/RI. Version 3 – 06/27/2016
Page 1 of 4
with biologically-realistic,  idiosyncratic  parameters  for  the  restoration  of  haptic  sensation  (in  double-blind  fashion,  the  cellular
neurophysiologists  characterizing  neural  regeneration  with  microscopy  are  unaware  of  subjects’  name  [CONTACT_607000];  and  the
human-subject  experimenters  are  unaware  of  the  haptic  feedback  parameter  that  will  be  used  in  the  experiment  each  day,
which  is  entered  by  [CONTACT_606985]  a  black-box  section  of  the  software  in  the  case  of  microscopic  evaluation  of  nerve
regeneration  (early  part  of  the  project),  or  which  is  automatically  input  by  [CONTACT_606986]  (later  part  of  the  project)).  The  main  experimental  factors  are  ‘haptic  feedback’,  with  three  modalities:  full,
partial  (nerve-regeneration  dependent)  and  null;  and  to  challenge  human  control  strategy  and  impose  demand  on  haptic
information,  the  ‘transported  object  weight’  (heavy,  medium  and  lightweight).
Recording  techniques:  Subjects’  electroencephalography  (EEG),  electromyography  (EMG)  and  behavioral  performance
scores  (number  of  drop  and  breakage,  speed)  are  recorded,  as  well  as  subjective  self-report  (perceived  task  difficulty).
Other  significant  materials:  Subjects  are  equipped  with  a  soft  haptic  feedback  armband,  a  cuff  with  variable  inflation  that
informs  of  the  pressure  measured  within  the  robotic  hand  as  it  manipulates  objects.  Subjects  face  a  computer  display  (initial
training  session)  or  the  robotic  arm  and  hand  (subsequent  sessions).
Procedures:  After  explanation  of  the  experimental  goal  and  signature  [CONTACT_4007]  a  written  informed  consent,  subjects  are  prepared  for
EEG  recording,  an  EMG  array  and  a  soft  haptic  feedback  armband  are  placed  on  their  missing  (or  dominant)  hand.  In  a  series
of trials,  they  use  a  robotic  arm  and  hand  to  perform  a  fragile  object  transportation  task  or  various  control  motor  actions.  The
task parameters  are  varied  between  trials  (presence  and  quality  of  haptic  feedback,  weight  of  the  visually-identical  object).  The
task, including  EEG,  EMG  and  armband  preparation,  instruction  and  numerous  breaks,  and  removal  of  the  EEG  electrode
array,  is  under  [ADDRESS_804224]  one  of  more  of  these  individual  subsystems  (EEG,  EMG,  soft  actuators)
independently  with  human  subjects.  Thus  on  the  consent  form  we  have  specified  this  by  [CONTACT_606987],  EMG,  and  soft  actuators  that  will  be  evaluated  during  experiments.
Time  commitment:  Each  experiment  will  last  at  most  2  hours.  Subjects  are  free  to  withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time  with
no repercussion  whatsoever.  At  the  end  of  each  experiment,  subjects  are  offered  continued  participation  over  the  consecutive
days of  the  week.
(c) Study  Population :  Subjects  are  18-65y.o.  volunteer  with  intact  limbs,  amputation  or  congenital  limb  absence.  Inclusion
criteria  are  normal/corrected-to-normal  vision,  general  good  health.  Exclusion  criteria  are  an  amputation  wound  that  has  not
yet healed,  the  absence  of  a  suitable  length  of  residual  limb  for  placement  of  haptic  feedback  controller  and  EMG  sensors,
presence  of  pain  that  prevents  utilization  of  those  experimental  appliances  and  the  use  of  psychoactive  drugs  that  modifies
baseline  neural  activity.
[CONTACT_607001]  has  demonstrated  the  ability  to  recruit  amputee  subjects  and  successfully  design  robotic  control  experiments  for
them  (grant  proposal  section  2.1-2  and  3.6).  Based  on  a  power  analysis  of  preliminary  data  of  grasp  performance  metrics  with
amputees  and  best  estimates  (standardized  probability  of  0.05  and  statistical  power  of  0.8),  a  minimum  of  seven  subjects  will
be required  for  adequately  powered  behavioral  analysis.  EEG  analysis,  on  its  side,  requires  a  minimum  of  12  subjects  per
group  (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_606978].,  Psychophysiology,  2000).  Therefore,  our  study  aims  for  3  x  12  subjects  (control,  amputees,  limb  absent)
and provides  for  pi[INVESTIGATOR_606979]  a  total  of  50  subjects.  (Past  experience  has  shown  amputees  and
limb-absent  people  to  be  dedicated  experimental  volunteers,  therefore  at  the  present  time,  we  factored  an  attrition  rate  of  32%.
d) Recruitment  Plan:  We  plan  to  recruit  test  subjects  by  [CONTACT_606988] ’s  office  phone  number  and  email  address.  Due  to  the
difficulty  in  recruiting  well-qualified  limb-absent  subjects,  flyers  may  also  be  posted  on  campuses  of  nearby  [CONTACT_6070],
including  [LOCATION_012]  International  University,  Nova,  etc.
After  volunteers  contact  [CONTACT_606989],  we  will  screen  subjects  for  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  over  the  phone  and  for
those  included,  we  will  arrange  a  time  to  perform  the  first  experiment.  Before  the  experiment,  we  will  explain  the  study
objectives  and  procedures,  answer  questions  and  then  we  will  ask  subjects  to  read  and  sign  the  informed  consent  form.
Appendix 1a: Basic Protocol Format. FAU/RI. Version 3 – 06/27/[ADDRESS_804225]  withdraws  during  the  session.  We  propose  to  compensate  all  subjects  who
participate  in  this  study  with  $80  to  offset  their  travel  time  and  expenses.
(e) Analysis  Plan:  We  compare  the  neural  (somatosensory  neuromarkers)  and  behavioral  characteristics  (performance,
subjective  report)  for  each  object  weight  and  each  feedback  modality.  We  hypothesize  that  trials  provided  with  less  noisy,
more  accurate  tactile  feedback  will  lead  to  stronger  and  more  timely  somatosensory  activity  as  measured  with  EEG
neuromarkers,  which  in  turn,  will  lead  to  faster  and  better  behavioral  performance  while  using  the  artificial  hand.  EEG
analysis  is  conducted  using  the  methods  developed  by  [CONTACT_606990].,  PNAS,  2007.  Nonparametric  Mann-Whitney  U-tests
will be  performed  on  the  subjective  evaluations  and  a  multifactor  ANOVA  will  be  performed  on  the  quantitative  success
rates related  to  the  number  of  times  the  objects  were  dropped  or  broken,  and  the  speed  of  transport.  Results  will  be
disseminated  as  oral  and  poster  presentations  at  conference,  proceedings  and  journal  submissions.
5. Benefits:  This  study  presents  minimal  risks  and  offers  no  direct  health  benefits  to  the  participating  subjects  but  aims  to
advance  understanding  on  the  behavioral  and  brain  mechanisms  underlying  somatosensation  and  its  plasticity.  Participation
in this  experiment  is  important  for  society.  Increased  understanding  on  the  plasticity  of  somatosensation  will  be  broadly
useful  for  behavioral  neuroscience.  The  scientific  advances  expected  to  result  from  this  research  will  specifically  benefit
amputees  and  limb-absent  people  who  use  prosthetic  hands  or  disabled  individuals  who  rely  on  robotic  assistants.  There  are
others  who  could  benefit  from  this  research  as  well,  for  example,  doctors  who  perform  robot-assisted  surgery  and  their
patients,  or  people  having  suffered  from  neurotrauma.
6. Risks:  This  study  will  involve  no  more  risk  than  encountered  during  routine  medical,  psychological  examination  or
during  daily  life.  The  EEG  employed  in  this  study  is  a  medical  grade  system  with  optical  isolation  that  prevents  electrical
risk. Sensitive  EEG  equipment  is  single-use  and  sterile  (syringes,  canula,  qtips),  or  when  not  possible  (EEG  and  EMG
electrodes),  decontaminated  with  compliant  medical  procedures  for  infectious  risk.  All  personnel  participating  in  this
research  are  trained  and  certified  by  [CONTACT_606991],  who  has  managed  EEG  training  at  the  Center  for  Complex
Systems  and  Brain  Sciences  since  2004.
Application  of  EEG  and  EMG  electrodes  presents  a  small  risk  of  skin  irritation  that  is  rare  and  usually  disappears  within  a
day or  two.  Application  of  the  haptic  stimulator  is  calibrated  to  avoid  excess  pressure  and  pain,  and  subjects  are  encouraged
by [CONTACT_606992].
Performance  of  the  robotic  control  task  is  designed  to  minimize  strain  and  fatigue.  There  are  small  risks  of  tension  or  fatigue  in
the muscles  of  the  limb  used  to  generate  the  robotic  control  signal;  of  visual  fatigue  while  concentrating  on  the  computer
screen  or  robotic  hand;  of  important  demand  on  attention  leading  to  mental  fatigue.  Those  effects  are  rare  and,  based  on
previous  studies,  we  expect  that  no  adverse  consequence  persists  beyond  a  few  hours.  Experimenters  are  present  at  the  side  of
the subject  at  all  time,  and  subjects  are  free  to  interrupt  a  session  at  any  time.
7. Informed  Consent  Process :  After  volunteers  contact  [CONTACT_606993],  we  will  ask  subjects  for
verbal  consent  to  conduct  the  screening  for  inclusion/exclusion  criteria.  We  will  inform  subjects  that  they  are  free  to  answer
each and  all  questions  from  the  screening  procedure.  Upon  acceptance,  the  experimenter  will  then  go  through  the  screening
procedure,  and  for  people  meeting  the  inclusion  requirements,  will  arrange  a  scheduled  time  to  perform  the  first  experiment.
Just before  the  scheduled  experiment,  we  will  explain  the  study  objectives  and  procedures,  answer  questions  and  then  we  will
ask subjects  to  read  and  sign  the  informed  consent  form.
(a) Inclusion/  exclusion  screening  procedures:  Subjects  are  asked  details  about  their  vision  (normal/corrected-
to-normal;  poor;  Prefer  not  to  answer  [PNTA  thereafter]),  general  good  health  (yes,  no,  PNTA),  if  appropriate
amputation  type,  healing  status  (yes,  no,  PNTA),  presence  of  neuropathic  pain  (yes,  no,  PNTA),  and  use  of
psychoactive  drugs  (yes,  no,  PNTA).
(b) Deception:  No  deception  will  be  used  either  during  the  screening  process  or  during  the  experiment.
(c) Cognitively-  or  decisionally-  impaired  subjects:  We  will  not  enroll  cognitively  or  decisionally-impaired
subjects.  Some  subjects  will  have  a  physical  disability  (absence  or  loss  of  a  limb):  such  does  not  affect  their  ability
Appendix 1a: Basic Protocol Format. FAU/RI. Version 3 – 06/27/2016
Page 3 of 4
to understand  the  purpose  and  procedure  of  the  experiment,  or  to  make  an  informed  decision  to  participate  and
provide  informed  consent.
(d) Emancipated  minors:  We  will  not  enroll  emancipated  minors .
(e) Non-English  speaking  subjects:  We  will  not  enroll  non-english  speaking  subjects.
8. Informed  consent  document:  Human  subjects  will  be  informed  of  the  study  objectives  and  procedures  before  being
proposed  to  consent  to  participate.  We  will  indicate  that  participation  is  on  a  voluntary  basis  and  we  will  use  a  written
informed  consent,  approved  by  [CONTACT_606994],  to  document  voluntary  participation.
9. Research  Materials,  Records,  and  Privacy:
(a) type  of  information  collected:  We  will  collect  demographic  information  as  required  by  [CONTACT_606995]  (subjects  are  able  to  decline  each  and  all  questions),  in  an  anonymized,  cumulative  data  table.  In
anonymized  digital  and  paper  data  records,  we  will  collect  behavioral  data  (time  series  reflecting  the  activity  of  body  parts),
EEG/EMG  data.  Data  is  acquired  by  [CONTACT_606996]/EMG/robotic  computer  system  and  custom-made  computer  programs.
(b) storage  of  research  information:  Anonymized  data  (random  code  identifier)  will  be  encrypted  and  stored  in  a  password
protected  computer  in  the  laboratory  of  [CONTACT_607002],  and  copi[INVESTIGATOR_606980]-protected  digital  media.  Consents  will  be  stored
in a locked  file  cabinet  in  the  laboratory  of  [CONTACT_607002]  and  the  key  will  be  available  in  the  principal  investigator ’s  office.
Anonymized  data  will  be  accessed  by  [CONTACT_606997].  We  will  destroy  the  informed  consents
after a  period  of  [ADDRESS_804226]  this  study  to  be  supported  by  [CONTACT_606998]  (grant
submitted  under  a  joint  panel).  NIH,  as  well  as  other  agencies,  have  articulated  a  strong  inclination  for  the  preservation  of
taxpayer-funded  scientific  data  (Collins  &  Tabak,  Nature,  2014;  Federer  et  al.,  PLOS  One  2015).  NSF  has  the  following
policy:  “Investigators  are  expected  to  share  with  other  researchers,  at  no  more  than  incremental  cost  and  within  a  reasonable
time,  the  primary  data,  samples,  physical  collections  and  other  supporting  materials  created  or  gathered  in  the  course  of  work
under  NSF  grants.  Grantees  are  expected  to  encourage  and  facilitate  such  sharing.”
(https://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dias/policy/dmp.jsp ) .  It  is  also  customary  in  our  field  that  data  is  preserved  for  replications  and
confirmation  studies,  and  several  target  publications  for  our  research  require  that  we  accept  requests  for  data  sharing  from  other
scientists.
10. Resources:
(a) Resources/facilities  at  FAU:  Personnel  involved  in  the  data  collection  are  Faculty  at  FAU,  Drs  Engeberg  and  Tognoli,
FAU  students,  and  subjected  to  amendments  of  this  IRB,  to-be-hired  postdoctoral  fellows  and  research  assistants.  All  have
received  a  training  for  EEG  recording  and  safety.  Recordings  will  take  place  in  the  laboratory  of  [CONTACT_607002],  Engineering
West.
(b) Resources  from  other  sites:  No  research  activities  involving  human  subjects  will  be  conducted  at  performance  sites
that are  not  owned  or  operated  by  [CONTACT_606999].
Appendix 1a: Basic Protocol Format. FAU/RI. Version 3 – 06/27/2016
Page 4 of 4