Safety and Feasibility of Intra-
Cardiac Echocardiography in 
Guiding Left Atrial Appendage 
Occlusion with the Watchman 
Device :  
The ICE WATCHMAN study  
 
NCT# [ADDRESS_382172]  30, 2023 
 1  Safety and Feasibility of Intra-C ardiac Echocardiography in Guiding 
Left Atrial Appendage Occlusion with the Watchman Device :  
The ICE WATCHMAN study  
Version 4 
08.30.2023 
 
 
1.0         PURPOSE OF THE INVESTIGATION               
 
The aim of this multi- center study will be to assess the feasibility and safety  of left atrial appendage 
(LAA) occlusion with the WATCHMAN FLX ™ device using a standardized intra -procedural 
intracardiac echocardiography ( ICE) protocol under moderate sedation  for procedural guidance . 
By [CONTACT_310705], we hope to show a reduction in procedural time, 
decrease use of supplemental invasive procedures  (central venous line , invasive arterial pressure  
monitoring and transesophageal echocardiography) and quicker patient recovery time. This 
approach can decrease healthcare resource utilization and safely simplify left atrial appendage  
closure with the WATCHMAN device.  
 
2.0         CLINICAL PROTOCOL         
 
The study will be a prospective, non- randomized multicenter registry of 110 patients undergoing 
LAA closure with the WATCHMAN FLX utilizing an intra -procedural ICE probe under moderate 
sedation. The primary feasibility  endpoint  will be ability to successfully implant the 
WATCHMAN FLX  device. Implant success is defined as confirmation of the device -specified 
release PASS (Position, Anchor, Size, Seal) criteria, successful device release, and adequate seal 
(defined as a residual leak <5 mm ) as assessed by a core lab interpretation of the TEE (or CT) [ADDRESS_382173]- implant. The primary safety endpoint  will be a composite of major complications (major 
bleeding [intracranial bleeding, or bleeding requiring blood transfusion], pericardial effusion 
requiring pericardiocentesis or surgery, device embolization, procedural -related stroke, or 
procedural related death). Additional measured end points will be: freedom  from conversion to 
general anesthesia and/or standard TEE during implant, the incidence and the size of iatrogenic atrial septal defect on 45 day TEE  (or CT). The ICE procedural images will also be collected and 
analyzed by [CONTACT_310706]- implanting interventionalist, and an 
imaging specialist. The images will be graded in quality as optimal (TEE equivalent), acceptable (adequate but not as detailed as TEE), and inadequate. This prospective study, along with its 
endpoints will be registered in clinicaltrials.gov   
 2.[ADDRESS_382174] of care practice for 
assessment of WATCHMAN FLX eligibility. Patients that are being considered for LAA Closure 
with WATCHMAN FLX device implant based on a history of non-va lvular atrial fibrillation who 
are at increased risk for stroke and systemic embolism  based on CHADS2VASc score >[ADDRESS_382175] 
an appropriate rationale to seek a non -pharmacologic alternative to anti -thrombotic therapy due to 
risks of  anti-thrombotic therapy. Patients should be able to tolerate the WATCHMAN FLX device 
implant procedure without the need for general anesthesia.    
 
Key inclusion criteria:  
• M
en and Women > 18 years of age 
• The patients is e ligible to undergo WATCHMAN FLX device implant  procedure 
• The patient is eligible for short term anticoagulation therapy 
• Ability to tolerate the procedure without the need for general anesthesia as assessed by [CONTACT_47806](s) 
• Ability to give informed consent for the procedure 
• The patient is able and willing to undergo the procedure under moderate sedation 
• The patient is able and willing to return for required 45- day TEE or computed tomography 
(CT) scan ning.  
 2.3    EXCLUSION CRITERIA    No specific exclusion criteria will be implemented based on age, weight, body habitus, renal insufficiency, LAA anatomy, or the presence of sleep apnea or chronic lung disease. However, 
Patients will be excluded from the study i f the treating physician(s) feel that general anesthesia is 
necessary to safely complete the procedure.  
 Key exclusion criteria:  
• Patient has contraindication for short term anticoagulation 
• The patient has history of a hypercoagulable state per medical record documentation 
• Pregnancy or planning to get pregnant during the investigation 
            
2.4    STUDY PROCEDURE  
 Pre-Procedure:  Informed consent should be obtained from the patient prior to the start of the 
procedure or within [ADDRESS_382176]  is encouraged  and should be performed shortly before the implant 
procedure (within 7- 10 days)  based on institutional protocols. Cardiac CT should be relied on as 
 [ADDRESS_382177] scan cannot be performed prior to WATCHMAN 
FLX procedure, LAA thrombus will be excluded intraprocedural with ICE from the right atrium 
and/or pulmonary artery before transseptal puncture is completed. The treating cardiologist will 
screen the patient and deem them suitable for attempting the procedure with moderate sedation.  
 Procedure: ICE will initially guide all implants . The ICE probe type (size, model, etc.), venous 
access approach (two vs. three venous accesses), access to the LA (single transseptal two probes or two different transseptal) are left to the discretion of the treating physician. However, the ICE probe will be advanced into the LA in all cases to guide the implant. It may not be possible to obtain identical views to those of TEE (0
O, 45O, 90O, 135O) with ICE. However, two orthogonal 
(short axis and long axis) views of the LAA should be obtained with ICE to document the position, compression, leak, and record the tug test  and comply with the device release criteria ( ICE-PASS) . 
The two recommended positions to obtain short - and long- axis views are mid - left atrium and left 
ventricular inflow view (just underneath the mitral valve) as illustrated in Figure -1. The 
WATCHMAN FLX device implant will otherwise be performed in accordance with standard 
practice, with the [LOCATION_011] Scientific clinical specialist overseeing the procedure. This individual is 
required to document appendage anatomy characteristics , procedural times , and release criteria 
measurements  and device compression. The WATCHMAN FLX device should not be deployed 
unless all release criteria are met. Indications for conversion to general anesthesia are at the 
discretion of the treating physicians and include, but are not limited to, hemodynamic instability, inability to maintain a protected airway during the procedure, inadequate cardiac imaging with  
ICE, and patient discomfort.   
Post-Procedure: Patients should be monitored after the procedure according to institution specific 
protocol. Same day discharge for AM cases is allowed but not required. Patients should be 
maintained on a patient specific antithrombotic therapy for 45- day post -procedure based on the 
recommendation of the treating physician. Further anti -thrombotic changes should be made on a 
patient specific basis after consideration of the [ADDRESS_382178] procedural data and 
information regarding the study’s primary and secondary endpoints for each case. A copy of this  
form, along with the pre -procedural CT imaging, procedural ICE images , and [ADDRESS_382179] report should be compi[INVESTIGATOR_310704] (Redcap) and Mayo Clinic Imaging Core Laboratory.  
 
   
 4 2.5     Study endpoints   
 
The primary feasibility endpoint  will be ability to successfully implant the WATCHMAN FLX 
device. Implant success is defined as confirmation of the device -specified release criteria on ICE  
(ICE-PASS) , successful device release, and adequate seal (defined as a residual leak <5 mm) 
assessed by [CONTACT_310707] 45 days’ post- implant.  
 
The primary safety endpoint  will be a composite endpoint of major complications (major bleeding  
and/or life -threatening  [intracranial bleeding, or bleeding requiring blood transfusion], pericardial 
effusion requiring pericardiocentesis or surgery, device embolization, procedural -related stroke, 
or procedural related death). An event is defined as procedure related if it occurred during or within 7 days of the procedure and deemed that the event was likely related to the device/procedure.  If 
the information  is insufficient, the conservative position (assuming procedure related) should be 
taken.  
 
Secondary endpoints : These include freedom from conversion to general anesthesia and/or 
standard TEE during implant, incidence,  and size of iatrogenic atrial septal defect at [ADDRESS_382180] procedure related characteristics and track any 
complications. The site -specific primary investigator will be responsible for this form’s accuracy 
and completeness.  Data forms, CT, and TEE i mages should be de -identified and sent to the Mayo 
Clinic  Laboratory from all participating institutions  for data analysis.   
 5.[ADDRESS_382181] maintenance and retention            
Originals  of all images, WATCHMAN FLX Implant Form, and data collection form  will be 
maintained at each site. A copy of this information should be sent to the study primary investigator.    
 