 
 
A Randomized Controlled Trial of Oral Acetaminophen for 
Analgesic Control After Transvaginal Oocyte Retrieval  
 
Study Protocol & Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
November  19, [ADDRESS_424545] POPULATION (S) FOR ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ...........................   
[ADDRESS_424546] of pain control during oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization 
(IVF) involves fentanyl, propofol, as well as oxycodone [1]. However, there exists 
little data of alternatives to narcotic medications for analgesic purposes in oocyte 
retrieval procedures. Potential for non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs (NSAIDSs), 
specifically ketorolac, to significantly improve pain scores in women undergoing 
oocyte retrieval has been shown previously [2]. In that study, ketorolac was 
administered immediately after oocyte retrieval procedures in addition to standard 
sedation. It was also shown that the use of these medications did not significantly 
alter pregnancy rate, live birth rate, or miscarriage rate in these patients [2]. Few 
other studies ha ve delved into the question of anesthetics for oocyte retrievals other 
than a retrospective study that showed no significant difference in pregnancy rates 
or implantation with the use of acetaminophen and diclofenac vs. acetaminophen 
alone if given postope ratively [3]. However, pain was not measured in this study for 
either group.  
 
Acetaminophen and NSAIDs have been studied as an adjunctive treatment in a 
single prospective study with no significant differences in outcomes other than 
cumulative pain scores  and reduction in use of rescue analgesia with tramadol [4]. 
Additionally, few alternatives other than narcotic medications have been studied; 
such adjuncts as EMLA cream and acupuncture have not shown a significant 
reduction in analgesic effect [5,6]. The paucity of data  on analgesics used for IVF  
oocyte retrievals illustrates that more research is necessary to determine if there are  
safe and effective non-narcotic medications  that can be used for this purpose.  
 
1. Kwan I, et al, Pain relief for women undergo ing oocyte retrieval for assisted 
reproduction.  Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2013. 1: p. CD004829.  
2. Mesen TB, et al, The effect of ketorolac on pregnancy rates when used 
immediately after oocyte retrieval.  Fertil Steril 2013. 100(3): 725 -/. 
3. Akande V, Garas A , and Cahill D, The effect of diclofenac and paracetamol 
on pregnancy and implantation rates in infertile women undergoing IVF 
treatment. J Obstet Gynaecol 2006. 26(8): 785 -7. 
4. Mohamad AH, et al, Parecoxib and paracetamol for pain relief following minor 
day-stay gynaecological surgery. Anaesth Intensive Care 2014. 42(1): 43 -50. 
5. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_342813] A, et al, Comparison of different anaesthetic methodologies for sedation 
during in vitro fertilization procedures: effects on patient physiology and 
oocyte competence. Gynecol Endocrinol, 2012. 28(10): 796 -9. 
6. Gejervall AL, et al, Electro -acupuncture versus conventional analgesia: a 
comparison of pain levels during oocyte aspi[INVESTIGATOR_342814]’ experience 
of well -being after surgery. Hum Reprod 2005. 20(3): 728 -35. 
 
1.2 Preclinical  Data  
 
None  
 
1.3 Clinical Data to Date  
N/A 
 
[ADDRESS_424547] -procedure as  compared to patients randomly assigned to placebo.  
 
3   STUDY DESIGN  
 
3.1  GENERAL DESIGN  
 
Randomized double -blinded placebo -controlled trial  
 
3.2  PRIMARY STUDY ENDPOINTS  
 
Primary outcome measures are as follows:  
1. Median of cumulative pain scores up to [ADDRESS_424548] SELECTION AND WITHDRAWAL  
4.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  
Females ages 21 -45 undergoing planned TVCP for oocyte retrieval for IVF; English -
speaking  
4.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_40483] 24 hours prior to procedure; acetaminophen use within 24 hours prior 
to procedure; allergy to acetaminophen  
4.[ADDRESS_424549] RECRUITMENT AND SCREENING  
Potential subjects were recruited and screened for eligiblity  on the morning of the  
procedure  by [CONTACT_3462] (staff and physicians involved in the study) . 
4.4 EARLY WITHDRAWAL OF SUBJECTS  
4.4.1 WHEN AND HOW TO WITHDRAW SUBJECTS  
Subjects  who consented to participate  were informed that they could voluntarily 
withdraw consent for partic ipation in the study at any time. Subjects were also 
informed that they could be  removed from the study  if it was  determined that 
participation would be harmful to the patient’s health or if the patient did not 
follow the study rules and requirements.  
4.4.[ADDRESS_424550]-procedure were compared between groups in an intent -to-treat analysis.  
 
5  STUDY DRUG  
This study involves administration of either a single 1000 -mg oral dose of 
acetaminophen (administered in the form of two 500 -mg tablets) or a drug placebo  
(administered in the form of two tablets, identical in appearance to the study drug). 
Administration of the study drug or placebo occur s at 60 minutes prior to the TVCP 
oocyte retrieval procedure.  
 
6   STUDY PROCEDURES  
As each patient arrives to the IVF procedure suite on their scheduled procedure date, 
study personnel will recruit and obtain informed consent from willing participants for  the 
study. Also, patients will be questioned to determine whether there are any exclusion 
criteria that would preclude their participation in the study.  Demographic data including 
body mass index, alcohol and tobacco use, history of prior oocyte retrieval , history of 
prior pelvic surgery, and history of chronic pelvic pain or endometriosis. The serum 
estradiol level at the time of ovulation trigger was abstracted from each participant’s 
medical record.  
Those patients who consent to participate will then ha ve a numbered envelope from the 
Research Pharmacy Department assigned to their data collection form. The 
anesthesiologist, who is the only person not blinded to the intervention, will then open 
the envelope to reveal the patient’s group assignment. After s tudy personnel have 
obtained a baseline pain score from the patient using a visual analog scale (VAS)  
corresponding to numbers [ADDRESS_424551] of propofol, fentanyl, and 
midazolam.  
After the procedure is completed, patients will be asked for a pain scor e using the VAS 
every 15 minutes for 60 minutes as per routine care in the recovery suite. Additionally, 
study personnel will document all other procedure and recovery data listed on the data 
collection form. All participants were discharged home with a pr escription for 8 tablets of 
hydrocodone/acetaminophen (5 mg / 325 mg), as per clinic protocol for all patients 
undergoing TVCP procedure.  
On post -procedure day one, [ADDRESS_424552] -procedure, with 
80% power and an alpha error 0.05.  
7.2 STATISTICAL METHODS  
Baseline characteristics will be  compared between groups with student’s t -test, Mann -
Whitney U, chi -squared, or Fisher’s exac t as appropriate. Median cumulative pain 
scores at [ADDRESS_424553].  
 
8  SAFETY AND ADVERSE EVENTS  
8.1 DEFINITIONS  
Adverse Events  
An adverse event is defined as “a ny untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a 
participant, including any abnormal sign (for example,  abnormal physical exam or 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the participant’s 
participation in the research, whether or not considered related to the participant’s 
participation in the research ” (clinicaltrials.gov).  
 
The following categories o f adverse event data will be  reported  as applicable : "All-
Cause Mortality," "Serious," and "Other (Not Including Serious)" adverse events.  
1. All-Cause Mortality: The occurrence of death due to any cause.  
2. Serious Adverse Events: Adverse events that result in any of the following 
outcomes: death, a life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_8448], a persistent or significant incapacity or 
substantial disruption of the ability to condu ct normal functions, or a congenital 
anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be 
life-threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_708], 
based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize t he participant 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes 
listed in this definition.  
3. Other (Not Including Serious) Adverse Events: Adverse events that are not 
Serious Adverse Events.  
Possible risks of acetaminophen incl ude allergic reactions (rash, urticaria, and/or 
anaphylaxis) and, rarely, liver dysfunction. The latter is associated with doses greater 
than [ADDRESS_424554] -procedure acetaminophen use.  
8.2 RECORDING OF ADVERSE EVENTS   
Each participant will be followed from baseline (administration of study or placebo drug) 
to [ADDRESS_424555]-procedure , and any adverse events will be recorded by [CONTACT_342815].  
As the study involves only the potential pre -procedure administration of oral 
acetaminophen  (or non -active placebo), there is minimal risk for harm or discomfort to 
participants. The study group will receive two [ADDRESS_424556].  
8.4 MEDICAL MONITORING  
The study drug or placebo will be administered pre -procedure  while in the preoperative 
area where the participants are already being monitored with routine vital signs prior to 
the procedure. They are then observed and monitored during the actual procedure (the 
average duration of which is 30 minutes) by [CONTACT_342816]. Additionally, one outcome measure requires a  60-minute post -
procedure assessment . Thus, in total, each participant will be directly monitored on the 
day of the procedure for at least 2.5 hours following drug admini stration.  
Participants will be given instructions at discharge to report any problems to the on -call 
physician. Specifically, participants will be instructed to seek medical assistance 
immediately if they experience any symptoms suggestive of liver damage , including 
dark urine, persistent nausea and/or vomiting, stomach/abdominal pain, extreme 
tiredness, or yellowing of the eyes or skin.  
Finally, the participant will be contact[CONTACT_3012] [ADDRESS_424557] STIPENDS OR PAYMENTS  
Subjects will not be compe nsated for their participation in this study.  
 