STUDY PROTOCOL - 960249  
 
TITLE:  Guanfacine to reduce relapse risk in women with alcohol use 
disorder (AUD)  
 
 
 
INVESTIGATORS:  Helen C Fox (PI), PhD; James Swain, MD; Ricardo Caceda, MD, 
PhD (back up MD); Asif Karim, MD (back up MD)  
Research Coordinators:  Erin Vacey; Suraj Bera  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
l markers of change underpi[INVESTIGATOR_203970]’s efficacy. Sixty women with AUD will be recruited 

Protocol – IRB960249  
      
A. SPECIFIC AIMS  
Approximately 5.7 million women in the US meet criteria alcohol use disorder (AUD). While this 
figure remains significantly lower than men, the traditional gender gap is rapi[INVESTIGATOR_203971] a 
result of sharp elevations in women’s drinking patterns due, in part, to socioeconomic gains within 
the labor force. As gender spe cific risk factors for AUD place women at a considerable 
disadvantage in terms of clinical health outcomes, this sharp increase in alcohol consumption 
urgently necessitates the development of interventions that have been specifically tailored to 
women. In view of this, preliminary data from our laboratory has shown that the alpha2 adrenergic 
agonist, Guanfacine, attenuates the negative reinforcing effects of alcohol and enhances 
cognitive regulation in the face of stress, preferentially in early abstinent w omen compared with 
men. We suggest that this may be due to gender -specific variation in sympathetic sensitivity. 
Thus, we propose a double blind, placebo -controlled, 10 -week randomized clinical trial to 
examine the preliminary effects of Guanfacine extende d release (GXR, 3mgs/daily) in 60 women 
with AUD. A parallel experimental study using a stress versus neutral imagery exposure paradigm 
will also be conducted following 7 weeks of treatment (when at full dose), to examine the stress -
to take part in the 10 -week outpatient trial for GXR (3mgs/daily) versus placebo (PLA). This will 
include twice weekly appointments comprising medical management and contingency 
management protocols, collection of urine, breathalyzer screens, and vitals. Measures of craving 
and mood will also be assessed. In week 10 participants, will take part in a laboratory challenge 
sessions, where they will be exposed to a personal stress versus relaxing imagery condition in a 
randomized order. Craving, anxiety, mood, cognitive control, HRBP , and biological stress system 
markers will be assessed at baseline, following imagery and at various recovery timepoints. A 
follow -up interview will be conducted 30 days following outpatient completion. As our prior 
research has also shown to Guanfacine t o be highly efficacious in reducing nicotine craving 
following exposure to stress in both cocaine dependent and alcohol dependent populations, we 
additionally include a sub -sample of treatment -seeking nicotine dependent women who do not 
meet criteria for A UD.  In view of prior research, we anticipate that GXR will be safe and well 
tolerated in women with AUD (H1); lead to greater abstinence and treatment adherence 
compared with the PLA group (primary outcome measures) (H2a) as well as greater attenuation 
of withdrawal symptoms and improved regulatory function (secondary outcome measures) both 
during outpatient treatment (H2b) and following stress exposure in the laboratory (H3a). We also 
anticipate that GXR -related changes to stress response in the laborator y will predict improved 
primary alcohol use outcomes (H3b). Exploratory aims will examine the effects of GXR versus 
placebo on a sub -sample of nicotine dependent women who do not meet criteria for AUD. 
Findings will help to elucidate unique stress -system m echanisms which support attenuation of 
drinking and smoking in women with AUD prior to further assessment in larger randomized clinical 
trials. This is of paramount importance to developi[INVESTIGATOR_203972] -being of an i ncreasingly vulnerable sub -population of drinkers  
B. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
1.1 Overview : Over the last decade, the traditional gender gap in alcohol use and abuse rates 
has been converging across ethnicities 41 due to socioeconomic factors 42, 43. Fo r example, 
between 1999 and 2008, the number of young women admitted to emergency rooms for being 
dangerously intoxicated rose by 52%, while the rate for young men, rose just 9% 44. Moreover, 
although the number of women who fit research criteria for alcoh ol abuse is increasing 45, they 
continue to be under -represented in clinical trials 46 and as such sex -specific treatment 
information for alcohol is  sporadic 6. Factors such as “telescopi[INVESTIGATOR_007]”, or propensity for the 
comparatively quick progression from use t o dependence typi[INVESTIGATOR_203973] 47, as 
well as a dearth in FDA -approved medications tested and validated in populations of alcoholic 
women 6, together highlight the urgent need for gender -sensitive medications. In view of this, we 
propose a prelim inary double blind, placebo controlled, 10 -week randomized clinical trial (RCT) 
to examine the initial safety and efficacy of the alpha2 adrenergic agonist, Guanfacine extended 
release (GXR; 3mgs/day) in 60 women with AUD, and a sub -sample of nicotine depe ndent 
women without AUD. The design also incorporates an experimental challenge study using a 
stress versus neutral imagery exposure paradigm to further elucidate some of the stress 
mechanisms potentially underlying GXR’s efficacy in improving primary drin king outcomes in 
women with AUD. We anticipate that findings will help to form the basis of a larger Phase II clinical 
trial. 
1.2 Stress system changes underlying alcohol withdrawal, craving & relapse : Extensive evidence 
shows that overactive hypothalamic CRH 21, 48, 49, as well as hyperactivity in sympathetic 
neurotransmission, 10, 13, 38, 50, and signaling 7, 9 all play a critical role in withdrawal symptom 
development 51, alcohol craving 13 nicotine craving 160,161, and relapse 52, 53. As such, 
chronic c ore stress system up -regulation may contribute to increased risk of alcohol relapse in 
several ways: First, the pathophysiology of both AUD, anxiety disorders, negative affect and 
physiological hyperarousal all share common elevated extra -hypothalamic CRF and NE circuitry 
53-57. This suggests that these mechanisms play a key role in the negative reinforcing and 
aversive motivational states underlying alcohol craving and compulsive alcohol seeking 6, 38, 39, 
58. Second, sympathetic overdrive impi[INVESTIGATOR_203974] 59 inducing α1 
receptor stimulation and desensitizing alpha2 receptors, impairing attentional processes by 
[CONTACT_204010] “signals” and increasing irrelevant “noise” 60 -62. Taken together, elevated 
HPA-SAM activity during earl y withdrawal from alcohol underlies negative reinforcement and 
weakens prefrontal adrenergic systems allowing for less control over rewarding and aversive 
motivational states, hence, promoting compulsive alcohol seeking.  
1.3 Sympathetic dominance in women  with AUD : Prior research from our own laboratory and 
those of others, has shown that enhanced anxiety and emotional sensitivity to stress as well as 
dysregulated autonomic output may represent unique risk factors for drinking in women, 
compared with men [ADDRESS_243227] following personalized stress are selective aspects of the motivational craving  or 
wanting “state” in socially drinking, substance abusing and alcohol dependent women relative to 
men 26, 27, 34, 63. High basal heart rate and NE levels are also specific to alcoholic women 6, 
64, as well as female smokers [ADDRESS_243228] regulation of the HPA axis 67 -70 suggests that these core 
sympathetic systems may play a key role in the vulnerability of women to stress exposure and 
the negative reinforcing aspects of alcohol craving during early abstinence. We therefore propo se 
that Guanfacine, which inhibits NE levels via stimulation of presynaptic alpha2 -adrenergic 
receptors 71, 72, will be particularly effective in attenuating the gender -sensitive anxiolytic and 
autonomic arousal aspects of craving and relapse vulnerability  in AUD women.  
1.4.1 Preliminary Data 1 : We conducted a randomized, double blind, placebo -controlled 
laboratory study examining the gender effects of 3 -weeks Guanfacine immediate release (GUA 
2 to 3mgs; b.i.d) using a 12 day titration schedule in a sample  of early abstinent treatment -seeking 
alcohol dependent  men and women (N=24; 8F/16M). Method: Following 3 -weeks of abstinence, 
all participants were exposed to three, 10 -min personalized guided imagery scenarios (i) stress, 
ii) cue, iii) combined stress/cu e), one per day, across [ADDRESS_243229] imagery. Results: GUA was found to be safe and 
well tolerated in both men and women, with fatigue being the most commonly reported side -
effect. All symptoms were reported as being mild to moderate and dissipated withi n the initial two 
weeks of inpatient stay. At baseline, GUA reduced cardiovascular output in women compared 
with both PLA groups (p<.0001, in all cases). Following imagery exposure, a series of Medication 
Group X Gender X Time -point interactions showed tha t immediately following all 3 imageries the 
GUA females reported significantly attenuated anxiety [F5, 644 = 2.8, p<.02], sadness [F5, 644 
= 2.4, p<.04], arousal [F5, 644 = 3.7, p=.003] behavioral arousal (sweaty palms, crying) [F1, 30 
= 3.6, p=0.06] as we ll as increased positive mood [relaxed state: F5, 644 = 2.7, p<.02; Joy: F5, 
644 = 2.8 p<.02] compared with the PLA females (Fig 1). Importantly these attenuations in stress 
reactivity occurred alongside decreased alcohol craving across all conditions in t he GUA females 
compared with the PLA females [F5, 644 = 2.7, p=.02]. No such discrepancy was observed 
between GUA and PLA males, with the exception of nicotine craving and SBP which was 
attenuated in both the male and female GUA groups. Findings support pr eclinical studies showing 
attenuation of alcohol -seeking, relapse and other negative reinforcing aspects of alcohol craving 
following alpha2 agonism.  
 
Importantly, the robust effects of GUA in women may again be related to a sensitized sympathetic 
profile in the PLA women relative to PLA males, suggesting the need for a particular threshold of 
emotional and sympathetic arousal to optimize Guanfacine’s efficacy in women. This also 
corroborates studies that have shown GUA and GXR to be effective in treating c onditions 
characterized by [CONTACT_204011], including attention -deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 73 -77 and drinking in high, but not low alcohol consuming rats 23. 
On the basis of these findings we propose that 10 -weeks of G XR will be well -tolerated and safe 
in AUD women (H1a). GXR will also promote abstinence and adherence to treatment (H2a) by 
[CONTACT_204012], craving, anxiety, and negative mood, during treatment (H2b), and during 
stress in the laboratory (H3a).  
1.4 Regulatory processes as a target for treatment:  Stress -related sympathetic sensitivity may 
highlight an important gender -sensitive aspect of compulsive alcohol seeking in AUD women. In 
addition, aberrations in sympathetic stress arousal also impi[INVESTIGATOR_203975] 78. For example, greater activity in regulatory regions such as the VMPC 
and sub -genular ACC following stress is associated with lower autonomic arousal [ADDRESS_243230] everyday life 87 may therefore allow for the 
development of medications that are gender -sensitive and also demonstrate high ecological 
validity outside of the laborat ory. In support, data from two prior studies show that a) inability to 
cognitively inhibit during stress in the laboratory can predict fewer number of days to relapse 
following treatment discharge (Fig. 2a), and b) that GXR strengthen these relapse -related  
cognitive processes preferentially in substance abusing women (Fig. 2b).  
Sixty -two early abstinent alcoholics were 
compared with 107 cocaine dependent 
individuals and 74, socially drinking 
controls on Stroop color/word 
performance, prior to and following  
exposure to 3 personalized imagery 
conditions (stress, cue, neutral). Following 
exposure to stress, both cocaine (p=.002) 
and alcohol dependent (p=.05) individuals 
were less able to inhibit or regulate pre -
potent responses compared with controls. 
The alco hol group was subsequently 
categorized into either “good” or “bad” 
performers of Stroop (using a median split) 
and survival curves were plotted for both 
groups as a function of Stroop performance following stress. Proportional hazards modeling  
indicated t hat good ability to regulate in the face of stress challenge, was significantly associated 
with a reduced chance of relapse following discharge (x² = 8.78; p=.01; HR = 1.46; 95% CI, 0.96 -
2.2). Similar findings were also observed following an identical anal ysis in the cocaine dependent 
individuals (not shown).  
1.5.2 Preliminary Data 3 (Fig. 2b):  
We subsequently examined whether GUA (immediate 
release) could enhance these mechanisms during early 
abstinence. Using a sample of men and women co -
dependent on al cohol and cocaine (N=40; 13F/27M) we 
administered the Stroop test prior to and following 
exposure to 3 imagery conditions (stress, cue, combined 
stress/cue). After adjusting for baseline variation, a 
Medication X Gender effect [F1, 19 = 5.6, p<.03] showed 
Stroop performance to be significantly enhanced 
following all imagery conditions in the GUA women, but 
not the GUA men (Fig 2b). These findings corroborate  
GUA -related improvements in sustained attention, motor 
and response inhibition across a variety of s pecies [ADDRESS_243231] on regulatory processes, as 
providing a key target mechanism for drinking in women. We therefore propose that during a 10 -
week period, GXR will promote abstinence and adherence to treatment (H2a) by [CONTACT_204013], cognitive regulation and impulse control during treatment (H2b), and during 
stress in the laboratory (H3a).  
 
In order to more fully elucidate the mechanisms underpi[INVESTIGATOR_203976]’s effects in AUD women, we 
additionally examine whether GXR -related changes to tonic and phasic stress system activity in 
the laboratory can predict drinking outcome measures during treatment. Our preliminary and 
published findings indicate that sensitized a utonomic stress activity and ability to regulate during 
challenge are known to a) have a substantial impact on achieving and maintaining alcohol 
abstinence 85, and b)  also characterize drinking in women. As such, we propose that attenuated 
craving, anxiety , negative mood, autonomic function and enhanced cognitive control following 
stress in the lab will predict improved outcome during a 10 -week treatment trial (H3b).  
As an exploratory aim, we propose examining the efficacy of GXR versus placebo in a small 
subsample of women who are dependent on nicotine, but do not meet criterial for AUD. Prior 
preclinical research has indicated greater anxiety -like behaviors following stress -related nicotine 
exposure in female compared with male rats 157,158.  Moreover, stu dies from our own laboratory 
have indicated that Guanfacine significantly reduces stress - and cue -induced nicotine craving in 
both cocaine dependent and alcohol dependent individuals co -morbid for nicotine 18,29,30.  
Moreover, attenuation was significantly  greater in females (See Fig 3a -c.). 
 
Fig.3c  Nicotine Craving across all 3 imagery conditions & time -points in early abstinent cocaine 
dependent individuals  
D. RESEARCH DESIGN AND 
METHODS  
Rationale / overview  
Sixty women meeting criteria for moderate to severe alcohol use disorder (AUD) will be recruited 
to take part in a 10 -week outpatient treatment trial for GXR (3mgs/daily) versus PLA. On the basis 

that up to 30% of women may drop -out following the initial few sessions109, [ADDRESS_243232] 42 women will also run through a parallel l aboratory paradigm during week 10 
Outpatient treatment will include twice weekly appointments comprising medical management 
(MM) and contingency management (CM) protocols, collection of urine drug screens, 
breathalyzers, and vitals. Alcohol craving, use, and withdrawal as well as perceived stress, 
anxiety, mood, impulsivity and emotion and cognitive regulation will also be assessed. All 
participants who have been on Guanfacine for 9  weeks will take part in a lab oratory challenge 
session, where they will be exposed to 2, personalized guided imagery conditions (stress and 
neutral in a counterbalanced order). Craving, anxiety, mood, cognitive control, HRBP, plasma 
cortisol, ACTH, and catecholamines will be assessed at baseline, following imagery exposure 
and at various recovery time -points. A follow -up interview will be conducted 30 days following 
outpatient treatment completion.  
 
Research Site  
The proposed R21 will be conducted at the Health Sciences Center (HSC) located at University 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_203977], which additionally offers a wide range of treatment modalities for 
dementia, depression, anxiety, psychotic and bipolar spectrum disorders, as well as all 
psychiatric disorders associated with acute and chronic m edical illness. The facility is excellently 
equip for running phase I clinical trials in alcohol and substance abusers, offering treatments in 
psychopharmacology, individual and group counseling as well as comprehensive evaluation 
and medical management. T he department is also fully staffed with highly experienced, multi -
disciplinary board -certified psychiatrists and clinicians, includin g [CONTACT_204040] who 
specializes  in addiction psychiatry. Physical examinations and other medical evaluations 
necessar y to determine eligibility for the current research will be conducted at the Clinical 
Research Center (CRC), located at [ADDRESS_243233] stress induction procedur es, cognitive testing 
and day to day research.   
 
Study sample  
Human Subjects:  This study aims to recruit 60 women seeking out -patient treatment and who 
meet current DSM -V criteria for moderate -to-severe alcohol use disorder (AUD). In addition we 
will recruit a separate small sub -sample of 10 women who are nicotine dependent and 
treatment -seeking, but do not meet criteria for AUD. On the basis that up to 30% of participants 
may drop -out of treatment after the initial few sessions109, 110, we anticipate that at least 49 
AUD women will run through the laboratory stress challenge. AUD w omen enrolled in this study 
will predominantly come from low socio -economic backgrounds in Suffolk County, Long Island. 
In addition the Health Science Center at Stony Brook Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_203978] a dedicated 
Comprehensive Psychiatric Emergency Program (CPEP) w hich sees [ADDRESS_243234] psychiatric 
history, substance abuse, family and psychosocial context, medical history, and current status. 
Mental status and physical examinations are also made and potential referrals filtered into the 
appropriate research programs. CPEP additionally has close links to 67 alcohol and substance 
use diso rder facilities across Long Island, including 8 detoxification centers, 6 inpatient clinics, 
and 7 residential programs all in close proximity.  In relation to the racial and ethnic background 
of the women typi[INVESTIGATOR_203979]: 70% are Caucasian (and  of those 10% are Hispanic) 
and 30% are African American. As a result, we expect that the projected demographics of our 
sample will follow the above race breakdown. Subjects will be recruited by [CONTACT_204014], through general practitioners at Stony 
Brook hospi[INVESTIGATOR_203980], radio and other print media as 
well as study flyers posted in community buildings in the Suffolk County area. We propose the 
following strategies to encourage women into the study:  
Recruitment & retention strategies tailored to women: a) Research indicates that 
community involvement plays an integral role in recruiting both women and ethnic minorities into 
clinical trials 142. In view of the propose d study, both [CONTACT_204041] and the recruitment teams based 
at Stony Brook Psychiatry, will maintain regular contact [CONTACT_204015]. Regular meetings will 
be organized with ob jectives to work closely with prominent community leaders within the local 
area in order to devise culturally appropriate community -based participatory recruitment 
strategies encouraging women from ethnic minorities into our research projects. b) As women 
are more likely to seek care for alcohol use disorders within primary care settings143, we intend 
to focus recruitment efforts within medical health centers and approach a local network of 
general practitioners within Stony brook hospi[INVESTIGATOR_203981]; c) Treatment will predominantly be focused on psychoeducational  techniques directed 
at the needs of women, incorporating issues associated with stress, self -esteem, domestic 
violence, parenting, caregiving status, trauma, anxiety, negative mood and eating; d) As 
research has shown that programs which allow women to bring their children have higher rates 
of retention and are a predictor of  better treatment outcomes, we will encourage women to bring 
their children with them to all visits. The outpatient department at Stony Brook, employs several 
research assistants and associates with additiona l expertise in running  developmental research 
protocols, and the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Department is well -equipped to offer onsite 
child-care assistance while mothers  complete the treatment visits with clinical staff; e) we have 
budgeted for loca l transportation if required146; The following inclusion / exclusion criteria will 
be required for eligibility:  
 
 
Addendum as per COVID -19 CDC  guidelines:  
All potential / ongoing participants will be screened for exposure to the COVID -19 virus 
using the CDC guidelines below:  
1. Have you traveled to the following places in the last 14 days?  
-China, Iran, Japan, any country in Europe or South Korea? (Note that all level 3 
and level 2 countries/regions listed on the CDC website are included; CDC is 
checked regularly for updates.  
 
2.  Have you had any of the following symptoms in the last [ADDRESS_243235] result or chronic medical condition? Fever greater than 100.4 deg F? Cough, 
difficulty breathing, sore throat?  
3. In the past [ADDRESS_243236] you lived with, visited, cared for, or been in a room for a prolonged 
period of time with someone who is under investigation or has been confirmed for COVID -
19/ Corona virus infection?  
 Any YES response the subject will be asked to make an appointment for a later date and 
will be directed to the Coronavirus  Hotline/phone  triage  center  set up at Stony  Brook  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  [PHONE_4385] . 
 
Any and all subjects need to be asymptomatic for all scheduled visits ongoing through the study.  
Safe distancing practices will be implemented at all in office meetings, should they occur. Virtual 
visits will be utilized for any visits as the need sees fit.  
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: Inclusion Criteria: i) Females, aged 18 -60 years, ii) must meet 
DSM -V criteria for AUD, iii) must produce positive urine toxicology screens on admiss ion to 
study, or have recently been through a detox protocol, iv) must demonstrate good health as 
verified by [CONTACT_204016]. Liver Function Tests (LFT) should not exceed 3 units above; 
Bilirubin Total 0 -1 MG/DL Conjugated, (D. Bilirubin) 0 -0.35 MG/ DL, Unconjugated (I.D. Bilirubin) 
0.2-0.65 MG/DL,  SGOT 10 -40 IU/L, SGPT 10 -40 IU/L, Alkaline Phosphatase 40 -112 U/L, Total 
Protein 6 -8.5 GM/DL Albumin 3.5 -5 GM/DL, and Globulin 2 -3.5 GM/DL.v) must be able to read 
English and complete study evaluations vi) must be able to provide informed written and verbal 
consent. Women currently stable on SSRI medication will be included in the study. Exclusion 
Criteria: i) Meeting current use disorder for any other psychoactive substance, excluding 
nicotine. ii) Having a ny other current Axis I psychiatric disorders requiring treatment/medication, 
with the exception of SSRIs, iii) EKG evidence at baseline screening of any clinically significant 
conduction abnormalities, including a Bazlett’s QTc  of >470 msec. iv) must not  be on 
monophasic contraceptives, nursing or pregnant, v) active significant medical illness within the 
past six months (i.e. cancer), vi) documented autoimmune disease (i.e. Lupus, Crohn’s/UC, 
Hashimoto’s) vii) documented neurological illness (i.e. seizur e disorder, h/o stroke, excluding a 
single childhood febrile seizure) or a history of migraine headaches as determined by a 
physician, viii) documented diagnosis of diabetes mellitus or use of diabetic agents, ix) 
documented history of head trauma with pro longed loss of consciousness.  
 
A small sub -sample of women will be recruited that meet all Inclusion and Exclusion criteria with 
the exception of not meeting criteria for AUD, and instead meeting criteria for tobacco use 
disorder. The inclusion & exclusion criteria for this group will be as follows:  
Inclusion Criteria: i) Females, aged 18 -60 years, ii) they must meet criteria for tobacco use 
disorder (TUD) as determined by [CONTACT_9288] 5, iii) they must demonstrate good health as verified 
by [CONTACT_15249] e xamination, iv) they must be able to read English and complete study evaluations 
v) They must be able to provide written and verbal consent . Exclusion Criteria: i) meeting 
current use disorder for any psychoactive substance, excluding nicotine. ii) having  any other 
current Axis I psychiatric disorders or medical conditions requiring treatment/medication, with 
the exception of SSRIs. iii) EKG evidence at baseline screening of any clinically significant 
conduction abnormalities, including a Bazett’s QTc of > 470 msec. iv) must not be on 
monophasic contraceptives, nursing or pregnant.  
  
 
 
SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR THE COVID -19 VIRUS DURING ALL SCREENING VISITS:  
 
Addendum as per COVID -19 CDC  guidelines:  
All potential / ongoing participants will be screened for exposure to the COVID -19 virus 
using the CDC guidelines below:  
4. Have you traveled to the following places in the last 14 days?  
-China, Iran, Japan, any country in Europe or South Korea? (Note that all level 3 
and level 2 countries/regions listed on the CDC website are included; CDC is 
checked regularly for updates.  
 
5.  Have you had any of the following symptoms in the last [ADDRESS_243237] result o r chronic medical condition? Fever greater than 100.4 deg F? Cough, 
difficulty breathing, sore throat?  
6. In the past [ADDRESS_243238] you lived with, visited, cared for, or been in a room for a prolonged 
period of time with someone who is under investigation or has been confirmed for COVID -
19/ Corona virus infection?  
 Any YES response the subject will be asked to make an appointment for a later date and 
will be directed to the Coronavirus  Hotline/phone  triage  center  set up at Stony  Brook  
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  [PHONE_4385] . 
 
Any and all subjects need to be asymptomatic for all scheduled visits ongoing through the study.  
Safe distancing practices will be implemented at all in office meetings, should they occur. Virtual 
visits will be utilized for any visits as the need sees fi t. 
 
Screening  
Screening & intake: After consented telephone screening, eligible participants will meet with a 
research assistant for an  initial  intake session where informed consent, physical examinations, 
blood work (liver function tests, glucose and complete blood count) and alcohol screening will be 
conducted. We will also take a blood sample in order to collect exosomal microRNA in order to 
assess whether any differences in transcription factors that are known to affect stress and 
drinking, exist between several candidate microRNA genes [miR -21; miR -26; miR -146a; miR -
10a]. Demographic data will be assessed using standard self -report forms. The  SCID -I 119 will 
be used to determine AUD and/or Tobacco Use Disorder, and the possible presence of any Axis 
1 psychiatric and/or substance use disorder. The State/Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI); 120 will be 
used to ascertain the presence of state and trai t anxiety symptoms. The Alcohol Urges 
Questionnaire (AUQ) 121: is a reliable and valid 8item scale that can be used for repeated 
assessments of alcohol craving 122. The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) is a 
10-item screening instrument des igned to distinguish between low risk drinkers and individuals 
with hazardous and harmful patterns of alcohol consumption (WHO, 1992). We will also include 
The Drinking Motives Questionnaire (DMQ; Cooper, 1994) which is a 20 -item well -established 
scale tha t assesses social, copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], enhancement and social conformity motives for drinking. The 
Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; 123): is a 14 item self -report assessing the degree to which 
situations are appraised as threatening or demanding. The Early Trauma Inventor y (ETI; 162) is 
a 56-item interview to measure childhood trauma. The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI 124) is 
regarded as a well -established, sensitive self -report measure of depressive symptoms. The 
Menstrual Cycle Questionnaire (MCQ) is a 30 -item standardi zed instrument documenting 
symptoms, typi[INVESTIGATOR_203982]. Female subjects will complete the questionnaire at 
baseline. The Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS -[ZIP_CODE]) is a globally well -established 
questionnaire designed to assess the personality/b ehavioral construct of impulsiveness126. The 
Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS; 127): is a well -validated measure of emotion 
dysregulation. Items reflect impulse control; emotional awareness, regulation and clarity. We will 
also administer the  UPPS Impulsive Behavior Scale (UPPS or UPPS -P; Whiteside and Lynam, 
2001) to more thoroughly examine a personality model of impulsivity. The scale comprises [ADDRESS_243239] for Nicotine Dependence (FTND;128) will be used to determine smoking 
dependence. The Shipley Institute of  Living Scale 129 provides a global measure of co gnitive 
functioning and IQ. The Time -Line Follow  Back (TLFB) Interview [ADDRESS_243240] es & Breathalyzers: will ensure current 
alcohol use. Urine samples will also ensure the potential participants are not pregnant. The 
Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS; Zimet et al., 1988) has good 
internal and test –retest reliabilit y, and is a measure of subjectively assessed social support within 
the three domains of “family” “friends” and “Significant Other”. The Hurt Feelings Scale (Leary, 
2013) and Adult Rejection Sensitivity Scale (Downey & Feldman, 1996) are both well -validated  
measures of interpersonal social pain and rejection.  
The following updates and safety guidelines to the current are proposed due to the 
Covid -19 pandemic :  
INITIAL INTAKES:  
INTAKE 1:  Subject will be read the entire consent via virtual media (ZOOM) using the share 
screen option. The subject will have the opportunity to ask questions during the virtual 
consenting.  A copy will be mailed (via email or regular mail if no email available) to the subject 
for signature [CONTACT_204039] [CONTACT_204017] -sign 
 https://www.docusign.com  
 Subjects will  initially  be screened over the phone. They will then be emailed the consent 
form to read and scheduled for a consent appointment over zoom, where they will b e taken 
through the consent procedure  with a research coordinator and given time to ask questions. 
Consent will be proved using Docu -sign.  Participants will then be scheduled for an 
appointment at the CRC where they will provide a  baseline blood dra w, HCG urine test and 
urine toxicology . An EKG test will also be  performed . If a stay at home order  is in place, 
subjects  will be required to provide a current EKG (within the last three months)  as well as  
the last blood pressure reading from their most recent primary care physician visit. If they 
are unable to provide this, they will be  waitlisted until they are able attend the CRC . All 
questionnaires and clinical interviews (including the SCID) will be pe rformed over ZOOM by 
[CONTACT_204018]. All clinical testing will be reviewed by [CONTACT_204019] ([CONTACT_204042] ). 
 
If the subject proves to be in good health (as confirmed with the study physician) and meets 
study inclusion / exclusion criteria, a pack age will be sent out in the mail by [CONTACT_204020]. The 
package will contain a blood pressure monitor kit, urine toxicology cups, disposable 
breathalyzers for alcohol and 1 week of medication (dose determined by [CONTACT_204021]) 
timeline calendar, blood pressure heart rate daily log,  and written instructions on how to 
perform these tests.  
 
INTAKE 2: Intake 2 will be conducted early in the morning in order to ensure that the 
initial medication dose is as close to 8am as possible.   
Once the package is received by [CONTACT_2299], the second intake will be performed over 
virtual media (ZOOM). The subject will first meet briefly with the study physician in order to 
establish good health. The subject will then meet with the study RA to complete 
questionnaires, the timeline follow back and take a tutorial on how to use the blood pressure 
monitor. All subjects will also provide a urine sample to assess drug use by [CONTACT_41680] a photo of 
the test strip on the urine cup using their cell phone, an d sending it to the study site cell 
phone to be printed and stored in the participant binder.   
Disposable breathalyzer tests will additionally be completed and logged in the participant 
binder and results displayed via zoom.  
 
Participant will then admini ster the first dose of study medication or virtual media visit. 
Questionnaires and surveys will be conducted and timeline follow back will be obtained.  Sit 
stand blood pressure recordings will be taken at the end of this intake.  Appointment for the 
weekly  virtual visits will be scheduled.  
 
Medication  
 
At a second intake appointment participants will meet with the study MD, and once cleared begin 
the first dose of Guanfacine or placebo. They will be randomly assigned to either GXR (3mgs) or 
PLA, and will receive the exact amount of medication until their next visit, provided in unit/dose 
containers and labeled with the time and date to facilitate appropriate dosing. Riboflavin will be 
added to the medications and blood plasma assessed for medication levels  every four weeks to 
ensure compliance131. The use of extended release GXR will also necessitate the use of only 1 
tablet per day, increasing likelihood of adherence  
ALL SESSIONS :  
 SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR THE COVID -19 VIRUS DURING:  
 
WEEKLY STUDY VISITS 2 x per week – all virtual:  
All assessments will be performed by [CONTACT_204022] a secured media site.  Using ZOOM 
with end to end encryption. Subjects will be mailed via UPS with signature [CONTACT_60675]: 1 BP 
monitoring kit, Urine toxicology cups, 1 -week medic ation until titrations to the optimal dose of 
3 mg of Guanfacine or Placebo; based on the blind randomization assigned by [CONTACT_56426]. Subjects will receive virtual tutorials form the research staff on the use of the BP 
monitor and utilization of the ur ine toxicology cups through zoom. Subjects will be monitored 
via virtual media during the use of these tools each visit. All adverse events to be reported 
and documented during these visits. Reported to study MD as needed and virtual visit with 
MD as neede d. All SAFTEE documents will be administered and documented. One virtual 
visit each week will include medication management , with continued assessment of the 
subject during the COVID_19 crisis to insure that additional counseling is not needed.  
 
Weekly Assessments  include the following :   
 
1. SAFTEE sheet – documenting any adverse effects  
2. A series of short rating scales measuring : craving (AUQ), stress (PSS), emotion 
regulation (DERS), mood (POMS), anxiety (STAXI), depressive symptoms (BDI) and 
withdr awal symptoms (CIWA)  
3. Timeline follow back (TLFB) – subject report of daily alcohol/drug use  
3. Vitals – sitting to standing  
4. Urine toxicology screen s and breathalyzer . At week [ADDRESS_243241]   
5. All participants will additionally be required to obtain a blood draw at the CRC on week 4 
and week 8 in order to assess LFTs, glucose and CBC and to quantify medication levels.  
 
Procedures  
Outpatient procedures : All AUD women will be required to attend  two outpatient visits per week 
for 10 -weeks.  All women will take part in Medical Management (MM) and Contingency 
Management (CM) protocols. All clinicians will be fully trained in these procedures, and educated 
specifically in the treatment needs of women, including relationship issues, caregiving sta tus, 
anxiety, mood and eating132. In week 10 of treatment a 12 -day taper schedule will be 
implemented 133, prior to discharge  
Dosing : Dosing will begin  at Intake 2 appointment . Women receiving GXR will begin dosing at 1 
mg/d (days 1 -7). Dosages will escal ate to 2mg/d (days 7 -21) and 3mg/g (day 21 - onwards). 
Please see Appendix 5 for titra tion and updated taper schedule . Identical placebo tablets will be 
used. All guanfacine and placebo tablets will contain riboflavin in order to ensure compliance  
Medical m anagement (MM) & contingency management (CM) for treatment adherence : The 
primary focus of the MM protocol134 is to assist clinicians in providing educational support 
strategies for maintaining medication adherence. It was designed for delivery in a primar y care 
setting and as such is a suitable platform for use in outpatient clinical trials assessing new 
medications for alcohol 135137. Primary goals include promoting compliance via psycho -
educational methods as well as encouraging participation into self -help programs aimed at 
women134. The initial session will be 3045 minutes followed by 10 minute follow -up sessions 
once per week. In addition, all subjects will receive CM providing participants with the opportunity 
to increase chances of winning variable d ollar prizes at study completion for kept appointments 
See Human Studies Section for full details of gender -specific recruitment goals (1.2) & CM 
protocol (4.1.3). 3.5.3 Outpatient Assessments: Primary Outcomes: All participants will be 
required to provide  a urine and breathalyzer screen at each appointment. In addition, the Time -
Line Follow -Back Interview 130 will be used to assess all alcohol and nicotine use in the previous 
90 days at baseline and weekly during the 10 week treatment trial. Primary alcoho l use outcomes 
will be: (1) time to initial drink and heavy drinking (men: ≥5 drinks; women: ≥4); (2) frequency: the 
total number of days of alcohol use; and (3) quantity: the average amount of alcohol use (no. of 
drinks) per occasion. Subjects will be con sidered drop -outs if they receive two phone calls and 
two letters inviting them to return. We will attempt to assess these early terminators at the time 
of discontinuation, at the 10 week termination point, and at the follow -up period. These women 
will be withdrawn from the study but considered in the intent -to-treat efficacy analyses. Secondary 
Outcomes: The following measures will be administered upon admission and twice weekly to 
assess the effects of GXR on craving, anxiety, mood, stress and regulation:  AUQ; STAI; BDI; 
POMS -Bi; PSS; DERS; BIS -11 and Stroop. Data Safety: The following measures will be   
assessed: (i) Sitting and standing vital signs: every 15 minutes for one hour (ii) Liver function 
tests, glucose and Complete Blood Count (CBC): weeks 4 an d 8 for abnormal values (iii) 
Systematic Assessment of Treatment Emergent Events (SAFTEE): every week to assesses the 
severity and duration of potential physical or health problems. Adverse events will be documented 
according to the criteria outlined in th e Human Subjects section 6.0. (iv)  Blood draw to assess 
medication levels: weeks 4 and 8 (v) urine test to ensure the participant is not pregnant: weeks 4 
and 8.  
SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR THE COVID -19 VIRUS DURING:  
 
LAB SESSIONS :  
 Safe distancing practices to be implemented during the pandemic crisis. NO stress 
challenge labs will be initiated until the STATE OF NEW YORK is cleared by [CONTACT_6750], or 
NIH from this current DISASTER CRISIS.  
 
Laboratory Session : The laboratory challenge s ession will be conducted in the 10th week of 
outpatient treatment, when all participants have reached full dose. During the lab, subjects will 
be brought into the testing room at [ADDRESS_243242] saliva, a blood pressure cuff and 
pulse oximeter used to periodically monitor vitals. After 10 minutes relaxation, baseline measures 
of alcohol craving, nicotine craving, anxiety, mood, HRBP and saliva  will be collected -5 minutes 
prior to imagery exposure. Subjects will then be given headphones and asked to imagine the 
situation being described, 'as if' they were actively participating in it at that moment. The script 
(either stress or neutral) will be  presented for exactly 5 minutes. All measures will be collected 
immediately following imagery (0) and again at +15 minutes and +30 minutes following imagery 
exposure. The Stroop task138 will be administered at baseline and following imagery only. All 
saliva will be placed on ice immediately, prior to storing at -20. Participants will then be given a 
1-hour break to relax, before repeating the procedure. All procedures will be identical, with the 
exception of the imagery presented (stress or neutral). The i magery order will be counterbalanced 
and neither the subject not the investigator will know the order of imagery presentation prior to 
the study. Relaxation instructions will be provided to ameliorate any residual effects of imagery. 
Imagery script develop ment, imagery training and relaxation techniques will be conducted in the 
week prior to the laboratory sessions (see Human Subjects Section 2.4). 3.7 Follow -up 
interviews: Face -to-face interviews will be conducted 30 days after outpatient treatment 
complet ion. Urine and breathalyzer screens and a daily assessment of alcohol use will be 
collected using the TLFB method130  
All 30 day follow -up interviews will be conducted over zoom.  
STATISTICS  
Data Analyses Plan: Aim1: To evaluate the safety and tolerability o f GXR (3mgs/day) in women 
with AUD. All potential adverse effects from both treatment groups will be recorded twice weekly 
and classified, per body system and reaction, in a frequency table. Comparisons between 
treatment groups will be conducted using t -tests, chi -square tests and ANOVAs as appropriate 
(H1a). Aim2: To determine the preliminary efficacy of 10 -week GXR (3mgs/day) versus PLA 
treatment on outcome measures in women with AUD: All analyses will be conducted using the 
intent -to-treat sample, and su rvival analyses will be used to examine medication effects on time 
to relapse measures. In order to model time intervals between events, reoccurring event -time 
analysis will be performed 139. Hierarchical Linear Models (HLM) will be used to determine the 
effects of medication on continuous dependent variables, including % days abstinent and number 
of days in treatment (H2a), as well as secondary outcome variables, including craving, stress, 
anxiety, mood (H2b). Failures in treatment attendance will be accou nted for by [CONTACT_204023] a 
random effect. Aim 3: To better determine the mechanisms underlying efficacy, by [CONTACT_14664] a 
parallel laboratory study: Linear Mixed Effects (LME) models will examine the effects of 
medication on all Dependent Variables foll owing stress versus neutral imagery within the 
laboratory (H3a). In order to elucidate the contribution of GXRrelated stress system changes in 
the laboratory on primary drinking outcomes, correlational, regression and survival analyses will 
be performed as  appropriate (H3b).  
FUNDING STATUS, DETAILS  
NIAAA have stated that they are in the process of issuing a restricted NOA, pending IRB approval.  
  *HUMAN SUBJECTS RESEARCH PROTECTION FROM RISK  SAFETY GUIDELINES 
FOR THE COVID -19 VIRUS DURING:  
 
LAB SESSIONS :  
 Safe distancing practices to be implemented during the pandemic crisis. NO visits  will be 
initiated until the STATE OF NEW YORK is cleared by [CONTACT_204024].  
 
Risk to Subjects  
Guanfacine extended release (GXR) treatment: GRX ( Intuniv; manufactured by [CONTACT_10188]) is an 
alpha2 -adrenergic agonist that is known to preferentially bind to alpha -2A-adrenergic receptors 
which are highly concentrated in the prefrontal cortical regions 148. While initial reactions to 
Guanfacine are common, mo st symptoms are mild and include fatigue, sedation, light -
headedness, dizziness and vertigo, and tend to disappear either on continued dosing or following 
dose adjustment 18, 149. In fact, one major advantage of Guanfacine over other alpha2 
adrenergic agon ists such as clonidine, is that it is less sedating with less hypotensive potential in 
both children and adults 73, 75, [ADDRESS_243243] to minimize this risk: (a) the dosing 
levels of GXR (3mgs) is within the range safely used in outpatient studies comprising children 
and adults with ADHD and tic disorders, commonly ranging from 1.5 to 4 mg/ day 73, 75, 
149.Moreover, our prior published and pi[INVESTIGATOR_203983] 3mgs are well tolerated in substance and alcohol abusing men and women18, 92. 
(b) Participants` heart rate, blood pressure and self -reports of any potential adverse effects are 
monitored twice weekly while taking part in outpatient treatment (c) As this study represents a 
preliminary outpatient trial in women with AUD, we propose a longer than standard “lead in” phase 
of [ADDRESS_243244] 
employed 16 -day titration phases 118.  
*Drawing of Blood:  
During each laboratory session, about four and a half ounces of blood will be drawn to measure 
stress system adaptations d uring the laboratory sessions. The amount of blood drawn for the 
tests is equal to about one fourth the blood obtained during a regular blood donation. People 
who are in good health are not usually affected by [CONTACT_204025]. However, to be safe, 
subjects will be warned against donating blood for at least six weeks after completing this study.  
The Imagery Procedures:  
Prior to admission, during intake procedures, a script development session will be conducted 
where information for script development  is obtained. Our standard imagery script development 
procedures will be used to develop the 5 -minute long personalized stress and neutral imagery 
scenarios. The stress imagery script will be based on participants’ description of a recent event 
that has ha ppened to them in the past year, and which has been experienced as " most 
stressful ". This will be determined using a 10 -point visual analog scale, where a score of 10 = 
“most stressful ”. Only scenarios scored as [ADDRESS_243245] or job -related stress. The 
neutral script will be developed from a personal nonalcohol -related relaxing situation. A 5 -
minute ‘script’ of each scenario will be written usin g the Scene Construction Questionnaires 
technique 151, [ADDRESS_243246] non -emotional neutral and physically arousing 
scenes (e.g. reading a magazine; doing sit -ups). They will then be questioned  about their ability 
to visualize and notice changes in physiological response. The method is adapted from Lang`s 
imagery training procedures 36, 152, and will serve to provide clear instructions on imagery 
procedure to reduce imagery variability. Both the  script development procedures as well as 
exposure to imagery in the laboratory sessions involve reliving a personal stressful event. 
Moreover, the objectives of our paradigm are to induce enhanced and persistent ([ADDRESS_243247] 
imagery) anxiety, negative moo d and alcohol craving within a controlled experimental setting. 
Although this can be particularly emotionally arousing during the sessions themselves, our 
previous experience has shown that by [CONTACT_3450] 1 1/[ADDRESS_243248] may linger for a prolonged period following the laboratory sessions 
and in order to reduce these symptoms the following safeguards will be taken: (a) Subjects will 
participate in lab sessions in the Department of Psychiatry, in quiet, relaxation rooms. Subjects 
who have difficulty reducing their craving levels will participate in relaxation procedures to return 
craving levels to baseline b oth after the imagery sessions and prior to being discharged from 
the unit. We have found that relaxation procedures are particularly effective in reducing craving 
levels after stress exposure 153, 154. (b) To enhance response to relaxation procedures, 
subjects will also be trained on relaxation procedures prior to the laboratory sessions. (c) Any 
subject reporting residual craving or emotional discomfort after completion of laboratory 
sessions will receive an individual counseling session by a licensed psy chologist experienced in 
therapy. The focus of this session will be copi[INVESTIGATOR_203984].  
All subjects will be screened for the COVID -19 virus: subjects that have been exposed 
will be excluded until they are cleared by [CONTACT_204026]  
 
*Physical examinat ion and other laboratory data collection:  
All subjects recruited will receive a comprehensive physical examination and laboratory blood 
work to ensure good physical health status. The physical examinations will be conducted by [CONTACT_204027]. Both will be well aware of study entry criteria and will 
manage physical and medical assessment accordingly. Routine laboratory blood work will 
include  CBC, ESR, glucose, BUN/creatinine, electrolytes, lipid profile, liver function tests. 
Abnormal findings will be further evaluated by [CONTACT_5989]  ([CONTACT_204043])  and appropriate 
medical advice will be provided. These are routine medical procedures and  should add no risks 
other than those normally associated with these procedures. However, the research nurse 
coordinator, with advice from the study physician, will ensure that potential women who may be 
excluded from research due to medical reasons or pre gnancy, or those who are in immediate 
need for medical or psychiatric attention, will be referred to the primary care/psychiatric care 
facilities in the network so they can receive the appropriate clinical care needed to address their 
condition. Breath scr eening and urine collections are performed primarily as safeguards to 
contamination of data and should add no risks other than those normally associated with these 
procedures.  
Nonspecific risks:  
Other risks from the outpatient counseling and rating scales  are not beyond usual clinical 
procedures in a substance abuse treatment program. All research, medical and clinical staff are 
thoroughly and systematically trained in the confidentiality and ethical procedures associated 
with patient health information. C onfidentiality of such data are specifically protected by [CONTACT_204028], and all records will be identified by [CONTACT_120467], with the master file kept under lock 
by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_79755]. Medical Treatment for Injury: The consen t 
form will specify that medical therapy will be provided for injuries sustained as a consequence of 
participation in this research. Should referral to specialists be needed, however, there are no 
outside funds available to cover the costs.  
 
Adequacy of Protection against Risks  
All subjects will be screened for the COVID -19 virus: subjects that have been exposed 
will be excluded until they are cleared by [CONTACT_204029] : 
Most assessments will be performed by [CONTACT_204018] s over the secured media site  ZOOM with 
end to end encryption . However, the c linical portion of the recruitment  intake process wi ll be 
performed with the  safety precaution s using appropriate PPE set forth by [CONTACT_6750]  . 
AUD treatment -seeking women will all be scree ned and interviewed by [CONTACT_204030]. If an individual expresses 
interest, she will receive an explanation of the study, risks, benefits and description of 
procedures. Subje cts will be informed that participation in all components of the research is 
entirely voluntary and that all information collected will be kept confidential. All women will be 
asked to sign the research consent form if they wish to participate following re solution of any 
questions and clear indication that they understand the nature of the study and the consent. 
After obtaining written informed consent for participation in the study, the study physician will 
interview all women and review medical and psychi atric data prior to admission.  
Confidentiality:  
All women who take part in this study will be free to drop out of the study at any time without 
penalty. All data will be kept confidential except in cases of imminent danger to the participants. 
Such limits to confidentiality will be clearly explained to participants verbally and in the written 
consent forms. Confidentiality in regard to collected materials will be maintained via a numbered 
reference system maintained by [CONTACT_473]. Subjects' names wil l appear only on a 
consent form and a "key" form kept by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_203985]. Only the project manager 
and PI [INVESTIGATOR_203986]. All 
number coded subjective and biological data wi ll be kept in locked offices with access only to 
investigators and research staff. Furthermore, good clinical and research practice procedures 
and HIPAA regulations will be followed. Subjects will be withdrawn from the study if they show 
severe psychologic al or symptomatic deterioration. They will subsequently be offered treatment 
as usual at the CNRU. Alternate treatment recommendations will be made and offered 
according to the subject's needs and wishes.  
 
Federal Certificate of Confidentiality:  
As the study involves the collection of sensitive data associated with alcohol use and the 
potential use of other illicit substances, a federal Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained 
from NIH to further protect the information provided by [CONTACT_204031]. A 
component of this project will also involve assessing each potential participant’s alcohol and 
illicit substance use (including cannabis, cocaine, nicotine and heroin), at several intake 
appointments and during a follow -up intervi ew, both by [CONTACT_6270] -report as well as using urine 
toxicology and breath alcohol screens. If participants are intoxicated on arrival to any of these 
face-to-face appointments, appropriate preventative action may be taken. For example, in the 
case of alcohol in toxication, this may include removal of car keys and providing participants with 
adequate time in which to remain at the HSC in the attendance of a research assistant until their 
BAC is consistently below .02, as deemed appropriate by [CONTACT_204032] (1989). Other forms of transport may also be offered including 
taxi or bus.  
Clinical deterioration, severe anxiety, depressive symptoms and suicidality:  
During the intake, outpatient and follow -up sessions, all wome n will be required to provide 
psychiatric information regarding anxiety and depression symptoms as well as suicidality by [CONTACT_204033], such as The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV; 
SCID -I; 119. If participants do repor t severe anxiety and /or depressive symptoms or suicidal 
ideation during any part of the study, either verbally to the clinical and /or research staff or via 
self-reported questionnaires, staff will conduct a further assessment of suicidality and will 
discuss the risk of imminent harm with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_83618]. Referral for further 
evaluation and/or emergency treatment will be made.  
Relapse, and drop out : Every effort will be made to re -engage patients who miss 
appointments. If subjects have misse d three consecutive appointments, all attempts will be 
made to bring the subject back to the outpatient clinic and after a comprehensive assessment of 
the subject’s treatment need, a formal referral will be made to appropriate inpatient, 
detoxification or intensive outpatient care.  
Potential Benefits of Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others  
Financial : Although the current study provides MM counseling and CM protocols known to 
decrease alcohol consumption155, the procedures do not have direct short -term benefits to the 
subjects. Thus, all participants will be paid $50 for the screening and baseline interviews at 
intake, $100 for each laboratory session, $50 for the follow -up interview, in addition to $25 for 
each week of outpatient treatment ($25 X 10 = $250) and the potential for money obtained via 
10-weeks of CM.  
Medical Management (MM):  Each participant will be seen by a coordinator in our research staff 
individual with alcohol research and health experience, psychologist, or counselor. The general 
purpose of the counseling sessions are to: (1) acquire information about important concepts and 
aspects of recovery from addiction; (2) increase self -awareness of specific problems and issues 
in relation to addiction and recovery. This will be particularly geared towards issues pertaining to 
women, such as stress, self -esteem, domestic violence, parenting, caregiving status, trauma, 
anxiety, negative mood and eating (3) learn new copi[INVESTIGATOR_203987]. The focus of this psycho -
educational approach is on providing patients with frequent supportive contact, introduce them 
to key concepts about the recovery approach, and develop a sense of personal responsibility for 
recover y. 
Contingency Management (CM):  CM has been shown to have the largest effect size of all 
psychosocial therapi[INVESTIGATOR_203988] 155, 156. As such, all 
women will also receive CM providing them with the opportunity to earn chances of winning 
dollar prizes of var ying magnitudes. The chance of winning prizes will be contingent upon kept 
appointments, not clean urine toxicology screens. This will decrease the chances of CM 
masking the effects of the medication. For every two biweekly appointments attended, the 
chanc e to draw for a dollar prize will increase by [CONTACT_31806], making a total of 10 chances if all 
appointments are met. If appointments are missed the number of prize draw “chances” are reset 
to one. The participants draw from a prize bowl containing slips of paper s tating either a dollar 
amount or “good job” (50% of the slips). The prizes will be in increments of $1 (44% of slips), 
$20 (6% of slips), and $100 (1 slip). All slips will be returned to the bowl at the beginning of 
each draw to maintain probabilities. The  total prize amount will be added to the participants 
check on study completion. If subjects are unable to achieve abstinence within four weeks, they 
will be offered inpatient treatment or referred to a higher level of care at another facility. If a 
subjec t achieves abstinence but has occasional relapses, outpatient treatment will continue until 
either abstinence is sustained or a higher level of care is clinically indicated.  
Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
First, this study will contribute in prov iding important information regarding the role of the 
adrenergic system in stress -induced alcohol craving and relapse. Using a validated human 
laboratory model of stress -induced alcohol craving and relapse risk is a unique way of 
assessing bio -behavioral m echanisms underlying these processes which may hold wider 
implications for the assessment and treatment of a range of addictive disorders. Second, there 
is a critical need to develop new pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_203989], especially for women. This is 
partic ularly significant as, to date there exists no FDA approved treatment that has been 
developed in women, or which targets stress pathophysiology in alcoholism (see Section 2.0). 
Moreover, understanding the mechanisms underlying such dysregulation and compul sive 
alcohol seeking, will provide information for the development of new tailored therapeutic agents 
for clinical testing. This study will also specifically provide important preliminary information on 
treatment efficacy of GXR in alcohol women with AUD w ith regard to safety, tolerability and 
ability to attenuate alcohol craving and drinking.  
  
H.   DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (for more than minimal risk studies) . THESE 
INDIVIDUALS ARE INDEPENDENT OF THE STUDY.  
Data Safety Monitoring Board: The Data Safety Monitoring Board for this study will include 
Kenneth Gadow, PhD, Director of Clinical Research, Cody Center for Developmental 
Disabilities at Stony brook (phone: 631 -638-1549; email: kenneth.g [EMAIL_4006] ); and 
Evelyn Bromet, PhD, Distinguished Professor of Psychiatry and Preventative Medicine at Stony 
Brook (phone: 631 -638-1920; email: [EMAIL_4007] ) ; and Jodi Weinstein, MD , 
Assistant Professor of Psychiatry at Stony Brook Medicine (phone: 631 - 444 – 4000; email: 
[EMAIL_4008] .)    
 
[CONTACT_204044], PhD is a Professor appointed in the Department of Psychiatry at Stony 
Brook University. He is internationally known for his research in children with autism spectrum 
disorder, models of pathogenesis, ADHD, aggression, Tourette’s syndrome and 
psychopharmacology.  He is a Principal investigato r on several NIH -funded 
psychopharmacology studies and is highly experienced in the requirements of data safety 
monitoring.  He is also independent of the current study.  
[CONTACT_204045], PhD is an internationally acclaimed Professor of Psychiatric Epi[INVESTIGATOR_203990]. Her research has focused predominantly on 
environmental risk factors associated with the onset and progress of PTSD, depression and 
psychosis. She is also a past and current member of several NIH advis ory committees and 
highly experienced in the conduct of NIH protocols. She is not an investigator on this study and 
will function as an independent monitor.  
[CONTACT_204046], MD is an assistant professor in the Department of Psychiatry at Stony Brook 
University. She was a medical student at Vanderbilt University and did her fellowship at 
Columbia University. She is not an investigator on this study and will function as an independent 
monitor.  
The DSMB members will evaluate all Adverse and Serious Adverse  Events, and will assist the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_203991]. [CONTACT_204046] will be the Physician on record and 
will be invited to all DSMB meetings. If  the physician is unable to attend, he will be sent a copy 
of all Adverse Events and will be required to respond “I have reviewed all of the Adverse 
Events, and the Clinical Trial poses NO RISK AND MAY CONTINUE OR POSES RISK AND 
SHOULD NOT CONTINUE.” These  notes will then be sent to IRB along with the Minutes. They 
will monitor the studies quarterly and review all adverse event sheets completed during that 
period. Although the proposed clinical trial and laboratory study includes generally safe 
procedures a nd we do not foresee termination of the study as a direct consequence of study 
procedures, if there is a need, the DSMB will assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_203992] 
a particular patient continuing in a study for safety reasons. The DSMB will a lso review the 
summary of all Adverse and Serious Adverse Events, which will be reported annually to the 
Stony Brook IRB committee and the appropriate NIH Project Officer.  
Monitoring and reporting Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse Events (SAEs): 
Data on Adverse Events occurring during the course of conducting this study will be collected, 
documented and reported to the Stony Brook IRB board and to NIAAA. A summary of all AE’s 
will be prepared annually, by [CONTACT_204034] [INVESTIGATOR_203993]. The Stony Brook IRB requires the re -approval 
of study protocols at least annually and will not re -approve the protocol without such reports.  
Adverse Events (AE) will be defined on the basis of the NIH Guidelines on Data and Safety 
Monitoring for Intervention Trials. These guidelines define an AE as any reaction, side effect or 
untoward event that occurs during the course of the clinical trial, whether or not the event is 
considered related to the study manipulations. A new illness, symptom, unfavorable or 
unintended sign, or worsening of a pre -existing condition or abnormality will be considered an 
AE. Stable chronic conditions such as diabetes that are present prior to study entry and do not 
worsen will not be considered AEs. AEs will include events and symptoms reported by [CONTACT_204035]. The AE Form will be used 
for recording the event and any follow -up information. The following Stony Brook IRB/FDA 
classification of AE “severity” and “attribution” will be used.  
Coding of Severity:  
0 = No adverse event or within  normal limits  
1 = Mild adverse event  
2 = Moderate adverse event  
3 = Severe, resulting in psychiatric or medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
4 = Life -threatening adverse event5 = Fatal adverse event  
Coding of Attribution:  
1 = Unrelated to study interventions  
2 = Unlikely relation ship to study interventions  
3 = Possible relationship to study interventions  
4 = Probable relationship to study interventions  
5 = Definite relationship to study interventions  
Reporting of Serious Adverse Events (SAEs): Each AE will be classified by [CONTACT_204034] [INVESTIGATOR_203994]. Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) will be defined on the basis of the NIH Guidelines on 
Data and Safety Monit oring for Intervention Trials. An SAE will be any fatal event, any 
immediately life -threatening event, any permanent or substantially disabling event or any event 
that requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (a severity rating of 3 or above). Any 
Unexpected Event that suggests a significant hazard, contra -indication, side effect or precaution 
will also be reported.  
The project PI [INVESTIGATOR_203995] o fficer within 48 hours, using the Stony 
Brook IRB adverse events reporting form.  The completed SAE Form will include 
demographic information, a narrative explanation of the event, and photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_203996]’s case re port forms. The project PI [INVESTIGATOR_203997] a need to re -design or amend the protocol, or a need to change the description of risk, 
either in the consent form or in the protocol.  
Reporting of other study -safety events: The project PI [INVESTIGATOR_203998], the Stony Brook IRB committee and the NIAAA program officer promptly of any change 
in recruitment or other changes in this project that are relevant to safety, as well as any action 
taken by [CONTACT_204036] a result of continuing review of this project . The 
NIH Project Officer will also be informed of any change in the status of the study protocol, 
including amendments to protocols, changes in informed consent process, or other problems 
that could a ffect the human subjects in the study.  
I.  LITERATURE CITED  
1 Bullers S. An Exploratory Study of Gender and Changes in Alcohol Consumption: A Qualitative 
Approach. Sociation Today. 2012; 10.  
2 Becker JB, Hu M. Sex differences in drug abuse. Frontiers in neuro endocrinology. 2008; 29: 
36-47.   
3 Fattore L, Altea S, Fratta W. Sex differences in drug addiction: a review of animal and 
humanstudies. Women's health. 2008;  
4: 51 -65. 4 Ruiz SM, Oscar -Berman M, Sawyer KS, et al. Drinking history associations with 
regiona l white matter volumes in alcoholic men and women. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental 
research. 2013; 37: 110 -22.  
5 Garbutt JC, Kranzler  HR, O'Malley SS, et al. Efficacy and tolerability of long -acting 
injectable naltrexone for alcohol dependence: a randomized controlled trial. Jama. 2005; 293: 
1617 -25.  
6 Fox HC, Sinha R. Sex differences in drug -related stress -system changes: implications f or 
treatment in substance -abusing women. Harvard review of psychiatry. 2009; 17: [ADDRESS_243249] Range of Substances: Alcohol, Nicotine, Marijuana, Heroin, Cocaine , and Caffeine. 
Substance abuse : research and treatment. 2013; 7: 171 -83.  
8 Aston -Jones G, Kalivas PW. Brain norepi[INVESTIGATOR_203999]. 
Biological psychiatry. 2008; 63: 1005 -6.  
9 Smith RJ, Aston -Jones G. Noradrenergic transmission in  the extended amygdala: role in 
increased drug -seeking and relapse during protracted drug abstinence. Brain structure & 
function. 2008; 213: 43 -61.  
10 Ehrenreich H, Schuck J, Stender N, et al. Endocrine and hemodynamic effects of stress 
versus systemic CRF i n alcoholics during early and medium term abstinence. Alcoholism, clinical 
and experimental research. 1997; 21: 1285 -93.  
11 Sher L. Combined dexamethasone suppression/corticotropin -releasing hormone 
stimulation test and antidepressants: different antidepress ants may produce different effects. 
Medical hypotheses. 2006; 66: 1248 - 9.  
12 Koob GF. Corticotropin -releasing factor, neuroplasticity (sensitization), and alcoholism. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the [LOCATION_002] of America. 2008; 105 : 
880910.  
13 Fox HC, Talih M, Malison R, et al. Frequency of recent cocaine and alcohol use affects 
drug craving and associated responses to stress and drug -related cues. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2005; 30: [ADDRESS_243250] year of abstinence. Drug 
and alcohol dependence. 2007; 86: 139 -46.  
15 Goldstein RZ, Volkow ND. Dysfunction of the prefrontal cortex in add iction: neuroimaging 
findings and clinical implications. Nature reviews Neuroscience. 2011; 12: 652 -69.  
16 McKee SA, Potenza MN, Kober H, et al. A translational investigation targeting stress -
reactivity and prefrontal cognitive control with Guanfacine for sm oking cessation. Journal of 
psychopharmacology. 2015; 29: 300 -11.  
  
17 Verplaetse TL, Weinberger AH, Smith PH, et al. Targeting the Noradrenergic System 
forGenderSensitive Medication Development for Tobacco Dependence. Nicotine & tobacco 
research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2015; 17: 486 -
95.  
18 Fox HC, Seo D, Tuit K, et al. Guanfacine effects on stress, drug craving and prefrontal 
activation in cocaine dependent individuals: preliminary findings. Journal of 
psychophar macology. 2012; 26: [ZIP_CODE].  
19 Gowing L, Farrell MF, Ali R, et al. Alpha2 -adrenergic agonists for the management of 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_43351]. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews. 2014; 3: CD002024.  
20 Mannelli P, Peindl K, Wu LT, et al. The combination very lo w-dose naltrexone -clonidine in 
the management of opi[INVESTIGATOR_43351]. The American journal of drug and alcohol abuse. 2012; 
38: 200 -5.  
21 Shaham Y, Shalev U, Lu L, et al. The reinstatement model of drug relapse: history, 
methodology and major findings. Psychop harmacology. 2003; 168: 3 -20.  
22 Arnsten AF. Catecholamine and second messenger influences on prefrontal cortical 
networks of "representational knowledge": a rational bridge between genetics and the symptoms 
of mental illness. Cerebral cortex. 2007; [ADDRESS_243251]  1: i6-15.  
23 Fredriksson I, Jayaram -Lindstrom N, Wirf M, et al. Evaluation of Guanfacine as a potential 
medication for alcohol use disorder in long -term drinking rats: behavioral and electrophysiological 
findings. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publicat ion of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015; 40: 1130 -40. 
24 Arnsten AF. Catecholamine influences on dorsolateral prefrontal cortical networks. 
Biological psychiatry. 2011; 69: e89 -99.  
[ADDRESS_243252], betaxolol, improves 
working memory performance in rats and monkeys. Biological psychiatry. 2005; 58: [ADDRESS_243253] K, et al. Gender differences in response to emotional 
stress: an assessment across subjective, behavior al, and physiological domains and relations to 
alcohol craving. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2008; 32: 1242 -50.  
27 Fox HC, Hong KI, Siedlarz KM, et al. Sex -specific dissociations in autonomic and HPA 
responses to stress and cues in alcohol -dependent patients with cocaine abuse. Alcohol and 
alcoholism. 2009; 44: 575 -85.  
28 Hartwell EE, Ray LA. Sex moderates stress reactivity in heavy drinkers. Addictive 
behaviors. 2013; 38: 2643 -6.  
29 Fox HC, Morgan PT, Sinha R. Sex differences in Guanfacine effects on drug craving and 
stress arousal in cocaine -dependent individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication 
of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014a; 39: 1527 -37.  
30 Fox H, Sinha R. The role of Guanfacine as a therapeutic agent to address stress -related 
pathophysiology in cocaine -dependent individuals. Advances in pharmacology. 2014b; 69: 217 -
65. 
31 Fox HC, Anderson GM, Tuit K, et al. Prazosin effects on stress - and cue -induced craving 
and stress response in alcohol -dependent individuals: preliminary findings. Alcoholism, clinical 
and experimental research. 2012; 36: [ADDRESS_243254] KL, Casey J, et al. Selective cocaine -related difficulties in 
emotionalintelligen ce: relationship to stress and impulse control. The American journal on 
addictions / American Academy of Psychiatrists in Alcoholism and Addictions. 2011; 20: 151 -60.  
33 Fox HC, Hong KA, Paliwal P, et al. Altered levels of sex and stress steroid hormones 
assessed daily over a 28 -day cycle in early abstinent cocaine -dependent females. 
Psychopharmacology. 2008; 195: 527 -36.  
34 Fox HC, Hong KI, Siedlarz K, et al. Enhanced sensitivity to stress and drug/alcohol craving 
in abstinent cocaine -dependent individuals com pared to social drinkers. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008; 33: 796 -805.  
35 Hyman SM, Fox H, Hong KI, et al. Stress and drug -cue-induced craving in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -
dependent individuals in naltrex one treatment. Experimental and clinical psychopharmacology. 
2007; 15: 134 -43.  
36 Sinha R. Modeling stress and drug craving in the laboratory: implications for addiction 
treatment development. Addiction biology. 2009; 14: 84 -98.  
37 Sinha R, Fox H, Hong KI, et al. Sex steroid hormones, stress response, and drug craving 
in cocaine dependent women: implications for relapse susceptibility. Experimental and clinical 
psychopharmacology. 2007; 15: 445 -52.  
38 Sinha R, Fox HC, Hong KA, et al. Enhanced negative emotion and  alcohol craving, and 
altered physiological responses following stress and cue exposure in alcohol dependent 
individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009; 34: 1198 -208.  
39 Sinha R, Fox H C, Hong KI, et al. Effects of adrenal sensitivity, stress - and cue -induced 
craving, and anxiety on subsequent alcohol relapse and treatment outcomes. Archives of general 
psychiatry. 2011; 68: 942 - 52.  
40 Sinha R, Garcia M, Paliwal P, et al. Stress -induced co caine craving and hypothalamic -
pi[INVESTIGATOR_204000]. Archives of general 
psychiatry. 2006; 63: 324 -31.  
41 Keyes KM, Grant BF, Hasin DS. Evidence for a closing gender gap in alcohol use, abuse, 
and dependence i n the [LOCATION_002] population. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2008; 93: 21 -9.  
42 Geels LM, Vink JM, van Beek JH, et al. Increases in alcohol consumption in women and 
elderly groups: evidence from an epi[INVESTIGATOR_119262]. BMC public health. 2013; 13: 207.  
43 McPherson M, Casswell S, Pledger M. Gender convergence in alcohol consumption and 
related problems: issues and outcomes from comparisons of New Zealand survey data. 
Addiction. 2004; 99: [ADDRESS_243255] kept secret: why women drink and how they ca n regain control. 1stb 
edition ed. Simon and Schuster, [LOCATION_001], NY, 2013.  
  
45 Ruiz SM, Oscar -Berman M. Closing the Gender Gap: The Case for Gender -Specific 
AlcoholismResearch. Alcohol and Drug Dependence. 2013; 1: 1 -3.  
46 Schiebinger L. Women's health and cl inical trials. The Journal of clinical investigation. 
2003; 112: 973 - 7. 
47 Greenfield SF, Rosa C, Putnins SI, et al. Gender research in the National Institute on Drug 
Abuse National Treatment Clinical Trials Network: a summary of findings. The American journ al 
of drug and alcohol abuse. 2011; 37: 301 -12.  
48 Zorrilla EP, Logrip ML, Koob GF. Corticotropin releasing factor: a key role in the 
neurobiology of addiction. Frontiers in neuroendocrinology. 2014; 35: 234 -44.  
49 Koob GF, Zorrilla EP. Neurobiological mechani sms of addiction: focus on corticotropin -
releasing factor. Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_36900]. 2010; 11: 63 -71.  
50 Bomfim GH, Verde LF, Frussa -Filho  R, et al. Functional effects of alcohol withdrawal 
syndrome on peripheral sympathetic neurotransmission in vas deferens of adult rats. Life 
sciences. 2014; 108: 3443.  
51 Muzyk AJ, Fowler JA, Norwood DK, et al. Role of alpha2 -agonists in the treatment of acu te 
alcohol withdrawal. The Annals of pharmacotherapy. 2011; 45: 649 -57.  
52 Koob GF. Alcoholism, corticotropin -releasing factor, and molecular genetic allostasis. 
Biological psychiatry. 2008; 63: 137 -8.  
53 Koob GF. Neurobiological substrates for the dark side o f compulsivity in addiction. 
Neuropharmacology. 2009; [ADDRESS_243256] 1: 18 -31.  
54 Dunn AJ, Berridge CW. Is corticotropin -releasing factor a mediator of stress responses? 
Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences. 1990; 579: 183 -91.  
55 Dunn AJ, Swiergiel AH, Palamar chouk V. Brain circuits involved in corticotropin -releasing 
factornorepi[INVESTIGATOR_204001]. Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences. 
2004; 1018: 25 -34.  
56 Dunn AJ, Swiergiel AH. Effects of acute and chronic stressors and CRF in rat and mo use 
tests for depression. Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences. 2008; 1148: 118 -26.  
57 Kushner MG, Abrams K, Borchardt C. The relationship between anxiety disorders and 
alcohol use disorders: a review of major perspectives and findings. Clinical psycho logy review. 
2000; 20: [ADDRESS_243257] KL, Hong KI, et al. Stress -induced and alcohol cue -induced craving in 
recently abstinent alcohol -dependent individuals. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 
2007; 31: 395 -403.  
59 Linnoila M, Meffor d I, Nutt D, et al. NIH conference. Alcohol withdrawal and noradrenergic 
function. Annals of internal medicine. 1987; 107: 875 -89.  
60 Marek GJ, Aghajanian GK. 5 -HT2A receptor or alpha1 -adrenoceptor activation induces 
excitatory  postsynaptic currents in layer  V pyramidal cells of the medial prefrontal cortex. 
European journal of pharmacology. 1999; 367: 197 -206.  
61 Arnsten AF. Development of the cerebral cortex: XIV. Stress impairs prefrontal cortical 
function.Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolesc ent Psychiatry. 1999; 38: 220 -2.  
62 Birnbaum S, Gobeske KT, Auerbach J, et al. A role for norepi[INVESTIGATOR_204002] -induced 
cognitive deficits: alpha -1-adrenoceptor mediation in the prefrontal cortex. Biological psychiatry. 
1999; 46: 1266 -74.  
63 Fox HC, Garcia M, Jr., Kemp K, et al. Gender differences in cardiovascular and 
corticoadrenal response to stress and drug cues in cocaine dependent individuals. 
Psychopharmacology. 2006; 185: 348 -57.  
64 Fox HCS, R. Gender differences in neurobiological response to stress a nd alcohol cues: 
implications for treatment and relapse. 30th Annual Research Society on Alcoholism Scientific 
Meeting, Chicago, IL, 2007.  
65 Fillmore KM GJ, Leino EV.. In: eds. Patterns and trends in women’s and men’s drinking. 
Rutgers Center of Alcohol Stu dies, New Brunswick, NJ 1997.  
66 Kessler RC, Crum RM, Warner LA, et al. Lifetime co -occurrence of DSM -III-R alcohol 
abuse and dependence with other psychiatric disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey. 
Archives of general psychiatry. 1997; 54: 313 -21.  
67 Becker JB, Perry AN, Westenbroek C. Sex differences in the neural mechanisms 
mediating addiction: a new synthesis and hypothesis. Biology of sex differences. 2012; 3: 14.  
68 Szawka RE, Rodovalho GV, Monteiro PM, et al. Ovarian -steroid modulation of locus 
coeruleus activity in female rats: involvement in luteinising hormone regulation. Journal of 
neuroendocrinology. 2009; 21: 629 - 39.  
69 Bangasser DA, Zhang X, Garachh V, et al. Sexual dimorphism in locus coeruleus dendritic 
morphology: a structural basis for sex differences in emotional arousal. Physiology & behavior. 
2011; 103: 342 -51.  
70 Retson TA, Reyes BA, Van Bockstaele EJ. Chronic alcohol exposure differentially affects 
activation of female locus coeruleus neurons and the subcellular distribution of corticotro pin 
releasing factor receptors. Progress in neuro -psychopharmacology & biological psychiatry. 2015; 
56: 66 -74.  
71 Scahill L. Alpha -2 adrenergic agonists in children with inattention, hyperactivity and 
impulsiveness. CNS drugs. 2009; [ADDRESS_243258] 1: 43 -9. 
72 Sica DA . Centrally acting antihypertensive agents: an update. Journal of clinical 
hypertension. 2007; 9: 399 -405.  
73 Chappell PB, Riddle MA, Scahill L, et al. Guanfacine treatment of comorbid attention -
deficit hyperactivity disorder and Tourette's syndrome: prelimi nary clinical experience. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1995; 34: [ADDRESS_243259], Arnsten AF, Asbell MD. An open trial of Guanfacine in the treatment of attention -
deficit  hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 1995; 34: 50 -4.  
75 Scahill L, Chappell PB, Kim YS, et al. A placebo -controlled study of Guanfacine in the 
treatment ofchildren with tic disorders and attention defici t hyperactivity disorder. The American 
journal of psychiatry. 2001; 158: 1067 -74.  
76 Sallee FR, Kollins SH, Wigal TL. Efficacy of Guanfacine extended release in the treatment 
of combined and inattentive only subtypes of attention -deficit/hyperactivity disord er. Journal of 
child and adolescent psychopharmacology. 2012; 22: 206 -14. 
77 Childress AC. Guanfacine extended release as adjunctive therapy to psychostimulants in 
children and adolescents with attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Advances in therapy. 20 12; 
29: 385 -400.  
78 Critchley HD. Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration. The 
Journal of comparative neurology. 2005; 493: 154 -66.  
79 Eisenberger NI, Taylor SE, Gable SL, et al. Neural pathways link social support to 
attenuated ne uroendocrine stress responses. NeuroImage. 2007; 35: [ADDRESS_243260], Chandler MP, et al. Cerebral correlates of autonomic 
cardiovascular arousal: a functional neuroimaging investigation in humans. The Journal of 
physiology. 2000; 523 P t 1: 259 -70.  
81 Gianaros PJ, Van Der Veen FM, Jennings JR. Regional cerebral blood flow correlates 
with heart period and high -frequency heart period variability during working -memory tasks: 
Implications for the cortical and subcortical regulation of cardiac autonomic activity. 
Psychophysiology. 2004; 41: [ADDRESS_243261] VA, Hughes BL, et al. Brain mediators of cardiovascular responses to 
social threat, part II: Prefrontal -subcortical pathways and relationship with anxiety. NeuroImage. 
2009; 47: 836 -51.  
83 Cutuli D. Cognitive reappraisal and expressive suppression strategies role in the emotion 
regulation: an overview on their modulatory effects and neural correlates. Frontiers in systems 
neuroscience. 2014; 8: 175.  
84 Blume AW, Marlatt GA. The role of e xecutive cognitive functions in changing substance 
use: what we know and what we need to know. Annals of behavioral medicine : a publication of 
the Society of Behavioral Medicine. 2009; 37: 117 -25.  
85 Rupp CI, Kemmler G, Kurz M, et al. Cognitive remediation therapy during treatment for 
alcohol dependence. Journal of studies on alcohol and drugs. 2012; 73: 625 -34.  
86 Stevens L, Verdejo -Garcia A, Goudriaan AE, et al. Impulsivity as a vulnerability factor for 
poor addiction treatment outcomes: a review of neurocog nitive findings among individuals with 
substance use disorders. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 2014; 47: 58 -72.  
87 Bari A, Robbins TW. Inhibition and impulsivity: behavioral and neural basis of response 
control.Progress in neurobiology. 2013; 108: 44 -79.  
88 Swartz BE, McDonald CR, Patel A, et al. The effects of Guanfacine on working memory  
performance in patients with localization -related epi[INVESTIGATOR_204003]. Clinical 
neuropharmacology. 2008; 31: 251 - 60.  
89 Ma CL, Arnsten AF, Li BM. Locomotor hy peractivity induced by [CONTACT_204037]2 - adrenoceptors in monkeys. Biological psychiatry. 2005; 57: 192 -5.  
90 Arnsten AF, Li BM. Neurobiology of executive functions: catecholamine influences on 
prefrontal cortical functions. Biological p sychiatry. 2005; 57: 1377 -84.  
91 Jakala P, Sirvio J, Riekkinen M, et al. Guanfacine and clonidine, alpha 2 -agonists, improve 
paired associates learning, but not delayed matching to sample, in humans. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the Amer ican College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1999; 20: 119 -30.  
92 Fox H, Sofuoglu M, Sinha R. Guanfacine enhances inhibitory control and attentional 
shifting in early abstinent cocaine -dependent individuals. Journal of psychopharmacology. 2015; 
29: 312 -23. 93 Ar nsten AF, Jin LE. Guanfacine for the treatment of cognitive disorders: a century 
of discoveries at Yale. The Yale journal of biology and medicine. 2012; 85: 45 -58.  
94 Arnsten AF, Rubia K. Neurobiological circuits regulating attention, cognitive control, 
motivation, and emotion: disruptions in neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2012; 51: 356 -67.  
95 Gamo NJ, Arnsten AF. Molecular modulation of prefrontal cortex: rational development of 
treatments for psychiatric disorders. Behavioral neuroscience. 2011; 125: 282 -96. 
96 Holmes A, Spanagel R, Krystal JH. Glutamatergic targets for new alcohol medications. 
Psychopharmacology. 2013; 229: 539 -54.  
97 De Sousa A. The pharmacotherapy of alcohol dependenc e: a state of the art review. Mens 
sana monographs. 2010; 8: 69 -82.  
98 Karhuvaara S, Simojoki K, Virta A, et al. Targeted nalmefene with simple medical 
management in the treatment of heavy drinkers: a randomized double -blind placebo -
controlled multicenter st udy. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2007; 31: 
1179 -87.  
99 Jonas DE, Amick HR, Feltner C, et al. Pharmacotherapy for adults with alcohol use 
disorders in outpatient settings: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Jama. 2014; 311: 
1889 -900.  
100 Oscar MA, Bataillon C, Bagheri H, et al. [Acamprosate (Aotal): could adverse effects upset 
the treatment of alcohol dependence?]. Therapie. 2003; 58: [ADDRESS_243262] Guanfacine 
improves memory in  aged monkeys without sedative or hypotensive side effects: evidence 
for alpha -2 receptor subtypes. The Journal of Neuroscience : the official journal of the 
Society for Neuroscience. 1988; 8: 4287 -98.  
102 Faraone SV, Biederman J, Spencer T, et al. Efficacy o f atomoxetine in adult  
attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: a drug -placebo response curve analysis. Behavioral and 
brain functions : BBF. 2005; 1: 16.  
103 Streeter CC, Terhune DB, Whitfield TH, et al. Performance on the Stroop predicts 
treatment  complian ce in cocaine -dependent individuals. Neuropsychopharmacology : 
official publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008; 33: 827 -
36.  
104 Brewer JA, Worhunsky PD, Carroll KM, et al. Pretreatment brain activation during Stroop 
task isassoci ated with outcomes in cocaine -dependent patients. Biological psychiatry. 
2008; 64: 998 -1004.  
105 Turner TH, LaRowe S, Horner MD, et al. Measures of cognitive functioning as predictors 
of treatment outcome for cocaine dependence. Journal of substance abuse tre atment. 
2009; 37: 328 -34.  
106 Verdejo -Garcia A, Betanzos -Espi[INVESTIGATOR_53067] P, Lozano OM, et al. Self -regulation and treatment 
retention in cocaine dependent individuals: a longitudinal study. Drug and alcohol 
dependence. 2012; 122: 142 -8.  
107 Carroll KM, Kiluk BD, Nich C , et al. Cognitive function and treatment response in a 
randomized clinical trial of computer -based training in cognitive -behavioral therapy. 
Substance use & misuse. 2011; 46: [ADDRESS_243263] an integrative science of the person. Annual review of  psychology. 
2004; 55: 1 -22.  
109 Stark MJ. Droppi[INVESTIGATOR_204004]: a clinically oriented review. Clin 
Psychol Rev. 1992; 12: 90 -116.  
110 Greenfield SF, Brooks AJ, Gordon SM, et al. Substance abuse treatment entry, retention, 
and outcome in wom en: a review of the literature. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2007; 
86: [ADDRESS_243264] inducer of 
growth hormone secretion --a comparison with clonidine. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 
1993; 18: 4 5-55.  
112 Bearn J, Gossop M, Strang J. Randomised double -blind comparison of lofexidine and 
methadone in the in -patient treatment of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2533]. Drug and alcohol dependence. 
1996; 43: [ADDRESS_243265] JP, Rogers GA, et al. Double -blind study of lofexidine and clonidine in 
the detoxification of opi[INVESTIGATOR_204005]. Drug and alcohol dependence. 1997; 44: 
57-61.  
114 Sinha R, Kimmerling A, Doebrick C, et al. Effects of lofexidine on stress -induced and cue -
induced opi[INVESTIGATOR_204006]: preliminary findings. 
Psychopharmacology. 2007; 190: [ADDRESS_243266], Patel A, et al. A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled 
study of guanfacine extended release in children and adolescents with attention -
deficit/hyperact ivity disorder. Pediatrics. 2008; 121: e73 -84.  
116 Boellner SW, Pennick M, Fiske K, et al. Pharmacokinetics of a Guanfacine extended -
release formulation in children and adolescents with attention -deficit -hyperactivity 
disorder. Pharmacotherapy. 2007; 27: 1253 - 62.  
117 Handen BL, Sahl R, Hardan AY. Guanfacine in children with autism and/or intellectual 
disabilities.  
Journal of developmental and behavioral pediatrics : JDBP. 2008; 29: 303 -8.  
118 Kisicki JC, Fiske K, Lyne  A. Phase I, double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled, dose  
escalation study of the effects on blood pressure of abrupt cessation versus taper down of 
Guanfacine extended -release tablets in adults aged 19 to 24 years. Clinical therapeutics. 
2007; 29: [ADDRESS_243267] manual for the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. 
Consulting Psychologis ts Press, Inc, Palo Alto, CA, 1970.  
121 Bohn MJ, Krahn DD, Staehler BA. Development and initial validation of a measure of 
drinking urges in abstinent alcoholics. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 
1995; 19: 600 -6.  
122 Drobes DJ, Thomas SE. Assessing  craving for alcohol. Alcohol research & health : the 
journal of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 1999; 23: 179 -86.  
123 Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. Journal of 
health and social behavior. 1983 ; 24: [ADDRESS_243268] CH, Mendelson M, et al. An inventory for measuring depression. Archives 
of general psychiatry. 1961; 4: [ADDRESS_243269] MS, Barratt ES. Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. 
Journal of clinical psych ology. 1995; 51: [ADDRESS_243270] MS, Mathias CW, Dougherty DM, et al. Fifty years of the Barratt Impulsiveness 
Scale: An update and review. Personality and Individual Differences. 2009; 47: 385 -95.  
127 KL G, L R. Multidimensional assessment of emotion regul ation and dysregulation: 
development, factor structure, and initial validation of the difficulties in emotion regulation 
scale. J Psychopathol Behav Assess. 2004; 26: [ADDRESS_243271] for Nicotine 
Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire. British journal of 
addiction. 1991; 86: 1119 -27.  
129 Shipley WC. A self -administering scale for measuring intellectual impairment and 
deterioration. Journal of Psychology. 1940; 9: 371 -7.  
130 Sobe ll L, Sobell M. Timeline follow -back: A technique for assessing self -reported alcohol 
consumption. Humana Press, New Jersey, 1992.  
131 Ramanujam VM, Anderson KE, Grady JJ, et al. Riboflavin as an oral tracer for monitoring 
compliance in clinical research. The  open biomarkers journal. 2011; 2011: 1 -7.  
132 Payne RA, Back SE, Wright T, et al. Alcohol dependence in women: Comorbidities can 
complicate treatment. Current psychiatry. 2009; 8: 52 -9.  
133 Strang J, Bearn J, Gossop M. Lofexidine for opi[INVESTIGATOR_204007]: revi ew of recent 
randomized and open controlled trials. The American journal on addictions / American 
Academy of Psychiatrists in Alcoholism and Addictions. 1999; 8: 337 -48.  
  
134 Pettinati HM, Mattson ME. Medical Management Treatment Manual: A Clinical Guide 
forResearchers and Clinicians Providing Pharmacotherapy for Alcohol Dependence as 
Part of the Treatment for Alcohol Dependence. Bethesda, Maryland, 2004.  
135 Anton RF, O'Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, et al. Combined pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_204008]: the COMBINE study: a randomized controlled trial. 
Jama. 2006; 295: 2003 -17.  
136 O'Malley SS, Rounsaville BJ, Farren C, et al. Initial and maintenance naltrexone treatment 
for alcohol dependence using primary care vs specialty care: a nested sequence of 3 
randomized trials. Archives of internal medicine. 2003; 163: 1695 -704.  
137 Pettinati HM, Anton RF, Willenbring ML. The COMBINE Study -: An Overview of the 
Largest Pharmacotherapy Study to Date for Treating Alcohol Dependence. Psychiatry. 
2006; 3:  36-9.  
[ADDRESS_243272]. Journal of 
clinical psychology. 1976; 32: 654 -8.  
139 Wei LJ, Lin, D.Y, Weissfeld, L. Regression analysis of multivariate incomplete failure time 
data by [CONTACT_204038]. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 
1989; 84: [ADDRESS_243273], prazosin, for alcohol dependence. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental 
resear ch. 2009; 33: 255 -63.  
141 Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1988.  
142 Burlew  K, Larios S, Suarez -Morales L, et al. Increasing ethnic minority participation in 
substance abuse clinical trials: lessons learned in the National Institute on Drug Abuse's 
Clinical Trials Network. Cultural diversity & ethnic minority psychology. 2011; 17 : 345 -56.  
143 Green CA, Polen MR, Dickinson DM, et al. Gender differences in predictors of initiation, 
retention, and completion in an HMO -based substance abuse treatment program. Journal 
of substance abuse treatment. 2002; 23: 285 -95.  
144 Graff FS, Morgan TJ, E pstein EE, et al. Engagement and retention in outpatient alcoholism 
treatment for women. The American journal on addictions / American Academy of 
Psychiatrists in Alcoholism and Addictions. 2009; 18: 277 -88. 
145 Connors GJ, DiClemente CC, Dermen KH, et al. Pre dicting the therapeutic alliance in 
alcoholism treatment. Journal of studies on alcohol. 2000; 61: 139 -49.  
146 Ashley OS, Marsden ME, Brady TM. Effectiveness of substance abuse treatment 
programming for women: a review. The American journal of drug and alcoho l abuse. 2003; 
29: 19 -53.  
147 Andrea Kopstein, Karl D. White. Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Substance Abuse 
Treatment: Addressing the Specific Needs of Women. Substance Abuse and Mental 
Health Services Administration (US), Rockville (MD), 2009.  
148 Aoki C, Go CG, Venkatesan C, et al. Perikaryal and synaptic localization of alpha 2A -
adrenergic   receptor -like immunoreactivity. Brain research. 1994; 650: 181 -204.  
149 Connor DF, Arnsten AF, Pearson GS, et al. Guanfacine extended release for the treatment 
of atte ntiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. Expert opi[INVESTIGATOR_204009]. 2014; 15: 1601 -10.  
150 Horrigan JP, Barnhill LJ. Does Guanfacine trigger mania in children? Journal of child and 
adolescent psychopharmacology. 1998; 8: 149 -50.  
151 G M, DN L, MJ K, et al. Individual differences in imagery and the psychophysiology of 
emotion. Cognitive Emotion. 1987; 1: [ADDRESS_243274], 2001.  
153 Margolin A, Avants SK, Kosten TR. Cue -elicited cocaine craving and autogenic relaxation. 
Association with treatment outcome. Journal of substance abuse treatment. 1994; 11: 549 -
52.  
154 Sinha R, Fuse T, Aubin LR, et al. Psychological stress, drug -related cues and  cocaine 
craving. Psychopharmacology. 2000; 152: 140 -8.  
155 Dougherty DM, Lake SL, Hill -Kapturczak N, et al. Using contingency management 
procedures to reduce at -risk drinking in heavy drinkers. Alcoholism, clinical and 
experimental research. 2015; 39: 743 -51.  
156 Dutra L, Stathopoulou G, Basden SL, et al. A meta -analytic review of psychosocial 
interventions for substance use disorders. The American journal of psychiatry. 2008; 165: 
179-87. 
157 Faraday MM, Blakeman KH, Grunberg NE. Strain and sex alter effects of str ess and 
nicotine on feeding, body weight, and HPA axis hormones. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 
2005; 80:577 – 89. 
158 Faraday MM, Elliott BM, Phillips JM, Grunberg NE. Adolescent and adult male rats differ 
in sensitivity to nicotine’s activity effects. Pharmacol Bioc hem Behav 2003;74:917 –31. 
159 Netter P, M¨ uller MJ, Neumann A, Kamradik B. The influence of nicotine on performance, 
mood, and physiological parameters as related to smoking habit, gender, and 
suggestibility. Clin Investig 1994;72:512 –8. 
160. Bruijnzeel AW.  Neuropeptide systems and new treatments for    nicotine addiction   
. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2016 Dec 28.  
161. Bruijnzeel  AW.  Tobacco    addiction    and the dysregulation of brain stress 
systems.  Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012 May; 36(5):141 8-41. Review.  
162 Bremner, JD, Vermetten, E, Mazure CM. Development and preliminary psychometric 
properties of an instrument for the measurement of childhood trauma: the early trauma 
inventory. Depression and Anxiety 2000; 12:1 -12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATISTICAL ANALYS IS PLAN  
 
Aim1: To evaluate the safety and tolerability of GXR (3mgs/day) in women with 
Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD) . All potential adverse effects from both treatment groups 
were recorded twice weekly and classified. Descriptive statistics are displayed in a 
frequency table.  
Aim2: To determine the preliminary efficacy of 10 -week GXR (3mgs/day) versus 
PBO treatment on ou tcome measures in women with AUD : Linear Mixed Effects 
(LMEs) models were used to analyze data from the intent -to-treat sample where, for all 
Dependent Variables (% no. of heavy drinking days, % no. of days abstinent, % drinks 
consumed on any one occasion,  alcohol craving, depressive symptomatology, anxiety 
and emotion regulation), the Between Group Factors of Group (GXR, PBO) and Within 
Group Factors of Time -points (12 -weeks), represented the Fixed Effects  and Subjects 
represented the Random Effects . Demog raphic and drug use variables differing 
between Treatment Groups and associated with the Dependent Variables were entered 
as covariates into the models and a Compound Symmetry covariance structure was 
applied to the model. Descriptive statistics were addit ionally conducted on % no. of 
negative urines collected across the trial.  
 