LAST REVIEWED AND APPROVED BY [CONTACT_84425] 20, 2023   
Study Title: “ Examination of First and Second 
Generation E -cigarettes ” ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED])
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92071] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
1 
  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_84403] L. Wagener, Ph.D., Ohio State Comprehensive 
Cancer Center  
 
Co-Investigators:  Laura A. Beebe, Ph.D., University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center , Dept. of Biostatistics and Epi[INVESTIGATOR_84404], MD, Ph.D., University of Oklahoma Health 
Science s Center , Dept. of Otorhinolaryngology  
 
Irina Stepanov, Ph.D., University of Minnesota , Dept. of 
Environmental Health Sciences  
 
Dorothy K. Hatsukami, Ph.D., University of Minnesota , Dept. of 
Psychiatry  
 
Peter Shields, Ohio State Comprehensive Cancer Center  
 
Table of Contents  
 
Abstract  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  [ADDRESS_92072] (DNA Damage)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  16 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92073] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
2 
 E. Statistical Methods ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  17 
Power Analysis  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  17 
Data Analytic Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  17 
Missing Data  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 18 
F. Gender/Minority/Pediatric Inclusion for Research  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  [ADDRESS_92074] Risk  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  20 
H. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 22 
Addendum  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  23 
COVID -19 Related Procedures  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 23 
I. Literature Cited  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92075] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
3 
  
 
 
 
Revision History : 
 
 
Revision Summary  Protocol 
Version date  Consent Form 
Version Date  IRB Approval  
Date  
Original submission  XX XX  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92076] use patterns and continued use, 
as well as biomarkers of toxicant exposure and effects. To do so, we will ran domly assign 453 adult smokers, 
naïve to e -cigarette use, to low -wattage devices (LWD), high -wattage devices (HWD), or usual brand cigarette 
control (UBC). All products will be provided for 12 weeks. Enrollment will be restricted only to smokers not 
planni ng to quit in the next 3 months. Prior to randomization, all participants will take part in a lead -in period to 
assess normal smoking behavior and to allow for stratification on important variables. Follow -ups will occur at 
1, 4, 8, 12, 26, and 52 weeks. O ur specific aims are to 1) assess the effect of provision of LWD vs. HWD on 
product switching, abuse liability, number of cigarettes smoked, and perceived nicotine dependence; 2) 
evaluate changes in biomarkers of harmful tobacco constituent exposure among participants assigned to LWD, 
HWD, and UBC; and 3) evaluate changes in biomarkers of toxicant effect among participants assigned to 
LWD, HWD, and UBC. This innovative study in its comprehensive examination of all e -cigarette devices as 
well as their impact  on smoking behavior and health outcomes, will provide the scientific foundation the FDA 
and other agencies need to establish effective regulatory strategies for the manufacture, distribution, and 
marketing of e -cigarettes.  
 
Project Narra tive/relevance to public health  
 
E-cigarettes are proliferating and evolving rapi[INVESTIGATOR_84405]. To date, it is not clear how 
e-cigarette products in general will impact smoking behavior and downstream health outcomes, let alone the 
differential effects between firs t versus second generation e -cigarette products. The proposed work will 
prospectively examine the effect of switching to e -cigarettes on changes in smoking patterns, nicotine 
dependence, exposures to harmful toxicants, and downstream physiological health e ffects.  
 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research  
Whereas no assurance can be made to an individual participant that he/she will personally benefit from this 
research, the experience should be beneficial. All participants will be encouraged to quit smoking at the 
completion of the study and will be provid ed referrals to local cessation resources. Adequate protections are in 
place in the event of unlikely and mild risks for study participation. Overall, it is expected that the potential 
benefits to participants in the proposed study outweigh the potential r isks. 
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92077] granted  the FDA’s Center for Tobacco 
Products regulatory authority over tobacco -based products. However, the FDA only recently proposed 
deeming regulations on e -cigarettes (ECs). Since their market emergence, ECs have evolved from low -
wattage devices (LWD) which look like conventional cigarettes, have few design components and limited 
nicotine delivery, to high-wattage devices (HWD)  which do not look like conventional cigarettes, have multiple 
desig n components and can achieve cigarette -like levels of nicotine -delivery. Each step of the evolution has 
led to increased consumer momentum, as well as increased demand from health officials to establish a 
science base to answer the question, “Are e -cigaret tes a benefit or burden to public health?”  
Our own as well as others’ research is beginning to suggest that very few exclusive EC users use LWD 
products. However, for a majority of current HWD users, a LWD product was the first vapor -based product they 
tried. In other words, the limited available data suggests that LWDs may lead to dual use and/or serve as a 
gateway product to HWD products. HWD pr oducts, on the other hand, appear to be sufficient for some 
smokers for exclusive use —likely due, at least in part, to better nicotine delivery. Conversely, better nicotine 
delivery may also lead to continued long -term nicotine addiction. Moreover, HWDs ma y also yield more toxic 
and carcinogenic compounds per puff than LWDs due to higher heating of the vapor. Missing from the current 
literature is a prospective study assessing differences between these two major types of ECs on smoking 
behaviors and pattern s, nicotine addiction, and on biomarkers of toxicant exposure and effect. Understanding 
the differential impact of LWD vs. HWD products on smoking as well as measures of proximal health outcomes 
will help immediately inform the science base needed for the FDA to impose appropriate product specific 
regulations.   
 
The overall aim of the proposed study is to evaluate the effect of switching from conventional cigarette 
smoking to one of two types of ECs on smoking behavior, product use patterns and continued use, as 
well as biomarkers of toxicant exposure and effects.   
 
To do so, we will randomly assign 453 adult smokers, naïve to EC use, to LWD electronic cigarette; b) HWD 
electronic cigarette;  or c) usual brand cigarette control (UBC). All products will be provided at no cost to the 
participant for 3 months. Enrollment will be restricted only to smokers not planning to quit in the next 3 months. 
Prior to randomization, all participants will tak e part in a lead -in period to assess normal smoking behavior and 
to allow for stratification on important variables.  
 
Aim 1:   
To assess the effect of provision of LWD vs. HWD  on product switching/substitution, abuse liability, 
number of cigarettes smoked, and perceived nicotine dependence. Hypothesis 1a:  Complete product 
substitution (vs. partial or no substitution) will occur at a significantly higher rate among smokers randomized to 
HWD  products compared to those randomized to LWDs  at 12, 26, and 52 -week follow -ups. Hypothesis 1b:  
Compared to those randomized to UBC, LWD and HWD participants will smoke fewer cigarettes per day, have 
lower product abuse liability and lower perceived nicotine dependence.  
 
Aim 2:  To evaluate changes in biomarkers of harmful tobacco constituent exposure among 
participants assigned to LWD, HWD, and UBC . Hypothesis 2a:  The degree of changes in exposure will be 
directly associated with the degree of substitution with EC —greater levels of substitution will  confer a larger 
decrease in exposure to harmful constituents. Hypothesis 2b:  Among those who completely substitute ECs for 
conventional cigarettes, LWD users (vs. HWD)  will have significantly lower levels of biomarkers of exposu re. 
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92078] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
6 
 Aim 3 : To evaluate changes in biomarkers of toxicant effect among participants assigned to G1, G2, 
and UBC.  Hypothesis 3a:  The degree of changes in biomarkers of effect (levels of DNA damage -markers 
indicative of increased cancer risk) will be directly associated with the degree of substitution —greater levels of 
substitution will confer a larger reduction in levels of DNA dam age. Hypothesis 3b:  Among those who 
completely substitute ECs for conventional cigarettes, LWD users (vs. HWD)  will have significantly reduced 
markers indicative of increased cancer risk.  
 
Our team is uniquely suited to conduct this investigation. Understanding how smokers use ECs as 
they transition away from smoking and carefully examining their health effects is critically important. 
This novel study will contribute knowledge urgently need ed by [CONTACT_84426] a way that best serves public health.  
 
B. Significance  
 
The U.S. FDA and E -cigarettes  
 
The passage of the [ADDRESS_92079] (FSPTCA) grants the FDA 
Center for Tobacco Products (CTP) regulatory authority over cigarettes, cigarette tobacco, smokeless tobacco , 
and roll your own tobacco. This promising pi[INVESTIGATOR_84406], marketing, and distribution of tobacco products in order to reduce tobacco -related morbidity 
and mortality. E -cigarettes (ECs) do not currently fall under the FDA’s regulatory authority; however, in April 
2014, the FDA proposed deeming regulations of ECs as well as a call for additional scientific research to 
inform the dev elopment of effective EC regulation. The proposed regulations 1) ban the sale of ECs to minors,  
2) ban vending machine sales, 3) require warnings that ECs contain nicotine, 5) require disclosure of 
ingredients, and 6) prohibit distribution of free  samples but with exemptions for research purposes. These 
regulations are important first steps in effectively regulating ECs.  
 
Innovation  
 
No study has directly compared LWD vs. HWD in a prospective, long -term, randomized controlled trial. This 
study will break new ground and provide a rich data source for the FDA, other regulators and scientists to 
firmly understand the effect of EC use on b oth behavioral and health outcomes. Our study does not make the 
mistake of viewing all ECs as the same. Randomized controlled trials have almost exclusively examined LWDs 
and have found only modest effects on smoking behavior, while the majority of survey studies include a large 
portion of individuals using HWDs and generally find astounding effects on smoking behavior. Is this difference 
simply due to self -selection bias involved in the convenience sampling of survey studies and increased veracity 
of repor ting in controlled trials, or are there truly differences? We believe there is a difference —some positive 
(higher probability of exclusive vs. dual use) and some negative (greater exposure to harmful and potentially 
harmful constituents and increased risk of continued nicotine dependence) —our study will be the first to 
directly evaluate these hypotheses.  
 
The proposed study will also provide our team with enough time (12 -months) to examine how EC use evolves: 
For those who slowly reduce their number of cigarettes per day, do they ever become exclusive users? Do 
those who become exclusive EC users stay exclusive? Do they  move on to newer generation products? What 
is the time course for this evolution? Do they change from tobacco -flavors to non -tobacco flavors? Would they 
continue to use ECs if only tobacco flavors were allowed? What happens to their interest in one day qu itting all 
nicotine? Our study will be the first to comprehensively examine these changes across the entire spectrum of 
EC products.  
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92080] comprehensive examination of changes in levels of cigarette and EC -related 
toxicants of exposure and how these levels vary between LWD vs. HWD users. We will examine exposure to 
tobacco -specific nitrosamines (TSNA), aldehyde s, nicotine, and CO. Our study will also be the first to examine 
changes in the effect of toxicant exposure, specifically DNA damage (a biomarker for increased cancer risk), 
with a recently established and more sensitive measure of DNA analysis than any ot her used in previous 
tobacco research (PADDA, developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Queimado); changes in lung functioning will be a secondary 
health outcome.  
 
Overall, this innovative study in its comprehensive examination of all EC devices and measurement of 
behavioral and health outcomes, will provide the scientific foundation the FDA and other agencies need to 
establish effective regulatory strategies.  
 
C. Approach and Preliminary S tudies  
 
Investigators  
 
[CONTACT_84468] (PI)  is Director of the Tobacco Research Center and a clinical psychologist. He 
received excellent training at Brown Medical School as a psychology resident and T32 postdoctoral fellow in 
cardiovascular behaviora l medicine (NHLBI T32HL076134). He has continued this momentum over the last [ADDRESS_92081]. Wagener has also 
published EC commentaries37,38 and an EC review article4. He was the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84407] R21CA164521, investigating 
the provision of dissolvable tobacco vs. medicinal nicotine in the reduction of children’s secondhand smoke 
exposure. He recently completed this study with excellent retention (84%) and several manuscripts are 
currently in preparation. [CONTACT_84469] has the experience, management and methodological skill, and 
knowled ge necessary to successfully conduct the proposed study.  
 
[CONTACT_84470]  (Co-I) has more than [ADDRESS_92082], “C ulturally -Tailored 
Smoking Cessation for American Indians,” a collaboration with the Kansas University Medical Center. [CONTACT_84471] currently directs three internally funded e -cigarette studies. They include a feasibility study comparing e -
cigarettes and trad itional NRT effects on conventional cigarette behaviors among women with cervical 
dysplasia; a follow -up study of e -cigarette users calling the Oklahoma Tobacco HeIpline; and an analysis of 
[ADDRESS_92083]. Lurdes Queimado (Co -I) is an Associate Professor and the Director of Basic and Translational Research 
for the Department of Otorhinolaryngology (ORL) at OUHSC. She holds an endowed professorship, the 
Presby[CONTACT_84427] a [ADDRESS_92084]. Queimado’s work on DNA damage has resulted in several public ations  
including: the development of a novel assay named PADDA to quantify DNA damage induced by [CONTACT_84428]42, the documentation that PADDA is at least [ADDRESS_92085] DNA damage induced by [CONTACT_84429]43, and the documentation that DNA 
damage detected by [CONTACT_84430] a potential biomarker for tobacco -associated head and neck cancer risk.39 In 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92086]. Dorothy Hatsukami (Co -I) is a Professor at the University of Minnesota and has a 21-year history of 
conducting tobacco harm reduction and regulatory research. She is an internationally -recognized expert in 
these areas. She has a history of substantial funding from the NIH, including serving as the PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a 
Transdisciplinary Tobacco Use Research Center, on a U19 (Models of Tob acco Product Regulation), and a 
U54 (New Standards for Nicotine in Cigarettes). She also previously served on the US FDA Tobacco Pr oducts 
Scientific Advisory Panel.  [CONTACT_84472] has conducted numerous NIH -funded studies examining novel, non -
cigarette tobacco products, including several switching studies like the current proposal. [CONTACT_84472] brings 
a depth and breadth of experience relevant to the proposed study.  
 
[CONTACT_84473] (Co -I) is an Assistant Professor at the University of Minnesota and has a 20-year history 
of conducting research in the field tobacco carcinogenesis. She has conducted numerous studies analyzing 
TSNA and other toxicants in cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, and nicotine replacement therapy products. She 
also developed and applied new methodologies for the measurement of biomarkers, such as urinary 
metabolites and DNA adducts of human exposure to tobacco carcinogens. [CONTACT_84474] is currently the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84408] R01 grants. In one of these studies, she is developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a testing approach that can produce 
meaningful predictions of changes in human exposure due to changes in constituent levels in cigarette 
smoke. In the second study , she investigates endogenous formation of NNN from nornicotine in smokeless 
tobacco users. [CONTACT_84474] brings analytical biochemistry expertise to the proposed study.  
 
 
D. Resear ch D esign and Methods  
 
Design Overview  
 
We propose to conduct a three -arm, randomized, parallel group trial that will proceed in four phases over 12 
months. Participants will access the screening questionnaire using a public survey link generated by 
[CONTACT_61604]. The survey link will be distributed on Facebook posts and ads, recruitment flyers and through 
OSU email distribution lists. During Baseline Phase 1 ( -1), participants will attend an orientation and 
assessment visit and be asked to smoke their usual brand of cigarettes for 1 week. During Baseli ne Phase 
2 (0), participants will be randomized to either LWD, HWD, or usual brand cigarette control (UBC). The 
LWD device provided will be an eCom -BT and the HWD device provided will be an Evolv DNA 250. At this 
visit, those randomized to an EC group will also be able to sample EC flavors and choose their preferred 
flavor for the next phase of the study. The Randomized Product Trial Phase (1 -12) will last [ADDRESS_92087] for the next 12 week s; otherwise , 
directions for use will be ad libitum. Those randomized to UBC will be instructed to use the product ad 
libitum. All products, to which participants will be randomized, will be provided at no cost; UBCs will be 
provided based on the average amount used pe r week  collected  during baseline phase 1. The Surveillance 
Phase  will last [ADDRESS_92088] use (or not) and other outcomes of interest (see Table 3), as well as biomarkers of toxicant 
exposure and effects will be measured. Over the course of the study, all participants will complete 8 study 
visits: -1, 0, +1, +4, +8, +12, +26, +[ADDRESS_92089] provision50 and 40 -week surveillance  period 
to allow sufficient time to examine any potential transitions3,51. Study visits will include completion of 
computerized surveys and collection of specimens for biomarker analysis. Participants will also be asked to 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92090] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
9 
 complete a brief (<2 minute) daily online smoking/product diary into a secure database via REDCap for the 
[ADDRESS_92091] letters/emails and call participants on behalf of this study. Participants interested will be referred to 
this study for screening . Though  we will not oversample participants of any particular background, we will 
advertise across a variety of media to increase the likelihood of recruitment across a range of races, 
ethnicities, age, socioeconomic status and locations (rural/urban). Smokers will be able to complete an 
online screener questionnaire  generated from a secure database to determine eligibility.  
 
Participants who meet the following eligibility criteria will be contact[CONTACT_84431]. Inclusion criteria:  1) smoke ≥[ADDRESS_92092] year; 2) not currently 
engaged in a quit attempt ; 3) read, write, and speak in English; 4) report at least minimal interest in 
switching to an alternative product (> “not at all” on a Likert scale); 5)  have no t regularly used a tank 
system, mechanical mod, or advanced personal vaporizer EC, though previous use of c ig-a-like devices 
of [ADDRESS_92093] month  will be allowed ; 6) plan to live in the local area for next year; 7) have 
access to a smart phone; 8) have access to email  and 9) be 21 years of age or older . Exclusion  Criteria:  
1) <21 years old  2) unstable or significant medical condition such as respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], kidney, or liver disease 
that could potentially affect biomarker data; 3) unstable or significant psychiatric conditions (past and 
stable conditions will be allowed); 4) history of cardiac event or distress within the past 3 months;5) 
currently pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding (pregnancy and breastfeeding status 
will continue to be evaluated throughout the study at each visit) ; and 6) do not reside in the same 
household as a participant currently active (have not completed all study visits) in the study.  If a 
participant is ineligible for the study at the time of screening, the participant can be reassessed at a later 
time to determine if they are now eligible  i.e. A participant meets all other eligibility criteria, but is not 
eligible because they are currently pregnant or breastfeeding. The participant can  submit a new screener 
after they are no longer pregnant or breastfeeding and can be reassessed for eligibility. Reassessment 
for eligibility will vary based on previous ineligibility criteria and will be determined on a participant by 
[CONTACT_84432].  
 
Recruitment Feasibility and Retention  
 
Recruitment  
 
We intend to recruit 453 cigarette smokers over a 40 -month period (60 months – 4 months for prep – 12 
months for final follow -up – 4 months for data cleaning/analysis). We have already recruited approximately half 
of the sample in Oklahoma (n=220); therefo re, we plan to recruit an additional 233 participants from the 
Columbus, Ohio area. The adult population of the Columbus Metropolitan Area is ~2,078,725 (US Census 
estimate, 2017) and 22% of Columbus residents smoke. Given that EC use is expected to rise o ver the next 
several years we conservatively estimate an average rate of trying at 50% for the proposed study duration. 
Therefore, our pool of potential participants in our local area is 228,660  (2,078,725  X .22 X .50). Because we 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92094] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
10 
 are trying to enroll 453 participants (0. 002% of our potential pool) over a 40 -month period, we are confident 
that our recruitment approaches will yield sufficient numbers and in our ability to enroll ~11 smokers per month 
(453/40 months).   
 
Retention  
 
All participants will receive $[ADDRESS_92095] by [CONTACT_84433] 8 visits ($40) , receive $7, 
when applicable, for parking , $40 for visit 1 and  $20 for each  subsequent  visit after that in which  they attend 
($180), an additional $20 for visits when specimens are collected ($100), $1 for each online diary entry 
($105 possible) and an additional bonus up to  $100 for protocol compliance (attending ≥ 7 visits and 
completing ≥70% of online daily diary entries, and returning study products) for a total up to  $505. The 
bonus payment will be given at different time points to encourage participant engagement: $[ADDRESS_92096] for a total of $20 and the remaining $[ADDRESS_92097] phase at their week 12 visit. To receive the $[ADDRESS_92098] phase at weeks 1, 4 and 8 visit s, participants  will need to attend 
the week 12 visit.  The remaining $ 40 will be compensated at week 52 if the participant attended ≥ 7 visits 
and completed ≥70% of online daily diary entries.  If an entire study visit is not able to be completed, the 
participant will be compensated $5 for travel and, if applicable, $7 for parking. We will also facilitate study 
visits by [CONTACT_84434] (e.g., multiple 
sources of contact, reminder calls/te xts/emails). To improve engagement and retention of study participants, 
participants will receive reminder calls in addition to email or text reminders. Reminders will be sent by [CONTACT_84435] a participant’s preferred method of contact. The participant’s preferred method of contact [CONTACT_84436]; however, alternative methods may be employed if issues arise with the 
preferred method (e.g., participant has run out of minutes; cellular providers are not compatible).   These 
methods are consistent with our team’s previous studies and have resulted in excellent retention rates.  
 
Project Timeline  
 
 
Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Months  1-4 5-8 9-12 1-4 5-8 9-12 1-4 5-8 9-12 1-4 5-8 9-12 1-4 5-8 9-12 
Preparation; supplies; training; IRB approval  X               
Recruitment & Enrollment   X X X X X X X X X X     
Follow -ups  X X X X X X X X X X X X X  
Data analysis, report writing, dissemination                X 
 
 
Detailed Study Procedures  
 
Advertisements will direct interested potential participants to complete a secure, online screener. Information 
regarding eligibility and the participant s’ email  addresses  and phone number s will be uploaded into a secure 
database. Potential participants will then be further screened by [CONTACT_648].  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92099] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
11 
 Phone Screening:  Trained staff will provide a brief description of the study and for those still interested, 
schedule an orientation and assessment visit and provide directions to the study site.  No cost r ide services 
through Lyft will be discussed as an option  for participants who may not have reliable means of t ransportation . 
 
Orientation and Assessment Visit:  During this first visit, participants will be informed of the study 
procedures and rationale  and asked to provide informed consent.  To ensure eligibility, participant smoking 
status will be biochemically confirmed via exhaled carbon monoxide testing (CO≥4ppm)  and eligibility 
related questions will be asked again and responses verified . Pregnancy exclusion will also be confirmed 
with a urine test (n.b. , pregnancy tests will be completed at each visit throughout the study). Participants will 
provide basic demographic and smoking history information consistent with questions used in the Tobacco 
Use Supplement to the 2006 Current Population S urvey and PATH study52 as well as additional 
standardized assessment questionnaires as described below and in Table 3. Participants will be instructed 
to smoke as usual until their Baseline 0 visit.  
 
Baseline Phase 1 (usual brand cigarette):  During this baseline period ( 1-3 weeks ), we will collect online 
daily smoking diaries. Upon the participant’s visit to the clinic after [ADDRESS_92100] 
additional subjective measures of use as well as collection of urine, blood , saliva,  and oral cells for biomarker 
analysis; thus, we will establish participants’ baseline smoking behavior in this phase.  
 
Baseline Phase 2 (Randomization & Sampling):  Immediately following the baseline assessment, 
participants will be randomized to one of three arms for a period of 12 weeks: 1) LWD EC, 2) HWD EC, or 
3) usual brand cigarette control (UBC). Randomization  will occur using a stratified block -randomization 
procedure with small, random -sized  blocks. Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_6270] -reported level of nicotine 
dependence, educational attainment, sex and age. Consistent with several of our recently completed an d 
ongoing EC studies and to more closely mimic real -world use, those randomized to LWD or HWD will first 
sample five 0mg nicotine EC flavors (tobacco, mint/menthol, bakery/dessert, fruit , tobacco ) to determine 
participants’ flavor preference during the Randomized Product Trial Phase. Specific flavors across the six 
categories above will be determined with the most recent ly available data from our ongoing survey studies 
of EC users. After the participant selects a preferred flavor, the participant will then sample various 
concentration levels of the preferred e -liquid flavor. For LWD, concentrations sampled will be 6mg  (extra 
low), 12mg  (low) , 18mg  (medium)  and 24mg  (high)  and for HWD, concentrations sampled will be 3mg  
(extra low) , 6mg  (low) , 12mg  (medium)  and 18mg  (high) . For LWD, we still start nicotine concentration 
sampling at 18mg and for HWD, we will start nicotine concentration sampling at 12mg. If a participant 
prefers to not try a specific flavor and/or nicotine concentration, they can choose not to sample them. If a 
participant finds that the initial concentration (medium) they sample is not tolerable, we will not have the 
participant sample the highest nicotine concentration and ask them to sample the low and extra low nicotine 
concentrations. Participants will be asked demonstrate they know how to use the device after sampling 
procedures are completed. Consistent with our previous studies20, participants will be instructed on how to 
use both the LWD or HWD products, provided a starter kit as well as ~30mL of e -liquid. The amount 
provided to participants will be documented and tracked throughout the study. Provision of refil l cartridges 
or childproof bottles will be titrated up or down based on use. All products will be given to participants in 
their original packaging, with manufacturers’ marketing, instructions, and recommendations for use and 
provided at no cost. We will s upplement these instructions with additional information on storing the EC and 
all liquid and cartridges up and away from children and pets. Although overdose or accidental ingestion is 
very unlikely and has not occurred in [CONTACT_84469]’s previous studies, all participants will be provided the 
state and national poison control telephone line as well as a “tip sheet” on recognizing signs of nicotine 
overdose.  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92101] Trial Phase: The purpose of this [ADDRESS_92102] for the next 12 weeks; otherwise they will be instructed to use ad 
libitum. Those randomized to UBC will be instructed to use the product ad libitum. All p roducts, to which 
participants will be randomized, will be provided at no cost; usual brand of cigarettes will be provided based on 
the average amount used per week collected during baseline phase 1. Follow -up study visits will occur at +1, 
+4, +8, and +[ADDRESS_92103] cartridges and refill bottles will be collected to 
account for reported use and a portion, in addition to the EC devices themselves, will also be used for 
subsequent HPHC analysis (see Biomarkers of Toxicant Exposu re section). New cartridges and new liquid 
refill bottles will also be provided based on estimated use. Study visits will include completion of computerized 
questionnaires and collection of urine and exhaled breath samples for biomarker analysis (see Table  3 for 
measures collection schedule). All participants will also be asked to complete a brief (<2 minute) daily online 
smoking/product diary in a secure database via REDCap for the [ADDRESS_92104] of vape 
shops located in the Columbus, OH area.  
 
Surveillance Phase:  The purpose of this 40 -week period is to assess how LWD vs. HWD  use evolves over 
time; specifically, continued use of product assigned, transitions to other types of EC products, smoking 
behavior and patterns, as well as continued monitoring of biomarkers of toxicant exposure and effect over 
the long -term. During this  phase, follow -up study visits will occur at +26 and +[ADDRESS_92105] at the 
end of the surveillance phase will be strongly advised to quit smoking/vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84409].  
 
Counseling  
 
Counseling as to use or not use the product at follow -up visits will not be a part of this study. At the second  
visit, participants  randomized to ECs  will be asked to attempt to completely switch to the product for the next 
3 months. In subsequent visits, we will continue to ask participants to completely switch/stay switched but will 
not provide additional counseling (e.g., copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]) so as to not influence the natural outcomes of product 
use (or non -use). For example, we assume t hat for those who find  the product unhelpful in managing 
cravings or otherwise unsatisfying they will move on to another product or return to smoking. In real world 
use, most who try EC will not have access to a trained therapi[INVESTIGATOR_84410] -solve 
such  issues. We will provide participants trouble -shooting tips for the mechanics of their product, provide 
replacement parts as needed, and also address adverse events as they arise (though <2% and mild in [CONTACT_84475]’s previous EC studies), but will not offe r ways (e.g., timing, puff duration, etc.) to make the EC a 
better substitute or its use a  more satisfying experience.  
 
 
Protocol Adherence and Quality Control  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92106] operating procedures 
(SOP) will be developed and all staff will be trained to ensure adherence to the SOP. As is standard practice 
for our team’s current studies, each visit will have its own checklist of specific measures to be completed and 
the order in which they are to be administered. To reduce data entry errors, we will use secure computer -
based questionnaires for participants to complete, including daily diaries. All specimens collected for 
biomarker analysis will be given individualized logging code s for each participant. All key on -site personnel 
will meet face -to-face weekly throughout the entire study. Off -site investigators will also participate in these 
weekly meetings during the first year for project start -up; however, this will be reduced to every other week 
as the study progresses. During these meetings, recruitment, enrollment, data collection, data monitoring 
results, and any co ncerns or issues that may arise will be discussed. We will also plan for all key personnel 
to meet at the OSU site in the first year for start -up and then in the final year to discu ss analyses, 
manuscripts, and future research based off of this study.  
 
Measures  
 
All measures, with the exception of the daily online diary, will be collected at the study site during the eight 
visits as indicated in Table 3. All measures, including daily diary, have been used previously by [CONTACT_84437], unless otherwise noted. Biomarkers of exposure and effect were chosen because they 
have shown reasonable laboratory reproducibility, have clear differences in levels between smokers and 
nonsmokers, demonstrate a dose -response relationship, and/or decrease upon tobacco cess ation54,55.  
 
Outcome Measures  
 
The following outcome measures will be assessed during study visits or emailed to the study participant if 
they are not able to attend a visit: 1) Complete Substitution  will be defined as ≥7 days of no more than 1 
conventional cigarette smoked (assessed via the Timeline Follow Back Questionnaire56 that assesses all 
tobacco/nicotine products used for prior 7 days), exhaled carbon monoxide of <4ppm (see biomarker 
measures below), and reported use of ECs over the same 7 -day period; 2)  EC Dependence  will be 
assessed using an adapted version of the Cigarette Dependence Scale57 and the Penn State EC 
Dependence Scale88; 3) Cigarette Dependence  will be measured with the Cigarette Dependence Scale57; 4) 
EC Likeability/Preference  will be measured using items derived from the Cigarette Evaluation Scale58 (7-
point Likert -type scale assessing different dimensions of responses to EC (e.g., psychological reward, 
satisfaction , and averseness) and an EC adapted version of the Product Evaluation Scale59; 5) EC Abuse 
Liability  will be assessed using both the Drug Effects/Liking Questionnaire60 as well as the Cigarette 
Purchase Task61,62 (modified to assess amount willing to pay across similar units of product, “How much 
would you be willing to pay for…a pack of your usual brand of cigarettes?…one e -cigarette cartridge?…1mL 
of e-liquid?”); 6) Transitions to other style of EC and tobacco products  will be assessed by [CONTACT_84438] , “Have you tried any other e -cigarette devices since your last visit?” Affirmative responses will 
be followed -up with questions regarding type of product, frequency and duration of use; 7) Motivation 
Rulers:  importance, confidence, and readiness to quit smoking and to quit all nicotine products (6 -items 
total) will be collected to assess for changes in motivation over time63. 
 
All participants will complete a daily online diary  of EC and/or conventional cigarette use during the Baseline 
and Randomized Product Trial Phases; during the Surveillance Phase, participants will be asked to 
complete daily diaries the week prior to their +26 and +52 -week visit. E -mails  or text messages , with a link 
to an online survey, will be sent automatically and participants will enter data directly into a secure database 
(REDCap) and to encourage completion, participants will be compensated for diary  completion at their next 
clinic visit. The participant’s preferred method of contact [CONTACT_84439]; 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92107] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
14 
 however, alternative methods may be employed if issues arise with the preferred method (e.g., participant 
has run out of minutes; cellular providers are not compatible). If participants are unable to complete a daily 
diary using the link to the online survey, they may be contact[CONTACT_84440] e the daily diary . If participants become ineligible during the course of the study, compensation for 
daily diaries will be given only for diaries completed up to the date that they  were deemed ineligible. Diary 
data will provide several outcome variables: 1) Smoking behavior:  conventional cigarettes smoked per day 
and 2) EC use : amount of e -liquid use and frequency of EC use; and 3) EC flavor:  report EC flavors used 
that day (categories for flavors along with examples will be provided.  
 
Table 3. Outcome Measures  Baseline  Randomized Product  
Trial  Surveillance  
Weeks  -[ADDRESS_92108]/Tobacco Use History and Exposure  X        
Demographic History  X        
Daily online e -cigarette and smoking diary  X X X X X X X X 
Timeline Follow -Back X X X X X X X X 
Cigarette Dependence Scale [ADDRESS_92109] Evaluation Scale    X X X X   
Cigarette Evaluation Scale   X  X  X X X 
Drug Effects/Liking Questionnaire (cigarettes 
and e -cigarettes)   X  X  X X X 
Cigarette Purchase Task (cigarettes and e-
cigarettes)    X X X X   
E-cigarette product transitions questionnaire    X X X X X X 
Motivation Rulers (cigarettes and nicotine)  X X X X X X X X 
Biomarker Measures     
Total NNAL (urine)   X  X  X X X 
Total NNN (urine)   X  X  X X X 
N6-HOMe -dAdo (blood)   X  X  X X X 
N2-ethylidene -dGuo (blood)   X  X  X X X 
Total Nicotine Equivalents (urine)   X  X  X X X 
Creatinine (urine)   X  X  X X X 
q-PADDA (oral cells)   X  X  X X X 
Exhaled breath CO  X X X X X X X X 
Pulmonary Function   X  X  X X X 
Pregnancy Test  X X X X X X X X 
Saliva Sample   X  X  X X X 
 
Biomarkers of Toxicant Exposure  
 
At visits where specimens are collected, participants will complete the Biomarker modifier  questionnaire  
(used extensively in [CONTACT_84472]’s current biomarker studies, a measure of factors that may moderate 
biomarkers of exposure and effect) which includes items that examine: a) tobacco smoke exposure at 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92110] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
15 
 home, work and socially; b) frequency of alcohol and other drug use; c) perceived stress; d) recent 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_1856]; and e) current medications. Most biomarkers of exposure proposed in this study 
have been analyzed extensively in [CONTACT_84474]’s labora tory. Methods for the analyses are described in the 
literature, and [CONTACT_84474] possesses the expertise and laboratory capacity to conduct these analyses. 
The collected urine samples will be aliquoted into [ADDRESS_92111], sample collection time -point, and the type of assay. Aliquots will be 
frozen at -20 ºC until analyses are conducted. Saliva samples (up to 2-[ADDRESS_92112] additional aliquots for potential future analyses of biomarkers of exposure 
to other constituents identified in this Aim, or other biomarkers that may be developed over time. Blood 
samp les will be collected into ‘purple top’ blood collection vacutainer tub es, and plasma, red blood cells, 
and buffy coat will be separated by [CONTACT_7891]. Buffy coat (used to isolate DNA ), plasma , and red blood 
cells will be stored at -80 ºC for potential future studies. Urinary total NNN and total NNAL . Exposure to 
NNK –an accepted cause of lung cancer in smokers64–is measured by [CONTACT_84441] 4 -(methylnitrosamino) -1-
(3-pyridyl) -1butanol (NNAL), which is the sum of NNAL and its glucuronides.[ADDRESS_92113] been 
reported to be present in EC fluids and aerosols.27 However, according to both the published literature72 
and our preliminary data (Stepanov, unpubli shed), there can be significant variation in the content of these 
carcinogens in EC and potentially variations between G1 and G2 products. Total NNN and total NNAL will 
be analyzed by [CONTACT_60628] (LC) -tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using standa rd validated 
methods.73-76  Briefly, urine samples will be mixed with stable isotope -labeled internal standards ([pyridine -
D4]NNN and [13C6]NNAL) and treated with β -glucuronidase to release free NNN and NNAL from their 
glucuronides. The samples will be fur ther purified by [CONTACT_57239] -phase extraction and analyzed by [CONTACT_29864] -MS/MS 
monitoring transitions m/z 178 → 148 for NNN, m/z 184 → 154 for [13C6]NNN, m/z 210 → 93 NNAL and m/z 
216 → 98 for [13C6]NNAL. Urinary HPMA . Acrolein exposure is measured by [CONTACT_84442] 3 -hydroxypropyl 
mercapturic acid (HPMA).77  Acrolein was chosen because it is an intense irritant and lung toxicant, and a 
suggested lung carcinogen that is present in EC.78 It will be analyzed using a validated method,55  in which 
purified samples will be analyzed by [CONTACT_29864] -MS/MS in the APCI mode, monitoring m/z 220 → 91 for 2 -HPMA 
and 3 -HPMA, and m/z 223 → 91 for [D 3]3-HPMA (internal standard). N6-HOMe -dAdo, and N2-ethylidene -
dGuo in leukocyte DNA . Exposure to formaldehyde and acetaldehyde can be measured via the analysis of 
N6-hydroxymethyl -deoxyade nosine ( N6-HOMe -dAdo) and N2-ethylidene -deoxyguanosine ( N2-ethylidene -
dGuo), respectively, in human leukocyte DNA.79,80  
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92114] to the more stable N6-Me-
dAdo. The hydrolysates will be further purified by [CONTACT_57239] -phase extraction, 
and analyzed by [CONTACT_29864] -MS/MS monitoring m/z 266 → 150 for N6-Me-dAdo 
and m/z 271 → 155 for [15N5]N6-Me-dAdo (internal standard).[ADDRESS_92115] to N2-ethyl -
dGuo; the hydroly sate will be purified by [CONTACT_57239] -phase extraction; and the 
purified sample will be analyzed by [CONTACT_84443]/MS monitoring m/z 296 → 180 
for N2-ethyl -dGuo and m/z 301 → 185 for [15N5]N2-ethyl -dGuo (internal 
standard).71,[ADDRESS_92116]. Analysis of these biomarkers will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_48577] (GC) -MS, using standardized methods.84-[ADDRESS_92117] biomarker levels for urine dilution. The analysis will be performed by 
[CONTACT_84444] -University Medical Center Diagnostic Laboratories (Minneapolis) with a Kodak Ektachem 500 
chemistry analyzer. Exhaled Carbon monoxide (CO) will also be collected to corroborate self -reported 
complete substitution vs. not. Note: in addition to human samples, [CONTACT_84474] will also conduct 
comprehensive tobacco -related HPHC analysis on the vapor from a randomly selected subset of participant 
EC devices (10 from each arm). This serves two purposes: 1) to correlate constituent levels with biomarkers of 
exposure in study participants, and 2) to examine if any additional HPHCs should be included in our biomarker 
analysis.  
 
Biomarkers o f Toxicant Effect (DNA Damage)  
 
Oral cells will be collected using a soft brush (CytoPak CytoSoft Brush, Medical Packing Corporation, CA) 
87.  Briefly, study subjects will be instructed to rinse their mouths with tap water, then brush and twirl each 
cytobrush for 30 seconds over the specified regions of the mouth. Areas designated for collection will be the 
top and bottom “gutter” areas (each with a separate CytoBrush), between the upper gum line and the 
mucosa of upper lip and cheek, and between the lower gum line and the mucosa of lower  lip and cheek on 
both sides of the mouth. DNA extraction  will be performed using standard methods as we previously 
described.40,41 DNA damage will be quantified using q -PADDA (Fig. 6) in the transcribed strand (TS) and 
non-transcribed strand (NTS) of the TP53 gene (oligonucleotides listed in Supplementary Table 1; 
Appendix) as we previously described.47,48 Briefly, a single non -cycled primer extension performed with a 5' -
biotin -tagged primer and Vent exo - DNA polymerase identifies damaged nucleotides (Fig.  6, inverted 
triangles). The non -cycled primer extension generates a pool of highly specific biotin -tagged extended 
products (EP), each of them derived from one strand of a single DNA molecule. Each EP has a stop 

IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92118] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
17 
 (asterisk), which represents replicative arrest by a damaged nucleotide, or nick. After several purification 
steps, the extended single -stranded products will be re -quantification (q -PADDA).47 Real-Time PCR 
reactions will be carried out in a CFX96 Real -Time PCR system in a 10 
 l final volume with 
SsoAdvanced ™ SYBR® Green Supermix (Bio -Rad), 0.3 
 M of each oligo, and 1.5/[ADDRESS_92119] pool. The PCR conditions will be: 95
  C, 3 min; 40 cycles (95
  C, 12 sec; 62
  C for TS and 61
  C 
for NTS, 2 m in). Samples will be amplified with two oligo sets for each strand -specific area to be analyzed. 
One set amplifies the targeted fragment (~ 700 bp) under analysis (damage template), while the other set 
amplifies a reference (~ 50 bp) immediately 5’ to the primer used for the initial primer -extension 
(undamaged template). Each sample will be assayed in at least three independent experiments. To analyze 
differences in amplification efficiency between samples, a threshold value on early exponential phase will 
be used. Damage will be analyzed using the [ADDRESS_92120] curve for absolute 
quantification.47,48 Lesion frequency will be estimated using the Poisson equation n= –ln(o).[ADDRESS_92121]: Using a spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], a trained technician will measure Pulmonary functioning  
including, forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_12194] (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC.  
 
E. Statistical Methods  
 
Power Analysis  
 
Complete substitution between LWD vs. HWD products is the primary outcome of the study, as rate of 
product substitution will likely drive the outcomes for all of the other aims; thus, we will estimate power for 
the proposed study based on this outcome at the [ADDRESS_92122] estimate for the LWD arm 
was based on the 3 -month, 7 -day point prevalence abstinence rate for the nicotinized EC (21.5%); 
however, as smokers in this study were motivated to quit smoking, set a quit date, and we re provided 
cessation counseling, we conservatively estimate that the percent of complete substitution will be lower in 
the LWD group (15%). For the HWD group, we will assume a substitution rate of 30% based on the 2 -
month abstinence rate for HWD products found in the only prospective trial of HWD use26. As such, a total 
of 453 patients (151/group) will be enrolled into the study. This sample size will provide about 80% power to 
detect a 15% difference in complete substitution between LWD and HWD groups for  a two -sided .[ADDRESS_92123]. In the sample size calculation, we assume the complete substitution rates are 15% and 
30% for the LWD and HWD groups. Our estimates of sample size adjust for attrition rates of 20% in each 
arm. These attrition rates  are a conservative estimate based on [CONTACT_84469]’s previous research. We are 
confident that with a total sample size of 453 participants (n=363 after accounting for attrition), we will have 
adequate power to test our primary aim. It is important to note t hat this sample size is deliberately 
conservative, as it does not assume the availability of repeated outcome measures that will be taken 
throughout the study. By [CONTACT_84445], we will be increasing the power to 
detect dif ferences between arms.  
 
Data Analytic Plan  
 
Statistical analyses will be performed using SAS 9.2 or later. P -values less than .05 will be considered 
statistically significant. Baseline demographics and smoker characteristics will be summarized by [CONTACT_10609] 
(LWD, HWD, and UBC). Continuous variables will  be presented as mean±SD and compared among [ADDRESS_92124].   
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92125] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
18 
  
Aim 1:  The focus of aim 1 is the examination of differential levels of (Hyp 1a) substitution between LWD 
and HWD, and (Hyp 1b) number of cigarette s smoked and nicotine dependence between G1, G2 and 
control. Hypothesis 1a:  Complete substitution rates, at the end of the Product Trial Phase (3 months) and at 
both Surveillance Phase Visits (6 and 12 months), will be compared between LWD and HWD arms using 
multiple logistic regression models. If necessary, models will adjust for baseline variables such as age, 
gender, number  of cigarettes per day and/or randomization stratification factors. The GEE model will be 
performed for the repeated measure analysis of complete substitution rate across multiple visits.  
Hypothesis 1b:  If needed, we will apply a normalizing transformation  to the response measure (e.g., taking 
the logarithm of cigarettes per day) before proceeding with the analysis, as a means of removing the effects 
of potential outliers. A single linear mixed effects regression model will be used to simultaneously estimat e 
the product arm effects on outcomes (i.e., cigarettes per day, nicotine dependence, motivation to quit 
smoking/nicotine) at 1, 3, [ADDRESS_92126] correlation in the outco me over time. We will control for baseline value of the outcome and 
potential confounders (including any variables not equally distributed between groups). Product arm will be 
coded using two dummy variables to account for the three product arms. Modeling is done using a 
likelihood -based approach and thus makes use of all available data (on the ITT sample) to produce 
consistent estimates of the regression parameters.  
 
Aim 2:  The focus of aim 2 is the examination of changes over time in biomarkers of toxicant exposure (Hyp 
2a) between LWD, HWD and UBC , and (Hyp 2b) among LWD vs. HWD users who completely switch. 
Hypothesis 2a:  The biomarker outcome measures analyzed will include mean levels of specific biomarkers 
at all follow -up time points.  The analysis of biomarkers of toxicant exposure will be analyzed similar to 
outcome variables in Hypothesis 1b. Again mixed effects models will be used for analysis and resulting 
contrast estimates comparing group effects over time will be used as measure of effect. We will again apply 
a normalization transformation but will also include potential confounding factors measured in the 
Biomarker Modifier Questionnaire in the model. Hypothesis 2b:  Similar analyses to Hypothesis 2a will be 
performed but only among the subset of LWD and HWD users who completely switch.  
 
Aim 3:  The focus of Aim [ADDRESS_92127] (Hyp 3a) 
between LWD, HWD and UBC , and (Hyp 3b) amongst LWD vs. HWD users who completely switch. For 
Aim 3 (Hypothesis 3a and IRB NUMBER: 6379 3b), we will run the same analyses as in Aim 2, but the biomarker 
outcome measures analyzed will include mean levels of DNA damage and pulmonary functioning at all 
follow -ups.  
 
Missing Data  
 
In the event of missing data, we will contact [CONTACT_84446]. If a participant drops out, we will 
attempt to gather follow -up information. However, if they refuse to be contact[CONTACT_84447], we will censor data at point of loss. Two statisti cal approaches will be used to handle 
missing data. First, we will use inverse probability weighting with propensity scores. This is a two -step 
procedure in which we first model the probability of missingness as a function of baseline covariates and 
previo us outcomes. Next, the inverse of the resulting predicted probabilities (from the logistic regression 
model) serve as weights in our proposed model of the response (e.g., salivary cotinine at follow -up). We will 
compare these results to a more conservative  intent to treat approach as a final step.  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92128] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
19 
  
F. Gender/Minority/Pediatric Inclusion for Research  
 
Inclusion of Women and Minorities  
 
According to 2018  US Census estimates , 51.3% of Columbus  residents are female. We expect that the 
proportion of female participants will likely be somewhat larger given our previous studies with smokers (55 -62% 
female). According to 2018 US  Census estimates , the racial composition of individuals living in Columbus  is 
60.5% White, 28.3% Black or African American, 5.2% Asian, 0.2% American Indian/Alaska Native, 0. 0% Native 
Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander, and 4.1% two or more races. The ethnic composition of individuals living in 
Columbus  is 6.0% Hispanic/Latino and 94.0% Non -Hispanic/Latino. We expect that our distribution will be similar 
to these but may potentially have a larger distribution of ethnic and racial minorities, given our previous studies 
and that menthol smokers tend to more often be black or Hispanic. How ever, we will continuously monitor 
enrollment in order to ensure that we are meeting recruitment goals to avoid under -recruiting minorities. If the 
targeted enrollment for minorities is not met because they do not respond to the advertisements, we will make 
special efforts to solicit their participation by [CONTACT_84448], local church organizations, 
and community centers.  
 
Inclusion of Children  
 
Participation in the proposed study will be restricted to individuals 21 years of age and older. This exclusion is 
for two primary reasons: 1) the use of tobacco products by [CONTACT_84449], and 2) the concern of introducing 
and potentially addicting children and adolescents to another tobacco product.  
 
G. Human P articipants  
 
Potential Risks  
 
The research protocol calls for current smokers who do not plan to quit  smoking within the next three 
months to attempt to completely substitute a LWD e -cigarette, a HWD e -cigarette, or to continue to smoke 
their usual brand of cigarette as they wish. Participants will not be provided any more instructions for use , 
and non -use of e -cigarettes is a permissible outcome. E -cigarettes are no more harmful than conventional 
cigarettes, and there is some evidence that they may offer reduced harm. Questionnaires, exhaled breath 
and urine collection procedures are all non -invasive and involve minimal risk to study participants. Potential 
risks are as follows: a) risk of using e -cigarettes, b) dual use of cigarettes and e -cigarettes, c) loss of 
confidentiality or privacy, d) potential for undermining smoking cessation, e) lack of appropr iate storage of 
nicotine -containing products in a house with children and pets, f) slight risk of discomfort, bruising and 
infection with blood draw, and g) slight risk of discomfort and very low risk of infection with oral (buccal) cell 
collection.  
  
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and several 
states, and federal health departments are investigating a multi -state outbreak of severe lung disease 
associated with using e -cigarette/vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84411] s. The investigation is ongoing and has not identified a cause, 
but all cases have reported use of vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84412]. The majority of patients have reported vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84413], 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92129] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
20 
 such as THC, obtained on the black market or other sources.  In addition, one of the chemicals that has been 
possibly linked is Vitamin E acetate (tocopheryl acetate) added to e -liquid cartridges and pods.  
 
The FDA has advised consumers to protect themselves by [CONTACT_84450][INVESTIGATOR_84414]/adding any substance to vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84415].  We will recommend that participants  use only the products that we provide  
them  for this study and do not add any substances to the e -liquids or alter the device in anyway.  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
 
At first contact, all participants which include women and minorities will be screened according to the 
studies inclusion/exclusion criteria. Those who are eligible will be given a brief verbal overview of the study 
and invited to participate. Informed con sent (including a description of the nature, purpose, risks, and 
benefits of the study) will take place through both oral and written explanation of the study. The voluntary 
nature of the study and the participant’s right to withdraw at any time will be st ressed during the consent 
process; a copy of the informed consent will be provided to the participant in written form at the time of 
consent for them to keep. Informed consent will be collected by [CONTACT_1744]-approved study personnel. 
Recruitment script s and materials, consent forms , and all study procedures will be approved by [CONTACT_84451]. All participants will provide written consent before any study data are collected.  
 
Protections Against Risk  
 
Efforts to reduce risk are as follows:  
1. Risk of using e -cigarettes: The risk of side effects and adverse events are very low. These products 
are sold online, and at e -cigarette specialty stores and convenience stores nationwide, without a 
prescription. Nevertheless, all participants will be scre ened for general medical precautions 
(pregnancy, cardiovascular disease) and monitored for adverse events during the study period. 
Study personnel will assess for adverse events via self -report at all follow -up visits. Smokers will 
also be provided a study  phone line to report an adverse event between follow -up visits. Any serious 
adverse events will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84416]. We will 
withdraw participants who have a serious adverse event, or become pregnant or begin to 
breastfeed. The most likely adverse (potential for nicotine overdose) event is anticipated to be rare 
(<5% i n [CONTACT_84469]’s previous studies) and mild (nausea, headache, disrupted sleep)  event  will be 
handled quickly (i.e., advice to participant to reduce or stop EC use). [CONTACT_84476], a physician, will 
also be available for medical oversight and to handle any questions regarding reported adverse 
events. Lab studies of toxin exposure suggest that ECs incur no greater risk to health than do 
convent ional cigarettes. Indeed, e -cigarettes generally show lower levels of harmful and potentially 
harmful constituents. To date, five e -cigarette studies discuss adverse events (3 survey and 2 
randomized clinical trials), reporting mild and tolerable side effe cts that generally resolved 
completely over time with continued use (90% of cases); the most predominant of which were 
mouth/throat irritation, cough, and headache. In both randomized clinical trials, no serious adverse 
events were reported and the e -cigar ette group and the nicotine patch group had comparable levels 
of adverse events. The most common were mouth irritation, throat irritation, dry cough and 
headache.  
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92130] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
21 
 2. Risk of dual use of cigarettes and e -cigarettes: The concern of smokers engaging in dual use is that 
they will substantially increase their uptake of nicotine, leading to nicotine overdose. The symptoms 
of nicotine overdose include nausea, vomiting, dizzin ess, headache, and rapid heart rate. In our 
previous trial with e -cigarettes (see Preliminary Studies section), none of the participants reported 
any indication of nicotine overdose in their dual use of e -cigarettes and conventional cigarettes. In 
fact, mo st reduced their level of conventional cigarette use in proportion with their uptake of e -
cigarettes. Preliminary analyses (n=20) from another one of our current randomized trials 
investigating the use of ECs by [CONTACT_84452]’s as a means of reducing their chi ldren’s SHSe (i.e., 
parents asked to use EC anytime they are in the home, car, or around their child), indicate that 
caregivers decreased in their level of salivary cotinine (Mbaseline=447.9 to M3 -mo=314.8). 
Caregivers also reported reduction in number of tobacco cigarette s per day from baseline to 3 - 
month follow -up (Mbaseline=19.6 to M3 -mo=9.5). Consistent with these findings, parents reported 
no adverse events, no serious adverse events , and specifically , no nicotine overdose event.  
3. Loss of Confidentiality and Privacy: Confidentiality will be maintained by [CONTACT_46766], 
disguising identifying information, and keepi[INVESTIGATOR_84417] a secure, password 
protected database. All biospecimen samples are kep t in a locked freezer and also will be 
deidentified. Names of participants will be kept separate from participant data. Only study research 
personnel  and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_84418] s’ name s and ID number s. All 
electronic data  will be numerically coded and stored in a password -protected database, on a 
password -protected computer in a secure research space. Participant information will be accessible 
only to research staff, who are pledged to confidentiality and have complete d training in the ethical 
conduct of research (i.e., both HIPAA and CITI trainings). Identifying information will not be reported 
in any publication.  
4. Potential for Undermining Cessation: The study sample is comprised of smokers with no plan to quit 
in the next three months. Therefore, we are not asking smokers who want to quit to continue 
smoking. Moreover, our previous study of e -cigarette sampling and  use among smokers 
unmotivated to quit smoking suggested that e -cigarette use increased smokers’ readiness and 
confidence to quit smoking. At the end of the study, all participants will be debriefed and educated 
about ECs and conventional cigarettes. This education will include the information that: a) there is 
no safe cigarette, b) the best thing a smoker can do to improve health is to quit, c) some ECs are 
manufactured by [CONTACT_84453], d) ECs, though able to be regulated by [CONTACT_4760] a tobacco 
product, are currently unregulated by [CONTACT_84454] 
(based on research such as the present proposal), and e) it is unclear whether ECs reduce the risks 
associated with smoking. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_84419], smoking, or smoking cessation. It is important to note that the use of ECs incurs no greater 
harm than if the participant decided on his/her own to use the product. ECs are available online and 
over-the-count er at various convenience stores, e -cigarette specialty stores and places where 
tobacco products are sold. Among those screened and ineligible/uninterested, referral resources for 
smoking cessation will be provided for those who inquire. Among study partic ipants, information on 
cessation resources will be provided at the final visit and if at any time during the study participants  
are interested in smoking cessation services, a list of smoking cessation resources will be provided.  
5. Lack of Appropriate Storage of EC Products: Consistent with [CONTACT_84469]’s previous EC studies, 
participants will be instructed to keep their UBCs, EC cartridges and childproof e -liquid refill 
containers up and away from their children and pets to protect a gainst unintentional poisoning. 
Although overdose or accidental ingestion is very unlikely and has not occurred in [CONTACT_84469]’s 
previous studies, all participants will be provided the state and national poison control telephone line 
as well as a “tip shee t” on recognizing signs of nicotine overdose. It is important to note that in the 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92131] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
22 
 unlikely event that someone other than the participant uses the EC, this risk would be no greater 
than if that same individual took the participant’s cigarettes.  
6. Slight risk of bruising, discomfort and infection with blood draw and oral (buccal) cell collection: 
Buccal cells  and blood  will be collected by [CONTACT_7628].  Sterile instruments will be used 
and for blood draws, the participants skin will be cleaned with an alcohol wipe at the venipuncture 
site. 
 
 
 
H. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
Adverse events will be assessed by [CONTACT_84455] -up visit via participant self -report 
and managed immediately. All adverse events will be reported to the OSU  IRB. We will monitor 
for risk of smoking by [CONTACT_84456] (pregna ncy, 
cardiovascular disease). Any adverse events, breaks of confidentiality, or any other data or 
safety issues that arise will be discussed immediately  between study personnel and [CONTACT_84475] . [CONTACT_84469] will be responsible for compl eting an Adverse Events Form should an  
event occur. [CONTACT_84469] will report potential unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects 
or others” (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_20865]) to the OSU  IRB within [ADDRESS_92132]. 
Wagener will gather any information needed to investigate the event and to determine 
subsequent action. Any subsequent action will be documented and reported to the OSU  IRB and 
the Program Officer at NIH. Adverse event reports will be reviewed annually with the OSU  IRB to 
ensure participant safety.  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92133] 6 ft apart, both wearing masks.  No more than 2 persons may ride the 
elevator at any given time.  The participant will be immediately escorted to a private exam/draw room.  
Therefore, there will be no waiting in open lobby/waiting areas.  
 
When in the exam room, the study coordinator will stand at least [ADDRESS_92134] a designated exam/draw room and smoking room in which to conduct their 
designated research study.   Each smoking room is separated from the staff control station in the hallway by [CONTACT_84457] a large window for the study coordinator to be able to see in and monitor study 
participant activity within the room.  There is also a speaker and mic rophone system within each smoking room 
along with the Genetech software system on the outside of each room at the smoking room computer stations.  
Therefore, the study coordinator and study participant can communicate without being in the room together.   
 
For study measures which cannot be physically distanced, appropriate PPE will be worn at all times by 
[CONTACT_84458], face masks, gloves, and isolation gowns or lab 
coats.  
 
Study surveys that are able to be completed remotely will be sent to participants using their preferred method of 
contact  [CONTACT_84459] -lab study visit . Surveys will be considered complete if at least 90% of survey 
responses recorded are valid. Repetitive use of “Refuse to Answer”, “0” or skippi[INVESTIGATOR_84420]. Surveys completed remotely will be  checked by [CONTACT_44498] . To receive the study visit  
portion of compensation,  90% of the survey responses recorded must be valid.   
After each participant visit is complete, there will be at least a 45 -minute period for cleaning and air exchanges 
in the negative pressure  rooms  and for cleaning  exam rooms  and equipment  before the next participant visit.  
All smoking rooms are under negative pressure with a ventilation rate of 36.8 – 44.1 air changes per hour 
(ACH).  
 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92135] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
24 
 I. Literature Cited  
 
1. Farsalinos KE, Spyrou A, Tsimopoulou K, Stefopoulos C, Romagna G, Voudris V. Nicotine absorption 
from electronic cigarette use: comparison between first and new -generation devices. Scientific reports 
2014;4:4133.  
2. Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Voudris V. Characteristics, perceived side 
effects and benefits of electronic cigarette use: a worldwide survey of more than 19,000 consumers. 
International journal of environmental research and public h ealth 2014;11:4356 -73. 
3. Lechner WV, Tackett AP, Grant DM, Tahirkheli NN, Driskill LM, Wagener TL. Effects of Duration of 
Electronic Cigarette Use. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on 
Nicotine and Tobacco 2014.  
4. Meier E, Tackett AP, Wagener TL. Effectiveness of electronic aids for smoking cessation. Curr 
Cardiovasc Risk Rep 2013;7.  
5. Dawkins L, Turner J, Roberts A, Soar K. 'Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]' profiles and preferences: an online survey of electronic 
cigarette users. Addiction 2013;108:1115 -25. 
6. Pepper JK, Emery SL, Ribisl KM, Brewer NT. How U.S. Adults Find Out About Electronic Cigarettes: 
Implications for Public Health Messages. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for 
Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2014.  
7. Carver R. Analyst projection: E -cigs will overtake traditional tobacco revenue at Reynolds in 2021 
Winston -Salem Journal2013.  
8. Herzog B. "Tobacco Talk" -- Q4 U.S. Vapor Retailer Survey. Wells Fargo Securities 2015:1 -18. 
9. Herzog B. Tobacco Talk: Vapors/Tanks Driving Next Wave Of E -Vapor Growth: Wells Fargo Securities 
LLC; 2014 March 24, 2014.  
10. Herzog B. Vape Shops - Springing Up Across The Country: Wells Fargo Securities; 2014.  
11. Rebuildable Atomizer Systems. at http://www.e -cigarette -forum.com/forum/rebuildable -
atomizer systems/. ) 
12. Bullen C, Howe C, Laugesen M, et al. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2013.  
13. Caponnetto P, Polosa R, Russo C, Leotta C, Campagna D. Successful smoking cessation with electronic 
cigarettes in smokers with a documented history of recurring relapses: a case series. Journal of Medical 
Case Reports 2011;5:585.  
14. Polosa R, Morjaria J, Caponnetto P, et al. Effect of smoking abstinence and reduction in asthmatic 
smokers switching to electronic cigarettes: evidence for harm reversal. International journal of 
environmental research and public health 2014;11:4965 -77. 
15. Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Cibella F, et al. EffiCiency and Safety of an eLectronic cigAreTte (ECLAT) 
as tobacco cigarettes substitute: a prospective 12 -month randomized control design study. PloS one 
2013;8:e66317.  
16. Vickerman KA, Carpenter KM, Altman T, Nash CM, Zbikowski SM. Use of electronic cigarettes among 
state tobacco cessation quitline callers. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for 
Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2013;15:1787 -91. 
17. Bullen C, Howe C, Laugesen M, et al. Electronic cigarettes for smoking cessation: a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2013;382:[ADDRESS_92136] of an electronic nicotine delivery 
device (e cigarette) on desire to smoke and withdrawal, user preferences and nicotine delivery: 
randomised cross -over trial. Tobacco control 2010;19:98 -103. 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92137] of an electronic nicotine 
delivery device (e -Cigarette) on smoking reduction and cessation: a prospective 6 -month pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
BMC Public Health 2011;11:786.  
20. Wagener TL, Meier E, Hale JJ, et al. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_84421] E -cigarette experimentation and 1 week of use. Nicotine & tobacco research : official 
journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2014;16:108 -14. 
21. Vansickel AR, Cobb CO, Weaver MF, Eissenberg TE. A clinical laboratory model for evaluating the acute 
effects of electronic "cigarettes": nicotine delivery profile and cardiovascular and subjective effects. 
Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American Association for Cancer 
Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_65480] 2010;19:1945 -53. 
22. Vansickel AR, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarettes: effective nicotine delivery after acute administration. 
Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 
2013;15:[ADDRESS_92138] of an electronic cigarette on 
smoking reduction and cessation in schizophrenic smokers: a prospective 12 -month pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
International journal of environmental research and public health 2 013;10:446 -61. 
24. Tackett AP, Lechner WV, Meier E, et al. Biochemically Verified Smoking Cessation and Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_84422]. Addiction 2015.  
25. Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Voudris V. Evaluating nicotine levels selection 
and patterns of electronic cigarette use in a group of "vapers" who had achieved complete substitution of 
smoking. Substance abuse : research and treatment  2013;7:139 -46. 
26. Adriaens K, Van Gucht D, Declerck P, Baeyens F. Effectiveness of the electronic cigarette: An eightweek 
flemish study with six -month follow -up on smoking reduction, craving and experienced benefits and 
complaints. International journal of environmental res earch and public health 2014;11:[ZIP_CODE] -48. 
27. Cheng T. Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes. Tobacco control 2014;[ADDRESS_92139] 2:ii11 -7. 
28. Callahan -Lyon P. Electronic cigarettes: human health effects. Tobacco control 2014;[ADDRESS_92140] 2:ii36 -40. 
29. Goniewicz ML, Knysak J, Gawron M, et al. Levels of selected carcinogens and toxicants in vapour from 
electronic cigarettes. Tobacco control 2014;23:133 -9. 
30. Cahn Z, Siegel M. Electronic cigarettes as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: a step forward 
or a repeat of past mistakes? J Public Health Policy 2011;32:16 -31. 
31. Kosmider L, Sobczak A, Fik M, et al. Carbonyl Compounds in Electronic Cigarette Vapors -Effects of 
Nicotine Solvent and Battery Output Voltage. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society 
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2014.  
32. Flouris AD, Chorti MS, Poulianiti KP, et al. Acute impact of active and passive electronic cigarette 
smoking on serum cotinine and lung function. Inhal Toxicol 2013;25:91 -101. 
33. Vardavas CI, Anagnostopoulos N, Kougias M, Evangelopoulou V, Connolly GN, Behrakis PK. Shortterm 
pulmonary effects of using an electronic cigarette: impact on respi[INVESTIGATOR_84423], impedance, and 
exhaled nitric oxide. Chest 2012;141:[ADDRESS_92141] 
2012;141:1110 -3. 
35. Goniewicz ML, Lingas EO, Hajek P. Patterns of electronic cigarette use and user beliefs about their 
safety and benefits: an internet survey. Drug Alcohol Rev 2013;32:[ADDRESS_92142] - versus second -generation 
electronic cigarettes in reducing symptoms of nicotine withdrawal. Addiction 2015.  
37. Wagener TL, Siegel M, Borrelli B. Let's keep our 'eye on the ball': reducing tobacco -related harm. 
Addiction 2012;107:1554 -5. 
38. Wagener TL, Siegel M, Borrelli B. Electronic cigarettes: achieving a balanced perspective. Addiction 
2012;107:1545 -8. 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92143] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
26 
 39. Ramachandran I, Ganapathy V, Gillies E, et al. Wnt inhibitory factor 1 suppresses cancer stemness and 
induces cellular senescence. Cell death & disease 2014;5:e1246.  
40. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of avoidable risks of cancer in the United 
States today. J Natl Cancer Inst 1981;66:1191 -308. 
41. Shukla PC, Singh KK, Yanagawa B, Teoh H, Verma S. DNA damage repair and cardiovascular diseases. 
The Canadian journal of cardiology 2010;[ADDRESS_92144] A:13A -6A. 
42. Sundar IK, Yao H, Rahman I. Oxidative stress and chromatin remodeling in chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease and smoking -related diseases. Antioxid Redox Signal 2013;18:1956 -71. 
43. Ames BN. Endogenous DNA damage as related to cancer and aging. Mutat Res 1989;214:41 -6. 
44. Hasty P, Campi[INVESTIGATOR_16616] J, Hoeijmakers J, van Steeg H, Vijg J. Aging and Genome Maintenance: Lessons from 
the Mouse? Science 2003;299:1355 -9. 
45. Cooke MS, Evans MD, Dizdaroglu M, Lunec J. Oxidative DNA damage: mechanisms, mutation, and 
disease. FASEB J 2003;17:1195 -214. 
46. Services USDoHaH. How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for  
Smoking -Attributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General. In: U.S. Department of Health and  
Human Services CfDCaP, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office 
on Smoking and Health, ed. Atlanta, GA2010.  
47. Reis AM, Mills WK, Ramachandran I, Friedberg EC, Thompson D, Queimado L. Targeted detection of in 
vivo endogenous DNA base damage reveals preferential base excision repair in the transcribed strand. 
Nucleic Acids Research 2012;40:206 -19. 
48. Vengatesh Ganapathy, Ilangovan Ramachandran, David A. Rubenstein, Queimado L. Detection of In 
Vivo DNA Damage Induced by [CONTACT_84460] a 
Novel Assay American journal of preventive medicine Under revision.  
49. (ESCODD) TESCoODD. Measurement of DNA oxidation in human cells by [CONTACT_84461]. Free Radic Biol Med 2003;34:[ADDRESS_92145] JM, Veldheer S, Hrabovsky S, Nichols TT, Wilson SJ, Foulds J. Factors Associated With 
Electronic Cigarette Users' Device Preferences and Transition From First Generation to Advanced 
Generation Devices. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine 
and Tobacco 2015.  
52. The Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health (PATH) Study. (Accessed June 3, 2014, at 
http://www.pathstudyinfo.nih.gov/UI/HomeMobile.aspx. ) 
53. Wagener TL, Meier E, Hale JJ, et al. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_84424] E -cigarette Experimentation and 1 Week of Use. Nicotine & tobacco research : official 
journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2013.  
54. Hatsukami DK, Benowitz NL, Rennard SI, Oncken C, Hecht SS. Biomarkers to assess the utility of 
potential reduced exposure tobacco products. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society 
for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2006;8:169 -91. 
55. Carmella SG, Chen M, Han S, et al. Effects of smoking cessation on eight urinary tobacco carcinogen 
and toxicant biomarkers. Chemical research in toxicology 2009;22:734 -41. 
56. Lewis -Esquerre JM, Colby [CONTACT_10009], Tevyaw TO, Eaton CA, Kahler CW, Monti PM. Validation of the timeline 
follow -back in the assessment of adolescent smoking. Drug and alcohol dependence 2005;79:33 -43. 
57. Etter JF, Le Houezec J, Perneger TV. A self -administered questionnaire to measure dependence on 
cigarettes: the cigarette dependence scale. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the 
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology 2003;28:359 -70. 
58. Westman EC LE, Rose JE. Smoking while wearing the nicotine patch: Is smoking satisfying or harmful? 
Clinical research 1992;40:871A.  
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92146] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
27 
 59. Hatsukami DK, Zhang Y, O'Connor RJ, Severson HH. Subjective responses to oral tobacco products:  
scale validation. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and 
Tobacco 2013;15:1259 -64. 
60. Zacny JP, Conley K, Marks S. Comparing the subjective, psychomotor and physiological effects of 
intravenous nalbuphine and morphine in healthy volunteers. The Journal of pharmacology and 
experimental therapeutics 1997;280:1159 -69. 
61. Jacobs EA, Bickel WK. Modeling drug consumption in the clinic using simulation procedures: demand for 
heroin and cigarettes in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -dependent outpatients. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 1999;7:412 -26. 
62. MacKillop J, Murphy JG, Ray LA, et al. Further validation of a cigarette purchase task for assessing the 
relative reinforcing efficacy of nicotine in college smokers. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 2008;16:57 -65. 
63. Boudreaux ED, Sullivan A, Abar B, Bernstein SL, Ginde AA, Camargo CA, Jr. Motivation rulers for 
smoking cessation: a prospective observational examination of construct and predictive validity. Addiction 
science & clinical practice 2012;7:8.  
64. nitrosamines. IAfRoCStat -s. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans.  
2007:41 -417. 
65. Carmella SG, Akerkar S, Hecht SS. Metabolites of the tobacco -specific nitrosamine 4 - 
(methylnitrosamino) -1-(3-pyridyl) -1-butanone in smokers' urine. Cancer research 1993;53:721 -4. 
66. Yuan JM, Koh WP, Murphy SE, et al. Urinary levels of tobacco -specific nitrosamine metabolites in 
relation to lung cancer development in two prospective cohorts of cigarette smokers. Cancer research 
2009;69:2990 -5. 
67. Church TR, Anderson KE, Caporaso NE, et al. A prospectively measured serum biomarker for a tobacco -
specific carcinogen and lung cancer in smokers. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a 
publication of the American Association for Cancer Research,  cosponsored by [CONTACT_84462] 2009;18:260 -6. 
68. Yuan JM, Gao YT, Murphy SE, et al. Urinary levels of cigarette smoke constituent metabolites are 
prospectively associated with lung cancer development in smokers. Cancer research 2011;71:6749 -57. 
69. Hecht SS. Biochemistry, biology, and carcinogenicity of tobacco -specific N -nitrosamines. Chemical 
research in toxicology 1998;11:559 -603. 
70. Stepanov I, Hecht SS. Tobacco -specific nitrosamines and their pyridine -N-glucuronides in the urine of 
smokers and smokeless tobacco users. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of 
the American Association for Cancer Research, cospons ored by [CONTACT_84463] 2005;14:885 -91. 
71. Yuan JM, Knezevich AD, Wang R, Gao YT, Hecht SS, Stepanov I. Urinary levels of the tobaccospecific 
carcinogen N' -nitrosonornicotine and its glucuronide are strongly associated with esophageal cancer risk 
in smokers. Carcinogenesis 2011;32:1366 -71. 
72. Kim HJ, Shin HS. Determination of tobacco -specific nitrosamines in replacement liquids of electronic 
cigarettes by [CONTACT_60628] -tandem mass spectrometry. Journal of chromatography A 
2013;1291:48 -55. 
73. Stepanov I, Carmella SG, Briggs A, et al. Presence of the carcinogen N' -nitrosonornicotine in the urine of 
some users of oral nicotine replacement therapy products. Cancer research 2009;69:8236 -40. 
74. Stepanov I, Carmella SG, Han S, et al. Evidence for endogenous formation of N' -nitrosonornicotine in 
some long -term nicotine patch users. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for 
Research on Nicotine and Tobacco 2009;11:99 -105. 
75. Stepanov I, Upadhyaya P, Carmella SG, et al. Extensive metabolic activation of the tobacco -specific 
carcinogen 4 -(methylnitrosamino) -1-(3-pyridyl) -1-butanone in smokers. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers 
& prevention : a publication of the American Associati on for Cancer Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_84464] 2008;17:1764 -73. 
76. Carmella SG, Han S, Fristad A, Yang Y, Hecht SS. Analysis of total 4 -(methylnitrosamino) -1-(3-pyridyl) - 
IRB Protocol Number: 2019C0082  
IRB Approval Original Date: 05/28/2019  
Version: [ADDRESS_92147] and Second Generation E -cigarettes  
 
28 
 1-butanol (NNAL) in human urine. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the 
American Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_84463] 2003;12:1257 -61. 
77. Carmella SG, Chen M, Zhang Y, Zhang S, Hatsukami DK, Hecht SS. Quantitation of acrolein -derived (3 -
hydroxypropyl)mercapturic acid in human urine by [CONTACT_60628] -atmospheric pressure chemical 
ionization tandem mass spectrometry: effects of cigarett e smoking. Chemical research in toxicology 
2007;20:986 -90. 
78. Humans IMotEoCRt. International Agency for Research on Cancer Dry Cleaning, Some Chlorinated 
Solvents and Other Industrial Chemicals. 1995:[ADDRESS_92148] in leukocytes of smokers and nonsmokers. Cancer research 2009;69:[ZIP_CODE].  
80. Chen L, Wang M, Villalta PW, et al. Quantitation of an acetaldehyde adduct in human leukocyte DNA and 
the effect of smoking cessation. Chemical research in toxicology 2007;20:[ADDRESS_92149]. International Agency for Research on Cancer Re -evaluation of Some Organic 
Chemicals, Hydrazine and Hydrogen Peroxide. 1999.  
82. Humans IMotEoCRt. International Agency for Research on Cancer A Review of Human Carcinogens: 
Chemical Agents and Related Occupations. 2012.  
83. Hukkanen J, Jacob P, 3rd, Benowitz NL. Metabolism and disposition kinetics of nicotine. Pharmacological 
reviews 2005;57:79 -115. 
84. Derby [CONTACT_84465], Cuthrell K, Caberto C, et al. Nicotine metabolism in three ethnic/racial groups with different 
risks of lung cancer. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American 
Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_65480] 
2008;17:3526 -35. 
85. Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Chen M, et al. Quantitation of urinary metabolites of a tobacco -specific lung 
carcinogen after smoking cessation. Cancer research 1999;59:590 -6. 
86. Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Murphy SE. Effects of watercress consumption on urinary metabolites of 
nicotine in smokers. Cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], biomarkers & prevention : a publication of the American 
Association for Cancer Research, cosponsored by [CONTACT_84466] 
1999;8:907 -13. 
87. Saftlas AF, Waldschmidt M, Logsden -Sackett N, Triche E, Field E. Optimizing buccal cell DNA yields in 
mothers and infants for human leukocyte antigen genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2004;160:[ADDRESS_92150] J, Hrabovsky S, Wilson SJ, Nichols TT, Eissenberg T. Development of a 
questionnaire for assessing dependence on electronic cigarettes among a large sample of ex -smoking E -
cigarette users. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015 Feb;17(2):186 -92. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu204. Epub [ADDRESS_92151] Drippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]": A High -Temperature, High -
Formaldehyde Emission Electronic Cigarette Use Method. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015 Apr 11. pii:  
ntv080. [Epub ahead of print].  
90. Jensen RP, Luo W, Pankow JF, Strongin RM, Peyton DH. Hidden formaldehyde in e -cigarette aerosols. 
N Engl J Med. 2015 Jan 22;372(4):392 -4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1413069.  
91. Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Kotandeniya D, et al. Evaluation of toxicant and carcinogen metabolites in the 
urine of e -cigarette users versus cigarette smokers. Nicotine Tob Res 2014 October 21 (Epub ahead of 
print).  
92. Ganapathy V, Ramachandran I, Rubenstein DA, Queimado L. Detection of in vivo DNA damage induced 
by [CONTACT_84467] a novel assay. Am J Prev Med. 
2015 Jan;48([ADDRESS_92152] 1):S102 -10.  
 