 
METRC VANCO Protocol v 2  10/6/2014  i Major Extremity Trauma Research Consortium (METRC):  
Local Antibiotic  Therapy  to Reduce Infection after Operative Treatment of Fractures at High 
Risk of Infection: A Multicenter Randomized, Controlled Trial  
[FDA IND #119891]  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Sponsored by: [CONTACT_246942]:   W81XWH -10-2-0134   
 
Principal Investigator/Protocol Chair: Robert V. O’Toole, MD  
 
Medical Monitor: Marc Swiontkowski, MD  
 
Version 2.0 
 
10/6/2014  
 
This template is adapted from the ICH guidance document E6 (Good Clinical Practices), 
Section 6.  
 
Confidentiality Statement  
 
This document is confidential and is to be distributed for review only to investigators, 
potential investigators, consultants, study staff, and applicable independent ethics 
committees or institutional review boards.  The contents of this document shall not be 
disclosed to others without written authorization from METRC (or others, as applicable), 
unless it is necessary to obtain informed consent from potential study participants.  
 
METRC VANCO Protocol v 2  10/6/2014  ii Confidentiality Statement  
 
This document is confidential and is to be distributed  for review only to investigators, 
potential investigators, consultants, study staff, and applicable independent ethics 
committees or institutional review boards.  The contents of this document shall not be 
disclosed to others without written authorization  from METRC (or others, as applicable), 
unless it is necessary to obtain informed consent from potential study participants.  
 
METRC VANCO Protocol v 2  10/6/2014  iii Signature [CONTACT_246987] , and 
provides the neces sary assurances that this trial will be conducted according to all stipulations of 
the protocol, including all statements regarding confidentiality, and according to local legal and 
regulatory requirements and applicable U.S. federal regulations and ICH gu idelines.  
The Lead Principal Investigator (Protocol Chair) should sign Signature [CONTACT_3490] 1.  A copy of this 
Signature [CONTACT_3490] 1 should be filed with the holder of the Regulatory documents and a copy should 
be maintained at the site.  
 
Principal Investigator:  _______________________________________________  
                                                                    Print/Type  
 
Signed:   Date:   
 Name/Title  
   
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300394] of General 
Abbreviations/Terminology……………………………………………  
List of METRC 
Abbreviations/Terminology……………………………………………  
Protocol Summary……………………………………………………………………..  7 
8 
9 
1. KEY ROLES………………………………………………………………………......  14 
2. BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE………. ..... 15 
2.1 Background 
Information……………………………………………………………..  15 
2.2 
Rationale………………………………………………………………………………  16 
2.3 Potential Risks and 
Benefits…………………………………………………………   
     2.3.1 Potential 
Risks…………………………………………………………………………….   
     2.3.2 Potential 
Benefits…………………………………………………………………………   
3. STUDY OBJECTIVES……………………………………………………………….  16 
3.1 Primary 
Objective……………………………………………………………………  16 
3.2 Secondary 
Objectives……………………………… …………………………………  16 
3.3 Exploratory 
Objectives……………………………………………………………….  16 
4.  STUDY 
OVERVIEW…………………………………………………………………  17 
5. STUDY POPULATION………………………………………………………………  17 
5.1 Description of the Study 
Population…………………………………………………  17 
     5.1.1 Participant Inclusion Criteria…………………………………………………………  18 
     5.1.2 Participant Exclusion 
criteria…………………………………………………………..  18 
     5.1.3 Co -Enrollment 
Guidelines……………………………………………………………….  19 
5.2 Strategies for 
Recruitment……………………………………………………………  19 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES……………………………………………………………  19 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300395] Review  22 
     6.2.2 Clinical Assessment  22 
     6.2.3 Participant Interview  23 
6.3 Participant Follow up and Data Collection  23 
     6.3.1 Follow -up Visit Schedule  23 
     6.3.2 Clinical Assessments  23 
     6.3.3 Participant Interviews  23 
     6.3.4 Retention  23 
     6.3.5 Final Study Visit  24 
     6.3.6 Early Termination Visit  24 
6.4 Study En dpoints  24 
     6.4.1 Primary Endpoint  24 
     6.4.2 Secondary Endpoint  25 
     6.4.3 Exploratory Endpoint  26 
     6.4.4 Substudy E ndpoint  26 
7. STUDY TREATMENTS  27 
7.1 Study Treatment #1  27 
     7.1.1 Description of Treatment  27 
     7.1.2 Potential Risks and/or adverse effects  27 
7.2 Study Treatment #2  28 
     7.2.1 Description of Treatment  28 
     7.2.2 Potential Risks and/or adverse events  28 
8. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY………………………………………………………  28 
8.1 Definitions………………………………………………………………………….  29 
     8.1.1 Adverse event…………………………………………………………………………..  29 
     8.1.2 Unanticipated problem……………………………………………………………….  29 
     8.1.3 Serious Adverse Event………………………………………………………………..  29 
8.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing, Managing 
Safety Parameters……………………………………………………………………..  29 
     8.2.1 Methods and Timing of Assessment………………………………………………….  29 
     8.2.2 AE/SAE Grading and Relationship Assignment……………………………………  30 
     8.2.3 Recoding and Documentation………………………………………………………..  30 
     8.2.4. Management of Adverse Events……………………………………………………..  30 
8.3 Adverse Event Reporting Procedures……………………………………………  31 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  6 
 
 
      8.3.1 Local Reporting Requirements……………………………………………………….  31 
     8.3.2 SAE and Unanticipated Problem Reporting Requirements………………………  31 
     8.3.3 METRC Coordinating Center Reporting Responsibilities……………………….  31 
     8.3.4 Department of Defense Reporting Requirements………………………………….  31 
8.4 Reporting Pregnancy………………………………………………………………  33 
8.5 Type and Duration of the Follow -up of Participants After Adverse Events…..  33 
8.6 Modifications of Study Agent(s)/Intervention(s) for a Participant……………..  33 
8.7 Halting Rules for the Protocol…………………………………………………….  33 
8.8 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_246878]/Cohort…………………………..  33 
8.9 Premature Withdrawal of a Participant…………………………………………  33 
8.10 Rep lacement of a Participant Who Discontinues Study Treatment…………..  33 
9. MONITORING ……………………………………  34 
9.1 Site Monitoring Plan……………………………………………………………..  34 
9.2 Safety Monitoring Plan…………………………………………………………..  34 
     9.2.1 Safety Review Plan by [CONTACT_4318]…………………………………………………  34 
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS…………………………………………..  35 
10.1 Overview and Study Objectives………………………………………………….  35 
10.2 Sample Size Considerations……………………………………………………..  35 
10.3 Randomization……… ……………………………………………………………  36 
10.4 Missing Data and Measures to Minimize Bias………………………………….  37 
10.5 Planned Interim 
Analysis……………………………………………………………  38 
10.6 Analysis Plan………………………………………………………………………  38 
11. QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE……………………….  39 
11.1 Data Quality Assurance………………………………………………………….  39 
11.2 Training and Certification of Centers…………………………………………..  39 
12. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS…………………………….  39 
12.1 IRB/Ethics Committee……………………………………………………………  39 
12.2 Exclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children (Special Populations)……….  39 
12.3 Participant Confidentiality……………………………………………………….  39 
12.4 Study Discontinuation…………………………………………………………….  [ADDRESS_300396] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]………………………………...  40 
13.1 Data Management Responsibilities……………………………………………...  40 
13.2 Data Capture Methods…………………………………………………………..  41 
13.3 Types of Data………………………………………………………… …………..  41 
13.4 Source Documents and Access to Source Data/Documents……………………  41 
13.5 Study Records Retention…………………………………………………………  41 
13.6 Protocol Deviations……………………………………………………………….  42 
14. PUBLICATIONS POLICY………………………………………………………  42 
15. SCIENTIFIC REFERENCES……………………………………………………  42 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  7 
 
 
 16. APPENDICES  49 
     Appendix A: Study Contacts 
Roster……………………………………………………  49 
     Appendix B: Protocol 
Committee………………………………………………………  50 
     Appendix C: Data Collectio n 
Schedule…………………………………………………  51 
     Appendix D: Consent 
Template………………………………………………………...  53 
     Appendix E: Evaluation to Give 
Consent……………………………………………….  59 
     Appendix F: Study Brochure 
Insert…………………………………………………….  60 
     Appendix G: Interviews  62 
 
  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300397] of General Abbreviations/Terminology  
 
AE Adverse Event/Adverse Experience  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CIB Clinical Investigator’s Brochure  
CIOMS  Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences  
CONSORT  Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CRO  Contract Research Organization  
DCC  Data Coordinating Center  
DSMB  Data and Safety Monitoring Board  
DSMC  Data and Safety Monitoring Committee  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
FWA  Federal -Wide Assurance  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IB Investigator’s Brochure  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Conference on Harmonization  
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
IEC Independent or Institutional Ethics Committee  
IND Investigational New Drug  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
ISM Independent Safety Monitor  
MedDRA ©  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MOP  Manual of Procedures  
N Number (typi[INVESTIGATOR_33891])  
NDA  New Drug Application  
OHRP  Office for Human Research Protections  
OHSR  Office for Human Subjects Research  
PHI Protected Health Information  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_246879]/Serious Adverse Experience  
SMC  Safety Monitoring Committee  
SOP Standard Operating Procedure  
WHO  World Health Organization  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300398] of METRC Abbreviations/Terminology  
 
AFIRM  The Armed Forces institute of Regenerative Medicine  
CDMRP                          Congressionally Directed Medical Research Program.   
CCCS      Civilian Core Clinical Sites    
DOD      Department of Defense  
DOD HRPO  DOD Human Research Subject Protection Office.   
DOD PRORP  Department of Defense Peer Reviewed Orthopaedic 
Research Program   
Master Consent Form  Template consent form designed for study by [CONTACT_246943]. 
RC     Site Research Coordinator  
RS     Site Research Staff  
Study Number     Protocol identification number  
Study Principal Investigator   [INVESTIGATOR_246880] a protocol  
Study Protocol Committee  Protocol development  
REDCap  Research Electronic Data Capture System  
[LOCATION_003]MRMC                                        [LOCATION_002] Army Medical Research and Material 
Command  
 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  10 
 
 
   
PROTOCOL SUMMARY   
 
Title : Local Antibiotic Therapy to Reduce Infection after Operative Treatment of Fractu res at 
High Risk of Infection: A Multicenter Randomized, Controlled Trial  
Sponsor : DOD PRORP  
Type of study : Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial  
 
Primary Aim:   Compare the proportion of deep surgical site infections within 6 months in 
patients treated with local Vancomycin powder compared to those treated without local 
Vancomycin  powder . 
 
Primary Hypothesis : The proportion of deep surgical site infections will be lower for patients 
treated wit h local Vancomycin powder . 
 
Secondary Aim #1:   Compare antibiotic sensitivities of the bacteria in the patients who develop 
deep surgical site infections in study patients treated with local Vancomycin powder compared to 
those treated without local Vancomycin powder . 
 
Hypothesis 1 : In the patients who develop infections, the antibiotic sensitivity profiles between 
patients treated with local Vancomycin powder  will be non -inferior to those treated without local 
Vancomycin powder . 
 
Secondary Aim #2:   Build and validate a risk prediction model for the development of deep 
surgical site infections in patients treated without local Vancomycin powder . (b) Explore 
whether the effect of local Vancomycin powder  is mo dified by [CONTACT_246944].  
 
Hypothesis 2 : Patient (e.g. medical co -morbidities ) and injury (e.g open fractures) factors will be 
highly predictive of infection risk.  
 
Hypothesis 3 :  Patients with higher predictive risk will experience greate r benefit from local 
antibiotics.  
 
Study design : The proposed study is a multi -center, prospective randomi zed controlled trial 
comparing treatment with and without the  local Vancomycin powder  at the time of fracture 
fixation.   
 
Study duration : 24 months; 12 month enrollment period, 6 month patient follow up .  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  11 
 
 
 Sample size : 500 patients will be consented per arm.  
 
Number of study sites : Over  15 sites will be included which is made up of a Combination of 
subset of 24 Core METRC and 4 MTFs not able t o enroll in competing METRC studies , and 30+ 
METRC satellite sites.  
 
Inclusion criteria   
1.   All “high energy” tibial plateau fractures treated operatively with pl ate and screw fixation. 
We define “high energy” tibial plateau fractures as patients who are either: 
1.1 Initially treated with an external fixation (with or  without  limit ed internal fixation)  
and treated definitively more than 3 days later after swelling has resolved. 
1.2 A ny open type I, II, or IIIA fracture, regardless of timing  of definitive  treatment. 
1.3 Any tibial plateau fracture associated with ipsilateral leg compartment syndrome 
fasciotomy wounds.  
 
2.   All “high energy” pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768] (distal tibial plafond) fractures treated operatively with pl ate and 
screw fixation. We define “high energy” pi[INVESTIGATOR_246881]: 
2.1 Initially treated with an external fixation (with or  without  fibula  fixation or 
limit ed internal fixation)  and treated definitiv ely more than [ADDRESS_300399] a portion of  the fixation (e.g. fibula  fixation in pi[INVESTIGATOR_246882] a  tibial plateau fracture) prior to definitive plate fixation, at the initial 
surgery before randomi zation. 
8. Patients m ay have other orthopedic and non -orthopaedic injuries. 
9. Patients may have pre-existing  musculosk eletal inju ries, be non ambul ators, or have spi[INVESTIGATOR_246883]. 
10. Women and mino rities are included.  
 
Exclusion criteria   
1.  The study injury: t ibial plateau, pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768], is already infected at time of study enrollment.  
2.   Patient speaks neither English nor Spanish.  
3.   Patients who have already had definitive fixation  prior to enrollment in the study . 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  12 
 
 
 4.   Severe problems with maintaining follow -up (e.g. patients who are homeless at the time of 
injury or those how are intellectually challenged without adequate family support).  
5.   Patient s with allergies , drug administration reactions,  or other sensitivities to Vancomycin  
(such as a history of Redman ’s Syndrome) . 
6.   Pregnancy.  
7.   The study injury is a t ype IIIB or IIIC open fracture.  
 
Outcome measures   
 
Primary Outcome Measure: Surgical Site Infection.  The main outcome measure will be 
the presence of clinically significant deep SSI in the  first 24 weeks after surgery, as 
determined by [CONTACT_246945] 24,34,51. These guidelines 
were developed to p rovide  clear, objective criteria for evaluating surgical wounds and 
determining  the presence or absence of infection. The CDC criteria is currently 3 months for 
surgical site infection and our pi[INVESTIGATOR_72193] 85% of the infections in this population 
happened in the first [ADDRESS_300400] moved the 
timeframe back to 6 months.  
 
Wound characteristics will also be  evaluated usi ng the ASEPSIS score 15,16,84,85. In this system 
wounds are scored using the weighted sum of  points assigned for predetermined criteria 
including  the need for Additional treatment, presence of Serous d rainage, Erythema, Purulent 
exudates, Separation of  deep tissues, the  Isolation of  bacteria, and the duration of  patients Stay 
(ASEPSIS).  This system of wound scoring compl ements the CDC guidelines by [CONTACT_1541] a 
means to g rade the severity of infection as does the METRC standardized infection CRF 
which records culture data, laboratory values  (as obtained as part of standard clinical care by 
[CONTACT_3725]), and other parameters to help insure  validity of the primary outcome measure.    
 
In keepi[INVESTIGATOR_246884], w e will define deep infections as those that require 
operative treatment, and superficial infections as those  that are treated without op erative 
intervention.  Based on o ur previous oxygen stu dy using the same patient population , we expect 
that 85% of infections in this patient population to require operative treatment and to have an 
overall deep infection rate around 11.5% 72. 
 
Secondary Outcome Measure: Bacterial Sensitivities: Second ary outcome measures in 
this study include culture data in the  group th at becomes infected. All d eep surgical site  
infections will h ave sterile intraoperative wound cultures taken, as is currently performed in 
routine  clinical practice. Sensitivities of the isolated bacteria, which are also determined 
routinely in current c linical practice, will be recorded for analysis.  Theoretically, the use of 
the local Vancomycin powder mi ght influence the sensitivi ty of bacteria to certain antibioti cs 
in the  patients who b ecome infected.   
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300401] common b acterial isol ates in infection after orthopa edic fracture care are m ethicillin 
resistant staph. aur eus and methicillin resistant coagulase negative Staphylococci .  These 
bacteria are frequently susceptible to Vancomycin, and the occurrence of Vancomycin 
resistant (meaning the drug is not effective against the bacteria) strains of  staph aureus and 
coagulase negative staphylococci w ould be clinically concerning.  We do not anticipate this 
occurring but will use  the rate of Vancomycin sensitivi ty as an out come measure in the  
patients with st aph. infections  as a secondary outcome measure.  The appearance of a dditional 
clinically relevant bacterial susceptibilities will also be monitored  as part of the study.  
 
Risk  Factors for Infection: All demographic characteristics of the patient, the descriptors of 
the injury, and details of  the surgical treatment that would be  available prior to the  implant of 
the local Vancomycin powder  will be  collected for analysis regarding determination of  a model 
to predict infection risk in this p atient popu lation.  This analysis will aid clinicians in 
determining risk for postoperative infection as well as help determine which patients are most 
likely to benefit from the  local Vancomycin powder technique.  
 
Demographic  variabl es will i nclude age, presence of co-morbiditi es such as 
diabetes, smoking  histo ry, histo ry of prior musculosk eletal infection, and histo ry of 
infection within the  past 30 d ays. 
 
Injury  descriptors will in clude injury mechanism,  open or closed fracture type, AO 
classification of  the fracture type, other orthopaedic injuries, and oth er non-
orthopaedic inju ries. 
 
Treatment param eters will include time from inju ry to definitive  treatment, time 
from inju ry to external fixation (for the tibial plateau and pi[INVESTIGATOR_246885]), and 
surgical approaches used (for the tibial plateau and pi[INVESTIGATOR_246886]). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. KEY ROLES  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300402] of clinical studies including patient 
enrollment, performing study procedures, data collection and conducting study follow -up visits.  
Publication Committee - Responsible for reviewing manuscripts prior to journal submission and 
reviewing presentations prior to presentation ; for m ediating and settling disputes and conflicts 
among study investigators over publication or presentation priorities, authorship, and any other 
issues related to publications or presentations; for p reparing and maint aining a list of concepts 
for publications and preparing and maintaining a list of approved METRC publications, which 
shows the status of each manuscript from initiation through publication.  
DSMB - Independent Data and Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) appoint ed by [CONTACT_246946], 
responsible for monitoring the accumulated interim data as the trial progresses to ensure patient 
safety and to review efficacy, evaluate recruitment, and assess overall data quality.  
Medical Monitor - Responsible for providing medical guidance and overseeing patient safety for 
the study. The MM participates in determining the course of action necessary to meet safety 
goals and objectives. This is achieved through the review of safety reports; resolving safety 
issues; and interacting with Princip al Investigators.  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300403] potential to reduce surgical site 
infection within both the military and civilian sectors and therefore improve patient outcomes 
from these potentially devastating injuries.  
 
1.2 Problem Definition: Infection after Fracture Fixation  
Infection continues to be a common complication associated with treatment of high -energy 
military fracture s 20,22,33,38,[ADDRESS_300404] (LEAP) study, a prospective multi -center study on high - energy trauma  11.   
The LEAP study reported that the re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246887] 57% and one of the major drivers of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_134577] - admission is deep 
infection  11,31. 
 
Traditional treatment protocols for high energy lower extremity fractures have demonstrated 
rates of surgical site infection and osteomyelitis ranging from 14. 3%% - 60.0%  
11,20,22,31,33,38,4 3,59,62,74 in both military and high energy civilian settings.  Traditional treatment 
protocols typi[INVESTIGATOR_246888] (plates and screws or nails) for fracture fixation, 
which have the disadvantage of placing metal within the fracture site. Multiple st udies 
demonstrate that infection rates tend to increase whenever hardware is placed within a wound 
67,68,71, likely due to the difficulty the immune system has in clearing bacteria from the biofilm 
that develops on metallic surfaces  28,67. High - energy mil itary injuries have a particularly high 
risk of infection  20,22,33,38,[ADDRESS_300405] -operative complication with estimates of $1.8 billion 
spent in treatment of surgical site infection each year in the [LOCATION_002]  13,14,71. Any treatment 
strategy that could reduce surgical si te infection would certainly make an important contribution 
to the care of our wounded soldiers, but also the care of orthopaedic trauma patients in general.  
 
Intravenous (IV) antibiotics are routinely given at the time of all fracture fixation surgery to 
decrease the rate of surgical site infection  13,14, 63,90.  The efficacy of prophylactic IV antibiotics 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300406] of systemic antibiotics is 
thought to be in delivery of antibiotics to the site of the surgery; however antibiotics are 
delivered throughout the body where it is not needed.  This limi ts the amount (dose) of 
antibiotics that can be delivered at the surgical site else risk toxicity to other remote organ 
systems.  
 
Intravenous antibiotics also are only delivered to tissues that have a blood supply since the 
antibiotics are administered int o the systemic circulation.  Tissues that are traumatized frequently 
have a compromised blood supply.  Further, all foreign material such as the metallic plates used 
in fracture fixation, have no blood supply so antibiotics are not delivered to the plate s urface 
where bacteria commonly adhere and colonize the surgical site.  
 
Local antibiotics  hold promise to reduce surgical site infection in general  91,92,96 and in particular 
in high energy fracture patients such as those seen in military injuries.  The mechanism of 
infection after fracture surgery is typi[INVESTIGATOR_246889] a dhere to the metal plates at the time of 
surgery and “colonize” the plate  28,67,68. The bacteria create a “biofilm”, a protective layer that 
sequesters the bacteria from the body’s immune system and allows the bacteria to multiply and 
eventually lead to surgical site infection  28,67,68.  Local antibiotics attempt to disrupt this cycle by 
[CONTACT_246947]  30,36,44,71. 
 
Traditionally orthopaedic trauma surgeons who wish to use this concept of local antibiotics are 
forced to create their own antibiotic delivery devices. Surgeons create “a ntibiotic beads” out of 
cement (polymethy methacralate) that is impregnated with antibiotics and then placed within the 
wound 93,94,95.  Fracture surgeons also use this concept when they create an intramedul ary nail 
out of antibiotic impregnated cement to help clear infections after fracture treatment 6. 
 
Antibiotic beads are an imperfect solution as they require removal of the antibiotic beads at 
another surgery, and the beads themselves take up space making them impractical in many 
fracture types as they may make wound closure difficult or impossible.  There are some 
dissolvable compounds that can be placed in a wound, but the existing products tend to drain 
fluid that looks like drainage associated with infection so they are rarely used in clinical practi ce 
for prophylaxis against infection.  
 
Although there is great interest in the use of local antibiotics to help decrease the rate of 
infection, currently orthopaedic trauma surgeons rarely have a way to implement this strategy. 
This concept has particular appeal for military extremity injuries because these injuries are 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300407] significant clinical benefit, 
but to date no such technique is widely used for these patients . 
 
1.4   Novel Approach: Local Vancomycin Powder  
 
Implantable medical devices incorporating antibiotics to reduce the risk of implant related 
infection have been used clinically in orthopedic surgery for decades [ADDRESS_300408] demonstrated no known 
complications or side effects of the local use of Vancomycin 97,98,99,100. In one study 80% of these 
patients had no systemic Vancomycin levels detected and 20% had very low levels tha t were 
well below clinical importance indicating the likely lack of effect of the technique on distant 
organs 98. 
 
The surgical technique employed using local Vancomycin powder has been to place the sterile 
powder directly in the wound over the hardware an d tissues at the time of wound closure 
97,98,99,100.  It is thought that this creates the “kill zone” for bacteria that inhibits biofilm 
formation.  As there is essentially no carrier for the antibiotics, the antibiotics  are likely gone 
within a day or even less time.    
 
It is unknown how long the antibiotics must be present in the wound to be effective, but the spi[INVESTIGATOR_246890]. It appears that there 
may be a critical window right around the time of surgery to reduce the rate of surgical site 
infection and local Vancomycin powder may play a crucial role in this period.   Other methods 
that reduce surgical site infection such as IV antibiotics [ADDRESS_300409] lower doses present over 
longer time periods which might be the case with antibiotics in longer acting carriers.  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300410] used the technique for high -risk patients without complication and some centers 
(Vanderbilt for example) have used the technique for years for this application.  Having said that, 
there is no literature to date support ing its use in patients at high risk of infection.  
 
Vancomycin powder is appealing in technique as it is potentially applicable to every patient 
treated with fractures at high risk for infection in both the military and civilian domains.  
Additionally, the re is nothing to theoretically limit such a concept from being used with any type 
of hardware, thus increasing the potential impact of the product on clinical practice.  Surgeons 
could cho ose to use the technique in patients of high risk of infection.  
 
There are s everal potential advantages of local Vancomycin powder over antibiotic coated 
implants.  The first is ease of study design.  Since  Vancomycin is already clinically used, it was 
straightforward to obtain FDA approval  for the study . Additionally, Vancomycin powder is low 
cost (<$10/dose) compared with the likely expense associated with these newer emerging 
technologies.  Further, surgeons, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], and operating room personnel are already familiar 
with Vancomycin powder so there are  almost no surgeon barriers to acceptance if the technique 
is demonstrated to work.  
 
Vancomycin has been chosen as the type of antibiotic for this study because of its proven track 
record in the spi[INVESTIGATOR_246891] 97,98,99,[ADDRESS_300411] common pathogen encountered in surgical site infection 89.  Additionally, 
there are no concerns regarding inhibition of bone healing or osteogenic cytotoxicity  88 or renal 
toxicity, especially at this relatively low dose for systemic toxicity.   
 
 
2.2 Rationale  
Althou gh there is strong theoretical and promising clinical data regarding the use of local 
antibioti cs to reduce infection, it is not  yet clear that local Vancomycin powder will p erform 
better than treatment without  local Vancomycin powder in a  rigorous head to he ad clinical trial. 
It is po ssible that the theoretical benefits of  local antibioti cs will not t ranslate into reduced 
infections in fracture p atients at risk for increased infection. 
 
2.3 Potential Risks and Benefits  
2.3.1 Potential Risks  
The risks associated with this study primarily concern adverse reactions to the study drugs.  All 
drugs are FDA approved and marketed for a variety of uses. The proposed protocol is of an 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  19 
 
 
 investigational use of the medication Vancomycin powder that is to b e placed in the orthopaedic 
surgical wound at the time of closure . The re is no intention of the protocol to support a new 
indication for use or significant change in labeling of the drugs; is not intended to support a 
change in advertising for the drugs; w ill not test a new dosage of the drug, nor is it being used in 
a new clinical population; and the study will be conducted with informed consent and in 
compliance with 21 CFR 312.7 regarding promotion and sale of drugs.  Patients in the study will 
be active ly monitored for any adverse reactions . The FDA approved this study with an IND on 
10/31/13  (IND #119891) . The study and its investigators  will comply with all FDA regulations.  
All attempts will be  made to minimi ze risk to  the study volunt eers; however every research 
study represents some  risk to its volunt eers including  psychological, legal, social and economic  
risks th at could be  brought about by [CONTACT_246948]. T hese study risks are small, however we will have protocols in  place to further 
minimi ze and monitor  these risks b ased on SOP’s developed at the coordinating center. 
 
Addition al theoretical risks inh erent to this stu dy involve  the use of the local Vancomycin 
powder.  The risk  of giving antibiotic powder are increased for participants who have a n 
allergy to the drug. In addition, there is increased risk for participants who are susceptible to 
local toxicity to the drug.  Neither of these issues was observed in the previous clinical trials 
97,98,99,100.  
A sample package insert for Vancomycin power will be attached with the IRB submission. The 
package insert identifies risks associated with the standard use of Vancomycin powder as an 
IV/Injectable medication. At this time we do not know the risks associate d with the current 
proposed delivery mechanism.  
 
Addition ally there is the  risk th at the technique  may actually increase the risk of  infection 
through some  unknown m echanism or create some  other as yet unanti cipated clinically 
significant problem. 
 
2.3.[ADDRESS_300412] clinical evaluation. In addition, further assessments will be conducted 
through the use of the Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), Short Form Musculoskeletal Assessment 
(SMFA), and the Veterans Rand 12 item Health Survey (VR12).    
 
3. STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 
3.1 Primary Objective  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300413] of 
local Vancomycin powder  is modified by [CONTACT_246944]. 
 
3.3 Explor atory Objectives  
N/A 
 
 
4.  STUDY OVERVIEW  
 
The study design is a prospective, randomized controlled trial comparing deep surgical site 
infection rates with and without the use of local Vancomycin powder  at the time of fracture 
fixation.  This study design will provide the highest quality evidence to investigate our 
hypothesis that the use of local Vancomycin powder  will be effective at decreasing deep surgical 
site infection in these at -risk patients.  The study population will be patients aged 18  to 80 years 
of age  with high energy fractures to the tibial plateau, or pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768] , treated operatively with plate and 
screw fixation.    
 
Patients will be approached for informed consent as soon as is feasible follow ing determination 
of eligibility. During the index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], participants will be asked to provide basic 
demographic information, health status and function prior to injury. Study injury characteristics 
will be obtained from the surgeon and the part icipant’s medical record.  
 
Participants will be prospectively followed at [ADDRESS_300414] of both a clinical examination and 
interview.   
 
5. STUDY POPULATION  
 
5.1 Description of the Study Population  
 
Approximately  1000 participants  (500 per treatment arm , see power analysis section below ) will 
be enrolled from METRC trauma centers  over a 12-month period. Participants will be recruited 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  21 
 
 
 during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246892].  Consenting procedures are described in detail in 
Sections 8 and 13 of this protocol.  
 
5.1.1 Participant Inclus ion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria   
1.   All “high energy” tibial plateau fractures treated operatively with pl ate and screw fixation. 
We define “high energy” tibial plateau fractures as patients who are either: 
1.1 Initially treated with an external fixation (with or  without  limit ed internal fixation)  
and treated definitively more than 3 days later after swelling has resolved. 
1.2 A ny type I, II, or IIIA open fracture, regardless of timing  of definitive  treatment. 
1.3 Any tibial plateau fracture associated with ipsilateral leg compartment syndrome 
fasciotomy wounds.  
 
2.   All “high energy” pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768] (distal tibial plafond) fractures treated operatively with pl ate and 
screw fixation. We define “high energy” tibial plateau fractures as patients who are 
either: 
2.1 Initially treated with an external fixation (with or  without  fibula  fixation or 
limit ed internal fixation)  and treated definitiv ely more than [ADDRESS_300415] a portion of  the fixation (e.g. fibula  fixation in pi[INVESTIGATOR_246882] a  tibial plateau fracture) prior to definitive plate fixation, at the initial 
surgery before randomi zation. 
8. Patients m ay have other orthopedic and non -orthpaedic injuries. 
9. Patients may have pre-existing  musculosk eletal inju ries, be non ambul ators, or have spi[INVESTIGATOR_246883]. 
10. Women and mino rities are included.  
 
Exclusion criteria   
1.  The study injury: t ibial plateau, or pi[INVESTIGATOR_246893].  
2.   Patient speaks neither English nor Spanish.  
3.   Patients who have already had definitive fixation  prior to enrollment in the study . 
4.   Severe problems with maintaining follow -up (e.g. patients who are homeless at the time of 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  22 
 
 
 injury or those how are intellectually challenged without adequate family support)  
5.   Patient allergy , drug administration reaction,  or other sensitivities to Vancomycin  (such as a 
history of Redman ’s Syndrome)  
6.   Pregnancy  
7.   The study injury is t ype IIIB or IIIC open fractures  
 
 
5.1.3 Co -Enrollment Guidelines  
Patients may be co -enrolled in other observational studies  as long as this is consistent with local 
IRB policies . At METRC sites that are participating in the local Vancomycin powder study, 
patients should be preferentially enrolled in the PAIN study if they are eligible for both studies. 
If a patient is not elig ible for the VANCO or PAIN studies, they may be enrolled into the 
Oxygen study.  
 
5.2 Strategies for Recruitment  
N/A 
 
6. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
6.[ADDRESS_300416] information to conform 
to their local requirements. The consent form will describe the purpose of the study, the 
procedures to be followed, and the risks and benefits of participation. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_246894] 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300417] will be  documented in the patient’s 
record.  
 
Once eligibility has been confirmed, the informed consent process will be completed by [CONTACT_246949].  Patients will be approached about potential 
participation in the study as soo n as is feasible following determination of eligibility.  
 
Participants will be approached and given the opportunity to enroll during their initial injury 
treatment. For the high energy tibial plateau  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_246885], the definitive treatment is 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_246895] 1-[ADDRESS_300418] time to discuss the stud y with others prior to making a 
final decision to participate. Patients and their families will be provided with a pamphlet 
describing the study, the risks and benefits of participation and what will be expected of them if 
they choose to participate.  Consent will be obtained in accordance with principles of GCP and 
ICH guidelines.  
 
For the rare case with an open fracture type that the surgeon deems the wound is clean enough 
for definitive fixation at the time of initial treatment, the pat ient may still be enrolled in the 
study.  These patients will be enrolled at the time of initial trauma. This patient group represents 
a small fraction of the open fractures, which themselves are a small subset of the overall group.    
At high energy traum a centers such as those participating in the study, some percentage of the 
patients will be eligible for the study but will not be able to consent due to traumatic brain 
injuries, intubation, or for other reasons related to their injury.  We will consent t hese patients 
using the individuals’ legally authorized representative.  The process for obtaining consent for 
surgery or study participation varies based upon the state the patient is being treated within, and 
as such the details of this process will be g uided by [CONTACT_246950].  
 
All study materials will be provided in both English and Spanish.  
 
Following completion of informed consent, the participant information will be entered into 
REDCap where a study number will be assigned an d final eligibility criteria confirmed.  
 
6.1.3 Assessing Capacity to Consent and Consenting a Proxy Respondent  
 
By [CONTACT_246951] (resulting from high energy mechanisms such as high 
speed motor vehicle crashes, high falls, and blas t injuries) it is expected that a large proportion (> 
15%) to have an associated traumatic brain injury which my render them unable to provide 
consent for the study.  It will be important not to exclude these patients from the study, as it 
would significan tly reduce our ability to produce generalizable knowledge. These patients are at 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  24 
 
 
 no greater risk of adverse consequences by [CONTACT_246952], and should 
be given the same opportunity to participate.    
 
Whenever possible, the patient him or herself (as opposed to a proxy) should be consented. Prior 
to initiating the consent process, the Research Coordinator will contact [CONTACT_102]’s Physician 
for confirmation that the patient has the ability to understand the relevant study in formation and 
communicate and maintain a choice.   If the physician indicates that the patient lacks the capacity 
to consent the legally authorized representative (LAR) will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
The research staff will endeavor to answer all questions posed by [CONTACT_3433] e patient and his/her family 
to ensure their understanding of the protocol. A limited number of questions will be asked of all 
patients after they are introduced to the study and have reviewed the consent form. These 
questions assess the person’s understan ding of the study and what it means to participate, their 
appreciation of the consequences of participation, and their ability to consider alternatives to 
participation. A formal comprehension test may be utilized, or comprehension will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_108443](s) obtaining the consent. A template for a comprehension test is provided in 
Appendix E.  
 
The Research Coordinator will ask the questions and determine the appropriateness of the 
responses.  If the Research Coordinator is at all unsure about the pat ient’s ability to consent s/he 
will consult with the study site PI.    
 
A legally authorized representative (LAR) with reasonable knowledge of the potential participant 
will be approached to consent on the patient’s behalf if one of the following is true:  
• The patient is unresponsive (and likely to remain unresponsive during the study).  
• The patient cannot adequately answer at least 2 questions and it is determined that the 
patient’s level of cognition is not likely to change before surgery.    
 
The choice o f LAR will follow standard procedures. The following with be approached in this 
order of priority:  
• Legal guardian  
• Proxy (health care agent) named in an advance directive or durable power of attorney for 
health care;  
• Family member or other surrogate identi fied by [CONTACT_218199].  
 
Guidance will be provided to assist the LAR in making the consent decision.  They will advised 
to base the decision on the participant’s expressed wishes, or, if these are not known, what they 
believe the p articipant would have desired under the circumstances of the injury, their beliefs and 
values. If the LAR does not know what the participant would have wanted, the LAR will advised 
to base the decision with the participant’s best interest in mind.  They wi ll be asked to carefully 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300419] the participant would likely give the LAR in making the choice about 
participation in the study.  
Recognizing that consent is an ongoing process, the study team will encourage the participants to 
ask additio nal questions that may arise during the course of their participation in the study.  
 
 
6.2 Baseline Data Collection  
 
Once consented into the study, baseline data regarding participant characteristics, injury 
characteristics, fracture classification and medical history/co -morbidities will be collected and 
entered into the REDCap data collection system.  Characteristics about hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246896].  A brief interview will be conducted with the 
participant or his/her surrogate.  
 
Blood sampling across the study will occur as performed at all institutions with respect to 
standard clinical care per institutional practice. This typi[INVESTIGATOR_246897], serum creatinine, and c omplete blood count at baseline.  The labs may or may not 
include tests for fungi.  We will also  pi[INVESTIGATOR_246898] [ADDRESS_300420] 30 participants at the main study 
institution, the University of Maryland, Baltimore (PI [INVESTIGATOR_246899]). As discussed in more detail in section [ADDRESS_300421] of the 
participating sites. These data will be collected in RedCap and will be reviewed as indica ted, by 
[CONTACT_7195] (identified below) for the study.  
 
All labs drawn at the sites will follow each institutions standard of care procedures.  We will not 
utilize a central laboratory for testing in this study. We will, however, request CAP/CLIA 
information for all participating sites to ensure that each lab attests to adhering to standard 
testing methodology.  
 
To comply with the FDA Annual Reporting requirements, and because the METRC 
Coordinating Center will not be providing the vials o f vancomycin powder to clinical sites, we 
will also collect the name, strength, manufacturer and back number for every vial of vancomycin 
used in this study.  
 
6.2.[ADDRESS_300422] Review  
 
• Circumstances and Type of Injury  
• Other Injuries  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  26 
 
 
 • Mode of Transport  
• Length of time in ICU  
• Discharge Disposition  
• Antibiotic Use  
 
6.2.2 Clinical Assessment  
 
• Side of Injury  (R/L)  
• AO/OTA Classification  
• Gustilo Type  
• Tscherne Classification  
• AP and Lateral x rays  
 
6.2.3 Participant Interview  
• Medications taken prior to Injury  
• Co-morbidities  
• Health Insurance  
• Height and Weight  
• Demographics (age, gender, race/ethnicity, education)  
• Income  
• Usual Major Activities Before Injury  
• Job Characteristics  
• Current Military Service  
• Job Motivation  
• Smoking History  
• Previous Injuries and Pai n 
• Marital Status and Social Support  
 
6.[ADDRESS_300423] operating procedures .   
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  27 
 
 
  
6.3.2   Clinical Assessments  
 
• Diagnosis of infection and detailed assessment of evidence of infection  
• Complications (type, severity, treatment)  
• Wound Healing  
• Antibiotic Use  
• Fracture Healing  
• Pain 
 
6.3.3   Participant Interviews  
 
• Re-Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]  
• Self reported pain (6 months only)  
• Brief Pain Inventory (6 months only)  
• Health Related Quality of Life (VR -12) (6 months only)  
• Short Musculoskeletal Function Assessment (SMFA) (6 months only)  
 
6.3.4  Retention  
 
Every effort will be made to retain participants in the study.  The study participants will receive 
an honorarium in recognition of their time and effort.  $ 50 will be given for completing the 6 
month visit s in appreciation for their time and e ffort.  We will also keep participants engaged 
through use of study updates on the METRC webpage and distribution of follow -up reminders 
and trinkets imprinted with the study logo.  
 
6.3.5  Final Study Visit   
 
Participants will complete the study at month 6. This final visit will occur in the clinic and will 
include the patient interviews and clinical assessments as identified above.   
 
Any ongoing SAEs will be followed to resolution.  
 
6.3.6 Early Termination Vi sit 
 
Should a participant terminate the study prematurely, if at all possible, all procedures required at 
the 6 month visit will be performed at his/her final visit.  
 
6.4  Study Endpoints  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  28 
 
 
 6.4.1 Primary Endpoint  
 
The primary endpoint  will be the presence of clinically significant surgical site infection (SSI) in 
the first [ADDRESS_300424] sterile intraoperative wound cultures taken, as is currently performed in 
routine clinical practice.  Sens itivities of the isolated bacteria, which are also determined 
routinely in current clinical practice, will be recorded for analysis.  We will describe the type of 
antibiotic resistance experienced in both groups as described in the outcomes measures descri bed 
in the protocol summary.   
 
7. STUDY TREATMENTS  
 
In extremity wounds, a typi[INVESTIGATOR_246900] 1000 mg of Vancomycin powder placed into 
the wound at time of closure.  All other components of the surgery would be per routine protocol 
at the sites. Previous data indicates that the systemic load from t his amount will likely be very 
low 97,98,99 ,100.  The typi[INVESTIGATOR_246901] 1000mg twice a day (often for 6 or more weeks if the 
patient has an infection), so this one time local dose is a relatively small amount of the drug 
compared to what is typi[INVESTIGATOR_246902].  
 
Most orthopaedic trauma surgeons are already familiar with using sterile Vancomycin powder in 
the operating room as it is used to make antibiotic beads and nails.  The powder comes sterile 
and the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246903], handling and all other aspects of managing the 
device.  The dose used for this study will be (1000mg) placed right before wound closure.  
 
Both groups will otherwise receive standard care, including prophylactic intravenous antibiotics, 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300425] at 
each institution.  Intravenous Vancomycin can be given as IV prophylaxis if that is the center’s 
protocol for an individual patient.  After consultation with multiple i nfectious disease specialists 
it appears the risk of renal (or other) toxicity from simultaneous IV and local powder application 
of Vancomycin is extremely unlikely.  Prior studies on systemic levels when using local 
Vancomycin powder demonstrated an undet ectable level in 80% of the patients, and a low level 
(average 1.6 µg/ml) in 20% of the patients 98. Local application of Vancomycin powder is very 
unlikely to increase the risk of Vancomycin side effects. Additionally, in current clinical practice 
much larger doses of local Vancomycin powder are placed in beads repeatedly during serial 
irrigation and d ebridements while patients receives IV Vancomycin for weeks at a time without 
any known consequence. In this group, serum levels of Vancomycin are also in the low range 103. 
For these reasons, the study allows the use of Vancomycin for prophylaxis if that is a center’s 
practice.  Whatever antibiotic prophylaxis protocol is used at the site, it should be applied  
consistently in both the treatment and control group.  It would not be appropriate to change the IV 
prophylaxis choice based on which treatment group  that patient was assigned.  No changes should 
be made to routine care based on allocation to the treatment or control group.  
 
Treatment Crossover  
 
Cross-over from one  treatment arm to another should be  very rare.  Cross-over should  only 
occur if for some reason the surgical team determined the local Vancomycin powder  could not 
be placed or if the Vancomycin powder is not available to be  placed, both of which would be 
extremely unusual.  As patients will not know whi ch treatment group t hey are in prior to 
surgery, there is no chance that they will elect to swit ch groups based on the  outcome of the 
randomi zation.  The only likely crossover is study error where an investigator forgets to place 
the local Vancomycin powder in a patient assigned to the treatment group.  The rate of this 
occurrence should be very low.  
 
7.1 Study Treatment #1  
 
7.1.1 Description of t reatment   
 
 
Treatment Group ( Local Vancomycin Powder ):  
 
Participants in the treatment group will receive a maximum dose of 1000mg of Vancomycin 
powder in their wound bed, which is placed right before wound closure.  Vancomycin powder 
may be combined with normal saline as per clinical practice at the participating institution.  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300426] treatment (prophylactic and otherwise) for preventing 
and treating infection.  
 
7.1.2 Potential Risks and/or adverse effects   
 
The risks o f giving antibiotic powder are increased for participants who have a known allergy to 
the drug. In addition, there is increased risk for participants who are susceptible to local toxicity 
to the drug.  Addition ally there is the  risk th at the technique  may actually increase the risk of  
infection th rough some  unknown m echanism or create some  other as yet unanti cipated clinically 
significant problem. 
 
The typi[INVESTIGATOR_246904], infection, malunion, nonunion, and 
neurovascular injury are inherent risks the operative procedures involved and do not differ from 
the standard of care.  
Any time information is collected for a study there is a small risk of breach of confidentiality. 
However, this risk is not  greater than the risk that already exists in clinical settings when 
handling medical data.  
 
 
7.2 Study Treatment #2  
 
7.2.1 Description of treatment   
 
Control Group (Standard of Care):  
Participants in this group will receive standard of care treatment for their injury, to include all 
institution specific standard treatment (prophylactic and otherwise) for preventing and treating 
infection. Participants in this group will not receive loca l Vancomycin powder.   
 
7.2.2 Potential Risks and/or adverse effects   
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300427] of care.  
Any time information is collected for a study there is a small risk of breach of confidentiality. 
However, this risk is not greater than the risk that already exists in clinical settings when 
handling medical data.  
 
 
8. ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
 
The study will monitor and report adverse events to ensure patient safety. Definitions and 
procedures for reporting adverse events are designed to satisfy 45 CFR Part 46, Subpart A; the 
“Common Rule”, shared by 17 Departments and Agenc ies as well as 21 CFR 312, the FDA 
regulation for adverse events.  The Common Rule requires written procedures and policies for 
ensuring reporting of “unanticipated problems” involving risks to participants to IRBs, 
appropriate institutional officials, and  the Department or Agency Head.  
 
The medical monitor (MM) is responsible for providing medical guidance and overseeing patient 
safety for the study. The MM participates in determining the course of action necessary to meet 
safety goals and objectives.   This is achieved through the review of Serious Adverse Event 
reports; resolving safety issues; and interacting with Principal Investigators.  
Each participating site is responsible for ensuring that all local IRB requirements for reporting 
adverse events (bot h internal and external) are met.   
 
8.[ADDRESS_300428], including abnormal sign 
(e.g., abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom or disease temporally associated 
with the subject’s participation in the study, whether or not consider ed related to the subject’s 
participation.  
 
8.1.2 Unanticipated problem  
 
Any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all of the following criteria:  
(1) is unexpected, in terms of nature, severity, or frequency, given the research procedures 
that are d escribed in the protocol and informed consent document and the characteristics 
of the patients eligible for the study.  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  32 
 
 
 (2) is related or possibly related to treatment/procedures under study; possibly related 
means there is a reasonable possibility that th e incident, experience, or outcome may 
have been caused by [CONTACT_246953].  
 
(3) suggests that the participation in the study may place subjects or others at a greater 
risk of harm (including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was 
previously known or recognized.  
 
Please note that not all adverse events are unanticipated problems and only some unanticipated 
problems are in fact adverse events.  For instance, if a laptop containing study data is stolen, this 
is an unant icipated problem but it is not an adverse event since it is not an untoward or 
unfavorable medical occurrence in a human subject  
 
8.1.3 Serious Adverse Event  
 
A serious adverse event is defined as:  
1. Death  
2. Allergic or other reaction that is thought to be due to the 
Vancomycin powder  
3. Other events that are unexpected AND serious AND related or 
possibly related to the use of Vancomycin  for the study  
 
8.2 Methods and Timing for Assessing, Recording, and Analyzing, Managing Safety 
Parameters  
8.2.1 Methods and Timing of Assessment   
 
Adverse  events may be discovered during regularly scheduled visits or through unscheduled 
patient contacts between visits.  Adverse events related to study procedures will be assessed 
during the index hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246905].  They will be recorded on study data 
forms whether or not they are thought to be associated with the study.  
 
8.2.2 AE/SAE Grading and Relationship Assignment  
 
Adverse event grading:   Adverse events will be graded using standard criteria. Relationship of 
event to the stu dy procedure will be determined by [CONTACT_5989].  
GRADE 1 (Mild) Transient or mild discomfort (< 48 hours); no medical intervention/therapy 
required  
  
 GRADE 2 (Moderate) Mild to moderate limitation in activity - some assistance may be 
needed; no or minimal medical intervention/therapy required  
  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  33 
 
 
  GRADE 3 (Severe) Marked limitation in activity, some assistance usually required; medical 
intervention/therapy required, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246906] 4 (Life -threatening) Extreme limitation  in activity, significant assistance required;   
significant medical intervention/therapy required, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_27595].  
 
Relationship Assignment  The relationship of the adverse event to participation in the study will 
be assessed as e ither:  
  
Definitely related  
Probably related  
Possibly related  
Unlikely related  
Unrelated    
 
 
8.2.3 Recording and Documentation   
 
Sites will maintain source documents including but not limited to (laboratory and radiology 
reports, clinical notes and discharge summaries). After review of initial and final reports by [CONTACT_35041], the events may be reclassified at their discretion.  
 
8.2.4. Management of Adverse Events  
 
Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events will be managed according to protoco l guidelines. If 
specific guidelines do not exist, AEs/SAEs will be managed according to the medical judgment 
of the treating physician.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_300429] always follow and comp ly with their own local institution’s adverse event 
reporting requirements, which may differ from those adopted by [CONTACT_246954].  Depending on the local requirements, a site may report events locally and not report those 
events to the M ETRC Coordinating Center. Each participating site is responsible for ensuring 
that all local IRB requirements for reporting adverse events (both internal and external) are met.   
 
8.3.[ADDRESS_300430] be reported to the Medical Monitor and METRC Coordinating Center within 72 hours of 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  34 
 
 
 being made aware of the event. In addition, a ll SAEs related to use of stud y medications would 
be reported to the individual manufacturers to contribute safety data for these drugs , as well as to 
the FDA via the MedWatch voluntary reporting mechanism using form FDA 3500 . 
 
In addition, Unanticipated Problems (UPs) that are not adv erse events must also be reported to 
the METRC Coordinating Center within 14 calendar days after the event has been discovered.    
SAEs/UPs will be reported to the METRC Coordinating Center by [CONTACT_246955]/UP form 
into REDCAP. REDCap is programmed to a utomatically send an email to the Coordinating 
Center for both SAEs and Ups, and to the Medical Monitor in the case of an SAE.  
 
The Medical Monitor for this study is : 
Mark Swiontkowski, MD, FACS  
Department of Orthopedic Surgery  
[ADDRESS_300431]., R200  
Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE]  
Telephone: (612) 273 -7951      
Fax: (612) 273 -7959  
E-mail: [EMAIL_4794]   
 
 
8.3.[ADDRESS_300432] of such events for reporting and review at Steering Committee 
meetings.  
 
8.3.4 Department of Defense Reporting Requirements  
 
The following are reporting requirements and responsibilities of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_246907]’s ([LOCATION_003]MRMC) Office of 
Research Protections (ORP), Human Research Protection Office (HRPO).  
        (1)  The protocol will be conducted in accordance with the protocol submitted to and 
approved by [CONTACT_246956].   
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  35 
 
 
         (2)  Accurate and complete study records will be maintained and made available to 
representatives of the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command as a part 
of their responsibility to protect human subjects in research.  Research records will be 
stored in a confidential manner so as to protect the confidentiality of subject 
information.   
        (3)  All unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, serious adverse events 
related to participation in the study and subject deaths rel ated to participation in the 
study will be promptly reported by [CONTACT_648] (301 -619-2165), by [CONTACT_6968] 
([EMAIL_4795] ), or by [CONTACT_6972] (301 -619-7803) to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC, Office 
of Research Protections, Human Resear ch Protec tion Office.  A complete written 
report will follow the initial notification.  In addition to the methods above, the 
complete report will be sent to the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel 
Command, ATTN: MCMR -RP, [ADDRESS_300433], Fort Detrick , Maryland [ZIP_CODE] -5012.   
        (4)  Suspensions, clinical holds (voluntary or involuntary), or terminations of this research 
by [CONTACT_1201], the institution, the Sponsor, or regulatory a gencies will be promptly 
reported to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP HRPO.  
        (5)  Any deviation to the protocol that may have an adverse effect on the safety or rights of 
the subject or the integrity of the study will be reported to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP 
HRPO as soon as the deviation is identified.   
        (6)  Major modifications to the re search protocol and any modifications that could 
potentially increase risk to subjects will be submitted to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP HRPO 
for approval prior to implementation.  All other amendments will be submitted with 
the continuing review report to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP HRPO for acceptance.  
        (7)  A copy of the approved continuing review report and the local IRB approval 
notification will be submitted to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP HRPO as soon as these 
documents become available.  A copy of the approved final study report and local IRB 
approval notification will be submitted to the [LOCATION_003]MRMC ORP HRPO as soon as these 
documents become available.   
        (8)  The knowledge of any pending compliance inspection/visit by [CONTACT_1622], OHRP, or 
other government agency concerning this clinical investigation or research, the issuance 
of Inspection Reports, FDA Form 483, warning letters or actions taken by [CONTACT_246957].   
 
Unanticipated problems involving risk to volunteers or others, serious, unexpected adverse 
events related to participation in the  study and all volunteer deaths related to participation in the 
study will be promptly reported by [CONTACT_648] (301 -619-2165), by e -mail ([EMAIL_1515]), 
or by [CONTACT_6972] (301 -619-7803) to the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command’s 
Office of Res earch Protections, Human Research Protections Office.  A complete written report 
will follow the initial notification.  In addition to the methods above, the complete report will be 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  36 
 
 
 sent to the U.S. Army Medical Research and Materiel Command, ATTN:  MCMR -RPH, [ADDRESS_300434], Fort Detrick, Maryland  [ZIP_CODE] -5012  
 
8.4 Reporting Pregnancy  
N/A 
 
8.5 Type and Duration of the Follow -up of Participants After Adverse Events  
 
Study patients who experience an SAE will be followed until resolution of the event, and a final 
report will be submitted to the medical monitor, the FDA, and the coordinating center.  
 
8.6 Modifications of Study Agent(s)/Intervention(s) for a Participant  
N/A 
8.7 Halting Rules for the Protocol  
 
If the treating surgeon determines that the patient is medically contraindicated to receiving  the 
Vancomycin powder for any reason, they should treat the patient appropriately and not pursue 
the application of the study specific treatment arm . 
8.8 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_246908]/Cohort  
 
The DSMB will review the overall progress of the trial in terms of recruitment and data quality 
and makes a formal recommendation to the DOD at the end of each scheduled meeting as to 
whether the trial should co ntinue unmodified, continue with protocol modifications or be 
stopped.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_300435] eted; the 
treatment arm of the study  will be  final so it is not po ssible  for the subject to withdraw from 
this po rtion of  the study.  However, the patient could withd raw from the  study by [CONTACT_246958] - up.  In the event that participants fail to follow  up, research staff will attempt to contact 
[CONTACT_236302] d etermine  whether or not they are having problems. If participants choose to withd raw 
after they have received treatment they will be made aware that this choice will not affect their 
current and f uture care at the study site but th ey will be  asked to communi cate with the  study 
team any issues they might have related to their initial inju ry. Patients will not be  removed for 
failure to follow post-operative instructions, non -compli ance with treating instructions, or  any 
other deviations from ideal clinical pathway. These deviations are common in clinical 
medicine and therefore are not grounds for removal from the  study. 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  37 
 
 
 Only loss of  funding or behavior by [CONTACT_102] (e.g. threatening of clinical staff) would cause 
termination of  the clinical relationship would require withd rawal from the  protocol.  Neither 
is anticipated to be  comm on but  participants will be  made aware that termination could o ccur 
and that the research team will communicate any changes associated with the study that may 
affect them and th eir participation. If study termination n eeds to o ccur due to loss of  fundin g, 
all participants currently enrolled will be  follow ed to compl etion and no n ew participants 
would be enrolled. Communi cation of  this would o ccur to the  satellite sites via the 
coordinating center. 
 
8.10 Replacement of a Participant Who Discontinues Study Treatment  
N/A 
 
9. MONITORING  
 
9.1 Site Monitoring Plan  
 
The METRC Coordinating Center will be responsible for site monitoring consistent with 
ICH/FDA guidelines. Monitoring will include a combination of remote and on -site visits of 
participating clinical research sites to review the individual subject records, including consent 
forms, case report forms, supporting data, laboratory specimen records, and medical records 
(physicians’ progress notes, nurses’ notes, individuals’ hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1332]), to ensure protection of 
study subjects, compliance wit h the protocol, and accuracy and completeness of records. The 
monitors also will inspect sites’ regulatory files to ensure that regulatory requirements are being 
followed.  
 
The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_44303] (e.g., consent forms, case report forms) and  pertinent 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_112466], the site monitors, the 
DOD, the Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP), or other regulatory authorities for 
confirmation of the study data.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_300436] (DSMB), appointed by [CONTACT_246946], is responsible 
for monitoring the accumulated interim data as the trial progresses to ensure patient safety and to 
review efficacy, evaluate recruitment, and assess overall data qual ity.  An interim analysis will 
occur after 33% of patients have been followed  for 6 months.  
 
The DSMB is a multidisciplinary group with a written charge provided by [CONTACT_246959].  
The DSMB will meet in person to review the protocol.  After the trial comme nces, the DSMB 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300437] additional safety reports on a more 
frequent basis.   For example, all serious adverse ev ents (SAE) are reported to the DSMB for 
their consideration and recommendations as they occur.  
 
At its first meeting the DSMB will review definition of all outcomes, adverse events and serious 
adverse events and revisions to the protocol made as appropriate. Summary data on adverse 
events (together with study outcomes) will be monitored by [CONTACT_246960], as needed. These summaries will include analyses comparing rates 
of adverse events by [CONTACT_47123], by [CONTACT_6903], or in other subgroups requested by [CONTACT_40746].  
 
After each meeting, the DSMB will issue a written summary of its review of the study data, 
including adverse events, for transmission to the IRBs at each of the study centers. Analyses or 
listings of adverse events will not be provided to the IRBs; however, adverse events involving 
unanticipated problems involving risks to participants, or breaches of protocol, which might 
entail risk to participants,  must be reported to local IRBs as soon as p ossible after they are 
discovered. Each participating center is responsible for ensuring that all local IRB requirements 
for reporting adverse events are met.  
 
The DSMB will review semi -annual reports by [CONTACT_246961].  
Interim data on safety measures requested by [CONTACT_246962] -annual full meetings.  Analyses will be prepared comparing rates of advers e events by 
[CONTACT_1570], by [CONTACT_246963].  Serious 
adverse events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_246964] a teleconference 
if any DSMB member requests  
 
 
10. STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
10.1 Overview and Study Objectives  
Again, the primary objective of the study is t o investigate if local Vancomycin powder reduce s 
deep surgical site in fection after operative treatment of fractures at risk for surgical site  infection, 
as this is a common p roblem encountered in the  treatment of milit ary injuries. The study design 
is a prospective, randomized controlled trial comparing deep surgical site infection rates with and 
without the use of local Vancomycin powder at the time of fracture fixation. The study 
population will be patients aged 18 to 80 years of age with high energy fractures to the tibial 
plateau  or pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768] , treated operativ ely with plate and screw fixation.    
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300438] 6 months of treatment. In our prior 
oxyg en study, 250 patients draw from a similar patient population as that proposed yielded a 3-
month deep infection risk of 11.5% 72.  As discussed in section 1.5, rates of deep surgical site 
infection after these fractures has varied considerably in previous studies with both higher and 
lower rates being reported in what are typi[INVESTIGATOR_246909].  We argue that our existing  
prospective data in an almost identical patient population, with the same fracture types, using the 
same primary outcome measure should yield a reasonably accurate estimate of anticipated 
infection rate in the proposed study group.  
Therefore, in our samp le size calculations, we assumed that control arm would  have an infection 
probability of 11%. Using a two -sided test 0.[ADDRESS_300439] 80% power to detect a 5.1% absolute reduction (45% relative reduct ion) in 
the probability of infection by [ADDRESS_300440].  
We plan one interim analysis (after a third  of the patients have been followed for 6 months) 
using an O’Brien -Fleming stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_3106].  We inflate the sample size by 1% in order to 
preserve the type I error.  We also conservatively inflate the sample size by 5% to account for 
loss to follow -up.  
 
 
Sample Size  
 
Based on the above considerations, the targeted sample size for the study is 500 fractures per 
study arm.  
 
10.3 Randomization  
 
Randomization Methodology. Patients will be  randomized electronically by [CONTACT_246965] D ata 
Management System maintained at the Coordinating Center at Johns  Hopkins School of Public 
Health.  Patients will be  random ly assigned (within center) in a 1:1 ratio to either treatment 
group (local Vancomycin powder)  or control group (no local antibiotics ).   Randomization will 
occur at the time of the surgery so th at the p atient will not be  aware pre-operatively or post-
operatively which treatment group he or she is in.  
 
Block randomi zation will  be used to ensure equal distribution of  treatment and control patients 
within the two fracture types (tibial plateau, and pi[INVESTIGATOR_246885]).  Participants who refuse 
randomization will not be  eligible for the study and will receive the control treatment. 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300441] to 
examine  the patient or the radiographs to d etermine  if the patient received the local 
Vancomycin powder .  As the primary outcome measure is deep surgical site infection 
requiring return to the operating room, we believe that the surgeon’s lack of blinding is less 
problematic in this case compared to an outcome variable that required more subjective 
evaluation such as superficial infection.  Fu rther, a standardized METRC infection CRF was 
designed during this study to record standard data (culture data, wound characteristics) to 
guard against any possibility of false positives.  
 
Addition ally, we will blind all of the data from the  statistician prior to the  preparation of  
reports wh en blinding  is no lo nger possibl e, as is the  standard practice at the data coordinating 
center at Johns Hopkins  School of  Public  Health.  All analyses will be  done  at the data 
coordinating center (which is not a  clinical center) to help reduce risk of  bias in the  analysis. 
 
  
10.[ADDRESS_300442], 
we will:  
1. Limit participant burden and inconvenience in data collection  
2. Select high quality investigators  
3. Provide pre -study training of investigators as well as on -study reinforcement  
4. Reimburse investigators based on follow -ups completed not on per -patient basis.  
5. Monitor and report missing data rates during the study  
6. Emphasize the importance of full participation in the study during the consent 
process.  
7. Collect information on the reason s for missing data.  
8. Actively engage participants and educate them about the importance of participation  
9. Hold regular Protocol Committee meetings to discuss strategies for follow -up    
10. Set targets for acceptable rates of missing data and terminate sites not  meeting targets.  
 
As with most p rospective studi es, missing  data will be  unavoidable (even with excellent 
follow - up).  Since the informative nature of missing  data cannot be  verified from the  observed 
data, we will adopt a  sensitivi ty analysis framework for reporting results. We will analyze data 
under a variety of modeling assumptions  regarding how strongly the missin gness mechanism is 
related to out comes 65.  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300443] (DSMB) is responsible  for approval the 
protocol for this t rial and for monito ring the accumulated interim data as the trial progresses 
to ensure patient safety, review efficacy, evaluate recruitment, and assess overall data quality. 
After the trial comm ences, the  DSMB will m eet twice per year to review data and other trial-
related issues. The DSMB may request more frequent meetings if necessary to fulfill its 
charge. 
The DSMB will review one planned interim analysis of  the primary outcome measure.  
O’Brien- Fleming  stoppi [INVESTIGATOR_246910].  The interim analysis will o ccur 
when approximately 1/3 of  the patients (roughly 330) will h ave 6-month out come data. At the 
end of  each meeting, the DSMB will m ake a formal recomm endation as to wh ether the trial 
should continue  un-modi fied, continue  with p rotocol modi fications, or  to be  stopp ed. 
 
10.6 Analysis Plan  
 
Specific Aim 1: 
 
Statistical analyses will follow  the intent-to-treat paradigm, which means all patients 
will be analyzed according to the treatment group to wh ich they were randomi zed. 
Treatment effects for binary endpo ints (e.g., infection) will be  estimated using a two-
group binomi al comparison of  proportions; 95%  confidence intervals for the absolute 
risk difference and relative risk will be  reported.  Tests on the  null hypothesis of  no 
treatment effect will be b ased on both a  Chi-squared test and a Fisher’s exact test – p-
values will be  reported. 
Treatment effects for continuous endpoints will be  estimated using a two- group 
comparison of  means; 95%  confidence intervals for the difference in means will be 
reported.  Tests on the  null hypothesis of  no treatment effect will be  based on both a  t-
test and a Wilcoxon rank-sum t est and p-values will be reported. 
For both bin ary and continuous out comes, regression mod eling may be employed if 
concerns about confoundi ng arise, due to imb alances between treatment groups with  
respect to k ey progno stic baseline covariates. Rando m effects regression mod eling may 
also be  employed if concerns regarding the clustering of outcomes within su rgeons or 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  42 
 
 
 centers emerge. 
 
Specific Aim 2: 
 
For patients who  are infected, we  will compute  a one-sided, 95%  lower confidence interval 
for the difference in antibiotic sensitivi ty to between treated and control.  We will compare 
this difference to a 10% non-inferiority margin. 
 
Specific Aim 3: 
 
We will build a  risk p rediction mod el for infection using  data from our  previous o xygen trial 
and a training  sample  from the control group of  the propos ed trial to estimate the parameters of 
a multiv ariate logistic regression mod el. Demographic and inju ry characteristics will be  
included as covariates in the model. The predictive accuracy of the model will be assessed by 
[CONTACT_246966] a  test sample  of patients from the  control group of 
the propos ed trial and calculating the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve. 
 
After building  the risk p rediction mod el, we will compute  a risk prediction score for each 
patient in the  trial and assess, via  interaction t erms in a  logistic regression mod el, whether the 
effect of local Vancomycin powder  on in fection is modi fied by [INVESTIGATOR_223207]. 
 
 
11. QUALITY CONTROL AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
 
11.1 Data Quality Assurance  
 
Quality Control (Q/C) and Quality Assurance (Q/A) procedures that apply to all studies are 
outlined in the METRC Manual of Operations (MOP).  A certification process (also outlined in 
the MOP) will be used as a basis for training and certification of the s tudy personnel involved in 
data collection.  In addition to consortium wide training and certification procedures, additional 
requirements may be added based on the nature of the study.  Ongoing data edits and audits will 
be performed to ensure collection of quality data. The continuous and timely flow of data from 
the centers to the MCC is an essential prerequisite for maintaining data quality.  
Monthly enrollment reports will be distributed to each center that will summarize recruitment, 
data completion a nd timeliness of data entry. These reports will also include a set of queries 
generated by [CONTACT_246967] 10 business days.  
 
11.2 Training and Certification of Centers  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  43 
 
 
 All participating centers together with their respective study personnel will undergo certification 
that included training, local site IRB, and a knowledge assessment on the study design and 
procedures.   
 
 
12. ETHICS/PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
 
12.1 IRB /Ethics Committee  
 
IRB approval will be obtained from the MCC at Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public 
Health, the DoD, and each participating clinical site according to METRC policies and 
procedures. Sites that recruit patients will submit METRC study recruitment materials to their 
organization’s IRB prior to use at that facility.  
Sites must provide the Coordinating Center with a copy of the initial IRB approval notice and 
subsequent renewals as well as copi[INVESTIGATOR_246911].  
No site can begin work related to this study until the site has been certified by [CONTACT_246968].  
 
12.2 Exclusion of Women, Minorities, and Children (Special Populations)  
 
The proposed study anticipates recruiting a significant proportion of racial/ethnic minorities 
(African -Americans, Asian -Americans and Hispanics) as well as non -Hispanic white subjects.  
The study will not include children or prisoners . The study will also exclude pregnant women.   
 
12.3 Participant Confidentiality  
 
It is the investigator’s responsibility to conduct the protocol under the current version of 
Declaration of Helsinki, ICH Guidelines, Good Clinical Practice, and rules of local IRBs. The 
investigator must ensure that the p atient’s anonymity be maintained in their data submission to 
the Data Coordinating Center.  
 
Patients will be identified only by [CONTACT_108444], SSN, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_17030]. Study Site Investigators will maintain a separate confidential enrollment 
log, which matches identifying codes with the patients’ names and addresses available only t o 
local clinic staff certified by [CONTACT_246969].  
 
All study forms, reports, and other records that are part of the study data collection materials will 
be identified by [CONTACT_17036]. All paper records will be kept 
in locked file cabinets. All electronic records of study data will be identified by [CONTACT_17037]. 
Clinical informa tion will not be released without written permission of the patient, except as 
necessary for monitoring by [CONTACT_456] (MCC), IRB, DOD, or DSMB. Consent procedures and 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300444] (HIPAA).  
 
12.[ADDRESS_300445] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]  
 
13.1 Data Management Responsibilities  
 
Instructions concerning the recording of study data on case report forms will be provided by [CONTACT_246970]. Each study site is responsible for transmitting the data in a timely fashion.  
The research coordinators at each site will obtain the inf ormation necessary to complete the case 
report forms (CRFs) from several sources including but not limited to, the patient's medical 
record, clinical evaluations and patient interviews. These forms will NOT contain the patient’s 
name, SSN, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246912]; they will be identified only by a unique patient -
specific study number.    
 
The Site Research Coordinator will enter non -personally identifiable information into a central 
and secured web -based data management system being implemented fo r all Consortium studies, 
known as REDCap. This data management system has incorporated state -of-the-art features for 
electronic data collection and is configured in accordance with best practices for information 
technology and research data management.   
 
All research data, in hard copy or electronic form, will be stored and managed in a secure 
manner following applicable federal regulations and ICH guidelines and according to 
institutional policies and practices. Hard copy documents containing subject dat a, patient 
identifiers and contact [CONTACT_246971], locked containers (file cabinets, 
drawers, etc.) in accordance with standard document management practices.  
 
At all times only MCC -certified key personnel specifically designated and  authorized by [CONTACT_1268] [INVESTIGATOR_246913], including electronic 
data and medical records.  All such personnel will be properly trained and supervised regarding 
the management and handling of confidential materials. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_246914], supervision, and conduct.  This information will be available for 
audit by [CONTACT_246972], the MCC, the DOD, and the OHRP.  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  45 
 
 
 13.2 Data Capture Methods  
 
Data will be collected in real time by [CONTACT_246973] (CRFs) , which will serve as source documents for the study. Source documents, 
which will include both the CRFs and other supp orting medical records (e.g laboratory & 
radiology reports, clinical notes and discharge summaries), will be signed by [CONTACT_976], other site 
Investigator, or Research Coordinator as indicated in the CRF instructions. The Research 
Coordinator, or MCC -certified sta ff member working under the supervision of the research 
coordinator, will enter the data from the CRFs into the REDCAP database.  
 
13.3 Types of Data  
 
Data will include medical and surgical histories, laboratory reports  (as obtained as part of 
standard cli nical care by [CONTACT_3725]) , radiology reports, clinical evaluations, adverse events and patient 
interviews.  
 
13.4 Source Documents and Access to Source Data/Documents  
 
Source documents including CRFs, laboratory results  (as obtained as part of standard clinical 
care by [CONTACT_3725]) , patient surveys, medical records, etc. will be maintained at the site and will be 
made available to study monitors, and representatives of regulatory agencies including the MCC, 
DOD, IRB, and OHRP.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_300446] 
been destroyed.  
 
 
13.6 Protocol Deviations  
 
Records of protocol deviations will be noted on the Protocol Deviation CRF (AF05) with the 
reason for the deviation recorded, as well as any action take n to mitigate the deviation. This 
information will be entered into REDCap. These records will be provided to the site’s IRB in 
accordance with local reporting requirements and be made available to study monitors.  
 
 
14. PUBLICATIONS POLICY  
Publications will  be written in accordance with the METRC publication policy (available on the 
METRC website: www.metrc.org).  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  46 
 
 
  
 
15. SCIENTIFIC REFERENCES  
 
1.   Archer KR, Castillo RC, Mackenzie EJ, Bosse MJ. “Gait symmetry and walking speed 
analysis following lower -extremity trauma.” Phys Ther. 2006 Dec;86(12):1630 -40. 
 
2.   Archer KR, Castillo RC, Mackenzie EJ, Bosse MJ. “Physical disability after severe lower - 
extremity injury.” Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2006 Aug;87(8):1153 -5. 
 
3.   Barei, DP, Nork SE, Mills WJ, Coles CP, Henley MB, Benirschke SK. Functional Outcomes 
of Severe Bicondylar Tibial Plateau Fractures Treated with Dual Incisions and Medial and 
Lateral Plates. JBJS 2006; 88:1713 -1721.  
 
4.   Barei, DP, Nork SE, Mills WJ, Henley MB, Benirschke SK . Complications Associated With 
Internal Fixation of High -Energy Bicondylar Tibial Plateau Fractures Utilizing a Two - Incision 
Technique. J Orthop Trauma 2004; 18:649 -657. 
 
5.   Benirschke SK, Agnew SG, Mayo KA, Santaro VM, Henley MB. Immediate Internal 
Fixation of Open, Complex Tibial Plateau Fractures: Treatment by a Standard Protocol. J Orthop 
Trauma 2002; 6(1):78 -86. 
 
6.   Bhadra AK, Roberts CS “ Indications  for Antibiotics Cement Nails” J Orhtop Trauma 2009  
May-Jun;23(5Suppl):S26 -30. 
 
7.   Bhandari M, G uyatt G, Tornetta P, et al. “Randomized Trial of Reamed and Unreamed  
Intramedullary Nailing of Tibial Shaft Fractures” JBJS 90 -A(12), pg 2567 -78, December,  
2008.  
 
8. Bhattacharyya T, Crichlow R, Gobezie R, Kim W, Vrahas M. Complications Associated with  
Posterolateral Approach for Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. J Orthop Trauma 2006; 20(2): 104 -107. 
 
9. Blauth M, Bastian L, Krettek C, Knop C, Evans S. Surgical Options of the Treatment of  
Sever Tibial Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]: A Study of Three Techniques. J Orthop Trauma 2001;  
15(3) :153-160. 
 
10. Blokker CP, Rorabeck CH, Bourne RB. Tibial Plateau Fractures An Analysis of the Results 
of Treatment in 60 Patients. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 1984;182:193 -199 
 
11. Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ, Kellam JF, Burgess AR, et al. “An A nalysis of Outcomes of  
Reconstruction or Amputation of Leg -Threatening Injuries.” N Engl J Med 347 (24), 2002.  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  47 
 
 
 12. Böstman OM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246916]äki HK. Adverse tissue reactions to bioabsorbable fixation devices.  
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2000 Feb;(371):216 -27. 
 
13. Bratzler DW, Houck PM et al. “Antimicrobial Prophylaxis for Surgery: An Advisory  
Statement from the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project” Clin Infect Dis 2004:38  
1706 -1715.  
 
14. Bratzler DW, Houck PM et al. “Antimicrobial Prophylaxis for Surgery: An Advisory  
Statement from the National Surgical Infection Prevention Project” Am J Surg 2005 Apr  
189(4) 395 -404. 
 
15. By[CONTACT_246974], Malek M, Davey PG, et al. Postoperative wound scoring. Biomed Pharmoacother  
1989; 43: 669 -673. 
 
16. By[CONTACT_246974], Napi[INVESTIGATOR_3694] A , Cuschieri A Validation of the ASEPSIS Method of Wound Scoring in  
Patients Undergoing General Surgical Operations J R Coll SUrg Edinb 1988 Jun 33(3): [ADDRESS_300447]:  
124(3):321 -9. 
 
18. De Boeck H, Opdecam P. Posteromedial Tibial Plateau Fractures Operative Treatment by  
[CONTACT_246975]. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 1995; 320:125 -128. 
 
19. Dendrinos GK, Kontos S, Katsenis D, Dalas A. Treatment of High -Energy Tibial Plateau  
Fractures by [CONTACT_246976]. JBJS [Br} 1966; 78 -B: [ADDRESS_300448] Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]: Upgrading AO/OTA Type C Fractures  to 
AO/OTA Type B. J Orthop Trauma 2008; 22(6): 426 -429. 
 
22. Ficke JR. Pollak AN. “Extremity War Injuries: Development of Clinical Treatment  
Principles.”Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 15(10):[ADDRESS_300449]. 
 
23. Gardner MJ, Mehta S, Barei DP, Nork SE. Treatment Protocol for Open AO/OTA Type C3  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246917]. J Orthop Trauma 2008; 22(7):451 -457. 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  48 
 
 
 24. Garner JS, Jarvis WR, Emori TG, et al. “CDC definitions for nocosomial infections, 1998”  
Amer J Infec t Control 1998; 16: 128 -140 
 
25. Gosling T, Schandelmaier P, Muller M, Hankemeier S, Wagner M, Krettek C. Single Lateral 
Locked Screw Plating of Bicondylar Tibial Plateau Fractures. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related 
Research 2005; 439:207 -214. 
 
26. Gustilo  RB, Mednoza RM, Williams DN. Problems in the management of type III (sever)  
open fractures: an new classification of type III open fractures. J Trauma 1984;24:742 -746. 
 
27. Gustilo RB, Anderson JT. Prevention of infection in the treatment of one thousand and 
twenty five open fracrtures of long bones: retrospective and prospective analyses. J BJS (A)  
1976;58:453 -458. 
 
28. Gristina A, Costerton J. “Bacterial Adherence to Biomaterials and Tissue” JBJS 67 -A, (2), pg  
264-273, February, 1985.  
 
29. Haidukewych GJ , Cox S, Herscovici Jr D, DiPasquale TG, Sagi HC, Lindvall E, et al.  
Outcomes of Treatment of Open Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]: A Series of 68 Fractures Treated at a Level  
One Trauma Center. Presented at OTA 2005, Session XII -Foot and Ankle, Paper #57.  
 
30. Hansen LK,  Brown M, Johnson D, Palme Ii DF, Love C, Darouiche R. In vivo model of 
human pathogen infection and demonstration of efficacy by [CONTACT_246977]. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009 Jul;32(7):[ADDRESS_300450], Ke llam J, Bosse MJ, Castillo R. “Complications following limb - 
threatening lower extremity trauma”. J Orthop Trauma. 2009 Jan;23(1):1 -6. 
  
32. Harris AM, Patterson BM, Sontich JK, Vallier HA. Results and Outcomes After Operative  
Treatment of High -Energy Tibial Plafound Fractures. Foot Ankle Int. 2006; 27(4): 256 -265. 
 
33. Herscovici Jr D, Devinney S, Jenkins MA, DiPasquale TG, Infante AF, Sanders RW. The 
Functional Outcomes of Type C3 Tibial Plafond Fractures with Use of a staged Protocol. 
Presented at OTA 2002, Session 5 -Foot and Ankle, Paper #30.  
 
34. Horan T, Gaynes R, Martone W, et al. CDC definitions for nosocomial surgical site 
infections, 1992: a modification of CDC definitions of surgical wound infections. Infect Control 
and Hosp Epid 1992; 13: 606 -608. 
 
35. Jensen DB, Rude C, Duus B, Bjerg -Neilsen A. Tibial Plateau Fractions A Comparison of  
Conservative and Surgical Ttreatment. JBJS [Br] 1990; 72 -B: 49 -52. 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  49 
 
 
 36. Josefsson G, Gudmundsson G, Kolmert L, Wijkström S. Prophylaxis  with systemic 
antibiotics versus gentamicin bone cement in total hip arthroplasty. A five -year survey of  
1688 hips. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1990 Apr;(253):173 -8. 
 
37. Kirkley A, Birmingham T, Litchfield R, et al. “A Randomized Trial of Arthroscopic Surgery  
for Osteoarthritis of the Knee” N Engl J Med, 359(11), pg 1097 -1107, Sept., 2008.  
 
38. Keeling J, Gwinn D, Tintle S, et al. “Short -Term Outcomes of Severe Open Wartime Tibial  
Fractures Treated with Ring External Fixation” JBJS 90 -A(12), pg 2643 -2651, Dece mber,  
2008.  
 
39. Koulouvaris P, Stafylas K, Mitsionis G, Vekris M, Mavrodontidis A, Xenakis T. Long -term 
Results of Various Therapy Concepts in Severe Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg  
2007; 127:[ADDRESS_300451] Reduction and  
Percutaneous Screw Fixation of Displaced Tibial Plateau Fractures. J Orthop Trauma 1992;  
6:340 -346. 
 
41. Kumar A, Whittle AP. Treatment of Complex (Schatzker Type VI) Fractures of the Tibial  
Plateau Wi th Circular Wire External Fixation: Retrospective Case Review. J Orthop Trauma  
2000; 14(5):[ADDRESS_300452] 17 -20 [LOCATION_011] #44.  
 
43. Lerner A, Fodor L, Soundry M “Is Staged External Fixation a Valuable Strategy for War  
Injuries to the Limbs?” Clin Orthop Rel Res 448: 217 -224, 2006.  
 
44. Lucke M, Schmidmaier G, Sadoni S, Wildemann B, Schiller R, Haas NP, Raschke M , 
Gentamicin coating of metallic implants reduces implant -related osteomyelitis in rats. Bone 2003 
32(5): 521 -31. 
 
45. Ly TV, Travison TG, Castillo RC, Bosse MJ, MacKenzie EJ. “Ability of lower -extremity 
injury severity scores to predict functional outcome after limb salvage.” J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2008 Aug;90(8):1738 -43. 
 
46. MacKenzie EJ, Bosse MJ, Pollak AN, Webb LX et al. “Long -Term Persistence of Disability  
Following Severe Lower -Limb Trauma.” JBJS 87A(8), 2005.  
 
47. MacKenzie EJ. Bos se MJ. Castillo RC. Smith DG. Webb LX. Kellam JF. Burgess AR.  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  50 
 
 
 Swiontkowski MF. Sanders RW. Jones AL. McAndrew MP. Patterson B M. Travison TG. 
McCarthy ML.   Functional outcomes following trauma -related lower -extremity  amputation.   
Journal of Bone & Joint Su rgery - American Volume. 86 -A(8):1636 -45, 2004  
Aug 
 
48. MacKenzie EJ, Castillo RC, Jones AS, Bosse MJ, Kellam JF, Pollak AN et al. Health -Care  
Costs Associate with Amputation or Reconstruction of a Limb -Threatening Injury JBJS  
2007; 89: 1685 -1692.  
 
49. Mac Kenzie EJ, Bosse MJ. “Factors influencing outcome following limb -threatening lower 
limb trauma: lessons learned from the Lower Extremity Assessment Project (LEAP).” J Am 
Acad Orthop Surg. 2006;14(10 Spec No.):S205 -10. 
 
50. MacKenzie EJ, Bosse MJ, Kellam JF , Burgess AR, Webb LX, Swiontkowski MF, et al.  
Characterization of patients with high -energy lower extremity trauma. J Orthop Trauma.  
[ADDRESS_300453];14(7):455 -66. 
 
51. Mangram AJ, Horan TC, Pearson ML, Silver LC, Jarvis WR. “Guideline for prevention of 
surgical site infection, 1999. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246918].” Infect 
Control Hosp Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 1999;20:[ADDRESS_300454], Do TT. External Fixation and Limited Internal Fixation for Complex  
Fractures of the Tibial Plateau. JBJS 1995; 77:661 -673. 
 
53. McCarthy ML, MacKenzie EJ, Edwin D, Bosse MJ, Castillo RC, Starr A, and LEAP Study  
Group. Psychological Distress Associated with severe lower -limb injury. JBJS 2003 85A(9)  
1689 -1697.  
 
54. McFerra n MA, Smith SW, Boulas HJ, Schwartz HS. Complications Encountered in the  
Treatment of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. J Orthop Trauma 1992; 6(2):195 -200. 
 
55. Moore TM, Patzakis MJ, Harvey JP. Tibial Plateau Fractures: Definition, Demographics, 
Treatment Rationale, and L ong-Term Results of Closed Traction Management or Operative 
Reduction. J Orthop Trauma 1987; 1(2):97 -119. 
 
56. Moseley J, O’Malley K, Petersen, N, et al. “A Controlled Trial of Arthroscopic Surgery for  
Osteoarthritis of the Knee” N Engl J Med, 347(2), pg 8 1-88 July, 2002.  
 
57. O’Toole RV, Castillo RC, Pollak AN, MacKenzie EJ, Bosse MJ and the LEAP Study Group  
JBJS AM 2008; 90: 1206 -1211.  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  51 
 
 
 58. O’Toole RV, Castillo RC, Pollak AN, et al., “Surgeons and their Patients Disagree on the 
Cosmetic and Overall Outcome after Surgery for High Energy Lower Extremity Trauma,”, J 
Orthop Trauma, 2009, Nov -Dec 23(10):716 -23. 
 
59. Owens BD, Kragh JF, Wenke JS, Macaitis J, Wade CE, Holcomb JB. Combat Wounds in  
Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom. J Tra uma, 2008;64:295 –299. 
 
60. Patterson MJ, Cole JD. Two -Staged Delayed Open Reduction and Internal Fixation of Severe  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. J Orthop Trauma 1999; 13(2):85 -91. 
 
61. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246919] -Fernandez A et al.. CAPROSYN*, another major advance in synthetic monofilam ent 
absorbable suture. J Long Term Eff Med Implants. 2004;14(5):359 -68. 
 
62. Pollak AN, Ficke JR.  Extremity War Injuries: Challenges in Definitive Reconstruction.  
JAAOS, 2008, 16 (11), 628 -634. 
 
63. Prokuski L “Prophylactic Antibiotics in Orthopaedic Surgery” J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2008  
May; 16(5):283 -93. 
 
64. Pugh KJ, Wolinsky PR, McAndrew MP, Johnson KD. Tibial Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]: A Comparison 
of Treatment Methods. J Trauma 1999; 47(5): 937 -941. 
 
65. Rotnitzky A, Scharfstein D, Su TL, Robins J. Methods for conducting sensitivity analysis of 
trials with potentially nonignorable competing causes of censoring. Biometrics. 2001  
Mar;57(1):103 -13. 
  
66. Sands A, Grujic L, By[CONTACT_246978], Agel J, Benirschke S, Swiontkowski MF. Clinical and 
Functional Outcomes of Internal Fixation of Displaced Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. Clinical Orthopaedics 
and Related Research 1998; 347:131 -137. 
 
67. Schwank S, Rajacic Z, Zimmerli W, et al. “Impact of Bacterial Biofilm Formation on In  
Vitro and In Vivo Activities of Antibiotics”Antimicrob Agents Chemother” 42(4), pg 895 - 
898, April, 1998.  
 
68. Schmidmaier G et al., “Prophylaxis and treatment of implant -related infections by [CONTACT_246979] - 
coated implants: a review” Injury 2006 May;[ADDRESS_300455] 2: S105 -12. 
 
69. Shah SN, Karun akar MA. Early Wound Complications after Operative Treatment of High 
Energy Tibial Plateau Fractures through Two Incisions. Bulletin of the NYU Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246920] 2007; 65(2): 115 -119. 
 
70. Sirkin M, Sanders R, DiPasquale T, Herscovici Jr D. A Sta ged Protocol for Soft Tissue  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  52 
 
 
 Management in the Treatment of Complex Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246915]. J Ortho Trauma 1999; 13(2):78 - 
84. 
 
71. Stall A, Becker E, Ludwig S, et al. “Reduction of Postoperative Spi[INVESTIGATOR_246921]” Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] 34(5) , pg 479 -483, 2009.  
   
72a. Stall A, Paryavi E, Gupta R, Zadnik M, Hui E, O’Toole RV. Perioperative supplemental     
oxygen to reduce surgical site infection after open fixation of high -risk fractures: A  
randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. J Trauma [in press ]. 
 
72b. Stall A, Gupta R, Zadnik M,  O’Toole RV “Does Perioperative Hyperoxygen Reduce the 
Rate of Surgical Site Infection Following Open Fixation of At -Risk Fractures”  Podium 
Presentation at American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, New Orleans, LA,  March, 2010.  
 
73. Stannard JP, Volgas DA, McGwin G, Obremsky WT, et al. “Negative -Pressure Wound 
Therapy Following High -Risk Lower Extremity Fractures” Podium Presentation 23rd Annual 
Meeting of Orthopaedic Trauma Association, [LOCATION_011], MA, October 2007.  
 
74. Starr AJ. “Fracture repair: successful advances, persistent problems, and the psychological 
burden of trauma.” J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2008 Feb;[ADDRESS_300456] 1:132 -7. 
 
75. Stevens DG, Beharry R, McKee MD, Waddell JP, Schemitsch EH. The Long -Term  
Functional Out comes of Operatively Treated Tibial Plateau Fractures. J Orthop Trauma  
2001; 15(5):312 -320. 
 
76. Teeny SM, Wiss DA. Open Reduction and Internal Fixation of Tibial Plafond Fractures 
Variables Contributing to Poor Results and Complications. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related 
Research 1993; 192:108 -117. 
 
77. Waddell JP, Johnston DWC, Neidre A. Fractures of the Tibial Plateau: A Review of Ninety - 
five Patients and Comparison of Treatment Methods. J Trauma 1981; 21(5):376 -381. 
 
78. Watson JT, Coufal C. Tr eatment of Complex Lateral Plateau Fractures Using Ilizarov  
Techniques. Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research 1998; 353:97 -106. 
 
79. Watson JT. High -Energy Fractures of the Tibial Plateau. Orthopedic Traumatology: Complex  
Fractures and Associated Inju ries 1994; 25(4): 723 -752. 
 
80. Webb LX. Bosse MJ. Castillo RC. MacKenzie EJ. LEAP Study Group. “Analysis of 
surgeon -controlled variables in the treatment of limb -threatening type -III open tibial  
diaphyseal fractures.” Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery - Ame rican Volume. 89(5):923 -8, 
2007 May  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  53 
 
 
  
81. Weinstein J, Lurie J, Tosteson, et al. “Surgical vs. Nonoperative Treatment for Lumbar Disk 
Herniation: The Spi[INVESTIGATOR_246922] (SPORT) Observational Cohort” JAMA, 
296(20), pg 2451 -2459, November, 2006.  
 
82. Weinstein J, Tosteson T, Lurie J, et al. “Surgical versus Nonsurgical Therapy for Lumbar  
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_246923]” N Engl J Med 358(8), pg794 -810, February, 2008.  
 
83. Weinstein J, Lurie J, Tosteson T, et al. “Surgical versus Nonsurgical Treatment for Lumbar  
Degenerative Spondylolisthesis” N Engl J Med 356(22), pg 2257 -2270, May, 2007.  
 
84. Wilson A, Treasure T, Sturridge M, et al. A scoring method (ASEPSIS) for postoperative 
wound infections for use in clinical trials of antibiotic prophy laxis. Lancet 1986; 311 -313. 
 
85. Wilson AP, Webster A, Grunegerg RN et al. Repeatability of the ASEPSIS Wound Scoring  
Method Lancet 1986; May 24:1(8491):[ADDRESS_300457] TJ, Harper MC, Johnson KD, et al.  
Operative Treatment of Fractures of the Tibial Plafond. A Randomized Prospective Study. JBJS 
1996; 78:1646 -1657.  
 
87. Young MJ, Barrack RL. Complications of Internal Fixation of Tibial Plateau Fractures.  
Orthopaedic Review 1994; 23(2):[ADDRESS_300458] of Various  
Concentrations of Antibiotics on Osteogenic Cell Viability and Activity  Journal of Orthoaedic 
Research July 2011.  
 
89. Hidron AI, Edwards JR, Patel J, et al. NHSN annual update: antimicrobi al-resistant 
pathogens associated with healthcare -associated infections: annual summary of data reported to 
the National Healthcare Safety Network at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, [ADDRESS_300459] Control Hosp Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2008; 29(11):[ADDRESS_300460] Control Hosp Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2008;29(suppl 1):S51 –61. 
 
91. Huiras P, Logan J, Papadopoulos S. Local antimicrobial administration fo r prophylaxis of  
  surgical site infections. Pharmacotherapy 2012;32(11):[ADDRESS_300461]  
  Dis2009; 49: 1541 –9. 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  54 
 
 
 93. Henry SL, Ostermann PA, Seligson D. The prophylactic use of antibiotic -impregnated beads 
in open fractures. J Trauma 1990; 30(10):1231 –8. 81.  
 
94.  Patzakis MJ, Mazur K, Wilkins J, Sherman R, Holtom P. Septopal beads and autogenous  
bone grafting for bone defects in patients with chronic osteomyelitis. Clin Orthop Relat Res  
1993; (295):112 –8. 
 
95. Ostermann P, Henry S, Seligson D. The role of loca l antibiotic therapy in the management of 
compound fractures. Clinical Orthopeadics and related research 1993; 10; (295):102 -11. 
 
96. Assor M. Noncemented total knee arthroplasty with a local prophylactic anti -infection  
 agent: a prospective series of 135 cases. Can J Surg. 2010 Feb;53(1):47 -50. 
 
97. O’Neill KR, Smith JG, Abtahi AM, et al. Reduced surgical site infections in patients  
  undergoing posterior spi[INVESTIGATOR_246924].  
  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] J. 2011; 11(7):641 -646. 
 
98. Sweet FA, Roh M, Sliva C. Intrawound application of vancomycin for prophylaxis in  
instrumented thoracolumbar fusions: efficacy, drug levels, and patient outcomes. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 2011; 
36(24):2084 -2088  
 
99. Molinari WJ, Khera O, Molinari RW. Prophylactic oper ative site powdered vancomycin and 
postoperative deep spi[INVESTIGATOR_246925]: 1,512 consecutive surgical cases during a six -year 
period. Eur spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] J. 2012; 21(4): S476 -S482  
 
100. Pahys J, Pahys JR, Cho SK, et al. Methods to decrease post -operative infectio ns following  
posterior cervical spi[INVESTIGATOR_79477]. 2013; 95(6): 549 -54 
 
101. Kanj  WW, Flynn JM, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_246926]. Vancomycin prophylaxis of surgical site infection 
in clean orthopedic surgery. Orthopedics. 2013; 36(2): 138 -146 
 
102. Godil SS, Parker SL, O'Neill KR, Devin CJ, McGirt MJ. Comparative effectiveness and 
cost-benefit analysis of local application of vancomycin powder in posterior spi[INVESTIGATOR_246927]. J Neurosurg Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 2013 Jul 12:1 -5 
 
103.  Konstantinos Anagnostakos and Katrin Koch,  “Pharmacokinetic Properties and Systemic 
Safety of Vancomycin -Impregnated Cancellous Bone Grafts in the Treatment of 
Spondylodiscitis,” BioMed Research International, vol. 2013, Article ID 358217, 6 pages, 2013. 
doi:10.1155/2013/358217  
 
  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  55 
 
 
 17. APPENDICES  
APPENDIX A: STUDY CONTACT [CONTACT_246980] (Protocol Chair)  
 
Robert V. O’Toole, MD  
University of Maryland, Baltimore  
Department of Orthopaedic Trauma  
[ADDRESS_300462].  
Baltimore, MD [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: [PHONE_5183]  
E mail: [EMAIL_2138]  
  METRC Coordinating Center Study Principal 
Investigator  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_246928] , PhD 
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health  
Dept. Health Policy and Management  
[ADDRESS_300463] Room  
Baltimore MD, [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: [PHONE_5184]  
Email: r [EMAIL_4796]  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300464], Bldg. 
3611  
Fort Sam Houston TX, [ZIP_CODE] -6315  
Phone: 210 -916-3742; Cell: 210 -288-2431  
Email: J [EMAIL_4797]   
 
Medical Monitor  
 
Marc Swiontkowski, MD  
Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery  
University of Minnesota  
[ADDRESS_300465]  
Suite R200  
Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: (612) 273 -,0 
Email: [EMAIL_4794]  
  METRC Coordinating Center  
 Director of Protocol Development  
 
Lauren E. Allen, MA  
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health  
Dept. of Health Policy and Management  
[ADDRESS_300466]  
Baltimore MD, [ZIP_CODE] 
Phone: [PHONE_5185]  
Email: lallen19@ jhu.edu   
 
METRC Coordinating Center Study Manager  
 
Tara J. Taylor, MPH  
Dept. of Health Policy and Management  
[ADDRESS_300467]  Baltimore MD, [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: [PHONE_5186]  
Email: [EMAIL_4798]  
 
METRC Coordinating Center  
Director of Data Management  
 
Anthony Carlini, MS  
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health  
Dept of Health Policy and Management  
[ADDRESS_300468]  Baltimore MD,  [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: 410 -502-8455  
Email: [EMAIL_4799]  
 
 
 
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  57 
 
 
 APPENDIX B: PROTOCOL COMMITTEE  
Robert V. O’Toole, MD (Study PI)    Renan Castillo, PhD  
University of Maryland Medical Center   Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public  
       Health  
 
Michael Bosse, MD      Amanda Holmes , MS  
Carolinas Medical Center     University of Maryland Medical Center  
 
Manjari Joshi , MD      Daniel Scharfstein, ScD  
University of Maryland Medical Center  John Hopkins Bloomberg  School of Public 
Health  
 
Ellen MacKenzie, PhD     Lauren E. Allen, MA  
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public  Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public  
Health  Health  
 
David Hak , MD      Tara Taylor, MPH  
Denver Health & Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246929] , MD      Dean Tsukayama , MD   
[LOCATION_012] Orthopaedic Institute/Tampa  Hennepin County Medical Center   
General & St. Joseph’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246930] , MD  Clinton Murray, MD  
Orlando Regional Medical Center  Brooke Army Medical Center  
  
Debra Sietsema, PhD, RN  Zachary Roberts , MD  
Orthopaedic Associates of Michigan    University of Oklahoma/OU Med Center  
Spectrum Health       
      
Hassan Mir , MD      Joseph Hsu,  MD    
Vanderbilt University Medical Center   Carolinas Medical Center    
             
     
Nalini Rao , MD      Matthew Graves , MD   
University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_246931] : www.metrc.org         
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  58 
 
 
 APPENDIX C: DATA COLLECTION SCHEDULE  
Assessment  Base -
line 2 
Week
s 3mo 6mo 
Patient Characteristics      
Demographics (age, gender, 
race/ethnicity, education)  X    
Income  X    
Usual Major Activities Before Injury  X    
Job Characteristics  X    
Current Military Service  X    
Job Motivation  X    
Smoking History  X    
Previous Injuries and Pain  X    
Marital Status and Social Support  X    
General Injury Characteristics      
Circumstances and Type of Injury  X    
Other Injuries  X    
Medical History      
Medications taken prior to Injury  X    
Co-morbidities  X    
Health Insurance  X    
Height and Weight  X    
Study Injury Characteristics      
Side of Injury  X    
AO/OTA Classification  X    
Gustilo Type  X    
Tscherne Classification  X    
Muscle Injury  X    
Nerve Damage  X    
Soft Tissue Loss  X    
AP and Lateral x rays  X    
Index Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246932]  X    
Length of time in ICU  X    
Discharge Disposition  X    
Antibiotic Use  X    
Clinical Follow -up Assessments      
Deep  Surgical Site Infection   X X X 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  59 
 
 
 Assessment  Base -
line 2 
Week
s 3mo 6mo 
Complications (type, severity, treatment)   X X X 
Wound Healing   X X X 
Antibiotic Use   X X X 
Fracture Healing   X X X 
Pain  X X X 
Self Reported Assessments      
Re hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]   X X X 
Self reported pain     X 
Brief Pain Inventory     X 
Health Related Quality of Life (VR -12)    X 
Short Musculoskeletal Function 
Assessment (SMFA)     X 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  60 
 
 
 APPENDIX D: CONSENT TEMPLATE  
 
INFORMED CONSENT DOCUMENT  
 
Draft Participant Consent Form  
 
Study Title:  Local Antibiotic  Therapy  to Reduce Infection after Operative Treatment of Fractures at 
High Risk of  Infection: A Multi center Randomi zed Controlled Trial 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_108401] V. O’Toole, MD, MS  
 
 
You are being asked to volunteer to be a part of a research study.  Please read this form carefully 
before you sign it. This consent form explai ns the research study and your part in the study.  If 
you decide not to participate in this study there will be no impact on your medical care.  You can 
choose not to take part and if you join, you may quit at any time.  Ask the study doctor or the 
study s taff to explain any words or procedures that you do not clearly understand.  Ask as many 
questions as needed.  All of your questions should be answered to your satisfaction before you 
sign this form.  
 
 
1. WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS RESEARCH STUDY?  
 
This research is being done to help determine the best treatment for severe lower leg injures like 
yours. Some broken bone injuries can be more likely to get an infection. It is mostly due to the 
way they were injured. These injuries are: a break in the to p of your tibia (larger bone in your 
lower leg), or a break in your pi[INVESTIGATOR_44768] (break in the bottom part of your tibia (larger bone in your 
lower leg)).  
 
Surgical site infection in the orthopaedic surgery population is a big public health issue.  
Wound infection s result in both longer length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246933].  
This study will be using an antibiotic called Vancomycin. This antibiotic is usually  given using 
an injection ( intravenous (IV) format ).  
 
Some research has been done with spi[INVESTIGATOR_246934] y. The research has shown that by [CONTACT_246981] a powder sprinkled right in the site of surgery can  
have a smaller risk for infection later.  In these studies there were no reports of problems for 
participants. Many orthopaedic sur geons are now using this antibiotic powder as part of their 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300469] 
surgery for a broken leg bone.  
 
 
This study is funded by [CONTACT_2315] (DOD) and is being c arried out in more than 
25 major trauma centers across the [LOCATION_002], including four Military Treatment Facilities 
that are taking care of service members who are injured in the line of duty.  
 
2. WHY AM I BEING ASKED TO PARTICIPATE?  
 
You are being asked to participate in this study because you are between the age of [ADDRESS_300470]?  
 
Your participation in this study will last for 6 months following your injury.  
 
4. HOW DOES THE STUDY WORK?  
If you agree to participate in this study, we will fix your broken bone as we normally  
would. The only change to normal care would be to randomize (th is is like the flip of a coin) you 
to one of two groups.  
 
Group 1 will receive antibiotic  (Vancomycin)  powder at your surgery site during your surgery  in 
addition to the standard of care antibiotic treatment at your facility (care that would be no 
differe nt than what you would receive if you were not in the study). If you are in Group [ADDRESS_300471] of care antibiotic treatment at your facility (care 
that would be no d ifferent than what you would receive if you were not in the study).  
 
After your surgery, your care will be exactly the same as if you were not in the study.  You will 
be asked to come back to the clinic and follow up with us at 2 weeks, 3 months, and 6 mo nths 
after your surgery. These visits coincide with times you would normally come back to see your 
physician for a check -up.  During these visits the following things will happen:  
 
• You will have a physical exam   
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  62 
 
 
 • Because you are in the study, you will be a sked additional questions by a member of the 
study team. These questions will typi[INVESTIGATOR_246935] 5 minutes of your time and will 
usually be asked while you are waiting to see your surgeon.  
• We will check to see if you have been re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246936] i njury since your last 
follow -up visit. If you have, we will gather the details about the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246937].  
• We will ask you if you have had any problems with your injured leg and if you have 
been told you have an infection by [CONTACT_246982].  
• You will also be asked if you are taking any kind of medication for any kind of 
infection.  
In addition, at the [ADDRESS_300472] been found 
to be useful in finding out how you are doing after your injury. These include the Brief Pain 
Inventory (BPI), Short Form Musculoskeletal Assessment (SMFA), and the Veterans Rand 12 
item H ealth Survey (VR12). The questions should take you approximately 10 minutes to answer.  
 
 
5. WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL RISKS OR DISCOMFORTS?  
 
There are standard risks with surgery. These will be explained to you along with your  
consent for surgery.   There are also standard risks associated with receiving any antibiotics. One 
risk is developi[INVESTIGATOR_246938]. There may  also be risks of using 
Vancomycin in powder form that are not yet known. This use of Vancomycin has not been 
approved by [CONTACT_1622], but some doctors use the drug in this manner outside the study. The FDA 
has permitted this use for this study.  
 
The risk of givin g you antibiotic powder is increased for those of you who have a n allergy to the 
drug Vancomycin . In addition, there is increased risk for those of you who are susceptible to 
local toxicity to the drug.  If you have a known risk to antibiotics please talk w ith your treating 
surgeon.  
 
Any time information is collected for a study there is a small risk of breach of confidentiality. As 
described below, your research data will be identified by a unique study number rather than your 
name [CONTACT_246988] [CONTACT_246983].  
 
6. WHAT ARE THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS?  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300473] clinical evaluation. 
In addition, you will be further evaluated using specific questions related to pain and your 
activity level (Brief  Pain Inventory (BPI), Short Form Musculoskeletal Assessment (SMFA), and 
the Veterans Rand 12 item Health Survey (VR12).    
 
7. DO I GET ANY PAYMENT FOR BEING IN THE STUDY?  
 
You will receive $50 each for completing the 6 month visit.  This payment is in appreciation of 
your time and effort.  
 
8. ARE THERE ANY COSTS INVOLVED IN BEING IN THE STUDY?  
 
If you are randomized to receive the Vancomycin powder, it will be paid for by [CONTACT_1758]. There 
is no cost to you to participate in this study.  
 
9. WILL MY INFORMATION BE KEPT PRIVATE?  
 
The information we collect from you will be kept private to the best of our ability. Your name, 
birth date, medical record number and any other information that could identify you as an 
individual will be removed from all stud y forms. Instead, we will label your forms with a unique 
study number. The link between your name [CONTACT_246989] [CONTACT_2371]. The information collected for the study will be stored in a 
password p rotected, HIP AA verified computer database that only authorized members of our 
research team can use. When we report the results of the study, we will combine the information 
about you with similar information about hundreds of other people so your individ ual 
information will not be identifiable.  
 
All study records will be considered confidential, and your name [CONTACT_246990].   
 
10. WILL YOU SHARE MY INFORMATION WITH OTHERS?  
 
We will use your information only for the purposes of t his study. The data from the study may be 
published. However, you will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300]. People designated from the institutions 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300474] human subjects engaged in research.  
11. WHAT ARE MY ALTERNATIVES TO PARTICIPATION?  
 
Your alternative is to not take part in the study. If you choose not to take part, your healthcare 
will not be affected.  
 
12. WHAT HAPPENS IF I LEAVE THE STUDY EARLY?  
 
Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. You have the right to withdraw from the 
research study at any time without penalty. Your decision will not affect the medical care you 
receive. If you decide to stop participating, you should notify the study doctor or the research 
coordinator a t your center.  
 
Your participation in this research study could be ended without your consent if we decide to end 
the study early. You may also be withdrawn from the study if your injury is not determined to be 
severe enough for inclusion.  
 
13. WHAT HAPPENS IF I AM INJURED O R BECOME ILL BECAUSE I TOOK PART 
IN THIS STUDY?  
 
If you are injured or become ill because of your participation in this study, you will receive 
emergency medical care if needed and you will receive assistance in getting other medical care 
as needed.  You o r your insurance carrier will be billed for the cost of care, just as you would be 
billed for any other medical care.  If you have any costs that are not covered by [CONTACT_22241], they 
are your responsibility.   
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300475] QUESTIONS OR PROBLEMS?  
 
• <<insert name>>,  the study coordinator at your hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246939].   If you have further 
questions or get sick or injured as a result of being in this study, you can contact << insert 
him/her>>  at <<telephone number>>.  You may also call the Director of the Study at 
your hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], <<insert name>> , at <<telephone number>>.   
 
• If you have further questions about your rights as a study participant you can call or 
contact [CONTACT_246984] e Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 
IRB Office. The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health is serving as the 
overall coordinating center for this study that is being conducted in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_246940]. Contact [CONTACT_246985] s IRB if you feel you have not been treated fairly or if 
you have other concerns.  The IRB contact [CONTACT_86422]:   
 
• <<insert local IRB contact [CONTACT_115339]>>  
 
You will receive a copy of this signed consent form.  
 
 
 
What does your signature (or thumbprint/mark) on this consent form mean?  
 
Your signature (or thumbprint/mark) on this form means:  
 
• You have been informed about this study’s purpose, procedures, possible benefits and 
risks.  
• You have been given the chance to ask questions before you sig n. 
• You have voluntarily agreed to be in this study.  
 
________________________              _____________________________   ________   
Print name [CONTACT_246991] 2   10/6/14  66 
 
 
                             
 
Ask the participant to mark a “left thumb impression” in this box if the participant (or 
participant’s parent) is unable to provide a signature [CONTACT_75697].  
 
 
________________________        _____________________________       __________  
Print name [CONTACT_246992] E: EVALUTION TO GIVE CONSENT  
 
EVALUATION TO GIVE CONSENT  
 
Procedure: Make a subjective judgment regarding item [ADDRESS_300476] the language to use in asking the questions in order to help the respondent 
understand them.  
 
 
1. Is the respondent alert and able to communicate with you?  
 
Yes ___  No ____   (if con dition not likely to change, seek proxy 
consent)  
 
2. Ask the respondent to name [CONTACT_246993] s/he will be asked to do as part of the 
study.  
 
Describe ________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________  
 
3. Ask the respondent to explain what s/he could do if s/he decided s/he did not want to 
participate in the study.  
 
Descr ibe________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  67 
 
 
 4. Ask the respondent to explain what s/he would do if s/he were experiencing distress or 
discomfort at any time durin g the study.  
 
Describe ________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________  
 
I hereby [CONTACT_246986] -named respondent is alert, able to communicate, and able to give  
acceptable answers to items 2, 3, and 4, above.  
 
____________________________________         ____________________________________  
Research Coordinator                                                             Date  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  68 
 
 
 APPENDIX F: BROCHURE INSERT  
Be Part of the Local Antibiotic  Powder ( VANCO ) Team!  
Help advance limb trauma care through research  
 
What is the Local Antibiotic  Powder Study?  
Very bad breaks of the lower leg and ankle are difficult to treat and are associated with infection 
and other co mplications. The goal of VANCO  is to determine whether a higher amount of using 
local antibiotics in a powder form during  surgery can reduce your risk of infection .  
 
Why me?  
This VANCO  study is funded by [CONTACT_2315] (DOD) and is being carried out in 
more than [ADDRESS_300477] a badly broken bone in your 
lower leg or ankle that your surgeon has determined is bad enough to qualify for the study.   
People with injuries similar to yours who are being treated at m ajor trauma centers from around 
the county are being asked to participate.   
 
How does the study work?  
We will observe the outcomes of your treatment and we will follow your recovery.  
After you sign this informed consent and agree to be part of the study, the following things will 
happen:  
• You will be randomized to either standard of care antibiotics or some additional local 
antibiotic (Vancomycin)  powder placed in your surgical wound at the time of surgery to 
fix your broken bone.  
• Information will b e collected about your injury and your surgery from your medical record 
and your surgeon and will be entered into a database by a member of the research team.  
• You will receive surgery to treat your injury. You and your surgeon will decide on the 
best cours e of treatment.  
 
After your surgery your care will be exactly the same as if you were not in the study.  You will 
be asked to come back to the clinic and follow up with us at 2 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months 
after your surgery. During these visits the follo wing things will happen:  
• You will have a physical exam  
• An x -ray will be taken to see how your bone is healing  
• You will be asked about any treatment to your leg that you have had other than with your 
surgeon  
• You will be asked if any doctor other than your surgeon has told you that you have an 
infection in that leg  
• You will also be asked if you are taking any antibiotics for any infection.  
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/[ADDRESS_300478] to be part of a 
nationwide effort and to help advance limb trauma care for others in the future.  Please talk to 
your doctor about participating, or visit www.METRC.org  to learn more.    
 
METRC Vanco Version 2   10/6/14  70 
 
 
  
APPENDIX G: INTERVIEWS  
 
[Will submit SF12, SMFA, BPI [INVESTIGATOR_246941]]  