SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  1 Statistical Analysis Plan for  
Serum Assessment of Preterm Birth --  
Outcomes Compared to Historical Controls:  
AVERT PRETERM TRIAL  
  
 
 
ClinicalTrials.gov number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Lead Study Investigator(s):  Matthew Kendall Hoffman, MD, MPH -ChristianaCare  
 
Funding:   Sera Prognostics, Inc., ChristianaCare Health Services.  
 
Title:        Serum Assessment of Preterm Birth:  
                                        Outcomes Compared to Historical Controls: AVERT   
                                        PRETERM TRIAL  
 
Study Design :                Prospective cohort study of screened women compared to a  
                                       historical control.   
Study Objective:     To examine whether the w omen who are screened using the  
                                       PreTRM® test around [ADDRESS_76458] a statistically    
                                       significant reduction  in adverse pregnancy outcomes.   
Prepared by:      [CONTACT_70227], PhD 
                                       Matthew Kendall Hoffman, MD, MPH  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76459]  5 
 
3. Statement of Problem  and Study  7 
3.1. Background and Rationale  7 
3.2  Risk Identification  7 
3.3. Study Design  8 
3.4. Study Population  9 
3.5. Primary Hypothesis or Question  10 
3.6. Secondary Hypothesis or Question  10 
3.7. Definitions of Outcomes  10 
 
4. Determination of Sample Size  12 
5. Statistical Analysis  14 
5.1.Analysis Population  14 
5.2. Descriptive Statistics  15 
5.3 Covariate Analyses  16 
5.4 Primary and Secondary Analyses  19 
5. Primary Endpoints  20 
5.6. Secondary Endpoints  22 
5.7. Exploratory Endpoints  23 
5.8. Safety Analysis  29 
5.9. Subgroup Analysis  29 
5.10. Missing Data  30  
    
6. Bias in the Hybrid  Study  31 
6.1 Potential bias in the hybrid  study  32 
6.2 Differences between historical and prospective cohorts  32        
        
  REFERENCES  32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  3  
1  ACRONYMS  and ABBREVIATIONS  
 
ACOG  American College of Gynecologists  
AE  Adverse Event  
AFI   Amniotic fluid index  
APS   Antiphospholipid syndrome  
ASA   Acetylsalicylic acid  
AUC   Area under the curve  
BPD                      Bronchopulmonary dysplasia  
BPP   Biophysical profile  
CC  Cubic Centimeter  
CCHS   ChristianaCare Health System  
CL  Cervical Length  
CLASI  Community Legal Aid Society, Inc  
CLASP  Collaborative Low -dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70199] (or estimated date of delivery)  
FDA   U.S. Food and Drug Administration  
g  Gram  
GA  Gestational age  
GAB  Gesta tional age  at birth  
GC  Gonococcus  
ICER   Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ration  
IRB  Institutional Review Board  
IBP4   Insulin -like growth factor binding protein 4  
ITT  Intention to treat  
IVH   Intraventricular hemorrhage  
LBW   Low birth weight   
LC-MS/MS  Liquid chromatography –tandem mass spectrometry  
LDA   Low dose aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70200] -indicated preterm birth  
mm  Millimeter  
NEC                 Necrotizing enterocolitis  
NICHD  Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human  
                        Development  
NICU   Neonatal Intensive Care Unit  
NIH   National Institutes of Health  
NMI                Neonatal morbidity and mortality  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  4 NNOLOS       Length of neonat al hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] (NNOLOS)  
NICULO S     Length of neonatal NICU stay (NICULOS)  
OHRP   Office of Human Research Protections  
P  Probability Value  
PECEP  Pesario Cervical para Evitar Prematuridad  
PTL   Preterm Labor  
PROM  Premature rupture of membranes  
PPROM  Preterm premature rupture of membranes  
PTB   Preterm birth  
PVL                Periventricular leukomalacia  
RCT   Randomized Clinical Trial  
RDS                Respi[INVESTIGATOR_70201]   a  randomized Trial of Pessary in Singletons  
TVCL   Trans -vaginal cervical length  
TVUS   Trans -vaginal ultrasound  
UAE   Unexpected Adverse Event  
UTI  Urinary Tract Infection  
VLBW  Very low birth weight  
WHO   World Health O rganization  
17-OHPC  17-hydroxy progesterone caproate  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76460]  
Executive Summary:  
AVERT P RETERM is a historically controlled trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of 
a preterm birth (PTB) prevention strategy versus standard -of-care pregnancy 
management in reduction of the incidence of adverse pregnancy outcomes.  Subjects in 
the prospective  arm receive  a commercially -available laboratory developed test, 
PreTRM® (Sera Prognostics, Inc).  Those  with higher -risk results are offered  a 
multimodal intervention protocol ; the remainder receive routine pregnancy management .  
Outcomes are compared between the prospective arm and historical controls .   
 
The AVERT study addresses an enormous obstetrical problem having a large unmet need 
with the use of a novel risk assessment tool (PreTRM®) and established multimodal 
interventions administered within the single ChristianaCare hospi[INVESTIGATOR_30469].  However, 
there are several potential limitations to the AVERT study.  Comparisons to historical  
controls can be susceptible to selection bias and epoch effects.  Subjects who don’t accept 
interventions may add self -selection bia s.  As well, AVERT is subject to a research halt 
due to the spread of SARS -CoV -2, avoiding a pandemic epoch effect while re stricting 
study size . 
 
This statistical analysis plan addresses the  study objective of evaluation of the PTB 
prevention strategy while overcoming  potential study limitations.  The original endpoints 
are replaced with more powerful endpoints aligned to the study size  and faithful to the 
study’s goal of reducing adverse outcomes .  The primary analysis is in a modified ITT 
population  enabling comparison of the fully consented PTB prevention strategy  
population  to a population who received standard care. To adj ust for any bias in consent 
to intervention, exploratory analyses compare subjects accepting and not accepting 
interventions, and address the efficacy of individual intervention components.  
 
An estimated 1,453  prospective subjects reached a gestational age  of 370/7 weeks  before 
local spread of  SARS -CoV -2 in Delaware  and the associated shut -down of non -COVID -
19 research at ChristianaCare.   Approximately 10,000 historical controls were selected 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76461] 86% power for 5% alpha shared across two co -primary endpoints: neonatal 
morbidity and mortality index and neonatal length of total hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408].   
 
The funder, Sera Prognostics, will remain blinde d to all clinical data until a formal 
communication of topline results from this analysis is made.  
 
Background:  Preterm birth (PTB) remains the leading cause of neonatal mortality and 
long term disability throughout the world.  Recently treatments early in  pregnancy such 
as progesterone, cervical support and maternal support have been demonstrated to delay 
delivery amongst at risk women.  Nonetheless, the majority of women who are at risk are 
not identified using current screening modalities.  
Hypothesis:  A cohort of pregnancies who are screened using the PreTRM® test around 
20 weeks gestation in which a bundle of interventions is given for elevated PreTRM® risk 
will show  either decreased neonatal morbidity/and mortality ( measured as a composite 
score, “ NMI ”), or decreased  length of neonatal stay in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (NNOLOS) .  
Secondarily, they will show a n increase in gestational age at birth  (GAB)  and a 
reduction in length of neonatal NICU stay (NICULOS), compared to an unscreened 
historical control group.  
Stud y Design Type:  Prospective cohort study of screened  pregnant  women compared to 
a historical control.  
Population:  Prospective subjects are recruited from ChristianaCare’s patient population 
as described in the study protocol .  A comparable  control  populati on will be identified 
from ChristianaCare’s  database , as described in the study protocol .  A total of 
approximately  10,[ADDRESS_76462] 6th, 2016 .   
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  7 Intervention:  Qualifying women will be screened using the PreTRM® test (Sera 
Prognostics, Inc.) at a large tertiary care center.  Predicated upon the degree of risk  based 
on a prespecified algorithm that includes height, weight, and measurement of two serum 
proteins (IBP4 and SHBG), women will be treated according to a pre-determined  
protocol . The outcomes of the screened cohort of  women will be compared to those of the 
historical control group at the same tertiary care center.  
Outcomes:   
Co-Primary outcome s: To determine whether a cohort of women who are screened with 
the PreTRM® test and then managed according to a prespecified protocol will have 
statistically significant reduction s in either (a) composite neonatal morbidity and 
mortality (NMI  score ), or (b) length of neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] (NNOLOS) , compared to a 
historical control group.  
Secondary outcomes: To determine whether a cohort of women who are screened with 
the PreTRM® test and then managed according to a pre -specified treatment protocol will 
have statistically significant reducti on in (a) length of NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70202]  (NICULOS) , or (b) a 
statistically significant increase in duration of gestation compared to historical controls.  
 
 
3  Statement of Problem and Study  
3.1   Background and Rationale  
Preterm delivery, defined as delivery prior to 370/7 weeks gestation, remains the dominant 
contributor  to neonatal morbidity and mortality throughout the world (March of 
Dimes   Save the Children, WHO. 2012; Mathews, Menacker, and MacDorman 2004; 
Anderson and Smith 2003) , including  up to 50% of pediatric neurodevelopmental 
disorders (Goldenberg and Rouse 1998) .  Infants born prematurely are at increased risk 
for a variety of long term medical complications such as respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], gastrointestinal, 
cardiovascular, and meta bolic disorders (McCormick & Richardson, 2002 ; Saigal & 
Doyle, 2008) . Given the tremendous medical, financial and emotional burden of preterm 
birth, interventions that increase  the GAB  of premature infants , even marginally , would 
profound ly impact  these children, their families and the health care system.  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76463] been limited to  looking for  
three specific clinical circumstances in a pregnant woman : 1) Non-specific socio -
econom ic factors (e.g. African -American race, lower socio -economic status, low BMI), 
2) A history of a prior preterm birth , or 3) a short cervix on transvaginal sonography.  
Each of these characteristics have severe limitations as screening strategies and do not  
allow for the meaningful identification of the majority of at-risk pregnancies.  
Socioeconomic risk factors are not highly specific for preterm birth and  have only 
demonstrated a sensitivity of 32% in a general population (Mercer, 1996).  The strongest  
known predictor  thus far  for predicting preterm birth is having a prior preterm birth.  As a 
sole risk factor  in singleton pregnanc y, its predictive value is limited by [CONTACT_49392] 40% 
of pregnancies occur in nulliparous women and only a minority of multiparous women 
will have this as a risk factor , resulting in a detection sensitivity of only 11%  (Petrini, 
2005).  Universal cervical length screening has demonstrated to be a reasonably specific  
marker, though shortening of the cervix only occurs in ap proximately 1% -2% of the 
general pregnant population  with at most a 6% sensitivity  increase  (Werner, 
Hamel,Orzechowski, Berghella, & Thung, 2015) (Orzechowski et al. 2014; Son et al. 
2016)  and has shown an AUC of only 0.6 1 when used i n a nulliparous population  at mid -
trimester (Esplin et al. 2017) .  If meaningful change is to  occur in  reducing the effects of 
preterm birth, a more sensitive and specific assay needs to be developed and to be 
implemented  at a point early enough in pregnancy that a rational treatment strategy can 
be invoked.  
 3.3   Study Design  
We propose a prospe ctive study where pregnant women are screened between 191/7- 206/7 
wks gestation  using  the PreTRM® test (Sera Prognostics, Inc.) .  A predetermined risk of 
sPTB ≥ 16% is set as the lower limit of what constitutes elevated risk that would initiate  
the pre-set group of treatment s as defined by a prespecified protocol.  The outcomes of 
this cohort will be compared to a historical control  at the same tertiary care center  at a 
time in which PreTRM® testing was not available . The funder, Sera Prognostics, will 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  9 remain blinded to all clinical data until a formal communication of topline results from 
this analysis is made.  
 
Additionally , a cumulative fiscal analysis of both cohorts will be covered by a separate 
SAP (SEAR) .   
 
The study design is illustrated in Figure 1 . 
 
 
Figure 1 . Design of the AVERT study  
3.4 Study Population  
We intend to study the effects of serum screening on women carrying a live singleton 
pregnancy between 191/7 to 206/7 weeks gestation.  Inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria 
were shown in the study protocol .  
 
Prospective Tested  Group :  as described  in the prospective cohort study design.  
Briefly, prospective subjects will be enrolled during a routine prenatal visit during 191/7-
206/7. Prior to screening a potential subject, the Principal Investigator (PI) will have 
obtained written IRB approval of t he informed consent form (ICF), and other related 
information. Eligibility criteria are given in the protocol.  
 

SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  10 Historical Control Group:  The Historical Control G roup of women was defined by 
[CONTACT_70228].  
Women who were transferred from other facilities would be excluded due to lack of 
records .  As an exception to exclusion criteria used in the prospective cohort, w omen who 
did not meet eligibility criteria related to assay requireme nts were not excluded from  the 
historical control group as these criteria are  only anticipated  to affect the PreTRM®test. 
3.5 Primary Hypothesis or Question  
Co-primary hypothes es are that women who are screened with the PreTRM® test between 
191/7 weeks and 206/[ADDRESS_76464] 1) a significant reduction in severe c omposite 
neonatal morbidity and mortality (NMI ), or 2) a significant reductio n in length of 
neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] (NNOLOS) in compar ison to historical control s. 
 
3.6   Secondary Hypothesis or Questions  
Women who were screened with the PreTRM® test will have 1) a significant  reduction in 
length of NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70203] 
2) a significant  increase in duration  of gestation  (GAB)  in comparison to historical 
controls.  
 
3.7    Definitions of Outcomes  
 
Primary and secondary endpoints, including adverse events, will be collected, measured, 
calculated, and pre -defined according to the study design.  
•    Composite neonatal morbidity and mortality (NMI): neonatal morbidity and 
mortality ( 14).  Neonates are as signed points according to the following criteria.  
0 to 4 scale with NICU  
0 = no events,  
1 = one event for (RDS, BPD, grade III or IV IVH, PVL, proven sepsis, or 
NEC) or <5 days in  the NICU, and no perinatal mortality;  
2 = two events or between 5 and 20 da ys in the NICU, and no perinatal 
mortality;  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  11 3 = three or more events or >20 days in the NICU, and no perinatal mortality;  
4 = perinatal mortality  
The component condition  abbreviation s are defined as follows:  
RDS: respi[INVESTIGATOR_70204]: broncho pulmonary dysplasia  
IVH: intraventricular hemorrhage  
NEC: necrotizing enterocolitis  
PVL: periventricular leukomalacia  
Component conditions are further defined in Appendix  1. 
•    Length of neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] (NNOLOS): days from delivery to neonatal 
discharge home , or until death if occurring before discharge .  This i ncludes all 
levels of care before discharge home, including all transfers across levels of care. 
NNOLOS  will be calculated in fractional days if times of birth and discharge are 
available  and rounded to the nearest integer , or as the number of days of 
difference between dates if times are not available;  times are not required.  In 
cases of stillbirth or neonatal mortality prior to discharge home, NNOLOS is set to 
one day longer than the maximum length of stay recorded for any infant.   
NNOLOS will be truncated at 440/7 weeks of gestational age as specified in the 
protocol.  
•    Length of neonatal NICU stay (NICULOS): days from admission to neonatal 
intensive care (NICU) to neonatal discharge  home  from the NICU  or until death if 
occurring before discharge .  This i ncludes all levels of care designated by 
[CONTACT_70229], including all transfers across levels of intensive 
care. Nursery and non -intensive care  days are not included.  This will be 
calculated in fractional days if times of admission and discharge are available and 
rounded to the nearest integer  value of total days , or as the number of total days in 
intensive care if times are not available; times  are not required.  NICULOS is set 
to zero for babies never admitted to the NICU  but admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] .  In 
cases of stillbirth or neonatal mortality in the NICU, NICULOS is set to one day 
longer than the maximum length of stay recorded for any infant.   NICULOS will 
be truncated at 440/7 weeks of gestational age as specified in the protocol.  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  12 • Duration of gestation: GAB is  set to 400/7 weeks for deliveries on the estimated due 
date (EDD)  and adjusted by [CONTACT_70230] .  The EDD is established by [CONTACT_70231] (LMP), according to ACOG guidelines , as 
described in the protocol . 
 
Safety outcomes: m onitoring of adverse events is described in the protocol.   
 
4. Determination of Sample Size  
This study has been terminated due to the advent of the SARS -CoV -2 pandemic in the 
ChristianaCare population.  At study termination,  1,873 subjects were enrolled i n the 
study .  To avoid bias in comparison of pre -pandemic controls to prospective subjects  who 
reached term during the pandemic period , the primary analysis of the study will be 
limited to an estimated 1,453 subjects who reached 370/7 weeks gestation   before local 
spread of SARS -CoV -2 in Delaware and the associated shut -down of non -COVID -19 
research at ChristianaCare. .  Approximately 10,000 historical controls were selected from 
a period of about 2 years immediately prior to study initiation.  
 
From  historic al data  on pregnancies at ChristianaCare Health System, we estimated a 
historical preterm birth rate of 9.1%.  The sample size estimation is based on  simulations 
of co -primary outcomes based on a simulated distribution of gestational age with a 
singleton preterm birth rate of 9.1%, and an  effect of intervention based on literature 
data26-28, with α -level spending of 0.05 shared between co -primaries using Holm’s 
method .   
 
Given shut-down of the study due to the SARS -CoV -[ADDRESS_76465] the required data, and if so, they will be included in the study.  
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  13 Power and sample size for this study are affected by [CONTACT_70232]® risk scores at or above the threshold of 1 6% 
risk (the study Screen Positive Rate (SPR)), the proportion of higher -risk subjects 
complying with interventions (compliance), and the rate at which subjects and their 
neonates remain in the study (retention).  For the purpose of power and sample size 
estimation and based  on study monitoring , we e stimate  that 34% of subjects in the pre-
pandemic portion of the prospective arm had PreTRM® risk scores at or above the 
threshold of 1 6% risk (the SPR).  
 
Power and samp le size are also affected by [CONTACT_70233]’s baseline level of risk 
of adverse neonatal outcomes related to prematurity, the sensitivity of testing in 
identifying at -risk pregnancies, retention of subjects in the study and the efficacy of the 
interv entions as implemented in the study. Literature26-[ADDRESS_76466] 
size is reduced for subjects with later G AB. 
 
For these reasons, power and sample size were estimated based on simulations, using a 
range of possible values for the factors noted above. These simulations used the 
observed distribution of GAB from previous studies, adjusted to match the expected 
overall preterm birth rate of 9.1% in this study. Treatment effect was modeled as a shift 
in the GAB corresponding to the effect sizes reported in published studies of preterm 
birth prevention that were based on single treatment modalities, and with extrapo lated 
treatment effects estimating additive effects of bundled interventions.  
 
For the first co -primary endpoint, reduction of severe composite morbidity/mortality, a 
range of the possible expected effect size can be inferred from the simulations. In the 
simulations, the proportion of subjects with NMI ≥ 3 is expected to be between 0.02 3 
and 0.0 2 in the prospective arm and near 0.03 6 in the control arm  based on a previous 
clinical utility study (Sera Prognostics: data on file) . Assuming these proportions, a  one-
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  14 sided Fisher ’s Exact test ,  a sample size of approximately 1,453 subjects with outcomes 
in the prospective arm with 55% compliance among higher risk  subjects  and about 
10,000 historical controls provide s power of 0. 7 – 0.9 (NCSS PASS 2020, module 
"Group -Sequential Tests for Two Proportions").  
 
For the second co -primary test, length of neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70205] . The hazard ratio based on simulations is expected to be between 1.3 2 and 
1.46 based on a previous clinical utility study (Sera Prognostics: data on file) .  Assuming 
these hazard ratios, a sample size of approximately 1,453 subjects with outcomes in  the 
prospective arm with 55% compliance among higher risk  subjects  and about 10,000 
historical controls provide s power of 0. 8 – 1.0 (NCSS PASS 2020, modules “Group -
Sequential Tests for Two Hazard Rates” and “Tests for Two Survival Curves Using 
Cox’s Propo rtional Hazards Model”).  Stratification is indicated based on non -
proportionality observed in previous studies . 
 
The two co -primary endpoints provide independent measurements of improved neonatal 
outcomes. Due to their correlation, there may be modest pow er to be gained from having 
two co -primary endpoints.   The estimated study power for the combination of the two 
co-primary endpoints is 0.8 – 1.0. 
 
5  Statistical Analysis  
 
Statistical tests will be performed at the 5% significance level unless otherwise specified.  
Such tests will be two -tailed unless otherwise specified as directional tests.   Primary and 
secondary endpoints will be analyzed using one -tailed tests.    
 
5.1 Analysis Populations  
One control population will be considered in primary  analyses: the historical control 
population.  The historical control population includes all subjects who attended 
ChristianaCare during the eligibility period and who satisfy all eligibility criteria.  
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76467]  populations will be considered in the analyses : an Intent -to-Treat (ITT) 
population,  a modified ITT population, a completer(s) population,  a compliant 
completers population,  a non -intervention completers population  and a safety population.  
The completers , compliant completers , non -intervention completers  and modified ITT  
population s are subset s of the ITT population.  
 
The ITT population includes all historical subjects selected and all prospective patients 
enrolled regardless of whether or not the co-primary  outcomes were observed , or in the 
prospective arm, any PreTRM test result has been gener ated or intervention consent has 
been signed . Subjects with missing outcomes  will be handled as described in the missing 
data sensitivity analyses.  
 
The modified ITT  (mITT) population includes all subjects for whom both co-primary 
outcomes are known; and who have either been selected for  the historical  control group, 
received a not -higher -risk PreTRM® test result, or consented to and initiated treatment 
before 240/7 weeks gestation after receiving a higher risk PreTRM®  test result.   
 
The completers popul ation includes subjects for whom both of  the co-primary outcomes 
are known , and, in the prospective arm, for whom a PreTRM® test result was generated .  
 
The compliant completers population includes ITT subjects who have missed no more 
than 20% of daily dos es for both low -dose aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70206], and 
participated in weekly care management  calls with no more than 20% missed weeks.   
The non -intervention  completers population includes all ITT subjects who received a 
higher -risk PreTRM®  test result but neither consented to nor initiated treatment before 
240/7 weeks gestation.   
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76468] consent to participate in the 
study and attempted a blood draw for the PreTRM®  test, regardless of  receipt of study 
interventions.   
 
5.2 Descriptive statistics  
Tables of demographic characteristics of participants in the PreTRM®  and historical 
control groups will be created from the study data bases.  Baseline subject characteristics 
include: demogra phic information, medical history, physical examination, and other 
laboratory tests.  Comorbidities include risk factors, diabetes mellitus, or metabolic 
syndrome, among others.  Tables of resource use of prospective subjects  and historical 
control groups w ill be created  as well.    Variables will  be summarized using means, 
medians, ranges, interquartile ranges and standard deviations for continuous data and 
counts and percentages for categorical data. In addition, we will also summarize the 
percentage of prospective subjects classified as high er and not-higher risk  from the 
PreTRM®  test results.   Summaries will be created for both the mITT  population and 
separately for the ITT population , and for the higher and not -higher risk groups in the 
mITT population . 
 
5.[ADDRESS_76469] for  
biases between the two arms , either by  [CONTACT_70234]. . 
 
The following variables are candidates for inclusion as covariates in the primary analysis: 
regression with covariates. These baseline covariates are present before  blood draw.  
• Maternal age  
• Categorical parity: multiparous vs. nulliparous  
• Maternal substance use disorders  assessed as Neonatal Opi[INVESTIGATOR_70207]  
07/11/2022  17  
The following variables are candidates for inclusion as covariates in the alternative  
analysis  using inverse probability score weighting , and in the exploratory analysis using 
propensity matching .  These baseline covariates are present before blood draw.  
• Maternal age  
• Categorical parity (nulliparous vs. multiparous)  
• Gravidity (integer)  
• Number of term children  
• Number of miscarriages  
• Maternal race  
• Pre-pregnancy continuous BMI  
• Pre-pregnancy categorical low BMI<19  
• Maternal height  
• Maternal chronic hypertension  
• Gestational diabetes  
• Insurance status  
• Smoking status  
• Maternal substance use disorders  assessed as Neonatal Opi[INVESTIGATOR_70208]  
• Delivery outside of ChristianaCare  
 
Inclusion of covariates in the  covariate -adjusted  primary , alternative  and exploratory 
analys es will depend on the proportion of missing values for the covariate, as follows. 
For each candidate variable, if fewer than 1% of subjects have a missing value, that 
variable will be included as a covariate in the analysis.   Sensitiv ity of results to missing 
data will be examined using missing data analysis methods . 
 
The primary and alternative  analyses will use cases with complete data for the included 
covariates, provided that no more than 5% of the total subjects are excluded from the 
analysis. If more than 5% of the total subjects would be excluded from the analysis, 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  18 candidate variables will be dropped from the analyses in order of the percent missing, 
until no more than 5% of the total subjects are excluded from the analysis.  
 
Descriptive statistics on baseline covariates will be compared between  the prospective  
arm and historical co ntrols .  This analysis includes covariates prespecified for both the 
primary and alternative  analyses . If we can obtain information on some of the cova riates 
that affect exposure s and decision s to participate, we can assess our ability to  reduce bias. 
Sociodemographic factors such as education and age  are often considered in this role .   
 
It is common that the basic characteristics may not be balanced between the p rospective 
cohort and historical cohort groups. We will  examine the potential sources of bias and 
address them  with a classical  and common  technique —adjusting by [CONTACT_70235] .  
 
While an easy to implement strategy to control for selection bias in propensity scoring is 
to adjust for factors that can break the biasing paths linking the exposure and the 
outcome , regression with covariates benefits from adjustment for independent predict ors 
of the outcome .  We expect that adjustment for independently predictive covariates can 
result in decreased selection bias and increased precision.  
 
The factors which impact the effect of intervention through selection and epoch biases 
will be assessed to demonstrate how well they address confounding in the analysis. 
Model selection techniques will be used to demonstrate an optim ized model. Although a 
minimum set of covariates is prespecified for use in addressing confounding, there may 
be an advantage  in exploratory analyses  to using a staged approach in which groups of 
covariates are introduced sequentially leading to progressively greater adjustment.  Using 
random forest and other machine learning methods, we will provide insight into which 
covariates have relatively greater influences on effect estimates, permitting comparison 
with known or expected associations or permitting the i dentification of possible mediator  
and/or intermediate variables.  
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  19 In alternative  and exploratory analyses,  the propensity score model will model the 
propensity score: predicted probability of a participant who will be placed in the 
prospective  group, via  running logistic regression: the dependent variable,  
    y=1, if p rospective group;  
    y=0, if historical group.  
The propensity score model will be derived from logistic regression using the key  clinical  
covariates available at the gestational age  of PreTRM® blood draw in the historical 
cohort, as well basic demographic characteristics.   The variables used  to generate 
propensity scores are specified above . 
 
The performance of the propensity score model will be evaluated by [CONTACT_12265]/ROC c -index; 
potential inte raction terms or high degree of terms may be included to improve the 
performance of the propensity model.  We will obtain an estimation for the propensity 
score: predicted probability ( p). 
 
With propensity score methods, we will check whether covariates  are balanced across the 
prospective and historical cohorts.  We can examine the distribution of propensity score 
between groups .  We will assess covariate balance between groups using p -value for 
comparison of two group, as well absolute standar dized mean difference (ASMD), with 
an ASMD <0.1 indicating good balance . 
 
We propose Inverse Propensity score Weighting (IPW) method for the alternative  
analysis .  IPW is a statistical technique for calculating statistics standardized to a pseudo -
populatio n different from that in which the data was collected.  After obtaining 
propensity score, we define for the prospective  arm:  
for historical c ontrols :
To avoid  the IPW method ’s instability  to extremes of propensity 
among partic ipants with high propensity score weights with undue  influence the results, 
we will use truncated scores and weights: 1)  below the 1st or 5th percentile and above the 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  20 99th or 95th percentile; resulting in weights between reasonable interval s for all 
participants; 2) truncating propensity score <0.001 or >0.999.  
 
5.4 Primary and Alternative  Analyses  
 
The primary and alternative  analyses will be performed in the modified ITT (mITT) 
population  on the primary, secondary and exploratory endpoints .  
The primary analysis is regression with covariates as specified for each endpoint.   
 
The alternative  analysis is regression with covariates as specified for each  primary, 
secondary and exploratory  endpoint, with weighting by [CONTACT_70236].   
Propensity -matched and unadjusted  “raw”  analyses  are pre -specified  as exploratory 
analyses.   These analyses will be performed on  primary and secondary endpoints.  
 
In analysis  combining primary, alternative and exploratory analyses , we will present the 
demographic and baseline characteristics differing between  the prospective  arm and 
historical co ntrols , selected from among the cova riates prespecified for the primary and 
alternative analyses.  We will compare the primary analysis using prespecified covariates, 
the alternative analysis using IPW, and exploratory PSM  un-adjusted (raw) data analys es 
(Table 2).  The results from these four  distinct  methods are expected to  show similarity  in 
direction and potentially in magnitude of effect .  If differences in direction are observed , 
further analysis such as double robust propensity score analysis will  be conducted.  
 
Variabl e Covariate Regression  Inverse Probability Weighted  Matched data  Unadjusted “Raw” data  
Prospec -
tive 
(N= ) Historical  
(N=   )  p-value  Prospec -
tive 
(N= ) Historical  
(N=   )  p-value  Prospec -
tive Historical  p-value     
Age             
Parity              
             
             
 
Table 2 : Baseline Characteristics   
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  21 For pre -specified analysis populations and for subgroups specified under  Subgroup 
Analyses  below , analyses will be conducted to examine the clinically important groups 
and unbalanced variables between the prospective and historical cohorts.  
 
 
5.5  Primary  Endpoint s  
 
Co-Primary Endpoint: neonatal morbidity and mortality (NMI)  
Reduction in composite neonatal morbidity and mortality (NMI)( 14; PREGNANT trial) 
in prospective subjects versus controls will be evaluated by [CONTACT_70237] 
≥3 vs. other scores.  The null hypothesis  (𝐻01) is no difference between controls and the 
prosp ective arm.  The alternative hypothesis is  (𝐻𝑎1) relative reduction in proportion of 
NMI of ≥3 in the prospective arm as compared to controls. Statistical testing for this 
endpoint will be performed using ordinal  logistic regression model with covariates  with 
weighting of NMI by [CONTACT_70238] a constant such as 0.01.   
  
The primary hypothesis is:  
H0: no difference between controls and the prospective arm   
      Odds of a higher vs. lower NMI in the prospective arm   =      Odds of a higher vs.  
lower NMI  in historical controls   
HA: relative reduction in  odds of a higher vs. lower NMI  in the prospective arm  
       as compared to historical controls.  
Co-Primary Endpoint: length of neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70209] a time -
to-event analysis in the top quantile of length of stay.  To avoid significant contamination 
of short stays associated with term births, the strata will be adjusted by [CONTACT_70239].  If 1.2 times the preterm birth rate in t he controls is less than 10%, the quantile will 
be set at 1.2 times the preterm birth rate.  Otherwise the quantile will be set to 10%.  The 
null hypothesis  (𝐻02)  is no difference between controls and the prospective arm.  The 
alternative hypothesis  (𝐻𝑎2)  is shorter length of stay in the prospective arm as compared 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  22 to controls. Statistical testing for this endpoint will be performed using a Cox 
proportional hazards regression model with covariates.  
 
The primary hypothesis is:  
H0: no difference between controls and the prospective arm   
      NNOLOS in prospective arm  =      
      NNOLOS in historical controls  
HA: shorter NNOLOS in the prospective arm  
       as compared to historical controls.  
 
Specification of t he co -primary endpoint of NNOLOS includes adjustment for non -
proportionality.  In case of significant non -proportionality  remaining after the adjustment 
prespecified above , we will under take additional exploratory analyses  in the context of 
the Cox mode l.  We will stratify any covariates with non-proportional effects and 
incorporate the covariates into the model as stratification factors rather than predictors; 
this includes discretizing  quantita tive variables.  We will document  any non-linear effect s 
of co ntinuous covariates  associated with  non-proportional effects.  Further, we will 
partition the time axis to analyze if the proportional hazards assumption holds for specific  
time periods (say the first week  vs. after the first ) but not for the entire lengt h of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70210]. 
 
Holm’s method will be used to control for multiple hypothesis testing  (𝐻01 𝑣𝑠 𝐻𝑎1,
𝐻02 𝑣𝑠 𝐻𝑎2 ) of the co -primary endpoints  in the study, controlling the family -wise error 
rate, to a significant α -level of < 0.05 .  
 
 
5.6 Secondary Endpoint s 
 
Reduction in length of NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] ( NICULO S) for all neonates from time of 
birth up to neonatal discharge in prospective subjects versus controls will be evaluated 
using a time -to-event analysis in the top quantile  of length of stay. To avoid significant 
contamination of short stays associated with  term births, the strata will be adjusted by [CONTACT_70240]  
07/11/2022  23 preterm birth rate.  If 1.2  times the preterm birth rate in the controls is less than 10%, the 
quantile will be set at 1.2 times the preterm birth rate.  Otherwise the quantile will be set 
to 10%.  
 
The seco ndary hypothesis is as follows:  
H0: no difference between controls and the prospective arm  
      NICULO S in PreTRM® test group =      
      NICULO S in historical group  
HA: shorter NICULO S in the PreTRM® prospective arm as compared to historical  
       controls.  
 
Statistical testing for this endpoint will be performed using a Cox proportional hazards 
regression model with covariates and stratification as specified above . 
  
For increase in time of gestat ion in prospective subjects versus historical controls, we will 
evaluate it using a time -to-event analysis in the bottom quantile  of gestational ages at 
birth.  To avoid significant contamination of short stays associated with term births, the 
strata will be adjusted by [CONTACT_70241].  If 1.2 times the preterm birth rate in the 
controls is less than 10%, the quantile will be set at 1.2 times the preterm birth rate.  
Otherwise the quantile will be set to 10%.  
The secondary hypothesis is as follows. :  
H0: no difference between controls and the prospective arm   
      time of gestation in PreTRM® test group =      
      time of gestation in historical group  
HA: longer time of gestation in the PreTRM® prospective arm as compared to 
historical controls.  
 
Statistical testing for this endpoint will be performed using a Cox proportional hazards 
regression model with covariates and stratification as specified above .   
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  24 A secondary endpoint will be met if the endpoint achieves significance with an alpha of 
0.05.  No adjustments will be made for the multiple hypothesis tests among the secondary 
endpoints, but conclusions will be interpreted with caution due to the multiple tests 
proposed.  
 
Non-proportionality of secondary endpoints will be addressed using the p re-specified 
adjustments for non -proportionality, and the additional approaches provided above for 
the co -primary endpoint NNOLOS.  
 
 
5.7 Exploratory Analyses  
 
In AVERT, there is a challenge and opportunity in the moderate rate of acceptance of 
intervention among high -scoring women in the intervention arm.  The exploratory 
analyses include options for addressing the non -accepting completers in the prospective 
arm, and comparing them to those in mITT and the compliant completers.  
 
The exploratory outcomes will be summarized within the prospective  arm and within 
historical controls  using descriptive statistics and graphical displays where appropriate.  
Continuous ou tcomes will be summarized using sample size (n), means, medians, 
standard deviations, and ranges.  Categorical outcomes will be summarized using 
frequency and percentages.  Estimates will be presented with 95% confidence intervals.  
Exploratory summaries w ill be performed for the mITT  population.  
The following exploratory endpoints will be evaluated by a test of proportions  in the 
prospective arm  versus historical controls . The null hypothesis is no difference between 
historical controls  and the  prospective  arm.  The alternative hypothesis is relative 
reduction in proportion of occurrence of one or more conditions  in the  prospective arm  as 
compared to historical controls.  Statistical testing for th ese endpoint s will be performed 
using a logistic regression model with covariates  as specified above  for the primary 
analysis, and with propensity scoring adjustment as specified for the alternative analysis .     
• Reduction in occurrence of one or more major neonatal morbidities with high 
likelihood of major chroni c illness  (MNM) : cystic periventricular leukomalacia, 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  25 grade 3 and 4 intraventricular hemorrhage, grade 3 or higher retinopathy of 
prematurity, bronchopulmonary dysplasia.   
• Reduction in the rate of PTB <35 weeks, <32 weeks and <37 weeks of gestation .  
This analysis will be  repeated for premature neonates delivered after spontaneous 
rupture of membranes or spontaneous onset of labor with gestational age at birth 
<32, <35 and <37 weeks vs. all other neonates.  
• Reduction in NICU admission rates in the immediate neonatal period prior to 
initial discharge  or neonatal death.  This analysis will be repeated for all premature 
neonates, and for premature neonates delivered after spontaneous rupture of 
membranes or spontaneous onset of labor.  
 
The following exploratory endpoints  will b e evaluated using a time -to-event analysis.  
The null hypothesis is no dif ference between historical controls  and the  prospective arm .  
The alternative hypothesis is shorter length of stay in the  prospective arm  as compared to 
historical controls . Statis tical testing for this endpoint will be performed using a Cox 
proportional hazards regression model with covariates  and stratification  as specified 
above  for the primary analysis, and with propensity scoring adjustment as specified for 
the alternative  analysis.  Length of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70211].  Length of NICU stay is 
adjusted to the maximum observed length of stay plus one for all instances of NICU 
mortality.     
• Reduction in length of NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70212].  For clarity, this analysis includes only PTBs with NICU admission.  
This analysis will be repeated for all premature neonates delivered after 
spontaneous rupture of me mbranes or spontaneous onset of labor.  
• Reduction in length of NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408] (including zero -length stays for those 
not admitted) for all premature neonates from time of birth up to neonatal 
discharge.  For clarity, this analysis includes PTBs independ ent of NICU 
admission, with stays for the non -admitted set to zero days.  This analysis will be 
repeated for all premature neonates delivered after spontaneous rupture of 
membranes or spontaneous onset of labor.  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  26 • Reduction in length of neonatal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70213] y for all premature neonates from time 
of birth up to neonatal discharge.  This analysis will be repeated for all premature 
neonates delivered after spontaneous rupture of membranes or spontaneous onset 
of labor.  
 
As exploratory analys es, the primary and alternative  analyses  will be replicated, with the 
modification that the exploratory analyses will use multiple imputation and will include 
the candidate variables for which more than 5% of subjects have a missing value.  
 
As exploratory analys es, the primar y analysis  will be replicated  as a “raw” unadjusted 
analysis , with the modification that no covariates will be included in regressions . 
 
As an exploratory analysis, a  test of the proportional odds assumption  for NMI data  will 
be conducted. If the proportio nal odds assumption does not hold, we will examine the 
data using a set of separate logistic regression s or partial proportional odds model s, to 
explicitly see how the odds ratios for the explanatory variables vary at the different 
thresholds. Alternativel y, we will also apply the generalized logit model, which treats the 
response as nominal (unordered) rather than ordinal and has a full set of parameters for 
each generalized logit.  We will then compare the results from proportional, fully 
nonproportional, and partial proportional odds models fitted to data.  
 
 
As exploratory analys es, the primary analysis  will be replicated, with the modification 
that the analysis will be restricted to prospective subjects with at least one propensity -
matched control, and historical controls will be restricted to those propensity -matched to 
prospective subjects.  At most [ADDRESS_76470] 
deviation of the propensity score; Mahalanobis metric matching  in conjunction with 
propensity score matching  (PSM), stratification matching, difference -in-differences 
matching (kernel and local linear weights), or exact matching.  The matching method will 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76471] if co variates are known to be misclassified under some approaches, 
an “intention to treat” analysis will be conducted that assumes that each participant 
continues to be exposed once they have received an initial treatment. Originally used in 
the analysis of ran domized trials, this approach has been used in this hybrid study. It can 
be worthwhile to do a sensitivity analysis on studies that use an “intention to treat” 
approach to see how different an “as treated” analysis would be even if intention to treat 
is the main estimate of interest.  
 
As exploratory analys es,  the primary and alternative  analyses  will be replicated using the 
completers population  with treatment covariates.   Covariates for treatment modalities  
inclusive of  use of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70214] , will be included in the analyses if showing  
record of use between LMP and delivery in both the prospective  arm and historical 
controls .  Subjects with missing data for required variables will be excluded from the 
analyses.  Subjects in the hi gher-risk group accepting interventions will be compared to 
non-intervention completers and to historical controls using descriptive statistics as 
described above.  If use of any treatment is significantly  associated with variables 
specified for the altern ative  analysis , this analysis will be repeated with inclusion of such 
variables as covariates in the analysis.  Subjects with missing data for required variables 
will be excluded from this analysis.   
 
As an exploratory analys is,  the primary and alternati ve analyses  will be replicated using 
the compliant completers population plus the not -higher -risk group as the preterm 
prevention arm for comparison to historical controls.  Additional subgroup analysis of the 
compliant completers population will apply the  primary, secondary and exploratory 
endpoints to subjects compliant with each component of the intervention versus all other 
compliant completers, and versus non -intervention completers.  If compliance with any 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  28 treatment is significantly associated with va riables specified for the alternative  analysis , 
this analysis will be repeated with inclusion of such variables as covariates in the 
analysis.  Subjects with missing data for required variables will be excluded from this 
analys is.     
 
The use of antenatal  corticosteroids will be assessed in relation to primary, secondary and 
exploratory endpoints, and will be compared between the preterm prevention  arm and 
historical controls, and between higher risk and not higher risk subjects in the preterm 
prevention arm.  Optimal timing of dosing of antenatal corticosteroids is herein defined as 
2 to 7 days (inclusive) prior to delivery at less than [ADDRESS_76472] ation. Use of 
antenatal corticosteroids will be expressed as a binary variable: were steroids given in the 
optimal interval between dose and delivery ? Significance of interaction between 
optimally timed use of antenatal corticosteroids and the specified treatment groups will 
be assessed in regression as an interaction term: (binary variable) * group.  This analysis 
will be performed without adjustment, adjusted for covariates  as specified for the primary 
analysis, and adjusted via propensity scoring as speci fied for the alternative  analys is. 
Missing values will be addressed as previously specified for exploratory analyses: by 
[CONTACT_70242].   
 
Primary, second ary and exploratory endpoints  will be assessed in the prospective portion 
of the mITT population as dependent responses to nonrandom quantitative assignment of 
treatment42.  The independent quantitative assignment variable will be the PreTRM® risk 
score.  The functional relationship between endpoints  and the risk score will be estimated 
for the prospective arm .  A discontinuity at the intervention threshold in the relationship 
between outcome and risk score observed in the prospective arm  will demonstrate 
intervention effect, measured as  the estimated magnitude of the discontinuity  and re-
assessed as the estimated risk -score dependent difference between compliant completers 
and non -intervention completers .  As this analysis involves only prospective subjects, it is 
independent of any selection biases or epoch effects present in comparisons of the 
prospective arm relative to historical controls.   To adjust for any biases present within the 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  29 prospective arm, the  analysis will be performed wit hout adjustment, adjusted for 
covariates as specified for the primary analysis, and adjusted via propensity scoring as 
specified for the alternative  analys is.   
 
The primary, secondary and exploratory endpoints will be applied to comparisons within 
the mIT T population .   
a) The higher -risk group will be compared to the not -higher -risk group within the 
prospective arm , for tests of equivalence .  This comparison is independent of any 
selection biases or epoch effects present in comparisons of the prospective arm  
relative to historical controls . 
b) The not -higher -risk group of the prospective arm  will be compared to historical 
controls  to assess test sensitivity .  It is expected that there will be significant 
differences in baseline characteristics between  the two groups.  The analysis will 
be performed without adjustment, adjusted for covariates specified for the 
primary analysis, and adjusted via propensity sco ring as specified for the 
alternative  analysis.   
c) The higher -risk group in the prospective arm  will be compared to a control 
comparator group estimated as the difference between the control group and the 
not-higher -risk group, to assess efficacy of the int ervention strategy.  For count 
endpoints, direct subtraction of counts (adjusted for arm size) will be used to 
estimate the comparator group.  For non -count endpoints, a number of most 
similar outcome s proportional to arm size  will be removed from the cont rol 
comparator group for each subject in the not -higher -risk group.   It is expected that 
there will be significant differences in baseline characteristics between  the two 
groups.  T he analysis will be performed without adjustment, adjusted for 
covariates specified for the primary analysis, and adjusted via propensity scoring 
as specified for the alternative  analysis.   
The following e xploratory outcomes will be examined using only the descriptive 
statistics described above.  
• Birthweight  
• Number of days of m echanical ventilation  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  30 • Amount of surfactant administered  
• Occurrence of birthweight <1500g and <2500g  
• Individual components of composite morbidity/mortality index  
• Whether or not a neonate received surfactant  
• Occurrence of pneumonia  
• Occurrence of 5 -minute Apgar<7  
• Occurrence of asphyxia  
• Occurrence of preeclampsia  
• Occurrence of gestational diabetes mellitus  
• Rate of PPROM  
• Rate of preterm delivery not associated with PPROM  
• Baseline and on -treatment p rogesterone levels determined by [CONTACT_29864] -MS 
 
Sensitivity analyses will be performed  to check uncertainties in our analysis, as well as 
address basic assumption validation and the effect of unmeasured/unbalanced 
confounding factor s on primary outcomes .  The analyses will compare inclusion and 
omission  of covariates in the analyses of primary, secondary and exploratory endpoints  in 
the mITT population .  As PTB is an outcome whose consequences are dominated by [CONTACT_70243], sensitivity analyses will also examine the 
effect on effect size estimates of omitting outliers from the analyses.   
 
A sensitivity analysis to control for reduction in subject number in the prospective arm  of 
the mITT population will be performed.  The primary and alternative  analyses  will be 
replicated as sensitivity analysis with bootstrap sampling of historical controls  to the 
same number of subjects as the prospective arm .  If exclusion of any completers from the 
mITT population is significantly associated with variables specified for the alternative  
analysis , this analysis will be repeated with such variables included as covariates.  
Subjects with missing data for required variables will be excluded from the covariate 
analysis.   
 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  31 A Bayesian Meta -Analysis  will be performed on the data from this study and relevant 
previous studies. This will be described in a separate document.  
 
Health Economic Outcomes:  
Total cost of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70215] a gestational ag e of 400/[ADDRESS_76473] and analyze safet y 
information for the mother. The d efinitions for AEs, UAEs, and SAEs are included in the 
protocol. These adverse events will be summarized and descriptive statistics p rovided.  
All adverse events (AEs) will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities (MedDRA).  Frequencies of adverse events will be presented by [CONTACT_70244], preferred term, treatment group, and severity level.  Safety analyses w ill be 
performed in the safety   population.  
 
 
5.[ADDRESS_76474] of other 
factors such as age, or other comorbidities on the effectiveness of the PreTRM® strategy .  
These can easily be included as covariates in a regression model, including treatment 
(prospective arm  or historical control) by [CONTACT_48993].  All covariates  included 
in the alternative  analysis in the Covariate Analyses section  will be included  in subgroup 
analys es. 
 
In prespecified subgroup analyses, in teraction terms will include age, chronic 
hypertension  and gestational diabetes .  Covariates categ orical BMI, categorical parity and 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76475] used various approaches, all depending on 
the “missing at random” (MAR) assumption.  If missingness can be considered to be 
random after conditioning on observed data, then the mechanism is said to be missing at 
random.42-[ADDRESS_76476] 
statistical procedures ar e no longer valid.  As discussed by [CONTACT_70245], 
virtually all strategies for dealing with this type of data are based on a number of 
“untestable and unverifiable” assumptions, which limit their utility.[ADDRESS_76477] 
defense is to simply avoid missing data as far as humanly possible.  
Missing data patterns of both prospective subjects  and historical control s will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_654], and other appropriate characteristics.46 Missing data patterns of the strategies will 
be compared to determin e similarity.  Analyses will be made comparing number of 
missing values of the prospective  and historical control dataset. In this case, the outcome 
is dichotomous, missing or not missing, and the event rates of the two groups will be 
compared by [CONTACT_70246], or negative binomial regression if the Poisson model is 
over-dispersed.  This analysis will include covariates  specified for the primary and 
alternative  analyses .  Similar to logistic regression, the exponentiated regression 
coefficient s of the model are incident rate ratios, comparing event rates of the 
intervention vs. historical cohort groups.    
 
6    Bias in the Hybrid Study  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  33  6.1 Potential bias in the hybrid study  
In this study, it is crucial to address selection bias, epoch bias, b ias from self -selection of 
compliant completers in the higher -risk group, as well bias due to COVID -19 / SARS -
CoV -[ADDRESS_76478] ~[ADDRESS_76479] that proper 
randomization is not achieved, thereby [CONTACT_70247].  In this study, prospective 
intervention group and historical cohort study group are not allocat ed through 
randomization, therefore selection bias may be one of the important issues to be 
address ed.  As the prospective arm and historical controls received care in different 
periods, epoch effects from trends in patient care and in public health may also prove an 
important source of bias.  Finally, incomplete acceptance of interventions by [CONTACT_70248] a source of bias that cannot be directly 
adjusted, as no higher risk group defined by [CONTACT_70249]® risk score i s present amongst the 
historical controls.   Bias due to comparison of historical controls from a pre -pandemic 
period to prospective subjects reaching term during the SARS -CoV -[ADDRESS_76480] to determine.  If bias is not taken into account, the results and conclusions of the 
study may be false or misleading.   Therefore,  it is necessary to consider the sources of 
bias in the outcomes analysis.    
 
6.2 Potential differences between historical and prospective cohorts  
The assessment of selection bias involves assumptions regarding inclusion or 
participation by [CONTACT_52893], and results can be highly sensitive to assumptions. 
Even with external validation data, which may w ork for unmeasured confounders,  it is 
difficult to account for more than a trivial amount of selection bias .  Self-selection bias in 
consenting of higher -risk subjects to interventions further depends on PreTRM® score, a 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/[ADDRESS_76481] become important in addressing selection bias in recent years.  
Other methods are instrumental variable and regression disconti nuity design (RDD).    
 
Comparison of diverse adjustment methods as specified in the primary, secondary and 
exploratory analyses will enable assessment of the degree of selection and epoch bias in 
the study, and the quality of prespecified and exploratory a djustments for bias.   
 
As well, exploratory analyses within the prospective arm will provide additional 
estimates of intervention efficacy without reference to historical controls.  
 
Statistical Analysis Plan for AVERT Economic Study  
(SEAR, Separate Docume nt)  
 
REFERENCES  
1 Anderson, Robert N, and Betty L Smith. 2003. “Deaths: Leading Causes for 2001.” 
National Vital Statistics Reports : From the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System  52 
(9): 1 –85. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14626726.  
[ADDRESS_76482], and John 
Owen. 2011. “Cerclage for Short Cervix on Ultrasonography in Women with 
Singleton Gestations and P revious Preterm Birth: A Meta -Analysis.” Obstetrics and 
Gynecology  117 (3): 663 –71. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21446209.  
3 Boelig, Rupsa C, Kelly M Orzechowski, and Vincenzo Berghella. 2016. “Cervical 
Length, Risk Factors, and Delivery Outcomes among  Women with Spontaneous 
Preterm Birth.” The Journal of Maternal -Fetal & Neonatal Medicine : The Official 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  35 Journal of the European Association of Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia 
and Oceania Perinatal Societies, the International Society of Perinat al 
Obstetricians  29 (17): 2840 –44. doi:10.3109/14767058.2015.1105957.  
4 Christian, M S, R L Brent, and P Calda. 2007. “Embryo -Fetal Toxicity Signals for 
17alpha -Hydroxyprogesterone Caproate in High -Risk Pregnancies: A Review of the 
Non-Clinical Literature fo r Embryo -Fetal Toxicity with Progestins.” The Journal of 
Maternal -Fetal & Neonatal Medicine : The Official Journal of the European 
Association of Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal 
Societies, the International Society of Perin atal Obstetricians  20 (2). Argus 
International, Horsham, PA [ZIP_CODE], [LOCATION_003]. [EMAIL_1378]: 89 –112. 
doi:10.1080/14767050601178758.  
5 “CLASP: A Randomised Trial of Low -Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70216] -Eclampsia among 9364 Pregnant Women. CLASP (Collaborative 
Low-Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70217]) Collaborative Group.” 1994. Lancet  343 
(8898): 619 –29. http://www.ncbi.nlm .nih.gov/pubmed/7906809.  
6 “Committee Opi[INVESTIGATOR_8561]. 561: Nonmedically Indicated Early -Term Deliveries.” 
2013. Obstetrics and Gynecology  121 (4). [LOCATION_002]: 911 –15. 
doi:10.1097/01.AOG.[PHONE_1712].[ZIP_CODE].a7; 
10.1097/01.AOG.[PHONE_1712].[ZIP_CODE].a7.  
7 Corporation, The r Rx. n.d. “Makena Prescribing Information.”  
8 Duley, L, D J Henderson -Smart, M Knight, and J F King. 2004. “Antiplatelet 
Agents for Preventing and Treating Pre -Eclampsia.” Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews (Online) , no. 4: CD000492. doi:10.1002/146518 58.CD000492.  
9 Esplin, M. Sean, Michal A. Elovitz, Jay D. Iams, Corette B. Parker, Ronald J. 
Wapner, William A. Grobman, Hyagriv N. Simhan, et al. 2017. “Predictive 
Accuracy of Serial Transvaginal Cervical Lengths and Quantitative Vaginal Fetal 
Fibronectin L evels for Spontaneous Preterm Birth Among Nulliparous Women.” 
JAMA  317 (10). American Medical Association: 1047. doi:10.1001/jama.2017.1373.  
10 Fonseca, E B, E Celik, M Parra, M Singh, K H Nicolaides, and Fetal Medicine 
Foundation Second Trimester Screening G roup. 2007. “Progesterone and the Risk of 
Preterm Birth among Women with a Short Cervix.” The New England Journal of 
Medicine  357 (5). Harris Birthright Research Centre for Fetal Medicine, King’s 
College Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], London, [LOCATION_008].: [LOCATION_005] Med ical Society: 462 –
69. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa067815.  
11 Goldenberg, Robert, and Dwight Rouse. 1998. “Prevention of Premature Birth.” 
New England Journal of Medicine  339 (5): 313 –20. 
12 Goya, M, L Pratcorona, C Merced, C Rodo, L Valle, A Romero, M Juan, et al. 2012. 
“Cervical Pessary in Pregnant Women with a Short Cervix (PECEP): An Open -
Label Randomised Controlled Trial.” Lancet , April. Maternal Fetal Medicine Unit, 
Department of Obstetrics, Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70218] d’Hebron, Universitat 
Autonoma de Barcelona, Barce lona, Spain; Maternal and Child Health and 
Development Network, Instituto Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.: Elsevier Ltd. 
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(12)[ZIP_CODE] -0. 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  36 13 Hamilton, Brady E, Joyce A Martin, Michelle J K Osterman, and Sally C Curtain. 
2015. “Births: Preli minary Data for 2014.” National Vital Statistics Reports : From 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health 
Statistics, National Vital Statistics System  64 (6): 1 –19. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26114874.  
14 Hassan, S S, R Romero, D Vidyadhari, S Fusey, J K Baxter, M Khandelwal, J 
Vijayaraghavan, et al. 2011. “Vaginal Progesterone Reduces the Rate of Preterm 
Birth in Women with a Sonographic Short Cervix: A Multicenter, Randomized, 
Double -Blind, Placebo -Controlled Trial.” Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology : 
The Official Journal of the International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and 
Gynecology  38 (1): 18 –31. doi:10.1002/uog.9017.  
15 Hui, Shuk Yi Annie, Chung Ming Chor, Tze Kin Lau, Terence T Lao, and Tak 
Yeung Leung. 2013. “Cerclage Pessary for Preventing Preterm Birth in Women with 
a Singleton Pregnancy and a Short Cervix at 20 to 24 Weeks: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial.” American Journal of Perinatology  30 (4): 283 –88. doi:10.1055/s -
0032 -1322550.  
16 Keirse, M J. 1990. “ Progestogen Administration in Pregnancy May Prevent Preterm 
Delivery.” British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology  97 (2): 149 –54. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2138496.  
17 Knight, M, L Duley, D J Henderson -Smart, and J F King. 2000. “Antiplatelet 
Agen ts for Preventing and Treating Pre -Eclampsia.” Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews (Online) , CD000492. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000492.  
18 Kozer, Eran, Shekoufeh Nikfar, Adriana Costei, Rada Boskovic, Irena Nulman, and 
Gideon Koren. 2002. “Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70219]: A Meta -Analysis.” American Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology  187 (6): 1623 –30. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12501074.  
19 Maher, Mohammad Ahmed, Ahmed Abdelaziz, Mohamed Ellaithy, an d Mohamed 
Fayez Bazeed. 2013. “Prevention of Preterm Birth: A Randomized Trial of Vaginal 
Compared with Intramuscular Progesterone.” Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica 
Scandinavica  92 (2): 215 –22. doi:10.1111/aogs.[ZIP_CODE].  
20 Mahoney, E M; Chu H. 2003. Cardiovasc ular Health Care Economics. Cost -
Effectiveness Analysis alongside Clinical Trials: Statistical and Methodologic 
Issues . Edited by [CONTACT_70250]. TOTOWA: Humana Press.  
[ADDRESS_76483] the Children, WHO., PMNCH. 2012.  Born Too Soon: The 
Global Action Report on Preterm Birth.  . Edited by M V Kinney CP Howson  JE 
Lawn. Geneva: World Health Organization.  
[ADDRESS_76484] Thirez, Jeanne Fresson, Jean -Christophe 
Rozé, and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] -Yves Ancel. 2010. “Prenatal Low -Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70220].” Pediatrics  125 (1): 
e29-34. doi:10.1542/ peds.2009 -0994.  
23 Mathews, T J, Fay Menacker, and Marian F MacDorman. 2004. “Infant Mortality 
Statistics from the 2002 Period: Linked Birth/infant Death Data Set.” National Vital 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  37 Statistics Reports : From the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Natio nal 
Center for Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System  53 (10): 1 –29. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15622996.  
24 McCormick, Marie C, and Douglas K Richardson. 2002. “Premature Infants Grow 
Up.” The New England Journal of Medicine  346 (3): 197 –98. 
doi:10.1056/NEJM200201173460310.  
25 McNamara, Helen Christine, Rachael Wood, James Chalmers, Neil Marlow, John 
Norrie, Graeme MacLennan, Gladys McPherson, Charles Boachie, and Jane 
Elizabeth Norman. 2015. “STOPPIT Baby [CONTACT_31051] -up Study: The Effect of 
Prop hylactic Progesterone in Twin Pregnancy on Childhood Outcome.” PloS One  
10 (4): e0122341. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0122341.  
26 Hillemeier MM, Domino ME, Wells R, et al. Effects of maternity care coordination 
on pregnancy outcomes: propensity -weighted analyses . Matern Child Health J. 
2015;19(1):121 -127. 
27 Manuck TA, Henry E, Gibson J, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in a recurrent preterm 
birth prevention clinic. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2011;204(4):320 e321 -326. 
28 Romero R, Conde -Agudelo A, Da Fonseca E, O'Brien JM, Cetingoz E, Creasy GW, 
Hassan SS, Nicolaides KH. Vaginal progesterone for preventing preterm birth and 
adverse perinatal outcomes in singleton gestations with a short cervix: a meta -
analysis of individual patient data. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2018 Feb;218(2): 161-180. 
29 Meis, P J, M Klebanoff, E Thom, M P Dombrowski, B Sibai, A H Moawad, C Y 
Spong, et al. 2003. “Prevention of Recurrent Preterm Delivery by 17 Alpha -
Hydroxyprogesterone Caproate.” The New England Journal of Medicine  348 (24). 
Department of Obstetric s and Gynecology, Wake Forest University, Winston -Salem, 
NC [ZIP_CODE], [LOCATION_003]. [EMAIL_1379]: [LOCATION_005] Medical Society: 2379 –85. 
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa035140.  
[ADDRESS_76485], Charles S Rittenberg, 
Amelia K Rowland, Jeffrey  E Korte, and Heather Kirby. 2008. “South Carolina 
Partners for Preterm Birth Prevention: A Regional Perinatal Initiative for the 
Reduction of Premature Birth in a Medicaid Population.” American Journal of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology  199 (4): 393.e1 -8. doi:1 0.1016/j.ajog.2008.07.047.  
31 Nicolaides, Kypros H, Argyro Syngelaki, Liona C Poon, Gemma Pi[INVESTIGATOR_70221], Natasa 
Tul, Aikaterini Zamprakou, Evdoxia Skyfta, Mauro Parra -Cordero, Ricardo Palma -
Dias, and Jesus Rodriguez Calvo. 2016. “A Randomized Trial of a Cervica l Pessary 
to Prevent Preterm Singleton Birth.” The New England Journal of Medicine  374 
(11): 1044 –52. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1511014.  
32 Nold, Christopher, Monique Maubert, Lauren Anton, Steven Yellon, and Michal A 
Elovitz. 2013. “Prevention of Preterm Birth by [CONTACT_70251]: What Are the 
Molecular Mechanisms?” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  208 (3): 
223.e1 -7. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2013.01.020.  
[ADDRESS_76486], B, E Puho, A E Czeizel, M V Skriver, and H T Sorensen. 2005. “Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70222]: A 
Population -Based Case -Control Study.” Am J Obstet Gynecol  192: 922 –23. 
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  38 34 Norman, Jane Elizabeth, Neil Marlow, Claudia -Martina Messow, Andrew Shennan, 
Phillip R Bennett, Steven Thornton, Stephen C Robson, et al.  2016. “Vaginal 
Progesterone Prophylaxis for Preterm Birth (the OPPTIMUM Study): A 
Multicentre, Randomised, Double -Blind Trial.” The Lancet  387 ([ZIP_CODE]): 2106 –16. 
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(16)[ZIP_CODE] -0. 
35 Northen, A T, G S Norman, K Anderson, L Moseley, M Divito, M Cotroneo, M 
Swain, et al. 2007. “Follow -up of Children Exposed in Utero to 17 Alpha -
Hydroxyprogesterone Caproate Compared with Placebo.” Obstetrics and 
Gynecology  110 (4). Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for 
Women’s Reproductive Health, U niversity of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, Alabama [ZIP_CODE] -0024, [LOCATION_003]. [EMAIL_1380]: 865 –72. 
doi:10.1097/01.AOG.[PHONE_1713].[ZIP_CODE].bc.  
36 Orzechowski, Kelly M, Rupsa C Boelig, Jason K Baxter, and Vincenzo Berghella. 
2014. “A Universal Transvaginal Cervica l Length Screening Program for Preterm 
Birth Prevention.” Obstetrics and Gynecology  124 (3): 520 –25. 
doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000000428.  
37 Owen, J, G Hankins, J D Iams, V Berghella, J S Sheffield, A Perez -Delboy, R S 
Egerman, et al. 2009. “Multicenter Randomiz ed Trial of Cerclage for Preterm Birth 
Prevention in High -Risk Women with Shortened Midtrimester Cervical Length.” 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  201 (4). Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingh am, AL [ZIP_CODE] -
7333, [LOCATION_003].: 375.e1 -375.e8. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2009.08.015.  
38 Reddy, Uma M, Alfred Z Abuhamad, Deborah Levine, and George R Saade. 2014. 
“Fetal Imaging: Executive Summary of a Joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Hu man Development, Society for Maternal -Fetal 
Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecolog.” Obstetrics and Gynecology  123 (5): 1070 –82. 
doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000000245.  
39 Rittenberg, Charles, Roger B Newman, Niki B Istwan, Debbie J Rhea, and Gary J 
Stanziano. 2009. “Preterm Birth Prevention by 17 Alpha -Hydroxyprogesterone 
Caproate vs. Daily Nursing Surveillance.” The Journal of Reproductive Medicine  54 
(2): 47 –52. http://ww w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19301566.  
40 Rittenberg, Charles, Scott Sullivan, Niki Istwan, Debbie Rhea, Gary Stanziano, and 
Roger Newman. 2008. “Women Receiving 17 -Alpha -Hydroxyprogesterone 
Caproate Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_70223] 34 Weeks Benefit f rom Daily 
Perinatal Nursing Surveillance.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  
199 (4): 389.e1 -4. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2008.06.070.  
41 Roberge, S, K H Nicolaides, S Demers, P Villa, E Bujold, Roberge S., Nicolaides 
K.H., Demers S., Villa P., and Bujol d E. 2013. “Prevention of Perinatal Death and 
Adverse Perinatal Outcome Using Low -Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248]: A Meta -Analysis.” 
Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology : The Official Journal of the International 
Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology  41 (Janua ry): 491 –99. 
doi:10.1002/uog.[ZIP_CODE].  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  39 42 Finkelstein MO, Levin B and Robbins H. 1996. Clinical and prophylactic trials with 
assured new treatment for those at greater risk: I. A design proposal. Am J Public 
Health 85:691 -695. 
43 Saade, George R, Kim A Boggess, Sco tt A Sullivan, Glenn R Markenson, Jay D 
Iams, Dean V Coonrod, Leonardo M Pereira, et al. 2016. “Development and 
Validation of a Spontaneous Preterm Delivery Predictor in Asymptomatic Women.” 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  214 (5): 633.e1 -633.e24. 
doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2016.02.001.  
44 Saigal, Saroj, and Lex W Doyle. 2008. “An Overview of Mortality and Sequelae of 
Preterm Birth from Infancy to Adulthood.” Lancet  371 (9608): 261 –69. 
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(08)[ADDRESS_76487], and Noya Galai. 2014. “Preconception Low -Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70224]: Results from the EAGeR Randomised Trial.” The Lancet  384: 29 –36. 
doi:10.1016/S0140 -6736(14)[ZIP_CODE] -4. 
46 Seegmiller, R E, G W Nelson, and C K Johnson. 1983. “Evaluation of the 
Teratogenic Potential of Delalutin (17 Alpha -Hydroxyprogesterone Caproate) in 
Mice.” Teratology  28 (2). UNITED STATES: 201 –8. doi: 10.1002/tera.[PHONE_1714].  
47 Silver, Robert M, Katherine Ahrens, Luchin F Wong, Neil J Perkins, Noya Galai, 
Laurie L Lesher, David Faraggi, et al. 2015. “Low -Dose Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_70225]: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Obstetrics and Gynecology  125 (4): 876 –84. 
doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000000736.  
48 Son, Moeun, William A Grobman, Nina K Ayala, and Emily S Miller. 2016. “A 
Universal Mid -Trimester Transvaginal Cervical Length Screening Program and Its 
Associated Reduced Preterm Birth Rate.” American Journal of Obst etrics and 
Gynecology  214 (3): 365.e1 -5. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2015.12.020.  
49 Stinnett, A A, and J Mullahy. 1998. “Net Health Benefits: A New Framework for 
the Analysis of Uncertainty in Cost -Effectiveness Analysis.” Medical Decision 
Making : An International J ournal of the Society for Medical Decision Making  18 ([ADDRESS_76488]). ICOM Health Economics, [COMPANY_012], Raritan, New Jersey, [LOCATION_003].: 
S68-80. 
50 Voellmin, Annette, Sonja Entringer, Nora Moog, Pathik D Wadhwa, and Claudia 
Buss. 2013. “Maternal Positive Affect over the Course of Pregnancy Is Associated 
with the Length of Gestation and Reduced Risk of Preterm Delivery.” Journal of 
Psychosomatic Resear ch 75 (4): 336 –40. doi:10.1016/j.jpsychores.2013.06.031.  
51 Wadhwa, P D, T J Garite, M Porto, L Glynn, A Chicz -DeMet, C Dunkel -Schetter, 
and C A Sandman. 2004. “Placental Corticotropin -Releasing Hormone (CRH), 
Spontaneous Preterm Birth, and Fetal Growth Restr iction: A Prospective 
Investigation.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology  191 (4). Department 
of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of [LOCATION_004] -Irvine, Irvine, CA 
[ZIP_CODE] -4260, [LOCATION_003]. [EMAIL_1381]: 1063 –69. doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2004.06.070.  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  40 52 Werler, Martha M, Jane E Sheehan, and Allen A Mitchell. 2002. “Maternal 
Medication Use and Risks of Gastroschisis and Small Intestinal Atresia.” American 
Journal of Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  155 (1): 26 –31. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11772781.  
53 Werner, Erika F,  Maureen S Hamel, Kelly Orzechowski, Vincenzo Berghella, and 
Stephen F Thung. 2015. “Cost -Effectiveness of Transvaginal Ultrasound Cervical 
Length Screening in Singletons without a Prior Preterm Birth: An Update.” 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecol ogy, June. 
doi:10.1016/j.ajog.2015.06.020.   
[ADDRESS_76489] -effectiveness in health and 
medicine . [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1996.  
55 Weinstein MC, Coxson PG, Williams LW, Pass TM, Stason WB, Goldman L. Am J 
Public Health. 1987;77:[ADDRESS_76490] -effectiveness analysis: a case study in atherothrombosis. 
Value in Health. 2004; 7:627 -635. 
56 Little RJA, Rubin D.B. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data , [LOCATION_001]: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1987  
57 Rubin DB.  Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys , [LOCATION_001]: John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. 1987.  
58 Schafer JL. Analysis of Incomplete MultivariateData , [LOCATION_001]: Chapman and 
Hall. 1997.  
59 Verbeke G, Melenbergh G.  Linear Mixed Models for Longitudinal Data . Springer , 
2009.  
60 Van Buuren SV, Boshuizen HC, Knook DL. “Multiple Imputation of Missing Blood 
Pressure Covariates in Survival Analysis,” Statistics in Medicine , 1999;18:681 –694. 
 
 
  
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  41 APPENDIX I:   
 
DEFINITIONS OF NEONATAL MORBIDITY/MORTALITY  
 
Neonatal Death and Stillbirth : Intrauterine fetal demise at a viable gestational age or 
neonatal death within 28 days of delivery  
 
Intraventricular Hemorrhage (IVH) : determined by [CONTACT_70252] I               subependymal hemorrhage  
Grade II              intraventricular hemorrhage, uncomplicated  
Grade III             intraventricular hemorrhage with ventricular dilatation  
Grade IV             intraventricular hemorrhage with ventricular dilatation and parenchymal 
extension  
 
Periventricular Leukomalacia (PVL) : all PVL is determined by [CONTACT_60372]  
• Any PVL  
• Cystic PVL  
 
Necrotizing Enterocolitis (NEC)  
Stage I: Other – Suspect  
•Treatment was observation  
Stage II: Clini cal – Definite  
•Treatment was medical   
Stage III:  Surgical – Advanced  
•Treatment was surgical  
 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_39053] (RDS) : requires both diagnosis and oxygen therapy  
•   For the purpose of the study diagnosis must include:  
• oxygen therapy (FiO2 ≥ 0.40) until infant death or ≥ 24 hours and   
• a clinical diagnosis of RDS  
 
Retinopathy of Prematurity (ROP)  
• Stage I  Ophthalmoscopic demarcation line of normal and abnormal vessels   
• Stage II Intra -retinal ridge (ridge that rises from the retina as a result of the 
growth of the abnormal vessels)  
• Stage III  Ridge with extraretinal fibrovascular proliferation (th e ridge grows from 
the spread of the abnormal vessels and extends into the vitreous)  
• Stage III+  Stage III and “plus disease” meaning that the blood vessels of the 
retina have become enlarged and twisted, indicating a worsening of the disease.  
• Stage IV  P artially detached retina.  
• Stage V  Complete retinal detachment.  
 
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia (BPD)  
•            Treatment with > 21% oxygen for at least 28 days, or  
•            Oxygen dependence after [ADDRESS_76491] -conceptional age   
SAP for the AVERT Study  
07/11/2022  42  
Sepsis :  Must incl ude 
• Blood culture proven sepsis, and 
• a Clinically ill infant with infection defined as:  
o Bacterial sepsis of the newborn  
o Streptococcal sepsis  
o Severe sepsis  
               
Neonatal Seizure  
• Any incident(s) documented as evidence of seizure/epi[INVESTIGATOR_70226],  
 
 
DEFINITIONS OF COMPOSITE PERINATAL MORTALITY/NEONATAL 
MORBIDITY OUTCOME SCORES:  
 
0 to 4 scale with NICU * (NMI) : This score is defined as the following:  
0 = no events,  
1 = one event for (RDS, BPD, grade III or IV IVH, any PVL, proven sepsis, or NEC) or 
<1-4 days in the NICU, and no perinatal mortality;  
2 = two events or between 5 and 20 days in the NICU, and no perinatal mortality;  
3 = three or more events or >20 days in the NICU, and no perinatal mortality;  
4 = perinatal mortality.   
 
Morbidities with high likelihood of major chronic illness (MNM) : This score is 
defined as the following:  
0 = no events,  
1 = one or more events for (cystic PVL, BPD, grade III or IV IVH, stage III or higher 
ROP, NEC requiring surgical treatment)   
 
*Adapted from Hassan SS, et al. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2011; 38:18 -31 
Supplementary Information  
 