H9X- MC-GBGM  Statistical Analysis Plan  
Relative Bioavailability of an Investigational Single Dose of Dulaglutide after Subcutaneous 
Administration by a Single Dose Pen Compared to a Prefilled Syringe in Healthy Subjects  
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
 
 Approval Date: 06- Dec-2017 
   
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 1of 14STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN
Relative Bioavailability of an Investigational Single Dose of Dulaglutide after Subcutaneous 
Administration by a Single Dose Pen Compared to a Prefilled Syringe in Healthy Subjects
Statistical Analysis Plan Status:  Final
Statistical Analysis Plan Date:  24-November -2017
Study  Drug: Dulaglut ide (LY2189265)
Sponsor Reference:  H9X -MC-GBGM
Covance CRU Study : 1000071-8368080
Clinical Phase I
Approval Date: 06-Dec-[ADDRESS_202776] ion Site Reacti on Assessment .............................................................. 13
9.4.7 Immunogenicit y........................................................................................... 13
9.4.8 Other assessments ......................................................................................... 13
9.4.9 Safety and Tolerabilit y Statisti cal Methodol ogy............................................ 13
10.INTERIM ANALYSES ............................................................................................... 13
11.CHAN GES FROM THE PROTOCO L SPECIFIED STATISTI CAL ANALYSES ......14
12.REFERENCES ............................................................................................................ 14
13.DAT A PRESENTATION ............................................................................................ 14
13.1 Derived Parameters ............................................................................................... 14
13.2 Missing Data ......................................................................................................... 14
13.3 Insufficient Data for Presentation .......................................................................... 14
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 3of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
2.ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviat ions pertain to the Statistical Analysis Plan ( SAP)only (not the tables, figures and 
listings [TFLs ]).
AE Adverse e vent
ALP Alkaline phosphatase
ALT Alanine aminotransferase
AUC Area under the concentration versus time curve
AUC([ADDRESS_202777]) A rea under the concentration versus time curve from t ime zero to 
time t, where t is the last time po int with a measurable concentrati on
AUC(0 -∞) Area under the concentration versus time curve from t ime zero to 
infinit y
AUC(0 -168h) Area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to [ADDRESS_202778] dose
AUC(0 -336h) Area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to [ADDRESS_202779] dose
AUC([ADDRESS_202780]) Area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to time t, 
wher e t is the last time point with a measurable concentration
%AUC(t last-∞) Percentage of AUC(0 -∞) extrapolated
BQL Below the quant ifiable lower limit of the assay
Cmax Maximum observed drug concentration
CI Confidence interval
CL/F Apparent total  body clearance of drug calculated after extra -vascular
administration
CRF Case Report Form
CRU Clinical research unit
CSR Clinical Study  Report
CV Coefficient of variat ion
EC Early Clinical 
ECG Electrocardiogram
e.g. For exam ple (Lat in: exempli gratia )
ICH International Council on Harm onisation
LLOQ Lower limit of quant itation
LS Least square
Final, [ADDRESS_202781] ings
t1/2 Half-life associ ated wi th the terminal rate constant (λ z) in non -
compartmentalanalysis
tmax Time o fmaximum observed drug concentration
ULN Upper limit of normal
Vss/F Apparent vol ume of  distribut ion at steady  state after extra -vascular 
administration
Vz/F Apparent vol ume of  distribut ion during the terminal phase after 
extra -vascular administration
WHO World Heal th Organizat ion
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 5of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
3.INTRODUCTION
This SAP has been developed after review of the Clinical Study Protocol (final version dated 24 
September 2017 ).
This SAP describes the planned analys is of the safety , tolerabili ty and pharmacokinet ic(PK)data 
from this study . A detailed descript ion of the planned TFLs to be presented in the clinical study  
report (CSR) is provided in the acco mpanying TFL shell document.
The intent of th is docum ent is to provi de gui dance for the stati stical and PK analyses of data. In 
general, the analyses are based on informat ion from the protocol, unless they  have been m odified 
by [CONTACT_173419] (EC) Biometrics .A 
limited amount of informat ion concerning this study (e.g., objectives, study  design) is given to 
help the reader’s interpretation. This SAP m ust be si gned off prior to first subject administration
for this study .When the SAP and TFL shells are agreed upon and finalized, they will serve as 
the tem plate for thi s study’s CSR.
This SAP supersedes the stati stical considerat ions ident ified in the protocol; where 
considerations are substant ially different, they  will be so identified. If addit ional analyses are 
requi red to suppl ement the pl anned analyses described in this SAP, they  may be performed and 
will be ident ified in the CSR. Any substantial deviations fro m this SAP will be agreed upon 
between Eli Lilly and Compa ny and Covance ECBiometricsand i dentified in the CSR. Any 
minor deviat ions from the TFLs may not be documented in the CSR.
This SAP is written with consideration of the recommendat ions outlined in the Inte rnational 
Council on Harm onisation (ICH) E9 Gui deline enti tled Gui dance for Industry : Stati stical 
Principles for Clinical Trials1and the ICH E3 Guideline ent itled Guidance for Industry : Structure 
and Content of Clinical Study  Reports2.
4.STUDY OB JECTIVE S
4.1 Primary Objective
To evaluate the relative bioavai labilit y of a single dose of dulaglut ide administered 
subcutaneously (SC) to healthy subjects as a single injection by [CONTACT_173420] (SDP; 
test) com pared to [ADDRESS_202782] ions by [CONTACT_173421] (PFS; reference).
4.2 Secondary Objective
To assess the tolerabili ty of a single dose of dulaglutide administered SC to healthy 
subjects as a single inject ion by [CONTACT_173422] 3 injections by [CONTACT_16625].
5.STUDY DESIGN
This study is a Phase 1, single -center, open -label, rando mized, 2 -period, crossover study  in
healt hy subjects to eval uate the rel ative bioavailabilit y of 4.5 m g of a new form ulationof 
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 6of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
dulaglut ide administered SC as a single injection by [CONTACT_173423] (test) compared to 3 injections by [CONTACT_16625] 
(reference).
Each subject will provide informed consent for study  parti cipat ion and will undergo a screening
examinat ion within 27 days pri or to enrollment.
In each treatment period, subjects will be admitted to the clinical research unit (CRU) on Day  -1.
On Day  [ADDRESS_202783] ions by [CONTACT_173424] . 
Blood sam ples will be collected predose and up to 336 hours postdose to measure dulaglut ide 
concentrations. At a minimum, subjects will remain at the CRU unt il collection ofthe 168 -hour 
(Day  8) PK sample in each period.
There will be a washout period of at least [ADDRESS_202784] 
will be required to return to the CRU for a fo llow-up visit 28 ±[ADDRESS_202785] (from screening through the fo llow-up visit) is 
approximately  84 days. The treatment sequences are detailed below:
Treatment Sequence Period 1 Period 2
1 Prefilled Sy ringe Single Dose Pen
2 Single Dose Pen Prefilled Sy ringe
Safety and tol erabilit y will  be assessed throughout the study  by [CONTACT_173425],
physical examinat ion, clinical laboratory  tests, el ectrocardi ograms (ECGs), and AE recording.
6.TREATMENT S
The fo llowing i sa list of the study  treatm ent abbreviat ions that will be used in the TFLs.
Study Treatment Name [CONTACT_173432]
4.5 mg Dulaglutide (Prefilled Syringe)Dulaglutide (PFS) 1
4.5 mg Dulaglutide (Single D ose Pen) Dulaglutide (SDP) [ADDRESS_202786] variabilit y (coefficient of variat ion) of 21% for
the area under the concentration vers us time curve (AUC )andmaximum  observed drug 
concentration (C max)of dulagl utide from previous studi es. Ei ghteen subjects will provide a 90%
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 7of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
probabilit y that the half -width of the 90% confidence interval (CI) of the ratio of the geometric
means for AUC and C maxis no larger than 14%.
Subjects who are randomized may  be replaced to ensure that at least 18 subjects may complete
the study .
8. DEFINITION OF ANALYSIS POPULATIONS
The “Safet y” populat ion will consist of all enrolled subjects, whether or not they  completed all  
protocol  requi rements .
The “Pharmacokinet ic” popul ation will consist of a ll subjects who received at least one dose of 
dulaglut ide and have evaluable PK data.  
All protocol deviat ions that occur during the study will be considered for their severit y/impact 
and will be taken into considerat ion when subjects are assigned to analysis popul ations.
9.STATISTICAL METHODOLOGY
9.[ADDRESS_202787] deviat ion (SD), m edian, 
min, max and N; for log -normal data (e.g. the PK parameters: AUCs and C max) the geom etric 
mean and geo metric coefficient of variat ion (CV%) will also be presented . For categorical data, 
frequency  count and percentages will be presented. Data list ings will be provided for all subjects 
up to the point of withdrawal, with any subjects excluded from the relevant population 
highlighted. Summary statist ics and statist ical analyses will generally only be performed for 
subjects included in the relevant analysis populat ion.For the calculat ion of summary statist ics 
and statist ical analysis, unrounde d data will be used. 
Mean change fro m baseline is the mean of all individual subjects’ change fro m baseline values. 
Each individual change fro m baseline will be calculated by  [CONTACT_173426]’s 
baseline value from the value at the timep oint. The individual subject’s change from baseline 
values will be used to calculate the mean change from baseline using a SAS procedure such as 
Proc Univariate.
Data analysis will be performed using SAS®Version 9.4or greater.
9.[ADDRESS_202788] disposi tion will be listed . The demographic variab les age, sex , race, ethnicit y, body  
weight, hei ght and body  mass index will be summar ized and listed. Tobacco/nicotine habit s will 
be listed.
Final, [ADDRESS_202789] imates will be determined using non -compartmental procedures in 
validated software program (Phoenix WinNonlin Version 6.4 or l ater).
Plasma concentrati ons ofdulaglut idewill be used to determine the following PK parame ters, 
when possible:  
Parameter Units Definition
AUC(0 -) ng.h/mL area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to 
infinity
AUC(0 -168h) ng.h/mL area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to 
[ADDRESS_202790] dose
AUC(0 -336h) ng.h/mL area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to 
[ADDRESS_202791] dose
AUC([ADDRESS_202792]) ng.h/mL area under the concentration versus time curve from time zero to 
time t, where t is the last time point with a measurable 
concent ration
%AUC(t last-) % percentage of AUC(0 -∞) extrapolated
Cmax ng/mL maximum observed drug concentration
tmax h time of maximum observed drug concentration
t½ h half-life associated with the terminal rate constant (λ z) in 
non-compartmental analysis
CL/F L/h apparent total body clearance of drug calculated after 
extra -vascular administration
Vz/F L apparent volume of distribution during the terminal phase after 
extra -vascular administration
Vss/F L apparent volume of distribution at steady state after extra -vascular 
administration
Addit ional PK parameters may be calculated, as appropriate.  The software and versio n used for 
the final analyses will be specified in the clinical  study report. Any except ions or special 
handling of data will be clear ly documented within the final study  report.
Formatting of tables, figures and abbreviat ions will follow the Eli Lilly Global PK/PD/TS Tool : 
NON- COMPARTMENTAL PHARMACOKINETIC STYLE GUIDE. The versi on of the tool
effect ive at the time of PK analysis will be followed.
General PK Parameter Rules
Actual  sampling times will be used in the final analyses of individual PK parameters, 
except for non -bolus pre -dose sampling times which will be set to zero . 
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 9of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
Cmaxand t maxwill be reported from observed values.  If C maxoccurs at m ore than one time 
point, t maxwill be assigned to the first occurrence of C max. 
AUC parameters will be calculated using a combination of the linear and logarithmic 
trapezoi dal methods (linear -log trapezoi dal rule).  The linear trapezoidal m ethod will be 
applied up to t maxand then the logarithmic trapezoidal method will be used after t max. The 
minimum requirement for the calculat ion of AUC will be the inclusio n of at least three 
consecut ive plasma concentrations above the lower limit of quant ificat ion (LLOQ), with 
at least one of these concentrations fo llowing C max. AUC(0 -) values where the 
percentage of the total area extrapolated is more than 20% will be flagged. Any AUC(0 -
) value excluded from  summary stati stics will be noted in the footnote of the summary  
table.
Half-life (t ½) will be calculated, when appropriate, based on the apparent terminal log -
linear portion of the concentration-time curve. The start of the terminal eliminat ion phase 
for each subject will be defined by [CONTACT_173427] i s no system atic deviat ion from the log -linear decline in plasma 
concentrations.  Half -life will only  be calculated when a reliable est imate for this 
param eter can be obtained comprising o f at least [ADDRESS_202793] ics will be documented in the footnote of the 
summary table. 
A uniform weight ing scheme will be used in the regressio n analysis of the terminal log -
linear portion of the concentration- time curve.
The parameters based on observed C lastwill be reported .
Individual PK Parameter Rules
Only quantifiable concentrations will be used to c alculate PK parameters with the 
exception of special handling of certain concentratio ns reported below the lower limit of 
quant itation (BQL).  Pl asma concentrations reported as BQL will be set to a value of zero 
when all o f the following condit ions are met : 
The compound is non -endogenous.
The samples are from the init ial dose peri od for a subject or from a 
subsequent dose period fo llowing a suitable wash- out period.
The time points occur before the first quant ifiable concentration.
All other BQL concentrat ions that do not meet the above criteria will be set to missing. 
Also, where two or more consecut ive concentrations are BQL towards the end of a 
profile, the profile will be deemed to have terminated and therefore any further 
quant ifiable concentrations w ill be set to missing for the calculat ion of the PK parameters 
unless it i s considered to be a true characteristic of the profile of the drug.
Individual Concentration vs. Time Profiles
oIndividual concentrations will be plotted utilizing actual sampling times.
oThe terminal po int selections will be indicated on a semi -logarithmic pl ot.
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 10of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
Average Concentration vs. Time Profiles
oThe average concentration profiles will be graphed using scheduled (no minal) 
sampling t imes. 
oThe average concentration profiles will be graphed using ari thmet ic average 
concentrations.
oThe pre -dose average concentration for single -dose data from  non-endogenous 
compounds will  be set to zero.  Otherwise, only quant ifiable concentrations will 
be used to calculate average concentration s.
oConcentrations at a sampling time exceeding the sampling time window specified 
in the protocol, or ±10%, will be excluded from the average concentration 
profiles.
oConcentrations excluded from the mean calculation will be documented in the 
final study  report.
oA concentration average will be plotted for a given sampling time only  if 2/[ADDRESS_202794] quant ifiable measurements that are 
within the sampling time window specified in the protocol or ± 10%. An average 
concentrati on est imated with less than 2/3 but more than 3 data poi nts may be 
displayed on the mean concentration plot if determined to be appropriate and will 
be docum
ented wi thin the final study  report.
Treatment of Outliers during Pharmacokinetic Analysis
Applicat ion of this procedure to all pharmacokineti c analyses is not a requirement. Rather, this 
procedure provides justificat ion for exclusio n of data when scientifically appropriate. This 
procedure describes the methodol ogy for ident ifying an individual value as an outlier for 
potenti al exclusi on, but does not requi re that the val ue be excluded from  analysis.  The foll owing 
methodol ogy will not be used to exclude complete profiles from analysis.
Data wi thin an Individual Profile
A value within an individu al profile may be excluded from analysis if any of the following 
criteria are met:
For pharm acokinet ic profiles during single dosing of non -endogenous compounds, the 
concentration in a pre -dose sam ple is quant ifiable.
For any  quest ionable datum  that does n ot sati sfy the above cri teria, the profile will be 
evaluated and results reported with and wit hout the suspected datum. 
Data between Individual Profiles
1.If n<6, then the dataset is too small to conduct a reliable range test.  Data will be 
analyzed with a nd without the atypi[INVESTIGATOR_119885], and both sets of results will be reported.  
2.If n6, then an object ive outlier test will be used to compare the aty pi[INVESTIGATOR_173417]:
a.Transform all values in the calculation to the loga rithmic domain.
b.Find the most extrem e value from  the ari thmetic mean o f the log transformed 
values and exclude that value from the dataset.
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 11of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
c.Calculate the lower and upper bounds of the range defined by [CONTACT_173428] ±3*SD of the remaining log -transfor med values.
d.If the extreme value is within the range of arit hmetic mean ±3*SD, then it is 
not an outlier and will be retained in the dataset.
e.If the extreme value is outside the range of arithmetic mean ±3*SD, then it is 
an outlier and will be excluded fro m analysis.
If the remaining dataset contains another atypi[INVESTIGATOR_173418] n ≥ 6 
following the exclusi on, then repeat step 2 above. This evaluat ion may be repeated as many 
times as necessary, excluding only one suspected outlier ineach iteration, until all data 
remaining in the dataset fall within the range of arithmetic mean ±3*SD of the log-transformed 
values.
Reporting of Excluded Values
Individual values excluded as outliers will be docum ented in the final report.  Approval of the 
final report will connote approval of the exclusio n.
9.3.[ADDRESS_202795] ics by [CONTACT_173429]. Mean (with and wi thout SD bars) and individual profiles over time will be 
presented for PK concentrations.
The PK parameter estimates will be evaluated to determine the relat ive bioavailabilit y of
dulaglut ide administered SC by [CONTACT_173423] (test) compared to dulaglut ide administered by [CONTACT_16625]
(reference).
Log-transformed C maxand AUC(0- ∞) (primary  param eters) and AUC(0- 168h) and
AUC(0 -336h) (secondary  parameters) will be evaluated in a linear mixed -effects analysis o f
variance model wit h fixed effects for treatment (SDP or PFS), period, and sequence and a
rando m effect for subject within sequence. The ratios of least squares geometric means of SDP
compared to PFS, as well as the corresponding 90% CIs, will be est imated and reported.
Example SAS code is given below:
procmixeddata=pk;
classsubject treatment period sequence ;
modellog(pk) = treatment period sequence / ddfm=kr;
lsmeans treatment / pdiff alpha=0.1 ;
randomintercept / subject=subject(sequence);
run;
The t maxwill be analyzed nonparametrical ly using the Wilcoxon signed rank test. Estimates of
themedian difference and the corresponding 90% CIs will be calculated.
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 12of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
9.4 Safety and Tolerability Assessments
9.4.1 Adverse events
Where changes in severit y are recorded in the Case Report Form ( CRF), each separate severit y 
of the adverse event (AE) will be reported in the listings , only  the m ost severe will be used in the 
summary tables . A pre -exist ing condit ion is defined as an AE that starts before the subject has 
provi ded wri tten informed consent and is ongo ing at consent . A non -treatm ent emerg ent AE i s 
defined as an AE which starts after informed consent but prior to the first dose. A treatment -
emergent AE i s defined as an AE which occurs postdose or which is present prior to dosing and 
beco mes more severe postdose.
All AEs will be listed .  Treatment -emergent AEs will be summariz ed by  [INVESTIGATOR_24258], severi ty and 
relationship to the study  drug. The frequency (the number of AEs, the number of subjects 
experiencing an AEand the percentage of subjects experiencing an AE) of treatm ent-emergent 
AEs will be summariz ed by [INVESTIGATOR_24258], Medi cal Dictionary  for Regulatory  Activities (MedDRA )
versio n 20.[ADDRESS_202796] ionary (Versi on March 2017).
Concomitant me dicat ion will be listed.
9.4.3 Clinical laboratory parameters
Allclinical chemistry (including amylase and lipase) , 
hematologyand urinalysis data will be 
listed. Addit ionally  clinical c hemistry , hematol ogyand urinalysis data outside the r eference 
ranges will be listed.
Values f or any  clinical chemistry , hematol ogy and urinalysis values outside the reference ranges 
will be flagged on the individual subject data list ings.
9.4.4 Vital signs
Vital signs data will be summarized by [CONTACT_173430], where 
baseline is defined as Day 1 predose from each relevant period. Furtherm ore, val ues f or 
individual subjects will be listed.
9.4.5 Hepatic Monitoring
If a patient experiences elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) ≥3× upper limit of normal 
(ULN), a lkaline phosphatase (ALP) ≥2× ULN, or elevated total bilirubin (TBL) ≥2× ULN, liver 
tests will be performed to confirm the abnormalit y.
If a patient has a liver abnormalit y then they  will be included in the list ings and summaries 
detailed below.
Final, 24 Nov 2017              Page 13of 14Statistical Analysis Plan CONFIDENTIAL
Covance Clinical Study  No. 8368080 Sponsor Reference H9X -MC-GBGM
The pati ents’ liver di sease history  and associ ated person liver di sease history  data will be 
listed. Any conco mitant m edicat ion of acetaminophen/paracetamo l will be listed. Results from 
any hepat ic monitoring procedures, such as a magnet ic resonance elastography (MRE) scan, and 
a biopsy assessment will be listed, if performed.
Hepati c risk factor assessment data will be listed. Liver related signs and symptoms data will be 
summarized in a frequency  table by  [CONTACT_173431].  Alcoho l and recreat ional 
drug use data will also be listed.
All hepat ic chemistry, hematology, coagulat ion, and serology  data will be listed. Values outside 
the reference ranges will be flagged on the individual pat ient data list ings.
9.4.[ADDRESS_202797] ion site will be evalu ated for ery thema, indurat ion, pain, pruritus, 
rash, and edema. If one or m ore symptom (s) of an inject ion site reaction (ISR) is reported during 
the assessment, a single AE for ISR will be recorded as a n AE. Data will be summarized in a 
frequency  table and listed for individual subjects.
9.4.[ADDRESS_202798] ing ADA and wit h treatment -emergent
ADA to dulaglut ide will be tabulated. Treatment -emergent ADA are defined as a change fro m 
negat ive at baseline to posit ive at endpo int with antibody  titer greater or equal to 1:4 or a posit ive 
at baseline to a posit ive at endpoint with greater or equal to 4 -fold increases. That i s, if a posi tive 
antibody  titer chang es fro m 1:2 at baseline to 1:[ADDRESS_202799] ingof maximum t iterswill be 
produced . If a neutralization assay is performed, the frequency o f neutralizing antibodies will b e 
tabul ated in subjects wi th treatm ent-emergent ADA.
The rel ationship between the presence (or absence) of ant ibodies and safet y and PK parameters
may be assessed.
9.4.[ADDRESS_202800] ically analyz ed.
9.4.9 Safety and Tolerability Statistical Methodology
No inferent ial stati stical analyses are planned.
10. INTERIM ANALYSES
An interim PK analysis (including C maxand AUC[0 -168h]) will be conducted [ADDRESS_202801] as it is a crossover 
study .
12. REFERENCE S
1.International Conference on Harmoniz ation of Technical Requirements for Registration of 
Pharmaceut icals for Hum an Use, ICH Harm onized Tri partite Gui deline, Stati stical Principles 
for Clinical Tri als (E9), 5 February  1998 .
2.International Conference on Harm onizat ion of Technical Requirements for Registration of 
Pharmaceut icals for Hum an Use, ICH H armonized Tri partite Gui deline, Structure and 
Content of Clinical Study  Reports (E3), 30 November 1995.
13. DATA PRESENTATION
13.1 Derived Parameters
Individual derived param eters (e.g. PK param eters) and appropriate summary statist ics will be 
reported to three significant figures. Observed concentration data, e.g. C max, shoul d be reported as 
received. Observed time data, e.g. t max, should be reported as received. N and p ercentage values
shoul d be reported as whole numbers. Medi an values shoul d be treated as an observed parameter 
and reported to the same number of decimal places as minimum and maximum values.
13.[ADDRESS_202802] sufficient numbers of subjects or data for presentation. If this 
occurs, the blank TFL shell will be presented with a message printed in the centre of the table, 
such as, “No serious adverse events occurred for this study .”
Leo Document ID = d1bac6af-f4cb-44a5-9603-b49a671dbd2a
Approver: 
Approval Date & Time: 27-Nov-2017 15:12:38 GMT
Signature [CONTACT_32869]: Approved
Approver: 
Approval Date & Time: 28-Nov-2017 10:28:33 GMT
Signature [CONTACT_32869]: Approved
Approver: 
Approval Date & Time: 29-Nov-2017 09:15:32 GMT
Signature [CONTACT_32869]: Approved
Approver: 
Approval Date & Time: 06-Dec-2017 04:30:53 GMT
Signature [CONTACT_32869]: Approved
[COMPANY_003]
[COMPANY_003]
[COMPANY_003]
[COMPANY_003]