HIV Oral Testing  Infographic  Experiment (HOTIE)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date of Update: October  23, 202 1  
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
In the [LOCATION_002], approximately 1.1 million persons are living with HIV. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_887432], comprehensive models of health care, and targeted HIV testing 
initiatives, over 160,000 persons are still unaware of their HIV serostatus. Emerging adult, 
sexual minority, men of color are disproportionatel y affected. Premised on the National AIDS 
Strategy's focus on identifying new HIV infections through increased HIV testing, the purpose of 
this formative pi[INVESTIGATOR_887433] -testing strategy that 
utilizes a simplicity -model approach to HIV self -testing in emerging adult sexual minority men of 
color.  
The overall study will focus on: (a) understanding facilitators and barriers to HIV self -
testing among emerging adult MSM, (b) designing a HIV self -testing infographic that utilizes a 
simplicity model, (c) finalizing the HIV self -testing infographic with input from a leadership group 
of HIV community members, (d) conducting a pi[INVESTIGATOR_187901] 300 emerging adult (ages 
18-34), sexual minority, men of color to test if a  collaboratively -designed HIV self -testing 
infographic can facilitate accurate and effective understanding of how to self -test for HIV when 
compared to paper -based, HIV self -testing information.  
By [CONTACT_438191], we will gain beneficial insights ne cessary for presenting HIV 
self-testing instructions in a meaningful, relevant, and comprehensible way. The results of this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_887434] -testing instructions can be 
worded or visually presented in o rder to break both literacy and language barriers that affect 
testing utilization and results accuracy.  
 
Methods  
The HOTIE intervention was a sequential, mixed methods pi[INVESTIGATOR_254577]. Mixed methods were an appropriate study design as we sought to describe the context for 
needing to develop an HIV self -testing infographic and the process of steps that lead to testing 
of the infographic. The study methods are consistent with the approaches for conducting mixed 
methods research by [CONTACT_887436] -Smith.  
Participants were recruited online from a HIPAA -compliant data management national 
survey panel recruitment company. Parti cipants were screened for eligibility online. Once 
considered eligible, they were informed about the purpose, risks and benefits of the study and 
then completed an online consent to participate or decline to participate. Those who consented 
to participate  were then randomly assigned, using automated random selection to either the 
intervention group (HIV self -testing infographic) or to the control group (HIV self -testing text-
based  instructions). The primary outcome was comprehension of the HIV Self -testing 
Infographic  and Usefulness, Ease of Use, Ease of Learning and Satisfaction of the HIV Self -
testing Infographic . Health literacy was a secondary outcome. More detailed information on the 
development and design of the infographic can be found elsewhere.  
 
Measures  
Sociod emographic data collected will include age (in years), gender, sexual attraction, 
race-ethnicity, educatio nal attainment , employment status, annual  incom e, and other 
information to characterize the sample . Outcomes of interest include health li teracy, oral HIV 
self-testing knowledge, HIV knowledge, oral HIV self -testing infographic usability as well as 
PrEP use, familiarity, and attitudes.  The following instruments w ill be administered.  
 
Oral HIV self-testing knowledge . Oral HIV self-testing knowledge w ill be assessed using an 
Oral HIV self -testing questionnaire. The Oral HIV self -testing questionnaire will assess accuracy 
in using oral HIV self -testing kits. Correct responses will be  coded as “1” and incorrect 
responses “0”. Responses to the five -items will be  summed to yield a total Oral HIV self -testing 
knowledge score ranging from 0 to 5 . 
 
Oral HIV self -testing infographic usability questionnaire. The Oral HIV self -testing 
infographic usability questionnaire is a 14 -item measure designed to assess usefulness and 
usability of the HIV oral self -testing infographic. The Oral HIV self -testing infographic usability 
questionnaire was derived from the Usefulness, Satisfaction, and Ease Questionnaire [1]. 
Responses will be  recorded using a 7 -point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree (1) to 
strongly agree (7). This measure assessed four domains that included usefulness of the HIV 
oral self -testing infographic (M = 5.47, SD = 1.40; Cro nbach’s α =.92), ease of use of the HIV 
oral self -testing infographic (M = 5.51, SD = 1.23; Cronbach’s α =.85), ease of learning using 
the HIV oral self -testing infographic (M = 5.41, SD = 1.37; Cronbach’s α =.86), and satisfaction 
with the HIV oral self -testing infographic (M = 5.34, SD = 1.33; Cronbach’s α =.79). Responses 
to the 14 -item measure will be summed to yield a mean score on usability among experimental 
group participants only ranging from 15 to 98 . 
 
Health literacy. The Short Assessment of Heal th Literacy -English, or SAHL -E is an 18 -item 
measure designed to assess an English -speaker’s ability to read and understand common 
medical terms [2]. The test contains a prin ted common medical term, a key word (the correct 
response), and a distractor word. Responses w ill be recorded dichotomously with either false  
(0) or true (1). Prior studies have demonstrated good internal consistency ranging from .80 to 
.89 [2]. Responses to 18 -items w ill be summed to yield a total score on Health literacy ranging 
from 0 to 18 .  Higher scores indicate greater health literacy.  
 
HIV knowledge . The Brief HIV Knowledge Questionnaire (HIV -KQ18) [3] is an [ADDRESS_1242029] responses w ill be coded as “1” with incorrect responses coded as 
“0”. Prior studies have demonstrated good internal consistency ranging from 0.75 - 0.89 [3]. The 
measure has been identified as suitable for those with low health literacy [3]. Responses to the 
18-items w ill be summed to yield a total score on HIV knowledge ranging from 0 to 18.  
PrEP Use, Familiarity, and Attitudes . PrEP Use, Fam iliarity, and Attitudes w ill be assessed 
using three separate multiple -choice questions. PrEP use  will be assessed using the question: 
“PrEP is the use of a medication taken before having sex as protection against HIV infection. 
Are you currently taking PrEP?” and measured dichotomously (0 = No, 1 = Yes ). PrEP 
familiarity w ill be assessed using the question: “Truvada is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_887435]. This is called PrEP or Pre -Exposure Prophylaxis. How familiar are you with 
Truvada also called PrEP?” Responses will be  collected using a three -item Likert scale from 1 
(not familiar or I  do not know about PrEP) to 3 (Familiar or I know about PrEP) . PrEP attitudes 
will be measured using the question “How do you feel about HIV -negative people taking 
Truvada as PrEP to prevent transmission of  HIV?” Responses will be  collected using a four -
point Likert scale from 1 (extremely negative) to 4 (extremely positive).   
 
Statistical Analysis  Plan . Post-hoc power analysis estimates w ill be performed using G*Power 
[4]. Analyses indicated that based on a type I error rate set at .[ADDRESS_1242030] size of 
.4 [5], and sample  of [ADDRESS_1242031] the null hypothesis with our oral HIV self -testing 
knowledge questionnaire [5]. Analyses will be  conducted in STATA. Between -group differences 
will be examined using chi -square and i ndependent samples t -tests to determine significant 
sociodemographic differences. Between -group differences using independent samples t -tests 
will also be examined on outcomes including oral HIV self -testing knowledge, HIV knowledge, 
and health literacy. C ases with missing data w ill be excluded from the analyses.  
 
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Lund, A.M., Measuring usability with the use questionnaire12.  Usability interface, 2001. 
8(2): p. 3 -6. 
2. Lee, S.Y.D., et al., Short assessment of health literacy—Spanish and English: a 
comparable test of health literacy for Spanish and English speakers.  Health services 
research, 2010. 45(4): p. 1105 -1120.  
3. Carey, M.P. and K.E. Schroder, Development and psychometric evaluation of the brief 
HIV Knowledge Q uestionnaire.  AIDS education and prevention, 2002. 14(2): p. 172 -182. 
4. Faul, F., et al., Statistical power analyses using G* Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and 
regression analyses.  Behavior research methods, 2009. 41(4): p. 1149 -1160.  
5. Faul, F., et a l., G* Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, 
behavioral, and biomedical sciences.  Behavior research methods, 2007. 39(2): p. 175 -
191. 
 