Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
Cover  Page  
Background,  Significance,  and Rationale   
 
 
 
 
Protocol Number: 7475  Version  Date:  6/12/18 
Protocol Title: Effect of Lorcaserin on Cannabis Withdrawal and Self -administration 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_348785],  PhD 
Email: [EMAIL_6712]  
Telephone: 646 -774-6153  
Office:  Cell [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
This section is intended to provide a basic overview of the study including a description of its purpose, methods, and 
subject  population.  The summary  should  provide  a concise  overview  of the study  for non-scientific  and scientific 
members of the IRB. Please avoid medical or technical terminology.  In general, the abstract of a grant does not provide 
a suitable  lay summary.  
Please  also paste  of a copy of the Lay Summary  into the PRISM  PSF Form.  
 
In order  to improve  treatment  outcome  for cannabis  use disorder  (CUD),  we have  developed  a laboratory  model  to 
investigate the effects  of potential treatment  medications  on cannabis  withdrawal and  on the subjective and reinforcing 
effects  of cannabis  in non treatment -seeking,  cannabis  smokers.  In this study,  we are interested  in testing  how 
lorcaserin  (10 mg, BID) influences  the effects  of cannabis  and the choice  to smoke cannabis  in this human  laboratory 
model  of cannabis  administration.  Lorcaserin  is a well tolerated,  selective  5HT2c  agonist  that is FDA-approved  for the 
treatment  of obesity.  5HT2c  receptors  are abundant  in areas  rich in dopamine  neurons  (Abramowski  et al., 1995)  and 
are involved in modulating impulsive behaviors and reactivity to drug-related cues (Anastasio et al., 2013; Cunningham  
and Anastasio, 2013). Recent preclinical data show that lorcarserin reduces THC self -administration and relapse in non - 
human primates (Justinova et  al., unpublished). We hypothesize that  lorcaserin wil l decrease cannabis withdrawal 
symptoms  and cannabis  relapse  in this human  laboratory  model.  
 
In this section,  provide  a brief summary  of the status  quo of the relevant  work field, and how the proposed  study  will 
advance  knowledge.  Specifically,  identify  the gaps  in knowledge  that your project  is intended  to fill. If no gaps  exist that 
are obviously  and directly  related  to your project,  explain  how your proposed  research  will contribute  to the overall 
understanding of your field. Describe potential impacts of your project within your field of study and in a broader context.  
Provide  a critical evaluation  of existing  knowledge.  The literature  review  does  not have  to be exhaustive.  
 
Cannabis use is increasing (SAMHSA, 2012) and numbers are likely to rise further with legalization; residents of states 
with medical  cannabis laws have higher odds of cannabis use and higher rates of DSM -V abuse/dependence compared  
to states without these laws (Cerdá et a l., 2012). Almost 20% of patients entering treatment for substance use disorders 
have a diagnosis of cannabis use disorder (CUD; SAMHSA, 2013), yet their outcome is poor. Only 15% –37% of patients 
achieve continued abstinence from cannabis following clinica l treatment (MTPRG, 2004; Budney et al., 2006; Kadden et 
al., 2007; Levin et al., 2011). There is a clear need for FDA -approved pharmacological options to improve cannabis  Lay Summary  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
treatment  outcomes. Human  laboratory studies  provide a  powerful means  of investigating potential medications  for 
drug treatment,  and are an important  precursor  to guide  expensive  clinical  trials (Koob  et al., 2009).  
 
The overall aim  of this study  is to test the  effects  of lorcaserin  on a range  of clinically -relevant  behaviors:  cannabis  self- 
administration  under  non-abstinent  conditions,  relapse  to cannabis  use, mood,  sleep,  food intake,  and cognitive  task 
performance. This drug is of interest because 5H T2c agonists influence behaviors motivated by a wide range of 
reinforcers. In preclinical studies, 5HT2c agonists, including lorcaserin, reduce the stimulant, discriminative stimulus and 
reinforcing  properties  of nicotine,  ethanol  and cocaine,  as well as reinstatement  of nicotine  and cocaine  seeking 
(Grottick et al., 2000; Fletcher et al., 2012; Cunningham et al., 2011; Higgins et al., 2013; Collins et al. 2016). These 
effects  persisted  with repeated  medication  administration  (e.g.,  Yamauchi  et al., 2004),  essential  for a treatment 
medication.  Similar  to obesity,  the indication  for which  lorcaserin  is approved,  substance  use disorders  reflect  learned 
behaviors that persist despi[INVESTIGATOR_262389] (e.g., Bickel et al, 1999; Fields et al., 2009). Lorcas erin is currently 
in clinical testing as an aid for smoking cessation (ClinicalTrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]) and a treatment for cocaine -use 
disorder (studies [STUDY_ID_REMOVED], [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
 
In non -human primates, pretreatment with [ADDRESS_433284] lorcaserin dose -dependently reduced THC self -administration  
behavior  at a dose  (4 μg/kg/inj.)  that maintains  high rates  of drug taking  behavior.  In a model  of relapse,  lorcaserin  also 
dose-dependently reduced cue -induced reinstatement of previously extingu ished THC -seeking behavior. However, 
lorcaserin  did not affect  THC priming -induced  reinstatement.  At the doses  that affected  THC self-administration  and 
reinstatement, lorcaserin did not reduce food -maintained self -administration under the same schedule of  reinforcement 
(Justinova, unpublished data). These findings suggest that lorcaserin could be a novel treatment for CUD.  
 
 Specific Aims and Hypotheses   
Concisely state the objectives of the study and the hypothesis or primary research question(s) being examined.  There 
should  be one hypothesis  for every  major  study  procedure  or intervention.  For pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602],  it is important  not to 
overstate  the study's  objectives.  If there  are no study  hypotheses,  describe  broad  study  goals/aims.  
 
The overall  aim is to test the effects  of lorcaserin  on a range  of clinically  relevant  behaviors:  cannabis  self- 
administration, relapse to cannabis use, mood, sleep, food intake, and cognitive task performance. We hypothesize that 
lorcaserin  will attenuate  cannabis’  positive  subjective  effects  and facilitate  abstinence  initiation,  i.e., reduce  cannabis 
self-administ ration  under  non-abstinent  conditions,  as well as reducing  relapse  to cannabis  use. 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria   
This section  details  your study  sample(s)  and addresses  the requirement  for risk minimization.  
You may choose to divide your sample by [CONTACT_66067] (healthy controls vs. subjects) or by [CONTACT_42540] (subjects who will 
have  an MRI)  and then define  different  sets of criteria  for each.  
For each  sample,  create  or insert  a table to describe  detailed  criteria  for study  inclusion  and exclusion  and the method 
you will use to ascertain each criterion. The method of ascertainment may describe tests, scales and instruments.  When 
relevant,  indicate  the level of training  of the person  who will make  the assess ment  (e.g. clinical  interview  by a 
psychiatrist).  
Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  needs  to be numbered  and listed  in outline  form (see Table  template  below).  
 
Name  [CONTACT_348800]/sub sample  
Healthy  Cannabis  Smokers  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 CRITERION  METHOD  OF ASCERTAINMENT   
Inclusion:   
1. Current  cannabis  use: average  of [ADDRESS_433285] 6x/ week  
for the past 4 weeks  Self-report  during clinical  interviews  (telephone, 
psychologist, physician), urine toxicology  
2. Able to perform  study  procedures  Practice sessions, physician’s physical and 
mental  status  examination  
3. 21-50 years  of age Legal  identification  
4. Women  practicing  an effective  form of 
birth control  (condoms,  diaphragm,  birth 
control pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382], IUD)  Self-report during clinical interview, physician’s 
evaluation  
5. English  Speaking  Clinical interview, ability to complete screening 
paperwork  
6. Able to give informed  consent  Clinical interview, physician’s mental status 
examination  
Exclusion:   
1. Current  diagnosis of  an eating disorder 
(anorexia, bulimia, etc.) or have lost more 
than 10% of their body  weight  within  the last 
3 months  and a known  sensitivity,  allergy  or 
contraindication  to lorcaserin  or similar  
medications  Medical  history,  physical  examination  
2. Current,  repeated  (>2x/week)  illicit drug 
use other than cannabis  Clinical  interview,  physicians  evaluation,  urine 
toxicology  
3. Presence  of any clinically  significant 
cardiovascular, respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], renal, 
gastrointestinal, hematologic, neurologic, 
pulmonary, immunologic, hepatic, endocrine,  
or other  abnormality  Medical history, physical examination, 12 -lead 
ECG, laboratory tests (Chem panel, CBC, 
urinalysis)  
4. History  of heart  disease  and cardiac  risk 
factors (congestive heart failure, edema, 
unstable angina, or cardiac arrhythmias), 
blood  pressure > 140/90, severe chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, uncontrolled 
hypertension or diabetes, or other medical 
condition  that would  make  participation  
hazardous  Self-report, clinical interview, abnormal ECG, 
Medical history, physical examination  
5. Interest  in treatment  for cannabis  use Self-report,  clinical  interview  
6. Current  parole  or probation  Self-report,  clinical  interview  
7. Current  pregnancy  or lactation  Clinical interview, physical examination, 
pregnancy  testing  (serum  HCG)  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 8. Recent history of significant violent 
behavior  (past  year)  Self-report,  clinical  interview   
9. Current Axis I psychopathology requiring 
medical  intervention  (e.g.,  bipolar  disorder, 
major depressive disorder, suicide risk,  
schizophrenia)  Clinical  interview;  diagnoses  determined  by a 
clinical interview via  the SCID, as  confirmed  by 
[CONTACT_348792]  
10. Current use of any prescription or over - 
the-counter  medication  Clinical interview, medical history, physical 
examination  
 
 
Study Procedures   
Provide  a clear,  concise  narrative  of study  procedures  with special  attention  to the subjects'  involvement.  Detail  the 
overall  study  timeline  and location  of study  procedures,  list all interventions,  assessments  and interviews,  estimate  the 
duration of each procedure, provide dosing schedules, identify study personnel involved in each procedure, and provide 
credentials  for relevant  personnel.  For complicated  study  designs,  we strongly  encourage  attaching  tables,  flow-charts, 
and study algorit hms.  
 
General design : This within -subject study  will have two [ADDRESS_433286]  achieved  steady  state 
conditions  (3 days  of 10 mg BID lorcaserin  administration).  On outpatient  dosing  days,  participants  will take their AM 
capsule  under  observation  and will take their PM capsule  (2030)  at home.  On the third day (move -in day),  they will take 
their AM capsule under  observation  and then receive their  PM capsule after  moving into  the laboratory. While inpatient, 
AM and PM capsules  will always  be administered  under  observation.  
 
Outpatient  Dosing  Visits : Participants  will undergo  two outpatient  dosing  visits  immediately  prior to each  inpatient 
phase.  On outpatient  dosing  days, participants  will be  administered  capsules  (lorcaserin  or placebo, depending  on 
phase)  at 0900  under  observation  and will take their PM capsule  (2030)  at home.  During  outpatient  dosing  visits  and 
move -in day, research staff will measure vital signs, urine toxicology, conduct at Timeline Followback and document any 
reported  side effects  from the medications.  Staff will also ask about  any medication  or dietary  supplement  use. 
Participants  will move  into the residential laboratory  (NYSPI, Division  on Substance Use)  the morning of  the third 
outpatient  dosing  visit. They  will be  given  the option  to contribute a  DNA sample  on move -in day. We will over -enroll 
during  the first outpatient  phase,  starting  up to [ADDRESS_433287]  the 
maximum  number  of participants  that can stay in the residential  laboratory  (n=4)  on move -in day. 
 
Inpatient  Phase : Immediately  before  the onset  of each  new medication  phase,  female  participants  will have  a urine 
pregnancy test. The overall design and daily inpatient schedule is outlined in the attached tables (Table 1 and 2). We will 
assess  vital signs  each  morning.  On move -in day, we will instruct  participants  on how  to smoke  marijuana  using  the 
paced  puffing pro cedure  and will inform them that  this is the strength  available  for self-administration. On  the first full 
inpatient  day (day 1), participants  will smoke  experimenter -administered  cannabis  6 times  (3 puffs/occasion).  The 
purpose  of this day is to standardize cannabis  exposure  prior to abstinence  initiation.  During  the next 3 days (days  2-4; 
Table  1), participants  will have  the opportunity  to purchase  individual  puffs  of cannabis  at $2/puff,  at 6 time points.  This 
measures  the reinforcing  effects  of cannabis  under  nonabstinent  conditions,  and will reveal  whether  a medication 
facilitates  abstinence  initiation . On day 5, cannabis  will be experimenter  administered  at 6 time points  in order  to again 
standardize cannabis exposure and assess medication effects on cannabis subjective ratings. On days 6 -8, no cannabis  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
 
will be  available. This  period  will assess  medication  effects  on cannabis  withdrawal. For  the remaining inpatient  days 
(days  9-11; Table  1), participants  will be presented  with 6 opportunities  throughout  the day to  purchase  individuals  puffs 
of cannabis ($[ADDRESS_433288] puff, $1 subsequent puffs). These days provide a laboratory measure of cannabis relapse. Money 
spent  on cannabis  during  the inpatient  phase  is deducted  from the total study  pay at the end of the study.  Participants 
will move  out on Day [ADDRESS_433289] the study schedule 
in the subsequent  inpatient  phase;  sometimes  the withdrawal  and relapse  condition  will occur  first and the abstinence 
initiation  condition  will occur  second.  Throughout each  day, participants  will wear  an Actiwatch  Activity  Monitoring 
System (Actiwatch: Respi[INVESTIGATOR_348786], Bend OR), which tracks gross motor  activity, and provides objective data on  
the number  of hours  slept and the number  of awakenings  (Perez  et al., 2008).  The Actiwatch  is the size of a wristwatch. 
It will be removed  briefly  each  evening  in order  to download  that day’s  data.  Participants  will also give a urine  sample 
each  morning  upon  awakening.  We will conduct  a urine  toxicology  twice/week;  we will also measure  extracellular 
vesicles  in urine  on certain  inpatient  days  to look for biomarkers  of recent  marijuana  use (potential  preliminary  data for 
future grant funding).  
 
 
Table  2: Inpatient  Schedule  
0815  Wake  up 1315  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  
 Subjective -Effects  Battery  1415  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  
 Sleep  questionnaire  1430  Cannabis  administration  
 Tobacco  Cigarettes  1445  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  
Weigh  In, BP/HR  Receive  Food  Boxes  1545  
0830  Medication  administration  1600  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  
Cannabis  administration  
0900  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  1615  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  
0945  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  1700  Recreation  period  starts  
1000  Cannabis  administration*  2030  Medication  administration  
1030  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  2145  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  
1115  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  2200  
1130  Cannabis  administration  Recreation  period  ends  
Cannabis  administration  
Subjective -Effects  Battery  
 
 
*On experimenter -administered days, participants will not be required to purchase puffs but will be given cannabis at 
no cost at the 6 times  indicated.  On self-administered  days,  cannabis  will only be administered  if participants  choose  to 
purchase it. All medication administration is double -blind.  
 
 
Debriefing : Participants  spend  the morning  after completion  of the final inpatient  phase  being  debriefed  regarding  the 
study design. Participants are encouraged to ask questions and provide recommendations for improving the experience 
(e.g., food, movies,  computer  games).  Following  debriefing,  the investigator  will discuss  options  for cannabis  treatment,  
1245  Choice  of 0, 1, 2, or 3 puffs  2400  Lights  out 
1300  Cannabis  administration    
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
1215  Task  and Subjective -effects  Batteries  
 
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
and will give participants a  pamphlet for our clinic (STARS), where cannabis -specific treatment studies are underway. It  
will be emphasized that treatment is always an option, they can always contact [CONTACT_348793], or call STARS 
directly,  if they are ready  to stop smoking  cannabis.  We are careful  to only enroll  non-treatment  seekers  into our 
studies,  so it is unusual  for participants  to express  interest  in treatment.  However,  the investigator  will emphasize  that 
treatment  for cannabis  use may be of interest  in the future.  We will also do a 12-lead ECG on the final study  day. 
Participants  will not leave  the laboratory  until a study  physician  approves  the ECG.  
 
Criteria for Early Discontinuation   
Define  criteria  that will be used  to exit or drop subjects  from the study.  Indicate  the time points  when  such criteria  will be 
applied,  and describe  the rating  instruments,  parameters,  and thresholds  that will lead to a decision  to terminate  a 
subject's  participation.  In addition,  explain  procedures  for managing  subjects  who are dropped  from the protocol.  
For treatment studies: To minimize risks to subjects, operationalized drop -out criteria should be defined so that subjects 
who worsen, or in some cases, fail to improve, are removed from the study and offered standard care.  The threshold for 
drop-out should  consider  the level of risk associated  with non-improvement  for the specific  disorder,  the availability  of 
alternatives,  and the typi[INVESTIGATOR_348787].  For example,  emergence  of suicidal  intent,  or psychosis, 
should  prompt  immediate clinical evaluation and withdrawal from the study.  
 
Participants  will be removed  from the study  and assessed  by a member  of the clinical  staff if, at any stage  during 
participation, they: 1) experience  a panic attack, as diagnosed by [CONTACT_2681] -V criteria; 2) experience significant psychological 
deterioration  as indicated  by [CONTACT_6270]-reported  anxiety  or depressed  mood  producing  clinically  significant  distress  beyond 
the discomfort  typi[INVESTIGATOR_348788];  3) report  suicidal  ideation;  or 4) show  functional 
deterioration  as indicated  by [CONTACT_348794].  Experienced 
research  staff will monitor  participants  for any potential  medical  or psychiatric  issues  over the course  of the study  in 
concert  with the medical  director,  [CONTACT_348801].  If a patient  is removed  from the protocol,  clinical  staff will 
undertake  a risk assessment  and determine  the appropriate  course  of action, including but  not limited  to admittance  to 
the emergency  department  of Columbia  University  Medical  Center,  and referral  for outpatient  treatment.  Participants 
may also  be discontinued  if they fail to  follow the study procedures.  
 
Blood and other Biological Samples   
Describe  how the sample  will be used  and indicate,  when  relevant,  the amount  of the sample.  The IRB wants  to know 
that the sample  is sufficient  for the purposes  of the study,  but that sampling  is limited  to what is minimally  necessary.  
If you’ve indicated that you intend to store a sample for future use, indicate where the sample will be stored, how long 
the sample  will be stored,  and to what purposes  the sample  will eventually  be put. Check  the IRB website  at 
http://irb.nyspi.org/irbdnn/Policies/GeneticResearch/tabid/96/Default.aspx  for specific  guidance  and additional 
information about  future use of DNA samples.  
 
We will do a complete  blood  chemistry  and a plasma  pregnancy  test (15 ml blood)  at screening.  If participants  opt to 
participate in the genetics study (IRB #6929R), and if we collect blood rather than buccal samples, an additional 15 ml 
may be drawn  on an inpatient  study day, totaling up  to 30  mls. 
 
The collection  of DNA/RNA  will enable  direct  study  of possible  genetic  contributions  to both the patterns  of behavioral 
response and biological measures associated with both illness and health. These samples will be used to investigate 
genetic  contributions  to drug use, abuse,  and dependence.  Although  the focus  of the research  is on the study  of 
addiction,  we ask participants  to indicate  in their consent  form whether  they would  also allow  their DNA to be used  for 
research  on other  (unforeseen)  disorders.  The measurement  of DNA is optional,  and it will be made  clear  to individuals 
that they are not required  to volunteer  for this component  in order  to participate  in the main  studies.  Blood,  cheek  swab  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
or saliva  samples  will be de-identified  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Haney.  Blood  plasma  (2 ml) and saliva  samples  will be will be stored  at -80 
°C until they are shipped out for analysis. [CONTACT_348802] will code samples with an ID number and have sole access to the 
codes. The samples will be sent to [CONTACT_348803] at Brown University or to [CONTACT_348804] of the Biomarkers Shared 
Resource center of Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center of CUMC with the accompanying ID number, age and 
gender. Drs. John  McGeary and  Santella  has agreed  to collaborate wit h us on these studies. They will not  have access  to 
any identifying  information  including  the name,  birthday,  social  security  number,  telephone  number,  or address  of the 
participant.  Once  the samples  are sent to the  Biomarkers  Shared  Resource  center or  to Brown  University, they  will be 
stored in a repository to which only Drs. McGeary and Santella and his staff will have access. Cell lines will not be grown 
from the samples. Once the RNA and DNA has been extracted from the samples and analyzed for polymo rphisms and 
biomarkers  of interest,  the data will be sent to [CONTACT_348802]  with the accompanying  serial  number.  
 
Assessment Instruments   
List all assessment  instruments,  indicate  who will administer  them,  and provide  an estimate  the duration  of each.  The 
IRB wants  to know  that assessments  instruments  are appropriate  measures  for the purposes  of the study  and are no 
more burdensome than is necessary.  The IRB will consider the burden of assessment instruments (in terms of time, 
sensitivity  of material,  etc.) in the risk/benefit  analysis.  Please  attach  copi[INVESTIGATOR_348789]-standard 
instruments.  
 
Screening  Instruments : 
Telephone  Interview:  10 min 
Drug Use History Questionnaire: 10 min 
General Health Questionnaire: 5 min 
Medical  History  Questionnaire:  10 min 
Beck Depression Inventory: 5 min 
Barratt  Impulsiveness  Scale:  10 min 
Trauma Assessment  for Adults:  [ADDRESS_433290] (MAST):  5 min 
Physical  and Psychiatric  Examination:  30 min 
Laboratory  Tests:  30 min 
PhD Interview  (MINI  SCID  and drug use history  interview):  30 min 
 
Objective Sleep Measures : Participants will wear an Actiwatch Activity Monitoring System that tracks gross  motor  
activity (Actiwatch®:  Respi[INVESTIGATOR_348790], Bend, OR;  Kushida  et al., 2001) and  records objective sleep  outcomes  (hours 
slept,  number of awakenings). We have used this system effectively to demonstrate perturbations in sleep as  a function  
of cannabis  withdrawal  (e.g.,  Haney  et al., 2010,  2013b).  
 
Subjective Effects : A 3-minute series of visual analog scales (VAS) in which participants indicate how they are feeling at 
that moment  will be done  8 times/day.  Mood  states  including  symptoms  of cannabis  withdrawal  (e.g.,  I feel irritable), 
positive subjective effect s (e.g., I like the cannabis), medication effects (e.g., I feel sedated) and drug craving (e.g., I want 
to smoke cannabis) are assessed. In addition, subjective ratings of the previous night’s sleep are measured each  
morning.  
 
Tobacco Cigarette Smoking : Cigarette -smoking participants will be provided with cigarettes and a lighter upon request. 
They  will report  each  cigarette  prior to smoking  it by [CONTACT_348795] a bar code  scanner.  At the end of each  day, the 
number  of cigarettes  smoked  will be verified  by [CONTACT_348796].  Cigarette  use 
is an important  predictor  of cannabis  relapse  (Haney  et al., 2013a).  
 
Performance Battery: A 25-minute battery, comprising a Digit -Symbol Substitution Task, Divided Atte ntion Task, Rapid 
Information Processing Task, Repeated Acquisition Task, and an Immediate and Delayed Memory Task (see Foltin and  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
Research  Related  Delay  to Treatment  
Clinical  Treatment  Alternatives  
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences   
 
Evans, 1993) will be completed 6 times/day. The battery assesses subtle changes in mental acuity, learning, and working 
memory, which could impact the medications’ practical utility in the clinic.  
 
Self-Report  Questionna ires: 
Drug Effects Questionnaire: 1 min Cannabis Rating Form (MRF): 2 min State Anxiety Inventory: 1 min 
Visual Analog Craving Scales (CAS): 3 min Beck Depression Inventory: 5 min  
 
Food Intake : A wide range of food items are available ad libitum. Participants scan each item with a bar code scanner 
before  consumption,  which  tracks  timing  as well as caloric  and macronutrient  content.  
 
Additional  Behavior : Social  Behavior  
 
Physiological  Measures : 
Qualitative Urinalysis: Collected daily; analyzed biweekly 
ActiwatchTM: Worn daily, measures activity  
ECG at study  termination,  heart rate and blood  pressure  daily 
 
Research  involving  participants  who are in need  of treatment  invariably involves  delay to  care, and  this delay is 
associated with risk.  Scheduling of procedures must be  carefully organized to minimize delay.  Other delay must involve 
only that minimally  necessary  to accomplish  the aims of the research  while  respecting  subject  well- being  and safety.  
Describe the delay, by [CONTACT_348797], before a participant can receive treatment of known 
efficacy  or standard care  routinely offered in the  community.  
 
Research procedures will not result in a delay to treatment since participants are not seeking treatment for  cannabis  
use. Nonetheless, all will be informed of cannabis treatment at STARS in case they change their minds in the future.  
 
Describe  what other treatment  or assessment  options  are available  to subjects  who do not participate  in research.  
 
Participants  are not seeking  treatment.  The alternative  is to not participate  in this study.  
 
"Risk"  is a broad  term used  to convey  the potential for  harm,  burden, and  inconvenience  related  to research 
participation.  Use this section to provide a comprehensive description of foreseeable physical, psychological, social, 
interpersonal, and economic risks introduced by [CONTACT_53775].  Include the source of the information.  Consider both the 
probability  and magnitude  of harm  and its impact.  Describe  the foreseeable  harms  associated  with the research 
(untoward  effects  of a medication)  and those  related  to delay  to individualized  treatment.  Include  data from the 
literature, and local data, if available, on risk rates and subject experiences with research procedures. Describe 
procedures in place  to minimize risk. In general, please create a numbered list of risks/categories of risk, and in general 
put the list in the order  of significance  or level of risk, the most  significant  risks first followed  by [CONTACT_2312].  
 
Cannabis : Possible side effects of smoked cannabis include: sedation, gait disturbance, tiredness, sadness, anxiety, 
concentration difficulties, increased heart  rate, palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814], dizziness, sleep disturbance, changes in food intake, 
restlessness, confusion, slee pi[INVESTIGATOR_008], clumsiness, gastrointestinal upset, headache, nausea, dry mouth, pallor, flushing, 
sweating,  and slurred speech.  Side effects associated  with cannabis withdrawal,  e.g., sleep difficulty,  irritability,  upset  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
stomach, restlessness, anxiety and loss of appetite may also occur. All participants are fully informed of the side effects 
that they might  experience,  and because  all currently  smoke  cannabis , these  effects  should  be familiar  to them.  
 
Lorcaserin : Lorcaserin is well tolerated, with no evidence of the side effects commonly associated with 5HT2b or 5HT2a 
receptor agonists, e.g., abuse, hallucinations, cardiac valve disease (see Smith et al., 201 0; Fidler et al., 2011; Shram et 
al., 2011). Transient and mild side effects include headache, dizziness, fatigue, nausea, dry mouth, constipation, cough, 
and back pain (Product  label;  Smith  et al., 2010).  Participants  will be warned  of rare but serious  side effects  include 
agitation, confusion, hallucinations, irregular heartbeat, depression, thoughts of suicide, and for men, an erection lasting  
longer  than [ADDRESS_433291]  a motor  vehicle  or 
operate  heavy  machinery  until they know  how the medication  affects  them  (although  they will be inpatient  for all but 2 
of the 14 days they take the medication).  Participants  will not be taking  any medications,  but will be warned  not to take 
any dietary  supplements  such as St. John's  Wort, tryptophan  and drugs that  impair  metabolism of  serotonin,  such as 
dextromethorphan  since  serotonin  syndrome,  a potentially  life-threatening  drug reaction,  can occur  when  two drugs 
that affect  the body’s  level of serotonin  are taken  together.  They  will also be warned  about  the potential  for heart  valve 
problems  and changes  in white  and red blood  cells.  
 
Given  that only healthy  participants  will be enrolled  and will only receive  an active  dose  of lorcaserin  for 14 days,  these 
rare side effects are even less likely. In clinical trials of 1 -year duration: 2.4% of patients receiving lorcaserin and 2.0% of 
patients receiving placebo  developed echocardiographic  criteria for valvular regurgitation at  one year. Decreases in 
white  blood  cell count  were  reported  in 0.4%  of patients  treated  with lorcaserin  as compared  to 0.2%  of patients  treated 
with placebo.  Decreases  in red blood  cell count  were  reported  by 1.3%  of patients  treated  with lorcaserin  as compared 
to 1.2%  treated  with placebo.  The participants  will be inpatient  in a closely -monitored  residential  laboratory  setting 
within  the NY State  Psychiatric  Institute  for 12 of the 14 days they are taking  lorcaserin  so we will monitor  them  closely 
throughout  their participation.  We will do an ECG at screening  and at the end of the  study,  and assess  vital signs  each 
day. 
 
Inpatient Research Designs : There are also minor risks  of isolation, boredom, and inactivity associated with living in the 
residential  laboratory.  In participants  we have  tested  to date under  similar  conditions,  such  problems  have  been 
minimal.  We describe  at length  possible  difficulties  of living  in the residential  lab before  volunteers  sign the study 
consent  form.  
 
Phlebotomy : Participants will provide a blood sample during screening; they will be warned that blood drawing may 
cause  slight  discomfort  at the site of needle  entry  and may result  in a small  bruise.  
 
Methods to Protect Confidentiality   
Describe  the data management  plan and the methods  you will employ  to protect  subject  privacy  and the confidentiality 
of research  data.  The section  should  detail  how information  will be collected,  recorded,  coded,  stored,  transmitted,  and 
as applicable,  shared  with other  investigators  so as to minimize  risks related  to breach  of confidentiality.  Confirm  that 
identifiers are removed, to the extent possible, from research data, and explain if there are links between subject identity 
and research  data,  or if the data is anonymous.  Also,  indicate  where  the data is stored,  who is responsible  for its 
safekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], and who has access to subject identity and codes, if any, which cross -link research data and subject identity. 
Confirm  that identifiable  data is not collected, stored, or  transmitted  by [CONTACT_2319], fax, on  removable  drives,  laptops, or  via the 
internet without proper protections, e.g. encryption.  
 
A Certificate of Confidentiality has been obtained for this study from the National Institute on  Drug Abuse. Our records  
will be kept confidential  and will only be accessible  to study  staff.  Screening  information,  which  may have  the 
participant’s  name,  will be kept in a locked  filing cabinet.  Once  a participant  is enrolled  into the study  all further 
documents  will be identified  solely  by [CONTACT_348798].  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
Describe  only benefits  to individual subjects  that are likely to  accrue  during  the study  itself.  Do not include  subject 
compensation  or treatment  to be provided  at the end of the study,  as these  do not figure  into the IRB's  risk benefit 
considerations.  Do not  describe  diagnostic  and evaluation components unless subjects receive  clinical feedback. Do not 
describe  the anticipated  scientific  benefits  of the research.  Some  studies  offer no direct  benefit  to subjects.  
There  are few direct  benefits  to research  volunteers  in the proposed study.  Prior to study  acceptance, all volunteers  will 
have  a medical  and psychiatric  work-up. Thus,  even  if participants  are not accepted into  the study,  they will benefit  from 
these  evaluations.  We offer all participants  the option  of obtaining  help to abstain  from drug taking.  Volunteers 
understand  that they can obtain  a referral  for drug treatment  at any stage  of their research  participation.  We repeat  our 
offer for treatment  referral  at discharge  from the study.  We will attempt  to obtain  a placement  in a drug abuse  clinic  for 
those  people  who indicate  a desire  for help,  and will inform  all volunteers  of our ongoing  cannabis -treatment  studies 
conducted  within  the Division  of Substance Abuse.  The major  benefit  of this research  from our  point of view is scientific. 
There  is clearly  a need  for better  treatment  options  for cannabis  dependence.  The model  we are proposing  to develop 
will allow us to better understand the effect of a potential treatment medication..  Direct  Benefits  to Subjects  
Uploaded  Protocol  Summary  Form  
 
 
 
 
Abramowski D, Rigo M, Duc D, Hoyer D, Staufenbiel M (1995) Localization of the 5 -hydroxytryptamine2C 
receptor  protein in human and rat  brain using  specific antisera.  Neuropharmacology  34(12): 1635 -45. 
Anastasio NC, Stutz SJ, Fox RG, Sears RM, Emeson RB, Dileone RJ, O'Neil RT, Fink LH, Li D, Green TA, Moeller 
FG, Cunningham KA (2013) Functional status of the serotonin 5 -ht2c receptor (5 -ht2cr) drives interlocked 
phenotypes that precipi[INVESTIGATOR_140358] -like b ehaviors in cocaine dependence. Neuropharmacology (Epub 13 
Aug).  
Bickel WK, Odum AL, Madden GJ (1999) Impulsivity and cigarette smoking: Delay discounting in current, never, 
and ex -smokers. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 146(4): [ADDRESS_433292] (2006)  Clinical  trial of abstinence -based  vouchers  and cognitive - 
behavioral therapy for cannabis dependence. J Consult Clin Psychol 74(2): 307 –316. 
Cunningham KA, Fox RG, Anastasio NC, Bubar MJ, Stutz SJ, Moeller FG, Gilbertson SR, Rosenzweig -Lipson S 
(2011) Selective serotonin 5 -HT(2C) receptor activation suppresses the reinforcing efficacy of cocaine and 
sucrose but differentially affects the incent ive-salience value of cocaine - vs. sucrose -associated cues.  
Neuropharmacology  61(3):  513-23. 
Fidler MC, Sanchez M, Raether B, Weissman NJ, Smith SR, Shanahan WR, Anderson CM; BLOSSOM Clinical Trial 
Group (2011) A one -year randomized trial of lorcaserin for  weight loss in obese and overweight adults: The 
BLOSSOM trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(10): 3067 -77. 
Fields  S, Leraas  K, Collins  C, Reynolds  B (2009)  Delay  discounting  as a mediator  of the relationship  between 
perceived stress and cigarette smoking status in adolescents. Behav Pharmacol 20(5 -6): [ADDRESS_433293]  J, Tampakeras  M, Higgins  GA (2008)  The 5-HT2C  receptor  agonist  Ro60 -0175 
reduces cocaine self -administration and reinstatement induced by [CONTACT_348799], and contextual  
cues. Neuropsychopharmacology 33:  1402 -12. 
Grottick  AJ, Fletcher  PJ, Higgins  GA (2000)  Studies  to investigate  the role of 5-HT(2C)  receptors  on cocaine - and 
food-maintained behavior. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 295(3): 1183 -91. 
Higgins  GA, Silenieks  LB, Rossmann  A, Rizos  Z, Noble  K, Soko  AD, Fletcher  PJ (2012) The [ADDRESS_433294] lorcaserin reduces nicotine self -administration, discrimination, and reinstatement: Relationship to  
feeding behavior  and impulse control. Neuropsychopharmacology 37(5): 1177 -91. 
Kadden RM, Litt MD, Kabela -Cormier E, Petry NM (2007) Abstinence rates following behavioral treatments for 
cannabis dependence. Addict Behav 32(6): 1220 –1236.  
Koob  GF, Kenneth  Lloyd  G, Mason  BJ (2009) Development of pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_348791]: A Rosetta 
stone approach. Nat Rev Drug Discov 8(6): 500 -515. 
Levin FR, Mariani JJ, Brooks DJ, Cheng W, Nunes EV (2011) Dronabinol for  the treatment of cannabis 
dependence: A randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled  trial. Drug Alcohol Depend 116(1 -3): [ADDRESS_433295] Research Group (2004) Brief treatments for cannabis dependence: Findings from 
a randomized multisite trial. J Consult Clin Psychol 72(3): 455 –466. 
Substance Abuse and  Mental Health  Services Administration  (SAMHSA) (2013) Results from the 2012  National 
Survey  on Drug  Use and Health:  Summary  of national  findings.  
Substance Abuse and  Mental Health  Services Administration  (SAMHSA), Center  for Behavioral Health  Statistics 
and Quality (2012) The TEDS report: Cannabis admissions reporting daily use at treatment entry . 
Smith  SR, Prosser  WA, Donahue  DJ, Morgan  ME, Anderson  CM, Shanahan  WR; APD356 -004 Study  Group 
(2009)  Lorcaserin  (APD356),  a selective  5-HT(2C)  agonist,  reduces  body  weight  in obese  men and women. 
Obesity  (Silver  Spring)  17(3):  494-503. 
Smith  SR, Weissman  NJ, Anderson  CM, Sanchez  M, Chuang E, Stubbe  S, Bays H, Shanahan  WR; Behavioral 
Modification and Lorcaserin for Overweight and Obesity Management (BLOOM) Study Group (2010) 
Multicenter,  placebo -controlled  trial of lorcaserin  for weight  management.  N Engl J Med 363(3):  245-56. 