 
   
 
 
The relationship among  changes i n Brain Network Activation , changes  
in core depressive and cognitive symptoms  and safety and tolerability  in adult outpatients with  major 
depressive disorder  treated with open -label, flexible -dose vortioxetine: A proof of concept  study  
 
John Zajecka MD  
Rush University Medical Center  
 
  
Sponsor:  Rush University Medical Center  
  Treatment Research Center  
  [ADDRESS_631425]  
  Skokie, Illinois [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Study Number:  IISR-2014 -100702 
  
IND Number:  N/A 
 
Compound:  Vortioxetine  
 
Contact [CONTACT_7171]:  John Zajecka MD  
Principal Investigator  
[EMAIL_9428]  
[PHONE_10203]       
                                            
    
  
1 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
Study Synopsis  
This study will include  adult outpatients 18 -65 years of age with major depressive disorder (MDD) with 
subjective reporting of cognitive dysfunction treated with flexible -dose vortioxetine (5 -20 mg/day) for 
eight weeks.  Following completion of the informed consent process, this  study will consist of a 
screening p eriod  (visit 1) of 2-14 days to assess inclusion/exclusion criteria.  Subjects who continue to 
meet inclusion criteria at baseline (visit 2) will begin the assessment and treatment phase of the study.  
 
The first EEG/BNA  (BNA)  will be performed at the screen visit . Subsequent BNA will be at baseline, 2 -
weeks after the start of treatment, and at the end of 8 weeks of treatment (or early termination) .  
 
 The Schedule of Events (Appendix  I) shows detailed study proc edures th at will be performed at each 
visit.  The table below clarifies the schedule of dosing and attendant BNA tests.  
 Quick Summary of Study Visits , Dosing and BNA  
Visit #  Screen  
1 Baseline  
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  
 
10 (or ET)  
Day -2 to -14 0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 
Treatment Week  -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Dose  mg/day  
 10  5-10 5-10 5-20 5-20 5-20 5-20* 5-20* 5-[ADDRESS_631426]  BNA  BNA  
 BNA  
     BNA  
*No dose changes allowed after visit [ADDRESS_631427] Population:  
Subjects aged 18 to 65 years old with  acute single epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865],  acute recurrent MDD and acute recurrent 
MDD with incomplete inter -epi[INVESTIGATOR_491131] (such as 
difficulty concentrating, slow thinking, and difficulty in learning new things or remembering things)  that 
correlated with  the timing of their current major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] (MDE) . 
 Number of Subjects:  
[ADDRESS_631428] is 
one who meets all inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria and completes the baseline visit including 
the baseline  BNA.   
 
Number of Sites: (U.S. Study)   
2:  Chicago, IL and Skokie, IL  
 
Dose Level(s):  
5 mg/d, 10mg/d,  15 mg/d, 20mg/d.  Route of Administration: Oral  
 
Duration of Vortioxetine Treatment:  
One dose daily for 8 weeks.   
 Period of Evaluation:  
Screening phase 1 -2 weeks; treatment phase 8 weeks.  
 
2 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
  
3 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
Introduction:  
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is the most common psychiatric disorder with a lifetime prevalence of 
16.2% and a 12 -month prevalence of 6.6% in developed countries [1]. It represents one of the most 
serious challenges faced by [CONTACT_491149], being a leading cause of 
disability globally [2] [3]. MDD is characteriz ed by [CONTACT_46917] [ADDRESS_631429] or pleasure, disturbed sleep or appetite, low energy, and feelings of 
guilt or low self- worth [4].  
  
It is well established that mood disorders are also associated with cognitive dysfunction [5,6]. In fact, growing evidence from neuropsycholo gical studies suggests that the majority of  patients suffering from 
MDD present with some form of dysfunction in certain cognitive domains  (such as executive function [7 -
10], visuospatial short -term memory and learning and on verbal learning [11]; psychomotor speed and 
in immediate and delayed free recall [12] and working memory [13]) before treatment and are among  
the most common residual symptom domain s after apparent successful treatment of other core MD D 
symptoms . Patients with depression also seem to perform si gnificantly worse than  normal controls on 
effort -demanding tasks, while they did not differ on the effortless tasks [14,15]. A st udy by [CONTACT_491150] [16] 
showed that patients with depression performed  approximately one half of an standard deviation  worse 
than healthy subjects on verbal learning and memory tests.   Other studies, however, found non -
significant or only minimal differences in n europsychological tests among patients with MDD and normal 
controls [17 -19]. 
 Regarding prevalence of cognitive dysfunction in MDD patients, little is still known.  Afridi et al. [20], 
assessed cognitive disturbances among newly diagnosed depressed (n=30) and healthy subjects (n=30). 
He found that 63.3% of the depressed patients had cognitive difficulties compared to 3.3% of healthy -
controls, with attention/concentration being the most common domain of cognition affected, followed 
by [CONTACT_491151]. The  presence or absence of cognitive dysfunction in MDD patients depend s on 
a number of factors including symptom severity [21], presence of melancholic features [22], presence of 
recurrent epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] [23], presence of psychotic features [24], remitted versus a cute states [25], age [26], 
and pharmacological and non -pharmacological interventions [27]. Regarding pharmacological 
interventions, some evidence shows that conventional antidepressants may worsen c ognitive function 
(e.g., tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)  secondary  to anticholinergic or antihistaminic effects; selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)  secondary  to selective increase of serotonin  (5-HT) resulting in 
diminished norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238]  (NE) and dopamine (DA) output; mirtazapin e secondary  to anti histaminic 
effects  [30]. 
 
Cognitive dysfunction in MDD may be a symptom of depressive illness and persist, as residual 
symptoms, despi[INVESTIGATOR_491132] [34]. As discussed above, they may also, however, emerge as adverse effects of some psychotropic medications, inc luding antidepressants [26 ]. 
 Various neurotransmitters are implicated in c ognitive processes, including [ADDRESS_631430] shown di fferential 
effects on memory and executive function in healthy and psychiatrically ill populations [35]. In animal studies, 5 -HT2A receptor agonists enhance  
associative  learning and certain antagonists impair associative learning [36]. In addition, depletion of 5 -
HT has been shown to impair discrimination reversal performance, a form of cognitive flexibility [37]. 
Dopamine is also involved in cognitive flexibility, with a role in attentional selection, reversal and 
extinction learning [38], [39]. Animal studie s have shown that blockade of DA  receptors in the prefrontal 
4 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
cortex impairs spatial wo rking memory [39]. Norepi[INVESTIGATOR_491133] a role in spatial working 
mem ory formation [38] as well as attentional set -shifting [37,38]. Acetylcholine has been implicated in 
aspects of reversal learning in the orbitofrontal co rtex [37]. Furthermore, behavio ral studies in humans 
suggest that acetylcholine is responsible for main tenance of attention and increased levels of this 
neurotransmitter are related to attentional effort [40]. Finally, histamine seems to affect learning and 
memory, partly via modulating acetylcholine release [41]. In rats, blockade of [ADDRESS_631431], impairs memory processing speed [42 ; data on file with [COMPANY_005]]. 
 Vortioxetine is a novel antidepressant with hypothetical multimodal mechanism of action.   It is thought 
to work through a combination of multiple  pharmacological modes of action:  5-HT reuptake inhibition , 
5-HT
3 and 5 -HT 7 receptor antagonism,  5-HT 1A receptor agonis m, and 5 -HT 1B receptor partial agonism  
[43]. In vivo nonclinical studies have demonstrated that v ortioxetine enhances levels of  the 
neurotransmitters 5 -HT, NE, DA , acetylcholine and histamine in specific areas of the brain [43]. These 
affinities are all considered to be of clinical relevance and involved in the mechanism of act ion at 
therapeutic doses.  
 Vortio xetine showed antidepressant activity in completed MDD studies in which primary endpoints 
were change in depressive symptoms.  Currently, three placebo -controlled clinical trials demonstrate 
vortioxetine’s efficacy on cognitive performance in adult outpatients with MDD (Katona , et al., 2012; 
McIntyre, et al., 2013; data on file  with [COMPANY_005]).  Two of the above studies (Katona, McIntyre) included 
duloxetine as a comparator antidepressant; both active antidepressant s demonstrat ed antidepressant  
efficacy compared to placebo.  Vortioxetine, not duloxetine, showed improvement compared to placebo on the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST).  Results of these two studies also suggested that the improvement with vortioxetine (and not  duloxetine) was a result of  direc t effects versus indirect (via 
mood)  improvement in cognition.   Correlating the clinical changes in mood  and cognition with 
translational imaging  data could prov ide insight to diagnose and  manage cognitive changes associa ted 
with MDD.  
 Vortioxetine improved cogniti on sub -items in the Montgomery -Åsberg Depression Rating Scale  (MADRS)  
[44] (Item 6 —  concentration difficulties) [45] and Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAM -A) [46] (Item 5 -  
concentration and memory) [47] when compared to placebo (in the trials in which the primary endpoint was also positive). In addition, exploratory cognitive t ests for verbal learning (RAVLT —  Rey Auditory 
Verbal Learning Test) [48] and executive function, working memory, processing speed and visuospatial 
attention DSST [49]) were included in a v ortioxetine conducted study in elderly patients [50] with MDD 
(prim ary endpoint was change in depressive symptoms). In this study, vortioxetine 5 mg/day improved 
cognitive dysfunction in both tests whereas duloxetine (active reference) improved cognitive 
dysfunction in the RAVLT but not in the DSST. This finding is consis tent with the literature as shown by a 
study in which elderly patients receiving duloxetine demonstrated significantly greater improvement in a composite cognitive score mainly driven by [CONTACT_491152] [51].  
 
Brain Network Activation : 
Appropriate diagnosis and differential diagnosis is critical to finding a treatment that will provide 
optimal efficacy. Currently, diagnosis depends on an assumption that historical and current clinical information is accurate and reliable.  The need to find biomarkers to improve current diagnosis and 
differential diagnosis, and the potential to predict treatment outcome, remains a significant unmet need 
in the optimal management of MDD . 
5 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
 
In recent years more attention has been devoted to the use of functio nal magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI) to assess the state of the frontolimbic circuit to diagnose depression and monitor response to treatment. In particular the activity of the rostral anterior cingulated cortex (rACC) measured both on 
fMRI and EEG has be en demonstrated to be a reliable biomarker of de pression and its response to 
antidepressant therapy .  
 
Sensory evoked potentials (SEPs) are electrical potentials, recorded from the central nervous system of humans or animals (usually via EEG) w hile stimula ting sense organs. T hey are distinct from spontaneous 
potentials (background EEG), which are recorded without stimulation. Contrary to spontaneous potentials, SEPs are phase -locked to the stimulus.  
 Event Related Potentials (ERPs) are msec by [CONTACT_491153], during sensory, motor, and cognitive tasks. They are extracted from the background electroencephalogram (EEG) through a process 
of time-locked averaging process of many trials of the same type to the onset of a sensory stimulus or a 
motor response. As such, they offer a powerful technique for the noninvasive characterization of human 
brain function by [CONTACT_491154], or der of activation, and dynamic orchestration of 
brain regions during the unfolding of cognitive tasks.  
 Although Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and fMRI allow for precise localization of functional activations during cognitive tasks, their temporal re solution is limited by [CONTACT_491155] (peaking 5 sec after an event and subsiding after 12 -15 
sec, and affecting both blocked and event -related fMRI designs). Because of the slowness of the 
hemodyn amic response PET and conventional fMRI have limited temporal resolution, while ERPs allow 
selective averaging of different stimulus types within the same experimental block, thus allowing mixed -
trial analysis (such as Successful and Failed inhibitions in the Go/NoGo signal). Moreover, ERPs can provide unique temporal information concerning the timing and order of activations of normal and 
abnormal neural activity within the block during the unfolding of cognitive tasks which can be the only 
significant information that differentiate between those activities. Finally EEG methodology is less invasive, less costly, and cumbersome than PET and fMRI methodology.  
 ERPs consist of an ordered sequence of waveforms such as P100, N100, P200, N200, P300, N400 dependin g on their latency and their polarity. Early components (P100 and N100 etc.) are called 
exogenous, because they require a stimulus, and reflect activity in primary or secondary sensory areas. 
However, such early ERP waves can be modulated by [CONTACT_491156] -down cognitive 
control processes. Longer latency components (P300, N400 etc.) are called endogenous, because they 
can be present even in response to an expected missing stimulus. P300 is elicited in visual or auditory oddball tasks in respons e to task -relevant, salient infrequent targets, with greater amplitude over the 
posterior (parietal) scalp. Another waveform of interest is the N200, a prominent N200 with a frontal distribution is observed in response to NoGo stimuli in Go/NoGo tasks, and  it is thought to reflect 
response inhibition processes. In contrast, Go stimuli elicit the parietally distributed P300.  
 
Although spatial resolution of the ERP method is coarse, it is improved by [CONTACT_295071] -density and 
new active amplifiers sensor arrays.  
 
6 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
Brain Network Activation (BNA) technology uses high density EEG to collect ERP data for generation of a 
reference brain network model (RBNM) based on common neural activations, or event -pairs, defined as 
any two salient electrophysiological events,  each at a given scalp location, frequency band and time 
range, with a specific temporal relationship. The algorithm produces a visual display of BNA network 
patterns that is simpler to interpret than traditional EEG output, while providing information on cortical 
connectivity. In addition, a RBNM similarity index (BNA score) is calculated for the EEG components of 
time (relative and absolute), amplitude, and overall pattern (connectivity) providing objective and easily interpretable results.  
 The present s tudy aims at clarifying dynamic spatio -temporal aspects of brain functional organization 
(e.g. inhibitory control, working memory) in MDD  and cognitive dysfunction associated with MDD  using 
BNA during the performance of the different tasks.  
 
Recent studies have validated the use of brain network activation (BNA) analysis using ERPs to diagnose 
and predict treatment response in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), models of 
schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease , concussion, pain and fibrom yalgia (data on file, ElMindA).  
 
We hypothesize that the application of BNA using ERPs may be used as a non -invasive tool to improve 
diagnosis , differential diagnosis, target -specific depression symptom domains such as cognition  and 
monitoring treatment response in MDD  with cognitive dysfunction .  
 Considering the compromised course of untreated depression and its well -known robust responsiveness 
to treatment, the development of an objective diagnostic tool to help diagnose individuals with MDD 
and predict treatment response can have a significant clinical and public health impact.  
 
Rationale for the Proposed Study : 
Vortioxetine has been shown to improve core depressive symptoms and improve cognitive function in 
adult outpatients with MDD and subjective comp laints of cognitive function. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_491134] a subsequent confirmatory study  that will further elucidate the e ffect of 
vortioxetine on MDD  and cognitive function in this population. This exploratory study will ascertain the 
acute changes in core depression symptoms, cognitive function, tolerability, and safety using flexible -
dose vortioxetine in adult outpatients with MDD with subjective complaints of cognitive functioning, as 
measured by [CONTACT_491157].  
 
Data suggest  that the impact of vortioxetine on cognition in MDD may be independent of the 
antidepressant effect, perhaps through a  centrally -mediated pathway different from that involved in the 
antidepressant effects.  This study will investigate the effect of v ortioxetine on cognitive dysfunction 
more broadly covering specific measures of attention, executive functioning and psychomotor speed, as 
well as assess its effect on core depressive symptoms , function and global change . The number of 
subjects treated in this study is generally accepted for exploratory studies and intended to demo nstrate  
1) improvement in cognition and efficacy in conventional MDD symptom domains, 2) improvement in cognition but no antidepressant efficacy in conventional MDD symptom domains, and, 3) no 
improvement of cognition and no antidepressant efficacy in conv entional MDD symptom domains.  We 
predict distinct patterns in brain network activity among these subgroups. This preliminary data is 
expected to provide greater insight into understanding the direct versus indirect antidepressant effects 
7 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
of acute treatment  with vortioxetine on cognition in MDD, and provide a basis for future clinical trials 
and applications.  
 
STUDY OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES  
 
OBJECTIVES  
 Primary Objective:  
• To explore BNA changes from baseline to endpoint on 1 ) efficacy of core MDD symptoms  and, 2) 
improvement of cognitive dysfunction with acute treatment of flexible dose vortioxetine in adult outpatients with MDD and subjective complaints of cognitive dysfunction.  
 Secondary Objectives:  
• To evaluate the  efficacy over eight weeks of treatment o f flexible -dose vortioxetine 
(5-20 mg/day) on standard outcome measures for core depression symptoms  
• To evaluate the changes in cogniti ve function  from baseline to endpoint with flexible -
dose vortioxetine (5 -20 mg/day)   
• To evaluate the changes in functionality over  eight weeks of treatment with flexible -
dose vortioxetine (5 -20 mg/day)   
• To explore baseline BNA patterns and clinical baseline features of:    
 - core MDD symptoms (including severity)      
 - cognitive dysfunction         
 - functionality   
• To explore change in BNA patterns  and clinical changes on:     
 - core MDD symptoms         
 - cognitive function         
 - functionality          
 - adverse even ts attributed to vortioxetine (per i nvestigator opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649])  
• To explore correlations between patter ns of BNA changes and evaluated changes in 
RDOC (Research Domain Criteria) domains and structures  
• To explore differences in BNA patterns and identify potential n eural pathways that 
may impact core depressive symptoms different from cognitive function  
• To explore  change in BNA patterns from baseline to after [ADDRESS_631432] outcome measures of core depression 
symptoms at the end of acute treatment  
• To strengthen the level of confidence with BNA patterns ob served during the course 
of treatment that may allow identification of potential trends observed as a result of 
treatment, by [CONTACT_7661] a screen and baseline BNA done prior to receiving treatment  
• To obtain baseline BNA data in adult outpatients with MDD and s ubjective cognitive 
dysfunction prior to treatment that can be utilized for identification of BNA patterns 
associated with MDD   
• To confirm t he safety and tolerability of v ortioxetine (5 -20mg/d ay). 
 
  
8 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
OUTCOMES  
 
Primary  Outcome:  
The primary outcome of this study is to explore changes in BNA pat terns from baseline to endpoint  with 
1) antidepressant response  status; response defined as  >  50 % change in total MADRS score from 
baseline to endpoint  and, 2) change in cognitive function  defined as change from baseline to endpoint 
on change in total number of correct symbols on the DSST . 
 Secondary Outcomes: 
1. Explore effect of core MDD symptoms, cognitive function, and functionality  from baseline 
through eight weeks of treatment with vortioxetine:  
a. Depressive symptoms  
i. HDRS -17 total score  
ii. QIDS -SR-16 total score  
iii. HDRS -28 total score  
iv. Response defined as ≥50% decrease in MADRS total score  
v. Remission defined as < 11 MADRS total score at endpoint  
vi. Asymptomatic remission defined as MADRS total sc ore <4  
vii. Cogni tion and functional ity  
viii. MGH -CPFQ total score  
ix. PDQ  
x. TMT- A/B 
xi. Stroop  Test  
xii. UPSA  
xiii. WLQ  
b. Global clinical status  
i. CGI-Severity  
ii. CGI-Improvement  
2. Explore effect of core MDD symptoms, cognitive function, and functionality from baseline to endpoint following t reatment with vortioxetine and the relationship between changes in BNA 
patterns from baseline to endpoint on:  
a. Depressive symptoms (change from baseline to endpoint)  
i. HDRS -17 total score  
ii. QIDS -SR-16 total score  
iii. HDRS -28 total score  
iv. Response defined as ≥50% decrease in MADRS total score  
v. Remission defined as <11  MADRS total score at endpoint  
vi. Asymptomatic remission defined as MADRS total score <4  
b. Cognition and functionality (change from baseline to endpoint)  
i. MGH -CPFQ total score  
ii. PDQ  
iii. TMT- A/B 
iv. Stroop Test 
v. UPSA  
vi. WLQ 
c. Global clinical status (change from baseline to endpoint)  
i. CGI-Severity  
9 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
ii. CGI-Improvement  
3. To explore c hange s in BNA patterns from baseline in predicting clinical outcome at endpoint on:  
a. Depressive symptoms (change from baseline, 2 week, 8 week)  
i. MADRS total score  
ii. HDRS -17 total score  
iii. HDRS -28 total score  
iv. QIDS -SR-16 total score  
b. Cognitive function and functionality (change form baseline, 2 week  , 8 week)  
i. MGH -CPFQ total  
ii. PDQ  
iii. WLQ  
c. Clinical global status (change from baseline, 2 week, 8 week)  
i. CGI-Severity  
ii. CGI-Improvemen t 
4. To explore differences in BNA patterns and identify potential neural pathways that may impact 
core depressive symptoms different from cognitive function:  
a. Explore differences in patterns of BNA changes from baseline to endpoint between : 
i. Subjects meeting antidepressant efficacy criteria (based on response and  
remission criteria for MADRS, HRSD, QIDS) and improvement in cognition  (based 
DSST ). 
ii. Subjects failing to meet antidepressant efficacy criteria (based on response  
criteria for MADRS, HRSD, QIDS) but show improvement in cognition  (based on 
DSST) . 
iii. Subjects failing to meet antidepressant efficacy criteria (based on response  
criteria for MADRS, HRSD, QIDS) and failing to show improvement in cognition (based on DSST) . 
iv.  
v.  
5. To explor e changes in BNA  patterns  in MDD with cognitive dysfunction prior to receiving 
treatment with vortioxetine and:  
a. Severity of MDD as measured by [CONTACT_491158], QIDS -SR-[ADDRESS_631433], TMT -
A/B,  TMT -B, Stroop , MGH-CPFQ total score, UPSA, WLQ . 
c. Prediction of achieving symptomatic remission of MDD as measured by [CONTACT_491159], HDRS -17 total score  and CGI -Improvement  (1 or 2)  
d. Prediction of cognitive improvement measured by [CONTACT_491160]; cutoff 70% improvement 
from baseline.  
6. Explore  relationship with changes in BNA patterns in remitted v s. non -remitted subjects after 8 
weeks of treatment with vortioxe tine as measured by [CONTACT_491161] e, HDRS -17 total score ,  
QIDS total score,, and CGI -Improvement.  
7. Assess safety and tolerability of 8 weeks open -label, flexible -dose vortioxetine in all subjects for:  
a. Spontaneously reported adverse events  
b. Clinical safety  laboratory tests (when indicated, vital signs, weight, EKGs and physical 
exam)  
10 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
c. Evaluate relationship between adverse events after 2 and 8 weeks of treatment with 
changes in BNA patterns for nausea, worsening of baseline suicidal ideation (as 
measured by M ADRS item 10, HDRS -17 item 2 and C -SSRS)  
 
Informed Consent : 
The informed consent document, in conjunction with verbal discussion of the protocol, will be used to explain the study, including the risks and benefits, to the subject in simple terms before the  subject is 
entered into the study.  The investigator is responsible to see that informed consent is obtained from each subject and to obtain the appropriate signatures and dates on the informed consent document prior to the performance of any protocol pro cedures and prior to any changes made to a subject’s 
medical treatment plan for the purpose of study participation.  The original signed consent form will be retained by [CONTACT_093].  
 
All subjects will take part in the informed consent process prior t o participating in any study specific 
assessments or procedures, including assessment of study specific inclusion and exclusion criteria. The 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_491135] d Clinical Practice Guidelines.  Subjects will then be eligible for Screening Visit.  
 Subject Selection:  
Subjects will be screened for study inclusion and exclusion criteria, and the case report form (CRF) will 
be reviewed by [CONTACT_458] p rior to Baseline Visit (Visit 2) . 
 Main Criteria for Inclusion: 
• The subject has single  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865] o r recurrent MDD (acute onset of recurrence of recurrent MDD 
with poor inter -epi[INVESTIGATOR_491136]) (inter -epi[INVESTIGATOR_491137]) as the 
primary diagn osis according to DSM -IV-TR criteria. The cu rrent MDE will be confirmed using the 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI V6.0.0).  
• The subject has a MADRS total score ≥ 26. 
• Subject reports subjective cognitive dysfunction (such as difficulty con centrating, slow thinking, 
and difficulty in learning new things or remembering things).  
• The reported duration of the current MDE is at least 3 months  and no longer than 24 months . 
• The subject is a man or woman between 18  and 65 years old, inclusive.  
• Right -handed, normal (corrected) vision, and normal hearing.  
 
Main Criteria for Exclusion: 
• The subject has a score  of ≥[ADDRESS_631434] at the Baseline Visit.  
• Failure to respond to or inability to tolerate an adequate trial of vortioxetine in the past.  
• Exposure to an investigational compound 30 days prior to enrollment   
• Exposure to any psychoactive or otherwise excluded medication within  five half- lives of the 
baseline visit  or during the study . Excluded medications include: antidepressants, anxiolytics, 
anticonv ulsants,  barbiturates, chloral hydrate, lithium, antipsychotics, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], 
hypnotics, MAO -Inhibitors, muscle relaxers,  triptans,  centrally -acting antihistamines,  central 
alpha -[ADDRESS_631435]. John's Wort . 
• The subject has 1 or more of the following:  
o Primary  psychiatric disorder other than MDD as defined in the DSM -IV-TR (as assessed 
by [CONTACT_42145], Version 6.0.0).  
11 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
o Current or history of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), pervasive 
developmental disorder, manic or hypomanic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], schizophrenia, or any other 
psychotic disorder, including major depression with psychotic features, mental retardation, organic mental disorders, or mental disorders due to a general medical 
condition as defined in the DSM -IV-TR. 
o Current diagnosis of alcohol or other substance abuse or dependence (excluding 
nicotine or caffeine) as defined in the DSM -TV-TR that has not been in sustained full 
remission for at least 6 months (for abuse) and 12 months (for dependence)  prior to 
Screening.  
o Positive urine drug screen prior to Baseline.  
o Presence or history of a clinically significant n eurological disorder (including epi[INVESTIGATOR_002])  or 
severe head injury, or any condition that has caused an abnormal EEG or that may interfere with an EEG recording  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871] . 
o Neurodegenerative disorder (Alzheimer Disease, Parkinson Disease, multiple sclerosis, Huntington Disease, etc).  
o Any unstable medical condition as determined by [CONTACT_458] ( PI). 
o Any DSM- IV Axis II disorder that might compromise the study  as determined by [CONTACT_978] . 
• The subject has any other disorder for which the treatment takes priority over treatment of MDD or is likely to interfere with study treatment or impair treatment compliance.  
• The subject has physical, cognitive, or language impairment  of such severity as to adversely 
affect the validity of the data derived from the neuropsychological tests.  
• The subject has a significant risk of suicide according to the PI 's clinical judgment .  
• The subject, in  the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439] , poses a risk of harm  to others.  
• The subject has initiated formal cognitive or behavioral therapy, systemic psychotherapy within less than 6 months of study screening, or has plans to initiate such therapy during the study.  
• The subject has received electroconvulsive therapy, v agus nerve stimulation, or repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation within 12  months prior to Screening.  
• The current MDE is considered by [CONTACT_978]  [INVESTIGATOR_491138] [ADDRESS_631436] 6 weeks duration each at the rec ommended dose.  
• The subject is pregnant or breastfeeding, or is  intending to become pregnant before, during, or 
within 30 days after participating in this study.  
• Hair or scalp conditions that may significantly compromise the quality of an EEG with 64 scalp electrodes, including but not limited to braids or significant alopecia, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871] (collaboration with ElMindA will be sought if unclear) . 
 Contraception  
From signing of the informed consent  through  the duration of the study  (and f or no less than [ADDRESS_631437] dose of study medication ), female subjects of childbearing potential* who are sexually active 
with a nonsterilized male partner** must use adequate contraception. In addition they must be advised not to donate ova during this period.  
 *Females NOT of childbearing potential are defined as those who have been surgically sterilized 
(hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy or tubal ligation) or who are postmenopausal (e .g., defined as at 
least [ADDRESS_631438] regular menses wit h an FSH>40 IU/L or at least [ADDRESS_631439] regular menses, 
confirmed before any study medication is implemented).  
 
12 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
**Sterilized males should be at least [ADDRESS_631440] obtained 
documentation of the absence of sperm in the ejaculate.  
 
An acceptable method of contraception is defined as one that has no higher than a 1% failure rate.  
 
In this study, the only acceptable methods of contraception are:   
• Barrier methods ( male condom PLUS spermicide; cap (plus spermicidal cream or jelly) PLUS male 
condom and spermicide; diaphragm (plus spermicidal cream or jelly) PLUS male condom and 
spermicide  
• Intrauterine devices (IUDs) (c opper T PLUS condom or spermicide; progesterone T PLUS condom 
or spermicide  
• Hormonal contraceptives (i mplants; hormone shot/injection; combined pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]; minipi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]; patch; 
vaginal ring PLUS male condom and spermicide ) 
 Female subjects will be provided with information on acceptable methods of contraception as part of the subject informed consen t process and will be asked to sign a consent form stating that they 
understand the requirements for avoidance of pregnancy and donation of ova during the course of the study and within [ADDRESS_631441]  will be performed at the screening visit  for women of childbearing potential and 
may be repeated at the investigator’s discretion.  
 
Pregnancy  
If any subject is found to be pregnant or breastfeeding during the study , she will be withdrawn and any  
sponsor -supplie d drug will be immediately discontinued.   
 If the pregnancy occurs during administration of active study medication  (e.g., after Visit [ADDRESS_631442] dose of active study medication ), the pregnancy will be reported immediately  to the IRB 
using standard procedures per the sponsor and PI.  
 If the female subject agrees to her  primary care physician being informed, the investigator will notify the 
primary care physician that the subject was participating in a clinical study at the time she be came 
pregnant and provide adequate details of treatment the subject received.  
 
All pregnancies discovered post -baseline will be referred to the subject’s primary care physician, 
obstetrician or other designated medical care provider and followed via regular communication for 30 
days  (including any premature termination) . 
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
See Schedule of Events  (Appendix I ) for complete list of study procedures performed at each visit.  
 
All BNA procedures will be done as early in the visit as possible to avoid any confounding factors that 
may impact the outcome, except during the screen visit (at this visit, the  BNA will occur after the subject 
completes the informed consent process and clinician -assessed inclusion/exclusion criteria are 
assessed ). The screening visit can be split into 2 visits, as long as the screening period does not ex ceed 
the 14 -day screen period.  
13 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
 
Visit 1 (Screen)  
• Following the informed consent process, subjects will begin the Screening Visit (Visit 1) , which 
will include a psychiatric/medical history, vital signs, urinalysis, urine drug screen, urine 
pregnancy test (females),  EEG/BNA,  blood drawn for laboratory tests  (CMP, CBC w/diff, TSH) , 
ECG, and clinician - and patient -rated scales .  
 Visits 2 -10 
All Subjects  
• Subjects who meet all inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria following the screenin g visit will 
enter the study. Weekly study visits will be conducted for effic acy, safety, and tolerability.  N o 
dose changes will be allowed after Visit 8 .   
• A baseline EEG /BNA  will be taken be fore the subject begins taking v ortioxetine and follow -up 
EEG/ BNA readings will be taken at Visit 4 , and Visit 10  (or last study visit if a subject is 
withdrawn early ).   
• Vital signs, review of adverse ev ents, study drug accountability  and clinician - and patient -rated 
scales will be conducted at specific study visits . 
 
Description of BNA  
BNA is a method of analyzing electrophysiological and neuropsychological brain network activity using 
multichannel signals acquired by [CONTACT_66594]/ERP non -invasive  system hardware.  The following sections 
describe the EEG methodology and the neurocognitive tasks.  
 
EEG Procedures  
Subjects will be fitted with a net containing [ADDRESS_631443] EEG recording will be performed using the FDA system manufactured by [CONTACT_491162], Inc (EGI) from [ADDRESS_631444] electrical safety (EN [ZIP_CODE] -1) and EMC compatibility. During  
the recording of ERPs, triggers sent by [CONTACT_491163].  
 
Neurocognitive tests (ERPs)  
The following  battery of tasks will be performed by [CONTACT_491164].  If total recording time 
reaches 60 minutes, the Delayed match -to-sample task below may be excluded.   
 Eyes Open/Eyes Closed tasks :  EEG will be recorded at rest (no cognitive task), [ADDRESS_631445] patterns of the default 
mode network (DMN). The DMN is a network comprising many brain regions which show in fMRI studies reduced activation during task execution. Recently, the DMN has been studied also in EEG signals (Laufs 
et al. 2003).  There is evidence that the DMN is impaired during emotional processing in MDD patients 
(for example see Grimm et al. 2009).   
 Auditory oddball task: The oddball task is a classic EEG paradig m that has been extensively used for 
many years, in numerous studies and in many neurological patient populations.  It is considered to 
14 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
involve executive functions, attention and memory processes . During the task, sounds will be presented, 
at an average rat e of 1 every 1.5 sec. A total of 80% of the sounds ("standard') will be tones of repeating 
frequency and intensity. A total of 10% of the sounds ("target") will be tones of another frequency to 
which participants will respond by [CONTACT_7326] a button. The rema ining 10% of sounds ("novel") will be 
multi -frequency s ounds, different for each trial ). Segments of 1200 ms will be averaged separately for 
"standard", "target," and "novel" sounds.  The task duration is approximately 12 minutes.  
 Visual Go -Nogo:  The Go s timuli consist of white color English alphabetic letters the NoGo stimuli consist 
of white colored X symbol. The NoGo appears 20% of the time and the Go stimuli appears 80%. The stimuli are presented in the center of a black background computer screen for 150 ms, and are located 
between two vertical white lines which remain constant on the screen. Subjects are instructed to press a key as quickly as they can when presented with the Go stimulus and withhold pressing the key when the NoGo stimulus appears. Th e task duration is approximately 14 minutes.  
 Delayed match- to-sample: Memory and emotional processing related evoked potentials will be 
measured by [CONTACT_491165] a delay of 1.[ADDRESS_631446]  one. The task duration is approximately 13 
minutes.  
 
Optional tasks:  
If recording time allows, additional, optional tasks may be complet ed which will be chosen from the 
following list, for a total EEG recording time of approximately 45 -60 minutes.  
 Inter hemispheric transfer time ( IHTT ): In this task the subject needs to count red dots that appear in 
the middle of the screen while white sq uares flashes  either in the left or right visual fields. At the end of 
each block the subject reports the number of red dots. The inter -hemispheric transfer time is calculated 
from the evoked response to the peripheral stimuli. The task duration is approxi mately 12 minutes.  
 Auditory Go/No Go test :  The Go/NoGo paradigm is among the most well -characterized assays of 
response inhibition to perceptual stimuli. Go/NoGo tasks involve the presentation of a continuous series of “Go” or “target” cues to which subj ects are asked to respond as quickly as possible, and “NoGo” or 
“distractor” cues that require subjects to inhibit motor responses. ERP studies reliably identify a negative -going component occurring 200 –  400 ms following NoGo stimuli known as the “NoGo N2 ”, 
which occurs maximally at fronto -central scalp locations. On NoGo trials, the N2 is followed by a 
positive -going shift. This positive complex, termed the “NoGo P3”, also occurs maximally at fronto -
central scalp sites and is typi[INVESTIGATOR_449984] 300 –  [ADDRESS_631447] demonstrated that the right ventral lateral prefrontal 
cortex (PFC), particularly the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), is consistently activated with successful motor 
control on Go/NoGo tasks, and lesions to the IFG impair such inhibitory control.  The IFG has been showing abnormal activity and connect ivity in MDD.  Based on these observations, the Go/NoGo may be 
a useful tool for assessing well- defined neural pathways in major depression. The task duration is 
approximately 18 minutes.  
 
LDAEP:   Subjects are seated with open eyes and are asked to look a t a fixation cross in front of them. 
Tones (1000 Hz, 40 ms duration with 10 ms rise and 10 ms fall time, ISI randomized between 1800 and 
15 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
2200 ms) of five intensities (54, 64, 74, 84, 94 dB sound pressure level) are presented binaurally in a 
pseudorandomize d form by [CONTACT_491166]. Before the study, the sound pressure level of the headphones 
should be calibrated with a sound level.  The task duration is approximately 13 minutes . 
 
INITIAL ASSESSMENT:  
 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Version 6.0.0 (MINI  or eMINI ) 
The MINI is a short structured diagnostic interview developed jointly by [CONTACT_379292] -IV and International Classification of Diseases 10th Revision 
psychiatric disorders. With an admin istration time of approximately [ADDRESS_631448] been done comparing the MINI to the Structured Clinical Interview 
for DSM -IV, Patient Edition and the Composite International Diagnostic Interview. The results of these 
studies showed that th e MINI  has acceptably high validation and reliability scores, but can be 
administered in a much shorter period of time (mean 18.7±11.6 minutes, median 15 minutes) than the 
above referenced instruments.   Adult ADHD Self -Report Scale (ASRS -v1.1)  Symptom Checklist  
The ASRS is a tool to help screen for ADHD in adult patients.  Insights gained through this screening may suggest the need for a more in -depth clinician interview.  The questions in the ASRS are consistent with 
DSM -IV criteria and addres s the manifestations of ADHD symptoms in adults.  The checklist takes less 
than 5 minutes to perform.  
 
DESCRIPTION OF CLINICAL OUTCOME MEASURES  
 DEPRESSION:  
 
Montgomery and Åsberg Depression Scale (MADRS)  
The MADRS is a 10- item rating scale designed to ass ess the severity of the symptoms in depressive 
illness that was shown to be sensitive to treatment effects. Items in the scale assess apparent sadness, 
reported sadness, inner tension, reduced sleep, reduced appetite, concentration difficulties, lassitude,  
inability to feel, pessimistic thoughts and suicidal thoughts. Symptoms are rated on a 7 -point scale from 
0 (no symptom) to 6 (severe symptom). Definitions of severity are provided at 2 -point intervals. The 
total score of the 10 items ranges from 0 to 60.  An experienced clinician can use the MADRS after a 
training session. It takes approximately 15 to 20 minutes to  administer and rate the MADRS.   All efforts 
will be made to keep the rater consistent.  
 Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS)  
The HDRS  is a clinician -rated used to rate the  patient’s depressive state based on feelings of depression, 
guilt, suicidality, anxiety,  agitation, level of insight, patterns of insomnia, loss of interest in work and 
other  activities, weight loss, hypochondriasis, and degree of psychomotor retardation.  It also  can be 
used to identify genital and somatic symptoms. This instrument will be administered by [CONTACT_491167].   All efforts 
will be made to keep the rater consistent.  
 
  
16 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
Quick Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology – Self-Report (QIDS -16-SR) 
The QIDS -16-SR is a 16 -item self- rated assessment of the severity of depressive symptoms. The QIDS 
assesses all the criterion symptom domains designated by [CONTACT_491168] M anual of Mental Disorders -  4th edition , text revised  (DSM -IV-TR) (APA 1994) 
to diagnose a major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]. These assessments can be used to screen for depression, 
although they have been used predominantly as measures of symptom severity. The seven day period 
prior to assessment is the usual time frame for as sessing symptom severity.  
 COGNITION  AND FUNCTIONALITY : 
Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST)  
The DSST is a cognitive test designed to assess psychomotor speed of performance  requiring visual 
perception, spatial decision -making and motor skills. The DSST consists of [ADDRESS_631449] 
symbols within the allowed time (eg, 90 sec) is measured. It takes approximately [ADDRESS_631450].  
 
University of San Diego Performance -based Skill Assessment and UPSA -Brief  
The UPSA was designed to evaluate the abilities of individuals to perform everyday tasks that are considered necessary for independent functioning in the community. The UPSA uses role -playing 
situations to evaluate skills in 5 areas: household chores (eg, preparing a shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_491139] a specific cooking task and shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_491140] a mock grocery store); communication (eg, emergency call, dialing a number from memory, callin g to reschedule a doctor’s appointment); finance (eg, counting 
change, reading a utility bill, and write and record a check for the bill); transportation (eg, planning the 
use of a public bus system); planning recreational activities (eg, preparing for an outing to the beach or 
zoo).  
 
Subscale scores for these scales range from 0 to 20 points, and total scores range from 0 to 100 points; higher scores reflect better performance. Administration of the UPSA requires about [ADDRESS_631451] [61] is a cognitive test designed to assess the ability to inhibit a prepotent  response to reading 
words while performing a task that requires attention control. The STROOP  test comprises [ADDRESS_631452] and ink 
color match; on the Incongruent STROOP  Sheet, the word and ink color do not match. For each sheet, the subject 
has [ADDRESS_631453] –  Part A and Part B  (TMT -A AND TMT -B) 
The TMT is a cognitive test designed to assess scanning, visuomotor tracking, executive function, and 
cognitive flexibility. Both parts of the TMT consist of 25 circles distributed over a sheet of paper. In Par t 
A, the circles are  numbered 1 –25, and the subject should draw lines to connect the numbers in 
ascending order. In Part B, the circles include both numbers (1 –13) and letters (A –L); as in Part A, the 
subject draws lines to connect the circles in an ascending pattern, but wit h the added task of alternating 
between the numbers and letters (ie, 1 -A-2-B-3-C, etc.). The subject should be instructed to connect the 
circles as quickly as possible, without lifting the pen or pencil from the paper. T he subject  is timed  as he 
or she con nects the “trail.” If the subject makes an error, it is point ed out immediately and the subject  is 
17 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631454]’s score only in that the correction of errors is included in 
the completion time for the task. It is unneces sary to continue the test if the subject has not completed 
both parts after [ADDRESS_631455] elapsed. It takes approximately 10 minutes to complete the TMT.  
 
Cognitive and Physical Functioning Questionnaire (MGH -CPFQ)  
The [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_491141] F unctioning Questionnaire is a brief scale 
used to measure cognitive and executive dysfunction in mood and anxiety disorders. It is a self- report 
unifactorial scale consisting of 7 items assessing aspects of cognitive and physical fu nctioning, rated on a 
scale from 1 (greater than normal) to 6 (absent). The reliability and validity of this scale has been 
evaluated and results have shown it to have strong internal consistency, temporal stability and sensitivity to change with treatment.  
 Perceived Deficits Questionnaire (PDQ)  
The PDQ is a subject -rated scale designed to assess cognitive function. The PDQ consists of four 5 -item 
subscales: Attention/Concentration, Retrospective memory, Prospective memory and 
Planning/Organization. Each item is rated on a scale from 0 (never) to 4 (almost always). The total score 
of the 20 items ranges from 0 to 80 with higher scores reflecting greater subjective cognitive 
dysfunction. It takes approximately 15 minutes to complete the PDQ.  
 
Working Limit ation Questionnaire  (WLQ)  
 The WLQ  has 25 items summarized as 4 scales that represent the percentage of time that a person was 
limited in particular job demands: time and scheduling demands such as working without stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_491142] g easily at the beginning of the workday (WLQ Time); physical work 
demands such as sitting, standing or staying in 1 position for longer than 15 min while working and using 
hand -held equipment (eg, phone) (WLQ Physical); mental -interpersonal work demands s uch as thinking 
clearly when working and speaking with people in -person, in meetings or on the phone (WLQ Mental); 
and output demands, such as working fast enough and doing work without making mistakes (WLQ Output). Scales are scored from 0, limited none o f the time, to 100, limited 100 percent of the time. 
Scores are weighted and aggregated to generate a productivity loss index score. The index is a weighted sum of scale scores that indicates reduction in output per hour compared with the output of a healt hy 
(not limited) employee. This questionnaire will only be administered to subjects who have been employed at least 14 days before baseline.  
 GLOBAL : 
Clinical Global Impression Scales (CGI -S and CGI -I) 
The CGI consist of 2 subscales: CGI -S and the CGI -I. The CGI -S assesses the clinician’s impression of the 
subject’s current mental illness state. The clinician should use his/her total clinical experience with this subject population and rate the current severity of the subject’s mental illness on a [ADDRESS_631456]’s improvement (or worsening). The clinician is required to assess the subject’s 
condition relative to Baseline on a 7 -point scale. In all cases, the assessment should  be made 
independent of whether the rater believes the improvement is drug- related or not.  
 
Assessment of Suicidal Ideation and Behavior  
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (“Lifetime Recent – Clinical ” and “ Since Last Visit – Clinical ” 
The C -SSRS was developed by [CONTACT_24661], PhD and researchers at Columbia University as a tool to help 
systematically assess suicidal ideation and behavior in subjects during participation in a clinical trial. The C-SSRS is comprised  of 23 questions divided among four domains addressing suicidal behavior and 
18 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631457] score. The primary endpoint 
will be analyzed using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with treatment and center as fixed factors, and baseline score as covariate. The p -values, least squares (LS) treatment means, difference between the LS 
treatment means, and 95% CIs for the treatment differences will be displayed.  
 This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_491143], and to provide data that will help design a future confirmatory study. 
Because this is an exploratory study, no formal sample size calculation was performed ; rather, sample 
size has  been based on that which is generally accepted by [CONTACT_491169] a study of this 
nature. In order to strengthen the level of confidence of the results, the BNA test is performed twice 
before the subject is given medication to provide repeatabil ity and two additional times during the 
course of treatment to allow the identification of any potential trend that may occur as a result of treatment.  
 
The relationship between changes in BNA and BNA total mean change from baseline and endpoint will 
be an alyzed. Changes in BNA  from baseline will also be analyzed by [CONTACT_491170] 
(e.g. response  to MADRS, remission, change in DSST ). 
 
Statistical analysis should also consider the fact that changes in brain networks may be independent of 
symptoms or neurocognitive scores; thus, the analysis of BNA changes across treatment duration should 
be also performed independently.  In other words, it is possible that BNA conveys information that is not 
found in other methods; trying to find correlatio ns may limit the correct interpretation. Therefore, 
robust trends found in BNA scores should be further researched, regardless of finding correlations to symptoms or neurocognitive tests.  For example, it could be that a change in BNA, without a significant  
change in symptoms, means that if the treatment will be continued for a few more weeks, a delayed improvement will be found; etc.  
 Secondary Efficacy Analyses  
Change from Baseline in TMT A, TMT B,  , PDQ, MGH -CPFQ, UPSA, percentage of productivity loss (WL Q), 
MADRS, CGI -S, and CGI -I will be analyzed at all time points (where rated) using ANCOVA model similar to 
the one described above for the primary endpoints.  
 MADRS responders (defined as a >50% decrease from Baseline), MADRS remission (defined as a MADRS  
total score <10).   CGI-S remission (CGT -S2), and CGI -I response (CGI -I2) will be analyzed at all time 
points by [CONTACT_51621], adjusting for baseline score and treatment.  
 
19 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631458] score and change 
from Baseline in MADRS total score as endogenous variables.  
 
C-SSRS will be summarized at all time points using descriptive techniques.  
 
All statistical tests will be 2 -sided and at the 5% level of significance. Ninety -five percent confidence 
limits will be presented together with the p -values.  
 Outcome Definitions  
• Remission (Primary Remission Criteria)  
o MADRS total score <  10; CGI-I < 2  
• Remission (Secondary Remission Criteria)  
o Score  < [ADDRESS_631459] 17  items of the HDRS (28 -item)    
o QIDS -SR16 total score < 5  
• Asymptomatic Remission  
o MADRS total score <  4 
• Response (Primary Response Criteria)  
o ≥50% decrease in MADRS total score from baseline   
• Respo nse (Secondary Response Criteria)  
o ≥50% decrease from baseline of first 17 items of the HDRS (28 -item)  
o ≥50% decrease from baseline in total score of HDRS (28 -item)  
o ≥50% decrease from baseline in total score of  QIDS -SR 16  
o ≥50% decrease from baseline in total score of MGH -CPFQ  
• Non -Remitted (Primary)  
o MADRS total score > 10 
• Non -response  
o  Change in MADRS total score from baseline < 25%, and MADRS total score > 10  
• Inadequate response  
o  Change in MADRS total score from baseline 25-49%, and MADRS total sc ore > 10  
 BNA Analysis  
 All BNA recordings will be transmitted to ElMindA for analysis.  
 
We will use a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve to assess the ability of each EEG BNA group 
pattern to discriminate MDD cases from controls using individual BNA similarity indices. The ROC analysis uses each value across the entire range of the  EEG BNA pattern as the cut -off for defining a case 
and compares this classification to the “true” diagnosis, as defined by [CONTACT_491171]. The ROC curve plots the sensitivity versus the false positive rate (1 -specificity) across the 
entire range of cut -offs.  This analysis generates a statistic called the area under the curve (AUC), which 
is proportional to the overall ability of the scale across its range of cut -offs to correctly identify both 
cases and non -cases.  
 Secondly, we will analyze the results of EEG measurement during the test within patients to identify 
possible predictors of treatment response. Those analyses are exploratory in nature, and they could potentially lead to develop an EEG biomarker to predict antidepressant re sponse.    
20 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631460] methods of blind source separation 
followed by [CONTACT_491172][INVESTIGATOR_491144], epoched and averaged to result with ERPs. For each band, the data is reduced into a set of discrete points that denote local 
extrema, the latencies and (z -score normalized) amplitudes of which are inputted to the algorithm. 
These activity peaks naturally contain the major conventional ERP components, but all other associated 
and induced peaks as well, which fully represent the significant information in the measured data. For each experimental state (i.e. pre - and post -treatment, monotherapy vs. adjunctive therapy, healthy 
control vs. MDD), the algorithm then searches for  peaks that have latencies synchronous across 
subjects. Next, peak -pair patterns are identified, whether within a single electrode or between any two, 
such that the inter -peak intervals were also synchronous across subjects. More complicated patterns of 
[ADDRESS_631461] patterns emerge –  the BNA group network.  
 In addition, BNA change analysis will be performed. Each subject participating in the drug treatment arm 
of the study is assigned similarity indices that quantify the degree to which his/her individual BNA repertoire match that of each group BNA. The score is computed twice for each subject –  once for pre -
treatment, and once for post -treatment,  the difference between them being termed 'BNA change'.  
 Safety Analyses  
Adverse Events  
• Spontaneously reported  AEs will be investigator- evaluated and documented throughout the 
study.  
• The definition of treatment -emergent adverse events (TEAEs) will be prov ided in the statistical 
analysis plan (SAP).  
• AEs that were reported more than once by a subject during the same period will be counted 
only once for that subject and period at the maximum severity.  
 Clinical Evaluations  
• Absolute values and changes from sc reening/Baseline in clinical safety laboratory tests, vital 
signs, ECG parameters, and weight will be summarized for each treatment group using descriptive techniques. Values outside normal ranges and potentially clinically significant values will be flagg ed and tabulated.  
• Physical examination findings will also be summarized for each treatment group.  
 RISK/SAFETY INFORMATION  
 EEG recording is a safe and non -invasive diagnostic procedure with no significant risk for the health of 
subjects. The EEG system c omplies with the standard electrical safety (EN [ZIP_CODE] -1) and electromagnetic 
(EMC) compatibility  and has received  FDA clear ance .  Staff will be trained to minimize the discomfort 
associated with electrodes placement. Subjects will be able to communicate wi th staff throughout the 
procedure. The recording will be discontinued if the subject will indicate that she has become uncomfortable.  
 Memory and thinking tests can sometimes make subjects tired or uncomfortable.  The study staff will try to make all subjects as comfortable as possible.  Subjects will be informed that they do not have to 
answer any questions they choose not to answer.  
21 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
 
Antidepressant medication (vortioxetine)  
At the time of informed consent, the subject will be instructed about the ris ks and benefits of the 
vortioxetine that will be used throughout the study.  
 
The potential risks of the medication will be based upon the FDA -approved package insert labeling for 
vortioxetine  and will include, but not limited to, spontaneous reported adverse events and potential 
serious adverse events.  Source documents will contain documentation that the subject was informed of 
risks of treatment  and that there was adequate time to read and d iscuss this information with the 
clinician during the informed consent process.  
 The FDA- approved package insert for vortioxetine  recommends a starting dose of 10 mg/day, increased 
to 20 mg/day as tolerated .  The maximum dose is 20 mg/day, and the minimum dose is 5 mg/day if a 
higher dose is not tolerated.  This allows for individualized “flexible” dosing for efficacy and tolerability.  
 
In order to standardize this flexible dosing, all subjects will be started at 10 mg/day following visit 2 
(baseline) .  The  dose will be increased to a maximum of 20 mg/day after visit 4 (2 weeks of treatment)  if 
tolerated by [CONTACT_423].  Dose decreases may occur at any time until Visit 8 for tolerability issues, to a 
minimum dose of 5 mg/day , and t he dose may be re -increased  if the tolerability issue resolves.  
 No dose adjustments may take place after visit 8 through the end of treatment (Visit 10) . 
 Safety, tolerability, and depressive symptoms/function assessments will occur at baseline and each 
subsequent visit through the  end of the study.  While this is an exploratory analysis, the impact of 
treatment at various points in the study will be analyzed. Baseline assessments will occur prior to the 
subject receiving medication.  
 
Drug accountability will be recorded at all visi ts. Subjects failing to meet  at least 80% adherence to study 
medication between study visits will be discontinued from the study.  
 Other Risks  
Whenever a subject is determined to be at risk for suicide during a clinical visit by [CONTACT_371692], sh e or he will be escorted to the nearest emergency room.  
 We wi ll not share info rmation about subject s' participation in this study with others t o minimize risks 
relative to subject s' privacy. Every effort will be made to k eep participation confidential.  These issues 
will be clearly stated in consent forms and discussed with participants during the informed consent procedure.  
 Consistent with good clinical practice, safety will be monitored by [CONTACT_6992]'s assigned clinician at each study visit.  This clin ician will be available 24 hours a day by p age.  The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_491145], reported adverse events, laboratory tests, and vital signs.  Subjects will be monitored for adverse events at each visit and during phone communications with the clinician.  All 
adverse events will be  recorded.   
 
22 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631462] will be asked to engage in 
research procedures not outlined in the consent form.  All adverse events will be reported to the PHRC according to PHRC guidelines.  
 
Subjects who are judged to experience a worsening of depressive symptoms as manifested by a CGI -
Improvement rating  of 6 or more  (1=Very much improved, 2=Much improved, 3=Minimally improved, 
4=No change, 5=Minimally worse, 6=Much worse, 7=Very much worse) or per the  investigator's opi[INVESTIGATOR_491146] [ADDRESS_631463] may be removed from the study and provided referrals as 
appropriate . 
 
Subjects with MDD will be offered three months of follow- up care at the completion of the study (or if 
they are required to d iscontinue for any reason) in which they will be seen by [CONTACT_491173]. Subjects will receive referrals to clinicians in their communities, 
either at the end of the [ADDRESS_631464] their  clinical history forwarded to his/her primary care physician, or a new 
clinician, we will forward any pertinent information upon completing release forms in compliance with Good Clinical Practice Guidelines.  If a subject was referred from a health care provider that is 
appropriate for follow -up care, the investigator may offer this among other possible referrals after the 
last study visit.  
 
EXPECTED BENEFITS  
Potential benefits to the participants include a thorough assessment by [CONTACT_491174], education 
about the disorder, a treatment for MDD that could be continued after the study, and the opportunity 
to contribute to medical science and thus help others with the disorder.  
 
MONITORING/REPORTING OF AE/SAE  COLLECTION AND RECORDING : 
Adverse ev ent means any untoward medical occurrence associated with the use of a drug in humans, 
whether or not considered drug related.  
 Life-threatening adverse event  or life-threatening suspected adverse reaction. An adverse event or 
suspected adverse reaction is  considered “life -threatening” if, in the view of either the investigator or 
sponsor, its occurrence places the patient or subject at immediate risk of death. It does not include an adverse event or suspected adverse reaction that, had it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death.  
 Serious adverse event  or serious suspected adverse reaction.  An adverse event or suspected adverse 
reaction is considered “serious” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life -threatening adverse event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_491147] o f existing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], a persistent or significant incapacity or substantial disruption of 
the ability to conduct normal life functions, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical 
events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] 
23 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631465] 
and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition.  
Suspected adverse reaction means any adverse event for which there is a reasonable possibility that the 
drug caused the adverse event. For the purposes of IND safety reporting, “reasonable possibility” means 
there is evidence to suggest a causal relationship bet ween the drug and the adverse event. Suspected 
adverse reaction implies a lesser degree of certainty about causality than adverse reaction, which means 
any adverse event caused by a drug.  
 Unexpected adverse event  or unexpected suspected adverse reaction. An adverse event or suspected 
adverse reaction is considered “unexpected” if it is not listed in the investigator brochure or is not listed at the specificity or severity that has been observed; or, if an investigator brochure is not required or available,  is not consistent with the risk information described in the general investigational plan or 
elsewhere in the current application, as amended. “Unexpected,” as used in this definition, also refers to 
adverse events or suspected adverse reactions that are mentioned in the investigator brochure as 
occurring with a class of drugs or as anticipated from the pharmacological properties of the drug, but 
are not specifically mentioned as occurring with the particular drug under investigation.  
 
While reports of pre gnancy and overdose are not adverse experiences as defined above, notifications of 
these events will be made  per procedure defined by [CONTACT_491175].  
 Any adverse event that is ongoing when a subject completes his/her participation in the study must be followed until any of the following occurs:  
a. The event resolves or stabilizes;  
b. The event returns to baseline condition or value (if a baseline value is available); or  
c. The event can be attributed  to agent(s) other than the study product, or to factors 
unrelated to study conduct.  
 
REPORTING  TO IRBs AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES : 
The sponsor must notify FDA in an IND safety report of potential serious risks, from clinical trials or any 
other source, as  soon as possible, but in no case later than 15 calendar days after the sponsor 
determines that the information qualifies for reporting under paragraph (c)(1)(i), (c)(1)(ii), (c)(1)(iii), or (c)(1)(iv).  The sponsor must submit each IND safety report in a narrative format or on FDA Form 3500A or in an electronic format that FDA can process, review, and archive.  See §312.[ADDRESS_631466] should 
24 
Protocol version date: May [ADDRESS_631467]’s participation if they will determine that it is not in the subject’s best interes t. 
 
IRB REVIEW/ETHICS/INFORMED CONSENT  
 
IRB Review  
Prior to enrolling any subjects, documentation will be obtained that the study protocol and informed 
consent form have been approved by [CONTACT_941] S chulman Associates Institutional Review Board.  Any change 
in the protocol or informed consent form will require prior written approval except to prevent injury or 
risk to a subject.  
 Regulatory Considerations  
This study will be conducted in accordance with the ethical principles stated in the most recent version 
of the Declaration of Helsinki or the applicable guidelines on good clinical practice, whichever represents 
the greater protection of the individual.  
 
Recruitment  
The study population will be recruited from the greater Chicago metropolitan area. Subjects will  be 
recruited from several source s, including referrals, responders  to our general depression recruitment  
(advertisements on craigslist, newspapers, radio, the PMA website, private practice settin gs and 
community health centers) . Subjects will  also be recr uited from ongoing clinical trials at Psychiatric 
Medicine Associates , LLC  (PMA). Subjects may also be recruited from other trials only if considered 
appropriate for an open label treatment study with vortioxetine and do not meet other exclusion criteria.
 This is a study of depression in adults and therefore children will be excluded.  
 
Subjects will be reimbursed for appropriate travel expenses during participation in the study.  
 
GENERAL STUDY PROCEDURES  
All study personnel will have completed training for Good Clinical Practice guidelines prior to study 
initiation.  There will be a start -up meeting on site for all study personnel prior to initiating the trial, 
including protocol review, study procedures, delegation of responsibility, recruitment, inter- rater 
reliability (for those who are involved in clinical ratings), and to review general study issues.  Updates of 
the study will occur at weekly staff meetings, including internal monitoring of study -related 
documentation, enrollment updates, and to review a mendments and/or serious adverse events.  
 
All subject source documents and case report forms will be in written form and contained in a subject 
binder.  Data for clinical patient/clinician assessments/outcomes will be entered into an electronic 
25 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
database after review by [CONTACT_093]/subinvestigator and internal monitor.  Subjects will be 
assessed at each visit by [CONTACT_1697]/subinvestigator to assure criteria are met to remain in the study.  
All study documents will be kept in a secure location and in co mpliance with GCP guidelines.  Medication 
dispensing and recording of accountability will be done only by [CONTACT_491176] (e.g., MD, 
PA).  All medication will be kept in a double -locked, secure location in accordance with GCP guidelines 
and DE A requirements (for the investigational product).  Temperature logs will be maintained daily and 
kept at a temperature recommended for the investigational drug.  
 
CONFIDENTIALITY  
All information collected about subjects for the purposes of this study will b e treated as confidential to 
the extent allowed by [CONTACT_2371].  The information obtained while subjects are enrolled in this study, including all study -related hospi[INVESTIGATOR_491148], will be made available to the study doctor, the study 
sponsor ( [COMPANY_005] ), the Institutional Review Board and other regulatory agencies, including the United 
States Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA).   
 
Sending Specimens/Data to Research Collaborators Outside of PMA:  
EEG recordings, neurocognitive tests, depression outcomes a nd demographic data will also be sent to 
ElMindA  Ltd headquarters in [ADDRESS_631468]. Beit Bachar, Herzliya [ZIP_CODE], Israel for analysis.  Any 
personal information and/or identifier will be removed to protect participants’ identity and privacy.  
 
ElMindA  Ltd will have access to EEG data, study -related case report forms and questionnaires, and 
neurocognitive test results to perform BNA analysis  (including electronic database information) .  Study 
documents and data will also be accessible by [CONTACT_4530], T akeda.  
 
INTENDED USE OF THE DATA  
The results of this research project may be presented at meetings or in publications, but the identity of subjects will not be disclosed in such presentations.  
 
  
26 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Trivedi MEI, Lin EH, Katon WJ. Consensus recommendations for improving adherence, self -
management, and outcomes in patients with depression. CNS Spectr 2007;12([ADDRESS_631469] 13):1 -27. 
2. Greden JF. The burden of recurrent depression: causes, consequences, and future prospects. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2001;62  Supp122:5 -9. 
3. World Health Organization. Depression: What is depression. Accessed 25 October 2011. 
Available at: http://www.who.intimental_health/management/depression/definitionlen/.  
4. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM -
IV-TR). 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.  
5. Zakzanis KK, Leach L, Kaplan E. On the nature and pattern of neurocognitive function in major 
depressive disorder. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neur ol 1998;11(3):111- 9. 
6. Robinson LJ, Thompson TM, Gallagher P, Goswami U, Young AH, Ferrier IN, et al. A meta- analysis 
of cognitive deficits in euthymic patients with bipolar disorder. J Affect Disord 2006;93(1 -3):[ADDRESS_631470] -epi[INVESTIGATOR_99652]. Am J Psychiatry 2004;161(6):[ADDRESS_631471] J Psychiatry 2004;58(1):[ADDRESS_631472] errors and executive function in schizophrenia and depression. Clin Neuropsychol  2006;20(2):271- 88. 
10. Smith DJ, Muir WJ, Blackwood DH. Neurocognitive impairment in euthymic young adults with bipolar spectrum disorder and recurrent major depressive disorder. Bipolar Disord 2006;8(1):[ADDRESS_631473] s on neuropsychological functioning: comparison of 
depressed versus nondepressed individuals. J Consult Clin Psychol 1989;57(3):396 -402.  
12. Ilsley JE, Moffoot AP, O'Carroll RE. An analysis of memory dysfunction in major depression. J 
Affect Disord 1995;35 (1-2):1-9. 
13. Pelosi L, Slade T, Blumhardt LD, Sharma VK. Working memory dysfunction in major depression: 
an event -related potential study. Clin Neurophysiol 2000; 111 (9): [ADDRESS_631474] RM. Effortf ul and automatic 
cognitive processes in depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1986;43(3):265 -7. 
15. Tancer ME, Brown TM, Evans DL, Ekstrom D, Haggerty JJ, Jr., Pedersen C, et al. Impaired effortful cognition in depression. Psychiatry Res 1990;31(2):161 -8. 
16. Burt DB, Zembar MJ, Niederehe G. Depression and memory impairment: a meta- analysis of the 
association, its pattern, and specificity. Psychol Bull 1995;117(2):285 -305.  
17. Miller LS, Faustman WO, Moses JA, Jr., Csern ansky JG. Evaluating cognitive impairment in 
depression with the Luria -Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery: severity correlates and 
comparisons with nonpsychiatric controls. Psychiatry Res 1991;37(3):219 -27. 
18. Grant MM, Thase ME, Sweeney JA. Cognitive disturbance in outpatient depressed younger adults: evidence of modest impairment. Biol Psychiatry 2001;50(1):35- 43. 
19. Castaneda AE, Suvisaari J, Marttunen M, Perala J, Saarni SI, Aalto -Setala T, et al. Cognitive 
functioning in a population -based sample of young adults with a history of non -psychot ic 
unipolar depressive disorders without psychiatric comorbidity. J Affect Disord 2008;110(1 -2):36-
45. 
20. Afridi MI, Hina M, Qureshi IS, Hussain M. Cognitive disturbance comparison among drug -naive 
depressed cases and healthy controls. J Coll Physicians S urg Pak 2011;21(6):351- 5. 
27 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
21. Bornstein RA, Baker GB, Douglass AB. Depression and memory in major depressive disorder. J 
Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 1991;3(1):78 -80. 
22. Van Londen L, Goekoop JG, Zwinderman AH, Lanser JB, Wiegant VM, De Wied D. Neuropsyc hological performance and plasma cortisol, arginine vasopressin and oxytocin in 
patients with major depression. Psychol Med 1998;28(2):[ADDRESS_631475] learning task. Neuropsychology 1999;13(4):557- 63. 
24. Belanoff JK, Kalehzan M, Sund B, Fleming Ficek SK, Schatzberg AF. Cortisol activity and cognitive changes in psychotic major depression. Am J Psychiatry 2001;158(10):1612- 6. 
25. Biringer E, Myldetun A, Sundet K, Kroken R, Stordal KI, Lund A. A longitudinal analysis of 
neurocognitive function in unipolar depression. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 2007;29(8):879 -91. 
26. Fava M. Symptoms of fatigue and cognitive/executive dysfunction in major depressiv e disorder 
before and after antidepressant treatment. I Clin Psychiatry 2003;[ADDRESS_631476] 14:30 -4. 
27. Hasselbalch BJ, Knorr U, Kessing LV. Cognitive impairment in the remitted state of unipolar 
depressive disorder: a systematic review. J Affect Disord 2010;13 4(1-3):20- 31. 
30. Duman RS. Neuronal damage and protection in the pathophysiology and treatment of 
psychiatric illness: stress and depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2009;11(3):239- 55. 
32. Kessing LV, Sondergard L, Forman IL, Andersen PK. Antidepressants and dementia. J Affect 
Disord 2009;117(1- 2):24- 9. 
34. Hindmarch I, Hashimoto K. Cognition and depression: the effects of fluvoxamine, a sigma- [ADDRESS_631477], reconsidered. Hum Psychopharmacol 2010;25(3):193 -200.  
35. Savitz J, Lucid I, Drevets WC. 5 -HT(1A) receptor function in major depressive disorder. Prog 
Neurobiol 2009;88(1):17- 31. 
36. Harvey JA. Role of the serotonin 5 -HT(2A) receptor in learning. Learn Mem 2003;10(5):355- 62. 
37. Robbins TW, Roberts AC. Differential regulation of Pronto -executive fu nction by [CONTACT_491177]. Cereb Cortex 2007;[ADDRESS_631478] 1:i151 -60. 
38. Robbins TW, Arnsten AF. The neuropsychopharmacology of fronto -executive function: 
monoaminergic modulation. Amin Rev Neurosci 2009;32:267 -87. 
39. El-Ghundi M, O'Dowd BF, George SR. Insights into the role of dopamine receptor systems in 
learning and memory. Rev Neurosci 2007;18(1):37 -66. 
40. Deco G, Thiele A. Attention: oscillations and neuropharmacology. Eur J Neurosci 2009;30(3):347 -
54. 
41. Blandina P, Efoudebe M, Cenni G , Mannaioni P, Passani MB. Acetylcholine, histamine, and 
cognition: two sides of the same coin. Learn Mem 2004;11(1):[ADDRESS_631479] cetirizine impairs 
working memory processing speed, but not epi[INVESTIGATOR_10682]. Br J Pharmacol 2010;161(2):456-
66. 
43. Lu AA21004 Global Investigator's Brochure. 9th Edition. H. Lundbeck A/S and [COMPANY_005] Global 
Research & Development Center, Inc., [ADDRESS_631480] 2011.  
44. Montgomery SA, Åsberg M. A new depression scale d esigned to be sensitive to change. Br J 
Psychiatry 1979;134:382 -9. 
 45. A randomised, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo  controlled,duloxetine -referenced, fixed -
dose study evaluating the efficacy and safety of three dosages of Lu AA21004, in acute treat ment of major depressive disorder. if Lundbeck A/S, Report No. Lu AA21004 -11984A, 21 
May 2010.  
46. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1960;23:56 -62. 
28 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
47. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, f ixed dose study comparing the 
efficacy and safety of a single dose of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of adults with generalized 
anxiety disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Centre (Europe) Ltd., Lu AA21004_311 
Amendment 1, 13 October 2010.  
48. Lezak MD, Howieson DB, Loring DW. Neuropsychological Assessment 4th ed: Oxford University 
Press; 2004.  
49. Wechsler D. Adult Intelligence Scale. 3rd ed. San Antonio, TX: Psychological  Corporation; 1997.  
50. Randomized , double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, duloxetine -referenced, fixed -
dose study comparing the efficacy and safety of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment  of major 
depressive disorder in elderly patients. H. Lundbeck A/S, Report No. 12541A, 31 January 2011.  
51. Raskin J, Wiltse CG, Siegal A, S heikh J, Xu J, Dinkel JJ, et al. Efficacy of duloxetine on  cognition, 
depression, and pain in elderly patients with major depressive disorder: an 8 -week, double -
blind, placebo -controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2007;164(6):900 -9. 
52. Integrated Clinical Stu dy Report. Double -blind, randomised, placebo -controlled study comparing 
the efficacy and safety of 2 fixed dosages of a novel antidepressant compound to that of 
placebo in patients with Major Depressive Disorder. H. Lundbeck A/S, Report No. Lu AA21004 
1149 2A, 06 October 2008.  
53. A Randomized, Double -Blind, Parallel- Group, Placebo -Controlled, Fixed -Dose Study Comparing 
the Efficacy and Safety of Lu AA21004 Versus Placebo in Acute Treatment of Adults With Major Depressive Disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Center, Inc., Report No. 303, 12 November 2009.  
54. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, active -referenced, fixed -dose 
study comparing the efficacy and safety of 2 doses of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of adults 
with  major depressive disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Center, Inc., Report No. 
Lu AA21004_304, [ADDRESS_631481] 2010.  
55. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, active -referenced, fixed -dose 
study comparing the efficacy and saf ety of 3 doses of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of adults 
with major depressive disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Centre, (Europe) Ltd., 
Report No. Lu AA21004 305, 14 June 2010.  
56. Siddiqui 0, Hung HM, O'Neill R. MMRM vs. LOCF: a comprehensiv e comparison based on 
simulation study and 25 NDA datasets. J Biopharm Stat 2009;19(2):227 -46.   
57. A double -blind, randomised, placebo -controlled, multicentre,relapse -prevention study with two 
doses of Lu AA21004 in patients with major depressive disorde r. H. Lundbeck A/S, Report No. Lu 
AA21004 -11985A, 07 September 2010.  
58. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, active -referenced, fixed -dose 
study comparing the efficacy and safety of 3 doses of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of ad ults 
with generalized anxiety disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Center, Inc., Report No. Lu AA21004_308, 12 October 2010.  
59. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, fixed -dose study comparing the 
efficacy and safety of 2 doses of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of adults with generalized 
anxiety disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Center, Inc., Report No. Lit AA21004 309, 17 November 2010.  
60. A randomized, double -blind, parallel- group, placebo -controlled, fixe d-dose study comparing the 
efficacy and safety of a single dose of Lu AA21004 in acute treatment of adults with generalized 
anxiety disorder. [COMPANY_005] Global Research & Development Center, Inc., Report No. Lu AA21004 
310, 25 February 2010.  
61. Lezak MD. Neuo psychologial Assessments. 4th ed: Oxford University Press; 1983.  
29 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
62. Stroop JR. Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. J Exp Psych 1935;18:643 -62. 
63. Collie A, Darekar A, Weissgerber G, Toh MK, Snyder PJ, Maruff P, et al. Cognitive testing in  early -
phase clinical trials: development of a rapid computerized test battery and application in a 
simulated Phase I study. Contemp Clin Trials 2007;28(4):391 -400.  
64. Carrasquillo MM, Morgan K. Commentary on Functional analysis of APOE Locus genetic variation 
implicates regional enhancers in the regulation of both TOMM40 and APOE. J Hum Genet 
2012;57(1):3 -4. 
65. Guy W. Clinical Global Impression (CGI), ECDEU Version. In: ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology. Revised ed. Rockville, MD: U.S. Dept.  of Health, Education, and Welfare; 
1976; DHEW publication no. (ADM) 76- 338, p. 218- 22. 
66. Posner K., Oquendo MA, Gould M, Stanley B, Davies M. Columbia Classification Algorithm of Suicide Assessment (C -CASA): classification of suicidal events in the FDA' s pediatric suicidal risk 
analysis of antidepressants. Am J Psychiatry 2007;164(7):1035 -43. 
67. Sullivan JJL, Edgley K, Dehoux E. A survey of multiple sclerosis Part 1: Perceived cognitive 
problems and compensatroy strategy use. Can J Rehabil 1990;4:99 -105. 
68. Fava M, Iosifescu DV, Pedrelli P, Baer L. Reliability and validity of the [LOCATION_005] general 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_460945]. Psychother Psychosom 2009;78(2):91 -
7. 
69. Patterson TL, Goldman S, McKibbin CL, Hughs T, Jeste DV. UCSD Performance -Based Skills 
Assessment: development of a new measure of everyday functioning for severely mentally ill adults. Schizophr Bull 2001;27(2):235 -45. 
70. Adler DA, McLaughlin TJ, Rogers WH, Chang H, Lapi[INVESTIGATOR_25195] L, Lerner D. Job performance de ficits 
due to depression. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163(9):[ADDRESS_631482]. Cognitive effects of paroxetine in older depressed patients. J Clin Psychiatry 1999;[ADDRESS_631483] 20:[ADDRESS_631484], Trabucchi M. Paroxetine and fluoxetine effects on mood and 
cognitive functions in depressed nondemented elderly patients. J Clin Psychiatry 2002;63(5):396 -402.  
73. Devanand DP, Pelton OH, Marston K, Camacho Y, Roose SP, Stem Y, et  al. Sertraline treatment of 
elderly patients with depression and cognitive impairment. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2003;18(2):123 -30. 
74. Doraiswamy PM, Krishnan KR, Oxman T, Jenkyn LR, Coffey DJ, Burt T, et al. Does antidepressant therapy improve cognition in elderly depressed patients? J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 
2003;58(12):M1137- 44. 
75. Nebes RD, Pollock BG, Houck PR, Butters MA, Mulsant BH, Zmuda MD, et al. Persistence of 
cognitive impairment in geriatric patients following antidepressant treatment: a randomized, 
double -blind clinical trial with nortriptyline and paroxetine. J Psychiatr Res 2003;37(2):99 -108.  
76. Trick L, Stanley N, Rigney U, Hindmarch I. A double -blind, randomized, 26 -week study comparing 
the cognitive and psychomotor effects and effic acy of 75 mg (37.5 mg b.i.d.) venlafaxine and 75 
mg (25 mg mane, 50 mg nocte) dothiepin in elderly patients with moderate major depression 
being treated in general practice. J. Psychopharmacol 2004;18(2):205 -14. 
77. Rosenberg C, Lauritzen L, Brix J, Jorgen sen JB, Kofod P, Bayer LB. Citaloprain versus amitriptyline 
in elderly depressed patients with or without mild cognitive dysfunction: a  danish multicentre 
trial in ge neral practice. Psychopharmacol 2007;40(1):63 -73. 
78. Pelton GH, Harper OL, Tabert MEI, Sackeim HA, Scarmeas N, Roose SP, et al. Randomized 
double -blind placebo -controlled donepezil augmentation in antidepressant -treated elderly 
30 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
patients with depression and cognitive impairment: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
2008;23(7):670 -6. 
79. Ferguson JM, Wesnes KA, Schwartz GE. Reboxetine versus paroxetine versus placebo: effects on 
cognitive functioning in depressed patients. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 2003;18(1):[ADDRESS_631485] 2008;110(1- 2):161- 6. 
81. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janays J, Weiller E, et al. The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry 1998;[ADDRESS_631486] 20:22 -33;quiz 4 -57. 
82. Posner K, Melvin GA, Stanley B, Oquendo MA, Gould M. Factors in the assessment of suicidality 
in youth. CNS Spectr 2007;12(2):156- 62. 
83. Lecrubier Y, Sheehan DV, Weiller E, Amorim P, Bonora I, Sheehan KH, et al. The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI). A short diagnostic structured interview: 
reliability and validity according to the CID'. European Psychiat 1997(12):224 -31. 
84. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Janays J, Weiller E, Keskiner A, et al. The validity of the 
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) according to the SCID -P and its reliability. 
Eur Psychiatry 1997;12:232- 41. 
85. CogState. CogState Clinical Trials. Published 2011. Accessed 01 November 2011. Available at: http://www.cogstate.com/go/clinicaltrials/our- tasks.  
86. Guidance for Industry: E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated Guidance . International 
Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for 
Human Use. Published 09 May 1997.  
  
  
31 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 
APPENDIX   I - SCHEDULE OF EVENTS  
         
Visit #  Screen  
1 Baseline  
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  
 
10 (or ET)  
Day -2 to -14 0 7 14 21 28 35 42 49 56 
Week  -1 to-2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
Informed Consent  X 
         
Incl/Excl Criteria  X X 
        
MINI  X 
         
ASRS  X          
Medical and Psychiatric 
History  X 
         
Demographics  X 
         
Physical Exam  X 
         
Laboratory tests, urinalysis, 
urine pregnancy test and 
urine drug screen1 X 
         
Vital signs and weight2 X X X X X X X X X X 
Height  
 X 
        
12-Lead ECG  X 
         
HDRS (28 -item)  X X X X X X X X X X 
QIDS -SR-[ADDRESS_631487]  X 
        X 
MGH -CPFQ  X X X X X X X X X X 
PDQ  X X X X X X X X X X 
CGI-S X X X X X X X X X X 
CGI-I 
  X X X X X X X X 
WLQ  X X X X X X X X X X 
C-SSRS3 X X X X X X X X X X 
Concomitant therapy  X X X X X X X X X X 
Study drug dispensed  
 X X X X X X X X  
Study drug accountability  
  X X X X X X X X 
Adverse events  X X X X X X X X X X 
EEG (BNA reading)  X X 
 X 
     X 
1may be repeated at investigator’s discretion  
2including body temperature (oral), blood pressure and pulse.  
3C-SSRS lifetime  version at screen only; Since Last Visit version at V2- 10 
32 
Protocol version date: May 1 6, 2017 
 