CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center. 
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530]  (if applicable).  Preoperative Magnetic Resonance as an Alternative to 
Computed Tomography Three -Dimensional Imaging for 
Characterizing Bone Loss in Shoulder Arthroplasty 
Candidates with Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis  
A prospective, blinded, and controlled clinical -trial . 
Regulatory Sponsor:  NYU Langone Health  
[ADDRESS_542067]  
[LOCATION_001], NY [ZIP_CODE]  
Funding Sponsor:  Department of Orthopedic Surgery  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_5951] D. Zuckerman, MD  
Study Device (Non -
Interventional)  Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
Co-Investigators:  Soterios Gyftopoulos, MD  
Young W. Kwon, MD, PhD  
Mohammad M. Samim, MD  
Mandeep S. Virk, MD  
David H. Mai, MD, MPH  
Protocol Number:  s17-[ZIP_CODE]  
Init
ial version:   8.21.2017  
Amended:10.11.2017 Clinical Research Protocol  
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral O steoarthritis   Page 1 
Version: 10.11.2017 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530]  (if applicable).  
 Study Summary  
Title Preoperative Magnetic Resonance as an Alternative to Computed 
Tomography Three- Dimensional Imaging for Characterizing Bone Loss in 
Shoulder Arthroplasty Candidates with Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis:  
A prospective, blinded, and controlled clinical trial.  
Short Title  3D MR versus 3D CT  in Glenohumeral O steoarthritis  
Protocol Number  S17-[ZIP_CODE]  
Methodology  A prospective, unrandomized, single- blinded, self -controlled, and single -armed 
diagnostic radiological  evaluation study . 
Study Duration  12-Months  
Study Center(s) Single -Center  
Purpose  To examine the non-inferiority  of three -dimensional (3D) magnetic resonance  
(MR) versus the gold -standard, 3D computed tomography (CT) imaging, in the 
analysis  of bone loss in shoulder arthroplasty (SA) candidates with 
glenohumeral osteoarthritis (OA).  This study does not assess the safety and 
efficacy of MR imaging for musculoskeletal disorders.  
Number of Subjects  50 subjects  
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Patients with glenohumeral  OA who are candidates for SA based on clinical 
examination with radiographic evidence of significant glenoid wear; males and 
females age [ADDRESS_542068] in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 2 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 I. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY AND BACKGROUND  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to examine the noninferiority of 3-dimensional (3D) magnetic resonance (MR) 
as an alternative to 3D computed tomography (CT) imaging to characterize glenoid bone loss in shoulder 
arthroplasty (SA) candidates with glenohumeral osteoarthritis and radiographic evidence of severe 
glenoid erosion. MR has been routinely used in musculoskeletal imaging with and without contrast. This 
study employs no non- FDA approved investigational MRI hardware or software.  
  
Background & Study Rationale  
There has been over a  five-fold growth in incidence of shoulder arthroplasty (SA) for glenohumeral 
osteoarthritis  (OA) since 2000 (1) (2) (3) (4). Asymmetric  glenoid erosion may occur in glenohumeral OA 
(5). Patient -specific variations in magnitude and retro version of g lenoid bone loss in glenohumeral  
osteoarthritis pose a challenge for orthopaedic surgeons in joint reconstruction (6). Eccentric loading of 
the glenohumeral joint may lead to glenoid loosening which  potentially requires revision surgery (7) . 
Moreover, posterior glenoid erosion is a risk factor for poorer outcomes in function and pain (8)  (9) (10). 
The management of glenoid erosion in shoulder arthroplasty demands individualized surgical techniques 
as well as implants to optimize outcomes and maximize implant longevity. Surgical techniques to address 
glenoid retroversion include eccentric reaming, glenoid bone grafts, augmented glenoid components, total 
shoulder arthroplasty, or specialized implants  (7) (11) . The “gold- standard” modality for assessment of 
complex glenoid anatomy to assist with surgical planning is 3D CT imaging (9)  (12) (13). However, CT 
imaging exposes patients to radiation. Recently, 3D MR has been developed to characterize glenoid bone 
loss (14). 
 
There is significant variation in glenoid morphology among patients with glenohumeral OA. Prior studies 
have discussed higher  distributions of patients with glenoids who had  posterior erosion and/or  
retroversion (15 -18) . To better guide treatment approaches, Walch et al. described glenoid morphology 
using CT scans in 113 shoulders between 1988 and 1995 (19)  . Specifically, the authors developed three 
broad classification types based on humeral head position, glenoid retroversion , and erosion pattern: 
Type A, Type B, and Type C. Types A and B have  subgroups  based on severity . 
 Three- dimensional reconstruction of CT images at the glenohumeral joint have reliably assisted surgeons 
with preoperative planning whereas two- dimensional ( 2-D) radiographs and CT scans may misrepresent 
important anatomical characteristics of the shoulder  leading to insufficient evaluation of erosion  (12) (13). 
 To mitigate  radiation exposure from 3D CT, 3D MR could serve as an alternative for patients with end-
stage glenohumeral OA  indicated for shoulder reconstruction . 
 
Study Design 
Prospective, unrandomized, double blinded, self -controlled clinical  trial 
 
Objective 
 
1. The primary objective is to evaluate the noninferiority  of 3D MR  when compared to 3D CT  for 
characterizing bone morphology in patients with glenohumeral osteoarthritis.  
 
Hypothesis  
3D MR imaging provides the same information as 3D CT in characterizing glenoid morphology.  
 
Primary Endpoints  
• Differences and/or similarities in glenoid erosion and version measurements between of 3D CT 
and 3D MR.  
 
Outcome Measure Evaluation Criteria  
• Degree of concordance/discordance between interpretation from  3D CT and 3D MR  
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 3 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 II. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH POPULATION  
 
Number of Subjects  
A total of fifty ( 50) patients will be enrolled in this study.  
 
Gender of Subjects   
Men and women will be included in this study.  
 
Age of Subjects  
Subjects will be at least 18 years of age. 
 
Racial and Ethnic Origin 
There are no enrollment restrictions based on race or ethnic origin.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
• Males and females ages 18 or more;  
• Patients suffering from glenohumeral OA ;  
• Radiographic evidence of severe glenoid erosion;  
• Indication for TSA based on clinical exam;  
• Patient is willing and able to review and sign a study informed consent form . 
 
Exclusion Criteria 
• Prior arthroplasty  at the affected shoulder;  
• Patients with inflammatory  arthritis ; 
• Patients with post-capsulorrhaphy arthritis ; 
• Patients with post-traumatic arthritis ; 
• Patients with rotator cuff tear arthropathy ; 
• Patients exhibiting a lack of physical or mental ability  to perform or comply with the study 
procedures; 
• Patients who are pregnant ; 
• Patients with implanted medical devices  that are contraindicated to exposure up to a 3.0- tesla 
magnetic field.  
 
Vulnerable Subjects 
Vulnerable subjects  will not be enrolled. 
 
Subject Withdrawal  
Patients are free to withdraw at any time from the study.  
 
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 4 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 III. METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
 
Sample Size Analysis  
Using SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, [LOCATION_003]) b ased on paired t -test analysis, for 
alpha = .05 and power = .80, ten pairs are required, at minimum, for the study.  
 
Methods and Procedur es  
 
Visit 1 -- Recruitment and Enrollment : 
The study will employ convenience sampling of surgical candidates with glenohumeral osteoarthritis from 
the practice of the primary investigator, who is the treating surgeon. Immediately following his or her 
clinical visit with the primary investigator, each patient who is a candidate for  shoulder arthroplasty will 
receive information on the study, including benefits and harms of participating in the study  from the co-
investigator  at primary investigator’s clinical office (NYU Langone Orthopedic Center) . Written consent will 
be obtained from subjects based upon their medical condition (as determined by [CONTACT_9682]). The 
consent process will take place during an office visit at which time the investigator has determined 
subject’s voluntary participation has been upheld. Subjects will be informed about the study and the 
intended purpose. They will be given the opportunity to ask questions and receive thorough explanations. They will be made aware of the possible risks and anticipated benefits. They will also be informed of alternative procedures. Subjects will then be given another opportunity to ask questions and agree or disagree to consent. Potential subjects may enroll by [CONTACT_428456]-investigator. 
The study will not exclude potential participants based on sex, race, and/or ethnicity.  Subsequently, the 
study co -investigator will determine subject eligibility to participate in the study by [CONTACT_428457], such as having prior history of injury involving metal or metallic particles as well as presence of medical implants, such as cardiac pacemakers .  
 This recruitment and enrollment visit should take no more than thirty (30) minutes.  
  
Visit 2 -- Preoperative Imaging: 
Subjects will have both 3D CT and 3D non- contrast MR scheduled on the same day. The CT scan, which 
is standard of care,  will be scheduled at NYU Langone Orthopedic Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_428446] , the 
investigational procedure,  at NYU Langone Orthopedic Center. Before imaging, the subjects will be 
screened for potential contraindications to each imaging modality  in accordance with institutional standard 
of care routine procedures .  The standard of care CT imaging will take no more than [ADDRESS_542069]’s  CT imaging is not dependent on receiving prior MR imaging; he/she will  
not experience delays in receiving standard of care CT imaging as a result of study participation.  
 The CT protocol consist s of 3-mm axial images of the glenoid reconstructed into 1 -mm sagittal and 
coronal 2D reconstructions  using the following parameters: [ADDRESS_542070] 
data were also used to produce a 3D reconstruction of each glenoid.  
 
The 2D glenoid version is measured by 2 musculoske letal- trained radiologists  on 2 occasions, at a  
minimum of 2 weeks apart, with the observers blinded to each other’s results. The 2 observers m eet 
before obtaining data to review the appropriate technique for measuring glenoid version. The 2D glenoid 
version is determined using the method of Friedman et al  (17)  with the mid glenoid cut being determined 
by [CONTACT_428458] 2 (20). 
 The 2D CT images are imported in Vitrea  software. The 3D volume rendering model will be produced. 
The 3D glenoid version is measured by [CONTACT_63931] 2 observers  on 2 occasions, at a minimum of 2 weeks 
apart, with the observers  blinded to each other’s results. Three points  which were previously validated 
were first interactively  placed on the Mimics 3D model by [CONTACT_63634]: the inferior tip of the scapula 
body, the center of the glenoid surface,  and the medial pole of the scapula, as described by [CONTACT_428459].  
(12)  As described in detail below, these points were used to define the transverse scapular plane,  based 
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 5 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 on which a  new 2D CT image is  generated. Each observer then manually  selected the anterior and 
posterior aspect of the glenoid on this  3D-corrected image, and version was determined according to the 
Friedman et al.  (17) The new CT image along the transverse scapular plane is generated according to the 
following procedure. The true coronal scapular plane  passed through the [ADDRESS_542071] 
data set using the Vitrea works tation.  
 
MRI is performed using 3 T scanner s with a  dedicated 16- channel shoulder array coils . The MRI 
sequences include 3-mm slice thickness and 0.5- mm gap width with a field of view  of 14 or 15 cm. There 
were 6 diagnostic sequences with axial, coronal,  and sagittal proton density  weighting as well as coronal 
T2 with frequency  selective  fat suppression and sagittal T1  images.  The protocol also included an axial 
3D dual echo- time T1 -weighted FLASH sequence with  Dixon -based water –fat separation with the 
following parameters:  TR 10, TE 2.45/3.7, field of view of 200 mm, acquired voxel size 1.0×1.0×1.4 mm, 
reconstructed voxel size 1.0×1.0×1.0 mm, flip angle 9 deg, matrix 192×192, bandwidth of  400 Hz/pi[INVESTIGATOR_8070], 
number of partitions=[ADDRESS_542072] -processing: The water -only source images from the Dixon sequence were post-processed 
using standard subtraction software on a syngo MMWP workstation (VB 3oE, Siemens). The lowest mean  
signal intensity (water min) from multiple ROIs placed on the soft tissues surrounding the osseous 
structures was used as a constant to calculate a subtraction image where the pi[INVESTIGATOR_428447] (water_min – SI (i)  with negative values being set to zero). This resulted in images  
with increased signal in the osseous structures, surrounded by  [CONTACT_428460]/void  soft tissue structures . 
These subtracted Dixon images then underwent manual segmentation,  generating 3D reconstructions of 
each shoulder (Tera Recon software ([IP_ADDRESS].2068)) .  
 The 3D MRI glenoid version is measured by [CONTACT_428461] 3D 
glenoid version measurement following generating a new 2D axial MR images form the 3D MRI model using the three- point method as described above.  
 
Data Analysis  
 Using SAS software, version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, [LOCATION_003]) Paired sample t -test to compare 
measurements by [CONTACT_428462].  
 
DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN (DSMP)  
 
I. Study Monitoring  
The co-investigator, Soterios Gyftopoulos, MD  will be the data safety monitor for this project.  
After a three (3) months follow -up period, [CONTACT_428465]  will review the data for SAE’s, protocol 
deviations and other issues. If it is determined that certain events occur above an expected rate (i.e. increased shoulder  pain), then enrollment will be stopped.  
 
II. Types of Data  
Under this DSMP, the following data/events will be captured and documented:  
• Radiologic images;  
• Diagnostic radiology interpretations;  
• Reportable and/or adverse events ; and 
• Protocol Deviations . 
 
III. Responsibilities and roles for gathering, evaluating and monitoring the data:  
Principal Investigator  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 6 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 After six months following study initiation, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_428448]- investigators and the 
Research Coordinator to discuss the current findings and analysis. During these meetings, the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_428449], and compliance with the study protocol.  
 
Research Coordinator  
The Research Coordinator will be responsible for providing data management support to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_428450]. This information will be documented in a secure Microsoft Excel spreadsheet with appropriate headings to distinguish the various types of data/events. The Research Coordinator will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20890]- investigators to discuss 
the current findings/analysis, concerns/issues (unanticipated problems and adverse events), and the overall study in general.    
IV. Reporting Adverse Events and Unanticipated Problems to the Monitoring Entity  
All reportable events will be sent to the IRB in accordance with the timeframes specified by [CONTACT_428463]. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_428451] a Reportable New Information (RNI) form to the IRB through Research Navigator.   
V. Assessments  
After 6 months and 1 year following study initiation,  the Principal Investigator, Co- Investigator(s) 
and Research Coordinator will review and assess the data and/or events captured under the DSMP.  
VI. Criteria for Action  
Should there be an event or series of events that occur that increases the risks to the participants, the “following steps” will be taken:  
1. An investigation into the event will be conducted;  
2. If required, a Reportable New Information (RNI) form will be submitted to the IRB;  
3. All primary study staff (PI, Co- I, Research Coordinator) will be notified;  
4. After a review,  
a. The protocol may  be modified;  
b. The study may  be suspended; or  
c. A decision may  be made to close out the study  
 
VII. Procedures for Communicating – dissemination of safety information  
Outcomes of monitoring reviews will be communicated to the IRB through a yearly summary that will include a narrative on all adverse and reportable events (previously reported or not, serious or not), as well as any proposed changes to the protocol and/or study analysis.  
 
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
All patient health information will be de- identified and assigned a code. Information linking participants’ 
names, medical record numbers or other PHI will be stored in s ecurely on NYU Langone Health’s digital 
server via RedCap. Participant medical information will be stored electronically within a password protected database available only to the principal investigator, co- investigators, and research staff as 
necessary for data analysis. The names, medical record numbers, and other PHI of the study participants will be deleted from their stored medical information and replaced with a linkage code. Access to 
participant medical information contained within this project will  be restricted to approved study personnel.  
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 7 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 IV. RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 
The following are risks and discomforts that patients may experience during their participation in this research study.  
 
Exposure to Magnetic Field  
is an increased risk of burns from devices that conduct electrical energy. These devices can include metallic objects, pulse oximeters, EKG leads, or skin tattoos. These devices can be either in or on the patient in order for a skin burn to occur. The FDA has found that 70% of all reported injuries from MRIs were burns to the skin.  To reduce this risk, all patients who are scanned in this study must complete 
thorough screening to ensure that no conductive materials are present in or on the patient’s body.  Additionally, the power limits  of the magnet will be adjusted as necessary.  
 Another possible risk is that a metal object could be pulled into the scanner and hit the patient . The 
patient  could be physically injured as a result. To reduce this risk, everyone near the magnet will remove 
all metal from their clothing or pockets when in the scanning environment.  The door to the scan room wi ll 
remain closed during the exam .  
 There are no known risks or adverse effects resulting directly from exposure to MRI.  However, subjects who have a pacemaker or metal objects in their body such as shrapnel or metal in the eye should not have the scan performed.  
 
Exposure to Magnetic Resonance Scanner  
The magnetic resonance scanner may exacerbate a fear of c losed spaces , expose patients to loud 
noises  
 
Loss of C onfidentiality  
While every effort will be made to keep participant information confidential, there is the potential risk of loss of confidentiality. In order to minimize this risk, any information that can identify a subject will be removed and replaced with a unique study ID that only the study coordinator/investigators will know.  
 
Psychological Risks 
When completing the radiologic imaging, patients may find testing conditions unpleasant, such as space 
constrictions in medical imaging devices.  
 
Protection A gainst Risks   
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_428452], management and retention of research data 
and all study related regulatory files. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_428453], which includes a complete regulatory binder that dates the records being retained. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_428454], and for 
their compliance with the study protocol and all NYU and Federal regulations. Patient PHI, such as MRNs can only be used within NYULMC’s administrative records, thus ensuring minimal research risks and protecting patient identity from public utilization. As the owner of the research data, the medical center will assert its r ights with respect to research data in order to assure compliance with regulatory and 
contractual requirements.  
 
Potential Benefits to the Subjects   
Study participants will not directly benefit from this study.  
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 8 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 V. INVESTIGATOR’S QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE  
 
The CV, human subjects’ tutorial completion report, and medical license (if applicable) are available for all 
investigators who are participating in this study. All research personnel have medical research experience and are qualified to participate in this quality study. Most importantly, staff have been properly educated 
and certified with CITI training to conduct research in a matter that will maintain full patient confidentiality.  
 
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 9 
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 VI. SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT/ASSENT  
 
Subject C apacity 
All subjects enrolled in this study will have capacity to provide informed consent.  
 
Debriefing Procedures  
No information will be withheld from the subject.  
 
Consent Forms  
Informed consent will be obtained from all subjects and documented with a signed, written consent form 
using the NYU SoM’s English standard consent form.  
 
Documentation of Consent 
In addition to following the consent process, it is understood by [CONTACT_428464]. There is a “Documentation of Consent” checklist that will be used as additional documentation. This form will serve 
as secondary proof that the informed consent process has been executed.   
 
Costs to the Subject  
Subjects will not incur any additional financial costs as a participant in this study beyond those normally 
associated with this type of condition. The 3D CT imaging is billed to the patient/patient’s insurance 
provider , hospi[INVESTIGATOR_36076] , or thir d-party  payer as per standard of care. The investigational 3D MR 
imaging is provided to enrolled participants at no cost – the patient/patient’s insurance provider , hospi[INVESTIGATOR_428455] , or third -party  payer is not responsible for the cost of the investigational MR imaging.  
 
Payment for Participation   
No payments/reimbursements will be provided to subjects for their participation in this study.  
 
     
 
     
 
  
3D MR versus 3D CT in Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis   Page 10  
Version:  10.11.2017 
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical Center.   
Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_4530] (if applicable).  
 VII. References 
 
 1. Day JS, Lau E, Ong KL, Williams GR, Ramsey ML, Kurtz SM. Prevalence and projections of total 
shoulder and elbow arthroplasty in the [LOCATION_002] to 2015. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery. 
2010;19(8):1115- 20. 
2. Kim SH, Wise BL, Zhang Y, Szabo RM. Increasing Incidence of Shoulder Arthroplasty in the [LOCATION_002]. The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery. 2011 Dec 21,;93(24):2249- 54. 
3. Trofa D, Rajaee SS, Smith EL. Nationwide trends in total shoulder arthroplasty and hemiarthroplasty for osteoarthritis. American journal of orthopedics (Belle Mead, N.J.). 2014 Apr;43(4):166.  
4. Schwartz B, Savin D, Youderian A, Mossad D, Goldberg B. National trends and perioperative 
outcomes in primary and revision total shoulder arthroplasty. International Orthopaedics (SICOT). 2015 Feb;39(2):271- 6. 
5. Bell RH, Noble JS. The management of significant glenoid deficiency in total shoulder arthroplasty. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery. 2000 May;9(3):248- 56. 
6. Knowles NK, Keener JD, Ferreira LM, Athwal GS. Quantification of the position, orientation, and 
surface area of bone loss in type B2 glenoids. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery / American 
Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons ... [et al.]. 2015 Apr;24(4):503- 10. 
7. Stephens SP, Paisley KC, Jeng J, Dutta AK, Wirth MA. Shoulder arthroplasty in the presence of posterior glenoid bone loss. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. American volume. 2015 Feb 4,;97(3):251- 9. 
8. Iannotti JP, Norris TR. Influence of Preoperative Factors on Outcome of Shoulder Arthroplasty for Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis. The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery. 2003 Feb 1,; 85(2):251- 8. 
9. Nyffeler RW, Sheikh R, Atkinson TS, Jacob HAC, Favre P, Gerber C. Effects of glenoid component version on humeral head displacement and joint reaction forces: An experimental study. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery. 2006;15(5):625- 9. 
10. Walch G, Moraga C, Young A, Castellanos -Rosas J. Results of anatomic nonconstrained prosthesis 
in primary osteoarthritis with biconcave glenoid. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery / American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons ... [et al.]. 2012 Nov;21(11): 1526.  
11. Hsu JE, Ricchetti ET, Huffman GR, Iannotti JP, Glaser DL. Addressing glenoid bone deficiency and asymmetric posterior erosion in shoulder arthroplasty. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery / American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons ... [et al.]. 201 3 Sep;22(9):1298- 308. 
12. Kwon YW, Powell KA, Yum JK, Brems JJ, Iannotti JP. Use of three- dimensional computed 
tomography for the analysis of the glenoid anatomy. Journal of Shoulder and Elbow Surgery. 2005 Jan;14(1):85- 90. 
13. Beuckelaers E, Jacxsens M, Van Tongel A, De Wilde LF. Three- dimensional computed tomography 
scan evaluation of the pattern of erosion in type B glenoids. Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery / American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons ... [et al.]. 2014 Jan;23(1):109- 16. 
14. Gyftopoulos S, Beltran L, Yemin A, Strauss E, Meislin R, Jazrawi L, et al. Use of 3D MR 
reconstructions in the evaluation of glenoid bone loss: a clinical study. Skeletal Radiol. 2014 
Feb;43(2):213- 8. 
15. Neer CSI. Replacement Arthroplasty for Glenohumeral Osteoarthritis. The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery. 1974 Jan 1,;56(1):1- 13. 
16. Neer CS, Morrison DS. Glenoid bone- grafting in total shoulder arthroplasty. The Journal of Bone & 
Joint Surgery. 1988 Sep 1,;70(8):1154- 62. 
17. Friedman RJ, Hawthorne KB, Genez BM. The use of computerized tomography in the measurement of glenoid version. The Journal of Bone & Joint Surgery. 1992 Aug 1,;74(7):1032- 7. 
18. Mullaji AB, Beddow FH, Lamb GH. CT measurement of glenoid erosion in arthritis. The Journal of bone and joint surgery. British volume. 1994 May;76(3):384.  
19. Walch G, Badet R, Boulahia A, Khoury A. Morphologic study of the Glenoid in primary glenohumeral 
osteoarthritis. The Journal of Arthroplasty. 1999;14(6):756- 60. 
20. De Wilde LF, Verstraeten T, Speeckaert W, Karelse A.  Reliability of the glenoid plane. Journal of 
Shoulder and Elbow Surgery. 2010;19(3):414- 22. 