[ADDRESS_339439] Management  of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder  
Medication Refill Requests  
 
Study Protocol  and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Tracy Lieu, MD, MPH, Daniel Parry, MD, Andrew deLaunay, PharmD, E. Margaret Warton, 
MPH, Eric Smallberg, MA, Michelle Mancha, BA, Stephanie Prausnitz, MS, Charles 
Quesenberry, PhD, Mary Reed, DrPH , Kristine Lee, MD  
 
From The Permanente Medical Group (Division of Research , Virtual Care Team, Adult and 
Family Medicine regional leads, and TPMG Consulting Services)  and Pharmacy Services, 
Kaiser Permanente Northern [LOCATION_004], all in Oakland, CA   
 
 
Version date: August 27, 2024  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
   
[ADDRESS_339440]  
 
Importance.  Enhancing the management of messages from patients and providing high- quality, 
consistent care  are top priorities for  The Permanente Medical Group ( TPMG ) and Kaiser 
Foundation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]/Health Plan ( KFH/P). A special extension of the Ryan  Haight Act currently 
enables pr oviders to prescribe controlled substances via telehealth interactions but expi[INVESTIGATOR_278029]  2024. I nformation about the quality of care provided via telehealth prescribing of 
controlled substances by [CONTACT_278031].  
 
Objective.  To compare pharmacist management of refill authorization  requests for attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medications with physician management r egarding quality 
of care, efficiency of service, and pa rent satisfaction.  
 
Design, setting, and participants.  This cluster randomized clinical trial will include parents of 
children in Kaiser Permanente Northern [LOCATION_004] who request ADHD medication refills via 
secure messages from April 2 9 to June 28, 2024. Of KPNC’s [ADDRESS_339441] care for ADHD medication refill requests 
has better or similar outcomes compared with PCP care , this will provide evidence supporting 
continuation of this approach. This study’s findings will be useful for KPNC and to inform 
discussions about renewing the special extension of the Ryan Haight Act that allows this 
approach.  
 
1. Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
 Enhancing m essage management and virtual urgent care options for patients are among TPMG  
and KFH’s top priorities. As team -based i nbox  management is further developed, evaluating its 
clinical effectiveness and outcomes  in terms of patient care experience and costs wil l provide 
valuable information for operational planning. In addition, sharing what we learn with other 
health care systems through talks and publications will help highlight  TPMG’s reputation as a 
group that innovates  to support clinicians while increasing  patient access through virtual care.  
 
This study will compare  the clinical outcomes  and costs of two alternative modes of 
management of parent requests for refills of medications for attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) : management by a regional team of pharmacists, vs. management by [CONTACT_146079] . Patients will be included if they are younger than 18 years and if their parent’s 
[ADDRESS_339442] was sent to a pediatrician or family medicine physician (but not to a 
psychiatrist).  We will conduct a cluster randomized trial in [ADDRESS_339443] to : 
 
Aim 1. Q uality of care  
  
Example hypothesis:  Patients without a weight recorded in the past [ADDRESS_339444] Care group 
than the Physician  Care group.  
 
Aim 2. Timeliness of care  
 Example hypothesis:  Patients m anaged via Pharmacist Care will have a faster time to 
refill prescription  than those managed via Physician  Care.  
 
 Aim 3. Parent satisfaction  
 
Example hypothesis:  Parents in the Pharmacist Care group will report comparable 
satisfaction with the process compared with the Physician  Care group.  
 
2. Background and Significance  
 
During the COVID -19 pandemic, the federal Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) and Health and 
Human Services (HHS) created a temporary special flexibility (under the Ryan Haight Act) to 
allow clinicians to prescribe refills of controlled substances via telemedici ne interactions. Prior to 
this, patients needing refills of controlled substances, including medications for attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) , had to  make in -person doctor’s office visits for refill requests .  
 Thanks to this special flexibi lity, Kaiser Permanente Northern [LOCATION_004] has been able to offer 
patients and parents the option of requesting medication refills via secure messages and structured refill authorization requests sent via the electronic health record (EHR) portal. To 
assist busy primary care physicians (PCPs) who would receive these requests in their inboxes, 
pharmacists have taken charge of replying to refill requests for all adults aged [ADDRESS_339445] 2 follow -up visits with a practitioner in 9 months. A key purpose of such 
4 
 follow- up visits is to check the child’s weight  to ensure that their weight gain is not falling behind 
associated with ADHD medication use.   
 
3. Innovation  
 
Pharmacist management of secure messages from patients is innovative in not having been adopted or evaluated at large scale. Preliminary anecdotal and unpublished information from 
within TPMG suggests that pharmacists’ scope of practice is well -suited to message 
management for many specific conditions based on treatment algorithms . At our KP San 
Francisco medical center, pharmacists have been able to take charge of messages for a range 
of issues , including refill authorization requests and requests to manage chronic conditions 
(hypertension, osteoporosis, attention deficit disorder, gout) and time- limited conditions 
(sexually transmitted infections, latent tuberculosis, opi [INVESTIGATOR_164846], and assessment of Paxlovid 
eligibility ).  
 
4. Approach  
 4.1. Design, setting, and participants .  
 
This cluster randomized clinical trial will assign parent secure message requests to pediatricians 
or family medicine physicians for ADHD medication refills for children aged <[ADDRESS_339446] Care or Physician  Care. The unit of randomization is  the KPNC facility . KPNC is an 
integrated health care system with 4. 5 million members served by [CONTACT_726] 970 0 physicians 
and 90,000 employees  in 21 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_161501] 207 medical offices . It has a mature EHR 
(EPIC/HealthConnect, adopted circa 2008) and encourages members to use a wide array of 
options for ou tpatient care, including secure messages to physicians via the EHR portal, e -
visits, video, telephone, and in- person office visits.  
 
The target population is children and adolescents aged <[ADDRESS_339447]  (RAR) for an ADHD medication  to their child’s pediatrician. An RAR is a 
highly structured electronic communication that does not allow the requestor to add any free 
text. This structure makes it possible for either a pharmacist or physician to handle the RAR.  
 
The regional pharmacy team  started to handle free-text secure message requests for refills from 
parents of patients with PCPs in pediatrics during a pi[INVESTIGATOR_278030] [ADDRESS_339448] 
Care, but continue to handle RARs from facilities randomized to Physician Care.  
 The formal study period will include patients with secure messages sent to the regional 
pharmacy team from May 6 , 2024  to June 21, 202 4 (7 weeks) . The unit of analysis will be the 
RAR, allowing some patients to appear up to two times in the study cohort.  
 
4.2. Intervention.  
 
[ADDRESS_339449] regional protocol  (as well as any existing medical center -
level protocols) . Following this protocol, physicians call patients via telephone to elicit additional 
information where needed, file ADHD medication refill prescriptions when appropriate, and send 
follow- up secure messages.  
 
Due to system technical constraints, during this study i t will not be  possible to withhold RAR s 
assigned to the Pharmacist Care group from the inboxes of the patients’ PCPs.  To ask 
physicians to not handle RARs assigned to the Pharmacist Care group, the regional director of 
desktop medicine sent an email to all pediatric chiefs at the start of the study period explaining 
the study and asking them to cascade the message to pediatricians to avoid handling RARs at 
the facilities selected for the Pharmacist Care group.  
 
4.3. Randomization.  Of the facilities in KPNC, 63 are eligible to be included. One facility (South 
Sacramento, which does not use this virtual care approach) will  be excluded. The eligible 
facilities were assigned at random to either the Pharmacist Care or PCP Care arm. The goal of 
the randomization assignment plan was to balance on these variables:  
• Number of estimated ADHD refill requests (based on ADHD med refill  data)  
• Race and ethnicity  
• Sex 
• Neighborhood deprivation index  
• Age 
 
We used  covariate- constrained randomization, a method to prevent imbalances on important 
variables that may be associated with the outcomes .[ADDRESS_339450] diagnostics were  applied in selecting the covariate balance criteria, 
ensuring no threats to the validity of the study design, including extreme reductions in total 
possible allocations for the trial, and instances of cluster pairs never/rarely or always/often 
randomized to the same arm.  An allocation of facilities to the two arms for implementation was  
randomly selected from the set of allocations that meet the final covariate balance criteria.     
 
The balance criteria were: maximum 5% between arm difference in total membership, 30% 
difference in total Bla ck, 20% for each of White, Asian and Hispanic  race/ethnic groups , and 
0.[ADDRESS_339451] not had a weight 
recorded in the EHR during the 6 months ( 180 days) prior to the ADHD medication refill request . 
We will determine  whether the prescribing clinician attempted to ensure that the child had a 
weight checked or recorded, counting the outcome as present  if (a) the patient was referred for 
an in- person visit for a weight check (including a well child visit or a nurse visit for a weight 
check) , or (b) had a parent -reported weight recorded in the EHR . This outcome will be assessed 
via analysis of EHR data  and chart review. Referral for a visit or weight check (part a above) will 
include any of the following:  
(a) the EHR record or chart review indicates that an appropriate in-person appointment was 
booked with pediatrics, family medicine, or psychiatr y after the ph armacist or PCP 
handled the message;  
(b) a chart note indicates that the pharmacist or physician handling the RAR instructed the parent to schedule a follow -up appointment for a weight check;  
(c) a note in the EHR indicates that a medical assistant or other staff member had 
attempted to book a follow -up appointment for a weight check  
 
Secondary outcomes will be the: 
 
a. Whether the child had a weight recorded within 30  days after the RAR, regardless  of the 
reason for the weight  being measured (this measure would count weights recorded at 
urgent visits)  
  
b. Hours  from the secure message request to the prescription order being placed,  among 
patients who had a prescription ordered  
 
c. Days from the secure message request to the prescription being filled (sold),  among 
patients who had a prescription ordered  
 
d. Parent satisfaction with care, as measured by [CONTACT_278032]:  
 
a. Whether the provider initially handling the request was able to fully resolve it without 
referring it to another provider (first -touch resolution)  
 
b. Whether the patient had a refill prescribed (% of patients with refills prescribed)  
 
4.4.2. Predictors and covariates  
 The primary predictor is study group, i.e. Pharmacist Care  or PCP Care . Covariates are o ther 
variables that could potentially mediate, moderate, or confound the association between the 
primary predictor and the outcomes . In this study, covariates  include patient age, sex, race, 
ethnicity, language spoken, and comorbidities, as well as the patient’s neighborhood- level SES .  
 
4.5. Data collection.   
 The primary outcome will be measured via analysis of EHR records and chart review, as 
defined above .  
 
[ADDRESS_339452] (HC, aka EPIC) EHR data (from Clarity) and EPIC access logs. For each patient 
with a refill request, EHR data will be used to identify all ADHD medication prescriptions ordered 
and filled (sold)  during the study period.  
 
Patient  care experience will be evaluated by [CONTACT_48744] a sample of parents selected at random 
in both the Pharmacist Care  and PCP Care  groups. We have designed a short survey  that takes 
no more than [ADDRESS_339453] that we are asking about a specific care experience and patients’ 
recall fades quickly after 2 weeks, we will field the survey using all 3 modes in a relatively efficient sequence. A letter containing a description of the study, language regarding informed 
consent and confidentiality, and the survey will be sent by [CONTACT_278033]  7 after the secure 
message has been replied to , and an email with a link to the online version will be sent on day 
11. Telephone administration will be attempted (up to 4 attempts total)  starting on day [ADDRESS_339454] valued at $10 to thank patients for considering 
participation will be included in the mailing. Responses will be treated as confidential and data 
will be aggregated, with no individual identifiers associated with data presented in reports.  
 Parent-reported outcomes will be reported on a 5- point scale and will include:  
a. Perceived effectiveness of the initial reply in addressing the request  
b. Perceived quality of care  for the request overall  
 
We will also ask parents to indicate the m ode by [CONTACT_278034] , e.g. secure message or a telephone, video, or in -person appointment.  
 
4.6. Statistical analysis plan. 
 
The primary analysis will treat each patient as part of the group to which their facility was 
assigned (intention- to-treat). However,  some patients in the Pharmacist Care group might have 
unintentional crossover and be handled by [CONTACT_278035]. For this reason, 
we will conduct a secondary analysis in which patients are grouped based on the initial 
management approach they actually received (pharmacist or physician, based on which type of 
clinician first contact[CONTACT_278036] ), similar to a per -protocol analysis. A n RAR  first accessed by 
a pharmacist and later accessed by [CONTACT_278037].  
 The primary  outcome is binary, i.e., whether or not a patient who had not had a weight check in 
the [ADDRESS_339455] errors.  The pre- specified set of covariates for 
inclusion in regression models include: study group and covariates used in the randomization 
procedure (i.e. patient socioeconomic status (using the Neighborhood Deprivation Index), 
patient age, sex, race and ethnicity, and comorbidity score ). Study group and other covariates 
will be treated as fixed effects and facility will be handled as a random effect.  
 
In addition, exploratory/sensitivity analyses will examine the impact of including additional 
covariates in our estimation of treatment effect, with focus on variables with chance imbalance 
in distributions by [CONTACT_1570], as determined in preliminary analyses. Analyses resulting in 
[ADDRESS_339456] a skewed distribution, log  
transformation will be used. Analyses of other continuous secondary outcomes will be similar. 
The approach to inclusion of covariates and sensitivity/exploratory analyses is as described for 
Aim 1 .   
 
For patient satisfaction , care experience scores will be compared between the study groups 
using linear mixed effects regression with log transformation if needed for skewed data , with 
analyses paralleling that described for the secondary outcomes . For analyses, categorical 
responses will be combined into a binary variable (Excellent or Very Good vs. Good, Fair, or Poor).  
 For all aims, s econdary analyses will assess v ariation in the estimates of treatment effect by 
[CONTACT_654], sex, socioeconomic status (using the Neighborhood Deprivation Index), and race and 
ethnic ity, via stratification by [CONTACT_278038] .  These stratifi ed analyses will 
inform the fitting of mixed effects regression models with appropriate cross -product terms 
between the potential effect modifier and study group indicator variable, allowing for a more 
formal assessment of heterogeneity in treatment effect.  
 
A facility may drop out before completion of the study if they were assigned to PCP Care but 
add local pharmacist management, thus diverging from their assigned group. ADHD medication refill requests to such a facility will be censored as of the dropout date (the date that local 
pharmacist management began).  
 
Tests of significance will be two- tailed with an alpha of .[ADDRESS_339457] ADHD medication refill 
requests per weekday, i.e., 35 eligible messages per week. We estimate based on expert 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_160781] 30% of these patients don’t have a weight check in the previous [ADDRESS_339458] account for the expected intraclass correlati on (ICC) of 
observations within facilities .  The ICCs in outcomes of interest are expected to be small , and 
therefore we present minimum detectable effects for  an expected ICC  of .03.   
 For Aim 1, the primary outcome  is the % of patients without a weight check in the past 6 months 
who received referral for an appropriate follow -up visit . The following estimates assume that 
30% of the [ADDRESS_339459] 6 
9 
 months, for a sample size of 95 ( 63 clusters with 1.5 patients each) . We also assume a desired 
power of 80%, a two- tailed alpha of 0.05 and an ICC of .03. If  50% of patients in the P CP Care 
group will receive an appropriate referral, t he least detectable difference will 77%. If 80% of the 
patients in the PCP Care group receive an appropriate referral, the least detectable difference 
will be 9 8%. Thus, this  sample size yields good power to identify only  large differences between 
the two arms in the primary outcome.  
 For Aim 2, the outcome is days from the secure message to the prescription order. The 
following estimates assume a sample size of 315  (63 clusters with 5  patients each), a desired 
power of 80%, a two- tailed alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_339460] size.  
 
For Aim 3, the outcome is perceived quality of care on the parent survey, measured on a 5- point 
Likert scale. We will attempt to survey all 315  parents in each of the two study groups. We 
estimate a response rate of 60% , for a completed sample of 189  across gr oups . The outcomes, 
effectiveness and quality  scores, are measured on a continuous 5 -point scale. This sample size 
will yield 80%  power to detect effect sizes of . 0.37 (relative to a standard deviation of 1) . Thus, 
the survey will have good power to identi fy medium sized differences in perceived effectiveness 
and quality of care.  
 
4. Projected Impact  
 
This study’s findings quality and timeliness of care  and patient  satisfaction  will inform decisions 
about how to deploy pharmacist effort for KPNC. The study leaders include regional leaders for Virtual  Medicine and Pharmacy who are well -positioned to make implementation decisions 
based on the results we generate.  
 
5. Deliverables and Dissemination Plan  
 
Our deliverables and dissemination plan have two purposes: To provide information for 
operational decisions by [CONTACT_278039], and to establish our reputation as leaders in Desktop 
Medicine and Pharmacy Services through publication. Specific deliverables and plans include:  
 
• The PI [INVESTIGATOR_58601] a presentation prior to study initiation to support conversations with 
leaders of service areas that will be included.  
• Soon after the a nalysis of computerized data is completed, we will create an internal 
report for Drs. Lee and DeLaunay to share via presentation to the appropriate chiefs and other operational leadership groups.  
• The analysis of clinician and patient data will be completed after this, and we will update the internal report to support a follow -up communication.  
• We will write a manuscript for submission to a peer -reviewed journal to share our 
findings with health care leaders in the U.S. and beyond.  
  
[ADDRESS_339461]. # eligible, per week (7 per da y to pediatrics)  [ADDRESS_339462]. # eligible over:  9 weeks  315  
      
# of facilities (clusters)   [ADDRESS_339463] detectable 
differences     
 Assumptions: Power = 0.80, alpha = 0.05   
      
For proportions, P0=0.50     
 ICC = 0.01  0.657     
 ICC = 0.03  0.663     
 ICC = 0.05  0.679     
      
For proportions, P0 = 0.80     
 ICC = 0.01  0.912   Surveys    
 ICC = 0.03  0.915   Response rate  0.6 
 ICC = 0.05  0.919   N 189 
    N per cluster  3 
For means,        
 ICC = 0.01  0.322     0.412  
 ICC = 0.03  0.334     0.42  
 ICC = 0.05  0.346     0.427  
 
 
Ref: University of Aberdeen cluster sample size calculator  
 