 
Cover Page  
 
Cognitive Rehabilitation for Veterans with Parkinson’s Disease  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol with S tatistical Analysis P lan 
version 3  (approved 02/24/2022 ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.0 Study Design and Methods  
Study Design  
To address the study objectives, a pi[INVESTIGATOR_510379].  
Study population:  
 
Group 1: Veterans  
A convenience sample of Veterans , who are screened and diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease (PD) and mild 
cognitive impairment in the executive function domain will be enrolled.  Targeted enrollment for the 
intervention is 45; they will be randomized to one of three groups: CCT+PRIIS (n=15), CCT+PRIIS control (n=15) 
or CCT control +PRIIS control (n=15).   
 
Group 2: Knowledgeable Informants  
We will also enroll knowledgeable informants/caregivers of the enrolled Veterans.  Thus, we will be enrolling 
civilians  (however it is possible that caregiver could be a Veteran and this is acceptable) . The purpose for 
enrolling a caregiver is to obtain their perspective on f unctional changes related to cognitive impairment in 
the Veteran living with PD. To obtained their perspective, they will complete the PD -Cognitive Functional 
Rating Scale (PD -CFRS) at three different time points during the study.  The planned activities f or the caregiver 
are the following: consent, demographic form, PD -CFRS at three different time points.  The consent form, 
demographic form and PD -CFRS will be completed at their first visit.  We will mail them the form when their 
Veteran completes the RCT,  we will mail them the form again one month later.  A knowledgeable 
informant/caregiver is not required in order for the Veterans to enroll.  Targeted enrollment is 45, however 
we anticipate having to enroll 60 civilians due to Veterans being withdrawn – and thus the associated civilian 
will need to be withdrawn.  
 
Below we list the inclusion and exclusion criteria  for both Veterans and Knowledgeable Informants . 
 
Group 1: Veterans  
 
In general, eligibility criteria target Veterans with idiopathic PD and not o ther forms of parkinsonism. Thus, 
only Veterans older than 50 with PD diagnosed according to [LOCATION_006] Parkinson’s Disease Society Brain Bank Protocol Title  Cognitive Rehabilitation for Veterans with Parkinson’s Disease  
 
  
Funding Agency  
or Sponsor  VA ORD  
  
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_510380], PhD  
 
  
Version Number  
and Date  vs 3 02.09.22 (approved 02/24/2022 ) 
Diagnostic Criteria will be eligible. PD medication can influence cognitive function, thus, only participants 
receiving s table medication (i.e., no changes in medication or dose for the past month) and who are expected 
to remain on stable medication for the duration of the RCT will be eligible.  
 
Inclusion criteria  for Veterans :  
• Diagnosis of PD as determined by [CONTACT_510384]’s Disease Society Brain Bank Diagnostic Criteria46  
• age 50 and older  
• receiving stable medication for at least 4 months (i.e., no changes in medication and medication dose 
in the past month) and who are expected to remain on stable medication for  the duration of the study  
• Mild cognitive impairment as determined by [CONTACT_510385] 2 criteria.  
• Speak and read English  
 
Exclusion criteria  for Veterans:  
• Dementia  
• Failure to demonstrate decision making capacity  
• cholinesterase inhibitor medication  
• History of deep brain stimulation surgery  
• severe depression  
• severe anxiety  
• severe apathy  
 
Group 2: Knowledgeable Informants  
 
Inclusion criteria for Knowledgeable Informants :  
• age 18 or older  
• Speak and read English  
• Interacts with the Veteran on a weekly basis  
 
Exclusion criteria for Knowledgeable Informants :  
• Pregnant  
 Women and minorities will be included in the study as long as they meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
Participants will not be excluded from the study based on their gender or ethnic background.  
Study Phases  
Phase 1: Initial Screening and Recruitment  
Veterans will be recruited from the Hines VA Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (VAH).  Based on the VA  Administrative data bases, from 
[ADDRESS_659734] 25% of them are 
expected to be PD -MCI All research procedures will be carried out under IRB and RR&D approved protocols at 
Hines VAH.  
 
In order to gain access to Veterans being treated at Hines VA, study personnel will obtain appropriate data 
access approvals including partial HIPAA waiver. Once approvals are secured, we will identify research 
candidates using the national inpatient and o utpatient files available at VA Informatics and Computing 
Infrastructure (VINCI). We will request access to data files on the Corporate Data Warehouse (CDW) (CDW 
Production Domains and Vital Status Files (including BIRLS), and CAPRI/VistAWeb, with real SSN  identifiers 
located in VINCI using the Data Access Request Tracker (DART) system. Once this access is approved, we will 
then search the database for the past 10 years (FY09 -FY18) f or Veterans who have had at least [ADDRESS_659735] a PD -D diagnosis, severe depression,  anxiety or apathy,  Deep 
Brain Stimulation (DBS )or are taking cholinesterase 
inhibitor me dication . Those deemed eligible will be 
recruited for study participation. We will send these likely 
eligible Veterans a recruitment letter in the mail that briefly 
describes the study as well as notifies them that the research 
team will be calling to ask if they would like to participate in 
the study. At least [ADDRESS_659736] 
only three messages, with a minimum of 24 hours between 
messages, and preferably at different times of the day.   
 
The telephone conversation includes :  
1. a description of the study and the time commitment 
required to complete the study (i.e., participation will 
last for approximately 2 months, this includes 4 study 
site visits.).   
 
2. A list of prescribed and over -the counter medications 
and the length of time the participant has been on 
each medication will also be collected.   
 
3. Identification of a potential knowledgeable informant/caregiver will be discussed.  We would ask the 
Veteran  to identify a person and give them our research contact [CONTACT_6227].   
If the Veteran appears to be eligible after the phone screen, we would mail a letter to the Veteran along with 
the consent forms and HIPAA for themselves and a knowledgeable informant to re view.   
Once eligibility is determined  for the Veteran , based on the phone screen, then the research team will call the 
Veteran to let them know if they are eligible or not.  If they are eligible, we would schedule a time for them to 
continue talking on th e phone to answer questions and schedule an appointment to review the consent forms 
and then discuss questions or concerns.   
When the potential knowledgeable informant calls the research team, we will provide a description of the 
study and the time commit ment required to complete the study. We will review eligibility criteria.  If the 
person is eligible, we will mail them a letter with the knowledgeable informant consent form and HIPAA for 
them to review.   
As a second  method of recruitment, the research t eam will work with the clinical managers at the Hines 
Neurology Clinic to determine Veterans with an upcoming neurology clinical appointment. We will access their 
VA medical records (i.e., chart reviews) to screen for eligibility. If eligible, these Vetera ns will also be sent the 
same recruitment letter and receive the same phone call as described above . We will also work with agreeing 
Neurologists at Hines VAH on a third  method of recruitment. In this case, the doctors will inform the ir patients 
of the stu dy and give them a recruitment flier following their routine clinical visit.  As a fourth  method, we will 
Figure 1: Study Phases  
 
 
screen medical records of Veterans in relevant clinics, such as Neurology , Geriatric clinic and rehab clinic , 
which will be accessed through CPRS.  
Phase 2. Informed Consent and Screening Procedures  
Informed Consent: Authorized clinical researchers will meet with the eligible  Veteran  in a private room to 
review the consent form and all research procedures, risks, confidentiality measures and study contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  All participants will be able to make their own decisions regarding research participation.  They 
will be encouraged to have a family member or friend in the room during the discussion of the study.  The 
participant will not be openly encouraged to participate in the research or told that there is any expected 
benefit from the experimental interventions during participat ion.  Potential research participants will have 
access to research staff to assist with any questions or concerns until understanding is achieved to the 
judgement of the individual asking the question – this mean that discussion of the study can continue w ith 
additional phone conversations or additional visits.  If a participant refuses participation, no further contact 
[CONTACT_97632].  
 
Before the consent is signed, the decision -making capacity tool will be administered.  This tool asks the 
Veteran to explain , in general, what the purpose of the study is and what is expected, in general from the 
participant.  If the Veteran fails to demonstrate an understanding, they will not be eligible for the study.  
 
When the  signed informed consent forms are completed, a n ote will be made in the Hines VA EMR, and the 
original consent will be kept in a locked cabinet in a locked research office behind swipe -access doors in Bldg 
1, Room B335 of Hines VA.  Additionally, a copy will be provided to the participant.   
During the same visit for informed consent, participants will be asked to complete additional screening and 
neuropsychological testing. Table 1 lists all standardized tests. Completion of consenting and screening is 
expected to take approximately 3 hours . 
 
Phase 1 In Person -Screening  
 
Screening for Depression: Participants will be screened with the Beck Depression Index -II. Those scoring 
between 29 - 63 will be withdrawn from the study as this indicates severe depression.   
 
Screening for Anxiety : Participants will be screened with the Beck Anxiety Scale . Those scoring  12 or greater  
will be withdrawn from the study as this indicates severe anxiety .  
 
Screening for Apathy : Participants will be screened with the Starkstein Apathy Scale . Those scoring 14 or 
greater will be withdrawn from the study as this indicates severe apathy .  
 
Screening for global cognitive function : First, participants will be screened with the MoCA (e.g., level 1 
screening). Those scoring below 21 will be withdrawn from the study  as this indicated dementia .   
 
Phase 2 In -Person Screening  
Screening for PD -MCI: The following tests for 5 cognitive domains will be used. Executive function:  Trail 
making test,  Action Fluency test,  Wisconsin Card Sorting Test. Memory:  Hopkins Verbal Learning Test -Revised , 
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test -Revised. Visuospatial: Judgme nt of Line Orientation , Hooper Visual 
Organization Test. Language: Similarities, [LOCATION_011] Naming Test. Attention/working memory: Letter number 
sequencing, Stroop color word test  
 
Additional tests and questionnaires : Theories of Cognitive Abilities , Need for Cognition Scale, Memory for 
Intentions Test  and Modified Fatigue impact Scale .  A questionnaire will also be administered to obtain 
demographic information (age, gender, ethnicity, race, and education level), service -related information 
(active duty or reserves and period of service time, and Parkinson’s disease -related history (year of diagnosis, 
number of years on Parkinson’s medication and side of motor symptom onset) , and current general computer 
use and use of commercially available cognitiv e training tools.  
 
 
 
Phase 3: Baseline data collection  
Repeated measures/study outcomes are included in a standardized battery of test that will be repeated at 
baseline, endpoint and follow -up. The battery is expected to take approximately 130 minutes to complete. Table 1: Standardized Assessment Tools for In -Person Screening Visit  
Assessment Name  [CONTACT_510391] 
(min)  
Phase One of In -Person Screening  
Beck Depression Inventory -II Depression  10 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment  Global cognitive function  10 
Beck Anxiety Inventory  Anxiety  10 
Starkstein Apathy Scale  Apathy  5 
                                                                                                                                              Total time: 35 
minutes  
Phase Two of In -Person Screening  
Letter number sequencing  Attention/working memory  [ADDRESS_659737] Scale  Fatigue  5 
                                                                                                                                               Total Time:              
124 minutes  
Table 2. Guidelines from the Movement Disorder Society Task Force on Defining & Assessing MCI10 
Assessment:  
Level [ADDRESS_659738] to assess global cognitive function 
(i.e., the MoCA) or a limited battery of neuropsychological tests. Based on M0CA total scores, 
[ADDRESS_659739] affected in PD.  
Definition of impairment:  Using neuropsychological tests and appropriate normative data; impairment is 
defined as [ADDRESS_659740] deviation below normative mean in 2 tests in the same domain or any two tests  in 
different domains.  
Tests administered during screening (e.g., the BDI -II, MoCA, BAI, and HVLT , Mem ory for Intentions  Test, and 
Modified Fatigue Impact Scale ) will not be replicated at baseline, but are included in Table 3 below to indicate 
it is a repeated measure.  
 
Phase 4: Intervention  
Participants will be randomized to one of three groups : CCT+PRIIS (n=15), CCT+PRIIS control (n=15) or CCT 
control +PRIIS control (n=15)  and issued a VA i Pad to take home and complete the study intervention . 
Participants and researchers who are administering and scoring outcome measures will be blinded to group 
assignment. Effectiveness of blinding will be evaluated by [CONTACT_510386] -point and endpoint 
questionnaires that assess perception of tr aining intervention69. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_510381]. [CONTACT_510392], who will be 
blinded to group assignments, will coordinate sensitive aspects of the study that requ ire blinding.   
 
CCT training games are developed by [CONTACT_114354], San Francisco, CA, and are designed to train 
components of EF specifically affected in PD (Table 5). Participants  will be asked to complete, at home, 4 
sessions/week for 8  week s. Each session will take 30min; totaling 16hr of CCT training. No dose effect is 
established for CCT, thus we looked to the literature24,[ADDRESS_659741] effects of training on 
cognition. Progress of the training will not be fixed; training modules will be continuously adaptive, following 
“staircase” procedures70, assuring that success in training on ~75% of exercise trials. While this leads t o a Table 3: Repeated Measures Assessment Tools used in the RCT  
Assessment Name (Abbreviation)  Outcome  Construct 
measure  Time to 
complete (min)  
NIH-EXAMINER components:  1o (composite 
score of 7 tests 
listed below)  Executive function  [ADDRESS_659742] -Revised ( HVLT ) 2o Memory  [ADDRESS_659743] ( SDMT ) 2o Processing speed  [ADDRESS_659744] (MIST)  2o Prospective 
memory  15 
Monetary -Choice Questionnaire  2o impulsivity  10 
Parkinson’s Disease -Cognitive Functional 
Rating Scale ( PD-CFRS ) 2o Real-life function  [ADDRESS_659745] -Acute Care ™ 
(AM-PAC™) –Applied Cognition questionnaire  2o Real-life function  10 
Timed instrumental activities of daily living 
(iADL)  2o Real-life function  [ADDRESS_659746] Scale  2o Fatigue  5 
Total Time: [ADDRESS_659747] games 
(Fig 2). Veterans  will be asked to complete, at home, 4 sessions/week for 8wk.  
 
For PRIIS, p articipants will work with a study team member  to determine patient -centered prospective 
memory tasks. Participants  will collaboratively agree on problem areas/areas that they would like to manage 
better (i.e., remember when to take my medicine ) formulated in the form of up to three personal 
rehabilitation goals using the Bangor Goal -Setting Interview (BGSI)72. They will rate their own performance on 
these goals at initial and follow -up assessments. Participants will be taught to form a ‘When X,  I will do Y’, 
recite the statement aloud three times, and imaging themselves performing the task during the situation in 
accordance with the statement for [ADDRESS_659748]/CCT active control assignments (e.g., on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday, when I eat lunch, I will complete my cognitive training games).   
 
PRIIS active control will include verbal rehearsal. These participants will be instructed to recite their 
prospective memory task (complete weekly intervention assignments) at least three times a day and study 
them for 30 s. Everyone will be given a  handou t with strategy instructions as reference. Weekly calls will be 
made to participants to assess their progress with the prospective memory task of completing weekly 
intervention assignments. Barriers, facilitators, and resources will be noted and discussed.  
The study team member designated as the cognitive coach will make weekly phone calls to the participant to 
assess compliance and help troubleshoot any difficulties with the assigned programs.  During the call, the 
cognitive coach will help the participant assess their progress with the prospective memory task of completing 
weekly intervention assignments (and for PRIIS the   other goals). Barriers, facilitators, and resources will be 
discussed.  
 
At midpoint and endpoint (weeks 4 and 8 of the intervention), participant’s perception of the training will be 
assessed , over the phone and by a study team member , with a short questionnaire that will include questions 
such as: Are the games en joyable? Are the games challenging? Do you look forward to playing the games? Are 
you motivated to play the games? Do you think your cognition is improving because of the games? Answers 
will be rated on a Likert scale. All participants will be reassessed w ith the neuropsychological  battery at 
endpoint and one month after endpoint. During the one month after endpoint, participants  will not be 
contact[CONTACT_510387] -up assessment.  
 
Specific to the CCT intervention, several factors may contribute to non -compliance with program use. S everal 
elements of flexibility will be incorporated in the treatment schedule to accommodate the challenges that 
Veterans with PD may encounter. First, the participan t may require extra time to complete the program. 
Participants will be asked to engage in four [ADDRESS_659749] -
assessment (completion) visit regardless of the number of sessions complete d. Second, we expect that not all 
participants will complete four sessions every week. To accommodate this, during the weekly phone calls to 
participants, the study team will work with them to generate a feasible training schedule if they are finding it 
difficult to meet requirements. Third, there may be some cases in which a participant may wish to stop or 
minimize the use of the program going forward, while remaining in the study. Potential reasons for this 
decision might be a change in health issues, fam ily/personal issues or lack of interest in the intervention. 
However, the participant may want to meet their personal commitment to the basic scientific research of the 
study. In such cases, after a study team discussion with co -investigators, the particip ant will be permitted to 
cease using the program and be scheduled for a post -assessment (endpoint) visit at the appropriate time 
relative to the baseline assessment. If the participant completed at least 12 hours of training within 12 weeks, 
then a 1 -month  follow -up assessment will be scheduled.  Fourth, some Veterans may not be able to complete 
the proposed training regimen in one sitting (i.e., 30 minutes) due to fatigue. To accommodate this issue, 
participants may choose to break the time into shorter se gments, which are more easily manageable . 
 
We will define “completers” of the intervention as those who completed at least 80% of the sessions.  
Phase 5: Endpoint  
Endpoint Behavioral Assessments:  
All participants will complete the assessments listed in Ta ble 3 in a private room with trained research staff at 
Hines.  A semi -structured interview will also be conducted by [CONTACT_7628]. This interview will take 
approximately 30 minutes and discussion will focus around feasibility of participating in t he study, perception 
of training for the 2 interventions, usefulness of the weekly cognitive coach calls, and guess at treatment 
group allocation.  We will audiotape this part of the session.  The option to consent to audiotapi[INVESTIGATOR_510382] ’s consent form  
Phase 6: Follow -up 
Follow -up Behavioral Assessments:  
One month after the last intervention session, all participants will complete the assessments listed in 
Table 3 in a private room with trained research staff  at Hines.  
 
Unblinding:  
Participants will be unblinded after the last participant completes the study.  A letter will be mailed to the 
Veterans.  
Knowledgeable informants/caregivers   
Knowledgeable informants/caregivers enrolled in the study will be administered the PD -CFRS. Data from the 
informant will be collected at baseline in person and, to reduce burden of data collection, end -point and 
follow -up surveys will be mailed to informants for complet ion.  Filling out this form three times  (along with an 
initial demographic  form) are  the only research procedures performed by [CONTACT_510388]/caregivers.  
 
COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH ACTIVITIES  
Veteran p articipants  will be compensated $120 for completing all research procedures in this study. 
Participants will receive $ 30 after completing the 2 -3 hour long diagnostic confirmation screen. Participants 
will receive $ 30 after completing baseline neuropsychological assessments, $30 after completing endpoint 
neuropsychological assessments and $ 30 after completing follow -up neuropsychological assessments.  
 
Payment Procedures if screening and/or assessments are completed Hines VA:  they will  be reimbursed $ [ADDRESS_659750] deposit via elec tronic funds transfer (EFT) .   
 
Knowledgeable informants/caregivers will not receive compensation.  
2.0 Risks  
We anticipate that this will be a study with minimal risk and low probability of adverse events.  There may be 
some risk of emotional distress when subjects are completing self -report assessments; poor performance on 
neuropsychological tests may also cause distress.  However, in the event that extreme distress is indicated by 
[CONTACT_87755], that is, the study participant indicates that they wi sh to harm themselves or others, 
research staff will escort the participant to mental health intake.  In the event of an adverse event it will be 
documented in the subject hard copy file and reported to the IRB within the time requirements set for by [CONTACT_510389].  
Cognition and other Mental Health Behavioral Assessments:  
Participant may experience some distress when completing self -report assessments or if they perform poorly 
on tests.  Participants will be told they can decline to answer any question. They will also be told that some 
questions are meant to be hard and som e are meant to be easy and we ask that they try their best. Screening 
assessments will take approximately [ADDRESS_659751] -assessment (completion) visit 
regardless of the number of sessi ons completed. Second, we expect that not all participants will complete four 
sessions every week. To accommodate this, during the weekly phone calls to participants, the study team will 
work with them to generate a feasible training schedule if they are f inding it difficult to meet requirements. 
Third, there may be some cases in which a participant may wish to stop or minimize the use of the program 
going forward, while remaining in the study. Potential reasons for this decision might be a change in health  
issues, family/personal issues or lack of interest in the intervention. However, the participant may want to 
meet their personal commitment to the basic scientific research of the study. In such cases, after a study team 
discussion with co -investigators, the participant will be permitted to cease using the program and be 
scheduled for a post -assessment (endpoint) visit at the appropriate time relative to the baseline assessment. If 
the participant completed at least 12 hours of training within 12 weeks, th en a 1 -month follow -up assessment 
will be scheduled.  Fourth, some Veterans may not be able to complete the proposed training regimen in one 
sitting (i.e., 30 minutes) due to fatigue. To accommodate this issue, participants may choose to break the time 
into shorter segments, which are more easily manageable.  
Confidentiality:  
Loss of confidentiality is a potential risk. This research study involves collection of questionnaires. To protect 
from breach of confidentiality, each participant will be assigned a unique identification number by [CONTACT_510390] (e.g., name, address, phone number, date of birth, social security number) will be on a  cross -walk 
file within secure Hines VA servers .  Sandra Kletzel  will provide  limited access to the data. Hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_510383] a lockable file cabinet in a lockable offi ce of [CONTACT_510393] at 
Hines VAH.  Any breach in security will be reported to ACOS/Research, Facility Information Security Officer 
(ISO) and facility Privacy Officer within one hour.  All Hines data will remain at Hines and will not be taken off 
stati on.  No data will be stored on hard drives.  
Unknown cognitive training  Risks:   
There may be other unforeseeable and/or unanticipated side effects that could occur.  An adverse events (AE) 
log and weekly  study monitor log will be used to monitor the occurr ence of any AE including unanticipated 
events.  A response plan to unanticipated AE will be developed should this occur.  
3.[ADDRESS_659752] will be utilized for further treatment 
development for cognitive function in Veterans with PD. These pi[INVESTIGATOR_290273] a will be used as preliminary data for a 
larger -scale Merit grant proposal submitted to the VA RR&D service.  
4.[ADDRESS_659753] administrators will undergo the same training. Data will be cleaned and tested for normality (if 
normality tests fail, appropriate transformations will be made), and proper missing dat a imputation 
techniques will be used. Test for multicollinearity  will be made.  The [ADDRESS_659754] effects. For ANCOVA, type I error rate (α=0.05) will be adjusted for multiple comparisons 
using Bonferroni corrections.  
 
Neuropsychological Data  Analytical Approaches. For Aims [ADDRESS_659755], a within patient  score change approach will be used, which defines MCID as the mean 
change between the outcome scores (NIH EXAMINER Executive composite score) of a group of patients 
selected per their answers. Second, a sensitivity - and specificity -based approach will be used. This anchor -
based approach is useful to calculate the threshold that allows for the best discrimination between groups of 
patients. The outcome score that produces the greatest and most balanced sensitivity and specificity for 
discriminating patients  with minimal change from patients without any change will be considered as the MCID. 
Used in con -junction with MCID estimations, sensitivity is the proportion of the patients having change on the 
external criterion (PD -CFRS) and whose outcome score (NIH E XAMINER Executive composite score) change 
exceeds the threshold MCID value. Similarly, specificity is the proportion of subjects without any changes on 
the external criterion (PD -CFRS) and whose outcome changes are below the threshold MCID value. Full, par tial 
and non -responders will be defined using the MCID in both the sham and active rTMS groups (i.e., full = > 1 
MCID, partial= 1 MCID, non= < 1MCID).  
 
The psychometric properties of the PD -CFRS (both self -report and informant report assessed separately) w ill 
be assessed using the Rasch model (i.e., construct validity) and concurrent validity will be examined using 
traditional correlational methods (i.e., concurrent validity with NIH -EXAMINER).  For the PD -CFRS, the 
interrater agreement between self - and in formant ratings will be calculated using the Corrected Discrepancy 
score, which is a rigorous measure correcting for between -subject differences in actual level of scoring.  
 