1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Title: Pragmatic Cyclical Lower Extremity Exercise Trial for Parkinson’s disease  
 
NCT #: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: November 9, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Title: Pragmatic Cyclical Lower E xtremity E xerci se for Parkinson’s Trial  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_16101] L. Alberts  
Date Modified: 11/9/2021 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS  
An unmet need in the treatment of Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is identification of an effective  disease- modifying 
intervention (e.g. pharmaceutical, surgical or behavioral).1,2 Increasing evidence, from our laboratory3-7 and 
others,8-10 coupled with our recently completed NIH -sponsored randomized controlled trial (RCT), CYClical 
Lower Extremity exercise for Parkinson’s trial (CYCLE) , indicates  high intensity  aerobic  exercise is a candidate 
to alter PD progression.  CYCLE trial data demonstrate that exercise delivered in a controlled, supervised 
laboratory setting results in global improvements in motor and non -motor function.  Global improvements were 
preserved following exercise cessation, suggesting exercise is likely enhancing CNS function.3,4,[ADDRESS_1086965] i s proposed, i n which PD patients complete 
the CYCLE protocol at  home , to address the following questions: 1) What are the disease -altering capabilities 
of a PD-specific  long- term, high intensity aerobic exercise intervention?  2) What are the relationships of  
patients’ phenotype and exercise performance variables to  PD progression within such an exercise program? 
Based on preliminary data, we hypothesize  that long -term high- intensity aerobic exercise slow s PD 
progression  relative  to Usual and Customary Care  (UCC).   In sum,  approximately 250 mild to moderate PD 
patients from  Cleveland Clinic and University of Utah will be randomized to a high- intensity home exercise or a 
UCC group. The CYCLE protocol , involving  aerobic intensity between 60- 80% of heart rate reserve with a 
target cadence between 80- 90 RPMs,  will be delivered to the patients’ home via the commercially available  
Peloton Cycle. T he exercise group  will be asked to cycle  3x/week for 12 months.  The UCC group will be 
instructed to engage in their normal activities. The Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease 
Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS III)  will be used to evaluate disease progression or rate of physical decline .  
Blinded MDS -UPDRS III  evaluations  will be completed at: enrollment , 6 and 12 months.  Biomechanical  iPad 
assessment s of motor and non- motor function16-19 will be completed at each time point ; thus  augment ing 
clinical outcomes  to provide a comprehensive understanding of the effects extended exercise on specific 
aspects  of PD motor control and executive function. Overall activity levels will be monitored for both groups via 
a wearable sensor.  
Aim 1: To determine the disease -altering effects  of a home -based high- intensity aerobic exercise 
program.  12-month MDS -UPDRS III rate of decline while off medication will serve as the primary outcome . 
Hypothesis : Those in the high intensity exercise group will have a significantly smaller one- year rate of decline 
in MDS -UPDRS III scores compared to the UCC group.  
Aim 2: To determine the effects of a home- based aerobic exercise program on upper and lower 
extremity function using biomechanical outcomes.  Our Nine Hole Peg Test (9HPT),19 gait speed19 and 
Timed Up and Go (iTUG)20,21 iPad modules will be used to quantify  upper and lower extremity function.  
Hypothesis : Performance on 9HPT, gait speed and iTUG will show significantly slower rates of decay over 12 
months for those in  the exercise group compared to the UCC group.  
Aim 3: To determine the effects of a home- based aerobic exercise program on non- motor function.  
Non-motor assessments will be evaluated using our iPad- based tests of processing speed (Processing Speed 
Test19,22), working memory and set switching (Trail Making Test A & B) . 
Hypothesis : Rates of decline in executive functions from enrollment to 12 months will be significantly less in the 
exercise group compared to the UCC group.  
Aim 4: To develop a prognostic model to predict 12- month MDS -UPDRS  III decline for patients 
participating in a home- based high- intensity aerobic exercise program.  
PD demographics (age, gender, disease duration, primary symptoms, age of onset, etc.) coupled with exercise performance variables (compliance, duration, cadence, heart rate, power, heart rate variability ) will be used to 
predict 12-month  change in MDS -UPDRS III scores among the exercise cohort.  
Hypothesis:   Demographics, baseline PD status and comorbidities, and exercise performance will predict [ADDRESS_1086966] (DSMB) oversight.    
Participant Recruitment, Screening and Randomization: 
CC’s  Center for Neurolo gical Restoration (CNR) manages 
6,000+  PD patients; each patient typi[INVESTIGATOR_789277] -annual 
neurology visits which include a complete MDS -UPDRS III 
evaluation. UU’s Movement Disorders Program manages 
2,000+ PD patients.  Their respective Directors, Drs. 
Fernandez (Cleveland) and Moretti (Utah), will lead their 
medical teams to screen in recruiting for this project  and will 
complete MDS -UPDRS III clinical evaluations , blinded to 
group assignment. The  pragmatic clinical trial design,  with 
exercise at home and relatively few visits to the study site, 
will minimize  travel burden, easing recruitment and 
facilitat ing recruitment of a racial ly and socio- economic ally 
diverse patient group.
[ADDRESS_1086967] effectively utilized RedCap across in previous multi -site clinical trials,
24-31 and clinical programs. Figure 1 
depi[INVESTIGATOR_789278] .  Total study participation time is projected to be 12.5  months , including ~2.5 weeks for cycle 
delivery and completion of init ial Comprehensive Assessments (On- /Off- meds).   
As shown in Figure 1, three Comprehensive assessments of motor and non- motor function will be conducted 
for all participants. Comprehensive (90 mins)  assessments (Table 1)  will be overseen by [CONTACT_6283]. Fernandez and 
Moretti, and will be completed at project enrollment (On - and Off -medication), 6 months (Off -medication), and 
12 months ( Off-medication). Visit windows will be within ± 10 days of their nominal dates. Participants will be 
reimbursed for time and travel expenses of $50 for each assessment. All clinical and self -report data will be 
entered into the RedCap database (see Data and Safety Monitoring). Each site’s biomechanical data from the 
iPad will be  uploaded securely , with encryption,  to the CC  HIPAA- compliant cloud instance (ClearData), 
processed in the cloud, and integrated into the Alberts lab’s on- premises, firewall protected, server.  
Asking participants to withhold medication for Off-state examinations  imposes a burden, but  the Off -
state (12 hours off meds ) will increase insight into the direct effect of exercise on PD  itself. Since m edication 
changes are frequent with PD and often result in symptomatic fluctuations , the Off -state provides a more 
reliable, less confounded time comparisons .  Medication reconciliation will be completed at each examination,   
and levodopa equivalent daily doses (LEDDs) will be determined and utilized in the prediction model  (Aim 4).  
To determine the potential impact of overall physical activity in disease progression, all patients will be 
provided a Garmin activity monitor to measure overall daily activity (e.g., active minutes and steps per day). 
Currently, the Garmin activity monitor is utilized by 30,000+ participants in the CC Health System employee 
health plan, and accurately counts steps and activity levels of individuals with PD.32 Patients will wear the 
device on their belt/waistband or shoe during waking hours and upload the data every [ADDRESS_1086968] ~6- months.  To ensure no loss of data the battery will be replaced at 
the 6 month assessment.  Activity monitor data will be synchronized with the secure CC Health system portal and downloaded to the Alberts research server behind the CC firewall.  The number of steps and minutes of 
activity, binned by [CONTACT_4475], week, month and year, w ill be considered for inclusion in the predictive model in Aim 4.  

4 
  
Leveraging a Widespread Consumer -based Home Exercise Platform:   Our previous model of deploying a 
consumer -based  interactive and connected exercise  cycle to the home will be leveraged  for this trial .27 The 
Peloton Indoor Cycle ( [LOCATION_001], NY ) will serve as the platform to deliver the CYCLE exercise protocol  and 
actively measure exercise performance variables.   To ensure safety in exercising and understanding of the 
Peloton, exercise participants  will be properly fit to the  Peloton. [CONTACT_619327] and [CONTACT_789281]  will be responsible 
for conducting this fitting session as both have extensive experience in fitting PD patients on exercise cycles.  
During this session seat height, reach, c lipless or platform pedal s, etc . will be optimized for comfort and safety 
in mounting and dismounting the cycle.  Patients will complete a tutorial related to using the cycle, heart  rate 
monitor and data transmission.  Patients will be informed of their t arget HRR (Karvonen method: [(220- age)-
resting HR] x 60- 80% + resting HR)  and complete a brief exercise session to ensure they fully understand the 
exercise requirements and Peloton interface.   They will be provided a Garmin activity monitoring device  and 
instructed on its use.   Within 10 days  of the clinical fitting session , a Peloton cycle will be delivered to the 
patient’s home by a certified technician.  They will assemble and  setup the cycle according to patient -specific 
fitting specifications . The certified  technician will ensure all aspects of the cycle are working properly.  The 
study coordinator will contact [CONTACT_25701] 48 hours of delivery to ensure the system is functioning as 
intended.   
Standardized High -Intensity Home Exercise Program: The Peloton platform  contains thousands of pre -
recorded cycling classes with varying levels of intensities and recommendations. Study staff will select cycling 
protocols from this pre -recorded list for cyclists entering the study at different levels of fitnes s (beginners, 
intermediate, or advanced) . Participants will be safely increased i n RPMs, heart rate, and overall levels of 
perceived exertion over subsequent  weeks of the study  to reach study recommendations . Participants will be  
will be asked to exercise on the Peloton 3 times per week for 50 -60 minutes (40 minutes at their target HRR  + 
5-10 minute warm -up and cool -down) for 12 months  and encouraged to exercise using a relatively high 
cadence (80-90 rpms) .  To increase engagement,  modules containing different professional Peloton instructors 
will be utilized.   All instances of the modules will be simila r in terms of aerobic intensity;  however  they will vary 
in type of background music and general personality of the instructor.  In addition to the selected  CYCLE  
modules, the patient will have the option to join more than 20 daily “live” sessions  or select one of  300+  scenic 
courses on the Peloton platform.  The se additional  options empower  each patient to exercise in a manner best 
suited for them and will facilit ate compliance.  Considering the  Peloton records , stores , and transmits  heart 
rate, power, speed, estimated distance , time and cadence for every exercise session, regardless of whether 
the patient is completing a CYCLE module, live class or scenic ride, the specific module  they complete is not 
critical as data are recorded, transmitted and downloaded to the study database regardless.  Secure data 
transmission procedures are detailed in Protection of Human Subjects.  
Study staff at each site will make bi -monthly calls to patients to address  technology  issues or compliance 
obstacles  for those patients not meeting exercise recommendations .  During these calls, exercise may be Outcome Measur e Domain  Comprehensive  
Aim 1    
MDS -UPDRS III  Rater -observed PD global motor symptoms  ✔ 
Aim [ADDRESS_1086969]  Upper extremity dexterity  ✔ 
Timed Up & Go  & 10M walk  Transfers, turning, gait speed  ✔ 
Postural sway  Postural s tability and Balance  ✔ 
Self-reported falls  Prospectively recorded via fall diary  ✔ 
Six Minute Walk Test   Cardiovascular fitness  ✔ 
Aim 3    
Processing Speed  Info processing  speed, implicit learning  ✔ 
Visual Memory Test  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_17120]  ✔ 
Trail Making Test A & B  Set-switching, attention, working memory  ✔ 
Neuro -QoL Quality of life  questionnaire  ✔ 
MDS -UPDRS I, II, IV  Part I: non -motor symptoms; Part II: self -reported motor 
symptoms; Part IV: motor complications  ✔ 
5 
 progressed as deemed appropriate based on physiological signs monitored by [CONTACT_789279] (see Protection of Human Subjects  for details ).  
Usual and Customary Care Group:  Participants randomized to the UCC group will be asked to maintain their 
current exercise habits for [ADDRESS_1086970] individuals from those programs. Similar to the home exercise group, a member of the study team 
will call these patients twice per month to inquire about activity levels, medication changes and technology 
assistance with the activity monitoring device and data.   
 
Alternate Data Capture : 
Due to the Covid- [ADDRESS_1086971] virtual visits with participants . The Cleveland Clinic will utilize either FaceTime or Zoom, and the 
University of Utah will utilize the preferred platforms of their institution.  
  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:  
Inclusion Criteria:  
a) Adult with a d iagnosis of idiopathic PD by a physician or physician extender  
b) Hoehn and Yahr stage I -III 
c) Demonstrate the ability to safely mount and dismount the Peloton stationary cycle  
d) In-home WiFi (Peloton system requires WiFi to transmit exercise data)*  
*2017 report indicates WiFi  rates of 76% and 83% in Ohio and Utah households respectively  
Exclusion Criteria:  
a) Participation in pharmaceutical or behavioral disease modifying PD -related clinical trial or study  
b) Diagnosis of dementia or any neurocognitive impairment that compromises one’s ability to provide 
informed consent.  
c) Implanted deep brain stimulation electrodes  
d) Recommendation for medical clearance using the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 
Preparticipation Health Screen (Figure 2)
[ADDRESS_1086972] obtain medical clearance 
by [CONTACT_789280].  
b. Those who choose not to obtain physician clearance will not be eligible for participation. Those 
who do not receive physician clearance for high intensity exercise will not be eligible.   
e) A musculoskeletal issue (arthritis, osteoporosis, back problem) that would limit one’s ability to engage 
in exercise  
f) Neurological disease other than Parkinson’s disease (i.e. multiple sclerosis, Huntington’s disease ) 
g) Current or active cardiac arrhythmia 
h) DeNovo patients (have not begun Parkinson’s disease medications).  
i) Previous or planned treatment of focused ultrasound for Parkinson’s disease management  
 
  
6 
  
                
              
REFERENCES  
1. Olanow CW. Can we achieve neuroprotection with currently available anti -parkinsonian interventions? 
Neurology 2009;72:S59- 64. 
2. Olanow CW, Kieburtz K, Schapi[INVESTIGATOR_330194]. Why have we failed to achieve neuroprotection in Parkinson's 
disease? Ann Neurol 2008;[ADDRESS_1086973] 2:S101- 10. 
3. Alberts JL, Linder SM, Penko AL, Lowe MJ, Phillips M. It is not about the bike, it is about the pedaling: 
forced exercise and Parkinson's disease. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 2011;39:177- 86. 
4. Ridgel AL, Vitek JL, Alberts JL. Forced, not voluntary, exercise improves motor function in Parkinson's 
disease patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2009;23:600 -8. 
5. Alberts JL, Phillips M, Lowe MJ, et al. Cortical and motor responses to acute forced exercise in 
Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2016;24:[ADDRESS_1086974] of forced- exercise therapy for Parkinson's disease on 
motor cortex functional connectivity. Brain Connect 2013;3:190 -8. 
Figure 2 :  Schematic of ACSM exercise readiness questionnaire. Detailed questions will be part 
of the pre -screening process.  
7 
 7. Rosenfeldt AB, Dey T, Alberts JL. Aerobic Exercise Preserves Olfaction Function in Individuals with 
Parkinson’s disease. Parkinson's disease 2016.  
8. Miyai I, Fujimoto Y, Yamamoto H, et al. Long -term effect of body weight -supported treadmill training in 
Parkinson's disease: a randomized controlled trial. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2002;83:1370 -3. 
9. Shulman LM, Katzel LI, Ivey FM, et al. Randomized Clinical Trial of 3 Types of Physical Exercise for 
Patients With Parkinson Disease. Jama Neurology 2013;70:183- 90. 
10. Schenkman M, Moore CG, Kohrt WM, et al. Effect of High- Intensity Treadmill Exercise on Motor 
Symptoms in Patients With De Novo Parkinson Disease: A Phase 2 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 
2018;75:219 -26. 
11. Shah C, Beall EB, Frankemolle AM, et al. Exercise Therapy for Parkinson's Disease: Pedaling Rate Is 
Related to Changes in Motor Connectivity. Brain Connect 2016;6:25 -36. 
12. Petzinger GM, Fisher BE, Van Leeuwen JE, et al. Enhancing neuroplasticity in the basal ganglia: the 
role of exercise in Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord;[ADDRESS_1086975] 1:S141- 5. 
13. Petzinger GM, Fisher BE, Akopi[CONTACT_1629] G, et al. The role of exercise in facilitating basal ganglia function in 
Parkinson's disease. Neurodegener Dis Manag 2011;1:157 -70. 
14. Tajiri N, Yasuhara T, Shingo T, et al. Exercise exerts neuroprotective effects on Parkinson's disease 
model of rats. Brain Res 2010;1310:[ADDRESS_1086976] 2009;[ADDRESS_1086977] 3:S42- 5. 
16. Burke D, Linder S, Hirsch J, et al. Characterizing Information Processing With a Mobile Device: 
Measurement of Simple and Choice Reaction Time. Assessment 2016.  
17. Ozinga SJ, Linder SM, Alberts JL. Use of Mobile Device Accelerometry to Enhance Evaluation of 
Postural Instability in Parkinson Disease. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2017;98:649- 58. 
18. Ozinga SJ, Machado AG, Miller Koop M, Rosenfeldt AB, Alberts JL. Objective assessment of postural 
stability in Parkinson's disease using mobile technology. Mov Disord 2015;30:[ADDRESS_1086978] (MSPT): an iPad- based 
disability assessment tool. J Vis Exp 2014:e51318.  
20. Miller Koop M, Rosenfeldt AB, Ozinga SJ, Alberts JL. Mobile device sensors detect slowness during 
turning in Parkinson’s disease.  Society for Neuroscience; 2016 Nov. 16, 2016; San Diego, CA.  
21. Miller Koop M, Ozinga S, Rosenfeldt A, Alberts JL. Quantifying turning behavior and gait in Parkinson's 
disease using mobile technology. IBRO Reports In Press.  
22. Rao SM, Losinski G, Mourany L, et al. Processing speed test: Validation of a self -administered, 
iPad((R)) -based tool for screening cognitive dysfunction in a clinic setting. Multiple sclerosis 2017;23:1929- 37. 
23. Probst JC, Laditka SB, Wang JY, Johnson AO. Effects of residence and race on burden of travel for 
care: cross sectional analysis of the 2001 US National Household Travel Survey. BMC Health Serv Res 
2007;7:40.  
24. Linder SM, Reiss A, Buchanan S, et al. Incorporating robotic -assisted telerehabilitation in a home 
program to improve arm function following stroke. J Neurol Phys Ther 2013;37:125 -32. 
25. Linder SM, Rosenfeldt AB, Bay RC, Sahu K, Wolf SL, Alberts JL. Improving Quality of Life and 
Depression After Stroke Through Telerehabilitation. Am J Occup Ther 2015;69:6902290020p1 -10. 
26. Wolf SL, Sahu K, Bay RC, et al. The HAAPI (Home Arm Assistance Progression Initiative) Trial: A 
Novel Robotics Delivery Approach in Stroke Rehabilitation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 2015;29:958- 68. 
27. van der Kolk NM, de Vries NM, Penko AL, et al. A remotely supervised home- based aerobic exercise 
programme is feasible for patients with Parkinson's disease: results of a small randomised feasibility trial. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2017.  
28. Cavanaugh JT, Ellis TD, Earhart GM, Ford MP, Foreman KB, Dibble LE. Capturing ambulatory activity 
decline in Parkinson's disease. J Neurol Phys Ther 2012;36:[ADDRESS_1086979] Understanding 
Ambulatory Activity Decline in Parkinson Disease. Phys Ther 2015;95:1142- 50. 
30. Dibble LE, Cavanaugh JT, Earhart GM, Ellis TD, Ford MP, Foreman KB. Charting the progression of 
disability in Parkinson disease: study protocol for a prospective longitudinal cohort study. BMC Neurol 
2010;10:110.  
31. Ellis TD, Cavanaugh JT, Earhart GM, et al. Identifying clinical measures that most accurately reflect the 
progression of disability in Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2016;25:65 -71. 
8 
 32. Lamont RM, Daniel HL, Payne CL, Brauer SG. Accuracy of wearable physical activity trackers in 
people with Parkinson's disease. Gait Posture 2018;63:104 -8. 
33. Riebe D, Franklin BA, Thompson PD, et al. Updating ACSM's Recommendations for Exercise 
Preparticipation Health Screening. Med Sci Sports Exerc 2015;47:2473 -9. 
 