 
 
Predicting and 
Addressing 
Colonoscopy in Safety 
Net Settings (PRECISE)  
Prot ocol 
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version: December 4, 2022  
 
1 
 Protocol: December  4, 2022 
1. Protocol Title  
The Predicting and Addressing Colonoscopy in Safety Net Settings (PRECISE)  
 
2. Objectives  
Phase I  (Aim 1) will be a milestone -driven planning phase  to externally validate the risk -prediction score, stratify 
patients’  probability of adhering to follow -up colonoscopy, and adapt patient navigation materials for the local 
context.  
Phase II  (Aims 2 –3) will be a large -scale, targeted, patient- randomized controlled trial that will include ~1200 
patients across 28 clinics in  western Washington State.  
 
Minority Supplement: A supplement for this study was awarded on 9 /23/2020  to assess gastroenterology  (GI) 
practic e changes due to the COVID19 pandemic.  This work will not alt er the study desig n, number of study 
participants, or consent considerations .  
Specific Aim  #1: Characterize organizational characteristics of GI  practices   
Specific Aim #2: Apply novel analytic techniques to identify G I practice characteristics  associated wit h 
timely follow -up colonoscopy completion  
 Supplement work is estimated to be finished by [CONTACT_5638] [ADDRESS_784105] had a 4 % higher incidence 
and 16% higher mortality from the disease than individuals who r eceived a colonoscopy w ithin [ADDRESS_784106] of this “missed opportunity” is tremendous and analyses show those who delayed screening for a yea r lost nearly 
10% in  life-years compared to those with prom pt follow -up.10  Colonoscopy follow -up rates  vary across populations. 
Our team observed a 54% [ADDRESS_784107] involving >50,000 patients in 26 CHC clinics [NIH 
UH3AT00 7782 ].18 STOP CRC data further show troubling disparities in follow -up by [CONTACT_545]/ethnicity, with Hispanic s 
following up at a low er rate than non -Hispanic whites (45% vs. 70%, within 18 mont hs).[ADDRESS_784108] ta rget patient navigat ion resources. Published 
rates of follo w-up colonoscopy range from 42 -82%.11-17 The successful New Hampshi re program, for example, reported 
that a high proportion (69% ) of non -navigated patients obtained a colonoscopy —that is, they did not need navigation . 
This finding is important because patient navigation programs can require extensiv e resources to adopt;  previous  cost 
evaluations of patient navigation have reported costs ranging from $50 to $[ADDRESS_784109]. Knowing which patients could benefit 
from navigation co uld optimize the del ivery of such services, address health disparities, and reduce associated costs. Th e 
proposed research, Pr edicting and Addressing Colonoscopy in Safety Net Settings (P RECISE), will do just this by 
[CONTACT_594318] p atients with a positive fecal test  (FIT), and test patient 
navigation as an approac h to improve colonoscop y adherence among patients who need it. Our study will also assess 
the cost of patient navigation. To date, no study has reported the cost of navigation across patient groups defined by 
[CONTACT_594319], as we propose.  
2 
 Risk -prediction models can im prove care quality and optimize health care resources, but mo re evidence is needed.28 
While risk -prediction models hold promise fo r identifying patien ts who are likely to forgo colonoscopy, previous 
research on this topic is scarce. Our team has developed a risk -prediction model specifically for follow -up colonoscop y 
receipt that relied on data from the STOP CRC trial of 26 CHC clinics  (CRC Risk) .  
 
 
4. Study Design  
Overview. This study will increase follow -up 
colonoscopy rates in large  numbers of diverse 
patients by [CONTACT_6310] a patient navigation 
program with  patients  obtaining follow -up 
colonoscopy. Phase I  (Aim  1) will be a 
milestone -driven planning phase  to externally 
validate the risk -prediction score, stratify 
patients’ probability o f adhering to follow -up 
colonoscopy, and adapt patient navigation 
materials for the local context. Phase II  (Aims 
2–3) will be a large -scale, targeted, p atient-
randomiz ed controlled trial that will include 
~[ADDRESS_784110] to compare rates of follow -up colonosco py completion in ~ 1200  patients who are randomized to receive 
either a telephone -based program of patient navigation delivered by [CONTACT_177002] (dev eloped by D r. Lynn 
Butterly and replicated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Peggy Hannon, project consultant) or usual care. We will also assess the  cost of the 
program for patient groups defined by r isk level  risk of adhering to follow -up colonoscopy). Secondarily, we will ass ess 
differences  in process outcomes and explore possible moderators of effectiveness. Results of this r esearch could lead to 
large -scale testing and adoption  of targe ted patient navigatio n approaches in clinical settings.  
 
5. Study Population 
a. Number of Subje cts 
All analysis will only include patients from the SeaMar Community Health Centers. First,  a retrospe ctive analysis of 
patie nts in the past [ADDRESS_784111]. Some exclusions may 
apply based on appropriateness o f screeni ng (i .e. if they had prior c olorectal cancer, or are on  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_594314]).  
 This inte rvention is part of clinical care. Subjects may refuse colonoscopy as  part of clinical care, b ut w ill have 
opportunity to opt out of the study.  
 
c. Vulnerable Populations  
This study will not include  children or neonates by [CONTACT_8345] (aged 50 -76). Prisoners were not knowingly inclu ded in the 
cohort. Pregnant women were not targeted bu t may have been inc lude d inc identally.  Decisionally impaired adults will 
not be excluded as CRC sc reening is recommended for these patients.  Validate risk model at 
Sea Mar
Adapt patient 
navigation materialsIdentify patients with positive FIT and determine risk of 
non-adherence to colonoscopy
Primary outcomes: (1) receipt of colonoscopy within 1 
year of positive FIT; (2) cost, cost -effectiveness, & ROI
- 2-phase patient randomized trial of patient navigation vs. usual care
- Enroll ~1,200 patients across 28 Sea Mar clinics
- 5-year RO1 study funded by [CONTACT_594320] 1:  Validate 
& apply risk model Phase 2:  Randomized Trial
Phone -based pa tient 
navigation delivered by 
[CONTACT_594321] (referral 
coordination & tracking)Assess patients ’ risk
[ADDRESS_784112] is a partne rship with Sea Mar C ommunity Health Centers. Sea Mar operates 34 medi cal clinics (28 
clinics  will participate in this trial; non -participating clinics are specialty sites) and serves a patient po pulation of 
~250,000; ~29,000 are eligible for CRC screening.  The proportion of Latino patients is 37%. Clinic personnel are sensi tive 
to, and reflective  of, the diverse populations they serve. Sea Mar has a fully integrated EHR plat form tailored for primary 
care (Allscripts, Chicago,  Illinois). Sea Mar has particip ated in efforts to r aise its CRC screening rates by [CONTACT_2329] a direct -
mail FIT approach followe d by  [CONTACT_594322].  
 
All analysis will be conducted at KPNW. Sea Mar (#FWA00000701) and Portland State University ( #FWA00003920)  
will cede IRB oversi ght to the KPNW IRB  (FWA 00002344 ).  
 
e. Recruit ment Methods /Data Collection  
Retrospective Risk Mo del 
For the r etrospective risk model, patients  who  are aged [ADDRESS_784113] a large -scale, targeted, patient -randomized controlled trial that will include ~[ADDRESS_784114] (FIT ). We will 
compare rates of follow -up colonoscopy completion in ~1200 patients having either a moderate or low risk of 
colonoscopy adherence who are randomi zed to re ceive either a telephone- based  (including text messages for 
scheduling, reminders , and outr each for “difficult to reach ” patients ) progr am of pa tient na vigation  delivered by 
[CONTACT_594323]. Patien ts will be rand omized based on county of their assigned clinic . Patients 
will b e randomiz ed u sing a stratified approach that cons iders county . The randomization will result in 600 
patients a ssigned to the patient navigation arm and 600  assigned to the usua l care arm.  
All navigatio n an d usual care will be conducted by [CONTACT_3433] e clinical te ams at SeaMar (nurses, MA’s, providers, etc.).  
The patient navigator will undergo intensive training du ring the  startup phase of the study. The navigator will 
receive coaching ( quality assuran ce supervis ion) by [CONTACT_594324]. Coaching will include rout ine 
(daily /weekly ) check -in phone calls,  and listening in o n patient navigation calls and tracking navigation fidelity . 
KPCHR staff will continue to monitor patient navigation calls througho ut the trial as part o f the intervention 
fidelity ass essment. The patient navigator will help patients add ress and r esolve barriers to fo llow -up care , such 
as, transport ation ba rriers through ride -share services  or medical transport services.  
We will assess  rates of c olon oscopy receipt by [CONTACT_594325] . At the end  of the evaluation, if the intervention 
is found to be successful, it will be offered to all  patients in the usua l care and  surveillance arms who did not get 
a follow -up colonoscop y. 
Patient Int erviews : Qualitat ive interviews will be conducted wi th patient s recruited through the participating 
clinics during the study . All recruitment materials will be approve d by [CONTACT_36985]. Interviews will be conducted over 
the phone or in person by a  CHR qualitati ve research speci alist and take place at a convenien t time and  locat ion 
for participants. We will work w ith the FQ HC to develop recruitment materials. The  decision was  made to  have  
CHR staff recruit patients and conduct interviews. However, r ecruitment lett ers will be prin ted on FQHC 
letterhead. If CHR staff encounte r any challenges recruiting participants f or these i nterviews, FQHC staff will 
assist with recruitment. P atient in terviews completed over the phone will require a waiver of signed informed 
conse nt.  
4 
 Clinic Staff Interviews : Select clinic personne l, some of  whom may participate in Patient Navigatio n, will be  
invited to participate in a 30-60-minut e phone or in  person  inter view about project implementation. We will 
work with clinics t o determine th e most appropriat e way to invite their staff to part icipate - this may be done via 
email or mailed lette r. Participants will receive a $ 20.[ADDRESS_784115] Interviews : Select GI clinic personn el and providers  will be invited to part icipate in a [ADDRESS_784116] to in vite their  staff to participate -  this may be done v ia email o r mailed letter. 
Participants will recei ve a $ 25.[ADDRESS_784117] of care 
acceptable in the clinic.  
 
All Spanish qualitative interviews will be conducte d by a bilin gual  qualitative researcher. P atient fa cing materials, such as 
the conse nt form , will be p rovided  in Sp anish. See above regarding consent proc ess.  
 
Translation s will be completed b y Jennifer Ri velli, Kat herine Vaughn  and Natalia Tommasi, KP certified CHR staff. 
Jennifer , Katherine  and Natalia certify that the outlined study d ocuments below hav e been translated into Spanish 
and/or Russi an to the  best of their ab ilities as  certified translators si nce 2012- 2013 (2018 K atherine) . They certify that 
the referenc ed d ocum ents  have been accurately  translated into Spanis h and /or Russian  and have retained  the au thenti c 
content of the original documents.  
 
Translated  study documents submitted to the IRB for review:  
• Patient recruitment introd uction letter  (English , Span ish, Russian)  
5 
 • Phone script  navigation (English, Spanish)  
• Patient text me ssages (English, S panish)  
• Colon  Cancer Fact Sheet  (English , Spanish , Russian)  
• Colonoscopy Bowel Prep Information Sheet ( English , Span ish, Russian)  
• Patient Navigation Outlin e Informatio n Sh eet (English , Spanish , Russian)  
• Patient interview recruitment introd uction letter  (Eng lish an d Spanish)  
• Navigator Script  Patient I nterview s (English  and Spanish)  
• Patient Interview Thank You Letter (Eng lish and Spanish)  
• Consent _Patient  Interview (Englis h an d Sp anish)  
 
HIPAA  Privacy Rule Authorization – if study will use or disclose Protected  Health  Informatio n (PHI)  
We r equest a ful l waiver o f the pri vacy rule au thorization requirement to allo w members o f the KP workforce within the 
KP region  to use Prot ected He alth Informat ion (PHI) from Seamar. For the qualitative intervie w component of thi s study , 
we reques t an alterat ion of the p rivacy rule authoriz ation - participant signature [CONTACT_594334].  
 
Electronic medic al records (EMR s) at partic ipating clinics will be used to identify the retrospective data and a 
prospective cohort o f poten tial study participants  based on in clusion an d exclusi on criteria.  Electronic medical 
records (EM Rs) will also be used to look for o utcomes (comple ted FIT/FOBT  or colo noscopy). We will run 
analyses on the control vs. intervention p atients to determi ne if o ur interven tion had a s ignificant e ffect. A C HR 
audito r will acces s clinical data from the partic ipating sit es to in spect the qualit y and ensure th e accuracy o f the 
data. Data from  all sites will be gathered at the clinics and sent  via secure file t ransfer  to CHR for  analysis. D ata 
Use Agre ements wil l be esta blished  to 1) allow for the aforementioned transfer, a nd 2) to permit CHR to s end 
analyzed limited datase ts back to the clinic s for further refinement on any issues encountered.  PHI will not be 
shared w hen the dat a are sent b ack for furt her validation/refin ement. 
 
Use of the medical record by [CONTACT_594326] e, required to identify participant s for the ove rall study.  
Therefore, we would be unable to seek authorization prio r to us ing the med ical record.  Only the PH I data req uired to 
identify the  study population will be acces sed. However, we may also: 1) acces s additional patient inform ation such as 
sociode mographic characteristics that may be related to differences in progr am reac h and effec tiveness, an d 2) access 
the minimu m PHI nec essary to properly carryout the research task of inter viewing patients. (Use o f the medical record is 
also required to identif y participants for qualitative interviews, so we wo uld not be able to  seek s ignature an d date for 
authorization  prior to using the  medical rec ord.) The use and disclosure of  PHI will invo lve no more than mini mal risk to 
the privacy of individu als. All iden tifiable study data will be stored within clinic data systems. See Section [ADDRESS_784118] a patient -randomized  trial that tests the ef fectiveness of patient navi gation. Both 
phases w ill be guided by [CONTACT_594327], researchers, policy  makers , and patie nts.  
The pa rticipating clinics will be fed erally quali fied health centers (FQHCs) tha t serve pop ulations that speak several 
languages, but mostly E nglish or Spanish.  Material s will be  translated by [CONTACT_594328], K P 
certi fied CHR st aff. 
 
[ADDRESS_784119]. Cynthia M ojica will  conduc t semi -structured in -depth interviews (  in-
person , phone  or virtual platform ) with GI providers  or office staff (including clinic mangers and colonoscopy schedulers)  
to ass ess practice changes due to the COVID 19 pandemic . (These interviews are distinct  from the GI interviews 
describe d above on page 4 of the  protocol. ) Interviews will be recorded and  last about 30 -60 minutes. Respondents  will 
be offered a $[ADDRESS_784120]-effectiveness ratio (IC ER) as: (1) cost per additional completed colonosc opy, (2) cos t per add itional 
adenoma detected, and 3) cost per a dditional cancer det ected. F inally, to  furthe r evaluate the impact o f specific 
program ele ments  on overall cost, we  will conduct a bu dget -impa ct analysis.  
 
Secondary outcomes and process meas ures. We wil l gather data from the EHR on time to colonoscopy co mpletion, time 
to in itiation  of cancer treatm ent, and ap pointment no -shows and cancelation s. Us ing the pathology re port, we will also  
track co lonoscopy -related quality measures, including adeq uacy of colo nosc opy p rep, detection of adenomas and 
cancer, and cancer stage at detection.  
 
Analysis of poss ible moderators.  Notabl y, our prel iminary dat a sho wed  follow -up colono scopy receipt varied  
substa ntially by [CONTACT_594329] (30%, 59%, and 93% fo r the low, mode rate,  and high strata, respectively), suggesting  
that assessments of  clinically meanin gful im pacts could  differ by p robability strata. To deter mine whether adheren ce 
probability mod erates th e effect of the intervention, we will add probabil ity strata  and the p roduct of stratum and arm  
to the primary outcome model. The pro duct rep resents th e inter action of arm and proba bility stratum; a sign ificant  term 
provides evi denc e for  effect modificati on. We will d etermine the nature of any interactio n by [CONTACT_594330] g raphical methods. We will repeat this analysis  using the  contin uous risk s core in plac e of the ri sk strata.  
 Minority Supplement:  
 
For minority supplement aim 1, w e will use descriptive statistics to summarize  the structural characteristics and 
processes of GI practices.   
 For minority supplement ai m 2, we will use d ata gathered from aim  [ADDRESS_784121] a configuratio nal analysis . We will 
use configurational com parative methods (CCM s) to identify conditions (organ izational structures, processes, and 
7 
 policies, and changes in processes and policies) as sociated with follow -up colonoscopy completion rate and time to 
colono scopy completion among Sea Mar Community Health Center patients.  
 
b. Sharing of Results with  Subjects  
Test results will  be shared wi th subjects per standard clinical pra ctice. We wi ll also p ublish findings and  share  findings 
with the participating clinics.  
 
c. Data and Spec imen Banking  – N/A 
 
8. Privacy, C onfidential ity, and Da ta Secu rity 
To reduce any  risk of disclosure of conf idential info rmation, subjects' privacy and confid entiality will b e ass ured by:  
a. Securely s toring  data in password -protected files and direct ories on sta ff computers withi n firewall 
protected ne tworks;  
b. Rem oving o r obscuring partic ipan t nam es prior to any presentation, p ublication, or other sharing of data 
outside the rese arch team, except with the exp ressed written consent of the subject( s); 
c. Ensuring that u nmodified data (c ontaining id entifying d ata or feat ures) a re accessible only  to membe rs of 
the research  team working  under the direction of the investiga tors for the  duration  of the project; 
identifiers will be removed as soon as is feas ible;  
d. Transporting  interview materials in locked  containers . 
 
9. Provisio ns to M onitor the Data to  Ensure t he Safety of Subje cts 
a. Designati on of a Data Safety Monitor:  
An indep endent inves tigator w ill serve as an Ind epende nt Monitor for Data and Safety for the  proje ct. S/he 
will not be key perso nnel in this  grant. S/h e will be q ualifie d to review the pa tient safety data generated  by 
[CONTACT_594331] y because of their unique clinical an d research e xper tise. 
b. Safety Review Plan  and P rotocol for Identifying, Reviewing and  Repor ting Adverse  Event to IRB and NIH:  
Study p rogress and  safety will be re viewed semi -annual ly (and m ore frequently if needed). Progress reports, 
including patient recru itment and A dver se Ev ents (AEs) will be provid ed to the Independent Monitors 
following eac h of the sem i-annual reviews. A semi - annu al report w ill be comp iled an d will include a list and 
summary of AEs. In addition, the  report will address (1) whether AE rates are con sistent wit h pre -study 
assum ptions ; (2) and the status of follow -up to a bnorma l screening r esults (within 6 month s). The  annual 
report will be  sent to  the Independent Moni tor, and will be forwarded to the IR B and NIH, if applicable. The 
IRB and  other appli cable rec ipi[INVESTIGATOR_594315].  
The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_594316] w ith the project di rector and r esearch sta ff weekly. All AEs  and unanticipated  problems  
occurring during the study wil l be collected, documented, and repor ted to the P I and the  Independent 
Monito r imme diately. During the intervention phase  of th e study, cli nic staff will rep ort any AEs or 
unantici pated probl ems tha t may have occurre d du ring the intervention.  
c. Assessment o f external factors that may impact participant safety  and/ or ethics for the r esearc h study:  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_594317] w-up w ith new info rmation in the lit erature and results of related stu dies. I f any 
new informat ion is av ailable that would  impact the r elevance of the study, it will be doc umented and 
repo rted to the Independent Monito r by [CONTACT_19052].  
d. Advanced plans f or int erim and/or f utility analysis:  
Interim analysis of da ta will not  be con ducted as part of this  stud y. Given our goal of evaluating  the 
implementation and maintenance o f this evide nce-based  intervention, an i nterim  analysis would be 
impractical. We do not an ticipate tha t new data would s how trends f or negative  outcomes r esultin g from 
the propose d interventions.  
 
[ADDRESS_784122] fee , and  patients may  receive a $ [ADDRESS_784123] for their 
participation in the interviews.  
 
13. Resourc es Ava ilable  
Our study will use Patient Navigatio n to engage patients in comple ting thei r screening. O ur study te am 
will include trained P atient Na vigation and will use their expertise to adapt material and define 
intervention comp onents.  
 
14. Drugs or Device s  
N/A 
 
15. Multi -Site Coordination  
This sit e will be  the IRB of record for SeaMar Community  Health Center s (#FWA0000 0701 ), which will ced e to the KPNW  
IRB (FWA 00002344 ). 
 16. Community -Based Participatory  Research  
We will use proven comm unity b ased participatory (CBPR) approaches throu ghout the design, 
executi on, and  disseminati on of the trial. We will apply novel and locally design ed approaches, suc h as 
patient navigation and continue to partner with our  established advis ory board to  solicit an d 
incorporate pat ient and clinic feedback throughout each phase of the res earch  study.  Commu nity 
rese arch partners will be required  to comple te all necessary h uman s ubjects’ protectio n training.  
 
[ADDRESS_784124] probability quintile will not be 
randomized into the study (will receive 
surveillance)  All patients (across probability strata) will be 
randomized , and effectiveness of navigation will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_594332]: FIT positive plus referred  Eligibility criteria: FIT positive and referred and reviewed 
by [CONTACT_594333][INVESTIGATOR_2394]/GI (to reduce post -randomization 
drop out , randomized in error ) 
Final outcome determination: Medical record 
review  Final outcome determination: Medical record review 
plus records request to GI and blinded adjudication  
Cost analysis, timeline w/o pandemic interruptions  Eliminate the cost -analysis activities to extend our 
recruitment interval to get closer to reaching our 1200 -
patient goal  