 Page 1 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dosing strategies for de novo once -daily extended release tacrolimus (LCPT) 
in kidney transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_588119] : 0371364 5 
 
Date: August 21, 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 2 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  1) Abstract of the study  
Outcomes after kidney transplantation have been significantly enhanced with the advances made 
in immunosuppressive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Tacrolimus is currently marketed as an extended -release once -
daily formulation dosing option for patients, d ecreasing pi[INVESTIGATOR_649390]. Some t ransplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_649391]. According to the literature, this can be linked to genetic disparities in the 
metabolism of tacrolimus .. This pote ntial complication , where differences on specific genes alters 
metabolism of tacrolimus,  can increase difficulty in getting to a therapeutic drug level for 
immunosuppresants  and is one large factor that  contribute s to the fact that kidney transplant 
surviv al rates differ between patients . Due to the enhanced bioavailability of Meltdose formulation 
once -daily extended -release tacrolimus, its de novo use in recent research and practice has been 
shown to expedite achievement of target tacrolimus trough concent rations. De novo use of once -
daily tacrolimus formulations is understudied. Through a prospective investigational study, we aim 
to determine the optimal strategy for de novo dosing of once -daily extended release tacrolimus 
(MeltDose formulation) for kidney  transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_649392] .  
 
2) Protocol Title  
Dosing strategies for de novo once -daily extended release tacrolimus (LCPT) in kidney transplant 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]  
 
3) Investigator(s)  
Principal Investigator(s): Adam Diamond, Pharm.D. BCPS  
Co-PI: [INVESTIGATOR_649393], MD, CM, FACS, FRCSC  
4) Objectives  
 
Primary Objectives:  
Identify the target dose of de novo once -daily MeltDose formulation of tacrolimus that achieves 
therapeutic tacrolimus trough concentrations for kidney transplant patients  at Temple U niversity 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649394]:  
Identify the time to achievement of therapeutic  trough concentrations for the de novo MeltDose 
formulation of tacrolimus  
Identify if the CYP3A5 genetic allele is expressed in enrolled participants to retrospectiv ely 
determine correlation between CYP3A5 genotype expression and other factors (e.g., time to 
trough, tacrolimus dosing, patient outcomes, demographics) in   kidney transplant patients  
 
5) Rationale and Significance  
Tacrolimus is the most commonly utilized ca lcineurin inhibitor after kidney transplantation. It 
is used in combination with mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone in order to provide 
sufficient immunosuppression to prevent acute rejection of transplanted organs. The 
development of a MeltDose tablet f ormulation has been designed to enhance the 
bioavailability of tacrolimus due to the low water solubility of the drug. In clinical trials, the 
utilization of MeltDose tablet formulations of tacrolimus has been shown to provide rapid 
achievement of target t acrolimus trough concentrations. This once daily dosing regimen 
has also led to lower peak concentrations and equivalent overall exposure when compared 
to immediate release and other extended release formulations of tacrolimus. Similar 
efficacy and safety profiles have been demonstrated when comparing the MeltDose 
formulation of tacrolimus to other available formulations.  
 Page 3 of 12      Revision: August 21, [ADDRESS_870428] -transplant outcomes . This 
can be prompted by [CONTACT_649405] P450 3A5 
(CYP3A5) gene that they may possess moreso compared to other s. If a patient is a  
CYP3A5*[ADDRESS_870429] -transplant period will help to lower risk for acute rejection.  
Tacrolimus, the immunosuppressant drug, is used fo r kidney transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. 
MeltDose tacrolimus is a lawfully marketed formulation of the tacrolimus drug. The de novo, 
or initial, use of MeltDose tacrolimus is a permittedunlabeled indication that is within the 
scope of medical practice and often use d for this population. However, data surrounding 
this initial dosing is lacking.  We hope to contribute to existing knowledge by [CONTACT_649406]. 
6) Resources and Setting  
Temple University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649395] 60 kidney transplants (deceased and 
live donor) per year. As a result we intend to reach our target enrollment in [ADDRESS_870430] been working in kidney transplant for numerous years (ranging from 5 to 25 years), 
and the entire research team is CITI trained . Only investigators and members of the 
research team, who will be adequately in formed about the protocol and study -related duties 
and are currently CITI trained, will have access to patient protected health information for 
the purposes of this study.  
This is a single center prospective observational study. As a result all research p rocedures 
will be conducted at Temple University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. The collection and analysis of research 
data will be conducted at Temple University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649396]. Only prospective data, from subject enrollment until [ADDRESS_870431] of care and the investigational procedur es for this study are as follows:  
Standard of Care  
 All kidney transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_649397] a de novo combination 
maintenance immunosuppression regimen . This combination regimen includes tacrolimus 
immediate -release and mycophenolate mofetil with or without prednisone. Mycophenolate mofetil 
and prednisone are started on the day of transplantation. The day of initiation of tacrolimus 
immediate -release is decided per transplant surgeon discretion. Upon hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649398], patients will be seen in the outpatient abdominal transplant surgery clinic three 
times weekly. Tacrolimus extended -release is associated with fewer tremors, has once -daily 
dosing to improve compliance, and requires lower total dail y doses compared with tacrolimus 
immediate -release to achieve therapeutic tacrolimus trough concentrations. For those reasons, 
our current practice in patients who are receiving tacrolimus immediate release and require high 
 Page 4 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  doses of tacrolimus immediate -release (10mg orally twice daily or greater), are experiencing 
significant tremors, or have medication non -compliance, those patients are converted from 
tacrolimus immediate -release to tacrolimus extended -release. Tacrolimus extended -release is not 
currently  used de novo .  The following table portrays the laboratory parameters that are drawn per 
standard of care at Temple University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649399]. Average length of 
inpatient stay is 4 days.  
Table A  
Setting  Tacrolimus 
immediate - 
release trough 
concentration  Serum 
creatinine  Glomerular 
filtration 
rate Potassium  Blood 
glucose  Hemoglobin 
A1C 
Day of Transplant             
Inpatient  
(lab parameters 
obtained every 24 
hours)    
(once tacrolimus 
initiated)           
Outpatient  
(lab parameters 
obtaine d three 
times weekly on 
Mon, Wed, Fri             
Investigational (Research)  
 All kidney transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_649397] a de novo combination 
maintenance immunosuppression regimen . This combination regimen includes tacrolimus 
extended -release  and mycophenolate mofetil with or without prednisone. Mycophenolate mofetil 
and prednisone are started on the day of transplantation. The day of initiation of tacrolimus 
extended -release is decided per transplant surgeon discretion. The use of tacrolimus extended -
release de novo differs from the standard of care. Goal tacrolimus trough concentrations 
for tacrolimus extended -release are identical to the way that goal tacrolimus trough 
concentrations are drawn for tacrolimus immediate -release a t Temple. Upon hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649400], patients will be seen in the outpatient abdominal transplant 
surgery clinic three times weekly. Table B portrays the laboratory parameters that are drawn 
per research protocol which is identical t o laboratory parameters drawn for all kidney 
transplant patients at Temple University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (Refer to Table A).  Average length of 
inpatient stay is expected to be [ADDRESS_870432] Tremor Questionnaire at 
Day 30 and the required oral swab for testing of CYP3A5 metabolic enzyme activity.  
Table B  
Setting  Tacrolimus 
extended -
release trough 
concentration  Serum 
creatinin
e Glomerul
ar 
filtration 
rate Potassiu
m Blood 
glucos
e Hemoglobi
n A1C  
Day of Transplant             
Inpatient  
(lab parameters 
obtained every 24 
hours; approximately    
(once 
tacrolimus 
initiated)           
 Page 5 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  Days 0 -4 
Outpatient  
(lab parameters 
obtained three times 
weekly on Mon, Wed, 
Fri; appro x Days 4 -30            
 
Table C  
Day 0  Study drug (tacrolimus) initiated at 0.13/mg/kg/day for all patients  
(the day of initiation decided per transplant surgeon discretion)  
Day 0 -4 Inpatient laboratory parameters checked every 24 hours per Tables A and B  
Day 4-30 Outpatient laboratory parameters checked three times weekly on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday per Tables A and B  
Day 30 visit  
(+/- 5 days)  Draw tacrolimus trough levels, serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration 
rate, serum potassium, and b lood glucose. Complete tremor questionnaire with 
participant.  
During or prior 
to Day 30 
visit Oral swab performed to be analyzed for testing of metabolic enzymatic activity  
(This will be performed  to see if genetic testing results reflect how the 
partic ipant is metabolizing tacrolimus [determined from tacrolimus 
extended -release doses used )  
All research procedures (e.g., data entry, data analysis) will be conducted at TUH. Temple 
University School of Pharmacy pharmacogenomics department will be used to  store 
specimen for genetic testing. All specimen will be de -identified and stored in an appropriate 
and locked container at Temple University School of Pharmacy pharmacogenomics 
department —accessible only to research and pharmacogenomics department staff.  
Researchers involved in this study will possess a list that links the genetic testing results to 
the participant. This list will be stored in a password protected encrypted document on TUH 
computer.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Page 6 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  
Dose Titration Protocol  
For the purpo se of this study no changes will be made to dose titration strategies for 
enrolled patients. For enrolled participants tacrolimus will be titrated as per Temple 
University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s standardized dose titration protocol. The following dose titration 
strate gy is used to titrate tacrolimus extended -release and tacrolimus immediate -release for 
patients receiving standard of care and for patients who are enrolled in this study:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7) Prior Approvals  
Veloxis Pharmaceuticals approved budg et for funding of study   
 Page 7 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  8) Study Design  
Single center prospective observational study  
a) Recruitment Methods  
Patients will be identified when an organ from live or deceased donor becomes available 
for kidney transplant. Prior to receiving their kidney transpla nt, subjects will be screened for 
inclusion/exclusion criteria on the day of transplantation. During the pre -operative 
preparation for transplant, patients will be consented for surgery and consented for the 
study at the same time if they volunteer to be i ncluded. The transplant surgeon performing 
the transplant operation will be responsible for screening the patients for inclusion and 
exclusion criteria as well as obtaining informed consent. Patients will need to provide 
informed consent to be included in the study, and will receive a copy of their consent. Each 
potential participant will be approached by [CONTACT_649407]. No advertisements for 
recruitment will be perfor med and no compensation will be provided for participation.  
b) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria 
 Adult patient who is 18 years of age or older  receiving a kidney  transplant at the Temple 
University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Kidney Transplant Program who a re capable of understanding consent 
and volunteer to take part in the study  
Exclusion Criteria 
 Scheduled for  multiple organ  transplant at enrollment  
 Non-English speak ing 
 Pregnant women  
 Moderate -severe hepatic impairment (Child Pugh > 10 or bilirubin > 2)  
 Existing contraindications to tacrolimus -based products including known hypersensitivity to 
tacrolimus or any other component of the formulation  
 Receiving concomitant medications known to have strong drug -drug interaction potential with 
tacrolimus includin g fluconazole, voriconazole, posaconazole, isavuconazole, itraconazole, 
ketoconazole, diltiazem, verapamil, metronidazole, erythromycin, clarithromycin, rifampin, 
rifabutin, rifapentine, phenytoin, fosphenytoin, phenobarbital, primidone, carbamazepi[INVESTIGATOR_050], St.  
John’s Wort, efavirenz, neivrapi[INVESTIGATOR_050], etravirine, atazanavir, darunavir, fosamprenavir, indinavir, 
lopi[INVESTIGATOR_054], ritonavir, nelfinavir, saquinavir, tipranavir, cobicistat  
 
c) Study Timelines  
Study enrollment and informed consent process will begin once IRB appro val is granted. 
Each subject will be active in the study until their one month visit —occurring day 30 +/ - [ADDRESS_870433] 35 
subjects are enrolled, an interim analysis will be pe rformed to evaluate the efficacy and 
safety of the initial dose provided.  A report of results will be distributed to Veloxis 
Pharmacuieticals® to assess the efficacy and safety of the utilization of tacrolius extended -
release. A statistical analysis will b e completed to identify the correlation with achieving a 
therapeutic tacrolimus trough concentration with using tacrolimus extended -release in the 
de novo setting. If required, an additional 35 patients  will be enrolled. We anticipate that 
after enrollment  of all subjects, data analyses will be completed 3 -6 months after 
recruitment has ceased.   
 
 
 Page 8 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018   
d) Study Procedures and Data Analysis  
 
Study procedures:  
This study is a single center prospective  observational study  condu cted at Temple University 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (TUH). All participants will be consented for all procedures involved in this study. This study 
will utilize the QUEST questionnaire (attached) to evaluate the severity of tremors at 1 month. Data 
to be collected includes tacrolimus trough levels, study drug dosing, hemoglobin A1c, incidence and 
severity of tremors, potassium, glomerular filtration rate, and rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (See Table B).  
Table C  
Day 0  Study drug (tacrolimus) initiated at 0.13/mg/kg/day for all patients  
(the day of initiation decided per t ransplant surgeon discretion)  
Day 0 -4 Inpatient laboratory parameters checked every 24 hours per Tables A and B  
Day 4 -30 Outpatient laboratory parameters checked three times weekly on Monday, 
Wednesday, and Friday per Tables A and B  
Day 30 visit  
(+/- 5 days)  Draw tacrolimus trough levels, serum creatinine, estimated glomerular filtration 
rate, serum potassium, and blood glucose. Complete tremor questionnaire with 
participant.  
During or prior 
to 
Day 30 visit  Oral swab performed to be analyzed for testi ng of metabolic enzymatic activity  
(This will be performed  to determine ability of the patient to metabolize 
tacrolimus)  
 
Data and Specimen Banking:  
Saliva collection kits will be used to collect subject saliva samples and genetic testing will be 
perfo rmed and stored at Temple University School of Pharmacy pharmacogenomics department. 
Data to be collected from this swab is to identify CYP3A5 genotype for metabolism of tacrolimus. This 
information will assist in identifying dosage requirements for the ex tended -release tacrolimus product. 
Informed consent will be obtained separately for this procedure. Study coordinators will collect and 
analyze saliva from saliva collection kits and the results will be recorded and stored as part of the 
research dataset. These saliva samples will be obtained during outpatient study visits and then stored 
in a locked file cabinet in the locked research office. Each saliva collection kit will be de -identified 
before transport to Pharmacy for analysis. Researchers involved in  this study will possess a list that 
links the genetic testing results to the participant. This list will be stored in a password protected 
encrypted document on TUH computer.    
When ready for genetic testing, within the week, the saliva will be analyzed and stored in a locked -[ADDRESS_870434] access to these specimen. Informed consent will allow release of this data for 
purposes of this  human research only.  
Data analysis:  
To ensure subject confidentiality, all information from electronic medical records will be stored 
in a de -identified fashion. Data collected from electronic medical record will include 
 Page 9 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  demographic information, comorbid ities related to transplant, cause of kidney disease, 
incidence and severity of tremors, study drug dosing, other immunosupressants prescribed, 
relevant labs (e.g., Cr, K, eGFR, HbA1c, blood glucose, tacrolimus level) and all other 
pertinent prospective da ta (e.g., rejection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]). Only prospective data created between 
Day 0 -Day 30 visit will be collected for the purpose of this research —no retrospective data will 
be collected. All PHI will be removed from this dataset and subjects will be assigned an 
arbitrary study ID number. This de -identified dataset will be kept in a separate locked drawer 
and locked office accessible to only research staff and entered into encrypted password -
protected online database, Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap™, ©Van derbilt 
University). Access to REDCAPTM will be granted to Adam Diamond, PharmD, BCPS, 
Amanda DeSenna, BA, BSN, RN, Hannah Sufrin, and Antonio Di Carlo MD, CM, FACS, 
FRCSC. Documents containing personal health information (e.g., consent, HIPAA form) will b e 
kept in a separate locked drawer in a locked office accessible only to study investigators. Raw 
data will be exported into a password -protected Excel data sheet stored on Temple hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649401] a locked research space for data analysis.  
Data analysi s will be performed by [CONTACT_649408] a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_649402]. From REDCap, raw data will be exported into an Excel sheet and analyzed in 
SPSS®, version 21.0 for Windows (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL).  Continuous data such as 
base line demographics and laboratory values that are normally distributed will be presented as 
mean (SD) and non -normally distributed data as median (25 -75% interquartile range).  Other 
baseline characteristics and outcomes will be analyzed with the following tests: Chi -square or 
Fisher’s exact tests for categorical data, and Student’s T -tests or Mann -Whitney U tests for 
continuous data. Kaplan Meier statistical testing will be utilized to evaluate time to therapeutic 
trough concentration. Subgroup analysis str atified by [CONTACT_097]3A5 genotype will be performed. All 
tests will be two -tailed, and p -values < 0.05 will be considered statistically significant.  
e) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Participants are volunteers and will be permitted to withdraw at any time during the durati on of 
the study. Each participant will be made aware of the eligibility to withdraw at any time at the 
sole discretion of the participant. Participants will remain eligible for study participation even if 
they do not want to complete the saliva collection kit to determine CYP3A5 genotype. If this 
occurs we will write a note to file and not obtain their saliva sample. As volunteers, participants 
are not required to do any aspect of the study that they do not want to do. The participant will 
be withdrawn from  the study only if they contact [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_649403]. If notification of withdrawal is obtained from a subject, data 
collection on this subject will cease immediately and no data already collect ed will be utilized in 
data analysis.  
f) Privacy & Confidentiality  
Each participant will be made aware of rules and regulations regarding protected health 
information (PHI) as outlined under HIPAA. HIPAA authorizations will be obtained from each 
participant at the beginning of the study. All study staff and investigators will be CITI trained 
and receive training regarding HIPAA authorizations and the storage and protection of PHI. 
The information collected from each chart will be de -identified and assigned an  arbitrary 
number. The dataset only with corresponding arbitrary number will be accessible only to study 
investigators within REDCap and in the form of a password -protected excel sheet. Consents, 
HIPAA form, and any other original copi[INVESTIGATOR_649404] s tored in a locked separate drawer 
in a locked room accessible only to research staff.  All saliva collection kits will be deidentified 
before being sent to the lab for genetic testing. Results of genetic testing will not be recorded 
into their chart, and w ill be used for research purposes only. Genetic testing results will not be 
shared with participants. The protected health information will not be reused or disclosed to 
 Page 10 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  any other person or entity, except as required by [CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the  research 
study, or for other research for which the use or disclosure of the protected health information 
would be permitted.  
9) Risks to Subjects  
The use of tacrolimus extended -release de novo  for the investigational purpose of conducting this  
research study will not involve more than minimal risk to the patient .  
The currently known risks of tacrolimus extended -release (Envarsus®) include:  
 Headache  
 Diarrhea  
 Swelling in the legs  
 Tremors  
 High blood pressure  
 High cholesterol  
 High blood sugars  
 High potassium  
 Increased serum creatinine  
 Upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092]  
 Urinary tract infection  
 Common cold  
 Viral infections  
 Fungal infections  
 Increased risk of lymphoma  
 Increased risk of skin cancer  
Risks associated with the use of all tacrolimus products which incl udes tacrolimus -extended 
release (Envarsus®) and tacrolimus immediate -release:  
 Headache  
 Diarrhea  
 Swelling in the legs  
 Tremors  
 High blood pressure  
 High cholesterol  
 High blood sugars  
 Page 11 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018   High potassium  
 Increased serum creatinine  
 Upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092]  
 Urinary tract infection  
 Common cold  
 Viral infections  
 Fungal infections  
 Increased risk of lymphoma  
 Increased risk of skin cancer  
The risk for acute organ rejection is present in all patients after kidney transplant on any 
immune suppressing therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Tac rolimus extended -release doses will be adjusted to 
achieve blood concentrations consistent with standard of care to minimize risk for organ 
rejection.  
The greatest additional risk provided to participants enrolled in this study is maintaining 
confidential ity due to data collection for Epic and Alpha EMR as well as the collection of saliva 
samples for genetic testing. The Temple University and the study investigators will protect all 
patient records and personal information to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371]. P atient identifiers will 
be kept private and physical forms will be filed in a locked cabinet and electronically stored in a 
password protected and encrypted manner. Personal health information will be kept 
confidential.  
In the event of research related in jury, the patient should immediately notify research team and 
they will arrange for them to receive medical care. Temple University, Temple University 
Health System and its subsidiaries will not provide monetary compensation or free medical 
care in the eve nt of research -related injury. The patient or their insurance company will be 
billed for medical care if this occurs. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
This prospective study will not directly benefit enrolled subjects.  
10) Costs to Subjects  
The subject may also be responsible pay for the cost of the study medication, which is the 
tacrolimus extended -release form. This depends on their insurance, as the copay of the study 
medication (tacrolimus extended -release form) may be higher than tacrolimus immediate -
release  form. In most cases the copay would be a similar cost for the study medication.  
11) Informed Consent  
No procedure will be performed if informed consent is not obtained. During the pre -operative 
preparation for transplant, patients will be consented for surg ery and consented for the study if 
they volunteer to be included. The transplant surgeon performing the transplant operation will 
be responsible for screening the patients for inclusion and exclusion criteria as well as 
obtaining the informed consent. Non -English speaking patients will not be enrolled. 
Investigator Guidance for informed consent (HRP -802) will be followed.  
 
 Page 12 of 12      Revision: August 21, 2018  12) Vulnerable Populations  
Not applicable. Participants who are pregnant, under 21 years, cannot consent for themselves, 
or prisoners will not be included.  
13) Sharing of Results or Incidental Findings with Subjects  
 
The genetic testing will not be included in their medical record, so this will not impact subject care in 
any way. Results of required genetic testing will not be shared with partici pants. All prospective data 
collected for this study is included in the medical record so incidental findings are not anticipated. In 
the event that any incidental findings are discovered in your medical record or by [CONTACT_649409] s by [CONTACT_649410] 24 hours by [CONTACT_9532] [INVESTIGATOR_5774].  
 
 
 
 