 
 
The Impact of Training with Whole Body EMS  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
4/20/[ADDRESS_940182] of Training with Whole Body -EMS  
Version 6 : April 20, 2022  
Aims and Objectives  
 
This study will be undertaken in healthy adults who are employees at Mayo Clinic, [COMPANY_002]ster 
MN 
 
Primary Aim:  
To assess the impact of train ing with whole body -EMS for a 16 -week period of time, involving 
1.0 x 20 minute training sessions per week, on peripheral endothelial function as measured using 
EndoPAT.  
 
Secondary Aims:  
To assess the impact of train ing with whole body -EMS f or a 16 -week p eriod of time, involving 
1.0 x 20 minute training sessions per week, on:  
i) Body mass index, waist circumference, percentage body fat and distribution, and 
blood pressure  
ii) Serum lipid profile, blood glucose and HbA1c,  blood inflammatory markers including 
high sensitivity -CRP and uric acid, and novel cardiovascular markers in the blood 
such as fibrinog en, homocysteine and lipoprotein  
iii) VO2 maximum  (Cardiopulmonary exercise testing parameters)  
iv) Maximum strength and maximum power in chest press and leg press  
 
2 
 v) Symptoms of angina as measured by [CONTACT_693295]) Quality of life as measured by [CONTACT_693296], symptoms of depression as 
measured by [CONTACT_127659] -9 Questionnaire , and symptoms of stress as measured on the 
Perceived Stress Scale  
vii) Temporal changes in blood levels of  creatinine kinase  
Sensorimotor characteristics  (visual -motor reaction time, peak knee muscular force, muscular 
force steadiness , and balance/posture  
Hypothese s 
   
We hypothesize that healthy adults who are employees at Mayo Clinic, [COMPANY_002]ster MN  who 
undergo whol e body -EMS training for a 16 -week period of time, involving 1 .0 x 20 minute 
training sessions per week, will experience:  
 
i) A significant improvement in peripheral endothelial function mea sured using 
EndoPAT  
ii) A significant improvement in body mass index, waist circumference , percentage body 
fat and distribution, and blood pressure  
iii) A significant improvement in lipid profile, blood glucose an d HbA1c,  blood 
inflammatory markers including high  sensitivity -CRP and uric acid, and novel 
cardiovascular markers in the blood such as fibrinog en, homocysteine and lipoprotein  
iv) A signifi cant improvement in VO2 maximum and cardiopulmonary exercise testing 
parameters  
 
3 
 v) A significant improvement in maximum strength and maximum power in chest press 
and leg press   
vi) A significant improvement in symptoms of angina as measured by [CONTACT_693297]) A significant improvement in quality of life as measured by [CONTACT_693296], 
symptoms of depression as measured by [CONTACT_127659] -9 Questionnaire , and symptoms of 
stress as measured on the Perceived Stress Scale   
viii) No significant difference in blood levels of  creatinine kinase across time  
viii) A significant improvement in sensorimotor characteristics (visual -motor reaction 
time, peak  knee muscular f orce, muscular force steadiness, standing balance , and 
overhead squatting posture ) 
ix)   
 
Methods  
 
Trial Design  
This study will consist of a blinded randomized controlled prospective study design , and will 
include [ADDRESS_940183] of : 
• Subjects under the age of 18  
• Pregnan cy/or suspected pregnacy  
• Subjects with a history of liver or kidney disease, acute illness , taking medica tions (such 
as glucocorticoids)  
• Subjects who have conditions (such as chronic inflammatory muscular diseases or 
Cushing’s sy ndrome) that affect muscle mass  
 
4 
 • Individuals with pac emakers and impl antable cardiac defibrillators  
• Individuals who conduct any other type of resistan ce training (> 45 minutes/week)  
• Individuals who have regular “high” alcohol consumpti on (> 80g/day on 5 days a week) , 
or are under acute influence of alcohol, drugs narcotics, and/or painkillers  
• Subjects unable to consent to or participate in the 16 -week EMS  intervention or be 
available for follow up  (1).   
• Subjects who report recent surgeries  
• Cardiac arrhythmias  
• Active medical implants  
• Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]  
• Seizures  
• Severe circulatory disorders  
• Arterial circulatory disorders  
• Strong bleeding tendencies (hemophilia)  
• Bleeding  
• Abdominal wall hernia  
• Inguinal hernia  
• Tuberculosis  
• Tumor diseases  
• Arteriosclerosis in advanced stage  
• Severe neurological disorders  
• Diabetes mellitus  
• Febrile diseases  
• Acute bacterial or viral infections  
• Liver disea ses 
• Kidney diseases  
• Cardiovascular diseases  
• Coronary heart diseases  
• Infected or wounded areas of the skin  
• Skin cancer  
• Rhabdomyolysis  
 
All s ubjects  in both groups  who enroll into this study will undergo an assessment of peripheral 
endothelial fun ction with reactive hyperemia -peripheral arterial tonometry (RH -PAT) testing 
using EndoPAT; an assessment of vital signs including heart rate, blood pressure, weight, height 
and body mass index; laboratory blood work ; cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693270]2 max and maximal tolerated heart rate; maximal strength and maximal power 
 
[ADDRESS_940184] press and leg press testing; and ultrasound -based percent body fat and fat 
distribution testing at baseline, and at 16-weeks follow -up (immediately after completing a 16 -
week trainin g program using whole body -EMS) (Figure 1 ).   Baseline  cardiovascular risk factors 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_693298].   In addition, subjects will 
complete an angina/chest pain symptom q uestionnaire (Rose Questionnaire), quality of life 
questionnaire (LASA Questionnaire), depression questionnaire (Patient Health Questionaire -9) 
and perceived stress questionnaire (Perceived Stress Scale) to assess for psychosocial wellness at 
each point in  the study.  Women of childbearing potential will have a urine pregnancy test to rule 
out pregnancy prior to enrollment.  Sensorimotor characteristics  such as visual -motor reaction time,  
Other sensorimotor characteristics (standing balance and posture) will be examined using a force 
plate and 2D camera with a commercially available app. .. . . Standing balance will be assessed by 
[CONTACT_693299] 30  seconds eyes -open and –closed. . Overhead squatting posture 
will be examined by [CONTACT_693300][INVESTIGATOR_693271] -based postural 
assessment application ( Posture  Co, Inc, Trinity, FL, [LOCATION_003]).  
 
Intervention  
Individuals who enroll in this study will be ra ndomized to two groups, in a 1:1  ratio: intervention 
group and control group.  In the intervention group we will apply 16 -week s of conventional 
whole body -EMS training 1 .0 time a week for a maximum of 20 minutes per session , with no 
intermitte nt breaks .  Individuals will undertake routin e exercise maneuvers (including squatting, 
lunging, forward flexion etc.) under the guidance of certified trainers while simultaneously 
having percutaneous electrical stimulation applied to their bodies while exercising through the 
 
6 
 whole body -EMS machine.  Individuals will be trained in a ratio of 2 subjects to 2 machine s and 
one trainer.  Subjects in the control group will undergo training with a similar physical exercise 
program as those in the interventional group  undertaking routine exercise maneuvers ( including 
squatting, lunging, forward flexion etc.) , and will use the same equipment and will be ‘dressed’ 
as if they were undergoing whole body -EMS, but will have no/subthreshold electricity signals 
applied to their body vest .  The EMS machine will be swi tched on and show normal wave 
patterns suggesting that it is working  normally, but study participants will be  blinded to whether 
or not they are receiving percutaneous electrical stimulation while doing the routine exercise 
maneuvers.  This will be applied  for a [ADDRESS_940185] focused 
on body composition and functional parameters  (1-4).  Briefly, with the whole body -EMS 
equipment (miha bodytec®, Gersthofen, [LOCATION_013]) we will apply a simultaneous but region  
specific stimulation of all the main muscle groups with an overall area of up to 2750 c m2. We 
will consistently ru n an guided whole body -EMS program in groups who will  always supervised 
 
7 
 and guided by [CONTACT_693301]  (i.e., two applicants coached by [CONTACT_693302]). Whole 
body -EMS will be conducted on approximately the same day, once  a week (i.e., 1.0 × week) for 
20 min utes.  The device will apply a bipolar electric current; we will select  an impulse frequency 
of [ADDRESS_940186] of 10–[ADDRESS_940187] exercises will be  based on a low amplitude squat exercise (< 35° leg 
flexion) with full amplitude movements of the arms (such as rowing, lat pulley, or butterfly).  
The emphasis of the protocol however will not be the effect on  muscle s induced by [CONTACT_693303] -EMS with high current intensity during 
functional movements. During the course of the study, the instructor  will progressively increase  
the volume of stimulation by [CONTACT_693304] 14 up to 20 min utes after 4 
weeks  of training .  The i ntensity of the stimulation will be  regulated using a rate of perceived 
exertion (RPE) scale to generate a sufficient, but tolerable, intensity of EMS application to all 
stimu lated areas. For each of the muscle groups stimulated, participants will be  encouraged to 
exercise at a RPE of “6 –7 out of 10 ” (i.e., “hard+ to very hard” ) on the Borg CR10 Scale (5).  
This specification will be  achieved in close interaction between the participant and instructor. 
Based on initial start settings determined after 4, 8, and 12 weeks, the impulse intensity will be  
increased slightly every 3 min utes to maintain/slightly increase the prescribed RPE du ring each 
session (refer to Supplemental Video).  
 
 
8 
 Schedule of events  
 
Baseline  
Day 0  Weeks 1 -7 Week 8  
follow -up 
(+/- 7 days)  Weeks 9 -
15 Week 16 
follow -up 
(+/-7 days)  
Informed Consent  X     
Brief review of 
medical history  X     
Exercise with EMS 
device  X X X X X 
Blood draw and 
laboratory testing**   X    X 
Creatinine Kinase  X  X  X 
Physical 
Assessment*  X    X 
Survey 
Questionnaires***  X    X 
EndoPAT  X    X 
Ultrasound -Based 
Body fat and fat 
distribution 
measurements 
(Sports Medicine 
Testing)  X    X 
Urine pg test± X     
Sensorimotor tests  X    X 
 
*Physical assessment includes:  body mass index, waist circumference, percentage body fat and 
distribution, blood pressure, maximum heart rate, VO2 maximum, maximum strength and 
maximum power in chest press and leg press  
 
**Laboratory Testing includes: high-sensitivity CRP, uric acid, fasting glucose, HbA1c, lipid 
panel, lipoprotein A, homocysteine fibrinogen.   
 
***Rose, LASA, PHQ -9, PSS Questionnaire  
±Women of childbearing potential only  
 
Outcomes and Measurements  
 
9 
  Research assistants will  perform  all baseline, and follow -up tests at 16-week s  based on 
availability of subjects schedule and tests equipment.  
 
Peripheral Endothelial Function: Endothelial function will be measured via the RH -PAT index 
as previously described (6-9).  The studies will be performed in a designated quiet, temperature 
controlled a nd uniformly lit room .  Individuals in the interventional and control gro ups will be 
tested at baseline, and will undergo re -testing after completing 16 -weeks of training within their 
assigned arm (within 2 weeks  of completion).  Subjects  will be fasting f or 4 hours before the study 
and will abstain from coffee or  tobacco use on the day of the examination.  Subjects taking any 
vasoactive medications, including calciu m channel blockers, nitrates, A CE-inhibitors or beta 
blockers, will discontinue these for 24  hours prior to testing.  The study will be conducted in the 
sitting position in a comfortable chair with armrests. A fitted blood pressure cuff will be placed on 
one arm, and the finger cuffs of the Endo -PAT 2000 device (Itamar Medical Inc. Ltd., Caesarea , 
Israel) will be placed on one finger of each hand (10).  Subjects will relax for 10 minutes before 
initiation of the protocol.  Baseline blood pressure and heart rate will be obtained via a digital 
automated blood pressure cuff (Omrom Healthcare, Inc., Vernon Hills, Illinois).  The EndoPAT 
2000 will be used specifically in this study because it is a Food and Drug Administration –approved 
noninvasive device, it allows continuous recording of the signal, and interpretation of the data is 
operator independent.  The use of a control arm will allow the elimination of systemic interference 
of the test and independence from the participant’s knowledge or conscious control of the signals  
(10-14).  The finger probes consist of inflatable latex air cuffs connected by [CONTACT_693305] a computer algorithm. A constant counter pr essure 
 
10 
 (predetermined by [CONTACT_693306]) will be applied through the air cushions. This 
prevents venous pooling and thereby [CONTACT_693307]. Pulsatile volume changes of the d istal digit induce pressure alterations in the 
finger cuff, which are sensed by [CONTACT_693308] -
PAT device.  A decrease in the arterial blood volume in the distal fingertip causes a decrease in 
pulsatile art erial column changes, reflected as a decrease in the measured PAT signal, and vice 
versa.  
 
 
Previous studies have demonstrated dependence of the RH -PAT score on nitric oxide, 
confirming that reported RH -PAT scores indeed reflect changes in nitric oxide – dependent 
endothelial function, rather than neurohormonal activation (15).  The reactive hyperemia 
protocol will consist of a 16-minute reactive hyperemia test, in the following sequence.  A  five-
minute baseline measurement, after which a blood pressure cuff on the test arm will be inflated 
to [ADDRESS_940188] 200 mmHg for five minutes  
(occlusion of pulsatile arterial flow will be confirmed by [CONTACT_693309]) after which, the cuff will be deflated, and the post -deflation PAT tracing will be recorded 
for an additional six minutes. The ratio of the PAT signal aft er cuff release compared to baseline 
will be calculated through a computer algorithm automatically normalizing for baseline signal, 
and indexed to the contralateral arm. The calculated ratio reflects the RH -PAT score ( scores 
below 1.7 will be considered consistent with abnormal peripheral endothelial function ).  
Although RH -PAT scores may not be the gold standard for endothelial function, several studies 
have shown good correlation between these methods and more widely accepted methods of 
 
11 
 endothelial function testing, such as intra -arterial acetylcholine infusion and brachial artery 
Doppler ultrasound following reactive hyperemia (11, 13, 14) . 
 
Laboratory Testing:  Laboratory testing will be undertaken in all participants a t baseline, and at 
16-weeks follow -up in both the intervention and control group.  Venous blood will be drawn for 
high-sensiti vity CRP , uric acid, fasting glucose, HbA1c, lipid panel , lipoprotein A, homocysteine 
and fibrinogen .  For patients in both groups , venous blood will also be tested for creatinine kinase 
levels at baseline, 8-weeks (halfway in to the training program s), and 16 -weeks (after completi ng 
each respective training program for both groups ).  A blood sample of approximately [ADDRESS_940189] Circumference:  Body height , weight  and waist 
circumference will be  measured  using calibrated devices.  Body mass index will be calculated as 
mass (kg)/height (m2). 
 
 
 
  
 
VO2 MAX and Maximal Heart Rate: This will be tested using exercise treadmill testing in the 
conventional manner.  
 
 
12 
 Questionnaires : Baseline clinical characteristics of all the participants will be carefully  
determined wit h validated baseline questionnaires (16).   Completeness and accuracy of the 
questionnaires will be carefully checked by [CONTACT_693310].  In addition, all participants will complete four additional questionnaires at baseline, 
and 16-weeks follow -up in each of the intervention and non -intervention arm s as follows:  
 
i) Rose Questionnaire  Is a validated questionnaire that has been used previously to 
assess for symptoms of angina (17) 
 
ii) Linear Analog Self -Assessment (LASA) Mayo Clinic has developed a series of items 
that ask s adults to rate their level of functioning on a scale from 0 (as bad as it can be) 
to 10 (as good as it can be).  The six items to be used in this study inquire about 
overall quality of life, and then cover the five domains of quality of life: (1)  mental 
well-being, (2)  physical well -being, (3)  emotiona l well -being, (4)  social well -being, 
and (5)  spi[INVESTIGATOR_176315] -being. (18, 19)  
 
iii) Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9) This is a questionnaire commonly used in 
clinical practice to assist in the assessment of patients who are suspected to have 
features consi stent with a diagnosis of depression   
 
iv) Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)  This is a 14 -item self -report tool that provides a global 
measure of perceived stress. (20)  Responses range on a 5 -point scale from “never” to 
“very often.”  A higher score indicates greater stress.  The PSS correlates well with 
 
13 
 life-events stress measures and social anxiety, and has adequate reliability (α= .84, 
.85, .86) in three different samp les.   
 
 
i)  
ii) Standing Balance: For standing balance test, participants will first stand on a portable 
force plate (Model6090 -06, Bertec, Columbus, OH) with two feet as steady as possible 
for 30 seconds with eyes open. Then, the same procedures will be repeated with eyes 
closed. Next, the low back region will be strapped with a vibration device to stimulate 
the muscle spi[INVESTIGATOR_693272] -open and –closed balance. A 
total of three trials will be collected. Position and velocity data about the center of 
pressure (CoP) of the body will be calculated and used for analysis.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
This will be a randomized controlled trial in which there will be an interventional group and a 
control group into w hich individuals wi ll be randomly assigned in a 1:[ADDRESS_940190] as possible on age (within 5 years) and sex.  Baseline, demographic 
and risk factor distribution will be outlined in Table 1 of our analyses.  The following parameters 
will be measured in all subjects at baseline, and at 16 -weeks follow -up (immediately after 
completin g training in either study protocol depending on which group the participant is in): 
peripheral endothelial function measured with RH -PAT using EndoPAT ; body weight and body 
mass index; waist circumference; blood pressure; total cholesterol, low and high density 
 
14 
 lipoprotein cholesterol and triglycerides, fasting blood glucose and HbA1c; high sensitivity -CRP, 
uric acid, fibrinogen, homocysteine and lipoprotein A; p ercentage body fat ; maximum strength 
and maximum power in  leg press; VO2 maximum, maximal heart rate, and scores measured on 
the Rose questionnaire, LASA questionnaire, PHQ -9 questionnai re and Perceived Stress Scale.  
In addition, serum creatinine kinase will be measured at baseline, 8 weeks and 16 weeks.  
 
We will compare values of each paramet er between groups at baseline and after 16 -weeks using 
unmatched analyses (using Student ’s t-test when comparing the aforementioned measures  as 
continuous variable and using Chi-squared test when characterizing variables in ca tegories of 
normal vs. abnorma l).  We will also assess for difference s in the value  of each parameter within 
groups  between baseline and 16 -weeks follow -up using matched analyses (using  Student ’s paired  
t-test when comparing the aforementioned measures  as continuous variable and McNema r’s test 
when characterizing variables in categories of normal vs. abnormal).   Lastly, we will compare the 
differences between baseline and 16 -weeks follow -up for each parameter between groups using 
unmatched analyses (using the student t -test when compar ing the aforementioned measures  as 
continuous variable and using Chi-squared test when characterizing variables in categories of 
normal vs. abnormal).  
 
Clinical Significance  
 
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the primary cause for morbidity, mortality, and the associated 
rising health care costs in the world (21). According to 2 012 statistics, poor diet, smoking, and 
 
15 
 lack of physical activity continue to account for an overwhelming majority of CVD and death (22). 
Recent data  demonstrate that nearly one million people in the US have suffered an acute coronary 
syndrome (21) and recent reports highlight the increasing burden of CVD in the developi[INVESTIGATOR_19744]  
(23). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_693273], the medical community has been unable to translate our current 
understanding of conventional cardiovascular risk factors and existing preventative strategies into 
a reduction in CVD morbidity and mortality (24). 
 
Strategies to Manage Risk of Cardiovascular Disease  
Major modifiable risk factors for CVD include hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], smoking (current or former), 
hypertension, abdominal obesity and diabetes mellitus, which are responsible for approximately 
80% of the population attributable risk for acute myocardi al inf arction in men and women (25).  
Identificatio n of at -risk groups and appropriately addressing risk factors forms the cornerstone of 
successful management of CVD .  This is ofte n achieved using multi -variable risk -prediction 
algorithms (26-29), of which the most widely used in clinical practice are the Framingham based 
models.  These  scores assign weights to different levels of traditional risk factors such as age, 
total cholesterol and systolic blood pressure, which are combined to generate an absolute 
probability of developi[INVESTIGATOR_693274] a specified time frame.  Framingham based ris k prediction 
models are well -established, practical and easy to use, supported by [CONTACT_693311], after calibration where necessary (30).  Nevertheless, 
Framingham based score s are limited by [CONTACT_693312] a limited number of risk factors, 
which have been identified from historically based population studies (31).  Further these 
conventional cardiovascular risk factors only account for between 58% and 72% of all incident 
 
16 
 cases of coronary heart disease ( CHD ) (32).  Alternative nonconventional risk factors may 
account for some of this gap and are becoming increasingly important particularly as the effects 
of previously implemen ted attempts at managing conventional risk factors are being seen.  For 
example, one time trend analysis showed that patients presenting to the catheterization laboratory 
with CHD had better blood pressure and lipid profiles between 2006 -2010, compared wit h 1994 -
1999 (33), which may reflect improved uptake of primary and secondary preventative strategies 
such as smoking cessation (34) as well as a higher proportion of patients taking risk modifying 
cardiovascular medication (35).  Furthermore, in one study of young adults hospi[INVESTIGATOR_693275], less than 25% would have qualified for lipid -lowering therapy . 
This is  based on guidelines available at the time (36), and further demonstrat es the limitation of 
current risk -based algorithms.  Th us, there is a need to identify, account for  and manage  novel 
risk factors not c urrently accounted for in tradi tional risk prevention models.  An example of 
such a factor is physical (in)activity and exercise.  
 
 
Physical Activity and Primary Prevention  
From 2006 –2011, physical inactivity  was associated with 11.1% of the aggregate healthcare  
spending in the [LOCATION_003], with inactive adults accounting  for a 30% difference in mean annual US 
expenditure  per capi[INVESTIGATOR_693276] ($1437 vs $713) (37).  Recent evidence has 
also indicated that time spent in sedentary behaviors is an independent  risk factor for a number of 
adverse health consequence s including obesity, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, some 
cancers , CVD -related mo rtality and all -cause morta lity (38).  Physical  inactivity has also been 
 
17 
 shown to be associated with approximately 6% of CHD  cases and a 0.68 -year reduction in life  
expectancy (39).  Moderate -to-high levels of physical activi ty have clearly  been  shown to be 
protective against CVD  (40, 41) .  A dose response  relation ship between physical activity and 
cardioprotection has been shown, such that even small amounts of physical ac tivity can have a 
beneficial effect on CVD risk (42).  Studies have shown tha t adults wh o maintain an active 
lifestyle as measu red by [CONTACT_693313], and not necessarily through exercise per se , 
are likely to have a lower prevalen ce of metabolic syndrome (43) and regardless of exercising 
regularly or not, better  cardiovascular health and l ongevity (44, 45) .  A further study  showed that 
postmenopausal women who either walk or vigorously exercise have substantial reductions in 
the incidence of CVD  events  (46).  Other large population -based studies have  also shown a 
relationship between regular physical activity an d reduced rates of CVD -related morbidity and 
mortality as well as favorable changes in risk factors for CVD such as systolic and diastolic 
blood pressure and lipid profile  (47-50).  Physical activity also improves cardioresp iratory 
fitness, which also independently improves CVD risk profile  (51). 
 
Physical Activity and Secondary Prevention  
Amongst patients with established CHD , exercise -based cardiac rehabilitat ion (CR) is the 
cornerstone of secondary prevention . CR consists of several core components including basel ine 
patient assessment, nutritional and psychosocial counselling, risk factor management, as well as 
physical activity counselling and exercise training  (52).  In pati ents with CHD , CR is associated 
with a 13% and 26% low er all -cause and CVD mortality, respectively, in addition to a 31% 
reduction in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_693277] 12 months  (53).  CR participation is also asso ciated with 
 
18 
 improvements in C HD risk  factors, reduced angina symptoms and depression,  improved exercise 
capacity and enhanced healt h-related quality of life (54-56).  In patients with heart failure who 
are receiving optimal  therapy, exercise -based CR programs  confer an additional 11% reduction 
in all-cause morta lity and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] , a 15% reduction in CV D death and heart failure  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], and improved quality of life  (57-59).  In light of these significant benefi ts, most 
contemporary guidelines provide a Class I -level recommendation for referral to CR for eligible 
patients  including those with stabl e angina, myocardial inf arction within the past 12 months, 
cardiac surgery (coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806], valve repair/replacement or heart or lung 
transplant), percutaneous coronary intervention and systolic heart failure.   A careful history and 
physical examination are important to  ensure that patients with CHD  do not have residual 
ischemic symptom s, uncontrolled heart failure  or threatening arrhythmias that may be triggered 
by [CONTACT_693314] s exertion. The risks for these adverse events decrease significantly after the index 
cardiac event, allowing patients to safely enroll in CR as early as 1 –2 weeks aft er hospi[INVESTIGATOR_489277] (60).  Prior to prescribing physical activity  for patients with CHD , patients’ exercise 
tolerance should be assessed by [CONTACT_693315] a baseline fitness level, and to evaluate for exerci se-induced myocardial ischemia or 
arrhythmias that may a lter ongoing medical management (60). Patients should be continued on  
their usual medications during exercise testing to simulate the anticipated hemodynamic  
responses during exercise training.    The safety of contemp orary exerc ise based CR programs is 
well established, with a reported incidence of cardiac arrest and death of approximately  1 in 
115,000 and 1 in 750, 000 patient hours  of participation, respectively (53, 56, 60) .  The general  
recommendation for patients is 30 –[ADDRESS_940191] 5 days of the week and performed at an intensity of 40 –80% of the  peak heart rate (60).  For 
patients with isch emic sig ns or symptoms during exercise, the intensity of exercise should b e 
prescribed at a heart rate at least 10 beats  per minute  below the isch emic or angina thresho ld 
(60).  While  adverse CV D events are rare, i ncreased medical supervision is necessary for those 
patients with moderate  to high risk of complications.  A stable patient, h owever, can start CR as 
early as 1 week after discharge.  Due to the significant cardiovascular benefits of exercise, 
patients una ble to attend supervised exercise sessions should continue to exercise independently. 
The recommended exercise intensity may be reduced to approximately 60% to 75% of the peak 
heart rate to decrease the risk of myocardial infarction or life-threatening arr hythmias (61).  
 
Lack of Up take of Physical Activity  
In a recent study of 58, 269 patients with acute myocardial infarction  who were eligible for CR 
only 62.4% were referred to CR at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] , and only 23.4% of all patients 
actually attended one or more CR sessions in the year following discharge , sugg esting significant  
CR underutilization (62).  In addition,  with regards to the primary prevention setting, though 
studies have shown a slight increase in physical activity amongst adults living in the United 
States bet ween 1988 and 2000, 25% of American adults report no participation in leisure -time 
physical activity (63).  Further, most older people are unable or unwilling (64) to under take the 
exercise doses recommended to favorably impact  body composition  and CVD risk  (65).  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_693278] (AHA) and American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 
recommend at least 30 minutes of moderate -intensity physical activity 5 days a week, 20 minutes 
 
20 
 of vigorous aerobic exercise 3 days a week or a combination thereof, in a ddition to 2 -3 
days/week of resistance, flexibility and neuromotor exercises (66).   
 
Anecdotally, lack of time is a commonly cited reason for lack of widespread and consistent 
uptake of physical activity amongst healthy subjects as well as those with established CHD  or 
heart failure.  A further reason may include l ack of awareness and education in the potential 
benefits of engaging in frequent exercise as well as the harms of living a sedentary life.  
Additional reasons may include injury or fear of injury and indeed the most common risk 
associated with physical act ivity is musculoskeletal injury.  Unaccustomed vigorous physical 
activity may also trigger adverse cardiovascular responses including myocardial infarction and 
malignant arrhythmia.  Nevertheless, while musculoskeletal and cardiovascular complications 
from  exercise increase with physical activity of increasing intensity , regular exercise and 
enhanced cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693279] (67, 68) .  Finally a 
lack of direction and monitoring as well as awareness in what type of exercise to do, how often 
to do it , and for how long further inhibits the widespread uptake of this habit whose integration 
into a day -to-day routine has proved challenging e ven for the most motivated of individuals.  
 
Existing Tools to Increase Uptake of Physical Activity  
To help improve  the uptake of regular physical activity at the population  level  the US 
Preventative Service Task Force emphasizes the effectiveness of clinic ian counselling and 
specifically recommends that overweight adults with risk factors for CVD receive intense 
behavioral counselling (Grade B  recommendation ) (69).  When counselling patients, t he AHA 
 
21 
 recommends that clinicians use the following strategies: setting specifi c and short -term goals, 
providing f eedback on progress, advocating strategies for self -monitoring, es tablishing a plan for 
frequency and duration of follo w-up, using individually tail ored interventions based on readi ness 
to change , and motivational interviewing and enhancing patient self -efficacy (70). Health 
coaching, in which dedication towar ds one’s health is fostered via professional support and 
motivati onal interviewing, is generally well received and offers additional support in promoting 
lifestyle  changes  (71).  In an attempt to ensure physical activity is a ddressed frequently in the 
outpatient clinical setting, the A merican College of Sports Medicine and American Medical 
Association launched the initiative ‘Exercise is Medicine’ in 2007 (72).  The campaign calls for 
promoti ng physical activity as part of  routine practice in healthcare,  encouraging clinicians to 
evaluate their patients ’ physical activ ity at every visit, ‘prescribing ’ exercise at appropriate 
‘dosages ,’ and where appropriate, referring patients  to cred entialed exercise professionals and to 
use technology to track participation (72).  This novel philosophy sees physical activity as a 
multi -disease targeting pharmaceutical equivalent  that should be monitored, re -dosed and 
modified on an ongoing basis cultivating the mindset that exercise is indeed medicine.  Clearly, 
effectively enhancing the uptake of regular physical activity to improve population health 
requires a significant commitment in time and human capi[INVESTIGATOR_307], which are ever -present barriers 
encountered by [CONTACT_584631].  Rapi[INVESTIGATOR_693280].   
 
Electronic Muscle Stimulation  
 
[ADDRESS_940192] included pedometers/acce lerometers, mobile applications and 
social media , all of which have provided motivation and monitoring of progress (73).  Whole 
body e lectronic muscle stimulation  (EMS), a method that primarily focusses on muscular 
dimensions, is a further development of local EMS application that enables all main muscle 
groups to be stimulated simultaneously with customizable intensity.  Whole body EMS provides 
a time efficient, jo int friendly, highly adaptable  training technology that forms  a promising 
option to enhance the widespread and frequent uptake of physical activity , at least in middle -
aged and older people (2, 4)  (see Figures 2 and 3).  While  conventional exercise protocols may 
comprehensively influence  cardiovascular risk factors and disease , as well as physical 
functioning amongst the elderly, decades of promoting physical activity has failed to enhance its 
widespread uptake such that only 30% of the European Union population aged 55 years and 
older exercise regularly  (1).  This situation indicates the need for low -thres hold interventions, 
which could at least offer the potential for improving some important health and functional 
parameters  of advanced age.  
 
Furthermore, s arcopenic obesity  (SO) , defined as the combination of low muscle and high fat 
mass (74), is reported to be a frequent condition in elderly people, and is present in up to 94% of 
people aged  ≥ 60 years (75). SO is predominately caused by a de crease of physical activity  in 
combinati on with stable caloric intake, mal nutrition, and hormonal changes (76).  Older people 
with SO have demonstrated poor health,  reduced functional capacity, and quality of life right up 
to loss of indepe ndence and institutionalization (74).  Besides the problem s associated with  
progressive loss of muscle mass, the concurrent  accumulation of (intra -)abdominal fat induces a 
 
23 
 higher ri sk for cardio -metabolic diseases (77, 78) .  Regular exercise favorably affect a number of 
cardiovascular risk factors and diseases in old age (79).  Indeed, resistance training is becoming 
an increasingly popular method of conditioning for recreational purposes and in competitive 
athletes.  In addition to  recreation, resistance training is also increasingly being used in 
rehabilitation (80).  The benefits of resistance training on the skeletal muscle are well established 
(81), and may extend to the prevention and treatment of cardio vascular risk factors (82).  
However, the effect of resistance training on cardiac  morphology and function remain  equivocal.  
A cross -sectional cardiovascular MRI study by [CONTACT_693316] (83) showed concentric left 
ventricular myocardial adaption in individuals undergoing resistance training.  A  further 
longitudinal cardiovascular MRI study showed that a relatively short period of high intensity 
resistance traini ng in previously untrained men wa s associated with  physiologically significant 
changes in cardiac a trial and ventricular morphology and function (84).  Apart from its potential 
use in endurance training, EMS could be of use in individuals who are not able to undertake 
physical training due to comorbidities or the underlying cardiac disease.  EMS has demonstrated 
positive effects on muscle and fat mass, and a gain of functional capacity in older sedentary 
people (85) (see below).  However, even though there is some evidence that EMS may induce 
changes in body composition and could favorably decreased the metabolic syndrome amongst 
elderly patients (77), studies ev aluating the potential role of EMS training on cardiac function 
and cardiovascular risk are lacking.  
 
Previous Studies Evaluating Electronic Muscle Stimulation  
 
 
24 
 STUDY TITLE  AIMS  SAMPLE  STUDY 
DESIGN  MAIN 
RESULTS  ADVERSE 
EFFECTS  
Kemmler et al. Evid 
Based Complement 
Alternat Med 2016 
Effects of Whole -
Body 
Electromyostimulation  
versus High -Intensity 
Resistance Exercise 
on Body Composition 
and Strength : A 
Randomized 
Controlled Trial (3) To 
determine 
the 
effectiveness 
of WB -EMS 
compared 
with the gold 
standard 
reference 
HIT, for 
improvin g 
body 
composition 
and muscle 
strength in 
middle -aged 
men Healthy 
untrained 
men, ages 30 -
50 years  
N=48  Randomized 
controlled trial:  
healthy 
untrained men 
aged  30-50 
years  were 
randomly 
allocated to 
either HIT (2 
sessions/week) 
or a WB -EMS 
group (3 
sessions/2 
week s) that 
exercised for 16 
weeks  
 
HIT was 
applied as 
"single -set-to-
failure 
protocol," while 
WB-EMS was 
conducted with Lean body mass 
changes of both 
groups (HIT 
1.25 ± 1.44% 
versus WB -
EMS 0.93 ± 
1.15%) were 
significant (p = 
.001); however, 
no significant 
group 
diffe rences 
were detected 
(p = .395)  
 
Leg-extensor 
strength also 
increased in 
both groups 
(HIT 12.7 ± 
14.7%, p = 
.002, versus 
WB-EMS 7.3 ± 
10.3%, p = Nil reported  
 
25 
 intermittent 
stimulation ([ADDRESS_940193]; 85 Hz, 
350 ms) over 20 
minutes  .012) wi th no 
significant (p = 
.215) between -
group 
difference  
 
Corresponding 
changes were 
also determined 
for body fat and 
back -extensor 
strength  
Kemmler, W. et al. 
Calcified Tissue 
International 2018  
 
Effects of combined 
whole body 
electromyostimulation 
and protein 
supplementation on 
local and overall 
muscle/fat distribution 
in older men with 
sarcopenic obesity: the 
Franso Study  (1) To 
determine 
the 
combined 
effect of 
WB-EMS 
and 
protein 
supplements 
on local and 
overall 
muscle/fat 
distribution 
in older man Community 
dwelling men 
≥ 70 years 
with 
sarcopneic 
obesity  
 
N = 67  
 Randomized 
controlled trial:  
WB-EMS and 
protein 
supplementation 
(n = 33) vs.  
a non -
intervention 
control group ( n 
= 34)  
 
WB-EMS was 
conducted 1.5 
sessions of 20 Thigh lean  
muscle volume 
increased 
significantly in 
the WB -EMS&P 
(p < 0.001) and 
increased 
slightly in the 
CG ( p = 0.435)  
 
Fat volume 
increased 
signifi cantly in 
the CG ( p < 3 participants in 
each of the WB -
EMS&P and  
control group  
were lost to 
follow -up: [ADDRESS_940194] 
“discomfort  
during WB -EMS 
application” as a 
reason  
 
 
26 
  with 
sarcope nic 
obesity  min/week for 16 
weeks. Whey  
protein 
supplementation 
aimed to ensure 
a daily intake of 
1.8 g/kg body 
mass  0.001) and was 
maintained in 
the WB -EMS&P 
group ( p = 
0.728)  
 
Group  
differences for 
both 
parameters 
were 
significant ( p = 
0.033 and p = 
0.002)  
 
Appendicular 
muscle mass 
and trunk fat 
also differed 
significantly  
(p < 0.001) 
between WB -
EMS and 
controls, with 
significant 
positive 0 participants of 
the WB -EMS&P 
group  
reported serious 
problems;  and 
no injuries or 
adverse  
effects were 
observed or 
reported by [CONTACT_32346]  
 
 
27 
 changes in the 
WB-EMS&P ( p 
< 0.001) and 
no relevant  
changes in 
controls  
 
 Changes of 
gait velocity, 
leg-extensor 
strength, and 
advanced 
lower 
extremity 
function  
of the WB -
EMS&P group 
differed 
significantly 
from co ntrols 
(p ≤ 0.002)  
Van Buuren et al. 
Rehabilitation 2014  
 
Electrical 
Myostimulation: To compare 
the effects of 
extended 
EMS to 
limited EMS Stable CHF 
patients 
(NYHA  
class II –III)  
were evaluate  Randomized 
controlled t rial: 
Extended EMS 
(n=18) vs. QoL was found 
to be improved 
in all  No safety 
concerns or 
adverse effects 
were described  
 
 
28 
 Improvement of 
Quality of Life, 
Oxygen Uptake and 
Left Ventricular 
Function in Chronic 
Heart Failure (86) on physical 
performance, 
left 
ventricular 
ejection 
function, and 
quality of 
life in 
congestive 
heart failure 
patients   
N=31  limited EMS 
(n=13)  
 
Training  
was performed 
for 10 weeks 
twice weekly 
for 
20 minutes  domains of the 
SF-36 
questionnaire  
 
In the extended 
EMS group 
there was a 
significant 
improvement in  
the domain 
physical 
functioning  
and emotional 
role 
 
Limited EMS 
group showed 
significant 
improvement in 
the domain 
vitality  
 
There was a 
significant 
increase in 
oxygen uptake  Patients with 
pacemakers or 
implantable 
cardiac devices 
had been 
excluded from 
this study  
 
 
 
29 
 at aerobic 
threshold in all 
groups (exEMS: 
+ 29.6 %,  
p < 0.001; 
limEMS + 17.5 
%, p < 0.001)  
 
EF increased  
from 36.94 ± 
8.6 to 42.36 ± 
9.1 % ( + 14.7 
%, 
p = 0.003) in 
the ex tended 
EMS group and 
37.7 ± 3.6  
to 40.3 ± 5.9 % 
[ + 6.9 %, p = 
0.18] in the 
limited EMS 
group  
Wittman et al. Clinical 
Interventions in Aging 
2016  
 
 To 
determine 
the 
combined Community 
dwelling 
women ≥ 70 
years with Randomized 
controlled trial:   
6 months of 
WB-EMS with  Metabolic 
syndrome Z -
score decreased 
in both groups; No safety 
concerns or 
adverse effect s 
were described  
 
[ADDRESS_940195] of whole body 
electromyostimulation  
on cardiometabolic 
risk factors in older 
women with 
sarcopenic obesity: the 
randomized controlled 
FORMOsA -
sarcopenic obesity 
study (87) effect of 
WB-EMS 
and 
protein 
supplements 
on the 
metabolic 
syndrome in 
elderl y 
community 
dwelling 
women with 
sarcopenic 
obesity  sarcopneic 
obesity  
 
N = 75  
 or without  
protein 
supplementation 
(150 kcal/day, 
56% protein) 
vs. 
a non -
interv ention 
control group  
(n=25 in each 
group)  
 
WB-EMS 
included one 
session of 20 
minutes (85 Hz, 
350 μs, 4 s of 
strain –[ADDRESS_940196]) per week 
with moderate -
to-high intensity  however, 
changes 
compared with 
the control 
group were 
significant 
(P=0.001) in the 
WB-EMS&P 
group only  
 
On analyzing 
the components 
of the metabolic 
syndrome, 
significant 
positive effects 
for both WB -
EMS groups 
were identified 
for mean 
arterial 
pressure, while 
the WB -EMS 
group 
significantly 
differed for  
 
[ADDRESS_940197] 
circumference, 
and the WB -
EMS&P group 
significantly 
differed for 
HDL -
cholesterol 
(P=0.006) from 
the control 
group  
 
No significant 
differences 
were observed 
between the 
WB-EMS 
groups  
 
Efficacy and Safety Considerations  
 
In voluntary strength training, the resistance of additional weight regulates the training intensity 
due to the maximum voluntary contraction (MVC), which is defined as one  repetition maximum.  
In contrary to voluntary exercise, EMS activates muscle contraction artificially without using a 
resistance load.  For this reason, it is not possible to simply transfer conventional training 
 
[ADDRESS_940198] shown  that electrical stimulus 
can be more intense than voluntary stimulus activated by [CONTACT_693317]  (88).   
In contrast to voluntary strength training, the  MVC in EMS strength training is regu lated 
according to the level of stimulation parameters. In t urn, these parameters depend on the 
individual conditio n of the muscular system and on individual pain perception.  Under voluntary 
conditions, it is difficult to reach the absolute maximum level of contrac tion because 
accomplishing this depends on the individual’s le vel of strength and motivation. Some studies 
revealed that elit e athletes w ith a high level of maximal strength are able to r each levels of MVC 
close to the absolute maximum, while a verage subjects only reach their maximum in extreme 
situati ons. For this reason, EMS could enable strength training at  intensities that are otherwise  
difficult to reach because of personal motivation levels (88). 
 
In a previous study , Hortobagyi  et al showed the effectiveness of different EMS methods for 
enhancing maximal strength, speed strength, jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_693281], and power in trained 
and elite athletes (89).  In another review, the authors showed that EMS is effective for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_693282]. Specificall y, after a stimulation period of 3 –6 weeks, 
significant gains were shown in maximal isometric and dynamic strength; eccentric isokinetic 
speed and concentric isokinetic speed strength; rate of force development; and power.  
Developi[INVESTIGATOR_693283] 25% (squat jump +21.4%, 
countermovement jump +19.2%, drop jump +  12%) and impro ved sprint times by [CONTACT_45848] -
4.8% in trained and elite athletes.  With regard s to the level of fitness, the authors showed that 
trained and elite athletes, despi[INVESTIGATOR_693284], were able to significantly 
 
33 
 enhance their level of strength to the same extent as is possible with untrained subjects  (90). 
Thus, EMS offers a promising alternative to traditional strength training.  However, compared to 
traditional voluntary strength training, several EMS parameters have to be considered in addition 
to parameters for common train ing regimen s when undertaking strength training with EMS. This 
complexity of different combinations of training regimens and stimulation parameters makes it 
difficult to systematically implement EMS.  
 
 
In a review comparing different training regimens usin g EMS and their training effectiveness, 
Filipovic et al. highlighted a number of preconditions necessary for producing a stimulus above  
the training threshold using EMS to promote strength adaptations.  In doing so, they provided 
guidelines for implementin g EMS effectively an d safely  in strength training (88).  They showed 
a significant relationship between  applying a stimu lation intensity of ≥ 50% MCV and 
significant strength  gains. To generate this level of MVC, they recommended training regimens 
that featured 4.4 +/ - 1.5 weeks  of training; 3.2 +/ - 0.9 sessions per week for 17.7 +/ - 10.9 
minutes per session.  They also rec ommended 6.0 +/- 2.4 seconds per contraction with 20.3 +/- 
9.0% duty cycle, with stimulation parameters as follows: impulse width 306.9 +/ - 105.1 
microseconds; impulse frequency 76.4 +/- 20.9 Hz; and impulse intensity 63.7 +/ - 15.9 mA to 
optimize training to systematically enhance  abilities such as maximal  strength, speed strength , 
jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_693281] , and power (88).  These formed acceptable training parameters that 
did not overstress the subjects ’ muscular system that could  in turn  potentially  hamper strength  
adaptations.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_940199] show n that the electrical stimulus  from EMS can cause significantly more stre ss to the 
muscular system and  therefore could lead to  higher creatin ine kinase levels  compared to  
volun tary muscle contraction exercise (88, 91).  Indeed, due to the ability to innervate large 
muscle areas simultaneously with dedicated individual intensity to each muscle group, EMS can 
be associated with potential muscle injury.  One study showed that, compared to traditional 
strength training, t he stress on the muscular system is about 40% higher after intensive EMS 
(88).  The authors arrived at the conclusion tha t the level of stimulation intensity is responsible 
for the elevation in creatinine kinase, while the duration of stimulation had no influence.  The 
authors also showed that subjects still exhibited high values after long periods ranging from 24 
hours to 4  days. Further stimulation within this time of decomposition would result in a 
cumulative rise in creatinine kinase levels (88), which in turn could overstress the muscular 
system  further .  Further, one study in which whole body EMS was implemented to the point of 
exhaustion in healthy novices confirmed very high elevations in  creatinine -kinase levels . 
Although this study did not detect any of the reported clinical consequences of this “severe” 
rhabdomyolysis, in less fit subjects who are neither optimally prepared nor supervise d, initial 
whole body EMS to exertion may have more far -reaching consequences.  Consequently, EMS 
requires a greater  interval between training sessions to prevent overstressing the muscular system 
and to ensure strength adaptations  compared to conventional  training .  Of note, a subsequent 
whole body EMS conditioning phase of [ADDRESS_940200] application to 
exhaustion demonstrated creatinine -kinase peaks in the range of conventional resistance exercise  
 
35 
 (92).  Studies have also shown that the muscular system acclimatizes to the electrical stimulus in 
as little as 3 weeks, which in turn results in reduced creatinine kinase activity (88).  These results 
indicate that a short period of careful whole body EMS conditioning should be mandatorily 
implemented in order to realize a safe application.  I ntroducing the electrical stimulus to subjects 
before starting with the actual stimulation period as part of an acclimatization period might 
prevent a cumulative rise in creatinine kinase levels while helpi[INVESTIGATOR_693285].  
Figure 4  highligh ts additional safety considerations.   
 
. 
Regarding the stimulation intensity, the aforementioned review showed that intensities of  ≥ 5 0% 
MVC were mostly produced with biphasic impulses (88).  Monophasic current flows from one 
electrode to the oth er in a fixed direction and can create an ionic curr ent within the tissue. This 
can result in unpleasant side effect s such as ele ctrolysis and risk of chemical burning.  
Conversely, biphasic currents flow between both electrodes and thus have a zero net  current.  
Accordingly, biphasic currents are perceived as more pleasant fo r the subjects’ muscles and thus 
subjects are abl e to tol erate biphasic currents better, which means that the impulses can be more 
intensive.  Consequently, bip hasic currents offer advantages for applying high stimul ation 
intensities and therefore have a positive influence  on the enhancement of strength abilitie s. 
 
In regard s to the influence of the impulse intensity (mA) on  stimulation intensity (MVC ), muscle 
contraction force can be regulated by [CONTACT_693318] (mA).  Accordingly, a higher  
impulse int ensity (mA) results in a higher %  MVC.  However, the impulse intensity depends on 
the resistance o f different tissue structures, a major p roportion of which is due to resistance of 
 
36 
 the skin.  Therefore, it is not possible to precisely determine the impulse intensity (mA) that 
ultimately re aches the muscle. Consequently , most studies used the maximum pain thresho ld 
(maximum tolerated amperage) to regulate  the maximum impulse intensity (88).  Nevertheless, 
the pain threshold depends on the subject’s indivi dual pain perception on the particular muscle. 
Studies have show n that subjects quickly  experience pain acclimatization with EMS, and thus in 
order to maintai n a certain lev el of stimulation intensity the impulse intensity (mA) has  to be 
continuously enhanced to adapt to the changing situation.  However,  studies have also shown 
that when increasing the impulse intensity , a maxi mal level of muscle contraction force is 
achieved with intensities over 100 mA , above which no further positive effects result.  
Furthermore, maximal impulse intensities and thus  high level s of muscle tension will limit 
dynamic movements, which are importa nt when training with EMS.  Thus the impulse intens ity 
(mA) has to be regulated to ensure unlimited  and free  movement.   This is an important 
consideration also when considering stimulation frequency.   While using 2–15 Hz stimulates 
mostly slow -twitch fiber s (type 1) , fast-twitch fibers  (type 2), which are responsi ble for the 
development of high forces, may not contract below 35 Hz .  Any further increase in  frequency 
can lead to a com plete tetanus of the stimulated muscle.   There are different opi[INVESTIGATOR_693286]/ideal level of stimulation frequency and the authors of the aforementioned review 
have suggested a target range of [ADDRESS_940201] shown 
that a minimum impulse width of 500 microseconds i s needed to develop high forces, and that 
lowering the imp ulse width significantly redu ces the MVC.  Impulse widths of > [ADDRESS_940202].  
Thus the authors of the aforementioned review concluded that an impulse width in a range 
 
37 
 between 200 and 400 microseconds would be  sufficient for generating the target stimulation 
intensities of ≥ 50% MVC.  Furthermore, this would  also activate the d eeper motor units without 
being unpleasant fo r the subject , and would still be intense enough to influence strength 
adaptations.  
 
 
Thus, EMS has to be applied intelligently and carefully , especially in untrained subjects who 
have to be trained with caution becau se of their lower resistance to intensive load s. Overloadin g 
the subjects’ muscular system by [CONTACT_693319]. This must be balanced against the fact that employing a load that is too low can  
result  in a rapid decrease (within 2 –4 weeks) in achieved strength gains, or to a lack of any 
significant enhancements in post -testing (88).  Nevertheless , significant strength gains have been 
demonstrated in individuals  training appropriately with EMS after a period of only 2–6 weeks 
(88).  Several trials have also  show n that when EMS is applied with optimal load s, the achieved 
strength gains can be kept at  a constant level , amongst untrained and trained subjects , for up to [ADDRESS_940203] -testing without doing any exercise (88).   
 
Guidelines for safe and effective WB -EMS  
In general:  
1. Safe and effective Whole -Body -EMS Training must always be accompanied by a trained 
and licensed WB -EMS trainer or scientifically trained personnel familiar with this field of 
application.  
2. Before the first training session of every beginner, an anamnesis of possible 
contraindications based on a list of questions must be taken and then documented in 
 
38 
 writing, confirmed by [CONTACT_48553]'s signature [CONTACT_693326]. Where relevant anomali es are 
found, a doctor is to be consulted and training only be commenced if clearance has been 
given.  
 
Preparing for training:  
1. As with any kind of intensive training, Whole -Body EMS training must only be carried out 
in a good physical condition and free o f pain. This includes abstaining from alcohol, drugs, 
stimulants/muscle relaxants or stress ahead of the training session. Training must never be 
carried out by [CONTACT_693320].  
 
2. Whole -Body EMS training leads to very high meta bolic stress of the organism because of 
very high volume of muscle mass addressed. This factor has to be taken into account 
through sufficient food intake that is as high in carbohydrates as possible. If this is not 
possible, then at least a high carbohydr ate, but light snack (≈250 kcal) should be eaten, 
ideally about 2 hours before training.  
 
3. So as to avoid possible renal stress (especially with undiagnosed problems) through 
intensive WB -EMS, additional fluids should be consumed before/during and after tr aining 
(500 ml each).  
 
4. Generally, medical – ideally sport -medicinal – consultation and clarification is advisable 
in the case of any discomfort, physical restrictions, infections or other internal, 
cardiological or orthopedic illnesses.  
 
Training:  
1. Regardless of physical status, sport experience and the user's wishes to that effect, under 
no circumstances  may WB -EMS training to exhaustion take place during the first training 
session or trial training. This has led in the past to undesired side effect s and negative health 
consequences and so must be avoided at all costs.  
2. After moderate initial WB -EMS, the stimulation level or current must be successively 
increased and adapted to the individual goals. The highest level is to be reached only after 
8-[ADDRESS_940204] (user's subjective effort impression: hard -
hard+). Training to complete exhaustion, especially in the sense of painful, continuous 
tetanus during the current phase, must generally be avoided.  
3. In addition, the ini tial training should be conducted with a reduced effective  training period. 
Advisable is 5 min impulse familiarization and a curtailed training session with moderate 
stimulus intensity (user's subjective effort impression: a bit hard) and 12 min intermitte nt 
load with short impulse phase (
 ). Only then should the training duration be cautiously 
increased and never exceed [ADDRESS_940205] 8 -10 weeks.  
5. Even after this conditioning phase, an interval of ≥[ADDRESS_940206] be maintained between 
training units in order to avoid accumulation of muscle breakdown products, permit 
regeneration and adaptation an d thus ensure a successful training outcome.  
 
Safety aspects during and after training  
1. During the training session, the trainer or the trained and qualified personnel should 
concentrate exclusively on the interests of the user(s). Before, during and after  training 
the trainer verbally and visually checks the user's condition so as to rule out health risks 
and ensure effective training. Training is to be stopped immediately if there are any 
contraindications. A trainer can train a maximum of 2 people at the  same time with EMS.  
 
2. During training, the equipment's operating controls must be directly in reach of the trainer 
and the user at all times. Operation/adjustment must be simple, quick and precise.  
 
 
Exercise and Endothelial Dysfunction  
 
Greater than  > 40% of the risk reduction associated with exercise cannot be explained by 
[CONTACT_693321] .  This  suggest s a cardioprotective vascular conditioning 
effect  of exercise that is  characterized by [CONTACT_693322], altered 
vascular structure and improved vascular reactivity (93, 94) . Sedentary behavior has also been 
shown to impair endothelial function (95-98).  Endothelial dysfunction is the unique yet almost 
universal “response to injury” of the v asculature under various clinical circumstances (99, 100) . 
It represents the first stage of atherosclerosis, and in fact, relates to plaque progression and 
vulnerability as well as a several fold increased risk of ischemic cardiac events and stroke  (101-
106). In clinical practice it is most often recognized by [CONTACT_693323] r esponse to 
increased flow (shear stress) or endothelial -dependent vasodilating agents such as acetylcholine 
 
40 
 (103, 107 -109).  In the coronary vasculature, an attenuated increase or decre ase in coronary 
blood flow  (110-114) to acetylcholine marks the presence of microvascular endothelial 
dysfunction, whereas an angiographically evident vasoconstrictive response of the coronary 
arteries is indicative of epi[INVESTIGATOR_693287]  (103, 113, 115, 116) .  Endothelial 
function can be assessed  noninvasively , peripherally  by [CONTACT_693324] (finger) 
reactive hyperemia using peripheral arterial tonometry (RH -PAT)  (117-119) (see below).   
Peripheral endothelial dysfunction (120)  measured using RH -PAT correlates well with 
invasively measured cor onary endothelial dysfunction and has been shown to be a strong 
independent predictor of adverse CVD outcomes (121, 122) .  Observational data has 
demonstrated  that people with minimal traditional risk factors for CVD but who have peripheral 
endothelial dysfunction have a higher incidence of heart disease, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], and death at 
follow -up compared to those without peripheral endothelial dysfu nction  (123-125).  Few clinical 
trials have evaluated the impact of physical activity and/or exercise on endothelial function as 
measured peripherally using RH -PAT.  O ne small trial demonstrated that when breaking 
prolonged si tting with very light activity, deterioration of end othelial function was avoided (97).  
Another study showed a strong relationship between lifetime physical activity level and reactive 
hyperemia index (RHI), but also showed h igher levels of endothelial dysfunction in the group 
undergoing only low-moderate level s of activity , suggesting little beneficial effect (126) .  A 
further study randomized patients with stable post -infarction heart failure  to either  moderate 
continuous training (70% o f peak heart rate) or high  intensity  aerobic interval training (95% of 
peak heart rate) three  times per week for [ADDRESS_940207] 
advice regarding physical activity .  The authors showed greater i mprovements in not only 
 
41 
 cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693288]-mediated 
dilation , an index of peripheral endothelial function,  in the high-intensity aerobic interval 
training  group compared to the  moderate continuous training  group (127) .  High intensity 
training offers greater time efficiency in add ition to superior cardiovascular effects, but the 
challenging nature of this form of training  limits its widespread uptake.  An assessment of 
vascular health and endothelial function could provide an individualized and integrated index of 
cardiovascular ri sk, accounting for the cumulative effects of both harmful and protective factors , 
as the terminal pathway which precedes overt CVD.  Consequently, evaluating the link between 
exercise, and in particular, EMS  as a novel tool in promoting time efficient, and  highly 
individualizable physical training, and endothelial function forms an unique and interesting 
question that offers potential benefits to patients in the primary and secondary prevention setting 
alike.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
  
 
 
 
 
References  
 
 
1. Kemmler W, Grimm A, Bebenek M, Kohl M, von Stengel S. Effects of Combined Whole -
Body Electromyostimulation and Protein Supplementation on Local and Overall Muscle/Fat 
Distribution in Older Men with Sarcopenic Obesity: The Randomized Co ntrolled Franconia 
Sarcopenic Obesity (FranSO) Study. Calcif Tissue Int. 2018.  
2. Kemmler W, Bebenek M, Engelke K, von Stengel S. Impact of whole -body 
electromyostimulation on body composition in elderly women at risk for sarcopenia: the 
Training and Elect roStimulation Trial (TEST -III). Age (Dordr). 2014;36(1):[ADDRESS_940208] rength: A Randomized Controlled Study. Evid Based Complement 
Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9236809.  
4. Kemmler W, Teschler M, Weissenfels A, Bebenek M, von Stengel S, Kohl M, et al. 
Whole -body electromyostimulation to fight sarcopenic obesity in community -dwelling older 
women at risk. Resultsof the randomized controlled FORMOsA -sarcopenic obesity study. 
Osteoporos Int. 2016;27(11):3261 -70. 
5. Borg E, Kaijser L. A comparison between three rating scales for perceived exertion 
and two different work tests. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2006;16(1):57 -69. 
6. Martin EA PA, Rihal CS, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Endothelial function and vascular 
response to mental stress are impaired in patients with api[INVESTIGATOR_693289]. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2010;56(1840 -1846).  
7. Hammadah M, Al Mheid, I, Wilmot, K, Ramadan, R, Alkhoder, A, Obideen, M, 
Abdelhadi, N, Fang, S, Ibeanu, I, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_45886], P, Mohamed Kelli, H, Shah, AJ, Pearce, B, Sun, Y, 
Garcia, EV, Kutner, M, Long, Q, Ward, L, Bremner, JD, Esteves, F, Raggi, P, Sheps, D, Vacc arino, 
V, Quyyumi, AA. Association Between High -Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin Levels and 
Myocardial Ischemia During Mental Stress and Conventional Stress. JACC Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2018;11(4):603 -11. 
8. Mehta P, Hermel, M, Nelson, MD, Cook -Wiens, G, Martin, EA, Alkhoder, AA, Wei, J, 
Minissian, M, Shufelt, CL, Marpuri, S, Hermel, D, Shah, A, Irwin, MR, Krantz, DS, Lerman, A, 
Noel Bairey Merz, C. Mental stress peripheral vascular reactivity is elevated in women with 
 
43 
 coronary vascular dysfunction: Results from t he NHLBI -sponsored Cardiac Autonomic 
Nervous System (CANS) study. Int J Cardiol. 2018;251:8 -13. 
9. Vaccarino V, Sullivan, S, Hammadah, M, Wilmot, K, Al Mheid, I, Ramadan, R, Elon, L, 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_45886], PM, Garcia, EV, Nye, J, Shah, AJ, Alkhoder, A, Levantsevych, O, G ay, H, Obideen, M, 
Huang, M, Lewis, TT, Bremner, JD, Quyyumi, AA, Raggi, P. Mental Stress -Induced -Myocardial 
Ischemia in Young Patients With Recent Myocardial Infarction: Sex Differences and 
Mechanisms. Circulation. 2018;137(8):794 -805.  
10. Martin EA, Tan SL, MacBride LR, Lavi S, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Sex differences in 
vascular and endothelial responses to acute mental stress. Clin Auton Res. 2008;18(6):[ADDRESS_940209], Jr., Kuvin JT, Lerman A. Noninvasive 
identificat ion of patients with early coronary atherosclerosis by [CONTACT_357645]. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44(11):2137 -41. 
12. Goor DA, Sheffy J, Schnall RP, Arditti A, Caspi A, Bragdon EE, et al. Peripheral arterial 
tonometry: a diagnostic m ethod for detection of myocardial ischemia induced during mental 
stress tests: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Clin Cardiol. 2004;27(3):137 -41. 
13. Kuvin JT, Mammen A, Mooney P, Alsheikh -Ali AA, Karas RH. Assessment of peripheral 
vascular endothelial function in the ambula tory setting. Vasc Med. 2007;12(1):[ADDRESS_940210] amplitude. Am Heart 
J. 2003;146(1):[ADDRESS_940211] Physiol (1985). 
2006;101(2):[ADDRESS_940212]. 
2004;4(3):[ADDRESS_940213] pain 
and intermittent claudication. Br J Prev Soc Med. 1977;31(1):42 -8. 
18. Clark MM, Novotny PJ, Patten CA, Rausch SM, Garces YI, Jatoi A, et al. Motivational 
readiness for physical activity and quality of life in long -term lung cancer survivors. Lung 
Cancer. 2008;61(1):117 -22. 
19. Locke DE, Decker PA, Sloan JA, Brown PD, Malec JF, Clark MM, et al. Validation of 
single -item linear analog scale assessment of quality of life in neuro -oncology patients. J Pain 
Symptom Manage.  2007;34(6):628 -38. 
20. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health 
Soc Behav. 1983;24(4):[ADDRESS_940214], VJ, Kissela, 
BM, Kittner, SJ, Lackland, DT, Lichtman, JH, Lisabeth, LD, Makuc, DM, Marcus, GM, Marelli, A, 
Matchar, DB, Moy, CS, Mozaffarian, D, Mussolino, ME, Nichol, G, Paynter, NP, Soliman, EZ, 
Sorlie, PD, Sotoodehnia, N, Turan, TN, Virani, SS, Wong, ND, Woo, D, Turner, MB; American 
 
44 
 Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Executive 
summary: heart disease and stroke statistics --2012 update: a report from the America n 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;125(1):[ADDRESS_940215], VJ, 
Huffman, MD,  Kissela, BM, Kittner, SJ, Lackland, DT, Lichtman, JH, Lisabeth, LD, Magid, D, 
Marcus, GM, Marelli, A, Matchar, DB, McGuire, DK, Mohler, ER, Moy, CS, Mussolino, ME, 
Nichol, G, Paynter, NP, Schreiner, PJ, Sorlie, PD, Stein, J, Turan, TN, Virani, SS, Wong, N D, Woo, 
D, Turner, MB; American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics 
Subcommittee. Executive summary: heart disease and stroke statistics --2013 update: a 
report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127(1):[ADDRESS_940216]. Clin Cardiol. 
2011;34(51 -58).  
24. Yusef S, Hawkins S, Ounpus S, Dans T, Avezum A, Lanas F, et al. Effects of potentially 
modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the 
INTERHEART study): case controlled study. Lancet . 2004;342:[ADDRESS_940217] of potentially 
modifiable risk factors associated with myocardial infarction in 52 countries (the 
INTERHEART study): case -control study. Lancet. 2004;364(9438):9 37-52. 
26. JBS 2: Joint British Societies' guidelines on prevention of cardiovascular disease in 
clinical practice. Heart. 2005;[ADDRESS_940218] 5:v1 -52. 
27. Anderson KM, Odell PM, Wilson PW, Kannel WB. Cardiovascular disease risk profiles. 
Am Heart J. 1991;121(1 Pt 2):293 -8. 
28. Conroy RM, Pyorala K, Fitzgerald AP, Sans S, Menotti A, De Backer G, et al. Estimation 
of ten -year risk of fatal cardiovascular disease in Europe: the SCORE project. Eur Heart J. 
2003;24(11):987 -1003.  
29. Jackson R. Updated New Zealand car diovascular disease risk -benefit prediction guide. 
Bmj. 2000;320(7236):709 -10. 
30. Lloyd -Jones DM. Cardiovascular risk prediction: basic concepts, current status, and 
future directions. Circulation. 2010;121(15):1768 -77. 
31. D'Agostino RB, Sr., Vasan RS, P encina MJ, Wolf PA, Cobain M, Massaro JM, et al. General 
cardiovascular risk profile for use in primary care: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 
2008;117(6):743 -53. 
32. Beaglehole R, Magnus P. The search for new risk factors for coronary heart diseas e: 
occupational therapy for epi[INVESTIGATOR_187543]? Int J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2002;31(6):1117 -22; author 
reply [ADDRESS_940219] 17 years: a study from the Mayo Clinic PCI registry. Clin Cardiol. 
2014;37(7):[ADDRESS_940220] laws. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(21):[ADDRESS_940221], Prasad A. Temporal trends (over 30 
years), clinical characteristics, outcomes, and gender in patients </=50 years of age having 
percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107(5):[ADDRESS_940222]: how do the National Cholesterol Education Panel III 
guidelines perform? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41(9):1475 -9. 
37. Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Pratt M, Yang Z, Adams EK. Inadequate ph ysical activity and 
health care expenditures in the [LOCATION_002]. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2015;57(4):315 -23. 
38. Dunstan DW, Thorp AA, Healy GN. Prolonged sitting: is it a distinct coronary heart 
disease risk factor? Curr Opin Cardiol. 2011;26(5):[ADDRESS_940223] VS, et al. 2013 
AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129([ADDRESS_940224] 2):S76 -99. 
40. Sofi F, Capalbo A, Cesari F, Abbate R, Gensini GF. Physical activity during leisure time 
and primary prevention of coronary heart disease: an updated meta -analysis of cohort 
studies. European Journal  of Cardiovascular Prevention & Rehabilitation. 2008;15(3):247 -
57. 
41. Shiroma EJ, Lee I -M. Physical Activity and Cardiovascular Health. Lessons Learned 
From Epi[INVESTIGATOR_693290], Gender, and Race/Ethnicity. 2010;122(7):743 -52. 
42. Sattelmair  J, Pertman J, Ding EL, Kohl HW, Haskell W, Lee IM. Dose -Response Between 
Physical Activity and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease: A Meta -Analysis. Circulation. 
2011;124(7):789 -95. 
43. Sisson SB, Camhi SM, Church TS, Tudor -Locke C, Johnson WD, Katzmarzyk PT. 
Accelerometer -Determined Steps/Day and Metabolic Syndrome. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine. 2010;38(6):575 -82. 
44. Ekblom -Bak E, Ekblom B, Vikström M, de Faire U, Hellénius M -L. The importance of 
non-exercise physical activity for cardiovascular he alth and longevity. British Journal of 
Sports Medicine. 2014;48(3):233 -8. 
45. Lee D -c, Sui X, Artero EG, Lee I -M, Church TS, McAuley PA, et al. Long -Term Effects of 
Changes in Cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693291] -Cause and Cardiovascular 
Disease Mortality in Men. The Aerobics Center Longitudinal Study. 2011;124(23):2483 -90. 
46. Manson  JE, Greenland  P, LaCroix  AZ, Stefanick  ML, Mouton  CP, Oberman  A, et al. 
Walking Compared with Vigorous Exercise for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Even ts in 
Women. New England Journal of Medicine. 2002;347(10):[ADDRESS_940225], Barlow CE, Macera CA, Paffenbarger RS, Jr., et al. 
Influences of cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693292]-cause mortality in men and women. JAMA. 1996;276(3):[ADDRESS_940226], Reed DM, Yano K. Physical activity and coronary heart 
disease in middle -aged and elderly men: the Honolulu Heart Program. Am J Public Health. 
1988;78(6):683 -5. 
49. Mora S, Cook N, Buring JE, Ridker PM, Lee IM. Physical activity and reduced risk of 
cardiovascular events: potential mediating mechanisms. Circulation. 2007;116(19):2110 -8. 
50. Sesso HD, Paffenbarger RS, Jr., Lee IM. Physical activity and coronary heart disease in  
men: The Harvard Alumni Health Study. Circulation. 2000;102(9):975 -80. 
51. Myers J, McAuley P, Lavie CJ, Despres JP, Arena R, Kokkinos P. Physical activity and 
cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_693293]: their independent and 
interw oven importance to health status. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2015;57(4):306 -14. 
52. Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, Bittner V, Comoss P, Foody JM, et al. Core 
components of cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a 
scientific statemen t from the American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, 
and Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Epi[INVESTIGATOR_21893], and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and 
Metabolism; and  the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. 
Circulation. 2007;115(20):[ADDRESS_940227] Rev. 
2011(7):CD001800.  
54. Jolliffe JA, Rees K, Taylor RS, Thompson D, Oldridge N, Ebrahim S. Exercise -based 
rehabilitation for coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001(1):CD001800.  
55. Stephens MB. Cardiac rehabilitation. Am F am Physician. 2009;80(9):955 -9; hand -out 
60. 
56. Taylor RS, Brown A, Ebrahim S, Jolliffe J, Noorani H, Rees K, et al. Exercise -based 
rehabilitation for patients with coronary heart disease: systematic review and meta -analysis 
of randomized controlled trial s. Am J Med. 2004;116(10):682 -92. 
57. Flynn KE, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_135164], Whellan DJ, Lin L, Blumenthal JA, Ellis SJ, et al. Effects of exercise 
training on health status in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;301(14):1451 -9. 
58. O'Connor CM, Whellan DJ, Lee KL, Keteyian SJ, Cooper LS, Ellis SJ, et al. Efficacy and 
safety of exercise training in patients with chronic heart failure: HF -ACTION randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2009;301(14):[ADDRESS_940228] Rev. 2014(4):CD003331.  
60. Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Kligfield P, Arena R, Balady GJ, Bittner VA, et al. Exercise 
standards for testing and t raining: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2013;128(8):873 -934.  
61. Thompson PD. Exercise prescription and proscription for patients with coronary 
artery disease. Circulation. 2005;112(15):2354 -63. 
62. Doll JA, Hellkamp A, Ho PM, Kontos MC, Whooley MA, Peterson ED, et al. Participation 
in Cardiac Rehabilitation Programs Among Older Patients After Acute Myocardial Infarction. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(10):1700 -2. 
 
47 
 63. Moore LV, Harris CD, Carlson SA, Kruger J, Fult on JE. Trends in no leisure -time 
physical activity --[LOCATION_002], 1988 -2010. Res Q Exerc Sport. 2012;83(4):587 -91. 
64. Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Schoenborn CA, Loustalot F. Trend and prevalence estimates 
based on the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Ame ricans. Am J Prev Med. 
2010;39(4):[ADDRESS_940229], Nigg CR, et al. American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Exercise and 
physical activity for older adults. Me d Sci Sports Exerc. 2009;41(7):1510 -30. 
66. Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, Powell KE, Blair SN, Franklin BA, et al. Physical activity 
and public health: updated recommendation for adults from the American College of Sports 
Medicine and the American Heart Ass ociation. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39(8):1423 -34. 
67. Hootman JM, Macera CA, Ainsworth BE, Addy CL, Martin M, Blair SN. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_52509]. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2002;34(5):[ADDRESS_940230], et al. 
Exercise and acute cardiovascular events placing the risks into perspective: a scientific 
statement from the American Heart Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, a nd 
Metabolism and the Council on Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2007;115(17):[ADDRESS_940231]. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet and 
physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in adults with cardiovascula r risk 
factors: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 
2014;161(8):587 -93. 
70. Artinian NT, Fletcher GF, Mozaffarian D, Kris -Etherton P, Van Horn L, Lichtenstein AH, 
et al. Interventions to promote physical activity a nd dietary lifestyle changes for 
cardiovascular risk factor reduction in adults: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2010;122(4):406 -41. 
71. Adams SR, Goler NC, Sanna RS, Boccio M, Bellamy DJ, Brown SD, et al. Patient 
satisfaction and perceived success with a telephonic health coaching program: the Natural 
Experiments for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT -D) Study, Northern [LOCATION_004], 2011. Prev 
Chronic Dis. 2013;10:E179.  
72. Medicine ACoS. Exercise is Medicine 2015 [Availa ble from: 
http://www.exerciseismedicine.org/ . 
73. Sallis R, Franklin B, Joy L, Ross R, Sabgir D, Stone J. Strategies for promoting physical 
activity in clinical practice. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2015;57(4):375 -86. 
74. Stenholm S, Harris TB, Rantanen T, Visser M, Kritchevsky SB, Ferrucci L. Sarcopenic 
obesity: definition, cause and consequences. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 
2008;11(6):693 -700.  
75. Batsis JA, Barre LK, Macken zie TA, Pratt SI, Lopez -Jimenez F, Bartels SJ. Variation in 
the prevalence of sarcopenia and sarcopenic obesity in older adults associated with different 
research definitions: dual -energy X -ray absorptiometry data from the National Health and 
Nutrition Exa mination Survey 1999 -2004. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2013;61(6):[ADDRESS_940232]. 2007;2(3):183 -9. 
 
48 
 77. Kim SH, Chung JH, Song SW, Jung WS, Lee YA, Kim HN. Relationship between deep 
subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and metabolic syndrome: a case control study. 
Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2016;8:10.  
78. Lee J, Hong YP, Shin HJ, Lee W. Associations of Sarcopenia and Sarcopenic Obesity 
With Metabolic Syndrome  Considering Both Muscle Mass and Muscle Strength. J Prev Med 
Public Health. 2016;49(1):[ADDRESS_940233] of resistance training 
on blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta -analysis  of randomized, 
controlled trials. Hypertension. 2011;58(5):950 -8. 
80. Giuliano C, Karahalios A, Neil C, Allen J, Levinger I. The effects of resistance training 
on muscle strength, quality of life and aerobic capacity in patients with chronic heart failure  
- A meta -analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;227:413 -23. 
81. Francis P, Mc Cormack W, Toomey C, Norton C, Saunders J, Kerin E, et al. Twelve 
weeks' progressive resistance training combined with protein supplementation beyond 
habitual intakes increases upper leg  lean tissue mass, muscle strength and extended gait 
speed in healthy older women. Biogerontology. 2017;18(6):881 -91. 
82. Strasser B, Schobersberger W. Evidence for resistance training as a treatment therapy 
in obesity. J Obes. 2011;2011.  
83. Fleck SJ, Pat tany PM, Stone MH, Kraemer WJ, Thrush J, Wong K. Magnetic resonance 
imaging determination of left ventricular mass: junior Olympic weightlifters. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 1993;25(4):522 -7. 
84. Scharf M, Oezdemir D, Schmid A, Kemmler W, von Stengel S, May MS, et al. Myocardial 
adaption to HI(R)T in previously untrained men with a randomized, longitudinal cardiac MR 
imaging study (Physical adaptions in Untrained on Strength and Heart trial, PUSH -trial). 
PLoS One. 2017;12(12):e0189204.  
85. Kemmler W, Schliffka R,  Mayhew JL, von Stengel S. Effects of whole -body 
electromyostimulation on resting metabolic rate, body composition, and maximum strength 
in postmenopausal women: the Training and ElectroStimulation Trial. J Strength Cond Res. 
2010;24(7):1880 -7. 
86. van Buu ren F, Mellwig KP, Frund A, Bogunovic N, Oldenburg O, Kottmann T, et al. 
[Electrical myostimulation: improvement of quality of life, oxygen uptake and left ventricular 
function in chronic heart failure]. Rehabilitation (Stuttg). 2014;53(5):[ADDRESS_940234] of 
whole body electromyostimulation on cardiometabolic risk factors in older women with 
sarcopenic obesity: the randomized controlled FORMOsA -sarcopenic obesity study. Clin 
Interv  Aging. 2016;11:1697 -706.  
88. Filipovic A, Kleinoder H, Dormann U, Mester J. Electromyostimulation --a systematic 
review of the influence of training regimens and stimulation parameters on effectiveness in 
electromyostimulation training of selected strength  parameters. J Strength Cond Res. 
2011;25(11):3218 -38. 
89. Hortobagyi T, Scott K, Lambert J, Hamilton G, Tracy J. Cross -education of muscle 
strength is greater with stimulated than voluntary contractions. Motor Control. 
1999;3(2):205 -19. 
 
49 
 90. Filipovic A, K leinoder H, Dormann U, Mester J. Electromyostimulation --a systematic 
review of the effects of different electromyostimulation methods on selected strength 
parameters in trained and elite athletes. J Strength Cond Res. 2012;26(9):[ADDRESS_940235] Physiol (1985). 2008;104(1):[ADDRESS_940236]. 2014;14(1):68 -77. 
93. Green DJ, O'Driscoll G, Joyner MJ, Cable NT. Exercise and cardiovascular risk 
reduction: time to update the rationale for exercis e? J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008;105(2):766 -
8. 
94. Wilson MG, Ellison GM, Cable NT. Basic science behind the cardiovascular benefits of 
exercise. Heart. 2015;101(10):[ADDRESS_940237] of an exercise countermeasure: results 
of the Berlin Bed Rest study. Journal of Applied Physiology. 2005;99(4):1293 -300.  
96. Demiot C, Dignat -George F, Fortrat J -O, Sabatier F, Gharib C, Larina I, et al . WISE 2005: 
chronic bed rest impairs microcirculatory endothelium in women. American Journal of 
Physiology - Heart and Circulatory Physiology. 2007;293(5):H3159 -H64.  
97. THOSAR SS, BIELKO SL, MATHER KJ, JOHNSTON JD, WALLACE JP. Effect of Prolonged 
Sitting  and Breaks in Sitting Time on Endothelial Function. Medicine & Science in Sports & 
Exercise. 2015;47(4):[ADDRESS_940238] of prolonged 
sitting on vascular function in young girls. Experimental  Physiology. 2015;100(11):1379 -87. 
99. Heistad DD, Armstrong ML, Marcus ML, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_693294], Mark AL. Augmented responses 
to vasoconstrictor stimuli in hypercholesterolemic and atherosclerotic monkeys. Circulation 
research. 1984;54(6):[ADDRESS_940239] of early and advanced 
atherosclerosis on vascular responses to serotonin, thromboxane A2, and ADP. Circulation. 
1989;79(3):698 -705.  
101.  Lerman A, Zeiher AM. Endothelial function: cardiac events. Circulation. 
2005;1 11(3):363 -8. 
102.  Reriani MK, Flammer AJ, Jama A, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Novel functional risk factors 
for the prediction of cardiovascular events in vulnerable patients following acute coronary 
syndrome. Circ J. 2012;76(4):[ADDRESS_940240], Jr., Lerman A. Long -
term follow -up of patients with mild coronary artery disease and endothelial dysfunction. 
Circulation. 2000;101(9):[ADDRESS_940241], Jr., Lerma n A. Coronary 
endothelial dysfunction is associated with an increased risk of cerebrovascular events. 
Circulation. 2003;107(22):2805 -9. 
 
50 
 105.  Yoon MH, Reriani M, Mario G, Rihal C, Gulati R, Lennon R, et al. Long -term endothelin 
receptor antagonism attenuate s coronary plaque progression in patients with early 
atherosclerosis. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168(2):1316 -21. 
106.  Lavi S, Bae JH, Rihal CS, Prasad A, Barsness GW, Lennon RJ, et al. Segmental coronary 
endothelial dysfunction in patients with minimal atheroscle rosis is associated with necrotic 
core plaques. Heart. 2009;95(18):1525 -30. 
107.  Bonetti PO, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Endothelial dysfunction: a marker of 
atherosclerotic risk. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003;23(2):168 -75. 
108.  Reddy KG, Nair RN, Sheehan H M, Hodgson JM. Evidence that selective endothelial 
dysfunction may occur in the absence of angiographic or ultrasound atherosclerosis in 
patients with risk factors for atherosclerosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;23(4):[ADDRESS_940242], Yeung AC, et al. Coronary 
vasomotor response to acetylcholine relates to risk factors for coronary artery disease. 
Circulation. 1990;81(2):[ADDRESS_940243] H. Correction of endothelial dysfunctio n in 
coronary microcirculation of hypercholesterolaemic patients by L -arginine. Lancet. 
1991;338(8782 -8783):[ADDRESS_940244]. 1993;91(1):29 -37. 
112.  Egashira K, Inou T, Hirooka Y, Yamada A, Urabe Y, Takeshita A. Evidence of impaired 
endothelium -dependent coronary vasodilatation in patients with angina pectoris and 
normal coronary angiograms. N Engl J Med. 1993;328(23):[ADDRESS_940245], Lerman A. Coronary endothelial 
dysfunction in humans is associated with myocardial perfusion defects. Circulation. 
1997;96(10 ):[ADDRESS_940246] pain and normal coronary arteries. Circulation. 
1992;86(6):[ADDRESS_940247], Jr., Lerman A. Ev aluation of patients with 
minimally obstructive coronary artery disease and angina. Int J Cardiol. 1996;53(3):[ADDRESS_940248] pain. Mayo Clin Proc. 1998;73(12):[ADDRESS_940249], Kuvin JT, Lerman A. Noninvasive 
identification of patients with early coronary atherosclerosis by [CONTACT_693325]. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2004;44(11):2137 -41. 
118.  Matsuzawa Y, Sugiyama S, Sugamura K, Nozaki T, Ohba K, Konishi M, et al. Digital 
Assessment of Endothelial Function and Ischemic Heart Disease in Wo men. Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 2010;55(16):1688 -96. 
119.  Matsuzawa Y, Kwon TG, Lennon RJ, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Prognostic Value of Flow‐
Mediated Vasodilation in Brachial Artery and Fingertip Artery for Cardiovascular Events: A 
 
51 
 Systemat ic Review and Meta‐Analysis. Journal of the American Heart Association. 
2015;4(11).  
120.  Lerman A, Zeiher AM. Endothelial Function. Cardiac Events. 2005;111(3):363 -8. 
121.  Reriani MK, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Endothelial function as a functional expression of 
cardiovascular risk factors. Biomarkers in medicine. 2010;4(3):351 -60. 
122.  Bonetti PO, Lerman LO, Lerman A. Endothelial Dysfunction. A Marker of 
Atherosclerotic Risk. 2003;23(2):168 -75. 
123.  Bonetti P, Lerman, LO, Lerman, A. Endothelial dysf unction: a marker of 
atherosclerotic risk. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2003;23(2):168 -75. 
124.  Flammer A, Anderson, T, Celermajer, DS, Creager, MA, Deanfield, J, Ganz, P, Hamburg, 
NM, Lüscher, TF, Shechter, M, Taddei, S, Vita, JA, Lerman, A. The assessm ent of endothelial 
function: from research into clinical practice. Circulation. 2012;126(6):753 -67. 
125.  Matsuzawa Y, Kwon, TG, Lennon, RJ, Lerman, LO, Lerman, A. Prognostic Value of Flow -
Mediated Vasodilation in Brachial Artery and Fingertip Artery for Ca rdiovascular Events: A 
Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4(11):e002270.  
126.  Kwaśniewska M, Jegier A, Kostka T, Dziankowska -Zaborszczyk E, Rębowska E, 
Kozińska J, et al. Long -Term Effect of Different Physical Activity Levels on Su bclinical 
Atherosclerosis in Middle -Aged Men: A 25 -Year Prospective Study. PLOS ONE. 
2014;9(1):e85209.  
127.  Wisloff U, Stoylen A, Loennechen JP, Bruvold M, Rognmo O, Haram PM, et al. Superior 
cardiovascular effect of aerobic interval training versus modera te continuous training in 
heart failure patients: a randomized study. Circulation. 2007;115(24):3086 -94. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
  
 
 
FIGURE 1  
 
 
 
 
 
Schematic outlining study flow  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
53 
  
 
 
FIGURE 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The stimulation unit for the extended electronic muscle stimulation (vest with stimulation 
module for the legs) (courtesy of MihaBodytech Augsburg)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
54 
  
 
 
FIGURE 3  
 
 
 
 
 

 
55 
  
 
 
 
 
Demonstration of potential physical exercises that can be undertaken while applying whole body 
electronic muscle stimulation using the MihaBodyTec ( Gersthofen, [LOCATION_013] ) device  

 
[ADDRESS_940250] by a German consensus conference in December 2015, 
consisting of whole body -EMS manufacturers (miha -bodytec, Gersthofen, [LOCATION_013]), 
educational institutions (GluckerKolleg, Kornwestheim, [LOCATION_013]), Licensees (PT Lounge Koln , 
Cologne, [LOCATION_013]) and publishing researchers.  In April 2016, the scientific part of the 
consortium (Frohlich, M.; Kemmler, W.; Kleinoder, H. v. Stengel, S.) formulated these general 
safety guidelines  
 
 
 
 
