   
OCTRI Resea rch Protocol Template Version 09/12/2005  1 Official Title:  Determination of the Circadian Resetting Effects of Escitalopram and Testing 
for Correlations Between Circadian Resetting and Antidepressant Effects  
 
NCT Number:  01214044  
 
Document Date:  09/03/2008  
 
 2 OCTRI  Protocol #  
IRB #  3686 
Revised:  
 
CLINICAL AND TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH CENTER   
Oregon Health & Science University  
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
Protocol Title : Circadian Effects of Escitalopram  
 
Investigators:  
 
 Name  [CONTACT_525838] & 
Mailcode  Phone  E-Mail  
Principal 
Investigator : [INVESTIGATOR_13925] S. Emens  M.D.  L-469 4-4041  emensj@ohsu.e
du 
* Required by [CONTACT_525827] [INVESTIGATOR_3267] a licensed MD with clinical privileges.  Will be considered a co -investigator 
for OCTRI reporting purposes.  
 
RCR Training :  Hav e all study personn el completed RCR training?   [ X] Yes   [   ] Pending  
(Must be complete before OCTRI  approval will be given.)  
 
Structured Scientific Abstract (one page):  
Background:  The human biological clock (circadian pacemaker) has long been thought to play a role in non -
seasonal depression.  A connection  is suggested by [CONTACT_525828] [ADDRESS_682284] on serotonin (such as some antidepressants) are able to 
reset the biological clock in animals.   
 
Object ive: The aim of the study is to obtain preliminary data  that will test whether the antidepressant 
medication escitalopram has a resetting effect on the human biolog ical clock  and whether the improvement in 
depression symptoms with escitalopram correlates w ith the degree to which the timing of the biological clock is 
realigned with the timing of sleep .   
 
Design:  14-16-week, fixed dose  (after titration) , open label trial .   
 
Setting and Subjects:  15 individuals with unipolar, non -seasonal depression  will be studied over 1 year . 
 
Intervention:  Subjects will first complete a one week, single -blind placebo lead -in phase. Subjects will then 
receive escitalopram for 8 weeks ( 10 mg/day for the first 2 weeks of treatment and then 20mg/day for the 
 
 3 remaining 6 weeks o f treatment ). 
 
Measurements:   Subjects will keep a sleep diary and wear a wrist activity monitor throughout the study  to 
document the timing and quality of sleep .  On two occasions (end of placebo week  and end of last treatment 
week ) blood and/or saliva will be sampled every 30 minutes  for 7 hours and the resulting samples will be 
assayed for melatonin.   The onset of melatonin secretion (dim light melatonin onset or DLMO ) will be used to 
mark the timing of the biological clock (circadian phase).  Circadian misalignment will be measured using the 
time interval between the DLMO and the average midsleep of the prior week (phase angle difference or PAD ). 
 Mood will be assessed throughout the study using the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D) as well as 
the Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-II) and Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI).  
 
Analysis:  A paired t -test will be used to determine whether there is a difference before and after treatment  in the 
average time of the DLMO .  Linear regression analysis will be used  to determine if there is a significant 
correlation between depression symptom severity  (HAM -D as well as the BDI-II and BAI  score)  and PAD.  
 
a.  Specific Aims:  
1. Primary Aims and Hypotheses:  
Primary Aim # 1:  To determine whether the antidepressant medic ation escitalopram has a 
resetting effect on the human biological clock (circadian pacemaker ). 
 
Hypotheses for Primary Aim #1:  
We hypothesize that escitalopram causes a shift in the timing of the biological clock (circadian 
phase) to  either  an earlier or l ater time.      
 
Primary Aim # 2:  To demonstrate that there is a correlation between improvement in 
symptoms of depression with escitalopram and the degree of realignment between the timing 
of sleep and the timing of the biological clock (circadian phase ). 
Hypotheses for Primary Aim #2  
We hypothesize that the degree of circadian realignment  from escitalopram correlates with 
improvement in depression symptom s in subjects  with non -seasonal major depressive disorder.  
 
b.  Background and Significance:  
1. Intro duction to Circadian Physiology  
The biological clock (circadian pacemaker) is located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei ( SCN ) of the 
hypothalamus and is responsible for regulating the near 24 -hour rhythms in a wide range of physiological 
variables such as the  timing of hormone secretion, oscillations in core body temperature, and alertness.1 The 
molecular “gears ” of the clock consist of transcription -translation feedback loops in SCN neurons.1  The clock 
is synchronized (or entrained) to the 24 -hour day by [CONTACT_525829] ( zeitgebers ).  Although various stimuli, 
such as physical activity, can reset the biological clock, the primary zeitgebe r in humans is the external light/dark 
cycle.[ADDRESS_682285] .3 The SCN also receives input from the intergeniculate leaflet 
(IGL) of the thalamus and the me dian raphe nuclei (MRN) of the midbrain both of which play a role in 
modulating the effects of light as well as weaker non -photic zeitgebers on the biological clock.  Light in the 
 
 4 morning generally causes a shift in the timing of the clock ( circadian  phase ) to an earlier hour ( phase 
advance ) while evening light causes a shift to a later hour ( phase delay ).2   
An important principle in circadian biology is that all of the various parameters under the control of the 
central pacemaker are yoked together.  For example, it has been shown that the rhythms in co re body 
temperature, cortisol, and melatonin all shift in concert in response to light exposure.4 Although the timing of 
some events are under volitional control in humans (such as the timing of sleep) the endogenous circadian drives 
for sleep and wakefulness rem ain coupled to the other rhythms under the control of the central pacemaker.  
 
Table 1. Definitions  
Circadian Term  Definition  
Phase  The timing of the biological clock. A specific point within a 
circadian cycle (e.g. the onset of melatonin secretion).  
Phas e Delay  Shift in the biological clock to a later time  
Phase Advance  Shift in the biological clock to an earlier time  
Zeitgeber  Stimuli able to reset the biological clock (e.g. light or 
exogenous melatonin)  
Phase angle difference (PAD)  Time difference be tween the dim light melatonin onset (a 
measure of circadian phase) and midsleep.  A measure of 
circadian misalignment.  
 
The onset of melatonin secretion in dim light (the dim light melatonin onset or DLMO ) has been 
demonstrated to be a precise and accurat e marker of circadian phase in humans.5, 6  The DLMO can be thought 
of as the “hands of the clock” that accurately reflect the workings of the underlying molecular “gears of the 
clock.”   
 
2. Serotonin and the Circadian System  
Serotonin (5 -HT) is an important neurotransmitter for the circadian system.  Serotonergic input to the 
pacemaker occurs via both median raphe nucleus (MRN) projections to the SCN as well as dorsal raphe 
nucleus (DRN) projections to the IGL.[ADDRESS_682286] been shown to reset the timing of SCN 
neuronal firing (both phase advances and phase delays) while both systemic and  intracerebral administration of 
5-HT agonists have been shown to reset the timing of behavioral rhythms (primarily phase advances).[ADDRESS_682287] begun to be elucidated.  Although 
experimental and species differences complicate the pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103], 5 -HT 1A, 5-HT 1B, and 5 -HT 7 receptors appear to 
play a role in mediatin g circadian effects.  The phase -resetting effects of 5 -HT agonists c an be blocked by 
[CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_8405] (in vivo) and ritanserin (in vitro) which are selective [ADDRESS_682288] on the circadian pacemaker.  The monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAO -I) clorgyline has been 
shown to increase circa dian period and cause a phase delay in entrained rhythms in the hamster while fluoxetine 
administration  in the rat has also been shown to lengthen circadian period.  Fluoxetine has been shown to induce 
a downregulation of the 5 -HT 7 receptors in the SCN and  administration of citalopram reduces the effects of 5 -
HT 7 receptor stimulation in the hippocampus.10  In humans, light treatment (which resets the circadian 
pacemaker)11 has been shown to be synergistic with citalopram treatment.12 
 
3. Circadian  System and Depression  
The circadian system has long been speculated to play a role in non -seasonal major depressive 
disorder.13 In addition to circadian rhythmicity in mood 14, other evidence suggestive of a relationship includes 
symptoms of insomnia, hypersomnia and diurnal mood variation; polysomnographic findings of shortened REM 
latency, increased sleep latency and increased wakefuln ess during sleep 15; differences in the amplitude of 
circadian rhythms and in timing of the biologic al clock 13; the therapeutic effects of manipulations of sleep (sleep 
deprivation or advancement of sle ep timing) 16, 17; and therapeutic effects of light therapy.18, [ADDRESS_682289] circadian  theories for non -seasonal major depressive disorder, the internal coincidence 
model 20, proposed that the biological clock is set abnormally early relative to the timing of sleep in depression 
and that sleep is depressant when it occurs at certain biological times.16  In other words, the misalignment 
between the timing of sleep and the timing of the circadian pacemaker contributes to depression symptoms.  
Consistent with this hypothesis, advancing the timing of sleep has been found to be antidepressant in some 
studies.20   
Although neither an advanced or delayed c ircadian phase position has consistently been found in 
individuals with depression compared to healthy controls 15, 17, it nonetheless remains possible that a 
misalignment  between the timing of sleep and the circadian pacemak er in either direction may be depressant in 
vulnerable individuals.21   
 
c.  Preliminary Studies / Progress Report:  
Our recent findings in winte r depression [seasonal affective disorder (SAD)] have shown that the degree  
of misalignment between the timing of sleep and the timing of the pacemaker correlates with symptom severity.21 
 We measured symptoms using the 28 -item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale while the degree of circadian 
misalignment was measured using the interval in time (phase angle difference or PAD) between the DLMO and 
the timing of midsleep.  Although average PAD was no different from our historical controls, PAD correlated 
with symptom severity in these depressed individuals (Figure 1).21   
 
 6 
 
 
d. Research Design and Methods  
1. Experimental Design:  
The study is a 14-16 week, fixed dose  (after titration) , open label trial of the circadian effects of 
escitalopram in  15 individuals with unipolar, non -seasonal depression .  
 
 Description of subjects  
1.1a. Screening  
Subjects will be interviewed by a study physician , the protocol will be explained and questions will be 
answered. A complete medical, psychiatric, and social history will be obtained by a study physician 
with sp ecial emphasis on sleep history; a physical exam and a structured psychiatric interview will be  
performed (Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV Axis I Disorders, SCID -I, modules A 
through F); and laboratory screening tests including CBC, Comple te Metab olic Set, TSH, EKG, Figure 1.  Correlation of symptom improvement with change in PAD in 
seasonally depressed patients treated with afternoon melatonin.  Symptoms 
were measured with the 28 -item HAM -D (SIGH -SAD).  Change in the PAD 
toward the normal value of [ADDRESS_682290] (if appropriate) will be done. Subjects will also be interviewed by a 
trained rater using the 21 -Item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D) and will complete the 
Horne -Ostberg Morningness -Eveningness que stionnaire which is a rating of subjective morning or 
evening preference.    
 
1.1b. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  (evaluated during the screening visit)  
All subjects enrolled in the protocol must meet the following inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. Inclusion criteria are as follows: (1) age 18 -65 years old; (2)able to comply with the 
requirements of the experimental protocol; (3) competent to sign informed consent; (4) have mild to 
severe major depressive disorder (without psychotic features and without a  seasonal pattern) 
according to DSM -IV-TR criteria as determined by a psychiatric examination and currently be 
under the care of a licensed mental health care provider (PhD or masters level psychologist, licensed  
social worker, licensed professional counse lor, psychiatric nurse practioner, or psychiatrist) or 
primary care physician (to help exclude potential SAD subjects we will require individuals with their 
first epi[INVESTIGATOR_525820]) . All subjects  (even if they  are not taking 
any psychiatric medications) are required have a provider with prescribing authority (primary care 
provider, psychiatrist, or psychiatric nurse practitione r); (5) score > 7 when interviewed by a trained  
rater using the 21 -Item Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM -D) 22; (6) be in good physical health (no 
clinically significant abnormalities) as determined by [CONTACT_525830] (including CBC, Complete Metabolic Panel, TSH, EKG, and urinalysis); (7) not be suicidal; 
(8) not be taking any other antidepressant medications besides escitalopram during the study; (9) be 
free of antidepressant  medications for 2 -4 weeks pr ior to beginning the study ; (10) not have a 
history of transmeridian travel or shift work in the past [ADDRESS_682291] no plans for transmeridian 
travel or shift work for the duration of the study; (11) be able to maintain a regular sleep wake 
schedule fo r the weeks one and nine of study (bedtimes and waketimes  ½ an hour) and (12) 
women of childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test and practice an acceptable 
method of birth control.  Acceptable methods are birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], Depo -Prover a, an IUD, a 
diaphragm or condom with spermicide, or abstinence .  Norplant is no longer on the market and 
thus, will not be listed as a possible contraceptive.  
 
Exclusion criteria are as follows:  (1) abnormal heart, liver, or kidney function; (2) signific ant 
laboratory abnormalities on CBC, Complete Metabolic Set, TSH, EKG, & urinalysis; (3) shift 
work or transmeridian travel  in the last 2 mo nths; (4) current use of melatonin; or (5)  evidence of a 
primary sleep disorder by [CONTACT_969].  Women who are pregnant or lactating are not eligible.  
Throughout participation, p otential subjects cannot be taking medication(s) with known sedative or 
stimulating effects or that would interfere with production of melatonin, e.g. benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_525821], antipsych otics, hypnotics, anxiolytics, anticonvulsants, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], beta adrenergic 
antagonists, alpha -2 agonists, corticosteroids, antihistamines (H 1 antagonists), theophylline, anti -
parkinsonian dopaminergic medications, melatonin or  over-the-counter cold preparati ons containing 
pseudoephedrine.  Only clinically relevant abnormalities on screening laboratories will result in 
subject exclusion.  During the study subjects will be required to limit caffeine intake to a maximum of  
two cups of coffee (or caffeine equival ent) before noon, limit alcohol to one alcoholic drink per day, 
 
 [ADDRESS_682292] a study initiation/materials visit followed by [ADDRESS_682293] -study follow -up safety visit will be scheduled at the end of 
treatment  (Table 2).  
 
1.2a. Washout  
Subjects who meet criteria for the study an d who agree to participate, will initially enroll into the 
washout phase of the study. Subjects will di scontinue any current antidepressant medications for a 
period of [ADDRESS_682294] subjects will enroll in a 2 -week washout, as r esearch has indicated the body 
clock needs about 2 weeks to reset itself .23, 24  However, subjects taking fluoxetine (Prozac) will need 
an additional 2 weeks of washout because fluoxetine has a longer half -life (it stays in the body longer). 
The study schedule will be extended two weeks (to 14 weeks) for those taking fluoxetine.  
During the washout phase, the study doctor will conduct weekly mood assessments over the phone  
and study staff will administer the H AM-D, BDI and BAI over the phone to ensure subject safety 
throughout this period when the subjects are not taking any antidepressant medications.    
 
1.2b. Treatment  
Subjects will first complete a one week, single -blind placebo lead -in phase. Subjects will t hen 
receive escitalopram for 8 weeks.  Subjects will receive 10 mg/day for the first 2 weeks of active 
treatment and then 20  mg/day for the remaining 6 weeks of treatment.  Medication will be dispensed on 
a weekly basis (see Table 2).   Forest Laboratories will provide escitalopram in 10 mg strength tablets  
and placebo tablets .  Compliance will be assessed using the Trackcaps MEMS6  system (AARDEX 
Ltd, Union City, [LOCATION_004]) .  The system is comprised of two parts, a standard plastic container with a 
threade d opening and a cap that contains a micro -electronic circuit which registers time when the 
capsule container is opened and when it is closed.  Time -stamped medication events stored in the 
MEMS6 can be transferred at any time through the MEMS6  Communicato r to a Windows -based 
computer. AARDEX® software analyzes and displays the computed parameters of the patient's 
compliance.  At the end of every treatment week any adverse experiences will be documented and 
vitals signs (temperature, blood pressure, heart r ate and respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]) recorded.  
 
1.2c. Assessment of Sleep  
Subjects will keep sleep diary during the placebo/treatment phase of the study  and will also wear a 
wrist actigraph to further document sleep/wake times, total sleep time, sleep quality and co mpliance. At 
the end of every study week actiwatch data will be downloaded  by [CONTACT_464] , sleep diaries collected, 
and any discrepancies resolved by [CONTACT_525831].  Subjects will also be asked to 
maintain a consistent sleep/wake sch edule (8 hour sleep epi[INVESTIGATOR_525822] -times ±0.5 
h) of their choosing during the placebo week and the last week of treatment (each of the weeks prior to 
the inpatient assessment of circadian phase, see below).  Subjective sleep quality will b e assessed using 
the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2272] (PSQI) questionnaire (which asks about sleep over the past month) 
 
 9 at each inpatient phase assessment . 
 
1.2d. Assessment of Mood  
Mood will be assessed by [CONTACT_464] (trained raters) using  the 21 -Item Hami lton Depression Rating 
Scale (HAM -D), Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II) and Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)  in a 
weekly phone interview during the washout period and in person , biweekly , starting Visit 3 (end of the 
placebo lead -in week , through treatment ). 
 
1.2e. Inpatient Assessment of Circadian Phase  
Subjects will have two assessments of the timing of their biological clock ( circadian phase ) via 
serial blood and/or saliva sampling both before and after treatment with escitalopram.  For each 
assessment, subjects will be admitted to the OHSU Oregon Clinical and Translational Research Center 
(OCTRI ) for 8 hours (1 hour before their 7 -hr sampling period begins).   An intravenous catheter will be 
inserted into a forearm vein and, under dim light (~10 lux), blo od samples will be drawn and saliva 
samples collected every 30 minutes for 7 hours  (from about 6 hours before habitual bedtime  to 1 hour 
after habitual bedtime ), for a total of 15 draws/collections.  Five milliliters of blood will be drawn for 
each sample.   The amount of blood drawn during each visit will be 75 ml (about 5 tablespoonfuls) and 
the total amount of blood drawn will be 150 ml (about 10 tablespoonfuls).  A small salivette is used for 
saliva collection.  Saliva collection will allow us to study i ndividuals unable to tolerate an intravenous 
catheter, those with failure of the intravenous catheter, or those with mild anemia.  The blood and saliva 
samples will be analyzed for melatonin so that the onset of secretion in the evening (an indication of t he 
timing of the body clock) can be determined (see below).  All interview and questionnaire based 
assessments of mood and sleep scheduled during these visits will be conducted prior to insertion of the 
intravenous catheter and subsequent blood collection.   
During sampling, subjects will be asked to refrain from cranberry juice, chocolate, bananas, 
caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee, tea, and soda (naturally caffeine free items such as Sprite are ok), 
avoid wearing lipstick (though standard lip balm is ok ), and avoid the use of toothpaste. We also ask 
subjects  avoid the use of Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], Ibuprofen, and other non -steroidal anti -inflammatories  during 
sampling.   
Subjects will also be asked  not eat or drink anything (including  water) in the  [ADDRESS_682295] they drink plenty of fluids, sit up a 
few minutes before taking the sample and chew on the salivette for longer (a few minutes, if needed).  
 
1.2f. Assessment of Vital Signs  and Adverse Events  
At the end of every week of treatment subjects will come to the OHSU outpatient OCTRI  for a 
check of vital signs (temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]) and any adverse 
events  or side effects will be noted . 
 
  1.2.g.  Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_525823] (end of week 11 or 13) a study physician will 
contact [CONTACT_525832] 
 
 10 (escitalopram 20 mg po qd) and their response to treatment in comparison to their prior therapy.  The 
study physician will be available to both the subject and their prescriber for consultation regarding 
whether the prescriber should maintain the subject on escitalopram or taper them off escitalopram and 
restart their previous medication(s).  If the subjec t and their prescriber elect to continue escitalopram, 
the prescriber will be responsible for providing this.  If subjects choose to discontinue the escitalopram 
the study doctor will provide 2 weeks of escitalopram at a dose of 10 mg by [CONTACT_525833] a taper of the medication.  The safety follow -up visit (see below) is timed to occur one week 
after the end of this taper.  
During the taper, the study doctor will conduct weekly mood assessments over the phone and study 
staff will administer the HA M-D, BDI and BAI over the phone to ensure subject safety throughout this 
period.   
 
1.2h. Safety Follow -up Visit  
Three  week s after finishing the study medication  (one week after completing the possible 
escitalopram taper ) (end of week 14 or 16) , subjects  will come to the outpatient OCTRI  for a repeat 
physical and psychiatric exam conducted by a study physician as well as an electrocardiogram (EKG) 
and laboratory screening tests (the same tests done during the initial  screening visit ).   
 
Table 2. Study Sch edule  (assuming a 2 - or 4-week washout)   
 
Study Phase:  Consent / 
Screening  Washout  Materials  Placebo  Lexapro 10 
mg qd  Lexapro 20 mg qd  Possible 
taper: 
Lexapro  
10 mg qd  Follow 
up 
Visit #:  1  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11   12 
Week of  Study  
(2-week Washout):  0 1 and 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
Week of  Study  
(4-week Washout):  0 1 to 4  4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Consent, screening, 
and Psychiatric 
Exam  X              
 
Physical Exam and 
labs X              X 
Mood Assessment: 
HAM -D,  BDI -II & 
BAI X  
X 
(weekly)   X  X  X  X  X   
 
Sleep assessment: 
PSQI     X        X    
Circadian  
Assessment:           
7 hours of  blood 
sampling     X        X   
 
Receive actiwatch & 
sleep diary    X X X X X X X X X     
Dispense 
Medication or 
Placebo    X X X X X X X X X    
 
Adjust Dose       X         
 
Check Vital Signs  X   X X X X X X X X X   X 
Check Adverse 
Events/Side Ef f ects     X X X X X X X X X    
 
 11   
  Description of analytic (laboratory) methods  
1.3a. Wrist Actigraphy  
Wrist actigraphy has been demonstrated to be a re liable way of assessing sleep/wake schedules and 
sleep quality.25 We will use the AW -64 Actiwatch ® with 64K memory and event marker made by 
[CONTACT_349713]-Mitter Co., Bend, OR. Actigra phy data will be collected for study weeks 1 through 9. Total sleep 
time, sleep latency, wake after sleep onset and sleep efficiency (percentage of time in bed that equals 
sleep) will be calculated from the actigraphy data.   
 
  1.3b. Melatonin Assays  
All m elatonin assays will be performed in the OCTRI  Core Laboratory. The samples will be 
assayed by [CONTACT_525834] 26, 27 and reagents will be supplied by 
[CONTACT_525835]., Windham, NH. The lower limit of sensitivity is 0.25 p g/ml; the coefficient of variation 
is 10.2% for concentrations of 15 pg/ml and 20% for concentrations of 0.5 pg/ml. This assay has 
been validated by [CONTACT_134294].28  
 
 1.3c. Circadian Phase  
Circadian phase will be estimated using the plasma or salivary dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) 
which is the time at which the melatonin concentration rises above a threshold of 10 pg/ml and 3 
pg/ml, respectively. These markers are equivalent and have been demonstrated to be reliable and 
highly accur ate markers of circadian phase.21, 27, [ADDRESS_682296] data point greater than 
threshold. Resolving the regression equation for the time at which the concentration is either 10 pg/ml 
or 3 pg/ml yields the DLMO. Under normal entrained conditions the 10 pg/ml plasma DLMO and 3 
pg/ml salivary DLMO typi[INVESTIGATOR_95469] 3 hours before sleep onset. Although posture is not fixed 
during the two 24 -hour assessments, there doesn’t appear to be an influence of posture on the 
DLMO.29 
 
2. Statistical considerations:  
  
 2.1 Primary Endpoints  (Primary Aim # 1 ): To determine whether the antidepressant 
medication escitalopram has a resetting effect on the human biologi cal clock (circadian 
pacemaker ). 
 
2.2 Secondary Endpoints  (Primary Aim # 2): To demonstrate that there is a correlation 
between improvement in symptoms of depression with escitalopram and the degree of 
realignment between the timing of sleep and the timing  of the biological clock (circadian 
phase ). 
 
2.3 Covariates/Confounders (Describe measures for covariates/confounders):  
This is a single blind, open label trial and therefore researcher bias may be a factor.  Also, there may 
be an order effect with the pla cebo control comparisons. Each subject will serve as their own control 
which will minimize confounders to some extent.   However, the goal of the study is to gather 
 
 [ADDRESS_682297] these same hypotheses.       
 
2.4 Analysis for primary outcomes (Describe the analysis for each  of the primary outcomes):  
Primary Aim # 1 : The timing of the biological clock (c ircadian phase ) will be estimated using the 
plasma or sa livary dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) .  A paired t -test will be used to determine 
whether there is a difference before and after treatment  (weeks 1 and 9, respectively)  in the average 
time of the DLMO . 
Primary Aim # 2: Circadian misalignment will be meas ured using the time interval between the 
DLMO and average midsleep during the prior week (phase angle difference or  PAD ).21  Linear 
regression a nalysis will be used to determine if there is a significant correlation between depression 
symptom severity  (HAM -D as well as the BDI-II and BAI score)  and PAD.  
 
2.5.  Sample Size Justification  (Include sufficient detail so that all calculations can be ve rified.):  
A paired t -test will be used to determine whether there is a difference before and after treatment  in the 
average time of the DLMO .  For a paired -t test, the equation for sample size is 30:  
22 2) (4
Dz zN
 
D is the expected difference in DLMO and σ is the expected standard deviation of the difference.  
We have a limited data set from which to estimate σ for the change in DLMO timing in non -seasonal 
depressives.  However, using our data set of winter depressives w hose circadian pacemaker was reset 
using oral melatonin administered in the evening, σ is estimated to be 0.55 h for the average change in 
DLMO.  When  = 0.05 (z  = 1.96), = 0.20 (z  = 0.842), and N =15 solving for D gives 0.80  h (48 
minutes) .  This diff erence  is similar to the change  in DLMO (0.89 h) we found in patients with winter 
depression in whom changes in PAD correlated with symptom improvement (Figure 1).  
Linear regression analysis will be used to determine if there is a significant correlation between 
symptom severity of depression and PAD. The R2 statistic and corresponding p -value will be the 
measures used to determine signifi cance (p ≤ 0.05). Given that there will be 15 patients, using Russ 
Lenth’s online sample size calculator31 for linear regression this sample size will allow us to find a R2 ≥ 
0.426 (with β = 0.20, α = 0.05). Current data on non -seasonally depressed patients (n=10, 
unpublished data) have shown that there is a linear correlation between PAD and depression symptom 
severity (HAM -D) with R2 values of 0.[ADDRESS_682298] us a minimum 
power of ~0.80.  
 
e.  Human Subjects  
1. Risks to Subjects  
a) Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
1) Involvement of human subjects:  
We intend to study [ADDRESS_682299] moderate to severe major depression but 
be otherwise healthy.  
 
 13  
2) Subject population:  
All subjects enroll ed in the protocol must meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
 
Inclusion criteria are as follows:  (1) age 18 -65 years old; (2)  able to comply with the 
requirements of the experimental protocol; (3) competent to sign informed consent; (4) ha ve mild to 
severe major depressive disorder (without psychotic features and without a seasonal pattern) 
according to DSM -IV-TR criteria as determined by a psychiatric examination and currently be 
under the care of a licensed mental health care provider (Ph D or masters level psychologist, licensed  
social worker, licensed professional counselor, psychiatric nurse practi tioner, or psychiatrist) or 
primary care physician (to help exclude potential SAD subjects we will require individuals with their 
first epi[INVESTIGATOR_28948] e of major depression to either have had the onset of symptoms before the Fall equinox 
or to have had symptoms persist after the Spring equinox) . All subjects  (even if they  are not taking 
any psychiatric medications) are required have a provider with presc ribing authority (primary care 
provider, psychiatrist, or psychiatric nurse practitioner) ; (5) score > 7 when interviewed by a trained  
rater using the 21-Item Hamilton Depression Scale (HAM -D) 22; (6) be in good physical health (no 
clinic ally significant abnormalities) as determined by [CONTACT_525836] (including CBC, Complete Metabolic Panel, TSH, EKG, and urinalysis); (7) not be actively 
suicidal; (8) not be taking any other antidepressant medications b esides escitalopram during the 
study; (9) be free of psychotropic medications for 2 weeks prior to beginning the study ; (10) not 
have a history of transmeridian travel or shift work in the past [ADDRESS_682300] no plans for 
transmeridian travel or shift w ork for  the duration of the study; (11) be able to maintain a regular 
sleep wake schedule for the weeks one and nine of study (bedtimes and waketimes  ½ an hour) 
and (12) women of childbearing potential must have a negative pregnancy test and practice an 
acceptable method of birth control.  Acceptable methods are birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], Depo -Provera, an 
IUD, a diaphragm or condom with spermicide, or abstinence .  Norplant is no longer on the market 
and thus, will not be listed as a possible contraceptive.  
 
Exclusion criteria are as follows:  (1) abnormal heart, liver, or kidney function; (2) significant 
laboratory abnormalities on CBC, Complete Metabolic Set, TSH, EKG, & urinalysis; (3) shift 
work or transmeridian travel  in the last 2 mo nths; (4) current use of  melatonin; or (5)  evidence of a 
primary sleep disorder by [CONTACT_969].  Women who are pregnant or lactating are not eligible.  Potential 
subjects cannot be taking medication(s) that would interfere with production of melatonin, e.g. beta 
adrenergic antagonist s, or melatonin .  Only clinically relevant abnormalities on screening laboratories 
will result in subject exclusion.  During the study subjects will be required to limit caffeine intake to a 
maximum of two cups of coffee (or caffeine equivalent) before noo n, limit alcohol to one alcoholic 
drink per day, and limit naps to 30 minutes per day but not six hours prior to bedtime.  
 
3) Rationale for inclusion of vulnerable populations:  n/a 
 
b) Sources of Materials:  
Measures of mood and sleep will be made using the Hami lton Depression Scale (HAM -D) 
structured interview administered by a trained rater, the Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI -II, a 
 
 14 self-rating scale for depression), the Horne -Ostberg Questionnaire (a measure of morning versus 
evening preference), and the Pit tsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI, a self -rating of sleep) at various 
points during the study (see Table 2 and section d.1.2).  Subjects will complete a sleep diary daily 
throughout the experiment.   Subjects will wear activity monitors [ADDRESS_682301] blood and/or saliva specimens collected on the inpatient  OCTRI  on 
two occasion s.  The data collected from these sources will be strictly confidential and used only for 
research purposes.  
 
c) Potential Risks:  
i. Discontinuing Medications . During the [ADDRESS_682302] elects to discontinue escitalopram at the end 
of the study , they will be tapered off the medication over the course of two weeks (see section 
d.1.2.g , above). There is a risk of a ntidepressant discontinuation symptoms including : insomnia,  
agitation, anxiety, irritability, dysphoric mood, nausea, diarrhea, muscle aches, malaise, dizziness, 
vertigo, and vivid dreams.    
 
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
a) Recruitment and Informed Consent:  
 Subjects will be recruited through newspaper adver tisements, the OHSU Study Parti cipation 
Opportunities web page, physician or mental health provider referral  and by [CONTACT_6063].  
 
 15 Candi dates will be interviewed by a study physician .  Candidates who are considered  appropriate for 
the study and interested  in participating will be asked to sign an IRB approved consent form.  A general 
medical, psychiatric, developmental and social history will be obtained.   
Candidates who are considered appropriate for the study (see above) and who are interested in 
partic ipation will be provided with a written copy of the consent form.  All subjects must be able to 
provide informed consent , as judged by [CONTACT_39635].      
 
b) Protection against risk:  
 
i. Discontinuing Antidepressant Medications.  
To monitor for a change in mood during the washout period, the study doctor will conduct a 
psychiatric  assessment weekly  via telephone and a trained rater will also  evaluat e mood via telephone 
using  the 21-Item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM -D), Beck Depression Inventory -II (BDI-
II) and Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) . If serious side effects occur, such as if the subject’s mood 
worsens to the degree that in the clinical judgment of the study physicians they are no longer able to 
participate in the study (e.g. are actively suicid al or have an increase in their HAM -D rating by > 50% ), 
they will be discontinued from the study. The study doctor  will be available to evaluate the patient  and, 
in consultation with their prescribing physician, to recommend a course of treatment (e.g. , restart their 
prior antidepressant medications  and increase visit frequency for psychotherapy ) for any serious side 
effects that are experienced.  
 
ii. Antidepressant Medication.    
As noted above in section 1.2 f., adverse events, side effects and vital signs (body temperature, 
blood pressure,  heart rate and respi[INVESTIGATOR_7137] e) will be documented and monitored at the end of every 
week of taking the study drug.  And a s noted above in section 1.2 d., subjects ’ mood will be evaluated 
at the end of the placebo lead -in week and every two weeks thereafter throughout treatment .  Finally, 
during a safety follow -up visit at the end of treatment,  subjects will have a  repeat physical exam as well 
as an electrocardiogram (EKG) and laboratory screening tests  (the same tests done during the initial  
screening visit ). 
 
iii. Blood sampling .   
 Blood draws will be done with good sampling technique and hemoglobins and hematocrits will be 
done before the study as part of the screening to assess for the possibility of anemia.  If a subj ect is 
tending towards anemia prior to blood sampling, we will limit the number of blood draws, substitute 
salivary collections for plasma collections or drop the subject from the study.  
 
iv. Saliva sampling.  Drinking water will be available to alleviate d ry mouth.  If there is gingival irritation 
and discomfort from the dental sponge the procedure will be stopped.  
 
v. Activity monitor .  Skin irritation will be minimized by [CONTACT_525837].  
 
vi.  Psychological interview and questio nnaires.    Subjects will be told that they may refuse to 
answer any questions they do not wish to answer.  If the questions are very upsetting to the subjects, the  
 
 [ADDRESS_682303] completed the taper , they will come to OHSU for a safety follow -up visit 
which includes a repeat physical and psychiatric exam conducted by a study physician as well as an 
electrocardiogram (EKG) and laboratory screening tests (the same tests done during the initial  screening 
visit, see section d.1.2.h , above) .    
 
 
 
3. Potential Benefits of the  Proposed Research to the Subjects and Others:  
Subjects are free to withdraw from the study at any time.  Subjects may contribute new information that 
may benefit others in the future.  Results of this investigation may have implications for individuals su ffering 
from depression.   
Subjects will receive $80 for each of the two evening admissions to the Oregon Clinical and 
Translational Research Center at OHSU  with blood drawing and/or saliva sampling and $40 for 9 weeks of 
wearing the actiwatch and completi ng the sleep diaries as well as completing the questionnaires and 
interviews during the assessment visits.  The total compensation will be $200 .   
 
 
4. Importance of Knowledge to be Gained:  
This study may allow us to devise better treatments for individuals w ho suffer from non -seasonal major 
depression.  It may allow us to find ways to improve both mood and sleep in individuals with major 
depression.  It may also allow us to predict which individuals will respond to circadian resetting treatments 
for depressio n.   
 
f. Future Plans  
 We intend to use the pi[INVESTIGATOR_525824] a randomized, placebo controlled, cross -over study of 
the effects of escitalopram and circadian phase and circadian alignment.  An equivalent duration of time on 
placebo and escital opram and the elimination of any order effects would be only some of the improvements on 
the current study design. This future application would either be another industry supported, investigator initiated 
study or an NIH sponsored study.  Because the work  would remain somewhat exploratory in nature we 
anticipate submitting an R -21 application should funding be sought from the public health service.   
 
Literature Cited:  
 
1. Reppert SM, Weaver DR. Coordination of circadian timing in mammal s. Nature 2002;418:935 -41. 
2. Czeisler CA, Wright Jr. KP. Influence of light on circadian rhythmicity in humans. In: Turek FW, Zee PC, eds. Regulation 
of Sleep and Circadian Rhythms. [LOCATION_001], NY: Marcel Dekker, Inc.; 1999:147 -80. 
3. Menaker M. Circadian P hotoreception. Science 2003;299:213 -4. 
4. Shanahan TL, Czeisler CA. Light exposure induces equivalent phase shifts of the endogenous circadian rhythms of 
 
 17 circulating plasma melatonin and core body temperature in men. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and M etabolism 
1991;73(2):227 -35. 
5. Lewy AJ, Cutler NL, Sack RL. The endogenous melatonin profile as a marker for circadian phase position. Journal of 
Biological Rhythms 1999;14(3):227 -36. 
6. Klerman EB, Gershengorn HB, Duffy JF, Kronauer RE. Comparisons of th e Variability of Three Markers of the Human 
Circadian Pacemaker. Journal of Biological Rhythms 2002;17(2):181 -93. 
7. Mistlberger RE, Antle MC, Miller JD. Behavioral and Serotonergic Regulation of Circadian Rhythms. Biological Rhythm 
Research 2000;31(3):240 -83. 
8. Morin LP. Serotonin and the regulation of mammalian circadian rhythmicity. Annals of Medicine 1999;31:[ADDRESS_682304] GE, Smith BN, Belenky M, Rea MA, Dudek FE, Sollars PJ. 5 -HT1B Receptor -Mediated Presynaptic Inhibition of 
Retinal Input to the S uprachiasmatic Nucleus. The Journal of Neuroscience 1999;19(10):4034 -45. 
10. Tokarski K, Zahorodna A, Bobula B, Grzegorzewska M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_525825] P, Hess G. Repeated administration of citalopram and 
imimpramine alters the responsiveness of rat hippocampal circuitry t o the activation of 5 -HT7 receptors. European Journal of 
Pharmacology 2005;524:60 -6. 
11. Lewy AJ, Sack RL, Miller S, Hoban TM. Antidepressant and circadian phase -shifting effects of light. Science 
1987;235:[ADDRESS_682305] of Citalopram: A placebo -controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 2003;64(6):648 -53. 
13. Boivin DB. Influence of sleep -wake and circadian rhythm disturbanc es in psychiatric disorders. Journal of Psychiatry & 
Neuroscience 2000;25(5):446 -58. 
14. Boivin DB, Czeisler CA, Dijk DJ, et al. Complex interaction of the sleep -wake cycle and circadian phase modulates mood in 
healthy subjects. Archives of General Psychia try 1997;54:145 -52. 
15. Benca RM. Mood Disorders. In: Kryger MH, Roth T, Dement WC, eds. Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2005.  
16. Wehr TA. Chronobiology. In: Sadock BJ, Sadock VA, eds. Comprehensive Text book of Psychiatry. Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4431] & Wilkins; 2000:133 -42. 
17. Van den Hoofdakker RH. Chronobiological Theories of Nonseasonal Affective Disorders and Their Implications for 
Treatment. Journal of Biological Rhythms 1994;9(2):157 -83. 
18. Tuunainen A, Kripke DF, Endo T. Light therapy for non -seasonal depression [Review]. The Cochrane Library 
2004;2:CD004050.  
19. Golden RN, Gaynes BN, Ekstrom RD, et al. The efficacy of light therapy in the treatment of mood disorders: a review and 
meta -analysis of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry 2005;162:656 -62. 
20. Wehr TA, Wirz -Justice A, Goodwin FK, Duncan W, Gillin JC. Phase advance of the circadian sleep -wake cycle as an 
antidepressant. Science 1979;206(9):710 -3. 
21. Lewy AJ, Lefler BJ, Emens JS, Bauer VK. The circadian basis of winter depression. In: Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science [LOCATION_003]; 2006:7414 -9. 
22. Hamilton M. Development of a rating scale for primary depressive illness. British Journal of Soc Clin Psychology 
1967;6:2 78-96. 
23. Czeisler CA, Johnson MP, Duffy JF, Brown EN, Ronda JM, Kronauer RE. Exposure to bright light and darkness to treat 
physiologic maladaptation to night work. New England Journal of Medicine 1990;322(18):1253 -9. 
24. Samel A, Wegmann HM. Bright ligh t: A countermeasure for jet lag? Chronobiology International 1997;14:173 -84. 
25. Sadeh A, Hauri PJ, Kripke DF, Lavie P. The role of actigraphy in the evaluation of sleep disorders. Sleep 1995;18(4):288 -
302. 
26. Earl C, O'Occhio M, Kennaway D, Seamark R. Se rum melatonin profiles and endocrine responses of ewes exposed to a 
pulse of light late in the dark phase. Endocrinology 1985;117:[ADDRESS_682306] DJ, Dawson D. Salivary melatonin as a circadian phase marker: validation and comparison to 
plasma melatonin. Journal of Biological Rhythms 1997;12(5):457 -66. 
28. Lewy AJ, Sack RL, Boney RS, et al. Assays for measuring the dim ligh t melatonin onset (DLMO) in human plasma. Sleep 
Research 1997;26:733.  
29. Cajochen C, Jewett ME, Dijk DJ. Human circadian melatonin rhythm phase delay during a fixed sleep -wake schedule 
interspersed with nights of sleep deprivation. Journal of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_525826] 2003;35:149 -57. 
30. Pagano M, Gauvreau K. Principles of Biostatistics. Second ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Duxbury; 2000.  
31. Lenth RV. Java applets for power and sample size [computer software]. In. 1.64 ed; 2006.  
 
 
 18  