Clinical Protocol 99-CH-0055, p. 1
​Rev. 7-6-[ADDRESS_489574] Number: 99-CH-0055
           Drug/Device:
[
18F]- L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (18F-DOPA), IND# [ZIP_CODE]; 
IND Sponsor: [CONTACT_390434]
mifepristone, IND#[ZIP_CODE]; IND Sponsor:  Laboratoire HRA-Pharma
 
Revision Date: July 6, [ADDRESS_489575]:   New Imaging Modalities in the Evaluation of Patients with Ectopic Cushing Syndrome
 
Identifying Words: PET,  [18F]-DOPA, Pentetreotide, Octreotide, ACTH
 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_167842]:Lynnette K. Nieman, MD, Senior Investigator, DEOB, NIDDK; CRC/1-3140; 496-8935*
 
Associate Investigators:Ahmed Gharib, MD, BMIB/NIDDK, 10/1C334Clara C. Chen, MD, Nuclear Medicine Division, Radiology and Imaging Sciences Department, Clinical
Center; 10/1C459
Millie Whatley, Nuclear Medicine Department, CC; 10/1C423BSusmeeta Sharma MD, NIH V olunteerRaven McGlotten, RN, DEOB, NIDDK; CRC/1-3140*Smita Jha, MD, NICHD/NIAMS; CRC/4-1341Katherine Araque, MD,  NIDDK;CRC/1-3121
 
*Investigators with this designation will obtain informed consent for this protocol
 
Estimated Duration of Study: 15 years
 
Subjects of Study: ​  N ​Age Range
Cushing syndrome, for screening ​202 ​18-90
Of these patients, for PET and Octreoscan ​100 ​18-90
​
Project uses ionizing radiation?  Yes. Radiation use is indicated for research. NIH Radiation SafetyCommittee has approved this use (rad authorization 1781C).
 
Project involves use of Durable Power of Attorney?  No
 
Off-Site Project?  No
 
Multi-Institutional Project?  No​PRECIS
 
Between 10% and 20% of patients with hypercortisolism (Cushing syndrome) have ectopic production ofadrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) that causes cortisol excess. In approximately 50% of these patients,the source of ACTH cannot be found despi[INVESTIGATOR_390402], magnetic resonance imaging, and octreotide scan
(Octreoscan) using the standard dose of indium- 111 pentetreotide ([
111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide).
The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of these imaging studies depends on anatomic alterations and/or the dose
and adequate uptake of radiopharmaceutical. In contrast, positron emission tomography (PET) has the
ability to detect pathologic tissue based on physiologic and biochemical processes within the abnormal
tissue. This protocol tests whether [18F]-L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (18F-DOPA) can be used to
localize successfully the source of ectopic ACTH production.  In addition the study examines whether
administration of the glucocorticoid antagonist mifepristone can improve the sensitivity of the standard
dose Octreocan.  Eligible patients participating in this arm of the study will have a second standard dose
dose Octreocan.  Eligible patients participating in this arm of the study will have a second standard dose
scan.  Others will receive a higher dose octreoscan  instead.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
Cushing’s  syndrome is an endocrine disorder caused by [CONTACT_390412]. In
10%-20% of patients this syndrome results from ectopic production of ACTH and very rarely from
ectopic CRH production (1-6). Small cell carcinoma of the lung, islet cell tumor of the pancreas,
medullary thyroid cancer, pheochromocytoma, and foregut carcinoid tumors are the most common
sources of ACTH production (1,2,5,7). The mean age at diagnosis in patients with ectopic ACTHproduction is [ADDRESS_489576] 1:1 (1,8). The ectopic source of ACTHproduction cannot be found in 50% of patients despi[INVESTIGATOR_179445], extensive, and expensive testing (9,10).These patients are at high risk of death due to sepsis, hypertension, gastrointestinal pathology, andmetastatic dissemination (8,11). More than 50% of patients with ectopic ACTH production cannot be
treated surgically or fail medical therapy and therefore, they ﬁnally undergo adrenalectomy with life-long
hormone replacement therapy (8). However, if the source of ectopic ACTH production is found before thetumor metastasizes, resection is usually curative. Thus, the ability to image primary and/or metastaticlesions has proved to be the key to successful treatment. Conventional imaging is generally performedwith computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the chest and abdomen.
123I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is taken up by [CONTACT_390413].  As discussed below, other modalities,including somatostatin receptor scintigraphy and various positron emission tomography (PET) ligands,
also may be useful in the localization of these tumors.
 
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy using [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide (Octreoscan, OCT), an
analog of somatostatin, may identify gastroenteropancreatic tumors, carcinoids, and medullary thyroid
carcinomas, all of which express somatostatin receptors (12). The conventional [ADDRESS_489577] has
been reported to localize ectopic ACTH production, at NIH and elsewhere (12-14). De Herder et al.reported a sensitivity of 78% for Octreoscan in patients with ectopic ACTH production (15). However, atNIH, our experience with somatostatin receptor scintigraphy using the conventional dose of 6 mCi of
[
111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide has not been as promising. Detectability of lesions in scintigraphic
studies depends not only on the size of the lesion but also on the amount of radioactivity in that lesion.
 Thus, in the original version of this protocol, we investigated whether a higher dose of
radiopharmaceutical could lead to higher concentrations in a lesion and better visualization. In thyroid
cancer, it is known that higher doses of 131I can detect more lesions than lower doses. Furthermore,
investigators using high doses of [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide for therapy (180 mCi) have seen
more lesions on patients’ post therapy scans as compared to their diagnostic scans (16). Analysis of 27
patients with surgically-proven ectopic ACTH-secreting tumors showed a 59% sensitivity for the “low
dose” ([ADDRESS_489578]).  In patients who had negative L-OCT, “high dose” ([ADDRESS_489579]) had an
additional 58% (7/12 patients) sensitivity (17).  As a result, the project was amended in [ADDRESS_489580] as isdone here.  In particular, the bladder receives high dose because these radiopharmaceuticals are excretedby [CONTACT_8212].   (See later: concern about radiation).  
Thus, while the beneﬁt-to-risk ratio has been considered acceptable because of improved localization  and
the high morbidity and mortality experienced by [CONTACT_390414] , a lower radiation dose would
be preferable.  To this end, we propose evaluation of whether the antiglucocorticoid mifepristone can
improve L-OCT sensitivity in patients with active hypercortisolism. 
111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide
binds primarily to the somatostatin receptors subtypes (sst) 2 and 5.  There is a large variability in
functional sst2 receptor expression in these tumors (18), which may account for failure of OCT detection
of tumors.  One explanation for this variability is that glucocorticoids can directly down-regulate the
expression of sst2 in neuroendocrine cells in vitro (19-20).  If this is the case in vivo, antagonism ofglucocorticoid action would be expected to relieve this down-regulation, and possibly allow forconversion of a negative OCT to a positive study. Two patients treated with mifepristone at the NIH andin the Netherlands, who converted from a negative to a positive scan, generated this hypothesis (22). However, the interval between the scans was from 2 – [ADDRESS_489581] in patients with ectopic ACTH secretion.
 
 
PET is a method of imaging disease based on the uptake and metabolism of a speciﬁc
radiopharmaceutical by [CONTACT_231589].  [18F]-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET has been used for years in
evaluating brain anatomical and functional abnormalities and more recently, in tumor localization (22).
Several studies have shown that malignant lesions (e.g. lung, bone, and colorectal cancers, lymphoma)
demonstrate elevated glycolysis when compared to normal tissue (23). In our previous review of results
from this project (24) as well as in our recent analysis (17), the sensitivity of the test in patients withfound tumors is 64% (7/11) and 47% (7/15) when all patients were considered (including occult tumorpatients). However, FDG PET did not detect (or suggest) any tumors that were not identiﬁed by [CONTACT_390415]/or MRI.
 
Because of the inability of FDG PET to detect otherwise occult tumors, we explored the availability ofother ligands. Neuroendocrine tumors such as foregut carcinoids have been classiﬁed as APUDomasbased on demonstration of amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (25).  In particular, tryptophan is
taken up and 5-hydroxylated to 5-hydroxy-tryptophan (5-HTP).  Carcinoid tumors that express the
enzyme aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (usually the mid-gut carcinoids) can decarboxylate 5-HTP to
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT). Sundin and colleagues demonstrated that these tumors take up
and retain [
11C]-5-HTP, allowing visualization via PET  (26).  Similarly, the tumors take up and
decarboxylate L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) (27).   The activity of L-DOPA decarboxylase isincreased in these tumors (28-30).  In a series of small studies, [
18F]-DOPA PET (F-DOPA PET) or [11C]-
DOPA PET had a sensitivity for pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, gastrointestinal carcinoids, other
carcinoids, melanoma, small cell lung cancer, pheochromocytoma, glomus tumor, and medullary thyroid
cancer of 50 to 85% (31-38).  Although 11C-5-HTP is not available as a ligand at the Clinical Center, F-
DOPA is available.  Since F-DOPA PET potentially has a better sensitivity than FDG PET, we
discontinued the research evaluation of FDG PET and substituted F-DOPA PET.
 
We found that F-DOPA PET substantiated a lesion seen on CT and/or MRI scan in [ADDRESS_489582]. Pacak has found that this strategy improves
tumor detection of pheochromocytoma, presumably by [CONTACT_390416].   This
amendment will now allow us to perform FDOPA PET/CT, which was not available previously.
 
The project was amended in [ADDRESS_489583] changed. A “surgical chestprotocol CT” (which involves thin (1-2mm) cuts throughout the thorax) will be obtained at each visit. For the initial imaging, gated “cardiac CT” will be obtained as well to look for retrocardiac lesions that
can be obscured by [CONTACT_105]-gated routine CT.   However, because of the amount of radiation, we will obtain
this scan only at the initial visit, unless there is a subsequent clinical suspi[INVESTIGATOR_1884] a retrocardiac lesion.   
 
OBJECTIVES
 
Speciﬁc questions to be addressed:
 
F-DOP A PET/CT
​(a) Compared to other imaging techniques, is the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of F-DOPA PET /CT
higher in detecting the source of ectopic ACTH production in patients with known and unknown tumorlocalization?
​(b) Does a correlation exist between F-DOPA uptake and the type of tumor, its size and
proliferative activity?
 
 
Octreoscan
​(c) Can the administration of mifepristone, [ADDRESS_489584] (L-OCT) to a subsequent positive result?
 
MRI
​(d) Does gated chest MRI detect more lesions than routine MRI?
 
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS
​
Standard Medical Evaluation of Cushing Syndrome
 
We will evaluate patients at the Clinical Center on an inpatient ward. Each subject will undergo a
complete medical history, physical examination, and chemical screening tests, including acute care panel,
liver function tests, thyroid function tests, complete blood count, plasma ACTH levels (30 ml of blood),
and urine free cortisol. Patients also undergo measurement of diurnal cortisol in blood and saliva to
conﬁrm the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome (20 ml of blood). This is followed by a CRH stimulation test(30 ml of blood), inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS; 90 ml of blood) and [ADDRESS_489585] (10 ml of blood).  Patients undergo MRI before IPSS: those with a massgreater than 6 mm diameter may not need IPSS, if CRH and dexamethasone suppression tests arecompatible with Cushing’s disease.  All of these tests are performed as part of the standard evaluation of
Cushing syndrome.
​
The initial diagnostic evaluation lasts up to 14 days. Where not limited by [CONTACT_390417], and
where guesthouse accommodation is available, it may be performed in the outpatient/day hospi[INVESTIGATOR_390403]. Patients whose results are consistent with
Cushing’s disease will be referred for transsphenoidal surgery, and will not undergo the imaging studies
described below.
 
Patients whose evaluation indicates ectopic ACTH secretion (generally, lack of response to CRH,dexamethasone and lack of central to peripheral ACTH gradient on IPSS) will undergo standard,medically-indicated, imaging studies for localization of the tumor, including CT (neck, chest, abdomen,
and pelvis), 1.5 T MRI (neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis), and [ADDRESS_489586] Octreoscan (L-OCT).
Women will undergo a serum pregnancy test within [ADDRESS_489587] Octreoscan is negative (or those ineligible
for the mifepristone study) will undergo H-OCT. Because of interference we will wait at least one weekafter dosing a low dose Octreoscan before doing a H-OCT. The IRB previously agreed that this would be
a medically indicated procedure in these patients. However, because it adds signiﬁcantly to the
cumulative radiation exposure, we have decided to limit this to three scans at intervals of at least one year.
 
The duration of standard imaging studies is about 10-[ADDRESS_489588], abdomen, or pelvis , and 1-3 hours
for Octreoscan (see below).
 
Research Procedures
 
Eligible patients with active hypercortisolism will receive the mifepristone-L-OCT combination as aresearch study (see below). Patients will undergo F-DOPA PET/CT as a research study, up to two studieswith an interval of at least 12 months . Patients may undergo imaging before or after treatment of ectopic
Cushing syndrome (if they have evidence of active ectopic ACTH secretion). Because of interference and
to allow for administration of mifepristone, we will wait at least ten days after dosing a low dose
Octreoscan before doing a second L-OCT. A gated chest MRI will be obtained using a 3 Tesla magnetwith T1 and T2 sequences. Blood will be collected into one heparin and serum tube and an aliquot ofurine will be retained for additional clinical or future research studies related to hypercortisolism.  As anexample, we previously studied the utility of pro-calcitonin using research samples collected under
another protocol (39). Patients will be asked to consent to the future use of tumor samples.  If they
consent to such use, samples may be used in the future, with identiﬁers, for studies not described here,without obtaining new informed consent.  Only studies related to Cushing’s syndrome or the biology oftumors would be undertaken.
​
​
F-DOPA PET/CT  procedures
 
The research team is responsible for ensuring that PET-speciﬁc regulations and procedures are followed.
 Patients are studied in the PET Department scanning facility at the Clinical Center after a minimum of 6hours fasting. A plastic catheter is inserted into an arm vein.  Patients receive carbidopa, 200 mg, orally
60 minutes before the scheduled injection of F-DOPA.
 
The Pet Department's new PET/CT scanner has higher resolution and sensitivity than the older GE
Advance instruments and allows us to perform a low dose CT for attenuation correction and localization.   The F-DOPA dose (12 mCi) is injected intravenously over approximately [ADDRESS_489589], followed by [CONTACT_390418][INVESTIGATOR_2117].  
The F-DOPA PET scan lasts up to ~2 hours. Patients having problems controlling their urine may need touse a Foley or condom catheter for approximately 12 hours after the injection of F-DOPA.
 
 
Octreoscan procedure
 
Patients are studied in the Nuclear Medicine scanning facility at the Clinical Center.  Patients are
ncouraged to hydrate themselves well before and after administration of [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-
pentetreotide to aid in renal elimination of unbound material.
 
The patient is injected intravenously with approximately 6mCi (L-OCT) or 18 mCi [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-
pentetreotide (H-OCT) in the Department of Nuclear Medicine and is imaged [ADDRESS_489590]/CT images are obtained.   For the clinical Octreoscans, additional delayed
images may be obtained if necessary.   Octreotide imaging takes 1-[ADDRESS_489591] day of imaging to clear bowel contents, as clinically indicated.
 
For the mifepristone study, mifepristone will be administered at a total daily dose of 600 mg (given as one200 mg tablet tid, per os) starting [ADDRESS_489592] is performed.   It will be givenin the morning (before breakfast), middle of the day (either immediately before lunch for subjects who
have late lunch or [ADDRESS_489593] an early lunch), and evening (either
immediately before dinner for subjects who have late dinner or 2 hours after dinner for subjects who havean early dinner). Blood (8 ml) will be drawn on the morning of the second scan, and will be stored forpossible measurement of mifepristone.  No other medical treatment for hypercortisolism will be given
during this time.  A research L-OCT will then be performed.  
 
The research L OCT scan will be performed in the same manner as the clinical study, except thatSPECT/CT of any one area will only be performed up to [ADDRESS_489594] study.
 
Evaluation and treatment at the conclusion of imaging epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]
​
The investigators will review the results of all imaging studies at the end of each admission. Imaging
results will be correlated; as is typi[INVESTIGATOR_390404], we will not blind the reader of anyconventional images to other results. However, the F-DOPA PET/CT, studies will be read without
knowledge of the results of conventional MRI and CT studies. If the conventional imaging studies
localize a possible tumor, the patient will undergo surgical resection, probably during a subsequentadmission. If the conventional imaging studies are equivocal, or if only the research studies suggest a
tumor, additional studies will be performed as clinically indicated. These studies may include repeat CT
scan focused on the area of concern, venous sampling for ACTH measurement in chest or abdominalvessels, ultrasound examination, bone scan, MIBG scan, ﬁne needle biopsy or other tests. The patient will
not undergo surgery unless additional studies reveal a mass. Thus, at the conclusion of each epi[INVESTIGATOR_390405] (and possible treatment), some patients with positive imaging will have surgical conﬁrmationof the source of ectopic ACTH secretion. All others will be non-localized. These patients will receivetreatment for hypercortisolism (usually medical, but adrenalectomy may be chosen), and will return to theClinical Center to have repeated CT and MRI imaging (every 6-12 months) and repeated F-DOPA
Clinical Center to have repeated CT and MRI imaging (every 6-12 months) and repeated F-DOPA
PET/CT and OCT (every 12 months).
 
If Cushing syndrome recurs or if patients are not cured by [CONTACT_390419], patients are offered re-
evaluation to localize any residual tumor or recurrence. In that case, all clinical, biochemical, and imagingtests may be repeated similar to the initial visit. Upon completion of the study, the patients are returned tothe care of their referring physician.
 
Concern about radiation dose
 
Patients receive radiation exposure with the medically  indicated dedicated CT scans as well as with the
low-dose CT scans used for attenuation correction and co-registration with PET and Octreoscans.  The
low and high dose octreoscans and the PET scans also deliver radiation.  The kidneys excrete these
radiopharmaceuticals.   As a result, the bladder receives a higher dose of radiation than other tissues.  Atthe doses potentially reached with the combination of L OCT plus H OCT, there may be a slight increased
risk of urinary bladder cancer. In patients receiving another radioisotope (I-131) in amounts that give
signiﬁcantly higher doses to the urinary bladder, results have been variable. One major study showed nosigniﬁcant increased risk whereas another showed a small increased risk of death from urinary bladdercancer (44,45). This latter study showed that approximately [ADDRESS_489595] scans is less than this.   The risk of fatal bladder cancer in the general population is 5 in 1,000.Therefore, patients participating in this protocol and /or the alternative proposed clinical scans may have
an increased risk of a fatal bladder cancer .  
 
In consideration of these issues, exposure will be limited as follows:  F-DOPA or a larger dose of [111In-
DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide can be repeated in patients with recurrent or persistent disease, but not untiltwelve months after the last PET or Octreoscan.  No patient will undergo a third F-DOPA. Patients who
previously received FDG PET may undergo two F-DOPA PET scans. A total of up to three H-OCT scanswill be performed in any ectopic ACTH patient followed at the NIH. Therefore, in those who undergo theL-OCT with mifepristone on this protocol, only two H-OCT scans will be allowed.  
​
PATIENT SELECTION
 
Inclusions
 
All eligible patients are invited to participate in this protocol. Patients are adults with possible ectopi[INVESTIGATOR_390406]. Since both men and women are affected with ectopic Cushing syndrome, both sexesare studied. All ethnic and racial groups are at risk and will be included. Patients must be willing to return
to NIH for follow-up studies.
 
Exclusions ​
• Pregnant or lactating women. A pregnancy test is performed in women of childbearing potential (up to
age 55) unless they have a history of  hysterectomy.
• Children (age less than 18) are excluded. Because ectopic ACTH secretion is rare in this age group, the
likelihood of beneﬁt is less and does not balance the risk of radiation.
• Patients taking medications that alter CYP3A4 activity will not be eligible for the mifepristone study,
since this P450 system metabolizes mifepristone.  Such participants would receive a clinical H-OCT
instead, if the L-OCT were negative.  Patients with hypokalemia (K < 3.5 mEq/L), despi[INVESTIGATOR_390407].
The presence of
• 
​severe active infection.
• clinically signiﬁcantly impaired cardiovascular (e.g. history of abnormally low ejection fraction, the
presence of moderate pulmonary ﬂuid overload, and blood pressure over 190/100), abnormal coagulation
in the absence of medically- indicated treatment (PT and PTT elevated by 30% above the normal values),
hematopoietic (hematocrit less than 30%, hemoglobin below 10 g/dl, white count below 3000 K/UL, and
platelets below 100,000 K/mm3), hepatic (liver enzymes elevated by 3-fold above normal values), or renal
function (plasma creatinine level over 2.0).
function (plasma creatinine level over 2.0).
• impaired mental capacity or markedly abnormal psychiatric evaluation that precludes informed consent.
• body weight over 136 kg, which is the limit for the tables used in the scanning areas.
• combined blood withdrawal during the six weeks preceding the study greater 450 ml.
• known allergy to [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide or other somatostatin analogues.
• strong evidence for Cushing’s disease. This includes those with a central to peripheral ACTH gradient
during IPSS or a lesion on pi[INVESTIGATOR_299446]. We anticipate that these exclusion criteria will increase the ratio
of patients with ectopic ACTH syndrome to those with Cushing’s  disease from the usual 1: 8 to 1: 2, thus
we would accrue [ADDRESS_489596] 30 patients.  The
current results imply an estimated success rate of about 55% for each modality; the plausible range for thetrue success rate ranges from about 26 to 80% using a 95% conﬁdence interval, a very broad range.
 Studying a total of 30 patients will allow us the possibility of precluding a true success rate of under 20%
(with 95% conﬁdence) if we were to see no additional successes.  If there are additional successes in theadditional patients the conﬁdence interval for what the true probability of success could be will still befairly broad. Since limited patients have been evaluated using F-DOPA, we ask that the overall accrualceiling remain intact and that it be altered based on annual reports of the results.  Additionally, we haveessentially no data on which to base a sample size calculation for the mifepristone study, and would re-
calculate accrual limits when such data are available.  
 
Data Collection and Evaluation
​
Staff in the Departments of Radiology will evaluate the conventional studies. [CONTACT_186672] reviews the F-
DOPA PET/CT without knowledge of the results of other localization studies. [CONTACT_390435]  reviews all
studies.  Data are maintained by [CONTACT_390420].
 
The study will be analyzed in collaboration with [CONTACT_390436] (Clinical Center Statistics Center).Data are collected and analyzed with regard to the sensitivity, speciﬁcity, accuracy, and predictive valuefor each scan being evaluated. The exploration and pathologic analysis is used as the reference standard.
McNemar’s test for evaluating paired data will be used (40).   In addition to McNemar’s test, other
approaches to evaluation of the four objectives are below:
​(a) Compared to other imaging techniques, is the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of F-DOP A PET/CT
higher in detecting the source of ectopic ACTH production in patients with known and unknown tumor
localization?  To determine this, we will calculate the sensitivity, speciﬁcity, positive and negative values
in patients with proven tumors and compare these with the results from the other modalities.  Conﬁdence
intervals will be calculated and overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_390408].  Wecannot perform these calculations for unknown tumors, but can compare the overall percentage of tumorsfound of all imaged using each technique.
​(b) Does a correlation exist between F-DOP A uptake and the type of tumor, its size and
proliferative activity?  To do this, we will evaluate the percent of each type of tumor that has a positive F-
DOPA scan.  Conﬁdence intervals will be used to compare across tumor types. Univariate logistic
regression will be performed using size and mitotic index as the variables.
​(c) Can the administration of mifepristone, [ADDRESS_489597] (L-OCT) to a subsequent positive result?  This will be a descriptive analysis, indicating the
percentage of tumors that convert the test to a positive result.  A post-hoc analysis will compare this
percentage to the historical percentage of tumors that are positive on high but not low dose octreoscan.
​ (d) Does gated chest MRI detect more lesions than routine MRI?   A similar approach will be
used, to look at the percentage of known tumors that are detected by [CONTACT_390421]ﬁdence intervals around those values.
 
 
​
PHARMACEUTICAL AND RADIATION SAFETY
 
Pharmaceutical Information: F-DOPA
 
F-DOPA is a radiolabeled amino acid (18F has a 109 minute half-time). It is approved by [CONTACT_390422] # [ZIP_CODE]. [CONTACT_390434], Chief, PET Department, holds the IND. F-DOPA is produced
as outlined in the IND.  F-DOPA has been used in many protocols at the NIH and at other centers
throughout the world. The formulation is prepared on the day of use and assayed in a dose calibrator. The
total amount of F-DOPA will typi[INVESTIGATOR_175640] ~2.4 mg and will not exceed 6.5 mg.
 
Pharmaceutical Information: [111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide
 
Pentetreotide is an analogue of octreotide (Sandostatin), produced by [CONTACT_390423], which allowsfor the binding of metals such as Indium. Octreotide itself is an 8 amino acid cyclic peptide, biologically
active analogue of the native somatostatin and has a longer plasma half-life than somatostatin. [
111In-
DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide is an FDA-approved agent that is obtained on a unit dose basis  or prepared
on-site in our radio pharmacy using commercial kits.  Three [ADDRESS_489598] low doses will be given for
the high dose (~18 mCi) scan. Each 18 mCi high dose contains ~[ADDRESS_489599]. The maximum possible radiation dose
that patients will receive from these research studies is outlined in the 88-23a form.
​
F-DOPA
 
No toxicity has been associated with the administration of F-DOPA, although with increased use it is
possible, although unlikely, that unanticipated side effects or allergic reactions may be observed from thisDOPA analog. From 4/1/200 to 7/31/2004 128 F-DOPA scans were performed at the NIH using up to 17
mCi of F-DOPA. Any toxicity related to the F-DOPA-PET precludes repeat administration of the F-
DOPA.
​
[111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide (Octreoscan)  
​
[111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide is excreted almost exclusively by [CONTACT_8212], with hepatobiliary
excretion accounting for approximately 2% of excretion. After injection, plasma clearance is rapid suchthat at 10 minutes, only approximately 33% of the injected dose remains in the blood pool. The physical
life of [
111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide is approximately 2.8 days (67.3 hours). The biologic half-life of
[111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide is approximately 6 hours.
 
[111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-pentetreotide has been shown in nonclinical pharmacological studies to have 1/[ADDRESS_489600] of octreotide in vitro when 3 or 6 mCi dose was used (package insert). Because of
these decreased hormonal effects and the fact that the dose of pentetreotide administered during this study
is approximately 10 or 30 mcg, which is 2.5-10 times less than the usual dose of octreotide prescribed for
therapy, no hormonal effects are expected to result from the radiopharmaceutical administration. As statedin the package, in clinical trials of 538 patients, less than 1% experienced the following: dizziness, fever,hypotension, changes in liver enzymes, joint pain, nausea, sweating, and weakness. These were transient.
To date, no patients at NIH have reported any adverse side effects after receiving [
111In-DTPA-D-Phe]-
pentetreotide (> 600 doses administered).
 
Mifepristone (HRA 052015; INN Mifepristone)
 
Mifepristone is a cortisol and progesterone analog with antiglucocorticoid and antiprogestin activity.
Healthy subjects receiving long-term mifepristone administration showed antiglucocorticoid effects at adaily dose of 10 mg/kg, which is about 5 – 10 fold greater than that required to demonstrate antiprogestin
effects (41).  The agent can effectively reverse the clinical and glucocorticoid-dependent biochemical
effects (41).  The agent can effectively reverse the clinical and glucocorticoid-dependent biochemical
features of CS (42).
 
The dose (200 mg three times daily) is close to the median dose (732 mg daily) found effective inimproving diabetes in patients with Cushing’s syndrome (43).  The duration of dosing is arbitrary.  There
are no data in animals regarding up-regulation of somatostatin receptors in vivo.  However, receptors are
restored in vitro within 24 hours (18).  Because octreoscans must be given at least one week apart
according to nuclear medicine a shorter dosing interval is not possible.  We have elected to give the agent
thrice daily to ensure constant levels.  Previous pharmacokinetic studies used an older formulation of theagent; until new PK studies are done we think that this is a conservative approach.  In patients who haveUFC >
 10-fold normal we will double the dose for 24 hours before and continuing until the 24-hour scan.
 
 
Mifepristone will be given under an active IND (70,795) sponsored by [CONTACT_390424],
NICHD’s collaborative research and development agreement (CRADA) partner, which is investigating
the utility of mifepristone for the treatment of ectopic ACTH secretion at the NIH and other sites. HRA
Pharma will provide mifepristone in [ADDRESS_489601]. Nieman is responsible for communication of events related to the IND. We will report to the Sponsor
those adverse events occurring within 24 hours of administration of F-DOPA (ten half-lives rounded up tothe nearest day), within 7 days if serious and 14 days if not serious. We will report similarly to
Laboratoire HRA Pharma (mifepristone sponsor) any event occurring during or within [ADDRESS_489602] dose of mifepristone administration (about 24h half-life).  Speciﬁcally, report will be by [CONTACT_390425]/NIAMS IRB and IND holders ([CONTACT_390434] [PHONE_5362] for F-DOPA, [CONTACT_390437], Laboratoire HRA Pharma for mifepristone).
 
Unanticipated problems will be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_489603], or decisions not to schedule all possible imaging (for example, not scheduling pelvic imaging in a
patient with a possible lung mass) will not be reported to the IRB or sponsor. All other anticipated or
unanticipated adverse events related to the research studies will b e reported in aggregate to the sponsor
and IRB at the time of annual reports .  Examples of expected adverse events include but are not limited to
those events detailed in the Investigators’ Brochure for mifepristone and in the protocol’s risk section, aswell as pulmonary embolism, other thromboembolic events, hypertension, worsening of pre-existingconditions, infection, and the like, which are common in patients with Cushing’s syndrome.  These would
be reported to the IRB only if they become unanticipated problems.
 
In the unlikely event that any untoward or unexpected outcomes occur, the patients will be treated for all
immediate medical problems (e.g. anaphylactic reaction) in an appropriate setting (e.g. ICU). Any patientwithdrawn or discontinued from the present study is not reinstated. The occurrence of a serious adverse
reaction will prompt review and there will be no further subject accrual until a thorough investigation into
the cause has been completed and it is deemed safe to continue.  
 
There is no DSMB associated with this study.  We have revised the NICHD Clinical Protocol MonitoringPlan to add that HRA Pharma will monitor the study for the use of mifepristone; we continue to request
NICHD monitoring of the F-DOPA portion of the study.
​
REGULATORY DOCUMENTATIONSource Documentation and Case Report FormsThe research staff documents data pertinent to eligibility and medical care during the admission.
 Research scans are reviewed at intervals with the study radiologist and recorded.  Biochemical data are
reviewed but not transcribed in toto from CRIS and eligibility is conﬁrmed at a meeting of the researchteam.
 
IRB and DSMC Documentation  The Principal Investigator, [CONTACT_390438], is responsible for maintaining IRB correspondence.  Documents
The Principal Investigator, [CONTACT_390438], is responsible for maintaining IRB correspondence.  Documents
retained in the ﬁles include each submission to each committee, the committees’ ﬁndings, theinvestigators’ responses and the ﬁnal approval sheets.
 
FDA Documentation  [CONTACT_390438] is responsible for communications related to the IND.  [CONTACT_390439] is the sponsor of thestudy.  Annual reports are sent to him regarding study progress.
 
Adverse Event Procedures and DocumentationEvents are reported as described above.
 
Study CompletionPer the CRADA agreement, those study ﬁles and data will be maintained indeﬁnitely; however, this maychange depending on the circumstances surrounding closure of the study.  
 
HUMAN SUBJECTS PROTECTIONS
 
Rationale for Subjects Selection
 
Adults of any ethnic and racial group are invited to participate. Exclusion and inclusion criteria are listedabove. Since radiation is used, no pregnant or lactating women are studied.
 
Advertisement, Recruitment, and Payment
 
The study is posted on the Clinical Center www protocol site, which explains the characteristics of thepatients sought and the main purposes of the study. A phone number is listed, where inquirers can obtainmore information and enter a mailing list for receiving information packets, including consent forms. Any
other advertisement will be submitted to the IRB for approval.
 
NIH employees may participate in this protocol. Patients do not receive payments or compensation.
Travel costs may be provided after the initial visit, or including the initial visit if there is ﬁnancial need.
 
Beneﬁts, Risks, and Hazards
 
Beneﬁts
 
Patients beneﬁt from initial and follow-up general and endocrinologic evaluations, including imagingstudies. Patients in whom a tumor causing ectopic Cushing syndrome is found are offered surgery at theNIH. Those with Cushing’s disease may undergo surgery at the NIH. Patients with hypercortisolemia due
to occult tumor will be offered medical treatment ( i.e. administration of drugs blocking cortisol synthesis
or cortisol action) or bilateral adrenalectomy.
 
Since there is a possibility that patients may beneﬁt from detection of previously unrecognized tumor,
information gained from this study may affect future clinical management of patients with ectopi[INVESTIGATOR_390406].
 
This is an elective study. Thus, nonparticipation does not affect a patient's clinical care, but patientselecting not to participate in the research component will be returned to the care of their outsidephysicians.
 
Risks and Hazards
​
1.  Risks related to radiation from the administration of radioactive drugs and attenuation CT scans. The
annual total effective research radiation dose to patients receiving both  FDOPA PET/CT and L-OCT after
mifepristone, is 3.12 rem.  It will be correspondingly less for those who receive only one of these research
studies. (Please also see Concern About Radiation” above re: radiation from other studies).   To minimizebladder exposure, FDOPA patients will be asked to void after approximately 30 min., and every 90minutes for the 6 hours following completion of the PET scan.  Patients will be asked to void every 2 – 4hours for [ADDRESS_489604]. Fainting can occur during insertion of a vascular
catheter in subjects who are sitting; however, in this study, the subjects are supi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. An indwelling line will
be placed to reduce the number of needle sticks needed for phlebotomy purposes.
 
3. Vein cannulation for IPSS may cause femoral hematoma, arteriovenous ﬁstula, bruising or discomfortor transient arm anesthesia.  Femoral vein puncture is sometimes more difﬁcult in patients with Cushingsyndrome because of marked obesity. There is a slight, but deﬁnite risk of entering the femoral artery that
might result in bleeding, a groin hematoma or arteriovenous ﬁstula. However, we currently have available
a "smart" needle with an ultrasound transducer incorporated in the tip which enables us to puncture veinseven in the most difﬁcult subjects so that we anticipate < 1% rate of these complications.  Patientsexperience mild discomfort and may have visible bruising in the groins after the procedure. Cannulationof the internal jugular vein led to transient loss of sensation in the arm in one patient at the NIH,presumably because of inﬁltration of the cervical nerves by [CONTACT_390426].
 
4. CRH administration has minimal risk. Up to 20% of patients experience ﬂushing and a smallerpercentage experience a metallic taste. CRH has been given safely on multiple occasions to the samepatients, as proposed here, in the context of CRH stimulation test or dexamethasone test. CRH has been
given more than 1000 times at the NIH and many thousands of times world-wide. The commercially
available formulation is used (Ferring Corp.).
 
5. Contrast allergy to radiographic dye. There is a very small (< 0.5 %) risk of new contrast allergy. Patients with a known dye allergy will receive prophylactic treatment.
 
6. Anemia. The maximum total amount of blood drawn for the standard medical tests is about 265 ml. Thestudy is not to be performed if the patient's previous and predicted total blood withdrawal for the sixweeks prior to the study is more than [ADDRESS_489605] infection.
 
8. Possible emotional responses during scans. A patient can develop nervousness, anxiety, and panicattacks during any scanning procedure. In such a case, the study is discontinued and the patient evaluatedand treated if necessary.
 
9.  MRI evaluations may cause claustrophobia.  Should this occur the study will be stopped and re-scheduled with administration of a sedative.
 
10. Risk of adrenal insufﬁciency due to mifepristone.  Subjects without Cushing syndrome who receivedlong-term mifepristone administration showed antiglucocorticoid effects at a daily dose of 10 mg/kg,which is about 5 – 10 fold greater than that required to demonstrate antiprogestin effects (41).
Overtreatment with mifepristone may lead to adrenal insufﬁciency. In case of suspi[INVESTIGATOR_390409]ﬁciency (deﬁned as hypotension and the presence of severe symptoms of nausea, vomiting ordiarrhea), we will stop mifepristone and initiate glucocorticoid substitution with hydrocortisone ordexamethasone. Therapy will take into account results from pharmacology studies demonstrating that 1mg dexamethasone or [ADDRESS_489606].
 
Patients with isolated symptoms (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, anorexia or isolated fatigue)will be monitored closely as an inpatient in the Clinical Center . Except for diarrhea, these symptoms are
expected possible effects of the study treatment and are not systematically indicative of adrenal
insufﬁciency. No modiﬁcation of treatment will be initiated unless symptoms worsen or patient develops
new symptoms. Hyponatremia and/or hyperkalemia can be indicative of adrenal insufﬁciency but also canbe explained by [CONTACT_390427].
 
Less speciﬁc adverse events as maculopapular rash also have been observed.
 
11. Risks associated with use of gadolinium-based contrast agents(GBCAs) for magnetic resonanceimaging(MRI). The FDA has issued a warning that certain groups of patients are at risk for nephrogenicsystemic ﬁbrosis after receiving gadolinium. In order to reduce unnecessary risks, serum creatinine and
systemic ﬁbrosis after receiving gadolinium. In order to reduce unnecessary risks, serum creatinine and
GFR will be obtained prior to any gadolinium-based procedure. Gadolinium will be withheld in patientswith acute or chronic renal insufﬁciency (GFR<60ml/min), unless deemed necessary in order to verify CT
scan ﬁndings required for clinical management decisions. The vast majority of patients receiving
gadolinium-based contrast agents have no symptoms related to the injection of this medication.  Mild
symptoms that may occur include coldness in the arm at the time of injection, a metallic taste, headache,and nausea.  In an extremely small number of patients, more severe symptoms have been reportedincluding shortness of breath, wheezing, hives, and lowering of blood pressure
 
Consent Process and Documents
 
When patients or physicians contact [CONTACT_390428],a consent form will be provided and any questions will be answered.  The study will be explainedverbally and all questions and concerns addressed at the ﬁrst NIH visit, at which time written informed
consent will be obtained. Members of the research team authorized to obtain consent are Dr . Nieman  and
[CONTACT_390440] McGlotten.  A record of communication of this information and of the consent to participate in
the study is placed in the medical record  and the patient receives a copy of the document . The research
team retains a copy. The right of the subjects to withdraw from this study or to refuse any procedure ismade clear.
 
Three consent forms will be used to reﬂect the various options available to current patients (based on
number of previous scans) and for new patients. All returning patients will be consented again with theappropriate consent.  These will include:
1.  Consent for previous patients who have had their maximum of two F-DOPA PET examinations and
three H-OCT examinations. On each admission they will get only standard  clinical imaging (CT, MRI, [ADDRESS_489607]).2.  Consent for (previous or new) patients who are hypercortisolemic.  On each admission they will getstandard clinical imaging (CT, MRI, [ADDRESS_489608]) as well as F-DOPA PET/CT and one octreoscanswith mifepristone.  Because most patients are hypercortisolemic at only one visit, we anticipate that they
would need a separate subsequent consent, unless they have recurrent disease.
3. Consent for (previous or new) patients who are hypercortisolemic and refuse or are not candidates formifepristone, or those who are not hypercortisolemic. On each admission they will get standard imaging(CT, MRI, [ADDRESS_489609]) as well as F-DOPA PET and high dose octreoscan (if low dose is negative), up tothe maximum number of PET and high dose octreoscans.
We do not plan or anticipate the enrollment of non-English speaking subjects; however they are not
excluded from participation either. Should a non-English speaking subject be eligible for enrollment, IRBapproval will be obtained for use of the short form consent process in the absence of a fully translatedconsent document as outlined in SOP 12.9.1, under the provisions of 45 CFR 46.117(b)(2). IRB approvalwill be obtained according to IRB guidance prior to obtaining informed consent from the potential studyparticipant/s.
 
Employee enrollment is not anticipated in this protocol, but if an employee wants to be enrolled in thestudy with the prospect of direct beneﬁt in accordance with the policy SOP 14F.3.[ADDRESS_489610] an independent person (i.e. bioethics staff) will
monitor consent process.
3. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_390410] a co-worker or
subordinate complete the Just-in-Take CITI course “Biomedical –Vulnerable Subjects-Workers/Employees”.
 
Conﬁdentiality and use of retained tissue specimens
 
Conﬁdentiality of patients is assured according to the laws of the State of Maryland. When results of astudy such as this are reported at meetings or in medical journals, the identiﬁcation of those patientstaking part is withheld. Medical records of Clinical Center patients are maintained according to current
legal requirements and are made available for review, as required by [CONTACT_387713],
legal requirements and are made available for review, as required by [CONTACT_387713],
only under the guidelines established by [CONTACT_33842]. All data are kept in locked ﬁles.
 
Patients will be asked to consent to the future use of urine, blood and tumor samples.  If they consent to
such use, samples may be used in the future, with identiﬁers, for studies not described here, withoutobtaining new informed consent.  Only studies related to Cushing ’s syndrome or the biology of tumors
would be undertaken. Investigators who are not part of this protocol may procure tumor tissue in theoperating room only with authorization from [CONTACT_390438]. Tissue samples may be shared with
collaborators, without personal identiﬁers.  All samples will be coded without personal identiﬁers and willbe stored in accordance with NIH and NICHD biospecimen policies.
 
Other Interested Parties and Collaborators
 
The NIH has a Cooperative Research And Development Agreement (CRADA) with Laboratoire HRA-Pharma, in Paris, [LOCATION_009].  The intention of the CRADA is to develop mifepristone for the treatment ofCushing’s syndrome, for use as an adjunctive agent for Octreoscan, and for use as a diagnostic agent.
​ ​REFERENCES
 
1.  Findling JW, Tyrrell JB. Occult ectopic secretion of corticotropin. Arch Intern Med 1986; 146:929-933.2.   Jex RK, van Heerden JA, Carpenter PC, Grant GS. Ectopic ACTH syndrome. Diagnostic and
therapeutic aspects. Am J Surg 1985; 149:276-282.
3.  Trainer PJ, Grossman A. The diagnosis and differential diagnosis of Cushing's syndrome. ClinEndocrinol  1991; 34:317-330.
4.   Schteingart DE, Lloyd RV , Akil H, et al. Cushing's syndrome secondary to ectopic corticotropin-releasing hormone-adrenocorticotropin secretion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1986; 63:770-775.5.  Orth DN. Cushing's syndrome. New Engl J Med 1995; 332:791-803.
6.   Orth DN. Corticotropin-releasing hormone in humans. Endocr Rev 1992; 13:164-191.
7.   Thorner MO, Martin WH, Ragan GE, et al. A case of ectopic ACTH syndrome: diagnosis difﬁcultiescaused by [CONTACT_390429]. Acta Endocrinol 1982; 99:364-370.8.  Pass HI, Doppman JL, Nieman L, et al. Management of the ectopic ACTH syndrome due to thoraciccarcinoids. Ann Thorac Surg 1990; 50:52-57.
9.   Doppman JL, Nieman L, Miller DL, et al. Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone syndrome:
Localization studies in 28 patients. Radiology 1989; 172:115-124.
​
10.  Doppman, JL, Loughlin,T, Miller DL, et al. Identiﬁcation of ACTH-producing intrathoracic tumors
by [CONTACT_390430][INVESTIGATOR_390411]. Radiology 1987; 163, 501-503.11.  Wajchenberg BL, Mendonca, BB, Liberman B, et al. Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone syndrome.
Endocr Rev 1994; 15:752-787.
12.
​Adams S, Baum R, Rink T, et al. Limited value of ﬂuorine-18 ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography for the imaging of neuroendocrine tumours. Eur J Nucl Med 1998; 25:79-83.13.
​Briganti V , La Cava MG, Peri,A, et al. Characterizing an ectopic secreting carcinoid with indium-
111-DTPA-D-Phe-Pentetreotide. J Nucl Med 1997; 38:711-714.
14.  Pasquali C, Rubello D, Sperti C, et al. Neuroendocrine tumor imaging: Can 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography detect tumors with poor prognosis and aggressive behavior? World J Surg1998; 22:588-592.15.  de Herder WW, Krenning EP, Malchoff CD, et al. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy: its value intumor localization in patients with Cushing’s syndrome caused by [CONTACT_390431]-releasing hormone secretion. Am J Med 1994; 96:305-312.16.  McCarthy KE. Visualization of somatostatin receptor-positive lesions with 111In-Pentetreotide is
dose-dependent. Dig Dis Sci 1998; 43:1876.
17. Zemskova MS, Gundabolu B, Sinaii N, et al. Utility of various functional and anatomic imagingmodalities for detection of ectopic adrenocorticotropin-secreting tumors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:1207-19.18. van der Hoek J, Lamberts SW, Hoﬂand LJ. The somatostatin receptor subtype 5 in neuroendocrine
tumours. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 2010; 19:385-99.
19. de Bruin C, Feelders RA, Waaijers AM, et al. Differential regulation of human dopamine D2 andsomatostatin receptor subtype expression by [CONTACT_390432]. J Mol Endocrinol 2009; 42:47-5620. van der Hoek J, Waaijers M, van Koetsveld PM, et al. Distinct functional properties of nativesomatostatin receptor subtype 5 compared with subtype 2 in the regulation of ACTH release by[CONTACT_390433]. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2005; 289:E278-87.
21.  Krenning EP, Kweekkeboom DJ, Reubi JC, et al. 111-octreotide scintigraphy in oncology. Digestion
21.  Krenning EP, Kweekkeboom DJ, Reubi JC, et al. 111-octreotide scintigraphy in oncology. Digestion
1993; 54 (Suppl. 1):84-87.22. de Bruin C, Hoﬂand LJ, Nieman LK, et al. Mifepristone effects on tumor somatostatin receptor
expression in two patients with Cushing's syndrome due to ectopic adrenocorticotropin secretion. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 97:455-62.23.  Conti PS, Lilien DL, Hawley K, et al. PET and [18F]-FDG in oncology: A clinical update. Nucl Med& Biol 1996; 23:717-735.24.  Pacak K, Ilias I, Chen CC, et al. The role of [(18)F]ﬂuorodeoxyglucose positron emissiontomography and[(111)In]-diethylenetriaminepentaacetate-D-Phe-pe ntetreotide scintigraphy in the
localization of ectopic adrenocorticotropin-sec reting tumors causing Cushing's syndrome. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 2004; 89:2214-21.25.  Pearse AG. The cytochemistry and ultrastructure of polypeptide hormone-producing cells of theAPUD series and the embryologic, physiologic and pathologic implications of the concept. J HistochemCytochem 1969; 17:303–313
26.  Sundin A, Eriksson B, Bergstrom M, et al. PET in the diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumors. Ann N YAcad Sci 2004; 1014:246-57.27.   Bergstrom M, Eriksson B, Oberg K, et al. In vivo demonstration of enzyme activity in endocrinepancreatic tumors: Decarboxylation of carbon-11-DOPA to carbon-11-dopamine. J Nucl Med 1996;37:32-37.28.  Baylin SB, Abeloff MD, Goodwin G, Carney DN, Gazdar AF. Activities of L-dopa decarboxylase
and diamine oxidase (histaminase) in human lung cancers and decarboxylase as a marker for small (oat)
cell cancer in cell culture. Cancer Res 1980; 40:1990–1994
29.  Berger,CL, de Bustros A, Roos BA, et al. Human medullary thyroid carcinoma in culture provides amodel relating growth dynamics, endocrine cell differentiation, and tumor progression. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 1984; 59:338–343.
30.  Gazdar AF, Helman LJ, Israel MA, et al. Expression of neuroendocrine cell markers L-dopa
decarboxylase, chromogranin A, and dense core granules in human tumors of endocrine andnonendocrine origin. Cancer Res 1988; 48:4078–408231.  Ahlstrom H, Eriksson B, Bergstrom M, et al. Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors - Diagnosis withPET. Radiology 1995; 195: 333-337.32.  Hoegerle S, Altehoefer C, Ghanem N, et al. Whole-body F-18 dopa PET for detection of
gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors. Radiology 2001; 220: 373-380.
33.  Becherer A, Szabo M, Karanikas G, et al.  Imaging of Advanced Neuroendocrine Tumors with (18)F-FDOPA PET. J Nucl Med. 2004; 45:1161-1167.34.   Dimitrakopoulou-Strauss A, Strauss, L G, and Burger C. Quantitative PET studies in pretreatedmelanoma patients: A comparison of 6- F-18 ﬂuoro-L-dopa with F-18-FDG and O-15-water using
compartment and noncompartment analysis. J Nucl Med 2001; 42: 248-256.
35.  Hoegerle S, Altehoefer C, Ghanem N, et al, E. F-18-DOPA positron emission tomography for tumourdetection in patients with medullary thyroid carcinoma and elevated calcitonin levels. Eur J Nucl Med
2001; 28: 64-71.36.  Jacob T, Younsi N, Grahek D, et al. Does small cell lung carcinoma take-up 18F -FDOPA and does18F -FDOPA PET add valuable information to 18F -FDG PET?  Preliminary results. J Nucl Med 2003:
44:391P-391P.
37.  Hoegerle S, Ghanem N, Altehoefer C, et al. F-18-DOPA positron emission tomography for thedetection of glomus tumours. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2003; 30:689-694.38.   Hoegerle S, Nitzsche E, Altehoefer C, et al. Pheochromocytomas: Detection with F-18 DOPA whole-body PET - Initial results. Radiology 2002; 222:507-512.
39. Zemskova MS, Nylen ES, Patronas NJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of chromogranin A and calcitonin
precursors measurements for the discrimination of ectopic ACTH secretion from Cushing’s disease. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:2962-5, 200940.  Armitage P. Statistical Methods in Medical Research. John Wiley & Sons, [LOCATION_001], 1971, pp. 126-129.41. Donaldson K, Briggs J, McMaster D. RU 486: an alternative to surgical abortion. J Obstet Gynecol
Neonatal Nurs 1994; 23:555-9.
42. Nieman LK, Chrousos GP, Kellner C, et al. Successful treatment of Cushing's syndrome with theglucocorticoid antagonist RU 486. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1985;61:536-40.43.  Fleseriu M, Biller BM, Findling JW, Molitch ME, Schteingart DE, Gross C; SEISMIC StudyInvestigators. Mifepristone, a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist,  produces clinical and metabolic beneﬁts
in patients with Cushing's syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97:2039-49.
44. Edmonds CJ, Smith T. The long-term hazards of the treatment of thyroid cancer with radioiodine. Br JRadiol 1986; 59:45-51.45.  Hall P, Holm, LE, Lundell G, et al. Cancer risks in thyroid cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1991; 64:159-
45.  Hall P, Holm, LE, Lundell G, et al. Cancer risks in thyroid cancer patients. Br J Cancer 1991; 64:159-
163.
 