 Title: Early changes in multiparametric MRI in response to neoadjuvant androgen 
deprivation and external beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer   
NCT Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
  
IRB Approval Date: 09/09/2013  
  
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_914662] 13 -343  
  
  
  
  
  
Closed to New Accrual  
   
  
  
  
  
Closure Date: 08/23/2016  
  
  
  
No new subjects may be enrolled in the study as described 
above.  Any questions regarding this closure should be directed 
to the study’s Principal I nvestigator  
  
  
Page  1 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285606]   
XII References   
  
  
  
 I  Background and Significance   
  
a.  Multiparametric MRI (mpMRI) and it’s role in prostate cancer   
Prostate MRI is known to play an important role in prostate cancer detection and localization, and 
indeed prostate cancer staging[1]. It also aids in tumor detection when there is a biochemical suspi[INVESTIGATOR_914663][2] ,[3]. Compared to conventional prostate MR 
techniques from [ADDRESS_1285607] of 
care prostate MR in 2013 provides a wealth of information regarding tumor functionality[1]. mpMRI 
includes functio nal quantitative sequences such as Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) and high 
temporal resolution Dynamic Contrast Enhanced (DCE) imaging. DWI is reflective of the random 
motion of water molecules at a cellular level, and is thus sensitive to cell membrane integrity, 
hypercellularity, enlargement of the nuclei and hyperchromatism. DWI (and more specifically, 
Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) derived from DWI) has been demonstrated on multiple 
occasions to correlate with Gleason score and serve as a biomar ker for prostate tumor aggressiveness 
[4–9]. On DCE, prostate cancer shows early strong enhancement compared to surrounding normal 
prostate tissue. This enhancement pattern is thought to represent tumor angiogenesis and is necessary 
for further tumor growt h[10],[11]. As a result, the number of vessels increases and these newly formed 
tumor vessels have higher permeability than do normal vessels because of weak integrity of the vessel 
wall. Studies have suggested that as the number of abnormal vessels in pro state cancer increases, the 
prognosis worsens[12][13]. Microvessel density in prostate cancer, an established independent 
predictor of pathologic stage, has been shown to correlate with DCE -MRI results[14].  
   
Page  2 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285608] a good 
chance of cure. However, there are some patients, specifically those who present with unfavorable 
cancer based upon well -established features suc h as high prostate specific antigen (PSA), high 
Gleason score and/or those with advanced local disease (T -stage T2b or higher) who remain at high 
risk for prostate - cancer mortality. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is very effective in 
controlling metas tatic prostate cancer and improves survival when added to radiotherapy for localized 
disease. A significant gain in overall survival in those with locally advanced prostate cancer using a 
combination of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and ADT has been de monstrated by [CONTACT_914672] (EORTC)[15] and the Radiation 
Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG)[16] and in others[17]. These randomized trials evaluated ADT 
given from six to thirty -six months. Long term (≥2 ye ars) of ADT confers a modest survival benefit in 
men treated with radiotherapy for locally advanced prostate cancer compared with 6 months of ADT, 
but it is associated with increased toxic effects[18]. Therefore, identification of men in whom [ADDRESS_1285609] ADT.   
  
 i.  Predicting those who will fail ADT therapy  
Time to PSA failure and the rate at which PSA rises are surrogates for prostate can cer specific 
mortality (PCSM). Very recently[19], PSA nadir of ≤ 0.3 ng/ml after 2 -3 months of neoadjuvant ADT 
(prior to initiation of EBRT) has been shown to be associated with improved long -term biochemical 
prostate tumor control, reduction in distant me tastases, and prostate cancer -related death. This initial 
PSA response during ADT may reflect the sensitivity of the prostate tumor to androgen deprivation 
and in turn to the radio -sensitivity bestowed by [CONTACT_914673]. 
Pre-EBRT PSA nadir may therefore represent a valuable early predictor for improved outcomes after 
radiation therapy for prostate cancer.   
 ii.  Predicting those who will fail 
ADT/EBRT therapy   
Looking further along the course of treatment with neoadjuvant  ADT and 4 months of EBRT,  
D’Amico et al[20] used the Prentice criteria to assess whether measured lowest PSA concentrations 
(PSA nadir) or PSA immediately after treatment (PSA end) were early surrogates for prostate cancer - 
specific mortality, as both PS A end and nadir PSA are available before PSA failure. In this study they 
retrospectively reviewed 2 randomized controlled trials (cohort of 734 men), that showed improved 
overall and prostate cancer specific survival with radiotherapy and 6 months of andro gen suppression 
compared with radio therapy alone. They found that men with PSA end values exceeding 0.5 ng/ml 
after EBRT and androgen suppression should be considered for long -term androgen suppression. 
Furthermore, an early endpoint such as PSA nadir aft er radiotherapy and at least 6 months of androgen 
suppression could identify men who are good candidates for future trials of additions of proven 
systemic therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (i.e, one that extends survival in men with castration -resistant metastatic prostate 
cancer ).   
  
c. mpMRI as a biomarker for response to therapy in prostate cancer   
A role for mpMRI as a non -invasive biomarker in assessing response to treatment options is currently 
an evolving area of great interest. In patients with low -risk prostate cancer on  active surveillance, DWI 
Page  3 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
  has been proposed to be a useful marker of prostate cancer progression and may help in identifying 
patients who may benefit from radical treatment [21],[22]. Recent studies have also investigated the 
use of mpMR to assess response  to ADT[23] and radiotherapy[24],[25], with promising results.   
  
After ADT, prostate gland shrinkage and fibrosis makes tumor difficult to detect on routine T2WIs. A 
feasibility study[23] evaluated the use of mpMR in monitoring response to ADT, and sugge sted that 
DCE as a marker of angiogenesis may help demonstrate ADT resistance, and DWI may help 
determine tumor cell death vs. residual tumor. In contrast to cytotoxic therapy, where ADC values 
increase (due to a lessening of the restriction of water molec ules), ADT may not result in significant 
necrosis of prostate cancer cells, and in fact ADC values of prostate cancer post [ADDRESS_1285610] been shown to remain the same[23]. In contrast, ADC values of areas where focal tumor was not 
suspected were sig nificantly reduced with ADT, possibly due to acinar hypertrophy, fibrosis and basal 
cell hyperplasia.   
  
Foltz et al. have looked at the very early post -radiotherapy changes in the prostate every 2 weeks up 
until 8 weeks of EBRT, and found that ADC was a possible candidate for early response to therapy, 
the optimal scan time being week 6 of EBRT[24]. Park et al have shown that ADC values in regions of 
tumor increased 1 and 3 weeks after initiating EBRT, and one month after completion of EBRT[25].  
  
Specif ic to DCE, there is known to be an anti -angiogenic role for ADT in the prostate (androgen 
ablation has been shown to suppress glandular epi[INVESTIGATOR_914664]). As PSA gene expression is down -regulated by [CONTACT_22802] T, PSA reduction post ADT may 
be secondary to androgen suppression rather than tumor cell death. It is therefore possible that DCE 
may act as a stronger surrogate for angiogenesis, rather than PSA.   
  
There has been a pre -clinical study (on prostate zenog raph models) evaluating a combination of 
parameters (ADC, DCE, tumor volume and PSA) which successfully predicted treatment response to a 
combination of ADT and radiotherapy, with a correlation coefficient of 0.85[26]. However, to our 
knowledge, no study h as yet looked at a role for mpMRI in evaluating the effect of combined ADT 
and EBRT on prostate mpMR in humans. Nor has there been any work published on correlating PSA 
end with prostate mpMR, to determine if mpMR may act as an early biomarker in determini ng those 
who would benefit from long -term androgen suppression. We therefore propose to evaluate mpMR in 
response to combined therapy (ADT and EBRT), and to correlate quantitative mpMR parameters at 
early timepoints, with PSA end and PSA nadir.  
  
  
II Specific Aims   
1. The primary aim of this study is to explore the feasibility of mpMR as an early imaging 
biomarker to assess response of intermediate - and high -risk prostate cancer during 
treatment with neoadjuvant ADT.   
2. A secondary aim is to explore the feasi bility of mpMR as an imaging biomarker to 
assess response of bulky localized prostate cancer to combined ADT/EBRT.  
Page  4 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285611] information for Rad iation Treatment (RT) 
planning purposes in men who are planning to undergo RT for prostate cancer.  
  
  
III Study endpoints   
1. The primary endpoint of this study is whether mpMR parameters measured after 2 
months of neoadjuvant ADT therapy (TP1) correlate wi th nadir PSA post 8 -weeks of 
ADT. In addition, we will determine whether mpMR parameters in areas of tumor (T) 
in those who fail neoadjuvant ADT (defined as PSA end ADT values >.3 ng/ml) are 
different to those who respond to ADT (defined as PSA end ADT ≤.3ng/ml).  
2. A secondary endpoint of this study is whether mpMR parameters measured after 6 
weeks of EBRT (TP2) and 8 weeks after completion of EBRT (TP3) correlate with end 
PSA (defined as PSA level immediately after EBRT treatment). In addition, we will 
determine whether mpMR parameters in areas of T in those likely to fail combined 
ADT/EBRT (defined as PSA end values >.5ng/ml) are different to those of responders 
(PSA end values ≤.5ng/ml).  
  
IV Subject selection   
1. Inclusion criteria:  
a. Adult males with unf avorable intermediate - to high -risk localized disease 
identified as one of the following three categories for unfavorable 
intermediatehigh risk factors, but must have visible disease on baseline MRI.  
i. Clinical or radiographic T2b -T4 primary tumor  
ii. Gleason score 7 -10 in any core  
iii. PSA ≥ [ADDRESS_1285612] to able to provide informed written consent prior to study entry.  
  
2. Exclusion criteria:  
a. The standard exclusion criteria for MRI exams will app ly which include 
patients with pacemakers, non -compatible intra -cranial vascular clips, inner ear 
implants, and severe claustrophobia.  
b. Patients who because of age, general medical or psychiatric condition, or 
physiologic status unrelated to the presence o f prostate cancer are unlikely to be 
candidates for repeat MRIs, or cannot give valid informed consent.  
c. Patients unwilling or unable to undergo the ecoil placement or multiparametric 
MRI exam.  
d. Patients with a history of allergic reaction to latex or Gado linium containing 
intravenous contrast agents.  
Page  5 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285613] recruitment/enrollment   
Men with unfavorable intermediate‐to high‐ risk prostate cancer  are routinely seen at the 
multidisciplinary Lank  Center  for Genitourinary  Oncology by a urologist, medical  oncologist and 
radiation  oncologist.  The standard of care for this patient  population is  combination therapy 
consisting  of complete androgen  blockade  and EBRT.  Patients  meeting eligibility  criteria and 
choosing  to have  their ADT/EBRT care at Brigham  and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_914665],  and asked  if they wish to participate in the study.  The study  staff (PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_58100]) will obtain a list of new patients  to be seen in GU rad iation oncology   
clinic for prostate  cancer. They  will review  the clinic  note in EPIC  to deter mine  which  treatment  
option  for prostate  cancer  was decided upon,  if the patient  meets  inclusion  criteria  for the study,  
and if the patient  had a baseline  MRI  prior  to starting  treatment.  If eligible for the study,  the 
treating  radiation oncologist/oncolog ist will be emailed  by [CONTACT_46575] (see attached email 
template) to ask their permission  to approach  the patient  to determine if the patient  is interested    
in being  part of the study,  or the treating radiation oncologist  can ask the patient  directly  if 
interested  in being  part of the study,  and obtain consent.    
  
To facilitate  awareness  of the study  and to help with recruitment,  we will post a flyer about the 
study  in the physician and nursing  radiation  oncology clinical office for staff to see.  
 If the p atient expresses interest in the study, they will be given a recruitment letter and a study 
consent form, which the radiation oncologist will review with them. Consent can be obtained at 
this time by [CONTACT_280545]. If so, the patient will be giv en a copy for their own record. 
However, there will be a second opportunity to consent the patient at the time of treatment 
planning for radiotherapy which occurs six weeks after the first LHRH injecti on.  Patients who a re 
consented  at six weeks will alre ady have undergone their baseline MRI and PSA, which is the 
standard of care for all intermediate - and high -risk prostate cancer patients. At this time, the 
radiation oncologist may review the study with the patient and obtain consent or the study 
radiolog ist may review the study with the patient and obtain consent. Either way, the physician 
who obtains consent will inform the study staff (Fiona Fennessy, MD PhD and the study 
coordinator) of the patient’s interest in the study. Those patients who elect to p articipate in the 
study with be contact[CONTACT_914674], 
and to answer any remaining questions.   
   
Any study patient may elect not to proceed with the study at any time.  
  
Page  6 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285614] of care.   
After an 8 -week course of neoadjuvant ADT, serum PSA nadir and a prostate MRI will be obt ained 
(TP1). EBRT will commence after an 8 -week course of ADT for an 8 -week period. However, 6 weeks 
into EBRT, subjects will undergo serum PSA level and a prostate MRI ( TP 2 ). An end PSA at the end 
of EBRT will also be obtained. Six months after starting ADT, they will have a final prostate MRI and 
serum PSA level ( TP 3 ). (Please see section a, b, c, and d below for protocol on ADT, PSA, prostate 
MRI and EBRT respectively ).  
  
  
1. ADT  
Androgen suppression therapy consists of combined androgen blockade. P atients receive an 
antiandrogen, typi[INVESTIGATOR_914666] (Casodex) and an LHRH -agonist, typi[INVESTIGATOR_914667]. AST is given 
for two months prior to radiotherapy and then continued for a total of six to 36 months, depending 
upon the treating physician and overall  health of the patient.   
  

Page  7 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285615] for 
staging and for EBRT planning. The 3 follow -up MRIs (at TP 1,2 and 3) are not standard of care 
management, and will be paid for by [CONTACT_5636]. However, all of the follow up prostate MRIs will 
use a standard BWH Radiology Department prostate non -endorectal coil MRI protocol. Subjects will 
need, to complete health screening and renal assessment forms completed prior to the MRI to 
determine if the patient is able to receive gadolinium.  Blood results measuring renal function within a 
3-week window prior to MR must be available, and if necessary , blood will be drawn to measure 
kidney function prior to administration of gadolinium. Subjects will be positioned lying on their back 
within the MRI magnet, which is a large cylindrical tube that allows strong magnetic fields to pass 
through the body. Ea rplugs and a padded table will be provided for the subject’s comfort. A radio 
frequency receiver coil encased in a plastic mold called a phased -array coil will be positioned around 
the subject’s pelvis. An endorectal coil will NOT be used for this study, a s the endorectal probe will 
distort the prostate (making correlation with CT for planning difficult) and because of the risk of 
proctitis during EBRT.  
  
The standard imaging protocol will include fast spin echo (FSE) for T2WI, fast spoiled gradient 
(FSPGR ) for T1WI and (Dynamic Contrast Enhanced) DCE -maps, and diffusion imaging for 
ADCmaps. If renal function is normal, the MR contrast agent gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnavist) 
will be used for DCE. A dose of 0.1 mmol/kg is administered intravenously using  an MR compatible 
power injector immediately before beginning the dynamic contrast enhancement (DCE) portion of the 
MRI exam. Magnevist is not given to patients with a history of prior allergic reaction, which is 
extremely rare. Possible use of light sedat ion for anxiety associated with the MRI exam should be 
discussed between the patient and referring physician prior to the MRI exam. If any anti -anxiety 
medication is prescribed, subjects should bring it to the examination and use as directed. Subjects will  
also be told to take all of their prescribed medications as regularly scheduled.  
  
Parking at BWH for time spent for [ADDRESS_1285616] 
clinical prostate MRI staging report will be issued in a timely fashion. The quantitative MR -based 
information (ADC -maps and DCE pharmokinetics) will be analyzed separately using Oncoquant 
software (GE Healthcare) and will not be included in the  standard MRI report. Should the results of 
this additional analysis impact the interpretation rendered in the standard prostate report, the referring 
physician will be contact[CONTACT_914675]. Individual results will not be discussed with or returned to the  
participating patients.   
Page  8 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
    
4. EBRT  
Intensity -modulated EBRT will be given using daily pre -treatment imaging on implanted fiducials 
according to Brigham and Women’s standards. This is referred to as image -guided, intensity 
modulated radiotherapy, or IGRT . The IGRT targets the prostate and seminal vesicles and in some 
cases, the pelvic nodes as well according to well standardized department protocols. Each daily 
treatment, or fraction, delivers 1.[ADDRESS_1285617] information  for Radiation Treatment  (RT) planning 
purposes  in men who are planning to undergo  RT for prostate  cancer.  This protocol is acquiring 
3T MRI images without an endorectal coil in men planning  to undergo  RT for prostate  cancer  after 
fiducial marker placement and CT simulation  but prior  to the start of RT. We will perform a fusion 
of the CT and non‐endorectal coil 3T MRI images using  the intraprostatic fiducial  markers. The 
fusion will allow  us to assess  if improved  delineation  of the prostatic  apex  and prostatic  rectal  
border  translates  into not losing any target (i.e. prostate  gland) covera ge but reduces the volume of 
rectum receiving  radiation  in excess of 70 Gray. W e will use the validated  rectal  metrics  of a rectal  
V70 < 20% and also <10cc  as the meas urement to make this assessment. If the rectal V70 can be 
reduced  with MRI information  then the risk  of late RT induced  rectal  bleeding  would  be 
expected  to decrease. The MR data will not be used in the RT treatment planning  of these  men but 
only for the assessment of whether  the rectal  V70 could be reduced.   
  
   
  
VII Biostatistics   
  
1. Correlation of ADC Change With PSA Nadir    
Zelefsky et al. report that 10 -year relapse -free survival among patients with PSA nadir < 0.3 was 
74.3%, compared with 57.7% for patients with higher PSA nadir values ( P = 0.001, N = 1045). In 
order to assess power  for a test of whether mpMR parameters measured after [ADDRESS_1285618] 8 -weeks of ADT therapy, we will make use of 
published data on the correlation between ADC change and nadir PSA. Foltz et al.[24] obse rved a 
correlation of 0.25 for nadir PSA with ADC percent change, between 6 weeks and the pre -RT baseline 
(N = 10).  With 30 subjects, we anticipate 80% power to detect an absolute correlation of 0.49 or 
greater. Although this is greater than the correlati on Foltz observed, we note that with a sample of size 
10, using Fisher's transformation, an approximate 95% confidence interval for Foltz's estimate is  ( -
0.45, 0.76), a wide interval which includes 0.49.     
  
Page  9 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
  2. Within -Patient ADC Changes  
Foltz et al.[2 4] reported a change in ADC between six weeks RT and baseline of -0.29 in tumor (2.8%,  
N = 36) and -0.56 in healthy tissue (N=10), with  SDs of 0.23 and 0.18, respectively (in units of 10^  ( -
3) mm^2/s). Using the average variance above, we estimate a SD for ADC of 0.20.  With N = [ADDRESS_1285619] 80% power to detect a significant within -subject absolute 
difference in ADC between two time points of 0.[ADDRESS_1285620] at the 0.05 
twotailed significance lev el, corrected for the 6 pairs of time points to be considered.  This is much 
smaller than the difference of 0.81 observed in healthy tissue described by [CONTACT_914676].[23], but larger 
than the very small difference of 0.03 that they observed in tumor.  Fol tz et al. observed changes in 
ADC between 4 weeks and baseline of 0.107 (B = 600) and 0.117 (B = 1200), both of which are less 
than 0.14.      
        
3. Comparison of Normal Tissue ADC With Tumor   
For comparisons between tumor and normal tissue, with [ADDRESS_1285621] 80% power to detect an 
absolute difference in mean ADC of 0.[ADDRESS_1285622], adjusted 
for multiple comparison of time -points.  Barrett’s group observed a mean difference in ADC between 
tumor and hea lthy tissue of 0.20.    
     
4. Comparison of ADC Changes between Patients who Fail Treatment and Those who do 
not.         
We estimate that 25% of men with grade T2c or greater cancer will have end PSA greater than 0.5, and 
will fail therapy.  Barrett et al.  reported a change in ADC between three months of ADT and a preADT 
baseline in tumor of -0.028 with a SD of 0.227 (N = 35), in 20 patients with tumor of stage T2c or 
greater. We therefore estimate that ultimately 25% of these patients failed.  We assume th at the ADC 
changes in patients who fail and patients who do not fail are both normally distributed, with the same 
SD but different means.  We estimate this SD from the Barrett et al. data as 0.227/sqrt  
(0.25^2+0.75^2) = 0.287. In our study, with [ADDRESS_1285623] 80% power to detect an absolute difference  
between the mean ADC change among those who fail treatment and those  who do not of 0.51 SDs, or 
0.51*0.287 = 0.15 x 10^ ( -3) mm^2/s change  in ADC. Barrett observed a baseline ADC mean in 
tumor of 1.006, hence we expect to be able to detect a change from baseline and 3 -months ADT in 
ADC of approximately +/ - 15% or greater.    
  
5. Descriptive statistics will be used  to enumerate the rectal V70's achieved using MRI 
versus CT data .    
  
  
  
VIII Risks and Discomforts   
Participants in this study will undergo a total of 3 follow up prostate MRIs. (Baseline standard of care 
prostate MRI prior to initiating therapy will be  ordered by [CONTACT_1963]). All MRIs will use a 
standard routine prostate MRI protocol without the use of an endorectal coil. Patients will receive 
Magnavist 0.1mmol/kg intravenously for each study, so renal function will need to be checked prior to 
Page  10 of 14  
Version  4/1/[ADDRESS_1285624] (which uses radiation to produce images), MRI uses powerful magnetic fields 
and radio waves to produce images. There are no know n health risks associated with this exposure. 
The radio waves used can cause a warming sensation to the body, similar to exposure to hot weather, 
or localized heating adjacent to the torso coil or ecoil. Body temperature can be expected to rise 
temporarily , but less than 1o Centigrade or about 2o Fahrenheit. In the event of a localized heating 
sensation, the subject will be instructed to notify the MR technologist immediately. However, the MRI 
scanner and the coils used have been designed to prevent localiz ed heating from happening and there 
have been no reports of localized heating in patients scanned to date.   
  
The MRI scanner also uses rapi[INVESTIGATOR_914668] i mages. Earplugs will be used to reduce this noise and will be 
offered to each subject. The switched gradients can, under certain circumstances, cause peripheral 
nerve stimulation that may be experienced as a mild twitching in the limbs and/or lower back mu scles. 
Such effects are rare and scan settings are kept well below the levels where such effects are known to 
occur.   
  
Subjects will be carefully screened at the time of enrollment to make certain that they do not have any 
unsafe metal implants. People w ho feel uncomfortable in confined spaces (claustrophobia) may feel 
uncomfortable lying in the narrow cylinder of the MRI magnet. Subjects will be able to communicate 
with the MRI technologist for the entire time they are in the magnet. The MRI will be stop ped at the 
subject’s request at any time he so wishes. In addition, all patients will be offered Ativan (.5 -1 mg) by 
[CONTACT_727236]. They also have the option to take a second dose upon arrival if they 
feel tense. All are driven home b y a friend or relative.    
  
  
  
IX Potential Benefit   
No direct benefits from the study should be expected by [CONTACT_914677]. Results 
from this study, however, may indicate that mpMRI is an early non -invasive biomarker that may 
predict those that will respond to ADT/EBRT and in particular, determine those who may benefit from 
long-term androgen suppression or use of non -standard hormone therapi[INVESTIGATOR_914669]. As mpMRI of the prosta te evaluates tumor physiology and 
functionality within the entire prostate gland, it offers information about underlying tumor 
heterogeneity and how these tumors respond to ADT alone and in combination with EBRT. The hope 
is that results from this study ma y offer preliminary information on how functional evaluation of the 
entire prostate could aid in strategizing patients for an optimal patient -specific therapy plan.  
  
X Monitoring and QA   
All subjects will complete the safety screening form, which will be  reviewed by [CONTACT_186422]. 
During the multiparametric MRI exam, the subject will be monitored for safety in the MR 
environment by [CONTACT_46168]. The quality of the MR data will be monitored by [CONTACT_914678] b y the study doctors on an ongoing basis.  
Page  11 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
    
All patient records will be kept on site and confidential. No individual identifiers will be used in any 
reports or publications resulting from this study. Data security will be controlled by [CONTACT_914679]’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].   
  
Standard monitoring software supplied by [CONTACT_914680] r egarding power deposition, gradient slew -rates, and field 
strength. MRSI quality assurance will be monitored using phantom studies performed within one week 
prior to any patient study to assure the MR scanner is functioning properly for reproducible data 
acquisition.   
  
All serious  adverse  events  will be reported  directly to the DFCI  Office  for Human  Research
 Studies  (OHRS). These include any serious adverse events such as an untoward medical occurrence that 
results in death or is life threatening (at the time of the event) or requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_914670]. Expected adverse events from MRI are not 
serious and include claustrophobia while in the MRI magnet, a warming sensation while in the  MRI 
magnet, or infiltration of intravenous contrast in the subcutaneous tissues at the time of its 
administration. All reasonable measures will be taken to avoid these adverse events.   
  
XI: Registration with QACT  
  
The registration procedure will be as follows:  
1. Obtain written informed consent from the participant prior to the performance of any 
non0standard of care prostate MRI.   
2. Complete the protocol -specific eligibility checklist using the eligibility assessment documented 
in the participant’s medica l/research record. To be eligible for registration to the study, the 
participant must meet each inclusion and exclusion criteria listed on the eligibility  
3. Fax the eligibility checklist(s) and all pages of the consent form(s) to the QACT at checklist.  
  
  
4. The QACT Registrar will (a) validate eligibility and (b) register the participant on the study  
5. The QACT Registrar will send an email confirmation of the registration and/or randomization 
to the person initiating the registration immediately following th e registration and/or 
randomization.  
  
  
  
XII References.  
[1] J. V Hegde, R. V Mulkern, L. P. Panych, F. M. Fennessy, A. Fedorov, S. E. Maier, and C. M.  
Page  12 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
  C. Tempany, “Multiparametric MRI of prostate cancer: An update on state -of-the-art techniques 
and their  performance in detecting and localizing prostate cancer.,” Journal of magnetic 
resonance imaging : JMRI , vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1035 –54, May 2013.  
[2] L. M. Wu, J. -R. Xu, H. Y. Gu, J. Hua, J. Zhu, J. Chen, W. Zhang, and J. Hu, “Role of magnetic 
resonance imagin g in the detection of local prostate cancer recurrence after external beam 
radiotherapy and radical prostatectomy.,” Clinical oncology (Royal College of Radiologists 
(Great Britain)) , vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 252 –64, Apr. 2013.  
[3] C. Roy, F. Foudi, J. Charton, M.  Jung, H. Lang, C. Saussine, and D. Jacqmin, “Comparative 
Sensitivities of Functional MRI Sequences in Detection of Local Recurrence of Prostate 
Carcinoma After Radical Prostatectomy or External -Beam Radiotherapy,” American Journal of 
Roentgenology , vol. 2 00, no. 4, pp. W361 –W368, Apr. 2013.  
[4] T. Hambrock and D. M. Somford, “Relationship between Apparent Diffusion Coeffi cients at 3 
. 0-T MR Imaging and Gleason Grade in Peripheral Zone Prostate Cancer 1 Purpose : Methods : 
Results :,” Radiology , vol. 259, no . 2, pp. 453 –461, 2011.  
[5] B. Turkbey, J. Locklin, A. A. Baccala, J. H. Shih, B. J. Wood, P. A. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946], and P. L. Choyke, 
“Is Apparent Diffusion Coeffi cient Associated with Clinical Risk Scores for Prostate Cancers 
that Methods : Results : Conclusion :,” Radiology , vol. 258, no. 2, 2011.  
[6] C. H. Tan, W. Wei, V. Johnson, and V. Kundra, “Diffusion -weighted MRI in the detection of 
prostate cancer: meta -analysis.,” AJR. American journal of roentgenology , vol. 199, no. 4, pp. 
822–9, Oct. 2012.  
[7] H. A. Vargas, O. Aki n, T. Franiel, Y. Mazaheri, J. Zheng, C. Moskowitz, K. Udo, J. Eastham, 
and H. Hricak, “Diffusion -weighted endorectal MR imaging at 3 T for prostate cancer: tumor 
detection and assessment of aggressiveness.,” Radiology , vol. 259, no. 3, pp. 775 –84, Jun. 20 11.  
[8] S. Verma, A. Rajesh, H. Morales, L. Lemen, G. Bills, M. Delworth, K. Gaitonde, J. Ying, R. 
Samartunga, and M. Lamba, “Assessment of aggressiveness of prostate cancer: correlation of 
apparent diffusion coefficient with histologic grade after radical pr ostatectomy.,” AJR. 
American journal of roentgenology , vol. 196, no. 2, pp. 374 –81, Feb. 2011.  
[9] Y. Itou, K. Nakanishi, Y. Narumi, Y. Nishizawa, and H. Tsukuma, “Clinical utility of apparent 
diffusion coefficient (ADC) values in patients with prostate cance r: can ADC values contribute 
to assess the aggressiveness of prostate cancer?,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : 
JMRI , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 167 –72, Jan. 2011.  
[10] B. Nicholson, G. Schaefer, and D. Theodorescu, “Angiogenesis in prostate cancer: biology a nd 
therapeutic opportunities.,” Cancer metastasis reviews , vol. 20, no. 3 –4, pp. 297 –319, Jan. 
2001.  
Page  13 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
  [11] M. R. Engelbrecht, H. J. Huisman, R. J. F. Laheij, G. J. Jager, G. J. L. H. van Leenders, C. a 
Hulsbergen -Van De Kaa, J. J. M. C. H. de la Rosette, J. G. Blickman, and J. O. Barentsz, 
“Discrimination of prostate cancer from normal peripheral zone and central gland tissue by 
[CONTACT_914681] -enhanced MR imaging.,” Radiology , vol. 229, no. 1, pp. 248 –54, Oct. 
2003.  
[12] L. a Mucci, A. Powolny, E. Giovannucc i, Z. Liao, S. a Kenfield, R. Shen, M. J. Stampfer, and 
S. K. Clinton, “Prospective study of prostate tumor angiogenesis and cancer -specific mortality 
in the health professionals follow -up study.,” Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of 
the Ame rican Society of Clinical Oncology , vol. 27, no. 33, pp. 5627 –33, Nov. 2009.  
[13] A. Erbersdobler, H. Isbarn, K. Dix, I. Steiner, T. Schlomm, M. Mirlacher, G. Sauter, and A. 
Haese, “Prognostic value of microvessel density in prostate cancer: a tissue microarra y study.,” 
World journal of urology , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 687 –92, Dec. 2010.  
[14] H.-P. Schlemmer, J. Merkle, R. Grobholz, T. Jaeger, M. S. Michel, A. Werner, J. Rabe, and G.  
van Kaick, “Can pre -operative contrast -enhanced dynamic MR imaging for prostate cance r 
predict microvessel density in prostatectomy specimens?,” European radiology , vol. 14, no. 2, 
pp. 309 –17, Feb. 2004.  
[15] M. Bolla, G. Van Tienhoven, P. Warde, J. B. Dubois, R. -O. Mirimanoff, G. Storme, J. Bernier, 
A. Kuten, C. Sternberg, I. Billiet, J. L. T orecilla, R. Pfeffer, C. L. Cutajar, T. Van der Kwast, 
and L. Collette, “External irradiation with or without long -term androgen suppression for 
prostate cancer with high metastatic risk: 10 -year results of an EORTC randomised study.,” The 
lancet oncology , vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 1066 –73, Nov. 2010.  
[16] M. V Pi[INVESTIGATOR_59986], R. Caplan, R. W. By[CONTACT_265813], C. a Lawton, M. J. Gallagher, J. B. Mesic, G. E.  
Hanks, C. T. Coughlin, a Porter, W. U. Shipley, and D. Grignon, “Phase III trial of androgen 
suppression using goserelin i n unfavorable -prognosis carcinoma of the prostate treated with 
definitive radiotherapy: report of Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Protocol 85 -31.,” Journal 
of clinical oncology : official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology , vol. 15, no. 
3, pp. 1013 –21, Mar. 1997.  
[17] A. V. D. Amico, M. Chen, A. A. Renshaw, M. Loffredo, and P. W. Kantoff, “Androgen 
Suppression and Radiation vs Radiation Alone for Prostate Cancer,” JAMA vol. 299, no. 3, pp. 
289–295, 2008.  
[18] M. Bolla, T. M. de Reijke, G. Van Tie nhoven, A. C. M. Van den Bergh, J. Oddens, P. M. P.  
Poortmans, E. Gez, P. Kil, A. Akdas, G. Soete, O. Kariakine, E. M. van der Steen -Banasik, E. 
Musat, M. Piérart, M. E. Mauer, and L. Collette, “Duration of androgen suppression in the 
treatment of prostat e cancer.,” The New England journal of medicine , vol. 360, no. 24, pp. 
2516 –27, Jun. 2009.  
[19] M. J. Zelefsky, D. R. Gomez, W. R. Polkinghorn, X. Pei, and M. Kollmeier, “Biochemical  
Page  14 of 14  
Version  4/1/16   
  Response to Androgen Deprivation Therapy Before External Beam Radiation Ther apy Predicts 
Long -Term Prostate Cancer Survival Outcomes.,” International journal of radiation oncology, 
biology, physics , pp. 1 –5, Mar. 2013.  
[20] A. V D’Amico, M. -H. Chen, M. de Castro, M. Loffredo, D. S. Lamb, A. Steigler, P. W. 
Kantoff, and J. W. Denham, “ Surrogate endpoints for prostate cancer -specific mortality after 
radiotherapy and androgen suppression therapy in men with localised or locally advanced 
prostate cancer: an analysis of two randomised trials.,” The lancet oncology , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 
189–95, Feb. 2012.  
[21] D. M. Somford, C. M. Hoeks, C. a Hulsbergen -van de Kaa, T. Hambrock, J. J. Fütterer, J. A.  
Witjes, C. H. Bangma, H. Vergunst, G. a Smits, J. R. Oddens, I. M. van Oort, and J. O. 
Barentsz, “Evaluation of diffusion -weighted MR imaging at incl usion in an active surveillance 
protocol for low -risk prostate cancer.,” Investigative radiology , vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 152 –7, Mar. 
2013.  
[22] N. J. van As, N. M. de Souza, S. F. Riches, V. a Morgan, S. a Sohaib, D. P. Dearnaley, and C. 
C. Parker, “A study of di ffusion -weighted magnetic resonance imaging in men with untreated 
localised prostate cancer on active surveillance.,” European urology , vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 981 –7, 
Dec. 2009.  
[23] T. Barrett, a B. Gill, M. Y. Kataoka, a N. Priest, I. Joubert, M. a McLean, M. J.  Graves, S.  
Stearn, D. J. Lomas, J. R. Griffiths, D. Neal, V. J. Gnanapragasam, and E. Sala, “DCE and DW 
MRI in monitoring response to androgen deprivation therapy in patients with prostate cancer: a 
feasibility study.,” Magnetic resonance in medicine : o fficial journal of the Society of Magnetic  
Resonance in Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 778 – 
85, Mar. 2012.  
[24] W. D. Foltz, A. Wu, P. Chung, C. Catton, A. Bayley, M. Milosevic, R. Bristow, P. Warde, A.  
Simeonov, D.  a Jaffray, M. a Haider, and C. Ménard, “Changes in apparent diffusion coefficient  
and T(2) relaxation during radiotherapy for prostate cancer.,” Journal of magnetic resonance 
imaging : JMRI , vol. 000, Oct. 2012.  
[25] S. Y. Park, C. K. Kim, B. K. Park, W. Par k, H. C. Park, D. H. Han, and B. Kim, “Early changes 
in apparent diffusion coefficient from diffusion -weighted MR imaging during radiotherapy for 
prostate cancer.,” International journal of radiation oncology, biology, physics , vol. 83, no. 2, 
pp. 749 –55, Jun. 2012.  
[26] K. Røe, M. Kakar, T. Seierstad, A. H. Ree, and D. R. Olsen, “Early prediction of response to 
radiotherapy and androgen -deprivation therapy in prostate cancer by [CONTACT_914682]: a 
preclinical study.,” Radiation oncology (London, England ), vol. 6, no. 1, p. 65, Jan. 2011.   
  
 Protocol 13 -343:          
Early changes in multiparametric MRI in 
response to neoadjuvant ADT and EBRT 
for prostate cancer   
  
Aim of Study:  To determine if there are measurable 
changes in prostate MRI that will hel p predict those who will 
or will not respond to ADT/EBRT    
  
Eligibility Criteria:   
1. Unfavorable intermediate - to high -risk localized disease:   
- Clinical or radiographic T2b -T4 primary tumor or   
- Gleason score 7 -10 in any core or   
- PSA ≥ 10 prior to initiatio n of therapy   
2. Patients deemed suitable for therapy with ADT and EBRT 
and able to provide informed consent  
  
What This Study Involves:    
After confirming eligibility and obtaining consent :  
• Baseline non -coil prostate MRI prior to the start of  
ADT/EBRT   
• 3 additional non -coil prostate MRIs over the next six 
months   
• PSA testing   
o The patient will not be charged for the MRIs, PSA levels, or for 
parking .  

 For more information, please contact: [CONTACT_914683]:   
 or  
Study PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_914671], M.D., Ph.D.    
  
MRI protocol schedule 
For patient: XXX  
  
  
  Baseline  
(Time point 1)  Time Point 2  Time Point 3    Time Point 4  
MRI    
Date   
(time)  
    
Nov 1, 2013  
(11 AM)    
Dec 27, 2013  
(10AM)    
Feb 7, 2014  
(11 AM)      
April 18, 2014  
(10AM)  
PSA  
Date  
    
Nov 1, 2013    
Dec 27, 2013    
Feb 7, 2014    
Feb 21, 2014    
April 18, 2014  
(Notes)  Baseline, prior 
to any therapy  8 weeks into  
ADT;   
Friday before  
XRT begins  Friday of week 
[ADDRESS_1285625] BEEN    
       
   
  
  
Recruitment letter for study entitled “ Early changes in multiparametric MRI in response to 
neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and external beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer”   
  
  
  
  
  
Dear Pa tient,  
  
I would like to invite you to be part of a research study for which I am the principal 
investigator. This study is for patients with intermediate - to high -risk prostate cancer who are 
going to be treated with hormone therapy and radiotherapy. The  purpose of this study is to 
evaluate whether MRI scans of the prostate can predict who will or will not respond to these 
treatments. It is expected that about 30 patients will take part in this study.  
  
As outlined in detail in the consent form, this stu dy involves a total of 3 follow up prostate 
MRI scans during the course of hormone therapy and radiotherapy. The study also requires 
providing a small blood sample (about ½ teaspoon) for PSA measurement on the same day 
as the prostate MRI, and an additiona l PSA blood test on the last day of radiotherapy. 
Should you decide to enroll in this research study, your participation will last [ADDRESS_1285626]:    
   
“Dear Dr ______  
Upon review of the medical records of your patient XX, DOB X/X/X, it would appear 
that he meets the eligibility criteria for our MRI research study protocol entitled "Ea rly 
changes in multiparametric MRI in response to neoadjuvant androgen deprivation and 
external beam radiation therapy for prostate cancer”.   
  
  SCENARIO 1: He is due to be seen by [CONTACT_914684] X/X/X. If you deem him to 
be an acceptable candidate, ca n you please discuss this study with him, and provide 
him with the attached recruitment letter. If he is interested and willing to be part of  
the study, can you obtain consent? I am available by [CONTACT_914685] 2: He was seen by [CONTACT_914684] x/X/X. Do you think he is an 
acceptable research candidate for this study, and do I have your permission to contact 
[CONTACT_914686], and if 
possible to obt ain his consent?  
  
For your convenience, the aim of the study, eligibility criteria, and what the study 
involves for your patient are as follows:  
  
Aim of Study:  To determine if there are measurable changes in prostate MRI that will 
help predict those wh o will or will not respond to ADT/EBRT   
   
Eligibility Criteria:   
1. Unfavorable intermediate‐ to high‐risk localized disease:   
‐ Clinical or radiographic T2b‐T4 primary tumor or   
‐ Gleason score 7‐10 in any core or   
‐ PSA ≥ 10 prior to initiation of therapy   
2. Patients deemed suitable for therapy with ADT and EBRT and able t o provide 
informed consent   
   
What This Study Involves:   
After confirming eligibility and obtaining consent:   
Baseline non‐coil prostate MRI prior to the start of ADT/EBRT   
3 additional non‐coil prostate MRIs over the next six months   
PSA testing   
   
The patient will not be charged for the additional MRIs, PSA levels, or for parking .  
  
 Sincerely,   
Fiona Fennessy   