1  PROTOCOL and ICF COVER PAGE:  
 
 
Accelerated  Repetitive  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  (rTMS)  as a treatment  
for post-stroke  depression  in the subacute  phase:  an open  label  pi[INVESTIGATOR_526731], MD  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
September 25, 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2  Protocol  Number  & Study  Protocol  Title  
 
Accelerated  rTMS  as a treatment  for post‐stroke  depression  in the subacute  phase:  an open  label  pi[INVESTIGATOR_526732] # [PHONE_10913]  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_526733]  = Amino  Acids,  Quantitative,  Plasma  
AIS = Acute  Ischemic  Stroke  
ASRM = Altman Self‐Ratin g Mania Scale  
BP = Blood Pressure  
CT = Computed  Tomography  
DLPFC = Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  
DSMB = Data Safety Monitoring Board  
EKG = electrocardiogram  
FDI = First  Dorsal  Interosseous  
FIM = Functional Independence Measures  
HAMD = Hamilton Depression Rating Scale  
HR = Heart Rate  
Hz = Hertz  
IR = Interventional  Radiology  
MINI = Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview  
MRI = Magnetic  Resonance Imaging  
mRS  = Modifed  Rankin Scale  
NIHSS=  National  Institutes  of Health  Stroke  Scale  
NLR = Neutrophil  to Lymphocyte  Ratio  
PSD = Post Stroke Depression  
RMT  = Resting  Motor  Threshold  
rTMS  = repetitive  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  
tPA = tissue Plasminogen Activator  
3   
 
Study  Team  Composition  
 
Research Summ ary 
Study  Population  – 
 Goal  subject  recruitment  N for this study  = 20 patients  
 
Patients  are NOT  recruited  from  vulnerable  populations  (eg children,  prisoners,  pregnant  women,  and/or  mentally  
handicapped individuals). Selection of subjects will be equita ble addressing gender, race, and ethnicity because all  
patients  who  have  radiographic  evidence  of stroke  and meet  eligibility  criteria  will be considered  for enrollment.  
 
All patients  must  meet  the following  inclusion  criteria:  
1. Ages  22‐85  years  old. 
2. Radiographic  evidence  of acute  or subacute  ischemic  stroke  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_526734]). 
3. Ischemic  stroke  diagnosed  within  the last 2 weeks  to 6 months.  
4. HAMD  depression  score  8 or greater.  
5. Agrees  and is able  to provide  written  informed  consent.  
6. Agrees  and is able  to participate  in all study  procedures.  
 
Exclusion  Criteria:  
1. Metallic  objects  or neurostimulators  implanted  intracranially.  
2. Stroke  in the Left DLPFC.  
3. Known  history  of epi[INVESTIGATOR_526735].  
4. Clinically  significant  EKG abnormalitie s including  QTC prolongation  >450  ms in men  or > 480 ms in women.  
5. A woman  who  is pregnant  or breastfeeding.  
6. History  of psychiatric  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526736] 
7. Current  SI or MINI  suicide  scale  > 8. 
8. ASRM  > 6 
9. Current  illicit  drug  use. 
10. History  of head  trauma resulting  in loss of memory  >5 minutes  or requiring  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
11. Evidence  of hemorrhage  in the brain  at the time  of study.   Role:  Principal  Investigat or 
[ADDRESS_683506]  information:  [EMAIL_10050]  304‐598‐6127  
Role:  Co‐Investigator  
2 
3 
4 Jessica  Elizabeth  Frey  Role:  Co‐Investigator  
Ashley  Brooke  Petrone  Role:  Co‐Investigator  
Umer  Najib  Role:  Co‐Investigator  
Role:  Study  Coordinator:  
1 Jay Michael  Sherman  
2 Louise  Ann Moore  
 
Role:  Study  Personnel:  
1 Padmashree  Srinivasan  Tirumalai  Section  I: Team  and Research  Summary  
4  Section  II: Design   12. Have  other  mental  or physical  conditions  that are inappropriate  for study  participation  at PI's discretion.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study  Design  – 
This is an open  label  trial meaning  that all participants  (stroke  patients  with  depression)  will be given  the intervention,  
which  in this case is  rTMS.  
 
The purpose  of this study is  to find alternative treatments  for patient' s suffering  from  depression  after  having a  
stroke. The specific treatment this study will be looking at is Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). TMS is a non‐  
invasive process where a patient reclines in a chair and a magnetic coil is placed near the pa tient's head. The coil will  
be pointed at specific target in the patient's brain and will give pulsations to that area of the brain. These pulsations  
can change the patient's brain activity. After the pulsations are done, the patients will be immediately a ble to resume  
their normal daily activities. After the TMS sessions, the patients' quality of life, measure of depression, and stroke  
deficits will be assessed. The patients will then follow up at their regularly scheduled stroke follow up appointments in  
the outpatient clinic and these same measures will be reassessed. Past studies have shown that TMS is safe and  
effective for treating major depression as well as motor recovery in stroke, but there are fewer studies looking at TMS  
in post‐stroke depression . This study aims to show that accelerated rTMS is a safe, effective, and convenient  
treatment for patient's suffering from post‐stroke depression in the acute to subacute phase. This will be an open  
label trial and thus all participants will receive the a ctive rTMS intervention. This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_48505] a small sample  
size (20 patients) and the information gathered from this study will help to generate future randomized controlled  
studies  on similar  topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  
 
 
Study  Duration  –3 years  total,  with  patients  accrued  and data  analyzed  on a rolling  basis.  
 
 
 
 
Background & Significance  
 
TMS  has been  well studied  in major  depression  and has shown  significant  benefit  for patients  suffering  from  MDD,  with  
more benefit seen in younger pa tients who already respond well to antidepressants (Dumas, Brunelin). TMS has also  
been well studied as an effective treatment for post‐stroke motor recovery by [CONTACT_526756]  (Hoyer).  Post‐  
stroke depression (PSD) is a phenomenon that affects up to 30‐50% of stroke survivors (Paolucci). It is a prevalent  
condition  that not only  affects  mood  but can translate  into poorer  motor  recovery  and overall  quality  of life. As acute  
5  stroke management continues to improve through the use of tPA and IR thrombectomy, there are more stroke survivors  
and as a consequence, a higher population of survivors suffering from PSD. Currently the mainstay of tre atment for PSD  
is the use of antidepress ants. However, many patients cannot tolerate antidepressants due to side effects or drug‐drug  
reactions. In addition, antidepressants are not always effective for patients. Therefore, an alternative treatment for PSD  
such as rTMS as needed. However, the do wnside for TMS is that it typi[INVESTIGATOR_20187] 4‐6 weeks of nearly daily session  
before a clinically significant benefit is seen and this is a barrier due to patient location, transportation, and compliancy  
(Janicak, Holtzheimer). Thus, a new protocol that acce lerates the time period in which the patient receives the rTMS  
sessions within a reasonable time frame is needed. Studies have shown that an accelerated protocol is a safe and  
effective treatment tool for patients suffering from major depressive disorder a s well as in patients suffering from  
alcohol withdrawal craving symptoms (Baeken, Herremans). Studies have also shown that rTMS is safe in the acute  
stroke period (Conforto, Khedr, Rossi). It follows then that an accelerated rTMS protocol would also be eff ective in  
patients  suffering from post‐stroke  depression. Please see attachments section  for cited references.  
Objectives  
 
Purpose – Overall purpose is to improve an otherwise poorly and incompletely treated common complication of stroke;  
PSD.  rTMS  is a promising alternative  as an effective  and practical tool  to combat  PSD.  
 
Primary  Objective  – 
Determine  the feasibility  and tolerability  of repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (rTMS)  in patients  with  post‐  
stroke  depression  (PSD)  in the subacute rec overy  period.  
 
Hypothesis : This study design and its execution will support the feasibility of a 4 day accelerated rTMS protocol and  
that PSD patients  will tolerate  this accelerated  protocol  in the subacute  recovery  period  following  an ischemic  stroke.  
 
Secondary  Objective(s)  – 
Determine  the efficacy  of repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (rTMS)  in patients  with  post‐stroke  depression  
(PSD)  in reducing  depressive symptoms  during  the subacute  recovery  period.  
 
Hypothesis : PSD patients  who  are treated  with  rTMS  in the subacute  recovery  period  following  an ischemic  stroke  will 
experience  amelioration  of their  depress ive symptoms  compared  with  PSD patients  who  do not receive  rTMS.  
 
Tertiary  objective ‐ 
Investigate  the role the immune  system  plays  in patients  who  undergo  rTMS  for PSD.  
 
Hypothesis : The NLR will be positively  correlated  with  the HAM‐D  scale  score  and is an accurate  prognostic  marker  to 
identify stroke patients at risk for PSD. Second, rTMS will decrease the NLR in stroke patients with PSD, and this  
reduction  in NLR will correlate  with  a decrease  in depression  symptoms,  as measured  by [CONTACT_51664]‐D  scale  score.  
 
 
Study  Design  & Methodology  
 
This is an open  label  study.  The intervention  that is being  studied  is rTMS  in PSD patients.  
1. Patients will have a radiographic study of the brain that shows evidence of ischemic stroke (this step re presents  
routine  care in  their  stroke evaluation).  
2. Patients  who  meet  the inclusion/exclusion  criteria  and have  a HAMD  or ≥ 8 will be offered  to participate.  
3. Enrolled  patients  will be scheduled  for their  4 day sessions  of neurostimulation.  
6  Prior  to stimulation  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_526737] 1): 
a. Screen  subject  with:  
a. ASRM  
b. MINI  
c. NIHSS  
d. mRS  
e. FIM 
f. HAMD  
g. Vitals  (EKG  and BP) 
h. Blood  draw  
i. Assess  whethe r psychiatric  medication  was changed  within  the preceding  10 days  
j. Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_466027]  (where  to place  the stimulator):  
i. the patient's resting  motor  threshold  (RMT)  will be identified  visually  as muscle  twitching  in 
the First Dorsal Interosseous (FDI) muscle i n 5 out of 10 stimuli provided. RMT can vary  
between patients, so this will be used to ensure that patients are all getting the same  
strength  of TMS  treatment.  
4. The following  protocol  will be  applied  on days  1‐4: 
High  frequency  (20 Hz)‐ rTMS  will be applied  to the patients.  There  will be five sessions  per day over  the course  
of 4 days for a total of 20 sessions. Neurostimulation will be applied with a figure of eight coil. There will be 40  
trains of 2.0 second  duration (39 pulses) with a 12 second intertrain interval for a total of 1560 pulses per  
session. Each session will be separated by 10‐20 minutes (based on subject discretion). Stimulation will be  
provided at up to  110% of the resting motor threshold over  the left DLPFC. Patient will be able to immediately  
resume  normal  activities  after  the stimulation  session  and their  safety  will be monitored  throughout  the study.  
 
5. Subjects’  vitals  will be checked  prior  to 1st rTMS  stimulation  session  of the day as well as after  the day’s last  
session.  
 
6. General  adverse  event  screens  will be conducted  following  each  day.  Self‐harm  will be assessed  before  and after  
each stimulation treatment. In addition to general and mood‐related significant adverse events will be defined  
as hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526738] a result of a psychiatric condition throughout the 12 months of enrollmen t (per  
subject).  
 
7. Following day 4’s stimulation, a follow up HAMD, FIM, mRS, NIHSS, ASRM and MINI will be conducted and  
bloodwork  obtained.  
 
8. A follow  up phone  call within  24‐72  hours  following  Day # 4 to further  assess  for any adverse  events  will be 
comple ted. 
 
9. Subjects  will return  for follow‐up  visits  at 3, [ADDRESS_683507] CBC/diff, Pax Gene tube, Sodium EDTA tubes, green top tube  
for AAQP drawn prior to TMS treatment, after TMS treatmen t, and at their 3 month follow up appointment to  
measure neutrophil‐lymphocyte ratios and arginase levels, in addition to glutamate levels and validation of any  
unique proteins (included in the kits) in order to characterize the immune response in patients with acute stroke  
and PSD.  
7  10. The blood samples wi ll be drawn before the 4 days of TMS, after the 4 days of TMS sessions, and during their 3  
month follow up. Four tubes of blood will be collected during the blood draws described: CBC/diff (lavender  
top),  PaxGene  tube,  Sodium  EDTA  tube,  and AAQP  (green  top). The samples  will be given  a de‐identified  sample  
number and then stored for processing serum and WBC isolation. Once fully processed, the sample will be  
stored in a locked ‐[ADDRESS_683508]’s background will also be recorded in our de‐identified secure database  
(RedCap):  age, gender,  ethnicity,  handedness,  stroke  risk factors,  etiology  of stroke,  mRS  prior,  antidepressant  
use prior  and if  an SSRI  was initiated post stroke.  
 
12. In addition to the specific tools used to monitor for adverse events describes above, eg the ASRM (for mania)  
and the MINI (for suicidality), adverse events will inc lude any hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526739]. Any death  
and cause, when known, occurring during the study period of [ADDRESS_683509]  to the treatments  during  the 
4 days  of active  rTMS treatment.  
 
13. Concomitant  medications:  all psychiatric  medications  will be recorded  at each  study  visit.  A participant  will not 
undergo  rTMS  if a modification  in their  psychiatric  medications in  the preceding  [ADDRESS_683510]’s binder.  
15. Prespecified stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1877]: if 1) a seizure in a patient or 2) a patient attempts/completes suicide occurs. Either of  
these  events  would  trigger  a Data  Safety  Monitoring  Board  Review.  This would  also generate  an IDE supplement  
for FDA review.  
The address  of the DSMB  is as follows:  
West  Virginia  University  Cancer  Institu te 
1801  Health  Sciences South  
[PO_BOX]  
304‐293‐[ADDRESS_683511] expertise conducting  
research; both in the clinical and pre‐clinical arenas, as well as trial design and data analysis, none of these members  
have  any involve ment  in this trial or stake  in its outcome.  They  are completely  independent  and impartial.  
 
 
1. Muhammed  Alvi,  M.D.:  [CONTACT_526767] is a vascular  neurologist.  He has been  Co‐I or PI [INVESTIGATOR_526740]‐initiated  
institutional  studies  as well as large  multi‐cen ter clinical  trials  and is currently  PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] 4 multicenter  trials  . 
8  2. Ann Murray, M.D.: [CONTACT_469937] specializes in treating people with inflammatory disorders of the CNS and is  
director  of our neuromodulation  center  with  a focus  on Deep  Brain  Stimulation  (DBS) . She has been  involved  
with  multiple clinical  trials and  is currently  PI [INVESTIGATOR_2394] 3 clinical trials.  
 
3. Cheryl  Smith,  M.D.,PhD:  [CONTACT_84135]  earned  her doctorate  in neuroanatomy.  Clinically,  she is a neuromuscular  
specialist. She has over [ADDRESS_683512]. Smith heads the Department of Neurology’s  
research  division  and is currently  PI/Co‐I of 6 active  clinical  trials.  
 
 
 
Schedule  of Activities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedures   
Screening  
Day 1 to 
170  
 
Enrollment/Baseline  
Visit  1, 
TMS  Day 1  
Study  
Visit  
2 
 
TMS  
Day 2 Study  
Visit  
3 
 
TMS  
Day 
3  
Study  
Visit  
4 
 
TMS  
Day 4  
Follow  
up Phone  
Call 
(within  
72 hours  
of 
Day 4) Study  
Visit  5 
 
3 
month  
follow  
up Study  
Visit  6 
 
6 
months  
follow  
up Final  
Study  
Visit  7 
 
12 
month  
follow  
up 
Informed  consent#          
Demographics           
Medical  history           
Variable  Collectiona          
Administer  rTMS           
Concomitant  psychiatric  
medication  review1   
Depression Screen (HAMD  
or PHQ  9)#          
Vital  signs1,2          
mRS  a,b          
FIM a,b          
NIHSS  a,b          
MINI  a,b          
rTMS  documented2          
EKG (as indicated)1,2          
Pregnancy  testa          
9  Key:  
#: can either  be completed  during  screening  phase  or during  visit 1, prior  to TMS 
a: before  TMS  on day 1 
b: after TMS  on day 4 
1: before each TMS treatment  
2: after  each  TMS  treatment   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedures   
Screening  
Day 1 to 
170  
 
Enrollment/Baseline  
Visit  1, 
TMS  Day 1  
Study  
Visit  
2 
 
TMS  
Day 2 Study  
Visit  
3 
 
TMS  
Day 
3  
Study  
Visit  
4 
 
TMS  
Day 4  
Follow  
up Phone  
Call 
(within  
72 hours  
of 
Day 4) Study  
Visit  5 
 
3 
month  
follow  
up Study  
Visit  6 
 
6 
months  
follow  
up Final  
Study  
Visit  7 
 
12 
month  
follow  
up 
Adverse  event  review  and 
evaluation (post  
treatment )1,2   
ASRM  a,b          
Other assessments(e.g.,  
bloodwork)a,b          
Psychiatric medication  
review           
 
 
 
 
 
Target  Population  & Recruitment  Methods  
See above.  
Goal  subject  recruitment  N for this study  = 20 patients.  
 
Patients  are NOT  recruited  from  vulnerable  populations  (eg children,  prisoners,  pregnant  women,  and/or  mentally  
handicapped individuals). Selecti on of subjects will be equitable addressing gender, race, and ethnicity because all  
patients  who  have  radiographic  evidence  of stroke  and meet  eligibility  criteria  will be considered  for enrollment.  
 
Inclusion & Exclusion Criteria – All patients must meet the following inclusion criteria: 1. Ages 22‐85 years old. 2.  
Radiographic evidence of acute or subacute ischemic stroke (typi[INVESTIGATOR_526741]). 3. Ischemic stroke diagnosed  
within the last [ADDRESS_683513] prior to enrollment. Exclusion Criteria: 1. Metallic objects or 
neurostimulators  implanted  intracranially.  2. Stroke  in the L DLPFC.  3. Known  history  of epi[INVESTIGATOR_526735].  4. 
Clinically  significant  EKG abnormalities including  QTC prolongation >450  ms in men  or > 480  ms in women.  5. A 
woman who is pregnant  or breastfeeding. 6. History of psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526742] 7. Current  
SI or MINI suicide scale > 8. 8. ASRM > 6 9. Current illicit drug use. 10. History of head trauma resulting in loss of  
memory  >[ADDRESS_683514]  other  mental  or physical  conditions  that are inappropriate  for study  participation  at PI's discretion.  
10   
 
Risk & Benefit  
Risk – Currently  there  are no standard  safety  guidelines  for TMS  in stroke,  although  it is generally  thought  that high  
frequency  TMS  carries  a higher  risk of seizure  since high  frequency  (>1 Hz) generates  cortical  excitability  (Rossi).  
However, it has also been reported that TMS is a  focal process and if the area of seizure susceptibility (whether that is  
an ischemic  stroke  or epi[INVESTIGATOR_526743])  is not  directly  stimulated  by [CONTACT_7712],  the risk  for seizure  is not any higher in  
the stroke population that in the regular healthy adult popula tion (Rossi, Jorge, Fregni). In addition, there have been  
several studies looking at various high frequency, high stimulation intensity protocols in stroke patients (for various  
outcomes such as motor recovery and grip strength) that have been shown to be safe, with similar side effect profiles  
to the general population (Guo, Sasaki, Hosomi, Guan). These studies have been summarized in the table below  
references. Of note, the only major adverse effect reported in all of the aforementioned studies was one pa tient with  
attempted  suicide‐  it should  also be noted  that this adverse  effect  was in a study  that was specifically  studying  suicidal  
ideation and thus all patients in the study were at high risk for suicidal ideation. All other reported side effects  
summa rized in the table below involve transient pain or feelings of discomfort at the site of stimulation. Accelerated  
rTMS has not been tested for PSD, which is part of the novelty of our proposed study. However, given the above  
studies  demonstrating  safety  and efficacy  of accelerated  protocols for  depression and  high  frequency,  high  
stimulation protocols in acute stroke timelines (as early as [ADDRESS_683515]‐stroke), it follows that an accelerated rTMS  
protocol would also be an effective and safe method in patients suffering from post‐stroke depression (when  
stimulation will be performed much later, in the subacute period). Lastly, the most current and complete meta‐  
analyses of rTMS in our population of interest (PSD) which compared 25 RCTs (n = 1,804 patients with n = 520 with  
safety data available) failed to show any significant inciden ce of a serious adverse event (including seizure) in the  
actively  treated patients (Shen 2017, McIntyre 2016).  
Due to the theoretical risk of higher seizure risk in a patient with stroke, we will follow similar protocols for clinical  
monitoring of seizure signs and symptoms as outlined in the studies mentioned above. Our study will have vitals  
closely monitored before and after each TMS session. Patients will be clinically monitored for signs of seizure and  
clinicians trained to diagnose and manage seizures  will be immediately available at the study site. AEDs will also be  
immediately available  should  any patients  have  a seizure  during  the study.  
Study  Site of  
Stimulation  Frequency  Trains  
per 
session  Sessions  
per day # of days  Total # 
of 
pulses  Intertrain  
interval  Intersession  
interval  # of 
patients  AEs 
Baeken 2014  
(Unipolar  
depression)  Left DLPFC  20 Hz 40 5 4 consecutive  31,2000  12 sec 15-20 min 15 Transient  
headache  
and 
transient  
fatigue  
Herremans  
2015  Right  DLPFC  20 Hz 40 5 3 consecutive  23,400  12 sec 15 minutes  26 1 dropped  
out due to 
temporary   
Recruitment – 1. Patients who have radiographic evidence of an acute stroke and are currently on the stroke service  
(or in the outpatient clinic) wil l be screened for depression with the HAMD scale during routine stroke care, including  
admission to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526744]. Potential  
candidates are pre‐screened by [CONTACT_526757]. MyChart messages may also  
be sent to qualified candidates and West Virginia Practice Based Network providers are aware of this study. They may  
refer an appropriate cand idate for more information. Participants may also be pre‐screened over the phone for those  
patients who were identified as potential study subjects.  2. The study will be explained to patients that meet the  
inclusion/exclusion criteria. 3. Patients who wish  to enroll and participate and who have decision making capacity will  
be consented during their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], at their outpatient neurology follow up appointment, depending on the  
timeline for that particular patient. TriNetX will also be used to identi fy potential candidates via chart review. Families  
will be invited  to participate  in the discussion regarding  enrollment  in this study.  
11  (cravings of 
alcohol  
dependent  
patients)           pain at  
stimulation  
site 
Seok  2015  
(MDD)  Not available  Not 
available  Not 
available  5 3 consecutive  Not 
available  Not 
available  Not available  20 No major  
AEs 
Holtzheimer  
2010  Left DLPFC  10 Hz 20 5 on day 
1 and 10 
on day 2 2 consecutive  15,000  25 sec 0 14 1 patient  
had 
possible  
increase  in 
SI 
Guo 2017  
(acute stroke  
for motor  
recovery)  Ipsilesional  
motor cortex  
(same  side as 
acute  stroke)  10 Hz 30 1 10 15,000  25 sec NA 15 none  
Fitzgerald  
2018  
(MDD)  Left DLPFC  10 Hz 83-84 3 6 63,000  15 sec 15-30 min 58 2 
withdrew  
due to  
treatment  
discomfort  
and 1  
withdrew  
due to 
migraine  
Duprat 2016  
(medication  
resistant  
depression)  Left DLPFC  iTBS  54 triplet  
bursts  5 4 consecuti ve 32,400  8 sec 15 min 50 3 dropped  
out due to  
discomfort  
at 
stimulation  
site 
Desmyter  
2016  
(suicide risk  
in refractory  
MDD)  Left DLPFC  iTBS  54 triplet  
bursts  5 4 consecutive  32,400  8 sec 15 min 50 1 suicide  
attempt  
(patients  
had SI  
prior to  
study  
enrollm ent 
because  
study was  
assessing  
suicide  
risk) 
Conforto  
2012  
(acute stroke  
treatment  of 
hemiparesis)  Contralesional  
motor  cortex  [ADDRESS_683516] 2005  
(acute  stroke  
for motor  
recove ry) Ipsilesional  
motor  cortex  3 Hz 10 1 10 15,000  50 sec NA 52 none  
Hosomi 2016  
(subacute  
stroke  for 
upper limb  
paresis)  Ipsilesional  
motor  cortex  5 Hz 10 1 10 50,000  50 sec NA 39 none  
Sasaki 2017  
(acute stroke  
for leg 
weakness  
recovery)  Ipsilesional  
motor cortex  10 Hz 10 2 5 10,000  50 sec Not reported  21 none  
Blesneag  
2015  Contraslesional  
motor  cortex  1 Hz Not 
reported  1 10 12,000  Not 
reported  NA 16 None  
reported  
Young Gu 
2017  
Population:  
PSD Left DLPFC  10 Hz 20 1 10 
(consecutive)  10,000  60 sec NA 24 None 
Jorge 2004  
Population:  
PSD L DLFPC  10 Hz 20 1 10 
(consecutive)  10,000  60 sec NA 20 Transient  
headache,  
local pain  
and 
anxiety.  
 
12            Insomnia  
in one  
patient.  No 
serious  AE 
Carey 2008  
Population:  
PSD Contraslesional  
motor  cortex  6 Hz 20 1 1 1000 25 sec NA 10 Transient  
fatigue,  
headache,  
neck pain.  
No serious  
AE 
reported.  
El Etribi  
2010  
Population:  
PSD L DLPFC  1 Hz 10 1 10 1000  2 sec NA 20 Transient  
mild 
headache  
Narushima  
2010  
 
Population:  
PSD or at  
least 3  
vascular  risk 
factors)  L DLPFC  
(excl uded  
patients with 
stroke at this  
location)  10 Hz 20 1 10 18,000  60 sec NA 31 None  
 
Benefit  ‐The current  options  for treating  post‐stroke  depression  include stroke  support  groups,  cognitive  therapy,  and 
anti‐depressants. Although these options are available and will be offered to all the patients in this trial, there is not  
one particular option that is currently considered the standard of care. There was one trial which showed that  
fluoxetine showed mild improvement in motor recovery for stroke patients, so fluoxetine is often prescribed for  
stroke patients to enhance motor recovery, though it is  not specifically used for PSD. Thus, patients previously on  
antidepressants or that have been started on antidepressants, particularly fluoxetine, will not be excluded from the  
study. However, patients will be asked to remain on current treatment (not to stop, start, or change antidepressants)  
throughout the duration of the study, unless medically necessary to adjust, so as to not influence results of the study.  
If a patient changes their antidepressant regimen within 10 days of TMS (pt will be rescheduled  if possible for  
stimulation sessions to begin or, if this change occurs within the 10 days following TMS treatment, it will be noted in  
our statistical analysis). Patients will also be informed of all the options available to them to treat their post‐stroke  
depression, and support groups, cognitive therapy, and antidepressants will be offered to all patients in addition to  
the TMS  therapy  to patients  in this study.  
Participants in this study may note a benefit in their mood, functional status, and motor recovery. Prior studies have  
shown  TMS  to improve  motor  recovery  after  stroke  and prior  studies  have  also shown  TMS  to improve  depression  in 
patients with major depression as well as post‐stroke depression (Dumas, Brunelin, Shen). It follows then that some  
form of TMS in the acute to subacute phase will additionally benefit patient's mood, motor recovery, and cognitive  
recovery.  
In order to com pensate for time spent or transportation costs, participants will be reimbursed with a $[ADDRESS_683517]‐stroke depression. The goal is  
to find an alternative treatment to post stroke depression since many patients cannot tolerate antidepressants due to  
side effects  or drug‐drug  interactions.  Thus  TMS  potentially  represents  a safe and convenient  alternative  or adjunctive  
therapy to antidepressants for patients with post‐stroke depression. It also represents an alternative or adjunctive  
treatment to therapy or support grou ps, treatments that rely heavily on a patient's intrinsic motivation for recovery,  
whereas  TMS  does  not depend  on patient's  motivation  for effectiveness.  This data  will be used  to support  a larger,  
randomized  controlled  project  comparing  accelerated  rTMS  to sham  TMS.  
 
Statistical  Analysis  Plan  
 Analyses  will be conducted  using  SPSS,  version  22. Descriptive  and frequency  data  will be analyzed  for Adverse  Events.  
T‐tests  will be used  to determine  differences  in BP/HR  pre‐ and post‐rTMS.  While  not sufficiently  powered  to provide  
13   
 
Safety  Monitoring  & Unanticipated  Event  Reporting  
If an adverse event is noted or any other question surrounding the eligibility of a patient, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_526745].  Any IRB reporting  is done  as a study  team  including  the PI, the study  coordinator  (s) and regulatory  liaison  
in accordance  with the requirements  outlined  by [CONTACT_1201]/IDE.  
 
Data  Safety  Monitoring  – 
This study will be stopped prior t o its completion if: (1) the intervention is associated with adverse effects that call  
into question  the safety  of the intervention;  (2) difficulty  in study  recruitment  or retention  will significantly  impact  the 
ability to evaluate the study endpoints; (3)  any new information becomes available during the trial that necessitates  
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_526746];  or (4) other  situations  occur  that might  warrant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_526746].  
 
Relationship  to TMS  Procedure:  
 
Definitely  related  – the AE can  be fully  explained  by [CONTACT_526758].  
Probably related – the procedure  is more likely the cause  of the AE than  other  factors.  
Possibly related – there is a reasonable possibility that the procedure is the cause of the AE, including that the  
procedure  and another  facto r(s) are equally  likely as causes  of the AE. 
Unrelated  – another  factor  is clearly  (incontrovertibly)  the cause  of the AE. 
 
Severity  Rating  Definition  
Grade  1 = Mild  Usually  transient,  requiring  no special  treatment  
Does  not interfere  with  usual  status  or activities  
Awareness  of the event,  but easily  tolerated  
Grade  2 = Moderate  May be  ameliorated  by [CONTACT_526759]  3 = Severe  Causes inability to perform usual activities  
Requires close  monitoring  and/or  intervention  
Grade  4 = Very  Severe/  
Life Threatening  Significantly  debilitating  or incapacitating  despi[INVESTIGATOR_526747] 4 AE severity criteria will be medically monitored and then discontinued from the study.  
Participants who meet Grade 1, 2, or 3 AE severity criteria will be medically monitored and determination of  
continuation/discontinuation  will be made  at the discretion  of the study  physician.  conclusive results, mixed‐model, repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) will be used to evaluate  
preliminary  efficacy  effects  of rTMS  on HAMD  score,  FIM score,  and NIH scores.  This latter  analysis  will serve  as pi[INVESTIGATOR_526748] . 
 
Sample Size –This is an open label, pi[INVESTIGATOR_526749] a treatment for post‐stroke depression. We hope to gather data about subjects'  
response to accelerated rTMS in preparation to eventually conduct a larger, randomized controlled trial comparing  
rTMS to sham rTMS. However, this study will look at a smaller sample size of intervention only patients to monitor  
safety  and efficacy  in this population.  
14   
 
Study  Duration  & Timeline  
 
 
 
 
Protected  Health  Information  (PHI)  
 
 
Confidentiality  & Privacy  
 Confidentiality – All data collected must be kept fo r a minimum of [ADDRESS_683518] protected database. All participant identifiers should be stored separately from the data collected (ex.  
ICFs should not  be in the same  locked drawer  as the survey  results  collected).  
 
Data will be  kept for [ADDRESS_683519]  for destroying  PHI if in paper  form.  It is 
a locked  box in a staff  only area . Electronic  data  will be deleted  from  the protected files.  
Data  is only  accessible  to the PI, research  team  members,  or IRB. 
 
Participants  will be "de‐identified"  and assigned  a participant  number.  Their  information  will be kept  on an encrypted  
drive. Consent forms will be kept in a separate, locked cabinet in a separate, locked room. Participants will be  
consented in their individual hospi[INVESTIGATOR_526750]. Similarly, all questionnaires and the TMS procedures will be completed in a private, secure room  
in individual  sessions  with no  other  participants and/or  nonessential  staff present.  Yes, this research  will deal  with  protected  health  information  (PHI).  However,  participants  will be "de‐identified"  and 
assigned  a participant  number  in our  secure  database  (RedCap).  Nov 2018‐Nov  2021:  Study  recruitment  and execution.  Parallel  data  analysis  and dissemination.  Adverse events will be monitored via the adverse events screening forms and patients will be routinely asked  
if they are experiencing any side effect s during the treatment process. Any of the following scenarios would trigger an  
immediate  review with the Data  Safety  Monitoring Board:  
‐a seizure  in a patient  
‐a patient  who  attempts  or completes  suicide  
The Data Safety Monitoring Board will also meet when 50% target patient accrual is achieved, and quarterly  
thereafter. The Board will review adverse events and trial progress. All serious  adverse events will be immediately  
discussed and if at any time the Board determines one of the above [ADDRESS_683520]  
 
 
Publications,  Presentations,  & References  
 
 
References  
 
 
Baeken,  C, D Marinazzo,  GR Wu, P  Van Schuerbeek,  J De May,  I Marchett i, MA Vanderhasselt,  J Remue,  R Luypaert,  R 
De Raedt. “Accelerated HF -rTMS in treatment -resistant unipolar depression: insights from subgenual anterior cingulate  
functional  connectivity.” The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry.  12: 2014.  
 
Blesneag AV, Slavoaca DF, Popa L, Stan AD, Jemna N, Isai Moldovan F, Mursenau DF. Low frequency rTMS in  
patients with subacute ischemic stroke: clinical evaluation of short and long term outcomes and neurophysiological  
assessment  of cortical excitability. J  Med Life 20 15;8(3):378 -387. 
 
Brunelin, J, E Poulet, C Boeuve, H Zeroug -vial, T d’Amato, M Saoud. “Efficacy of repetitive transcranial magnetic  
stimulation  (rTMS) in major  depression: a review.”  L’Encephale. 33(2): 2007,  126-134. 
 
Conforto AB, SM Anjos, G Sapsonik, EA  Mello, EM Nagaya, W Santos, KN Ferrero, ES Melo, FI Reis, M Scaff, LG  
Cohen. “Transcranial magnetic stimulation in mild to severe hemiparesis early after stroke: a proof of principle and novel  
approach  to improve motor  function.” Journal  of Neurology.  259(7): July  2012,  1399 -1405.  
 
Desmyter, S, R Duprat, C Baeken, S Van Autreve, K Audenaert, K van Heerigen. “Accelerated intermittent theta burst  
stimulation for suicide risk in therapy -resistant depressed patients: A randomized, sham -controlled trial.” Front iers in  
Human  Neuroscience. Sept 2016.  
 
Dumas,  R, R Padovani,  R Richieri,  C Lancon.  “Repetitive  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  in Major  Depression:  
Response  Factor.” L’Encephale. 38(4): Sep 2012,  360-368. 
 
Duprat,  R, S Desmyter,  R de Rudi,  K van Heerige n, D Van den Abbeele,  H Tandt, J  Bakic,  G Pourtois,  J Dedoncker,  M 
Vervaet, S Van Autreve, GM Lemmes, C Baeken. “Accelerated intermitten theta burst stimulation treatment in  
medication -resistant  major  depression:  A fast road to remission?”  Journal  of Affec tive Disorders.  200: Aug 2016,  6-14. North  American  Conference  on Neuromodulation  (NANS)  Las Vegas  Jan 2019.  Poster  presentation.  Study  Design.  
Van Liere  Research  Day.  West  Virginia  University,  Morgantown,  WV.  Poster  Presentation,  first place  award.  
CTSI  Annual  Conference.  Greenbrier  Resort,  WV,  April  2019.  Poster  presentation.  Preliminary  Results.  NONE  Section  IV: Other  Considerations  
16 
 Fitzgerald PB, Hoy KE, Elliot D, McQueen RNS, Wambeek LE, Daskalakis ZJ. Accelerated repetitive transcranial  
magnetic  stimulation in  the treatment of depression. Neuropsychopharmacology  2018;  
 
Fregni F, Boggio PS, Vall e AC, Rocha RR, Duarte J, Ferreira MJL, Wagner T, Fecteau S, Rigonatti SP, Riberto M,  
Freedman SD, Pascual -Leone A. A sham -controlled trial of a 5 day course of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation  
of the unaffected hemisphere  in stroke patients. S troke  2006;37:2115 -2122.  
 
Guan YZ, Li J, Zhang WH. Effectiveness of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) after acute stroke: a one  
year longitudinal randomized  trial. CNS  Neuroscience &  Therapeutics 2017;23(12):940 -946. 
 
Guo Z, Jin Y, Peng H , Xing G, Liao X, Wang Y, Chen H, He B, McClure MA, Mu Q. Ipsilesional high frequency  
repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  add-on therapy  improved  diffusion  parameters  of stroke  patients  with motor  
dysfunction:  a preliminary DTI study. Neural Plast icity 2016;2016:11.  
 
Herremans, SC, P Van Schuerbeek, R De Raedt, F Matthys, R Buyl, J De May, C Baeken. “The impact of accelerated  
prefrontal high -frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) on cue -reactivity: an fMRI study on craving  
in recently  detoxified alcohol -dependent patients.” PLoS One.  10(8): 2015.  
 
Holtzheimer, PE, WM McDonald, M Mufti, ME Kelley, S Quinn, G Corso, and CM Epstein. “Accelerated repetitive  
transcranial magnetic stimulation (aTMS) for treatment -resistant depressio n.” Depression and Anxiety. 27(10): Oct 2010,  
960-963. 
 
Hosomi  K, Morris  S, Sakamoto  T, Taguchi  J, Maruo  T, Kageyama  Y, Kinoshita  Y, Goto  Y, Shimokawa  T, Koyama  T, 
Saitoh  Y. Daily  repetitive  transcranial magnetic  stimulation  for poststroke  upper  limb pares is in the subacute  period.  
Journal  of Stroke  and Cerebrovascular  Diseases  2016;25(7):1655 -1664.  
 
Janicak, PG, and ME Dokucu. “Transcranial magnetic stimulation for the treatment of major depression.”  
Neuropsychiatric  Disease and Treatment. 11: 2015, 1549 -1560. 
 
Jorge, RE, RG Robinson, A Tateno, K Narushima, L Acion, D Moser, S Arndt, E Chemerinski. “Repetitive transcranial  
magnetic stimulation as treatment of poststroke depression: a preliminary study.” Biological Psychiatry. 55(4): Feb 
2004,  398-405. 
 
Khed r, EM, MA Ahmed, N Fathy, JC Rothwell. “Therapeutic trial of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation after  
acute  ischemic stroke.” Neurology. 65:  2005, 466 -468. 
 
Oberman, L, D Edwards, M Eldaief, and A Pascual -Leone. “Safety of theta burst transcrania l magnetic stimulation: A  
systematic  review  of the  literature.” Journal  of Clinical  Neurophysiology. 28(10):  Feb20 11,  67-74. 
 
Rossi, S, M Hallett, PM Rossini, A Pascual -leone. “Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines for the 
use of tran scranial magnetic stimulation in clinical practice and research.” Clinical Neurophysiology. 120(12): Dec 
2009,  2008 -2039.  
 
Seok JH, Chung MH. The efficacy and safety of accelerated repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in major  
depressive  disorder: single -blind,  randomized study. Brain  Stimulation 2015;8:378 -394. 
 
Sasaki N, Abo M, Hara T, Yamada N, Niimi M, Kakuda W. High -frequency rTMS on leg motor area in the early phase of  
stroke.  Acta Neurologica Belgica 2016;117:189 -194. 
 
Shen, XY, MY Liu, Y Che ng, C Jia, XY Pan, QY Gou, XL Liu, H Cao, LS Zhang. “Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic  
Stimulation for the treatment of Post -stroke depression: a systemic review and meta -analysis of randomized and  
controlled  clinical trials.” Journal of Affective  Disorders . 211: 2017, 65 -74. 
17 
  
 
Key Information  for: 
Accelerated  Repetitive  Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  (rTMS)  as a treatment  
for post-stroke  depression  in the subacute  phase:  an open  label  pi[INVESTIGATOR_526751].  This page provides key information that  may 
help you to  make this  decision;  more detailed  information can  be found after  this section.  
 
Why  is this research  being  done  and what  is involved?  
The purpose of this study is to find alternative trea tments for patient's suffering from depression after having a  
stroke.  
 
The specific treatment this study will be looking at a procedure called Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation  
(TMS). During an TMS session, an electromagnetic coil is placed against your sc alp. The electromagnet  
painlessly delivers a magnetic pulse that stimulates nerve cells in the region of your brain involved in mood  
control  and depression.  
 
In this study, you will receive [ADDRESS_683521]  to participate  and what  are the risks,  benefits  and alternatives?  
Participation in this research study is complet ely voluntary and you are free to withdraw from the research at  
any time.  You  may or may not  directly benefit from  participating  in this research.  
Side effects  such as headache  and light headedness  are generally  mild to moderate  and improve  shortly  after an 
individual  session and decrease  over time with additional  sessions.  
Rare but serious risks from participation in this study include temporary or permanent hearing loss, seizure, and  
mania.  There may be  other study  related risks  that are currently not  known.  
You do not have to participate in this study and your post -stroke care will not be affected if you choose not to  
participate. Alternative treatment options for post -stroke depression include antidepressants and  
counseling/therapy.  
 
Who  can I talk to  if I have questions  or concerns?  
If you have any questions or concerns about this research or would want to withdrawal from the study, you can  
contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Amelia Adcock at 304 598 -6127 or [EMAIL_10051]  from the Dept. of Neurology at  
West  Virginia University.  
 
 
For more  information,  please  see the Informed  Consent  Form.  
 
Page  1 of 9 
 
Page  2 of 9  
 Informed  Consent  | More  than  Minimal  Risk  Research  (Version  date December 
20, 2018)  
 
Site Version  25 Sept 2019  
 
 
Principa l Investigator  (PI) | Amelia  Adcock,  MD 
Department  | Neurology  
Co-Investigator(s)  | Jessica  Frey,  MD;  Ashley  Petrone,  PhD;  Umer  Najib,  MD, 
Patrick  Marshalek,  MD 
Coordinators  Jay Sherman,  RN Louise  Moore,  RN, Jennifer  Krupp,  MPH  
 
Funding  Source  | None  
WVU  IRB Protocol  # | [PHONE_10913]  
Study  Title  | Accelerated Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) as a treatment  
for post-stroke  depression in  the subacute  phase:  an open  label pi[INVESTIGATOR_526752],  you should  contact  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Adcock  at [ADDRESS_683522]  the WVU  
Human  Research  Protection Program  (HRPP)  at (304)  293-7073 or  by [CONTACT_25541]  [EMAIL_10052] . 
 
Introduction  
You,  , have been asked to participate in this research study, which has been  
explained  to you by  . This study  is being  conducted  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Adcock  in the 
Department  of Neurology  at West  Virginia  University,  along  with Jessica  Frey,  MD;  Ashley  Petrone,  PhD;  Umer  
Najib,  MD, Patrick Marshalek, MD.  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to determine if repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS) is an effective  
treatment  for post-stroke  depression  (PSD).  Post-stroke  depression  affects  up to 30- 50% of stroke  patients.  TMS  
may reduce depressive symptoms in stroke patients by [CONTACT_526760], and may  
additionally  improve  strength and  thinki ng in stroke  patients.  WVU expects  to enroll up  to 20 subjects.   
Page  3 of 9  
 Description  of Procedures  
If you are enrolled  in this study,  you will be evaluated  with several  scales:    
Hamilton  Depression  Screen  (HAMD):  measures  level  of depression  
   Functional  Independence  Measures  (FIM):  measures  level  of independence  
   NIH stroke  scale:  measures  severity  of stroke  symptoms  using  a neurologic  exam    
MINI  Suicide Scale: measures risk of suicide  
   Altman  Self-Rating  Mania  Scale  (ASRM):  measures  tendency  toward  mania  
After that, you will receive an experimental protocol using TMS. The protocol involves 20  
total sessions over the course of 4 consecutive days. A brief description of the actual rTMS  
procedure  is as follows:  
 
   Step One:  You will recline  comfortabl y in the treatment  chair,  awake  and alert 
   Step Two:  A small  curved  device  containing  the magnetic  coil rests lightly  on your head    
Step Three:  The device  delivers  pulses directly  to the  target  areas  of your  brain  
   Step Four:  You can immediately  resume  normal  activities  
During  treatment,  you will hear a  clicking  sound  and feel a tappi[INVESTIGATOR_526753].  
 
Study  Procedures  
The study  procedures  will be as follows:  
   After reviewing and signing this consent form, you will be screened with a sur vey to ensure you meet all  
inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  as well as the surveys  listed  above  
   Any personal  information  will be de-identified  
   Bloodwork will be drawn along with your routine labs to check for signs related to post stroke  
depression . 
We will obtain  basic  vital signs  including  EKG,  blood  pressure,  and heart  rate prior  to the start of the TMS  
sessions.  
All participants  will receive  rTMS  using  the following  experimental  protocol:  
   [ADDRESS_683523]  my blood  samples  stored  for future  testing.  
 
 
 
 
Risks  and Discomforts  
Common  Side Effects:  
   Temporary  pain or discomfort  at stimulation  site   
Headache  
   Eye pain   
Toothache  
   Muscle  twitch    
Facial  pain 
   Neck  stiffness  
Acetaminophen  or other  medications  for treatment  will be available  and provided  to you if the 
above  side effects o ccur.  
Uncommon  Side Effects:  
   Temporary  or permanent  hearing  loss   
Seizure  (less than 0.1%  of the time)    Mania  
In order  to minimize  the rare risk of hearing  loss, the following  procedures  will be followed:    
You will wear earplugs  during the TMS  sessions  
   Study  staff will discuss  with you the risk of permanent  hearing  loss if earplug  falls out 
   Study  staff will ask you to immediately  report  any loosening  of an earplug  duringTMS  
   Investigators will immediately stop TMS if you report or if an  investigator observes that an earplug has  
loosened  or has fallen out.  
In order  to minimize  the rare risk of seizure,  the following  procedures  will be followed:  
   You will be monitored at all times for signs of seizure by a trained physician or nurse who  has 
experience  treating seizures  
 
Page  5 of 9  
    Equipment such as oxygen, suction, blood pressure monitor, CPR equipment, and anti seizure  
medications  will be available on site  if needed  
   Given the social implications of seizure and convulsive syncope (i.e. adv erse impact on  future  
employability,  insurability,  and/or  eligibility  to drive),  in the event  of seizure,  the 
investigators  will provide  you with a letter  documenting  that the event  was experimentally  produced.  
 
In order to minimize the rare risk of mania,  you will be monitored with the Altman Self -Rating Mania Scale and  a 
score concerning for manic symptoms will halt further TMS trials and you will be provided with appropriate  
psychiatric  care should  these symptoms occur.  
 
There is no known adverse effect of TMS on cognitive functioning. The long -term effects of TMS are  
unknown.  
 
If you are a woman of child bearing age, you will be asked to provide a pregnancy test prior to enrollment in the  
study.  
 
Starting any treatment for depression, you may become more  depressed before getting better. Your depression  
symptoms will be closely monitored throughout the study. Any signs of self -harm or suicidal ideation will lead  
to removal from the study and immediate and appropriate psychiatric care for these symptoms. An y increased  
risk of self-harm  will be assessed  via a standardized  questionnaire  known  as the M.I.N.I.  Suicide  Scale.  
 
You will be asked to report any adverse reactions you may experience throughout the study. You may choose to  
discontinue  the study  at any time.  
 
In addition, this study will involve some routine blood draws. Some adverse reactions to blood draws include  
pain from inserting a needle under the skin surface (common), fainting at or about the time of blood drawing  
(infrequent),  bruising  at the site (infrequent), and  infection  at the site (rare).  
 
Alternative  
You do not have to participate in this study and your post -stroke care will not be affected if you choose not to  
participate. Alternative treatment options for post -stroke depression include  antidepressants and  
counseling/therapy,  which  have been  discussed  with you  and you are welcome  to partake  in as well.  
 
Benefits  
Possible benefits include the improvement of your health, including improvement of your depression as well as  
motor recovery a nd improved quality of life. Since this study is using TMS in a novel way, it is not known  
whether rTMS will be effective in your case, and you may not receive any benefit or your condition may  
worsen.  The knowledge gained  from  this study may  eventually be nefit others.  
 
Financial  Considerations  
There  are no special  fees for participating  in this  study.  
All participants will a receive card to compensate for their time ($10 for each TMS procedure completed with  
an additional  $10 for subjects  who complete  all four TMS).  Additional  compensation  is available  for lodging  
 
Page  [ADDRESS_683524] significant barriers  
securing  transportation  to trial  appointments (including the  TMS session  days).  
You may be asked to provide your Social Security Number and/or verification of U.S Citizenship or Permanent  
Resident  Status to receive payment.  
Your information may be provided to the appropriate parties for billing and/or payment purposes.  Please be  
advised that any compensation received for participation in a research study, including a gift card, is considered  
taxable income and must be reported to the IRS.  If you are a WVU employee or a WVU student -employee, you  are 
required to report the total amount of c ompensation received for your participation in a research study to the  WVU  
Tax Services Office upon receipt of payment.  
 
Voluntary  Compensation  
In the event that you are physically injured as a result of participating in this research, care will be availa ble and  
we will connect you with a medical professional who will examine and treat you if needed. Unless an injury  
happened because of an error directly related to the study, we will not compensate for any medically related  
charges.  You should  realize,  however,  that you have  not released  this institution  from  liability  for negligence.  
Please contact [CONTACT_093], [CONTACT_526768] at [ADDRESS_683525] order or may be inspected by [CONTACT_526761] , including  the Food  and Drug  Administration  (FDA),  without  your additional  consent.  
In addition, there are certain instances where the researcher is legally required to give information to the  
appropriate authorities.  These would include mandatory reporting of infectious diseases, mandatory reporting  of 
information about behavior that is im minently dangerous to your child or to others, such as suicide, child  abuse,  
etc. 
In any publications that result from this research, neither your name [CONTACT_526764].  
 
Volunta ry Participation  
Participation in this study is voluntary.  You are free to withdraw your consent to participate in this study at any  
time. If you choose to withdraw your participation from the study, the data collected on you up until that time  
remains a p art of the study database and may not be removed.  No additional information will be added to the  study  
database after your withdrawal.  
Refusal  to participate  or withdraw  will not affect  your future  care at West  Virginia  University.  
In the event  new information  becomes  available  that may affect  your willingness  to participate  in this study,  this 
information will be given to you so that you can make an informed decision about whether or not to continue  
your participation.   
Page  [ADDRESS_683526] (GINA)  
A Federal law, called the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), generally makes it illegal for  
health insurance companies, group health plans, and most employers to discriminate against you based on your  
genetic  informatio n.  This  law generally will protect  you in  the following  ways:  
 
• Health  insurance  companies  and group  health  plans  may not request  your genetic  information  that we 
get from  this research.  
• Health insurance companies and group health plans may not use your ge netic information when making  
decisions  regarding your eligibility  or premiums.  
• Employers with [ADDRESS_683527] Virginia's genetic discrimination laws protect patients from discrimination by [CONTACT_526762].  This means that a h ealth plan or insurance company cannot raise your rates based on genetic  
information about you or commit any other form of illegal discrimination, nor can employers in West Virginia  
use your genetic  information  to inform decisions  related  to hiring or firi ng you. 
 
 
HIPAA  Authorization  
We know that information about your health is private. We are dedicated to protecting the privacy of that  
information. Because of this promise, we must get your written authorization (permission) before we may use or  
disclose  your protected health  information or share it  with others.  
You can decide to sign or not to sign this authorization section. However, if you choose not to sign this  
authorization, you will not be able to take part in the research study. Whatever choice yo u make about this  
research  study will not  have an effect on  your access to medical  care.  
 
 
Persons/Organizations  Providing  the Information  
Patient  (data  are from  the participant)/West  Virginia  University  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]/  WVU  Medicine/  WVUHS  (data  are from  
record s) 
 
 
Persons/Organizations  Receiving  the Information  
   The research site(s) carrying out this study.  This includes UHA or UHA Affiliates, WVU, WVU  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600],  
WVUHS.  It also  includes each site’s  research staff  and medical staff.  
 
Page  [ADDRESS_683528] Virginia University Human Research Protection Program and/or Compliance and the Office  of 
Sponsored Programs.  
   WVCTSI  Clinical  Trials  research  staff 
The Following  Information  Will Be Used  
Informa tion from your existing medical records, and new information about you that is created or collected  
during this study, such as: history and physicals, clinic visit notes, nursing and staff notes, laboratory results, x - 
rays,  EKG results,  demographic data,  pulmonary tests,  imaging scans,  and study  forms.  
The Information  is Being  Disclosed  for the Following  Reasons  
   Review  of your data for quality  assurance  purposes    
Publication  of study  results (without  identifying  you) 
   Other research purposes such as reviewing the safety or effectiveness of the study drug and other  products 
or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]; conducting performance reviews of the study drug; evaluating other products or  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_82256]; developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a better understanding of disease; improving the d esign of future  clinical  trials  
 
You may cancel  this Authorization  at Any Time  by [CONTACT_526763]:  
[INVESTIGATOR_526754]  
[ADDRESS_683529]  
Morgantown, WV [ZIP_CODE]  Email: 
akad [EMAIL_10053]  Phone:  
[ADDRESS_683530] a right to see and make copi[INVESTIGATOR_154554]. You will not be able to see or copy your  records 
related to the study until the sponsor has complet ed all work related to the study. At that time, you may  ask to see 
the study  doctor’s  files related  to your  participation  in the study  and have  the study doctor  correct  any information  
about you that is wrong.  
 
This authorization will expi[INVESTIGATOR_526755].  
ClinicalTrials.gov  
A description of this clinical trial will be available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov , as required by U.S. Law.  
This Web site will not include information that can identify you.  At most, the Web site will include a summary  of 
the results.  You can search this Web site  at any time.  
 
Page  [ADDRESS_683531]’s  Legal  Representative  
 
 
Printed  Name  [CONTACT_526765].  The participant willingly agrees to be in  the 
study.  
 
 
 
Signature  [CONTACT_526766]   