1 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717782] Number  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Principal 
Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Bonita Franklin  
Methodology  Randomized open label  
Study Duration  Estimated duration for the main protocol (e.g. from start of 
screening to last subject processed and finishing the study)  
Study Center(s)  Single -center or multi -center.  If multi -center, note number of 
projected centers to be involved.  
Objectives  to determine if using a glucose sensor helps adolescents with t1D 
understand their range of op tions in controlling their diabetes     
Number of Subjects  60 
Diagnosis and Main 
Inclusion Criteria  Adolescents with type 1 diabetes and an HbA1c > = 8 %   
 
2 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548439] 1 diabetes ( T1D)  is one of the most common chronic diseases presenting in 
childhood. The prevalence ranges from [ADDRESS_717783] few years. The incidence of TIDM 
has increased by [CONTACT_2902] 2 -3 % each year. Management of T1D requires frequent blood 
glucose monitorin g, insulin injections and careful attention to diet. Hemoglobin A1c is a 
measure of average blood glucose over the prior 60 -90 days. The 2014 ADA goal for 
target HbA1c in adolescents is below 7.5 % but this is seldom achieved. There are 
multiple challenges  to managing T1D in adolescents. The insulin requirements are 
constantly changing as adolescents go through puberty, lead more independent lives and 
make their own food choices. In addition, adolescents may not feel the need to work hard 
to control their d iabetes as they feel healthy and have a sense of invulnerability and 
immortality. Tight blood glucose control requires frequent changes in the insulin regimen 
and pattern recognition. Even when patients check blood glucose levels regularly, it is 
measured only 4 -8 times per day while fluctuations in blood glucose occur continuously. 
Introduction of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) provides a measure of blood 
glucose level every [ADDRESS_717784] to 
but not a  replacement for capi[INVESTIGATOR_362846] . In the Type 1D  exchange clinic 
registry  {Wong, 2014 #75} , 9 % of over 17,000 participants used CGM (6% of children 
<13 years old, 4% of adolescents 13 to <18 years, 6% of young adults 18 to <26 years, 
and 2 1% of adults ≥26 years).   On July 21, an FDA advisory panel voted 8 -2 to allow 
patients to use Dexcom's G5 CGM data for making treatment decisions without a finger 
stick verification. Society representative [CONTACT_548464]  testified  in support of the 
label change citing the device's safety and the need for additional guida nce on how to use 
unverified CGM data effectively. The panel's recommendation will now be considered by 
[CONTACT_548440], if accepted, will carve a path forward for Medicare coverage of the 
device.  Currently CGM is not universally covered by [CONTACT_548441] . This wealth of 
information could theoretically allow adolescents to understand their diabetes better as 
well as help the physician in making changes in insulin regimen while avoiding 
hypoglycemia. Studies in adults have shown CGM significantly lowers HbA 1c levels 
without increasing risk for hypoglycemia. However research has shown that HbA1c did 
not improve in adolescents with T1D placed on CGM (presumably due to the lack of 
consistent use) but HbA1c was lowered in young children and adults on CGM. While 
development of a closed loop system for diabetes management will require CGM, 
adolescents are often resistant to wearing the CGM device.  
 
AIM:  
 
To determine if short -term use of  continuous glucose monitoring systems  (CGMS ) with 
intensive real time feedback  about diabetes management from medical staff to the patient 
will affect motivation and/or behavior, in adolescents with poorly controlled type 1 
3 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717785] tended to focus on participants who are in better 
glycemic control at bas eline and who report better adherence and diabetes -related quality 
of life than expected  of a randomly selected sample of subjects with type 1 diabetes.   
 
Studying a more broadly representative group that includes subjects with poor glycemic 
control will provide helpful information about glycemic and psychological effects of 
CGMS in an at risk group (1). Research indicates that various psychological skills and 
psychosoc ial factors, including copi[INVESTIGATOR_548430] a large role in the efficacy 
of CGMS use (2). 
 
 
We hypothesize that short -term CGMS use with feedb ack (and/or lack thereof) and 
patients’ sense of self -efficacy will influence their stage of change and potentially 
glucose levels.  
 
SUBJECTS:  
 
Sixty adolescents, ages 13-22 years , with type 1 diabetes and  an HbA1c >  = 8 %  who are 
also naive  to CGMS  or who have not used a CGMS in at least six months  use will be 
recruited from the diabetes outpatient population followed at Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Lutheran 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Woodhull Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], and the NYU Fink Pediatric Ambulatory Care Center.  
Forty subjects will be rand omly assigned to the CGMS group and 20 subjects will be 
assigned to the control group.  
 
Screening procedures to determine eligibility:  
At the medical appointment for each patient to determine eligibility for the study the 
research personnel will verify age , diagnosis of t1D, and HbA1c from  data in the  
electronic medical record , investigator  will also determine if the potential subject has any 
exclusion criteria listed below.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Patients with developmental delay, and patients who do not us e a gluco se meter to test 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_548431] , and patients without  access to a telephone will be excluded.  
 
METHODS:  
 
Throughout the study, all communication with the subject  and his/her parent will be 
conducted in  the preferred language of the patient and in that of his /her parent.  If 
required, a n interpreter will be utilized by [CONTACT_756].  
An introduction to the relationship between HbA1c, average blood glucose, and the 
complications of chronically elevated blood sugar levels will be provided d uring 
recruitment.  Potential subjects will be identified at their regularly scheduled clinic 
4 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548442] a recruitment script uploaded under recruitment materials section . 
 
The study is minimal risk (MR). The device is approved by [CONTACT_548443]/approved labeling. The probability and magnitude of harm or 
discomfort anticipated in this research is similar to those ordinarily encountered i n daily 
life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.  
 
The use of the CGMS will be described.  
 
The study will consist of 4 phases.   
1: For all participants a t entry into the study the participant’s HbA1c will b e measured in 
the lab at the location of the patient’s visit and his/her glucose meter will be downloaded  
as part of routine  care.  The average capi[INVESTIGATOR_329694] , (with range and standard 
deviation ) and the average number of tests per day over the pr ior 14 days will be 
recorded.  The current individual care plans  for self -management of type 1 diabetes will 
be reviewed by [CONTACT_548444].   
 
Questionnaires will be administered to all the participant s except Appendix F : 
1) Appen dix A - Stages of Change measure (original). We created a 5 item questionnaire 
to assess the patient's current stage.  
2) Appendix B - Psychosocial self -efficacy (University of Michigan Diabetes Research 
and Training Diabetes Empowerment Scale short -form) - DES. 8 items. Also available 
for use .(3-6) 
3) Appendix C - Knowledge and risk perception (University of Michigan Diabetes 
Research Training Center Diabetes Knowl edge Scale). 23 items - DKT. We are 
substituting rapid acting insulin for NPH insulin in item 17 since NPH is not used in our 
study population. Available for use without permission  as long as the source is quoted. (7, 
8) 
4) Appendix D - Quality of life (Peds QL 3.2, Diabetes module,)1 – Peds QL.  33 items 
on a Likert scale. (9) 
5) Appendix E - Depression (PHQ -2.). 2 items. If the patient receives a score of 3 or 
above, a referral to psychiatric services will be made. No permission required to 
reproduce, translate, display or distribute. (10, 11) 
6) Appendix F – CGM Satisfaction Scale. To be administered at second visit. See below  
number 2 on protocol . Will only be administered to study group.  
7) Appendix G  - Demographic  variables will be collected . 
8) Appendix H - Telephone administered questionnaire . 
9. Appendix I – data to be tabulated in research database in RedCap  
 
                                                           
 
5 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717786] scoring instructions will be fo llowed for published tests.  
The CGMS will be used only in the study group. The CGMS that will be used will be 
Dex-COM® which consists of the sensor, transmitter and the receiver.  The Dec -COM 
CGM device is FDA approved for use in patients 2 years and olde r. 
 
Sensor  - The sensor is packaged in a sterile sealed pouch, containing an applicator,  
sensor pod and sensor wire.  The applicator barrel helps to insert the sensor wire inside the 
sensor pod under the skin. After inserting the sensor wire, the applicator  barrel is 
removed. The sensor wire stays in the sensor pod with the pod attached to the skin by 
[CONTACT_548445]. The sensor wire is made of silver and platinum with polymer membranes. Once 
inserted, the thin and flexible wire measures the glucose levels in the f luid between the 
cells (interstitial fluid) for up to seven days.  Dexcom sensor is inserted in the 
belly/abdomen (ages 2 years and older) or the upper buttocks (ages 2 to 17 years).  The 
sensor is water resistant   
 
 
 
 
 
Transmitter  - Snappi[INVESTIGATOR_548432] r pod, the gray plastic transmitter wirelessly sends 
your glucose information to your display devices —receiver . The transmitter is re -usable 
and water -resistant . 
 
 
6 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717787] from any liquids and very high humidity.  
 
 
 
Adverse Effects  / Risks.    
Inserting the sensor and wearing the adhesive patch might cause infection, bleeding, pain 
or skin irritations (redness, swelling, bruising, itching, scarring or skin  discoloration). 
There is a low chance of this happening. In the clinical study for the Dexcom G4 
PLATINUM System, only slight redness and swelling occurred in a few patients. If any 
of these events happen, the patient  might feel discomfort in the area the sensor is inserted. 
There is a remote chance that a sensor fragment could remain under your skin if the 
sensor breaks while patient is wearing it. This did not happen in the clinical study for the 
Dexcom G4 PLATINUM System. If you think thinks a sensor ha s broken under your 
skin, he shall contact [CONTACT_548446]’s Technical Support. 
Sensor breakage may cause some anxie ty, but it is not a significant medical risk.  
 
Contraindications.  
The Dexcom sensor, transmitter, and receiver  must be removed  before Magnetic 
7 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548447] (MRI), Computed Tomography (CT) scan, or diathermy tre atment. 
The device is MR Unsafe . The magnetic fields and heat could damage the device so that 
it might not display sensor glucose readings or provide ale rts, and patients  might miss a 
low or high blood glucose value.  
Taking medications with acetaminophen (such as Tylenol) while wearing the sensor may 
falsely raise the sensor glucose readings. The level of inaccuracy depends on the amount 
of acetaminophen a ctive in the body and may be different for each person.  
 
Benefits.  
Real-time CGM provides benefits beyond the information one gets from a blood glucose 
meter. It provides glucose readings every five minutes for up to seven days to help det ect 
trends and pa tterns in glucose levels. This trend information can hel p you see where the 
gluco se is now as well as where the glucose may be heading and how fast the patient  may 
be getting there. Understanding the glucose trends may help take action to help avoid 
high o r low glucose values. Alerts and the low alarm tell when your glucose is outside of 
the target  glucose range and may help avoid low and high blood sugar. Rise and fall 
glucose alerts can also provide benefit by [CONTACT_548448][INVESTIGATOR_2478] y going 
down or up. This way the patient  can be alerted to this information before the glucose is  
too high or too low and take action to avoid it. Real -time CGM can help increase time in 
the target glucose range without increasing time in  the low or high glucose ra nge. Real-
time CGM can help improve diabetes control (lower A1c values, reducing glycemic 
variability and time spent in low and hig h blood glucose ranges) which can help reduce 
diabetes related complications. In some cases, patients perceived an increase i n their 
quality of life and peace of mind when using real -time CGM as well as reportin g a high 
satisfaction with CGM.  
 
Inserting the Device . 
It is necessary to choose an area that is at least 7.[ADDRESS_717788] 
the sensor pointing in the up or down direction.  
 
8 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717789] the transmitter in the sensor pod with the flat side facing down.  
 
9 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717790]. The 
transmitter should lie flat in the sensor pod. We should hear 2 “clicks.” If we do not hear 
2 “cl icks,” the transmitter might not be fully snapped in. We can release your pi[INVESTIGATOR_548433].  
c. Make sure the transmitter is secure by [CONTACT_548449].  
 
 
 
4. Hold the transmitter in place with one hand. Using your other hand, remove the 
transmitter latch by [CONTACT_548450].  
 
 
10 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548451] (Dex -COM ®) device wi ll be explained and the device placed on 
the subject’s abdomen by a trained study personnel . The participant will be instructed to 
continue to perform capi[INVESTIGATOR_548434], and to calibrate the Dex -
COM ® at least twice daily.  The par ticipant will be encouraged to review the CGMS 
readings as often as possible, particularly before meals, bedtime, and 1 -2 hours after 
eating.  If the glucose result on the CGMS is >= 300 mg/dl, or <= 80 mg/dl, he/she will 
be instructed to verify the result s by [CONTACT_548452], follow the usual care 
instructions and then call the Pediatric Diabetes team for advice.  An alarm upper limit 
will be set on the CGMS device at 3 00 mg/dl, and a lower limit at 80 mg/dl.  He/she and 
the investigator will agree  on a time of day for daily phone contact.   The phone advice 
will be based on standard medical management of type [ADDRESS_717791] will be with the adolescent participant.  
 
2: Study visit # 2  will be in  1 week  from the in itial visit  for both the study and control 
groups .  The patient s in the study group will return the CGMS device at the time of the  1 
week  appointment.  The glucose  meter s of all participants will be downloaded, and the 
data will be extracted as above.   The Empowerment Scale short form and the measure of 
Stages of Change will be administered  to both groups .  A brief questionnaire about the 
participant’s response to use of CGMS will be given  to the study group  (CGM 
Satisfaction scale  – Appendix F ). Study and control groups will both be given a $50 
11 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548453] .  
3. Study visit # 3 will be scheduled at 1 month  for both the study and control groups . The 
patient’s glucose meter will be downloaded and the data will be extracted as above. The 
Empowerment Scale short -form, Quality of Life , Family  Management Measure  and the 
Stages of Change questionnaires will be administered. There will be an open -ended 
interview with the participant. The patient will be given $20 on completion at this visit.  
  
  
 
4: Study visit #4 will be scheduled at 3 months  for both the study and control groups .  
The patient’s HbA1c will be measured  in the lab at the location of the patient’s visit , 
his/her gluco se meter will be downloaded and the data will be extracted as above. The  
Empowerment Scale short -form , PHQ -2, Quality of Life  and the Stages of Change 
questionnaires will be administered.  The patient will be given $20 on completion at this 
visit. 
 
CONSENT:  
 
The study personnel w ill describe the procedure s: filling  out the questionnaires, wearing 
the CGMS device for 1 week , participating in daily phone calls with study personnel  for 
the 1 week when the device is used, and the requirement s of returning the CGMS device,  
and of bringing  the gluco se meter to all appointments.   The participant and his/her parent 
must sign the consent for these items.  The study personnel  will change the sensor in [ADDRESS_717792] .  Minor skin irritation 
or bruising may occur, and there is a low risk of skin infection.  Restrictions in terms of 
submersion in water will be described and consented.  The Dex -Com ® CGMS device is 
FDA approved for use in children and adolescents  with type 1 diabetes . 
 
ANALYSIS:  
 
Measures of the level of glycemic control will be assessed primarily by  [CONTACT_13505]1c and  
secondarily by [CONTACT_548454]’s gluco se meter.  
Comparison of the glucose results  (average, range, standard deviation , number of daily 
tests) between the study entry,  1 week , 1 month and 3 month  follow up  visits will be 
done.  Comparison of HbA1c at entry and at 3 -month follow -up will be performed.  
Questionnaire scores will be compared between study entry , 1 week follow up , 1 month 
follow up  and 3 -month follow -up visits  for DES  and Stages of Change scales.  We will 
determine if there is a correlation between the scores on the q uestionnaires and measures  
of glucose control. We will classify study and control participants into adherent and non -
adherent groups.  
12 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548455] -adherent:  
Study subjects will receive points for calibrating the CGM device and for successfully 
completing phone contact [CONTACT_548456].  The patient will receive 2 
points for calibrating the device 2 times /day for at  least [ADDRESS_717793] any less than mentioned before. The two score s will be added to get a 
total score. Patients with scores 3 -4 will be classified as adherent and scores 0 -2 will be 
classified as non -adherent . Control subjects who complete 4 or more phone calls on 
different days will be classified as adherent and those who com plete fewer phone calls 
will be classified as non -adherent.  
 
Statistical methods:  
Demographic data will be tabulated. Statistical analysis of questionnaires will be done 
according to published standards. The paired t -test will be used  for comparisons 
involving stages of change score.  
Independent variables will include the empowerment score,  average glucoses, HbA1c  and 
whether the subjects fall into the  adherent  vs. non -adherent groups. Dependent variables 
include glucose level(s) and stage of change. We wi ll analyze the 7 day average glucose 
by [CONTACT_548457]: No change  (-15 to + 
15), Higher (>= + 15) or Lower (<= -15). We will analyze the HbA1c and categorize the 
results in terms of change: No change ( > -0.5 to  + 0.5), Higher (>= + 0.5) or Lower (<= -
0.5). Stages of change (Appendix A) will be categorized as unchanged, improved or 
worsened. In addition , descriptive statistics including quality of life, d iabetes knowledge 
scale, and demographic variables  will be tabulated .  
 
Statistical Analysis for sensor study:  
Questionnaires:  
Demographics (Appendix G): data will be put in table form, with range, mean, s.d. scores 
for age; % Male/Female; and descriptive data for the remainder of the items.  In 
Questions #11, 13 and 14, with 1 -5 scales, the range, mean, and s.d. scores will be given.  
Stages of Change (Appendix A): scores can be given categorically, with each question 
assigned a score of 1 for a “yes” answer, and zero for a “no” answer; then range, mean, 
s.d. will be calculated before and after the intervention.  In addition, a “yes” or “no” 
answer to these questions will determine which “stage of change” category the subject 
belongs in, according to the definition of “stages of change”.  This is categorical data.  
We will analyze movement in the “stages of change” by [CONTACT_548458].  This will be categorical: improvement, no change, 
deterioration.  
13 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548459] -Short Form (Appendix B): the average of the scor es of the 
completed items will be tabulated.  Each question is answered as [ADDRESS_717794] (Appendix C): There a re [ADDRESS_717795].  This will be administered only at baseline.  
Peds  Quality of Life 3.2 Diabetes Module: (Appendix D): There are 33 questions with 
Likert scale answers (0 -4).  Scores are transformed on a scal e of [ADDRESS_717796] will be 
administered before and after the study intervention.  
PHQ -2: (Appendix E): The score ranges from 0 -6.  The scores will be compared before 
and after the study intervention.  
CGM Satisfaction Scale: (Appendix F): We are using an  abbreviated version of a 
previously published CGM -SAT scale.  Each question is scored 1 -5 and the mean is 
calculated.  This will be given after the intervention and only in the intervention group.  
Daily Phone Log: (Appendix H): Scoring will be done for ea ch day of the initial week of 
the study, in both CGM intervention group, and control group based on the following:  
Study subjects will receive points for calibrating the CGM device and for successfully 
completing phone contact [CONTACT_548460] t eam. The patient will receive 2 
points for calibrating the device 2 times/day for at least [ADDRESS_717797]. All 
categorical variables will be presented as mean +standard deviation. For categorical 
variables the differences between the compliant and non-compliant  groups will  be 
assessed using the Mann Whitney or rank order Wilcoxon test based on normality. For 
categorical variables independent sample t test will be used. Univariate analysis will be 
used to establish correlation between variables of interest . 
 
Protocol Section  8: Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  
Safety and Adverse Effects:  
In case of unanticipated problems involving risk to subjects or others, such as intercurrent 
illness or experience that develops or worsens in severity during the course of the study, 
or worsenin g of a pre -existing condition, the P.I. will be notified and determine if this 
event is related to the study, if further medical investigation must be done, if the event is 
14 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717798]’s current medical care for t1D it is not 
anticipated that the study will result in serious or important adverse events , such as 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_64329] .  If there are any adverse events, even if cons idered non -
serious, these will be addressed by [CONTACT_941] P.I. as appropriate, and reported from the initiation 
of the study to the end of the study (the study period of 3 months plus 30 days).  All 
unresolved adverse events will be followed by [CONTACT_941] P.I. until the  events are resolved, the 
subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event is explained.   
At the last scheduled visit, the P.I. or research personnel will instruct each subject to 
report any subsequent adverse events so that these may also be recorded a nd documented.  
 
General Physical Examination Findings  
At screening, any clinicall y significant abnormality will  be recorded as a preexisting 
condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically significant findings/abnormalities 
that meet the definiti on of an adverse event will  be recorded and documented as an 
adverse event.   
 
Abnormal Laboratory Values  
A clinic al laboratory abnormality will  be documented as an adverse event if any one of 
the following  conditions is met:   
 The laboratory abnormality is no t otherwise refuted by a repeat test to confirm the 
abnormality  
 The abnormality suggests a disease and/or organ toxicity  
 The abnormality is of a degree that requires active manage ment; e.g. discontinuing 
use of the CGM device.  
 
Recording of Adverse Events  
At each contact [CONTACT_190365] e subject, the investigator will  seek information on adverse events 
by [CONTACT_5147], as appropriate, by [CONTACT_5148].  Informati on on all adverse 
events will be recorded immediately in the source document, and also in the appropriate 
adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  All clearly related signs, 
symptoms, and abnormal diagnostic procedures results will be recorded in the source 
document, though should be grouped under one diagnosis.  
 
Any serious adverse eve nt that occurs after the study period and is considered to be 
possibly related to the study treatme nt or study participation will be  recorded and 
reported immediately.  
15 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548461]: n otifying the IRB  
P.I. will  submit reports of the following problems promptly but  no later than 5 working 
days from the time the investigator becomes aware of the event:  
 Unanticipated problems including adverse events  that are unexpected and 
related  
 
Other Reportable events:  
P.I. will make a prompt report to the IRB, though no later than 5 working days   for: 
 Complaint of a research subject  when the complaint indicates unexpected risks or 
the complaint cannot be resolved by [CONTACT_5051].  
 Protocol deviati ons or violations  (includes intentional and accidental/unintentional 
deviations from the IRB approved protocol) for any of the following situations:   
– one or more participants were placed at increased risk of harm  
– the event has the potential to occur again  
– the deviation was necessary to protect a subject from immediate harm  
 Breach of confidentiality  
 Incarceration of a participant  when the research was not previously approved 
under Subpart C and the investigator believes it is in the best interest of the sub ject 
to remain on the study.  
 New Information indicating a change to the risks or potential benefits  of the 
research, in terms of severity or frequency. (e.g. analysis indicates lower -than-
expected response rate or a more severe or frequent side effect; Oth er research 
finds arm of study has no therapeutic value; FDA labeling change or withdrawal 
from market)  
 
Reporting Process  
The reportable events noted above will be reported to the IRB using the form: 
“Reportable Event Form” or as a written report of the e vent (including a description of 
the event with information regarding its fulfillment of the above criteria, follow -
up/resolution and need for revision to consent form and/or other study documentation).  
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_548435]’s study file.  
 
Reporting Process  
Adverse events may be submitted on FDA Form 3500A (MEDWATCH Form), or in a 
narrative format .  
16 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548462][INVESTIGATOR_548436] -risk to subjects there is n o need to develop a safety endpoint   
Medical Monitoring  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_16462]/her site.  This safety 
monitoring will include careful assessment and appropriate reporting of adverse events as 
noted above, as we ll as the construction and implementation of a site data and safety -
moni toring plan. Medical monitoring will include a regular assessment of the number and 
type of serious adverse events.  
 
Protocol Section 9: Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007];  
 
Information about study subjects will be kept confidential and managed according to the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
(HIPAA).  Research personnel will obtain a signed subject authorization informing the 
subject of the  following:  
 What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this 
study  
 Who will have access to that information and why  
 Who will use or disclose that information  
 The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization fo r use of their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by 
[CONTACT_5151], retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of 
subject authorization.  For subjects that have r evoked authorization to collect or use PHI, 
attempts will be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the 
subject is alive) at the end of their scheduled study period.  
Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original r ecords of clinical findings, observations, or other 
activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  
Source data are contained in source documents.  Examples of these original documents, 
and data records include : hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, 
memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing records, 
recorded data from automated instruments, copi[INVESTIGATOR_548437] a ccurate and complete, microfiches, photographic negatives, 
microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the pharmacy, at 
the laboratories, and at medico -technical departments involved in the clinical trial.  
Case Report Forms  
The study case report form (CRF) is the primary data collection instrument for the study.  
All data requested on the CRF must be recorded.  All missing data must be explained.  If 
17 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/[ADDRESS_717799] ion was 
not asked, write “N/D”.  If the item is not applicable to the individual case, write “N/A”.  
All entries should be printed legibly in black ink.  If any entry error has been made, to 
correct such an error, draw a single straight line through the in correct entry and enter the 
correct data above it.  All such changes must be initialed and dated.  DO NOT ERASE 
OR WHITE OUT ERRORS.  For clarification of illegible or uncertain entries, print the 
clarification above the item, then initial and date it.  
Records Retention  
The study data will be entered into RedCap.  
REDCap is a secure web application for building and managing online surveys and 
databases. The study will use REDCap's process for both surveys and data collected 
during this study.  
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_548438] [ADDRESS_717800]  IRB  approval . 
 
Protocol #10: Study Monitoring, auditing and inspecting Plan:  
Study Monitoring Plan  
This study will be monitored according to the monitoring plan. The i nvestigator will 
allocate adequate time for such monitoring activities.  The P.I. will verify that the 
subjects in the study have signed consent/assent to participate, and that the 
documentation at each study visit is complete.  The P.I. will also review t he database, 
including survey material, lab results, clinical assessment, and subjective responses of the 
subjects in the study.  If any adverse events occur the P.I. will adhere to the required 
reporting protocol.   
 
The Investigator will also ensure that  the monitor or other compliance or quality 
assurance reviewer is given access to all the above noted study -related documents and 
study related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.), and has adequate 
space to conduct the monitoring visit.  
Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by [CONTACT_5040]/EC, the sponsor, government regulatory bodies, and University compliance and 
quality assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g. so urce documents, 
regulatory documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator will 
ensure the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, 
diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
18 
 
Use of continuous glucose monitoring system with intensive feedback in adolescents with 
poorly controlled type 1 diabetes  
Version Date: 04/26/2018  
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the NYU School of Medicine and Langone Medical 
Center.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_548463].  
 
1. Patton SR, Clements MA. Psychological Reactions Associated Wi th Continuous Glucose 
Monitoring in Youth. Journal of diabetes science and technology. 2016.  
2. Psychological aspects of continuous glucose monitoring in pediatric type 1 diabetes. Pediatric 
diabetes. 2006;7(1):32 -8. 
3. Anderson RM, Funnell MM, Butler PM, Arnold MS, Fitzgerald JT, Feste CC. Patient 
empowerment. Results of a randomized controlled trial. Diabetes care. 1995;18(7):943 -9. 
4. Anderson RM, Funnell MM, Fitzgerald JT, Marrero DG. The Diabetes Empowerment Scale: a 
measure of psychosocial self -effica cy. Diabetes care. 2000;23(6):[ADDRESS_717801] ML, Oh M, Fitzgerald JT. Evaluating a 
problem -based empowerment program for African Americans with diabetes: results of a randomized 
controlled trial. Ethnicity & disease.  2005;15(4):671 -8. 
6. Anderson RM, Fitzgerald JT, Gruppen LD, Funnell MM, Oh MS. The Diabetes Empowerment 
Scale -Short Form (DES -SF). Diabetes care. 2003;26(5):1641 -2. 
7. Collins GS, Mughal S, Barnett AH, Fitzgerald J, Lloyd CE. Modification and validation of the 
Revised Diabetes Knowledge Scale. Diabetic medicine : a journal of the British Diabetic Association. 
2011;28(3):[ADDRESS_717802]. Diabetes care. 1998;21(5):706 -10. 
9. Varni JW, Burwinkle TM, Jacobs JR, Gottschalk M, Kaufman F, Jones KL. The PedsQL in type 1 
and type 2 diabetes: reliability and validity of the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory Generic Core Scales 
and ty pe 1 Diabetes Module. Diabetes care. 2003;26(3):631 -7. 
10. Williams JW, Jr., Noel PH, Cordes JA, Ramirez G, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_19043] M. Is this patient clinically 
depressed? Jama. 2002;287(9):1160 -70. 
11. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: validity of a two -item 
depression screener. Medical care. 2003;41(11):1284 -92. 
 