 
A Prospective, Randomized, Fellow Eye 
Comparison of Fellow Eyes Undergoing LASIK 
With the Intralase IFS150 Versus the Visumax  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
March 6, [ADDRESS_334976] in 
the study. This includes a slit lamp examination of the front of the eye and a dilated 
fundoscopic examination of the back of the eye. If there is any pathology noted that 
would exclude the patient from the study, then we will inform the patient and m ake an 
appropriate referral. if the patient is deemed appropriate for the study after a comprehensive examination included computerized videokeratography, then they can be 
enrolled. The patient will undergo bilateral simultaneous eye surgery. Which eye is 
March 6, 2018   Page 2 of 7 treated with the Intralase IFS 1500 and which eye is treated with VisuMax will be 
randomized so there is a 50% chance for either eye to receive one treatment. The patients 
will be seen on the day of surgery, post op day one, one month, three months, six months 
and one year. The patient will receive topi[INVESTIGATOR_274091]. The patient will receive pred forte 1% ophthalmic drops for one 
week after treatment. The patient will also receive vigamox ophthalmic drops for four 
days after treatment. All of this is within the usual and customary standard of care for the 
treatment of patients undergoing LASIK surgery.  
b. Procedure Risks  
We are studying two brands of femtosecond lasers. Both lasers are FDA approved and common ly used in clinical practice. The research procedures are the least risky that can 
be performed consistent with sound research design.   
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
No deception will be used.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
No audio or video recordings are planned for the study.   
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
Alternative procedures include no surgery and continuing to wear  glasses and contact [CONTACT_13276].  
 
Alternatives also include performing LASIK or PRK surgery on both  
eyes outside of the study.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
The surgery is performed in both eyes at the same time. Once a patient has had a LASIK flap created there is no need to create an additional LASIK flap. Patients in both groups will receive the same postoperative care.  
g. Study Endpoint(s)  
We plan to follow the patients for one year. Patients can experience improvement in their vision 6- [ADDRESS_334977] Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Most reports in the literature report comparable outcomes between different 
manufacturers of femtoecond lasers for similar levels of nearsightedness with and 
without as tigmatism.  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments 
None.  
4. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. IDE-Exempt Devices  
IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_274094] ; Abbott Medical Optics, Inc.  
IND-Exempt Device 2  
Name:  [CONTACT_274095] ; Abbott Medical Optics, Inc.  
IND-Exempt Device 3 
Name:  [CONTACT_274096] ; Zeiss  
 
5. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
Up to [ADDRESS_334978] that the subjects do not participate in more than one study and this will be stated on the consent form.  
k. Payments to Participants  
There is no payment for participating in the study. The patients will receive a reduced fee 
of $  per eye to participate in the study. The usual and customary fee is $  
per eye.  
l. Costs to Participants 
The patient is responsible for a fee of $  per eye w/out discount and $  per eye with the discount.  
m. Planned Duration of the Study  
The study is for one year. We estimate that the study will take approximately three years 
to complete. Total time per participant during the screening process is approximately 45 
minutes. Total time per participant for active participation in the study will be 

March 6, 2018   Page 5 of 7 approximat ely 10 to 12 hours. Total time per participant for analysis of the participant 
data is approximately 30 minutes.  
6. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
No investigational devices are to be used. The excimer laser(AMO Visx Star S4 
CustomVue)is FDA approved for use in LASIK surgery. Both femtosecond lasers 
(VisuMax and Intralase IFS) are FDA approved for use in LASIK surgery. LASIK 
surgery is commonly performed in the excimer department.  
ii. Investigational drugs 
No investigational drugs are being used.  
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
Vigamox - ocular irritation, stinging, allergy.  
Pred Forte - ocular irritation, increased intraocular pressure, cataract formation  
Systane - ocular irritation, burning, transient blurring of vision  
Voltaren - ocular irritation, burning, allergy  
Proparacaine - ocular stinging, transient anesthesia of cornea 
Diazepam - nausea, drowsiness  
Vicodan  - nausea, drowsiness  
iv. Procedures 
Corneal topography, slit lamp biomicroscopy, Snellen  visual acuity testing, low contrast 
visual acuity testing, and anterior segment ocular coherence tomography testing are all routine non-contact [CONTACT_274093].  
Applanation tonometry and pachymetry involve touching a probe to the eye to measure intraocular pressure and corneal thickness respectfully. There is a low risk of a corneal 
abrasion while performing these tests (less than 1%). These tests are routinely performed 
in all the patients seen in the excimer clinic.  
Corneal sensation measurement using Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometry utilizes a nylon filament to stimulate the corneal nerves to measure corneal sensation. This device is 
commonly used in the clinic with essentially little or no risk.  
Fundus examination involves a dilated examination of the posterior pole of the eye. Bright light is projected into the eye. Patients can experience some discomfort  secondary 
to the bright light. This test is also performed as a routine part of every comprehensive eye exam in the excimer clinic.  
 The following are non-investigational procedures:  
LASIK  
Corneal topography  
Slit lamp biomicroscopy  
Fundus examination  
March 6, [ADDRESS_334979] visual acuity testing  
Anterior segment ocular coherence tomography  
Ultrasonic pachymetry  
Corneal sensation measurement using Cochet-Bonnet Aesthesiometry  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation-produci ng machines  
Not applicable.  
vi. Physical well-being  
Low risk.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being 
Low risk.  
viii. Economic well -being  
Low risk.  
ix. Social  well-being 
Low risk.  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low risk.  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
Not applicable.  
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
We will perform regular examinations of subjects at frequent intervals. If any adverse effects are noted, the subject will receive the appropriate care as needed. Both eyes are 
being treated at the same time so we will be following patients after the treatment.  
d. Study Conclusion 
We expect the study to terminate after all subjects have been enrolled. We will terminate 
the study sooner if a clear advantage is seen with one laser system compared to the other. 
We may terminate the stu dy earlier depending on our rate of enrollement.  
Individual subjects may be terminated for a variety or reasons including but not limited to: 
-failure to come to follow up visits  
-failure to follow the appropriate medication regimen -pregnancy 
-the subject  needs to receive treatment not allowed in the study  
-the study is cancelled  
March 6, 2018   Page 7 of 7 -unanticipated circumstances  
-other administrative reasons 
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review 
All measures of visual performance including unc orrected visual acuity, best 
spectacle corrected visual acuity, low contrast visual acuity, higher order aberration 
analysis, anterior segment OCT imaging.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring 
The principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_274092] t he data.  All adverse events will be 
reported to the IRB within one week of discovery.  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
NA 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
NA 
7. BENEFITS  
Subjects should experience a reduction or elimination of their nearsightedness with and  
without astigmatism with a resultant improvement in their uncorrected visual acuity. We may  
discover that either the VisuMax or the Intralase IFS yields better results with LASIK surgery so  
future subjects can choose the better technology.  
8. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information and specimens are handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  