 
 Page 1 of 7  IRB Minimal Risk Protocol Template  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Study Information  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_421643], Ph.D., P.E.      
 
       
Study Title: Comparative Effectiveness between Microprocessor Knees and Non-Microprocessor Knees 
 
Protocol version number and date: Version 1.3, September 2014 
 
Purpose  
 
Hypothesis:   
Hypothesis 1a: Differences exist between Microprocessor Knees and Non-Microprocessor Knees.  
Hypothesis 1b: Differences exist between the prosthetic and non-prosthetic limb for each prosthetic knee. 
Hypothesis 2: Differences exist in fall rates between amputees using Microprocessor Knees and Non-
Microprocessor Knees. 
 
Aims, purpose, or objectives:   
This study will assess if the functional performance and musculoskeletal outcome of transfemoral amputees are 
improved after receiving a Microprocessor Knee (MPK) compared to a Non-Microprocessor Knees (NMPK).   
 
Aim 1:
  Quantify the functional efficacy and satisfaction of transfemoral amputees wearing different prosthetic 
knee joints. 
Aim 2:  Assess the safety of transfemoral amputees wearing different prosthetic knee joints. 
Background ( In clude relevant experience, gaps in current knowledge, preliminary data, etc .):   Note: If this study establishes a human specimen repository (biobank) for research 
purposes, do not use this template. Use the Mayo Clinic Human Specimen Repository 
Protocol Template found on the IRB home page under Forms and Procedures at 
http://intranet.mayo.edu/charlie/irb/  
 
First -time Use: Use this template to describe your study for a new IRB submission.  
1. Complete the questions that apply to your study.  
2. Save an electronic copy of this protocol for future revisions.    
3. When completing your IRBe application, you will be asked to upload this template to the protocol 
section.  
Modification:  To modify this template after your study has been approved:  
1. Open your study in IRBe. Click on the study ‘Documents’ tab and select the most recent version of the 
protocol. Save it to your files.  
2. Open the saved document and activate “Track Changes”..  
3. Revise the protocol template to reflect the modification points , save the template to your files  
4. Create an IRBe Modification for the study and upload the revised protocol template.  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_532200] documented improved gait symmetry (Kirker, Clinical Rehabilitation . 
10:267-273, 1996;  Schmalz, Gait and Post ure. 16(3):255-263, 2002) and lower energy consumption (Schmalz, 
Gait and Post
ure. 16(3):255-263, 2002; Taylor, Prosthetics and Orthotics International . 20:116-121, 1996; 
Buckley, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 78:330-330) when using a MPK.  Multiple studies 
(H
afner, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 88(2 ):207-217, 2007 ; Kahle, Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research and Development . 45(1):1-14, 2008; Highsmith,  Prost hetics and Orthotics 
International . 34(4):362-377, 2010 ) ha ve shown that MPKs are more effective at preventing falls than NMPKs.  
B
lumentritt evaluated the safety of a MPK vs. NMPK in the gait laboratory and demonstrated that the MPK 
offered the highest degree of safety and was the most suitable prosthetic intervention for preventing falls 
(Blumentritt, Journal of Prosthetics and Orthotics . 21(1):2-15).  Kaufman (Kaufman, Gait and Post ure. 26:489-
493, 2007) demonstrated significantly improved balance, a more normal gait, and significantly more reliance on 
the MP
K prosthesis, and that amputees spontaneously increase their activity in the free-living environment 
when using MPKs.  The users’ subjective feedback was that the MPK improved their quality of life. This study 
se
eks to gather additional experience of community-living, transfemoral amputees using MPKs.   
 
Our previous and current research activities demonstrate our abilities to conduct this proposed research program 
a
nd yield novel research findings.  Of particular relevance to this study is our prior objective comparison of 
MP
Ks to NMPKs (Kaufman, Gait and Posture . 26:489 -493, 2007; Kaufman, Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation . 87(7): 1382-1385, 2008).  Additionally, we are currently able to quantify activity in the 
fr
ee-living environment using the Actigraph, a commercially available activity monitoring device.  The monitor 
is able to measure 3D acceleration and record the data using on-board memory.  The activity monitor has been 
used 
by [CONTACT_421647]-of-daily-living of a transfemoral amputee for four continuous 
da
ys while using a MPK.  These data reveal ed that a large portion of the day was spent performing low level 
a
ctivity.  There was asymmetry between the prosthetic and sound limb with more activity on the sound side.   
Finally, we have the capability to measure variable cadence in the free-living environment and have used this 
capability to study patients before and after total hip replacement surgery.  These data demonstrate our ability to 
measure activity level in the field over multiple continuous days and provide a meaningful interpretation, and 
a
re able to provide a unique perspective on the patient’s prosthetic usage.  Our laboratory has also been 
conducting multiple studies utilizing a biweekly fall tracking mailer to record number of falls and details 
surr
ounding these falls.  We currently have more than [ADDRESS_532201] Information – charts, records, images, or specimens are co nsidered ‘subjects’  
 
Target accrual : Proposed number of subjects to be included in your study at your site. “Subjects” may include 
M
ayo Clinic charts, records, or specimens, and/or  charts, records, or specimens received at Mayo Clinic from 
e
xternal sources for collaborating analysis by [CONTACT_181910] :    
Target accrual is [ADDRESS_532202] population:  Subjects will include 50 unilateral transfemoral amputees, age 55 and over.  No restrictions 
will
 be placed on gender or race.  Efforts will be made to included equal numbers of subjects below and above 
65 
years of age. 
 
 Page 3 of 7   
Inclusion Criteria:  
 Unilate ral transfemoral amputee 
 Medic are Functional Classification Level K2 or K3 
 C urrently using NMPK prosthesis 
 C urrent NMPK prosthesis is well fitting at the socket 
 No c urrent stump problems, such as skin breakdown  
 Able  to ambulate without a gait aid 
 
Exclusion Criteria:   
 P revious neuromuscular complications currently affecting gait 
 C urrently undergoing dialysis treatments 
 Amputation of the  contralateral limb 
 P oor fit of current NMPK prosthesis 
 
Will a Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained? If yes, provide an explanation .  No. 
 
Study Design  
 
Methods: Describe, in detail, the research activities that will be conducted under this protocol :  
  
The
 study design is a reversal design whereby [CONTACT_421648].  Each subject will 
be tested using their current NMPK, fit and tested with a MPK, and then tested again with their NMPK, e.g. A-
B-A design.  MPK prostheses from all manufacturers will be considered appropriate for testing.  Each MPK to 
be used in this study is FDA approved.  Each subject will be given an acclimation period (typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] ~4 months) 
consistent with other similar studies (Hafner, Arc hives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 88(2):207-217, 
2007; Kahle, Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development . 45(1):1-14, 2008; Kaufman, Archives of 
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 87(7): 1382-1385, 2008; Hafner, Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development . 46(3): 417-433, 2009) before testing is commenced on the MPK.  The foot will be in the L5981 
class, e.g. flex foot or equivalent.  The same socket, suspension, and foot will be used throughout the study in 
or
der to eliminate these confounding variables.  All prosthesis fittings will be performed by [CONTACT_423]’s own 
certified prosthetist according to manufacturers’ fitting guidelines. 
 
Patient Function (Efficacy):  Field based measurements will be obtained using ActiGraph activity monitors 
attached to waist, and bilaterally to the ankle and thigh for a period of [ADDRESS_532203] will don the monitors in the morning after waking and remove them prior to 
sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. 
 
Patient Satisfaction and Safety:  The subject’s self-assessed satisfaction and safety during the previous four 
weeks in their free-living environment will be measured at the end of each prosthetic rotation.  The general 
health SF-36 questionnaire and condition-specific Prosthesis Evaluation Questionnaire (PEQ) will be used to 
quantify patient satisfaction.  The PEQ addendu m (PEQ-A), [ADDRESS_532204] initially what activities that are important to them are impossible or difficult to do 
with their current (NMPK) prosthesis.  These activities and difficulty levels are revisited when using the MPK 
and again when switched back to the NMPK. 
 
All study materials will go to subjects via mail and will be returned to study staff by [CONTACT_421649]. 
 
Resources: Describe the available resources to conduct the research (personnel, time, facilities, mentor 
c
ommitment, etc.) :  
 
All expenses (personnel, materials, postage) are covered by a research contract with the American Orthotic and 
Prosthetic Association (AOPA).  Research activities will be carried out by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_421644].  Costs associated with MPK prosthesis components and their 
fitting will be covered directly by [CONTACT_421650]. 
 
Check all that apply. If none apply, leave blank:  
 
  This i s a multisite study  involving Ma yo Clinic and non-Ma yo Clinic sites.  
W
hen checked, describe the research procedures/activities being conducted on ly at Mayo Clinic: 
 
  Mayo Clinic staff will be engaged in research activity at a non -Mayo Clinic site .  When checked, provide 
the location and a detailed description of the Mayo Clinic research staff involvement . 
 
   This study is to establish and/or maintain an ongoing database or registry for research purposes only. 
 
  The research involve s contact [CONTACT_181917] , for example , survey s, questionnaires, 
obser
vation, blood draw . 
 
  The study involves  audi otapi[INVESTIGATOR_421645], Images, Specimens  
Provide the date range for collection of data and/or specimens that will be included in your research dataset.  
(Example: 01/01/2000 to 12/31/2012 )  
Da
te range: From ___/___/_____  to ___/___/_____ 
 
Check all that apply : 
 
  This study involves only  data and/or  specimens t hat exist at the time this application is submitted to the  IRB 
(IRB submission date) . No data  or specimens  will be collected beyond this date.  
 
 
  This study involves only data and/or specimens that will be collected after submission to t he IRB . 
 
 
 Page 5 of 7    The study involves data  and/or  specimens  that exist a t the time of submission to the  IRB and data  a nd/or  
specimens  that will be collected after submission to the IRB , for example  a study that includes c ollect ion of 
existing data  and prospective collection of specim ens. 
 
  Data  and/or specimens used in this study are collected under another IRB protocol. When checked, provide  
the IRB number(s) from which the research material will be obtained and c heck the box bel ow to attest  that 
subj
ects have provided consent for future use of their data  and/or spec imens, as described in this protocol .  
 
 IRB Number(s): 
 
 □Subjects have provided consent for use of their data and/or specimens, as described in this protocol. 
 
  Other data sources will be utilized in this study . When checked, provide all data sources:  
 
 
Data Confidentiality, HIPAA Subject Iden tifiers  
 
Review the list of subject identifiers below and, if applicable, check the box next to each subject identifier being 
recorded at the time you are collecting/abstracting data/specimens for use in this study. 
 
Subject Identifiers :  Individually identifiable information, including demographic data, that identifies the 
indi
vidual or for which there is reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify the individual.  NOTE: 
I
dentifiers apply to subjects enrolled in your study and to the subject’s relatives, household members, 
employers, etc. 
 
Internal  refers to subject identifiers that will be included in the dataset maintained by [CONTACT_3476]. 
External  refers to subject identifiers that will be shared with persons outside of the immediate study team, for 
e
xample, sent to an external collaborator or shared with a national registry.  
 
 
SUBJECT IDENTIFIERS  
Check all that apply  INTERNAL  
IDENTIFIER  EXTERNAL  
IDENTIFIE R 
Name  x  
Social Security number    
Medical record/patient registration number , lab a ccession, specimen or 
radiologic image number  x  
Study number, subject ID, or any other unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code that can be used to  link the identity of the subject to the 
data x  
Dates: All elements of dates [month, day, and ye ar] directly related to an 
individual . Their birth date, date of death, date of diagnosis, etc.   
Note: Recording a year only is not a unique identifier.  x  
Medical d evice identifiers and serial numbers    
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voic e prints , full face photographic   
 
 Page 6 of 7  images and any comparable images  
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs) , Internet Protocol (IP) address 
numbers , email address    
Street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes  x  
Phone  or fax  numbers  x  
Account, member, certificate or professional license numbers, health 
beneficiary numbers    
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers    
If None of the above identifiers will be recorded or maintained in the  
dataset and/or sent outside of the study team, please check “None”.   None   None  
 
 
Statistical Information  
 
Note: Power analyses and study endpoints are not needed for a pi[INVESTIGATOR_34173] .  
 
 No statistical information . If checked , pleas e explain : 
Statistical Considerations 
 
Power Statement:  The study power is based on an effect-size approach (Cohen, Psychological Bulletin . 
112:155-159, 1992).  Based on a paired design with 50 subjects enrolled, there will be 80% power to detect 
differences in means between the two devices (MPK vs. NMPK) of at least 0.[ADDRESS_532205] size.  This sample size is larger than previous MPK studies (Hafner, 
Arc
hives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 88(2 ):207-217, 2007; Kahle, Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research and Development . 45(1):1-14, 2008; Kaufman, Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation . 
87(7): 1382-1385, 2008), where the number of subjects ranged from 15 to 21. 
 
Data Analysis Plan:  
The purpose of this study is to compare the functional efficacy, patient satisfaction, and safety of two prosthesis 
designs: MPK vs. NMPK.  The effects of these two prosthesis designs on these outcome variables will be 
evaluated using a one-factor repeated measures ANOVA.  If the data are not sufficiently Gaussian, a non-
parametric procedure such as Friedman's test will be used.  Comparisons of A1 versus B, and A2 versus B will 
be also conducted using multiple comparison procedures or contrasts following the global ANOVA or 
Friedman's test.  All procedures and analysis methods proposed in this study have been used previously and 
have been thoroughly validated.   
 
The tri-axial accelerometer signals will be processed to yield activity levels of none, low, medium and high. 
Statistical analysis will determine if there are differences in activity level between the two prosthetic designs.  
Post-hoc analyses will be performed to determine which activity subscales differ between the prosthetic 
de
signs.  Asymmetry between the prosthetic and non-prosthetic limb will be quantified using the asymmetry 
index described by [CONTACT_421651] (Kaufman, Journal of Pediatric Orthopedics . 16(2):144-150, 1996).  
Variations in cadence will be quantified, since the data suggests that K2 patients benefit from a MPK (Theeven, 
Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine . 43(10):906-915, 2011; Burnfield, Pro sthetics and Orthotics International . 
36(1)
:95-104, 2012).  Age related changes in gait will also be quantified.  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_532206] matter content (concentration, confidence, stumbles, falls) and tested to determine if there 
are differences due to prosthetic design.  The information about falls from the biweekly fall tracking mailers 
will
 be compi[INVESTIGATOR_421646] (MPK vs. NMPK).  The  Patient-Specific Functional 
Scale scores will be compared across time points as well. 
 
Endpoints 
     
Primary: Complete data collection of all subjects and complete statistical analyses          
S
econdary: Manuscript publication 