Title:Potential Mechanisms for Intussusception after Rotavirus Vaccine-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_878225]'s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878226]: Mary Allen Staat, MD, MPH
Co-Investigators: Steven Black, MD
Alexander J. Towbin, MD
Elizabeth P.Schlaudecker, MD, MPH
Jean A.Tkach, PhD
Ardythe L. Morrow, PhD
Monica M. McNeal, MS
Mekibib Altaye, PhD
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Co-Principal Investigator s:Karen Broder, MD and Margaret Cortese, MD
Co-Investigators: Umesh Parashar , MD, MBBS
Devindra Sharma, MSN, MPH
ClinicalTrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page1of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017Contents
1KEY ROLES ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........4
2BACKGROUND AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE ................................ ................................ ..........4
2.1Rotavirus Infection and the History of Rotavirus Vaccines. 4
2.2Intestinal Imaging 7
2.3Potential Modifiers of Rotavirus Infection, Vaccine Response and Shedding and
Intussusception 9
3Purpose and Objectives ................................ ................................ ................................ ................... 12
3.1      Purpose 12
3.2Hypothesis 12
3.3Primary and Secondary Objectives 12
3.4Study Outcome Measures 12
4Research Plan ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ......13
4.1Overview of Study 13
4.2Selection of Study Population 14
4.3Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 14
4.4Randomization and Study Withdrawal 16
5 STUDY SCHEDULE ( See Appendix 1) ................................ ................................ ................................ [ADDRESS_1226976] Milk Collection 20
6.3Saliva Collection 20
6.4Stool Collection 20
6.5Blood Collection 20
6.6MRI/Ultrasound Imaging [ADDRESS_1226977] 24
8   LABORATORY EVALUATIONS AND METHODS ................................ ................................ .........24
8.1Blood-Cytokine and Inflammatory Responses and Maternal Antibody (IgG) ........................... [ADDRESS_1226978] Milk -IgA antibody and Secretor Status of the Mother 25
8.5Future Testing 25
9   IMAGIN G METHODS ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................... 26
9.1MR Imaging 26
9.12Methods 26
9.13ImageInterpretation 26
9.2Ultrasound Imaging 26
9.21Methods 26
9.22Image Interpretation 26
10RANDOMIZATION, DATA MANAGEMENT, STATISTICAL PLAN ................................ .....27
10.1Randomization Plan 27
10.2Data Management Plan 27
10.3Statistical Analysis Plan 27
11ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY ................................ ................................ ................................ .........29
11.1Adverse Events 29
11.2Safety Reporting: For Adverse Events 30
12POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS ................................ ................................ ......................... 30
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page3of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017PROTOCOL SUMMARY
Title: Potential Mechanisms for Intussusception after Rotavirus Vaccine
–Pi[INVESTIGATOR_878227]: Phase 4
Population: Infants6 weeks to 1 3weeks of age
Site: Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878228]:
Description of Agent Single oral dose of either of the licensed and recommended
OrIntervention: rotavirus vaccines: Rotarix® (RV1 ) orRotaTeq® (RV5) given alone or
with other routinely given vaccines
Primary Objectives: 1)to examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 withorwithout other
routineimmunizations ongastrointestinal anatomy
2)to assess the feasibility of conducting a larger scale study
Exploratory Objectives :1)to examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 with or without other
routine immunizations on gastrointestinal motility
2)to examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 with or without other routine
immunizations on blood and stool cytokines and inflammatory
responses, including clinical reactogenicity events
3)to assess patterns and level of vacci ne virus shedding after RV1 and
RV5
4)to provide preliminary data assessing associations with the pattern of
rotavirus vaccine strain (RV1 and RV5) shedding in the stool a nd
blood,stool cytokine responses ,and the anatomy and/or functional
motility of the small intestine ;and examine other factors such as
maternal antibody, breast milk antibody, andhuman blo od group
antigensto see if these factors modify these responses
5)to compare MRI and ultrasound imaging
Description Prospective randomized clinical study ofthe potential
of Study Design s: effects of the first dose of RV1 or RV5 on gastrointestinal motility and
anatomyandblood and stool cytokine responses and assess ment of
associations with the pattern of the sheddi ng of vaccine strain rotavirus
in the stool with these outcomes
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page4of44
Version 5.0 15SEP20171KEYROLES
Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878226] :Mary Allen Staat, MD, MPH
Co-Investigators : Steven Black , MD
Alexander J.Towbin, MD
Elizabeth P.Schlaudecker , MD, MPH
JeanA.Tkach, PhD
ArdytheL.Morrow, PhD
MonicaM.McNeal, MS
Mekibib Altaye, PhD
Study Coordinator : Nancy Back , RN, MPH
Study Manager: Marilyn Rice, MS
StudyTeam: Michelle Roth, RN
Krista Doerflein, LPN
Brittany Cassel l, LPN
JacquiDellaTorre, LPN
Centersfor Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Co-Principal Investigator s:Karen Broder, MD and Margaret Cortese, MD
Co-Investigators: Umesh Parashar , MD, MBBS
Devindra Sharma, MSN, MPH
Coordinator : Oidda Museru, MSN, MPH
This study is funded by a CDC contract with Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878229]. The Cincin natiChildren’s Medical Center PI  (Mary AllenStaat)
will oversee the overal l study and direct activities . CDC personnel will collaborate to develop the
protocol, conduct the study, ensure the study is aligned with CDC public health priorities, and analyze the
data and disseminate the results. CDC may receiv e access to coded data. This study will be registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov.
2BACKGROUND AND SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE
2.1Rotavirus Infection ,the History of Rotavirus Vaccines and Intusscusception
Prior to the licensure of rotavirus vaccines, rotavirus eswerethe most common cause of severe acute
gastroenteritis (AGE) in children worldwide with nearly all children infected in the first five years of
life1,2.In the [LOCATION_002] (US),rotaviruses were estimated to cause 55,[ADDRESS_1226979] proposed that the benefits of rotavirus vaccinesin
preventing rotavirus disease and death, even at a lower efficacy in developi[INVESTIGATOR_14696], far outweigh the
risksof intussusception .CDC’s Advisory Committee on I mmunization Practices (ACIP)routinely
recommends rotavirus vaccine for infants2.It ishowever, important to have a level of certainty about this
balance of risk and benefit given that intussusception in resource poor countries has a higher likelihood of
a poor outcome since there are delays in evaluation and decreased access to standard treatment whichcan
lead to high surgery rates and death. A better understanding of the potential biological mechanisms of
rotavirus vaccines to cause intuss usception as well as factors which may modify risk may provide
information to lessen the risk for intussusception or a poor outcome if a child gets intussusception. Below,
wesummarize what is known with regard to rotavirus vaccines, rotavirus infection an d intussusception to
date.
RRV-TVand Intussusception
On August 31, 1998, the tetravalent rhesus -based rotavirus vaccine (RRV -TV) (RotaShield ®, Wyeth -
LederleVaccines and Pediatrics) was licensed by [CONTACT_2165] (FDA) for routine
use among infants15.RRV-TV was found to be safe and effective pre -licensure. However, l ess than a year
after licensing, 15 cases of intussusception which occurred shortly after receipt of RRV -TV were reported
to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)16.Subsequent an alyses led by [CONTACT_878259]-TVand the development of intussusception . Thisled the
ACIPtowithdraw the recommendation for use of RRV-TV14,17and themanufacturer tovoluntarily
withdraw RRV-TV from the market in the US14.The initial publication describing the association
reported an increased risk for development of intussusception from [ADDRESS_1226980]
dose of vaccine (adjusted odds ratio, 21.7)18.A smaller risk also existed after receipt of the second dose of
vaccine. Researchers estimated that one case of intussusception attributable to vaccination with RRV -TV
would occur for every 4670 to 9474 infants vaccinated. Ecologic studies that followed reported a lower
vaccine-attributable risk19,20.Further analysis revealed that the risk was age related and substantially
increased in those older than 90 days21,22.Of note, in pre-licensure studies of thisrotavirus vaccine,
intussusception was seen in 5 of 10,054 vaccine recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] (0.5 per 1,000) and 1 of 4,633 controls (0.2 per
1,000);a difference that the investigators concluded was not statistically significant23.The pathogenic
mechanism for this association has notbeen identified24.
Current Rotavirus Vaccines
AfterRRV-TVwaswithdrawn from the market, two new rotavirus vaccines were subsequently developed
and introduced into the pediatric immunization schedule. Large pre -licensure studies for both vaccine
candidates were required to determine if there was an increased risk of intussusceptionfor each vaccine.
In these large phase 3 studies, no increased risk for intussusception was identified25,26. The ACIP and
American Academy of Pediatrics (A AP)recommended routine use of these two rotavirus vaccines in US
infants: RotaTeq® (RV5) which was licensed by [CONTACT_81775] 200627and Rotarix® (RV1) which
was licensed in April [ZIP_CODE]. Post-licensure programs to monitor the safety of these two vaccines were
established both in the US and abroad ,and after years of use, p ost-marketing studies from different
countries have identified a low level of risk of intussusception with both rotavirus vaccines ;however,
results have varied28-30.
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1226981] RV1 dose in Brazil.  They did ,however find a
smaller attributable risk (AR)of 1 case of intussusception for every 76,000 childrenvaccinated after dose
2.In Australia, active surveillance data from a sel f-controlled case series analysis estimated the AR for
intussusception to be 4.3 (95% CI, 0.8 –23.3) cases per 100,000 infants vaccinated in the 1–21 days after
dose 1 and the 1 –7 days after dose 229.Similarly, in US infants, an increased risk for intussusception after
RV1 was identified in the Vaccine Safety Datalink ( VSD) with an elevated risk during the first1-[ADDRESS_1226982] -licensure Rapid Immunization Safety
Monitoring System ( PRISM)suggested an increased risk after RV1, although the study was
underpowered32.
RotaTeq (RV5) and Intussusception
Since RV5 was licensed and recommended for use in the US prior to RV1, there have been more doses
givenand therefore a larger amoun tof data for monitoring post -licensure safety.  Four studies in the US
from 2010 to 2012 found no increased risk of intussusception with RV533-36.However, more recently, in
anAustralian study, active surveillance data from a self -controlled case series analysis estimated an AR
forintussusception in thefirst21 days after dose 1 and the first7 days after dose 2, to be7.0 (95% CI,
1.5–33.1) cases per 100,000 for RV529.Data from PRISM identified an increased risk of intussusception
afterRV5. In the first7 days after dose 1 of RV5 the ARwas 1.1 (95% CI 0.3, 2.7) additional
intussusception cases per 100,[ADDRESS_1226983] 21days after dose 1 of RV5 the AR
was 1.5 (95% CI 0.2, 3.2) additional cases of intussusception per 100,[ADDRESS_1226984]-licensure
studies.This could be due to the low level ofrisk, small sample sizes for a rare outcome and/or
differences in vaccine responses in different populations. Even though there are inconsistencies in these
studies,overall there is evidence that RRV -TV, RV1 and RV5 areassociated with an increased risk of
intussusception . The reasons for the increased risk are unknown and it is not clear if there are product-
specific differences that are real or if factors specific to the populations studied differ . Factors such as
transplacental maternal antibody and breast milk antibodycan influence vaccine -virus replication37,and
human blood group antigens (FUT -2) can affect susceptibilit y to rotavirus disease38.Other factors such as
nutritional status, micronutrient deficiencies and interfering gut flora could also impact viral replication39.
It is also possible that oral polio vaccine could influence risk for intussusception.  In the post -licensure
safety studies in Brazil and Mexico30, Brazilian children routinely received oral polio vaccine (OPV)
while Mexican children are given inactivated polio vaccine as part of their routine immunizations. Since
replication of polio virus is highest with dose one, and has been shown to lower the take of RV140,41, this
may be one factor that influences risk of intussusception where OPV is used. While OPV is not used in
the US, as we examine the association of intussusception and rotavirus in resource poor countries,
concomitant use of OPV with rotavirus vaccines will need to continue to be studied. In considering
factors associated with the risk of intussusception from rotavirus vaccines ,it will be important to examine
these potential modifiers whenever possible. Understanding the pathophysiology for such possible
association sis important not only in terms of performing risk -benefit analyses fo r existing vaccines but
also to facilitate introduction of newvaccines for which large pre -licensure assessments have not been
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1226985] enema for treatment and simultane ous
confirmation of the intussusception. In the case that theintussusception cannotbe reduced, the child is
thentaken to surgery for manual reduction with some children requiringpartialresection of their intestine
due to ischemic damage from the intussusception or because of a pathologic lead point .
The causes of intussusception are not known ;however, prevailing theories include :1) edema/thickening
of the bowel wall (resulting from inflammation and lymphoid hyperplasia),  2) prominent mesenteric
lymph nodes acting as lead points42and 3) alterations in gut motility43.A small fraction of cases have an
anatomical or pathologic “lead point”, s uch as a polyp, or Meckel’s diverticulum, that increases a child’s
susceptibility to intussusception. However in m ost children there isno clear explanation. Some studies
have suggested infectious agents as causes of intussusception, including adenoviruse s24,44-48, rotavirus49,
HHV-648, HHV-748, Epstein-Barr virus48,Escherichia coli50,Salmonella50,Shigella50,and
Campylobacter50;however,the implications of these findings are unclear since most studies do not
include a comparison group. Evidence of ro tavirus infection has been found in 5 -37% of infants with
intussusception in case series49;however,the association between natural rotavirus infection and
intussusception has never been confirmed with rigorous epi[INVESTIGATOR_29820]11,42,45,51.Prior to the
widespread use of rotavirus vaccines in the US, when rotavirus disease was distinctly seasonal,
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878230] ,suggesting that either rotavirus did not
play a major role in the etiology of intussusception or that multiple infectious agents with different or less
distinct seasonal patterns ma detheassociation between rotavirus infection and intussusception difficult to
detect51,52.Thus,whilewild-type rotavirus infection has not been linked to increased risk for
intussusception, a small increased risk for intussusception af ter wild-type rotavirus cannot be ruled out11.
One study suggested that rotavirus infection induced anatomical changes in the intestine (hyperplasia of
Peyer’s patches and mesenteric lymph node enlargement )compatible with those that could cause
intussusception42howeveranotherexamining intussusception in RRV-TVrecipi[INVESTIGATOR_878231]24, suggesting there may be different pathophysiologic mechanisms that lead to intussusception .
2.2Intestinal Imag ing
Imaging Studies in Children w ith Rotavirus Infection
Two previous studies have been done in children to explore possible mechanisms for the cause of
intussusception in children with wild -type rotavirus infection42,43. In the first study, 13 children with
confirmed rotavirus infection were age -and sex-matched to healthy children and ultrasound
measurements were done to assess ileum wall thickness and mesenteric lymph node diameters at
enrollment and one month later ; motility was not assessed42. The average age at enrollment was
comparable ( 7.2months for cases and 7.3 months for controls).Theyfound children with rotavirus
infection to have significantly thicker ileum wall thickness, greaterlymph node size and number of nodal
aggregates and greaterfree fluid compared to controls. While distal ileum loops were visualized in all
study subjects, the terminal ileum was only visualized in 46% of patients with rotavirus infection and in
62% of control s. Theyconcluded thatthese changes suggested a mechanism by [CONTACT_878260]. Since most intussusception oc curs at the terminal ileum, it is critical that an
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page8of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017imaging study evaluating risk for intussusception can effectively image this area.  With MRI, we will be
able to visualize and measure thewall of the terminal ileum for all patients as well as assess moti lity.
In a second study, investigators enrolled five children with symptomatic rotavirus infection and did
imaging with ultrasound and MRI within 5 days of the onset of symptoms and repeated imaging 5 -9
weeks later with an age range of 8 -20 months (mean age of 14 months)43.They found t hree of the five
infants had a significantly thicker ileal wall thickness in the acute period compared to the convalescent
period but no differences in the number and s ize of mesenteric lymph nodes. They found no difference in
peristaltic activity between the two time periods using MRI imaging without sedation. The authors did not
appear to have a period where the infants were made NPO.  A small sample size (4 infants fo r the MRI)
and lack of a specific protocol for feeding may have impacted their ability to assess motility patterns.
While these studies provide useful preliminary data, none were done in the age group in question or with
rotavirus vaccine exposure. In ad dition, radiographic techniques and assessments of motility have
improved since 2004 allowing for more standardized measures of normal anatomy and motility (pre -
immunization) and more sensitive measures post -immunization with the use of MRI .
Intestinal Motility Imaging
Thestandardimaging modality forclinicalevaluation of intestinal motility is fluoroscopy whereopaque
contrast material is administered orally or via a nasogastric tube into the bowel lumen, followed by [CONTACT_878261]. A
significant drawback is that fluoroscopy results in a relatively large radiation exposure. While abdominal
ultrasound avoids radiation exposure, technical challenges of ultrasound limit the ability to assess
intestinal motility. Ultrasound can only focus on one bowel loop at any given time, making assessment of
the entire bowel quite time intensive. Assessment of a single bowel loop over several minutes in order to
qualitatively and quantitatively assess motility is challenging. Any air within the bowel lumen
significantly decreases image quality. In addition, ultrasound is very dependent on the skill and
experience of the ultrasonographer and there is a high degree of inter -operatorvariability. Alternatively,
MRI is extremely effective in providing detailed information about anatomy and function including
motion53.MRIusesmagnetic field sand radio waves to create detailed images of the organs and tissues ;
there is no radiation exposure with this procedure. Recently, MRI has been used in the evaluation of in -
utero suspected congenital ma lformations of the intestine54, as well as evaluation of ongoing disease
activity in pediatric patients with inflammatory bowel disease55. Several recent studies have demonstrated
the ability of dynamic MRI, using ultrafast ac quisitions (< 1 sec), to evaluate intestinal motility56-61.
2.3Inflammatory Mediators and Intussusception -Use ofBlood and Stool Cytokine
Analyses
While we know that both infectious agents and receipt of vaccines induce immune responses and
inflammatory mediators, little is known about specific patterns of inflammatory mediator expression
which might be associated with an adverse event from a vaccine such as rotavirus vaccine and
intussusception. We know that specific cytokine responses can alter intestinal motility and lymph node
enlargement. Therefore we postulate that specific patterns of expression could predispose to
intussusception. While limited animal and human studies have examined serum cytokine responses, to our
knowledge, no studies of stool cytokines have been undertaken in evaluating rotavir us vaccines or
intussusception.
Animal Studies
Early studies in mice demonstrated that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can induce intussusception62.
Inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis factor, platelet -aggregating factor, and other cytokines
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1226986] been associated with LPS -induced intussusception
in mice67. In one study, indomethacin (a non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drug) treatment of mice after
LPS, prevented intussusception67. However, in another study,no correlation was demonstrated between
serumTNFα levels and the development of intussusception in mice68.
Human Studies
Several studies have evaluated serum cytokines in children at the time of acute ileocolic
intussusception69,70. Levels of IL -6, neopterin, and C -reactive protein (CRP) were significantly elevated in
children with intussusception co mpared to normal laboratory ranges and convalescent samples69.Another
study demonstrated elevated IL -[ADDRESS_1226987] examin ed fecal
cytokine responses to norovirus71,E. coli72,73, and other etiologic agents of travelers’ diarrhea using
enzyme immunoassays (EIA)74. [CONTACT_878306], our co-investigator, enrolled children with symptomatic C.
difficile(cases), symptomatic controls (without C. difficile ) and asymptomatic controls with and without
C. difficile . Stool samples were tested using EIAfor fecal IL -8, lactoferrin, and phosphorylated -p38
protein concentrations, as well as the novel quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (q
RT-PCR) to determine IL -8 and chemokine ligand (CXCL) -[ADDRESS_1226988] prolonged diarrhea. In addition, fecal
cytokines were higher in samples from symptomatic children (with and without C. difficile )than in
samples from asymptomatic children with C. difficile . In astudy in adults, persistent diarrhea was also
shown to be correlated more with intestinal inflammation than fecal pathogen burden. The RT-PCR
method was more sensitive than ELISA for IL -[ADDRESS_1226989] found a decreased antibody response to the live rotavirus vaccine RV1 in pre -licensure
studies in infants with higher levels of transplacental neutralizing antibody to the vaccine strain
(unpublished results). Therefore, early protection from rotavirus disease in cluding asymptomatic neonatal
rotavirus infections84,85may be due, at lea st partially, to protection by [CONTACT_878262]86. The risk of intussusception increases with age and many felt therisk
ofRRV-TV-associated intussusception also increased with age18. Therefore, in order to best understand
potential mechanisms associated with intussusception and rotavirus vaccines, ideally, it would be
important to examine responses in children with the broadest age r ange possible.  Since the age
recommendations for the first dose of rotavirus vaccine is [ADDRESS_1226990] selected the age range of 6 week to 13 weeks (12 weeks,
6 days) in order to provide assurances that the other [ADDRESS_1226991] not found this to be true. To our knowledge there are no
data describing differences in vaccine virus shedding, cytokine responses or intussusception in brea stfed
and non-breastfed infants. In the case -control study evaluating intussusception and RRV -TV,datawere
re-analyzed to assess risk factors for intussusception unrelated to RRV -TV97.Cases were infants who had
intussusception between November 1998 and June 1999. Controls were matched by [CONTACT_878263][INVESTIGATOR_878232]. Sociodemographic and feeding practice data were collected through parent and provider interviews.
Risk factors for intussusception were identified while controlling for exposure to RRV-TV. Of the 429
cases enrolled, 87% had not received RRV -TV. There were 1763 controls. In addition to finding male
sex, Hispanic or black race/ethnicity, and Medicaid enrollment to be factors associated with
intussusception, an interaction was found between introduction of solid food and type of formula
consumption.  Using breast milk as the referent group, infants wi th introduction of solid food for at least 5
weeks who consumed soy milk -based formula had a lower risk (OR 0.26; 95% CI 0.1 -0.7) and infants
without introduction of solid food who consumed cow's -milk formula had an increased risk (OR 2.33;
95% CI 1.4 -3.9).
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1226992] -fed infants had a relative risk of intussusception of 6.0 (95% CI, 1.8 to 20.4)
when breast -feeding at admission was exclusive and of 2.3 (95% CI, 0.8 to 6.6) when it was partial98.
They concluded that exclusive breast -feeding may be a risk factor for intussusception in infancy.
FUT2 Secretor Gene and Rotavirus Susceptibility
Recently, we and others have reported that, similar to norovirus, risk of rotavirus infection is determined
in part by [CONTACT_28045]’s FUT2(fucosyltransferase 2) genotype38,99,100. TheFUT2(secretor) gene is
responsible for producing an enzyme that makes carbohydrate histo -blood group antigens (HBGAs)
available on the surface of the gut. The major human rotavirus genotypes (P4 , P6, and P8) bind to HBGA
that are synthesized by [CONTACT_270672]2gene enzymes, specifically H type 1, Lewis B or A antigens101,102.
Individuals who are homozygous recessive for the FUT2(secretor) gene, and are thus known as “non -
secretors,” lack these HBGA on their mucosal surfaces, thereby [CONTACT_878264][INVESTIGATOR_1663]. From a collaborative multi -site surveillance study with the CDC New
Vaccine Surveillance Network (CDC NVSN), we identified 56 rotavirus -positive cases of acute
gastroenteritis (AGE). None of these rotavirus AGE cases had the non -secretor FUT2 mutation, compared
with 23% of healthy controls (p<0.01). Additional surveill ance by [CONTACT_878265]
120 rotavirus positive cases, and similarly, found that only 2% of the rotavirus AGE cases were FUT2
non-secretors compared to 23% of healthy controls (p<0.01).
FUT2non-secretors are approximately one -quarterof the population and appear to be largely protected
not only against rotavirus but also against norovirus, while the majority of the population with FUT2
secretor genotype appears to convey risk. Thus, the question arises, why is the FUT2genotype maintai ned
–what is the benefit? Several lines of investigation suggest that the carbohydrates synthesized by [CONTACT_878266]2enzyme have an anti -inflammatory impact on the intestinal tract. The FUT2secretor genotype and
oligosaccharide made by [CONTACT_270672]2enzyme favors micr obial diversity103, and the growth of beneficial,
immune-regulatory intestinal microbiota104-106. Conversely, the lack of these carbohydrates in the FUT2
non-secretor genotype is a risk factor for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and functional chan ges in
the microbiota that are accompanied by [CONTACT_26423] -clinical levels of inflammation in the local intestinal
mucosa103.
Other Routine Immunizations
Young infants receive multiple immunizations that are associated with elevated bloodcytokines and other
inflammatory markers. Routine childhood immunizations have been found to be associated with pro -
inflammatory cytokine responses, including INF -γ23,24,IL-525, IL-626, and IL-827.These routine
immunizations may therefore contribute to or interfere with the inflammatory response following
rotavirus immunization, potentially altering the risk for intussusception.
Thereforeit will be important that in two arms of thestudy infants will receive routine 2 month old
immunizations withone of the two recommended rotavirus vaccine s (RV5 or RV1) toevaluate the
contribution of blood cytokine responses associated with the addition of routine immunizations to
rotavirus vaccine and whether there are stool cytokine responses that are associated with routine
immunizations with rotavirus vaccine given conc urrently.This will provide two arms that reflect “real
world” immunization schedule, allowing for the determination of any changes in the outcomes from
receiving all the recommended vaccines.  The outcomes found in these two arms will be compared to the
RV1 and RV5 alone arms.
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1226993]-fedinfantscould modify
rotavirus vaccine virus shedding and/or inflammation following v accination.
3.3Primary and Exploratory Objectives
Primary Objective s:
1)toexamine the effects of RV1 and RV5 withorwithout other routine immunizations on
gastrointestinal anatomy
2)to assess the feasibility of conducting a larger scale study
Exploratory Objectives:
1) to examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 with or without other
routine immunizations on gastrointestinal motility
2)to examine the effects o f RV1 and RV5 with or without other routine immunizations on blood and
stool cytokines and inflammatory responses, including clinical reactogenicity events
3) to assess patterns and level of vaccine virus shedding after RV1 and RV5
4)to provide preliminar y data assessing associations with the pattern of rotavirus vaccine strain (RV1
and RV5) shedding in the stool and blood, stool cytokine responses, and the anatomy and/or functional
motility of the small intestine; and examine other factors such as maternal antibody, breast milk antibody,
and human blood group antigens to see if these factors modify these responses
5)to compare MRI and ultrasound imaging
3.4 Study Outcome Measures
Intestinal Anatomy and Motility -Use ofMagnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)and Ultrasound (US)
We have selected magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)for ourmainimaging stud y outcome .Ultrasound
will also be done and the results obtained will be compared to the MRI results.   This will be done
because ultrasound is the standar d clinical mode of imaging for intussusception and is more readily
available in both the US and abroad compared to MRI. In addition, ultrasound was used in previous
studies. While ultrasound is a useful modality to assess the presence or absence of intus susception
clinically, it has several limitations which make it difficult to assess the bowel serially. Some of the
limitations of ultrasound include its lack of standard planes of imaging, lack of reproducibility, operator
dependence, and inability to accurately assess motility and to image the entire abdomen. Alternatively,
MRI is ideally suited to evaluate both intestinal anatomy and motility to assess for changes pre -and post-
immunization with rotavirus vaccines and this is why MRI will be our main ima ging study outcome .
Inflammatory Mediators -Blood and Stool Cytokines
We will measure both blood and stool cytokines pre -and post-rotavirus vaccination. The cytokines
chosen include those shown in past studies to be associated with intussusception and others were chosen
because of the association with lymphoid hyperplasia. For blood, we will test C -reactive protein as it is
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page13of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017readily available and used clin ically.  For both blood and stool, we will measure: IL -2, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8,
IL-15, INF-γ andTNF-α.
Rotavirus Vaccine VirusShedding
We will use RT -PCR to identify rotavirus vaccine strains, to examine the duration of shedding and to
quantitate rotaviru s shedding 5days post -vaccination. We willthenassess the correlation ofthe amount
of virus shedding with intestinal anatomy and motility as well as cytokine and inflammatory responses.
The Ct values will be examined and categorized as none, low or hig h for analysis. We chose [ADDRESS_1226994] 14 days and shedding becomes less frequent after 14 days. Vaccine virus shedding (qualitative) will
be doneonallstoolscollected. In addition, since we will be collecting reactogenicity data for Days [ADDRESS_1226995] the initial blood
sample for m aternal antibody to see if maternal antibody affects shedding of vaccine virus, blood and
stool cytokine responses and intestinal motility and anatomy. In addition, we will measure the infant’s
IgA antibody to assure that the child has not been infected w ith rotavirus.
Breast Milk Antibody
We will obtain a breast milk sample from breastfeeding mothers of infants enrolled in the study in order
to examine the potential effect of rotavirus IgA in breast milk on vaccine virus shedding, cytokine
responses, and intestinal anatomy and motility .The analysis will be exploratory given the small sample
size.
Secretor Status
Thus,in an exploratory analysis, we will examine whether there is an association with secretor sta tus and
inflammatory response.
4Research Plan
4.1Overview of Study
This study is a prospective clinical study designed to 1) examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 alone or
with other routine immunizations on gastrointestinal anatomy 2) to assess the feasibility of conducting a
larger scale study .Exploratory objectives include 1)to examine the effects of RV1 and RV5 with or
without other routine immunizations on gastrointestinal motility 2)to examine the effects of RV1 and
RV5 with or without other routine immunizations on blood and stool cytokines and inflammatory
responses, incl uding clinical reactogenicity events 3) to assess patterns and level of vaccine virus
shedding after RV1 and RV5 4) to provide preliminary data assessing associations with the pattern of
rotavirus vaccine strain (RV1 and RV5)shedding in the stool and blood , stool cytokine responses, and the
anatomy and/or functional motility of the small intestine; and examine other factors such as maternal
antibody, breast milk antibody, and human blood group antigens to see if these factors modify these
responses and 5)to compare MRI and ultrasound imaging.
Healthy infants 6-13weeks of age will be randomized (1:1:1:1)to receive either,RV1alone,RV5alone,
RV1 with ACIProutinely recommended immunizations ( Diphtheria, Tetanus and Pertussis ( DTaP),
Haemophilus influenz atype b (Hib),pneumococcal conjugate (PCV13) , Hepatitis B (HBV)and
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page14of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017inactivated polio (IPV )) or RV5 with routine immunzations .Imaging study personnel and parents will be
blinded to the rotavirus vaccine type ; parents will be informed about the rotavirus vaccine type at the
completion of the study .Up to150infants will be enrolled (see inclusion/exclusion below ).  The age -
group of infants 6-[ADDRESS_1226996] dose of rotavirus
vaccine at the AAP/ACIP recommended age of 2 months (minimum age of 6 weeks and maximum age of
14 weeks and 6 days)2and, to assure that other ACIP recommended vaccines can be administered at the
recommended age.
Recruitment and enrollment will occur prior to the first study visit. There will be three scheduled study
visitsafterrecruitment /enrollment .. Infants will be randomized to either RV1, RV1 plus other
immunizations, RV5 alone, or RV5 plus other immunizations. Visit1(day 0)will include blood, saliva,
stool and breast milk collection . The MRI and ultrasound will be performed prior to vaccination .
Children will receive the immunizations to which they are randomiz ed.Imaging personnel and parents
will be blinded to rotavirus vaccine type ; they will be informed about other vaccines administered .  A
second MRI and ultrasound will be performed at Visit 2(day 5)and blood and stool samples collected.
Parents will be unblinded at the completion of Visit3(day 14). Arrangements will be made to get
remaining doses of same rotavirus vaccine. Daily stool samples will be collected at home during the 1 5
day study period (on vaccination day 0 and for next 14 days). Amemoryaidwill becompleted to collect
reactogeni city dataon days [ADDRESS_1226997] -vaccination responses in the study infants. Cytokines
and intestinal anatomy and motility will be assessed at baseline (Visit1, the day of vaccine receipt)and5
days after vaccination ( Visit2). For both blood and stool ,the following cytokines will be tested: IL-2, IL-
6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-15, INF-γ and TNF-α.Additional biomarkers may be studied. The5day period post -
vaccination was chosen because this time period corresponds with the peak period for intestinal
replication of rotavirus vaccine virus for both vaccines107.
In order to protect the health of infants, we will provide procedures to facilitate and assure that infants
enrolled in the study will receive the routinely recommended vaccines for 2 month old infants which are
DTaP,Hib,PCV13,HBVandIPVthat will als o allow them to get their 4 month vaccines on schedule108.
4.2Selection of Study Population
Normal healthy full term infants ( >37 weeks gestational age ) will be recruited. Subjects will be recruited
without regard to race, gender, or ethnicity. Up to150subjectswill be recruited from established patient
populations at CCHMC. These include our CCHMC Pediatric Primary Care Clinic, employees at
CCHMC,andour CCHMC study database. Parental permission /i nformed consent will be obtained from
the parents/legal guardians before any procedures are performed. Their parents/legal guardians will be
interviewed to assure that the infants meet all the eligibility criteria and will be available for the duration
of the study.
Geographically, our proposed study population will be from our primary service area at CCHMC. We do
not anticipate targeted recruitment based on minority status, but no minority will be exclud ed from the
study.
4.3Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Subject Inclusion Criteria
Infants who meet the following criteria will be eligible to participate in this study:
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page15of44
Version 5.0 15SEP20171.healthy infant 6 to 13weeks(12 weeks and 6 days) of age at day of rotavirus vaccine administ ration
2.free of obvious health problems as established by [CONTACT_878267]’s primary
physician prior to Visit 1
3.parent/legal guardian willing to have infant feed from a bottle for contrast
4.parent/legal guardian willing and capable of signing informed consent
5.parent/legal guardian and infant expected to be available for entire study
6.parent/legal guardian can be reached by [CONTACT_756]
7.parent/legal guardian expresses willingness to complete study procedures and receiv e [ADDRESS_1226998] Exclusion Criteria
Infants will not be eligible if any of the below conditions apply:
1.gestational age of <[ADDRESS_1226999] for 4 hours prior to MRI procedure
3.receipt of any vaccine exceptinitialHBV(must have at least 28 days be tween HBV and Visit 1to be
included)
4.history of severe allergic reaction to HBVvaccine
5.contraindications for any of the routine vaccines
a.Severe Combined Immune Deficiency
b.history ofintussusception
6.precautions for either RV1 or RV5 (may interfere with study outcomes)
a.altered immunocompetence
i.infants with primary and acquired immunodeficiency states, cellular
immunodeficiency ,hypogammaglobulinemic and dysgammaglobulinemic states
ii.infants with blood dyscrasias, leukemia, lymphomas, or other malignant neoplasms
affecting the bone marrow or lymphatic system
iii.infants on immunosuppressive therapy (including high -dose systemic corticosteroids)
iv.infants who are HIV -exposed or infec ted
b.acutegastroenteritis
c.moderate or severeacuteillnesswith or without fever
d.pre-existingchronicgastrointestinal diseases(e.g., congenital malabsorption syndromes,
Hirschsprung's disease, or short -gut syndrome)
e.infants with spi[INVESTIGATOR_878233] r exstrophy (latex rubber is contained in the RV1 oral
applicator)
7.sensitivity to latex (latex rubber is contained in the RV1 oral applicator)
8.febrile illness within previous14 days(axillary temperature of 100.4◦F or higher)
9.history of vomiting (forceful expulsion of partially digested milk/food) within 24 hours prior to Visit
1and/or diarrhea (3 watery stools) within14days ofVisit 1
10.receipt of any steroids, immunoglobulins, other blood products/transfusion
11.receipt of non -steroidalanti-inflammatory drugsin previous 72 hours (may affect cytokine response)
12.receipt of an antipyretic medication (acetaminophen or ibuprofen) within [ADDRESS_1227000]
dose of rotavirus vaccine or is already planning to administer a prophylactic antipyretic medication on
the day of and the day following vaccination (this exclusion does not apply if the caretaker indicates
he/she might administer antipyretics after vaccination to reduce a fever)
13.is enrolled or plans to enroll in another clinical t rial while participating in this study (observational
studies are allowed)
14.any condition which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_7372], may post a health risk to the subject or
interfere with the MRI or vaccine evaluation
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page16of44
Version 5.0 15SEP201715.currently receiving medication for gastroesophageal reflux ( GERD)or any other gastrointestinal
condition including colic
16.infant who is a relative of any research study personnel
17.allergy to barium
18.failed newborn hearingscreening
4.4Randomization and Study Withdrawal
Randomization Procedures
The randomization code will be prepared by [CONTACT_878268][INVESTIGATOR_878234]. The randomization code will link to the vaccine assignment. The subject will be assigned a
randomization code. Randomization will takeplace prior to the vaccine administration, but after the
parent/legal guardian has given permission/informed consent , signed the IRB -approved consent form and
met all of the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria. Infants will be randomized 1:1:1:1to one of
four groups: 1) RV1alone, 2)RV5alone, 3) RV1 with routine immunizations (DTaP, Hib, PCV13, HBV
and IPVor 4) RV5 with routine immunzations.
Reasons for Withdrawal
The study personnel may withdraw a subject from the study at any time for the following reasons:
1.unable to comply with the study protocol
2.receipt of blood or blood products (including immunoglobulin) during the study period
3.malignancy or confirmed or suspected immunodeficiency such as HIV infection or severe combined
immunodeficiency
4.receipt of or history of any medications or treatments t hat affect the immune system, such as immune
globulin, interferon, immunomodulators, cytotoxic drugs, or other drugs known to be frequently
associated with significant major organ tox icity since enrollment
5.receipt of long -term (>2 weeks) potentially immunosuppressive corticosteroid medication during the
study period
6.parent/legal guardian request
7.infants who vomit within 15 minutes of rotavirus vaccination will not be withdrawn but wil l be
replacedfor analysis purposes
8.allergic reaction to barium
Handling of Withdrawals
Every effort will be made to undertake protocol -specific safety follow -up procedures for subjects who are
withdrawn by [CONTACT_107605]/legal guardians.  The subject’s parents/lega lguardians will be encouraged to
participate in the final follow -up contact [CONTACT_772968] 14 days after the initial visit.
Subjects who are withdrawn may be replaced if deemed necessary by [CONTACT_878269] m eet study
enrollment goals .
5STUDY SCH EDULE(SeeAppendix 1)
5.1Recruitment and Enrollment
Recruitment will be done by [CONTACT_878270] (PPC) Clinic at
CCHMC and through study advertisement at C CHMCtargeted towards our employee e -mail system and
database of past research participants who have agreed to be e -mailed for future studies. Any written
communication provided to the potential subjects' parents/legal guardians about the study will be
submitted to the IRB for their approval before study initiation.
We routinely conduct studies through the PPC and our research personnel are present in the clinic .We
will review the patients scheduled and will identify those who are age eligible for the stud y.  The medical
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227001] for those age -eligible will be screened to identify children who would not be eligible for the study
(exclusion criteria). Parents of potentially eligible infants will be approached to discuss participation in
the study. If interest ed, informed consent will be obtained before giving instructions and scheduling Visit
1.After consent is obtained, infant will be randomized into one of four study groups .
For recruitment of infants of CCHMC employees and through our research database, the interested parent
will call our study line. Relatives of study personnel will be excluded from participation as is standard
procedure .Study personnel will discuss the study by [CONTACT_648] .Subjectswill be screened by [CONTACT_878271]. Ifeligible and interested, a meeting time will be arranged prior to Visit 1to
obtain informed consent. The infant’s primary care provider will be contact[CONTACT_878272] [ADDRESS_1227002] be 6 weeks to 13 weeks of age (12 weeks, 6 days) for Visit 1, the day of immunization.
Inclusion and excl usion criteria will be reviewed. All  medications taken within the [ADDRESS_1227003] information will be obtained. The parent/legal
guardianwill be given containers for stool and breast milk collection at home.Instructions will be given
to the parent with the date, time and location for Visit 1andtheneed fortheirinfant to be NPO for 3
hours prior to appointment and to return with a stoolcollected the day of Visit 1(note for MRI must be 4
hoursNPO, but will ask to be 3 hours NPO since it will take ~one hour from arrival until feed for MRI).
5.2Parent Education about Rotavirus Vaccines and the Study
Parents approached for this study will be educated about the two licensed rotavirus vaccines (R V1 and
RV5) and informed that the AAP and ACIP routinely recommend rotavirus vaccines for infants anddo
not express a preference for RV1 or RV52. We will explain that their infant may be randomized to a
vaccine type different from the vaccine given at their primary care practice. The parent will also be
informed that RV1 is a two dose vaccine series and RV5 is a three dose vaccine series and th at if they
choose to have their infant participate in the study, their infant will need to complete the series with the
same vaccine type (all RV1 or all RV5). RV1 is to be administered orally in a 2 -dose series, with doses
administered at ages 2 and 4 mon ths. RV5 is to be administered orally in a 3 -dose series, with doses
administered at ages 2, 4, and 6 months. The minimum age for dose 1 of rotavirus vaccine is 6 weeks; the
maximum age for dose 1 is 14 weeks and 6 days. The minimum interval between doses of rotavirus
vaccine is 4 weeks and there is no maximum interval set. All doses should be administered by [CONTACT_654] 8
months and 0 days. The parent of infants who arerandomized to receive rotavirus vaccines without other
childhood vaccines will be informed tha t sincethepurpose of the study is to study the effects of rotavirus
vaccine,theirinfant will wait to receive the rotavirus vaccine until two weeks or more after other
routinely administered immunizations or will not receive their other recommended vaccines until two
weeksor moreafter their rotavirus vaccine .If the child is re ceiving routine immunizations af ter the
rotavirus vaccine, every effort will be made for the infant to receivethese vaccines within the
recommended ACIP schedule for vaccines routinely recommended at 2 months of age (DTaP, Hib,
Prevnar, Hepatitis B and IPV vaccine)108.The parents of infants who are randomized to receive rotavirus
vaccines with other recommended vaccines will be informed of this for their planning and provided with a
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227004] a 2 -month well child che ck-
up, but will be asked not to receive 2 -month vaccines at this visit.  Children receiving other childhood
vaccines as part of the study will receive the following vaccines Pentacel(DTaP, Hib and IPV
combination), Prevnar (PCV13)and HBV, in addition to the rotavirus vaccine. If one of these is not
available we will replace it with another equivalent licensed vaccine. All vaccines administered as part
of the study will be documented for the parent and child’s health care provider. This information will be
faxed to the provider.  The vaccines administered will be documented in EPIC, in IMPACT (the Ohio
State Registry) and in letter form with copi[INVESTIGATOR_878235].
5.3Study Visits
Enrollment/Recruitment Visit
review inclusion/exclusion criteria and medical history
obtain informed consent
obtain a release to get medical information from the primary care provider
collect contact [CONTACT_878273] 2 month
check up if known
if refuses study, record refusal reason on screening log
sample collection instructions
distribute sample collection supplies
review MRI and ultrasound prep
randomize to study group and inform parent of resultof all routine vaccines or rotavirus vaccine
alone (not specific rotavirus vaccine type)
schedule visit 1
givewritteninstructions for Visit 1 to parent(Appendix 5) Reminder Call  1 (day prior to Visit 1)
review sample collection instuction s
review MRI/ultrasound prep
review time, date and location of Visit 1 Visit1(Day 0-Vaccine Administration )
contact [CONTACT_878274]
inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed to determine if child still meets criteria for study
temperature will be recorded prior to immunization ;axillarytemperature must be <100.4◦Fprior to
administr ation of vaccine s
breast milk specimen brought from home if mother is breast feeding or can be collected at the visit if
needed
saliva specimen collected for human blood group antigen testing
baseline stool specimen (brought from home) before receiving the rotavirus vaccine
MRI to assess intestinal anatomy and motility
Ultrasound of abd omen to assess intestinal anatomy
baselinebloodspecimen for cytokine testing and maternal antibody testing (IgG)
The Vaccine Information Sheet (VIS) will be provided to pare nts/guardians for all vaccines
administered.
Thestudy product administrator, who is licensed to administer the vaccine (e.g., MA,LPN, RN, NP,
PA, or MD), will orally administer the rotavirus vaccine as indicated in the randomization code
oif the infant vomits after receiving the vaccine, in accordance with AAP and ACIP
recommendati ons, the vaccine will not be readministered but time of vaccine
administration and  vomiting will both be documented.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page19of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017For infants randomized to receive other vaccines as part of the study, the study product administrator,
who is licensed to administer the vaccine (e.g., MA,LPN, RN, NP, PA, or MD), willadminister the
vaccines,according to standard practice: Pentacel (DTa P, Hib and IPV combination), Prevnar
(PCV13)and  HBV), in addition to the rotavirus vaccine.  If one of these is not available we will
replace it with another equivalent licensed vaccine.
Memory aide will be reviewed with the parent and the parent will demonstrate ability to take
temperature and will be instructed in the collection of reactogen icity, adverse event, fever and
concomitant medication administration data for 14 days after vaccination .Parent/gurardian will be
given a thermometer to use for daily axillarytemperature recording
distribution of s upplies for daily stool collection for 14 day swith instructions for storage and re turn
writteninstructions (Appendix 6) will be given to the parent with the date, time and location for Visit
2and need for infant to be NPO (nothing to eat or drink) for3hours prior to appointment and to
return with daily stools collected
paymentfor time and travel will be pr ovided for the study procedures
study personnel will complete the case report form CRF
Reminder Call 2(Day 3 +2 days)
review sample collection instuctions
review MRI/ultrasound prep
review time, date and location of Visit 2
review memory aide with parent/guardian
Visit2(Day5 +/-1 day)Post-Vaccination)
contact [CONTACT_878275]
inclusion and exclusion criteria will b e reviewed to determine if child still meets criteria for study (no
vaccines given since last visit)
MRI to assess intestinal anatomy and motility
ultrasound to assess intestinal anatomy
submission of daily stool specimens colle cted
blood collected for cytokine testing
memory aide will be reviewed with the parent and the parent will demonstrate ability to take
temperature and will be instructed in the collection of reactogen icity, adverse event, fever and
concomitant medication admiration data forremainingstudy period
distribution of supplies for daily stool collection with instructions for storage and return
paymentfor time and travel for study procedures
writteninstructions (Appendix 7) given to the parent with the date, time and location for Visit 3and
need to return with the collected daily stool specimens and memory aide
study personnel will complete the C aseReportForm (CRF)
Reminder Call 3(Day 11 +/ -2 days)
review sample collection instuctions
review time, date and location of Visit 3
review memory aide with parent/guardian
Visit3(Day 14+/-4days)
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page20of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed to determine if child still meets criteria for study
(hasnot had any vaccines sinceVisit1)
submission of allremaining daily stool specimens collected from the infant
memory aide reviewed with the parent and collected
paymentfor time and travel provided for the study procedures
ensure parent has written plan on how to receive next dose(s) of rotavirus vaccine
administer parent/guardian satisfaction survey
6STUDY PROCEDURES
6.1Rotavirus Vaccine Randomization and Administration
Infants will be randomized to receive 1)RV1alone, 2)RV5alone, 3) RV1 with routine immunizations
(DTaP,  Hib, PCV13, HBV and IPV or 4) RV5 with routine immunzations prior to Visit 1. They will
receive the vaccination (s)after the MRI /Ultrasound is completed at Visit 1.
6.2Breast Milk Collection
Breastfeeding mothers will be asked to collect one breast milk sample to bring to Visit 1to assess anti -
rotavirus IgA antibody ELISAandthesecretor status of the mother. Approximately [ADDRESS_1227005] milk will be frozen at a minimum of -20°C.If unable to collect this sample at Visit 1, it can
be collected at Visit 2 or 3.
6.3Saliva Collection
AtVisit1, asaliva specimen will be collected for secretor genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_878236] -tipped
swabs in the infant’s mouth, saturating it with saliva and placing it in the Oragene (DNA Genotek)
solution. Once mixed with Oragene, the DNA in saliva is stabilize d and can be stored indefinitely at room
temperature. If unable to collect this sample at Visit [ADDRESS_1227006] bulk stool samples daily (Day 0 -Day 14) to assess rotavirus vaccine virus
shedding patterns and stool cytokine s.Cytokines will be tested forstools from Visit1andVisit2(stool
collected on the day sof the MRI).  Vaccine virus shedding (qualitative) will be done on stools from Visit
1throughVisit2(stool collected on the day of the MRI). If the Visit2stool is positive then theadditional
stools will be tested to determine the duration of shedding. If the Visit2stool is positive, a quantitative
PCR will be done on that stool.
Only bulk specimen s will be collected. Stools may be collected in diapers and placed in collection bag.
Rectal swabs will not be used for stool collection because we have found that they are not a reliable
source for detection of rotavirus109. Specimens will be refrigerated or frozen within [ADDRESS_1227007] the specimen at home will be asked to freeze the specimen within 8 hours of
collection. Once delivered to the lab, bulk stool and extracts will be frozen at a minimum of -20°C.
6.5Blood Collection
Experienced nurses will obtain a venousblood specimen ( approximately 2-3mL of blood ) by
[CONTACT_48571] (preferably) or by [CONTACT_878276] 1(pre-vaccination and
Visit 2(post-vaccination ) for cytokine and biomarker assays.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page21of44
Version 5.0 15SEP20176.6MRI/UltrasoundImaging
Using MRI, a non -invasive imaging method that does not use radiation , we will 1) assess intestinal wall
thickness, 2) lymph nodes and 3) intestinal motility patterns that may be associated with an increased risk
for intussusception. The MRI will be done at Visit 1just prior to the ultrasound and rotavirus vaccination
andsimilarly at Visit 2to ascertain for any changes in these three parameters between the two exams. A
trained MRI technician will conduct the procedures in accordance with standard practice.
Atrecruitment /enrollment , parents will be informed that to be included in the study, they will be asked to
keep their infant NPO for approximately 3hours prior to Visit 1and Visit [ADDRESS_1227008] a reminder call the day prior to eachvisitto confirm the study time and remind them to keep the
infant NPO. Research staff will meet the parent at the Welcome Center and escort the parent and child to
the CCHMC Imaging Research Center (IRC). The infant will not be sedated for the MRI; rather, the
infant will be fed and swaddled110,111. All images will be obtained on a 1.5T Philips MRI scanner located
in the IRC after appropriate metal screening and ear pro tection (ear plugs and MiniMuffs™ (Natus
Medical Incorporated, San Carlos, [LOCATION_004]).
The infants will notreceive intravenous contrast. However, they will receive enteric contrast by [CONTACT_878277] e quality. Thirty minutes prior to imaging,
each subject will be fed 20 mL/kg of a 3:1 mixture of VoLumen (Bracco Diagnostics) slowly over about
[ADDRESS_1227009] the parents and primary care physician.
After completion of the MRI, an ultrasound of the abdomen will be done.  The non -invasive ultrasound
will be done to 1) assess intestinal wall thickness and2) lymph nodes that may be associated with an
increased risk for intussusception. The ultrasound will be done at Visit [ADDRESS_1227010]
practice.The ultrasound will take up to 30 minutes to complete
6.7Rotavirus Vaccine Administration
No restrictions are placed on t he infant's feeding before or after receipt of rotavirus vaccine (except as
needed for the MRI) .Documentation of whether the child is being breastfed and/or type of formula will
be collected. While the efficacy of the rotavirus vaccine series is similar a mong breastfed and
nonbreastfed infants, breastfeeding could potentially be related to outcome so we will document feeding
practice at each visit and daily on the memory aid . Eventhoughrotavirus vaccine can be administered to
infants with minor acute illness (e.g., mild gastroenteritis or mild upper -respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092], with or
without fever ),both minor and major acute illness eswill be exclusion criteria ,as these conditions could
interfere with our outcome measures (gastrointestinal motility and anatomy and cytokine responses ).
6.8Reactogen icity Assessment
Reactogenicity will be assessed for both groups for fourteen days after vaccine receipt (Days 0 -14)and
recorded by [CONTACT_7071]/legal guardian on a provided memory aid . The events will include fever, fussiness
and gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea (number of stools per day and looser than
normal).Parents will be instructed not to take temperature after bundling and how to distinguish vomiting
from normal spi[INVESTIGATOR_22940]. Data will be collected using review of memory cards with the parent . We have
found this to be accurate, simple and acceptable to the parents of young infants. The following
reactogenicity signs/symptoms will be collected:
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page22of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017•Diarrhea:  defined as 3 or more epi[INVESTIGATOR_878237] -than-normal stools in 1 day
•Vomiting: 1epi[INVESTIGATOR_254962] (forceful expulsion of partially digested milk/food) in 1 day
•Fever:  axillary temperature ≥ 99.5degrees F (measured once daily or more frequently if perceived
fever)
•Hematochezia: maroon stools or any evidence of blood in the stool -black and tarry stools or frank red
blood
•Irritability
Thefollowing grading system will be used in evaluating the fever and systemic events during Days1-14
following vaccination:
Reaction Mild (Grade 1) Moderate (Grade 2) Severe (Grade 3)
Fever (axillary) ≥99.5°F to ≤100.4°F >100.4°F to ≤102.2 >102.2°F and higher
Diarrhea3 looser than normal stools/
day4-5loose stools/ day >6loose stools/ day
Vomiting 1 epi[INVESTIGATOR_254962]/ day 2epi[INVESTIGATOR_878238]/ day ≥ 3epi[INVESTIGATOR_878238]/ day
Irritability Crying more than usualSome interference with normal
activitySignificant interference with
normal activity
HematocheziaAny stools that are black and tarry; maroon in color; or, frank red blood -each epi[INVESTIGATOR_878239]’s medical provider immediately
6.9Receipt of other Recommended Vaccines
At thefinal visit, Day 14,arrangements will be made to facilitate receipt of initial ACIP recommended
vaccines for [ADDRESS_1227011] not already received them prior to Visit 1 .See tables below to
reference the recommended ages and time intervals between vaccine doses:
Study Visit 1Study Visit 3PrimaryMD Visit
(not part of study)
RV Immunization “2 month” Immunizations “4 month” Immunizations*
6 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks
7 weeks 9 weeks 13 weeks
8 weeks 10 weeks 14 weeks
9 weeks 11 weeks 15 weeks
10 weeks 12 weeks 16 weeks
11 weeks 13 weeks 17 weeks
12 weeks 14 weeks 18 weeks
*minimum of [ADDRESS_1227012] whenever
possible (all RV1 or all RV5). We have established procedures to make every effort for children in the
study to complete the rotavirus vaccine series with the same brand used for the first dose in the study. We
will provide the parent and their infant’s h ealth care provider with written and electronic/fax
documentation respectively of the dates, types, route, dose and manufacturer of vaccines given and will
enter these into the CCHMC electronic medical record (immunization section and encounter note) as we ll
as the Ohio State Registry IMPACT system. We will offer the parents to return to receive the same brand
dose if they do not receive their care at CCHMC and their primary care provider does not offer the same
brand. For children receiving their care at C CHMC, we will provide their primary care provider with the
same brand dose. These additional doses of rotavirus vaccines will not be considered a study
procedure. [ADDRESS_1227013] practice.
https://www.gsksource.com/gskprm/htdocs/.../ ROTARIX -PI-PIL.PDF
https://www.merck.com/ product/usa/pi.../r/ rotateq/rotateq_pi.pdf
7.2Dosage, Preparation, and Administration of Study Product
RotaTeq®
Each 2-mL dose is supplied in a container consisting of a squeezable plastic, latex -free dosing tube with a
twist-off cap, allowing for direct oral administrat ion (RotaTeq ®2009).6.[ADDRESS_1227014] (ClinCard). We will load payment onto the ClinCard after each clinic visit that is completed.
$150 at 1stClinic Visit
$150 at 2ndClinic Visit
$100 at 3rdClinic Visit
$50 if asked to come in for an unscheduled visit
If parent comes in for a clinic visit and the child is not eligible, they will receive $25. If unable to
complete the study, they will be paid for each study visit completed.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page24of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017To administer the vaccine:
1.Tear open the pouch and remove the dosing tube.
2.Clear the fluid from the dispensing tip by [CONTACT_878278][INVESTIGATOR_878240].
3.Open the dosing tube in 2 easy motions:
a.Puncture the dispensing tip by [CONTACT_878279].
b.Remove the cap by [CONTACT_878280]
4.Administer dose by [CONTACT_878281]'s mouth toward the inner cheek
until the dosing tube is empty. ( A residual drop may remain in the tip of the tube.)
If for any reason an incomplete dose is administered (e.g., infant spi[INVESTIGATOR_878241]), a
replacement dose will not be administered. The infant should continue to receive any remaining dos es in
the recommended series. There are no restrictions on the infant’s consumption of food or liquid, including
breast milk, either before or after vaccination with RotaTeq ®(RotaTeq ®2009).
Rotarix®
Each 1-mL dose consists of a vial of lyophilized vaccine to be reconstituted with a liquid diluent in a
prefilled oral applicator, allowing for direct oral administration (Rotarix ®2009).
To administer the vaccine:
1.Remove the vial cap and push the transfer adapter onto the vial (lyophilized vaccine).
2.Shake the diluent in the oral applicator (white, turbid suspension). Connect the oral applicator to
the transfer adapter.
3.Push the plunger of the oral applicator to transfer the diluent into the vial. The suspension will
appear white and turbid.
4.Withdraw the vaccine into oral applicator.
5.Twist and remove the oral applicator.
6.Administer Rotarix ®orally.
In the event that the infant spi[INVESTIGATOR_878242], a replacement dose will not
be administered. There are no restrictions o n the infant’s food or liquid consumption, including breast
milk, either before or after vaccination with Rotarix ®(Rotarix®2009).
7.3Assessment of Subject Compliance With Study Product
The study vaccines, RotaTeq ®and Rotarix ®, will be administered by [CONTACT_878282],
who is licensed to administer the vaccine (e.g., LPN [licensed practical nurse], RN [registered nurse], NP
[nurse practitioner], PA [physician assistant], or medical doctor [MD]), in the clinic. Study personnel will
record the administration time on the CRF and include whether it was a complete dose or a partial dose
due to regurgitation.
8LABORATORY EVALUATIONS AND METHODS
8.1Blood-Cytokine and Inflammatory Responses and AntibodyTesting(IgGand
IgA)
Blood specimens from Visit 1will be used for assessment of anti-rotavirus IgGantibody(maternal) and
anti-rotavirus IgA antibody to rotavirus and measurement of serum cytokine levels and on the day of the
second MRI ( Visit 2)for measurement of serum c ytokine levels and anti-rotavirus IgA . Blood for the
antibody assays will be drawn into a serum separator tube by [CONTACT_48571] (2-3 mL). After collection, the
tubes will be kept at room temperature until the blood has clotted. The tubes will be centrifuged at room
temperature at approximately 1000 -1300g (2,400 -2,700 RPM) for 10 -15 minutes to ensure the sample is
sufficiently separated. The serum will be removed using sterile glass or plastic pi[INVESTIGATOR_878243] 5.0 15SEP2017
Page25of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017appropriately labeled cryovials (approxi mately 3 x 0.5 mL). The serum aliquots will be stored at -20 °C or
colder until testing. The cytokines of interest will be assayed in a multiplex Luminex assay using the
serum samples ( Nefertiti C. DuPont et al 2005) .The following cytokines will be measured: IL-2, IL-6,
IL-7, IL-8, IL-15, INF-γ andTNF-α. In addition, a C -reactive protein (pre -and post-vaccination) will also
be done.Additional cytokines or biomarkers may be done should funding become available.
Maternal antibodies to rotavirus will be measured using an anti -rotavirus IgG ELISA assay developed and
qualified in the Laboratory for Specialized Clinical Studies (LSCS). The antibody enzyme immunoassay
will be used to detect and quantify rotavirus IgG antibody concentrations in human serum112. Each assay
willinclude a serially diluted [ADDRESS_1227015] consisting of a
human serum pool arbitrarily assigned as having 1000 Units/mL. The curve will be modeled using the [ADDRESS_1227016] curve. Serum
anti-rotavirus IgA will be determined using the same assay but using an anti -human IgA conjuga te.
8.2Stool-RV1 and RV5 Shedding and Cytokine Responses
Stool specimens will be utilized for both assessment of rotavirus vaccine shedding patterns and
measurement of stool cytokine s. For stool cytokine testing, stool specimens from Visit1andVisit 2will
be used. For assessment of rotavirus vaccine virusshedding patterns ,all collected stools will be
analyzed. Cytokine testing will be done on Visit 1andVisit 2specimens only. All stool samples will be
kept frozen at -20 °C or colder until testing . For determination of rotavirus shedding and cytokine
responses, stools will be thawed and nucleic acids will be extracted .For cytokine determination, PCR will
be performed using Taqman gene expression assays from Life Technology for each of the cytokines of
interest.The following cytokines will be done: IL -2, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-15, INF-γ andTNF-α.
Additional biomarkers or cytokines may be done should funding become available.
8.3Saliva-DNA Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_878244]’s secretor status by [CONTACT_37688][INVESTIGATOR_007].
Assay plates can accommodate up to 96 subjects each. We anticipate a yield of 25 -30 ug of DNA per
child using Oragene solution, which is more than sufficie nt for the purposes of this analysis. Secretor
genotype will be determined at CCHMC through testing for known single nucleotide polymorphisms of
the secretor gene ( FUT2),428G>A114.
8.4Breast Milk -IgAAntibody and Secretor Status of the Mother
Breast milk samples will be used to assess anti-rotavirus IgA antibody and secretor status of the mother.
The anti-rotavirus IgA assay is a validated, standard ELISA assay that has been used for both R V1 and
RV5clinical trials by [CONTACT_95205] (LSCS)112. We will also evaluate the mother’s secretor status from breast
milk using the genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_878245]114.
8.5Future Testing
The informed consent form include sinformation ab out specimen storage and future use of the stored
specimens. Samples will be retained for possible future testing with a linkage to identifiers . The samples
will be stored locally at the site andlocal site investigators will have access to the samples. Ho wever,
before the use of these samples by [CONTACT_148711](s), request for use of these samples will require
project approval by [CONTACT_6750]. The stool, saliva, serum, breast milk and DNA samples will be banked for
future testing beyond the defined scope of t his project; the consent forms will specifically include consent
for banking samples for future use. Potential testing that could be done if funding were available includes
(but is not limited to) testing of additional biomarkers or cytokines in the stool and blood as well as
examining changes to the stool microbiome pre-andpost-vaccination.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page26of44
Version 5.0 15SEP20179IMAGING METHODS
9.1MRImaging
9.12Methods
Anatomic imaging will be acquired with axial and coronal T2 -weighted sequences. Motility will be
evaluated using dynamic high spatial resolution 2D balanced steady state free precession (bSSFP)
imaging. Coronal and axial balanced steady state images will be acquired during free breathing with an
acquired temporal resolution of approximately 0.6s/image over 85seconds. Diffusion weighted imaging
will also be acquired using multiple b -values in order to evaluate any changes in diffusion restriction
within the bowel wall or mesenteric lymph nodes between the two MRI exams.
9.13Image Interpretation
Anatomic imaging will be assessed by a pediatric radiologist with expertise in abdominal imaging ([CONTACT_878307]). The well -distended distal/terminal ileum bowel wall thickness will be measured in [ADDRESS_1227017] visible right lower quadrant
mesenteric lymph nodes will be measured in short axis on each exam. Any secondary signs of
inflammation (perienteric fat stranding, engorged vasa recta, free fluid) will be documented on each
exam.After completion of the primary anatomic review by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Towbin, a second pediatric radiologist
with expertise in abdominal imaging will perform the same review on a random subset of subjects in
order to determine inter -reader reliability.  The second reviewer will be blinded t o the intial assessment as
well as to the time point of imaging.
Motility imaging will be assessed as follows :First, a quantitiative assessment will be performed. A
well-distended segment of distal/terminal ileum will be chosen by [CONTACT_878283] (D r. Towbin) .
Novel,semi-automated software,will be utilized to assess the coronal cine sequences in this
investigation. No pre-market submission to the FDA has been made for the softwarenor are there any
current plans to do so in the future. Thesemi-automated method computes a cross sectional area across
timeand the creates a best fit curve to determine the frequency or frequencies of contraction.  After
reviewer [ADDRESS_1227018] reviewer(a pediatric gastroenterologist with expertise in gut motility) will
review the images to determine which movie has faster motility, and for each movie, if the motility is
organized or disorganized. Finally, each of the three reviewers will assess the focal segment of the
distal/terminal ileum in the same manner.
9.2Ultrasound Imaging
9.21Methods
Anatomic imaging of the terminal ileum will bedoneby [CONTACT_878284].
9.22Image Interpretation
Anatomic imaging will be assessed by a pediatric radiologist with expertise in abdominal imaging ([CONTACT_878307]). The well -distended distal/terminal ileum bowel and cecum wall thickness will be measured in [ADDRESS_1227019] right lower
quadrant mesenteric lymph nodes will be measured in short axis on each exam. Any secondary signs of
inflammation (perienteric fat stranding, engorged vasa recta, free fluid) will be docum ented on each
exam.
After completion of the primary anatomic review, a second pediatric radiologist with expertise in
abdominal imaging will perform the same review on a random subset of subjects in order to determine
inter-reader reliability.  The secon d reviewer will be blinded to the intial assessment as well as to the time
point of imaging.
10RANDOMIZATION, DATA MANAGEMENT ,STATISTICAL PLAN
10.1Randomization Plan
Upon meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria, subjects will be randomized to one of the four vaccine
groups:1)RV1alone, 2)RV5alone, 3) RV1 with routine immunizations (DTaP, Hib, PCV13,HBV and
IPV) or 4) RV5 with routine immunzations This will b e a simple randomization using SAS®PROC
PLAN, which uses a random number generator to make assignments. Study statisticians will generate the
assignments in advance of any enrollment. After obtaining informed consent ,an unblinded research
personnel will contact [CONTACT_878285] a specific subject’s assignment. Parentsand all study
radiologists will be blinded as to which arm the child is randomized to until completion of the study.
Parents will learn which rotavirus the child received at thecompletion of Visit 3 .  Parents will be
informed about the specific other vaccines used in the study. If there is an urgent medical need to unblind
during the study,  then this can be done by [CONTACT_878286].
10.2Data Management P lan
The Data Management Center (DMC) of the Division of Biostatistics and Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] (DBE) will
provide full data management support for this study. In collaboration with the study team and the CDC,
case report forms will be developed. The DMC will devel op the data capture system using a web -based
data collection system, REDCap, as the primary source of data entry and storage. REDCap is a software
toolset and workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial
datadeveloped by [CONTACT_50222], with collaboration from a consortium of institutional partners
including the University of Cincinnati Academic Health Center. REDCap provides HIPAA -compliant and
[ADDRESS_1227020] ;patient identifiers will be kept at CCHMC; no identifying information will be included on
anydata sent to the CDC.
REDCap is hosted on a network specially designed to support the rigorous security and compliance
requirements of basic, clinical and translational research projects. Administered by [CONTACT_878287] (BMI), this network features multiple firewalls as well as a central facility for
managing hosted systems and users. The result is another layer of access control and audit capability on
top of what REDCap already provides.
10.3DataAnalysis Plan
Primaryobjectives -Statistical Analysis.
a)Descriptive statistics :
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page28of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017Descriptive statistics will be calculated for all demographic, anthropometric, reactogenicity, serum, image
and fecal variables. For continuous variables, five -number (mean, SD, minimum, median, maximum)
summaries will be produced. For class (categorical) variables, frequencies and percentages will be
reported. Descriptive statistics will be calculated for the entire study population, as well as for each
vaccine group at each time point. Investiga tors will be advised by [CONTACT_878288], or data entry issues, based on these summary statistics. To determine whether continuous serum,
image and fecal outcomes meet the assumption of a Gaussian (normal) distribution, the Shap iro-Wilk test
will be used. Where a significant departure from normality exists, an appropriate transformation of the
data will be employed prior to inferential analyses. If transformations are not successful, non -parametric
analyses will be used.
b)Inferential statistics
The primary analysis for this study is the comparison of anatomical outcome as measured by [CONTACT_878289]
(RV1, RV5 with and without other vaccines: 4 groups) and within (pre and post) study groups. The primary
anatomical outcome will be the terminal ileum th ickness measured in mm. The change in this outcome
before and after vaccination will be compared for each study group (within group test) using a paired t -test,
while the between group difference at pre, post and on the difference between pre and post (cha nge score)
will be initially analyzed using general linear model (GLM) where the ileum thickness (at pre, post and
change score) is modeled as a function of group (4 -groups). Depending on the result of the F -test from the
GLM analysis, this will be followe d by [CONTACT_878290] (6 -comparisons). This will be
examined using a two sample t -test. If the difference between groups with and without other vaccines for a
given vaccine (RV1 or RV5) is not significant we might combine the categories a nd conduct a comparison
test for the outcome between the two vaccine types. If the primary outcome is not normal before or after
transformation we will use the non -parametric Kruskal -Wallis test to compare the groups. Although the
primary between group com parisons is based on the pre -post change score, we are conducting additional
analysis based on the pre and post data to get more insight about the distribution of the primary outcome
variable.
We will also examine the distribution of socio -demographic and other potential covariates among the
groups using a GLM analysis. If some covariates are differentially distributed among the groups, those
covariates will be controlled for in the primary analysis described above. Potential modifiers such as breast
milkor secretor status will be examined by [CONTACT_878291] a function of group, potential
modifier and the interaction between group and modifier. In this case the parameter of interest is the
coefficient of the interaction term, however it is possible that the interaction test might not be sensitive due
to sample size. Regardless we will examine and report the observed change between groups for each
potential modifier as a subgroup. For example we will report difference between groups in the pr imary
outcome for secretors and non -secretors separately.
To assess how vaccine shedding is related with the primary outcome by [CONTACT_878292] (using sample obtained close in ti me with the
imaging). This will be examined using Pearson or Spearman correlation coefficients based on the normality
of the data. The resulting correlation coefficient from each group can be compared with each other
(pairwise) using Fisher’s transformatio n and compare the resulting z -scores. If the correlation are not
different we may then combine the groups and run the correlation across group to get an insight on the
relationship between shedding and imaging parameter.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page29of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017For all the other imaging paramete rs (cecum thickness, wave pattern and amplitude) similar analysis
described for the primary outcome (ileum thickness) will be conducted. For Lymph node presence a logistic
regression instead of GLM, and for the lymph node number, and wave frequency a Poiss on regression will
be used.
For the cytokines outcome (IL2, IL6, IL7, IL8, IL15, TNF) similar analysis described for the primary
imaging outcome including examination of modifying variables and potential subsequent stratified analysis
will be conducted.
Power
Since sample -sizes were predetermined and since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], no power calculations were
conducted.  Effect sizes will be reported from the results, to aid in the development of future studies.
Feasibility Analysis
The proportion of childr en meeting the outlined feasibility benchmarks (Appendix 3) will be determined.
11ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY
11.1Adverse Events
RV1 and RV5 arerecommended routinely for inf ants in the US and is consistent with normal standard of
careTherisks associated with vaccination are not greater than those encountered in the performance of
routine medical care.
RV1 Adverse Events
Anticipated common ( >5%) solicited adverse events related to the administration of the RV1 rotavirus
vaccine include (as per Package Insert) fussiness/irritability, cough/runny nose, fever, loss of appetite, and
vomiting115.There is also a small risk for intussusception as shown in recent studies31,32.
RV5 Adverse Events
Anticipated commonadverse events related to the administration of the RV5 rotavirus vaccine include (as
per Package Insert) includediarrhea, vomiting, irritability, otitis media, nasopharyngitis, and
bronchospasm116.There is also a small risk for intussusception as shown in recent studies31,32.
Other vaccines –All vaccines used will be licensed and recommended for routine use by [CONTACT_63511].
Possible risks  are explained in the Vaccine Information Statements .
(http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/ ).
Events meeting Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System ( VAERS)reportingrequirements will be
reported as indicated below.
As previously mentioned, th ere are minimal risks associated with venipuncture for obtaining research
related labs. Foreseeable adverse events associated with venipuncture area: mild, temporary discomfort at
the venipuncture site, bruising, and phlebitis.
MRI/Ultrasound AdverseEvents
Subjectsmay have some discomfort due to the noise from the MRI scanner. Earplugs and
headphones and/or MiniMuffs will be used to decrease sound levels to <+99dB(dBA) .Infants may
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page30of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017become fussy/irritable from being NPO 4 hours prior to the MRI (NPO three hours prior to visit
and one hour for intake and preparation for the MRI) .
Low density barium sulfate (VoLumen )will be used as an oral contrast agent for theMRI
enterography .  Barium sulfate is an inert substance and has an excellent safety profile with well
over 60 years of use in patients.  Barium is biologically inert and is not absorbed or metabolized by
[CONTACT_878293]. The risk of an allergic reaction is 1 in 1 million and the risk of
a fatal reaction is 1 in 10 million (Appendix 3 -PackageInsert). There are no known risks from
ultrasound .
11.2Safety Reporting: For Adverse Events
The investigator must report the following events to VAERS with a notification to theCDC Project
Manager by e-mail, including a copy of the report (VAERS form). In addition, these events will be
reported on the VAERS/AESI case report form:
Any adverse event listed by [CONTACT_29386] a contraindication to fur ther doses of the
vaccinesuch as a severe allergic reaction
Any adverse event listed in the VAERS Table of Reportable Events Following Vaccination found
using the following link :
https://vaers.hhs.gov/.../ VAERS_Table_of_Reportable _Events_Following_ Vacc ination.pdf
In thejudgment of the PI, any unexpected reaction to the vaccine will reportto VAERS as well as
theCDC Project Manager.
ThePI [INVESTIGATOR_878246]
12POTENTIAL RISKS AND BENEFITS
Potential Benefits
There is not likely to be a direct benefit to the infants participating in this study. The information learned
from this research study may benefit other children receiving rotavirus vaccines and increase our
knowledge about why some babies get intussusception.
Potential Risks, Discomforts, Inconveniences and Precautions
This study poses no greater than minimal risk to the subjects. As defined in 45 US Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) 46.102 (i), “Minimal risk means that the probability and magnitude of harm or
discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in an d of themselves than those ordinarily
encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or
tests.”The risks associated with rotavirus vaccination and other recommended vaccines are the same as
those encountered in the performance of routine medical care and are described in section 11.[ADDRESS_1227021] will also be asked to provide stool specimen sby[CONTACT_878294] s.
There are minimal risks associated with venipuncture for obtaining research related labs. Foreseeable
adverse events associated with venipuncture area: mild, temporary discomfort at the venipuncture site,
bruising, and phlebitis.
TheMRIuses a large magn et and a computer to take detailed pi[INVESTIGATOR_878247]. There is no
radiation in an MRI scan. There are no known risks to a n intestinal MRI in babies when appropriate
procedures are used .MRI is routinely used in neonates and infants for certain con ditions such as brain
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227022] some discomfort due to the noise from the MRI scanner.
Earplugs and headphones and/or MiniMuffs will be used to decrease sound levels to <+99dB(dBA) .
Infants may become fussy/irritable fr om being NPO prior to the MRI. There is a very small chance of
identifying clinically significant findings from MRI /Ultrasound imaging.   If this occurs, the parents and
the primary care physician will be notified.
Low density barium sulfate (VoLumen )will be used as an oral contrast agent for theMR
enterography.  Barium sulfate is an inert substance and has an excellent safety profile with well
over 60 years of use in patients.  Barium is biologically inert and is not absorbed or metabolized by
[CONTACT_878293]. The risk of an allergic reaction is 1 in 1 million and the risk of
a fatal reaction is 1 in 10 million (Appendix package insert) .There are no known risks for
ultrasound imaging.
The primary goals of this study are to evaluate potentialmechanisms for intussusception by
[CONTACT_878295]. Noserious (or
severe)adverse events are anticipated using these licensed products b ut wewillcollect adverse
event data as outline in section 11.
There is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality of data.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page32of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017APPENDICES
APPENDIX 1.  STUDY VISITS AND PROCEDURES
Study Days
Recruitment/
Enrollment-1 0 12345678910111213 14
Visit Recruitment 1 2 3
Age <11wks 6 wks to-
12 wks, 6 days
Informed Consent X
Demographics X X X X
Medical History X X X X
Inclusion/Exclusion
CriteriaX X X X X
Explain & Distribute
Memory AideX X
Axillary Temperature X XXXXXXXXXXXXX X
Reactogenicity X XXXXXXXXXXXXX X
Stool Instructions X X X X
Supplies Distributed X X
Review MRI Prep X X X
Schedule
AppointmentX X X
Reminder Call X X X
Infant Stool
CollectionX XXXXXXXXXXXXX X
Randomized X X
MRI X X
Ultrasound X X
Stool Submission X X X
Memory Aid Review X X X X
Blood Obtained X X
Breast Milk Sample X
Saliva Sample X
Vaccination One of Four
Groups
Case Report Form X X X X X
Vaccination Record X X
Parent Satisfaction X
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page33of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017APPENDIX 2. FEASIBILITY BENCHMARKS
Item Goal
Willingness to enroll10% of subjects who are screened and found eligible will enroll in the
study
Reason for non -enrollment 90% of those not enrolled will be asked for reason for refusal
Temperature monitoringAt least 70% of parents will check and record  their baby’s axillary
temperature on  at least 70% of the study days
ReactogenicityAt least 70% of the parents will complete the reactogenicity assessment for
70% of the days
Study visitsAt least 70% of subjects will complete all study visits on time (per
protocol) and remain in the study until completion
Blood drawsAt least 70% of the blood draws will be successfully completed per
protocol
MRI imaging At least 70% of subjects will successfully complete both MRIs
Stool collection At least 70% of parents will collect 70% of the [ADDRESS_1227023] 50% of breastfeeding moms will collect a breast milk sample
Saliva collection At least 70% of subjects will successfully have saliva obtained
Receipt of 2 month
vaccination s90% of infants will receive remaining immunizations within ACIP
guidelines
Remaining rotavirus doses75% of infants will receive the second RV immunization with the same
RV vaccine given as the first dose
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page34of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017APPENDIX 3.
VoLumen Package Insert

Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page35of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017

Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page36of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017APPENDIX 4.
REFERENCES
1.Prevention of rotavirus disease: guidelines for use of rotavirus vaccine. American Academy of
Pediatrics. Pediatrics 1998;102:1483 -91.
2.Cortese MM, Parashar UD, Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Prevention of rotavirus
gastroenteritis among infants and children: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2009;58:[ADDRESS_1227024] Dis J
2006;25:[ADDRESS_1227025] Dis 1988;158:1112 -6.
5.Kilgore PE, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Glass RI. Trends of diarrheal disease --associated mortality
in US children, 1968 thr ough 1991. JAMA 1995;274:1143 -8.
6.Malek MA, Curns AT, Holman RC, et al. Diarrhea -and rotavirus -associated hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878248] 5 years of age: [LOCATION_002], 1997 and 2000. Pediatrics 2006;117:[ADDRESS_1227026] Dis 2009;[ADDRESS_1227027] 1:S9 -S15.
8.Parashar UD, Gibson CJ, Bresee JS, Glass RI. Rotavirus and severe childhood diarrhea. Emerg
Infect Dis 2006;12:[ADDRESS_1227028] Dis 2003;9:565 -72.
10.Tate JE, Burton AH, Boschi -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] C, et al. 2008 estimate of worldwide rotavirus -associated
mortality in children younger than 5 years before the introduction of universal rotavirus vaccination
programmes: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2012;12:136 -41.
11.Tate JE, Patel MM, Cortese MM, et al. Remaining issues and challenges for rotavirus vaccine in
preventing global childhood diarrheal morbidity and mortality. Expert Rev Vaccines 2012;11:[ADDRESS_1227029] Pharm 1998;55:2226, 8.
13.Intussusception among recipi[INVESTIGATOR_878249] s vaccine--US, 1998 -1999. Ann Pharmacother
1999;33:1020 -1.
14.Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Withdrawal of rotavirus vaccine recommendation. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1999;48:1007.
15.Rotavirus vaccine for the prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among children.
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep
1999;48:1 -20.
16.Centers for Disease C, Prevention. Intussusception among recipi[INVESTIGATOR_878250] --United
States, 1998 -1999. MMWR Morb Mort al Wkly Rep 1999;48:577 -81.
17.Abramson JS, Baker CJ, Fisher MC, et al. Possible association of intussusception with rotavirus
vaccination. American Academy of Pediatrics. Committee on Infectious Diseases. Pediatrics
1999;104:575.
18.Murphy TV, Gargiullo PM, Massoudi MS, et al. Intussusception among infants given an oral
rotavirus vaccine. N Engl J Med 2001;344:[ADDRESS_1227030] Dis 2003;187:[ADDRESS_1227031] of
rotavirus vaccination programme on trends in admission of infants to hospi [INVESTIGATOR_878251]. Lancet
2001;358:1224 -9.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page37of44
Version 5.0 15SEP201721.Simonsen L, Viboud C, Elixhauser A, Taylor RJ, Kapi[INVESTIGATOR_300012]. More on RotaShield and
intussusception: the role of age at the time of vaccination. J Infect Dis 2005;[ADDRESS_1227032] 1:S36 -43.
22.Rothman KJ, Young -Xu Y, Arellano F. Age dependence of the relation between reassortant
rotavirus vaccine (RotaShield) and intussusception. J Infect Dis 2006;193:898; author reply -9.
23.Rennels MB, Parashar UD, Holman RC, Le CT, Chang HG, Glass RI. Lack of an apparent
association between intussusception and wild or vaccine rotavirus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J
1998;17:924 -5.
24.Lynch M, Shieh WJ, Bresee JS, et al. Intussusception after administration of the rhesus
tetravalent rotavirus vaccine (Rotashield): the search for a pathogenic mechanism. Pediatrics
2006;117:e827 -32.
25.Vesikari T, Matson DO, Dennehy P, et al. Safety and efficacy of a pentavalent human -bovine
(WC3) reassortant rotavirus vaccine. N Engl J Med 2006;354:[ADDRESS_1227033] severe rotavirus gastroenteritis. N Engl J Med 2006;354:11 -22.
27.Parashar UD, Alexander JP, Glass RI, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices CfDC,
Prevention. Prevention of rotavirus gastroenteritis among infants and children. Recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55:1 -13.
28.World Health Organization. Statement on Rotarix and Rotateq vaccines and intussusception.
2010. 2010. (Accessed July 2, 2014, at
http://www.who.int/vaccine_safety/committee/topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]/rotavirus/rotarix_and_rotateq/intussuscept ion_sep20
10/en/.)
29.Carlin JB, Macartney KK, Lee KJ, et al. Intussusception risk and disease prevention associated
with rotavirus vaccines in Australia's National Immunization Program. Clin Infect Dis 2013;57:1427 -34.
30.Patel MM, Lopez -Collada VR, Bulh oes MM, et al. Intussusception risk and health benefits of
rotavirus vaccination in Mexico and Brazil. N Engl J Med 2011;364:2283 -92.
31.Weintraub ES, Baggs J, Duffy J, et al. Risk of intussusception after monovalent rotavirus
vaccination. N Engl J Med 20 14;370:513 -9.
32.Yih WK, Lieu TA, Kulldorff M, et al. Intussusception risk after rotavirus vaccination in U.S.
infants. N Engl J Med 2014;370:503 -12.
33.Haber P, Patel M, Izurieta HS, et al. Postlicensure monitoring of intussusception after RotaTeq
vaccination in the [LOCATION_002], February 1, 2006, to September 25, 2007. Pediatrics 2008;121:1206 -12.
34.Shui IM, Baggs J, Patel M, et al. Risk of intussusception following administration of a
pentavalent rotavirus vaccine in US infants. JAMA 2012;307:[ADDRESS_1227034] Dis J
2010;29:[ADDRESS_1227035] Dis J 2012;31:[ADDRESS_1227036] Dis J 2010;29:919 -23.
38.Van Trang N, Vu HT, Le NT, Huang P, Jiang X, Anh DD. Association between norovirus and
rotavirus infection and histo -blood group antigen types in Vietnamese children. J Clin Microbiol
2014;52:1366 -74.
39.Patel M, Shane AL, Parashar UD, Jiang B, Gentsch JR, Glass RI. Oral rotavirus vaccines: how
well will they work where they are needed most? J Infect Dis 2009;[ADDRESS_1227037] 1:S39 -48.
40.Steele AD, De Vos B, Tumbo J, et al. Co -administration study in South African infants of a live -
attenuated oral human rotavirus vaccine (RIX4414) and poliovirus vaccines. Vaccine 2010;28:6542 -8.
41.Zaman K, Sack DA, Yunus M, et al. Successful co -administration of a human rotavirus and oral
poliovirus vaccines in Bangladeshi infants in a 2 -dose schedule at 12 and 16 weeks of age. Vaccine
2009;27:1333 -9.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page38of44
Version 5.0 15SEP201742.Robinson CG, Hernanz -Schulman M, Zhu Y, Griffin MR, Gruber W, Edwards KM. Evaluation
of anatomic changes in young children with natural rotavirus infection: is intussusception biologically
plausible? J Infect Dis 2004;189:1382 -7.
43.Bass D, Cordoba E, Dekker C, Schuind A, Cassady C. Intestinal imaging of children with acute
rotavirus gastroenteritis. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2004;39:[ADDRESS_1227038] Dis 2011;15:e641 -5.
45.Bines JE, Liem NT, Justice FA, et al. Risk factors for intussusception in infants in Vietnam and
Australia: adenovirus implicated, but not rotavirus. J Pediatr 2006;149:452 -60.
46.Selvaraj G, Kirkwood C, Bines J, Buttery J. Molecular epi[INVESTIGATOR_878252], Australia. J Clin M icrobiol 2006;44:3371 -3.
47.Guarner J, de Leon -Bojorge B, Lopez -Corella E, et al. Intestinal intussusception associated with
adenovirus infection in Mexican children. Am J Clin Pathol 2003;120:[ADDRESS_1227039] Dis J 1998;17:893 -8.
49.Konno T, Suzuki H, Kutsuzawa T, et al. Human rotavirus infection in infants and young children
with intussusception. J Med Virol 1978;2:265 -69.
50.Nylund CM, Denson LA, Noel JM. Bacterial enteritis as a risk factor for childhood
intussusception: a retrospective cohort study. J Pediatr 2010;156:[ADDRESS_1227040] JI. Lack of association between rotavirus infection and
intussusception: implications for use of attenuated rotavirus vaccines. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2002;21:[ADDRESS_1227041] Dis J 2004;23:S173 -8.
53.Darge K, Anupi[INVESTIGATOR_878253], Jaramillo D. MR imaging of the abdomen and pelvis in infants, children,
and adolescents. Radiology 2011;261:12 -29.
54.Brugger PC, Prayer D. Fetal abdominal magnetic resonance imaging. European journal of
radiology 2006;57:278 -93.
55.Chalian M, Ozturk A, Oliva -Hemker M, Pryde S, Huisman TA. MR enterography findings of
inflammatory bowel disease in pediatric patients. AJR American journal of roentgenology
2011;196:W810 -6.
56.Froehlich JM, Patak MA, von Weymarn C, Juli CF, Zollikofe r CL, Wentz KU. Small bowel
motility assessment with magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI
2005;21:[ADDRESS_1227042] of hyoscine N -butylbromide versus glucagon on the small bowel assessed by [CONTACT_163831]. European radiology 2009;19:1387 -93.
58.Ailiani AC, Neuberger T, Brasseur JG, et al. Quantitative analysis of peristaltic and segmental
motion in vivo in the rat small i ntestine using dynamic MRI. Magnetic resonance in medicine : official
journal of the Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine / Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine
2009;62:116 -26.
59.Wakamiya M, Furukawa A, Kanasaki S, Murata K. Assessment of small bowel motility function
with cine-MRI using balanced steady -state free precession sequence. Journal of magnetic resonance
imaging : JMRI 2011;33:[ADDRESS_1227043] imaging employing steady -state acquisition
(FIESTA) cine acquisition of fetal non -central nervous system abnormalities. Journal of magnetic
resonance imaging : JMRI 2007;26:672 -7.
61.Patak MA, Froehlich JM, von Weymarn C, Breitenstein S, Zollikofer CL, Wentz KU. Non -
invasive measurement of small -bowel mo tility by [CONTACT_878296]. Gut 2007;56:1023 -5.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page39of44
Version 5.0 15SEP201762.Nissan A, Zhang JM, Lin Z, Haskel Y, Freund HR, Hanani M. The contribution of inflammatory
mediators and nitric oxide to lipopolysaccharide -induced intussusception in mice. J Surg Res
1997;69:2 05-7.
63.Pons L, Droy -Lefaix MT, Bueno L. Role of platelet -activating factor (PAF) and prostaglandins in
colonic motor and secretory disturbances induced by [CONTACT_878297].
Prostaglandins 1994;47:123 -36.
64.Montuschi P, Trin gali G, Parente L, Preziosi P, Navarra P. Interleukin -1 beta-and tumour -
necrosis-factor-induced inhibition of rat gastric fundus motility in vitro. Pharmacol Res 1994;30:25 -33.
65.Khan I, Collins SM. Expression of cytokines in the longitudinal muscle mye nteric plexus of the
inflamed intestine of rat. Gastroenterology 1994;107:[ADDRESS_1227044] SE, Kang G, Conner ME. Rotavirus infection enhances
lipopolysaccharide -induced intussusception in a mouse model. J Virol 2006;80:[ADDRESS_1227045] with lipopolysaccharide -induced intussusception. Eur J Pediatr Surg
2008;18:103 -6.
68.Badriyyah M, Mazeh H, Brocke S, Osmanova V, Freund HR, Hanani M. Prevention of
lipopolysaccharide -induced intussusception in mice by [CONTACT_878298]2 inhibitor rofecoxib. Pediatr Surg Int
2008;24:333 -6.
69.Willetts IE, Kite P, Barclay GR, et al. Endotoxin, cytokines and lipid peroxides in children with
intussusception. Br J Surg 2001;88:878 -83.
70.Karabulut B, Erdogan D, Bostanci I, Onde U, Karakoc AE. Are interleukin -6, body mass index
and atopy crucial in infantile intussusception? Indian J Pediatr 2010;77:1257 -60.
71.Ko G, Jiang ZD, Okhuysen PC, DuPont HL. Fecal cytokines and markers of intestinal
inflammation in international travelers with diarrhea due to Noroviruses. J Med Virol 2006;78:[ADDRESS_1227046] Dis 1998;177:[ADDRESS_1227047] Dis 2002;185:[ADDRESS_1227048] of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli virulence factors in international travelers. J Clin Microbiol
2002;40:4185 -90.
75.El Feghaly RE, Stauber JL, Tarr PI, Haslam DB. Intestinal inflammatory biomarkers and
outcome in pediatric Clostridium difficile infections. J Pediatr 2013;163:[ADDRESS_1227049] Dis 2013;56:1713 -21.
77.Hasegawa T, Ueda S, Tazuke Y, et al. Col onoscopic diagnosis of lymphoid hyperplasia causing
recurrent intussusception: report of a case. Surg Today 1998;28:301 -4.
78.Shteyer E, Koplewitz BZ, Gross E, Granot E. Medical treatment of recurrent intussusception
associated with intestinal lymphoid hy perplasia. Pediatrics 2003;111:682 -5.
79.Nelson BH. Interleukin -2 signaling and the maintenance of self -tolerance. Curr Dir Autoimmun
2002;5:92 -112.
80.Hofmann SR, Ettinger R, Zhou YJ, et al. Cytokines and their role in lymphoid development,
differentiat ion and homeostasis. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;2:495 -506.
81.Porter BO, Malek TR. IL -2Rbeta/IL -7Ralpha doubly deficient mice recapi[INVESTIGATOR_878254] (IEL) developmental defects of gammac -/-mice: roles for both IL -2 and IL-15
in CD8alphaalpha IEL development. J Immunol 1999;163:5906 -12.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page40of44
Version 5.0 15SEP201782.Chen Q, Ghilardi N, Wang H, et al. Development of Th1 -type immune responses requires the
type I cytokine receptor TCCR. Nature 2000;407:916 -20.
83.Zheng BJ, Lo SK, Tam JS, Lo M, Yeung CY, Ng MH. Prospective study of community -acquired
rotavirus infection. J Clin Microbiol 1989;27:2083 -90.
84.Perez-Schael I, Daoud G, White L, et al. Rotavirus shedding by [CONTACT_878299]. J Med Virol
1984;14:127 -36.
85.Bishop RF, Barnes GL, Cipriani E, Lund JS. Clinical immunity after neonatal rotavirus infection.
A prospective longitudinal study in young children. N Engl J Med 1983;309:[ADDRESS_1227050] Dis 1990;162:1055 -62.
87.Oyejide CO, Fagbami AH. An epi[INVESTIGATOR_878255] a cohort of
Nigerian infants: II. Incidence of diarrhoea in the first two years of life. Int J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 1988;17:[ADDRESS_1227051] Dis J
1993;12:54 -61.
89.Naficy AB, Abu -Elyazeed R, Holmes JL, et al. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_878256]. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 1999;150:[ADDRESS_1227052] sy mptomatic rotavirus infection. Lancet 1998;351:[ADDRESS_1227053] Dis J 2006;25:[ADDRESS_1227054] Dis
1992;165:161 -5.
93.Chan J, Nirwati H, Triasih R, et al. M aternal antibodies to rotavirus: could they interfere with live
rotavirus vaccines in developi[INVESTIGATOR_14696]? Vaccine 2011;29:1242 -7.
94.Asensi MT, Martinez -Costa C, Buesa J. Anti -rotavirus antibodies in human milk: quantification
and neutralizing activity. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2006;42:560 -7.
95.Jiang B, Patel M, Parashar U. Rotavirus vaccines for global use: what are the remaining issues
and challenges? Hum Vaccin 2010;6:425 -7.
96.Jiang V, Jiang B, Tate J, Parashar UD, Patel MM. Performance of rot avirus vaccines in developed
and developi[INVESTIGATOR_14696]. Hum Vaccin 2010;6:[ADDRESS_1227055] roenterol Nutr 2010;51:458 -
63.
98.Pi[INVESTIGATOR_253501] A, Caracciolo G, de Luca U, et al. Infant feeding and idiopathic intussusception. J
Pediatr 1993;123:[ADDRESS_1227056] Dis 2014;58:173 -7.
100.Imbert-Marcille BM, Barbe L, Dupe M, et al. A FUT2 gene common polymorphism determines
resistance to rotavirus A of the P[8] genotype. J Infect Dis 201 4;209:1227 -30.
101.Huang P, Xia M, Tan M, et al. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_878257]8* of human rotavirus recognizes histo -blood
group antigens in a type -specific manner. J Virol 2012;86:4833 -43.
102.Liu Y, Huang P, Tan M, et al. Rotavirus VP8*: phylogeny, host range, and interaction with histo -
blood group antigens. J Virol 2012;86:9899 -910.
103.Tong M, McHardy I, Ruegger P, et al. Reprograming of gut microbiome energy metabolism by
[CONTACT_878300]2 Crohn's disease risk polymorphism. ISME J 2014.
104.Wacklin P, Makivuokko H, Alak ulppi N, et al. Secretor genotype (FUT2 gene) is strongly
associated with the composition of Bifidobacteria in the human intestine. PLoS One 2011;6:e20113.
Version 5.0 15SEP2017
Page41of44
Version 5.0 15SEP2017105.Rausch P, Rehman A, Kunzel S, et al. Colonic mucosa -associated microbiota is influenced by [CONTACT_878301]2 (Secretor) genotype. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011;108:[ZIP_CODE] -
5.
106.Yu ZT, Chen C, Kling DE, et al. The principal fucosylated oligosaccharides of human milk
exhibit prebiotic properties on cultured infant microbiota. G lycobiology 2013;23:169 -77.
107.Haber P, Patel M, Pan Y, et al. Intussusception after rotavirus vaccines reported to US VAERS,
2006-2012. Pediatrics 2013;131:1042 -9.
108.CDC ACIP Immunization Schedule. at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child -
adolescent.html. )
109.Stockman LJ, Staat MA, Holloway M, et al. Optimum diagnostic assay and clinical specimen for
routine rotavirus surveillance. J Clin Microbiol 2008;46:184 2-3.
110.Mathur AM, Neil JJ, McKinstry RC, Inder TE. Transport, monitoring, and successful brain MR
imaging in unsedated neonates. Pediatr Radiol 2008;38:[ADDRESS_1227057] MW, Yoo SJ. Cardiovascular
MRI without sedation or general anesthesia using a feed -and-sleep technique in neonates and infants.
Pediatr Radiol 2012;42:[ADDRESS_1227058] Dis 1990;161:44 0-5.
113.Gautam R, Esona MD, Mijatovic -Rustempasic S, Ian Tam K, Gentsch JR, Bowen MD. Real -time
RT-PCR assays to differentiate wild -type group A rotavirus strains from Rotarix and RotaTeq vaccine
strains in stool samples. Hum Vaccin Immunother 2013;10.
114.Morrow AL, Meinzen -Derr J, Huang P, et al. Fucosyltransferase 2 non -secretor and low secretor
status predicts severe outcomes in premature infants. J Pediatr 2011;158:[ADDRESS_1227059] ion [package insert]
Rotarix (rotavirus vaccine, live, oral), GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals. Rockville, MD: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration.. 2011. at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/biologicsbloodvaccines/vaccines/approvedproducts/ucm133539.pdf. )
116.Food and Drug Administration. Product -approval information -licensing action [package insert]
RotaTeq (rotavirus va ccine, live, oral, pentavalent), [COMPANY_006] & Co. Rockville, MD: US Department of
Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. 2011. at
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/biologicsbloodvaccines/vaccines/approvedproducts/ucm142288.pdf. )
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227060] Visit Instruction
Thank you so much for participating in our study. We will be calling you in
the next few days to schedule your baby’s study visits.  Below are the
instructions for the first visit. We will call you before the visit to go over all of
this with you. Do not h esitate to call us with any questions between now and
your scheduled visit.
Day before first study visit
We will call you the day before your first scheduled visit. If your contact [CONTACT_878302] [PHONE_18194]/[ADDRESS_1227061] up to date information. You
may also email us at [EMAIL_16715]
Put the cold pack you were given at enrollment in your freezer so it will be ready to use
If you are breastfeeding, collect about an ounce of breastmilk within 24 hou rs of your
appointment and keep in refrigerator.
We want you to bring a fresh refrigerated (not frozen) stool sample with you to the first visit.
Save a poopy diaper within [ADDRESS_1227062] bowel movements every day! If baby [CONTACT_878303], you should throw away the first and bring the most recent
diaper to the visit. Place diaper in clear labeled bag and put in silver bag you were given at
enrollment. Label with date and time of collection and keep in refrigerator.
Day of first study visit
Do not feed baby [INVESTIGATOR_8178] 3 hours before your scheduled visit time
Put the cold pack in the silver bag with the stool sample and bring with yo u, along with the breast
milk sample, if breastfeeding
Bring the baby’s social security number (if available), pacifier, empty bottle/nipple, formula or
breast milk and other items you may need. The visit will last approximately 3.5 hours
We will meet you at your appointment time in front of the gift shop, main hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878258] C welcome desk. If you are driving, park near the C elevators in the garage.  If you are
dropped off or coming by [CONTACT_430099], enter thru C location doors in the main entrance circ le on Burnet
Avenue
Any questions, do not hesitate to call us at [PHONE_18194] or 513 -303-8800or email us
[EMAIL_16715]
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227063] study visit. We will be calling
you the day before your next visit to remind you of the appointment.  Below
are the instructions for what to do between now and your next visit.  Do not
hesitate to call us with an y questions between now and your scheduled visit.
Beginning today until next visit
Fill out the memory aid everyday as instructed starting today. Take the temperature under your
baby’s arm every evening and record on the memory aid. Remember to document a ny
medications or doctor visits on the memory aid.
Save all poopy diapers in the dated labeled clear bags and keep all in silver bag in your
refrigerator.
We will call you the day before your next scheduled visit. If your contact [CONTACT_878302] [PHONE_18194]/[ADDRESS_1227064] up to date information. You
may also email us at [EMAIL_16715]
Put the cold pack you were given at enrollment back in your freezer so it will be ready to use
Day of second study visit
Do notfeed baby [INVESTIGATOR_8178] 3 hours before your scheduled visit time
Put the cold pack in the silver bag with  all of the poopy diapers and bring with you, along with
your memory aid
Bring the baby’s pacifier, empty bottle/nipple, formula or breast milk and other item s you may
need. The visit will last approximately 3.5 hours
We will meet you at your appointment time in front of the gift shop, main hospi[INVESTIGATOR_878258] C welcome desk. If you are driving, park near the C elevators in the garage.  If you are
dropped off or coming by [CONTACT_430099], enter thru C location doors in the main entrance circle on Burnet
Avenue
Any questions, do not hesitate to call us at [PHONE_18194] or 513 -303-8800or email us at
[EMAIL_16715]
Version 5.[ADDRESS_1227065] Visit Instruction
Thank you so much for completing your second study visit. We will be calling
you the day before your next visit to remind you of the appointment.  Below
are the instructions for what to do between now and your next visit.  Do not
hesitate to call us with a ny questions between now and your scheduled visit.
Beginning today until next visit
Continue to fill out the memory aid everyday as instructed. Take the temperature under your
baby’s arm every evening and record on the memory aid. Remember to document any
medications or doctor visits on the memory aid.
Save all poopy diapers in the dated labeled clear bags and keep all in silver bag in your freezer .
We will call you the day before your next scheduled visit. If your contact [CONTACT_878302] [PHONE_18194]/[ADDRESS_1227066] up to date information. You
may also email us at [EMAIL_16715]
Put the cold pack you were g iven at enrollment back in your freezer so it will be ready to use
Day of third study visit
Put the cold pack in the silver bag with all of the poopy diapers and bring with you, along with
your memory aid. We must have both in order to complete the visit .
If yourbaby[CONTACT_878304] (PPC) patient, we will meet you at the PPC. IF
baby[INVESTIGATOR_3267] a PPC patient the appointment will be scheduled at the T1 research clinic and we will
meet you at the gift shop.
The study visit will take about 15 minutes. If scheduled in the PPC this will be followed by [CONTACT_878305]’s regularly scheduled well check up with PPC staff.
Any questions, do not hesitate to call us at [PHONE_18194] or 513 -303-8800or email us at
[EMAIL_16715]