PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 1 of 28  
R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory 
Hyperarousal and Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_340865] V. Pedapati, MD, MS, FAAP  
Associate Professor, Division of Psychiatry and Neurology  
Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349], Division of Psychiatry  
[ADDRESS_493570]  
Cincinnati, OH [ZIP_CODE] -3039  
Office [PHONE_8198]  
Fax [PHONE_8199]   
[EMAIL_6595]  
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
Craig Erickson, MD   Professor, Psychiatry, CCHMC/University of Cincinnati (UC)  
Lauren Ethridge, PhD   Asst. Professor, Pediatrics/Psychology, OUHSC  
Makoto Miyakoshi, PhD  Project Scientist, CCHMC  
Stephanie Jones, PhD   Professor, Brown University  
Laura Batterink, PhD   Asst. Professor, Western University  
Steve Wu, MD    Associate Professor,  Neurology , CCHMC /UC 
Elizabeth Smith, PhD   Asst. Professor, Psychologist, CCHMC  
Meredith Will, PhD   Asst. Professor, Psychologist, CCHMC  
VERSION NUMBER /DATE :  
Version 1.0 // 4.03.2023  
 
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision #  Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
    
    
    
    
    
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493571] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ...........................  21 
17.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ . 22 
18.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ .....................  22 
19.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ ................  22 
20.0  Setting  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 22 
21.0  Resources Available  ................................ ................................ ...............  22 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 3 of 28 1.0 Study Summary  
 
 
 Study Title  R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics  Underlying 
Sensory Hyperarousal and Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
Study Design  The proposed project includes a case -control descriptive study 
(Aims  1 & 2) and an acute , crossover clinical trial (Aim 3).  
Primary Objective s Aim 1: Translational neurodynamics in resting and sensation.  
Aim 2: Cognitive studies (Statistical Learning).  
Aim 3 : Sensory and cognitive perturbation studies.  
Research Intervention  Closed -loop alpha  auditory entrainment  
Study Population  The study population includes subjects 5 to 15 years of age with 
Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) with full FMR1 mutations, as well as 
two age -and-sex matched cohorts of control subjects consisting 
of typi[INVESTIGATOR_393275] (TDC) and subjects with autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD).  
Sample Size  180 human subjects will be recruited in total: 120 subjects total 
for case -control portion (60 FXS, 60 ASD, 60 TDC) and 60 
subjects total for clinical trial (20 FXS, 20 ASD, 20 TDC).  
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
Definitions  FXS, Fragile X Syndrome  
KO, knockout  
TDC, typi[INVESTIGATOR_393276], alpha auditory entrainment  
EEG, electroencephalography  
ITC, inter -trial coherence  
ASD, autism spectrum disorder  
FMRP, Fragile X mental retardation protein  
CFC, cross -frequency power -power coupling  
ERP, event -related potentials  
TCD, t halamocortical dysrhythmia  
SL, statistical learning  
PAF, peak alpha frequency  
PPF, peak power frequency  
WT, wild type  
BCI, brain -computer interface  
WLI, word learning index  
BLE, behavior learning effect  
AM, amplitude modulated  
LSL, lab streaming layer (software component)  
GUID, global unique identifier  
NDAR, National Database for Autism Research  
NIMH, National Institute of Mental Health  
ERSP, event -related spectral powe r 
CNS, central nervous system  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 4 of 28 2.0 Objectives  
Our central hypothesis is that in Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), reduced alpha (~10 Hz) pacing and 
increased gamma (>30 Hz) noise impairs, via altered timing, the detection of sensory patterns and the 
ability to mount precise neural responses, thereby [CONTACT_393298] . Our approach  involves three scientific aims, which, if addressed, 
would ascertain underlying mechanisms that may alleviate sensory and cognitive impairments.  
Specific Aim 1: Translational neurodynamics in resting and sensory studies.  We hypothesize  
that fine -temporal alpha and gamma neurodynamics  will uncover the basis of participant - and 
subgroup -level variation that drives FXS group effects. 1A: We will acquire resting -state 
electroencephalography ( EEG ) and sensory auditory chirp paradigms in 40 youth (5 to 1 5 years old) 
with FXS and age - and sex -matched typi[INVESTIGATOR_393275] (TDC) and autism spectrum disorder  
controls  (ASD) . Neurodynamics (peak power frequency, spectral events) and biophysical modeling of 
each paradigm will be compared between groups. Neurodynamics will be assessed indiv idually and in 
combination as predictors of psychological measures, medication effects, co -occurring 
neuropsychiatric diagnoses, and computerized cognitive testing. 1B: We aim to identify neurodynamic 
features that distinguish Fmr1-/- KO from wild type (using preexisting resting -state EEG and sensory 
auditory chirp murine data). 1C (Exploratory) : We aim to identify neurodynamic features that are 
conserved between Fmr1-/- KOs and participant human subgroups based on genotype. We 
hypothesize  that full mutatio n, non -mosaic males with FXS will share similar neurodynamics as 
the Fmr1-/- KO (knockout) mouse. Shared neurodynamics between Fmr1-/- KO and a human subgroup 
will have a high translational impact.  
Specific Aim 2: Cognitive studies.  We hypothesize  statistical learning ( SL) will be impaired in FXS 
and the degree of SL impairment will be related to cognitive and language abilities in FXS. 2A: 
Passive SL Task will compare structured (word) entrainment via EEG intertrial coherence (ITC) 
between FXS, TDC, and ASD.  2B: Psychological measures (i.e., cognitive testing, expressive 
language sampling, and language ability) will be examined to identify key subgroups and predictors of 
neural response. As the Passive SL Task can capture an objective proxy of a cognitive process  across 
a wide variety of functional levels, it will have a high impact on understanding heterogeneity in FXS.  
Specific Aim 3: Sensory and cognitive perturbation studies. We hypothesize  that “bottom -up” 
alpha auditory entrainment of the corticothalamic drive will normalize the ability to mount precise 
neural responses to stimuli (increased ITC) and diminish asynchronous gamma “noise.” 3A: Acute 
perturbation with closed -loop (to individualize stimulus) alpha auditory entrainment ( AAE) will be 
conducted in FXS and sex - and age -matched TDC and ASD controls (n=20 per group). AAE will be 
performed in two visits as a double -blind, sham -controlled crossover study such that each participant 
will receive AAE and sham in random order. We will a ssess if closed  loop AAE leads to normalizing 
phase synchronization of the sensory auditory chirp and the Passive SL Task.  3B (Exploratory) : We 
will determine if AAE can enhance word learning as measured by [CONTACT_393299].   
3.0 Background  
Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), a monogenetic neurodevelopmental disorder, manifests varying levels of 
intellectual disability , autistic features , and sensory hypersensitivity1. To date, despi[INVESTIGATOR_140566] [ADDRESS_493572] identified reproducible, group -level abnormalities in resting -state EEG and sensory 
auditory chirp responses linked with intellectual disability, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and sensory 
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 5 of 28 hyperarousal6-14. This data demonstrates that individuals with FXS do not mount precise neural 
responses to the sensory auditory chirp and, instead, show increases in  “noise” in the form of  
asynchronous gamma activity10. Furthermore, a marked reduction in alpha power suggests altered 
thalamocortical function , reducing the ability to detect signal from noise in the environment and 
representing potential tractable targets for “bottom -up” entrainment.  However, to translate these 
findings to effective treatments for individuals with FXS, two significant knowledge gaps must be 
addressed : 1) how does individual variability in neural activity in FXS contribute to core, impairing 
sensory and cognitive symptoms; and 2) could indiv idually targeted, external entrainment of this neural 
activity improve sensory and cognitive function?   
Significance  of Aims  
Constituent Neurodynamics  of Alpha and Gamma Alterations (Aim 1):   
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_179799] a single -gene disorder, FXS patients exhibit market variability in  EEG, molecular, 
and behavioral phenotypes compared to the Fmr1 -/-KO mouse model6, 15 -18. This high variability 
is observed within and across males with full mutation (mosaic and non -mosaic) and females 
who, due to an X -linked disorder, exhibit obligate mosaicism7, 15, 19, 20. Though a link between 
Fmr1 -/-KO and males with full mutation FXS can be predicted based on suspected Fmr1 
expression21, the degree to which they share conserved physiology is yet unknown. Identifying 
parallel neurophysiological markers between mice and a particular human subset would 
represent a significant breakthrough for precision medicine in FXS. EEG is a highly feasible 
method to postulate whole -brain hypotheses in FXS,  for which there is consensus on group -
level effects in humans8-10, 14 and Fmr1 -/-KO mice6, 22, 23. Therefore, Aim 1 studies will 
investigate the neurodynamic basis and biophysical modeling of alpha and gamma alterations 
in resting -state and sensory auditory chirp EEG17 to parse heterogeneity.  
Statistical Learning as a High-value Target in FXS (Aim 2):  Though resting -state and sensory studies 
can provide insight into FXS physiology, there is an urgent need to develop cognitive paradigms that 
can be studied across the FXS phenotype and be broadly applicable to cognitive development. 
Children with FXS, fo r example, do not keep pace with the typi[INVESTIGATOR_393277], and 
their skills plateau prematurely24. Statistical learning (SL) is the process by [CONTACT_393300], through passive exposure and without effort or conscious intention to learn. 
SL is present from birth25 and operates continuously across the lifespan to extract and flexibly update 
statistical regularities from the environment26. While SL operates across many different domains, it is 
thought to play a significant role in language learning, most notably in speech segmentation27. Pauses 
or other acoustic cues do not reliably demarcate words in continuous speech. Becoming sensitive to 
the statistical regularities between neighboring syllables may allow learners to discover word 
boundaries in speech28, 29. Given most individuals with FXS show significant, lifelong language 
impairments, including delay of first words, deficits in SL would be expected in FXS27. Confirming this 
hypothesis and determining whether intervention is effective at improving SL would have far -reaching 
clinical implications, as improving communication abilities is an almost ubiquitous goal for families of 
individuals with FXS30. 
Since SL is performed passively and can be 
measured through EEG independently of behavior, 
it can be captured in children with FXS regardless 
of cognitive functioning ability31, 32. During SL, 
complex patterns are passively extracted through 
environmental exposure. Interestingly, the neural 
acquisition of patterned data heuristically resembles 
the responses to sensory auditory chirp when 
monitored by [CONTACT_393301]-trial coherence ( ITC)31. In this regard, SL 
is an ideal bridge between passive EEG sensory 

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 6 of 28 paradigm like the sensory auditory chirp and more complex but less feasible cognitive or language 
EEG paradigms ( Fig. 4 ). 
Normalizing EEG  through  Alpha Auditory Entrainment (AAE)  (Aim 3):  The observed reproducible 
alterations in brain activity raise a key  question: would normalization of  targeted  EEG activity lead to  
improved sensory and SL  markers within the  disorder?  Thus far, it remains an open question whether 
the EEG alterations observed in FXS represent a  physiological mechanism that maintains suboptimal 
brain states or if they simply reflect compensatory changes to  other aberrant neural processes.  
Though previous reports have identified group -level correlations of EEG and  behavioral data,  the 
ability  of AAE to “pace” alpha rhythms  (10 Hz) into typi[INVESTIGATOR_393278] -time EEG.  If successful, this could lead to a new approach to address ing the  
underlying cognitive impairment in FXS and thus alter the trajectory of intellectual development in this 
disorder2.  
Summary:  To this end, we have developed a cutting -edge approach to study heterogeneity in EEG 
signatures in humans, explore their relevance for sensory and cognitive disturbances, and introduce 
perturbation studies to test causal inferences. Our approach encompass es three key areas that, in our 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], are of critical importance to advancing the FXS field. First, we will perform fine -temporal 
analysis (neurodynamics) of resting -state and sensory EEG to capture individual variability, model 
biophysical properties, and quantify the constituent factors of known group effects. At this juncture, we 
also ascertain which subgroup of persons with FXS shares neurodynamic profiles with theFmr1 -/-KO 
mouse model. Second, we will study SL in FXS as a cognitive proxy and identif y neural markers of SL 
with individual and subgroup variability. Third, we propose to move beyond correlational studies to 
examine causal effect, for the first time, that if individualized alpha entrainment will lead to 
normalization of neural responses in  response to sensory auditory chirp and SL word entrainment.  
Preliminary Data  Justifying Proposed Approach  
The investigative team has collected the largest cohort to date of high -resolution FXS patient resting -
state EEGs (n=70; 32F; mean age= 20.5+/ -10 years old; range=6 to 46) with age/sex -matched 
controls (n=71; 30F; mean age=22.2+/ -10.7 years old; range=6 -48). We recently conducted the first 
source analysis of resting -state EEG in FXS and found 1) decreased peak alpha frequency, 2) 
reduced alpha 
power, 3) centralized 
distribution (known 
as anteriorization) of 
"slow" alpha 
frequencies (8 to 10 
Hz), 4) theta po wer, 
not alpha power, is 
inversely coupled to 
gamma power in 
FXS, and 5) 
increased 
asynchronous 
gamma power (see 
Fig. 5 for 
summary)33.  
Global decrease and “slowing” of alpha activity in FXS:  A peak frequency of 10 to 13 Hz (upper alpha) 
has specific functional relevance for several major physiological systems in typi[INVESTIGATOR_393279]34-38. As a radio receiver prefers specific electromagnetic frequencies, neurons and 
oscillatory networks also demonstrate frequency preferences39, 40. The "switch" to a dominant peak 
rhythm at 4 -8 Hz in FXS ( Fig. 5A) and reduced global alpha power ( Fig. 5B ) may be insufficient to 
drive neural ensembles with an alpha preference35, 38, 41, 42. Thus, the canonical role of alpha in 

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 7 of 28 establishing inhibition -timing windows for optimal sensory and neurocognitive processing may be 
impaired in FXS.  
The peak frequency of 10 to 13 Hz (upper alpha) is functionally important for several physiological 
systems in typi[INVESTIGATOR_297114]34-38. Like a radio receiver, neurons and oscillatory networks 
also demonstrate frequency preferences39, 40. In FXS, there is a "switch" to a dominant peak rhythm at 
4-8 Hz (theta range) and reduced global alpha power, which may be insufficient to drive neural 
ensembles with an alpha preference35, 38, 41, 42. Thus , the canonical role of alpha in establishing 
inhibition -timing windows for optimal sensory and neurocognitive processing may be impaired in FXS.  
“Noisy” Elevated Gamma in FXS ( Fig 5C ): Asynchronous gamma oscillations (30 to 80 Hz) hold a 
special interest in NDDs because of their relation to cortical excitability23, 43, their association with 
perception and cognition44, and measurability in animal models22. The role of gamma oscillations is 
increasingly nuanced, such that precise synchrony in gamma power is associated with functional 
networks and higher -order cognition36, 45, but also that a modest degree of asynchrony or "noise" is  
normal46-48. However, asynchronous (or background) gamma power above what is typi[INVESTIGATOR_393280]44 and, at a circuit level, is associated with reduced spi[INVESTIGATOR_393281]49.  
Evidence of Thalamocortical dysfunction:   
Alterations in thalamocortical activity may unify the system -level hypothesis that underlies these EEG 
findings . Thalamocortical dysrhythmia (TCD) is an electrophysiological motif observed in several 
neuropsychiatric conditions (e.g., epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], Parkinson's disease, tinnitus, depression, and neuropathic 
pain)50-[ADDRESS_493573] been associated with clinical features in these 
disorders. Importantly, in our dataset, abnormalities in alpha and gamma power demonstrate 
significant clinical associations with several core features of FXS, including cognitive function, anxiety, 
social communication, and auditory attention.  
Feasibility of Statistical Learning Tasks  (Aim 2):  Extensive work by [CONTACT_2296] ([CONTACT_393330]) has reliability 
demonstrated in infant and youth populations31, 53 that neural entrainment of SL can be tracked using 
EEG ( see Fig. 1C , pg. 13 ). To date, SL has not been investigated in FXS, but is a highly salient area of 
study in FXS given the interest in language acquisition and as a cognitive proxy for learning in youth with 
FXS19, 54. Furthermore, neural entrainment is amenable to neurodynamic analysis, as embedded 
words gradually  increase as the exposure progresses and predicts improvement in reaction time to test 
SL performance.  
Evidence of neural entrainment by [CONTACT_393302] (Aim 3):  To date, neural perturbation, or entrainment to 
enhance cortical alpha activity, remains unexplored in FXS. The presence of hyperacusis (and EEG 
evidence of sensory hyperarousal) led the investigative team to consider using rhythmic alpha -frequency 
audito ry signal to modulate cortical activity. We reasoned that an auditory entrainment signal could drive 
alpha oscillatory activity at both subcortical and cortical levels because encoded acoustic stimuli 
ultimately reach the temporal lobes via a thalamic intermediary (medial geniculate nucleus). Auditory 
entrainment has been used effectively as a neural probe, both for short -term suppression of tinnitus55, [ADDRESS_493574] an alpha preference , and this enhancement can be observed by [CONTACT_393303], normalization of sensory auditory chirp response (increased ITC and 
decreased asynchronous gamma), and enhancement of SL (as measured by [CONTACT_393304]).  Closed -loop implementation: We have integrated  AAE into a closed -loop perturbation paradigm in 
which alpha power can "self - correct" based on real -time responses. Closed -loop perturbation is a 
powerful framework for testing circuit hypotheses of com plex neural phenomena and has emerging use 
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 8 of 28 in clinical settings for epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]63, Parkinson’s64, and Tourette’s disorder65. A neural closed -loop system 
would ideally account for individual variability in response by [CONTACT_393305][INVESTIGATOR_393282]66. 
AAE Feasibility data:  Our approach is ideal for children as it is delivered at hearing threshold using 
headphones and the perturbation can be rapi[INVESTIGATOR_393283] -time. Unlike other non -invasive brain 
stimulation (e.g., TMS or TDCS), our approach is specifically tailored to a "bottom -up" approach by 
[CONTACT_393306] (which we hypothesize is 
impaired in FXS). We developed a novel AAE stimulus (“baseline AAE”) that creates a differential 
rhythm between the left an d right ear starting at high theta range (7 Hz) through high alpha (13 Hz) in 2 
Hz steps on a 500 Hz sine carrier tone.  
AAE modifies alpha power in FXS:  To demonstrate feasibility and obtain pi[INVESTIGATOR_393284] 8 subjects (TDC: 6M, 7M, 8F, 20M; FXS: 15F, 28M, 38M, 48M). All subjects 
completed the paradigm without any adverse events. The eventual goal of baseline AAE is to iden tify a 
starting frequency for closed -loop perturbation to account for baseline individual variability. Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_393285]. 1) We demonstrate a high level of neural response variability 
to AAE (controlled by [CONTACT_365556]) in eight subjects  (Fig. 10A ), providing rational for the closed -loop approach  
and further emphasiz ing the importance of capturing individual variability in therapeutic development.  2) 
We show  evidence of AAE’s effects on resting -state EEG  in a 15 -year-old FXS female , wherein AAE 
appeared to increase alpha power and decrease theta power over sham AAE (Fig. 10B  Left). 3) In the 
same subject, u sing peak power frequency  analysis  (PPF) we identified both an exogenous leftward -
shifted “alpha” peak and increased alpha peak power between 9 to 11 Hz ( Fig. 10B Right ). 4) Using 
causality analysis (direct directed transfer function), we observed evidence of AAE information outflow 
(phase -based and controlled via sham) from the temporal lobes to frontal, central, and occipi[INVESTIGATOR_393286] a 7-year-old male ( Fig. 10C)   
4.0 Study Endpoints  
Aim 1: Sensory Auditory Studie s 
Primary  outcomes  of interest: 1) Neurodynamic features (peak power frequency, event rate, 
event duration) , 2) 40 Hz ITC of the sensory auditory chirp , 3) Asynchronous gamma power . 
Aim 2: Cognitive Studies  
Peak Power Frequency
Real-time Moving A verage2/Hz dB) Power AAE-Sham (uV
-2024 7 Hz-SHAM 9 Hz-SHAM
11 Hz-SHAM
5 10 154
-2024
4
5 10 15
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz)target Hz
13 Hz-SHAM
AE - Sham
5% FDR adjusted
13 Hz AAE
Sham
10 20-24-22-20-18-16-14-12-10*
*ThetaAlphaPower (10*log10uV2/Hz dB)
[ADDRESS_493575] Directed Transfer
Causality Function (dDTF)
AAE  > Sham
FDR < .001Peak-power sorted time
2 4 8 132030Frequency (Hz)
-26-22-18-14-10-6
dB1. Endogenous ‘alpha’
at 6 Hz
3. emergence of
“mu” rhythm
2. increased peak
alpha frequency power
F ig . 10: N eu ral E n train m en t b y A A E . A . As expected, AAE resulted in high level of interindividual variability between stimulus frequencies. AAE power 
following subtraction of Sham. In our design, a starting frequency would be selected based on maximum response and then AAE would proceed in a 
closed-loop fashion individualized to each participant. B . L eft: 13 Hz AAE vs. sham resulted in an increase in alpha power and a decrease in theta power 
in a 15-year-old female with FXS (paired-t test).  R ig h t:  Peak Power Frequency (PPF) analysis following AAE baseline show endogenous “alpha peak” 
(~6-7 Hz) and AAE induced alpha peak (~9-1 1 Hz). Interestingly , the sensorimotor mu rhythm appeared following stimulation, suggesting normalization of 
alpha rhythms. C. Evidence of AAE information flow (phase-based) from L  temporal lobe to frontal, central, and occipi[INVESTIGATOR_393287]. 
D . Demonstration of operational BCI software implemented at CCHMC for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. AAE, alpha auditory entrainment; sham, carrier frequency only .B. Alpha Enhancement in FXS youth A. AAE Response D. BCI Prototype C. Phase entrainment
Peak Power Frequency
Real-time Moving A verage2/Hz dB) Power AAE-Sham (uV
-2024 7 Hz-SHAM 9 Hz-SHAM
11 Hz-SHAM
5 10 154
-2024
4
5 10 15
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz)target Hz
13 Hz-SHAM
AE - Sham
5% FDR adjusted
13 Hz AAE
Sham
10 20-24-22-20-18-16-14-12-10*
*ThetaAlphaPower (10*log10uV2/Hz dB)
[ADDRESS_493576] Directed Transfer
Causality Function (dDTF)
AAE  > Sham
FDR < .001Peak-power sorted time2 4 8 132030Frequency (Hz)
-26-22-18-14-10-6
dB1. Endogenous ‘alpha’
at 6 Hz3. emergence of
“mu” rhythm
2. increased peak
alpha frequency power
F ig . 10: N eu ral E n train m en t b y A A E . A . As expected, AAE resulted in high level of interindividual variability between stimulus frequencies. AAE power 
following subtraction of Sham. In our design, a starting frequency would be selected based on maximum response and then AAE would proceed in a 
closed-loop fashion individualized to each participant. B . L eft: 13 Hz AAE vs. sham resulted in an increase in alpha power and a decrease in theta power 
in a 15-year-old female with FXS (paired-t test).  R ig h t:  Peak Power Frequency (PPF) analysis following AAE baseline show endogenous “alpha peak” 
(~6-7 Hz) and AAE induced alpha peak (~9-1 1 Hz). Interestingly , the sensorimotor mu rhythm appeared following stimulation, suggesting normalization of 
alpha rhythms. C. Evidence of AAE information flow (phase-based) from L  temporal lobe to frontal, central, and occipi[INVESTIGATOR_393287]. 
D . Demonstration of operational BCI software implemented at CCHMC for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]. AAE, alpha auditory entrainment; sham, carrier frequency only .B. Alpha Enhancement in FXS youth A. AAE Response D. BCI Prototype C. Phase entrainment
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 9 of 28 Primary: Word -learning Index (WLI) for the SL passive exposure task,  i.e., EEG phase -
synchronization at 1.1 Hz (word rate) compare d to 3.3 Hz (syllable rate) over  the exposure period . 
Exploratory: Learning Effect (BLE)  of the SL active performance task . 
Aim 3: Neural  Perturbation  Studies  
Primary: 1) AAE versus sham change in 40 Hz ITC , and 2) WLI during SL passive exposure task.  
Exploratory : AAE vs. sham effect on reaction time  (indicated by [CONTACT_393307] ) during  
SL active performance task.  
5.0 Study Design and Procedures  
5.1 Study Design  
Aims 1 & [ADDRESS_493577] of a case -control study that will be completed over two visits lasting  
approximately 3-4 hours each, including:  medical and psychological assessments, neurocognitive 
testing, and EEG/ event -related potentials (ERP)  procedures. Visits one and two may be completed  up 
to three months apart. Following completion of Aim 1 and 2 studies, subjects and their guardians may 
be asked to participate in Aim 3.   
Aim 3 (Intervention)  consists of a two -visit, randomized controlled, crossover acute perturbation study 
to study the effect of AAE or sham stimulation on 1) the sensory auditory chirp (ITC and asynchronous 
gamma) and Passive SL Task (word learning ITC) and 2) in sufficiently c ooperative participants, 
reaction time responses of an exploratory Active SL Task (word learning). AAE will be performed in 
two visits as a double -blind, sham -controlled crossover study such that each participant will receive 
AAE and sham in random order. For Aim 3, we estimate two [ADDRESS_493578] a 1 -
week washout.  
FX ENTRAIN Stud ies flow:  
 
5.[ADDRESS_493579]  age/functioning, 
tolerability of procedures , and family schedule . The research team will work to always fit the needs of 

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493580]/family.  In line with this, subjects, caregivers, or parents may be given the option  to complete 
appropriate surveys or questionnaires electronically through Redcap, over phone /video call with a 
member of the study team, or from home and mailed back to the research team. We  may not administer 
all of the measures, assessments, or procedures, listed below . Measures administered will be at the 
discretion of the PI. If any data is unable to be collected, this will not be considered a protocol violation, 
but will be noted in the study chart. When applicable,  assessments and measures previously collected 
from related, linked studies conducted by [CONTACT_393308] -retest effects . 
Clinical data  may include, but is not limited to, previous behavioral, neuropsychological, or other testing , 
and the resul ts of any pertinent laboratory tests including previously conducted genetic chromosomal or 
microarray testing, vital signs, medication history, imaging history, CBC, metabolic panels, lipid panel, 
and other blood testing . 
Standardized Measures and Assessments  
Participants  may c omplete  the following : 
1. Brief medical history and physical exam  to determine any exclusion criteria and 
medication.  Medication history will contain medication details including duration taking the 
medication, time of last dose, history (with start and stop dates) of discontinued medications, and 
any non -pharmaceutical  treatments such as herbals or complementary medications.  Physical 
exam may include height, weight, head circumference, vitals and CNS data.  
2. Hearing  and vision tests  to assess adequate hearing threshold using conventional threshold 
measurements from 0.25 to 8 kHz with simple behavioral responses , and vision tests to confirm 
corrected far visual acuity of less than 20/40.   
3. Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)67 which is a screener for autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD). TDC controls must score ≤[ADDRESS_493581] 
score < 15 to be included in the study.   
4. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule -2 (ADOS)68 will be completed to assess for co -
morbid ASD in the FXS cohort, and to confirm ASD diagnosis in the ASD cohort. All ASD subjects 
and o nly FXS subjects scoring ≥ 12 on SCQ will complete the ADOS.   
5. Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Kid (MINI -KID)69: Structural diagnostic 
interview to assess call co -occurring disorders in all subjects.   The standard MINI Kid assesses 
the [ADDRESS_493582] Binet IQ Scale -5th Ed (SB-5)70. to provide a Full Scale, Verbal, and Nonverbal I.Q.   
7. Vineland Adaptive Behavioral Scales - Third Edition71, to assess adaptive skills.   
8. Expressive Language Sampling  (ELS) , conversation, and narrative19 to assess naturalistic 
language abilities and heavily used in FXS.   
9. Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (CELF -5)72: Comprehensive evaluation of 
language abilities to determine the level or levels of language (e.g., semantics, morphology, 
syntax, and pragmatics).  
10. Parent -report measures  of psychological functioning: Aberrant Behavioral Checklist  (ABC)73; 
Anxiety, Depression, and Mood Scale (ADAMS)74; Sensory Profile75; Social Responsiveness 
Scale (SRS -II)76; Repetitive Behavior Scale -Revised  (RBS -R)77; Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale  
(PARS)78; Pediatric Quality of Life  (PQL)79.  
11. NIH Cognitive Toolbox80 for neurocognitive and neuropsychological skills . 
 
 
 
Table 1:  Detailed list of medical and standardized study assessments  by [CONTACT_393309]: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 11 of 28 Assessment   FXS  TDC  ASD   Remote 
Administration  Online 
Survey  
Medical assessment (history, concomitant  
medication evaluation)   X  X  X  X   
Physical (height, weight, head circumference, 
vitals, CNS data)  X  X  X      
Hearing and vision screener   X  X X      
Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ)   X  X  X  X X 
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule 
(ADOS)     X*    X      
Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Kid 
(MINI -KID)  X  X  X  X   
Stanford -Binet Intelligence Scale, 5th Edition   X  X  X      
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale 3rd Edition  X  X  X  X   
Clinical Evaluation of Language Fundamentals 
(CELF -5)  X  X  X      
Expressive Language Sampling  (ELS)  X  X  X      
Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC)   X  X  X  X X 
Anxiety, Depression, and Mood Scale (ADAMS)   X  X  X  X X 
Sensory Profile   X  X  X  X X 
Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS -II) X  X X  X X 
Repetitive Behavior Scale -Revised (RBS -R)  X  X  X  X X 
Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale (PARS)   X  X  X  X X 
Pediatric Quality of Life  X  X  X  X X 
NIH Cognitive Toolbox   X  X X      
* Only administered to FXS subjects with SCQ score ≥12  
Detailed schedule of procedures by [CONTACT_172961]/visit  
 
 
Neurophysiology  Tasks  
Table 2: Schedule of n europhysiology and neurocognitive procedures  
  

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 12 of 28 Aim 1  (Visit 1) : 
Sensory Auditory Studies  Aim 2 (Visit 2) : 
Cognitive Studies  Aim 3  (Visits 3 & 4) :  
Closed -Loop Neural  
Perturbation Studies  
Resting State EEG   Resting State EEG  Resting State EEG   
Sensory Auditory Chirp   Passive SL Task   AAE1 Baseline    
Auditory Steady State  Active SL Task Sensory Auditory Chirp  
AAE1 Baseline   AAE1 Baseline  Passive SL Task  
    Active SL Task 
1AAE, Alpha  Auditory  Entrainment  Paradigm  
EEG /ERP  Procedures  
EEG/ERP  may be used to assess the electrophysiologic correlates of exposure to sensory stimuli (i .e. 
auditory /, visual, tactile) and/or during behavioral computerized testing. Recordings are acquired using 32 
up to 256 -channel cap (HydroCel  Geodesic Sensor Net) with a n amplifier. Data are recorded at a sampling 
rate of 1000 Hz with saline -based electrodes . Acoustic stimuli are generated and presented using 
MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA) and synchronized with a pulse to mark the onset of each stimulus  
Video may be recorded to accurately identify non -brain artifact contamination of the recording. In order to 
facilitate accurate EEG electrode locations on the scalp during analysis any subject that receives an EEG  
may be photographed to determine  electrode positions during recording; this may include a  5-10 minute 
procedure in which the EEG net and electrode positions are captured using photogrammetry software and a 
stereoscopic camera. Data will be used to generate a numerical coordinates file. All EEG collection will be 
completed by [CONTACT_393310] . Our team developed systematic behavioral preparation 
including social stories, visual schedules, and demo nets/parent training to optimize data collection. In 
our experience, >95% of study eligible individuals with FXS provide usable EEG data following our  study 
protocols. To maintain cooperation with study procedures, resting and sensory EEG is performed while 
watching a standardized silent cartoon. Behavioral tasks will use response button boxes . 
1. Resting state EEG:  Continuous data will be recorded for 5-7 minutes . 
2. Sensory Auditory Chirp:  "Chirp" stimuli will be delivered through headphones /speakers  with a 
1000 -Hz carrier tone amplitude modulated (AM) by a chirp sinusoid linearly increasing in 
frequency from 0 –100 Hz over 2000 ms. One-to two -hundred stimuli will be separated by a 1.5 -
2 sec inter -trial interval, for  7.5-12.5 minutes of testing.   
3. Sensory Auditory Steady State:  As an exploratory outcome, we may  test stability of 
synchronization at alpha (10 Hz) frequency and its relation alpha power phase. Stimuli will consist 
of white noise amplitude modulated by a sinusoid for 3 sec at 10 Hz. Fifty trials at each frequency 
(100 trials total) will be randomly p resented and separated by a 1.5 -2 sec inter -trial interval, for 
8.3 minutes of testing.    
4. Alpha Auditory Entrainment (AAE) Baseline:  The AAE was generated in MATLAB 2019b with 
a [ADDRESS_493583]. We had five total conditions including silence (no stimulus), sham 
(500 Hz both ears), and linearly increasing alpha frequencies of 7 Hz (507 Hz in right ear), 9 Hz 
(509 Hz in right ear ), 11 Hz (511 Hz in right ear), 13 Hz (513 Hz in right ear). The total stimulation 
length is twelve minutes with one minute of stimulation of each frequency in pseudorandom 
order.    
5. Dynamic AAE  during closed -loop perturbation : The requested frequency differential will be 
generated by a custom function in MATLAB to deliver AAE in the requested .[ADDRESS_493584] for 60 seconds until the next iterative feedback. Combining AAE with paradigm:  
The AAE stimulus will be played back at background noise level alongside either the sensory 
auditory chirp or SL tasks. There is considerable literature on the combination of entrainment 
beats with other auditory stimuli (speech, music) maintaining the ph ysiological response81-83. 
6. Sham AAE : The sham stimulus  was generated in MATLAB with a 500 Hz sine carrier tone . The 
sham AAE condition  will mimic the closed -loop AAE condition  detailed above , however  only the 
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 13 of 28 carrier stimulus (500 Hz) is mixed with the paradigm audio  during sensory auditory chirp or SL 
tasks .  
Eye Tracking  
Participants may be monitored or asked to make specific eye/eyelid movements. Behavioral and 
emotional tasks may be used in conjunction to monitor eye movements. This task involves the subject 
to look at a sequence of varying emotional faces and social seq uences. The resulting ocular movements 
may be recorded using a Tobii Eye Tracker (Tobii Technology AB, Danderyd Sweden) or similar 
scanner -compatible technology.  
Statistical Learning  Tasks  
Assessment of SL include s a 1) Passive SL Task and 2) Active SL Task. This approach allows us to 
capture data on all participants regardless of adaptive functioning. The Passive SL Task uses an EEG -
based measure of neural entrainment involving ITC31, [ADDRESS_493585] Learning Index (WLI). The 
Active SL Task based measure uses reaction time to estimate a behavioral measure of SL, the 
Behavioral Learning Effect BLE32. The tasks may be altered (e.g., speed reduced, additional instruction 
or practice given) to  increase feasibility for  participants.   
Procedure  Overview  (all SL tasks)  
Participants will be seated in front of a computer monitor with headphones compatible with EEG cap. If 
a subject is not able to tolerate headphones, alternative methods like speakers may be used instead . 
To facilitate cooperation and reduce motion artifact, standardized, silent non -social videos will be 
played during the task.  Stimuli (see Fig. 1 ): Twelve syllables are combined to make four, three -syllable 
pseudowords. This miniature synthetic language resembles natural language as (1) transitional 
probabilities are higher for neighboring  syllables within words than across word boundaries and 2) a 
given syllable may be present in more than one  word. For example, a transitional probability of 1.0 for 
a syllable pair such as "vinay" indicates that every "vi" in  the stream was followed by "nay." SL occurs 
as the brain "discovers" hidden words in the spe ech stream by  [CONTACT_393311].  
Passive SL Task:  Each participant will be presented with both a structured and random stream of 
syllables. The structured stream will consist of the four generated words, concatenated in 
pseudorandom order without any pauses or acoustic cues between words (e.g., vinayfeetidomoo …). 
Each word will be presented [ADDRESS_493586] repeats. The random stream contains the same total number of 
syllables, which are ordered pseudorandomly  to avoid syllable repetitions but will otherwise not follow 

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 14 of 28 any hidden structure. Words will be presented at a rate of 1.1 per a second (thus, syllable rate is 3.3 
Hz), resulting in 10 minutes of each structured and random continuous stimuli. As previously published, 
the expected outcome of this study is an increas e in EEG phase -locking at 1.1 Hz over the exposure 
period —present in the structured condition only —indicative of gradual word discovery and successful 
word segmentation resulting from statistical learning.  
Word -learning Index (WLI)  for Passive SL : WLI is the primary EEG outcome measure for the exposure 
task and, similar to our sensory studies, is based on intertrial phase coherence (ITC). As the participant 
"learns" the four words in the structured stream (i.e., uses statistical probabilities acro ss neighboring 
syllables to segregate the speech stream), their EEG typi[INVESTIGATOR_393288] -locking 
(increased ITC) at the word presentation rate (1.1 Hz) and decreased phase -locking at the syllable 
presentat ion rate (3.3 Hz). Thus, patterns of EEG phase -locking, corresponding to a shift in processing 
from raw syllable units to cohesive words, reflect gradual statistical learning in the brain. The effect can 
be quantified by [CONTACT_40397] a ratio of the ITC for wor ds versus syllables, as follows:    
WLI = Intertrial Coherence word rate  / Intertrial Coherence syllable rate   
A higher WLI indicates a  relatively stronger  response to tri -syllabic nonwords compared to raw syllables, 
reflecting stronger word segmentation due to statistical learning. The WLI predicts subsequent 
performance on behavioral tests of statistical learning and increases over time in the structured condition 
only, and not in the random condition31.  
Active SL Task (Exploratory):  Following the exposu re task, each participant may a ttempt to perform a 
reaction -time based task that provides a behavioral index of SL . Participants will be instructed to press 
a button when they hear a given target syllable (e.g., "moo"). Prior to the main task, the participant may 
complete [ADDRESS_493587] across a total of five, one -
minute blocks, each corresponding to a separate target syllable. Within each one -minute block, each of 
the six words will be repeated 4 -9 times . A visual reminder of the target (e.g., a pi[INVESTIGATOR_510] a Cow for 
"moo") will be displayed for the entirety of the block. Targets presented within later positions within a 
nonsense word, ( i.e., those syllables that are more predictable) elicit faster reactio n times than less 
predictable, word initial syllables, providing a reaction -time bas ed measure of statistical learning. Thus, 
the Behavioral Learning effect can be quantified as follows:   
BLE (in ms) = (Reaction time target syllable position 1 )-(Reaction time  target syllable position 3 )  
Larger BLE values indicate greater proportional facilitation to predictable words in the stream, indicative 
of stronger SL at the individual level. Group comparisons can be facilitated by [CONTACT_393312] 1  to normalize to an individual's baseline reaction time. Larger BLE values 
indicate greater proportional facilitation to predictable words in the stream, indicative of stronger SL at 
the individual level.  
Interventional Agent: Alpha Auditory (Neural) Entrainment  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493588] attempted to reduce the 
complexity of the protocol to be 
feasible in youth and simplify 
interpretation for future chronic 
dosing studies.  
Procedure  Overview  
Three segments (approximately 
15 minutes each) will be 
conducted to 1) identify the baseline AAE, 2) conduct closed -loop perturbation sensory studies, and 3) 
conduct closed -loop perturbation SL studies. Similar to Aim [ADDRESS_493589] will be offered a 5 to 10 -minute br eak. 
Baseline AAE (Segment 1):  To avoid extensive "frequency finding" during the closed -loop segments we 
have opted to perform a linear increasing auditory entrainment paradigm to identify an optimal starting 
frequency. We will record 3 to 5 minutes of resting state EEG prior to the AAE baseline paradigm. The 
brain computer interface ( BCI) will provide real -time detection of peak -power frequency and magnitude 
of the target frequency range at each frequency step and will be recorded with subject data. Following 
completion of the baseline AAE paradigm for each subject, the investigator (s) will evaluate output curves 
and determine optimal starting frequency. Segment 1 is performed during AAE or sham treatment 
conditions.  
Closed -loop segments 2 and 3: Paradigm procedures for both sensory auditory chirp and SL paradigm 
will be identical to Aims 1 and 2 , with the addition of the AAE stimulus (either active or sham) to the 
paradigm audio . As the SL Tasks syllables can be varied, the subjects will learn a new “miniature” 
language on each visit. In the closed loop condition, prior to starting paradigm sixty seconds of the 
selected baseline AAE will be delivered via earphones before the star t of the paradigm to capture 
sufficient data for feature feedback. Following initiation of the paradigm, every [ADDRESS_493590] feasibility 
will be assessed for completion of the SL performance task. Following completion of paradigm, subjects 
will be allowed to watch a video of their choice (with sound ) as the EEG cap is removed to facilitate 
cooperation and serve as a reward.  
5.3 Blindness and Procedure for Breaking the Blind  
This is a double -blind, sham -controlled study. Investigators, study staff, and study subjects will be 
blinded to the randomized study treatment assignments. Unlike drug studies, the “treatment” in this 
study is the AAE stimulus (alpha auditory entrainment)  versus Sham (carrier frequency alone) without 
an alpha entrainment rhythm. Each subject will get either AAE or sham, but the order will be 

PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493591] will be kept with a designed study personnel (who is not 
involved in running subject visits or data analysis). The  blinded list will be coded with BCI software to 
deliver the correct treatment order of Sham or AAE. As the stimulus will be delivered via headphones 
or speakers at background noise levels and generate identical triggers study personal will remain 
blinded until after study completion. Though we do not anticipate any need for an emergency 
unblinding, it will only be considered in situations where the knowledge of the treatment code has an 
impact on the planned treatment of the emergency. Once the randomization code is broken for a 
subject, he/she must be withdrawn from the study. The investigator must record the reaso n for the 
emergency unblinding in the source documents and recorded in the electronic database.  
5.[ADDRESS_493592] Risks (all aims)  
All experimental procedures will be carried out in a setting and among staff who are carefully trained 
and experienced in working with individuals with developmental disabilities including FXS and ASD. All 
human research procedures take place on the clinic al campus of CCHMC . In addition to the on -site 
presence of an attending physician who is PALS certified, the clinical resources of CCHMC will be 
available in the case of an adverse event which includes access to AED equipment and the 
Emergency Department.  See Risks to Subjects  section for detailed  precautions against risks.  
6.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Findings from assessments will be made available to agents of the participants (parents, schools, 
treating psychologists, physicians) only with the expressed, written consent of the parents/guardians 
and if appropriate for the study participant.  
The study investigator team is joined by a pediatric neurologist (S.W.) with expertise in clinical EEG 
and brain stimulation and extensive collaboration with the P.I. on pediatric TMS studies84-89. Since 
ASD patients have a higher risk for epi[INVESTIGATOR_393289] , the neurologist's role will be 
to review all research resting -state EEGs for abnormalities, including evidence of seizure activity. If 
any abnormalities are found, these findings' clinical relevance and urgency and the need for a 
neurological exam will be discussed with the principal investigator. The findings will be directly 
discussed with the family with appropriate clinical referral. In addition, any featu res of clinical 
significance within the EEG recordings will be considered in subgroup and co -variate analysis.  
7.0 Study Timelines  
Individual subjects’ duration of participation in this study is estimated to be approximately 16 hours  
over the course of up to two years, with up to three months of separation allowed between visits 1 and 
2 (descriptive study), and 3 and 4 (clinical trial), respectively. It is expected that participants’ duration 
of participation will be significantly sho rter than is stated above , however, c onsidering many FXS 
families travel great distances to be seen in our lab clinically, high flexibility in scheduling is imperative 
for ensuring equal opportunity to those who w ish to participate in research.  
We plan to enroll all study subjects by [CONTACT_185241] 4 and estimate the  primary analyses will be 
completed by [CONTACT_185241] 5.  
8.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria (all aims):  FXS ASD  TDC 
Aged [ADDRESS_493593] documentation of ASD diagnosis    X   
Score ≤ 15 on SCQ screen    X   
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493594] -Binet      X 
Score ≤8 on an SCQ screen      X 
    
Exclusion Criteria (all aims):  FXS ASD  TDC 
Patient has auditory or visual impairments that cannot be corrected  X X X 
History of substance abuse or dependence within the past 6 months  X X X 
 
Vulnerable Populations  
• Inclusion of women and minorities:  We will include males and females in numbers consistent 
with the distribution expected in the clinic populations. We will not exclude any participant 
based on race or ethnicity. The distribution of minorities will be consistent with the distribution 
expec ted in Cincinnati.  
• Inclusion of children:  A central aim of the proposed research is to evaluate the underlying 
mechanisms responsible for brain development in children with FXS. This can only be done by 
[CONTACT_393313] . The minimum age of 5 was chosen because of 
the level of cooperation required to complete procedures, and the upper age limit of 15 was 
chosen because of common age -related changes in behavior and brain function beyond that 
age.  
• Persons with Cognitive Impairment or other limited decision -making capacity:  To be inclusive 
and most generalizable in our study findings, and because some elements of our protocol can 
be completed with minimal cognitive requirements , such as event -related potential ( ERP) 
monitoring of cortical responses to tones, we will recruit any study -eligible patient with Fragile X 
Syndrome regardless of level of cognitive disability into as many study components as they can 
complete.  We will recruit all FXS patients who we believe can complete study procedures . 
9.0 Local Number of Subjects  
The target enrollment for the case -control portion (Aims 1 & 2) is 120 subjects and 60 subjects for the 
clinical trial  (Aim 3) , for a total of 180 subjects across all aims . We plan to recruit a total of 60 subjects 
with Fragile X Syndrome with full FMR1 mutations (>200 CGG repeats; at least partial FMR1 gene 
methylation ). Of these FXS subjects, [ADDRESS_493595] will recruit  an additional  two cohorts of control 
subjects  for a total of 60 IQ-, sex -, and chronologically aged  matched  non-syndromic (i.e., idiopathic) 
ASD controls, and 60 sex-and chronologically aged matched TDCs. Following completion of  the case -
control portion , subjects and their guardians may be asked to participate in the clinical tria l portion of 
the study .  
Retention Plan:  We do not anticipate a high drop -out rate since almost all testing is non -invasive, and 
each portion of the study (case -control and clinical trial, respectively)  can be completed in [ADDRESS_493596] close to 90% retention of all recruited subjects. 
Subjects unable to complete study procedures or who fail to consent/withdrawal following enrollment 
will be replaced to maintain our enrollment target of [ADDRESS_493597] consented to be contact[CONTACT_393314]: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493598] in participation.   
Participants with a history of Developmental Disability will be recruited from the CCHMC 
Developmental Disabilities Psychiatry Service (inpatient and outpatient services), the CCHMC Division 
of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics outpatient clinics, ot her CCHMC outpatient clinics, 
CCHMC inpatient units, at special events and from the general public.  
The study will be advertised in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/clinic and general public areas via print, email, electronic and 
social media. The Cincinnati Fragile X Research and Treatment Center will be sending out a monthly 
newsletter providing resources, research findings, upcoming events, and research opportunities to 
families who have expressed interest in clinic/research; information about research opportunities will 
also be distributed in the form of a brochure. All recruitment materials mentioned above  will be  IRB-
appro ved prior to send -out. 
Interested families or potential participants may contact [CONTACT_393315], at which time a research coordinator will follow 
up by [CONTACT_61529].  When individuals contact [CONTACT_393316], 
we will provide them with basic information regarding study procedures and aims , inform them that this 
research is voluntary,  and answer any questions about the study. Family and medical history will be 
reviewed in person or over the phone to determine study eligibility. If no exclusionary factors are 
identified in the review of family and medical history, then subjects will be scheduled for a meeting to 
obtain informed consent.  
Potential participants and their families may be given the option to have a practice cap/beanie mailed 
to them to aid with sensory familiarity in preparation for a potential future visit. For some participants 
with a history of Developmental Disability, th e optional EEG tasks may present an uncomfortable 
sensory experience, especially to those unfamiliar with the EEG cap. To allow for adequate practice 
and preparation time, this option may be presented before the potential participant has been 
consented to the study. The practice beanies fit snugly around the head, offering a similar sensation to 
a real EEG cap. If the family already owns a similar cap the subject can practice with they may be 
asked to use that instead. The caps will not be used to screen subjects and are only being provided to  
increase subjects’ comfortability with EEG. Subjects  who opt to receive a practice cap are not required 
to practice wearing  the cap  prior to the first visit. It will be explained to potential subjects/caregivers  
that receiving the practice cap does not require them to later enroll in the research study or to 
complete EEG tasks at a subsequent research visit.  The practice caps are of negligible monetary 
value and are not believed to unduly influence subjects’ consideration of participating in the study.  
Compensation  
Subjects will receive $ 50 for each completed visit . If a participant cannot complete any study visits, 
they will be compensated  at a rate of  $15/hr. based on what they have completed.  
Payment will be in the form of a reloadable debit card (ClinCard). We will provide the card and load 
money onto the card after each completed visit . We will also administer a handout that will explain how 
to use it.  
Because this research study involves payment for participation, we are required by [CONTACT_312629] (IRS) rules to collect and use participants’ social security or tax ID number (SSN) in 
order to track the amount of money that we pay. We wi ll only use the participants’ SSN to keep track 
of how much money we pay to them and their SSN will not be used as part of this research.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 19 of 28 Families traveling significant distance to our clinic may be reimbursed for travel costs at the discretion 
of the PI. This may include mileage, hotel, airfare and /or other associated costs.  
11.[ADDRESS_493599] of his or her caregiver or legal representative, 
the reason(s) should  be documented in the subject's source document.  Any research information 
recorded for, or resulting fr om, participation in this research study prior to the date that the subject 
formally withdrew their consent will be retained and may continue to be used and disclosed by [CONTACT_393317]; however, no new data will be collected.  
12.0 Risks to Subjects  
Confidentiality of records and results:  The neurophysiological, medical, psychological, and behavioral 
measures will be made anonymous and labeled only by a unique identification number. Appropriate 
precautions will be taken to protect the confidentiality of all data. All subjects will be infor med of this, 
including the HIPAA privacy of information act.   
Behavioral and cognitive testing:  There are minimal risks anticipated to participating in observational, 
clinical behavioral assessments. In the rare case that an individual might become overly fatigued or 
distressed during the assessment session, the session will be discontinued and resch eduled. 
Evaluation procedures are designed to be compatible with the attention span of a person with 
intellectual disability, greater activity level, and need for access to his or her parents or guardians. The 
NIH Cognitiv e Toolbox specific ally created downward developmental extensions to accommodate for 
these needs. In addition, specialized procedures will be accompanied with specialized approaches 
such as using social stories and visual aids. There will be praise for task attention and overall  
emphasis on reducing language demands. The clinical investigators have extensive experience 
working clinically with developmentally disabled patients and their families.  
EEG:  EEG testing is considered minimal risk. The most common risk associated with these tasks is 
boredom. The EEG nets do not use an electrode gel, but rather a saline solution and sponges which 
has a very low risk of skin irritation. The candidate and EEG tec hnicians are highly experienced with 
doing EEG with sensitive populations such as children and subjects with neurodevelopmental 
disorders . 
13.[ADDRESS_493600]'s 
behavior which  may benefit them. We may also provide resources to connect them to local, regional, 
and national support organizations for FXS. Families and subjects may appreciate contributing to the 
discovery of innovative FXS treatments that will benefit other individ uals. Healthy subjects often have 
various motivations and different rewards for participating in the study. Some subjects will be primarily 
motivated by [CONTACT_393318]. Others may want to participate to learn more about their 
skills or are pe rsonally committed to developmental disability research.   
14.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
Data Storage and Sharing  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493601] ‐protected folder.  EEG scans recordings will be 
anonymized by [CONTACT_393319]/recording and 
will be stored on a secure server.   
Sociodemographic information collected from this research may be utilized to create a Universal 
Identification Number (GUID) for the National Database for Autism Research (NDAR). Data that is 
collected from each research visit may be shared with NDAR. Befo re this data is sent to NDAR, 
information such as name [CONTACT_393329] a GUID.  
Research data gathered as part of this study may be shared and provided to other investigators 
affiliated with the Neurobehavioral and Neurology Research Teams at CCHMC for the purpose of data 
sharing. If information is requested by [CONTACT_2413], the PI [INVESTIGATOR_393290]. If participants 
are enrolled in multiple or linked studies, their research data will be shared across studies to reduce 
participant burden and avoid duplication of procedures. All shared data will be de -identified, and 
results will be published as group data without the use of characteristics that would id entify individual 
participants.  
Quality Control  
At point -of-entry, data values will undergo consistency edits (e.g., ID validation, range verification, 
duplicate detection) and personnel will be required to correct errors. Data management staff will run 
logic error programs to check for accuracy and irr egularities within and across data structures and 
within and across sites. Quality assurance checks will be conducted regularly by [CONTACT_393320]. Regularly scheduled, and as needed, communications between the 
study team , the neuroimaging team and PI [INVESTIGATOR_393291].  
Data Analysis  
Power Analysis : Aim 1A:  Based on differences in PPF in FXS vs. TDC in our resting state EEG data, 
we expect an effect size of approximately .[ADDRESS_493602] sizes in low gamma power and N1 
amplitudes in FX S10, 12, 90, 91. Aim 2:  The effect size for WLI differences between structured and 
random conditions is approximately .853. The primary comparisons for both Aim 1A  and Aim [ADDRESS_493603] size of 0.8, 40 subjects in each of the three diagnostic groups yields 84.3% power at a 
level of significance = .0125. Effects size data for FXS vs. ASD for these measures is not available but 
may be estimable for future studies. Aim 3:  This aim is novel, without a strong basis for estimating an 
effect size. AAE effect size of PPF enhancement (vs. sham) in our preliminary data is between .89 and 
.97 (obtained peak frequencies of 9.3 to 9.6 Hz). For the within -groups crossover, an AAE trial to 
detect treatment differences in a 2 X 2 crossover design (20/group) yields approximately 80% power to 
identify group differences with an effect size of .9 at an alpha of 0.05.  
Statistical analysis : PPF ( Aim 1A ) and WLI ( Aim 2 ) were selected as primary response variables 
since they will be individually optimized as starting parameters in Aim [ADDRESS_493604], but confirmation of FXS vs. 
ASD can weaken the inference that differences in intellectual ability and genetic liability alone account 
for group difference. Covariates:  FXS vs. TDC model will include age, sex, and non -verbal IQ. FXS vs. 
ASD will additionall y include co -occurring psychiatric diagnoses, psychiatric medication(s) (4 
categories), and SRS score. A group by [CONTACT_393321]: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 21 of 28 differences in FXS15. Aim 1B:  Murine data will consist of a parallel model to Aim 1A with three 
neurodynamic variables (PPF, event duration, and event number) and independent variable of group 
(KO or WT; 80 in each group). Aim 3:  A linear model with repeated measures will test a 2 -treatment, 
2-period, 2 -sequence balanced -crossover design (Williams, 1989) with Kenward -Roger adjustment92 
applied. Further, as in Aim 1A and 2, two separate models will be examined for FXS vs. TDC and FXS 
vs. ASD. The responses of interest in Aim 3 are 40Hz ITC and WLI change (AAE vs. sham). The fixed 
effects of diagnostic group, treatment, the interaction bet ween diagnostic group and treatment, 
treatment sequence, and period will be examined. Potential carryover effects will also be assessed. 
Covariates:  Covariates for each comparison will be identical to models for Aim 1A and 2 above. The 
adjusted (least squa res) means for the diagnostic group by [CONTACT_393322].   Within the FXS group, for example, the treatment 
effect will be by [CONTACT_393323] (FXS treatment – FXS sham) at the 0.05 level o f significance.  
Exploratory analyses:  Aim 1A:  Other neurodynamic response variables (event rate and event 
duration) and chirp response (40Hz ITC and gamma ERSP) will be modeled as PPF. If the sex x 
diagnostic group interaction is significant (p < .05), subsequent post -hoc inter -diagnostic comparisons  
will be made for each sex. Lastly, for Aim 1A, the five variables representing neurodynamics and chirp 
response (PPF, event rate, event duration, 40 Hz ITC, and gamma ERSP) will be examined as a 
multivariate response across two paradigms (rest and chirp).  As in the models above, diagnostic group 
will be the independent variable along with the appropriate covariates as described above. Aim 1C:  To 
identify which FXS genotype (males with or without mosaicism and females) has similar alterations in 
neurodynamic variables as the Fmr1 -/- KO (vs. WT) we will derive 95% confidence intervals for the 
effect sizes for each of the three neurodynamic varia bles for each of the three FXS subgroups (vs. 
their respective matched controls) and compare to the confidence inter val for the effect size based on 
the Fmr1 -/- KO vs. WT comparison.   Lastly, significant differences between the FXS effect sizes and 
the murine effect size will be explored using bootstrap methodology where the resampling will be 
within each subgroup (huma n and mouse).  
15.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
There are no known risks or side effects associated with auditory entrainment; this stimulation 
is considered minimal risk . However, given the potential of neuromodulation and our site’s long 
history with TMS neuromodulation and clinical trials in FXS and ASD populations , we have opted to 
implement standardized safety measures and review study progress through a data safety monitoring 
board (DSMB).  
[CONTACT_393331] , Outpatient Clinical Director with the Division of Psychiatry at CCHMC, will serve as 
the DSMB Chair. [CONTACT_393332]  assumes this role for the Pedapati lab neurodevelopmental disorders 
interventional trials, and he is divisionally supported to execute this work.  The monitor will review 
recruitment and adverse events every 6 months and report their assessment to the P.I. The 
independent monitor will also review any SAEs and significant unanticipated events as they occur.  
A physician  will monitor  data quality and adverse events at each visit. Any adverse events will be 
reported to the PI. All adverse events will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602], and reported in summary form to the IRB, on 
an annual basis and at the conclusion of the study. Any SAE during any study related activity 
(assessments, EEG , etc. ) will be immediately reported to the DSMB  and CCHMC IRB . In addition, the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_393292].  
16.[ADDRESS_493605]’s name. No information about the participant, or provided by [CONTACT_393324], will be disclosed to others without his/her written permission, except if 
necessary to protect his/her rights or welfare; or if required by [CONTACT_2371].  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/[ADDRESS_493606] under 18 years of age, their parent(s)/legal guardian(s) will be required 
to give voluntary written informed consent. Written assent will be obtained from subjects who are at 
least eleven years of age and cognitively able to give assent. Due to the age range  for this study  (5 to 
15), some children will not be able to sign an assent form.  
Informed consent procedures for the study will be conducted by [CONTACT_393325]. Legally authorized representatives together with participants initially will receive written 
materials and be given an oral explanation of the study.  After an LAR has read the consent and 
expressed willingness to enroll in the study, the individual obtaining the informed consent will review 
any points about which the potential participant /LAR  is unclear, and the participant /LAR be invited to 
ask questions . Participants and their LARs will be informed during their initial c onsent , and on several 
additional occasions throughout their experience in the study , that r efusal to participate in the study  
will in no way influence or restrict treatment services  at CCHMC , and the participant is free to withdraw 
at any time with no negative consequences.  One signed and witnessed copy of the consent and 
assent forms will be stored in secure storage and the p articipants  and LARs  will be given a copy of the 
signed forms.  
Consent may take place via in -person electronic consent (using REDCap for the eConsent) or over the 
phone  or video call (via paper or REDCap for eConsent). REDCap is a secure web application for 
building and managing online surveys and databases. While REDCap can be used to collect virtually 
any type of data (including 21 CFR Part 22, FISMA, and HIPAA -compliant environments ), it is 
specifically geared to support online or offline data capture for research studies and operations. The 
CCHMC REDCap team has te mplates available for research use for eConsenting which includes 
Consent to be a Research Subject and Authorization to Use or Disclose (Release) Health Information 
that Identifies Participant for a Research Study (HIPAA). The REDCap electronic consent for mat does 
not accommodate the current CCHMC formatting which includes headers with logos and stamps on 
each page and will therefore require some modifications. E -consenting can be conducted following 
CCHMC Clinical Research Procedure Number 41 -1.4 Section 3 .5.2. 
19.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
We will follow SOP guidelines for written documentation of consent (HRP -091).  
20.[ADDRESS_493607] at Cincinnati Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29349].  
21.[ADDRESS_493608] and complete the study.  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 23 of 28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
References  
1. Hagerman RJ, Berry -Kravis E, Hazlett HC, Bailey DB, Moine H, Kooy RF, Tassone F, Gantois I, 
Sonenberg N, Mandel JL, Hagerman PJ. Fragile X syndrome. Nature reviews Disease primers. 2017;3:[ZIP_CODE]. 
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.65.  
2. Erickson CA, Kaufmann WE, Budimirovic DB, Lachiewicz A, Haas -Givler B, Miller RM, Weber JD, 
Abbeduto L, Hessl D, Hagerman RJ, Berry -Kravis E. Best Practices in Fragile X Syndrome Treatment 
Development. Brain Sci. 2018;8(12). doi: 10.3390/brainsci8120224 ; PMCID: PMC6315698.  
3. Erickson CA, Davenport MH, Schaefer TL, Wink LK, Pedapati EV, Sweeney JA, Fitzpatrick SE, 
Brown WT, Budimirovic D, Hagerman RJ, Hessl D, Kaufmann WE, Berry -Kravis E. Fragile X targeted 
pharmacotherapy: lessons learned and future directions. J Neurodev D isord. 2017;9:7. doi: 10.1186/s11689 -
017-9186 -9; PMCID: PMC5467059.  
4. Feczko E, Miranda -Dominguez O, Marr M, Graham AM, Nigg JT, Fair DA. The Heterogeneity 
Problem: Approaches to Identify Psychiatric Subtypes. Trends Cogn Sci. 2019;23(7):584 -601. doi: 
10.1016/j.tics.2019.03.009; PMCID: PMC6821457.  
5. Feczko E, Fair DA. Methods and Challenges for Assessing Heterogeneity. Biol Psychiatry. 
2020;88(1):9 -17. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2020.02.015.  
6. Lovelace JW, Ethell IM, Binder DK, Razak KA. Translation -relevant EEG phenotypes in a mouse 
model of Fragile X Syndrome. Neurobiol Dis. 2018;115:39 -48. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2018.03.012; PMCID: 
PMC5969806.  
7. Smith EG, Pedapati EV, Liu R, Schmitt LM, Dominick KC, Shaffer RC, Sweeney JA, Erickson CA. Sex 
differences in resting EEG power in Fragile X Syndrome. J Psychiatr Res. 2021;138:89 -95. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpsychires.2021.03.057.  
8. Sabaratnam M, Vroegop PG, Gangadharan SK. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_393293] 18 males with fragile X 
syndrome. Seizure. 2001;10(1):60 -3. doi: 10.1053/seiz.2000.0492.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 24 of 28 9. Van der Molen MJ, Van der Molen MW. Reduced alpha and exaggerated theta power during the resting -
state EEG in fragile X syndrome. Biol Psychol. 2013;92(2):216 -9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2012.11.013.  
10. Wang J, Ethridge LE, Mosconi MW, White SP, Binder DK, Pedapati EV, Erickson CA, By[CONTACT_254623], 
Sweeney JA. A resting EEG study of neocortical hyperexcitability and altered functional connectivity in fragile 
X syndrome. J Neurodev Disord. 2017;9:11. doi: 10.1186/s11689 -017-9191 -z; PMCID: PMC5351111.  
11. Wilkinson CL, Nelson CA. Increased aperiodic gamma power in young boys with Fragile X Syndrome 
is associated with better language ability. Mol Autism. 2021;12(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s13229 -021-[ZIP_CODE] -x. 
12. Ethridge LE, De Stefano LA, Schmitt LM, Woodruff NE, Brown KL, Tran M, Wang J, Pedapati EV, 
Erickson CA, Sweeney JA. Auditory EEG Biomarkers in Fragile X Syndrome: Clinical Relevance. Front Integr 
Neurosci. 2019;13:60. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2019.[ZIP_CODE]; PM CID: PMC6794497.  
13. Heard TT, Ramgopal S, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_188817] J, Lincoln SA, Rotenberg A, Kothare SV. EEG abnormalities and 
seizures in genetically diagnosed Fragile X syndrome. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2014;38:155 -60. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2014.07.002.  
14. van der Molen MJ, Stam CJ, van der Molen MW. Resting -state EEG oscillatory dynamics in fragile X 
syndrome: abnormal functional connectivity and brain network organization. PLoS One. 2014;9(2):e88451. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0088451; PMCID: PMC3921158 . 
15. Baker EK, Arpone M, Vera SA, Bretherton L, Ure A, Kraan CM, Bui M, Ling L, Francis D, Hunter MF, 
Elliott J, Rogers C, Field MJ, Cohen J, Maria LS, Faundes V, Curotto B, Morales P, Trigo C, Salas I, Alliende 
AM, Amor DJ, Godler DE. Intellectual function ing and behavioural features associated with mosaicism in 
fragile X syndrome. J Neurodev Disord. 2019;11(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s11689 -019-9288 -7; PMCID: 
PMC6933737.  
16. Kazdoba TM, Leach PT, Silverman JL, Crawley JN. Modeling fragile X syndrome in the Fmr1 
knockout mouse. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2014;3(4):118 -33. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2014.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: 
PMC4298642.  
17. Roberts JE, Long AC, McCary LM, Quady AN, Rose BS, Widrick D, Baranek G. Cardiovascular and 
behavioral response to auditory stimuli in boys with fragile X syndrome. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013;38(3):276 -84. 
doi: 10.1093/jpepsy/jss114; PMCID: PMC3604823.  
18. Hall SS, Jiang H, Reiss AL, Greicius MD. Identifying large -scale brain networks in fragile X syndrome. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2013;70(11):1215 -23. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.247; PMCID: PMC4040266.  
19. Shaffer RC, Schmitt L, John Thurman A, Abbeduto L, Hong M, Pedapati E, Dominick K, Sweeney J, 
Erickson C. The Relationship between Expressive Language Sampling and Clinical Measures in Fragile X 
Syndrome and Typi[INVESTIGATOR_393294]. Brain Sci. 2020;10(2). doi: 10.3390/brainsci10020066; PMCID: 
PMC7071383.  
20. Meng ML, Kaufmann W, Frye R, Ong K, Kaminski J, Velinov M, Berry -Kravis E. The association 
between mosaicism type and cognitive and behavioral functioning among males with fragile X syndrome. Am J 
Med Genet A. 2021. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.[ZIP_CODE].  
21. Berry -Kravis EM, Lindemann L, Jonch AE, Apostol G, Bear MF, Carpenter RL, Crawley JN, Curie A, 
Des Portes V, Hossain F, Gasparini F, Gomez -Mancilla B, Hessl D, Loth E, Scharf SH, Wang PP, Von Raison 
F, Hagerman R, Spooren W, Jacquemont S. Drug developm ent for neurodevelopmental disorders: lessons 
learned from fragile X syndrome. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2018;17(4):280 -99. doi: 10.1038/nrd.2017.221; 
PMCID: PMC6904225.  
22. Jonak CR, Lovelace JW, Ethell IM, Razak KA, Binder DK. Multielectrode array analysis of EEG 
biomarkers in a mouse model of Fragile X Syndrome. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;138:104794. doi: 
10.1016/j.nbd.2020.104794.  
23. Goswami S, Cavalier S, Sridhar V, Huber KM, Gibson JR. Local cortical circuit correlates of altered 
EEG in the mouse model of Fragile X syndrome. Neurobiol Dis. 2019;124:563 -72. doi: 
10.1016/j.nbd.2019.01.002; PMCID: PMC6371815.  
24. Hall SS, Burns DD, Lightbody AA, Reiss AL. Longitudinal changes in intellectual development in 
children with Fragile X syndrome. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2008;36(6):927 -39. doi: 10.1007/s10802 -008-
9223 -y; PMCID: PMC4820329.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 25 of 28 25. Bulf H, Johnson SP, Valenza E. Visual statistical learning in the newborn infant. Cognition. 
2011;121(1):127 -32. Epub 20110713. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2011.06.010. PubMed PMID: 21745660.  
26. Krogh L, Vlach HA, Johnson SP. Statistical learning across development: flexible yet constrained. Front 
Psychol. 2012;3:598. Epub 20130111. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 23430452; PMCID: 
PMC3576810.  
27. Saffran JR. Statistical learning as a window into developmental disabilities. Journal of 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders. 2018;10(1):35. doi: 10.1186/s11689 -018-9252 -y. 
28. Saffran JR, Johnson EK, Aslin RN, Newport EL. Statistical learning of tone sequences by [CONTACT_393326]. Cognition. 1999;70(1):27 -52. doi: 10.1016/s0010 -0277(98)[ZIP_CODE] -4. 
29. Saffran JR, Aslin RN, Newport EL. Statistical learning by 8 -month -old infants. Science. 
1996;274(5294):1926 -8. doi: 10.1126/science.274.5294.1926.  
30. Bailey DB, Jr., Raspa M, Olmsted M, Holiday DB. Co -occurring conditions associated with FMR1 gene 
variations: findings from a national parent survey. Am J Med Genet A. 2008;146A(16):2060 -9. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.a.[ZIP_CODE].  
31. Batterink LJ, Paller KA. Online neural monitoring of statistical learning. Cortex; a journal devoted to the 
study of the nervous system and behavior. 2017;90:31 -45. Epub 2017/02/24. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2017.02.004. 
PubMed PMID: 28324696.  
32. Batterink LJ. Rapid Statistical Learning Supporting Word Extraction From Continuous Speech. Psychol 
Sci. 2017;28(7):921 -8. Epub 20170511. doi: 10.1177/0956797617698226. PubMed PMID: 28493810; PMCID: 
PMC5507727.  
33. Pedapati E. Neocortical Localization and Thalamocortical Modulation of Neuronal Hyperexcitability 
contribute to Fragile X Syndrome: Source Data for Figures2022. doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.19424015.v13.  
34. Garcia -Rill E, D'Onofrio S, Luster B, Mahaffey S, Urbano FJ, Phillips C. The 10 Hz Frequency: A 
Fulcrum For Transitional Brain States. Transl Brain Rhythm. 2016;1(1):7 -13; PMCID: PMC4990355.  
35. Zhang H, Watrous AJ, Patel A, Jacobs J. Theta and Alpha Oscillations Are Traveling Waves in the 
Human Neocortex. Neuron. 2018;98(6):1269 -81 e4. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.05.019; PMCID: 
PMC6534129.  
36. Fries P. Rhythms for Cognition: Communication through Coherence. Neuron. 2015;88(1):220 -35. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2015.09.034; PMCID: PMC4605134.  
37. Bollimunta A, Mo J, Schroeder CE, Ding M. Neuronal mechanisms and attentional modulation of 
corticothalamic alpha oscillations. J Neurosci. 2011;31(13):4935 -43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5580 -10.2011; 
PMCID: PMC3505610.  
38. Jensen O, Mazaheri A. Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_393295]: gating by [CONTACT_119978]. 
Front Hum Neurosci. 2010;4:186. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC2990626.  
39. Tseng HA, Martinez D, Nadim F. The frequency preference of neurons and synapses in a recurrent 
oscillatory network. J Neurosci. 2014;34(38):[ZIP_CODE] -45. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2462 -14.2014; PMCID: 
PMC4166170.  
40. Tseng KY, Mallet N, Toreson KL, Le Moine C, Gonon F, O'Donnell P. Excitatory response of 
prefrontal cortical fast -spi[INVESTIGATOR_393296]. Synapse. 
2006;59(7):412 -7. doi: 10.1002/syn.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC2190627.  
41. Bonnefond M, Jensen O. Gamma activity coupled to alpha phase as a mechanism for top -down 
controlled gating. PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0128667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128667; PMCID: 
PMC4454652.  
42. Jensen O, Gips B, Bergmann TO, Bonnefond M. Temporal coding organized by [CONTACT_393327]. Trends Neurosci. 2014;37(7):357 -69. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2014.04.001.  
43. Antoine MW, Langberg T, Schnepel P, Feldman DE. Increased Excitation -Inhibition Ratio Stabilizes 
Synapse and Circuit Excitability in Four Autism Mouse Models. Neuron. 2019;101(4):648 -61 e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuron.2018.12.026; PMCID: PMC6733271.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 26 of 28 44. Mably AJ, Colgin LL. Gamma oscillations in cognitive disorders. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2018;52:182 -7. 
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2018.07.009; PMCID: PMC6139067.  
45. Fries P. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. 
Trends Cogn Sci. 2005;9(10):474 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2005.08.011.  
46. Burke JF, Zaghloul KA, Jacobs J, Williams RB, Sperling MR, Sharan AD, Kahana MJ. Synchronous 
and asynchronous theta and gamma activity during epi[INVESTIGATOR_393297]. J Neurosci. 2013;33(1):292 -
304. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2057 -12.2013; PMCID: PMC3711 714. 
47. Brunel N, Hansel D. How noise affects the synchronization properties of recurrent networks of 
inhibitory neurons. Neural Comput. 2006;18(5):1066 -110. doi: 10.1162/089976606776241048.  
48. Battaglia D, Hansel D. Synchronous chaos and broad band gamma rhythm in a minimal multi -layer 
model of primary visual cortex. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011;7(10):e1002176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002176; 
PMCID: PMC3188510.  
49. Guyon N, Zacharias LR, Fermino de Oliveira E, Kim H, Leite JP, Lopes -Aguiar C, Carlen M. Network 
Asynchrony Underlying Increased Broadband Gamma Power. J Neurosci. 2021;41(13):2944 -63. doi: 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2250 -20.2021; PMCID: PMC8018896.  
50. Choi S, Yu E, Lee S, Llinas RR. Altered thalamocortical rhythmicity and connectivity in mice lacking 
CaV3.1 T -type Ca2+ channels in unconsciousness. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(25):7839 -44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.[PHONE_8200]; PMCID: PMC4485103.  
51. Llinas R, Urbano FJ, Leznik E, Ramirez RR, van Marle HJ. Rhythmic and dysrhythmic thalamocortical 
dynamics: GABA systems and the edge effect. Trends Neurosci. 2005;28(6):325 -33. doi: 
10.1016/j.tins.2005.04.006.  
52. Llinas RR, Ribary U, Jeanmonod D, Kronberg E, Mitra PP. Thalamocortical dysrhythmia: A 
neurological and neuropsychiatric syndrome characterized by [CONTACT_334708]. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A. 1999;96(26):[ZIP_CODE] -7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.96.26.[ZIP_CODE]; PMC ID: PMC24801.  
53. Batterink L. Syllables in Sync Form a Link: Neural Phase -locking Reflects Word Knowledge during 
Language Learning. Journal of cognitive neuroscience. 2020;32(9):1735 -48. Epub 2020/05/19. doi: 
10.1162/jocn_a_01581. PubMed PMID: 32427066.  
54. Abbeduto L, Berry -Kravis E, Sterling A, Sherman S, Edgin JO, McDuffie A, Hoffmann A, Hamilton D, 
Nelson M, Aschkenasy J, Thurman AJ. Expressive language sampling as a source of outcome measures for 
treatment studies in fragile X syndrome: feasibility, practice effects, test -retest reliability, and construct validity. 
J Neurodev Disord. 2020;12(1):10. Epub 2020/03/24. doi: 10.1186/s11689 -020-[ZIP_CODE] -6. PubMed PMID: 
32204695; PMCID: PMC7092603.  
55. Neff P, Michels J, Meyer M, Schecklmann M, Langguth B, Schlee W. 10 Hz Amplitude Modulated 
Sounds Induce Short -Term Tinnitus Suppression. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017;9:130. doi: 
10.3389/fnagi.2017.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC5437109.  
56. Reavis KM, Rothholtz VS, Tang Q, Carroll JA, Djalilian H, Zeng FG. Temporary suppression of 
tinnitus by [CONTACT_393328]. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012;13(4):561 -71. doi: 10.1007/s10162 -012-0331 -6; 
PMCID: PMC3387310.  
57. Zhang X, Jiang Y, Zhang S, Li F, Pei C, He G, Ao M, Yao D, Zhao Y, Xu P. Correlation Analysis of 
EEG Brain Network With Modulated Acoustic Stimulation for Chronic Tinnitus Patients. IEEE Trans Neural 
Syst Rehabil Eng. 2021;29:156 -62. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE .2020.3039555.  
58. Garcia -Argibay M, Santed MA, Reales JM. Efficacy of binaural auditory beats in cognition, anxiety, 
and pain perception: a meta -analysis. Psychol Res. 2019;83(2):357 -72. doi: 10.1007/s00426 -018-1066 -8. 
59. Galvez G, Recuero M, Canuet L, Del -Pozo F. Short -Term Effects of Binaural Beats on EEG Power, 
Functional Connectivity, Cognition, Gait and Anxiety in Parkinson's Disease. Int J Neural Syst. 
2018;28(5):1750055. doi: 10.1142/S0129065717500551.  
60. Beauchene C, Abaid N, Moran R, Diana RA, Leonessa A. The effect of binaural beats on verbal 
working memory and cortical connectivity. J Neural Eng. 2017;14(2):026014. doi: 10.1088/1741 -2552/aa5d67.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 27 of 28 61. Colling LJ, Noble HL, Goswami U. Neural Entrainment and Sensorimotor Synchronization to the Beat 
in Children with Developmental Dyslexia: An EEG Study. Front Neurosci. 2017;11(360):360. doi: 
10.3389/fnins.2017.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC5506338.  
62. Solca M, Mottaz A, Guggisberg AG. Binaural beats increase interhemispheric alpha -band coherence 
between auditory cortices. Hear Res. 2016;332:233 -7. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2015.09.011.  
63. Sisterson ND, Wozny TA, Kokkinos V, Constantino A, Richardson RM. Closed -Loop Brain Stimulation 
for Drug -Resistant Epi[INVESTIGATOR_002]: Towards an Evidence -Based Approach to Personalized Medicine. 
Neurotherapeutics. 2019;16(1):119 -27. doi: 10.1007/s13311 -018-0068 2-4; PMCID: PMC6361057.  
64. Bouthour W, Megevand P, Donoghue J, Luscher C, Birbaumer N, Krack P. Biomarkers for closed -loop 
deep brain stimulation in Parkinson disease and beyond. Nat Rev Neurol. 2019;15(6):343 -52. Epub 2019/04/03. 
doi: 10.1038/s41582 -019-0166 -4. PubMed PMID: 309 [ZIP_CODE].  
65. Xu W, Zhang C, Deeb W, Patel B, Wu Y, Voon V, Okun MS, Sun B. Deep brain stimulation for 
Tourette’s syndrome. Translational Neurodegeneration. 2020;9(1):4. doi: 10.1186/s40035 -020-0183 -7. 
66. Bolus MF, Willats AA, Whitmire CJ, Rozell CJ, Stanley GB. Design strategies for dynamic closed -loop 
optogenetic neurocontrol in vivo. J Neural Eng. 2018;15(2):026011. Epub 2018/01/05. doi: 10.1088/1741 -
2552/aaa506. PubMed PMID: 29300002; PMCID: PMC5957 547. 
67. Ung D, Johnco CJ, McBride NM, Howie FR, Scalli L, Storch EA. Optimizing the screening of autism 
spectrum disorders in outpatient clinics: An examination of the Social Communication Questionnaire -Lifetime. 
Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders. 2016;27: 21-8. 
68. Lord C, Rutter M, DiLavore PC, Risi S, Gotham K, Bishop S. Autism diagnostic observation schedule: 
ADOS -2: Western Psychological Services Los Angeles, CA; [ADDRESS_493609], Janavs J, Bannon Y, Rogers JE, Milo KM, Stock SL, Wilkinson 
B. Reliability and validity of the mini international neuropsychiatric interview for children and adolescents 
(MINI -KID). J Clin Psychiatry. 2010;71(3):[ZIP_CODE].  
70. Roid G. Stanford -Binet Intelligence Scales. Fifth ed. Itasca, IL: Riverside; 2003 2003.  
71. Sparrow SS, Cicchetti DV, Balla DA. Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales: Second Edition (Vineland 
II), Survey Interview Form/Caregiver Rating Form2005.  
72. Wiig EH, Semel E, Secord W. CELF 5: Pearson/PsychCorp; [ADDRESS_493610]. 2012;42(7):1377 -92. doi: 
10.1007/s10803 -011-1370 -2; PMCID: PMC3290710.  
74. Esbensen AJ, Rojahn J, Aman MG, Ruedrich S. Reliability and validity of an assessment instrument for 
anxiety, depression, and mood among individuals with mental retardation. J Autism Dev Disord. 
2003;33(6):617 -29. doi: 10.1023/b:jadd.[PHONE_8201].[ZIP_CODE].5 5. 
75. Brown C, Tollefson N, Dunn W, Cromwell R, Filion D. The Adult Sensory Profile: measuring patterns 
of sensory processing. Am J Occup Ther. 2001;55(1):75 -82. doi: 10.5014/ajot.55.1.75.  
76. Constantino JN, Gruber CP. Social Responsiveness Scale. Los Angeles: Western Psychological 
Services; 2005 2005.  
77. Hooker JL, Dow D, Morgan L, Schatschneider C, Wetherby [CONTACT_162702]. Psychometric analysis of the repetitive 
behavior scale -revised using confirmatory factor analysis in children with autism. Autism Res. 
2019;12(9):1399 -410. Epub 20190627. doi: 10.1002/aur.2159.  PubMed PMID: 31246379; PMCID: 
PMC8115199.  
78. The Pediatric Anxiety Rating Scale (PARS): development and psychometric properties. J Am Acad 
Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2002;41(9):1061 -9. doi: 10.1097/00004583 -200209000 -[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 
12218427.  
79. Varni JW, Seid M, Rode CA. The PedsQL ™: measurement model for the pediatric quality of life 
inventory. Med Care. 1999;37(2):126 -39. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: R01 FX ENTRAIN: Perturbation of Neurodynamics Underlying Sensory Hyperarousal and 
Statistical Learning in Youth with FXS  
 
ENTRAIN V1_ 5/02/2023  Page 28 of 28 80. Shields RH, Kaat AJ, McKenzie FJ, Drayton A, Sansone SM, Coleman J, Michalak C, Riley K, Berry -
Kravis E, Gershon RC, Widaman KF, Hessl D. Validation of the NIH Toolbox Cognitive Battery in intellectual 
disability. Neurology. 2020;94(12):e1229 -e40. doi:  10.1212/WNL.0000000000009131; PMCID: PMC7274932.  
81. Lee M, Song CB, Shin GH, Lee SW. Possible Effect of Binaural Beat Combined With Autonomous 
Sensory Meridian Response for Inducing Sleep. Front Hum Neurosci. 2019;13(425):425. doi: 
10.3389/fnhum.2019.[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC6900908.  
82. Gantt MA, Dadds S, Burns DS, Glaser D, Moore AD. The Effect of Binaural Beat Technology on the 
Cardiovascular Stress Response in Military Service Members With Postdeployment Stress. J Nurs Scholarsh. 
2017;49(4):411 -20. doi: 10.1111/jnu.[ZIP_CODE].  
83. Wiwatwongwana D, Vichitvejpaisal P, Thaikruea L, Klaphajone J, Tantong A, Wiwatwongwana A. The 
effect of music with and without binaural beat audio on operative anxiety in patients undergoing cataract 
surgery: a randomized controlled trial. Eye. 2016;3 0(11):[ADDRESS_493611], Wu SW, Erickson CA, Sweeney JA, Shaffer RC, Horn PS, Wink LK, Gilbert 
DL. Motor cortex facilitation: a marker of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder co -occurrence in autism 
spectrum disorder. Transl Psychiatry. 2019;9(1):29 8. Epub 20191113. doi: 10.1038/s41398 -019-0614 -3. 
PubMed PMID: 31723120; PMCID: PMC6853984.  
85. Guthrie MD, Gilbert DL, Huddleston DA, Pedapati EV, Horn PS, Mostofsky SH, Wu SW. Online 
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation Protocol for Measuring Cortical Physiology Associated with Response 
Inhibition. J Vis Exp. 2018(132):e56789. doi: 10.3791/[ZIP_CODE]; PMCID: PMC5912388.  
86. Pedapati EV, Gilbert DL, Erickson CA, Horn PS, Shaffer RC, Wink LK, Laue CS, Wu SW. - Abnormal 
Cortical Plasticity in Youth with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 
2016;26(7):[ADDRESS_493612] -stroke non -fluent aphasia: a case study. Neurocase. 
2014;20(1):1 -9. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2012.713493.  
88. Pedapati EV, Gilbert DL, Horn PS, Huddleston DA, Laue CS, Shahana N, Wu SW. - Effect of [ADDRESS_493613] transcranial magnetic stimulation on the primary. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015;9(91).  
89. Hong YH, Wu SW, Pedapati EV, Horn PS, Huddleston DA, Laue CS, Gilbert DL. Safety and 
tolerability of theta burst stimulation vs. single and paired pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation: a 
comparative study of 165 pediatric subjects. Front Hum Neurosc i. 2015;9:29. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2015.[ZIP_CODE]; 
PMCID: PMC4316715.  
90. Ethridge LE, White SP, Mosconi MW, Wang J, Pedapati EV, Erickson CA, By[CONTACT_254623], Sweeney JA. 
Neural synchronization deficits linked to cortical hyper -excitability and auditory hypersensitivity in fragile X 
syndrome. Mol Autism. 2017;8:22. doi: 10.1186/s [ZIP_CODE] -017-0140 -1; PMCID: PMC5463459.  
91. Ethridge LE, White SP, Mosconi MW, Wang J, By[CONTACT_254623], Sweeney JA. Reduced habituation of 
auditory evoked potentials indicate cortical hyper -excitability in Fragile X Syndrome. Transl Psychiatry. 
2016;6:e787. doi: 10.1038/tp.2016.48; PMCID: PMC4872406.  
92. Kenward MG, Roger JH. Small sample inference for fixed effects from restricted maximum likelihood. 
Biometrics. 1997;53(3):983 -97. 
 