                                                        
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Development of a Behavioral Intervention for Chronic Pain in Individuals With HIV   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
STUDY PROTOCOL  
 
 
Version 1.0 
Sep, 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
Send Questions or Comments to:  
Jessica  Merlin [EMAIL_5972]  
Riddhi Modi  [EMAIL_5973]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
2 
  
 
 
I. STUDY OVERVIEW   
Defined as pain lasting longer than three months, chronic pain affects up to 30% of the 
US population.  It often occurs in patients with complex chronic illness, including 
medical, psychiatric, and substance use comorbidities. However, chronic pain is not 
simply a symptom of these comorbidities. Its distinct neurobiologic basis and substantial 
impact on phy sical and emotional function make it a serious illness in itself. In 
recognition of its importance, the Institute of Medicine has called chronic pain a “public 
health crisis,” and identified research on chronic pain, particularly in populations most 
burden ed by [CONTACT_203451], to be a priority.   
The burden of chronic pain in HIV -infected patients is substantial. Prevalence estimates 
of chronic pain in HIV -infected patients are as high as 39 -85%. Mounting evidence 
suggests that chronic pain in HIV is often a ssociated with psychiatric illness, especially 
mood disorders such as depression, and has serious health consequences, including 
up to [ADDRESS_372752].  
III. STUDY ACTIVITIES  
a) STUDY POPULATION   
A total of 40 patients (up to 60 ) who are patients at the UAB 1917 clinic, enrolled in 
CNICS, experiencing chronic pain (Brief Chronic Pain Screening Questionnaire (BCPQ) 
= at least moderate pain for at least 3 months) and moderately severe and impairing 
chronic pain (PEG pain questionnair e = average of all three times is 4 or greater).  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Enrolled in CNICS  
2. Age ≥ 18 years  
3. Chronic pain (Brief Chronic Pain Screening Questionnaire (BCPQ) = at least 
moderate pain for at least 3 months)  
4. Moderately severe and impairing chronic p ain (PEG pain questionnaire = 
average of all three times is 4 or greater)  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Do not speak or understand English  
2. Are planning a new pain treatment like surgery  
 
 
[ADDRESS_372753] -of-mouth by [CONTACT_304554], calls generated from flyer tear -
offs, and responses to the flyer on the TV monitors.  
b) PRE-SCREENING  
Potential participants will be prescreened over the phone using our prescreening phone 
script. If the individual passes the telephone prescreen, he or she will be scheduled for 
an in -person pre -screening visit by a member of the STOMP recruitment team. The  date 
and time of the pre -screening visit along with the participant contact [CONTACT_304555].  About [ADDRESS_372754] the participant’s eligibility on the Prescreening Visit Appointment Form. If the 
participant is eligible for enrollment, a Screening and Enrollment Visi t will be scheduled 
and recorded on a Screening and Enrollment Visit form. The participant will also be 
thanked and given their $25 incentive.  
 If the participant is not eligible, he or she will be thanked for their time and give their 
$25 incentive.  
c) SCRE ENING  AND ENROLLMENT  
 
 
[ADDRESS_372755] verify the following: protocol name, 
version number, dates for use, and institution.  The Study team member will also ensure 
that the most recent informed consen t is being used for the study. Initial informed 
consent must be completed and documented before any other study related procedures 
are done.  
Comprehension will be assessed by [CONTACT_304556], c an you tell me about how long the study may  last, etc.  
The consent process is esti mated to take around 30 minutes.  
Study staff will ensure that the participant has signed and dated the consent form 
including the HIPAA form.   
All signed consent forms will be stored in locked file cabinets under respective 
participant files.  
Baseline Assessment  
 
 
6 
 The research staff will then administer the baseline assessment which includes a 
confirmatory set of screening questions via RedCap.  Confirmation of the participant’s 
eligibility will be recorded in RedCap.  
Following completion of the baseline assessment , participants will be thanked for 
coming and given their $50 incentive payment for their time.  Completion of Baseline 
assessment will be recorded in excel logs.  
d) RANDOMIZATION  
Our team will utilize a 1:[ADDRESS_372756] it 
in the excel logs.  
e) ASSIGNMENT OF ARM OF STUDY  
Approximately, 20 intervention arm and 20 control (standard of care) partici pants will 
be randomly assigned. Recruiting staff and research personnel will be masked to 
treatment arm assignment at the initial study visit. After the initial study visit , study 
coordinator will inform the participant of the follow -up assessments and thank the 
participant for their time. Staff personnel doing the assessment will still be blinded to 
the arm assignment.  
If the participant is randomized to the intervention gr oup, the participant will be informed 
of the next steps which includes the first group session.  If the date of the first group 
 
 
7 
 session has been established, the participant will be informed of the date and time. If it 
has not been scheduled, the participa nt will be informed that s/he will receive a call 
within the next two weeks informing his/her with the date and the time of the first group 
session  
f) INTERVENTION  
This behav ioral intervention consists of 12 intervention sessions (6 group and 6 
individual ses sions). The sessions will be completed over a period of [ADDRESS_372757], and is successfully self -managing his/her chronic pain.  
Participants will receive a reminder call/text ap proximately 48 hours before the group 
session to remind them of the upcoming session. Participants will also be notified of the 
upcoming group sessions at the end of each one -on-one intervention.  Group sessions 
will be conducted in UAB 1917 clinic buildin g or the Bevill Biomedical Research Building 
(BBRB). A sign -in sheet will be used to document attendance. Session notes will be 
used to document any major issues presented or any anecdotal nuances identified. The 
date, start time and end time of the sessio n will also be documented. Participants will 
 
 
[ADDRESS_372758] up to 5 reminder calls to remind about their upcoming 
intervention session. Please note the purpose of these calls is to remind about 
 
 
9 
 appointments but in case patient initiates the conversation regarding intervention or 
other related to the study staff will talk t o participant regarding intervention.   
If a participant misses a session, they will receive up to 5 reminder calls asking why and 
what we can do to help. If there are things we can do to help that are reasonable (e.g., 
more reminders, more transportation assistance, or other things), we will provide them. 
If they miss more than one visit, they may receive a call asking about their future 
participation in the study and whether, if they are unwilling to participate in intervention 
sessions, they would willin g to just complete outcome assessments.  
Assessments  
All participants in the intervention group will also receive a baseline, post -intervention 
(after all sessions are complete d), and at about 3 month s ([ADDRESS_372759]) 
assessment. These may be conducted by [CONTACT_48052]. They will also participate 
in an audio -recorded in –person qualitative interview at the mid -point and end of the trial 
which will be transcribed using a third party company.  
Qualitative interviews  
Participants assigned to intervention a rm, peers and interventionists of the study will be 
interviewed at mid -point of the study and end of the study to provide their feedback on 
the STOMP intervention. These interviews will be audio -recorded and later transcribed 
using third party.  
g) CONTROL  
The control group will receive “treatment as usual”.  The “treatment as usual” or control 
arm refers to the standard of care that patients receive at the UAB [ADDRESS_372760] of care is for patients to discuss chronic pain with their providers at  their 
 
 
10 
 discretion. Although highly variable, providers can recommend and prescribe 
pharmacologic (e.g., opi[INVESTIGATOR_304552]), non -pharmacologic (e.g., 
physical therapy, referral to psychology) approaches for pain.  This study will not 
interfer e in any way with usual care. No additional treatment will be provided to 
participants allocated to the control group. The control group participants will complete 
the baseline assessment and around 12 week follow -up ([ADDRESS_372761]) assessment.  
h) SNAP SHOT OF STUDY ACTIVITIES  
Procedure  Length of Time 
Required of 
Participants  Frequency of Repetition  
Individual sessions 
(intervention group only)  6 sessions, up to 
approx. 120 minutes 
each  Maximum of on average 
every other week  
Group sessions 
(intervention group only)  6 sessions, up to 120 
approx minutes each  Maximum of on average 
every other week  
Questionnaire 
assessments – see 
attached  Approx 30 minutes  Baseline,  end of intervention, 
and 3 months after 
intervention  
Qualitative interviews 
(intervention gr oup only)  Approx up to 120 
minutes  Midpoint and end of trial  
Phone calls (intervention 
group only)  Approx up to 30 
minutes  Average of once weekly  
 
 
 
11 
 h) SUMMARY OF COMPENSATION  
Intervention group  
In person for Prescreen    $25 
Screening/Enrolment visit    $50 
Mid-point qualitative interview   $50 
End of study qualitative interview   $[ADDRESS_372762] intervention follow up    $50 
3 month follow up     $100  
 Control group  
In person for Prescreen    $25 
Screening/Enrolment visit    $50 
12 week assessment    $50 
3 month follow up    $100 
Offer parking vouchers /coffee vouchers/bus tickets etc. as required  to the participants  if 
that is the standard practice followed over at the clinic .  
IV. DATA  COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT  
All study documentation will be kept in locked file cabinets in  BBRB or CCB in study 
personnel’s offices. RedCap database can only be accessed by [CONTACT_304557] a UAB computer or encrypted laptop.  
V. DATA ANALYSIS  
Outcomes were reported as means and standard deviations for continuous 
variables, and frequencies and  percentages for categorical variables.  T-tests 
were used to compare change scores for continuous variables and Fisher’s exact 
 
 
[ADDRESS_372763] coded the remaining transcripts with continued 
input from the other coder.  Representative quotes are presented for themes that 
helped us understand why and how the intervention could work.   
VI. CRISIS PROTOCOL  
As a general note, referrals can be made for crisis consultation at any time.  The 
research staff will document the finding s of his/her evaluation and the course of action 
taken.  Providers for the patient may be informed about the same . 
VII. PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Our team has devised a comprehensive plan for ensuring protection of human subjects 
throughout the course of the proposed study. We will utilize an English -language 
consent form with common phrasing that describes that no special privileges or 
consideratio ns will be conferred as a result of study participation, and that access to 
medical care will not be affected by [CONTACT_52764]’s decision to enroll in the 
study. The procedures listed in the following sections detail procedures that have been 
approved and utilized during recent years of clinical and behavioral trials at each site for 
collaborative research that utilizes sensitive information from participants. Our team will 
make every effort to protect all participants’ confidential and private information in order 
to minimize possible study -associated risks.  
All findings related to this research will be available and provided to study participants in 
accordance with standard practices. Clinical and measurement data used for research 
studies wil l be released only in de -identified fashion . 
 
 
13 
 In addition, all study personnel are required to renew Human Subjects trainings 
annually, or in accordance with their site regulatory mandates.  
VIII. KEY PERSONNEL AND ROLES  
Principal Investigators:  
Jessica  Merlin     Principal Investigator      
[INVESTIGATOR_304553]:  
Riddhi Modi     Coordinator  
Chastity McDavid    Coordinator  
Sally Shurbaji    Interventionist  
King, Kiko S.     Interve ntionist  
Banasiewicz, Mary K   Research Technician  
Hutchins Katelin K    Research Technician  
Megan Couture    Research Technician  