IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342787] 
Current Stimulation for Pain in Older 
Adults With Knee Osteoarthritis:  A Phase II Randomized Sham -Controlled 
Trial  
 
 
 
 
  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
November 7, 2019 
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  2  Protocol Title:  Self-Administered  Transcranial Direct  Current  Stimulation  for Pain  in Older 
Adults with Knee Osteoarthritis: A Phase II Randomized Sham -Controlled 
Trial 
 
Principal 
Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_281005] 
, PhD 
 
Co-Investigators:  Hongyu Miao,  PhD 
Luca Pollonini, PhD Salahadin  Abdi,  MD,  PhD 
 
Study  Coordinator:  Samuel  Payen  
 
Population:  A maximum of 120 community -dwelling older adults with knee osteoarthritis 
who are 50 –[ADDRESS_342788] [LOCATION_007] will be enrolled. Participants 
who  meet  eligibility  criteria  will be randomly  assigned  to either  active  tDCS  (n 
= 60) or sham  tDCS  (n = 60). 
 
 
Number  of Sites:  UTHealth  School  of Nursing is the only  site for this study.  
 
Study  Duration: Three years  
 
Subject  Duration: Four  months  including follow -up assessments  
 
 
 
General  Information  
− Knee  osteoarthritis (OA) is one  of the  most  common  pain conditions  among  people over 45,  and the 
management of OA pain is challenging because the pain is only partially responsive to existing 
pharmacological approaches, which are often associated with adverse e ffects. Also, knee OA pain is 
characterized by [CONTACT_281019] -related brain activation, possibly explaining the limited success of 
existing  peripherally  based  treatments  that target  the pain  locally  in the area  of the knee.  Therefore, 
there  is growing  interest in interventions  targeting  brain function for  this population. One promising 
treatment is noninvasive transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) with the anode over the primary motor cortex (M1) and the cathode over the contralateral supraorbital area (SO) as it can change brain activity in a noninvasive, painless, and safe way. tDCS falls under the category described by [CONTACT_4760] a “non -significant risk” device. Recent studies suggest that clinic -based M1 - 
SO applied tDCS has promising efficacy for managing chronic pain. However, no investigator to date has examined the effect of the self -administered home -based tDCS on clinical pain. Recent 
technological advances have increased the portability of tDCS, which creates the potential for home use wit h real- time monitoring through a secure video conferencing platform of stimulation  
delivered through electrodes mounted on custom single position headgear to ensure fidelity of treatment localization. The proposed study directly addresses this gap in the literature by 
[CONTACT_281020]- administered, remotely supervised M1 -SO applied tDCS at home in 
120 older adults with knee OA pain using an experimenter - and participant -blinded, randomized, 
sham -controlled, phase II parallel group (1:1 for two groups) design. The first aim of this study is to  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342789] aim is to investigate the feasibility and acceptability of self- administered M1 -SO applied 
tDCS in older adults with symptomatic knee  OA. This study will provide definite insight into an 
exciting new modality of nonpharmacological pain self- management in that it will be extremely 
easy, safe, and noninvasive with minimal side effects.  
 
Background Information  
− Arthritis is one of the leading causes of pain, impairments of activities in daily life, and disability in 
people aged 45 and above.1,2 Of the 53 million adults diagnosed with arthritis, more than 22 million 
(42%) reported trouble with their activities of daily living due to arthritis .3 Osteoarthritis (OA) is the 
most common of the arthritic conditions, with the knee being the most commonly affected joint.2,4,[ADDRESS_342790] 
Current Stimulation (tDCS), has rec eived significant attention for the treatment of pain in chronic 
conditions due to its neuromodulatory effect.12-[ADDRESS_342791] injury,12 and multiple sclerosis.14 Therefore, we will 
assess the feasibility, acceptability, and efficacy of this novel nonpharmacological treatment option 
in older adults with knee OA pain. Our hypothesis is that self -administered M1 -SO applied tDCS will 
reduce clinical pain intensity and pain -related cortical response more than sham tDCS  
 
Objectives  
− The purpose of this project is to assess the feasibility, acceptability, and efficacy of the self-  
administered tDCS in older adults with knee OA. The specific aims are the following: (1) To determine the effects of self -administered M1 -SO applied tDCS on clinical pain intensity in older 
adults  with  symptomatic  knee OA, (2) To determine  the effects  of self- administered  M1-SO applied 
tDCS on pain -related cortical response in older adults with symptomatic knee OA, and (3) To 
investigate  the feasibility  and acceptability  of self- administered  M1-SO applied  tDCS  in olde r adults 
with symptomatic knee OA. Outcome measures include clinical pain intensity, pain -related cortical 
response using functional near -infrared spectroscopy, and feasibility and acceptability using tDCS 
experience questionnaire and side effects questionna ire. 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  4  Study  Design  
− We will conduct a double -blind (participant and experimenter), 
randomized,  sham -controlled,  phase  II parallel- group  study  with  two 
groups (sham and active tDCS) in 120 older adults with knee OA.  
− Expected  duration  of study  is three years  after the IRB approval 
from CPHS.  
− tDCS with a constant current intensity of 2 mA will be applied for 20 
minutes per session daily for 2 weeks (Monday to Friday) via the 
Soterix 1x1 tDCS mini -CT Stimulator device (Soterix Medical Inc., NY; 
6.5 i nches long, 3 inches wide, 0.7 inches thick) with headgear and 
5x7 cm saline -soaked surface sponge electrodes. The FDA has ruled 
that the aforementioned tDCS stimulator is a “non -significant risk” 
device, a requirement for Investigational Device Exceptions . The 
sponge electrodes snap into the custom headgear, which is secured to the participant’s head for simple and fail- safe electrode 
preparation. This single -position headgear with clearly labeled 
sponge markers eliminates room for user error and helps con serve 
the placement  of the montage.  Participants  can only  administer  a 
stimulation session via the Soterix 1x1 tDCS mini- CT Stimulator device after being provided a single - 
use unlock  code  by [CONTACT_281021]  (only  the on/off  button 
will be adjustable by [CONTACT_36801]; they will not be able to adjust the device settings). After 
the participant enters the unlock code, the screen on the device will show a timer that counts down the minutes until  the end of the session. At [ADDRESS_342792] the sponges and to safely 
store  all materials  for the next session.  For sham  stimulation,  the electrodes  will be placed  in the same 
positions as for active stimulation, but the stimulator will only deliver 2 mA current for 30 seconds. 
This sham stimulation method has been shown to be reliable and indistinguishable from active treatment.
12,19 
 
Study  Population 
− A maximum  of 120 community -dwelling  older  adults  with  knee osteoarthritis  (OA)  will be enrolled. 
Similar to our previous work,20 participants who are 50 -85 years old will be considered eligible if 
they  (1) have  symptomatic  knee OA based  on American  College  of Rheumatology  Clinical criteria,21 
(2) have had knee OA pain in the past [ADDRESS_342793] 30 on a 0 -100 N RS for 
pain, (3) can speak and read English, and (4) have no plan to change medication regimens for pain throughout the trial. According to American College of Rheumatology criteria,
[ADDRESS_342794] 3 of 6 criteria, including age > 50 y ears, stiffness < [ADDRESS_342795] 
any concurrent medical conditions that could confound the interpretation of outcome measures, 
pose a safety risk f or any of the assessment or tDCS procedures, or preclude the successful 
completion of the protocol. Specific exclusion criteria are: (1) prosthetic knee replacement or non - 
arthroscopic surgery to the affected knee, (2) history of brain surgery, brain tumo r, seizure, stroke, 
or intracranial metal  implantation,  (3) systemic  rheumatic  disorders,  including rheumatoid  arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, and fibromyalgia, (4) alcohol/substance abuse, (5) current use of 
sodium channel blockers, calcium chann el blockers and NMDS receptor antagonists, (6) diminished 
cognitive function that would interfere with understanding study procedures (i.e., Mini -Mental 
Status  Exam  score  ≤ 23), (7) pregnancy  or lactation,  (8) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_281006]: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  5  psychiatric  illness,  and (9) no access  to a device  with  internet  access  that can be used  for secure 
videoconferencing for real- time remote supervision.]  
− Participants  will be recruited  in Southeast  [LOCATION_007]  under  the direction  of the PI. We will advertise 
around local institutions (e.g., UTHealth) and communities by [CONTACT_281022]. In 
addition, we  will put our recruitment  flyer on the  UTHealth  official  social  medial channels  (e.g., 
Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn). PI [INVESTIGATOR_261691]. Obtaining written informed consent will take place in -person at a scheduled baseline visit.  
 
Study  Procedures  
− Participants  will do self- administered  tDCS  at their  home  or private  room  for three weeks  (Mondays - 
Fridays)  under  real- time  supervision by [CONTACT_62063]. Data  will be collected  by [CONTACT_281023]. Ahn’s (PI’s) laboratory at UTHealth 
School of Nursing (see Table below). Participants will visit UTHealth School of Nursing four times, 
and each visit will take approximately [ADDRESS_342796] X                   
MMSE  X                   
Knee  Radiograph* X                   
Medical  History 
Questionnaire  X                   
Clinical  Pain  Intensity                     
NRS (primary 
outcome)  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
WOMAC  (secondary 
outcome)  X     X     X     X X X X 
PCS (secondary 
outcome)  X     X     X     X    
Pain -related  Cortical 
response                     
fNIRS imaging 
(secondary  outcome)  X     X     X     X    
QST measures  X     X     X     X    
Feasibility  and 
Acceptability                     
tDCS  experience 
questionnaire 
(secondary  outcome)                  
X    
Side effects 
questionnaire 
(secondary  outcome)    
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X    
Note:  B, Baseline;  M, Monthly  follow -up phone  assessment after completion  of tDCS  treatment;  MMSE, 
Mini -Mental Status Exam; NRS, Numerical Rating Scale; WOMAC, Western Ontario and McMaster 
Universities Osteoarthritis Index; PCS, Pain Catastrophizing Scale; QST, Quantitative Sensory Testing; fNIRS, functional near-infrared spectroscopy. The baseline visit will occur [ADDRESS_342797] -intervention, participants will complete a follow -up tele phone  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  6  assessments of clinical pain  intensity.  * Knee  radiographs  can be scheduled  at a different  time  depending 
on the participants’ availability.  
 
− Pregnancy  Test.  If participants  are a woman  of childbearing  potential,  there may  be unknown  risks 
to the fetus. Therefore, pregnancy test by a sample of urine will be obtained in all woman of 
childbearing potential once at baseline visit.  
− MMSE.  MMSE  will be used  to exclude  people  with  diminished  cognitive  function  (i.e.,  Mini -Mental 
Statu s Exam score ≤ 23).  
− Knee Radiograph.  Knee  radiographs  will be taken  to determine  OA severity  using Kellgren -Lawrence 
scores.  
− Medical  History  Questionnaire. All participants will  complete  a thorough  questionnaire to  collect 
demographic  and medical history  details,  including age,  sex, height,  weight,  duration  of knee OA, 
current and past treatments for knee OA, comorbid conditions, and current medications.  
− Clinical Pain Intensity. Clinical pain intensity will be measured by [CONTACT_281024] e their 
average knee pain over the past 24 hours via NRS from 0 (no pain) to 100 (worst pain imaginable). Following Initiative on Methods, Measurement, and Pain Assessment in Clinical Trials recommendations  for clinical trials  involving  chronic  pain,
22 pain intensity  changes  assessed through 
an NRS will be our primary outcome measure  for data analysis purposes. We also measure clinical 
pain intensity using Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC), which ranges from 0 to 96, wit h higher scores indicating worse OA pain -related symptoms. 
Moreover, we measure pain catastrophizing using Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS), which ranges from 0 to 52, which higher score indicating higher pain catastrophizing.  
− Pain -related Cortical response. We will measure pain -related cortical response using a continuous - 
wave, multichannel fNIRS imaging system (LIGHTNIRS, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with three semiconductor lasers at 780, 805, and 830 nm. This instrument encompasses 8 light sources and 8 detectors connected to comfortable headgear using optical fibers. The illumination and detection 
optodes will be arranged in a geometrical layout that will cover the prefrontal and somatosensory 
cortex  regions  bilaterally,  consistent with  locations  investigat ed in previous  studies.
23,24 In addition,  a 
few optical channels will be located to the primary auditory cortex as a control region that remains 
inactive during pain stimulation (i.e., both fNIRS and thermal stimulation devices run silently). Based on our hypothesis, we believe these cortical areas will exhibit significant hemodynamic activity elicited by [CONTACT_281025]. Hemodynamic image reconstruction will be aided by [CONTACT_281026]’ anatomical landmarks (nasion, pre - 
auricolar left and right, vertex and inion) using a 3D Digitizer (Polhemus Patriot, Colchester, VT). Optical recordings will be collected during thermal pain stimulation according to the following protocol. A temperature -controlled pain generator (Medoc TSA -II Neurosensory Analyzer) will be 
used to produce thermal stimulation through a 16 ×16 mm
2 thermode  placed onto the forearm. The 
experimental protocol consists of an initial baseline period of 60 seconds during which no thermal stimulation will be applied (i.e., thermode at room temperature), followed by 20 -second stimulation 
at 45°C  and a 30-second  resting period.  This experimental  block  will be repeated  six times,  for a total 
experimental duration of [ADDRESS_342798] about 20 -25 min, including th e brain imager 
setup time. In addition, a multimodal Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) battery will be completed: heat pain (e.g. threshold, tolerance), pressure pain threshold, punctate mechanical pain (e.g. suprathreshold ratings and temporal summation) , and Conditioned Pain Modulation (CPM). These 
measures will be assessed using equipment and methods available at the [CONTACT_52449]’s laboratory, including a Medoc TSA -II Neurosensory Analyzer and Wagner pressure algometer.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  7  − Feasibility. We will calculate  the percentage  of participants  who  a) meet  the inclusion  criteria,  b) 
agree to be randomly assigned, c) complete the full tDCS protocol, and d) attend the follow -up 
assessment. 
− Acceptability. We will collect data on participants’ tDCS experience via a questionnaire, at the 
conclusion  of tDCS  treatment on a 0 (strongly  disagree)  to 10 (strongly  agree)  scale:  1) It was easy  to 
prepare the device and accessories; 2) The device was unnecessarily complex; 3) The device was 
easy to use; 4) I felt the video conferences with a technical person were helpful; 5) I would imagine that most people would learn to use this device quickly; 6) The device was cumbersome to use; 7) I felt confident using the device; 8) I needed to learn a lot of things before I cou ld get going with this 
device; 9) The effectiveness of the treatment increased over the course of treatment; 10) Overall, I felt that transcranial electrical stimulation treatment benefited me. Participants will also be encouraged to elaborate their answers in free -form.  
− Moreover, we will evaluate the presence and severity of possible side effects of treatment at the end of each session on a 0 (not at all) to 10 (highest degree) scale. The participants will be asked in an open -ended manner whether they experienced any side effects, and they will then be asked 
specifically about tingling, itching sensation, burning sensation, pain at the stimulation site, fatigue, nervousness, headache, difficulty concentrating, mood change, and changes in vision or visual perception. If any side effects are reported, the degree of relatedness to the intervention will be 
assessed on a 5 -point scale (details of the data and safety monitoring plan are provided in the 
Human  Subjects  section).  This approach  has been  used  in our previous  study  and frequently  in other 
studies.
20,25,26  
 
Data and Safety  Monitoring  
− The DSM  plan  is in accordance  with  the Policy  of the National Institute  of Nursing Research  (NINR) 
for Data and Safety Monitoring of Extramural Clinical Trials set forth in 2014. As part of the DSM plan, we have convened a Safety Monitoring Committee (SMC) of which the organization, responsibilities, and operations are mandated by [CONTACT_281027]. 
− Level of risk of the intervention. We will investigate the effects of self- administered transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS) on clinical pain in older adults with knee osteoarthritis pain in this study. The FDA determined that the tDCS devi ce as used in those studies is Non -Significant Risk 
(NSR), and the UTHealth IRB also determined that the tDCS as used in this study is Non -Significant 
Risk (NSR). To add additional safety measures for this study, we will convene a SMC. This study constitutes minimal risks because: (1) the discomfort is transient in nature and generally subsides immediately after the procedure; (2) participants are instructed that they may stop any procedure at any time with no adverse consequences; and (3) the level of disc omfort experienced by 
[CONTACT_281028].  Also, risks  will be minimized  by [CONTACT_281029], and the study physician will have full discretion to exclude participants who may be at excessive risk.  
A. Monitoring  Entity  
Role of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_116116] . [CONTACT_52449], the PI, will have primary responsibility for monitoring 
study research staff, who will receive training on the study design, recruitment, and protocol prior to study  initiation. Research  staff will receive  formal training  on the study  protocol  by [CONTACT_6283]. Ahn,  Abdi,  and 
Pollonini, which will entail one day of intensive training followed by [CONTACT_281030].  The research  staff  will attend  weekly  meetings  with  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_281007] -investigators to discuss any study issues regarding recruitment and 
follow -up data collection. These meetings will be used to discuss experiences with the intervention 
participants, provide consultation, ascertain whether the research staff are following study protocols,  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342799]. Miao,  the 
study statistician, will coordinate data management and analysis. 
Role of the SMC . The SMC will be responsible for oversight of the activities related to implementing the 
clinical trial to ensure patient safety, conformance to the clinical protocol, overall performance of the 
trial components, and integrity of the data being collected. The SMC will meet prior to the start of 
enrollment, and then annually to review study progress (e.g., recruitment, retention, and safety procedures) and participant safety concerns and also as needed to adjudicate any adverse events. All meeting  materials  will be considered privileged  by [CONTACT_281031].  This confidentiality  will be maintained 
at all times to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371].  
The SMC will comprise 3 members with expertise in neuromodulation, statistics, and geriatric 
clinical rese arch:  Ricardo  Jorge,  MD,  professor  of psychiatry  and behavioral  sciences  at Baylor  College  of 
Medicine; [CONTACT_281046], PhD, associate professor and biostatistician at The University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston Cizik School of Nursing; and Carmel Dyer, MD, Roy M. and Phyllis Gough Huffington Chair in Gerontology and the Nancy P.  and Vincent F. Guinee Distinguished Chair in 
Gerontology at The University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston. The SMC members are independent of the project. These members are appropriately qualified to review the scientific design and conduct of the study, to evaluate safety and risks to participants, to interpret data statistically, and 
to make recommendations concerning continuation, modification, suspension, or termination of the study.  
Annual SMC meetings will begin after the first week of dat a collection. In addition, should any 
adverse event occur, the SMC will be informed immediately, and a special session will be scheduled to discuss  strategies  to deal  with  the event.  The annual  meeting  will include  a synopsis  of the protocol  and 
design, discussion of the status of interventions and data collection procedures, a summary of subject contacts, discussion of any adverse events or potential adverse events, status of data entry and 
verification, and a summary of any descriptive and inferential statistics to date. Details about data 
quality and completeness and data collection timeliness will be provided to the SMC, including enrollment rates, exclusion rates and reasons, completion of scheduled data collection, reasons for study withdrawal, adequac y of enrollment composition, demographic similarities/differences between 
the intervention and control groups, protocol deviations and adherence, and compromises in confidentiality. The SMC meetings will be closed sessions without the investigators, during  which the 
SMC will  discuss the  need for  additional procedures to prevent adverse events  or ensure  data integrity. 
In the unlikely  case  that the study  needs  to be terminated  early  owing  to unexpected  adverse  events  or 
inadequate conduct of the study, the SMC will make recommendations to the investigators.  
Recommendations  from  the SMC  meetings  will be shared  with  the UTHealth  IRB and the NIH during 
annual reports and immediately if the SMC identifies adverse events not previously reported or recommends early termination of the study.  
Role  of the IRB. This study  will be approved  by [CONTACT_281032]. The UTHealth  IRB will have  the primary 
oversight of the study, and the PI ([CONTACT_52449]) will be responsible for reporting the status of the study to the IRB. Annual progress reports and renewals will be completed for the IRBs and will include a summary of the recommendations of the SMC. If adverse reactions related to study procedures are noted, they will be immediately reported to the UTHealth IRB by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Ahn s o that the IRB is aware of any 
risks involved with the study. The IRB will be responsible for ensuring the adequate and appropriate composition of the SMC as specified by [CONTACT_281033].  
Reporting to NINR .
  [CONTACT_52449], the PI, will be responsible for submitting n ecessary reports to the NINR. 
Summaries  of the protocol  and design,  the status  of the intervention  group,  data  collection  procedures, 
a summary of subject contacts, discussion of any adverse reactions or any potential adverse reactions, the status of data entry and verification, a summary of any descriptive statistics to date, and the 
recommendations of the SMC will be included in each annual report to the NINR. The NINR will be  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  9  notified within 7 days if the human subjects research or the DSM plan is changed prior to or during 
implementation  of the clinical trial for approval.  In addition,  should any adverse  reaction  occur  or should 
the SMC recommend terminating the study early, the information will be immediately reported to the NINR program o fficer. All personal identifiers will be removed from any documentation sent to the  
NINR. Timely reports to the NINR will be generated for:  
• Unanticipated  problems  or unexpected  serious  adverse  events  that may  be related  to the study 
protocol  
• IRB-approved  revisions  to the study  protocol  that indicate  a change  in risk for participants  
• A summary  of recommendations  made  by [CONTACT_281034] (if applicable) the action plan for response  
• Notice  of any actions  taken  by [CONTACT_281035]  
 
B. DSM  Procedures  
B1. Monitoring  study  safety.  
Monitoring  schedule . All the stimulation and testing  sessions will  be supervised  by [CONTACT_281036].  At each  stimulation,  participants  will be asked 
to report any adverse events they have experienced. A study physician (i.e., [CONTACT_281047]) will also be available to evaluate the participant  if needed. Based on information obtained at this visit, participants 
will then be referred for follow -up assessment and/or treatment with the appropriate healthcare 
provider. Drs. Ahn, Pollonini, Abdi, and Miao will meet every month (by [CONTACT_17084]/or in pe rson) to 
monitor study progress including data collected from participants on any serious health events that caused them to seek medical attention and if any of these resulted in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_281008]. Any adverse reactions noted by [CONTACT_281037], the UTHealth IRB, SMC, 
and NINR. All adverse events will be reviewed monthly by [CONTACT_281038]. Also, in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_281009], minority status and gender will be included in these reports to allow for the detection of differential effects.  
Auditing s
elected cases  for compliance  with  IRB requirements . All data designated as primary outcome 
data will be subject to a 100% cross -referencing between electronic and paper forms. This audit must 
have  an error rate less than  1%. If the verification  fails the audit,  all data  will be re-entered,  the original 
computer files will be discarded, and the newly re -entered data will be audited. This process will 
continue until the audit no longer excee ds the maximum allowable error rate. All audits will be 
supervised and documented by [CONTACT_978].  
Conformance  w ith informed  consent  requirements . This study  will be approved  by [CONTACT_281039].gov,  and written  informed  consent  will be obtained from  all participants  prior 
to study commencement. The informed consent document will thoroughly describe the procedures and any associated risks, and study staff will verbally review the information with each participant before enrollment into the protocol. They will also be informed that they can withdraw their consent at any 
time without penalty. Individuals will participate in the study only after they provide verbal and signed consent. Consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_40224] a private space. The informed consent form will be reviewed in detail with each potential participant, and they will be provided a copy of the informed consent form to review prior to providing consent. Informed consent will be documented i n writing via the participant’s and investigator’s signatures.  
Verification of source documents .
  A number of quality control procedures will be used to ensure the 
validity and integrity of the data and the safety of all participants involved in the study. Relevant data and safety  information  obtained from  each  study  participant  will be verified  against  the original source 
documents  by [CONTACT_171427],  and any identified  discrepancies  will be reviewed  at these  weekly 
meetings. All identifying information will be archived on a password -protected server in password - 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342800] -protected folde rs. 
Investigator compliance.  All of investigators  will complete Protection  of Human  Subjects  certification 
and receive additional education on research and ethics as needed.  
B2. Minimizing  research -associated  risk. 
Location  of data  collection . All procedures  involving  human  participants  will be performed  at the PI’s 
laboratory at UTHealth.  
Storage of collected data. All electronic data will be stored in password -p rotected, secured computer 
systems. Only  the participant’s  study  identification  number  will appear  on any data  forms.  Only  research  
team members will have access to the completed data forms and electronically stored data. All data will 
be considered part of the participant’s  confidential  record.  Data  collected  from  research  participants  will 
be stored in a secured, password -protected computer file. All paper data (e.g., participant contact 
[CONTACT_3031], consent forms, etc.) will be placed in a locked file cabinet within 24 hours of their acquisition as designated by [CONTACT_1758]'s research assistant. All data will remain confidential.  
Data  en
try  requirements . The data  entry  system  will require  a login  identification  and password  to gain 
access to the data. Where appropriate, validation and range rules will be applied to the actual entry fields. Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_281010].  
Data management and analysis .
  Our research team has substantial experience in the design and 
implementation of data management procedures that provide accurate recording and storage of data, participant  confidentiality,  and timely  analysis. Based on our experience,  we believe  that the major data 
management and analysis needs for the proposed project can be met by [CONTACT_2329] a high -end PC, equipped 
with SPSS and SAS for Windows and appropriate spreadsheet programs. All data files will be 
automatically backed up daily. [CONTACT_281048], the study statistician, will coordinate data management and 
analysis.  
Data quality control. All staff involved in data collection will be trained and certified to ensure their 
competence and re -certified periodically throughout the study, as we have done in similar trials. Data 
will be collected and numerically coded using pre -tested electronic entry forms. Every effort will be 
made  to ensure  that missing  data  are kept  to a minimum.  Data  entry  programs  with  range  checking  and 
response validation will be used for all data entered. The research assistant will be trained to avoid 
omissions in data  entry,  and computer  entry  protocols  will be programmed  to avoid  accidental skippi[INVESTIGATOR_281011]. As we have done in prior studies, we will develop a manual of procedures during the initial study start -up period that explicitly describes the specific procedures related to intervention 
delivery, data collection, and quality assurance.  
Measurement and reporting of participant accrual and adherence to eligibility criteria. The  r
 ate of 
participant accrual as well as adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria will be reviewed weekly during the recruitment  phase  and then  every  month  to assure  that participants  meet  the eligibility  criteria  and 
ethnic diversity goals outlined in the grant proposal.  
Final storage of paper data. All paper data (e.g., consent forms) will be housed at a facility that 
specializes  in the storage  of medical/research  information.  The destruction  date  of these files will be at 
least [ADDRESS_342801] been collected, entered, 
and passed the audit  process, the data  will be available  to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_281012]. Only  the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_261700]. No confidential information may be released without the express written consent of the study participants. Only copi[INVESTIGATOR_245181]. The original data file will remain in its pristine state.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342802] linking this number to the participant’s identity will be maintained in a password -protected data file, 
accessible only by [CONTACT_281040]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_281013], maintaining strict adherence to the 
requirements of the law, UTHealth and federal regulations, research protocols, and health information 
security.  Only  trained  research  team  members  designated  in the IRB-approved  study  protoco l will collect 
data.  Research  Electronic  Data  Capture  (REDcap;  http://www.project -redcap.org)  will be used  to capture 
and store participant data, and the data will be stored on the secure data file server at UTHealth, accessible only by [CONTACT_281041] -protected computer. All 
research data will be labeled using the participant’s unique identifier. No name [CONTACT_281045]. All paper data (e.g., participant contact [CONTACT_3031],  consent 
forms) will be placed in a locked file cabinet at the UTHealth Cizik School of Nursing within [ADDRESS_342803] ongoing supervision in how to handle participants’ discomfort. Participants can choose whether to be in the study or not. They may withdraw at any time without consequences of any kind.  
They  may  also refuse  to answer  any questions  they  do not wish  to answer  and still remain  in the study. 
There may be occasions when study participants exhibit stronger and more se rious signs of emotional 
distress. Research staff will be trained to identify and respond to signs of acute distress. We will emphasize  to research  staff  at all study  team  meetings  that if a participant  becomes  upset,  they  should 
be offered the option of d iscontinuing participation in the study without penalty (i.e., still receiving 
payment) or continuing at a later time after a break. Our study physician ([CONTACT_281047]) and [CONTACT_52449] will be available for immediate consultation in the event of encountering an une xpected acute psychological 
issue.  
Adverse event reviewing . Adverse events will be reviewed at each study team meeting to assure all 
participant  safety  and reporting protocols  were  followed.  The SMC  will meet  annually  to review  reports 
on adverse  events  and unanticipated  problems,  discuss  participant  safety  concerns,  and review  general 
study progress.  
Adverse  ev ent reporting . Study  participants  will be encouraged  to immediately  report  any “emergencies 
or events” by [CONTACT_281042].  These instructions will be included on the consent 
forms. The study  team  will record  all reported  events  in the adverse  events  and unanticipated  problems 
log (including the subject’s name, the date, and an event description). All members of the study team will inform the PI, [CONTACT_52449], immediately of any adverse events and unanticipated problems, and he will consult with co -investigators and the SMC members on the necessary action. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_281014]. The action and date of implementation will also be recorded in the adverse events and unanticipated problems log. The entire investigative team and SMC will participate in classifying events as “serious” or “non -serious” (see list below), as well as “non - 
attributable,” “possibly attributable,” or “attributable” to the intervention. The SMC will advise the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_281015] 2 weeks of reviewing the reports.  
1. Serious  events  include  any event  or condition  that is life threatening or results  in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_62002] a 
physical or cardiac event serious enough to require medical attention. These events may be: a. Fatal  
b. Life threatening  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  12  c. Permanently  disabling  
d. Required  or prolonged  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  (admission,  not ER visit)  
e. Overdose  
f. Significant  hazard  to the patient  
2. Non -serious  events  include  all other  events.  
 
D. This is a single  site study.  
 
E. Ongoing assessments that may  impact  the safety  or ethics  of the study.  
The research team is active in clinical pain research and will continue to monitor the literature, attend 
national and international conferences,  and consult  with  colleagues  to assure  that we are aware  of any 
emerging data that may impact the safety or the ethics of the study.  
 
F. Advanced  plans  for interim/futility  analysis  
One focus of the investigator meetings will be to continuously monitor and develop strategies to prevent  adverse  reactions,  monitor  the research  staff,  and protect  data  integrity.  Accrual data  will be 
reviewed by [CONTACT_281043]. The study team will make amendments to the protocol should accrual fall below 15% of the target or should drop -outs exceed projections by 15%.  
 
Statistics  
− In this study, we will ran domly assign [ADDRESS_342804] size of 0.89 with more 
than 99% power at a significance level of 0.05 after accounting for 10% attrition. The minimum 
effect  size we can detect with  this sample  size is 0.54  with  80%  power  at a significance  level  of 0.05 
after accounting for 10% attrition. Thus, our sample size will provide sufficient power to detect a 
clinically meaningful effect.  
− All data  will be analyzed  using the intention -to-treat approach.  All demographic  and clinical variables 
will be summarized using descriptive statistics, such as mean ± standard deviation (SD) or median (interquartile range, IQR) as appropriate for continuous variables and frequency and percentage for categorical variables. The distribution of all variables will be examined to check the validity of distribution assumptions before any analysis, using measures of central tendency and a visual 
inspectio n of histograms and quantile -quantile plots. If the normality assumption is not met, 
equivalent non -parametric approaches will be employed. SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) will be 
used to perform the proposed statistical analyses.  
 
Ethics  
− IRB approval will be sought  from  CPHS.  
− Participation in this study is completely voluntary. All participants will be informed of the nature of 
the procedures  and associated  risks.  Also,  participants  will be informed  that they  can withdraw  from 
the study at any time and t hat this will have no adverse impact on the study or on their own future 
medical treatment. Subjects will participate in the study only after they provide verbal and signed consent. Trained research personnel will obtain consent in a private room where par ticipants feel 
comfortable.  Informed  consent  will be documented  in writing  via the participants’  and investigators’ 
signatures.  
 
Quality  control  and assurance  
− Data  Management  and Analysis.  PI [INVESTIGATOR_281016], participant  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/[ADDRESS_342805] can be met by [CONTACT_2329] a high -end PC, 
equipped  with  SPSS and SAS for Windows  and appropriate  spreadsheet  programs.  All data  files will 
be automatically backed up daily.  
 
Publication Plan 
− We will publish  research  results  at the peer -reviewed  journal  and/or  scientific  conferences.  After 
completion of the study, results will be returned to research subjects if they want.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  14  References  
 
1. Hunter  DJ, McDougall JJ, Keefe FJ. The symptoms  of osteoarthritis  and the genesis  of pain.  
Rheum  Dis Clin North  Am. 2008;34(3):623- 643. 
2. Lawrence  RC, Felson DT, Helmick  CG, et al. Estimates  of the prevalence  of arthritis  and other 
rheumatic conditions in the [LOCATION_002]. Part II. Arthritis Rheum. 2008;58(1):26 -35. 
3. Barbour  KE, Helmick  CG, Theis  KA, et al. Prevalence  of doctor -diagnosed  arthritis  and arthritis - 
attributable activity limitation -[LOCATION_002], 2010 -2012. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2013;62(14):869- 873.  
4. Felson DT, Lawrence  RC, Dieppe  PA, et al. Osteoarthritis:  new  insight s. Part 1: the disease  and its 
risk factors. Ann Intern Med. 2000;133(8):635- 646.  
5. Jordan  JM, Helmick  CG, Renner  JB, et al. Prevalence  of knee symptoms  and radiographic  and 
symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in African Americans and Caucasians: the Johnston County 
Osteoarthritis Project. J Rheumatol. 2007;34(1):172- 180.  
6. Institute of Medicine.  Relieving  pain in America:  A blueprint  for transforming prevention,  care, 
education, and research. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.  
7. Davis KD, Moayedi M. Central mechanisms of pain revealed through functional and structural 
MRI. Journal  of neuroimmune  pharmacology  : the official journal  of the Society  on NeuroImmune 
Pharmacology. 2013;8(3):518- 534.  
8. Latremoliere  A, Woolf  CJ. Central sensitization:  A generator of pain  hypersensitivity  by [CONTACT_52446]. The journal of pain : official journal of the American Pain Society. 2009;10(9):895- 926.  
9. O'Neil CK, Hanlon JT, Marcum ZA. Adverse effects of analgesics commonly used by [CONTACT_281044]:  focus  on non-opi[INVESTIGATOR_261701].  The Americ an journal  of geriatric 
pharmacotherapy. 2012;10(6):331 -342.  
10. Solomon  DH, Rassen  JA, Glynn  RJ, Lee J, Levin  R, Schneeweiss  S. The comparative  safety  of 
analgesics in older adults with arthritis. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170(22):1968- 1976.  
11. Reid MC, Henderson CR , Jr., Papaleontiou M, et al. Characteristics of older adults receiving 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_52436]:  treatment duration  and outcomes.  Pain Med.  2010;11(7):[ADDRESS_342806]  current  stimulation  for the treatment of pain  in fibromyalgia.  Arthritis Rheum. 
2006;54(12):3988- 3998.  
13. Simis  M, Reidler JS, Duarte  Macea  D, et al. Investiga tion of Central Nervous  System  Dysfunction 
in Chronic Pelvic Pain Using Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy and Noninvasive Brain 
Stimulation. Pain Pract. 2014.  
14. Mori  F, Codeca  C, Kusayanagi  H, et al. Effects  of anodal  transcranial direct  current  stimulation  on 
chronic neuropathic pain in patients with multiple sclerosis. J Pain. 2010;11(5):436- 442.  
15. Antal  A, Terney  D, Kuhnl  S, Paulus  W. Anodal  transcranial direct  current  stimulation  of the motor 
cortex ameliorates chronic pain and reduces short int racortical inhibition. J Pain Symptom 
Manage. 2010;39(5):890- 903.  
16. Nitsche  MA, Cohen  LG, Wassermann  EM, et al. Transcranial direct  current  stimulation:  State  of 
the art 2008. Brain stimulation. 2008;1(3):206- 223.  
17. Fregni  F, Pascual- Leone A. Technology insight: noninvasive brain stimulation in neurology - 
perspectives  on the therapeutic  potential  of rTMS  and tDCS.  Nature  clinical  practice  Neurology. 
2007;3(7):383- 393.  
18. Valle A, Roizenblatt  S, Botte S, et al. Efficacy of anodal transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS)  for the treatment  of fibromyalgia:  results  of a randomized,  sham -controlled  longitudinal 
clinical trial. Journal of pain management. 2009;2(3):353 -361.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-19-0469 
IRB APPROVAL  DATE:  11/07/2019  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  
Adapted  from  NIH protocol  template  and ICH Guidelines  Page  15  19. Gand iga PC, Hummel  FC, Cohen  LG. Transcranial DC stimulation  (tDCS):  a tool for double -blind 
sham -controlled clinical studies in brain stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol. 2006;117(4):[ADDRESS_342807]  current  stimulation  over  primary 
motor cortex (anode) and contralateral supraorbital area (cathode) on clinical pain severity and 
mobility performance in persons with knee osteoarthritis: An experimenter - and participant - 
blinded,  randomized,  sham -controll ed pi[INVESTIGATOR_281017].  Brain stimulation.  2017;10(5):902- 909.  
21. Altman  R, Asch  E, Bloch  D, et al. Development  of criteria for the classification  and reporting of 
osteoarthritis. Classification of osteoarthritis of the knee. Diagnostic and Ther apeutic Criteria 
Committee of the American  Rheumatism  Association.  Arthritis Rheum.  1986;29(8):1039 -1049.  
22. Dworkin RH, Turk DC, McDermott MP, et al. Interpreting the clinical importance of group 
differences  in chronic  pain  clinical trials:  IMMPACT  recommend ations.  Pain.  2009;146(3):238 - 
244.  
23. Yennu  A, Tian  F, Gatchel  RJ, Liu H. Prefrontal hemodynamic  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_281018] -infrared 
spectroscopy in response to thermal stimulations over three body sites. Neurophotonics. 
2016;3(4):045008.  
24. Yucel  MA, Aasted  CM, Petkov  MP, Borsook  D, Boas  DA, Becerra L. Specificity  of hemodynamic 
brain responses to painful stimuli: a functional near- infrared spectroscopy study. Scientific 
reports. 2015;5:9469.  
25. Bikson  M, Grossman  P, Thomas  C, et al. Safety  of Transcranial Direc t Current  Stimulation: 
Evidence Based Update 2016. Brain stimulation. 2016;9(5):[ADDRESS_342808] current stimulation. Brain stimulation. 2012;5( 2):155 -162.  