v.2.8.2024                   Page 1 of 15 Study Title:   
 
Are Virtual Visits for Delivery  of Postoperative Care Following Urogynecologic Surgery Equal to 
Office Visits? The VIDEO Randomized Trial  
 
 Principal Investigator s:  
 
Cecile Ferrando, MD MPH : Associate Professor . Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic 
Reconstructive Surgery; Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
Lannah Lorraine Lua- Mailland, MD MPH: Fellow in Female Pelvic Medicine and Reconstructive 
Surgery. Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery; Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
 
Co-Investigators:   
 
Marie Fidela Paraiso, MD : Staff. Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery; 
Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
Amy Park, MD : Section Head.  Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery; 
Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
Shannon Wallace, MD : Staff. Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery; 
Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
Abigail Anderson, APRN CNP : Nurse Practitioner . Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic 
Reconstructive Surgery; Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland 
Clinic  
 
Michelle Miller, APRN CNP : Nurse Practitioner . Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic 
Reconstructive Surgery; Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
 
Natalie Weigand, APRN CNP ; Nurse Practitioner . Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic 
Reconstructive Surgery; Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at Cleveland Clinic  
  Sponsor , if Applicable  (include NIH and other funding sources here) : Research Program 
Committees  and Obstetrics and Gynecology Institute  
    
v.2.8.[ADDRESS_876797] been published evaluating patient satisfaction with telehealth visits in the 
urogynecologic population.
4,6 The intervention evaluated by [CONTACT_653377] . was limited to 
telephone visits only for postoperative follow -up.4 The study by [CONTACT_43265]. included only patients 
undergoing pelvic organ prolapse surgery with a follow- up call placed 48 to 72 hours after 
discharge  and both video and in- person groups returning to the office at 90 days after surgery ; 
patient satisfaction was evaluated at  the 30-day in-person versus virtual visit .6 Both trials 
demonstrated  that postoperative telehealth visits  were non- inferior to traditional in- office visits 
based on patient satisfaction;  with no difference in healthcare utilization, complication rates, or 
clinical outcomes based on validated questionnaires. Additionally, several  studies have 
demonstrated a positive correlation between patient preparedness for pelvic organ prolapse and/or anti -incontinence surgery  and postoperative satisfaction, perioperative outcomes, 
postoperative symptom and quality of life improvement, and perceived complications .
8-10 
 
The proposed VIDEO  randomized trial will help inform clinical practice regarding the utility 
and perceived value of videoconferencing for postoperative care of urogynecologic patients by 
[CONTACT_653378]- office visits after pelvic 
organ prolapse and/or anti -incontinence surgery. The study will secondarily investigate other 
important components of healthcare quality, including safety and clinical outcomes, by 
[CONTACT_653379]  12 weeks 
after urogynecologic surgery.  
v.2.8.2024                   Page 3 of 15  
B. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
Primary  aim:  
• To compare  patient satisfaction with their postoperative visit  between patients receiving 
in-office versus virtual -video postoperative visits at 6 weeks after surgery . 
We hypothesize that patient satisfaction with a virtual  postoperative visit  will be 
noninferior to patient satisfaction with an in- office postoperative visit  
 
Secondary aims : 
• To compare healthcare resource utilization after the postoperative visit up to 12 weeks 
following urogynecologic  surgery between patients receiving in -office versus virtual -video  
postoperative visits . 
We hypothesize that the virtual group will be noninferior to the in- office group based on 
healthcare resource utilization after the postoperative visit up to 12 weeks  following 
surgery . 
 
• To compare adverse events after the postoperative visit up to 12 weeks following 
urogynecologic  surgery between patients receiving in- office versus virtual -video six-week 
postoperative visits . 
We hypothesize that  the virtual group will be noninferior to the in- office group based on 
adverse events after the postoperative visit up to 12 weeks  following surgery . 
 
• To evaluate patient and provider preferences/attitudes toward in- office versus virtual -
video postoperative visits  
 C. RESEARCH PLAN 
 
Overall Study Design 
• The study is a randomized c ontrolled  noninferiority trial evaluating patient satisfaction 
with in-office versus vi rtual-video  postoperative visits at six weeks following 
urogynecologic  surgery . We aim to  assess whether the intervention of virtual 
postoperative visit via videoconference technology  is noninferior  to the 
standard/traditional in- office postoperative visit  for our primary outcome of patient 
satisfaction . The recruitment period will be 15  months ( January  1, 2023 to March 31, 
2024). The follow -up period for each participant will be 12 weeks  after surgery . 
 
Outcome Measures  
• Primary Outcome:  
o Patient satisfaction as measured by [CONTACT_653380]- 18 at 
the 6- week postoperative visit  
• Secondary Outcomes:  
o Healthcare resource utilization as measured by [CONTACT_4676] -initiated phone calls, 
unscheduled in-person /virtual  office  visits, emergency room  or urgent care visits, 
and inpatient readmissions after the scheduled postoperative visit up to 12 weeks 
following surgery  
o Adverse events after the scheduled postoperative visit up to 12 weeks  following 
surgery  
o Patient and provider preferences/attitudes toward virtual or office visits  
 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 4 of 15 Eligibility Criteria  
• All patients of the Center for Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery in the 
Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology and Women’s Health Institute at the Cleveland Clinic (Main Campus, Fairview Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Hillcrest Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Medina Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_653373] ) scheduled to undergo major or minor  surgery 
for pelvic organ prolapse and/or urinary incontinence  
o Major  surgery
+ 
 Minimally invasive (laparoscopic or robotic) sacrocolpopexy  
 Vaginal colpopexy (intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal)  
 Vaginal or minimally invasive (laparoscopic or robotic) hysteropexy (uterine suspension)  
 Obliterative procedures (colpocleisis)  
+ Additional procedures accompanying the above major operations may 
include: hysterectomy (total or supracervical), trachelectomy, salpi[INVESTIGATOR_173677]- oophorectomy, anterior and/or posterior colporrhaphy with 
perineorrhaphy, enterocele repair, minimally invasive Burch colposuspension or paravaginal defect repair, vaginal mesh removal or revision, placement of vaginal graft, or placement of mid- urethral sling  
o Minor  surgery  
 Isolated colporrhaphy (anterior/posterior) and/or perineorrhaphy  
 Placement of mid- urethral sling  
 Vaginal mesh removal or revision  
• Inclusion Criteria  
o Age greater than 18 years old  
o Has technological capability to participate in videoconferencing (high- speed 
internet access with desktop computer or mobile device)  
o Has decision- making capacity and able to provide informed consent  for research 
participation  
o Able to speak and read English  
• Exclusion Criteria  
o Patient requested to physically come in the office  or have a virtual visit for her 
postoperative visit  
o Planned concomitant surgery with another surgical team  
o Office follow- up is deemed medically necessary by [CONTACT_48368]/surgeon 
 
Study Procedures  
• Screening and Recruitment  
o Participants will be prospectively identified by [CONTACT_653381]’s initial consultation when the decision is made to proceed with surgery for 
pelvic organ prolapse and/or urinary incontinence.  
o Compensation will be provided to trial participants with a total of $50 in the form of  
a check in the mail from Cleveland Clinic . The payment will be prorated according 
to the procedures completed. The participant will receive $10 after completion of the Patient Preparedness Questionnaire pre- operatively, $20 after completion of 
the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire- 18 postoperatively, and $20 after 
completion of the Patient Postoperative Visit Questionnaire postoperatively.  
Addresses for mailing of checks will be verified.  
o Reasons for declining participation in the study will be collected and recorded 
separately.  
 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 5 of 15 • Consent/Asse nt Process 
o Patients who agree to participate will sign a consent form. The consent interview 
will occur during the participant’s  preoperative  visit at the Center for 
Urogynecology and Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery at Cleveland Clinic . 
Alternatively, the patient will be able to provide consent for research participation remotely via electronic signature [CONTACT_653393] .  
 
• Randomization:   
o Trial participants will be randomized to one of two arms:  
 1) Office  Visit  (Control  Arm) : Patients randomized to the control arm will be 
scheduled for and follow up with the surgeon or an advanced practice provider via an in- office visit at 6 weeks after the planned date of surgery. If 
the surgery were to be rescheduled to a future date, the postoperative visit will be moved accordingly to ensure follow -up occurs at the 6- week  
postoperative period.  
 2) Virtual  Visit  (Intervention Arm) : Patients randomized to the intervention 
arm will be scheduled for and follow up with the surgeon or an advanced practice provider via a virtual visit using videoconference technology at 6 
weeks after the anticipated date of surger y. If the surgery were to be 
rescheduled to a future date, the postoperative visit will be moved 
accordingly to ensure follow -up occurs at the 6- week postoperative period.  
o Stratified b lock randomization will be used to ensure that the number of 
participants is equally distributed among the study groups  and stratified by [CONTACT_653382] (major, minor) . The allocation sequence will be generated with block size of 4 
using computer software. Randomization will be implemented with the REDCap Randomization module. Randomization schedule can only be accessed by a research personnel not directly involved in patient care. T he patient’s 6- week 
postoperative visit will be scheduled according to her assigned group.  
 
• Study instruments:  
o Study instruments will be administered at the preoperative visit  and the 6- week 
postoperative visit.  The questionnaires for this study include the Patient 
Preparedness Questionnaire (PPQ) , the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire- 18 
(PSQ -18), and modified patient and provider preference questionnaires entitled, 
Patient Postoperative Visit Questionnaire and Provider Postoperative Visit Preference Questionnaire.   
o The PPQ will be administered during the preoperative visit to assess  patient 
knowledge and preparedness for surgery, which has been demonstrated in other studies to impact postoperative satisfaction, perceived complications , and drug 
utilization .
10-11 The PPQ  is a 11 -item questionnaire scored on a six -point Likert 
scale and has responses ranging from 1 (strongly agree) to 6 (strongly disagree) .9 
The questionnaire for this study will utilize the same six -point scale with a reversed 
scoring system, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 (strongly agree) . Although 
there are currently no validated measures to assess surgical preparedness in urogynecology, the PPQ has been used in several studies assessing surgical preparedness in women undergoing pelvic organ prolapse and/or stress urinary incontinence .
8,12 These studies utilized the same cutoff score for question 11 (i.e., 
an answer of “strongly agree” to the question “overall, I feel prepared for my 
upcoming surgery”) to define meeting criteria for preoperative preparedness.  
o The PSQ -[ADDRESS_876798] s, time spent with doctor , 
and accessibility and convenience. Responses are scored on a five- point Likert 
scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The total score for 
the questionnaire ranges from 18 (dissatisfaction with medical care) to 90 (highest satisfaction with medical care).  The questionnaire has been studied extensively 
and used as a valid and reliable measure of satisfaction in a variety of settings, including postoperative care after pelvic organ prolapse surgery and minimally invasive gynecologic surgery .
5-6 
o Currently, there are no validated tools to assess patient or provider attitudes towards telemedicine in urogynecology. A customized patient questionnaire 
“Patient Postoperative Visit Questionnaire” will be administered after the six -week 
postoperative visit to assess patient’s preference/attitude towards virtual and office 
visits . The items in this questionnaire were adapted from a survey used in a cross -
sectional study of patients and clinicians (psychiatry, neurology, cardiology, 
oncology, and primary care) participating in telehealth virtual video visits in an 
academic health system .
[ADDRESS_876799] their preference for in- person or virtual visits for 
future postoperative visits and to specify their reason/s.  
o A provider preference questionnaire “Provider Postoperative Visit Preference 
Questionnaire” will be administered to the surgeon or advanced practice provider 
after completion of the six -week postoperative visit to assess provider 
preference/attitudes . The questionnaire was adapted from the provider survey 
utilized by [CONTACT_653383]. and consists of 10 comparative questions about office visits and virtual video visits .
3 
o All questionnaires can be completed either with paper forms or electronically 
through Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap), depending on patie nt/provider preference. Study participants will be reminded within 48 to 72 
hours  after their visit regarding complet ion of  their questionnaires by  [CONTACT_653384] a standardized phone script or by [CONTACT_653385] 6-week postoperative visit. Reminders for survey 
completion will be sent up to two  times.  
 
• Preoperative Visit  
o The preoperative visit will take place per our standard protocol, which includes a thorough discussion of the surgical purpose, alternatives, benefits, risks/complications, and postoperative expectations. Following informed consent, 
study -related procedures during the preoperative visit include study randomization, 
and scheduling of postoperative visits per study protocol . The PPQ will also be 
administered during this visit.  
 
• Postoperative Visit (6 weeks)  
o Prior to the [ADDRESS_876800] of discussion points will be used 
to standardize counseling and evaluation during the 6- week postoperative visit . 
Both office and virtual visits will be conducted in the same manner : The provider 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 7 of 15 will inquire about any concerns the patient has regarding recovery, followed by [CONTACT_653386]. These outside healthcare encounters will be documented by [CONTACT_653387].  The provider will review key aspects of 
postoperative care (bowel function, urinary function, presence of vaginal bleeding, 
dietary status, and ambulatory status), postoperative instructions and precautions, findings and procedures done during surgery, and pathology results (if applicable). The provider will then visually examine surgical sites and document their findings in their Epic note.  The provider will inquire about any additional questions from the 
patient  and perform additional evaluation/t reatments  per standard of care.  The 
PSQ -18 and the Patient Postoperative Visit  questionnaire will be administered 
after th is visit. The patient may be contact[CONTACT_653388] t wo times  by a study 
investigator  via phone, text or email  within 48 to 72 hours  after the visit  regarding 
completion  of study questionnaires  using a script .  
 
• Provider Recruitment and Study Procedures  
o Surgeons and advanced practice providers will be educated about the study during the Urogynecology Section Research Meeting as part of the provider recruitment process.  
o After the six -week virtual or in -office visit, the provider will fill out the Provider 
Information Sheet and the Provider Postoperative Visit Preference Questionnaire. The provider will complete the questionnaire at the end of the visit. If this is not feasible, the provider will be sent a text reminder for up to two times to their 
Cleveland Clinic issued phone number within 48 to 72 hours after the visit.  
 
 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 8 of 15  
 Preoperative 
Visit Day of 
Surgery  Postoperative 
Visit  
(6 weeks)  End of study 
follow- up  
(12 weeks  after 
surgery ) 
Questionnaire: PPQ  
 X    
Questionnaire:  
PSQ -18  
   X  
Questionnaire:  
Patient Postoperative Visit   
   X  
Questionnaire:  
Provider Postoperative Visit 
Preference  
   X  
Data collection:  
Demographic and baseline 
clinic al characteristics  X    
Data collection:  
Perioperative characteristics   X   
Data collection:  
Postoperative healthcare 
resource utilization, adverse 
events    X X 
 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 9 of 15  
D. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
• Data Collection  
 
o A) Demograp hic data will include the following:  
 Date of preoperative visit  (MM/DD/YYYY)  
 Route of preoperative visit with surgeon (in- office/virtual)  
 MRN  
 Age (years) 
 Race  
 Ethnicity  
 Marital status  
 Distance from home to clinic (miles)  
 Vaginal parity  
 Menopausal state  
 Current tobacco use  (Y/N) 
 BMI (kg/m2) 
 Comorbid conditions  (MI, CHF, peripheral vascular disease, 
cerebrovascular disease, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, connective tissue disease, ulcer disease, mild liver disease, diabetes, diabetes with end organ damage, hemiplegia, moderate or severe renal disease, any tumor without metastasis, leukemia, lymphoma, moderate or severe liver disease, metastatic solid tumor, AIDS)  
 Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) score  
• Calculation for CCI: diabetes with complications, hemiplegia/paraplegia, renal disease, and malignancies, age 60- 69 
are assigned a score of 2; age 70- 79 moderate/severe liver disease 
is assigned a score of 3; metastatic solid tumour and AIDS/HIV are assigned a score of 6; the remaining comorbidities are assigned a score of 1  
 Prior prolapse surgery  (Y/N; if Y, specify)  
 Prior anti -incontinence surgery  (Y/N; if Y, specify)  
 Preoperative prolapse overall stage  based on POP -Q exam ( 0, I, II, III, IV)  
 Preoperative POP -Q points ( Aa, Ba, C, GH, PB, TVL, Ap, Bp, D ) 
 Preference for text or email reminder communication  
 Preferred mobile phone number or email address  
 
o B) Perioperative data will include the following : 
 Date of surgery (MM/DD/YYYY)  
 Location of OR facility  
 Surgery level (Minor, Major)  
 Surgery type  
 Concomitant procedures  
 Operative time  (minutes)  
 Estimated blood loss  (ml) 
 Intraoperative complications  (bladder injury, ureteral kinking, bowel injury, 
vascular injury, EBL ≥ 300 ml, transfusion, conversion to open procedure, 
other -specify)  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7577]  (no. of hours if <24 hours; no. of days if >24 hours)  
 If patient was admitted,  was the admission planned (Y/N)  
v.2.8.2024                   Page 10 of 15 • If N, specify reason for postoperative admission  
 Voiding trial results (Pass/Fail)  
• If Fail, select outcome: foley catheter reinserted, patient taught 
intermittent self -catheterization  
 Postoperative prescriptions at discharge (name, dosing, quantity)  
 
o C) Six-week postoperative data will include the following:  
 Date of postoperative visit  (MM/DD/YYYY)  
 Number of days postop at 6- week visit  
 Route of postoperative visit ( in-office, virtual)  
• If virtual, was an in -office visit recommended for further evaluation 
(Y/N); reason for office evaluation (specify)  
• If virtual, did the patient require assistance with using video conference technology prior to their scheduled appointment  (Y/N)  
• If virtual, were there any technological difficulties during the visit (Y/N) 
 Did the patient cross -over to the other group at any point before the 6- week 
visit (Y/N)?  
 Provider conducting postoperative visit (APRN, MD , other -specify)  
 Abdominal exam performed (Y/N); if Y, list findings (normal, abnormal -
specify)  
 Pelvic/vaginal exam performed (Y/N); if Y, list findings (normal, abnormal -
specify)  
 Patient -initiated phone call to surgeon’s office prior to 6 -week postoperative 
visit (Y/N); i f Y, 
• Total number of phone calls  (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of phone call #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for phone call #1  
o Outcome of phone call ( counseling/reassurance, prescription 
sent,  new order placed,  new office/virtual appointment 
scheduled,  advised to go to ED/urgent care, provider placed 
follow- up call to patient the next day, other -specify)  
• Date of phone call #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for phone call #2  
o Outcome of phone call  
• Date of phone call #3 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for phone call #3  
o Outcome of phone call  
 Unanticipated outpatient (office/virtual) visits to surgeon’s office prior to 6 -
week postoperative visit (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of outpatient visits including office voiding trials (No. of 
occurrences)  
• Total number of voiding trial visits (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of outpatient visit  #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for outpatient visit  
o Outcome of outpatient visit (counseling/reassurance, prescription sent, new order placed, new office/virtual appointment scheduled, advised to go to ED/urgent care, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/direct admission, reoperation, provider/patient to 
place follow -up call, other -specify)  
v.2.8.2024                   Page 11 of 15 • Date of outpatient visit #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for outpatient visit  
o Outcome of outpatient visit  
• Date of outpatient visit #3 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for outpatient visit  
o Outcome of outpatient visit  
 Emergency  department or urgent care visits prior to 6 -week postoperative 
visit (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of ED/urgent care visits (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of ED visit #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for ED visit  
o Outcome of ED visit (discharge, readmission, reoperation, 
other -specify)  
• Date of ED visit #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for ED visit  
o Outcome of ED visit (discharge, readmission, reoperation, other -specify)  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_653374] 6- week postoperative visit  (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5394]  
• Date of readmission #1 
o Reason/s for readmission  
o Outcome of readmission (discharge, reoperation, other -
specify)  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7577] (no. of days)  
 Adverse events  prior to postoperative visit  (Y/N);  if Y, specify ( urinary tract 
infection, neurologic injury, hemorrhage/hematoma, blood transfusion, 
wound infection and cellulitis, seroma, abscess, pyelonephritis, sepsis, vaginal fistula, vaginal dehiscence, deep venous thrombosis, pneumonia, drainage of abscess, delayed gastrointestinal injury, delayed genitourinary injury, ileus, small bowel obstruction, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accident and stroke, death, mesh complication, readmission, reoperation)  
 
o D) Twelve -week postoperative data will include the following:  
 End of follow -up (i.e. , date marking  6 weeks after the patient’s scheduled 6-
week postoperative visit ) (MM/DD/YYYY)  
 Number of days postop at date above  
 Patient -initiated phone call to surgeon’s office during the next six weeks  
following  the scheduled 6 -week postoperative visit (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of phone calls (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of phone call #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for phone call #1  
o Outcome of phone call (counseling/reassurance, prescription sent, new order placed, new office/virtual appointment scheduled, advised to go to ED/urgent care, provider placed follow- up call to patient the next day, other -specify)  
• Date of phone call #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for phone call #2  
o Outcome of phone call  
v.2.8.2024                   Page 12 of 15  Unanticipated outpatient (office/virtual) visits to surgeon’s office during the 
next six weeks following the scheduled 6- week postoperative visit  (Y/N); if 
Y, 
• Total number of outpatient visits including office voiding trials (No. of 
occurrences)  
• Total number of voiding trial visits (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of outpatient visit #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for outpatient visit  
o Outcome of outpatient visit (counseling/reassurance, prescription sent, new order placed, new office/virtual appointment scheduled, advised to go to ED/urgent care, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]/direct admission, reoperation, provider/patient to 
place follow -up call, other -specify)  
• Date of outpatient visit #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for outpatient visit  
o Outcome of outpatient visit  
 Emergency department or urgent care visits during the next six weeks 
following the scheduled 6- week postoperative visit  (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of ED/urgent care visits (No. of occurrences)  
• Date of ED visit #1 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for ED visit  
o Outcome of ED visit (discharge, readmission, reoperation, other -specify)  
• Date of ED visit #2 (MM/DD/YYYY)  
o Reason/s for ED visit  
o Outcome of ED visit (discharge, readmission, reoperation, other -specify)  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_653375] 6-
week postoperative visit  (Y/N); if Y,  
• Total number of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5394]  
• Date of readmission #1 
o Reason/s for readmission  
o Outcome of readmission (discharge, reoperation, other -
specify)  
o Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7577] (no. of days)  
 Adverse events during the next six weeks following the scheduled 6 -week 
postoperative visit (Y/N); if Y, specify (urinary tract infection, neurologic injury, hemorrhage/hematoma, blood transfusion, wound infection and cellulitis, seroma, abscess, pyelonephritis, sepsis, vaginal fistula, vaginal dehiscence, deep venous thrombosis, pneumonia, drainage of abscess, delayed gastrointestinal injury, delayed genitourinary injury, ileus, small bowel obstruction, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, 
cerebrovascular accident and stroke, death, mesh complication, 
readmission, reoperation)  
 
• Power Analysis  and Sample Size Calculation  
o The primary outcome of this study is to compare  patient satisfaction between 
patients scheduled for office versus virtual six -week postoperative visits.  
o A priori sample size calculation determined that 100 participants (50 per group) 
would allow for 80% power to assess a noninferiority margin of 5 points on the 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 13 of 15 total PSQ- 18, with a SD of 10 and significance level of 0.05. A minimum important 
difference has not been reported for the PSQ -18; however, previous studies using 
this tool demonstrated SD for total PSQ -18 score ranging between 2.6 and 11.8 
and used a 5- point interval for the noninferiority margin.6,13 To account for an 
anticipated attrition rate of approximately 5%, we aimed to enroll a total of 106 
participants (53 per group).  
 
• Statistical Analysis  
o Patient satisfaction (PSQ -18) total scores, as well scores in each of the 7 PSQ -18 
domains, will be treated as continuous  data and checked for normality . Healthcare 
utilization will be analyzed in dividually  (number of phone calls, number of 
outpatient visits, number of emergency department or urgent care  visits, number of 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5394]), as well as a composite of all encounter  types.  Adverse 
events will be analyzed independently but also as a composite utilizing the Clavien -Dindo Grading System for surgical complications.  Attitudes toward 
office/virtual visits will be analyzed by [CONTACT_653389] a virtual visit, prefer an office visit, or have no preference.  
o All analyses w ill be conducted using an intention- to-treat principle. Baseline 
demographic and clinical characteristics w ill be summarized using descriptive 
statistics. Normally -distributed continuous measures w ill be summarized using 
mean and standard deviation (SD), whereas those showing departure from normality w ill be summarized using median and interquartile range (IQR). 
Categorical measures w ill be summarized using number of participants and 
percentage. The primary end- point analysis w ill be designed to test whether 
patient satisfaction with a virtual postoperative visit i s noninferior to an in- person 
postoperative visit, as determined by [CONTACT_653390] -18 at the scheduled 
postoperative visit. Noninferiority would be shown if the lower limit of the two- sided 
95% confidence interval for the between- group mean difference in the primary 
endpoint (i.e., the difference between the mean PSQ -18 total score in the virtual 
group minus the mean PSQ -18 total score in the in- office group) i s more than -5 
points. Similar analyses w ill be performed for each secondary outcome. The 
noninferiority margin is  defined as 5 points for the PSQ -18 total score and 0.5 
points for the PSQ -18 domain scores, 10% absolute for composite healthcare 
resource utilization, and 25% absolute for composite adverse events . Planned 
exploratory subgroup analyses of patient satisfaction, healthcare resource 
utilization  and adverse events  based on surgery level w ill be additionally 
performed.  
o All statistical analyses will be  performed using JMP Pro version 17.0 software 
(SAS Institute, Cary, NC). 
o Data will be managed in REDCap. Statistical support will be provided by [CONTACT_653391].  
 E. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
 
Protection of each subject’s personal health information will be a priority in this study. One master Excel file containing subject personal information including name [CONTACT_114279] a password- protected file, on a designated protected research drive 
on a password- protected computer in a locked office at the Cleveland Clinic. In that file, each 
subject will be assigned a subject identification number that will be used for the purposes of 
data collection in order to de- identify subjects. All paper forms used for data collection will be 
kept in a research cabinet dedicated to this project which will be locked at all times, in a 
v.2.8.2024                   Page 14 of 15 locked office at the Cleveland Clinic. All forms will contain de- identified information; 
identification numbers will correspond to the subjects listed in the master Excel file. All study 
data will be transferred and managed electronically using REDCap. Each subject will be entered into REDCap using the assigned identification number from the master Excel file.  
 
F. DATA/SAMPLE SHARING  
 
Not applicable  
 
G. ADVERSE EVENTS AND DATA MONITORING  
 
Any adverse event or unanticipated events will be reported as soon as feasible to the IRB using IRB WebKit . Examples of adverse events include inability to attend the postoperative 
visit due to technological issues  (If the visit cannot be completed due to technological issues, 
the provider will ensure that the appointment  is rescheduled to another time that is 
convenient and acceptable to the patient).  All events will be recorded and kept in a research 
binder assigned to this study in a locked office. Monthly reviews during the study period will 
be done by [CONTACT_544613], and if 
they are, that they are being handled and reported properly. The study will be terminated if patients in the intervention arm have decreased satisfaction of 20% compared to the control 
arm. This will be assessed monthly at the reviews mentioned above.  
 
H. STUDY TIMELINE  
 The goal for this research study is for completion by [CONTACT_653392]’s (LLL) three- year fellowship at Cleveland Clinic (June 2024). After obtaining 
institutional review board approval, a discussion will be held at the section research meeting to educate all urogynecology staff, fellows, and nurse practitioners on the implementation of this project. An in- service will be given to familiarize outpatient nursing staff and scheduling 
staff with the project.  
 Patient recruitment will begin thereafter with the goal of recruiting and completing data collection on all patients over a n 18-month time period. At the end of this time, final data 
analysis will be performed and manuscript preparation will be initiated. The manuscript will be submitted to a high impact gynecology journal. This timeline ensures project completion well before the conclusion of the primary investigator’s fellowship.  
 
     
v.2.8.2024                   Page 15 of 15 I. REFERENCES  
 
1. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists . Implementing Telehealth in 
Practice: ACOG Committee Opi[INVESTIGATOR_653376], Number 798.  Obstet Gynecol . 
2020;135(2):493- 494. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000003672  
2. Wosik J, Fudim M, Cameron B, Gellad ZF, Cho A, Phinney D, Curtis S, Roman M, Poon EG, Ferranti J, Katz JN, Tcheng J. Telehealth transformation: COVID -19 and the rise of 
virtual care. J Am Med Inform Assoc . 2020;27(6):957- 962. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocaa067. 
PMID: 32311034; PMCID: PMC7188147.  
3. Donelan K, Barreto EA, Sossong S, Michael C, Estrada JJ, Cohen AB, Wozniak J, Schwamm LH. Patient and clinician experiences with telehealth for patient follow -up care. 
Am J Manag Care. 2019;25(1):40- 44. 
4. Thompson JC, Cichowski SB, Rogers RG, Qeadan F, Zambrano J, Wenzl C, Jeppson PC, Dunivan GC, Komesu YM. Outpatient visits versus telephone interviews for postoperative care: a randomized controlled trial. Int Urogynecol J . 2019;30(10):1639-
1646. doi: 10.1007/s00192- 019-[ZIP_CODE] -z.  
5. Radtke S, Umeh R, Chavez M, Curiel Z, Mendez K. Utilizing Telemedicine for Delivery of 
Postoperative Care Following Minimally Invasive Gynecologic Surgery: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Gynecol Minim Invasive Ther . 2021;10(3):148- 153. doi: 
10.4103/GMIT.GMIT_66_20.  
6. Lee DD, Arya LA, Andy UU, Harvie HS. Video Virtual Clinical Encounters Versus Office Visits for Postoperative Care After Pelvic Organ Prolapse Surgery: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg. 2021;27(7):432- 438. doi: 
10.1097/SPV.0000000000000909.  
7. Hwa K, Wren SM. Telehealth follow -up in lieu of postoperative clinic visit for ambulatory 
surgery: results of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_29426]. JAMA Surg . 2013;148(9):823- 7. doi: 
10.1001/jamasurg.2013.2672. PMID: 23842982.  
8. Halder GE, White AB, Brown HW, Caldwell L, Wright ML, Giles DL, Heisler CA, Bilagi D, Rogers RG. A telehealth intervention to increase patient preparedness for surgery: a randomized trial. Int Urogynecol J . 2022;33(1):85- 93. doi: 10.1007/s00192 -021-[ZIP_CODE] -w. 
9. Kenton K, Pham T, Mueller E, Brubaker L. Patient preparedness: an important predictor of surgical outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol . 2007;197(6):654.e1- 6. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajog.2007.08.059. PMID: 18060968.  
10. Sassani JC, Grosse PJ, Kunkle L, Baranski L, Ackenbom MF. Patient Preparedness for Pelvic Organ Prolapse Surgery: A Randomized Equivalence Trial of Preoperative Counseling.  Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg. 2021;27(12):719- 725. 
doi:10.1097/SPV.0000000000001049  
11. Khorfan R, Shallcross ML, Yu B, Sanchez N, Parilla S, Coughlin JM, Johnson JK, Bilimoria KY, Stulberg JJ. Preoperative patient education and patient preparedness are associated with less postoperative use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]. Surgery.  2020;167(5):852- 858. doi: 
10.1016/j.surg.2020.01.002.  
12. Brubaker L, Litman HJ, Rickey L, Dyer KY, Markland AD, Sirls L, Norton P, Casiano E, 
Paraiso MF, Ghetti C, Rahn DD, Kusek JW. Surgical preparation: are patients "ready" for 
stress urinary incontinence surgery? Int Urogynecol J . 2014;25(1):41- 6. doi: 
10.1007/s00192- 013-2184- x. 
13. Das D, Kenton K, Mueller M, et al. Patient Satisfaction With Telehealth Visits for New 
Patient Appointments for Pelvic Floor Disorders: A Randomized Trial of Telehealth 
Versus Standard In- Person Office Visits. Urogynecology  (Phila). 2023;29(2):273- 280. 
doi:10.1097/SPV.0000000000001280  