 Use of Omega-3 Fat Emulsion (Omegaven) in Infants With Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver Disease       
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
October 19, 2010
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  Use of Omega -3 Fat Emulsion (Omegaven™)  in Infants with 
Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver Diseas e 
William F. Walsh, M.D., Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_370088]’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_370089], TN 3

Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  Table of Contents:  
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
6.0 Study Procedures  
7.0 Risks of Investigational Agents/Devices (side effects)  
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to 
Participants or Others  
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
10.0 Statistical Considerations  
11.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
12.[ADDRESS_462986] Ret ention  
Appendices  
Appendix A   Study Procedure Calendar  
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  1.0 Background  
Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver Disease (PNALD)  
Parenteral nutrition (PN) provides intravenous nutritional supplementation for patients unable to absorb 
adequate enteral nutrients secondary to insufficient intestinal length or function. PN contains the 
macronutrient building blocks of the human diet in their most elemental forms (amino acids and dextrose) 
and is commonly administered with a fat emulsion to avoid essential fatty acid deficiency and to provide 
a calorically dense source of non -protein calories. In addition, PN contains the essential micron utrients 
(electrolytes, trace elements, and vitamins) to provide an optimal nutritional regimen. Before the 
development of PN in the late 1960’s, patients with insufficient gastrointestinal absorptive function 
commonly died of starvation and subsequent com plications of malnutrition(1, 2). Today, more than 
30,000 patients are permanently dependent on parenteral nutrition for survival. However, PN continues 
to be associated with hepatic injury that occurs at an unpredictable rate and includes both biochemical , 
i.e., elevated serum bilirubin, aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase, and histologic alterations such
as steatosis, steatohepatitis, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_16215], cholestasis, fibrosis, and cirrhosis (3, 4). These abnormalities,
which worsen with the duration  of PN a dministration, is  more prevalent in the pediatric population.
Additional risk factors for this condition include prematurity, low birth weight, long -term use of PN, the
lack of concomitant enteral intake, sepsis, and multiple operative procedures (5).
Although the pathological features of  PNALD have been well described, the etiology, prevention, and 
treatment of this complication are not well understood. Multiple hypotheses exist to explain the 
pathogenesis of PNALD including altered gut hormonal profil es (6), the propensity for bacterial 
translocation in the absence of enteral intake (7, 8), intestinal stasis resulting in the reduced clearance of 
hepatotoxic bile acids (8), and direct deficiencies or toxic components of the PN solution itself resulting in 
excessive glucose calorie uptake, excessive lipid infusion, or nutritional deficiencies such as essential 
fatty acid deficiency (9 -11). None of these theories has been confirmed consistently. The etiology of 
PNALD is currently considered multifactorial.  Available treatment options for this disease process are 
limited and have achieved moderate success at best. Care of the PN -dependent patient is focused on 
gradually increasing enteral caloric intake as the residual bowel adapts allowing  PN to be discont inued 
(12).  In fact, it has been shown both experimentally and clinically that partial enteral nutrition, when 
tolerated, helps to protect against the development of PNALD (13 -15). In severe cases of refractory 
hepatic failure, liver transplantation with  or without accompanying small bowel transplantation remains 
the only treatment option.  
Role of Intravenous Fat Emulsion on PN Associated Liver Disease  
Recent evidence demonstrates that lipi[INVESTIGATOR_370090]. Enteral lipi[INVESTIGATOR_370091] a 
micelle and packaged into chylomicrons which are released into the portal venous system for ultimate 
uptake and disposal in the liver. Once in the bloodstr eam, these particles rapi[INVESTIGATOR_370092] -density lipoproteins and can subsequently be metabolized by [CONTACT_4852]. The 
emulsified particles of commercially made and intravenously administered lipid emulsions, such as 
Intralip id®, mimic the size and structure of chylomicrons, but differ in their content. In contrast to 
chylomicrons, artificial lipid particles primarily contain essential fatty acids and omega -[ADDRESS_462987], it appears that they may be cleared as whole particles by [CONTACT_309622].(16) These factors may account for the increased incidence of steatohepatitis associated with the 
intravenous administration of Intralipid®.  
The mechanism of clearance of omega -3 fatty acid containing lipid emulsions is unknown, but appears to 
be largely independent of the pathways identified above (17). Furthermore, omega -[ADDRESS_462988] been shown to decrease de novo lipogenesis (18),  prevent or attenuate PN -induced 
hepatosteatosis in rats (19) and guinea pi[INVESTIGATOR_370093] -fat diet -induced 
hepatosteatosis in rats (20). In addition, omega -[ADDRESS_462989] of inflammatio n (18, 21). They can displace arachidonic acid from tissue fatty acid pools, 
thereby [CONTACT_309623] -synthesizing enzymes and inflammation (21).  
  
Table 1 summarizes the composition of Intralipid® and Omegaven ™ fat emulsions.  
 
Table 1 
Comparison of Parenteral Fat Emulsions (10 grams fat/100 mL)  
OIL Intralipid® Liposyn® II Omegaven ™ 
Soybean  10 5  
Safflower   5  
Fish   10 
% FATS     
Linoleic  50 65 0.1-0.7 
α-linolenic  9 4 <0.2 
E.P.A.    1.3-2.8 
D.H.A.    1.4-3.1 
Arachidonic acid    0.1 -0.4 
Glycerol  2.3 2.5 2.5 
Egg Phospholipid  1.2 1.2 1.2 
Available in the   United 
States  Yes Yes No 
 
                                                                                                                                                  
Rationale for Omegaven ™ Treatment  
 
Unlike conventional intravenous fat emulsions, Omegaven ™ is comprised solely of fish oils containing 
primarily omega -[ADDRESS_462990] shown that IV fat emulsions such as fish oil that are 
high in eicosapentaenic and docosahexaenoic acid reduce impairment of bile flow as seen in cholestasis 
caused by [CONTACT_370113](19,20). We hypothesize that by [CONTACT_309621] ™ in 
place of conventional phytosterol/soybean fat emulsions, that the cholestasis may be reversed and  
patients will be able to be maintained on adequate PN until they are able to ingest adequate n utrition 
enterally.  
 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
In the [LOCATION_002], patients dependent upon parenteral nutrition (PN) receive parenteral fat emulsions 
composed of soybean oils. Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_370094]. They have been implicated in predisposing patients to PN associated 
liver disease. Phytosterols such as those contained in soybean oils are thought to have a deleterious 
effect on biliary secretion.  Accumula tion of lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309587].  
 
Children requiring prolonged courses of  PN are at risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_370095]. We 
hypothesize that although omega -6 fatty acid emulsions prevent fatty acid  deficiency, they are not 
cleared in a manner similar to  enteral chylomicrons and therefore accumulate in the liver and resulting in 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  steatotic liver injury. We  further hypothesize that a fat emulsion comprised of omega -3 fatty acids (i.e., 
fish oil) such  as Omegaven™ would be beneficial in the management of steatotic liver injuiry by [CONTACT_370114], the reduction of arachidonic acid -derived inflammatory mediators, 
prevention of essential fatty acid deficiency through the presence of  small amounts of arachidonic acid, 
and improved clearance of lipi[INVESTIGATOR_309589]. Animal studies have shown that IV fat emulsions (IFE)  
such as fish oil that are high in eicosapentaenic and docashexaaenoic acid reduce impairment of bile 
flow which is s een in cholestasis caused by [CONTACT_309620].  Furthermore, we hypothesize 
that that intravenous omega three fatty acids will be well tolerated and might reduce the inflammatory 
effect in the liver of prolonged PN exposure and could potentially reverse any hepatic dysfunction due to 
PN/IFE use.  By [CONTACT_309621]™ in place of conventional phytosterol/soybean fat emulsions 
we may reverse or prevent the progression of PN associated cholestasis and thus allow the patient to be 
maintained on adequate PN until they are able to ingest adequate nutrition enterally.  
 
Assessment of the effect of treatment will be based on a non -randomized, open -labeled, prospective 
study of intravenously administered Omegaven™ fat emulsion to determine safety and preliminary 
efficacy in the treatment of PN associated liver injury.  
 
Specific Aims /Objectives  
 
1. To determine the safety profile of an intravenous omega -3 fat emulsion (Omegaven™)  
 
Hypothesis for Aim 1 : 
1.1 – PN containing Omegaven ™ will be safe for patients with respect to the risk of unexpected bleeding, 
coagulopathies, and other adverse events.  
1.2 – PN containing Omegaven ™ will promote more short -term growth and development than 
conventional fat emulsions.  
1.3-Incidence of sepsis will be similar to historical incidence of sepsis on TPN and IL ™ 
  
2. To  determine if  established PN associated liver disease can be reversed or its progression halted by 
[CONTACT_2329] a parenteral fat emulsion prepared from fish oil as me asured by [CONTACT_370115].  
 
Hypothesis for Aim 2:  
2.1 – Our primary hypothesis is that, after reaching bilirubin levels > 2 .5 mg/dL, patients receiving 
Omegaven ™ will reach a bilirubin  level ≤ 2 mg/dL faster than patients receiving conventional fat 
emulsions. Additionally, patients receiving Omegaven ™ will experience a decrease in their levels of 
bilirubin and other hepatic enzymes over time . 
2.2 – Patients with surgical gastrointestina l disease and cholestasis will improve  clinical hepatic status . 
2.3 – Since patients receiving Omegaven ™ will have improved immune function, they will have a lower 
infection rate then patients receiving conventional fat emulsions.  
2.4 – Due to a better general hepatic condition, patients receiving Omegaven ™ will also experience 
lower occurrence of liver tran splant, death from hepatic associated causes, and blood transfusions.  
 
3.0 Animal Studies and Previous Human Studies  
 
Animal Studies  
 
In initial studies  at Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7724], they  hypothesized that the development of PNALD may 
be dependent on both the  route and quantity of fat administration and that omega -[ADDRESS_462991] the development of 
steatohepatitis in PN -dependent animals. This murine model of enteral PN -induced  steatohepatitis is 
largely due to a high carbohydrate load and essential fatty acid deficiency. Although this model is not 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  replicative of the clinical setting, it is a model that maximizes liver steatosis. In this model, mice are 
treated with oral PN for 19 days before being sacrificed. These animals develop severe fatty liver changes 
demonstrated by [CONTACT_370116] (H&E, PAS, and oil red O staining), and also have 
biochemical changes consistent with liver injury (elevated alkaline phosphata se and serum 
transaminases). Experimental groups were supplemented with Intralipid® by [CONTACT_370117], intravenously, and subcutaneously. Other groups were also supplemented 
with omega -3 fatty acids (Omegaven™) by [CONTACT_105332] e routes of a dministration.  In this study they  found a 
consistent pattern of protection against PN -associated steatohepatitis by [CONTACT_309628]® 
(22). In mice that received the highest dose of enteral Intralipid®, there was a marked decr ease in the 
extent of overall liver injury as measured by [CONTACT_309629], histologic analysis, liver fat content, and 
serum liver enzyme levels. In all areas of this investigation, mice treated with enteral lipid most closely 
resembled the control mice t hat did not receive PN as part of the experimental protocol. These results 
were in complete contrast to the extensive fatty infiltration and evidence of hepatic injury found in mice 
that received PN without lipid supplementation as well as in mice that rec eived PN with intravenous 
Intralipid®. Mice receiving intravenous Intralipid® had the most severe liver changes.  Both groups of 
animals developed marked hepatic steatosis with macrovesicular fatty infiltration and significant 
elevations in spectroscopic l iver fat content and serum transaminase levels. In addition, the effect of 
enteral Intralipid® supplementation appeared to be dose -dependent; mice receiving one -third the dose of 
enteral Intralipid® showed improved liver histology but still demonstrated a moderate degree of liver 
injury by [CONTACT_370118]. The nutritional model employed in this study 
provided all experimental mice with enteral PN solution ad libitum . In this way, mice were not force -fed 
PN and self -regulated thei r PN intake by [CONTACT_309631]. Importantly, all mice gained 
weight throughout the 19 -day protocol, and there were no differences in weight gain parameters between 
the groups. The PN solution was a typi[INVESTIGATOR_370096] 
20% dextrose and 2% amino acids. Each milliliter of this formula provides 0.2 g (0.68 kilocalories) of 
dextrose and 0.02 g (0.08 kilocalories) amino acid. As the daily intake per animal of PN averaged 15 ml, 
mice were ingesting ap proximately 11.4 kilocalories/day and 456 kilocalories/kg/day. This caloric load is 
similar to the established dietary energy needs of the mouse (23). The parenteral fat source used in this 
study was Intralipid® 20% (Baxter, Deerfield, Illinois), which is a soybean oil -based emulsion. Each 
milliliter of this emulsion cont ains 0.2 g (2.0 kcal) of fat. They  recognize d that the model may not 
completely match the clinical, human, setting of intravenou s PN -administration; however, their  goal was 
to produce a fat ty liver with biochemical evidence of injury.  
  
In a second set of experiments, the same murine model was used to determine whether Omegaven™ 
(Fresenius - Kabi, Bad Homburg, [LOCATION_013]), a commercial fish oil fat emulsion available in Europe, 
would prevent fa tty liver changes by [CONTACT_370119], and to determine the 
serum fatty acid profile of these animals. Animals receiving Omegaven™ via the oral and intravenous 
routes had completely normal livers on histology and MRI spectrosc opy revealed normal liver fat content. 
Liver functions tests in orally treated animals were also within the norm, while there were minimal 
elevations in intravenously treated groups. There was no fatty acid deficiency in these groups as 
determined by [CONTACT_309632] (5,8,11 -Eicosatrienoic acid) levels in the serum fatty acid analysis. Mead acid is 
the only polyunsaturated fatty acid of note produced de novo  by [CONTACT_370120]. Furthermore,  arach idonic  acid levels were low in 
Omegaven™ treated animals consistent with previous reports. In a third set of experiments, mice were 
made severely fatty acid deficient. These mice were treated for 10 days with Omegaven™ and had 
complete reversal of their fa tty acid deficiency.  
 
Similarly, other investigators studied livers in a newborn pig model and  showed that intravenous 
administration of fish oil, which consists primarily of omega -3 fatty acids, reduced parenteral nutrition -
induced cholestasis.(22) Howev er, the study was only [ADDRESS_462992] regime of nutritional support by [CONTACT_370121].  It has 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  been thought that reduction of an essential fatty acid, such as omega -6, during long -term therapy would 
result in fatty acid deficiency and deterioration of the health of the patient. Our experience to date, as 
discussed below, demonstrates that the use of Omegaven™ as monotherapy does not result in the 
development of essential fatty acid deficiency and it can actually be used to as monotherapy to treat this 
deficiency state.   
Preliminary Safety and Efficacy Data for Use of Omegaven™ in Other Diseases  
Omegaven™ has been used for over [ADDRESS_462993] to conventional fat emulsions.  According to 
current data, an increase in the proportion of omega -3 fatty acids is thought to optimize nutrition in 
general, but in particular benefit patients whose underlying disease might benefit from an increase in 
omega -3 fatty acids.  An adequate intake of omega -3 fatty acids results in anti -inflammatory an d 
immunomodulatory effects that are protective in nature from inflammatory tissue damage, capi[INVESTIGATOR_370097], and improved immunological resistance. It may also reduce the risk of thrombosis and 
increase microvascular perfusion due to its anti -aggregatory and vasodilatory effects.  
In Europe and Asia, the use of parenteral omega -3 fatty acids has been used in the following adult patient 
populations (24 -28): 
•post traumatic and post surgical patients
•patients experiencing early stages of sepsis/SIRS
•patients at risk of hyperinflammatory processes
•patients with inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)
•patients with inflammatory skin diseases (psoriasis, atopic eczema)
The dosing used in these patients was 0.1 g (1ml) to a maxim um of 0.2 (2ml) /kg body weight. The 
infusion rate used did not exceed 0.5ml/kg/body weight/hour.  Since it was intended to be infused in 
combination with conventional fat emulsions, the total fat intake was limited to 10 -20% as fish oil.  The 
duration of administration did not exceed 4 weeks.  
Preliminary Safety and Efficacy Data for Use of Omegaven™ in Infants  
Pediatric experience with Omegaven™ is limited to 2 unpublishe d clinical trials .  These trials were 
performed in [LOCATION_013] and Taiwan (29). The German study was a controlled, randomized, open parallel -
group clinical study to investigate whether or not omega -3 fatty acids could be incorporated into the 
plasma phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_370098] b irth weight preterm infants.  In this 7 -day safety trial, Omegaven™ 
use was evaluated on the basis of clinical, laboratory, and antioxidant parameters and lipid metabolism. 
Treatment was started on day 3 -5 of life and continued for a total of 7 days. Patie nts received 
Omegaven™ plus conventional soybean fat emulsion or soybean emulsion alone.  The maximum dose of 
Omegaven™ in the study was 0.2 gm/kg/day.  The study concluded that the Omegaven™ was well 
tolerated in this group of preterm infants in respect t o both hematological and biochemical parameters. 
The incidence of reported adverse events between both study groups was similar. The eicosapentaenoic 
acid (EPA) content of plasma phospholipi[INVESTIGATOR_370099]™ arm, with the 
proporti on of EPA to the total fatty acids reaching almost three times the baseline value. The sum of 
omega -3 fatty acids showed a significantly greater increase in the Omegaven™ group compared to the 
conventional treatment arm.  
The Taiwanese study was a single c enter, controlled, open -labeled study conducted to investigate the 
safety of parenteral administration of Omegaven™ in preterm infants. The group of 20 infants were 
randomized to one of two treatment groups; one consisting of Omegaven™/conventional lipi[INVESTIGATOR_370100].  The average dose of Omegaven™ in the treatment group of 
this 14 -day study was 0.13 + 0.02 g/kg/day.  There were no significant differences between the two 
groups with regard to body weight and length.  Similarly, there was no significant difference in the 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  hematological or biochemical parameters.  There were no adverse events that were attributable to 
Omegaven use. It was concluded that Omegaven™ was well tolerated in these preterm infants.  
 
 
Results of Prior Patient at Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], [LOCATION_011]  
 
The only prior use of  Omegaven™ for monotherapy, both in the [LOCATION_002] as well as well as abroad,  
is limited to its use in an adolescent male in 2 002 at Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7724],  who required a soy free  
form of parenteral fat emulsion for the treatment of essential fatty acid deficiency. In that instance, 
therapy was started at 0.2gm/kg/day and advanced to 0.67 gm/kg/day. He remained on Omegaven™ a 
total of 57 days. His essential fatty acid deficiency co rrected and he did not experience any adverse events 
during his course of therapy that could be attributed to the use of Omegaven™(30) . 
 
Experience in PN Liver Injury  
 
A single patient with bridging fibrosis due to prolonged parenteral nutrition use has be en treated by 
[CONTACT_370122]'s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], [LOCATION_011]  (FDA IND  # ). By [CONTACT_654] [ADDRESS_462994] proliferation, mild fibrosis, and mild periportal iron deposits. On a subsequent 
biopsy, he progressed to bridging fibrosis.  Omegaven™ was started at a d ose of 0.2 g/kg/day IV and 
advanced by 0.2 g/kg/day increments to 1 g/kg/day ove r a 14 -day period. In order to ensure adequate 
caloric intake, additional non -protein calories were provided as parenteral carbohydrates (as dextrose).  
No other parenteral for m of fat emulsion was administered during Omegaven™ therapy.  His enteral 
feeds were advanced while on the Omegaven™. Once the goal dose of Omegaven™ was reached, the 
direct bilirubin declined and normalized.  His AST also normalized and he was removed fro m the liver -
small bowel transplant list. Weekly c -reactive protein (CRP) levels were obtained to monitor systemic 
inflammation. CRP levels decreased from a high of 1.85 to 0.17 mg/dL (Normal <0.5). He continues to 
receive Omegaven ™ at a dose 1g/kg/day and has had no evidence of bleeding or clinical evidence of 
essential fatty acid deficiency. His direct bilirubin continues to be within the normal range and he has no 
evidence of jaundice. He is still receiving approximately 50 -% of his total caloric needs vi a the parenteral 
route. He continues to grow and is achieving his developmental milestones appropriately. This child has 
been on Omegaven ™ for [ADDRESS_462995] been treated with Omegaven ™.  As of August 9, 2007,  no 
patient receiving Omegaven ™ has died of PN associated liver disease.  
 
 
4.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
 
1. Patients  aged 0 to 2 years  will be PN dependent (unable to meet nutritional needs soley by [CONTACT_309638]) and are expe cted to require PN for at least another [ADDRESS_462996] parenteral nutrition associated liver 
disease (PNALD) as defined as a direct bilirubin of >2.5 mg/dl or more. Other causes of liver disease  
should be excluded. A liver biopsy is not necessary for treatment.  
3. Signed patient informed consent.  

Version 1.[ADDRESS_462997] therapi[INVESTIGATOR_370101]/her liver disease
including surgical treatment, cyclic PN, avoiding overfeeding, reduction/removal of copper and
manganese from PN, advancement of enteral feeding, and the use of  ursodiol (i..e., Actigall®).
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Other causes of chronic liver disease (Hepatitis C, Cystic fibrosis, biliary atresia,  and alpha 1 anti -
trypsin deficiency,)
2. Enrollment in any other clinical trial involving an investigational agent (unless approved by [CONTACT_370123])
3.. The  parent or guardian or child unwilling to provide consent or assent
4. Patients with severe hemorrhagic disorders
5. Patients with severe liver disease not caused by [CONTACT_370124]
6. Patients with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
5.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
NICU attendings will screen their patients for infants who need prolonged parenteral nutrition (TPN) and 
have Parenteral Nutrition Associated Liver Disease.  The attending physician will ask the family if they 
would lik e more information about the study.   D r. Walsh  will be notified of these infants, and assess if 
they are s uitable candidates.  [CONTACT_370129]  or the NICU research nurses will explain the study to the infant’s 
parents / legal guardians and obtain informed conse nt in the NICU at Vanderbilt Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
Assessment of the effect of treatment will be based on a non -randomized, open -labeled, prospective 
study of intravenously administered Omegaven™ fat emulsion to determine safety and preliminary 
efficacy in  the treatment of PN associated liver injury.  
6.0 Study Procedures  
Omega -3 Fat Emulsion (Omegaven ™) 
Bottles containing 50mL or 100 mL of 10% Omegaven ™ will be purchased from International Pharmacy 
of Hamburg, [LOCATION_013] or directly from the manufacturer. Approval is pending from the FDA to allow for 
billing of Omegaven.   Omegaven™ is manufactured by [CONTACT_309642], Bad Homburg v.d.h, 
[LOCATION_013]. Omegaven ™ is formulated as an emulsion from fish oils.  See attached Product Information 
Sheet.   
While inpatient, the emulsion for each patient will be provided in its original container for volumes more 
than 96 ml/day.   Doses less than 96 ml/day will be repacked into syringes to allow for administration via 
syringe pump.  If patients are to be discharged home on Omegaven™, all doses will be administered 
from the original manufacturer’s container.  
All study materials wi ll be stored securely until the time of administration. The bottles will be stored at 
room temperature below 30° C (do not freeze). Damaged or suspect drug will be returned unused to 
Fresenius - Kabi. Containers should be shaken before use.  
All supplies fo r the study will be accompanied by [CONTACT_194472][INVESTIGATOR_370102]. Information recorded on these accountability and shippi[INVESTIGATOR_370103], batch numbers, quantities received or disp ensed, to whom dispensed, returned 
drug and drug lost or damaged. At the end of the study, all used and unused Omegaven™ will be 
accounted for.  If expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697], the remaining drug supplies will be destroyed.  
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  Details of Omegaven™ Administration  
After baseline  labs are obtained (Table 2 and 3), therapy with Omegaven™ will be initiated at the goal 
dose of 1 gram /kg/day and is infused over 12 -24 hours.  Omegaven™ will be infused intravenously 
through either a central or peripheral catheter alone or in conjunctio n with parenteral nutrition.   If 
additional fat calories are needed, they will be provided via the enteral route.. The same standards of 
care provided to all patients receiving parenteral nutrition solution will be followed. Routine nutritional 
monitoring  is described in Table 3.  
Table 2: Suggested Schedule Safety Monitoring for Omegaven™ Therapy 
(To be done baseline pre -Omegaven™ therapy and weekly until direct bilirubin <0.4 mg/dL)  
Table 3: Suggested Monitoring Schedule for Omegaven™ Therapy  
(Amended  December 26, 2006)  
Parameter  Baseline  
(pre-
Omegav
en) Dail
y Q 
week
* Periodicall
y*** 
Weight  X X 
Fluid balance  X X 
Vital Signs  X X 
Catheter site/function  X X 
Laboratory test:  
Sodium  X X 
Potassium  X X 
Chloride  X X 
Glucose  X X 
BUN  X X 
Creatinine  X X 
Triglycerides  X X 
Calcium  X X 
Magnesium  X X 
Phosphorus  X X 
Prealbumin  X X 
C reactive protein  X X 
Albumin  X X 
Total protein  X X 
SGPT  X X 
Alkaline phosphatase  X X 
Bilirubin (total and 
direct)  X X Parameter  Baseline  Biweekly  Monthly  
Essential Fatty Acid 
Profile  X X 
PT X X 
PTT X X 
INR X X 
Version 1.[ADDRESS_462998] X  X  
Copper     X 
Iron    X 
Vitamins A,D,E     X 
Essential Fatty Acid 
Profile  X  X  
Free cholesterol  X  X  
Free fatty acids  X  X  
Lipid Panel  X  X  
Hemoglobin  X  X  
Hematocrit  X  X  
RBC  X  X  
WBC  X  X  
Platelets  X  X  
PT X  X  
PTT X  X  
INR X  X  
Fibrinogen      
Selenium     X 
Zinc    X 
Carnitine     X 
Aluminum     X 
Retinol binding 
protein       
(check when getting 
Vit A)     X 
* More often as necessitated by [CONTACT_309667]; may be reduced in patients who are stable 
and whose biochemical markers have improved. Refer to protocol for additional information  
 
 
In the event that a patient is unable to achieve adequate calories parenterally and is unable to tolerate 
enteral feeds, it may be necessary to evaluate whether or not the patient should continue the study with 
Omegaven™ as monoth erapy or resume therapy with conventional fat emulsions so that additional 
parenteral fat calories can be given. The clinical team, in conjunction with the patient's primary physician, 
will determine if the patient should be removed from the protocol. The DSMB will also be notified.   
 
Prior to the administration of each Omegaven™ dose, two nurses will check the dose dispensed against 
the physician’s orders and verify that the infusion pump settings (hourly rate, volume to be infused) are 
correct before the infusion is started.  
 
As previously mentioned, Omegaven™ may be infused in the same manner as conventional fat 
emulsions through either a central or peripheral line. The emulsion is isotonic. It is compatible with 
parenteral nutrition solutions and may be co -infused via y -site. Omegaven™ may be infused through a 
1.2micron inline filter.  
 
 
Dose Modification  
 
Lipid Intolerance  
 
If lipid intolerance develops, defined as serum triglyceride levels > 200 mg/dL, the following will be 
considered prior to  reducing the dose:  
 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  a) If the level was obtained while the patient was receiving a continuous 24 - hour infusion of
Omegaven™, the total dose should be infused over 20 hours, and a repeat serum triglyceride level
obtained prior to resuming the infusion 4 h ours later.
b) Other sources of lipid intolerance should be considered and addressed (drugs, renal disease)
If the triglycerides continue to remain high despi[INVESTIGATOR_368387], a dosage reduction 
of 25% of the current dose will be consi dered.  
Duration of Therapy  
Patients will remain on Omegaven™ until weaned from PN. Patients may continue monotherapy with 
Omegaven™  as an additional source of calories after the dextrose/protein portion of PN is discontinued  
In the event that a patient who has been listed for a liver or liver/intestinal transplant has an organ 
become available, the participation in this protocol will not preclude them from receiving the transplant.  
Disruption of Therapy  
In event that Omegaven ™ cannot be administered (i.e. loss of central venous catheter access, fluid 
restrictions, need to administer an incompatible medication/blood product), the infusion of Omegaven ™ 
may be interrupted and resumed when the conflicting situation is resolved. Som e potential interventions 
that can be used include:  
Situation  Possible Solution  
Loss of central venous access  Administer via peripheral route  
Fluid restriction  Consult with pharmacy to concentrate PN, 
medications to allow for administration  
Limited access, need to administer 
incompatible medications  Stop Omegaven ™ infusion, flush catheter 
with either NS or dextrose, administer 
incompatible medication, flush catheter, 
resume infusion; may be necessary to 
infuse Omegaven ™ over g reater than 12 
hours (use multiple syringes so as to keep 
maximum hang time of Omegaven ™ 
source container less than 12 hours)  
Discontinuation of Therapy  
Patients will continue to be followed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_370104] -patient or if discharged they will be followed in the Out-
Patient GI Clinic upon discontinuation of therapy with Omegaven™ for a minimum of 2 months after the 
treatment is stopped.  
Data Collection  
All clinical and laboratory research data will be abstracted from source documents (medical records) and 
recorded and maintained on study specific case report forms (CRF).  These CRFs will be stored within 
individual subject binders in accordance with Good Clinical Practice Standards and FDA requi rements. 
Study materials will be kept in the Principal Investigator’s locked office and access will be restricted to 
authorized study staff only.  Subject confidentiality will be maintained by [CONTACT_370125] -specific data 
using a unique confidential stu dy identifier.  
7.0 Risks  
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  Potential Risk of Omegaven™ Treatment  
 
Omegaven has been studied in animal pre -clinical models as well as Phase  I, II, III, and post marketing 
human trials in both Europe and Asia. Prolonged bleeding time and an inhibited platelet aggregation can 
occur. It should not be administered to patients known to be allergic to fish or egg protein.  
 
Contraindications to Ome gaven™ include the following:  
 
Impaired lipid metabolism   
Severe hemorrhagic disorders  
Unstable diabetes mellitus  
Collapse and shock  
Stroke/  Embolism  
Recent cardiac infarction   
Undefined coma status  
 
 
Side effects:  
 
The infusion of Omegaven™ can lead to a  prolonged bleeding time and an inhibited platelet aggregation. 
In rare cases, patients may experience a fishy taste.  
 
The administration of Omegaven™ should be stopped or reduced if there is a marked increased in blood 
glucose levels during the Omegaven™ infusion. Undesirable effects that are seen during the infusion of 
Omegaven™ that may also occur with conventional fat emulsions (i.e., Intralipid®) include:  
 
Slight rise in body temperature   
Heat sensation and/or cold sensation  
Chills  
Flushing or cyanosis  
Lack of appetite, nausea, vomiting   
Dyspnea  
Headache, pain in the chest, bone pain  
Priapi[INVESTIGATOR_309614]/decrease blood pressure  
Anaphylactic reactions/erythema  
 
A recent review of the literature suggests a slight change in risk status. There was a single case report of 
an infant developi[INVESTIGATOR_370105] : J Pediatr.  2010 Feb;156(2 ):[ADDRESS_462999] erythrocyte fragility and ultimately cause shape alterations, which make the red blood 
cells more susceptible to trappi[INVESTIGATOR_370106]. None of the 13 infants in our study has 
developed any anemia and we will now monitor for that reported complication.  
 
 
Other expected adverse events that are common to all patients with short bowel syndrome, regardless of 
the type of fat emu lsion they receive, include blood stream infections and re -admittance to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. 
Causes for re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_370107], bloodstream infections, electrolyte abnormalities, 
bowel obstruction, and central venous catheter malfunction.  
 
Overdose:  
 
In the event of an overdose of Omegaven,™ there is a risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_370108] >200 mg/dL acutely as a result of too rapid a rate of infusion, or 
chronically at high infusion rates in associa ted with a change in the patient’s clinical condition (e.g., renal 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  dysfunction, sepsis).  In such cases, the infusion should be stopped or, if necessary, continued at a 
reduced dose. Metabolic acidosis has occurred in patients receiving Omegaven™ at excess ive doses 
without simultaneous administration of dextrose.  
 
Potential Benefit of Omegaven™ Treatment  
 
Omegaven™ may be effective in stabilizing or reversing hepatic injury associated with the use of 
parenteral nutrition. It may allow the patient to continue to receive the majority of his/her caloric intake 
from parenteral nutrition while advancing on enteral nutrition or awaiting liver or liver/intestinal transplant  
 
 
Potential Risks of No Treatment  
 
Since Omegaven™ will only be offered to those pati ents for whom no standard therapy is likely to safe 
and effective, the risks of not being treated are those allowing for the natural history of their disease and 
associated clinical manifestations to progress. These include fulminate liver failure and deat h. 
 
Summary – Overall Risk Assessment  
 
Patients will be at some risk inherent in taking a pharmaceutical agent that has not been fully evaluated 
for long duration treatment. However, the availability of safety data demonstrates no life -threatening risks 
or toxicities to vital organs or physiologic functions. Prolonged bleeding times and inhibition of platelet 
aggregation are a potential risk, especially to those patients with an underlying coagulopathy or those 
being treated with an anticoagulant. The poten tial benefits of Omegaven™ in this patient population are 
mainly based on the experimental evidence and a single case of dramatic success. However, the study 
will only be available to those for whom no standard therapy is available or appropriate, or has a lready 
failed. The risks and potential benefits will require careful individual assessment by [CONTACT_370126].  The heterogeneity of clinical manifestations will lead to non -uniform risk -benefit ratios 
across the eligible patient popula tion. 
 
Potential Benefits  
 
The potential benefits of this study apply directly to the patient in question and to possible improvement 
in the treatment of future patients. If successful, the  experimental treatment will provide a safe and 
effective means of avoiding liver failure req uiring transplant or that may  lead to death.  Thus, the 
potenital complications of surgery or fulminant hepatic failure may be avoided.  
 
PN associated liver disease is a life threatening condition . Available therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (liver/small bowel 
transplant, inte stinal lengthening, ursodiol, combination enteral/parenteral feedings) are often 
inadequate.  Phytosterol containing intravenous fat emulsions containing large quantities of omega [ADDRESS_463000] been associated with PN associated liver disease. One pat ient, with bridging fibrosis 
secondary to prolonged PN/lipid therapy, treated with Omegaven ™ has had a sustained dramatic 
response with resolution of jaundice and direct bilirubin levels < 2. The safety profile of Omegaven ™ has 
been demonstrated to be acce ptable for the diseases treated and should be considered as an option for 
patients requiring a form of intravenous fat emulsion.  
 
 
8.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants 
or Others  
 
Adverse events (AEs) will be assessed and reported from the time of the first Omegaven™ infusion until 
exit from the study. In particular, the patient will be observed during and shortly after Omegaven™ 
administration for the occurrence of anaphylactic or allergic reactions.  Other expected adverse events 
include death, blood stream infection; h emodynamic instability; re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_370109], dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, catheter malfunctions, bowel obstructions , and 
Version 1.[ADDRESS_463001] infection.  Unexpected adverse events will also be assessed and reported in compliance 
with the VUMC IRB requirements. Patients experiencing any adverse events that are moderate or severe 
in nature and that may be related to Omegaven ™ will have their treatment temporarily halted until the 
adverse event has resolved. Dose modifications will occur as described above.If a dose reduction is 
made  for adverse events later considered to be unrelated to Omegaven ™, the Omegaven ™ dose will 
be inc reased back to the dose prescribed prior to the dose reduction..  Patients with anaphylactic or 
allergic reactions will not continue Omegaven ™ treatment.  
 
Any serious or unsuspected adverse events will be reported to theVUMC IRB and the FDA  within 72 
hours of the occurance being known, or within 24 hours if the event is fatal or life threatening. This will be 
done in person, by [CONTACT_756], or email,  and by [CONTACT_309648]/unexpected event 
reporting.  
 
Adverse events are detected by [CONTACT_183581] H Neonatology medical and nursing staff during provision of standard 
care services including the routine monitoring of vital signs and daily physical exam data.   Adverse 
events identified by [CONTACT_370127] [INVESTIGATOR_370110], and subsequently to the appropriate board or committee.  
 
The PI, [CONTACT_370129], will be responsible for assuring that adverse event reporting  requirements are actually 
met. Any patients who have agreed to participate in the trial, but who have not yet undergone 
intervention, will be informed of adverse events. A revised consent document will be submitted to the IRB 
with the adverse event form for review and approval. All adverse events will be classified by [CONTACT_250882] r as definitely, probably, possibly, or unrelated to administration of study drug  
 
 
 
9.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
Patients will be withdrawn from the study for any of the following:  
 
a) Toxicity considered unacceptable by [CONTACT_100615]  
b) Patient/guardian requests to discontinue treatment and/or observation for any reason.  
c)   A suitable organ has been located and the patient is able to undergo a liver or liver/intestinal 
transplant.  
d) Decision by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_370111]’s best medical interest.  
 
In the event that a patient is withdrawn from the protocol, study staff will document the date of 
withdrawal, the reason for withdrawal, and the results of all measurements of interest made up to date of 
withdrawal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.0  Statistical Considerations  
 
Analysis of Safety and Tolerability of Omegaven™  
 
All primary safety and tolerability analyses will be based on descriptive statistics. In secondary analyses, 
we will also assess the statistical significance of differences. Some safety and tolerability outcomes will 
be measured only in the Omegaven™ group. For those, we will compare results before starting PN with 
Omegaven™ (while receiving PN with soybean oil fat emulsions) with after  starting PN with 
Omegaven™. The period receiving Omegaven ™ will start to be counted 30 days after beginning PN with 
Omegaven™ for the main analysis.  
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  Primary outcomes measured in the Omegaven™ group will include  routine measurement of the direct 
bilirubin levels and whether the   INR was ever > 2.   
Primary outcomes measured in the Omegaven ™ and soybean based fat emulsion groups will include 
whether triglycerides were ever > 400mg/dL, whether albumin was ever > 3,  any occurrence of 
unexpected bleeding and number of times it occurred, occurrence of any anaphylatic reaction, rate of 
blood stream infections as shown by [CONTACT_239975], rate of line infections and gram positive 
central venous catheter infection s..  
 
 
Analysis of Efficacy of Omegaven™  
 
The primary outcome to gain preliminary evidence of efficacy will be based on the time from baseline to 
normalization of bilirubin level, i.e, first time point among three consecutive in which bilirubin is < 2 
mg/d L. We do not anticipate that any subject will present a rebound on direct bilirubin after normalization. 
However, we will describe the cohort with respect to the frequency of rebounds in bilirubin levels.  
 
Crude comparisons of time to normalize direct bil irubin levels using  Omegaven™ Results of these 
analysis will be compared with results of analysis excluding subjects who die or are transplanted. Time to 
reach a total bilirubin of 1.[ADDRESS_463002] bilirubin.   
 
We will also describe individual profiles over time (i.e., 2 months before before baseline or birth until end 
of follow -up period) for all subjects using graphical methods. Trends in liver functio n markers over time 
will be explored using generalized linear models in which correlations of observations within subjects will 
be accounted using a generalized equations or random effects approach. In these models we will 
hypothesize that for both groups biochemical levels increase for all tests with equal slope before 
treatement. After treatment, however, levels should be decreasing for patients in the Omegaven™ group. 
We will perform these analyses including only subjects who did not die or undergo trans plantation and 
including all subjects but assigning for subjects who died or underwent a transplant their worse possible 
outcome after they died or had the transplant. Using descriptive statistics, we will also explore the 
association between spi[INVESTIGATOR_370112].               
 
Assessment of efficacy will be also based on comparison of means (or medians) of the mean and 
maximum modified PELD scores of e ach subject across all follow -up weeks. Adjustments of these 
comparisons for potential confounders will be based on linear regression models. Mean rates of infection 
will be compared. Liver transplant, mortality, and red blood cell product transfusion even ts will be 
collected.  
 
 
Limitation of Study  
Biases in our efficacy estimates could also result from misclassification, since the marker o f reversal of 
cholestaisis, i.e., direct bilirubin does not accurately translate all components of liver function.  
 
11.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
Study data  will be collected on paper  Case Report Forms (CRF's) developed by [CONTACT_978]. The CRF can 
only be acc essed by  [CONTACT_370128].  Study participants are on ly identified in the CRF 
with a sequentially generated study number.  A paper Log with the identifiers of the study subjects will be 
kept in a locked research office and only available fo r view to the PI, Sub -Investigators, the safety 
monitor if requested and the FDA if requested.   
 
Infants  and children  enrolled will be assigned a study number that will identify the p atient on Case 
Report Forms.  Study numbers will be assigned sequentially with enrollment.  Only the investigators 
involve d with the study will have access to the log revealing which  patients were assigned which study 
Version 1.0  
October 19, 2010  number s.   No identifiable information (such as patient name, medic al record number) is included in the 
CRF.  
12.[ADDRESS_463003] Retention  
The original copy of the electronic CRF will remain on server for six years after the conclusion of the trial, 
and then destroyed.