 
[ADDRESS_129274] of Pregnancy  on Buprenorp hine Pharmacok inetics and 
Pharmacodyna mics  
Version: June [ADDRESS_129275] 02863601  
Obstetric -Fetal Pharmacology Research Centers (OPRC) Network  
The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 
(NICHD)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_115773] N. Caritis, MD  
Magee -Womens Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
[ADDRESS_129276] Room 2229  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
  
 
2 
 Revision History:  
Version/Protocol 
Date  Revision Description  
11 July 2016  Original version approved by [CONTACT_115808][INVESTIGATOR_115774]  
14 Sept 2016  - Added a pre-dose  blood draw  during PK visits to allow sufficient volume to analyze 
BUP and required chemi stries   
- Added a pre -dose saliva collection during a PK study visit, in addition to  the pre -
dose collection for pH   
- Removed temperature measurement from the screening procedures  
- Removed urinalysi s from the screening procedures  
9 Feb 2017  - Addition of the measurement of QID dosing of buprenorphine  
28 Apr 2017  - Additional changes to the consent form and measurement of dosing schedules for 
patients  
16 Nov 2017  - Revision to the timing of the postpartum PK visit to 4 -6 weeks after delivery  
01 Mar 2018  - Section D.5.vi: Clarify that m ultiple venipunctures may be necessary if blood 
cannot be obtained from the IV  
- A screening visit will occur within [ADDRESS_129277] complete PK visits 1 and 3 (postpartum) to remain enrolled in the 
study  
- Urine drug screens will be performed during the screening visits but not during the 
PK visits  
-  Patients testin g positive for non -prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]/opi[INVESTIGATOR_115775]. They may be rescreened if still within the gestational window, but 
subjects will be dismissed from the study after two positive drug screens.  
14 Mar 2018  - Added the  option of 5 times a day buprenorphine dosing . The duration  of the PK 
studies and  specific time intervals  that biological specimens are collected were 
added for subjects taking a five time daily dose.  
- Included content regarding the specific parts  of the study subjects may choose to 
participate in  Subjects are no longer required to participate in the PK studies and 
may choose from any of the five parts of the study described in the consent form.  
25 June 2018  - Included an additional sample collection at each PK visit and delivery (for PK 
study patients only) for peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) .   
- Revised sections pertaining to the collection of breast milk samples and heel stick 
blood samples.  Trough and peak level heel stick samples will be collected during 
the PP PK visit and during the optional ancil lary study. A total of 8 heel stick 
samples may be collected.  
- Revised the section pertaining to the collection of postpartum blood samples.  
- Addition of blood samples for BUP and DNA analysis at the screening visit for 
subjects not participating in the PK study.  
- Changed QID study visit to 7 hour duration  
- Inclusion Criteria: gestation age changed to < 19 6/7  
- Exclusion Criteria changed:  
PK Study – Delivery at another institution where outcome data cannot be obtained 
on mother and baby  
[CONTACT_115809]  – Delivery at another institution  where 
samples cannot be obtained on mother and baby  
- Added vital signs to Baseline Screening Visit for PK Study patients  
- Added sample processing instructions for PBMC analysis and DNA analysis  
 
[ADDRESS_129278] 2018  - Added clarification that questionnaires for alcohol, tobacco, illici t drug use, and 
depression will  be completed at all screening visits  
- Study Design, Part A: Clarified that subjects must complete the first PK visit and 
the postpartum PK visit in order to remain in the PK study.  
- Added a BUP and DNA sample to be collected at the Baseline Screening Visit for 
PK study patients to avoid having to rescreen if they switch to a different part of 
the study . If the DNA sample is unable to be obtained at the screenin g visit, it may 
be collected anytime during the study when blood is being drawn.  
- Section D.5.vi:  AST/SGOT, ALT/SGPT, creatinine  are collected at PK Visits 2  & [ADDRESS_129279] of Steering Committee members from the cover page  
- Subjects are only required to complete one PK study  
- Revised labs performed at Screening Visit  
- Created one PK Screening Visit performed prior  to all PK study visits  
- Added clarification that Labor and Delivery biological specimens will be collected 
when possible.  
24-January 2019  - Section D.5.iii: Subjects in any part of the study who are dismissed from their MAT 
clinic due to non -compliance will be dism issed from the study and replaced.  
- Section D.5.ix: A urine sample will be collected for a comprehensive drug screen 
within [ADDRESS_129280] milk and infant heel 
stick samples during a rountine  postpartum PRC visit, as long as the mother is still 
taking Subutex or Suboxone.  
  
 
4 
  
OPRC Protocol: Impact of Pregnancy  on Buprenorp hine Pharmacok inetics and 
Pharmacodyna mics (Version Date:  June 5 , 2019 ) 
 
A.  Significance 
Substance  abuse costs our nation over $[ADDRESS_129281] recent National 
Survey on Drug Use and Health (2012 ), 6% of pregnant women reported using illicit subs tances within 
the past 30 days1. Azadi et  al found  that 3% of women were urine-positive for illicit opi[INVESTIGATOR_115776]2. Currently, the standard of care for an op ioid-dependent  pregnant woman in most institutions 
is methadone, ho wever buprenorphine ( BUP) is also used  for this indication as it is FDA -approved for 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_115777] . There has been  increasing evidence  that 
BUP may have comparable efficacy to methadone, and  may have fewer  severe neona tal complications 
espec ially neona tal abs tinence  syndrome (NAS). In a recent  study, BUP-exposed,  as opposed  to 
methadone  exposed,  neona tes required significantly less morphine for treatment of NAS, had  
significantly shorter duration of treatment for NAS and had significantly shorter hosp ital stays3. 
Methadone,  a full µ agonist, has  significant adverse reactions such  as Q-T prolongation, po tential for 
life-threatening respi[INVESTIGATOR_115778]4-6. Conversion from illicit narcotic use to 
methadone  commonly requires hosp italization for 3-[ADDRESS_129282] 
based on  the patient’s symptomatology4,5. Upon hosp ital discha rge methadone  treated patients receive 
daily dosing of medication at outpatient clinics that monitor the patients for con tinued  illicit drug use. This 
requirement is extremely burdens ome on the patients since many do not have transp ortation and they 
must a rrive at the clinics in the morning. BUP, a partial µ agonist, has decreased severity of adverse 
reactions and therefore physicians are able to convert patients on an outpatient basis. The patient is 
given a 1-4 week supp ly of oral medication thus eliminating the burdens ome task of attending daily 
clinics for drug administration. These  benefits of BUP are changing the management of drug addiction 
dramatically and more institutions will turn from in-patient treatment with methadone  to the outpatient 
strategy with BUP. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists in its 2012 Committee 
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_115779] “supports the use of buprenorphine as first line treatment for 
pregnant opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] –depende nt women”7.  Similarly the American Society of Addiction Medicine support s 
the use of buprenorphine in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] - addicted pregnant women8 and the World  Health Organization 
(WHO) which encourage s availability of a buprenorphine option has described the worldwide availability  
of buprenorphine9. The dosing of BUP currently is based on  studies in men and non-pregnant women 
and limited animal data that related plasma conce ntrations of BUP to the degree of saturation of the µ 
receptor in the brain10-13. These studies suggest that a  dose of 16 mg daily saturates 95% of the µ 
recep tors. The plasma half-life in non-pregnant subjects is approximately 22 hours and therefore a dose  
of 16 mg/day appea rs to be sufficient to saturate the receptors. The standa rd recommended dos ing 
regimen for sublingual BUP is therefore 8 mg bid or 16  mg QD. Unlike for methadone,  where increased 
dosing is recommended  during pregnanc y, currently there are no guidelines on dosing BUP in pregnant 
women. The dosing regimen used in non-pregnant su bjects does  not appe ar to be adequate for pregnant 
women. Dosing is adjusted to the patient’s symptomatology using the Clinical Opi[INVESTIGATOR_83637] (COW) 
score, so me of which is subjective and some based  on objective physiological pa rameters. The failure 
rate for BUP is highest (33%) du ring the induc tion period i.e. the time from stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_115780] a stable dose  of BUP3. This suggests that the current treatment regimens for BUP are 
inadequate for many women. Indeed  at Magee-Womens Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], using COW scores to determine a 
dosing regimen has resulted in many women requiring doses  higher than the 16 mg daily dose  used  in 
non-pregnant subjects. The high failure rate of BUP during induction and the experience  at Magee are 
 
5 
 consistent and  point to the urgent need for pregnancy  –spec ific pharmacokinetic studies of BUP. It is 
expected that dosing would be different in pregnancy given the dramatic physiological cha nges 
characteristic of pregnanc y. This includes  changes in salivary pH (which affects dissolution and 
absorption of a sublingual BUP), the change in activity of many cytochrome P450 (CYP) and conjugating 
enzymes [BUP is metabolized by [CONTACT_115810] 1 (CYP3A and  CYP2C8 and CYP2C19 and phase  2 
(UGT1 and UGT2) enzymes] and changes in renal clearance  of medications (particularly relevant for 
conjugated metabolites)4. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_115781] y, only 
one clinical case  report study has evaluated the plasma concen trations of BUP after ad ministration of 
sublingual tablets during pregnancy but only three pregnant women were included14. Obviously, more 
subjects should be evaluated to define the pharmacokinetic parameters of sublingual BUP and its 
metabolites and to make proper dosing recommendations for pregnant  women. The critical barrier to 
optimal prenatal care for opi[INVESTIGATOR_115782]. Drug addicted pregnant 
women are at g reat risk of pregnancy complications and they generally avoid prenatal ca re because  of 
their addiction issues. Obstetric health care providers are not generally knowledgeable in the area of 
drug abuse  and are frustrated by [CONTACT_115811]. A treatment program that co ntrols drug 
craving will enhance  patient co mpliance  and improve prenatal care. Treatment s trategies such  as 
methadone  which requires hospi[INVESTIGATOR_115783]. BUP offers the patient a  treatment option that is not onerous but if that treatment is inadequate, 
those  women will abandon  treatment and  seek relief elsewhere i.e. ‘the street’. Optimizing the dosing 
regimen of BUP will overcome a key barrier to the provision of quality health care for these high-risk 
women. Our expectation is that h igher doses  of BUP are needed by [CONTACT_115812] . By [CONTACT_9851] a dosing regimen that is based 
on the pharmacology of BUP in pregnanc y, health care providers will be more willing to utilize higher 
doses which shou ld reduce  the mother’s desire to seek illegal drugs elsewhere. This change will keep 
the women in the health care system and improve maternal and  neona tal outcomes such as  NAS. 
Compliant d rug-addicted women in a health care system will be less like to have her baby  [CONTACT_115813].  The likelihood  that this pregnant woman does  
not relapse  to use of illegal street drugs is enhanced  if she has demonstrated compliance  during 
pregnancy  and is on a program that provides her BUP after pregnancy  is completed. Our study will also 
evaluate the appropriate dose  reduction that may be necessa ry in patients postpartum and minimize 
occu rrence of side effects in these patients and their breast fed babies if they are maintained on doses  
used during pregnanc y. The impact of these  changes on society would be substantial. 
 
B.  Innovation 
 
Our proposed  project challenges the current clinical p ractice paradigm that defines a dose  of BUP for 
pregnant women that is based  on pharmacokinetics in men and non- pregnant women and relies on 
the COW score to titrate the dose. We will define the pharmacokinetics and pharmacod ynamics of 
BUP in early and late  pregnancy and the postpartum period  and de termine what contributes to the 
variation in plasma concentrations and response.  We will also relate plasma concen trations of BUP and 
its major metabolites to physiologic parameters that can be used to gauge the a mount of drug in 
mother’s plasma. Our expectation is that we will demonstrate that h igher doses of BUP are needed  
throughout pregnancy and that the dosing regimen can be  adjusted using patient co variates and 
biophysical measu rements in addition to the COW scores. Our exploration of pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115784]15-17. There is a strong relationsh ip between plasma BUP conce ntrations and the 
saturation of brain µ receptors12. If µ recep tor occupancy  is a major determinant of maternal satiety and 
drug-seeking behavior, then plasma concentrations of BUP and its metabolites are key in achieving 
these  outcomes. Any variation in dosage requirements cann ot be attributed to differences in blood brain 
barrier pe rmeability but may rather reflect d ifferences  in abso rption or metabolism or e limination of BUP 
or its metabolites. Therefore, to optimize therapy a direct or indirect measure of plasma BUP is needed. 
 
[ADDRESS_129283] the risk of Neonatal Abstinence S yndrome (NAS) and will define 
neonatal exposure to buprenorphine through breast milk.  
 
Our specific aims are:  
1. To determine the impact of pregnancy on the pharmacokinetics of buprenorphine (BUP) and its 
metabolites after sublingual administration . 
2. To determine the impact of patient covariates such as age, race, co -medications and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms of BUP metabolizing enzymes (CYP3A4/5; UGT) and transporters 
(P-glycoprotein) on the variability in exposure of BUP and its metabolites in preg nant women . 
3. To evaluate potential pharmacodynamic endpoints for dosing sublingual BUP during pregnancy 
and the non -pregnant state.  
4. To evaluate the relationship between maternal and umbilical cord BUP and its metabolite 
concentrations . 
5. To evaluate the relat ionship between maternal, placental and neonatal covariates such as 
concentrations of BUP and its metabolites  in maternal and umbilical cord blood and maternal 
and newborn hair to NAS severity and duration.  
6. To evaluate potential infant exposure to BUP and metabolites through breast milk.  
 
We anticipate that the currently recommended dose of buprenorphine will be insufficient in many women 
to satisfy their drug cravings. Although some part of this craving may be psychological rather than 
physiologic, we anti cipate that alterations in physiology due to pregnancy may result in more rapid 
metabolism and elimination of this medication and thus provide a level of medication that is sub -
therapeutic. We also anticipate that the poor relationship between NAS and mate rnal dosage of 
buprenorphine may in part be explained by [CONTACT_115814].  
  
 
7 
  
D.  Approach  - Overall Strategy Methodology and Analysis  
 
 D.1. Study Overview 
 
We will enroll eligible, consenting pregnant women who are receiving sublingual BUP 
(subutex) in a supervised hospi[INVESTIGATOR_115785].  Due to the possibility of limited subject availability at individual centers, 
recruitment can target subjects receiving pregna ncy care at other institutions. Likewise, 
since buprenorphine is commonly not dispensed in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885], subjects may need 
to be recruited from clinics where buprenorphine is provided to pregnant women as part 
of a structured maintenance program.  To  facilitate enrollment , recruitment can target one 
or more specific aims as summarized below.  
 
For Specific Aims 1 and 3:  
We will recruit 40 eligible, conse nting pregnant  women to an ‘extensive sampling’ 
pharmacokinetic (PK) study in which they  will be studied three times:  once between 8 0/7 -20 6/7 , 
once between 21 0/7 -35 6/[ADDRESS_129284] 12 weeks apart. We will also obtain patient demographics and 
medical h istory.   
 
We will encourage s ubjects to complete as many PK studies as possible; however, subjects are 
only required to complete one  PK study  in order to participate in this  portion of the study.   Each 
study is [ADDRESS_129285] has  been  on a stable dose  of BUP for a 
minimum of 7 days.  Physiologic testing (pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115726], galvanic skin respon se, and heart  rate),  
COW and craving sco res will be performed before the daily dose  of BUP is taken.  
Measurement Type  Dosing  Length 
of Study  No. of Measurements  
Blood (BUP/metabolite)  
BID 13 hrs  Baseline + 12 additional  
Physiologic  Baseline + 9 additional  
Blood (BUP/metabolite)  
TID 9 hrs  Baseline + 12 additional  
Physiologic  Baseline + 9 additional  
Blood (BUP/metabolite)  
QID 7 hrs  Baseline + 10 additional  
Physiologic  Baseline + 7 additional  
Blood (BUP/metabolite)  
5 times/daily  6 hrs  Baseline + 10 additional  
Physiologic  Baseline + [ADDRESS_129286]’s routine visits to the MWH BUP 
clinic for 4 weeks.  
 
For Specific Aims 2, 4 and 5: 
Blood will be ob tained and genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_115786] 
(CYP3A and UGT) will be performed. Given that norbuprenorphine is a substrate for P-
glycoprotein (P -gp), genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_115787]. We will also evaluate peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) as a surrogate marker of metabolic enzymes and 
transporters. The expression of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters in the PBMCs will 
be correlated with the plasma concentrations of BUP and its major metabolites.  
 
Those women who do not participate in the PK study described in the section above (for specific 
aims 1 and 3) will be consented to participate in some or all of the other components of the study . 
In those women , we will obtain a blood specimen at the time of consent and record the time of 
blood draw, the time of the last dose administration , and the dosing history.  Subjects recruited to 
the other components of the study  will not reduce the sample size requirements (n=40) for the 
parent trial but will be used to more precisely model BUP pharmacokinetic s.  
 
The following applies to all enrolled women whether or not they are participating in the PK study . 
 A maternal blood sample will be obtained from the mother prior to  delivery .  A portion of the 
placen ta, umbilical cord , and umbilical cord blood  will be collected at delivery  and immediately 
frozen.  
 When possible, a small quantity of maternal and newborn  hair will be removed from the 
scalp as close to delivery as possible for determination of buprenorphine and metabolites.  
 In the nursery, the infant will unde rgo standard newborn testing for signs of neona tal 
withdrawal (Neona tal Abstinence  Syndrome, NAS). The duration and intensity of treatment will 
be recorded.  
Maternal a nd umbilical co rd blood and maternal and infant hair concen trations of BUP and  its 
major metabolites will be determined by [CONTACT_450]. We will determine maternal cord 
blood conce ntration ratios and hair concentrations of buprenorphine and related concen trations to 
the sever ity of neon atal withdrawal symptoms.  
 
For Specific Aim 6: Subjects who are breastfeeding and undergoing the postpartum 
pharmacokinetic study will also be asked to provide breast milk samples for estimation of total 
amount of BUP and  its metabolites secreted. On this PK study day, subjects will be asked to pump 
the breast just prior to taking the study dose  of BUP. Subjects will then take the BUP dose. 
Approximately every 2-[ADDRESS_129287] of the milk will be returned to the mother for 
feeding the baby. In those women consenting , we will also obtain one  heel stick blood sample prior 
to a feeding and another sample 1 hour after the feeding. Optimally, this will be done during the 
feeding that is as close as possible to the mother’s BUP dose.  
 
We will also perform another elective ancillary study while the baby [CONTACT_115815][INVESTIGATOR_115788] s to evaluate the time of appearance of BUP in breast milk and to 
assess how much drug gets into the baby’s blood. We will study  postpartum women who are 
 
[ADDRESS_129288] 1 -3 sample s (at least 1 ml but no more than 5 ml each)  of the 
mother’s milk for analysis of BUP. We will request [ADDRESS_129289] feeding (trough leve l) and 
another one 1 hour after  the feeding (peak level).  
 
D.2.  Primary Research  Question 
The primary research questions are whether BUP and metabolite exposu re (reflected as the dose -
adjusted AUC ) differs  during pregnancy and between pregnanc y and the postpartum  state . 
 
D.3.  Secondary  Research  Questions 
 
This study will also attempt to address the following questions recognizing that an inadequate sample 
size may be available for some of these outcomes:  
 
1. How quickly do buprenorphine trough concentrations decrease after delivery ? 
2. What maternal covariates impact the plasma concentration of BUP and its metabolites?  
3. Is there a pharmacodynamic parameter that reflects maternal satiety and withdrawal?  
4. What is the relationship between maternal BUP and metabolite concentrations and cord blood 
concentrations and NAS risk?  
5. What is the infant’s exposure to BUP through breast milk ? 
6. How quickly in the postpartum period does BUP appear in breast milk ? 
7. How well does cotinine concentration relate to smoking reported by [CONTACT_115816] ? 
8. Does smoking modify the relationship between physiologic measures and plasma  
buprenorphine  concentrations ?  
9. Does smoking impact the risk of NAS ?  
10. How well do catecholamine concentrations reflect physiologic parameters and satiety ? 
 
 D.4.  Study Design 
 
This will be a multicenter pha rmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacod ynamic (PD) study of sublingual 
BUP in pregnant women on the medication for their drug addiction. There are several parts to this 
study and subjects may participate in one or more parts, as described below .  
For subjects that choose to  participate in procedures other than the  PK studies  (Parts B -E), only 
minimal testing is required prior to coming to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_115789]. Blood samples for BUP 
determination and DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) analysis will be obtained at the time of consent.  
 
Part A: Subjects will participate in PK studies that  will occur at 2-3 different times during the 
study:  1) b etween 8 and 20 weeks of pregnancy; 2) between 21 and 35 weeks of pregnancy; 
and 3) between [ADDRESS_129290] one  PK visit in order to participate in 
this portion of the study .  
Part B: Prior to  delivery, we will collect maternal blood samples . At the time of delivery, we will 
collect a  cord blood sample, a [ADDRESS_129291] sample.  
Part C: Hair samples from the mother and baby [CONTACT_115817] 3 days after delivery  
 
10 
 Part D: While the baby [CONTACT_115815][INVESTIGATOR_057], we will request  1-3 sample s (at least 1 ml but no more 
than 5 ml each) of the mother’s breast milk for analysis of BUP.  We will collect  [ADDRESS_129292] feeding (trough level) and another one 1 hour after  the feeding (peak level ). 
Alternatively, s ubjects may also elect to participate in Pa rt D during 1-3 routine postpartum 
PRC appointment s, as long as they are still taking Buprenorphine (Subutex or Suboxone) .  The 
research staff will work with the patient to coordinate the sample collection with the timing of 
the patient’s last BUP dose.   
During each visit, w e will request an infant heel stick sample prior to a breast feeding (trough 
level). The subject will then collect a breast milk sample. We will reserve a sample of at least [ADDRESS_129293] a second infant heel stick sample 1 hour after the feeding (peak 
level). Ideally, we will collect both breast milk and heel stick sa mples during each collection; 
however, it is acceptable to col lect only breast milk samples if the mother does not consent to 
the collection of heel stick samples.  
  
Part E: We will collect [ADDRESS_129294]’s routine 
visits to the MWH BUP clinic week ly for the next [ADDRESS_129295] dose administration, and the dosing history  will also be recorded.  
 
D.4.i. Entry criteria include:  
 
1. Age between 18 – [ADDRESS_129296] be taking Subutex or Suboxone.  
3. Gestational age < 19 6/7 weeks * 
4. Singleton gestation  
5. Able to give informed consent and  unde rgo study p rocedu res   
6. Willing to have urine samples screened  for the presence  of alcoho l, barbiturates,  
opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], cocaine ( or metabolites), benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], synthetic opi[INVESTIGATOR_115790]  * 
7. Willing to participate in at least one PK study  either during pregnancy or in postpartum  * 
*Requirement applies only to those subjects in the PK study  
 
 
D.4.ii. Exclusion Criteria include:  
 
1. Major fetal anomalies or malformations  
2. HIV or AIDS  
3. Comorbid dependen ce on benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_115791]  
(including anti-seizure medications)  
4. Taking medication known to interfer e with buprenorphine  metabolism  
5. Active or chronic suicidal or ho micidal ideation or attempts  
6. Elevated liver enzymes (AST, ALT > 2 times normal) * 
7. Creatinine > 1.5 mg/dl  * 
8. Part A (PK Studies ): Delivery at other institution where outcome data cann ot be obtained on 
mother and baby  
[CONTACT_115818] B -E (Procedures other than the PK Study) : Delivery at another institution  where 
samples cannot be obtained on mother and baby  
 
11 
 9. Active use of non-prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]/opi[INVESTIGATOR_115792] 1 week prior to  each PK visit  * 
10. Hematocrit <28  * 
* Requirement applies only to those subjects in the PK  study  
 
D.4.iii. Gestational Age Determination:  
 
A project ges tational age will be established  for all sub jects prior to study initiation. We will use 
criteria used  by [CONTACT_115819]-Fetal Medicine Units for their clinical trials (see MOO) . 
 
D.4.iv. Informed Consent  Criteria: 
 
Written informed consent will be obtained before entry into the trial. Full disclosure of the nature 
and potential risks of participating in the trial will be made. Each center will develop its own 
consent form acc ording to the requirements of its Institutional Review Board. Women who are not 
fluent in English will be enrolled by a person fluent in their language and both verbal and  written 
informed consent ob tained in that language; if such  are not a vailable, they will not be included. 
 
D.5. Study Procedures  
 
D.5.i. Screening for Eligibility:   
 
The inclusion/exclusion criteria will be reviewed with the patient’s chart. Any woman who appea rs 
to be eligible will be informed about the study and asked to sign a medical records release  so 
that the medical records may be obtained. If a patient appea rs to meet the criteria for enrollment 
and expresses interest in the study, she will be told about  the study and asked to sign the 
informed conse nt form. A copy  of the signed consent  form will be provided to the patient. 
 
D.5.ii. Screening Visit Procedu res  
1. PK Studies:  
The information listed below will be obtained for consented patients within 1 -2 week s prior to 
scheduling  a PK study:  
a. Demographic information: age, race, weight, height   
b. Medical history: medica l disorders, HIV, mental health disorders   
c. Obstetrical h istory including outcome of all prior pregnancies  
d. Social history: questionnaires regarding alcohol use, tobacco  use, illicit drug use and 
depression  
e. Concomitant  medications  
f. Project gestational age and estimated date of delivery.  
g. Vital signs (blood pressure, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697])  
h. Screening blood chemistries to confirm eligibility include: chemistry (blood urea nitrogen 
[BUN], creatinine, total protein, alanine aminotransferase [ALT/SGPT], aspartate 
aminotransferase [AST/SGOT], hemoglobin [Hgb], platelet , albumin ).* 
i. A hematocrit [Hct] is required at the first screening visit, unless a result is available from 
the subject’s medical record within the past [ADDRESS_129297] 
dose administration, and the  dosing history  *  
l. Blood sample for DNA analysis  - If the DNA sample is unable to be obtained at the 
screening visit, it may be collected anytime during the study when blood is being drawn . * 
m. Review p rocedur es for the upcoming study visit.  
*Performed at the subject’s first PK study only  
If information was collected as part of a previous Screening Visit, some items above (a, b, c, e and f) 
will require updating only, if applicable.  
  
2. Procedures other than the PK Studies:  
The information  listed below  will be obtained at the time of consent from women agreeing to 
other parts of the study but not participating in the PK study.   
 
a. Demographic information: age, race, weight, height  
b. Medical history: medical disorders, HIV, mental health disorders   
c. Obstetrical h istory including outcome of all prior pregnancies  
d. Social history: questionnaires regarding alcohol use, tobacco  use, illicit drug use, and 
depression   
e. Concomitant medications  
f. Project gestational age and estimated date of delivery.  
g. Blood sample for BUP analysis (record the time of the blood draw, the time of the last 
dose administration, and the dosing history) . 
h. Blood sample for DNA analysis  (If the DNA sample is unable to be obtained at the 
screening visit, it may be collected anytime during the study when blood is being 
drawn .) 
 
 
D.5.iii. Patient Manag ement:  
 
No attempt will be made to mandate clinical management of the subjects. If complications arise, 
the patient will still be eligible for additional PK studies unless the complication affects the 
pharmacology of BUP i.e. significant liver or renal disease.  
 
If a patient who consented to any part of this study (Part s A-E) is dismissed from her Medication 
Assisted Treatment (MAT) clinic due to non-compliance, she will be dismissed from the study and 
another subject will be recruited to replace  her.  
 
If non -prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]/opi[INVESTIGATOR_115793],  the subject will be 
ineligible to complete the pending PK visit. Subjects may be re -screened at a later date as long as 
they are within the gestational window for the PK visit. If a subject in the PK study has two positive 
drug screens for non -prescribed opi[INVESTIGATOR_858]/opi[INVESTIGATOR_115794], she will be dismissed 
from the study and replaced with another study subject . 
 
At the time of enrollment, patients will consent to those components  of the study  that they wish to 
participate in. Subjects are required to complete  at least  one PK study  in order to participate in 
this portion of the study. If a subject consents to portion of the study and they are  unable to 
complete it within the acceptable timeline, they will still be eligible to participate in the remaining 
 
13 
 parts of the study they consented to .   
 
D.5.iv. Study PK Visits:  
 
Once the subject has signed the consent form, completed the Screening Visit, and is deemed 
eligible for the study, the resea rch staff will establish a schedu le for the subject to undergo their 
first PK study . Subjects participating in the PK study must complete  at least one PK study.   
 
Screening Visit s will be conducted within 1-[ADDRESS_129298] 
continue to meet the criteria listed in section D.4, with the exception of exclusion criteria items 6 
and 7.  A urine drug screen (Immunoassay) will be performed on the day of the PK study.     
 
Each PK study, both during and after pregnancy,  will be performed after the subject has been  on 
a cons istent two, three, four, or five time daily  dose  of BUP for a minimum of 7 days.  
 
D.5.v. BUP  Administration During PK Visit :  
 
 Each subject will bring her o wn prescribed medication to the Clinical Resea rch Center (CRC ). The 
subject will be on a stable dose of BUP two, three , four , or five doses daily which will be supp lied 
by [CONTACT_115820] a Drug Addiction clinic. She will use  her own medication during the 
entire study and the resea rch staff will not provide any BUP at any time during the study. We are 
only studying women on two, three , four , or five  times  daily medication to minimize time in the 
CRC and  to reduce  the number of blood samples to be drawn.  
 
After all base line procedu res, including performance of the physiologic testing and collection of 
biological specimens, the patient will be instructed to take her usual p rescribed dose  of BUP.  
Prior to taking her medication, the sub ject will fill her mouth with saliva and then swallow it twice 
to help ensure that the saliva flows well. Then, the subject will place some saliva onto pH pap er 
and the pH of the saliva will be recorded. A saliva (1-2 mL) sample also will be obtained analyzed 
for buprenorphine and metabolites.  The sub ject will then take her prescribed morning dose  of BUP 
sublingual tablets. BUP tablets are supplied in two dosa ge strengths (2mg and 8mg). The drug 
will be taken sublingually and patients will be asked to hold the tablet(s) under the tongue for at 
least five minutes without swallowing to allow for full disintegration of the tablet(s). The sublingual 
area will be examined at the end  of five minutes, and  any premature swallowing will be recorded, 
along with the time it occu rred following ad ministration. If pi[INVESTIGATOR_115795](s) are 
still present after five minutes, the subject will be asked to hold the tablet(s) for an additional five 
minutes without swallowing. Subjects will be asked to abstain from smoking, drinking (except for 
water),  and eating for two hours following drug administration to ensu re maximum abs orption from 
the sublingual s ite and the gastrointestinal tract. At two hours post-dose, the subject will be 
provided with a light meal. Smoking is then allowed.  
 
D.5.vi.  Venous  Blood, Urine, Saliva and Postpartum Breast Milk Collection (Applicable to 
Subjects in the PK Study):    
 
On the day of the PK study, a venous catheter will be inserted and  used for frequent blood draws, 
whenever possible. Multiple venipunctures may be necessary if the patient has poor venous access 
and the  blood sample(s) cannot be obtained through the IV .  
 
Baseline blood samples  (12 mL) , saliva  (1-2 mL)  and urine  will be collected and analyzed for 
buprenorphine and metabolites . We will perform a urine drug screen by [CONTACT_115821]. Blood will also be utilized for determination of catecholamines (epi[INVESTIGATOR_115796]), cotinine, and PBMC analysis.  Screening blood chemistries and hematology labs 
 
14 
 (AST/SGOT, ALT/SGPT , creatinine , BUN, total protein, albumin, hemoglobin, and p latelets ) are 
collected at the first Screening Visit only to establish eligibility . A hematocrit  is also required at the 
first screening visit, unless a result is available from the subject’s medical record within the past [ADDRESS_129299] screening visit, it will not be repeated 
during the remainder of the study.  Baseline p hysiologic measurements (pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115726], galvanic 
skin response, blood pressure, and heart rate)  will be taken and the subject will subsequently take 
her medication as prescribed. 
 
Additional b lood and saliva  samples will be collected at the following time intervals.   The maximum 
amount of blood drawn from a subject on a study day is  103 mL.  
 
Sample/Measurement Type  Dosing  Time Interval  
blood  & saliva  BID Baseline and 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 
360, 480, 600, [ADDRESS_129300] dose  
blood & saliva  TID Baseline and 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 
300, 360, 420, [ADDRESS_129301] dose  
blood & saliva  QID Baseline and 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 
300, [ADDRESS_129302] dose  
blood & saliva  5 times/day  Baseline and 10, 20, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 240, 
and [ADDRESS_129303] dose  
 
Refer to section D.5.xi for blood and s aliva collection and  processing  instructions.  
 
All urine voided from 0-12 hrs. (subject will be asked to empty bladder  at 12 hrs for BID dosing, at 8 
hours for TID dosing, at 6 hours for QID dosing , and at 5 hours for five times daily dosing ) will be 
collected, total volume recorded and aliquots will be frozen immediately.   
 
For those  women who are breast-feeding during the postpartum PK visit and wish ing to 
participate in the breast feeding component , and if the CRC allows infants to come to the unit with 
their mothers, we will obtain breast milk at baseline prior to the morning BUP dose and 
approximately every 2-[ADDRESS_129304] up to a maximum of 6 heel sticks (trough and peak levels on 3 occasions) as part of 
the postpartum ancillary study.  
 
Upon completion of all biological fluids collection, the venous  catheter will be removed and the 
subject will be discha rged to home. 
  
 
15 
  
 
D.5.vii.  Physiological T esting (Applicable to Subjects in the PK Study):   
 
Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115797] a hand held pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115798] (PLR-200™ 
Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_60187]- Neuroptics Irvine Cal.), galvanic skin respo nse will obtained using the Mind Ware 
Mobile Impedance  Device, heart rate and  blood pressure will be recorded by [CONTACT_115822]. The 
Cravings and  COW scores will be pe rformed in conjunction with physiologic asses sments at the 
following times:  
Sample/Measurement Type  Dosing  Time Interval  
physiologic  BID Baseline and  30, 60, 90, 120, 240, 360, 480, 600, 
[ADDRESS_129305] dose  
physiologic  5 times/day  Baseline and  30, 60, 90, 120, 180, 240, 300, 
minutes post dose  
 
D.5.viii. Dietary Restrictions (Applicable to Subjects in the PK Study) :  
 
Subjects will be required to fast (other than water) after midnight prior to the study visit, and for two 
hours after the study drug is administered. Participants may not consu me grapefruit juice within [ADDRESS_129306] 100  mL of 
water per  hour in order to maintain adequate urine flow. 
 
D.5.ix. Delivery Specimens (Applicable to all Subjects) :  
 
A urine sample will be collected for a comprehensive drug screen within 48 hours of admission  for 
delivery . Samples from subjects with a positive drug screen at delivery will not be used for specific 
aim 5  of the study.  
 
Prior to delivery, maternal blood specimens (for BUP and PBMC analysis) will be collected , when 
possible . 
  
At the time of delivery, a cord blood specimen, a placen ta sample  (3x3 cm), and an umbilical cord 
sample (3 inches) will be collected, when possible . The umbilical cord and placenta samples are 
immediately frozen at -[ADDRESS_129307] -delivery . 
 
Labor and Delivery biological specimens  (including the urine drug screen)  will be collected when 
possible.  
  
 
16 
  
D.5.x. Neonatal Evaluation and Care (Applicable to all Subjects) : 
 
All infants of subjects in this trial will be evaluated for Neona te Abstinence  Syndrome according to 
study criteria . Treatment of withdrawal will be standardized to the degree possible . At Magee the 
assessment for symptoms of withdrawal is performed every 2-4 hours with the Finnegan  Scoring 
system. Morphine is initiated as  the drug of choice for infants with opi[INVESTIGATOR_115799] ≥ 8, according to t he scoring system and  treatment plan 
at Magee.  
 
When possible,  a sample of newborn scalp hair will be obtained , as close to delivery as possible , 
but not to exceed [ADDRESS_129308] -delivery . 
 
D.5.xi. Blood and Saliva Collection and  Processing :  
 
The following collection and processing instructions apply to all blood and saliva samples collected 
during this study. The samples collected will be  dependent on which parts of the study the subject 
participates in.  
Blood samples will be collected as follows:   
 Maternal and Cord Blood Samples for BUP Analysis: One 10  mL heparinized vacutainer 
tube will be drawn  at the time points described in  section s D.5.vi  and D.5.ix .  The tube should 
be centrifuged at 1500 g at 4°C  for 15 minutes . Plasma samples will then be transferred into 
polypropylene tubes  and frozen at -80 degrees centigrade until ana lysis.  
 PBMC analysis : One [ADDRESS_129309] sample (pre -
dose) at each PK study visit and at delivery  (applicable to all subjects) , when possible . The 
sample should be stored at room temperature.  Notify [CONTACT_115826]’s lab in 
advance at 412 -400-7027 / [PHONE_2643] or via email ( [EMAIL_2292] ) to allow for pi[INVESTIGATOR_115800] 4 hours of collec tion.  
 DNA Analysis: One 10 mL EDTA vacutainer tube will be drawn  at the Baseline Screening 
Visit. If the DNA sample is unable to be obtained at the screening visit, it may be collected 
anytime during the study when blood is being drawn . The sample should be frozen at -80 
degrees centigrade until ana lysis. 
 
Saliva  samples will be collected using a Sarstedt Salivette collection device. The salivary collection 
sponge can be centrifuged later in the day.  Salivary pH will be determined. Oral fluid samples will 
then be transferred into polypropylene tubes  and frozen at -80 degrees centigrade until ana lysis.  
 
D.5.xii. Study Outcome Measu res and Ascertainment (Applicable to all Subjects) :  
 
Mothers and infants will be followed until they are discha rged from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], at which time 
relevant data from the labor, delivery and nursery records will be recorded. 
 
a. Primary Outcome:  
 
The primary outcome is the exposu re to BUP (AUC ) during pregnancy  and the post -partum state . 
 
b. Secondary Outcomes Maternal :  
Other maternal o utcomes to be measured are: 
1. The relationsh ip between COW and Craving scores, pupi[INVESTIGATOR_115726], heart rate , blood pressure 
 
[ADDRESS_129310] milk. 
 
c. Secondary Outcomes Neonatal :  
 
Neona tal ou tcomes to be measured include the following: 
 
1.  Relationship between concentrations of BUP and  its metabolites in maternal  and umbilical  
cord plasma and maternal and newborn hair  and maternal dose and parameters of    
neonatal withdrawal  
2.  Infant hospi[INVESTIGATOR_598]  
3.  Birthweight  
4.  Gestational age  
5.  Neonatal Complications including: Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1505] (RDS), stillbirth,  
neona tal death, intraventricular hemorrhage as determi ned by [CONTACT_60372],    
bronchopu lmonary dysplasia, necrotizing enterocolitis, early onset of neonatal seps is,     
seizures, retinopa thy of prematurity (ROP) , and hyperbilirubinemia. 
 
D.5.xiii.  Statistical Considera tions 
 
Data Analysis Plan:  
 
The primary outcomes will be the area under the plasma concen tration x time curve (AUC ) of BUP 
during early pregnancy  compared to the AUC in late pregnancy.   We will also compare the AUC of 
BUP and metabolites during  early and late pregnancy and the post -partum period.  Mixed -effect 
models, repeated measures ANOVA or paired t -testing, will be used  to compare early to  late-
pregnancy  and overall pregnancy  values to the postpartum values. Seconda ry outcomes such  as 
metabolite concen trations will be analyzed in the same fashion. Additional an alysis will also include 
multiple regressions to evaluate the relationsh ips between maternal and  fetal plasma concen trations 
of BUP and its metabolites, p lacental p-glycoprotein, physiologic parameters and CYP3A4/5 
expression. We will also use popu lation pharmacokinetic analysis to evaluate the contribution of 
various covariates (i.e. maternal genotype, BMI, etc.) to the obse rved variability in the trough plasma 
conce ntrations of BUP. 
 
Primary Hypothesis 
Based  on data from our recently completed study, the dose -adjusted AUC was 2.34 ± 1.82  
(ng/ml).hr in pregnant women at a mean gestational age of 34 weeks. I n postpartum  women , the 
dose adjusted AUC was nearly 100% higher at 4.0 ± 2.8  (ng/ml).hr .  We anticipate that the AUC in 
the first half of pregnancy  will be somewhere between values of non -pregnant women and those of 
pregnant women in the latter part of pregnancy. The sample size required to demonstrate a 50% 
difference between the dose adjusted AUC in the first half of pregn ancy and the second half of 
pregnancy as well as a 50% difference between the dose adjusted AUC in the first half of pregnancy 
and the postpartum  state is 37 (α = 0.05, β = 0.80) .  We will recruit an additional 3 subjects  to 
 
18 
 account for dropouts  or noncomp liance . The second ary physiological outcomes will also be 
addressab le with this sample size as the variance  in pupil measu rements is small (4.65±0.4 mm at 
base line and 2.64±0.08 mm  at 2 hours in the paper of Middleton et al13  and each patient will provide 
data from 2-3 PK studies. Thus there will be 120 studies that relate a physiologic variable to plasma 
buprenorphine. Specific Aim 5 which relates NAS to various parameters (maternal dose, maternal 
and cord plasma buprenorp hine /metabolite concentrations  etc.) can be addressed with the 
projected sample size  as correlations between the dependent variable NAS and the numerous 
independent variables i.e. maternal dose, maternal concentration at delivery, maternal hair 
concentration, cord blood concentration, newborn hair concentration etc . can be performed with 
samples size of 15. We assume that 50 % of these infants will have some degree of NAS so the 
sample size of [ADDRESS_129311] this hypothesis , recruitment 
should be easier and can be done at secondary sites if nee ded.  
 
Secondary  Hypotheses  
Patients will be at steady  state when the pharmacokinetic studies are performed. This will be 
docu mented by [CONTACT_115823] 0 and at 12 hrs. (less than 20% variation). 
Plasma concentration-time profiles  will  be  analyzed  using  both  non-compartmental  and  
popu lation  pharmacokinetic  modeling  and simulation approaches.  Data will be analyzed using 
WINNONLIN and NONMEM software. We will compare various pharmacokinetic parameters 
between pregnant and non-pregnant (postpartum) subjects using a paired t-test as described 
previously. This will include all non-compartmental data (Cmax, Tmax, AUC (0-τ), AUC(0-∞), ke, λz, 
CL/F, CLR, Vd/F, Vss, AUMC, and MRT). Population pharmacokinetic model will be developed  
using non linear mixed effects modeling software (NONMEM version 7.1; ICON Development 
Solutions, Endicott City, MD), GNU Fortran 95 compi[INVESTIGATOR_115801] (version 5.1.0). The general 
linear model under steady state will be con structed us ing  ADVAN 5  SS5  subroutines.  In  order  
to  identify  the  covariates  that  influence  the pha rmacokinetics of BUP, the following covariates 
will be evaluated: maternal age (years), body  weight (kg), race, gestational age, serum 
albumin, serum creatinine (mg/dL), salivary PH, buprenorphine dose, tablet size and 
co-medications and SNPs of the various metabolizing enzymes. For covariate 
selection, univariate analysis with stepwise forward addition (p<0.01) and backward elimination 
(p<0.001) procedu res   will be followed. The covariates that significantly influence  the 
pharmacokinetics of BUP and its metabolite will be incorporated in the final model. The predictive 
performance of the model will be internally evaluated using prediction corrected-visual predictive 
check,  where 1500  data sets will be simulated using the parameter estimates in the final model. 
The 50th percentile concen tration (median) and the 5th and 95th percentile conce ntrations (90% 
prediction interval) will be plotted and compared to the observed conce ntrations. The data obtained 
will be used  to validate the predictions of SIMCYP-PBPK  simulation from the basic/translational 
project.  
 
D.6. Preliminary  Data Relevant to the Primary  Outcome 
 
We have developed  a HPLC-MS-MS assay  for BUP and metabolites with a lower limit of 
quantitation of the assay  for BUP (BUP), of 0.05 ng/ml, while that for no r-BUP is 0.5 ng/ml. We 
have performed an intensive PK study on 12 subjects  The dose–adjusted AUC in the third trimester 
of pregnancy  (2.4 ng/ml).hr was lower than in the postpartum pe riod (4.0 ng/ml).hr while clearance  
is higher in pregnancy  (589 L/hr) than in the postpartum pe riod (288 L/hr). There was a larg e 
variation (cv = 50%) in both AUC and clearance values.  None of the subjects in this cohort was 
studied in the first half of pregnancy.  
 
D.7. Potential Problems, Alterna tive Strategies, Benchmarks  
 
 
[ADDRESS_129312] 30 patients in the system. We 
estimate acce ptance  rates of 33% given time requirements. The other OPRC sites appear to have 
limited BUP patients delivering at their institutions which impact  their ability to carry out all aspects of 
this study. Potential subjects however can be recruited at clinics that provide opi[INVESTIGATOR_115802]. The CRC studies do not require the patient to deliver at the 
OPRC hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . Likewise cord blood and maternal blood at delivery can be obtained for other 
institutions where these patients deliver. Follow -up of the infants in non - OPRC hospi[INVESTIGATOR_115803] a 
challenge and therefore Hypothesis 5 may require that more infants be studie d at Pi[INVESTIGATOR_115804]. Given our increasing volume of BUP patients we should be able to recruit 
additional subjects at the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_115805].  This study con tributes to the primary 
aims of the OPRC  as the issue of opi[INVESTIGATOR_115806]/PD information to provide clinical guidance begs for such studies to be done.  
 
D.9. Sample Analysis  and Collection of Negative Control Samples  
 
Biological specimens will be collected and labeled with the study and subject number only and 
stored in locked freezers at MWH or the Magee Women Research Institute. Only the study 
research staff will have access to individually identifiable private inform ation. Biological 
specimens will intermittently be sent to [CONTACT_115826]’s lab at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_115807]. Samples sent for analysis will not contain any identifiable information . Patient 
demographics necessary for pharmacokinetic an alysis will also be blinded and sent to [CONTACT_115827]’s lab.  
 
Negative Control Samples: Biological samples from women who are not taking BUP are required 
as negative controls. Subjects potentially eligible as negative controls will be identified by 
[CONTACT_115824].   Patients will be approached by [CONTACT_115825] a co -
investigator  about the study . Healthy volunteers serving as negat ive controls will be recruited 
prior to delivery o r within [ADDRESS_129313]. Venkataramanan’s lab , and according to study procedures .  The biological 
samples may include any of the following: urine, saliva, placenta, umbilical cord blood, umbilical 
cord tissue, maternal  hair, infant hair, and breast milk.  
  
 
20 
  
D.9.i. Eligibility Criteria  for Volunteers Serving as Negative Controls   
Inclusion Criteria:  
1.  Age between 18 – [ADDRESS_129314] 12 months  
3.  Able to give informed consent and undergo study procedures   
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Currently t aking buprenorphine  