Cover Page for ClinicalTrials.gov 
Official Title of the Study: 
 The COVID -19 Pandemic and V eterans: An  Active Intervention 
Study ID: [REMOVED] 
Principal Investigator:  
[INVESTIGATOR_60490], PhD  
[EMAIL_1178]  [PHONE_1120]  
Date of Document:  
 October 6, 2021  
  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 Data will be  analyzed using SPSS 26.0. We will use  Pearson’s Chi -square and one -way 
ANOVA to compare demographic variables, baseline psychopathological characteristics, and 
baseline ATSPPH -SF scores o f the three groups. We will use  Independent t -tests to compare 
baseline psychopathological characteristics (continuous variables), and Chi -square tests to 
compare the severity of each psychopathology (ordinal variables) of participants who do and do 
not re port Covid- 19 exposure. All statistical tests will be  2-sided, using α<0.05.  
Intervention effects will be  tested using the generalized estimating equations (GEE) 
approach, as recommended for randomized controlled trials . The GEE approach accounts for 
correlated repeated -measures analysis and accommodates missing data via estimated marginal 
means relying on the entire sample. Thus, this analytic strategy includes data from all randomized participants who provide at least one data point. To represent within- subject 
dependencies in the models, we will specify  an unstructured correlation matrix. We will first  
apply a full factorial model across the four time points (baseline and post -intervention, 14 and 
30-day follow -ups) for treatment -seeking intentions, and three time points (baseline, 14-  and 30-
day follow -ups) for clinical symptoms. Time -by-group interact ion terms will be  used to test the 
intervention effect hypothesis of greater treatment -seeking in the video group. For significant 
differences, post hoc tests will be  used to compare each group pair. Effect sizes will be  reported 
using Cohen’s d when appropriate.  
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 1 of 11
Protocol Title:
The COVID-19 pandemic and veterans: An 
active intervention
Protocol Number:
[ADDRESS_65411] Approval:
07/03/2020
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:
No Expi[INVESTIGATOR_60491]:
10/06/[ADDRESS_65412] Principal Investigator:
[INVESTIGATOR_60490],  PHD
Email: [EMAIL_1179]
Telephone: 646-774-8092Co-Investigator(s):
John Markowitz, MD
Doron Amsalem
Research Chief:
Helen Simpson, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
Department & Unaffiliated Personnel
Department
What Department does the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40348]?
Anxiety Disorders ClinicWithin the department, what Center  or group are  you affiliated with,  if any? 
PTSD Team
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
N/A
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_65413] indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Internet-based Data Collection  or Transmission
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Adults
   Adults  over 50
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?
YesDescribe internal accountAccount RFMH: 2801DIs the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
[INVESTIGATOR_60492]/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)  has widely  and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_60493], overwhelming 
intensive care units and health  care  capacity.  While the physical risk (e.g.  pneumonia,  respi[INVESTIGATOR_60494]) is getting  the most scientific and clinical attention, this outbreak also has significant  mental 
health risks  and extreme psychological  fear-related responses. Among the general  population,  there  are 
high-risk groups as  elderly people, disabled  individuals and people  with  previous  exposure to trauma (e.g., 
people with military experience). Veterans are among the subgroups who  are high  risk for PTSD and  other 
mental health problem.  The overarching  goal of  this study is to examine  the efficacy of an online,  large-
scale, brief  video-based intervention in reducing fear and stress and  improving  help seeking behavior in  
relate to  COVID-19.
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 3 of 11
In a sizable randomized  controlled trial (N=2,000), with pre-, post- and follow-up assessments the aim is to 
(1) determine whether  video-based intervention  reduce self-stigma and social  media  use and  increase help-
seeking behavior in relate to COVID-19  among people with  military experience, and to (2) test  the effect  of 
the intervention in reducing  symptoms of depression, anxiety and PTSD, that  will be measured by [CONTACT_60499] (PHQ-9)  and Generalized Anxiety  Disorder  (GAD-7)  and the Primary Care  PTSD  
Screen for DSM-5  (PC-PTSD-5).  
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)  has widely  and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_60493], overwhelming 
intensive care units and health  care  capacity,  leading the World Health Organization (WHO) to  declare  a 
pandemic. According to the official  website of the WHO1, more than [ADDRESS_65414] been exposed to the  virus. Non-essential workers  were required to  stay at home and  the 
shutdown of non-essential businesses are  among  the restrictions that influence the lives of millions across 
the globe. While the physical  risk (e.g. pneumonia, respi[INVESTIGATOR_60495])  is getting  the most scientific and  
clinical attention, this outbreak also has significant  mental health  risks and extreme psychological fear-
related responses.
 
The outbreak of COVID-[ADDRESS_65415] elicited fear  and anxiety about 
becoming infected. Isolated at  home, people consume information that might be unreliable  and unverified 
for many hours every day.  The widespread use of social media  and the extensive  array  (or sources)  of 
information can increase confusion and worries which in turn increase fear  and anxiety. Moreover, indirect 
exposure to 24-hours  of television news and  social media has a  wide range of psychopathological  
consequences, of which Posttraumatic Stress Syndrome (PTSD) symptoms are  the most common.2 A recent  
study3 conducted in China one month into the outbreak examined the prevalence of mental health problems 
in COVID-19 era  and found a  high rate  of depression (48.3%), anxiety (22.6%)  and a combination of 
depression and  anxiety (19.4%) among 4,[ADDRESS_65416] depression and  anxiety than  people  with  less social  media  
exposure. To  date, more than 3 billion people are being asked  to stay at home,  which  may lead to  increased 
exposure to social media, likely resulting in widespread mental health problems among isolated individuals around the globe. Given the magnitude  of the COVID-19 outbreak, its risk to physical and  mental health, 
and the unique  nature  requiring to stay isolated, sheltered, at hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], or at home, an effective and timely  
response is  essential to  address the psychosocial needs associated with the ongoing exposure to  social 
media, disease, death, and distress. 
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 4 of 11
Among the general  population, there  are high-risk groups as elderly  people,  disabled individuals and people 
with previous exposure  to trauma  (e.g.,  people with military experience). Veterans  are among the subgroups  
who are high risk for PTSD and other mental health problem. Furthermore, many veterans are reluctant to 
seek help,  despi[INVESTIGATOR_60496], they avoid  mental health care, or  may wait years to  decades before 
they seek  help.[ADDRESS_65417]  in mental health providers, 
being seen  as weak or stereotyped as “dangerous/violent/crazy”,  and a belief that they are responsible for 
having mental  health problems.5,6Applying strategies to reduce  self-stigma and improve  help seeking  
behavior among veterans may ameliorate impaired functioning and reduce risks for long-term  psychiatric  
illness. Thornicroft7  showed that social contact [CONTACT_60500]-
seeking behavior and  stigma-related attitudes. Social contact [CONTACT_60501]  a member 
of the group; While both direct, in-person  social contact [CONTACT_60502],  video-based  social  contact [CONTACT_60503], the latter can be implemented on a larger scale.8-[ADDRESS_65418]-based programs: an  
empowered presenter with lived experience who attains his/her goals (e.g., “I  was able to  fight the COVID-
19”). 
The overarching goal of  this study is to examine the efficacy of an online, large-scale, brief video-based 
intervention in reducing fear and  stress and improving help seeking behavior in relate to COVID-19.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
In a sizable randomized  controlled trial (N=2,000), with pre-, post- and follow-up assessments the aim  is to 
(1) determine whether  video-based intervention  reduce self-stigma and social  media  use and  increase help-
seeking behavior in relate to COVID-19  among people with  military experience, and to (2) test  the effect  of 
the intervention in reducing  symptoms of depression, anxiety and PTSD, that  will be measured by [CONTACT_60499] (PHQ-9)  and Generalized Anxiety  Disorder  (GAD-7)  and the Primary Care  PTSD  
Screen for DSM-5  (PC-PTSD-5).
Hypotheses: That (1) the brief video is expected to have greater impact  in reducing self-stigma, increasing 
help-seeking behavior  and changing  habits of social  media use in relate to COVID-19  than  a written 
vignette or control groups in comparison to pre-intervention and to  non-video conditions,  (2) the brief video 
is expected  to have greater impact  in reducing  symptoms of depression and  anxiety  an PTSD. 
Description of Subject Population
Sample #[ADDRESS_65419]  population
18-80
Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown
It is expected the  sample will roughly mirror  the general [LOCATION_002] adult population:
Anticipated gender distribution: 52% female,  48% male
Anticipated racial distribution: 79% white only, 13% African  American only,  2% Asian only, 1% Native 
American, 5% 2+ racesAnticipated Hispanic Ethnic Distribution: 15% Hispanic, 85 % Non-Hispanic Description of subject  
populationDescription of subject populationParticipants recruited using Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)  will be adults in  the U.S.  with  military 
experience who are willing  to complete  an online  experiment for a small  financial reward.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
Participants will be  recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk  (AMT: https://www.mturk.com/mturk/). AMT  
is a website that  allows  interested persons to choose  from a large number of tasks to  perform,  including 
completion of surveys,  for small amounts of compensation. AMT requires users to  be over 18 years old.  For 
this study the age  range will be defined as 18-80. No demographic restrictions will be placed on 
participants, other than  being with military experience  and a resident  in the U.S.
How and by [CONTACT_60504]/or recruited? 
A posting (the Information  Sheet attached  to this  protocol) will be listed  on AMT once the study is approved 
by [CONTACT_1201]. Participants can peruse the tasks available via AMT and  read  the information posted  if they 
desire. The posting  will explain the terms  and conditions of  the study. If participants agree to the conditions 
and consent to  participate, they will click  on a link that will direct them to complete the  study  procedures via 
Qualtrics.com (a secure,  online data-collection  platform that will store  the study data in  a password- 
protected account); if  they do not consent  to the  conditions, they will not  participate.
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
As stated above, a posting (the Information  Sheet attached to this protocol) will be listed  on AMT once the 
study is approved by [CONTACT_36985]. In  answering "yes" to the question below  about whether  we have recruitment 
material requiring review,  we are  referring to the Information Sheet.
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
YesDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
Yes
Concurrent Research Studies
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 6 of 11
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
No
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name [CONTACT_40443]/sub sampleAMT ParticipantsCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
 Study Criteria  Method of  Ascertainment
 Military experience and  at 
least [ADDRESS_65420]  military 
experience
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentNoWaiver of documentation of consent YesWaiver of parental consent No
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 7 of 11
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
No
Describe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
N/ADescribe Study Consent ProceduresAs stated earlier, a posting (the Information  Sheet attached to this protocol) will be listed  on AMT once the 
study is approved by [CONTACT_36985]. Participants can peruse the tasks available via AMT and read the information 
posted if  they desire. The posting will explain  the terms and  conditions  of the study. If participants agree  to 
the conditions  and consent to participate, they will click on a link that  will direct  them  to complete the study 
procedures via  Qualtrics.com (a  secure, online data-collection  platform that  will store the study data in a 
password-protected account); if they do not consent to the conditions,  they will not  participate.
Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Information Sheet
Waiver of Documentation of Consent
Would the consent form signature [CONTACT_60510]’s identity and the research data?
YesIs breach of confidentiality the main study risk?YesDescribe the study component(s) for which  waiver  of documentation is  requested
The information sheet  will act as consent, but no signature [CONTACT_60511].
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Type in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
N/A
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this study
The proposed research  will examine the effects  of video-based intervention in people with military 
experience. Participants will  be randomly assigned to either a) video-based intervention  featuring the 
personal story of a veteran who was  deployed  to Afghanistan and now suffering from COVID-19  related 
symptoms, and his straggles and  barriers to care, (b)  vignette intervention – a written description of the 
same personal story, (c) no-intervention control  arm.
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 8 of 11
Qualtrics.com (the platform  used for data  collection) will automatically randomly assign each participant to 
one of the three arms.
The video-based intervention comprises of roughly 90-second video with  a veteran describing his attitude 
towards COVID-19 before and after he  was tested positive and  his personal barriers to treatment and  
recovery, his personal experience with the use of social media, his fears and  anxieties (i.e., sharing his/her 
own lived experience).  The vignette, a written  description of the aforementioned story, will deliver the  same 
information, but without the social contact [CONTACT_60505]. The video/vignette will be 
provided at  the day one.  Before and after  each intervention, a survey will be provided to all groups.  In day 
14, and day 30, a follow-up survey will be  provided  to all groups.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Questions for the pre- and post-intervention (day 1) and follow-up (day  14 and  day 30).
Baseline Questionnaire (will be conducted pre intervention only) will include four  questions regarding 
demographics (age, sex, ethnicity and  race).  Based on  previous  studies it is estimated the response  
time will be around [ADDRESS_65421]-intervention (day  1) and follow-up (day  14 
and day 30):
 
1. Attitude towards COVID-19 – attitude towards COVID-19 questions were adapted  from a measure 
created by [CONTACT_60506]. about stigma and fear towards  people  with HIV.11 The questionnaire will 
include six questions and based on previous studies it is estimated  the response  time for 50 seconds. 
2. Attitude towards seeking help - Attitude towards help seeking will be based on the ATSPPH-SF (Attitudes Towards Seeking Professional Psychological Help Scale), and will include 5 questions (0-disagree, 3-agree). One table will be created  to include all [ADDRESS_65422] with a 
known COVID-19  patient and if the participant has been tested for COVID-19. It  is estimated  the 
response time will be around 50 seconds. 
Three questionnaires will assess clinical symptoms and will be conducted  at pre-intervention (day 1) 
and follow-up (day 14 and  day 30):
 
1. Gad-7 questionnaire  will include  7 questions  that assess anxiety
2. PHQ-9 questionnaire will include 9 questions to assess depression3. Primary Care  PTSD screen for DSM-5 will include 5 yes/no questions  to assess PTSD. 
Three tables will be created, one for each questionnaire.  Based on previous studies it is estimated  the 
response time will be 150 seconds.  
Protocol Summary  Form
8006
Neria, Yuval
Page 9 of 11
In sum, the estimate time  for day 1 (pre  and post intervention) is 8 minutes for  intervention groups 
and 6 minutes for control. The estimate time for each follow up is  5 minutes (day 14 and 30).
Please attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_014], unless  standard  instruments are used
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?
NoTreatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
None. No treatment is involved in this  study, and  the study does not prevent any participant from 
undergoing treatment  for any medical problem.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Breach of confidentiality  is the main risk of the study. Another potential risk is that participants may 
experience mild psychological distress when  answering questions  about COVID-19,  due to  its sensitive  
nature.
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
For both  of these risks, participants will be reminded that their  responses are completely anonymous and  
that they are free to select "prefer not to answer" if they do not wish to answer  a question or  end their study 
participation at any time. Further ways to address  the risk of breach of confidentiality are discussed in  the 
Methods to Protect  Confidentiality section. 
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
AMT protects confidentiality in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_60497].com  privacy  policies.  No identifiable information 
concerning participants'  responses is shared with anyone.
The investigators of  this research will only have access to the anonymous responses  and associated 
demographic data of the respondents. They will not have access  to any identifiable  information of the 
respondents, and  therefore  will be  unable  to identify any individual  respondent.  When setting  up the  data  
collection procedures on Qualtrics.com,  settings available from  Qualtrics will be used to  ensure that IP 
addresses will not be collected.
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_65423] Benefits to Subjects
There is no foreseeable benefit to subjects.
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
Yes
Please describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Participants will be  compensated $3.30 in total for participating in the study ($1.10 for  Day 1, $1.10 for the 
follow-up on Day 14, and $1.10 for the follow-up  on Day 30),  a competitive rate on AMT for such a short 
study. At the conclusion  of each part of the  study,  a “completion code” is displayed  to each participant by 
[CONTACT_60507].  Participants are instructed to input  this code on the AMT  web page where they 
signed up to participate in the study. Once a  participant completes the study and  inputs  the correct code, the 
researchers will credit $1.10 to his/her AMT user account on each  day of participation (for a possible  total 
of $3.30).  There are no bonus payments associated with this study. 
References
References
References
1.WHO: https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/685d0ace521648f8a5beeeee1b9125cd
2.Mittal D, Drummond KL, Blevins D, Curran  G, Corrigan P, Sullivan  G. Stigma associated with 
PTSD: Perceptions of treatment  seeking  combat  veterans. Psychiatric rehabilitation journal. 2013 
Jun;36(2):86Gao J, Zheng  P, Jia Y, et al. Mental health problems and social  media  exposure  during 
COVID-19 outbreak. Available at SSRN 3541120. 2020 Feb 17.
3.C Henderson, S Evans-Lacko,  G Thornicroft.  Mental illness stigma, help  seeking, and  public health 
programs. Am J Public  Health, 103 (2013), pp. 777-780.
4.Mittal D, Drummond KL, Blevins D, Curran  G, Corrigan P, Sullivan  G. Stigma associated with 
PTSD: Perceptions of treatment  seeking  combat  veterans. Psychiatric rehabilitation journal. 2013 
Jun;36(2):86.
5.Smith  JR, Workneh A, Yaya S.  Barriers and Facilitators to  Help-Seeking for Individuals  with  
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Systematic Review.  J Trauma  Stress. 2019 Nov 7. doi: 
10.1002/jts.[ZIP_CODE]. 
6.Rüsch N, Angermeyer MC, Corrigan  PW. Mental illness stigma: concepts, consequences, and 
initiatives to reduce stigma. European psychiatry.  2005  Dec 1;20(8):529-39.
7.Thornicroft G, Mehta  N, Clement  S, Evans-Lacko  S, Doherty  M, Rose D,  Koschorke  M, Shidhaye 
R, O'Reilly C, Henderson C. Evidence  for effective  interventions  to reduce mental-health-related 
stigma and discrimination. The Lancet. 2016 Mar  12;387([ZIP_CODE]):1123-[ADDRESS_65424] of Mental Illness Stigma, On the Stigma of Mental  Illness: 
Practical Strategies for  Research and  Social Change. American  Psychological  Association, 
Washington, DC. 2005.
9.Koike S, Yamaguchi S,  Ojio  Y, Ohta K, Shimada T, Watanabe K,  Thornicroft  G, Ando  S. A 
randomised controlled trial of  repeated  filmed  social contact [CONTACT_60508]-related  
stigma in young adults. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_60498]. 2018 Apr;27(2):199-208.
10.Clement S, van  Nieuwenhuizen A, Kassam A, Flach C, Lazarus A,  De Castro M, McCrone P,  
Norman I, Thornicroft  G. Filmed  v. live social  contact [CONTACT_60509]: randomised  
controlled trial. The British Journal of  Psychiatry. 2012 Jul;201(1):57-64.
11.Corrigan PW, Michaels PJ, Vega  E, Gause  M, Larson J,  Krzyzanowski R, Botcheva L. Key 
ingredients to contact-based  stigma change: A cross-validation. Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal. 
2014 Mar;37(1):62.
12.Berger, B. E., Ferrans, C. E., & Lashley, F.  R. (2001). Measuring stigma  in people with HIV: 
Psychometric assessment of the HIV stigma scale.  Research in Nursing  & Health, 24(6), 518-529. 
Uploads
Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Information  Sheet(s)
Upload copy(ies) of recruitment  materials/ads to be reviewed
Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
Upload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study