 
Protocol 12 -15-2017 
 Title : 
Patient Education Bundle vs. Nurses feedback and Coaching to Prevent Missed Doses of Venous 
Thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis : A crossover, cluster randomized controlled trial  
 
Acronym : 
ENACT (Patient Education Bundle vs. N urses Feedb Ack and C oaching Trial)  
 
Primary Investigator : 
Elliott R. Haut, MD, PhD  
 
Location : 
The Johns Hopkins Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Baltimore, MD  
 
Overview  
VTE associated harm is underappreciated among hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69627]. In order to ensure best practices, and administer a defect -
free VTE prevention nurses must understand and educate patients on the importance of the VTE 
prophylaxis.   We propose to  conduct a randomized trial comparing the effect of a validated, real- time 
patient education bundle (PEB), to a program of nurse feedback and coaching (NFC ) provided by [CONTACT_69629].  
 
Background Missed doses of prescribed Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) pharmacologic prophylaxis is significant problem. Data on patients admitted to The Johns Hopkins Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_69628] 12% of prescribed doses of pharmacologic VTE prophylaxis were not administ ered. There were several reasons 
for these missed doses. The leading reason (nearly 60% of missed doses) was patient or family member 
refusal for any reason.  
 
Based on data collected by [CONTACT_69630] (HSCRC) in the Maryland hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]- acquired conditions (MHAC) program, during [ADDRESS_75964] of current efforts to improve rates of VTE prophylaxis ordering by [CONTACT_13922].  
 
As part of a Patient -Center ed Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) -funded project, the investigators 
have developed a registry of missed doses of VTE prophylaxis that includes data on missed doses of VTE 
prophylaxis.  
 
Primary hypothesis  
Both interventions (PEB and NFC) will improve m edication administration (as measured by [CONTACT_69631])  
 
Secondary hypotheses  
1. Combining both interventions (PEB and NFC) will decrease patient refusal of VTE prophylaxis  
2. Combining both interventions (PEB and NFC) will decrease missed doses for reasons other  than 
patient refusal  
 
Protocol 12 -15-2017 
 3. Overall, PEB intervention will be more effective than NFC in reducing missed doses for any 
reason:  
a. The PEB intervention will be more effective than NFC in reducing in reducing patient refusal 
b. The NFC intervention will be more effectiv e than PEB in reducing missed doses  for 
other reasons of missed doses other than patient refusal 
4. There will be a differential effect on medicine and surgery floors  
5. There will be a differential effect by [CONTACT_69632] (race, age, sex)  
6. There will be a differential effect on high vs. low performing floors  
7. There will be a differential effect dependent on pharmacological dosing regimen (i.e. medication, frequency)  
8. There will be an overall decline in the incidence of VTE events (all, DVT, PE)  
 
Design 
A single institution, crossover, cluster randomized controlled trial (x -cRCT).  
 
Participants   
Eligibility Criteria  
Participating floors will be assigned one of two interventions based on a randomization sequence.  
Eligible floors are defined as:  
A. All medical and surgical flo ors (non - intensive care units)  
B. 16 total floors (10 medicine, 6 surgery)  
 Eligible Patients are defined as: All patients on assigned floors except:  
A. Patient data for those transferred between floors will be excluded.  
B. Patient data for those on floors during the cross -over time will be excluded.  
 Intervention In the PEB arm, the intervention will include:  
A charge nurse will intervene in real- time via an EHR -triggered alert when there is documentation that a 
dose of VTE prophylaxis med ication is not given for any reason. The charge nurse will speak to the 
bedside nurse and one of them will provide the patient with the education bundle including one -on-one 
personalized discussion, supplemented by a 2 -page paper handout and patient educat ion video.  
 
In the NFC arm, the intervention will include:  
Nurse leadership (i.e. managers, directors) will provide data to all nurses on their personal clinical 
effectiveness with the proportion of doses of VTE prophylaxis administered. The data will hav e 
comparisons to their nurse peers on the same floor. Coaching for nurses will include one -on-one 
conversations with bedside nurses with lower performance than their peers.  
 Primary Outcome:  
Missed doses of VTE prophylaxis  
 
Secondary outcomes:  
Patient refu sed doses of VTE prophylaxis  
Missed doses of VTE prophylaxis for reasons other than patient refusal  
VTE events (all VTE, DVT, PE) 
Patient satisfaction (via surveys and HCAHPS scores)  
 
Protocol [ADDRESS_75965] a blinded biostatistician team perform all analyses.  
We will use the intention -to-treat (ITT) approach.  
We will compare outcomes  across intervention periods .   
We will compare outcomes based upon randomized floor.  
We will use multiple output ation to reduce the levels of hierarchical structure to the floor and nurse 
level by [CONTACT_69633] [ADDRESS_75966] by [CONTACT_69634] (medicine vs. surgery) and patient level characteristics (race, sex, age , 
insurance ) when calculating proportion s and risk of missed doses.  
We will conduct a sensitivity analysis (e xcluding floors where prior intervention occurred ). 
Check for differential effect that may eliminate biases in pre -implementation data (by [CONTACT_545], age, sex)  
 
  
 
Protocol 12 -15-2017 
  
 
PRE-TRIAL  
(6 MONTH S) PERIOD I 
(3 MONTHS)  PERIOD II 
(3 MONTHS)  POST -TRIAL  
(3 MONTH S)  
 
 
   
 
RANDOMIZATION     
Randomization 
with sequence 
generator  Block (Medicine) : 
5 Medicine floors - PEB 
5 Medicine floors - NFC 
 Block (Surgery):  
3 Surgery floors - PEB 
3 Surgery floors - NFC Block (Medicine):  
5 Medicine floors - PEB+NFC  
5 Medicine floors - NFC+PEB   
 Block (Surgery):  
3 Surgery floors - PEB+NFC  
3 Surgery floors - NFC+PEB  Observation 
assessment  
 
 PEB  
NFC  
NFC+ PEB  
PEB+NFC  
POST -
TRIAL 
PERIOD  
 