1 
 Am I Stoned? Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a field sobriety test for cannabis use. 
PI: H de Wit 
Other investigators: J Weafer, A Bershad, R Lee 
Jan 11, 2017  
 The rapid increase in use of cannabis across the US has raised public health concerns about safety related to 
the drug, especially risks related to impairments  in cognitive performance and judgment.  There is evidence 
from controlled studies that marijuana and its active ingredient delta-9 -tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) can impair 
memory, reaction time and attention.  However, it is not clear to what extent these impairments are manifested 
in naturalistic, non-laboratory settings , and importantly, it is  not clear to what extent users are aware of their 
impairments  after drug use.  A lack of awareness of impaired performance would pose an especially great risk 
to public safety compared to deficits that are clearly apparent to the user.  
 
We have developed a prototype for an app called Am I Stoned? that could be used by [CONTACT_718840]-laboratory setting to assess their level of impairment relative to their non-intoxicated state. Information 
about impairments and awareness of impairment would be of value to researchers studying the safety of the 
drug, as well as to users who are concerned about their ability to function safely.  In the ultimate version of this 
app, users would engage in a baseline determination phase and then a drug utilization phase. The baseline 
determination phase would require them  to complete simple tasks on a hand-held device (e.g., phone) on [ADDRESS_981074] a controlled, laboratory -based study with known doses 
of THC to determine the sensitivity and time course of the impairments in app-based task performance.  
Therefore our Specific Aims for this administrative supplement are as follows:  
 
Aim 1:  To determine the sensitivity of our  app-based tests of memory, reaction time and attention in 
experienced marijuana users using  known doses of THC (7.5, 15 mg oral) and placebo.  Fifty -six volunteers 
will participate in three 4-hour sessions, separated by [CONTACT_185883].  They will be required to be drug-free at these 
sessions.  On each session they will ingest a single dose of THC (7.5 or 15 mg) or placebo, and complete both 
the computer and app-based tasks  two hours after consumption.  Subjects will also complete brief 
performance tasks and mood questionnaires on a desktop computer  at 0, 1.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 4 hours after 
consumption.  
   
Aim 2:  To assess participants’ ability to predict and estimate their performance impairment.  The participants 
described in Aim [ADDRESS_981075] and estimate their level of performance on each task  (i.e., better than normal, 
about normal, poorer than normal).  These ratings will be examined in relation to participants’ actual 
performance, and subjects  will be provided with feedback  – relative to their non-drug performance.   Awareness 
of impaired performance is a critical step in preventing accidents and minimizing risk. 
 
This proposal will establish the sens itivity of the tasks to be used by [CONTACT_718841].  The project will provide initial information about the participants’ ability to judge their own 
performance, about sensitivity of the tasks, and about inter -individual variability in performance and in drug 
effects.  Once we have established the sensitivity of the app tasks  to detect THC -induced impairment we will 
be ready to deploy the app Am I Stoned? to a more naturalistic setting.  Overall, the long-term benefits of this 
app would be to: 1) improve the safety of marijuana use by [CONTACT_718842], and 2) contribute to our knowledge of marijuana use by [CONTACT_718843].  
This laboratory study is a first step to achieving these goals.  
 
[ADDRESS_981076], it will allow  both researchers  and drug users  to assess  the level of impairment after 
marijuana use using convenient, portable devices  in the users’  own naturalistic  setting.  Second,  it will allow  
both researchers  and users  to determine the users’  own ability  to judge their level of impairment. And relatedly, 
the project will provide information about the relationship between subjective intoxication and impaired 
performance. The information obtained will be valuable to researchers  and users  alike,  and lead to ways  to 
reduce risks from marijuana use. 
 
Marijuana is among the most  widely  used recreational  drugs  in the world, and its use in the US is increasing 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_718834]. Frequent marijuana use is associated with 
numerous  adverse outcomes, including impairments  in cognitive functions  such  as reaction time and short 
term memory  (e.g., Sewell  et al, 2009; Desrosiers  et al, 2015; Broyd  et al, 2016). A recent comprehensive 
review  of the advers e effects  of marijuana by [CONTACT_718844] (2016)  concludes  that marijuana impairs  psychomotor  
function, memory  and attention. However, most  studies  assessing cognitive impairments  have been assessed 
under  highly  controlled laboratory  conditions, and it is not known  whether  these problems  accurately  reflect  the 
impairments  that occur  in the drug users’  natural  environment. Performance assessments  under  controlled 
laboratory  assessments  may either  overestimate the degree of impairment, or underestimate their severity  in 
the more  complex  real-world  setting. It is difficult  to assess users’  performance in the field because we lack 
data on users’  baseline drug-free performance.  We  also lack information about the dose they ingested,  the 
purity  of the drug or the time since  dosing,  and about the users’  psychological  state and activities  at the time of 
testing, and about  the presence of other  drugs. The lack of knowledge about participants’  drug-free 
performance makes  it especially  difficult to know  whether  a user is impaired by a drug, relative to his or her 
own baseline performance. Ultimately, we propose to develop an app to assess participants’  performance on 
simple  cognitive tasks  in their natural  environments, both under  the influence of the drug and in a drug-free 
state.  As  a first step to achieve this goal, and the plan for this administrative supplement, we plan to validate 
the sensitivity  of our app under  controlled conditions.  We  will administer  known doses  of pure THC or placebo 
to participants  who are drug-free, and assess  their performance and performance awareness  under  controlled  
conditions.  Performance will be assessed both on tasks  administered on a phone (to be used in the final app), 
and on standardized computer  tasks  typi[INVESTIGATOR_718835].  Our  goal is to identify  phone tasks  
that are equally  sensitive  to the computer  tasks,  and to show  that both are sensitive to THC administration.    
 
An important feature of our to-be-developed app Am I Stoned? is that it will provide feedback  on users’  
perceptions  of impairment, relative to their actual  impairment.  Drug  users are not always  able to judge their 
own level of performance under  the influence of a drug (Goldstein et al, 2009).  Importantly, this lack of 
knowledge greatly  heightens  the risk for engaging in unsafe  behaviors. Indeed, drugs themselves  may have 
direct effects  on cognitive judgment, which  may impair  the users’  ability  to detect degradation in their 
performance. Evidence from controlled studies  indicates  that drug users  often underestimate the extent to 
which  drugs  impair  their performance. For example Brumbeck  et al (2007)  reported dissociation s between 
perceived and actual  impairment after an acute dose of alcohol  among light and heavy  drinkers. Both light and 
heavy  drinkers  were  equally  impaired by [CONTACT_718845], but the heavy  drinkers  underestimated their level of 
impairment, compared to the light drinkers. It is not known whether  marijuana users  are able to estimate their 
own level of impairment.  A lack of awareness  between perceived and actual  performance impairment has 
important consequences  for safety  of drug use.  
 
This project  will also address  a related question:   Are the user’s  feelings  of intoxication related to his or her 
impaired performance?   In general, feelings  of intoxication  are related to performance impairments  and both 
are related to the dose of drug. However, tolerance can develop to either  the subjective or objective effects , 
and tolerance to the subjective intoxicating effects  may develop more  rapi[INVESTIGATOR_718836]. This discordance is an especially  dangerous  combination for the safe use of drugs. 
Moreover, as noted above, drugs  that produce feelings  of euphoria may also impair  judgment and cognitive 
function. Assuming that users  are more  aware of their subjective state of feeling ‘high’  than their level of 
impairment, this is important information to obtain, and provide directly  to the users.  
[ADDRESS_981077] is highly innovative in several respects.  The ultimate goal is to develop an app that 
will enable users’ to assess their level of impairment in the own natural environments.  The app- based tasks 
will be brief, simple and sensitive, and relate to impairments that may affect the user’s functioning.  The app 
will also provide unique new information about the extent to which users are aware of their impairments in 
performance.  The project outlined here is the first step to developi[INVESTIGATOR_718837], by [CONTACT_718846] a controlled 
setting.  
 
 
Approach.  
This is a proposal for an administrative supplement to obtain preliminary, proof-of-concept data to develop an 
app for self -assessment of  cannabis-induced impairment .  Marijuana use, for both recreational and 
therapeutic purposes, is becoming increasingly common  as states remove restrictions on use. The increased 
use raises new concern about the safety of this drug, including its ability to impair  basic cognitive and 
psychomotor tasks , and whether the users are aware of their impairment.  
 
We propose to design a simple performance test that users can use in the field, using a cell phone, to assess  
their level of impairment relative to their own drug-free state. In this preliminary study we will compare 
participants’ simple task performance after a known dose of d elta-9 -tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC), or placebo, 
administered under double blind conditions .  In our app the participants will be  asked  to gauge their own 
perceived level of impairment (as determined by [CONTACT_6270]-ratings and judgments of impairment) as well as  their 
actual  impairment (as gauged by [CONTACT_9426]) , providing important feedback and training about their ability to 
detect impairment.  In the ultimate version of the app (though not in this task development study) we will 
provide participants with feedback about their performance, including both their objective performance and 
their perceptions of the performance.  It will be valuable for users to know that their drug use leads to 
decrements in performance, and it would be especially informative if we can demonstrate their inability to gauge their own impairment.  These features will be part of the final app, when we get to the point of 
administering it repeatedly in the non -laboratory setting.  
 
THC,  the primary psychoactive ingredient of mari juana, is known to impair short-term memory , increase 
reaction time and impair attention. We will examine four tasks sensitive to the effects of THC using a simple 
app in a controlled setting (memory task, motor tappi[INVESTIGATOR_91989], reaction time and addition; Broyd et al, 2016; 
Desrosiers et al, 2015). The data obtained in the controlled setting will provide the basis for future  testing in the 
naturalistic, field setting.  Fifty -six healthy experienced but non-daily  marijuana users will be recruited for a 
three-session laboratory study, in which they receive oral doses of THC (7.5 and 15 mg oral) and placebo 
under double blind conditions .  They will be required to be THC -free at the beginning of the 4-hour sessions.  
During the sessions subjects  will ingest the drugs and complete the app tasks two hours after ingestion, as well 
as standardized laboratory measures of performance and mood states at half hour intervals .  Subjects will be 
asked to estimate their level of performance before and after each app task completion, without feedback on 
their actual performance.  Cardiovascular measures (heart rate and blood pressure) will be obtained at regular intervals .  The primary goal is to develop app tasks that are sensitive to the drug’s effects and the drug dose on 
performance, as a model for future field testing.   
 
We would like to expand on several methodological considerations  and our responses to them. 
1. Why use THC instead of marijuana?  We have chosen to develop the app tasks with THC because the drug is readily available and because it has a known pharmacology, time course and dose effects.  We 
recognize that we propose to use the app in a naturalistic setting where users will be using marijuana, 
and not THC, and where we have little control of the composition of the marijuana they will be using.  
However, to develop a task sensitive to the primary psychoactive ingredient of marijuana, we feel that oral THC is the drug with which we have the most control.  
2. Why not obtain plasma samples of THC and its metabolites during each session, to link impairments to 
plasma levels of THC and its metabolites?  This would be extremely valuable, and we have given 
careful consideration to the possibility of obtaining plasma samples .  It would help to account for 
individual differences in absorption and metabolism, and to serve as a comparison to drug levels 
[ADDRESS_981078] a nurse present to insert indwelling catheters and take the blood draws for repeated 
samples. Nurses charge about $50 per hour, and with fringe this would require $25,[ADDRESS_981079] of the assays. An even greater expense would be the assays  for both THC and its 
metabolites in repeated samples. One less costly alternative would be to obtain a single blood sample 
at the expected time of peak levels, but a single sample would not provide information about peak or 
time course.  
3. Why not obtain saliva samples to monitor THC levels? Most commercially available salivary THC kits 
test only presence or absence of THC.  The quantitative assays that do exist measure only THC and 
not its metabolites, and because the metabolites form quickly and contribute to the behavioral effects, 
the simple THC level would provide little useful information.  
 
Thus, w e believe that for this purpose it would be best to administer oral THC.  We do not feel that the plasma 
level data are essential for our purpose, as we plan to administer fixed doses of oral THC to participants who are known to be drug-free at the beginning of the sessions. We recognize that marijuana contains many other 
constituents than THC, and that the pharmacokinetic profile of oral THC is very different from smoked 
marijuana (Milman et al, 2014; Wachtel et al 2002) .  Yet, THC (and its metabolites; Huestis, 2007)  seem s to be 
the primary active ingredient responsible for the behavioral and subjective effects of marijuana (Wachtel et al, 
2002). Although the pharmacokinetic information would be of value in a future study, we feel that in this study, 
where we have full control over the dose and time course of the drug effects, we can accomplish our primary 
goals without THC assays  
 
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS.   
Participants. Healthy experienced but nondaily marijuana users (N= 56 obtain, 48 completers ; 24 men, 24 
women 18-35 years)  will be recruited with print and internet ads. Our ultimate target population in the future 
naturalistic phase of this project will be users who use occasionally but not daily, in order to obtain information 
about both drug-free and post-drug performance. We are not targeting daily users for this project  because we 
wish to obtain baseline data from drug-free days as well as data from smoking days, to provide users with 
accurate feedback  on their performance.  Thus, only experienced, non-daily  users will be recruited in this 
preliminary study.  Participants will be screened according to Protocol 13681B, and accordingly  must have at 
least a high school education, BMI 19-26, no current physical or psychiatric health problems determined by a 
physical examination, an electrocardiogram and an in-person psychiatric screening interview  (SCID; First et al, 
2015), no current medications, and no current substance use problems , based on the interview and a time-line 
followback .  We will exclude women who are pregnant or planning to become pregnant. We will obtain detailed 
information about participants’ drug use history, including their use of cannabis.  Participants who meet criteria for Moderate or Severe Cannabis Dependence will be excluded (First et al, 2015) , and subjects must agree to 
abstain from marijuana use to test negative for recent cannabis use at each session.  For this protocol w e will 
obtain information about habitual cannabis use (age at first use, period of heaviest use, past year use and 
current use over the past month), so that we may use l evel of use as a covariate in the analysis. We will also 
collect data on sex, age,  height and weight to conduct exploratory analyses on these variables.  Women will be 
tested any phase of the cycle except women who report serious premenstrual dysphoria will be tested during 
the follicular phase.  We will record whether women are users of oral contraception and the phase of their 
menstrual cycle at each session .   
Sample Size and Power : We will test [ADDRESS_981080] drug effects.  We based the sample size on our own 
previous studies and other published reports  using laboratory -based studies .  De srosiers et al (2015) detected 
effects of smoked marijuana (6.8% THC) on c ognitive and psychomotor performance using a critical tracking 
task and a divided attention task using samples of [ADDRESS_981081] found in a previous study 
(Ballard et al., 2013) that THC significantly impaired memory accuracy  (relative to placebo) for positive and 
negative affective images , with large effect sizes in each case (partial eta squared = .20 and .13 respectively).  
Orientation session.  Subjects will first participate in a 1-hour  orientation session to provide informed 
consent, agree to the study conditions described above, and practice the performance tasks . They will be 
instructed to refrain from any use of drugs or alcohol for [ADDRESS_981082] pass urine tests for recent drug use including marijuana, and to 
pass these tests they should abstain from use for one week if they are light users (1- 2 times per week) and for 
two weeks if they are heavier users (e.g., daily).  They will be instructed to abstain from smoking marijuana for 
the entire study. They will be told to have a normal night’s sleep before the session, and a small breakfast 
before the sessions.  Subjects will then practice the app tasks and the computer  tasks to be used in the three 
sessions to minimize practice effects across the three study sessions.  
Experimental protocol.  Each subject will participate in three  sessions ( 0, 7.5 mg and 15 mg THC ) in 
counterbalanced order, separated by [CONTACT_386787] . The sessions will be conducted from [ADDRESS_981083] for pregnancy (women). Those who test positive for any drugs will be rescheduled and pregnant women 
will be dropped.  Participants  will then complete pre -drug mood questionnaires  and their heart rate and blood 
pressure will be measured. They will then ingest a capsule containing 0, 7.5 or 15 mg Dronabinol  with 100 ml 
water.  One drug condition will be administered on each of the three days, in mixed order and under double-
blind conditions.  Subjects  will complete the tasks 2 hours after ingesting the capsule, and heart rate and blood 
pressure, as well as mood questionnaires, will be measured at half hour intervals .  At times when no 
experimental events are scheduled subjects will be free to relax, read or watch tv.  Following the sessions 
subjects will be escorted to public transportation or provided with transportation home. 
Drug.  THC (Marinol® [dronabinol]; Solvay Pharmaceuticals) will be orally administered in doses of 7.5 mg 
and 15 mg, in opaque capsules with dextrose filler. Placebo capsules contain only dextrose. These doses of 
THC are known to produce performance impairments as well as subjective intoxication (Broyd  et al, 2016; 
Hartman and Huestis, 2013) . 
     Dependent measures.   
Selection of tasks :  We have  selected  five app tasks from ResearchKit 
[http://www.researchkit.org/docs/docs/ActiveTasks/ActiveTasks.html] that are likely  to be affected by [CONTACT_718847] 
(Broyd  et al, 2016;  Hartman and Huestis, 2013) .  These are spatial -span  memory ), finger  tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007] , reaction 
time, mental  addition,  and time perception/estimation.  These tasks assess basic  motor, psychological  and 
cognitive  function that THC and marijuana are known to affect (Broyd  et al, 2016; Hartman and Huestis, 2013 ; 
Sewell  et al. 2013).   The tasks  are relevant to everyday  activities  including safe operation of machines  and 
accurate decision-making  in a job setting.  Note that the App to be used in the future naturalistic  study  will 
include additional  features  related to consent, demographic  characteristics  and data collection and 
management.  However, for the present, laboratory -based study  we will only use the App to administer  the 
tasks  and collect data on the hand-held device.  We have selected four tasks from ResearchKit for initial  
testing, with the goal of selecting the three most  sensitive tasks  for the next stage of the project.  The  working 
software operates  on a mobile device using Apple’s  ResearchKit framework. For the purpose of this laboratory -
based preliminary  study  we will distribute the app to iOS devices  we provide through the Apple “B2B” 
(business -to-business)  distribution system. Reviewers  wishing  to examine the app should ask us for a 
redemption code that will give them  access.  Task  performance and questionnaire data collected on the app will 
be transferred to an Access database on our main  computer  system.  
 
The four tasks  will be presented in mixed  order  at each hourly  administration of the task.   From  these four 
tasks  we propose to select the three  tasks  that are most  sensitive to the effects  of THC, and show  the least 
change in learning across  sessions .  
• Spatial  Memory  (forward  and reverse ): In this memory  task participants  are asked to observe and then 
recall  pattern sequences  of increasing length in a game-like  environment. The span is automatically  
varied during the task, increasing after successful  completion of a sequence, and decreasing after 
failures, in a range from [ADDRESS_981084]  recall  pattern 
sequences  in reverse  order. 
• Finger -tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]: In this measure of psychomotor  performance and coordination, the participant rapi[INVESTIGATOR_718838]-dominant hand for 20 
seconds.  
• Reaction time:  In this  reaction time task, the user is asked to shake the device in response to a visual 
6 
 clue on the device’s screen. The user makes  three attempts, in which he or she must shake or move 
the device with an acceleration that is greater than the value of the thresholdAcceleration property 
within the given time. The task finishes when the user successfully completes the attempts as 
instructed in the task. Data collected by [CONTACT_718848]. 
Each of these objects contain a timestamp representing the delivery of the stimulus and an ORKFileResult object that references the motion data collected during an attempt.  
• Paced Visual Serial Addition Task  (PVSAT).  The PVSAT measures cognitive function that assesses 
visual information processing speed, flexibility, and the calculation ability of the user. Single digits are 
presented every [ADDRESS_981085] 
answers.  
• Time Perception/Estimation Task. The time perception/estimation task measures two components of 
time perception, time estimation as well as time production. The user must estimate the amount of time 
elapsed during a certain visual distraction for several trials and then the user must hold down a button 
for a defined period of seconds without seeing a timer.  
 Self-evaluations of performance on the app tasks.  Subjects will be asked to estimate their performance on 
the tasks immediately  before and following each task.  They will indicate on a 5-point scale whether they think 
their performance will be or was poorer than normal (1-2), about the same as normal (3) or better than normal (4-5).  They will not be provided with feedback on their estimates, relative to their actual performance, until the 
end of the study.  The apps are currently being developed.  
 
Computer -based tasks.  Participants  will also complete standardized psychomotor tasks on a desktop 
computer 1.5 hours  after drug administration. We will be converting all the ResearchKit tasks into computer -
based tasks. This will allow us to compare performance decrements using the hand-held device to impairments 
seen with typi[INVESTIGATOR_718839].   
 
Self-report rating questionnaires.   Prior to performing the tasks as well as after  completing the tasks , they 
will also complete questionnaires regarding the mood and intoxication states  0, 1.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 4 hours 
after consumption. They will complete the Drug Effects Questionnaire (Morean et al 2013), asking whether 
they feel a drug effect, whether they like or dislike it and whether they feel high.  They will also complete a 
shortened version of the Marijuana scale of the Addiction Research Center Inventory (Chait et al 1994) to 
detect marijuana-specific mood effects.   
 
Data  analysis and timeline. The primary  outcome measures  are i) actual  performance on the app tasks: ; ii) 
actual performance on the desktop tasks. iii) predicted and perceived performance on each task, and iv) 
ratings  of how “high”  the subject feels. First we will examine the quality  of the data to exclude grossly  
inappropriate responses  (e.g., all minimum or all maximum values). Then  we will determine whether  there are 
orderly  changes  in task performance (i.e., improvement or decline)  across the 3 sessions,  and co-vary  for 
session  order  if necessary . Then we will assess the effects  of the drug on performance on each  task and on 
the mood questionnaires  using linear  mixed  models  for repeated measures  (Hedeker  & Gibbons, 2006)  with 
factors  of drug condition  and session  time point,  and random  subject intercept and session  effects .  For drug 
condition, we will treat placebo as the reference cell and make  comparisons  of each drug level to placebo.  We 
expect that the effects  of THC on both subjective state and performance will peak  two hours  after drug 
ingestion. Finally,  we will examine relationships  across variables . We will examine the concordance in 
impairment using the desktop administered tasks  and the tasks administered with hand-held devices.  We  will 
also examine the relationship between participants’  estimates  of the impairment and their actual  impairment by 
[CONTACT_147572] a ratio between the two (drug  minus  placebo for estimates: drug minus  placebo for actual  
impairment).   We expect that it will take one year to complete testing of [ADDRESS_981086] the capacity to create new 
tasks using ResearchKit.  Another possibility is that performance on the app tasks differs from performance o 
the computer based tasks.  If the app tasks are more sensitive (to time or dose effects), we will continue to use 
these.  If they less sensitive we will again review the difficulty level of the app tasks, and attempt to harmonize 
the app tasks with the computer -based tasks.   
 
Next  steps.   Once  we have demonstrated that the app is sensitive  to the effects  of THC,  we will be ready  to 
test it in a non-laboratory  setting.  The  ResearchKit apps  are designed for use in real-world  settings, and we 
expect to be able to proceed to the next phase with little further  technical  development.  In the next phase, we 
will invite  occasional  marijuana users  (N=20)  to participate in a feasibility  study, in which  they agree to 
complete the tasks  on [ADDRESS_981087] 3 hours.  (In  the present project we will wait one week  between sessions  to allow  full 
clearance of THC between sessions.)   Subjects  will provide informed consent, demographic  information (age, 
sex, education), and information about their current habitual  drug use. We will collect  the data in a coded form, 
and compare the performance and performance evaluations  to the findings  from our laboratory  study.  Once  
we determine the sensitivity  of the app to detect impairments  when used outside the laboratory, we can 
proceed to offer the app on a larger  scale  to marijuana users  who are interested in obtaining objective 
feedback  on their level of impairment. 
 
 
Literature cited 
 
Broyd  SJ, van Hell HH, Beale C, Yücel M, Solowij  N. (2016)  Acute and Chronic  Effects  of Cannabinoids  on 
Human Cognition-A Systematic  Review.  Biol Psychiatry. 79(7):557-67.  
 
Brumback,T , D Cao, A King (2007)  Effects  of alcohol  on psychomotor  performance and perceived impairment 
in heavy  binge  social  drinkers . Drug  and Alcohol  Dependence 91:10– 17 
 
Chait, LD, JL Perry,  Acute and residual effects of alcohol and marijuana, alone and in combination, on mood 
and performance. (1994) Psychopharmacology 15:340-9. 
 Desrosiers, NA, JG Ramaekers, E Chauchard, DA Gorelick  MA Heustis   (2015)  Smoked cannabis’  
psychomotor  and neurocognitive  effects  in occasional  and frequent smokers.  J Anal Toxic  39, 251-261. 
 First MB, Williams JBW, Karg RS, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280] (2015) Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -5—Research 
Version (SCID -5 for DSM -5, Research Version; SCID -5-RV). Arlington, VA, American Psychiatric Association.  
 Goldstein, RZ, AD Craig, A Bechara, H Garavan, AR Childress, M Paulus, N Volkow (2009) The neurocircuitry 
of impaired insight in drug addiction. Trends in Cognitive Science, 13, 372-380. 
 
Hartman, RL and MA Huestis (2013) Cannabis effects on driving skills.  Clinical Chemistry, 59: 478-492. 
 
Hedeker, D and RD Gibbons (2016)  Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Wiley: Hoboken, NJ.  
 
Huestic, MA (2007) Human cannabinoid pharmacokinetics.  Chem Biodivers 4: 1770-1804.  
 Milman  G MM Bergamaschi , D Lee, DR Mendu, AJ Barnes , R Vandrey , and MA Huestis
, (2014) Plasma 
Cannabinoid Concentrations during Dronabinol Pharmacotherapy for Cannabis Dependence Ther Drug Monit. 
36(2): 218– 224. 
 
Morean, ME, H de Wit, AC King, M Sofuoglu, SY Rueger, SS OMalley (2013) The drug effects questionnaire: 
8 
 psychometric support across three drug types. Psychopharmacology 227:177-92 
 
Sewell  RA J Poling,  and M Sofuoglu (2009)  The effect of cannabis  compared with alcohol  on driving. Am J 
Addict. 18(3):  185– 193. 
  
Wachtel, S. R., ElSohly, M. A., Ross, S. A., & de Wit, H. (2002).  A comparison of the subjective effects of ∆9-
tetrahydrocannabinol and marijuana in humans.  Psychopharmacology, 161, 331-339. PMID: 12073159 
 