1 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Systematic Investigation of Neurophysiological Correlates of Low Dose Intravenous Ketamine in 
Treatment Resistant Depression Patients  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 08/02/2017  
  
2 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
 essant res   
Protocol Title: A systematic investigation of neurophysiological correlates of low dose intravenous 
Ketamine in treatment resistant depression patients  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_374329], M.B.B.S. DPhil, Assistant Professor of Psychiatry  
Co-Investigators:  
 Salih  Selek,  M.D.  Visiting  Associate  Professor,  Department  of Psychiatry  & Behavioral  Sciences  
 Jair C. Soares,  MD, PhD.  Professor  and Chairman  of Department  of Psychiatr y and Behavioral  Sciences  
 Giovana Zunta -Soares, M.D. Assistant Professor of  Psychiatry  
 Raymond Cho, M.D., M.Sc. Assistant Professor of  Psychiatry  
 Joao Luciano De Quevedo, MD, PhD. Professor of  Psychiatry  
 Gabriel Rodrigo Fries, PhD, Postdoctoral Research  Fellow  
 
Study Coordinators:  
 Nithya Ramakrishnan, M.S. B.Eng., Assistant Research  Engineer 
Kathryn Durkin, B.S., Research Assistant  II 
Population: 20 patients, age: 18 -60 
Number of Sites: 1 
Study Duration: [ADDRESS_468644] Duration: 2 -3 weeks  
 
General Information  
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is one of the most disabling mental illnesses worldwide with a lifetime 
prevalence of about 17% in the [LOCATION_002] [1, 2] and is associated with increased mortality [3, 4]. Treatment 
resistant depressio n (TRD), defined as reduced clinical response to adequate doses and duration of 
antidepressants,  is a severe,  chronic  and most  disabling  form of MDD  [5, 6]. The introduction  of antidepressants 
revolutionized the field of mood disorders since 1950’s. Antide pressants significantly reduced the morbidity, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374330] [7]. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_374331], 
nearly 50% of depressed patients do not, unfortunately, fully respond to treatment [6, 8] and current 
antidepressants takes few weeks to work. Furthermore, there are no reliable clinical biomarkers available to 
predict who will respond to antidepressant treatment and thus patients often go through several trial -and-error 
attempts  of different  treatment  strategies  with only modest  benefits.  Identifying  novel  therapeutic  targets  for TRD 
is a critical priority as prolonged illness is a strong predictor of poor functional outcome [6, 9]. Consequently, 
there are two primary challenges in antidepress ant research: (a) developi[INVESTIGATOR_374332], safe and effective 
antidepressant treatments, and (b) developi[INVESTIGATOR_374333] a focus on early indicators of treatment response. The serendipi[INVESTIGATOR_374334], a widely used anesthetic drug, has opened up development of 
novel glutamate based antidepressant treatment strategies. The overarching objective of the current project is 
to address  the challenge  of developi[INVESTIGATOR_374335] -validated, reliable and non -invasive clinical neurophysiological techniques such as 
electroencephalography (EEG) and transcranial magnetic stimulation  (TMS). 
 
Background Information  
Ketamine hydrochloride (HCl) is widely used anesthetic agent with intravenous bolus injection at of 1 to 4.5 
mg/kg at a rate of 0.5 mg/kg/min can rapi[INVESTIGATOR_374336] 30 seconds and lasting for 5 –10 
min [10] . The sub -anesthetic dose (0.5 mg/kg over 40 minutes) of Ketamine improves depression symptoms in 
patients with TRD [11 -13], bipolar depression [14] and post -traumatic stress disorder [15] and also in reducing 
suicidal ideation (SI) in depressed patients [ 16, 17]. The improvement in depression scores were seen as early 
as 2 hours and the antidepressant effects persisted in up to 35% of patient at the end of 7 days [11]. Murrough 
et al 2013 [12] conducted a relatively larger (N=[ADDRESS_468645]), two site, randomized,  parallel design clinical trial and 
confirmed the superior efficacy of Ketamine even compared to active placebo anesthetic drug, midazolam in 
reducing depression symptoms. ]The response rates to Ketamine vs. midazolam were 64% and 28%, 
respectively  with strong effect  size (Cohen’s  d 0.7) and 21 out of 47 patients  Ketamine -treated  patients  continued 
to exhibit improved scores over the 7 -day period and thus highlighting inter -individual variability in duration   of 
response  to Ketamine . A subsequent  study  found that early antidep r pI[INVESTIGATOR_374337]: HfiSrsCt-MinSf-u16s-i0o7n05 
3 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
was highly  predictive  of a sustained  response  to subsequent  infusions  [18]. IThus,  even  though  the efficacy 
of ketamine has been clearly established by [CONTACT_374351], the exact underlying neural mechanisms involved in 
Ketamine’s  rapid  antidepressant  effect  is still unclear  [23]. Ketamine  is a n-methyl  aspartate  (NMDA)  antagonist 
and administration at low doses transiently increases glutamate release in the frontal cortex, thus enhancing 
glutamatergic neurotransmission presumably through non -NMDA mechanisms such as α -amino -3-hydroxy -5- 
methyl -4-isoxazole propi[INVESTIGATOR_149046] (AMPA), metabotropic glutamate, and kainate receptors [24, 25]. Indeed, 
AMPA  antagonist  pretreatment  abolishes  Ketamine’s  antidepressant  effect  [26]. Anesthetic  dose  of Ketamine  is 
however not associated with glutamate release [25 ]. NMDA receptor antagonism decreases the activity of 
cortical parvalbumin -positive interneurons and causes cortical excitation by [CONTACT_374352] 
[25]. Recent neurobiological studies suggest that Ketamine induced NMDA blockade triggers a complex 
intracellular  cascade  - Ketamine  upregulates  BDNF  expression  by [CONTACT_374353]  (eEF2) 
kinase [27], and increases synaptic protein synthesis and spi[INVESTIGATOR_374338] (PFC) [28]. In 
summary, a sub -anesth etic dose of Ketamine induces increased glutamate activity and initiates synaptic 
plasticity processes presumably mediating the antidepressant effects [29, 30]. The challenge is to be able to 
validate these preclinical findings in patients with depression.  In addition, it is unclear if the early increases in 
glutamatergic  neurotransmission  are related  to the antidepressant  action.  If there  are non-invasive  biomarkers 
available, then it is possible to directly test in TRD patients if the early antidepressant effect of Ketamine is 
related  to enhanced  glutamate  neurotransmission  and synaptic  plasticity . 
 
Clinical markers of glutamate neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity  
Substantial evidence has shown abnormalities in glutamatergic neuro transmission causing impairments in 
neural plasticity in mood disorders [31]. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) has been employed to 
measure brain glutamate and glutamine. MRS Ketamine studies in healthy subjects have been inconsistent, 
showing no chan ge or increased glutamate or glutamine. One study in TRD patients found Ketamine 
pretreatment low Glx/glutamate ratio (as a marker of glutamine) in the prefrontal cortex was associated with 
greater improvement [32]. Proton MRS measurements of glutamate and  glutamine, especially at low field MRI, 
has poor spatial  and chemical  resolution.  A 1H-[13C] -MRS  at high MRI field show  sub-anesthetic  Ketamine  dose 
increase  glutamate/glutamine  cycle  in rats [33] but these  findings  require  confirmation  in human  clinical  subjects. 
Peripheral BDNF levels: Antidepressant treatment increases brain BDNF expression. While it is currently not 
possible  to measure  brain  BDNF  in patient,  peripheral  BDNF  levels  are decreased  in patients  with MDD  [34] and 
serum BDNF increases is asso ciated with antidepressant treatment response [35]. Ketamine significantly 
increased plasma Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) levels in treatment responders compared to non - 
responders at [ADDRESS_468646] -infusion [36, 37] and negatively correlated with  the depression scores [38]. These 
results suggest that plasma BDNF at [ADDRESS_468647] findings (Fabbri and Serretti, 2015). Specifically, associations with 
genetic  variants are especially  complicated  because  they require  very large  sample  sizes  and not often  look into 
the functionality  of those  variants.  In this context,  switching  the focus  to functional  genetic  markers,  such  as DNA 
methylation and gene expression levels, to predict a priori the response to treatment, would overcome those 
limitations and allow for a more accurate and dynamic measure of how the cells of a given patient will actually 
respond to potential medications . This approach has been proposed by a recent study showing that the ex vivo 
cellular  response  to medications  can predict  the clinical  outcome  of the treatment  in vivo. Specifically,  the degree 
to which paroxetine reduced the phosphorylation of the enzyme DNA methyltransferase (thereby [CONTACT_374354])  in peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells of depressed 
patients  significantly  correla ted with the reduction  of depressive  symptoms  after six weeks  of treatment  (Gassen 
& Fries et al., 2015). In other words, the failure to improve symptoms was detected after seventy two hours of 
ex vivo treatment in blood cells. In this sense, the study aim s to observe specific expression and/or  methylation  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  
4 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
markers measured in blood cells isolated treated ex vivo with a single dose of ketamine and it’s correlation with 
the clinical response to treatment in patients with treatment -resistant depression.  
 
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) measures of Corti cal Excitability  
TMS is a widely employed non -invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) technique to characterize neurophysiological 
function  underlying  neuropsychiatric  illnesses  [39], including  markers  of cortical  excitability  and plasticity  that can 
elucidate the neurobiology of drug action [40]. TMS paradigms include measurements of motor evoked 
potentials (MEP) with surface electromyography (EMG) applied to hand muscles such as the abductor pollicis 
brevis (APB) after applying single or paired T MS pulses on the motor cortex [41, 42]. The motor cortex is an 
extensively studied target area for neurophysiological studies because changes in motor activation and 
excitability can be readily and reliably assessed by [CONTACT_374355] [42]. MEP amplitude, cortico -moto r threshold (MT) 
and intra -cortical facilitation (ICF) are commonly reported measures of cortical excitability function [42]. The 
MEP amplitude is measured as the average response to a series of TMS pulses applied at a consistent TMS 
intensity [43]. MEP am plitude is thought to be dependent on NMDA and voltage gated channels and thus 
modulated  by [CONTACT_374356] a reliable  measure  of the excitatory/inhibitory  balance  of cortical 
pyramidal cells [39]. MT is a measure of corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_374339] [40, 42]. Voltage -gated sodium (Na) channels regulate axon 
excitability  and NMDA  regulates  fast excitatory  synaptic  neurotransmission  in the neocortex  [39]. Anticonvulsants 
with Na channel blocking properties increase MT. Ketamine, a NMDA antagonist, paradoxically decreases MT 
[44]. ICF assessments  by [CONTACT_374357]  a subthreshold  (80%  of RMT)  conditioning  stimulus  followed  by a 
suprathreshold  test stimulus,  with an interstimulus  interval  of 10–20 ms [39, 45]; such  pre-conditioning  facilitates 
(i.e. increases amplitude) the MEP. ICF is thought to index NMDAR -mediated excitatory neurotransmission in 
the cortex [39, 46] though GABA and other neuromodul ators may also contribute to ICF. A review of TMS 
studies of cortical excitability in patients with MDD indicated no significant differences in cortical excitability 
measures  [47]. However,  there  were  cortical  inhibitory  deficits  as measured  by [CONTACT_90169]-cortical inhibition  and silent 
cortical period, both thought to be linked GABA function. Interestingly, Levinson at al. found increased resting 
motor threshold (RMT) in TRD compared with unmedicated MDD patients, medicated/ euthymic MDD patients, 
and healthy su bjects [48]. While chronic (30 days) administration of paroxetine in healthy subjects induced a 
significant increase in ICF, single intravenous administration of serotonergic antidepressants, citalopram and 
clomipramine  reduced  motor  cortical  excitability  in TRD patients  [49]. These  findings  raise  the intriguing  question 
whether any reductions in cortical excitability in TRD patients could be ameliorated by [CONTACT_374358]’s ability to 
increase cortical  excitability.  
 
Auditory steady state response (ASSR) and Gamma band oscillations  
Gamma band oscillations (30 -80 Hz) are thought to play a critical role sensory and cognitive processing, and in 
the pathophysiology  of a number  of neuropsychiatric  disorders.  The auditory  steady  state  response  (ASSR)  is a 
widely used non -invasive electroencephalography (EEG) technique to study cortical gamma oscillations in 
auditory cortex. The ASSR evoked power is thought to be regulated by [CONTACT_374359]  (PV) gamma  aminobutyric  acid (GABA)  inhibitory  interneuron  activity  on sensory  cortical  pyramidal 
[50, 51]. Ketamine and NMDA antagonists dose -dependently increases ASSR power and gamma oscillations 
[52, 53] and causes  increased  cortical  excitability  likely  by [CONTACT_374360]/inhibitory  balance  at the circuit  level 
[25, 54, 55]. Further, there has been recent initial validations of ASSR at 40 Hz frequency as a potential marker 
of NMDA activity [56]. Only one study looking at ASSR using MEG study reported no change in MDD patients 
compared to healthy subjects bu t significantly larger ASSR power if compared with BD patients  [57] 
 
Objectives  
The primary goal of the project is to study the effect of Ketamine on cortical neurophysiological function in TRD 
patients. There are three key preclinical findings regarding K etamine antidepressant effects that motivate the 
current  study:  a) low dose  Ketamine  causes  early  increase  in glutamate  neurotransmission;  b) Ketamine  initiates 
synaptic plasticity; c) ketamine infusion leads to rapid improvement in depression symptoms; d) specific 
expression and/or methylation markers measured in blood cells isolated treated ex vivo with ketamine will 
significantly correlate with the clinical response to treatment in patients with treatment -resistant depression; The 
proposal essentially em ploys robust and non -invasive neurophysiological techniques, ASSR -gamma oscillatory 
response  and  TMS  cortical  excitabilit y  to  investigat e  the  abov e  finding s  in  patie nIRtsB wNUithMBtrEeRat:mHeSCnt-MreSs-1is6t-a07n0t5 
5 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468648]  is innovative  in multiple  respects;  this proposal  is the first systematic  investigation  of 
neurophysiological correlates of rapid antidepressant effect of low dose intravenous Ketamine in TRD 
patient  and is highly  innovative  and original.  The study  design  will be an open  label  intervention  and by [CONTACT_374361],  it is possible  to study  temporal 
dynamics of neurophysiological changes and closely relate these to the changes in depression symptoms. 
This proposal will be significant contribution to our understanding of Ketamine’s early antidepressant effect . 
This project will be the first attempt to study the effect of Ketamine on cortica l gamma ASSR and index of 
NMDA activity in TRD patients. Another innovative component of this project is the integration of clinical, 
neurophysiological  and blood  based  BDNF  markers  in the study  of Ketamine  antidepressant  effect.  This proposal 
will potenti ally yield substantial data on markers of treatment response. As reported above, BDNF measures 
were only reported at [ADDRESS_468649] of low dose Ketamine on cortical 
excitability and plasticity in the Dorsal Lateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) of patients with TRD using TMS -EEG . 
We had previously  collected  cortical  excitability  data from [ADDRESS_468650] determined  resting  motor 
thresholds (RMT) as the lowest stimulator output intensity which elicited an MEP greater than [ADDRESS_468651] 
5 out of 10 trials. RMTs were found to be comparable across participants ( M=53.8 , SE =5.0;, purple) and 
commensurate with previous investig ations in the literature. Bipolar EMG recordings of the APB muscle during 
TMS at 100% RMT demonstrated a mean peak to peak amplitude of 569 µV. To measure ICF, an initial 
conditioning  pulse  applied  at 80% of RMT  was followed  by a test pulse  at 100%  RMT  at an inter-stimulus  interval 
of 10 ms. MEP responses at this latency resulted in an increased mean peak to peak MEP amplitude of   1381  
µV- a 233%  increase  over the single  pulse  response.  Our assessment  of motor  cortex  excitability  was determined 
to be robust and reliable with a total data collection time of less than four minutes and minimal data processing. 
Thus,  our TMS  indices  are a straightforward  and ideal  index  of Ketamine -induced  cortical  excitability  changes.  
 
Exploratory Aim: T o investigate Ketamine’s acute excitatory glutamatergic effect on cortex as indexed by [CONTACT_374362]. The first goal of the study is to deploy auditory steady state response (ASSR) and gamma band 
oscillations as a marker of Ketamine’s early excitatory effect on  cortex. We previously studied the feasibility of 
quantifying the effect of pharmacological manipulations on cortical ASSR power. We studied the effect of 
amphetamine, which increases synaptic dopamine neurotransmission. Twelve healthy subjects (mean age 
30.3±10,  M:F 7:5) took part in a double -blind,  cross -over,  placebo -controlled  study  of single -dose  amphetamine 
(0.5 mg/kg) administration. Subjects performed the ASSR task, involving auditory click trains consisting of 
binaural presentations of 1 ms duratio n tones repetition frequencies of 40 Hz, 30 Hz, or 20 Hz. To ensure 
attention to stimuli, click trains were presented as an oddball paradigm. Electroencephalographic (EEG) data 
during task performance were collected on a 128 channel Geodesic Sensor Net. Of f-line de -noising and 
averaging will be performed with EEGLAB (62), and wavelet analyses with Brain Vision Analyzer. The average 
evoked gamma power was derived for the 40 Hz stimuli over the interval 225 –525 ms after stimulus onset. 
Amphetamine  showed  decreases  in gamma  power  specifically  to the 40 Hz stimuli  (t=2.3,  p<.05,  dz=0.66).  Time 
frequency plots of gamma power after amphetamine for [ADDRESS_468652] 
 
Study Design and Procedure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  
6 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468653] patients  will receive  low dose 
Ketamine (0.5 mg/kg) over 40 minutes as previous studies  [58]. 
The overall study design is described in Figure1 above.  
Ketamine  infusion:  We will use slow infusions  of ketamine  over a time period  of 40 minutes.  Study  drug will be 
provided in syringes, containing clear solutions of 1 ml of (0.5mg/kg) ketamine. The dosage will be calculated 
using the patient’s weight in kilograms. For dosing purposes, 0.[ADDRESS_468654]  (Salih  Selek)  will monitor  the patient  at HCPC. 
The administration of ketamine will be initiated by [CONTACT_101034]. The anesthesiologist will be present 
during  the ketamine  administration  (40 minutes)  and post-procedu re (until  patient  is awake  and anesthesiologist 
deems patient is clinically stable. The infusions will be conducted in our hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374340] a room 
set specially for this study. During the infusion, patients will be asked constantly about “how they feel” and will 
receive c onstant attendance from a psychiatric nurse and the attending ACLS - trained psychiatrist. ECG and 
pulse  oximetry  monitoring  will be maintained  throughout  the infusions  to check  for hemodynamic  changes.  
After  completion  of each  [ADDRESS_468655] ER/physician in case of emergency. We will make it clear to the patient that all of the study 
procedures  are optional  at patients’  and the PIs discretion.  
Cortical Excitability -TMS procedure: TMS -EEG will be performed at 4 hours, 24 hours and 7 days after the 
infusion. Patients will be seated in an armchair with elbow semi -flexed; the forearm pronated and fully relaxed. 
Participants will be given ear plugs for comfort and noise safety. A MagVenture MagPro X100 transcranial 
magnetic stimulator system with a figure -of-eight coil (diameter=70 mm for each loop) will be placed tangentially 
over the scalp overlying the primary motor cortex and DLPFC. The stimulator is paired with Localite 
neuronavigatio n  system  which  allow s  precisel y  localize d  stimulus  applicatio n  andIRiBtsNiUntMegBrEaRti:oHnSCal-sMoS-a1l6lo-0w7s05 

7 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
external control of the MagPro system. EMG readings may be obtained from the APB muscle. TMS stimulation 
will be applied to the corresponding region of the contralateral primary motor cortex . The optimal coil position 
will be determined by [CONTACT_68290] 1 -cm increments over the motor cortical area while delivering magnetic 
pulses and by [CONTACT_374363]. The procedu re may be repeated for the 
opposite hemisphere. The main purpose of this study is to examine the cortical excitability measures after 
Ketamine. Resting motor threshold (RMT) is defined as the stimulation intensity eliciting an MEP greater   than  
0.5 mV in 5 of 10 trials  with a relaxed  APB.  Intra-cortical  facilitation  (ICF)  is defined  as subthreshold  conditioning 
stimulus set at 80% of resting MT calibrated to produce an average MEP of 0.[ADDRESS_468656] stimulus follows conditioning stimulus between 10 -20 
milliseconds (ms) (55). Conditioning stimuli maybe delivered to left Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex (DLPFC) or 
Broadmann  Area  [ADDRESS_468657] stimulus  in 1 of 3 random  inter-stimulus  intervals10  ms (ICF- 
10), 15 ms (ICF -15), and 20 ms (ICF -20) for ICF measures. The sequence of administration will be 
counterbalanced to reduce order effects. For ICF, the change in test stimulus MEP amplitude of each inter - 
stimulus interva l was expressed as a percentage of the mean unconditioned MEP amplitude (55). TMS will be 
applied concurrently with EEG recordings. EEG/EMG Acquisition and Analysis - EEG sessions will be 
conducted  in a sound -attenuated  room  lit with a low-level ambient  light. EEG  Brain  Products  Brain  Amp MRPlus 
64 channel system is used to acquire EEG data. EEG signals are recorded with a 64 channel cap at a high 
sampling  rate (500 Hz) from the entire  scalp,  with signals  amplified  by a shielded,  MR-compatible  amplifier.  The 
software, Brain Vision Recorder, will be used to coordinate EEG recordings with EPrime. Continuous data will 
be filtered off -line with a .2 - to 100 -Hz bandpass filter with a 60 -Hz ideal notch filter. ASSR Epochs are defined 
as −500 to 1000 ms relative to  stimulus onset adjusted to a −350 to −150 -ms prestimulus baseline. Ocular and 
ECG  artifacts  will be removed  with ICA-based  detection  and correction  methods  (EEGLab);  [59]. Data  will be re- 
referenced  to average  reference.  EMG  data will be obtained  using  the Brain  Amp ExG amplifier  which  allows  for 
up to [ADDRESS_468658] -TMS pulse. Software and hardware for the analysis of EEG/EMG data, include 
state -of-the-art analytic and statis tical packages (e.g. EEGLab, Brainstorm, Matlab, and  SPSS).  
 
 
OPTIONAL:  ASSR/EEG  paradigm:  Task  - Patients  will wear  ER-3A insert  earphones  (Etymotic  Research,  Elks 
Grove, IL, [LOCATION_003]) for auditory stimuli and will be seated ∼80 cm from an LCD computer monitor used to present 
visual stimuli. All stimuli are presented using E -Prime software (Psychological Software Tools, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA, 
[LOCATION_003]). Click trains of 500 -ms duration will be presented binaurally at 65 ± [ADDRESS_468659] stimuli will be click trains with individual clicks being 1 -kHz carrier frequency 
whereas Oddball  stimuli will be click trains with clicks of 2 -kHz carrier frequency. During click train presentation 
and for 200 ms after click train cessation, the screen remained blank (black). Participants will be then prompted 
by [CONTACT_12127] a central fixation cross to respond by [CONTACT_374364]  (110 trials  per block)  or their right index  finger  for Oddball  stimuli  (10 trials  per block).  Behavioral 
analyses  will be conducted  to confirm  attention  to task but only correct  Standard  trials  will be submitted  for EEG 
analyses.  
OPTIONAL: Blood Tests:  
Gene Expression and Methylation: The study aims to identify alterations in gene expression and methylation 
markers induced by [CONTACT_374365] -resistant depression with ketamine and assess their correlatio ns with clinical response (as measured 
by [CONTACT_374366] - HDRS). For that end blood samples will be collected 
from all subjects immediately before the first administration of ketamine, and peripheral blood mononuclea r cells 
will be isolated with Ficoll -Paque®, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell will then be re -suspended 
in RPMI  and plated  at 4 x 105/cm2.  After  recovery  for 6 hours,  cells will be treated  with ketamine  or vehicle.  RNA 
and DNA  samples  will be isolated  from peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells immediately  after treatment  (2 hours) 
and  interrogate d  by  [CONTACT_16638] -sequencin g  (Ion  Proton ,  Therm o  Fisher )  and  the  InIfRinBiuNmUMMBeEthRy: lHaStiCo-nMESP-I1C6-0k7i0t5 
8 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
(Illumina), respectively, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The reduction in the HDRS scores from 
baseline  to post treatment  will then be correlated  with the alterations  in the markers  from both analyses,  and the 
markers  that show  the strongest  correlations  with the reduction  in HDRS  will be selected.  Moreover,  expression 
and methylation markers will be compared between responsive and non -responsive patients. This will lead to 
the identification  of a ‘treatment  response  biosignature’  incorporati ng information  from gene  expression  and DNA 
methylation that can predict the response to ketamine in patients. BDNF: Ketamine and metabolites levels will 
be measured at baseline, 40 mins, 2 -4 hours and 24 hours after ketamine infusion and serum BDNF tests will 
be performed at baseline (before each infusion), 2 -4 hours and 24 hours after each infusion. Samples will be 
stored at Behavioral and Biomedical Sciences Building (BBSB) for analysis. BDNF concentrations were 
quantitatively determined by [CONTACT_28745] -linked  immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A trained personnel will collect up 
to a total of 10 8 cc tubes (about 5.4 tablespoons) of blood from one subject in all the visits combined. A 
maximum  of 4 8 cc tubes  of blood  (2.5 tablespoons)  will be drawn  per day from an individual.  
Assessment  
The protocol consists of three components: clinical and cognitive and neurophysiological assessments. 
Clinical assessment  
This evaluation will obtain family history and demographic data. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_374341] (past  
medical  history,  physical  exam,  etc.) will be requested  from treating  clinicians  and health  care providers.  We will 
perform a urine drug screening (UDS) to rule out recent undisclosed use illicit substances. Demographic 
information is obtained through a s tandardized form and covers: age, race, gender, education (information both 
on siblings and their parents), religion, and socioeconomic status. Handedness in all participants will be 
confirmed with Oldfield's Edinburgh Handedness  Inventory  
 
Patients may fi ll out mood questionnaires rating the severity of the clinical symptoms at various time points at 
the discretion of the PI.  
 
Self-report questionnaires and Clinical Assessments to assess mood, anxiety and severity of clinical symptoms:  
1. Adult ( Brief Dissoci ative Experiences Scale [DES -B]—modified): to monitor the dissociative side effects, 
Scale  features:  simple,  easy  to use, new DSM -5 self-rated  scale.  Frequency:  After  every  injection  
2. Severity Measure for Generalized Anxiety Disorder —adult: to measure the severity of anxiety. Scale 
features:  simple,  easy  to use, new DSM -5 self-rated  scale.  Frequency:  At the discretion  of the PI 
3. Snaith –Hamilton Pleasure Scale : to measure the level of anhedonia, Scale features: easy to use, used 
before in ketamine studies, self -rated scale. Frequency: At the discretion of the  PI. 
4. SCID -I Interview : This is the standard psychiatric research evaluation for ascertainment of psychia tric 
diagnosis in the context of research studies (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_72443]., 2007). It is a comprehensive structured interview for 
determining  axis I diagnosis  according  to the DSM -IV. Frequency:  Before  the start of the study  
5. Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI): This is a clinical instrument to assess global changes in patients’ 
status in clinical studies. We will use the CGI -BD, for use with BD patients (Guy et al.,  1976).  
6. Montgomery -Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS): this scale rates depressive sympt oms, and its 
psychometric  properties  are well-established  (Montgomery  et al. 1979).  Frequency:  Before  the start of the study 
and at 4 hours,  24 hours  and 7 days  after infusion.  (Changed  based  on the PI). 
7. Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS): This is a well -established clinical severity rating scale for manic 
symptoms that has adequate inter -rater reliability and internal consistency (Young et al., 1978). Frequency: 
Before  the start of the study  and at 4 hours,  24 hours  and 7 days  after infusion.  (Changed  based  on the PI). 
8. Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS): the PANAS comprises two mood scales, one that 
measures  positive  affect  (PA) and the other  which  measures  negative  affect  (NA).  Used  as a psychometric  scale, 
the PANAS can show relations between positive and negative affect with personality stats and traits. Ten 
descriptors  are used  for each  PA scale  and NA to define  their meanings.  Participants  in the PANAS  are required 
to respond to a [ADDRESS_468660] using 5 -point scale that ranges from very slightly or not at all (1) to extremely (5). 
This scale  may be administered  prior to and following  each  infusion  to assess  acute  changes  in mood.  Frequency 
Before the start of the study and at 4 hours, 24 hours and 7 days after infusion. (Changed based on the PI). 
9.The World Health Organization Quality of Life(WHOQOL) -Brief ): this scale is patient -reported and measures 
the degree  of enjoyment  and satisfaction  experienced  by [CONTACT_374367]  (Endicott  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  
9 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
et al., 1993). Frequency: Before the start of the study and at 4 hours and 24 hours after infusion. (Changed 
based on the PI).  
10. Hamilton  Depression  Rating  Scale  (HDRS):  a multiple  item questionnaire  used  to provide  an indication  of 
depression, and as a guide to evaluate recovery. Frequency: Before the start of the study and at 4 hours, 24 
hours and 7 days after infusion. (Changed based on the  PI). 
11. Hollingshead Socioeconomic Status: This scale is patient -reported and indication of socioeconomic 
status:Frequency: At the discretion of the  PI. 
12. Columbia Suicide Severity Rating  Scale  
 
Cognitive assessment (Optional)  
Patients may complete the BAC -A is based on the Brief Assessment of Cognition in Schizophrenia (BAC -S). 
The BAC -S has been validated both linguistically and psychometrically in a number of psychiatric populations, 
including  patients  with schizophrenia  and BD (Cuesta  et al. 2011Cuesta  et al., 2011;  Hill et al., 2013;  Kuswanto, 
Sum,  & Sim, 2013;  Salgado  et al., 2007;  Segarra  et al., 2011).  It has been  shown  to be as valid and sensitive  as 
a traditional neuropsychological assessment and takes approximately 35 minutes to administer (Keefe et al., 
2004;  Velligan  et al., 2004).  Six of the [ADDRESS_468661] Learning,  Digit Sequencing  Task,  Category  Instances  (Animals)  and 
Controlled Oral Word Association Test (F and S -words), Tower of London (Keefe et al., 2004). In addition to 
these [ADDRESS_468662] (a modified version of the Emotional Stroop 
task (LaMonica, Keefe, Harvey, Gold , & Goldberg, 2010; Williams, Mathews, & MacLeod, 1996)) and the 
affective auditory verbal learning test (Affective interference test). The latter task is similar to the Affective 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AAVLT) (Snyder & Harrison,  1997).  
 
Participan ts may complete the Effrt task (Treadway et. al 2009) which is an effort -based decision making task 
using E -Prime software (Psychological Software Tools). Participants may make additional bonus money from 
this task and it will be added to their compensatio n. 
 
Subjects may also be asked to do some simple tasks which will involve looking at a computer screen display 
(figures, symbols, numbers, letters, words or sentences) or listening to sounds through headphones (clicks, 
beeps, or words). The participant is asked to respond to the stimuli by [CONTACT_7326] a response button. Stimuli will 
be presented on a computer screen using E -Prime (Psychological Software Tools, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA). Dependent 
variables will be reaction time, response, and accuracy collected via keyb oard, joystick, button box or similar 
device and stored on a computer. The task will involve separate trials and trials are organized in blocks so that 
participants will be allowed to rest in between blocks. In each session, cognitive tasks will be present ed on a 
computer screening using E -Prime (Psychology Software Tools, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], PA).  
 
Neurophysiological assessment (Optional)  
TMS -TMS stimulation will be applied to the corresponding region of the contralateral primary motor cortex  and 
left DPFC  or Broadmann  Area  6 to examine  the cortical  excitability  measures  after Ketamine  infusion.  EEG - EEG 
will be acquired as participants perform an auditory task. The purpose of EEG is to study gamma band 
oscillations as a marker of Ketamine’s early excitatory effect on cortex. TMS and EEG will take place 
concurrently.  
 
Summary  
We will pre -screen potenti al participants over the phone to minimize the invitation to non -eligible participants. 
During the screening visit, we will screen patients for eligibility. Patients will then arrive for their study Day # 
2(Baseline),  when  they will get blood  draws  (option al), complete  questionnaires  and undergo  TMS -EEG.  Patients 
will come to our inpatient psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374342] (Day # 3) , where they will be given 
ketamine by [CONTACT_74309]. During the infusion, patients will be asked constantly about “how they feel” and will 
be monitored continuously from psychiatric nurse and the attending Anesthesiologist. EKG and pulse -oximetry 
will be monitored throughout the procedure to check for hemodynamic changes. After the completion of [ADDRESS_468663] for two – four hours under the observation of clinical nurse and, reassessed again by 
[CONTACT_374368] 2 hours after infusion. Patients may be undergoing EEG/ASSR at 10minutes, 40 minutes and at 
4 hours after infusio n and blood tests after infusion(4 0 minutes)  and 2-4 hours afteIRr BinNfuUsMioBnE. RP:aHtiSeCn-tMwSi-l1l 6th-0e7n05 
1
0 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468664]  undergo  TMS -EEG  & EMG  at 4 hours.  Patient  will be discharged  to a responsible  adult  who will accompany 
the patient home. Patients will be invited again for day #4 (24 hours after infusion), where they will have to 
complete TMS -EEG & EMG, EEG/ASSR(optional) and blood tests(optional). They will be invited again for just 
TMS  7 days  after infusion.  Patients  may be contact[CONTACT_374369] a clinical visit with the psychiatrists on days 1, 4, and 7for a 
follow up assessment of mental  state.  
 
Study Population  
We will enroll  20 patients  with Treatment  Resistant  Depression  (TRD)  in this study.  Participants  will be male  and 
female adults, aged [ADDRESS_468665] a high minority population.  
 
Selection Criteria for individuals: 
Inclusion criteria – 
1. Be between [ADDRESS_468666] (defined  as two or more  unsuccessful  trials  of antidepressants  at an adequate 
dose for at least 4  weeks)  
 
Exclusion criteria – 
1. Diagnosed with intellectual disability, eg. Mental retardation, neurodegenerative diseases, eg. Early 
onset  neurocognitive  distur bances  such  as frontotemporal  dementia  or behavioral  disorders,  eg. adult 
onset Attention Deficit Hyperactivity  Disorder  
2. Diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder  (BD) 
3. Diagnosed with personality  disorders  
4. Previously or currently diagnosed with psychosis (schizoaffective disorder –SAD) or schizophrenia – 
SCZ)  
5. Current  major  medical  problems  that affect  brain  anatomy,  neurochemistry,  or function,  e.g., obstructive 
sleep apnea requiring Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP), liver insufficiency, kidney 
insufficiency, cardiovascular problems, systemic infections, cancer, auto -immune diseases, and any 
brain disorder (seizure disorder, stroke, dementia,  degenerative neurologic diseases); history of any 
brain diseases, including seizures, stroke, meningitis, encephalitis, dementia, degenerative brain 
diseases, and head injury with loss of consciousness for any period of  time 
6. Diagnosed specifically with a cardiovascular disorders such as "uncontrolled" hypertension or diastolic 
BP over 100, Arrhythmias, Chronic Heart Failure, Myocardial Infarction (MI) or suffering from Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) or asthma. Cardiac clearance prior to enrol ling in the study 
and medical records from physician will be required per patient’s  PCP 
7. Patients with increased risk of laryngospasm, active upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_18073], respi[INVESTIGATOR_41826],  increased  intracranial  pressure,  hyperthyroidism,  or porphyri a 
8. Current substance abuse or dependence. Only patients who achieved stable, full remission for at least 
[ADDRESS_468667] feeding. All female in reproductive age will undergo pregnancy tests. Female 
participants  will be required  to provide  evidence  of use of contraceptives  during  the course  of the study,  
10. Unable to understand the design and requirements of  the study  IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0705 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017  10  
  
11. Unable to sign the informed consent for any  reason.  
 
Sources of Materials: All participants will provide demographic, health and psychiatric history information 
obtained  at screening,  and electro -physiological  (e.g. EMG -TMS,  blood  pressure)  data obtained  during  the study 
sessions. We will also obtain urine a t all study sessions to ascertain drug and alcohol use and (in women) 
pregnancy status. All data collected on paper forms will be stored in locked cabinets, while electronic data is 
stored on our secure password protected server (maintained by [CONTACT_374370]). All electronic records will identify study participants only by a study code, and the 
electronic  file linking  codes  to individual  identifiers  will be destroyed  once  data collection  is complete.  
 
Potential Risks  
 
For all participants:  
 
1. Diagnostic procedures and questionnaires : Some of the questions asked during the screening may be 
considered sensitive information, including drug use history and psychiatric history. Answering these questions 
may be  psychologically discomforting to some subjects. There are also risks associated with loss of 
confidentiality.  
 
2. Psychophysiological monitoring: We will monitor psychophysiological responses using conductive electrodes 
attached  to the skin of participants  with an adhesive.  There  may be mild discomfort  or irritation  to the participant’s 
skin as a result of cleaning the sites to apply the sensors, but this should be transient. Approximately half of 
individuals experience slight stinging/irritation lasting arou nd [ADDRESS_468668] longer (up to two to three d ays). All equipment will be 
appropriately grounded and shielded, and stimulus equipment will be optically isolated from the participant 
making any electrical hazard to the participant extremely unlikely. All surfaces in contact [CONTACT_82970]’ 
skin are disposable, and all equipment will be thoroughly cleaned between sessions to make risk of infection 
also unlikely.  
 
Neurophysiology  Testing - Participants  may experience  some  mild discomfort  during  tasks  involving  presentation 
of auditory  stimuli.  
 
EEG -The EEG (electroencephalograph) is a non -invasive procedure which may cause skin irritation from the 
placement  of recording  electrodes  in less than 1% of people.  Itchiness  of scalp  or redness  because  of electrode 
gel could result and is the same amount of  risk as any saline solution. The EEG is administered by [CONTACT_374371].  
 
TMS - The side effects  with TMS  are very rare. The most  common  side effects  include  headaches  and ringing  in 
the ears (earplugs are always worn to prevent this). TMS side effects also include a small risk of seizure and 
convulsion. This is a very rare complication; the reported risk is less than [ADDRESS_468669] commonly reported side effects during a 4 hour period after infusion include feeling strange or unreal 
(58.3%),  abnormal  sensations  (54.2%),  blurred  vision (50.0%),  feeling  drowsy  or sleepy  (48.5%)  and headaches 
(30-40%).  Based  on previous  evidence,  we do not expect  ketamine  to impair  cognitive  functions  such  as memory, 
attention or language. If patients are currently taking certain medications on a daily basis within 24 hours prior 
to and / or after receiving ketamine, they will not be able to take these medication(s) while receiving a ketamine 
infusion  without  clearance  or approval  of the physicians  involved  in administering  ketamine.  Medications  include: 
Sedatives  (e.g.,  clonazepam,  lorazepam,  alprazolam);  Antibiotics  (e.g.,  azithromycin,  clarithromycin);  Antifungal 
agents (e.g., ketoconazole); Tramadol. This is  due to concerns for potential increased sedation or trouble 
breathing. The risk of addiction to ketamine for a single –dose study is very  rare. 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468670] risks  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent: Participants will be self -referred in response to various study 
advertisements  via flyers.  Individuals  who call for information  will be given  a brief description  of the study.  Those 
interested will then be asked to answer questions about their disease status. A trained research assistant will 
conduct this telephone -screening interview. Eligible subjects will be scheduled for an in -person screening visit 
at the  BSBB.  
 
Once eligible for the study, they will be invited for stu dy Day# 1, which will begin with the presentation of the 
informed  consent  form.  The consent  form will detail  the requirements  of study  participation  (e.g.,  # of visits,  type 
of data collected, time commitment, etc.) Subjects will be told that the purpose o f the study is to evaluate 
neurophysiological measures to study the effect of ketamine on TRD. Subjects will be informed that they will 
have to attend a total of five visits (screening and four study visits). Other information on the consent form will 
include a full description of study requirements, reimbursement, risks, benefits, alternatives, and the role of the 
local IRB. All questions  will be answered  before  written  consent  is requested.  Informed  consent  will be obtained 
only by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1660] a trained senior member of the staff (e.g. study  coordinator).  
 
The research protocol, consent form, and all assessment/advertising materials will be reviewed and approved 
by [CONTACT_374372] (CP HS) at UTH.  
 
Protections against risk  
1. Risks  related  to diagnostic  procedures/questionnaires:  As noted  above,  the primary  risks related  to these 
procedures are participant discomfort and loss of confidentiality. Regarding participant discomfort, we 
will make clear that we ask for this sensitive information as part of the consent process. Further, while 
subjects may be uncomfortable reporting these issues, the risks of serious sequelae are extremely low. 
Regarding confidentiality, we have rigorous procedures in place to ensure confidentiality of data, 
including  locked  cabinets  for confidential  files, participant  coding,  secure  computer  systems,  and rigorous 
training of personnel. Computer systems are secure and strictly monitored by [CONTACT_374373]. 
Laboratory staffers are trained in confidentiality of participant information. No information is allowed to 
leave the lab or to be accessed by a  computer outside of the university’s secure computer system, and 
all data are further  protected  by [CONTACT_374374]. 
No information  will be published  in a form in which  the participant  can be identified.  We will also obtain  a 
Certificate  of Confidentiality  for this study  to provide  additional  protection  for sensitive  information.  
 
2. Risks related to psychophysiological monitoring: As noted above, precautions are taken to make 
electrical hazards from equipment unlikely, including correct grounding and optical isolation of the 
participant. Disease hazards are minimized through disposable electrode collars and thorough cleaning 
process es. Mild, transient skin irritation from cleaning procedures is common (as described above), but 
the possibility of more serious skin irritation will be minimized by [CONTACT_374375].  
 
3. Electroencephalography (EEG): The EEG is administered by [CONTACT_374376].  
 
4. Transcranial  Magnetic  Stimulation  (TMS):  Earplugs  are always  worn  to prevent  any headaches  or ringing 
in ears caused by [CONTACT_374377]. In this protocol, since it will not be repetitive TMS, the risk is very  rare. 
 
5. Neurophysiology Testing: Patients may stop at any time if they experience any discomfort during tasks 
involving  presentation  of emotional  pi[INVESTIGATOR_374343].  The decibel  levels  of the auditory  task will 
be checked before start of the study and will not fluctuate signific antly through the  study.  
 
6. Risks related to study medication: The following procedures will be taken to safeguard against adverse 
medication  events : (1) careful  initial intak e evaluatio n to determin e eligibilit y bIaRsBeNdUoMnBinEcRlu: sHiSoCn-/MexSc-l1u6s-0io7n05 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017  12  
  
criteria; (2) thorough physical evaluation prior to infusion, consisting of physical examination, standard 
laboratory  tests,  electrocardiogram,  urine  toxicology  screen,  pregnancy  test and vital signs;  (3) Monitoring 
of concomitant illicit drug use at each visit with self -report, urine and/or breath testing; (4) Review of 
medication response, adverse events, and medication compliance with the study nurse; (5) Regular 
evaluation of all medical information. In  the event that contraindicated medical conditions and/or other 
serious adverse symptoms arise after initiation of the medication, medication will be discontinued and 
the subject will be  examined.  
 
7. Risks related to alternative treatments: As noted above, w e believe that our therapeutic interventions 
provide  treatment  that is considerably  superior  to most,  if not all treatment  opportunities  in the community. 
Nevertheless, we will refer patients to other facilities upon request or when required by [CONTACT_374378]. We will also conduct regular literature searches on alternative treatments, and in the 
event  that an alternative  treatment  emerges  with clearly  superior  efficacy,  we would  suspend  the current 
study  and provide  all participants  with referrals  for this alternative  treatment.  
 
8. Study  withdrawal : The research  study  and participation  is completely  voluntary.  Participants  can withdraw 
from the study at any time without giving a reason and without any consequence. A decision not to take 
part or to stop being a part of the research  project  will not change  the services  available  to them  from the 
UTHSC -H, Department of Psychiatry or the HCPC. The investigators could stop participation if an 
unfavorable or unexpected reaction is  noticed.  
 
9. Unanticipated Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]: If a patient needs to be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374344], they will be removed from their study participation and their study treatment 
will end at that  time.  
 
10. Risks of blood draw: There are minimal risks involved in having the blood draw for the study. The blood 
sample will be drawn from a peripheral vein, by a trained staff person. The risks involved are related to 
local bruising but these will be minimized by [CONTACT_374379].  
 
Potential benefits of the proposed research to the participants and others  
All assessment and services provided in these studies will be free. This particular pseudo randomization is 
considered for this study so as to offer the benefitting treatment  to the majority of study population and will be 
similar to other recent studies. The treatments should help in TRD and preventing relapse. Subjects will be told 
if unusual information is discovered during the study that will make a difference in treatment  for this or other 
problems. By [CONTACT_374380] . 
 
Reimbursement  
Patients will be provided $15 per hour for their participation in the study except for the infusion day, where they 
will be paid a total of $100 for the day, as well as the 7 day follow -up, where they will be paid $10 for the day. 
Total re imbursement for patients may go up to $100 plus $15x8 +$10 = $230.  
 
Importance of the knowledge to be gained  
Research participation will help the patients in curing TRD and possibly preventing relapse. The current project 
aims to address this important gap by [CONTACT_374381] (TMS) 
based techniques. The selected medication has shown preliminary evidence of benefit in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_374345].  TRD is highly  prevalent  and leads  to devastating  consequences  on a personal and societal  level.  Further, 
this study will pi[INVESTIGATOR_374346].  The above  stated  risks are relatively  mild in degree  and procedures  have  been  designed  to 
minimize their probability. We believe this protocol has an extremely favorable risk/benefit ratio. The psychiatry 
department  has an excellent  track  record  in conducting  similar  controlled  trials  with the utmost  attention  to safety.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017  13  
  
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_374347].  
 
Data monitoring plan  
Data  will be collected  and stored  as described  above  in Sources  of Material,  and analyzed  with primary  outcomes 
as described in the Statistical Plan. Trained research assistants will enter data into an existing, relational 
database. Allowable input values will be restricted to standardized Access entry forms so as to maintain data 
integrity. All observations will be double -entered to verify accuracy, with any problems detected discussed with 
the PI. If necessary, re -training of research assistants will be conducted. Due to the comparatively small and 
initial  nature  of the current  trial, an interim  data analysis  is not planned.  
 
Safety monitoring plan  
During screening, study applicants will undergo a complete psychological and physical exam to determine their 
eligibility and safety of their participation in this study, per inclusion/exclu sion criteria detailed above. During the 
treatment phase of the study, participants will be asked about adverse events at each clinic visit and vital signs 
will be continuously monitored during the infusion and two hours after the infusion.  
 
All adverse  events (AEs)  occurring  during  the course  of the study  will be collected,  documented,  and reported  to 
the Principal  Investigator.  The occurrence  of AEs will be assessed  at baseline  and each  visit during  the treatment 
phase of the study. The PI, in consultation with the co -investigators, will review any AE’s as soon as they are 
reported. The study investigators will follow all AEs to the point of a satisfactory resolution. A study participant 
may have their me dication discontinued of may be withdrawn from the study if the Study Physician determines 
it is the best decision in order to protect the safety of a participant. All AEs will be assessed to determine if they 
meet criteria for an  SAE.  
 
Serious  adverse  events (SAEs),  as defined  by [CONTACT_1622],  will be evaluated  at each  visit. Any SAE,  whether  or not 
related  to study  medication,  will be reported  to the IRB within  [ADDRESS_468671]  appropriate  follow -up medical 
monitoring. Monitoring w ill continue until the problem requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374348], is clearly unrelated to study medication, or results in death. Outcome of SAEs will be 
periodically reported to  IRB. 
 
Inclusion of Women  
The subjects will include males and females, ages 18 -65 years old, from various race/ethnic backgrounds, as 
reflected in the local community in the greater Houston area.  
 
Inclusion of Minorities  
Our study will include minority groups in proportions that wi ll be representative of the ethnic/racial composition 
of the local community in Houston, [LOCATION_007]. Our projected numbers for minority enrollment are detailed in the 
enrollment table attached.  
 
Inclusion of Children  
Children  will not be included  in the study.  The inclusion  of children  at this early  stage  would  increase  substantially 
the number  of subjects  needed  for the overall  project.  At this time,  we will focus  on an adult  population  (ages  18- 
65 years  old), which  will also allow  us to limit some  of the potential  confounding  factors  to our brain  imaging  and 
neurocognitive findings. Depending on our results these investigations will be extended to children and 
individuals over 65 years old in future  studies.  
 
Prisoners and pregnant women  
We are aware of th e special protections afforded to prisoners per federal regulations. We will not actively recruit 
people  who are incarcerated  to participate  in this study.  We do, however,  acknowledge  the possibility  of research 
participant s in our targe t populatio n being incarcerate d durin g the study.  If an activIeRpBaNrtUicMipBaEnRt :isHSinCc-aMrSc-e1r6a-t0e7d05 
14 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705 
IRB APPROVA L DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468672]  until an incarcerated  participant  is released  from jail. Finally,  neither  pregnant  woman 
nor neonates will be enrolled in this  study.  
 
Power Analysis  
Sample size justification: For the current proposal, our power calculation is based on our prior data on ASSR 
(Komek K et. al 2012) after pharmacological manipulation with effect size estimate of 0.[ADDRESS_468673] patients  and found  decreased  motor 
excitability (increased RMT)(Minelli A et.al 2010) with large effect size estimate of Cohen’s d = 1.2. For this 
project proposal, even if we assume a lower effect size of d=0.9, assumin g a two -sided alpha <0.05, a sample 
of N=15, randomized in a cross -over design, participants provides 95% power to detect a difference between 
the two groups. Our sample size of 20 subjects would be sufficient event at attrition of  20%.  
 
Statistics  
Normality  assumptions  for continuous  variables  will be examined.  Where  appropriate,  outliers  will be winsorised 
and log, square  root or reciprocal  transformations  applied  to achieve  normality  if appropriate.  If normality  cannot 
not been achieved, either untransformed or dichotomized scores were used. Baseline characteristics will be 
compared  between  responders  and non-responders  with the Mann -Whitney  U test for continuous  variables  and 
the chi -square test for categorical v ariables. Changes between two time -points for continuous variables were 
tested with paired t tests, and associations between continuous variables will be quantified with the Spearman 
correlation coefficient. Random effects models will be performed to quant ify changes in clinical score and its 
component items over time and to compare temporal differences between eventual responders and non - 
responders.  Splines  will be used  to determine  differences  in the pattern  of response  over time among  all patients 
and to identify  the time at which  there  was no additional  improvement  in depressive  symptoms.  Additionally,  the 
relationship between response status between baseline and end of study calculating sensitivity, specificity, and 
positive and negative predictive values will be reported. Time to relapse for patients who met response criteria 
at end point will be estim ated with the Kaplan -Meier method. Analyses will be performed with IBM SPSS 
Statistics  (version  19; SPSS,  Chicago,  Illinois)  and SAS (version  9.2; SAS,  Cary,  North  Carolina).  
 
 
Data Handling and Record Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_374349] a low -risk project in terms of ethica l concerns. This study will acquire, use and create individually 
identifiable health information (known as Protected Health Information or PHI). Confidentiality will be protected 
at all times  by [CONTACT_374382].  All research  information  will be stored  in 
locked  files at all times.  Only authorized  research  staff will have  access  to the information  gathered  in this study. 
Only subjects capable to provide consent will be included in the  study.  
 
As per the Health  Insurance  Portability  and Accountability  Act (HIPAA)  all individuals  who are eligible  and agree 
to participate  in this research  study  will be required  to sign a HIPAA  research  authorization  prior to participation. 
If an individual  refuses  to sign the HIPAA  research  authorization,  they will not be able to participate  in this study. 
The HIPAA form is part of the official consent  form.  
 
Data  will be stored  separately  from participants’  identifiers.  Both will be stored  on encrypted  drives  on computers 
in locked  offices.  Confidentiality  will be protected  by [CONTACT_374382].  All 
research information will be stored in locked files at all times. Only authorized research staff will have access to 
the information gathered in this study. A ll paper data will be stored on the the 3rd floor of the UT Department of 
Psychiatry, at the BBSB (room number 3260) in a double locked cabinet . The electronic data will be stored on 
the L drive, in a subfolder labelled “BPRC”, located under the subfolder “UT Center of Excellence on Mood 
Disorders". An Accounting of Disclosure (AOD) will be created and maintained for any disclosure of individually 
identifiable information (III) outside the UTHSC -H. The manual spreadsheet will include the date of the 
disclos ure, nature or description of the III disclosed purpose of each disclosure and the name [CONTACT_374383]. The study imparts only minimal risk to included  subjects.  
15 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705 
IRB APPROVA L DATE: 08/02/[ADDRESS_468674] routine (bimonthly) reviews of 
consistency, reliability and accuracy of data collected for any paper records. Similar checks for any data in 
electronic  form will also be conducted  but in an automated  fashion  (e.g checking  for accurate  time/date  stamps, 
file sizes  etc.).  
 
 
1. Kessler, R.C., et al., Prevalence and treatment of mental disorders, 1990 to 2003. N Engl J Med, 2005. 352(24): p. 
2515 -23. 
2. Collins,  P.Y.,  et al., Grand  challenges  in global  mental  health.  Nature,  2011.  475(7354):  p. 27-30. 
3. De Hert, M., et al., Physical illness in patients with severe mental disorders. II. Barriers to care, monitoring and 
treatment guidelines, plus recommendations at the system and individual level. World Psychiatry, 2011. 10(2): p. 
138-51. 
4. Whiteford,  H.A.,  et al., Global  burden  of disease  attributable  to mental  and substance  use disorders:  findings  from 
the Global  Burden  of Disease  Study  2010.  Lancet,  2013.  382(9904):  p. 1575 -86. 
5. Fava,  M., Diagnosis  and definition  of treatment -resistant  depression.  Biol Psychiatry,  2003.  53(8): p. 649-59. 
6. Rush, A.J., et al., Acute and longer -term outcomes in depressed outpatients requiring one or several treatment 
steps:  a STAR*D  report.  Am J Psychiatry,  2006.  163(11): p. [ADDRESS_468675],  F., et al., Mortality  of patients  with  mood  disorders:  follow -up over  34-[ADDRESS_468676],  2002.  68(2- 
3): p.  167-81. 
8. McIntyre, R.S., et al., Treatment -resistant depression: definitions, review of the evidence, and algorithmic 
approach. J Affect Disord, 2014. 156: p. 1-7. 
9. Miller,  I.W.,  et al., The treatment  of chronic  depression,  part  3: psychosocial  functioning  before  and after  treatment 
with  sertraline  or imipramine.  J Clin Psychiatry,  1998.  59(11):  p. 608-19. 
10. Mion,  G. and T. Villevieille,  Ketamine  pharmacology:  an update  (pharmacodynamics  and molecular  aspects,  recent 
findings).  CNS Neurosci  Ther,  2013.  19(6): p. 370-80. 
11. Zarate, C.A., et al., A randomized trial of an N -methyl -D-aspartate antagonist in treatment -resistant major 
depression.  Arch  Gen Psychiatry,  2006.  63(8): p. 856-64. 
12. Murrough, J.W., et al., Antidepressant efficacy of ketamine in treatment -resistant major de pression: a two -site 
randomized  controlled  trial.  Am J Psychiatry,  2013.  170(10):  p. 1134 -42. 
13. Berman,  R.M.,  et al., Antidepressant  effects  of ketamine  in depressed  patients.  Biol Psychiatry,  2000.  47(4): p. 351- 
4. 
14. Zarate,  C.A.,  et al., Replication  of ketamine's  antidepressant  efficacy  in bipolar  depression:  a randomized  controlled 
add-on trial.  Biol Psychiatry,  2012.  71(11):  p. 939-46. 
15. Rasmussen,  K.G.,  Ketamine  for posttraumatic  stress  disorder.  JAMA  Psychiatry,  2015.  72(1): p. 94-5. 
16. Price, R.B., et al., Effects of ketamine on explicit and implicit suicidal cognition: a randomized controlled trial in 
treatment -resistant  depression.  Depress  Anxiety,  2014.  31(4): p. 335-43. 
17. Murrough, J.W., et al., Ketamine for rapid reduction of suicidal  ideation: a randomized controlled trial. Psychol 
Med, 2015. 45(16): p.  3571 -80. 
18. Murrough,  J.W.,  et al., Rapid  and longer -term  antidepressant  effects  of repeated  ketamine  infusions  in treatment - 
resistant  major  depression.  Biol Psychiatry,  2013.  74(4): p. 250-6. 
19. Morgan,  C.J., H.V. Curran,  and I.S.C.o.  Drugs,  Ketamine  use: a review.  Addiction,  2012.  107(1): p. 27-38. 
16 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
  
20. Newport, D.J., et al., Ketamine and Other NMDA Antagonists: Early Clinical Trials and Possible Mechanisms in 
Depression.  Am J Psychiatry,  2015.  172(10):  p. 950-66. 
21. Salvadore,  G. and J.B. Singh,  Ketamine  as a fast acting  antidepressant:  current  knowledge  and open  questions.  CNS 
Neurosci Ther, 2013. 19(6): p.  428-36. 
22. Shiroma, P.R., et al., Augmentation of response and remission to serial intravenous subanesthetic ketamine in 
treatment  resistant  depression.  J Affect  Disord,  2014.  155: p. 123-9. 
23. Browne, C.A. and I. Lucki, Antidepressant effects of ketamine: mechanisms underlying fast -acting no vel 
antidepressants.  Front  Pharmacol,  2013.  4: p. 161.  
24. Moghaddam, B., et al., Activation of glutamatergic neurotransmission by [CONTACT_113883]: a novel step in the pathway 
from NMDA receptor blockade to dopaminergic and cognitive disruptions associated with the prefrontal cortex. J 
Neurosci, 1997. 17(8): p.  2921 -7. 
25. Homayoun, H. and B. Moghaddam, NMDA receptor hypofunction produces opposite effects on prefrontal cortex 
intern eurons  and pyramidal  neurons.  J Neurosci,  2007.  27(43):  p. [ZIP_CODE] -500.  
26. Maeng, S., et al., Cellular mechanisms underlying the antidepressant effects of ketamine: role of alpha -amino -3- 
hydroxy -5-methylisoxazole -4-propi[INVESTIGATOR_374350].  Biol Psychiatry,  2008.  63(4): p. 349-52. 
27. Autry, A.E., et al., NMDA receptor blockade at rest triggers rapid behavioural antidepressant responses. Nature, 
2011. 475(7354): p.  91-5. 
28. Duman, R.S. and N. Li, A neurotrophic hypothesis of depression: role of synaptogenesis in the  actions of NMDA 
receptor  antagonists.  Philos  Trans  R Soc Lond  B Biol Sci, 2012.  367(1601):  p. 2475 -84. 
29. Li, N., et al., mTOR -dependent  synapse  formation  underlies  the rapid  antidepressant  effects  of NMDA  antagonists.  
Science, 2010. 329(5994): p. 959 -64. 
30. Kavalali, E.T. and L.M. Monteggia, How does ketamine elicit a rapid antidepressant response? Curr Opin 
Pharmacol, 2015. 20: p. 35-9. 
31. Abdallah, C.G., et al., Ketamine and rapid -acting antidepressants: a window into a new neurobiology for mood 
disorder  thera peutics.  Annu  Rev Med,  2015.  66: p. 509-23. 
32. Salvadore, G., et al., An investigation of amino -acid neurotransmitters as potential predictors of clinical 
improvement  to ketamine  in depression.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol,  2012.  15(8): p. 1063 -72. 
33. Chowdhury, G.M., et al., ¹H-[¹³C] -nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy measures of ketamine's effect on 
amino  acid neurotransmitter  metabolism.  Biol Psychiatry,  2012.  71(11):  p. 1022 -5. 
34. Bocchio -Chiavetto, L., et al., Serum and plasma BDNF levels in major depression: a replication study and meta - 
analyses.  World  J Biol Psychiatry,  2010.  11(6): p. 763-73. 
35. Polyakova,  M., et al., BDNF  as a biomarker  for successful  treatment  of mood  disorders:  a systematic  & quantitative 
meta -analysis. J Affect Disord, 2015. 174: p. 432-40. 
36. Cornwell, B.R., et al., Synaptic potentiation is critical for rapid antidepressant response to ketamine in treatment - 
resistant  major  depression.  Biol Psychiatry,  2012.  72(7): p. 555-61. 
37. Duncan, W.C., e t al., Concomitant BDNF and sleep slow wave changes indicate ketamine -induced plasticity in 
major  depressive  disorder.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol,  2013.  16(2): p. 301-11. 
38. Haile, C.N., et al., Plasma brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and response to ketamine in treatment - 
resistant  depression.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol,  2014.  17(2): p. 331-6. 
39. Ziemann,  U., et al., TMS  and drugs  revisited  2014.  Clin Neurophysiol,  2015.  126(10):  p. 1847 -68. 
40. Ziemann, U., Pharmaco -transcranial magnetic stimulation studies of motor excitability. Handb Clin Neurol,  2013.  
116: p. 387 -97. 
41. Daskalakis, Z.J., et al., Transcranial magnetic stimulation: a new investigational and treatment tool in  psychiatry.  
J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci, 2002. 14(4): p. [ADDRESS_468677],  roots  and peripheral 
nerves: Basic principles and procedures for routine clinical and research application. An updated report from   an 
I.F.C.N. Committee. Clin Neurophysiol, 2015. 126(6): p. 1071 -107.  
43. Zaaroor,  M., H. Pratt,  and A. Starr,  Time  course  of motor  excitability  befo re and after  a task-related  movement.  
Neurophysiol Clin, 2003. 33(3): p. 130 -7. 
44. Di Lazzaro, V., et al., Ketamine increases human motor cortex excitability to transcranial magnetic stimulation. J 
Physiol, 2003. 547(Pt 2):  p. 485-96. IRB NUMBER:  HSC -MS-16-0705 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 08/02/2017   
 17 
 
45. Croarkin, P.E., et al., Evidence for increased glutamatergic cortical facilitation in children and adolescents with 
major  depressive  disorder.  JAMA  Psychiatry,  2013.  70(3): p. 291-9. 
46. Hanajima,  R., et al., Difference  in intracortical  inhibition  of the motor  cortex  between  cortical  myoclonus  and focal 
hand  dystonia.  Clin Neurophysiol,  2008.  119(6): p. 1400 -7. 
47. Radhu, N., et al., A meta -analysis of cortical inhibition and excitability usin g transcranial magnetic stimulation in 
psychiatric  disorders.  Clin Neurophysiol,  2013.  124(7): p. 1309 -20. 
48. Levinson,  A.J., et al., Evidence  of cortical  inhibitory  deficits  in major  depressive  disorder.  Biol Psychiatry,  2010.  
67(5): p. 458 -64. 
49. Minelli, A., et al., Effects of intravenous antidepressant drugs on the excitability of human motor cortex: a study 
with  paired  magnetic  stimulation  on depressed  patients.  Brain  Stimul,  2010.  3(1): p. 15-21. 
50. Gonzalez -Burgos, G. and D.A. Lewis, GABA neurons and the mechanisms of network oscillations: implications for 
understanding  cortical  dysfunction  in schizophrenia.  Schizophr  Bull,  2008.  34(5): p. 944-61. 
51. Bartos,  M., I. Vida,  and P. Jonas,  Synaptic  mechanisms  of synchronized  gamma  oscillations  in inhibitory  interneuron 
networks. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2007. 8(1): p.  45-56. 
52. Plourde, G., J. Baribeau, and V. Bonhomme, Ketamine increases the amplitude of the 40 -Hz auditory steady -state 
response  in humans.  Br J Anaesth,  1997.  78(5): p. 524-9. 
53. Sullivan,  E.M.,  et al., Effects  of NMDA  and GABA -A Receptor  Antagonism  on Auditory  Steady -State  Synchronization 
in Awake  Behaving  Rats.  Int J Neuropsychopharmacol,  2015.  18(7): p. pyu118.  
54. Yizhar,  O., et al., Neocortical  excitation/inhibition  balance  in information  processing  and social  dysfunction.  
Nature, 2011. 477(7363): p. 171 -8. 
55. Gandal, M.J., et al., Gamma synchrony: towards a translational biomarker for the treatment -resistant symptoms 
of schizophrenia.  Neuropharmacology,  2012.  62(3): p. [ADDRESS_468678], 2016. 190: p. 800-6. 
58. Zarate, C.A., et al., A double -blind, placebo -controlled study of memantine in the treatment of major  depression.  
Am J Psychiatry, 2006. 163(1): p. 153 -5. 
59. Delorme, A. and S. Makeig, EEGLAB: an op en source toolbox for analysis of single -trial EEG dynamics including 
independent  component  analysis.  J Neurosci  Methods,  2004.  134(1): p. 9-21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -MS-16-0705  