Coaching Alternative Parenting Strategies (CAPS) Study: Targeting Neurobiological and 
Behavioral Mechanisms of Self -regulation in High- risk Families  
 
NCT #02684903 
Date: 09/2/[ADDRESS_863338] as well as the State of Oregon’s Department of Health and Human 
Services. A DHHS certiﬁcate of conﬁdentiality was obtained to further protect the identity of 
research subjects in the study. Parents and guardians provided written informed consent to 
participate, and children gave verbal assent prior to engaging in any study procedures.  
 
Eligible families were identiﬁed and recruited to participate in the clinical trial  through the 
Department of Human Services (DHS) Child Welfare and Self Sufﬁciency divisions . DHS staff 
members identiﬁed eligible families from their database if the primary caregiver had 1) no 
history of perpetrating sexual abuse and 2)  a child between 3 and 8 years old. Following this 
pre-selection process within DHS, a core member of the CAPS research team contact[CONTACT_644895] s tudy and further screen them for eligibility. Families 
were free to participate or decline and  were informed that they would be randomized to either 
the PCIT intervention or would be provided services as usual after completion of their baseline 
assessment . Interested families were screened for eligibility on the following criteria: (a) the 
participating parent was at least 18+ years old at study entry and (b) is the participating child’s 
biological or custodial parent; (c) the participating child was between 3 and 7 years old at study 
entry; (d) no parent  or caregiver in the home was a documented child sexual abuse perpetrator 
per child welfare records, (e) the parent spoke sufﬁcient English to engage in the assessment, 
and (f) the parent provided written informed consent  to participate.  
 
Clinical Trial Design  
 Two assessments were completed for all study families (pre -treatment and post -treatment), 
and a mid- treatment assessment was completed for PCIT families only. Each of the pre - and 
post-treatment assessments consisted of two separate visits that were scheduled 
approximately one week apart. Following completion of both visits in the pre- treatment 
assessment, families were randomly assigned to one of two conditions in this parallel groups design: PCIT treatment or Family Services -as-Usual (SAU) control. Families were 
overallocated to the intervention condition at a rate of 1.5:[ADDRESS_863339] PCIT session, or 
approximately 9– [ADDRESS_863340] -treatment approximately 9 –[ADDRESS_863341] 
PCIT phase (i.e., child-directed interaction, CDI) and before beginning the second PCIT phase 
(i.e., parent -directed interaction, PDI). Mid -treatment assessments were completed in one 
laboratory visit. Pre-treatment, mid- treatment, and post-treatment assessments each included  joint 
parent -child tasks, individual child tasks, and individual parent tasks. Cardiac physiology was 
monitored at rest, with participants watching a neutral video either jointly before parent -child tasks 
or individually before solo tasks. Cardiac physiology was also measured during all experimental 
tasks and during recovery periods (where participants again watch a neutral video) immediately 
following each task (see physiology  acquisition details  in Outcome Measures  below).  Parents  were  
compensated for their time at each visit, offered paid taxi services or reimbursed for transportation, 
and children were given a small prize. Detected child maltreatment outcomes will be  evaluated 
using the state-wide child welfare  administrative  database, with matches based on unique 
identiﬁers for the participating child and individual unique identiﬁers for the participating parent. All 
database matches will be manually checked to conﬁrm any positive matches for future 
maltreatment reports where the participating study  parent  is identiﬁed as the perpetrator.  Any 
reports  made by [CONTACT_484214][INVESTIGATOR_644887] “surveillance effect” reports and treated 
appropriately in data analyses.  
 
Pre- and Post-Treatment Assessment  
 
Following voluntary informed consent procedures, parents and children completed 
anthropometric measures (i.e., standing height, weight, and waist circumference) and were  
ﬁtted with seven disposable, pre -gelled electrodes for the recording of electrocardiogram 
(ECG) and impedance cardiogram (ICG). ECG  was measured  from three  electrodes  placed  in a 
modiﬁed Lead II arrangement on the distal right clavicle, lower left rib, and lower right 
abdomen. ICG was measured from two electrodes placed on the participant’s midline along 
the top end of the sternum between the two clavicles, at the bottom end of the sternum  where  
the ribs meet,  and two electrodes  along the spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. ECG and ICG data were  wirelessly 
transmitted via an ambulatory impedance cardiograph (Mindware Mobile #50- 2303- 00; 
Mindware Technologies, Westerville, OH, [LOCATION_003]) to a desktop computer equipped with 
Mindware’s Biolab (2.4) acquisition software that integrates simultaneously recorded audio and 
video. Both parents and children wore  a vest throughout each visit that secures the wireless 
ambulatory monitor close to their body and allow ed them to move freely during the tasks. 
Cardiac physiology was monitored throughout all tasks at each visit for both parents and children. After children and parents were ﬁtted with the electrod es, a 3 -min resting baseline 
measure of parent and child’s concurrent cardiac physiology was obtained while they were 
sitting quietly together and watching a neutral video of oceanic animals. Immediately afterward, 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, and resting pulse were assessed via blood pressure 
cuffs, while the parent and child remained sitting.  
 
Following  assessment  of initial resting cardiac  physiology, dyads completed  two joint 
interaction tasks that were  video - recorded and during which cardiac physiology was collected. 
First, the standard PCIT Dyadic Assessment Protocol ( 33) employ ed a standard set and 
arrangement of toys that were spread out on the playroom ﬂoor for all dyads. Parents were 
provided with an earbud and walkie- talkie to allow assessors to provide task instructions while 
parents were alone in the playroom with their child. The PCIT dyadic assessment protocol 
consists of three 5 -min parent -child interactions: a 5- min Child -Led Play task (i.e., please 
follow your child ’s lead…); followed  by a 5-min Parent -Led Play task (i.e., now you decide on 
what you two will play …), and a 5 -min Clean -Up task (i.e., it ’s time for your child to clean up all 
of the toys ). After the interaction, the parent’s earbud was removed,  and cardiac physiology 
was assessed during a 2 -min joint recovery before the dyad began the second interaction  
task. Dyads then completed  the Social Engagement task  (SET) during which the child and 
adult are seated in close physical proximity  while  completing three  reciprocal  activities:  (1) 
gently pointing to the other’s facial features (i.e., hair, chin, nose, and ears); (2) counting each 
other’s ﬁngers; and (3) whispering a story in each other’s ear. Children completed  the task 
twice: once with their parent and once with a female research assistant. Each activity was  
presented for a ﬁxed time interval and the story told by [CONTACT_644896].  Activity  order  remain ed consistent  across  dyads, whereas  the interactive  
partner  condition (i.e., parent  or research  assistant) was counterbalanced within assessment 
wave. That is, children were  randomly assigned to a partner order that remained constant 
throughout subsequent assessment waves. Cardiac physiology was assessed in another 2-
min joint recovery immediately after completing the SET, and then, blood pressure 
readings were  obtained. Parents and children were  given a short break and small snack prior 
to transitioning into individual  tasks.  
 
Parents  were  taken to a separate  testing room  in the lab, where  the Mindware Mobile carrier was 
removed and replaced with Biopac carriers for ECG and ICG [Dual Wireless Respi[INVESTIGATOR_644888] (BN-Tx); Biopac  Systems, Inc.]. Next, parents were  ﬁtted with a 
256-channel high density Electrical Geodesics Inc. (EGI Philips; Eugene, OR) Hydrocel 
Geodesic Sensor Net while their child observed . EEG was recorded at a sampling  rate of 500 Hz 
using the EGI net and Net Amp 300 ampliﬁer integrated with Net Station  software version  [IP_ADDRESS]  
(EGI Philips;  Eugene, OR). Parents  completed  a 4-min resting EEG  task in which  they ﬁrst close d 
their eyes  for 2 min and then ﬁxate d on a blank  screen for 2 min while  seated in a dark room. Next, 
a 3-min resting baseline measure of cardiac physiology was  collected while parents  and 
children watch ed a neutral ocean video. Parents completed  the executive function tasks 
[Auditory Attention (AUDAT)  and Stop Signal;  speciﬁed  in Outcome  Measures  below] while 
simultaneous EEG and cardiac physiology were  recorded. Parents completed  an Emotional 
Go/No -Go task to conclude visit #1.  Meanwhile,  children completed  two subtests  of the 
Woodcock Johnson- III Tests of Achievement and two brief self -regulatory tasks [Head -Toes -
Knees -Shoulders (HTKS); Working Memory] while cardiac  physiology  was monitored  during  
each task and for 2- min recovery  periods  after each task.  Note  that children’s  cardiac physiology 
was recorded during an additional 2- min standing baseline prior to the HTKS  task.  
 
Families returned to the lab for a second 2- hour visit within one week  of their initial visit. During  
visit #2, children were  ﬁtted  with a  64-channel  EGI Hydrocel  Geodesic  Sensor  with identical  
EEG equipment and acquisition software to that used with parents. Children completed  
executive functioning tasks (AUDAT and Zoo  Go/No -Go) while  simultaneous  EEG  and cardiac  
physiology were  recorded. Children then completed  the Emotional Go/No- Go task while cardiac 
physiology was recorded. During this time, parents completed questionnaires that allow for the 
assessment of socio -demographic characteristics, environmental risk, and child behav ior (see 
Outcome Measures ). After parents and children both completed individual tasks, peak 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_696] ﬂow (i.e., cardiovascular function) was  measured using a spi[INVESTIGATOR_14007], and the 
highest of three values was  recorded within -person. Next, whole blood spots were  collected 
from both parents and children to assess intervention effects on metabolic and immune 
markers. Four to ﬁve spots of blood (~50 ml each) were  collected on Whatman strips, then were  
dried, processed, and frozen at −20°C, before samples were  transferred for storage in a pad-
locked −80°C freezer to undergo enzyme- linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). All 
research assistants responsible for collecting blood spots ﬁrst completed  a 
comprehensive Bloodborne Pathogens training that outlined  emergency procedures, safe 
handling, contact [CONTACT_644897], and exposure control plan, prior to working with participants. 
Research assistants  used disposable masks  that cover  the nose  and mouth,  goggles,  and 
disposable gloves.  At the end of the pre-treatment  assessment,  the parent  was given a sealed, 
double- blind randomization letter after completing questionnaires and prior to collection of 
allostatic load measures. If the family was  randomized to the PCIT treatment condition, a 
research  assistant  review ed the basic  structure  and goals  of PCIT  with the parent, gave a brief tour 
of the PCIT clinical rooms, and scheduled  the family  for an intake  session with an available 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541].  
 
Mid-Treatment Assessment  
 
Only families who were randomized to the PCIT condition and engaged in treatment sessions 
were  invited to complete a mid-treatment assessment. Written informed consent from the 
parent and  verbal  assent  from the child were  obtained.  During  this single -visit assessment, 
dyads completed  assessment tasks noted above using identical  procedures  unless  speciﬁed  
here.  Parent  and child provide anthropometric measures (i.e., height, weight, and waist 
circumference) and then were  ﬁtted with seven disposable, pre- gelled electrodes  for recording 
cardiac  physiology  during a 3-min joint resting  baseline.  Dyads complete d the PCIT Dyadic 
Assessment Protocol during which cardiac physiology data were  collected. Cardiac physiology 
was recorded during a 2 -min recovery. Children then completed  the Social Engagement task 
with their parent only  (not a research assistant) during the mid -treatment assessment. Cardiac 
physiology was collected again during a 2- min post -task recovery. Parents and children took  a 
short snack break and then transitioned to individual  tasks.  Parents  then completed  the Stop 
Signal  task,  during which  only behavioral data was  collected (i.e., no EEG or cardiac 
physiology) due to time constraints. Parents completed  a subset of the questionnaires that 
were  presented at pre -treatment . Separately,  children completed  a 3-min measure  of resting 
cardiac physiology while standing, followed by [CONTACT_644898]. Children’s cardiac 
physiology was then recorded during a 2 -min recovery. Next, the child completed  a sitting 3 -
min resting baseline, followed by [CONTACT_644899]/No- Go task. Neither children nor parents 
provided  EEG dat a during the mid-treatment assessment due to time constraints. After 
completion of individual tasks, whole blood spots and measures of peak expi[INVESTIGATOR_696]  ﬂow were  
collected from both parents  and children.  
 
Outcome Measures  
 
Dyadic Parent -Child Interactions  
 
Video- recorded parenting behaviors and child responses during the standard PCIT Dyadic 
Assessment Protocol (i.e., child- led play, parent -led play, and clean- up tasks) at pre -treatment, 
post- treatment, and mid- treatment were  collected, transc ribed and then coded using the well -
validated Dyadic Parent -Child Interaction Coding System, Fourth Edition ( 55) (DPI[INVESTIGATOR_45599] -IV). For 
the PCIT intervention group, DPI[INVESTIGATOR_45599] -IV coding was  also completed  on parent -child interactions 
during Child Directed Interaction (CDI) sessions (i.e., standard, 5-min child -directed play 
segment) and standard Parent Directed Interaction (PDI) session segments that bega n with 
the 5 -min child -directed free play  segment  (see PCIT  Intervention and Delivery  below).  PCIT 
session coding was conducted using only the session video- recordings (i.e., without  
transcripts).  Parenting behaviors that were  coded include labeled praises, unlabeled praises, 
behavior descriptions, and reﬂections; criticisms, direct and indirect commands, questions, 
and neutral talks. Children’s compliance and non-compliance behaviors in response to 
parent commands were coded. Commands where children have no opportunity to comply 
were also  coded.  Coders  completed 20 hours  of intensive,  hands -on training prior to coding 
study assessments, and continued to meet regularly to maintain 80% inter -rater reliability. All 
coders were blind to participants’ condition group and assessment  wave.  Parent and child 
behaviors were  coded sequentially and summed to calculate a task average for each behavior. 
For assessment visit s (i.e., pre -treatment, mid- treatment, and post -treatment), values were also  
summed in 30 -sec epochs within each task and summarized into task averages. Reliability 
coding was completed on 20% of study families, with cri terion  set to 80% interrater reliabi lity. 
 
Cardiac Physiology  
From ECG/ICG recordings of cardiac physiology, RSA and pre- ejection  period (PEP) were  
assessed as indices of the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems, respectively. 
RSA is derived from high -frequency heart rate variability measured in the ECG (children,  0.24 
to 1.04 Hz; adults,  0.12 to 0.40 Hz). PEP is derived by [CONTACT_644900] Q -
point of the ECG and the B-point  of the dZ/dt  wave,  indexing  the time interval  between opening 
of the left ventricle and ejection of blood into the ventricle. Heart rate is evaluated from the 
ECG as the number of R -R wave intervals per minute. Both RSA and PEP are measured in 
30-s epochs, except during the Emotional Go/No-  Go task (described  below)  during which  they 
are assessed  for the task duration.  All data was cleaned ofﬂine  using Mindware  HRV analysis 
software version 3.1.1.  Data were visually inspected and cleaned for movement artifacts and 
equipment errors.  
 
Neurophysiology  
 
EEG was acquired from parents and children during rest periods and  completion of executive  
function tasks  (i.e., Stop Signal,  Go/ No -Go, and AUDAT) during T1 pre -treatment and T3 post - 
treatment sessions only. EEG was  recorded at a sampling rate of 500 Hz using an EGI 
Hydrocel Geodesic Sensor Net integrated with Net Station  software  (Electrical Geodesics  Inc; 
Eugene,  OR). After  recordings  were  completed,  raw EEG  ﬁles were  exported  from Net Station 
in simple binary format to prepare them for preprocessing . After preprocessing, continuous 
EEG ﬁles were  epoched into task -speciﬁc bins by [CONTACT_5586]- locking EEG to event codes 
synchronized with events of interest, to yield ERPs for analysis. Each  epoch was subjected  to 
standard  artifact rejection  procedu res. Final processed ERP ﬁles for a given participant for 
each task will consist of all artifact -free epochs of interest, relative to a 200- ms pre -stimulus 
baseline. Grand averages are created for each task by [CONTACT_644901].  
 
Attentional Control  
 
Parents and children individually complete the Auditory Attention Task (AUDAT) to assess 
attentional control.  Participants listen to one of two children’s stories presented simultaneously 
in separate free- ﬁeld speakers situated 90° to their left and right sides. During each story, one 
speaker present ed a male voice while the other speaker present ed a female  voice,  each  
reading different  narratives  ranging from 2.5 to 3.5 min in length and edited to remove pauses 
greater than 1 second. An arrow on the screen reminded the participant which story to attend 
to. Selective attention during the task is assessed via ERPs recorded to 100- ms sound probes 
(i.e., ba, buzz sounds) superimposed on the to-be-attended and unattended stories. Each 
participant attends to four separate stories over the duration of the task, with direction of 
attention counterbalanced across gender of narrator (male or female) and side of speaker (left  
or right)  with a pseudo- randomized order . Immediately  after each  story,  the participant  was 
asked three comprehension questions to ensure they were attending to the appropriate 
narrative.  
 
Inhibitory Control  
 
Parents  complete  two 6-min blocks  of the Stop Signal  task to assess response inhibition and 
impulse control. A stop -signal response time (SSRT) was calculated as the difference 
between the speed of the stop process and the stop signal delay, reﬂect ing efﬁciency of the 
inhibitory control process. Each block of the task consists of 128 trials (32 stop trials) and 
lasted [ADDRESS_863342] were  ERPs 
time-locked to the stop signal and ERPs time- locked to responses, for example, N2 and P3 
ERP components shown to be enhanced in amplitude on trials that are correctly inhibited.  
 
Participating children completed  four 2.5- min blocks of a Zoo Go/No -Go task to measure 
inhibitory control. C hildren were  presented with a story of a zookeeper and instructed to 
respond by [CONTACT_644902] a button box each time a zoo animal appears on the computer monitor 
(go signal). After 12 practice trials, they are told to withhold their response each time they see a 
monkey.  On No-Go trials  (i.e., monkey  stimulus), children were  given feedback for their 
responses, with a smiley emoticon  for correct  responses  and correctly  withheld  responses, and 
an angry emoticon for incorrect responses (i.e., did not withhold or did not respond). After a 
brief practice period that includes the monkey and emoticon feedback, children complete four  
blocks  of 45 trials  each,  with short  breaks  in between blocks, for a total of 180 trials. Of these, 
33% of trials per block are no-  go trials.  Children also completed  the Head Toes Knees 
Shoulders  task (HTKS),  adapted for use with ages  4–8, to assess behavioral response 
inhibition, and with McClelland’s modiﬁcations,  is appropriate for use with children aged 3 to 7 
years. Children are introduced to four instructions, “touch your head,” “touch your toes,” “touch 
your shoulders,” and “touch your knees.” After  a series  of non-conﬂict  trials  in which  they do as 
instructed, children were  told to respond using the “opposite” rule to the examiner (e.g., touch 
head when examiner says touch toes). A total of [ADDRESS_863343].   
 
Emotion Regulation  
 
Parents  and children also complete Emotional  Go/No -Go tasks to assess emotion regulation. 
Stimuli were  images of neutral, angry, happy, sad, and fearful facial expressions for 
parents, and only neutral, happy, or angry for children. Parents and children each completed  
an age- appropriate version of the  task, in which they were  instructed to press a response key 
when a target emotion was  presented, and to refrain from responding when a distractor 
emotion was presented . 
 
Survey Measures  
 
Parents are asked to report on both their own and their child’s adverse life experiences, 
attributions, socio- emotional functioning, general health, and relationships. In addition, parents 
report on their parenting stress, children’s traum a symptoms and children’s behavior. All 
questionnaires are completed in interview format with a trained research assistant. Parents are 
given a small booklet of scales for Likert -type questions, which they can point to when 
responding. Responses are entered into Qualtrics by [CONTACT_644903]. Table [ADDRESS_863344] 
mirror, providing positive feedback, support, and guidance. Each  session  was 50–60 min long.  
The PCIT intervention is assessment -driven and includeed weekly DPI[INVESTIGATOR_644889],  and parent 
ratings of child behavior problems using the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI). ( See 
PCIT International  guidelines).  Parents in the intervention condition were  invited to complete a 
second optional informed consent if they wished for their PCIT therapi[INVESTIGATOR_644890] a routine 
progress report to their DHS caseworker. No additional study data, aside from the optional 
progress reports and any mandated maltreatment reporting, was  shared with DHS authorities. 
Families were  provided light snacks at each visit and reimbursed for transportation costs to 
attend sessions. Treatment was suspended or  discontinued if the child was removed from the 
home entirely during the course of treatment;  however, families were retained in the study 
through the T3 post -treatment assessments when  possible.   
 
Interventionist Training and Fidelity  
 
A team  of eight  masters  or Ph.D.  level practitioners  completed an intensive 40- hours training 
with [CONTACT_644906] and her clinical team of nationally certiﬁed PCIT trainers at Oklahoma 
University Health Sciences Center (OUHSC) and delivered the PCIT intervention to CAPS 
study families. PCIT therapi[INVESTIGATOR_644891] ﬁdelity criteria. Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_644892],  in addition to live, video-
based consultation during conduct of their PCIT sessions with study families. Adherence to  the 
protocols  was assessed using live, remote,  direct  observation of sessions  and by [CONTACT_644904] -by-session ﬁdelity checklists following each session. All PCIT sessions  were  
videotaped to ensure  rigorous  adherence to the PCIT protocol and a minimum of 10% of 
videotaped sessions were oded for ﬁdelity by [CONTACT_644905] 90%  criterion.  
 
Services- as-Usual -Control Condition  
 
The Services -as-Usual  (SAU)  control  condition was an ecologically valid,  ethical  comparison 
group in which  families  receive  typi[INVESTIGATOR_644893],  including 
access to a variety of in -home family visitation services, respi[INVESTIGATOR_644894], and other individual 
child counseling and/or parent education training. Parents completed  a Services Utilization 
Questionnaire via interview at post-treatment, indicating how many times in the past [ADDRESS_863345] -treatment for all study  families.  
 