 
 
 
 
Use of Ocular Point of Care Ultrasound in Diagnosing 
Retinal Detachment in the Emergency Department: A 
Prospective Study.  
 
NCT# 5170078  
 
Document Date: August 21, 2017  
1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. PROTOCOL  INFORMATION  
Title: Use  of Ocular  Point  of Care  Ultrasound in Diagnosing Retinal  Detachment  in 
the Emergency Department:  A Prospective Study.   
Funding Source:  Emergency Medicine  
Phase  of Study:  initial  
Version  Date  of Protocol:  version  1 
 
2. PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR’S  INFORMATION 
PI [CONTACT_5627]:  Tze Lyn Stephanie  Tseeng,  MD 
Assistant  Professor,  Attending Physician  Loma  Linda Emergency Department  
Loma  Linda University Health  Center 
[ADDRESS_833278]  
Loma  Linda, CA  [ZIP_CODE]  
[EMAIL_11957] 
 
3. STUDY  PERSONNEL  
Patients  will be enrolled  and data will  be collected  by [CONTACT_625448]  
 
4. STUDY  INFORMATION  
Location(s)  of Research  Activity: Loma  Linda Emergency Department   
Expected  Start/Stop Dates  of Research:July 2017- July 2018  
Type  of Research:  Other - Ultrasound diagnostic  
 
5. INCLUSION /  EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion criteria:  Participants  may  include  any patient that  is greater than 18 years 
old with  any complaint  of vision  loss,  flashers,  floaters and/or  any other  patient  
whom  the emergency physician feels  requires an  evaluation  for mac  on retinal  
detachment, mac off retinal detachment, vitreous hemorrhage, and or  vitreous  
detachment. Patients  that meet  this eligibility  criterion  must  also  be receiving  a 
consult  by a LLU ophthalmology  physician in order to  obtain comparative  time  
values  and accuracy for ED physician  diagnosis  versus ophthalmologist  diagnosis .  
 
Exclusion  criteria: Exclusion  Criteria  includes  any ocular  trauma, any  concern  for 
ruptured globe, or  any other  extraneous reason  determined  by [CONTACT_625449]. Excluded  patients  also include:  pregnant  women,  patients  < 18  years of  
age, and patients  not receiving  an ophthalmology  consult. We will be  excluding 
pregnant  women  in order  to minimize  the exposure to  ultrasonography  for expectant  

2 mothers.  We will be  excluding patients  <[ADDRESS_833279]  RECRUITMENT  & SCREENING  
Number  of Subjects:  estimated  250- [ADDRESS_833280]  Age Range:  18+  
Subject  Gender:  males  and females both   
Racial/E thnic  Distribution: any   
Target  Study  Population:  Adults  non pregnant  patients  with  painless  vision  loss 
Recruitment  Method Info:  Potential  patients  will be  identified  by [CONTACT_625450]  a possible  retinal  detachment.  
 
7. INFORMED CONSENT  PROCESS  
The study  will take  place  in the Emergency Department  of LLUMC.  The patient  study  
population will include  adult  patients  presenting  to the emergency department  with  
ocular  complaints  that lead to a physician’s  suspi[INVESTIGATOR_625445]. A  
treating attending physician or  resident  will evaluate  the patient  as per standard of  
care.   If there  is a concern  for retinal  detachment, the treating  physician will  order  an 
ophthalmology  consult.  
IRB trained resident  physicians   or attending  physicians  of the Loma  Linda 
emergency department  will identify  and approach patients  regarding the  study  and 
obtain a signed  informed consent  if the patient  agrees to  participate.  No medical  
records will  need  to be accessed  for the purposes  of this screening. If the patient  
declines to  be enrolled  in the study,  treatment  will proceed  as per standard of  care 
determined  by [CONTACT_56951]. In  the cases  where the  physi cian treating  the 
patient  approaches  the patient  about  being enrolled  in this study,  it will  be made  
clear to the patient  that his/her  decision  to be enrolled  or not will in  no way  affect 
their  quality  of care in the ED by [CONTACT_625451].  Only  patients  who require  an 
ophthalmology  consult  to diagnose  retinal  detachment,  as part  of their  normal  ED 
care,  will be enrolled.  No  x-rays,  CTs,  or formal  ultrasounds  will be  performed  
solely for  the purpose  of this study.  If a patient  agrees to  be enrolled  in the study,  
he/she  will sign  a written  informed consent  form  and a HIPAA  form  prior  to the 
ultrasound procedure being performed.  
The time  of ophthalmology  consult  will be  recorded.  Next  an emergency department  
physician will  perform  the ocular  ultrasound and m ake a diagnosis  based upon their  
findings. Images  will be  archived  and stored  in a locked  hard  drive stored  in a locked  
office.  Agreeing to  participate  will allow  the study  team  to collect  data from  the 
ultrasound exam  and authorize  access  to the subject’s medical  record  for the 
purposes  of research  only.  Information accessed  from  the medical  record  includes  the 
duration of  symptoms,  height  and weight, age, and  the outcomes  of standard testing. 
The final  discharge  diagnosis  from  the ophthalmology  consult  will be reviewed  as 
well.  
 
8. STUDY  DESIGN  
a. Background or  rationale  for this study:  This  is a prospective,  cross- sectional  
study  to assess  the utility  of Point  of Care  Ultrasound (POCUS)  in the diagnosis  
of ocular  complaints  in the emergency department  with  specific  focus  on the 
accuracy of  diagnosis  when  compared to  that of a blinded ophthalmologist. 
Ocular  complaints  represent  between  2% and 3%  of ED visits  (Walker et al, 
2011). This  percentage may include  vision -threatening diagnoses  including 
3 retinal  detachment, which  can occur  in 3-4% of patients  presenting with  ocular  
complaints  (Alotaibi et  al, 2011). However,  the equipment  and expertise 
required  to adequately  assess for  conditions  such as retinal  detachment  are 
limited  in busy  EDs  due to the time  consuming and challenging nature  of the 
examination. I ncorporating the  use of an ultrasound could provide  a more  
available, focused,  and timely  assessment.   
b. Objectives.  To determine the  accuracy  of ocular  ultrasound in diagnosing retinal  
detachment  compared to  gold standard of  ophthalmology  examination.  
c. Procedures  involved (Research  Interventions):  Ocular  Ultrasound 
d. Alternative  procedures, if any, that  are not included in  the study  but migh t be 
advantageous  to the subject.  none  
e. If any deception  is required  for validity  of this study, explain why this is 
necessary  and how  subject(s)  will be debriefed. n/a  
f. Concise  review  of literature  that supports  the rationale,  objectives,  and 
methodology of  the proposed study:  Ocular  POCUS  has been  utilized  by 
[CONTACT_625452] a tool  for identifying  
retinal  detachment  since 1969 (Lizzi  et al, 2004;  Coleman  et al, 1969;  Vrablik  
et al, 2014). The  ophthalmology  team  at LLU  Medical  Center  evaluates patients  
using a focused  ocular  exam  with  a fundoscope  and ocular  dilation. The  
emergency department  team  has access to  one fundoscope  for ocular  
examination;  incorporating the  use of an ultrasound could provide  a more  
available, f ocused,  and timely  assessment.  A recently published  meta -analysis  
identified  only  3 small  prospective trials  in the Emergency Department  that 
were determined  to be at low risk of  bias (Vrablik,  2014). The first study  
conducted by  [CONTACT_625453] 2002 demo nstrated  an impressive 100%  sensitivity 
and 100%  specificity of  ocular  POCUS  identification  of retinal  detachment  in 
61 subjects.  In this study  all attending physicians  and residents received  only  1 
hour  of hands -on instruction  and 1 hour  of lecture prior  to study  participation 
(Blaivas  et al, 2002).  A  second study  conducted in 2010 by  [CONTACT_625454] a sensitivity of  100%  and specificity of  83% in detecting  retinal  
detachment  by [CONTACT_625455] 48 subjects  after  only  a 20 -minute  ocular  
ultrasound lecture (Yoonessi  et al, 2010). Shinar  et al conducted the  final study  
in 2011, which  demonstrated a sensitivity of  97%  and specificity of  92%  in 
detecting  retinal  detachment  by [CONTACT_625455] 92 subjects  (Shinar  et al., 
2011). These studies  suggest  that ocular  POCUS  is an accurate diagnostic  tool 
for identifying  retinal  detachment  in the ED and may  require minimal  ED 
physician training. However,  these studies  are limited  in their  sample  size.  We 
intend to expand upon this  prior  research  by [CONTACT_79323] m ore patients  in addition 
to comparing the  accuracy of  ocular  POCUS  diagnosis  to a blinded 
ophthalmologist. In  secondary outcome  measures we  will compare  the overall  
time to diagnosis  of the Emergency Physician  performing  ocular  POCUS  to the 
time to diagnos is of the consulting ophthalmologist. Many  additional  studies 
have  identified  multiple  other  diagnostic  utilities  for ocular  ultrasound. While  
accurate  assessment  of the optic  disc can provide  critical  information  regarding 
the patient’s  intracranial  pressure,  and be invaluable  in diagnosis  and 
treatment  for patients,  an accurate  evaluation by  [CONTACT_625456].  
Utilizing  ultrasound to  assess both retrobulbar  optic  nerve sheath and optic  disc 
swelling  as an indicator  of increased  intracranial  pressure may prove  as an 
4 accurate  alternative.  This  may  lead to  earlier ED  detection  of increased  
intracranial  pressure that may  be caused  by a variety of  pathologies  including 
inflam matory  diseases,  infection, infiltrative  conditions, and  microvascular 
infarction, such  as occurs  with  malignant  hypertension (Blaivas, 2003;  Tayal  et 
al, 2007;  Kimberly  et al, 2008;  Geeraerts et  al, 2008, Teismann et  al, 2013).  
Other  case reports  recentl y suggest  the potential  utilization  of ultrasound to 
identify  optic  neuritis  and as risk stratification  for identifying  orbital  cellulitis  
(Kang et  al, 2014). Therefore,  continuing to  expand the  research  of ocular  
POCUS  in the ED could lead to  a multitude  of uses for  the evaluation of  ocular  
complaints  that may  improve  the accuracy and speed  to diagnosis  at a lower  
cost with  a non -invasive  diagnostic  tool.  
 
9. DATA COLLECTION  
 
Potential study  subjects  will be  identified  by [CONTACT_625457]  a compl aint 
of painless  vision  loss and treating physician’s  clinical suspi[INVESTIGATOR_625446].  If a patient  meets criteria  
for the study,  then a research  team  member  will approach each  patient  who  meets 
criteria  for possible  enrollment.  The  patient  will be given  a Consent  Form  to read  
and any  questions  answered  by [CONTACT_625458]/or  treating  physician. If  he or she 
agrees to  participate  in the study, the patient  will sign a HIPAA Authorization Form  
and Conse nt Form  prior  to enrollment.  The emergency physician will evaluate  the 
patient  as per standard of  care.  Inclusive criteria  for this study  denotes  that patients  
must  be receiving  an ophthalmology  consult  as per standard of care.  The time of 
ophthalmology  consult  will be  recorded.  The ocular  point  of care  ultrasound will then  
be performed  on the  patient  while  a research  team  member  (including research  
assistant  students)  records required  information on a data collection  form.  The 
ultrasound that will be  perfo rmed  will be for research  purposes  in the majority  of 
cases.  The treating  physician may  perform  an ocular  ultrasound on the  patient  as 
part of the treatment  plan, per  physician preference.  In this case,  the patient  will still 
need  to consent  to the use of their  ultrasound data for  research.  The physician 
performing the  ultrasound will place  the probe  over  the patient's  closed  eye. The 
physician will  perform  two exams,  a static  exam  and a kinetic  exam.  In the static  
exam  the physician will as the patient  to keep  their  eyes forward while  they  scan  
longitudinal  and transverse in  long and  short  axis (all in normal  gain). Then for  the 
kinetic exam,  the physician will use  normal  gain to  visualize the ocular  nerve in  
longitudinal  axis,  then  the physician will over  gain for  the same  visualization. The  
PHI recorded  will be  the medical  record  number, name  [CONTACT_73150],  and date  and 
time of treatment.  Only  the lead researcher and co -researchers will have  access to  
the medical  record  number  for reviewing  ultrasound rep orts and disposition reports,  
as indicated  on the  attached Data  Collection  Sheet. The  final  diagnosis  of the 
ophthalmologist  will be accessed  through the  use of the medical  record  number. The  
time it was entered  in the chart  will be used  as the time  parame ter for  which  we use 
as the ophthalmologist  consult  time.  Patient  privacy will be  protected  during this  
study  as the patient  information  will be coded and  replaced  with a study  number  that 
will be  used  during the  study. This  information will  be kept  in a locked  area  and 
separate  from  the study  files,  only  authorized members  of the study  team  will have  
access to  patient  identifiable  data. Subject  identifiable  information  will be destroyed  
once  the data  is no longer  needed. Regarding training, ED  residents wi ll receive 
supplemental  lecture and  hands -on training in  ocular  ultrasound. The  purpose  of this 
supplemental  training  will be to familiarize  residents with  performing an ocular  
ultrasound. The training  itself will  not be evaluated  in practice for  research  purposes.  
[ADDRESS_833281]  number  
for accessing  patient  information and  reports.  
 
10. LABELING  & STORAGE  OF DATA &  SPECIMENS 
Patient’s  private  health  information will be  kept  confidential and enrollme nt in the 
study  will include  a patient  study  number. The  master patient  identification  key will  
be kept  in a locked  office  accessible only  to researchers.  Patient’s  ultrasound images  
will be  stored  on a password encrypted  drive which  will be locked  in an office  
accessible only  by [CONTACT_625459].   
 
11. DATA ANALYSIS  
The data will  be screened  for normality, missing  data, outliers, and skewness.   
Descriptive statistics will  be conducted on the  data, including  all study  related  
variables.   Correlation matrices and  path analyses  will be  presented  to examine  the 
mediating role.  Effect  sizes for  all of these statistics  will be reported  to establish 
practical  significance.  
 
12. RISK AND INJURY  
Patients  deemed  eligible  for the study  will be  subjected  to bedside  ocular  ultra sound 
via modalities  described  above, which  require specific movements  of the ultrasound 
probe  as well  as changing settings  on the machine  itself.  As such,  patients  will only  
be exposed  to ultrasound  gel and ultrasound probes  emitting  high -frequency  sound 
waves,  which  poses  a minimal  risk of  infection,  no radiation exposure,  and is 
generally  well -tolerated  by [CONTACT_1962].  Patients  will have  a small  plastic  patch  known as  
a Tegaderm  applied to their  closed  eyelid  prior  to application of ultrasound gel, to  
furth er reduce the  very low  risk of  infection  or irritation  from  the gel. This  is routine  
practice and  is well  tolerated  by [CONTACT_1962]. At  any point, study  subjects  may  decide  to 
refuse consent  for the study.  
 
13. BENEFIT(S)  
Patients  will not be personally  compensate d but  the performance of  ultrasound may  
aid in  diagnosis  of ocular  complaints  or identification  of ocular  pathology. 
 
14. COMPENSATION  
There will be  no compensation for  patients  or researchers.   
 
15. CONFIDENTIALITY  
Patient  privacy will be  protected  during this  study  as the patient  information will be  
coded and replaced  with  a study  number  that will be  used  during the  study.  This  
information will be  kept  in a locked  area and separate  from  the study  files,  only  
authorized members of  the study  team  will have  access to  patient  identifiable  data. 
The patient’s  images  will be held on a password encrypted  external  hard drive which  
will be  stored  in a locked  office.   
 
16.  LITERATURE  REVIEW  
1. Walker  RA, Adhikari  S. Chapter  236 p1517- 1549.  Eye Emergencies.  In: Tintinali  JE, 
Kelen  GD, Stapczynski  JS, eds. Tintinali's  Emergency  Medicine:  A Comprehensive  
Study  Guide.  7th ed. New  York:  McGraw -Hill; 2011.   
2.  Alotaibi  AG, Osman  EA, Allam  KH, et al. One month outcome  of ocular  related  
emergencies  in a tertiary  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_625447].  Saudi  Med J. 2011;32:1256-
1260.  
6 3.  Lizzi  FL, Coleman  DJ. History  of ophthalmic  ultrasound.  J Ultrasound Med.  
2004;23:1255- 1266.  
4.  Coleman  DJ, Konig WF, Katz  L. A hand -operated,  ultrasound  scan system  for 
ophthalmic  evaluation.  Am J Ophthalmol.1969;68:256 -263 
5.  Michael  E. Vrablik,  DO; Gregory  R. Snead,  MD; Hal J. Minnigan,  MD, PhD;  Jonathan 
M. Kirschner,  MD; Thomas  W. Emmett,  MD, MLS;  Rawle  A. Seupaul,  MD.The  
Diagnostic  Accuracy  of Bedside  Ocular  Ultrasonography for the Diagnosis  of Retinal  
Detachmen t: A Systematic  Review  and Meta -analysis.  Annals  of Emergency  Medicine  
(2014)   
6.  Blaivas  M, Theodoro D, Sierzenski  PR. A study  of bedside  ocular  ultrasonography  in the 
emergency  department.  Acad  Emerg  Med.  2002;9:791 -799. 
7.  Shinar  Z, Chan  L, Orlinsky  M. Use of ocular  ultrasound for the evaluation  of retinal  
detachment.  J Emerg  Med.  2011;40:53- 57. 
8.  Yoonessi  R, Hussain  A, Jang TB. Bedside  ocular  ultrasound  for the detection  of retinal  
detachment  in the emergency  department.  Acad  Emerg  Med.  2010;17:913- 917. 
9.  Teismann,  N, Lenagham,  P, Nolan,  R, Stein,  J, Green,  A. Point -of-care Ocular  
Ultrasound to DetectOptic  Disc Swelling.  Academic Emergency  Medicine.  September  
2013.   
10. Blaivas  M, Theodoro D, Sierzenski  PR. Elevated  intracranial  pressure  detected  by 
[CONTACT_625460].  Acad  Emerg  Med.  2003; 
10:376 –81.  
11.  Tayal  VS, Neulander  M, Norton  HJ, Foster  T, Saunders  T, Blaivas  M. Emergency  
department  sonographic  measurement  of optic  nerve  sheath  diameter  to detect  findings  
of increased  intracranial  pressure  in adult  head  injury  patients.  Ann Emerg  Med.  2007; 
49:508 –14.  
12.  Kimberly  HH, Shah  S, Marill  K, Noble  V. Correlation  of optic  nerve  sheath  diameter  
with direct  measurement  of intracranial  pressure.  Acad  Emerg  Med.  2008; 15:201 –4.  
13.  Geeraerts  T, Merceron  S, Benhamou D, Vigu_e  B, Duranteau  J. Non-invasive  
assessment  of intracranial  pressure  using  ocular  sonography in neurocritical  care 
patients.  Intensive  Care  Med.  2008; 34:2062– 7.  
14.  Kang,  T, Seif, D, Chilstrom,  M, Mailhot,  T; Ocular  Ultrasound  Identifies  Early  Orbital  
Cellulitis.  Western  Journal  of Emergency  Medicine  (2014)   