IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
 
TITLE: Improving Weight Management at the VA: Using the MOVE! Toward Your Goals tool in Primary Care 
(Awardee/ PI: [INVESTIGATOR_426315], MD MS) 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS 
 
Veterans shoulder a disproportionate burde n of obesity and its co-morbidities, i ncluding diabetes, hype rtension, 
and hyper lipi[INVESTIGATOR_035].  Modest weig ht loss in obese patients through di et and exercise improves health and prevents 
chronic di sease, but primary care providers (PCPs) o ften fail to adequately counsel patients abo ut their weig ht due to 
lack o f time an d training. Thus, to ols and brief interventions are needed to support provider s’ behavi or change 
counseling. The VA currently o ffers th e MOVE! program to treat overweig ht and obese patients, but o nly 9% of e ligible 
patients a tten d. At the same time, V eterans on av erage see th eir PCPs 3.6 times per year, whi ch supports the 
impo rtance of developi[INVESTIGATOR_587221] (PC)-based interventions. The [LOCATION_002] Preventive Services Task force 
(USPSTF) recommends the use of the 5As framework (Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, Arrange) for counseling patients 
about weight.  
Interactive behavi or change t echnologies utilizing expert system so ftware programs are an innovative way t o 
facilitate 5As counseling to promote behavi or chan ge in primary care . These programs perform computerized risk, 
lifestyle,  and theory- ba sed, behavioral assessmen t to provide comp uter-generated, ta ilored advice to patients. They 
also can provide info rmation to healt hcare team s. The MOVE!11 so ftware is an exper t system program for VA patients 
referred  to MO VE!, but is not currently used in primary care by [CONTACT_19045]-Aligned Care Teams (PACT). 
Collaborativ e goal setting can be used to achieve behavior  change in this intervention. This construct, a critical 
compone nt of several behavi or change theories a nd models and corresponding to “agree” in the 5As model , has be en 
widely r ecommended for health promotion i n primary car e.  Our formative work (MIRB #[ZIP_CODE]) using key informant 
interviews with PACT teamlets and MOVE! staff and focus groups with Veterans demonstrated that goal setting is 
feasible and acceptable to patients and PACT teamlets and provided insight on ba rriers to goal se tting, and ways to 
facilitate goal-setting conversations.  
During the development phase of this project, we developed  a primary care-based intervention called MOVE! 
Toward Your Goals (MTG) to facilitate weight management within primary care and increase adoption of intensive VA 
programs such as MOVE!. The MTG intervention uses a new MTG software tool (that we developed) delivered on tablets 
to facilitate 5As-based weight management counseling with a health coach and healthcare team to promote goal-
setting, behavi or change, and weig ht loss i n the primary care setting . The Veteran also receives follow up with 10-15 
health coaching calls over 1 year.  
As part of a pi[INVESTIGATOR_141106] a larger, multicenter trial, w e will randomize 160 subjects t o receive either Enhanced 
Usual Care or the MTG Intervention.  
 
Primary Aim:  To explore di fferences in fe asibilit y, acceptability, and interme diate, behavioral, an d weigh t loss outcomes 
at 3, [ADDRESS_772499]-inter vention between the MTG intervention and Enhanced Usual Care. We will 
explore differences within each arm and compare t he 2 inter vention arms.   
 
Hypothesi s: Among obese VA PC patients in an urban primary care practic e, a brief, interactive comput er- assisted 
intervention w ill result in signifi cant improvements in interme diate ( self-efficacy, intention, and motivatio n to change 
lifestyle behaviors), behavioral (di et and physical activity improvements, adheren ce to MOVE!), and weig ht loss 
outcomes a t 3, 6 and 12 months. 
 
Explorato ry Aim: To compare the intervention arm to a third study arm of non-enrolled PC patients matched for age, 
gender, and BMI (“Usual Care” ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
 
 
RESEARCH PLAN 
 
A. BACKGROUND/SIGNIFICANCE 
 
 VETERANS/OBESITY 
The burden of obesity among Veterans is substantial, and modest weight loss can have significant benefit. The 
majority of Americans are either overweight or obese1 and obesity is associated with higher mortality.2 Approximately 
36-37% of patients seen at the VA are obese,3,[ADDRESS_772500] a high degree of chronic disease. For instance, 
84% of obese Veterans have hypertension, 78% have hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], and 45% have diabetes.[ADDRESS_772501] weight loss (7%) 
via a 16-session program can reduce the risk of diabetes in high-risk patients by 58 %.5  Thus, the [LOCATION_002] 
Preventive Services Task Force recommends that all patients are screened for obesity and offered intensive lifestyle 
counseling.6 
The VA offers the MOVE! program, an intensive lifestyle behavior change program, nationally. Patients who 
attended 2 or more MOVE! sessions lost 2.[ADDRESS_772502] clinically significant (>5%) weight loss (19% vs. 12%) and less likely to gain weight (29% vs. 38%).7 Another 
study of MOVE! demonstrated improved weight loss trajectories (-1.6kg/yr) compared to weight gain (+2kg/yr) prior to 
enrollment.8 Unfortunately, many obese patients are either unwilling or unable to attend intensive weight management 
programs, and barriers are poorly understood. Only 8% of eligible patients attend at least 1 MOVE! visit9. While this is 
partly due to poor patient adherence to the MOVE! program, another reason is variable implementation of MOVE! 
across VA sites. In addition, while one of the goals of the MOVE! program was to integrate weight management into 
primary care (PC), in practice, this program often operates more like a specialty service where treatment is provide d 
outside of the PC visit or setting where patients receive frequent care.   
 
 PACT 
The PC setting is critical to red ucing the burde n of ob esity; primary care-based interventions have a broad 
potential reach. Th e VA/Depar tment of Defense (DOD) g uidelines f or screening and managemen t of overweig ht and 
obesity recommend that providers treat all patie nts wit h obesity.10 Veterans i n the VA system see a primary c are 
provider (PCP) an average of 3.6 times per year,11 providing multiple opportunities for weight management counseling 
and referral to MOVE!. PC is an impo rtant ven ue to promote weig ht loss, and e ffectiv e PC-based int erventions can hav e 
a signifi cant pub lic health impact . Physicians ’ and other provider s’ co unseling is associated with positive behavioral an d 
weight-loss outcomes.12,13 However, PCPs frequently fai l to effectively counsel obese patie nts to lo se weig ht.14,15 This i s 
due to lack o f training,16 poor competency,17 perceived lack of e ffectiveness,18 and competing demands on time during 
the medical visit.19 PCPs m ay fail t o recogniz e that a patient is obese. In a r ecent study, o nly 53.5% of obese patients at 
the VA had an obesity diagnosis i n their el ectronic me dical record.4 Tho se that had a diagnosis of ob esity were much 
more li kely to receive counseling.4 Thu s, interventions are needed to support physician s’ and other provider s’ ob esity 
identification and cou nseling. 
To improve counseling opportunities and enhance care coordination during a primary care visit, the VA adopted 
a patient centered medical home model called Patient Aligned Care Teams (PACT) in 2010. T he PACT model provides a 
team-b ased, patient- centered approa ch to health care th at utilizes a multidisciplinary practi ce team that includes a RN 
Care  Manager, a Clinical Associate (L PN), and Administr ative Associ ate, and t he primary care provider (the “teamlet ”) as 
well as social w orkers, dietitians, and specialists (othe r team members) to de liver patient- centered care.9,[ADDRESS_772503] provides the opportunity for longitudinal, team-based care that is integrated with the MOVE! 
program. However, in the 2013 MOVE! progress report, the majority (55%) of VA sites surveyed reported that MOVE! 
programs were separate from PACT.[ADDRESS_772504] teamlets could increase 
patient motivation to attend the MOVE! program and facilitate weight loss for those who do not attend.  
 
 THE 5As 
The [LOCATION_002] Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that providers use the 5As framework 
to counsel patients for weight management. This model, which has been shown to promote weight loss and smoking 
cessation,22,[ADDRESS_772505] via addressing barriers (motivational interviewing), and Arrange to follow-up or refer patient for further 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
treatment.24 Our previous work has allowed us to determine which aspects of the 5As framework need to involve the 
healthcare team (e.g. agree and assist) and also identified which are particularly time-consuming (assessing multiple 
behaviors and providing advice).  
 
Computerized i nterventions m ay be effective in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_587222] 5As-based obesity counseling in the primary care setting. 
Interactive behavior change t echnologies use expert system 
comput er software to evaluate patient s’ risk and curren t 
behaviors (assess), an d then gen erate person alized, ta ilored 
behavi or change advi ce (advise).[ADDRESS_772506] been show n 
to facilitate goal se tting (agree) and lifestyle behavi or change i n 
primary care se ttings,26,[ADDRESS_772507] th eir prim ary care providers to deliv er lifestyle and 
weight-loss counseling28 and m ay be mor e likely to change their 
lifestyle behavi or when couns eled by [CONTACT_587231].16 
Further, patie nt-provider commu nication has be en directly 
linked to adherence and health outcomes.29 Figure 1  shows 
how the MTG intervention corresponds to the 5As framework. 
 
 GOAL-SETTING 
Goal setting is a critical compone nt of the MTG  
intervention , corr esponds to t he “Agre e” compone nt of the 5As 
framework24 and is associated wit h effectiv e weight 
management.26,30 Effective weight loss interventio ns need to include the patients’ perspective, and having them set 
individualized goals is a strategy supported by [CONTACT_587232].31 Based on this theory, having an intention to change a behavior predicts behavior change. Thus, forming 
specific goals or “goal intentions” increases the likelihood of behavior chage .32,33 Goal setting is also commo nly used to 
promote behavi or change in prim ary care se ttings34 and f its well into other behavi or change theories and models 
including the chronic care mod el,35 chronic di sease self-management programs,36,37 and s ocial cognitiv e theory.38 A 
systematic revi ew of goal setting for lifestyle behavi or change in primary care showed that i t was effec tive in promoting 
diet and physical activity changes.38 Another systematic review showed that technology-assisted interventions combined 
with counseling promoted weight loss.39 Thus, technology-assisted goal setting has the potential to overcome barriers 
and facilitate weight management.  
Health-related go als can be general (l osing weight, exercisi ng more) or specific ( substituti ng water for sod a, 
attending a weekly aero bics class).[ADDRESS_772508] goal se tting processes and outcomes. Prior to our own qualitative studies (see below), a review of the 
literature reve aled no studies exami ning the barriers, preferen ces, and f acilitators to goal setti ng in obese VA patients . 
We used this info rmation to optimize t he goal se tting process f or the intervention. 
 
 RELEVANCE OF PROPOSED RESEARCH TO VA 
The VA is a national leader in providing comprehensive ob esity screening and tre atment program s. The VA 
currently scree ns all patients for  obesity, and high-ri sk overweight and obese patients ar e referred  by [CONTACT_539573]! progra m to receive comprehensive ob esity counseling. Pe rformance measures from the Office o f Healthcare 
Transfo rmation (OHT) stip ulate that screeni ng for BMI an d offer of r eferral t o MOVE! occur for all eligible patients  ( t he 
averag e screening and r eferral rate is 94%) .  The MOVE!11 questio nnaire is currently used primar ily by [CONTACT_587233]!  programs (use v aries by [CONTACT_374767] n). However, this tool is not currently used for PC 
patients outside of the MOVE! program, and our own formative research showed that it needed increased Figure 1 : MTG Intervention in the 5As 
framework  
 •MTG tool assesses current weight 
management related behaviors and barriers  ASSESS  
•Patient receives tailored advice by [CONTACT_587234]. Advice is facilitated by 
[CONTACT_539577].  ADVISE  
•MTG tool guides patient to choose goals. 
Health coach and healthcare team work 
further with patient to agree on goals.  AGREE  
•Health coach and healthcare team do brief 
motivational interviewing to address barriers  ASSIST  
•Referral to MOVE! program and/or other 
resources; Health coach follows up with 
telephone counseling.  ARRANGE  
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
functionality in order to help patients use the tailored advice to set behavior change goals.  
 
 THE MOVE TOWARD YOUR GOALS INTERVENTION:  
To address this need, we developed the MOVE! Toward Your Goals (MTG) tool, a weight management and goal 
setting tool based on the MO VE!11 software, to  support ob esity management durin g the primary car e visit. This tool has 
the potential to reach a greater per centag e of in dividuals and m ay promot e increased attendance to more intensiv e 
treatments (i. e. grou p therapy, in dividual cou nseling, TeleMO VE!) ava ilable through t he MO VE! program. The MTG tool 
is designed to be part of a 5As, PC-based interventi on within PACT.  Based on our preliminary studies (described below), 
our intervention will include training appropriate members o f the PAC T teamlets (PCPs , nursing staff ) as well as health 
coaches to f acilitate goa l setting and d eliver brief, target ed motivationa l interviewi ng to address ambivalence and 
resistan ce when necessary. 
Figure [ADDRESS_772509] mod el to im prove delivery of 
obesity care (based on preliminary studies described below). Th e patient completes t he MTG tool  (described in more 
detail below) prior to a PC visit with the assistance of a health coach. The tool facilitates goal setting conversations by 
[CONTACT_587235], barriers to weight management, and current behaviors. It then 
provides tailored advice, guiding patients to create initial weight, nutrition, and physical activity goals. The tool then 
generates a personalized report, goal setting worksheets, and tailored educational materials. The health coach and 
patient use these tools to collaboratively refine and discuss specific behavi or change goa ls. A provider report and the 
patient’s preliminary goals are automatically sen t to t he practice team through a CPRS research note . After checking in 
for a sched uled primary care visit, the patient meets w ith their RN Care manager and PCP who r eview the ta ilored 
advice with the patien t and review the goals. Either the RN care manager or PCP co llaborati vely refin es and/ or endorses 
the goals and does brie f motivational interviewi ng to address ba rriers to achi eving the goals. They also  document these 
goals in CPRS so tha t they can b e addressed duri ng future visits. Th e patien t then has the option of attending t he MO VE! 
program and/or goes ba ck to the comm unity/ fam ily to wor k toward his or her behavioral weigh t managemen t goals. The 
health coach or other member of the PACT team the n calls the patient regularly to follow up on the patient’s goal 
attainment ( or lack of) w ill be addressed at sub sequen t visits.  
 
 
B. PRELIMINARY STUDIES 
 PFIZER STUDY 
Usability Study with 
Latinas: We conducted usability 
studies of the MOVE!23 software 
with Latina women with vario us 
levels of computer literacy to work 
with the MO VE!23 software 
applicatio n (earlier version of 
MOVE!11) and materi als, provide 
feedback about its design, and 
explore its potential application in 
creating weight management 
goals . Although generally well 
received, we found the MOVE!23 
software was only marginally 
effective at facilitating goal setting . 
Patients had difficulty 
understanding some of the 
questions and interacted with the 
tool more readily when its 
language was familiar and content was personally relevant. When faced with ambiguity and uncertainty, they relied on 
the to ol’s visual cues and examples, actively sought relevant personal experiences, and/or requested facilitator support. 
Additionally, they appreciated the tailored health advice that the software provided, but failed to recall information 
needed to create goals and build a weight management plan. This study highlighted the need to develop a new software Figure 2: How the MTG  Intervention Can Be Incorporated into the 
PACT Model 
 
 
 
 
Community/Family  
Integrated Healthcare System  
PACT teamlet  
Primary Care Provider Visit  
Patient completes 
MOVE! Toward Your 
Goals (MTG) tool  
Patient and 
PACT member 
discuss and 
agree on goals  
PCP does brief 
motivational 
interviewing  
(if needed)  
Patient 
Attends 
MOVE!  
Patient 
achieves 
lifestyle 
goals  
With Health Coach, patient reviews facilitators, 
barriers, and advice, creates SMART goals, and 
discusses VA resources  
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.[ADDRESS_772510] usability studies of the MOVE!23 with a Veteran 
population, many of our findings still applied and informed the development of our intervention. 
 
 CAREER DEVELOPMENT AWARD STUDY – FORMATIVE PHASE 1 
 
Key Informant Int erviews:  We conducted semi-s tructured k ey informan t interviews with VA employee s working 
within P ACT an d MOVE! and k ey administr ative sta ff. The purpose of the se interviews was to assess: 1) current attitudes 
and perceptions regarding obesity care; 2) obesity-related counseling practices 3) perceptions and experiences with the 
MOVE! program; and 4) targets for interventions to improve implementation of obesity care in the PC setting. We found 
that perceived role among PCPs was influenced by [CONTACT_45437], whereas personal experience with their own weight 
management impacted role perception among LPNs/RNs. Attitudes about whether or not they could impact patients' 
weight outcomes via counseling or referral to MOVE! varied. System-level communication about VA priorities through 
electronic health records and time allocation influenced teams to prioritize referral to MOVE! over weight management 
and lifestyle behavior change counseling. Overall, we found a diversity of attitudes, and practices within PACT, and 
identified factors that can enhance MOVE! implementation and inform interventions to improve weight management 
within PC. Most importantly, this study highlighted PACT teamlet barriers to obesity care and thus, we decided to train 
and incorporate health coaches in our intervention rather than rely exclusively on the PACT teamlet to help set initial 
weight management and lifestyle goals .  
 
Patient Focus Groups: We conducted f ocus groups wit h Veteran patient s to assess: 1) attitudes, barriers, and 
facilitators to healthy behavior change; 2) uses and understanding of goal setting; and 3) weight management-related 
experiences with health care providers in the PC setting, technology, and the MOVE! program. We found that military 
service continued to impact Veterans’ lifestyles even years after service. We also identified individual/interpersonal -, 
community/environment-, and healthcare system-related factors affecting healthy behaviors . We found that Veteran s 
want counseling and weight management advice from the health care team to be tailored to their individual preferences 
and needs. Findings from this study support offering more opportunities for weight management counseling within 
PACT teamlets where Veterans are seen frequently. Additionally, many of Veterans have used technology to assist in 
making health decisions and/or managing their weight, supporting the use of incorporating technology, particularly 
tablet computers as opposed desktop computers, into weight management interventions as long as there is adequate 
support or alternatives. 
 
 CAREER DEVELOPMENT AWARD STUDY – DEVELOPMENT PHASE II  
 
MTG Tool Development and Usability Testing: Based on findings from our Formative Phase I studies, we 
developed an interactive online tool, MOVE! Toward Your Goals (MTG), to facilitate goal setting for lifestyle behavior 
change within the PC setting at the VA, as well as conducted usability testing to further refine this tool and understand 
best strategies for its use among Veterans. It was designed at a 5th grade literacy level with low text density per page 
and simple navigation. The MTG tool uses the following algorithm: The patient completes a questionnaire about weight, 
barriers to weight loss, and lifestyle behaviors; each answer generates tailored weight loss or behavior change advice.  
The patient then indicates how much weight he or she wants to lose and assigns a number (1-10) indicating the 
perceived importance of each pi[INVESTIGATOR_587223]. Based on this information, the tool guides the patient to choose a weight 
loss goal, up to 2 nutrition goals, and a physical activity goal. The tool then provides links for the health coach (or 
healthcare team member) to print out an individualized patient summary (health advice and initial goals), SMART goal 
setting worksheet, VA weight management resources, tailored educational handouts, and a report for the coach. The 
role of the coach is to help the patient make the goals “SMART” (specific, measurable, attainable, relevant,  and time-
based), address potential barriers, and link the patient to more intensive VA and community resources.  
Usability testing of the MTG tool with Veterans suggested that the MTG tool can facilitate collaborative goal 
setting. Veterans appreciated the clean visual layout, the in-person support while using the tool, and had a strong 
positive reaction to the health coaching session and personalized binder of printouts. They left the session feeling 
motivated to work on their goals.  Barriers to tool use were identified including problems with tool navigation, tablet 
use, and unclear wording of some questions. These informed iterative changes and refinement of the tool.  
 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
5As Intervention Development: As part of our Formative Phase I studies, we conducted Veteran focus groups and 
interviews with key VA PACT and MOVE! staff to assess a proposed brief intervention based on the 5As where patients 
use an online tool to create health goals and then bring these goals and advice discussed with their health coach to 
members of the PACT teamlets during their primary care visit. ). Participants were also asked about their experiences 
with goal setting, weight management, and technology. Both Veterans and VA staff held positive views toward the use 
of goal setting for healthy behavior change and stressed the importance of social support in achieving goals. Veterans 
and staff appreciated that the intervention would provide individualized counseling from the healthcare team to achieve 
goals. Veterans did not want technology to replace human support. Physicians and nurses felt that time constraints 
would be a barrier to implementation, indicating that they could not spend more than 3-[ADDRESS_772511] developed the following components of the intervention and measures: 
(subject to change based on the results from our ongoing pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124] ): 
 
- Pre-/Post-surveys: We developed survey measures to be taken before and after the MTG tool to gather demographic 
information, as well as assess computer use, knowledge/participation in MOVE! programs, experiences with PACT, 
health literacy, their social/physical environment, quality of life, social support, level of patient activation, motivation 
to lose weight, self-efficacy, diet, and physical activity behaviors. Most of the question items are taken from validated 
measures. 
 
- Health coaching Training:  The literature supports the use of patient navigators or health coaches46 who will help 
patients refine their goals and teach them how to discuss their lifestyle goals with their provider. At the Manhattan 
VA, RN Care Managers within the PACT teamlets currently receive training related to motivational interviewing and 
behavior change. Although our initial plan was to train RN Care Managers, based on our formative work, we found 
that RN Care Managers at the VA have very limited time to discuss lifestyle goals and behavior change with patients. 
Thus, we will be training research team members to be Health Coaches to guide patients through our intervention, 
specifically to use our MTG tool, review tailored advice, and assist patients with setting initial weight loss and 
behavior change goals. Specifically, health coaches will receive training in motivational interviewing, the 5As 
framework for obesity counseling, as well as MOVE! training to learn and thus advise patients about to the different 
weight management programs and resources available to them at the VA.  
 
- Brief provider counseling training: After patients complete the MTG tool and create goals with their Health Coach, 
patients will briefly discuss their goals with their RN care manager or primary care provider who will endorse and/or 
improve upon the initial goals and address barriers at each visit. We will shorten and adapt a 5-hour obesity 
curriculum 47,[ADDRESS_772512] 
members in order to tailor the curriculum to each individual. 
 
- CPRS Research Note/Reminders: The MTG tool creates a provider reported that will be cut and pasted into CPRS as a 
research note to summarize and communicate to the patient’s PACT team the weight management discussions and 
initial goals agreed on between the patient and health coach. It includes the patient’s self -reported BMI, risk-level, 
importance/confidence in controlling weight, level of social support, weight loss goal and SMART nutrition and 
physical activity goals, barriers, current behaviors, and interested VA resources.  Completion of this note generates a 
reminder within CPRS for the PCP or RN care manager to read the research note, document whether they discussed 
the goals, resources, and barriers, and also document any additions or changes to the weight management plan . 
This research note and reminder system will also be used to document Health Coach telephone counseling as well as 
subsequent primary care visits by [CONTACT_102]. 
 
- Developi[INVESTIGATOR_587224]: The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends providing more than 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.[ADDRESS_772513] between 5-16 interactions within a 9-12 month period.  Health Coaches will be 
trained to call to review the patients’ goal and personalized advice, monitor goal adherence, set new goals when 
appropriate, and use motivational interviewing techniques to address barriers to behavior change. This is an optimal 
way to increase the impact of the intervention since higher frequency interventions are associated with better 
weight loss outcomes49,[ADDRESS_772514] of care. A subset of participants will receive video 
conferencing calls instead of traditional telephone counseling to assess feasibility of this method of interaction as 
well.  
 
C. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS  
 OVERVIEW  
 
The first 10-[ADDRESS_772515] a 
randomized, controlled p ilot study in the VA NYHHS primary 
care c linic to tes t the feasib ility of implementation an d 
acceptability of the MOVE! Toward your Goals (MTG) 
intervention for patients and providers. There are two 
distinct phases of the randomized intervention: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1 
and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2. We will assess intermediate (e.g. self-
efficacy, goal attainme nt, motivation to lose weight), 
behavioral (di et and physical activity) outcomes, and weight 
loss at 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_772516] Baseline 
study visit, all participants will complete a Baseline Survey 
and obtain weight and height measurements.  
Those in the MTG intervention group will then 
complete the MTG tool on a tablet computer, receive a 
binder of personalized materials generated by [CONTACT_330583], and 
receive a 15-20 minute counseling session about weight loss 
and lifestyle goals with a Health Coach (research team 
member). Participants randomized to the Enhanced Usual 
Care control will receive a handout about local MOVE! 
programs and selected VA MOVE! and Healthy Living Message handouts related to weight management.   
After this Baseline study visit, participants in the MTG intervention group will receive 10-15 follow up counseling 
phone calls with the health coach to review goals over a 12 month period. In Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1, participants will meet with 
their PCP during their regularly scheduled visit before taking an exit survey. In Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2, participants will meet with 
their PCPs at any point during the course of the one year intervention.  During the visit, RN care managers and the PCPs 
will be prompted in CPRS to read a CPRS Research Note entered by a Health Coach. It will summarize the Figure 3 : Study Design Flowchart  
 
 
Patient completes Baseline Survey  
Patient receives  
Enhanced Usual Care  
Patient receives  
MTG Intervention  
Regular PACT visits as needed  
Telephone counseling  
 
3-month follow -up study visit in -person  
6-month follow -up study visit in -person  
12-month follow -up study visit in -person  
Regular PACT visits as needed  
Telephone counseling  
 
Regular PACT visits as needed  
Telephone counseling  
 
Regular PACT visit (same -day or at any point during 1 year ) 
Patient completes Exit Survey  
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
interaction/discussion with the patient during the Baseline study visit, as well as any goals made or barriers discussed 
with the health coach (if the patient was randomized into the MTG Intervention arm). The PACT member may briefly 
counsel patients about lifestyle and weight. The PACT member will summarize this interaction in a specific CPRS note. 
Following the PCP visit, patients will be asked a series of questions about their experience during their baseline 
appointment (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1) or at any of the follow-up research visits at the 3, 6, or 12 month mark (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2) . For 
all participants, we will measure intermediate and behavior change outcomes at 3-, 6- and 12-months via an in-person 
study visit. Figure 3  shows a flow diagram of the study.  
 
 
 DESIGN 
 
Inclusion and Exclusion criteria of study participants: Criteria will include: aged 21- 70 (this age range represents 96% of 
MOVE! participants 51) and a Body Mass Index of ≥30kg/m2 or a Body Mass Index of ≥[ADDRESS_772517] access to a 
telephone, and/or will not be available to be contact[CONTACT_6811] 3, 6, and 12 months for follow up will also be excluded.  
 
Study Sites: The study will be conducted at the [LOCATION_001] Harbor VA HCS. In 2009 and 2010, there were 16,000 total 
unique patients in primary care with 6,989 (44%) made by [CONTACT_23270] a diagnosis of obesity. The Manhattan campus 
has [ADDRESS_772518] and MOVE! leaders have approved this study design and are supportive of PACT 
teamlet and patient participation in this study. 
 
Time Frame: 12 months intervention, 2 year follow up. 
 
Patient recruitment overview: We will recruit a consecutive sample of up to 160 overweight/obese patients (120 
subjects who complete intervention assuming 25% patient dropout) from the VA primary care clinics. Since this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480], we may opt to stop recruitment earlier if study proves to be feasible and/or funding is obtained for a larger, 
cluster randomized efficacy study of the intervention. For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1, we will obtain an electronic list of obese 
patients with appointments in the next month for participating providers and the RA will review charts for further 
eligibility. Lists of eligible patients will be sent to their respective primary care providers who will be asked to determin e 
if any of the patients are medically ineligible to participate (e.g. have a condition where the PCP does not want the 
patient to engage in lifestyle behavior change). Potential participants will then be sent a letter from both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_587225] (i.e. request not to be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]). Eligible 
participants will then be offered participation in the study via telephone. This recruitment strategy has been used by [CONTACT_587236], Scott Sherman, MD, MPH, and was approved by [CONTACT_32084].  
 
For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2, we will allow for participating PCPs to refer patients to the study. PCPs will be allowed to contact 
[CONTACT_587237] a good fit for the study. 
As in the previously mentioned strategies, we will send letters to patients before contact[CONTACT_587238], run through eligibility criteria, and review their medical charts. We will ask these PCP referred patients 
for permission to review their medical chart to determine medical eligibility. These patients will also be informed that 
they can opt out of receiving information by [CONTACT_587239].  
 
For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2, we will contact [CONTACT_587240]/obese patients who have been seen by 
[CONTACT_587241]. From this list, we will mail out batches of recruitment letters (i.e. approximately 100 
letters per week) to let patients know that they might be eligible to participate and that they can call us for more 
information at our study line. As in the aforementioned recruitment strategy, we will inform patients that they can opt 
out of receiving information by [CONTACT_587239].  We will also highlight that we have to ask eligibility questions by [CONTACT_587242]. Importantly, before we call, we will e-mail their respective PCPs to ensure that patients 
are medically eligible. After PCP approval, we will contact [CONTACT_587243], run through 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
eligibility criteria, and review their medical charts. We will ask all patients on the phone if it is permissible to review their 
medical chart to determine medical eligibility.   
 
 
PCP and  Health Coach Recruitment and Training Overview :  
We will invite 3-[ADDRESS_772519] teamlets if they would like to participate as well. Only those 
willing to participate will be included in the study and receive training. The training will be less than one hour and 
scheduled either one- on-one or in small groups so as not to interfere with their VA clinical or administrative duties. They 
will review the 5As and practice brief motivational interviewing to augment their previous VA training so they can 
support participants’ weight management and lifestyle goals and address barriers. Based on our formative data, we will 
allow PACT teamlets to decide who will discuss goals/barriers with patients and outline possibilities. 
 
We will train research assistants with either a bachelor’s or master’s degree to serve as health coaches. The health 
coaches will receive additional training based on a previous 5As curriculum I used in as part of an evidence-based 
intervention.53 The health coaches will receive 3-5 hours of training in small groups. They will practice counseling via role 
playing and videotape review. 
 
Study Arms/Randomization: The first 10-12 participants will not be randomized —they will be recruited into the MTG 
intervention group only (see below) and outcomes for this group will be evaluated separately. The purpose of these first 
non-randomized participants is to ensure the feasibility of implementation prior to conducting the randomized portion 
of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. After screening patients for eligibility and obtaining consent, participants will be randomized (using a 
random number generator) to either the MTG intervention or Enhanced Usual Care.  
 
MTG Intervention group: Participants will arrive to meet us in the 9th floor primary care area.   After completing 
consenting materials and a Baseline Survey, participants will complete the MTG tool. They will then have a brief 
break and snack. After the break, they will work collaboratively with the Health Coach using tool-generated 
materials to modify their goals into SMART goals (specific, measurable, attainable relevant, and timely). The 
patient will then receive a binder containing an individualized report with a summary of their personalized 
advice, initial goals, and barriers and facilitators to weight loss. They will also receive a packet of MOVE! 
handouts tailored to their questionnaire responses. The Health Coach will also inform the patient of the 
resources available to them at the VA (e.g. MOVE, TeleMOVE!) that can assist them in achieving their goals. At 
the end of the visit, the Health Coach will enter a research note into the CPRS system detailing the patient’s 
goals and other important information in the form of a provider report for the provider to review (generated by 
[CONTACT_587244]). This note will be attached to our administrative non-billable clinic, NYN PACT WEIGHT MGMT 
STUDY. For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1, after health coaching, patients will meet with their PCP for their regularly schedule 
visit and afterwards complete an exit survey. For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2, after health coaching, the patient will meet with 
the research team to complete an Exit Survey and then meet with their PCP during a regularly scheduled visit at 
any point during the course of the 1-year study. Based on information from the CPRS report generated by [CONTACT_587245], the PCP will review lifestyle goals and conduct brief motivational interviewing to address potential 
barriers (3-5 minutes).  The PACT member will summarize this interaction in a specific CPRS reminder. Over the 
[ADDRESS_772520] the PCP directly should any 
serious issue arise while working a patient. Patients will follow up with VA resources if indicated/desired. 
Participants will return for separate 3, 6, and 12 month follow-up study visits to measure intermediate, behavior 
change, and weight outcomes. 
 
- Enhanced Usual Care : Participants will arrive prior to scheduled PC visit and complete the same consenting 
materials and Baseline Survey as the intervention group. Instead of the completing the MTG tool and receiving 
health coaching, they will receive weight management handouts (Healthy Living Messages handouts and MOVE! 
handouts) as well as information about intensive weight management programs at the VA including MOVE!. For 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 1, the patient will then meet with a PACT member (either the PCP or another participating PACT 
member) during their regularly scheduled PC visit and afterwards complete an Exit Survey. For Pi[INVESTIGATOR_42751] 2, the 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.[ADDRESS_772521] teamlets as needed when they return for their regularly 
scheduled PC visits. Patients will follow up with VA resources if indicated/desired. Enhanced Usual Care 
participants will return for separate 3, 6, and 12 month follow-up study visits to measure intermediate, behavior 
change, and weight outcomes. 
 
 COMPENSATION 
 
To compensate for travel and time spent completing survey measures and basic measurements, study 
participants will be given a cash voucher in the amount of 40 dollars for the Baseline study visit, 30 dollars for the 3 and 
6 month study visits, and 60 dollars for the 12 month study visit. This proposed payment is reasonable and 
commensurate with the expected contributions of participants and is meant to provide additional incentives for 
participants to complete all 4 study visits. This amount of payment and the terms of the payment are included in the 
informed consent form. This payment is fair and appropriate and does not constitute undue pressure or influence, or 
coercion of, the prospective research participant to volunteer for or continue participation in the research study.  
 
 POTENTIAL BENEFIT/RISK 
 
Benefits: 
- Patients : The patients who participate in the study will have the opportunity to receive weight management 
information, and potentially set lifestyle behavior change goals to improve their diet and increase physical 
activity, which may lead to weight loss and improved health outcomes. Even for patients who do not change 
their lifestyle behaviors, talking about these topi[INVESTIGATOR_587226].  
 
- Providers, RN Care Managers, and other VA employees : VA employees who participate in the study may gain 
improved obesity-related knowledge and patient counseling skills, which could enhance their career, job 
performance, and satisfaction. Specifically, VA employees may have the opportunity to receive (additional) 
training in 5As weight management counseling and practice brief motivational interviewing. Training in these 
could help to facilitate and/or improve discussions around weight management and health behavior change 
with patients, as well as encourage the use of individualized techniques to improve diet and exercise and setting 
health behavior change goals with patients.  
 
Risk:  
- Patients: This research involves minimal risk for physical, psychological, social, and economic harm. The 
researchers understand that exploration of these topi[INVESTIGATOR_539563] a persons’ individual struggle with their weight can 
be emotionally charged for many people, particularly considering the stigma placed on obesity in our society. 
The researchers have been trained in order to effectively facilitate conversations on this sensitive topic and will 
seek to minimize any emotional discomfort you may feel during the study. Additionally, any potential behavior 
changes related to diet or exercise will be assessed and approved by [CONTACT_539587], the Primary Investigator, and health professionals. Patients will be encouraged to slowly increase 
their physical activity under the supervision of their PCP. While there is always the risk of injury from starting or 
increasing physical activity, the benefits usually outweigh potential harms. We will monitor patients for adverse 
events.   
 
- VA employees : This research involves minimal risk for physical, psychological, social, and economic harm. 
 
 MEASUREMENTS 
 
Assessment will occur at the following time points: 
A. Baseline study visit: Baseline survey and basic physical measurements (weight, height, waist circumference) 
B. In-person follow-up study visits at 3, 6 and 12 months: Follow-up in-person questionnaire and basic physical 
measurements (weight, height, waist circumference) 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
C. Follow-up telephone calls (only patients in MTG intervention): Follow-up telephone questionnaire  
D. Chart review: This will occur periodically to assess MOVE! attendance, PACT teamlet visits (documentation of 
weight management-related conversations), and medical co-morbidities. Outcomes will be assessed through 
chart review up to 2 years after the baseline visit. 
 
Baseline Data: Prior to the intervention, patients will receive a Baseline survey. To evaluate recruitment for the 
intervention, baseline data including socio-demographic information, perceived health status, health literacy, perceived 
environmental factors, and depression will be collected.54–[ADDRESS_772522] health-related attitudes, beliefs, and baseline behaviors.  
 
Weight & Height: Study personnel will obtain patient weight measurements using a standardized protocol which 
includes; 1) weighing before eating without shoes or heavy garments using a digital scale that will be calibrated monthly; 
2) measuring height using the primary care clinic stadiometer and rounded to the nearest half inch, at each study time 
point (Baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months). 
 
Waist Circumference: Waist circumference will be measured using procedures adapted from National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)58. Study personnel will use measuring tape to the nearest 0.1cm at the high 
point of the iliac crest at minimal respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. This will be measured at baseline, 3, 6, and 12 months. 
 
Feasibility: We will use process measures (from direct observation, to determine the feasibility of implementing the 
MTG intervention at the initial visit. Data on time to complete the MTG tool, number and types of goals made, number 
of patients reporting that their PACT teamlets  engaged in goal setting conversations, number of reminders completed 
by [CONTACT_539588], time spent doing the intervention, the  impact of the intervention on workflow (physician and RN 
Care Manager report, qualitative interviews) will be collected. At [ADDRESS_772523] used previously pertaining to intervention 
implementation. We will also perform qualitative interviews with RN Care Managers and providers. We will use chart 
review to note the number of times patients in the telephone support arm actually receive telephone counseling. 
 
Acceptability: We will collect data on patient satisfaction with the intervention and the overall visit 59,[ADDRESS_772524] interviews with participating providers and RN Care Managers to obtain qualitative 
data on acceptability. 
 
Intermediate Outcomes: Our intermediate outcomes are based on the theory of planned behavior [ADDRESS_772525] been adapted for our survey measures by [CONTACT_539589], attitudes, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control. 
We will also assess goal attainment at 3, 6, 12 months. 
 
Behavioral Outcomes: We will assess diet and physical activity behaviors at baseline and again at 3, 6, and 12 months. 
Our main dietary outcomes will be servings of fruits and vegetables, fat intake, refined carbohydrates, and sweetened 
beverage intake via surveys. A subset of up to 20 participants will complete 24-hour dietary recalls, and this will allow us 
to assess total energy intake and energy density in this subgroup. Physical activity outcomes will be changes in duration 
and intensity. We will use chart review to evaluate attendance to TeleMOVE! or MOVE! (# of sessions) pre- and post-
baseline visit and 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_772526]- intervention. 
 
Treatment Fidelity: During patient surveys conducted after the patient sees the primary care provider, we determine 
whether patients recall reviewing goals and receiving obesity-related counseling from the provider. We will also 
audiotape up to 5 Baseline visits with each provider to evaluate the quality of counseling around patient goals and 
potential barriers to achieving them. Finally, we will do detailed chart reviews using a chart abstraction tool to monitor 
how often providers see patients and document goal-setting discussions during subsequent visits after the index visit. 
 
Data Storage/Security 
 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
- Research Activities:  The following will all take place in private room at the Manhattan VA with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or 
research staff – filling in consent forms, using MTG tool, receiving weight management information, receiving 
weight management counseling, completing survey measures.  
 
- Storage of data:  All written data will be kept in locked filing cabinets in a locked room only accessible by [CONTACT_978] 
[INVESTIGATOR_539564] (including survey responses, audio files, and responses to 
online tool) on secure local VA servers and only accessible on VA password protected computers by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_539565]. Original audio files will be removed from recorders. The data key link will be maintained as a 
password-protected Excel datasheet on a secure VA Harbor computer within a locked VA Harbor office by [CONTACT_978], 
and destroyed upon completion of the final study dataset.  The data key link will be kept separate from all 
survey responses. Only study investigators will perform data entry, access either the surveys or datasets, or 
perform any analysis of the dataset. 
 
- Transcription:  For transcription of audio files, files will be sent as encrypted files through the secure server to the 
VA-contracted transcription company, Transcription Outsourcing, LLC. Transcripts will be de-identified by [CONTACT_539590] a unique coded identifier generated by [CONTACT_1268]. This unique identifier will not use any identifying information (i.e. it will not be generated 
using the subject’s  social security number, name, etc.) Recorded information will be transferred to Transcription 
Outsourcing via a HIPAA-compliant web portal using a VA computer. The transcripts will then be stored and 
analyzed on a VA secure server. This transcription procedure was approved by [CONTACT_539591] (MIRB [ZIP_CODE] ) 
under the consultation of the ISO and PO. 
 
- The MTG tool : The MTG tool uses a web-interface to ask health questions and collect the data in order to deliver 
tailored advice . This website will be hosted on either a hired private programmer’s server (approved research 
personnel) or an NYU server. In both cases, Data Use Agreements have been setup with both parties and the VA 
to protect ownership and use of collected coded data. Data will be regularly migrated from either server (private 
programmer or NYU) to the VA server via encrypted USB drive.  This data storage procedure was approved by [CONTACT_539592] (MIRB [ZIP_CODE]) under the consultation of the ISO and PO. 
 
Other Quality Control Procedures: The study staff will meet biweekly for the duration of the study to review patient 
recruitment and data collection procedures to ensure standardization. Research assistants will send reminders to Health 
Coaches when it is time to call patients in the telephone support arm.  To monitor for and address unanticipated adverse 
events, there will be discussions during meetings with research staff, PI, mentors of PI, and providers/VA staff.  
 
 DATA ANALYSIS 
 
Sample Size and Power Analysis: For weight loss outcomes, we will evaluate pre- and post-intervention in each arm 
separately and compare two arms. We base our sample size on within-person weight change at baseline and [ADDRESS_772527] -2.3kg (SD=5.3) in the MTG intervention arm and no weight 
change in the Enhanced Usual Care arm, based on a PC-based study of clinical support tools for lifestyle change and a 
systematic review of technology-assisted weight loss interventions in primary care.39 Having 60 patients in each arm, the 
power is 82% to detect this pre- and post-intervention difference in each arm (at the two sided 0.05 significant level).  
We will also explore weight loss differences between two arms. We do not know how much additional weight loss that 
telephone support will lead to compared with the enhanced usual care arm. However, if we have [ADDRESS_772528] 80% power to detect a 2.8 kg difference between two 
arms. Assuming 25% dropout rate, we will randomize 160 subjects to obtain 120 evaluable subjects. We conducted 
sample size calculation using PASS 2008 software. 
 
Statistics Analysis Plan:  First, all the variables will be summarized using mean with standard deviation and median with 
interquartile range for continuous variables and frequency table for categorical variables, overall and by [CONTACT_539593], respectively. Mann-Whitney tests for continuous variables and Fisher exact tests for categorical variables will be 
used to check if baseline characteristics are balanced between two arms. Second, Mann-Whitney tests for continuous 
outcomes and Fisher exact tests for categorical outcomes will be used to compare outcome variables (including 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
intermediate outcomes, behavioral outcomes, and weight outcomes) between two arms at [ADDRESS_772529] several statistical analyses to describe Veterans participating in the study. Descriptive statistics, 
including numerical summaries, frequency tables and graphical displays, will be used to present baseline participant 
characteristics. Exploratory tests, such as chi-square tests and t-tests, will be used to investigate if baseline characteristics 
are balanced between two randomized arms. Analysis of missing data due to dropout or incomplete surveys will be 
investigated by [CONTACT_539594] a relationship between baseline characteristics/risk factors and 0-1 indicator that defines 
whether or not a measurement is observed. This analysis will help to identify factors that are likely to be associated with 
dropout. Additionally, we will investigate whether the dropout rates are different between two arms. For instance, 
participants with higher levels of motivation may be more likely to be retained in the study. To deal with these missing, 
we will incorporate the multiple imputation procedure with the regression analyses to be discussed in the following, 
along with some sensitivity analysis.   
 
Qualitative Data: The audio recordings of provider interviews and patients visits will be transcribed by a VA-contracted 
transcription company (methods used in our previous IRB-approved study MIRB [ZIP_CODE]) . We will use detailed grounded 
theory-based procedures including open, axial, and selective coding.[ADDRESS_772530] in data analysis and interpretation. Analysis will be facilitated through constant comparison techniques.  
 
 EXPLORATORY AIM  
 
Explorato ry Aim : To compare the intervention arm to a third study arm of non-enrolled PC patients matched for age, 
gender, and BMI (“Usual Care”).  
 
Analyzing the Third Arm: We will compare the two randomized study arms (Enhanced Usual Care and MTG intervention) 
arms with the third study arm of non-enrolled PC patients who are from the same cohort (seen by [CONTACT_539595]). Because the third study arm is not randomized, we 
do not expect the three arms are balanced at baseline characteristics and comparable. We will first identify important 
confounders (such as age, gender, BMI) and then use propensity score to adjust for these confounders when comparing 
the outcomes between three arms.  
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Ogden CL, Curtin LR. Prevalence and trends in obesity among US adults. JAMA . 
2010;303(3):235-241. 
2.  McGee DL. Body mass index and mortality: a meta-analysis based on person-level data from twenty-six 
observational studies. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2005;15(2):87-97. doi:10.1016/j.annepi[INVESTIGATOR_6730].2004.05.012. 
3.  Das SR, Kinsinger LS, Yancy WS, et al. Obesity prevalence among veterans at Veterans Affairs medical facilities. 
Am J Prev Med . 2005;28(3):291-294. 
4.  Noël PH, Copeland LA, Pugh MJ, et al. Obesity diagnosis and care practices in the Veterans Health Administration. 
J Gen Intern Med . 2010;25(6):510-6. doi:10.1007/s11606-010-1279- z. 
5.  Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the Incidence of Type 2 Diabetes with Lifestyle 
Intervention or Metformin. N Engl J Med . 2002;346(6):393-403. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa012512. 
6.  Screening for Obesity in Adults: Recommendations and Rationale .; 2003:930-932. Available at: 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/3rduspstf/obesity/obesrr.htm. 
7.  US Department of Veteran Affairs. MOVE! Implementation Best Practices: Evaluation Results, Final Report.  
8.  Dahn JR, Fitzpatrick SL, Llabre MM, et al. Weight management for veterans: examining change in weight before 
and after MOVE! Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2011;19(5):977-81. doi:10.1038/oby.2010.273. 
9.  VHA National Center for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. MOVE! Weight Management Program for 
Veterans Fiscal Year 2013 Evaluation Report: Narrative Summary .; 2013:1-12. 
10.  US Department of Veteran Affairs, Department of Defense. Management of Obesity and Overweight (OBE) 
(2014). VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening and Management of Overweight and Obesity. 
11.  Maciejewski ML, Perkins M, Li Y-F, Chapko M, Fortney JC, Liu C-F. Utilization and expenditures of veterans 
obtaining primary care in community clinics and VA medical centers: an observational cohort study. BMC Health 
Serv Res . 2007;7:56. 
12.  Galuska DA, Will JC, Serdula MK, Ford ES. Are health care professionals advising obese patients to lose weight? 
JAMA . 1999;282(16):1576-8. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10546698. Accessed October 9, 
2014. 
13.  Abid A, Galuska D, Khan LK, Gillespie C, Ford ES, Serdula MK. Are healthcare professionals advising obese patients 
to lose weight? A trend analysis. Medscape Gen Med . 2005;7(4):10. 
14.  Nawaz H, Adams ML, Katz DL. Weight loss counseling by [CONTACT_37157]. Am J Public Health . 
1999;89(5):764-767. 
15.  Ruser CB, Sanders L, Brescia GR, et al. Identification and management of overweight and obesity by [CONTACT_587246]. J Gen Intern Med . 2005;20(12):1139-1141. 
16.  Huang J, Yu H, Marin E, Brock S, Carden D, Davis T. Physicians’ weight loss counseling in two public hospi[INVESTIGATOR_539568]. AAMC Acad Med J Assoc Am Med Coll . 2004;79(2):156-161. 
17.  Jay M, Gillespie C, Ark T, et al. Do internists, pediatricians, and psychiatrists feel competent in obesity care?: using 
a needs assessment to drive curriculum design. J Gen Intern Med . 2008;23(7):1066-1070. 
18.  Foster GD, Wadden TA, Makris AP, et al. Primary care physicians’ attitudes about obesity and its treat ment. Obes 
Res. 2003;11(10):1168-1177. 
19.  Yarnall KSH, Pollak KI, Ostbye T, Krause KM, Michener JL. Primary care: is there enough time for prevention? Am J 
Public Health . 2003;93(4):635-641. doi:10.2105/AJPH.93.4.635. 
20.  Stange KC, Nutting P a, Miller WL, et al. Defining and measuring the patient-centered medical home. J Gen Intern 
Med . 2010;25(6):601-12. doi:10.1007/s11606-010-1291- 3. 
21.  Arigo D, Hooker S, Funderburk J, et al. Provider and staff perceptions of veterans’ attrition from a national 
primary care weight management program. Prim Health Care Res Dev . 2014;(February):1-10. 
doi:10.1017/S1463423614000139. 
22.  Ockene IS, Hebert JR, Ockene JK, et al. Effect of physician-delivered nutrition counseling training and an office-
support program on saturated fat intake, weight, and serum lipid measurements in a hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_587227]: 
Worcester Area Trial for Counseling in Hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035] (WATCH). ; 1999:725-731. 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
23.  Unrod M, Smith M, Spring B, DePue J, Redd W, Winkel G. Randomized Controlled Trial of a Computer-Based, 
Tailored Intervention to Increase Smoking Cessation Counseling by [CONTACT_539597]. J Gen Intern Med. 
2007;22(4):478-484. 
24.  Goldstein MG, Whitlock EP, DePue J. Multiple behavioral risk factor interventions in primary care. Summary of 
research evidence. Am J Prev Med . 2004;27([ADDRESS_772531]):61-79. 
25.  Glasgow RE, Bull SS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Steiner JF. Interactive behavior change technology. A partial solution to the 
competing demands of primary care. Am J Prev Med . 2004;27([ADDRESS_772532]):80-87. 
26.  Estabrooks PA, Nelson CC, Xu S, et al. The frequency and behavioral outcomes of goal choices in the self-
management of diabetes. ; 2009:391-400. 
27.  Glasgow RE, Nutting PA, Toobert DJ, et al. Effects of a brief computer-assisted diabetes self-management 
intervention on dietary, biological and quality- of-life outcomes. Chronic Illn . 2006;2(1):27- 38. 
28.  Diaz VA, Mainous AG, Pope C. Cultural conflicts in the weight loss experience of overweight Latinos. Int J Obes 
2005 . 2007;31(2):328-333. 
29.  Stewart M, Brown JB, Donner A, et al. The impact of patient-centered care on outcomes. ; 2000:796-804. 
30.  Nothwehr F, Yang J. Goal setting frequency and the use of behavioral strategies related to diet and physical 
activity. Heal Educ Res Vol [ADDRESS_772533] 
Soc Psychol . 2002;32(4):665-683. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2002.tb00236.x. 
32.  Abraham C, Sheeran P. Implications of goal theories for the theories of reasoned action and planned behaviour. 
Curr Psychol . 2003;22(3):264-280. doi:10.1007/s12144-003-1021- 7. 
33.  Sheeran P, Webb TL, Gollwitzer PM. The interplay between goal intentions and implementation intentions. Pers 
Soc Psychol Bull . 2005;31(1):87-98. doi:10.1177/0146167204271308. 
34.  Bodenheimer T, Handley MA. Goal-setting for behavior change in primary care: an exploration and status report. 
Patient Educ Couns . 2009;76(2):174-180. 
35.  Bodenheimer T, Wagner EH, Grumbach K. Improving primary care for patients with chronic illness: the chronic 
care model, Part 2. Jama J Am Med Assoc . 2002;288(15):1909-1914. doi:10.1001/jama.288.15.1909. 
36.  Mokdad AH, Ford ES, Bowman BA, et al. Prevalence of obesity, diabetes, and obesity- related health risk factors, 
2001. Jama J Am Med Assoc . 2003;289(1):76-79. 
37.  Locke EA, Latham GP. A theory of goal setting and task performance . Prentice Hall; 1990:480-483. 
doi:10.2307/258875. 
38.  Shilts MK, Horowitz M, Townsend MS. Goal setting as a strategy for dietary and physical activity behavior change: 
a review of the literature. Am J Heal Promot AJHP . 2004;19(2):81- 93. 
39.  Levine D, Savarimuthu S, Squires S, Nicholson J, Jay M. Technology-assisted weight loss interventions in primary 
care: A systematic review [in press]. J Gen Intern Med . 2014. 
40.  Nothwehr F, Dennis L, Wu H. Measurement of behavioral objectives for weight management. Heal Educ Behav 
Off Publ Soc Public Heal Educ . 2007;34(5):793-809. 
41.  Locke EA, Latham GP. Building a Practically Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation. Am Psychol . 
2002;57(9):705-717. doi:10.1037//0003-066X.57.9.705. 
42.  Drewnowski A, Darmon N, Briend A. Replacing Fats and Sweets With Vegetables and Fruits —A Question of Cost. 
Am J Public Health . 2004;94(9):1555-1559. 
43.  Sahyoun NR, Zhang XL, Serdula MK. Barriers to the consumption of fruits and vegetables among older adults. J 
Nutr Elder . 2005;24(4):5-21. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16597557. Accessed June 6, 
2014. 
44.  McArthur L, Chamberlain V, Howard AB. Behaviors, attitudes, and knowledge of low-income consumers 
regarding nutrition labels. J Health Care Poor Underserved . 2001;12(4):415-428. 
45.  Kutner M, Greenberg E, Jin Y, Paulsen C. The health literacy of America’s adults: results from the 2003 National 
Assessment of Adult Literacy. US Dept. of Education, National Center for Education Statistics; 2006:1- 59. 
46.  Vale MJ, Jelinek M V, Best JD, et al. Coaching patients On Achieving Cardiovascular Health (COACH): a multicenter 
randomized trial in patients with coronary heart disease. Arch Intern Med . 2003;163(22):2775-83. 
doi:10.1001/archinte.163.22.2775. 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.[ADDRESS_772534] of primary care resident physician training on patient weight loss 
at 12 months. Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2013;21(1):45-50. Available at: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23505167. Accessed April 9, 2014. 
48.  Jay M, Schlair S, Caldwell R, Kalet A, Sherman S, Gillespie C. From the patient’s perspective: the impact of training 
on resident physician's obesity counseling. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25(5):415-422. 
49.  Digenio AG, Mancuso JP, Gerber RA, Dvorak R V. Comparison of methods for delivering a lifestyle modification 
program for obese patients: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med . 2009;150(4):255-262. 
50.  Wylie-Rosett J, Swencionis C, Ginsberg M, et al. Computerized weight loss intervention optimizes staff time: the 
clinical and cost results of a controlled clinical trial conducted in a managed care setting. J Am Diet Assoc . 
2001;101(10):1155-62; quiz 1163-4. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11678486. Accessed 
April 23, 2014. 
51.  Koepsell TD, Littman AJ, Forsberg CW. Obesity, overweight, and their life course trajectories in veterans and non-
veterans. Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2012;20(2):434-9. doi:10.1038/oby.2011.2. 
52.  Obesity N, Initiative E. Guide Identification , Evaluation , and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults. 
Obesity . 2000:1-94. 
53.  Jay M, Gillespie C, Schlair S, Sherman S, Kalet A. Physicians’ use of the 5As in counseling obese patients: is the 
quality of counseling associated with patients' motivation and intention to lose weight? BMC Health Serv Res . 
2010;10(1):159. doi:10.1186/1472-6963- 10-159. 
54.  Befort CA, Greiner KA, Hall S, et al. Weight-related perceptions among patients and physicians: how well do 
physicians judge patients’ motivation to lose weight? J Gen Intern Med . 2006;21(10):1086-90. 
doi:10.1111/j.1525-1497.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
55.  Saelens BE, Ph D, Frank LD, Med AB. Environmental Correlates of Walking and Cycling : Findings From the 
Transportation , Urban Design , and Planning Literatures. (c):80-91. 
56.  Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL, Corporation TR, Street M, Monica S, Ca [LOCATION_003]. THE MOS SOCIAL SUPPORT SURVEY. 
1991;32(6):705-714. 
57.  Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JBW. The PHQ-9. [ZIP_CODE]:606-613. 
58.  (CDC) C for DC and P. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Survey Questionnaire . Atlanta, Georgia; 2009. 
59.  Marshall G, Hays R. Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire Short Form (PS-18). 1994. 
60.  Ware J, Snyder M, Wright W. Development and Validation of Scales to Measure Patient Satisfaction with Medical 
Care Services. Vol 1, Part B: Results Regarding Scales Constructed from the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire and 
Measures of Other Health Care Perceptions. 1976. 
61.  Creswell J. Qualitative inquiry and research: Choosing among five approaches. 2nd ed.  Lincoln: Sage Publications; 
2007.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Personnel:  
 
Melanie Jay, MD, MS 
Grant Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]/Principal Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jay is an Assistant Professor at NYU School of Medicine and is a full-time staff physician if she gets this award. 
She currently devotes 80% of her time to research and leads the obesity counseling and prevention arm of the Research 
on Medical Education Outcomes Unit. She is also a primary care internist with clinical expertise in medical weight 
management. As a clinician, she started weight management programs at Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_587228]. These multi-disciplinary clinics continue to provide care to underserved obese patients and feature English and 
Spanish support groups, medical intakes, individualized nutrition counseling, and nutrition education classes. [CONTACT_587247] 
then left her full-time clinical practice after 4 years to pu rsue fellowship training (she received a Master’s of Science in 
Clinical Investigation through the NYU Fellowship in Medicine and Public Health Research in 2009) and to work towards 
becoming a independent investigator dedicated to treating and preventing obesity in primary care.   
Her previous clinical, administrative, and research experiences have prepared her well to complete the proposed 
research and training plan. She developed a multi-media intervention to improve food label comprehension and 
conducted a randomized controlled trial to study its impact on patients. She also surveyed [ADDRESS_772535]/control design. 
These experiences made her realize the importance of developi[INVESTIGATOR_587229]. They have also laid the groundwork for her proposed research 
through the development of surveys to evaluate clinician attitudes and competencies, and patient exit interview 
evaluations of physicians’ obesity counseling.  Further, they gave her ex perience in project administration and 
management and have led to publications peer-reviewed journals.  
 
Craig Tenner, MD 
Co-Investigator 
[CONTACT_587248] is the Director of Health Promotion / Disease Prevention at the VA – [LOCATION_001] Harbor Healthcare 
System and an Assistant Professor of Medicine at the NYU School of Medicine. He graduated NYU Medical School in 
1992 before completing a residency in Internal Medicine at NYU/Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54246]. Since leaving residency, he 
has been an Attending Physician with a busy clinical practice at the VA – [LOCATION_001] Harbor Healthcare System in 
Manhattan and an active member of the NYU Medical Center faculty. His personal areas of research interest include 
Preventive Medicine and Medical Informatics. More specifically, his research focuses on identifying the barriers in 
obtaining preventive healthcare and ways to improve healthcare delivery. Currently, he is working on a number of 
projects related to population health, panel management and the Medical Home model of care. He has provided 
significant input to the protocol design, as well as created the CPRS note system needed for this intervention study. 
Yixin Fang, PhD 
Co-Investigator 
[CONTACT_587249] has expertise and motivation necessary to successfully carry out the statistics analysis in the proposed 
work. [CONTACT_587249] has a strong and broad background in clinical trials, multi-level analysis, survey analysis, observational 
studies, and many other biostatistical fields. As a PhD student at Columbia University, he received specific training and 
expertise in the fields of genetic epi[INVESTIGATOR_587230]. As a postdoctoral 
research fellow in the Department of Psychiatry at Columbia University, he conducted data analysis for many real data 
problems across different disciplines. Overall, [CONTACT_587249] has a demonstrated record of successful and productive research 
in biostatistics, and his expertise and experience have prepared him to accomplish the proposed project.   
IRB APPROVAL - Continuing Review 01.11.2018 
 
 