Aneuploidy rates and morphokinetic parameters in sibling embryos cultured in distinct culture media
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Document Date: June 28, 2017
Title:  Aneuploidy rates and morphokinetic parameters in sibling embryos cultured in 
distinct culture media 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_238545], MD 
Background:  
Embryonic  aneuploidy is the underlying  etiology for the majority of failed implantation and 
miscarri
age. Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) with transfer of a euploid  embryo has 
been
 advocated as a strategy  for increasing live birth rates with a single embryo transfer. 
Culturi
ng 
embryos to the blastocyst  stage for trophectoderm biopsy is a requirement for PGS. 
Several  commercially-available  single-step  embryonic  culture  media  with varying 
compositi
on have been established  for use in the IVF laboratory. Early reports have suggested 
differenc
es 
in clinical outcomes, such as aneuploidy and miscarriage rates, with distinct  
culture  media  currently in standard use.1,[ADDRESS_288949]. 
Specific  Aims: 
1.To determine if aneuploidy rates differ between sibling embryos cultured in distinct
media.
2.To determine if embryo quality differs between sibling embryos cultured in distinct
media.
3.To determine if morphokinetic parameters, as assessed by [CONTACT_238547], differ
between sibling embryos cultured in distinct  media.
4.To determine if and how morphokinetic parameters and aneuploidy rates differ
between embryos with zona breach performed on day three  of embryo development 
versus
 at the blastocyst  stage. 
5.To assess the accuracy of non-invasive genetic testing of embryos from spent culture
media.
Design: 
Prospective  sibling embryo study  in an academic IVF laboratory comparing clinical 
parameters 
for embryos cultured in two different single-step  culture  media  with time lapse 
imagi
ng. 
Study Population: 
Couples 
planning  in vitro fertilization (IVF) with intent  for blastocyst  culture  for 
preimpl
antation genetic screening (PGS) will be offered enrollment prior to initiation of their  
treatment 
cycle. Intend to enroll  124 subjects (see sample  size calculation below).  
Inclusion Criteria: 
All subjects
 planning  blastocyst  culture  for preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) will be 
offered
 enrollm
ent. 
AFC 
>8 
Male and female partner > 18 years of age  
Exclusion  Criteria: 
Female  partner age >42 years of age 
Cleava
ge stage biopsy 
 
Outcome Measures: 
Aneuploidy 
rate for embryos cultured in one of two distinct  media  from the same patie nt 
(Primary 
outcome) 
Embryo 
quality at cleavage and blastocyst  stages 
Morphokinetic  parameters from time lapse imaging 
 
Study 
Implementation: 
 
Couples planning  in vitro fertilization (IVF) with intent  for blastocyst  culture  for 
preimpl
antation genetic screening (PGS) will be offered enrollment prior to initiation of their  
treatment
 cycle. Ovarian stimulation will be performed  with standard treatment chosen by [CONTACT_238548]'s 
primary  physician.  The day of  ovulation trigger will be determined by [CONTACT_238549].  Oocyte retrieval will be performed according to clinic standard 36  hours following 
ovulation trigger. All oocytes aspi[INVESTIGATOR_238546]  (see supplement  with 
media  systems).  Follicular  fluid will be collected from a large  and a medium-sized follicle 
from 
each ovary in order to perform a direct  correlation of follicular size to oocyte  recovery, 
matura
tion, and embryo development. The collected follicular fluid will also be  assayed for 
estradiol,
 follicle stimulating hormone, leutinizing hormone,  and progesterone. 
 
 
On 
the day of oocyte  retrieval, the male  partner will produce a semen  sample  per usual clinic 
protocol.  Following 2-3 hours of incubation, hyaluronidase  will be used to denude cumulus 
cells
 surrounding oocytes per usual clinic protocol.  Fertilization will be performed by 
[CONTACT_238550] (ICSI) of all  mature  oocytes by a trained embryologist. After 
16-18 hours, fertilization will be evalua ted by [CONTACT_238551]-nuclei. Fertilized 
embryos 
from each patient's cohort will remain split for  culturing in SAGE or Global media  
systems as  previously designated. All embryos will be cultured in the EmbryoScope+  time 
lapse
 incubator. Once placed in the EmbryoScope,  embryos will be cultured at 37 degrees C 
with
 6% CO2 and 5.5% O2 or up to 6 days without media  exchange. 
 
The
 EmbryoScope+  incubation chamber contai ns a built-in microscope and camera allowing 
for continuous monitoring of embryonic  development.  Image  acquisition software will be 
used to obtain  high-contrast  images every 10 minutes from several focal  planes to create time-
lapse 
videos. Conventional embryonic  assessment will be  made  by [CONTACT_238552]-
specified time points. Cleavage-stage embryos will be assessed for cell  number, symmetry,  
percent
age fragmentation, evidence of multinucleation, and progression of compaction. 
Blastocysts 
will be evaluated to assess for blastocele volume and expansion, inner cell mass  
development, and trophectoderm organization. Additional  morphokinetic parameters will be 
assessed
 with time lapse videos including time to pronuclear fading or syngamy (tPNf), time 
to 
2-[ADDRESS_288950] 
clinical
 protocols. Number of embryos to be transferred will be determined by [CONTACT_102]'s 
primary  physician.  
 
Additional  data  will be collected on clinical pregnancy rate  (ultrasound demonstrating 
gestati
onal sac with yolk sac per transfer) and live  birth rate.  These data  are routinely 
collected and reported to the Society  for Assisted Reproductive Technology Clinical  
Outcomes 
Reporting  System (SART CORS) according to  the Fertility Clinic Success Rate  
and
 Certification Act of  1992.  
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis: 
The primary  outcome  is rate  of aneuploidy for embryos cultured in one of two distinct  media  
from the same patient. We will perform a paired  t-test  to compare  number of euploid  
blastocysts in embryos split for  culture  in two different  media  from the same patie nt. Our 
secondary 
outcome  is embryo quality for split embryos. Embryo quality will be graded at  the 
cleavage
 and blastocyst  stages. High quality cleavage embryos will have at least  6 
blastome
res or greater and scores of "1"or "2" for  symmetry  and fragmentation. Expanded  
blastocysts 
will be considered high quality where inner cell  mass and trophectoderm score are 
"A" or "B." We will perform paired  t-tests to compare  number of high quality cleavage and 
blastocyst  stage embryos from the cohort of sibling embryos cultured in  different  media.  
 
 
Sample Size Calculation: 
The primary  outcome  is aneuploid fraction for embryos cultured in two distinct  media  from 
the same patient. To detect same difference in euploid  fraction as Hickman et al (29% vs 
16%)  we would  need 176 blastocysts per arm. This  calculation does not account  for clustering 
of embryos from the same patient; however, we will obtain  a substantially higher number of 
blastocysts per arm as  we are planning  to power for our secondary outcome  (see below). 
 
Our secondary outcome  relates to differences in embryo quality among split embryos cultured 
in 
distinct  media. Previous review of internal data demonstrates that interventions targeting 
couples
 with a history of  poor embryo quality have been able  to demonstrate a four-fold 
increas
e in high quality day 3 fraction. We need 62  subjects (31/arm)  to detect four-fold 
increase  in high quality day 3 fraction within this population with history of poor embryo 
qualit
y (< 40% good quality cleavage stage fraction). We estimate that  25% of clinic patients 
have 
poor quality cleavage stage fraction. Therefore, would need 4 x 62= 248 patients. 
However, since we are splitting embryos from the same patient, each  cohort of embryos 
serves as its own control.  Therefore,  we need to enroll  124 patients to power for our 
secondary
 outcome  of clinically meaningful differences in embryo quality. 
 
 
 
References
: 
1Campbell A, Smith R, Montgomery S et al. A prospective  multi-center comparison  of two 
different  single step culture  media  using sibling embryos. In: Human  Reproduction Vol 31, 
Suppl  1; 2016 July 3-6; Helsinki, Finland:  ESHRE 2017. Abstract 265. 
 
2Hickman  C, Wells D, Gwinnett D et al. Euploid  rate sensitivity to laboratory culture 
environment:  a blind, prospective, randomized, sibling study. In: Human Reproduction Vol 
31, Suppl  1; 2016 July 3-6; Helsinki, Finland:  ESHRE 2017. Abstract 203. 
 
3Goodman LR, Goldberg J, Falcone T, Austin C, Desai N. Does the addition of time-lapse 
morphokinetics in the selection of embryos for transfer improve  pregnancy rates? A 
randomized controlled trial. Vol 105 (2); 2016: 275-85. 
 
4Minasi MG, Colasante  A, Riccio T, Ruberti A, Casciani  V, Scarselli  F et al. Correlation 
between aneuploidy standard morphology evaluation  and morphokinetic development in 1730 
biopsied blastocysts:  a consecutive case series study. Hum Reprod 31(10); 2016:2245-54. 
 
5Morbeck 
DE, Baumann  NA, Oglesbee D. Composition of single-step  media  used for human 
embryo
 culture. Fertil  Steril  107(4);2017: 1055-60. 