Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 1 of 32 
 
THE GID GROUP  
CLINICAL RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
USE OF AUTOLOGOUS AD IPOSE -DERIVED STROMA L 
VASCULAR FRACTION TO  TREAT OSTEOARTHRITI S OF THE 
KNEE: A CONTROLLED, RANDOMIZED, DOUBLE -BLINDED 
TRIAL  
Protocol Number:  GIDOA -01 
Date  and Version Number : October 1 , 201 5 Ver. 3.0 
Investigational Device:  GID SVF -2 
Study Phase:  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38086] -Investigator:  The GID Group   
[ADDRESS_39974]. Suite 240  
Louisville, CO [ZIP_CODE]  
Funding Organization:  NA 
Site Investigator s:  Site: Rothman Institute (RI)  
Name:  [CONTACT_38125], MD   
Telephon e:[PHONE_610]     
E-mail:  [EMAIL_636]  
 
Site: The Cooper Health System  
Name:  [CONTACT_38126], MD   
Telephone:  [PHONE_611]    
E-mail:  miller -[EMAIL_637]  Site: [LOCATION_007] 
Plastic Surgery  
Name: [CONTACT_38127] R. Garza, MD  
Telephone: (210)  616-0301  
Email: [EMAIL_638]    
 
Approval:  
 
   
PI [INVESTIGATOR_38087] (Name [CONTACT_13693])   Date  
This confidential information about an investigational product is provided for the exclusive use of 
investigators of this product and is subject to recall at any time.  The information in this document 
may not be disclosed unless federal or state law or regulations require such disclosure.  Subject to the 
foregoing, this information may be disclosed only to those persons involved in the study who have a 
need  to know, with the obligation not to further disseminate this information.   
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39975] read the protocol specified below. In my formal capacity as Investigator, my duties 
include ensuring the safety of the study subjects enrolled under my supervision and 
providing  The GID Group  with complete and timely information, as outlined in the 
protocol.  It is understood that all information pertaining to the study will be held strictly 
confidential and that this confidentiality requirement applies t o all study staff at this site. 
Furthermore, on behalf of the study staff and myself, I agree to maintain the procedures 
required to carry out the study in accordance with accepted GCP principles and to abide 
by [CONTACT_38114].  
Protocol Number:  GIDOA -01 
Protocol Title:  Use of Autologous Adipose -Derived Stromal Vascular Fraction to Treat 
Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Controlled, Randomized, Double -Blinded Trial  
Protocol Date:  October 1 , 201 5 
   
Investigator Signature   [CONTACT_38128] T itle 
Site #    
Site Name   
[CONTACT_38129] -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39976] populations  ...............................  14 
2.4.2  Anticipated number of research subjects  ................................ ..............................  14 
2.4.3  Inclusion criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 14 
2.4.4  Exclusion criteria  ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 15 
2.5 Study procedur es ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  15 
2.5.1  Screening procedures  ................................ ................................ ............................  15 
2.5.2  Concomitant Medications  ................................ ................................ ......................  16 
2.5.3 Study treatment  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 16 
2.5.4  Study treatment procedures  ................................ ................................ ..................  17 
2.5.5  Allocation to treatment  ................................ ................................ .........................  20 
2.5.6  Unblinding  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  21 
2.5.7  Treatment adherence  ................................ ................................ ............................  21 
2.5.8  Withdrawal of subjects due to non -compliance  ................................ ....................  21 
2.5.9  Procedures to assess efficacy  ................................ ................................ ................  21 
2.5.10  Procedures to assess safety  ................................ ................................ ...................  21 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39977] maintenance and retention  ................................ ................................ ...............  29 
10.3  Data Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  31 
 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39978]  
K-L Scale  Kellgren -Lawrence Osteoarthritis Scale  
• Grade 0, None – No radiographic featur es of OA are present  
• Grade 1 , Doubtful – Doubtful narrowing of joint space and 
possible osteophytic lippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
• Grade 2, Minimal – Definite osteophytes and possible narrowing 
of joint space  on anteroposterior weight -bearing radiograph  
• Grade 3, Moderate – Moder ate multiple osteophytes, definite 
narrowing of joint space and some sclerosis and possible 
deformity of bone ends  
• Grade 4, Severe – Large osteophytes, marked narrowing of joint 
space, severe sclerosis and definite deformity of bone ends   
LR lactated Ring er’s 
OA osteoarthritis  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_38088] r ate 
SAE  serious adverse event  
SVF  stromal vascular fraction  
UADE  unanticipated adverse device effect  
UAE  unanticipated adverse event  
VAS  visual analog scale  
WOMAC  Western Ontario and  McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index  
 
  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 6 of 32 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
TITLE  Use of Autologous Adipose -Derived Stromal Vascular 
Fraction to Treat Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Controlled, 
Randomized, Double -Blinded Trial  
SPONSOR  The GID Group  
FUNDING 
ORGANIZA TION  NA 
NUMBER OF SITES  Up to 3 sites 
RATIONALE  This study will examine the safety and efficacy of autologous 
adipose -derived stromal vascular fraction (SVF) cells 
processed with the GID SVF -2 device for pain , function and 
stiffness  in the knees of oste oarthritic subjects.  
 
Osteoarthritis is the main form of arthritis and affects over 20 
million people in the [LOCATION_002].  In the knee it can cause 
severe pain , reduced functionality and increased stiffness  thus, 
a treatment that would reduce pain , incr ease function and 
reduce stiffness  would be of benefit to many people.  
STUDY DESIGN  This is a multi -center, prospective, randomized, blinded, 
interventional safety and efficacy study.  
PRIMARY 
OBJECTIVE  To evaluate the safety of a single injection of auto logous 
adipose -derived SVF for treatment of osteoarthritis of the knee.  
SECONDARY 
OBJECTIVE  To evaluate the initial efficacy of a single injection of 
autologous adipose -derived SVF for reduction of pain and 
stiffness and increased functionality  in patient s with 
osteoarthritis of the knee.  
NUMBER OF 
SUBJECTS  39 
SELECTION 
CRITERIA  Inclusion Criteria : 
1. Grade II or Grade III osteoarthritis using Kellgren -
Lawrence grading scale (K -L Grade)  as diagnosed using 
weight bearing X-ray, physician review, and/or pre -op MRI   
2. Study Subjects must have failed a minimum of at least two 
conservative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], spanning a period of at least 3 
months, including (i) oral pain medications, (ii) physical 
therapy, (iii) corticosteroid injection of the knee, (iv) 
viscosupplementati on injection of the knee   
3. Study Subjects must be willing to voluntarily give written 
Informed Consent to participate in the study and sign the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) authorization before any study procedures are 
perfor med 
4. Males and females 40 -75 years old   
5. Subjects will be in good health (ASA Class I -II) with a 
BMI < 35  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39979] present with  a knee 
pain score ≥6 and ≤16 using the short -form WOMAC pain 
(A1 subscale, 20 total points)   
8. Subjects with bilateral disease will only be treated in one 
knee.  The treated knee must have K -L grade II or III with a 
pain score ≥6 and ≤16 using the short -form WOMAC pain 
(A1 subscale, 20 total points) and the contralateral knee has 
a K-L grade of I or II with a pain score <6 using the short -
form WOMAC pain (A1 subscale, 20 total points)   
9. Subjects must speak, read and understand English  
10. Subjects must be reaso nably able to return for multiple 
follow -up visit s 
Exclusion Criteria : 
1. Subjects whose knee pain is caused by, (i) diffuse edema, 
(ii) displaced meniscus tear, (iii) lesion greater than 1 cm in 
any direction, or (iv) osteo chondritis desicans  
2. Subjects who h ave had surgery of either knee within [ADDRESS_39980] had a major injury to the 
targeted /treatment  knee within [ADDRESS_39981] had an injection in either knee in the 
prior 3 months, including corticosteroids, 
viscosupplementation or platelet rich plasma (PRP)  
5. Subjects who have gout, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus 
arthropathy, psoriatic arthritis, avascular necrosis, severe 
bone deformity, infection of the knee joint, fibromya lgia, 
pes anserine bursitis, or neurogenic or vascular 
claudication.  
6. Subjects who have symptomatic OA of the hips, spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], or 
ankle that would interfere with the evaluation of the treated 
knee  
7. Subjects that are unwilling to stop taking prescription  or 
over the counter  pain medication 7 days prior to any visit  
8. Subjects that are allergic to lidocaine, epi[INVESTIGATOR_38089]  
9. Subjects with a history of bleeding disorders, 
anticoagulation therapy that cannot be stopped as follows  
prior to injection ; Thrombolytic s and anti -platelet 
medication including but not limited to Coumadin 
(warfarin) for 3 days, Plavix (colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745]) for 3 days, 
ASA/NSAIDs/fish oil supplements for 7 days, Xeralta® 
(rivaroxaban) for 24 hours  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 8 of 32 
10. Subjects with systemic immunosuppressant use within  six 
(6) weeks from screening and subjects with HIV/viral 
hepatitis  
11. Subjects with chondrocalcinosis, Paget’s disease and 
Villonodular synovitis  
12. Subjects  that use any form of tobacco  
13. Women that are pregnant or planning to become pregnant 
during the study  
14. Subjects on long term use of oral steroids  
15. History of any chemotherapy or radiation therapy on the 
targeted/treatment leg  or adipose harvest site   
16. Subjects currently on worker’s compensation  
INVESTIGATIONAL 
DEVICE / 
INTENDED USE  GID SVF -2 
The GID SVF -2 device is indicated for use for harvesting, 
filtering , separating, and concentrating autologous  stromal 
vascular fraction cells from adipose tissue for reintrodu ction to 
the same patient during a single surgical procedure for  
treatment of pain associated wi th joint osteoarthritis. The GID 
SVF-2 device is to be used only with the GID SVF Procedure 
Pack.  
CONTROL GROUP  This study is a 3 -arm study with a placebo control group.  The 
study  arms are: 1) low -dose group (15 million SVF cells in 4  
ml of lactated Rin ger’s (LR)), 2) high -dose group (30 million 
SVF cells in 4  ml of LR), and placebo  control group (0 SVF 
cells in 4  ml of LR).   
DURATION OF 
SUBJECT 
PARTICIPATION 
AND DURATION OF 
STUDY  Subjects may have up to 4 weeks between screening and 
treatment.  After t reatment follow -up visits will be at 2 days,  6 
week s; 3 and 6 months; with safety follow -up phone calls or 
visits at [ADDRESS_39982] Screening:  up to [ADDRESS_39983] Treatment:   [ADDRESS_39984] Follow -up: [ADDRESS_39985] Safety Follow -up: 2 year s 
The total duration of the study is expected to be 1 year (6 
months to complete recruiting and 6 months to complete 
follow -up) with safety follow -up completing within 3 years.  
CONCOMITANT 
MEDICATIONS  The following medications should be stopped or are not  
allowed during the study as follows:  
ANY Pain Medication [ADDRESS_39986] may not take a ny medication s and 
over-the-counter drug s as follows : 
a. 14 days Prior to Surgery  
• Oral steroids that are short course (less than 1 4 days 
total)  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 9 of 32 
b. 7 days Prior to Surgery  
• Pain medications (all);   
• ASA/NSAIDs/fish oil supplements  
c. 3 days Prior to Surgery -  
• Throm bolytics and anti -platelet medication including 
but not limited to Coumadin (warfarin), Plavix 
(colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745] ) 
d. 24 hours Prior to Su rgery –  
• Xeralta® (rivaroxaban)  
After Surgery  the subject may not take a ny m edications and 
over-the-counter drug s as follows:   
a. For 24 hours After Surgery –  
• Xeralta® (rivaroxaban)  
b. For 3 days After Surgery -  
• Throm bolytics and anti -platelet medication inc luding 
but not limited to Coumadin (warfarin) , Plavix 
(colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745]) ,  
• ASA/NSAIDs/fish oil supplements   
c. Oral steroids for duration of study  
All concomitant medications will be recorded on the 
Concomitant case report form at each subject follow -up visit.  
SAFETY 
EVALUATIONS  Incidence and severity of adverse events  and comparison of 
MRI images from baseline to 6 months for any unusual 
findings.   
EFFICACY 
EVALUATIONS  & 
PRIMARY 
ENDPOINT  Pain, function and stiffness  will be compared at baseline and [ADDRESS_39987]-operatively using the validated short -form of the 
WOMAC instrument and a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for 
pain.  
Efficacy will be achieved if either SVF dose is shown to be 
superior to the placebo group at the [ADDRESS_39988] completed the 6 week follow -
up, an interim analysis for safety will be con ducted.   If there 
are two (2 ) or fewer adverse events  less than grade  4 on the 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) 
scale,  then the high dose will be administered. Serious adverse 
events will be monitored on an ongoing basis throughout th e 
study and safety follow -up period.  
STATISTICS  
 The primary efficacy will be evaluated using Dunnett’s 
multiple comparison with a control test.  
RATIONAL FOR 
NUMBER OF 
SUBJECTS  The samples size determination is based on the primary 
efficacy endpoint usi ng the WOMAC score (scaled to 100 
points full scale) and evaluated using Dunnett’s multiple 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 10 of 32 
comparison with a control one -sided (i.e., superiority) test.  
Assuming a standard deviation of [ADDRESS_39989] (i.e., minimal clinically signi ficant difference) of at least 
17 (representing about a 33% decrease from baseline) points 
with an α = 0.05 significance level and a power of 80% a 
conservative sample size of 11 subjects per group is needed .   
This sample size estimate is based on a Bonfe rroni correction 
and as such is conservative (i.e., larger than necessary). Thus, 
the goal will be to have no fewer than 11 subjects per treatment 
group. To account for possible exclusions/lost to follow -up of 
data an additional 2 subjects per treatment gr oup (20%) will be 
added for a sample size of 13 subjects per group for a total 
enrolled sample size of 39 subjects.  
1 PURPOSE OF THE INVESTIGATION  
1.1 Overview of Investigation and Clinical Plan  
Osteoarthritis (OA) is known as degenerative arthritis or degener ative joint 
disease or osteoarthrosis , and represents a group of mechanical abnormalities 
involving degradation of joints, including the articular cartilage and subchondral 
bone. Symptoms typi[INVESTIGATOR_38090], tenderness, stif fness, locking, 
and sometimes  effusion. Clinical treatment generally involves a life -long 
combination of exercise, lifestyle modifications, and/or analgesics. If pain 
becomes debilitating, joint replacement surgery may be an option to improve 
the quality of life.  
A new and  novel treatment strategy has had preliminary success in preclinical 
studies as well as in pi[INVESTIGATOR_38091] (SVF) cells derived from adipose tissues. The SVF is a 
concentration of nucleated cells normally present in the adipose tissue.  This 
treatment strategy uses the autologous SVF cells derived from harvested 
adipose tissue within a single clinical procedure (bedside).  The adipose tissue is 
harvested under sterile conditions, then washed,  then dissociated using 
enzymatic digestion, then the SVF cells are concentrated and returned to the 
patient using a syringe injection to the joint space.  
This IDE application addresses the GID SVF -[ADDRESS_39990] 
manufacturer are both FDA -registered and audited, MDD certified, and 
ISO13485:2003 certified companies.  Both maintain a Quality Management 
System (QMS) compliant with the Quality System Regulation (QSR) to provide 
the framework of controls for the facility and processes employed in the 
manufacture, assembly,  labeling and distribution of medical devices.  
This clinical trial with this IDE proposal is a multi -center, randomized, double -
blinded, controlled clinical study to investigate the safety and efficacy in the use 
of adult autologous adipose SVF for the tre atment of pain associated with joint 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 11 of 32 
OA.  The hypothesis of this trial is that the proposed clinical outcome measures 
of reduced pain resulting from the treatment of OA of the knee joint with 
autologous adipose SVF tissue will be superior to a placebo cont rol treatment.  
1.2 Name [CONTACT_38130] -2 and GID SVF Procedure Pack  
1.3  Intended use of the investigational device  
The GID SVF -2 device is indicated for use for harvesting, filtering , separating, 
and concentrating autologous  stromal vascular fr action cells from adipose tissue 
for reintrodu ction to the same patient during a single surgical procedure for  
treatment of pain associated wit h joint osteoarthritis. The GID SVF-2 device is 
to be used only with the GID SVF Procedure Pack.  
All materials su pplied for the proposed study are for investigational use only 
and are to be used solely within the context of the approved protocol.  
1.4 Objectives of the clinical investigation  
1.4.1 Primary objective  
Evaluate the safety of the GID SVF -2 for the treatment of osteo arthritis in 
the knee in humans.  
1.4.2 Secondary objectives  
Evaluate the efficacy of the GID SVF -2 for the treatment of osteoarthritis 
of pain , stiffness and functionality  associated with osteoarthritis of the 
knee in humans . 
1.5  Anticipated Duration of the clinica l investigation  
It is anticipated that the trial duration will not exceed 1 year; 6 months for 
recruitment and 6 months follow -up with an additional 2 years for safety 
follow -up. 
2 CLINICAL PROTOCOL  
2.1 Protocol number and title  
GIDOA -01: Use of Autologous Adip ose-Derived Stromal Vascular Fraction to 
Treat Osteoarthritis of the Knee: A Controlled, Randomized, Double -Blinded 
Trial  
2.2 Protocol version , number and date  
Version 3.0, GIDOA -01, October  1, 2015    
2.3 Study design  
2.3.1 General study design  
This is a multi -center,  prospective, randomized, blinded, interventional 
safety and efficacy study.  The study is designed as a  dose escalation, 
parallel -groups design (uncorrelated, unpaired, independent groups) with 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 12 of 32 
placebo control. There are three groups: treatment group high  dose (H) 
receives injection of 4 cc of LR with 3 0 million SVF cells; treatment 
group low dose (L) receives injection of 4 cc of LR with 15  million SVF 
cells; placebo control group (C) receives injection of 4  cc of LR with zero 
SVF cells (Figure 2).   
An SVF dose escalation design will be included in the study.  The first 
fifteen (15) subjects will be randomized to low dose or placebo as follows: 
nine (9) subjects will receive the low SVF dose (15 x 106 cells) and six (6) 
subjects will receive the placebo (no SVF cells).  When all fifteen (15) 
subjects have reached the 6 week follow up the cohort of 15 will be 
evaluated for adverse events and any safety issues.  If there are two or less 
adverse events of less than grade 4 on the Com mon Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events (CTCAE) scale  in the low SVF dose group, then the 
remaining twenty -four (24) subjects will be randomized to receive the 
following doses: four (4) subjects will receive the low SVF dose (15 x 106 
cells), thirteen (13) subjects will receive the high SVF dose (30 x 106 
cells) and seven (7) subjects will receive the placebo dose.    
  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 13 of 32 
2.3.2 Study design schematic  
Figure 1 Study Flow Schematic  
 
Surgery /Baseline 
Subject completes WOMAC and VAS 
then liposuction , randomization to : 
1) Low Dose SVF or
2) Placebo 
knee injection 
Office Visit  - [ADDRESS_39991] completes WOMAC & VAS
Office Visit  - [ADDRESS_39992] completes WOMAC & VAS
Office Visit  - [ADDRESS_39993] completes WOMAC & VAS
MRI of knee 
Office Visit  - [ADDRESS_39994] interested & meets criteria then Authorized 
physician or staff member administers Consent .  Did the subject 
complete the Informed Consent ?GIDOA -01
Were there 5 or more adverse 
events related to the device ? 
Begin enrolling high dose subjects
Stop studyYes
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39995] of males and females between the ages of 40 and 75 
with Kellgren -Lawrence OA grading scale (K -L Grade) II or  III and a 
WOMAC pain score ≥ 6 ≤ 16  on a 20 point scale in one knee and a 
WOMAC pain score ≤ [ADDRESS_39996] has 
bilateral disease.  
2.4.2 Anticipated number of research subjects  
Enrollment was determined to be 39 based on a minimally  clinically 
significant difference of 17 points on the WOMAC pain score with an α = 
0.05 significance level and a power of 80% (11 subjects/group) plus an 
additional 2 subjects per group (20%) for lost to follow up.  
2.4.3 Inclusion criteria  
1. Grade II or Grade III  osteoarthritis using Kellgren -Lawrence grading 
scale (K -L Grade)  as diagnosed using  weight bearing  X-ray, 
physician review, and/or pre -op MRI .  
2. Study Subjects  must have failed a minimum of at least two 
conservative therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], spanning a period of at least  3 months, 
including (i) oral pain medications, (ii) physical therapy, (iii) 
corticosteroid injection of the knee, (iv) viscosupplementation 
injection of the knee.   
3. Study Subjects  must be willing to voluntarily give written Informed 
Consent to participate  in the study and sign the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) authorization before any 
study procedures are performed.  
4. Males and females 40 -75 years old.   
5. Subjects  will be in good health (ASA Class I -II) with a BMI < 35.  
6. Subjects must have c ontinued pain in the knee despi[INVESTIGATOR_38092] [ADDRESS_39997] present with a knee pain score 
≥6 and  ≤16 using the short -form WOMAC pain ( A1 subscale, 20 total 
points).   
8. Subjects  with bilateral disease will only be treated in one knee.  The 
treated knee must have K -L grade II or III with a pain score ≥6 and  
≤16 using the short -form WOMAC pain ( A1 subscale, 20 total 
points) and the contralateral  knee has a K -L grade  of I or II with a 
pain score <6  using the short -form WOMAC pain ( A1 subscale, 20 
total points).   
9. Subjects m ust speak, read and understand English.  
10. Subjects  must be reasonably able to re turn for multiple follow -up 
visits.  
 
 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 15 of 32 
 
2.4.4 Exclusion criteria  
1. Subjects  whose knee pain is caused by, (i) diffuse edema, (ii) 
displaced meniscus tear, (iii) lesion greater than 1 cm in any 
direction, or (iv) osteo chondritis desicans.  
2. Subjects  who have had surg ery of either knee within [ADDRESS_39998] had an injection in either knee in the prior 3 
months, includin g corticosteroids, viscosupplementation or platelet 
rich plasma (PRP).  
5. Subjects  who have gout, rheumatoid arthritis, lupus arthropathy, 
psoriatic arthritis, avascular necrosis, severe bone deformity, infection 
of the knee joint, fibromyalgia, pes anserine bursitis, or neurogenic or 
vascular claudication.   
6. Subjects  who have symptomatic OA of the hips, spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], or ankle that 
would interfere with the evaluation of the treated knee.  
7. Subjects  that are unwilling to stop  taking prescription or over the 
counter pain medication 7 days prior to any visit  
8. Subjects  that are allergic to lidocaine, epi[INVESTIGATOR_38093]  
9. Subjects with a history of bleeding disorders, anticoagulation therapy 
that cannot be stopped as follows  prior to injection Thrombolytics and 
anti-platelet  medication including but not limited to Coumadin 
(warfarin) for 3 days, Plavix (colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745]) for 3 days, 
ASA/NSAIDs/fish oil supplements for 7 days, Xeralta® 
(rivaroxaban) for 24 hours.  
10. Subjects with systemic immunosuppressant use within six (6) weeks 
from screening and subjects with HIV/viral hepatitis.  
11. Subjects with chondrocalcinosis, Paget’s disease and Villonodular 
synovitis  
12. Subjects  that use any form of t obacco  
13. Women that are pregnant or planning to become pregnant during the 
study.  
14. Subjects on long term use of oral steroids  
15. History of any chemotherapy or radiation therapy o f the 
targeted/treatment leg  or adipose harvest site .   
16. Subjects currently on worker’s compensation  
2.5 Study procedures  
2.5.1 Screening procedures  
Initial screening may be done over the pho ne or at the medical office.  
Subjects will be asked questions from a screening form and if they meet 
the criteria on the form will be asked if they are interested in coming back 
for an office screening visit.  A copy of the Informed Consent Document 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_39999] will be evaluated for Grade II or Grade III 
osteoarthritis (K -L scale) as diagnosed using X -ray, physician review, 
and/or pre -op MRI.  If potential participant meets the grading criteria,  then 
they will be evaluated for the remaining inclusion/exclusion criteria.   
2.5.2 Concomitant Medications  
The following medications should be stopped or are not allowed during 
the study as follows:  
ANY Pain Medication [ADDRESS_40000] may not take any medications and over -the-
counter drugs as follows:  
a. 14 days Prior to Surgery  
• Oral steroids that are short course (less than 14 days total)  
b. 7 days Prior to Surgery  
• Pain medications (all);  
• ASA/NSAIDs/fis h oil supplements  
c. 3 days Prior to Surgery   
• Thrombolytics and anti -platelet medication including but not 
limited to Coumadin (warfarin), Plavix (colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745] ),  
d. 24 hours Prior to Surgery   
• Xeralta® (rivaroxaban)  
After Surgery the subject may not take any m edications and over -the-
counter drugs as follows:   
a. For 24 hours After Surgery  
• Xeralta® (rivaroxaban)  
b. For 3 days After Surgery -  
• Thrombolytics and anti -platelet medication including but not 
limited to Coumadin (warfarin), Plavix (colpi[INVESTIGATOR_7745]),  
• ASA/NSAID s/fish oil supplements   
c. Oral steroids for duration of study  
 
All concomitant medications will be recorded on the Concomitant case 
report form at each subject follow -up visit.  
2.5.[ADDRESS_40001]’s adipose tissue will be acquired through liposuctio n of the 
abdomen or thigh and will be suctioned directly into the GID SVF -[ADDRESS_40002] will then be treated with an i njection in the knee of  4 ml of LR 
containing one of the following:  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 17 of 32 
a) Low Dose - 15 x 106 (range 12.5  x 106 – 17.2 x 106) nucleated SVF 
cells;  
b) High Dose - 30 x 106 (range 27.5  x 106 – 32.5 x 106) nucleated SVF 
cells; or  
c) Placebo - [ADDRESS_40003] in the operating room on a sterile 
table that is not visib le to any study personnel.  The processing 
technician will use the GID SVF Procedure Pack for fat processing.    
All tissue contact[CONTACT_38115] (GID SVF -2, syringes, tubing) will 
be sterile single -use laboratory disposables.  All procedures must be 
follow ed as outlined in the IFU.   Figure 2 shows an overview of the 
adipose lipoaspi[INVESTIGATOR_38094].  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 18 of 32 
Figure 2 Overview of Adipose Lipoaspi[INVESTIGATOR_38095]
~. [ADDRESS_40004]
limited to two 
retestsDose =  Placebo 
Prepare Dose
~up to [ADDRESS_40005] 
~125cc of Adipose Lipoaspi[INVESTIGATOR_38096] & Test
~0.5 cc for Release AssaysWash  
~100 cc will be available for 
processing 
Resuspend 
SVF pellet in 4 cc LR
~ 5 cc SVF available for testing and 
dose
Prepare & Send 
~0.5cc of 
resuspension to 
Central labRelease Criteria MetNo No
NoYes
YesYesFlow Diagram from Processing of Adipose Lipoaspi[INVESTIGATOR_38097] -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_40006] group of 15 subjects will be randomized to  receive one of 
the following  SVF doses :   
• Low SVF dose, 15 x 106 (range 12.5 x 106 – 17.5 x 106) 
nucleated SVF cells, suspended in 4  ml of lactated 
Ringer’s  (9 subjects) or  
• Placebo  control , 0 SVF cells, in 4 ml of lactated Ringer’s  
(6 subjects)  
If there are two or less  adverse events of less than grade 4 on the 
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) scale , 
then the remaining twenty -four (24) subjects will be randomized to 
receive th e following doses : 
• Low SVF dose,  15 x 106 (range 12.5 x 106 – 17.5 x 106) 
nucleated SVF cells, suspended in 4 ml of lactated 
Ringer’s  (4 subjects)  or 
• High SVF dose, 30 x 106 (range 27.5 x 106 – 32.5 x 106) 
nucleated SVF cells, suspended in 4 ml of lactated  
Ringer’s  (13 subjects) or  
• Placebo control group,  0 SVF cells, in 4 ml of lactated 
Ringer’s  (7 subjects)  
Release Criterion for each injection of the SVF cells will be:  
• a minimum of 70% viability (Chemometec NC -200) cells 
and 
• total nucleated cell count in d ose range (Chemometec NC -
200) and 
• endotoxin assessment using rapid methodology with 
endotoxin  level ≤ 200 EU  per dose  and 
• no gram negative detected .   
The data for the cell yield , viability , endotoxin and gram ID  
assessment s are recorded on the Cell Count Assay  case report  form .  
   
Release Criteria Not Met:    
• If the dose is equal to placebo,  then continue with the 
study checking the ‘Release’ box on the Cell Count Assay 
CRF.  
• If the release criteria are not met, then all criteria will be 
retested with only one retest allowed  per release criteria .   
• If the retest does not meet the release criteria,  then the 
patient is withdrawn from the study  (see Section 3.3). 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 20 of 32 
Release Criteria Are Met:  
• The box for ‘Release’ is checked and the processing 
technician signs  the Cell Count Assay form.  
The form will not be added to the subject’s binder until after the study 
has been completed and all unblinding is complete.  
4. Injection of Cells  
The anteromedial  or superolateral portal  of the treatment knee will be 
prepare d for injection. These  location s were chosen  due to ease of 
access into the intra -articular space and to avoid injecting into the fat 
pad of the knee.  No sedation or pain medication will be administered 
to the patient.  An ethyl chlorid e topi[INVESTIGATOR_38098]. Lidocaine local 
anesthetic will be injected using a 25 gauge needle to numb the skin 
and subcutaneous tissues. Verification of the needle in the 
intraarticula r space  of the knee  will be done by  [CONTACT_38116][INVESTIGATOR_38099] .  The knee will 
be aspi[INVESTIGATOR_38100] a maximum of 5 ml using an 18 gauge/1.5  inch 
needle.  Then all of the 4  cc SVF cells suspension will be injecte d 
into the intra -articular space through the same 18 gauge/1.[ADDRESS_40007] pressure over 
the injection site will placed for approximately ten (10) seconds.  
Hemostasis after injection will be confirmed, the in jection site will 
then be cleaned with an alcohol wipe and covered with a sterile 
bandage . This can be removed the next morning. The patient will be 
given crutches and asked to be non -weight bearing on the injected 
knee for two (2) days.  The patient will be encouraged and allowed to 
bend and flex the knee as long as non -weight bearing condition s are 
maintained.  Patients will be given written instructions concerning 
after-injection  and liposuction  care and encouraged to call the 
administering physician at any time with questions and concerns . The 
patient will be asked to wait in the waiting room for [ADDRESS_40008] to ensure double -blind administration of study 
treatments.   
▪ Access to the randomization code will be strictly cont rolled and only 
the processing technician, who will not be involved in safety or 
efficacy evaluation, will know to which group the subject is 
randomized on the day of the surgery.   
▪ The processing technician will process the SVF or placebo syringe out 
of sight of any personnel involved in the study.  The technician will 
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 21 of 32 
mask the syringe (tape) before it is seen by [CONTACT_38117].  
2.5.[ADDRESS_40009] log. If the need arises to unblind the treatment for a 
patient (i.e. adverse event) the processing technician can consult the log 
for treatment identification.   
2.5.[ADDRESS_40010]’s health and/or welfare if they were to continue in the study.  
Subject s may voluntarily withdraw from the study at any time without 
prejudice.  
Subjects who are withdrawn will not be replaced if they have received 
study treatment and if it is determined that there is not sufficient data for 
analysis the subject’s data will b e removed from analysis.    
2.5.[ADDRESS_40011] of 3 sub scores; 1) pain with 5 qu estions 
and 20 total points; (2) stiffness, with 2 questions and 8 total points and 
(3) functionality with [ADDRESS_40012] 
will be asked to rate their pain using a visual analog scale (VAS), a 
horizontal 100 mm line with anchors  of ‘no pain’ and ‘worst imaginable 
pain’.  The patient will be asked to mark a point on the line to indicate 
their pain intensity when climbing or descending stairs.  
 
2.5.10  Procedures to assess safety  
Adverse events will be continuously monitored  by [CONTACT_7676],  the 
independent Safety Monitor and sponsor  to evaluate safety of the device 
and treatment up to 2 years.  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 22 of 32 
MRI’s will be taken pre -treatment , 6 months  and 1 year  according to the 
following sequence:  
• Sequence: proton density fat saturation (PD fat sat)  
• Sagittal plane only  
• Magnet: 3.0T or 1.5T with knee coil (8 -16 channel)     
2.5.11  Schedule of study visits  
Initial screening may be done over the phone or at the office.  All 
subsequent visits will be at the site offices with the 2 year safety 
evaluation to be complet ed at the office or over the phone  (Appendix A). 
Prior to surgery the subjects will come into the office for an evaluation 
visit where they will be enrolled in the study and the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria will be con ducted.  If they qualify for the study the subject will 
have an MRI of their treatment knee.  Subjects will return to the office [ADDRESS_40013] will complete the VAS and 
WOMAC questionnaires. MRI’s of the knee will be taken at the [ADDRESS_40014]’s insurance.  Subjects will be given a 
stipend of $ 350.[ADDRESS_40015]-operative clinical office visits  (Table 1)   Subjects will receiv e 
compensation only at the time of these visits .  Subjects will not be 
compensated for missed visits or visits outside the required 4 visits.   
  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_40016] Compen sation  
Time after Treatment  Compensation  
2 days (15 minutes)  $ 50 
6 week s (15 minutes)  $ 50 
3 months (15 minutes)  $ 50 
6 months (1 hour)  $200  
Total  $350 
2.6 Study outcome evaluations  
2.6.1 Study endpoints  
Safety: Safety endpoints are adverse events  at any time  point  and MRI of 
the knee at 6 months  and 1 year  for any findings indicating that the device 
is not safe as used . 
Efficacy : This will be achieved if either dose is shown to be superior (i.e., 
less pain , better function and less stiffness ) to the placebo g roup at the [ADDRESS_40017] are:  
H0: µL = µC and µH = µC 
Ha: µL < µC and/or µH < µC 
2.6.2 Sample size determination  
The samples size determinati on is based on the primary efficacy endpoint 
using the WOMAC score (100 points full scale) and evaluated using 
Dunnett’s multiple comparison with a control one -sided (i.e., superiority) 
test.  Assuming a standard deviation of [ADDRESS_40018] 
(i.e., minimal clinically significant difference) of at least 17 (representing 
about a 33% decrease from baseline) points with α = 0.05 significance 
level and a power of 80% a conservative sample size of 11 subjects per 
group is needed .  This sample  size estimate is based on a Bonferroni 
correction and as such is conservative (i.e., larger than necessary). Thus, 
the goal will be to have no fewer than 11 subjects per treatment group. To 
account for possible exclusions/lost to follow -up of data an addi tional 2 
subjects per treatment group (20%) will be added for a sample size of 13 
subjects per group for a total enrolled sample size of 39 subjects.  
2.6.3 Outcome data and data analysis  
Data analysis will be performed by a trained statistician using appropriat e 
statistical methods and software (e.g. JMP or SAS). Descriptive statistics 
will be presented as means, standard deviations, medians and ranges for 
the continuous variables and as counts and percents for categorical 
variables. An alpha level of 5% will be  used for all analyses, unless 
otherwise stated.  Demographics will be tabulated overall and by [CONTACT_38118].  Confidence intervals will be provided where appropriate.  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 24 of 32 
The primary efficacy will be evaluated using Dunnett’s multiple 
comparison with a control test (one -sided for superiority).  
The safety analysis will be descriptive and narrative in nature, with SAE's 
and AE's tabulated by [CONTACT_6764], preferred term, severity and relation to 
procedure.  
MRIs will be evaluated for any anomalies or safet y issues as observed by 
[CONTACT_978].  
[ADDRESS_40019] for small volume liposuction 
surgery and a knee injection. These are detailed in the Informed Consent 
materials . 
3.2 Adverse event s and  reporting  
3.2.1 Adverse event definitions  
Adverse Event (AE): Any untoward medical occurrence in a clinical 
study of an investigational device; regardless of the causal relationship of 
the problem w ith the device or, if applicable, other study treatment or 
diagnostic product(s).  
Unanticipated adverse event (UAE): Any adverse effect, the frequency, 
specificity or severity of which is not consistent with the risk information 
described in the clinical s tudy protocol(s).  
Serious adverse event (SAE):  An adverse event is considered “serious” 
if, in the view of either the investigator or the sponsor, it results in any of 
the following outcomes:  
• death  
• a life -threatening AE  
• inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38101]  
• a persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
Unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE): Any serious adverse 
effect on health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death ca used 
by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the 
investigational plan or any other unanticipated serious problem associated 
with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
3.2.2 Eliciting adverse event information  
Clinical study subjects will be routinely questioned about adverse effects 
at all study visits.  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 25 of 32 
3.2.3 Recording and assessment of adverse events  
All observed or volunteered advers e events (serious or non -serious) and 
abnormal test findings, regardless of treatment group, if applicable, or 
suspected causal relationship to the investigational device or, if applicable, 
other study treatment or diagnostic product(s) will be recorded in  the 
subjects’ case histories.  For all adverse events, sufficient information will 
be pursued and/or obtained so as to permit 1) an adequate determination of 
the outcome of the effect (i.e., whether the effect should be classified as a 
serious adverse eve nt) and; 2) an assessment of the casual relationship 
between the adverse event and the investigational device or, if applicable, 
the other study treatment or diagnostic product(s).    
Adverse events or abnormal test findings felt to be associated with the 
investigational device or, if applicable, other study treatment or diagnostic 
product(s) will be followed until the effect (or its sequelae) or the 
abnormal test finding resolves or stabilizes at a level acceptable to the 
sponsor and investigator.  
3.2.[ADDRESS_40020] finding (i.e. sterility of SVF) will be classified as an 
adverse event if one or more of the following criteria are met:  
• The test finding is accompanied by [CONTACT_4659]  
• The test finding necessitates additional diagnosti c evaluation(s) or 
medical/surgical intervention; including significant additional 
concomitant drug or other therapy (Note: simply repeating a test 
finding, in the absence of any of the other listed criteria, does not 
constitute an adverse effect.)  
• The tes t finding leads to a change in study dosing or exposure or 
discontinuation of subject participation in the clinical study  
• The test finding is considered an adverse event by [CONTACT_38119] a culture results in a positive sterility test it w ill be considered an 
abnormal test finding and reported to the FDA within [ADDRESS_40021] findings to determine 1) if 
the abnormal test finding should be classified as an adverse event; 2) if 
there is a reasonable possibility that the adverse event was caused by [CONTACT_38120] -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 26 of 32 
investigational device or other study treatments; and 3) if the adverse 
event meets the criteria for a serious adverse event . Adverse events will be 
scaled according to Common Terminology Criteria for Ad verse Events 
(CTCAE, ver . 4.03: June 14, 2010).  
If the sponsor , safety monitor  and/or investigator’s final determination of 
causality is “unknown and of questionable relationship to the 
investigational device or other study treatments,” the adverse event will be 
classified as associated with the use of the investigational device or other 
study treatments  for reporting purposes.  If the sponsor , safety monitor  
and/or investigator’s final determination of causality is “unknown but not 
related to the investig ational device or other study treatments,” this 
determination and the rationale for the determination will be documented 
in the respective subject’s case history.  
3.2.6 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_38102]; (1)  if there are 5 or more device related adverse events 
of severity greater than grade 4 on the CTAE scale; (2) if more than 20% 
of subjects (8 subjects) receiving  SVF report an increase in pain to a level 
greater than eight (8) on the VAS pain scale or function decreases more 
than 50% compared to baseline functional assessment using the WOMAC 
function assessment subscale A3; (3) if escalation difficulty in study 
recruitment or retention will significantly impact the ability to evaluate the 
study endpoints; (4)  any new information becomes available during the 
trial that necessitates stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356].  Any subject that has been treated 
prior to stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_38103] r any reason will be monitored for adverse 
effects and if such events occur the subject will be treated until resolution .    
3.2.[ADDRESS_40022] findings, the investigator shall submit  the 
event  to the sponsor and FDA through the  FDA’s FDA Adverse Event 
Reporting System (FAERS) .   
A copy of this report will be provided to all participating study 
investigators.   
The event  will be submitted to t he FDA as soon as possible and, in no 
event, later than [ADDRESS_40023] findings  
If, following receipt and investigation of follow -up information regarding 
an adverse event that was previously determined not to be a UADE, the 
sponsor , safety monitor  and/or investigator determines that the event does 
meet the requirements for expedited reporting, the sponsor and/or 
investigator will submit the event to FAERS  as soon as possible, but in no 
event later than 10 working days, after the determination is made.  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 27 of 32 
Subsequent to the initial submission of a completed FAERS , the sponsor 
and/or investigator will submit additional information concerning the 
reported adverse ev ent or abnormal test finding as requested by [CONTACT_1622].  
3.2.[ADDRESS_40024] 
findings, the investigator will submit a copy of the FAERS report  to the 
IRB as soon as  possible and, in no event, later than 10 working days after 
the sponsor and/or investigator first receives notice of the UADE or [ADDRESS_40025] 
will be treated until resolution and their medical outcome is determined.  
4 DESCRIPTION OF THE INVESTIGATIONAL DEVICE  
The GID SVF -2 device is a sterile single -use disposable canister used for harvesting, 
filtering, separating, and  concentrating autologous stromal vascular fraction cells 
from adipose tissue for reintroduction to the same patient during a single surgical 
procedure for treatment of pain associated with joint osteoarthritis. The GID SVF -2 
device is to be used only with  the GID SVF Procedure Pack.  
The GID SVF -2 device is a canister with various ports molded from polymer 
materials and a convenient tray. The canister is a closed system protecting the tissue 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_38104]. The harvested tissue is d eposited into the 
canister and filtered to capture the tissue and separate the fluid portion.  
Functional Principle:  
The harvested tissue and fluids are aspi[INVESTIGATOR_38105] a filter in the canister which 
captures the tissue particles and allows fluids through.   The harvested tissue may be 
rinsed with a sterile LR solution injected through the Patient port or Luer port. A 
manual stirring assembly allows the user to mix the tissue and fluids during the 
filtering process. Waste fluids are transferred to a waste cont ainer that is in -line with 
the aspi[INVESTIGATOR_38106].  
5 MONITORING PROCEDURES  
Monitoring for safety will be conducted by  [CONTACT_38121] [INVESTIGATOR_38107].  A study monitor will monitor the  study for 
compliance with t he clin ical protocol.     
6 LABELING  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 28 of 32 
The canister packaging is labeled for identity and an “Instructions for Use” and 
“User’s Manual” is provided with each unit.  
The labeling will contain the statement "CAUTION - Investigational Device.  
Limited by [CONTACT_4496] (or Uni ted States) Law to Investigational Use." [21 CFR  
812.5(a) ].   
7 INFORMED CONSENT  
Informed consent will be obtained in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, 
ICH GCP, US Code of Federal Regulations for Protection of Human Subjects (21 
CFR 50.25[a,b], CF R 50.27, and CFR Part 56, Subpart A), the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, if applicable), and local regulations.  
The Sponsor and/or Investigator will prepare the informed consent form and HIPAA 
authorization and provide the docu ments to IRB for approval.  The written consent 
document will embody the elements of informed consent as described in the 
International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) and will also comply with local 
regulations. The Sponsor and Investigator will retain an IRB -approved copy of the 
Informed Consent Form in the study master file.  
A properly executed, written, informed consent will be obtained from each subject 
prior to entering the subject into the trial.  Information should be given in both oral 
and writte n form and subjects (or their legal representatives) must be given ample 
opportunity to inquire about details of the study.  A copy of the signed consent form 
will be given to the subject or legal representative of the subject and the original will 
be main tained with the subject’s study binder.  
[ADDRESS_40026] operating procedures and policies of the IRB, 
and the Investigator will keep the IRB informed as to the progress of the study.  The 
Investigator will obtain assurance of IRB compliance with regulations.  
Any documents that the IRB may need to fulfill i ts responsibilities (such as protocol, 
protocol amendments, consent forms, information concerning patient recruitment, 
payment or compensation procedures, or other pertinent information) will be 
submitted to the IRB.  The IRB’s written unconditional approv al of the study protocol 
and the informed consent form will be in the possession of the Investigator before the 
study is initiated.  The IRB’s unconditional approval statement will be transmitted by 
[CONTACT_38122].  
This approval must refer to the study by [CONTACT_38123].  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 29 of 32 
Protocol and/or informed consent modifications or changes may not be initiated 
without prior written IRB approval except when necessary to eliminate immediate 
hazards to the patients or when the change(s) involves only logistical or 
administrative aspects of the study.  Such modifications will be submitted to the IRB 
and written verification  that the modification was submitted and subsequently 
approved should be obtained.   
The IRB must be informed of revisions to other documents originally submitted for 
review; new information that may affect adversely the safety of the patients of the 
condu ct of the study; an annual update and/or request for re -approval; and when the 
study has been completed.  
[ADDRESS_40027] enroll ed into the 
clinical study.  The investigator will review, approve and sign/date each 
completed CRF; the investigator’s signature [CONTACT_38131]’s responsibility for ensuring that all clinical and laboratory data 
entered on the CRF are complete, accurate and authentic.   
Any missing, unused, or spurious data will be noted in the study records.   All 
efforts will be made to account for missing data.  Data may be removed if it 
does not meet quality criteria such as unreadable data or data entered with more 
than one value.  
Source Data are the clinical findings and observations, laboratory and test data, 
and other information contained in Source Documents .  Source Documents are 
the original records (and certified copi[INVESTIGATOR_38108]); including, but not 
limited to, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38109], physician or office charts, physician or 
nursing notes, subject diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy dispensing 
records, recorded data from automated instruments, x -rays, etc.  When 
applicable, information recorded on the CRF shall match the Source Data 
recorded on the Source Documents.   
10.[ADDRESS_40028] maintenance and retention  
The sponsor and investigator will maintain records in accordance with 21 CFR 
812, Subpart G , to include:  
Item Sponsor  Investigator  
FDA correspondence related to the IDE application 
and Investigational Plan; including copi[INVESTIGATOR_38110] 3500A , supplemental IDE 
applications, current investigator lists, progress 
reports, notice of device recall or disposition,  X  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 30 of 32 
Item Sponsor  Investigator  
FDA notice of device recall or disposition, copi[INVESTIGATOR_38110] 3500A  X X 
IRB correspondence (including approval 
notifications) related to the clinical protocol; 
including copi[INVESTIGATOR_38111]  X X 
Current and past versions of the IRB -approved 
clinical protocol and corresponding IRB -approved 
consent form(s) and, if applicable, subject 
recruitment advertisements  X X 
Signed Investigator’s Agreements and Certifications 
of Financial Interests of Clinical In vestigators  X X 
Curriculum vitae (investigator and clinical protocol 
sub-investigators)  X X 
Certificates of required training (e.g., human subject 
protections, Good Clinical Practice, etc.) for sponsor 
and investigator and listed sub -investigators  X X 
Normal value(s)/range(s) for 
medical/laboratory/technical procedures or tests 
included in the clinical protocol  X X 
Laboratory certification information  X X 
Instructions for on -site preparation and handling of 
the investigational device and/or study treat ment or 
diagnostic product(s), and other study -related 
materials (i.e., if not addressed in the clinical 
protocol)  X X 
Master randomization list   X 
Signed informed consent forms   X 
Completed Case Report Forms, signed and dated by 
[CONTACT_1697]   X 
Source  Documents or certified copi[INVESTIGATOR_38112]   X 
Monitoring visit reports  X X 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_38113] -investigators, including notifications of 
adverse effect information  X X 
Subject screening and enrollment logs   X 
Subject Identification Log   X 
Investigational device accountability records, 
including documentation of device disposal  X X 
Final clinical study report.  X X 
 
Staff a t all facilities have training i n GCP regulations, HIPAA and patient 
confidentiality.  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -[ADDRESS_40029]’s name [CONTACT_18904] a list of possible ID’s.  The subject’s 
name [CONTACT_38132] a study look up 
document, which shall be kept at the study site consistent with confidential 
document policies.  
The subject ID of excluded subjects will not be re -assigned.  Information 
describing the reason(s) for exclusion will be documented on the  
Inclusion/Exclusion CRF.  
CRFs will be labeled with the subject’s Subject ID and no subject identifying 
information will appear on reports,  publications, or other disclosures of clinical 
study outcomes.  
The sponsor and investigator will retain the specifie d records and reports for up 
to two years after the marketing application is approved for the investigational 
device; or, if a marketing application is not submitted or approved for the 
investigational device, until two years after investigations under the  IDE have 
been discontinued and the FDA so notified.  
10.3 Data Management  
The sites will send CRFs to the sponsor for data entry.  CRFs may be sent via 
FedEx, fax or uploaded to the secure, HIPAA compliant share site.  Data from 
the CRFs will be entered into a clinical data management system (CDMS) by 
[CONTACT_456].   
The data man agement system will have verifications and restrictions on data 
entry.  The data entry will be 100% reviewed by [CONTACT_38124].  Erroneous, questionable or missing data will be collected on a Data 
Clarification  Form  (DCF)  for each sit e and sent to the site for correction.  The 
DCF  will have an area for the site to make corrections or the site may make the 
correction on the original CRF and return to the sponsor.  
Once all data has been entered, clarification and queries have been resolv ed, and 
the data is determined to be clean the database will be declared locked.  
  
Adipose -derived SVF for the Treatment of Knee OA  
Protocol # GIDOA -01 
Confidential                                                  Ver. 3.0   Page 32 of 32 
Appendix A – Schedule of Visits and Procedures  
Case Report Form  Eligibility 
Screening   Pre-
Surg.  
 Surg.   
 2 days  
±[ADDRESS_40030]-op 6 week s  
(±1 week )  
Post-op 3 month s  
(±2 weeks)  
Post-op 6 months  
(±2 weeks)  
Post-op Safety  
1 year  
(±1 month)  Safety  
2 years  
(±1 month)  As 
Needed  
Screening Form   X X         
Inclusion/Exclusion   X         
MRI   X     X X   
Demographics   X         
Vital Signs   X X X X X X X   
Surgery/Knee 
Injection CRF    X        
Cell Count Assay     X        
Cell Culture Assay    X        
Pain Evaluation 
(VAS)   X X  X X X    
Short Form 
WOMAC   X X  X X X    
Concomitant 
Medications   X X X X X X    
Safety Follow -up        X X  
Subject Exit          X X 
Adverse Events           X 
 