 1 Enhanced Medical Rehabilitation in Older Adults (EMR R01)  
Statistical Analysis Plan ( Final ) 
 
 
  
Trial Registration Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
SAP Version: 2 
Version Date: 5/29/2019  
Protocol Version: 8  
 
  
Roles and Responsibilities  
 
Michael Yingling MS;  SAP Author  
Philip Miller AB;  Senior Biostatistician  
Eric Lenze, MD;  Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_570235]; Co -Investigator  
Emily Lenard, MSW;  Study Coordinator  
  
  
 
         
 
         
  
  
 2  
  
Abbreviations : 
 EMR :  Enhanced Medical Rehabilitation  
 SOC:  Standard of Care  
 SNF:  Skilled Nursing Facility  
 OT:  Occupational Therapy  
 PT:  Physical Therapy  
 PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_570236]:  Adverse Event  
 SAE:  Serious Adverse Event  MADRS : Montgomery and Asberg Depression Rating Scale.  
 CIRS -G: Cumulative Illness Rating Scale for Geriatrics  
 SBT: Short Blessed Test  
 SAS: Statistical Analysis Software  
 ANCOVA: Analysis of Covariance  
    
 
         
 
Introduction: 
 
i. Background and Rationale:  
 [ADDRESS_748206] -acute rehabilitation  
consists of daily physical therapy (PT) and occupational therapy (OT) to achieve restoration (e.g., 
regain walking ability and counteract bone and muscle loss by [CONTACT_570243]), and adaptation (e.g., learn to perform activities of daily living and safely live at home). The most common setting for post- acute rehabilitation is a skilled nursing facility (SNF).   Length 
of stay is about [ADDRESS_748207] vulnerable individuals.  This problem should be remediable by [CONTACT_570244].  We therefore developed 
Enhanced Medical Rehabilitation . 
 
ii. Objectives:  
 
1. Aim 1 (Primary): Examine the effectiveness of EMR for improving functional outcomes  in 
older adults admitted to SNFs for post -acute rehabilitation.   
 
H1: EMR will improve functional recovery to a greater extent than standard -of-care 
rehabilitation.  
 
Explanation: The purpose of H1 is to examine the effectiveness of EMR.  If H1 is  
supported, this could establish EMR as the gold -standard practice for post -acute 
rehabilitation.  Our primary analysis is the change from baseline to Discharge . This single 
primary endpoint allows for an effectiveness test that is not confounded by [CONTACT_570245] -discharge issues beyond the reach of EMR.  
 
2. Aim 2 : Examine EMR’s ability to overcome patient- level barriers to successful 
rehabilitation.  
 
H2: The effectiveness of EMR for functional recovery will be greatest in: (a) patients with 
clinical depression; (b) patients with high levels of medical comorbidity; (c) patients with 
cognitive impairment.  
 Explanation: EMR was designed to overcome barriers to rehabilitation (for example, due to depression); therefore, the difference in functional recovery between EMR and SOC should be greater in the most vulnerable older adults.  If H2 is supported, we will demonstrate that older adults with these common comorbidities benefit the most from high intensity, high engagement rehabilitation.  If so, this would refute conventional 
wisdom in post -acute rehabilitation, codified in admission criteria for rehabilitation 
facilities, regarding the appropriate candidates for rehabilitation (as described in 
Significance).  
 
 4 3. Aim 3 (Secondary): Effect of EMR on MADRS scores on individuals with clinical 
depression.  
 
4. Calculate d a rate of clinical depression (SCID for those with elevated MADRS score ):  
 
[ADDRESS_748208] depression diagnosis.  
 
Conclusion: only 14 individuals in the study had a clinical depression (ie, a diagnosis of depression).  No further analyses to be done.  
 
Additional Variables/Outcomes  
 
6-Minute Walk/Gait Speed: Administered at Baseline and Discharge. Two 
components for 6 -Minute Walk:  
1) Distance Ambulated (feet): text box. If unable to complete, distance was entered as a 0.  
2) Time: options are 6 minutes, Other time (MM:SS), and N/A  
 
Two components for Gait Speed (Baseline, Day 30, Discharge):  
1) Distance: radio bu tton (10 meters, 4 meters, 0 meters). If unable, 0 meters 
selected.  
2) Time (seconds): text box (if unable, time is 0).  
 
Disposition (i.e., discharge to  community vs. not)  
 
Rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (rate) . 
 Secondary analyses (not for main paper):  
1. PANAS (A positive and a negative affect score).  
 2. PROMIS (Ability to Participant in Social Roles and Activities).  
3. OARS IADL.  
 
Process data: Measures of the dosage of intervention (# of EMR steps done in each 
therapy activity; PAT %; Rehab Participation Scale Score)  before and after training.  
Study Methods : 
 
i. Trial Design:  
 
This was a randomized , parallel- group  trial where patients received either EMR or SOC 
therapy.  
 Patients who received EMR received therapy only from therapi[INVESTIGATOR_570237]. Their therapy sessions followed the EMR protocol. Otherwise, their 
SNF care did not differ from usual care.  
 
 5 Patients who received SOC received therapy  only from PT/OTs (or assistants) who were 
not trained nor supervised in EMR. These therapi[INVESTIGATOR_570238] (videotaped or 
observed) but were not asked to do anything differently with their patients.  
 
ii. Randomization:  
 
Randomization  (blocks… 2 and 4 patient s). was 1:1 to EMR or SOC with stratification by 
[CONTACT_570246].  
 
iii. Sample Size:  
 
The sample size was based on 80% power to detect a Cohen’s d=0.[ADDRESS_748209] size on the ANCOVA difference in treatments at primary endpoint, based on a two -tailed p<0.025 
(because two outcome measures are used).  G*Power 3.1.2 was used for power 
calculations.  A Cohen’s d=0.4 is between “small” (0.2) and “medium” (0.5) effect sizes.  
Effect sizes for function were in the “large” range, d=0.[ADDRESS_748210] sizes in a full- scale study, hence our 
choice to power at d=0.4.  Such an effect size is clinically relevant for the functional outcomes. We will only examine affective recovery as an outcome for those who are 
“affectively impaired” to begin with; i.e., those with clinical depression at baseline; with this reduced N, we are powered at 80% for a d=0.54. This same power analysis would apply for any subgroup analysis of depressed; i.e., if we wish to demonstrate that EMR is effective both in the case of clinical depression and in “non- depressed” older adults.  
 
iv. Statistical Interim Analyses/Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_570239]:  
 
Not applicable; we did not have any interim data analysis or early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_112259].  
 
v. Timing of Final Analysis:  
 
All outcomes will be analyzed collectively.  
 
vi. Timing of Outcome Assessments  (including windows) :  
  Schedule of Assessments  
 SNF admit  
(baseline)  Da
y 7 Day 
30 
 SNF 
discharg
e Day 60 Day 90 Outcomes  Function    
Barthel Index (primary outcome)  X  X X X X 
Gait speed  X  X X   
6-minute walk  X   X   
Depression  SCID (given if indicated by [CONTACT_45689])  X      
MADRS  X  X    
17-item positive and negative affect scale  X X X  X X 
 6 Processes  Rehabilitation intensity   
Patient active time & actigraphy (at 20% of 
sessions at random)  collected each session throughout 
stay   
Treatment engagement   
Observer -rated Rehabilitation Participation Scale 
(at 20% of sessions at random)  collected each session throughout 
stay   
Fidelity data (at 20% of session at random)  collected each session throughout 
stay   
Post -Treatment Affect   
Self-Assessment Moniker (at 20% of session at 
random)  collected each session throughout 
stay   
Patient Satisfaction and Treatment Fidelity Survey  Collected after therapy sessions    
Other rehabilitation variables    
Rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]    X X X X 
Disposition (home, long -term care)  X  X X X X 
Social Participation (PROMIS Ability to Participate 
in Social Roles and Activities)      X X 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (OARS IADL)      X X 
 Executive Functioning (Clock Drawing Test)  X      
 Fear of Falling  X      
 Readiness for Rehab  X X     
 Short Blessed Test  X      
 Medical Comorbidity (CIRS -G) X      
 Barthel Index: Pre -morbid version  X      
 
 
Statistical Principles :  
 
i. Confidence Intervals and P -Values  
 
Level of significance  is 5%   
 
ii. Adherence and protocol deviations  
 
Protocol Deviation :  
Any alteration or modification to the IRB- approved research without prospective IRB 
approval.   The term research encompasses all IRB -approved materials and documents 
including the detailed protocol, IRB application, consent form, recruitment materials, questionnaires/data c ollection forms, and any other information relating to the research 
study.  
 Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_570240].  
 
 7 Variables: number of EMR principles  used per therapy session; PAT.  
 
iii. Analysis Populations  
 
 
    
Trial Population : 
 
i. Screening d ata to describe representativeness of trial sample will include age, gender, race  and 
ethnicity.  
 
ii. Eligibility  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
a. [ADDRESS_748211] -acute care from PT and OT for 2 weeks 
or more.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
a. Language, visual or hearing barriers to participation (e.g. unable to communicate with research staff).  
b. Medical illness preventing study participation or accurate data collection (e.g., highly unstable cardiac illness such that early re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_312545]; 
metastatic or other cancer such that hospi[INVESTIGATOR_570241].  
c. Moderate -severe dementia (demonstrated by [CONTACT_570247]/or short blessed 
score greater than 13).  
d. Progressive neurol ogical condition such that recovery of function is not feasible.  
e. Patient did not have the ability to walk prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (e.g. paraplegic).  
f. Schizophrenia or other chronic or current psychotic disorder.  
g. Patient nor mally resides in a long- term care  facility.  
 
       
iii. Recruitment :  the numbers that will be presented in a CONSORT diagram include:  
1. # Screened /Consented and reasons for ineligibility.  
2. # Randomized to EMR vs SOC.  
3. # Present at each follow- up time point (i.e., Day 30, Discharge, Day 60, and 
Day 90); reasons for discontinuation/lost to follow -up. 
4. # Included in Final Analysis; reasons excluded from final analysis.  
 
iv. Withdrawal/follow -up 
 
No follow -up was done for withdrawn participants. If a participant was withdrawn, then 
an attempt was made to  obtain final prognosis information using clinical data available 
from the chart unless explicitly told not to do so by [CONTACT_2299] . 
 
 8 v. Baseline Patient Characteristics  
 
In addition to the screening variables described above, the variables below will als o be 
summarized in a Baseline Characteristics Table. Continuous variables will be 
summarized using median  and IQR while categorical variables will be summarized using 
counts and percentages. These statistics will be provided by [CONTACT_3004] (EMR Vs SOC)  and 
as a whole .  
 
• Barthel Index  
• MADRS Score  
• Gait Speed  (Distance in meters and Time in seconds)  
• 6-Minute Walk  (Distance Ambulated, in feet)  
• PANAS Score  
• Short Blessed Test Score  
• CIRS- G Score  
• Clock Drawing Score  
 
    
Analysis : 
 
i. Outcome Definitions  
 
1) Aim 1: Examine  the effectiveness of EMR for improving functional outcomes in older 
adults admitted to SNFs for post -acute rehabilitation.  
 
H1: EMR will improve functional recovery to a greater extent than standard -of-care 
rehabilitation.  
 The primary measure employed fo r assessing functional improvement will be The 
Barthel Index. This index is a 10 -item scale used to ascertain the degree of 
independence of normal daily activities. This will be done by [CONTACT_570248] 10 
items. A high score indicates a high degree  of indepen dence , and a  score can range from 
0 to 100.  
 
2) Aim 2: Examine EMR’s ability to overcome patient -level barriers to successful 
rehabilitation.  
 
H2: The effectiveness of EMR for functional recovery will be greatest in: (a) patients with 
clinical depression; (b) patients with high levels of medical comorbidity; (c) patients with cognitive impairment.  
 
 Part (a) will be assessed using the MADRS, which is a 10 -item scale used  
 to assess for major depression. Each item is rated on a scale of 0 to 6,  
 where a 6 is worse. The total score (i.e., sum of these 10 items) will be  
 9  used to assess for major depression and can range from 0 to 60.  
 
 Part (b) will be assessed using the  CIRS- G, which is a 13 -item scale used to  
 assess for disease in all major body  systems. Each item is rated on a scale  
 of 0 to 4, with a 4 indicating severe impairment. The total score (i.e., sum  
 of these 10 items) will be used to assess for medical comorbidity and can  
 range from 0 to 52.  
 
 Part (c) will be assessed using the SBT Scores.  The SBT is a 
 6- item scale used to assess for memory/concentration deficits . A total  
 score, which is obtained after applying a weighting factor to each item  
 then summing up the final item scores, can range from 0 to 28. A high  
 score indicates im pairment consistent with dementia.  
 
   
 
ii.  Analysis Methods  
 
The primary outcome analysis for functional recovery will use a marginal model  with 
time (baseline and discharge), condition (E -MR vs. SOC) and time x condition as fixed 
effects and with a covariance structure specified based on the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Employing a marginal model allows for a more robust approach in the 
handling of missing data compared to the traditional ANCOVA model.  
 
For H2 under Aim 2, each potential con tinuous moderator will be individually inserted 
into the primary model. The term of interest will be the time x condition x moderator 
interaction. 
 The secondary analyses for Six -Minute Walk distance and Gait Speed will use a Mann -
Whitney U Test to test for differences in means between groups. In addition, a Chi-Square test will be employed to test for independence between condition and the secondary outcome variable re -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Finally, the outcome of self -reported 
function will use  a marginal model using time (30, 60, and 90 days), condition and time x 
condition as fixed effects, with a covariance structure specified based on BIC.  
 
Explorator y analyses will also test whether the effects of age, gender, race and site (i.e., 
Barnes Jewish Extended Care Vs Alexian Brothers Sherbrooke Village ) altered the 
conclusions of the primary results as well as the conclusions of the moderator results .  
 Note: we will not look at the nesting of subjects within therapi[INVESTIGATOR_570242].  
  
iii. Missing Data  
 
We use a marginal model which accounts for missing  data (no multiple imputation was 
used) . 
 10  
iv. Harms  
 
An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject temporally 
associated with participation in the clinical study or with use of the experimental agent 
being studied. An adverse finding can include a sign, symptom, abnormal assessment (laboratory test value, vital signs, electrocardiogram finding, etc.), or any combination of these.  
 AEs will be labeled according to severity (i.e., mild, moderate or severe), which is based on the AE’s imp act on the participant.  
 AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they are related to the study intervention or other study procedures (i.e., definitely unrelated, definitely related, 
probably related, or possibly related).  
 
SAEs that are u nanticipated, serious, and possibly related to the study intervention will 
be reported to the IRB, and NIMH in accordance with requirements.  Unexpected fatal or life -threatening AEs related to the intervention will be reported to the NIMH Program 
Officer within 7 days. Other serious and unexpected AEs related to the intervention will 
be reported to the NIMH Program Official within 15 days.  Anticipated SAEs will be handled in a less urgent manner but will be reported to the IRB in accordance with their requirements.   
 
v. Statistical Software  
 
All analyses will be performed using SAS and/or R.  
 
 
vi. References  
 none  
 