NI N D S Pr ot oc ol Te m plate (re v. 2 4 J ul 0 6)   I R B Pa nel: Bl ue    W hite  Pr ot oc ol Title  T he treat me nt of me nstr uall y -r elate d m o o d d is or ders wit h 
t he g o na d otr o pi n releasi n g h or m o ne ( G n R H) a g o nist, de p ot 
le u pr oli de acetate ( L u pr o n) 
Pr ot oc ol N u m ber      9 0- M- 0 0 8 8 
Date of T his S u b missi o n/ Versi o n    J u ne 1 8, 2 0 1 9 
 
Lea d Ass ociate I n vesti gat or  
Peter J. Sc h mi dt , M. D.  NI M H/ 
SB E  Bl d g  1 0  
R m  3 N 2 4 4  P h o ne  
3 0 1 -49 6 -6 1 2 0  E-mail  
petersc h mi dt @ mail. ni h. g o v  
 
Ass ociate I n vesti gat ors  
Da vi d R. R u bi n o w, M. D.  De pt. of 
Ps yc h, 
U N C   [ADDRESS_811310] u bi n o w @ me d. u nc.e d u 
L y n nette K. Nie ma n  NI C H D/ 
P R E B  Bl d g 1 0 C R C  
R m 1 3 1 4 0  3 0 1 -4 9 6 -8 9 3 5  E-mail  
nie ma nl @ mail. ni h. g o v  
Pe dr o E. Marti nez, M. D.  NI M H/  
S B E  Bl d g 1 0 C R C  
R m 2 6 3 3 0  3 0 1 -4 0 2 -0 6 1 5  E-mail 
marti ne p @ mail. ni h. g o v  
S ha u -Mi n g Wei, P h D  NI M H/  
C B D B/  
SI N  Bl d g. 1 0  
R m 3 C 2 0 8 3 0 1 -5 9 4 -4 7 6 0  E-mail  
s ha u mi n g @ mail. ni h. g o v  
 
 
Researc h C o ntact  
Peter J. Sc h mi dt, M. D.  NI M H/ 
SB E  Bl d g 1 0 C R C  
R m 2 5 3 3 0  P h o ne  
3 0 1 -49 6 -6 1 2 0  E-mail  
petersc h mi dt @ mail. ni h. g o v  
 
Me dicall y Acc o u nta ble I n vesti gat or  
Pe ter J. Sc h mi dt , M. D.  NI M H/ 
S B E  Bl d g 1 0 
R m 3 N 2 4 4  P h o ne  
3 0 1 -49 6 -6 1 2 0  E-mail  
petersc h mi dt @ mail. ni h. g o v  
 
T otal re q ueste d accr ual  
   1 0 0 Patie nts (se paratel y descri be patie nt gr o u ps)  
   0     V ol u nteers 
 
H u ma n Researc h Pr otecti o ns Pr o gra m I n vesti gat or a n d Staff Trai ni n g:  
“J ust i n ti me” h u ma n s u bjects pr otecti o n trai ni n g c o urses are re q uire d f or i n vesti gat ors a n d staff 
partici pati n g o n t his pr ot oc ol:  N o ne 
 
Pr oject Uses I o nizi n g Ra diati o n:   N o     Yes (attac h R S C/ R D S C d oc u me nt ati o n)  
     Me dicall y -i n dicate d o nl y 
     Researc h -relate d o nl y 
     B ot h  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 2 IND/IDE   No    Yes (attach FDA documentation) 
  Drug/Device/#  34,662 L eoprolide acetate 3.75 mg 
  Sponsor  NIMH (Maryland Pao, MD is the official representing the Institute)  
 
Durable Power of Attorney    No   Yes 
 Multi -in stitutional Project   No   Yes 
 Institution_________________ FWA #_________ 
D
ate of IRB approval_________ (attach IRB documentation) 
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Board  No   Yes 
 Technology Transfer Agreement  
 No   Yes 
Agreement type and number __________________________ 
 Samples ar
e being stored    No   Yes 
 F
lesch -Kinkaid reading level of consent form: 
Combined: 11.0 
Genetics: 9.5  
 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 3  Precis  
 This protocol is designed to accompany Clinical Protocol # 81 -M-0126, The 
Phenomenology and Biophysiology of Menstrually-Related Mood and Behavioral Disorders.  Its 
original purposes  were as follows:  1) to evaluate the efficacy of the gonadotropin releasing 
hormone (GnRH) agonist depot leuprolide acetate (Lupron) in the treatment of menstrually-related mood disorders (MRMD) by [CONTACT_611953], and 2)  to determine the possible relevance of gonadal steroids to affective state by 
[CONTACT_611954].  We observed that GnRH agonist induced ovarian suppression was an effective treatment compared to placebo in women with MRMD.  Additionally, women with MRMD but not asymptomatic controls (participating in companion protocol  # 92 -M-0174) experienced a recurrence of mood 
and behavioral symptoms when either estradiol or progesterone (but not placebo) was added back.  These data suggest that women with MRMD have a differential sensitivity to the mood destabilizing effects of gonadal steroids (1).  Having established that women with MRMD show a differential behavioral response to 
estrogen and progesterone, we now hope to identify the underlying mechanisms and physiologic concomitants of the differential behavioral sensitivity by [CONTACT_611955] (described in companion protocols) under the three hormonal conditions created by [CONTACT_3181], and comparing results obtained wit h those seen in normal controls (Protocol # 92-M-0174).  Planned 
studies include the following: cognitive testing, , brain imaging (3D PET, FMRI, MRS) and genetic studies including induced pluripotent cells. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 4  
Table of Contents 
       Page #  
1) Background and Scientific Justification      7 
2) Study Objectives         17 
3) Subjects          18 
a. Description of study populations    18 
b. Inclusion criteria       18 
c. Exclusion criteria       19 
4) Study Design  and Methods        21 
a. Study overview      21 
b. Recruitment         21 
c. Screening         22 
d. Study Procedures      23 
e. End of Participation      28 
5) Management  of data and samples       28 
6) Additional Considerations         28 
7) Risks and Discomforts        28 
8) Subject Safety Monitoring         36 
9) Outcome Measures          37 
10) Statistical Analysis         37 
  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 5  
11) Human Subjects Protection         [ADDRESS_811311] selection       38 
b. Justification for exclusion of children    38 
c. Justification for inclusion/exclusion of other vulnerable subjects  38 
d. Justification of sensitive procedures     38 
e. Safeguards for vulnerable populations   38 
f. Qualifications of Investigators     38 
12) Anticipated Benefits          40 
13) Classification of risk          40 
14) Consent documents and process       40 
15) Data and Safety Monitoring         41 
16) Quality Assurance         41 
a. Quality assurance monitor      41 
b. Quality assurance plan      41 
17) Adverse Event and unanticipated problem Reporting    42 
18) Alternatives to Participation         42 
19) Privacy                                                                               44 
20) Confident iality          45 
21) Conflict of Interest          45 
22) Technology transfer          45 
23) Research and Travel Compensation      45 
24) References           48 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 6 25) Appendix        56 
Abbreviations: 
MRMD  – menstrually related mood disorders  
GnRH – Gonadotropin releasing hormone 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 7 1) Background and Scientific Justification  
 Menstrual -related mood disorder (MRMD) is a condition characterized by [CONTACT_611956], 
behavioral, and somatic symptoms that are temporally linked to the luteal phase of the normal 
menstrual cycle (2) .  The pathophysiologic role of the luteal phase in MRMD is currently 
unclear, as are the roles of the ovarian steroids, estrogen and progesterone.  In a previous study (3), truncation of the luteal phase with high doses of the progesterone receptor antagonist mifepristone (RU  486) failed to alter the course or severity of the symptoms of MRMD: Both 
affective and somatic sy mptoms typi[INVESTIGATOR_611929].  This study suggested the lack of causal relevance of mid - late luteal phase biology in MRMD.  In contrast ovarian suppression with GnRH agonists resulted in the remission of MRMD symptoms in some (4 -13) (but not all (14) ) trials, suggesting 
the importance of changes in ovarian hormones in the development of MRMD symptoms.  As stated previously (3) , these data are consistent w ith MRMD representing a disorder of mood state 
that is triggered by [CONTACT_123595]- related events occurring prior to the mid - late luteal phase of the 
menstrual cycle.  
 In this study (1), we sought to answer three questions: 1) Does ovarian suppression 
eliminate the symptoms of MRMD; 2) Will exogenous administration of estradiol or progesterone reverse the effects of ovarian suppression on mood; and 3) Do women  lacking a 
history of MRMD respond similarly to women with MRMD during manipulation of gonadal steroid levels?  Our findings to date confirm several previous studies reporting the therapeutic efficacy of ovarian suppression in women with MRMD (4 -12).  Second, our data suggest that 
women with MRMD experience an acute symptom precipi[INVESTIGATOR_611930] -induced ovarian suppression, similar to the observations of 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 8 Muse et  al. (15) and Mortola et  al. (9).  Third, and of greatest interest, controls showed no 
perturbation of mood in response to either ovarian suppression or to exogenous hormone 
administration.  Given the identical nature of the hormonal manipul ations performed in patients 
and controls, it would appear that the mood changes seen in MRMD patients represent an abnormal response to otherwise unremarkable hormonal changes. Efficacy of Leuprolide vs. Placebo:  We observed significant reductions in MRMD  symptom 
severity during leuprolide treatment for all symptoms measured on both daily rating scales except for the symptom of increased appetite.  We observed that only six of ten (double blind) and ten of 18 women (open label or double blind) with MRMD re ceiving leuprolide met our 
criteria for response.  Thus, we observed response rates between 45 and 60% employing relatively conservative criteria.  The reported response rates to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) in women with MRMD (40 -60%) (16-25) appear similar to the rates observed 
in trials of GnRH -agonists.  Thus, although the majority of studies would support the short term 
use of GnRH agonists or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in this condition, symptomatic response is not uniform, and predictors of response are lacking.  The relatively brief period of GnRH agonist administration was well tolerated by [CONTACT_611957].  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_611931], no woman dropped out of the study due to intolerable side effects.  Indeed, we observed no adverse mood or behavioral effects during the hypogonadal state induced in this protocol, nor did we observe significant changes in weight or blood pressure recordings.  In fact, women with MRMD rated themselves on the visual analogue scale ratings as feeling significantly better than the controls when they were hypogonadal and less symptomatic than during their baseline  (pretreated) condition.  We did not observe any woman with MRMD to 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 9 meet our criteria for response on placebo, and symptom rating scores were significantly 
decreased in the sample receiving leuprolide compared to those receiving placebo.  
Effects of Hormone Addback:  In the second phase of the study we observed the recurrence of 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_611932], both physical and emotional, in women with MRMD during hormone addback.  Symptom recurrence was observed within one to two weeks of exposure to either estradiol or progesterone given separately.  The doses of estradiol or progesterone resulted in plasma hormone levels comparable to the levels observed during the normal menstrual cycle, and there were no differences in plasma hormone levels between women with MRMD and controls.  
 Our data are consistent with two previous studies by [CONTACT_611958]. (15) and Mortola  et al. 
(9) reporting the return of both physical and emotional symptoms in women with MRMD when estrogens or progestins were added back under conditions of GnRH-agonist induced ovarian suppression.  We observed significant (or at least a trend level of significance) worsening of MRMD symptoms for all symptoms measured in all scales during hormone addback except for 
the symptoms of food cravings and increased appetite.  No differences in symptom severity 
measures were observed between women with MRMD and controls in any symptom during leuprolide -induced hypogonadism (with the exception of women with MRMD feeling more 
happy and more relaxed than controls).  Investigators have reported correlations between plasma estradiol and/or progesterone levels and symptom severity in women with MRMD (26-30) and, 
additionally, have observed the following differences in plasma hormone levels in samples of women with MRMD compared to controls: no differences in levels of both estradiol and progesterone (31, 32), high levels of estradiol and low levels of progesterone (29, 33), and high levels of estradiol and no differences in progesterone (28) .  Our data are consistent with the 
suggested relationship (based on correlative rather than direct data) between MRMD symptom 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 10 severity and ovarian steroid secretion.  Additionally, the proposed lag (three to seven days) (27-
29) in the correlation between progesterone levels and symptom onset is also consistent with our observations of MRMD symptom recurrence occurring approximately one to two weeks after the administration of estradiol or progesterone.  Several women experienced a remission of their symptomatic state after 7 -10 days of symptoms despi[INVESTIGATOR_611933].  This suggests that the onset of MRMD may be triggered by [CONTACT_611959], but the “switching out” of the MRMD stat e is independent of plasma hormone levels.  
Finally, the variable association between either estradiol or progesterone and symptom return, within individual women with MRMD, may provide an explanation for otherwise discrepant correlative relationships observed in studies with small sample sizes, since it is unlikely that a sample of women with MRMD would uniformly display a link between the same ovarian steroid and mood symptoms.  Our data extend the findings of our previous study employing RU 486 (3) in which we 
demonstrated that MRMD symptoms occur independent of the mid - late luteal phase of the 
menstrual cycle.  The observations from this earlier study su ggested that MRMD may represent 
either an autonomous mood disorder linked to, but not caused by, menstrual cycle hormones, or, alternatively, that hormonal events occurring prior to the mid - luteal phase of the menstrual cycle triggered the onset of MRMD symptoms.  The data from the present study of a selected sample of leuprolide responders support the latter relationship and is consistent with the proposals of other investigators (27, 28)  who have suggested that periovulatory changes in either 
estradiol or progesterone secretion may be critical to the onset of MRMD symptoms.  
MRMD Patients Compared  with Controls: The most striking finding in this study is the 
differential symptom response in women with MRMD compared to controls.  Women with 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811312] that MRMD symptoms occur in a context within which normal levels of ovarian steroids (or their neurosteroid metabolites (34) ) similar to those measured 
across the normal menstrual cycle may interact with neuroregulatory systems to alter behavior in a susceptible group of women.  Identification of the mechanisms underlying the susceptibility to these effects will not only assist in the development of more specific treatments for individual women with MRMD but additionally will provide a context within which to address the relationship between mood dysregulation and changes in reproductive endocrine function in conditions such as postpartum depression and depression occurring in the context of the 
perimenopause. 
Background and Justification for Brain Imaging Studies 
 Recent brain imaging studies in asymptomatic women (i.e.,  women without MRMD) 
confirm for the first time in humans that physiolog ic levels of ovarian steroids have the capacity 
to modulate the neurocircuitry thought to be involved in both normal and pathological affective states.  First, Berman  et al. performed cognition- activated O
15PET scans in women during 
conditions of GnRH agonist -induced hypogonadism and gonadal steroid replacement.  They 
observed the elimination of Wisconsin Card Sort- activated regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) 
in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex as well as an attenuation of cortical activation in the inferior parietal lobule and posterior inferior temporal cortex (bilaterally) during GnRH agonist-induced 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 12 hypogonadism (35).  The characteristic pattern of cortical activation re-emerged during both 
estradiol and progesterone addback.  Additionally, they observed a differential pattern of hippocampal activation with estradiol increasing and progesterone decreasing activation re lative 
to hypogonadism.  This was the first demonstration that ovarian steroids have activational effects on rCBF during cognitive stimulation in the brain regions (i.e., PFC) implicated in disorders of affect and cognition.  Two recent studies using fMRI and 
1HMRS respectively, have extended 
these findings in young women under conditions of GnRH agonist-induced ovarian suppression.  Compared with baseline, ovarian suppression was associated with decreased activation in the prefrontal cortex during verbal memory encoding (but not retrieval) (36).  In the second study with 
1HMRS, ovarian suppression was associated with an increase in choline concentration (a 
proxy for neuronal metabolism/turn -over) in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (37).  Second, 
Goldstein  et al. (38) observed an increase in amygdalar activity and arousal (as measured by 
[CONTACT_611960], respectively) during the late follicular phase of the menstrual cycle 
(higher estradiol levels) compared  to the early follicular phase (characterized by [CONTACT_611961]).  Third, Protopopescu  et al. (39) employed an affective pi[INVESTIGATOR_611934] (a region that in some studies exerts inhibitory 
control over amygdalar functioning) during the luteal compared with the follicular phase.  Moreover, preliminary data  from these same investigators in women with MRMD 
(Silbersweig,  DC, personal communication) suggest a relative loss of OFC activity (decreased 
inhibition) in women with MRMD during the luteal phase.  Notwithstanding the caveat that decreased cortical “acti vity” also could reflect more efficient or optimal function, these data 
suggest that a reduction in OFC inhibition of amygdalar function during the luteal phase is associated with MRMD symptoms.  Finally, Dreher  et al. (40) , have initiated an event- related 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811313] error prediction (PFC) from 
sustained response to reward uncertainty (ventral striatum).  Preliminary data in the controls demonstrate, for the first time in humans, that ovarian steroids modulate reward system function, with increased follicular phase activation of the OFC and amygdala during reward anticipation and of the midbrain, striatum, and left ventrolateral PFC during reward delivery.  New analytical approaches wil l allow for testing the hypothesis that the hormonally -induced alteration in 
function includes changes in interregional neural interactions.  These findings then suggest that cognitive and affective information processes may serve as probes to identify can didate circuits 
for the mediation of gonadal steroid -dependent affective dysregulation.  Additionally, these 
neuroimaging studies in women suggest that ovarian steroids can influence many neural processes and systems relevant to MRMD including arousal, str ess-responsivity, and reward 
processing. 
Background and Justification for Induced Pluripotent Cell Study  
We wish to collect an additional sample of venous blood in women who have participated 
(or who currently are participating) in protocols 90-M- 0088, tit led “The treatment of 
menstrually -related mood disorders with the gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist, 
depot leuprolide acetate (Lupron),” and 92-M-0174, titled “The central nervous system effects of 
pharmacologically induced hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with and without estrogen and progesterone replacement.”  Previous findings from these protocols have demonstrated a differential behavioral response (i.e.,  a recurrence of typi[INVESTIGATOR_611935]) to physi ologic levels of the ovarian steroids estradiol and 
progesterone in women with premenstrual dysphoria (PMD) compared with asymptomatic 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 14 controls.  The observed differential response appears to be tissue specific since the effects of 
ovarian steroids at seve ral other target tissues does not differ in women with and without PMD 
(e.g., endometrium, pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117], breast).  The biological basis for this differential behavioral response to ostensibly the same physiologic stimulus is unclear; however, it is well estab lished 
that tissue specificity in the response to sex steroids is mediated by [CONTACT_611962].  Receptors for both estradiol and progesterone are widely distributed throughout the brain, and recent neuroimaging studies have demonstrated that both estradiol and progesterone regulate the activation patterns in brain regions involved with the processes of affective adaptation and stress responsivity.  We hypothesize that the capacity for phenotypic differences between women with and 
those without PMD will be preserved in the cellular function of induced pluripotential cells 
(IPCs). Although the phenotypic difference in response to sex steroids is tissue specific, the latent capacity for differential expression in response to steroids s hould be preserved in IPCs and 
expressed in the differentiation of the IPCs into neural elements.  Thus, we plan to obtain T-lymphocytes from peripheral blood (47)  in order to conve rt these cells into IPCs to establish 
neuronal and glial cell lines in both women with PMD and controls.  This study will be done in collaboration with [CONTACT_611984] at the NIAAA.  The goal of this project will be to develop 
neurons and glial cells from participants and to characterize their gene expression patterns, morphological properties, and cell signaling pathways in response to exposures to physiologic levels of estradiol and progesterone.  These experiments, therefore, will allow us to evaluate the nature of the differential behavioral response by [CONTACT_611963].  The  two behavioral phenotypes 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811314] and return of symptoms upon re- exposure to estradiol or progesterone (PMD) or 
the absence of negative behavioral symptoms during both GnRH agonist and ovarian steroid addback phases (controls).  Each of these women who is interested in participating will be re-
consented for this study.  
We hypothesize that the T -
 lymphocytes obtained from women with PMD and those from 
asymptomatic controls can be converted into IPCs and differentiated into model neuronal and 
glial cell lines.  The production of these pluripotential cell lines will retain genetic (or epi[INVESTIGATOR_18193]) variations that will help us understand the differential behavioral response at a cellular level in this condition. a) Medications Used in Protocol  
 GnRH is a decapeptide produced by [CONTACT_611964][INVESTIGATOR_611936] (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH).  Leuprolide acetate (Lupron) is a synthetic nonapeptide that functions as an agonist that is 80 to 100 times more potent than synthetic native GnRH in inducing the release of LH (48, 49).  During the first week 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811315]- menopausal women.  These decreases in gonadal steroid levels occur 
within two to four weeks after initiation of treatment.  Lupron is not active when given orally; however, following a single injection of depot Lupron, mean peak leuprolide acetate plasma concentration was almost 20  ng/ml after four hours and .36 ng/ml at four weeks, levels 
associated with effective gonadotropin suppression.  The plasma half-life of depot Lupron is not known; however, the half -life in the non-depot form is approximately three hours. 
 The administration of 17  beta estradiol via a transdermal system was chosen for this 
study because it has several advantages as described by [CONTACT_611965] (50).  First, it delivers 
the primary ovarian estrogen, estradiol, into the circulation at a constant rate and results in 
sustained levels of estradiol, constant rates of excretion of estradiol conjugates, and 
estrone/estradiol ratio s less than one (as seen in the pre- climacteric period of life).  Thus, 
transdermal estradiol is considered to result in a more physiological form of estrogen replacement than occurs with oral estrogens (51) .  Second, it delivers sufficient estradiol into the 
circulation to raise estradiol plasma concentratio ns to levels similar to those of women in the 
early follicular to mid -follicular phases of the menstrual cycle (50, 52-55), levels reported by 
[CONTACT_611966], in particular hot flushes.  Finally, the system ca n be applied and removed without difficulty, 
allowing for easy adjustment of the dosage in the presence of minor side effects such as nausea that may not require complete cessation of the medication.  With the application of the estrogen 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 17 patch system twice  weekly, patient compliance has been reported to be excellent, and only 
occasional local irritation has been observed (52) .  Further, transdermal estradiol can provide 
adequate amounts of estrogen to suppress hot flashes, correct vaginal atrophy, and reduce urinary 
calcium excretion (52) without increasing synthesis of renin substrate.  An increase in renin 
substrate has been suggested to accentuate or initiate the development of high blood pressure in susceptible women with other predisposing factors (56) , and has been implicated as a factor 
contributing to the association of hypertension with administration of oral conjugated estrogen (57).  Progesterone is widely prescribed in gynecologic settings, with proved indications including dysfunctional uterine bleeding, endometriosis, mastodynia, galactorrhea and precocious puberty (58) .  Furthe r, progesterone suppositories have been approved by [CONTACT_611967] # 82-M-0193. 2) Study Objectives 
 The results of this protocol and its companion protocol (92-M- 0174) demonstrate that 
during conditions of GnRH agonist-induced ovarian suppression women with MRMD experience a differential behavioral response to physiologic levels of ovarian steroids compared with controls.  Our current objectives are to employ this hormone manipulation paradigm to invest igate the underlying substrates for this differential behavioral response as well as the 
mechanisms mediating the differential risk.  The current study objectives are as follows:  
1) To investigate possible differences in the substrate mediating the observed 
differential response , we will employ multimodal imaging paradigms (O
15 PET, MRI) to 
examine the neurocircuitry regulated by [CONTACT_611968] (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 18 hormone conditions established in this protocol.  Additionally, we will examine hormone- related 
differences in HPA axis responsivity between women with MRMD and controls. 
2) To investigate possible mechanisms underlying the observed differences in 
behavioral response to ovarian steroids we will examine the profile of neurosteroid metabolites 
in plasma using a metabolo mics platform to determine if the enzymatic metabolism of 
behaviorally relevant steroids differs in women with MRMD and controls.  Additionally, we will employ functional genomics studies in- vitro cell cultures to examine potential differences in 
cellular function in women with MRMD and controls after exposure to physiologic levels of ovarian steroids. 3) Subjects 
 a) Description of Study Population:  The subjects of this study will be women who meet 
the criteria for MRMD as described in Protocol  # 81-M-0126, “The Phenomenology and 
Biophysiology of Menstrually-related Mood and Behavioral Disorders.”  All patients in this 
protocol will have already pa rticipated in Protocol # 81-M-[ADDRESS_811316] a prospectively 
confirmed and predictable relationship between their mood disorder and the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle; i.e.,  a 30% change in severity of symptom self rating scales, relative to  
the range of the scale employed, during the seven days premenstrually compared with the seven days post-menstrually in two out of three months of study.  We intend to recruit 100 women with MRMD to complete the current study objectives.  Participants who drop out may be replaced.  b) Inclusion criteria:  
• History within the last two years of at least six months with menstrually -related mood 
or behavioral disturbances of at least moderate severity-- i.e., disturbances that are 
distinct in appearance and associated with a notable degree of subjective distress;  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 19 • Symptoms should have a sudden onset and offset; 
• Age 18-50; 
• Not pregnant and in good medical health; 
• Medication free.  
 The Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia will be administered to al l 
patients prior to study entry.  Any patient with a current axis I psychiatric diagnosis will be 
excluded from participating in this protocol. 
 Prior to treatment, a complete physical and neurological examination will have been performed and the following  routine laboratory data obtained: 
 A. Blood  Complete blood count; thyroid function tests; cortisol; renal function tests, such as BUN and creatinine; electrolytes; glucose; liver function tests.  
 B. Urine  
 Routine urinalysis; urine pregnancy test.  
 GnRH agonist will not be administered to any subject with significant clinical or 
laboratory abnormalities.  The blood tests and urinalysis will be repeated two weeks after GnRH agonist administration to rule out any evidence of acute renal, hepatic or hematolo gic toxicity.  
 Additional tests  
 Results of Pap smear performed within one year of the onset of treatment will be 
obtained.  c) Exclusion Criteria : The following conditions will constitute contraindications to 
treatment with hormonal therapy and will preclude a subject's participation in this protocol:  
• Current Axis I psychiatric diagnosis 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 20 • History consistent with endometriosis;  
• Diagnosis of ill-defined, obscure pelvic lesions, particularly undiagnosed ovarian 
enlargement;  
• Hepatic disease as manifested by [CONTACT_611969]; 
• History of mammary carcinoma;  
• History of pulmonary embolism or phlebothrombosis; 
• Undiagnosed vaginal bleeding; 
• Porphyria; 
• Diabetes mellitus;  
• History of malignant melanoma;  
• Cholecystitis or pancreatitis;  
• Cardiova scular or renal disease;  
• Pregnancy; 
• A ny woman meeting the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop Criteria (STRAW) 
for the perimenopause (59).  Specifically, we will exclude any woman with an 
elevated plasma FSH level ( > 14 IU/L) and with menstrual cycle variability of 
> 7 days different from their normal cycle length.  
 S ubjects tak ing birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_611937].  Subjects taking 
diuretics, prostaglandin inhibitors, or pyridoxine (putative treatments for MRMD) will similarly be excluded from the study, as will patients taking psychotropic agents (e.g., lithiu m carbonate, 
tricyclic antidepressants).  All subjects will be required to use non -hormonal forms of birth 
control (e.g., barrier methods) to avoid pregnancy during this study. 
• NIMH employees and staff and their immediate family members will be excluded 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 21 from the study per NIMH policy.  
       
4) Study Design  a nd Methods 
 a) Study Overview 
 This outpatient study consists of a baseline period  (three months), followed by [CONTACT_611970] (phase I) and three  months of estradiol and progesterone 
replacement (phase II).   Subjects who experience remission of symptoms in Phase I will advance 
to Phase II of the protocol.  Those who do not experience symptom relief in Phase I may opt to enroll in another treatment protocol or receive open treatment for a time -limited period. 
Throughout the study p articipants will have weekly or biweekly visits to the outpatient clinic for 
blood draws and ratings, w ill complete daily self ratings, and will be scheduled for additional 
procedures and tests as described below.  
 b) Recruitment  
 Patients will be sought by [CONTACT_611971] -related 
mood disturbances. 
• Flyers will be produced with tear -offs.  P osters will not have tear -offs.  
• Flyers /poster  will be used in color as submitted, or may be printed in black and white.  The 
color of the flyer may vary.  However, color changes will be made proportionally throughout the 
ad and  will not be used to change the emphasis of the flyers.  
• The size of the flyers/posters  may vary, but all parts , including fonts and pi[INVESTIGATOR_499], will be 
changed proportionately to the rest of that flyer.  Disproportionate changes in size will not be used to change the emphasis of the flyer.  
• Flyers /posters may be posted on bulletin boards on the NIH campus, and at coffee shops, 
grocery stores, bookstores, libraries, fitness centers, community centers, or placed in venues, such 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 22 as at advocacy group offices, in doctor’s office waiting rooms, and retail establishments with 
approval of the venue or in accord with their policy.  
• Flyers /posters may be made available at outreach exhibits, speaking engagements, support 
group meetings, parent ing groups, profes sional meetings, and association/trade meetings with 
approval of the venue or in accord with their policy.  
• Flyers /posters may be given directly to persons requesting study information.  
• Flyers /posters may be posted electronically on websites such as such as NIH or NIMH 
websites, advocacy/parenting group websites such as PTAs, athletic groups or neighborhood groups, publications’ websites such as Washington Parent, or Gazette.  
• Flyers/posters may be sent  electronically to persons requesting study information 
• Flyers/posters may be sent electronically to listserv administrators.  SBE will not post directly 
to Listservs.  Rather, an email with the material  attached , including the following statement will 
be sent to the administrator of the listserv: 
 You are receiving the email because your email address is included on this listserv.   The 
purpose of this message is to inform you of an NIMH study that is recruiting subjects.   The 
administrator of this listserv  has permitted its use for this distribution . 
 The administrator has the option of sharing the information with their list.  Examples of types 
of Listservs to be contact[CONTACT_573653], parenting/family, school, sport groups, 
women’s health and fitness.  SBE will retain copi[INVESTIGATOR_611938].  
• IRB-approved advertisements may be placed in local and national print publications of 
newspapers, magazines and support or health care organizations, such as The Washington Post, The Express, Washington Parent, Gazette, Washingtonian, Washington Jewish Week and others.  
• NIH Record announcements will appear as text in the NIH Record . 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 23 • NIH employees and staff will not be directl y recruited by [CONTACT_429962]-
workers to participate in this study.  
 c) Screening  
 All patients in this protocol will have already participated in Protocol # [ADDRESS_811317] a prospectively confirmed and predictable relationship between their mood disorder 
and the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle; i.e.,  a 30% change in severity of symptom 
self rating scales, relative to the range of the scale employed, during the seven days premenstrually compared with the seven days post-menstrually in two out of three months of study.  Initial assessments may be performed by [CONTACT_611972] (Steiner -Carroll Scale) (60) , Beck Depression Inventory (61) , State -Trait 
Anxiety Inventory (62) , Hamilton Depression Scale (63) , and related psychological measures.  
Additionally, subjects will be asked to fill out symptom self- rating scales  (as described in 
screening protocol 81-M-0126) , the daily symptom rating scale (Halbreich and Endicott) (64) 
and visual analogue scales (65), on a daily basis.  Symptom ratings, diagnostic interviews, and other questionnaires will be collected through an online system using a subject-specific log in and password to protect confidentiality (see Appendix I). Both participants and investigators wil l 
input data into CTDB/CTSS. Participant entered data will be reviewed during the clinic visit. All subjects meeting criteria will receive a careful medical screening and will be excluded if there is evidence of significant renal, cardiac, hepatic, or othe r medical disorder.  All patients will 
receive routine physical and laboratory examinations such as urinalysis, hematocrit, hemoglobin, BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, electrolytes, and a serum pregnancy test.  Blood specimens will also be collected  on interview days by [CONTACT_611973] a 
number of endocrine measures such as estrogen, progesterone, sex hormone binding globulin, testosterone, prolactin, cortisol, T4, T3, and TSH. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 24  d) Study Procedures  
 Baseline  
 All subjects  will have a three month baseline period during which mood and behavioral 
ratings will be obtained.  Urinary pregnancy tests will be performed in all women prior to 
administration of the GnRH agonist to exclude pregnancy.  No pregnant women will be continued in the study.   
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811318] via 
intramuscular injection on a monthly basis in our clinic for a maximum of twenty -four weeks 
(see Figure I).  Subjects will fill out symptom self- rating scales on a daily basis preceding, 
during, and following treatment with GnRH agonist.  Additionally, subjects will be administered the following ratings during weekly clinic visits: Beck Depression Inventory, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593]-Trait Anxiety Inventory, the Rating Scale for Premenstrual Tension (PMTS) (self and rater administered versions) and a side effect checklist.  Following the third month of GnRH agonist treatment, the results of the trial will be discussed with each patient.  In those subjects who  
continue to evidence cyclical mood and behavioral changes comparable to their menstrually -
related mood disturbances, GnRH agonist administration will be discontinued, and these subjects will be offered participation in an alternate treatment protocol.  Th ose patients who experience a 
complete remission of mood and behavioral disturbances during the treatment with the GnRH 
agonist will be entered into the second phase of this study. 
 Phase II  
 Phase II of the study consists of the sequential replacement of estradiol and progesterone 
under double blind (subject and rater) conditions to determine whether these hormones are critical in the determination of the patient's premenstrual mood state.  These patients will continue to receive GnRH agonist for another [ADDRESS_811319], patients will be randomized into one of two groups as follows: group I will receive 0.1  mg/day of 
17ß- estradiol via skin patch (Estraderm) for a period of five weeks.  During the fifth week, progesterone suppositories (200 mgs twice daily) will be added to provide progesterone withdrawal -induced shedding of the endometrium and menses in order to prevent prolonged 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 26 exposure of the endometrium to unopposed estrogen.  Following the four weeks of estradiol 
adminis tration and the week of combined estradiol and progesterone, there will be a two week 
washout period when placebo patches and suppositories will be substituted for estradiol and progesterone.  Patients will then be administered progesterone (200  mg) suppos itories twice 
daily for a period of five weeks following which no progesterone will be taken.  Group II is identical to group I except the order of administration of hormones is reversed: progesterone suppositories (200 mg BID) will be administered for the  first five weeks, followed by a two 
week washout, and then estradiol 0.1 mg/day for five weeks, with the addition of progesterone during the fifth week of estrogen treatment.  To maintain double blind conditions all patients will use both patches (active or placebo) and suppositories (active or placebo) daily for the [ADDRESS_811320], in addition to the completion of daily 
mood and behavioral rating scales, blood samples (50 ml) will be drawn bi- weekly, if possible, 
for 24 weeks of this study (total  = 660 ml).  All blood sampling will be obtained in the following 
fashion.  Subjects will arrive at the 4th or 9th floor outpatient clinic; they will be seated or placed 
at bed rest, a scalp vein needle will be placed in the forearm or hand via venipuncture and approximately 50 ml of blood will be drawn.  This blood will then be analyzed for several measures such as gonadotropi[INVESTIGATOR_2115], estradiol, and progesterone to confirm creation of the intended hormonal conditions.  Additionally, blood samples will be assayed for hormonal/metabolic measures that could distinguish either the symptomatic state in women with MRMD or women with from those without MRMD.  
  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 27  
Related Studies  
I. Brain Imaging 
 In an earlier study, we demonstrated that the expected pattern of cognitive task - activated 
cerebral blood flow was eliminated during Lupron-induced hypogonadism and normalized with hormone addback.  These group data did not permit us to determine the following: 1)  whether 
the disappearance of the normal response during hypogonadism reflects recruitment of new neural areas of simple increased variance, and 2)  whether women with MRMD differ in their 
activated response from controls.  Subjects in this protocol will be asked to participate in brain imaging (as outlined in protocols  # 90 -M-0014, 91-M-0124) studies during each of the different 
hormonal conditions of this study.  The use of 0
15 PET and FMRI will enable us to investigate 
the effects of gonadal steroids on cerebral blood flow on an individual basis. II Genetic Studies  
 This protocol offers an unparalleled opportunity to identify potential genetic 
contributions to the differential sensitivity to gonadal steroids underlying MRMD because it identifies rel atively pure phenotypes; i.e., women with estrogen - or progesterone - precipi[INVESTIGATOR_611939].  A specific hormonal precipi[INVESTIGATOR_611940], thus, dramatically increasing the likelihood of detecting any genetic contribution to the differential behavioral response to the same hormonal signal.  Two genetic strategies will be employed: candidate gene studies examin ing polymorphisms in the 
receptors modulating the hormone signal (i.e., estrogen, progesterone, and androgen receptors); and establishment of cell lines for genome scanning in the future when polymorphism mappi[INVESTIGATOR_611941] (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 28 microarray technology becomes widely availa ble.  Wherever possible, internal control genotypes 
will be acquired (affected family -based control method). 
Induced Pluripotent Cells .  Samples derived from from peripheral blood cells (47) may be 
utilized for procedures such as special stains, immunohistochemistry, direct immunofluorescence 
or immunoelectron-microscopy for localization of immune deposits, PCR, or establishment of cell cultures.  In our protocol, the samples will be  used to grow a pluripotent cell lines.    e) End 
of Participation  
 At the completion of this study, a member of the research team will review the results of 
the study with each woman.  Women with MRMD will be offered participation in other evaluation and treatment protocols as indicated or, alternatively, referred for standard treatment to a caregiver in the community.  
5) Management of Data and Samples : 
 a) Storage  
 Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign.  Data will be kept in 
password -protected computers.  Samples will be kept in locked storage.  DNA samples and cell 
lines will be stored in locked freezers in David  Goldman’s laboratory (NIAAA) on Fischer’s 
Lane in Rockville.  Only study investigators will have access to the samples and data.  
 Data from structured diagnostic interviews and symptom ratings are kept 
in secure research files and electronically on the Branch server space or within the CTDB database.  Access to these research files is only available to study investigators. Symptom 
ratings, diagnostic interviews, and other questionnaires will be collected through an online system using a subject-specific log in and password to protect confidentiality (see Appendix I). 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 29              b) Data  (Including Genomic Data) and Sample Sharing Plan:             
This protocol is not subject to the Genomic Data Sharing (GDS) policy. The sharing of  
Genomic data according to the GDS policy is covered under the screening protocol 81-M-0126. 
Data and samples may  be shared with dbGaP, collaborating laboratories at NIH or outside of 
NIH and/or submitted to NIH -designated repositories and databases if consent for sharing was 
obtained.  Repositories receiving data and/or samples from this protocol may be open- access or 
restricted access.  
 Samples and data will be stripped of identifiers and may be coded (“de -identified”) or 
unlinked from an identifying code (“anonymized”). When coded data is shared, the key to the code will not be provided to collaborators, but will remain at NIH.  Data and samples may be shared with investigators and institutions with an FWA or operating under the Declaration of Helsinki (DoH) and reported at the time of continuing review.  Sharing with investigators without an FWA or not operating under the DoH will be submitted for prospective IRB approval.  
Submissions to NIH -sponsored or supported databases and repositories will be reported at the 
time of Continuing Review.  Submission to non-NIH sponsored or supported databases and 
repositor ies will be submitted for prospective IRB approval.  
 R equired approvals from the collaborating institution will be obtained and materials will be 
shipped in accordance with NIH and federal regulations.  Data will not be shared from those who completed participation prior to Amendment 32 (FF).  6) A
dditional Considerations  
a. Research with investigational drugs or devices N/A 
7) R isks and Discomforts  
 Lupron 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811321] of Lupron is hot flushes (flashes) reportedly occurring 
in 4-89% of patients receiving the drug.  Lupron-induced hot flushes have ranged in severity from occasional mild flushing to frequent sweating.  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_611942]; however, in at least one study, the incidence of hot flushes did not appear to decrease with continued therapy.  In a recently completed study of [ADDRESS_811322] common side effects reported to occur were as follows:  1) hot flashes of mild to moderate 
intensity (89%), 2) headache (22%), 3)  nervousness or irritability (11%), and 4) insomnia (10%).  
Local irritation at the injection sit e was complained of in less than 10% of the patients in this 
sample, and there was a mean decrease in bone density, as measured by [CONTACT_611974] 3.4 to 4.0%, which totally reversed after the medication had been discontinued for six months.  Approximately ten patients of the original sample of [ADDRESS_811323] injection of depot Lupron (Tapp Pharmaceuticals, personal communication).  In our experience to date, menstrual cycle irregularity has persisted up to six months after the last injection. Blurred vision, lethargy, memory disorder, and numbness have been reported in less than 3% of patients receiving the drug.  Thrombophlebitis and/or pulmonary embolus, and congestive heart failure have occurred rarely in patients receiving Lupron, but a causal relationship to the drug has not been established.  Adverse GI effects occurring in 2% or more of patients receiving Lupron include nausea and/or vomiting, constipation, and anorexia.  Diarrhea and a sour or unusual taste in the mouth have been reported less frequently.  Other adverse effects of Lupron occurring in less than 3% of patients include decreased hematocrit and 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 31 hemoglobin concentration, fatigue, fever, facial swelling, rash, hives, hair loss, and itching.  
Limited information is available on the acute toxicity of Lupron.  Following subcutaneous administration of Lupron in rats at dosages 250-500 times the usual human dosage, dyspnea, decreased activity, and local irritation at the injection site were observed; however, there is no evidence to date that overdosage in humans produces similar adverse effects.  Lupron dosages up to [ADDRESS_811324].  Recent longitudinal follow-up studies of girls and boys receiving GnRH agonists as a treatment for precocious puberty report the development of normal reproductive function, skeletal growth, and fertility (86-88).  The FDA recently published a caution about the effects of GnRH agonists in elderly males; however, the safe use of these agents in younger adults and children was not questioned in the FDA statement.  Estradiol  
 Nausea is the most common side effect of estrogen administration.  At conventional 
replacement doses, higher than those employed in this protocol, this complaint seldom interferes with eating, and no weight loss has been reported.  Breast engorgement, endometrial hyperplasia and bleeding are also common side effects of estrogen administration.  Pre -existing fibroid 
tumors of the uterus may enlarge under the effects of estrogen; however, at the dosage and for the duration of estrogen administration in this protocol this risk is small.  
 The relationship between estrogen, both endogenous and exogenous, and the development of endometrial carcinoma has been suggested by [CONTACT_142433] (89) .  Numerous retrospective case control studies published since [ADDRESS_811325] menopausal exposure to unopposed estrogens for more than one year results 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811326] that the optimal regimen to prevent hyperplasia and thus, inferentially, the risk of carcinoma, consists of 12 to 13 days of progestin treatment each month when estrogens are administered (90).  There is an increase in 
thromboembolism and stroke in women receiving estrogen therapy (91- 98) (and, possibly, 
ovarian and lung cancer (99-102)); however, these complications are unlikely at the dose and 
duration of estrogen therapy employed in this protocol and in the younger age of the women participating in this trial.  One study (52) reported no effect of the estrogen patch on the four clotting indices previously shown to be altered by [CONTACT_350332] (90, 103, 104).  
Additionally, recent studies (105, 106) observed that an increased risk of venous 
thromboembolism was associated with oral but not transdermal estrogen compared with nonusers (odds ratios = .42 [95% CI, 1.5 to 11.6] and 0.9 [95% CI, 0.4 to 2.1] respectively (107)).  Blood pressure, on average, appears to be unaffected by [CONTACT_350333], although both increases and decreases have been reported.  Post menopausal estrogen therapy has been observed to increase the relative ri sk of cardiovascular disease in some (95, 108) but not all 
studies (109-111) .  Indeed recent analyses of the Women’s Health Initiative demonstrate that the 
adverse effects of estrogen therapy on cardiovascular outcomes were largely confined to older women compared with younger perimenopausal women (98, 112-120).  High doses of oral estrogens have been reported to elevate hepatocellular enzyme levels and, less commonly, cause 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 33 cholestatic jaundice.  The risk for gall stones and hepatocellular adenomas has been reported to 
be increased i n association with oral contraceptive use, and although uncommon these 
complications may also occur with the use of replacement doses of estrogen (121-123).  Further, most studies have suggested an increased relative risk of breast cancer after four or five years’ use (98, 120, 124-136), similar to the risk expected if the onset of menopause was delayed for a comparable length of time.  
 Due to the publicity surrounding the cancellation of the treatment arm of the Women’s Heal th Initiative study (137) that involved the administration of combined conjugated estrogens 
and medroxyprogesterone acetate (Prempro), we have included the following statement in the consent documents: Adverse Events Related to Combined Hormone Replacement and the Results of the Women’s 
Health Initiative (WHI)  
 The WHI study demonstrated that continuous administration of one form of estrogen 
(conjugated estrogens) in combination with one form of progesterone (medroxyprogesterone 
acetate) is associated with an increased risk of dementia, heart attacks, stroke, blood clots, and breast cancer.  Estradiol, the form of estrogen that we use in this study, is administered as a sole agent (with the exception of one week’s combination with progesterone) and, consequently, we do not expect that it will pose the increased risks observed with the chronic combination of the conjugated estrogens and medroxyprogesterone administered in the WHI study.  Indeed, while the estrogen alone arm of the WHI trial was shown to be associated with an increased risk of stroke, no increased risk of either heart disease or breast cancer was observed (137, 138). 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 34  Estrogens may precipi[INVESTIGATOR_350259], and depression has also been reported to 
occur with the use of estrogens.  In general, considering the dose and duration of treatment that 
we propose to use in this protocol, the risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_350260].  Progesterone  Progesterone and the synthetic progestins are widely prescribed, with indications including dysfunctional uterine bleeding, endometriosis, mastodynia, galactorrhea, and precocious puberty (58) .  Side effects reported in women taking progestins are uncommon but 
may include breakthrough bleeding, edema, change in weight (increase or decrease), cholestatic jaundice, rash (with or without pruritus), depression of mood, easy fatigue, lack of initiative, and chloasma.  Since progestins are often used in women with antecedent menstrual irregularity, it is not clear whether the breakthrough bleeding represents an effect of the medication or refractoriness to treatment.  In the large majority of patients, menstruation occurs predictably following withdrawal of progestins and is usually more regular than in spontaneous cycles. 
 Side effects observed in pat ients receiving combined oral contraceptives include nausea, 
breast soreness, vaginal discharge, fluid retention, hypertension, and clotting abnormalities, 
which have been associated with the estrogen component of the oral contraceptive.  Thromboembolic disorders including thrombophlebitis, pulmonary embolism, and cerebral and coronary thrombosis appear to occur with greater frequency in women taking oral contraceptives.  While the increased incidence of these disorders has been associated with the estrogen  component of the oral contraceptives, it is now believed that the progestogen 
component may, to a lesser extent, contribute to the increased risk.  There are relatively few reports associating oral contraceptives with the development of carcinomas (vaginal, uterine, hepatic, and mammary) despi[INVESTIGATOR_350261], although this may reflect the latent 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811327] an association 
between intrauterine exposure to female sex hormones and congenital anomalies.  
 Symptom Production  Preliminary observations in this protocol (1) suggest that some women may experience a 
recurrence of their typi[INVESTIGATOR_611943].  These symptoms have been similar in severity to those experienced prior to study entry.  However, if symptoms are intolerable we will discontinue the study.  Any patient experiencing clinically significant side -effects such as nausea, hypertension, 
vomiting or extreme fluid retention from the medication will have the dose titrated to achieve relief of the symptoms.  If adequate relief cannot be achieved in this manner, drug treatment will be discontinued, but the patient's continued involvement with our clinic will not be jeopardized.  Similarly if menopausal symptoms occurring secondary to GnRH agonist treatment are intolerable, drug treatment will be discontinued.  
Blood Drawing 
One discomfort of this study may occur due to the venipuncture and multiple blood 
sampling.  Total blood withdrawal (6 60 ml) falls within NIH guidelines ( 550 ml. per eight week 
period).  Potential discomforts in this study could arise from the repeated venipuncture (i.e., bruising or pain at site of needle entry) or the completion of rating scales.  The latter should take between 5-[ADDRESS_811328] worked. Risks Related to Additional Procedures 
 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811329] participating in the study.  Although there are no physical risks associated with participation in genetic studies, apart from those rou tinely 
associated with phlebotomy, psychological and social/economic risks associated with genetics studies of the kind described here are difficult to define, and remain the subject of heated controversy in the ethics community.  The major risk, to the de gree that any exists, is that a 
breach of confidentiality regarding genetic studies that resulted in third parties finding out genetic information about a person could theoretically place a person at risk for loss of insurance, loss of employment, etc. bec ause of genotype -based discrimination.  To our knowledge, no 
person has ever suffered harm for the reasons just described as a result of participating in a genetics research study.  Regardless, our written informed consent process will go over these risks carefully.  In addition, subjects will have the right to “withdraw” from the research by [CONTACT_487921].  Finally, all research records containing any subject-identifying information will be stored under lock and key, or in secured computing environments by [CONTACT_573666].  Personal identifiers are never associated directly with genotypes in the same data file - all genotype information is indexed only to de- identified subject codes.  With these 
safeguards in place, we are confident the researc h is virtually without psycho- social -economic 
risk to subjects.  
  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811330] before the study, and close clinical scrutiny during all aspects of the study.  
8) Subject Safety Monitoring  
 Subjects are evaluated by [CONTACT_611975].  Medical history and physical 
assessments occur at each clinic visit including interviews, symptom assessments, vital signs, and laboratory testing when clinically indicated.  After completing the study , subjects will either 
be discharged from this protocol with a referral to the community, or will be referred to other NIMH studies.  
 Patients will be warned not to become pregnant during the study and will be advised to employ barrier contraceptiv e methods.  Observations from our previous study (1) suggest that 
some women may experience a recurrence of their typi[INVESTIGATOR_611943].  These symptoms have been similar in severity to those experienced prior to study entry.  However, if symptoms are intolerable we will dis continue the subject’s 
participation in the study  (or the study -specific procedure).  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811331] seen - no unexpected adverse events.  Similarly, we do 
not anticipate unexpected adverse events with the dose of Lupron that we propose to use.  Nonetheless, we see subjects every two weeks during their clinic visit and advise them in the consent form that if they experience side effects, they should not ify the investigator immediately.  
Any adverse events will be reported as per NIH policy. 9) O
utcome Measures  
 Current outcome measures include symptom ratings, brain activation and connectivity,  metabolo mic and genomic measures.  
10) S
tatistical Analysis  
 A responder to Lupron will be defined in the following way: 1) the absence of PMTS rating scale scores above ten during any week of phase I (this threshold reflects our clinical experience with this rating scale and represents the maximum follicular phase score seen in over 
110 premenstrual syndrome patients followed longitudinally), and 2) the absence of two weekly 
mean scores on anxiety, depression, or irritability scales greater than  2.5 on a six point scale 
within a two month time period (1, 84).  The effects of both estrogen and progesterone replacemen t on mood ratings will be analyzed using similar threshold criteria to define patients 
as responders (recurrence of mood syndrome) or non- responders.  Previous estimates by 
[CONTACT_611976]. (85) in CBDB, NIMH, suggest that 15 women with MRMD and 15 controls 
(recruited through protocol # 92-M-0174) would be required in the brain imaging component of this protocol to achieve statistical power of 80% and an alpha = .05.  In our first study we observed a response rate to GnRH agonist-induced ovarian suppression of 60% and a recurrence rate of mood symptoms during addback of 100%.  Therefore, to study 15 women in the brain 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811332] and return of symptoms upon re- exposure to estradiol or progesterone (PMD) or 
the absence of negative behavioral symptoms during both GnRH agonist and ovarian steroid addback phases (controls).  Each of these women who is interested in participating will be re-consented for this study.  
11) H
uman Subjects Protection  
 a) Subject selection:  
 Subject selection will be equitable.  We will select physically healthy adult female 
individuals.  Male subjects will be excluded as this is a study about menstrually related mood 
disorders which does not apply to men.  The proportion of ethnic minorities (vs. Caucasians) in 
the total sample, will be approximately consistent with the overall U.S. population proportions. 
b) Justification for inclusion/exclusion of children:  
We will exclude children or minors because the study population is women with MRMD . 
c) Justification for inclusion or exclusion of other vulnerable subjects: Pregnant women are excluded due to the risks associated with hormone administration.  
Cognitively impaired subjects and those unable to provide consent are excluded due to the rigorous requirements of daily ratings, cognitive testing and weekly study visits. 
d) Justification of sensitive procedures: 
N/A 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 40 e) Safeguards for vulnerable populations: 
 Protections for NIH employees, staff and family members participating in this study include 1) 
assuring that the participation or refusal to participate will have no effect, either beneficial or adverse, on the subject’s employment or position at the NIH, 2) giving employees and staff who are interested in participating the “NIH Information Sheet on Employee Research Participation” prior to obtaining consent, and 3) assuring that there will be no direct solicitation of employees or staff.   
f) Qualification s of Investigators: 
Peter  J. Schmidt,  M.D., is an investigator with the Section on Behavioral Endocrinology, 
NIMH.  He has over [ADDRESS_811333] access to personally identifiable information (PII).  
Lynnette K.  Nieman,  M.D., is a senior investigator in the Reproductive Biology and 
Medicine Branch, NICHD and has e xtensive experience with clinical research studies in 
endocrinology and reproductive biology.  She will not be involved in obtaining consent.  Pedro  E. Martinez,  M.D., is a staff clinician within the Section on Behavioral 
Endocrinology, NIMH and has performed endocrine studies examining the effects of aging and reproductive hormones on mood and behavior in both adults and children.  He will be allowed to obtain consent. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811334] several 
years.  Her graduate training at the NIH/Brown Program included collaborative neuroimaging studies on the effects of genotype and reproductive hormones on brain function.  She has worked with our program for more than ten years (as part of our ongoing collaborations with [CONTACT_611985]’s group), first as a doctoral candidate, then as a postdoctoral fellow. Currently, she is a research fellow within our Branch and in the future will be offered a position as a staff scientist. Over the last decade [CONTACT_411184] has worked closely with our clinical program and this protocol involving the administration of a GnRH agonist with and without ovarian steroid hormone replacement.  She will be involved in imaging data collection and analysis, and manuscript 
preparation. She will not obtain informed consent.  
 The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_611944] 25 (Training requirements for the NIH 
Human Research Protections Program) have completed all required training.  
12) A
nticipated  Benefits  
 Menstrually -related mood disorders constitute a condition that causes significant distress 
to a potentially large number of women.  The potential benefit of determining an effective and 
consistent treatment for menstrually -related mood disorders is quite significant, particularly since 
existing therapi[INVESTIGATOR_611945].  Further, the opportunity to explore potential biological mechanisms underlying both the menstrually- related 
mood disorders and their response to treatment offers the possibility of uncovering some etiopathogenic mechanisms involved in these and related mood disorders. 13) C
lassification of Risk  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 42  The overall risks for this study are more than minimal.  
 There are low risks to individual subjects in the use of medication and procedures under 
the conditions stated in this protocol.  Patients sta nd to gain effective and scientifically validated 
pharmacologic treatment of a condition that is frequently associated with pronounced 
debilitation.  Lupron is currently available for long term administration.  Finally, patients who continue to experience cyclic mood symptoms during treatment with GnRH analogue will be 
unlikely to respond to further hormonal manipulation and would potentially profit from currently available psychotropic medication.  
14) Consent Documentation and Process 
 Each patient will receive a verbal and written explanation of the purpose, procedure, and 
potential hazards of this project.  A record of the communication of this information and of the consent to participate in this study will be placed in the medical record.  The right of the subjects to withdraw from the study or to refuse any procedure will be made clear.  Any patient whose 
symptoms become excessive during either the GnRH alone or estrogen/progesterone replacement 
phases will be offered another medication without completi ng the sixth month trial.  
Confidentiality of patients will be assured according to the laws of the State of Maryland.  In case of published data resulting from the study, care will be taken to protect the anonymity of patients.  
 Consent for NIH employees and staff will not be obtained by [CONTACT_430085].  15) D
ata and Safety Monitoring  
 A. Data and Safety Monitor  
 Data and safety will be monitored by [CONTACT_079].   
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811335] annually. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_611946].  
 C.        Criteria for stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_611947] (or the study- specific procedure) will be stopped if any patient experiences 
clinically significant, unexpected, side- effects from the medication that cannot be relieved with a 
dose reduction.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_611948].   
 16) Quality Assurance 
 A. Quality Assurance Monitor  
 Quality assurance will be monitored by [CONTACT_978], the research team and the NIMH Office of 
Regulatory Oversight (ORO).  
 B. Quality Assurance P lan  
 ORO monitors intramural res earch studies to ensure compliance with GCP, 
organizational policies and regulations.  Audit frequency is determined by [CONTACT_611977].  Results of ORO audits are provided to the PI, the Clinical Director and the CN S IRB.  As an IND study, this protocol will be subject to GCP audits at study 
initiation and after the first enrolled subject.  Timing of subsequent review will be established by [CONTACT_611978].  17) R
eporting of Unanticipated problems, adverse events and protocol deviations 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_28874], documenting, and reporting unanticipated problems, adverse events (AEs), including serious adverse events (SAEs), and deviations in 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811336] as a result of an issue by [CONTACT_3445], research staff, lab, or phlebotomy. Omissions such as these will be considered expected events and not protocol deviations provided they are infrequent and do not include data needed to assess safety or the primary study outcome.  
Cumulative proportions of these missed events in the study population will be presented to the 
IRB annually. In addition, the rate of omissions will be monitored by [CONTACT_32366]. If an individual miss es more than 15% of the required assessments/procedures or if more than 15% of 
the participants miss completion of the same assessment or procedure, it will be considered a deviation and a deviation report will be sent to the IRB within 14 days.  
All adverse events, deviations, and unanticipated problems will be summarized and 
reported at the time of Continuing Review. 18) A
lternatives to Participation  
 Subjects do not receive any treatment in this study or forego any treatment in order to 
participate in this study.  The alternative, t herefore, is not to participate.  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 45 19) P rivacy : 
 All research activities will be conducted in as private a setting as possible.  
20) Confiden tia lity 
 Samples and data will be stored using codes that we assign.  Data will be kept in 
password -protected computers.  Samples will be kept in locked storage.  Only study investigators 
will have access to the samples and data.  
This study collects sensitive information on medical and psychiatric diagnoses and drug 
and alcohol use. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_611949] -workers through staff discussions and written 
branch/section procedures.  Prior to en rollment, potential participants will be informed that this 
sensitive information will be in their NIH medical record.  
21) C onflict of Interest  
 NIH guidelines on conflict of interest have been distributed to all investigators. There are 
no conflicts-of- interest to report.  
22) T echnology Transfer  
 There are no technology transfer agreements associated with this protocol  
23) R esearch and Travel Compensation  
 Reimbursement of travel and subsistence will be offered consistent with NIH guidelines.  
Compensation will be prorated for parts completed if subjects do not complete the study.  No 
escort fee will be provided.  
 Employees and staff who participate during work hours must have permission from their supervisor. NIH employees and staff must either participate  outside of work hours or take leave 
in order to receive compensation.  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 46 1) Core Protocol 
Initial evaluation, physical exam (2 hours)  100.00 
Screening phase     100.00 
Clinic visits (weekly) 2 hour x 13    390.00 
Multiple venipuncture x 13   260.00 
Psychological testing x 5   100.00 
Symptom rating scales x 6 months   150.00 
Investigational drugs a) Depot Lupron injections 100.00 x 6 = 600.00   b) Skin patches daily x 3 months 400.00 
  c) Vaginal suppositories daily x 3 months 400.00 
Total      2500.00 
Blood Volume  Core protocol: 660 mls  
   
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 47 24) Fl ow Sheet  
 
 0         4         8       12 0        4         8        12Time
(weeks)Effects of GnRH Agonist & Gonadal Steroid 
Replacement in MRMD
Leuprolide
(3.75 mg IM QM)Baseline
(3 cycles)
Estradiol 0.1 mg/day
Progesterone 200 mg BID
Placebo/PlaceboResponderNon-Responder
ORLeuprolide
(3.75 mg IM QM)
Procedures
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 48 25) R eferences  
 1.  Schmidt, P.J., Nieman, L.K., Danaceau, M.A., et al.: Differential behavioral effects of 
gonadal steroids in women with and in those without premenstrual syndrome. N. Engl. J. 
Med. 338:209-216, 1998. 
 2.  O'Brien, P.M.S., Backstrom, T., Brown, C., et al.: Towards a consensus on diagnostic 
criteria, measurement and trial design of the premenstrual disorders: the ISPMD Montreal consensus. Arch. W omens Ment. Health 14:13-21, 2011. 
 3.  Schmidt, P.J., Nieman, L.K., Grover, G.N., et al.: Lack of effect of induced menses on 
symptoms in women with premenstrual syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 324:1174-1179, 1991. 
 4.  Muse, K.N., Cetel, N.S., Futterman, L.A., et al.: The premenstrual syndrome: effects of 
"medical ovariectomy". N. Engl. J. Med. 311:1345-1349, 1984. 
 5.  Hammarback, S., Backstrom, T.: Induced anovulation as a treatment of premenstrual 
tension syndrome: a double-blind cross-over study with GnRH- agonist versus placebo. 
Acta. Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 67:159-166, 1988. 
 6.  Hussain, S.Y., Massil, J.H., Matta, W.H., et al.: Buserelin in premenstrual syndrome. 
Gynecol. Endocrinol. 6:57-64, 1992. 
 7.  Brown, C.S., Ling, F.W., Andersen, R.N., et al.: Eff icacy of depot leuprolide in 
premenstrual syndrome: effect of symptom severity and type in a controlled trial. Obstet. Gynecol. 84:779-786, 1994. 
 8.  West, C.P., Hillier, H.: Ovarian suppression with the gonadotrophin-releasing hormone 
agonist goserelin (Zoladex) in management of the premenstrual tension syndrome. Hum. Reprod. 9:1058-1063, 1994. 
 9.  Mortola, J.F., Girton, L., Fischer, U.: Successful treatment of severe premenstrual 
syndrome by [CONTACT_611979]-releasing hormone agonist and 
estrogen/progestin. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 72:252A-252F, 1991. 
 10.  Bancroft, J., Boyle, H., Warner, P., et al.: The use of an LHRH agonist, buserelin, in the 
long-term management of premenstrual syndromes. Clin. Endocrinol. 27:171-182, 1987. 
 11.  Mezr ow, G., Shoupe, D., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_18551], D., et al.: Depot leuprolide acetate with estrogen and 
progestin add-back for long- term treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Fertil. Steril. 
62:932- 937, 1994. 
 12.  Freeman, E.W., Sondheimer, S.J., Rickels, K., et al.: Gonadotropin -releasing hormone 
agonist in treatment of premenstrual symptoms: with and without comorbidity of depression: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J. Clin. Psychiatry 54:192-195, 1993. 
 13.  Wyatt, K.M., Dimmock, P.W., Ismail, K.M.K., et al.: The effectiveness of GnRHa with 
and without "add- back" therapy in treating premenstrual syndrome: a meta analysis. Br. 
J. Obstet. Gynaecol. 111:585-593, 2004. 
 14.  Helvacioglu, A., Yeoman, R.R., Hazelton, J.M., et al.: Premenstrual syndrome and 
related hormonal changes: long-acting gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist treatment. J. Reprod. Med. 38:864-870, 1993. 
 15.  Muse, K.: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist-suppressed premenstrual syndrome 
(PMS): PMS symptom induction by [CONTACT_4728], progestin, or both. Abst. Soc. Gynecol. Invest.118, 1989. 
 16.  Menkes, D.B., Taghavi, E., Mason, P.A., et al.: Fluoxetine's spectrum of action in 
premenstrual syndrome. Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 8:95-102, 1993. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 49  17.  Menkes, D.B., Coates, D.C., Fawcett, J.P.: Acute tryptophan depletion aggravates 
premenstrual syndrome. J. Affective Disord. 32:37-44, 1994. 
 18.  Stone, A.B., Pearlstein, T.B., Brown, W.A.: Fluoxetine in the treatment of late luteal 
phase dysphoric disorder. J. Clin. Psychiatry 52:290-293, 1991. 
 19.  Steiner, M., Steinberg, S., Stewart , D., et al.: Fluoxetine in the treatment of premenstrual 
syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 332:1529-1534, 1995. 
 20.  Wood, S.H., Mortola, J.F., Chan, Y.- F., et al.: Treatment of premenstrual syndrome with 
fluoxetine: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Obstet. Gynecol. 80:339-
344, 1992. 
 21.  Eriksson, E., Lisjo, P., Sundblad, C., et al.: Effect of clomipramine on premenstrual 
syndrome. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 81:87-88, 1990. 
 22.  Sundblad, S., Modigh, K., Andersch, B., et al.: Clomipramine effec tively reduces 
premenstrual irritability and dysphoria: a placebo -controlled trial. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 
85:39-47, 1992. 
 23.  Su, T. -P., Schmidt, P.J., Danaceau, M.A., et al.: Fluoxetine in the treatment of 
premenstrual dysphoria. Neuropsychopharmacology 16:346-356, 1997. 
 24.  Freeman, E.W., Rickels, K., Sondheimer, S.J., et al.: Nefazodone in the treatment of 
premenstrual syndrome: a preliminary study. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 14:180-186, 1994. 
 25.  Dimmock, P.W., Wyatt, K.M., Jones, P.W., et al.: Eff icacy of selective serotonin -
reuptake inhibitors in premenstrual syndrome: a systematic review. Lancet 356:1131 -
1136, 2000. 
 26.  Backstrom, T., Mattsson, B.: Correlation of symptoms in pre -menstrual tension to 
oestrogen and progesterone concentrations in blood plasma. Neuropsychobiology 1:80-86, 1975. 
 27.  Halbreich, U., Endicott, J., Goldstein, S., et al.: Premenstrual changes and changes in 
gonadal hormones. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 74:576-586, 1986. 
 28.  Redei, E., Freeman, E.W.: Daily plasma estradiol and progesterone levels over the 
menstrual cycle and their relation to premenstrual symptoms. Psychoneuroendocrinology 20:259- 267, 1995. 
 29.  Wang, M., Seippel, L., Purdy, R.H., et al.: Relationship between symptom severity and 
steroid variation  in women with premenstrual syndrome: study on serum pregnenolone, 
pregnenolone sulfate, 5a-pregnane-3,20-dione and 3a-hydroxy-5a-pregnan-20-one. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 81:1076-1082, 1996. 
 30.  Hammarback, S., Damber, J.- E., Backstrom, T.: Relationship between symptom severity 
and hormone changes in women with premenstrual syndrome. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 68:125- 130, 1989. 
 31.  Backstrom, T., Sanders, D., Leask, R., et al.: Mood, sexuality, hormones, and the 
menstrual cycle: II. Hormone levels a nd their relationship to the premenstrual syndrome. 
Psychosom. Med. 45:503 -507, 1983. 
 32.  Rubinow, D.R., Hoban, M.C., Grover, G.N., et al.: Changes in plasma hormones across 
the menstrual cycle in patients with menstrually related mood disorder and in co ntrol 
subjects. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 158:5-11, 1988. 
 33.  Backstrom, T., Carstensen, H.: Estrogen and progesterone in plasma in relation to 
premenstrual tension. J. Steroid Biochem. 5:257-260, 1974. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 50  34.  Nyberg, S., Backstrom, T., Zingmark, E., et al.: Allopregnanolone decrease with 
symptom improvement during placebo and gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
treatment in women with severe premenstrual syndrome. Gynecol. Endocrinol. 23:257-266, 2007. 
 35.  Berman, K.F., Schmidt, P.J., Rubinow, D.R., et al.: Modulation of cognition- specific 
cortical activity by [CONTACT_290707]: a positron-emission tomography study in women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94:8836-8841, 1997. 
 36.  Craig, M.C., Fletcher, P.C., Daly, E.M., et al.: Gonadotropin hormone releasing hormone 
agonists alter prefrontal function during verbal encoding in young women. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32:1116-1127, 2007. 
 37.  Craig, M.C., Daly, E.M., O'Gorman, R., et al.: Effects of acute ovarian hormone 
suppression on the human brain: an i n vivo  
1H MRS study. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
32:1128-1132, 2007. 
 38.  Goldstein, J.M., Jerram, M., Poldrack, R., et al.: Hormonal cycle modulates arousal 
circuitry in women using functional magnetic resonance imaging. J. Neurosci. 25:9309-9316, 2005. 
 39.  Protopopescu, X., Pan, H., Altemus, M., et al.: Orbitofrontal cortex activity related to 
emotional processing changes across the menstrual cycle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102:[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE], 2005. 
 40.  Dreher, J., Schmidt, P.J., Kohn, P., et al.: Menstrual cycle phase modulates reward-
related neural function in women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104:2465-2470, 2007. 
 41.  Burgess, L.H., Handa, R.J.: Chronic estrogen-induced alterations in adrenocorticotropin 
and corticosterone secretion, and glucocorticoid receptor- mediated functions in female 
rats. Endocrinology 131:1261-1269, 1992. 
 42.  Viau, V., Meaney, M.J.: Variations in the hypothalamic- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal response to 
stress during the estrous cycle in the rat. Endocrinology 129:2503-2511, 1991. 
 43.  Roca, C.A., Schmidt, P.J., Altemus, M., et al.: Differential menstrual cycle regulation of 
hypothalamic- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis in women with premenstrual syndrome and controls. 
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 88:3057-3063, 2003. 
 44.  Altemus, M., Roca, C., Galliven, E., et al.: Increased vasopressin and adrenocorticotropin 
responses to stress in the midluteal phase of the menstrual cycle. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 86:2525-2530, 2001. 
 45.  Petrides, J.S., Mueller, G.P., Chrousos, G.P., et al.: Exercise-induced activation of the 
hypothalamic- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal (HPA) axis: differential sensitivity to glucocorticoid 
suppression. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 79:377-383, 1994. 
 46.  Deuster, P.A., Petrides, J.S., Singh, A., et al.: Endocrine response to high-intensity 
exercise: dose-dependent effects of dexamethasone. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 85:1066-1073, 2000. 
 47.  Seki, T., Yuasa, S., Fukuda, K.: Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells from a 
small amount of human peripheral blood using a combination of activated T cells and Sendai virus. Nat. Protoc. 7:718- 728, 2012. 
 48.  Santen, R.J., Warner, B.: Evaluation of synthetic agonist analogue of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (Leuprolide) on testicular androgen production in patients with carcinoma of the prostate. Urology 25:53-57, 1985. 
 49.  Wilson, A.C., Vadakkadath Meethal, S.V., Bowen, R.L., et al.: Leuprolide acetate: a drug 
of diverse clinical applications. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 16:1851-1863, 2007. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 51  50.  Cedars,  M.I., Judd, H.L.: Nonoral routes of estrogen administration. Obstet. Gynecol. 
Clin. North Am. 14:269-298, 1987. 
 51.  Powers, M.S., Schenkel, L., Darley, P.E., et al.: Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of transdermal doseage forms of 17 B estradiol: comparison with 
conventional oral estrogens used for hormone replacement. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 152:1099-1106, 1985. 
 52.  Chetkowski, R.J., Meldrum, D.R., Steingold, K.A., et al.: Biological effects of 
transdermal estradiol. N. Engl. J. Med. 314:1615-1620, 1986. 
 53.  Laufer, L.R., DeFazio, J.L., Lu, J.K.H., et al.: Estrogen replacement therapy by 
[CONTACT_611980]. Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 145:533-538, 1983. 
 54.  Steingold, K.A., Laufer, L., Chetkowski, R.J., et al.: Treatment of hot f lashes with 
transdermal estradiol administration. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 61:627 -632, 1985. 
 55.  Setnikar, I., Rovati, L.C., Vens- Cappell, B., et al.: Pharmacokinetics of estradiol and of 
estrone during repeated transdermal or oral administration of estradiol. Arzneim. -Forsch. 
Drug Res. 46:766-773, 1996. 
 56.  Laragh, J.H., Sealey, J.E., Ledingham, J.G.G., et al.: Oral contraceptives. Renin, 
aldosterone, and high blood pressure. J. A. M. A. 201:918-922, 1967. 
 57.  Crane, M.G., Harris, J.J., Winsor, W.: Hypertension oral contraceptive agents and 
conjugated estrogens. Ann. Intern. Med. 74:13-21, 1971. 
 58.  Henzel, M.R.: Contraceptive hormones and their clinical use, in Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology and clini cal management, 2nd edition, Yen, 
S.S.C., Jaffe, R.B., eds. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, pp. 643-682, 1986. 
 59.  Soules, M.R., Sherman, S., Parrott, E., et al.: Executive summary: Stages of Reproductive 
Aging Workshop (STRAW). Fertil. Steril. 76:874-878, 2001. 
 60.  Steiner, M., Haskett, R.F., Carroll, B.J.: Premenstrual tension syndrome: the development 
of research diagnostic criteria and new rating scales. Acta Psychiatr. Scand 62:177-190, 1980. 
 61.  Beck, A.T., Ward, C.H., Mendelson, M., et al.: An inventory for measuring depression. 
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 4:561-571, 1961. 
 62.  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., Lushene, R.: STAI manual for the state- trait anxiety 
inventory. Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA, 1970. 
 63.  Hamilton, M.:  A rating scale for depression. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 23:56-62, 
1960. 
 64.  Endicott, J., Nee, J., Cohen, J., et al.: Premenstrual changes: patterns and correlates of 
daily ratings. J. Affective Disord. 10:127-135, 1986. 
 65.  Rubinow, D.R., Roy-By[CONTACT_7943], P.P., Hoban, M.C., et al.: Prospective assessment of 
menstrually related mood disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 141:684-686, 1984. 
 66.  Kampen, D.L., Sherwin, B.B.: Estrogen use and verbal memory in healthy 
postmenopausal women. Obstet. Gynecol. 83:979-983, 1994. 
 67.  Sherwin, B.B., Tulandi, T.: "Add- back" estrogen reverses cognitive deficits induced by a 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist in women with leiomyomata uteri. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 81:2545-2549, 1996. 
 68.  Resnick, S.M., Metter, E.J., Zonderman, A.B.: Estrogen replacement therapy and 
longitudinal decline in visual memory. A possible protective effect? Neurology 49:1491-1497, 1997. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 52  69.  Hampson, E.: Variations in sex- related cognitive abilities across the menstrual cycle. 
Brain Co gn. 14:26-43, 1990. 
 70.  Hampson, E.: Estrogen- related variations in human spatial and articulatory -motor skills. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 15:97-111, 1990. 
 71.  Wechsler, D.: Wechsler adult intelligence scale - revised. The Psychological Corporation, 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., San Antonio, 1981. 
 72.  Corwin, J., By[CONTACT_33712], F.W.: Translations of excerpts from André Rey's psychological 
examination of traumatic encephalopathy and P.A. Osterrieth's the complex figure copy test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist 7:3 -21, 1993. 
 73.  Benton, A.L.: Revised visual retention test. Psychological Corporation, [LOCATION_001], 1974.  74.  Benton, A.L., Hamsher, K.d., Varney, N.R., et al.: Contributions to neuropsychological 
assessment. Oxford University Press, [LOCATION_001], 1983. 
 75.  Spreen, O., Strauss, E.: A compendium of neuropsychological tests. Oxford University 
Press, [LOCATION_001], 1991. 
 76.  Shepard, R.N., Metzler, J.: Mental rotation of three- dimensional objects. Science 
171:701-703, 1971. 
 77.  Oltman, P.K.: A portable ro d-and-frame apparatus. Percept. Mot. Skills 26:503-506, 
1968. 
 78.  Benton, A.L., Hamsher, K.d.: Multilingual aphasia examination. AJA Associates, Iowa 
City, IA, 1976. 
 79.  Gronwall, D.M.A.: Paced auditory serial- addition task: a measure of recovery from 
concussion. Percept. Mot. Skills 44:367-373, 1977. 
 80.  Luger, A., Deuster, P.A., Kyle, S.B., et al.: Acute hypothalamic- pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal 
responses to the stress of treadmill exercise. N. Engl. J. Med. 316:1309 -1315, 1987. 
 81.  Kyle, S.B., Smoak, B.L., Douglass, L.W., et al.: Variability of responses across training 
levels to maximal treadmill exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 67:160-165, 1989. 
 82.  Gunston, K.D.: Norethisterone enantate in the treatment of premenstrual syndrome. So. 
Afr. Med. J. 85:851- 852, 1995. 
 83.  Holsboer, F., von Bardeleben, U., Wiedemann, K., et al.: Serial assessment of 
corticotropin-releasing hormone response after dexamethasone in depression. Implications for pathophysiology of DST nonsuppression. Biol. Psychiatry 22:228-234, 1987. 
 84.  Halbreich, U., Bakhai, Y., Bacon, K.B., et al.: Screening and selection process for studies 
of menstrually -related changes. J. Psychiatr. Res. 23:65-72, 1989. 
 85.  Van Horn, J.D., Ellmore, T.M., Esposito, G., et al.: Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_611950] -based statistical 
power on parametric images. NeuroImage 7:97-107, 1998. 
 86.  Feuillan, P.P., Jones, J.V., Barnes, K., et al.: Reproductive axis after discontinuation of 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog treatment of girls with precocious puberty: long term follow -up comparing girls with hypothalamic hamartoma to those with idiopathic 
precocious puberty. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84:44-49, 1999. 
 87.  Feuillan, P.P., Jones, J.V., Barnes, K.M., et al.: Boys with precocious puberty due to 
hypothalamic hamartoma; reproductive axis after discontinuation of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog therapy. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 85:4036-4038, 2000. 
 88.  Magiakou, M.A., Manousaki, D., Papadaki, M., et al.: The efficacy and safety of 
gonadotropin- releasing hormone analog treatment in childhood and adolescence: a single 
center, long- term follow -up study. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 95:109- 117, 2010. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 53  89.  Gambrell, R.D.: The role of hormones in the etiology and prevention of endometrial 
cancer. Clin. Obstet. Gynecol. 13:695-723, 1986. 
 90.  Nieman, L.K., Loriaux, D.L.: Estrogens and progestins, in Textbook of pharmacology, 
Reynard, A., Smith, C., eds. W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia, pp. 695-716, 1992. 
 91.  Gutthann, S.P., Rodriguez, L.G., Castellsague, J., et al.: Hormone replacement therapy 
and risk of venous thromboembolism: population based case-control study. Br. Med. J. 
314:796-800, 1997. 
 92.  Jick, H., Derby, L.E., Myers, M.W., et al.: Risk of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_611951]. Lancet 348:981-983, 1996. 
 93.  Daly, E., Vessey, M.P., Hawkins, M.M., et al.: Risk of venous thromboembolism in users 
of hormone replacement therapy. Lancet 348:977-980, 1996. 
 94.  Grodstein, F., Stampfer, M.J., Goldhaber, S.Z., et al.: Prospective study of exogenous 
hormones and risk of pulmonary embolism in women. Lancet 348:983-987, 1996. 
 95.  Stampfer, M.J., Colditz, G.A., Willett, W.C., et al.: Postmenopausal estrogen therapy and 
cardiovascular disease : ten-year follow-up from the Nurses' Health Study. N. Engl. J. 
Med. 325:756-762, 1991. 
 96.  Vickers, M.R., MacLennan, A.H., Lawton, B., et al.: Main morbidities recorded in the 
women's international study of long duration oestrogen after menopause (WISDO M): a 
randomised controlled trial of hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women. Br. Med. J. 335:239-250, 2007. 
 97.  Grodstein, F., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J., et al.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy and 
stroke: role of time since menopause and age at initiation of hormone therapy. Arch. Intern. Med. 168:861-866, 2008. 
 98.  North American Menopause Society: Estrogen and progestogen use in postmenopausal 
women: 2010 position statement of The North American Menopause Society. Menopause 17:242-255, 2010. 
 99.  Beral, V., Million Women Study Collaborators, Bull, D., et al.: Ovarian cancer and 
hormone replacement therapy in the million women study. Lancet 369:1703-1710, 2007. 
 100.  Morch, L.S., Lokkegaard, E., Andreasen, A.H., et al.: Hormone therapy and ovarian 
cancer. J. A. M. A. 302:298-305, 2009. 
 101.  Chlebowski, R.T., Schwartz, A.G., Wakelee, H., et al.: Oestrogen plus progestin and lung 
cancer in postmenopausal women (Women's Health Initiative trial): a post -hoc analysis 
of a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 374:1243-1251, 2009. 
 102.  Hampton, T.: Lung cancer mortality higher in women who used combination hormone 
therapy. J. A. M. A. 302:615-616, 2009. 
 103.  Mandel, F.P., Geola, F.L., Meldrum, D.R., et al.: Biological effects of various doses of 
vaginally administered conjugated equine estrogens in postmenopausal women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 57:133-139, 1983. 
 104.  Melis, G.B., Fruzzetti, F., Paoletti, A.M., et al.: Fibrinopeptide A plasma levels during 
low estrogen oral contraceptiv e treatment. Contraception 30:575-583, 1983. 
 105.  Canonico, M., Oger, E., Plu-Bureau, G., et al.: Hormone therapy and venous 
thromboembolism among postmenopausal women: impact of the route of estrogen administration and progestogens: the ESTHER study. Circulation 115:840-845, 2007. 
 106.  Olie, V., Canonico, M., Scarabin, P.-Y.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy and venous 
thromboembolism. Thromb. Res. [ADDRESS_811337] 3:S26-S29, 2011. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 54  107.  Canonico, M., Plu-Bureau, G., Lowe, G.D.O., et al.: Hormone replacement therapy and 
risk of venous thromboembolism in postmenopausal women: systematic review and meta -analysis. Br. Med. J. 336:1227-1231, 2008. 
 108.  Barrett -Connor, E., Bush, T.L.: Estrogen and coronary heart disease in women. J. A. M. 
A. 265:1861-1867, 1991. 
 109.  Lobo, R.A.: Evaluation of cardiovascular event rates with hormone therapy in healthy, 
early postmenopausal women: results from 2 large clinical trials. Arch. Intern. Med. 164:482-484, 2004. 
 110.  Bush, T.L.: Preserving cardiovascular benefits of hormone replacement therapy. J. 
Reprod. Med. 45:259-272, 2000. 
 111.  Fitzpatrick, L.A., Litin, S.C., Bell, M.R.: The women's health initiative: a heart- to-HRT 
conversation. Mayo Clin. Proc. 75:559-561, 2000. 
 112.  Grodstein, F., Manson, J.E., Stampfer, M.J.: Hormone therapy and coronary heart 
disease: the role of time since menopause and age at hormone initiation. J. Womens Health 15:35-44, 2006. 
 113.  Hsia, J., Langer, R.D., Manson, J.E., et al.: Conjugated equine estrogens and coronary 
heart disease: the women's health initiative. Arch. Intern. Med. 166:357-365, 2006. 
 114.  Clarkson, T.B.: Estrogen effects on arteries vary with stage of reproductive life and extent of subclinical atherosclerosis progression. Menopause 14:373 -384, 2007. 
 115.  Hodis, H.N., Mack, W.J.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy in clinical perspective. 
Menopause 14:944- 957, 2007. 
 116.  Rossouw, J.E., Prentice, R.L., Manson, J.E., et al.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy and 
risk of cardiovascular disease by [CONTACT_388987]. J. A. M. A. 297:1465-1477, 2007. 
 117.  Manson, J.E., Bassuk, S.S.: Invited commentary: hormone therapy and risk of coronary 
heart disease - why renew the focus on the early years of menopause? Am. J. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 166:511-517, 2007. 
 118.  Manson, J.E., Allison, M.A., Rossouw, J.E., et al.: Estrogen therapy and coronary- artery 
calcification. N. Engl. J. Med. 356:2591-2602, 2007. 
 119.  Taylor, H.S., Manson, J.E.: Update in hormone therapy use in menopause. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 96:255-264, 2011. 
 120.  Santen, R.J., Allred, D.C., Ardoin, S.P., et al.: Postmenopausal hormone therapy: an 
Endocrine Society scientific statement. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 95([ADDRESS_811338] 1):s1-s66, 2010. 
 121.  Petitt, D.B., Sidney, S., Perlman, J.A.: Increased risk of cholecystectomy in users of 
supplemental estrogen. Gastroenterology 94:91-95, 1988. 
 122.  Uhler, M.L., Marks, J.W., Judd, H.L.: Estrogen replacement therapy and gallbladder 
disease in postmenopausal women. Menopause 7:162 -167, 2000. 
 123.  Liu, B., Beral, V., Balkwill, A., et al.: Gallbladder disease and use of transdermal versus 
oral hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal women: prospective cohort study. Br. Med. J. Available at: http://www.bmj.com/cgi/reprint/337/jul10_2/a386   Accessed: 
September 24, 2009. 
 124.  Wingo, P.A., Layde, P.M., Lee, N.C., et al.: The risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal 
w
omen who have used estrogen replacement therapy. J. A. M. A. 257:209-215, 1987. 
 125.  Grady, D., Ernster, V.: Does postmenopausal hormone therapy cause breast cancer? Am. 
J. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 134:1396-1400, 1991. 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 55  126.  Colditz, G.A., Hankinson, S.E., Hunter, D.J., et al.: The use of estrogens and progestins 
and the risk of breast cancer in postmenopausal women. N. Engl. J. Med. 332:1589-1593, 
1995. 
 127.  Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer: Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative reanalysis of data from [ADDRESS_811339] cancer. Lancet 350:1047-1059, 1997. 
 128.  Bergkvist, L., Adami, H.Q., Persson, I., et al.: The risk of breast cancer after estrogen and 
estrogen -progestin replacement. N. Engl. J. Med. 321:293-297, 1989. 
 129.  Schairer, C., Lubin, J., Troisi, R., et al.: Menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin 
replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. J. A. M. A. 283:485-491, 2000. 
 130.  Chen, W.Y., Manson, J.E., Hankinson, S.E., et al.: Unopposed estrogen therapy and the 
risk of invasive breast cancer. Arch. Intern. Med. 166:1027-1032, 2006. 
 131.  Stefanick, M.L., Anderson, G.L., Margolis, K.L., et al.: Effects of conjugated equine 
estrogens on breast cancer and mammography screening in postmenopausal wome n with 
hysterectomy. J. A. M. A. 295:1647-1657, 2006. 
 132.  Chlebowski, R.T., Hendrix, S.L., Langer, R.D., et al.: Influence of estrogen plus 
progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy postmenopausal women: the women's health initiative randomized trial. J. A. M. A. 289:3243-3253, 2003. 
 133.  Li, C.I., Malone, K.E., Porter, P.L., et al.: Relationship between long durations and 
different regimens of hormone therapy and risk of breast cancer. J. A. M. A. 289:3254-3263, 2003. 
 134.  Fournier, A., Boutron-Ruault, M., Clavel-Chapelon, F.: Breast cancer and hormonal 
therapy in postmenopausal women - letter to the Editor. N. Engl. J. Med. 360:2366-2367, 2009. 
 135.  Chlebowski, R.T., Kuller, L.H., Prentice, R.L., et al.: Breast cancer after use of estrogen 
plus progestin in postmenopausal women. N. Engl. J. Med. 360:573-587, 2009. 
 136.  Beral, V., Reeves, G., Bull, D., et al.: Breast cancer risk in relation to the interval between menopause and starting hormone therapy. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 103:296-305, 2011. 
 137.  Writing Group for the Women's Health Initiative Investigators: Risks and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the Women's Health Initiative randomized controlled trial. J. A. M. A. 288:321-333, 2002. 
 138.  The Women's Health Initiative Steering Committee: Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in postmenopausal women with hysterectomy. The women's health initiative randomized controlled trial. J. A. M. A. 291:1701-1712, 2004. 
 139.  Kohl, H.W., Powell, K.E., Gordon, N.F., et al.: Physical activity, physical fitness, and 
sudden cardiac death. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Rev. 14:37- 58, 1992. 
    
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 56 Appendix I 
Clinical Trials Database - Security Overview  
There are multiple  aspects to the security framework for the Clinical Trials Database (CTDB) and 
Clinical Trials Survey System.  The following features allow for the safe and secure collection of 
research variables:  
• Application Firewall - The NICHD has recently upgraded thei r application firewall which 
protects both the front end web server and back end database server for the CTDB.  Strict policies are in place which control exactly who has pre- defined, limited access to the 
application.  This firewall is a state -of-the- art hardware solution which blocks access to 
everyone but authorized users for the CTDB system.  
• Data Encryption and SSL Certificates - The CTDB system makes use of military grade encryption both for the session and the data storage.  The CTSS collects de- ident ified self -
reported data.  Both systems protect information from interception by [CONTACT_611981] a 1024 bit signed certificate.  The entire communication session from the time a client requests a connection to the system to the time a user logs out is encrypted using a certificate from an industry recognized vendor.  The result is a secure communications channel for our partners, providing data confidentiality and integrity.  In further, the CTDB program encrypts data stored within the system, thereby [CONTACT_611982].     
• CTSS HIPAA Requirements  - Below is the list of identifiers to be removed for the de -
identification of health information under HIPAA. This is found in 45 C.F.R. 164.514(a),(b)&(c)  
(A) Names;  
(B) All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city, 
county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of the Census:  
(1) The geographic unit formed by [CONTACT_120826] 20,000 people; and  (2) The initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer people is changed to 000.  
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 57 (C) All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older;  (D) Telephone numbers;  (E) Fax numbers;  (F) Electronic mail addresses;  
(G) Social security numbers;  
(H) Medical record numbers;  
(I) Health plan beneficiary numbers;  
(J) Account numbers;  (K) Certificate/license numbers;  
(L) Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers;  
(M) Device identifiers and serial numbers;  
(N) Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs);  
(O) Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers;  
(P) Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints;  
(Q) Full face photographic images and any comparable images; and  (R) Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, except as permitted by [CONTACT_573680] (c) of this section  
• Logical Access Controls (Role/Privileges) – Logical access controls are in placed using role 
based security for database access and application account access. Security controls are in 
place to detect unauthorized access attempts. The application is further protected by [CONTACT_611983]. Inactive user accounts are monitored and removed when not needed, and users are disconnected after a specific period of inactivity. Encryption is used (1024bit SSL key) and data is HIPPA compliant. Access is monitored and apparent security violations are investigated when identified. Insecure protocols are disabled on all applica tion servers. Guest and anonymous accounts/access is disabled.  
• Audit Trails  – Activity involving access to and modification of sensitive or critical files is 
logged and monitored for possible security violations. Access to these audit trails is strictly controlled and can be used to support after-the-fact investigations of how, when and why normal operations ceased should this occur. Off- line storage of audit logs is retained for a 
period of at least 1 year. Suspi[INVESTIGATOR_611952].  
• Physical and Environmental Protection  – The servers are physically located in a secured 
NIH data center with controlled limited access. All work products from the system including Data backup tapes are rotated to off -site storage with must be authorize and are recorded. All 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page 58 visitors to sensitive areas are escorted with entry codes changed periodically. Fire prevention 
and suppression devices are installed and in working condition. All heating and air-cooling systems are periodically checked to ensure proper working condition.  
• Production Input and Output Control  – Audit trails are in place to record data changes. 
Only authorized system administrators are allowed access to this data, as well as any data backup tapes. Damaged media is sanitized or destroyed, and any hardcopy media is shredded when no longer needed.  
• Contingency Planning  – All critical data files, database files and web server files have been 
identified. A regularly scheduled data backup solution is in place with identified resources supporting critical operations. A comprehensive contingency plan has been developed and documented. This plan has been approved by [CONTACT_573682]. The Contingency plan/Disaster recovery plan is regularly tested and adjusted as appropriate.  
• Hardware and Software System Maintenance – Access is limited to the hardware and 
software infrastructure. Restrictions are in place as to who performs maintenance activities. 
Procedures are in place to monitor the use of system resources. All new and revised hardware and software are tested and approved before implementation. All system and application components are tested, documented and approved prior to promotion to production environment. Detailed system specification as prepared and r eviewed by [CONTACT_141314]. A 
version control system is in place for all key application and operating system files. The systems are actively managed to monitor and reduce vulnerabilities with unnecessary 
services eliminated.  
• Strategic framework – The tactical  security framework provides a mechanism whereby [CONTACT_573683]- to-day operational support activities for the 
regular maintenance of the CTDB system.  These initiatives incorporate application and 
software security.  The CTDB application was designed using the latest Java technology.  This allows the adaptation of the application to ever- changing business rules within the 
application.  An Oracle 10g relational database provides the repository for the clinical data.  The use of a robust, industry standard relational database provides a modular architecture design of CTDB which allows for the CTDB program to assign role based security to the participants in the system.  This allows roles to be defined and implemented for diff erent 
users- such as investigators, study participants, report writes, etc- in order to secure database 
  
CNS IRB Protocol Template (rev 9.21.11)     
   
page [ADDRESS_811340] 
security framework of the system.  
 