 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management of Palmar Hyperhidrosis With Hydrogel -based Iontophoresis  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
August 15, [ADDRESS_315135] Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_259198], via self –referrals from  recruitment flyers and from the Stanford Dermatology 
Clinics  Stanford Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_259199].  Patients will be 
screened for eligibility either in person during  a routine clinical visit or over the phone.   
 
The study will consist of 3 treatment phases (daily treatment for  2 weeks, 3x/week 
treatment for 3 weeks and 2x/week treatment for 3  weeks) and a post -treatment 
evaluation.   
 
During the daily treatment phase, the subject will perform sweat  level assessments and 
deliver treatment during office visits (1 in  person and 1 virtual in this phase) and daily at 
home. The sweat  level assessments will include gravim etry (in -office), 
visual  assessment, iodine imprint testing (at home and in -office), and a   
study diary (at home and in -office), all commonly used methods to  assess sweat levels 
for research purposes. Treatment will consist  of 30 -60 minutes of hydrogel -based 
iontophoresis. During the   
three -time per week and two -time per week phases, the patients  will undergo the 
allocated amount of treatments per week, perform  iodine imprints at home and 
complete a study diary. There will be   
one office visit at the start  of the 3x/week phase. The post - treatment evaluation will 
take place as an office visit.   
 
The first visit will be used to explain the study protocol, obtain  informed consent, assess 
disease severity with baseline sweat  level assessments, determine treatm ent settings, 
and provide  training on performing the treatment and a study diary at home.  Sweat 
level assessment will be obtained using gravimetry  (quantitative measurement of sweat 
production by [CONTACT_259201] a  specified time period), iodine imprint testing  (topi[INVESTIGATOR_259200]), and completion of a  study diary. Study diary entries consist of a 
hyperhidrosis  disease severity scale (HDSS) score (modified to ref lect the  severity of 
symptoms over a single day, visual pain assessment   
(Wong -Baker pain scale), and a prompt to specify general comments  or any side effects 
related to the treatment. Treatment will  consist of delivering a low level of direct 
electrical c urrent to  the palmar side of one hand.   
 
In line with standard tap water iontophoresis, amperage will be  increased manually by 
[CONTACT_259202]. The 
current level  will not be increased b eyond 20 mA regardless of patient’s  tolerance. The 
treatment may not be effective below a minimal   
therapeutic level (R.A. Fischer MD -2 manual). Therefore, if the  subject finds low levels of 
current intolerable (e.g. below 6ma),  the investigators may decid e to exclude the 
subject from the  study. The treatment duration will be up to 1 hour, consistent  with 
what commercial devices are able to sustain (Hidrex DVP1000  user manual).   
 
During the various treatment phases, the subject will be asked to  perform the following 
tasks independently at home: deliver  treatments daily, triweekly or biweekly for a 
period of 2 -3 weeks  each, complete a daily questionnaire/study diary, and 
perform  iodine imprint testing at least twice per week. Data will be  collected through a 
REDCap survey. The patient will also be asked  to photograph and store the paper 
imprints in a dedicated folder.   
 
A second contact [CONTACT_259203] [ADDRESS_315136] is correctly  performing the t reatment, and to provide any 
additional training  needed.   
 
After the end of the daily treatment phase (day 14, 15, 16 or 17),  the subject will return 
to the office to perform treatment,  complete gravimetry and iodine imprint sweat level 
assessments.   
 
The subject then enters treatment phases with decreased treatment  frequency to 
3x/week for 3 weeks and 2x/week for 3 weeks. They  will return to the office for a final 
evaluation visit and study   
wrap -up (day 56, 57, 58 or 59).  
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
We wi ll be assessing the difference in  sweat levels between the hands using gravimetry, 
iodine imprint   
testing, and symptom questionnaires. Gravimetry is commonly used  in research settings 
to quantify sweat levels. Filter paper is weighed before and after appl ication to 
the palmar surface of the hand for a fixed duration in time, e.g. 5  minutes. The weight 
difference quantifies the amount of sweat  produced over a period of time (in mg/min). 
We will follow up  changes in sweat levels based on data uploaded  throug h REDCap. 
After the study the Student’s t -test will be used  to assess sweat levels between the 
treated and untreated hands.   
 
Iodine paper imprint testing is a documented method to  qualitatively assess sweat 
levels. The hands  are cleaned and dried prior to  application of iodine solution to  the 
palmar sides of the hands. After the iodine solution has  dried, subjects will apply steady 
pressure with their palms onto a  sheet of paper. Sweat in contact [CONTACT_259204] a  colorimetric change, w ith a purple -black color on the paper  indicating the 
presence of sweat on the hands. The subject will  take a photograph of this paper as a 
baseline qualitative measure  of sweating and upload this onto the REDCap system 
through the   
survey diary. We will fo llow up changes in sweat levels on a daily  basis based on data 
uploaded through REDCap. Differences in iodine imprint testing results between the left 
and right hand, and changes over the course of the study, will be assessed visually by a 
member of the re search staff. After the study we  will try to quantify the difference in 
sweat levels between the hands  using image analysis software (e.g. ImageJ).  
Subjects will  complete a survey diary with questions based on the Hyperhidrosis  Disease 
Severity Scale (HDS S), a sweat assessment that is commonly  used in hyperhidrosis 
studies. Modifications  that we have made to the HDSS include distinguishing 
symptom  severity of each hand and assessing overall symptom severity on a  single day. 
Study diary responses will be re viewed by a member of the research staff on a daily 
basis  
 
 
 
 
 
 ●  
 
 
 