Project Title: Optimizing Ankle Exoskeleton Assistance for Walking Across the Life 
Span  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date: April 25, 2024  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Study Protocol  
 
We used c ommercially available bilateral ankle exoskeletons (Dephy Inc, Boxborough, 
MA) with custom controllers to provide  plantarflexion assistance to each user . The 
exoskeletons have on -board encoders and inertial measurement units to enable state -
based control.  
 
Participants walked in six conditions: (1) without ankle exoskeletons  (NoExo) , (2) ankle 
exoskeletons without assistance  (NoTorque , (3) exoskeletons with springlike assistance  
(Spring) , and exoskeletons with three motorized assistance strategies with increasing 
peak torque : (4) 10  N-m (MotorLow) , (5) 20  N-m (MotorMed) , (6) 30 N -m (MotorHigh) . 
The spring -like assistance used impedance control without dampi[INVESTIGATOR_763128] 
a spring stiffness of 70 Nm/rad. The assistance began in the foot-flat position after heel 
strike and ended at toe off mimicking a spring and clutch mechanism than enabled  
storage and release of elastic energy in stance and free foot motion during swing . The 
torque profile for the motor assistance conditions was specified by a spline generated 
from four nodes: peak  time, rise time, fall time, and peak torque . The spline settings 
were  based on a previously published study  that used human -in-the loop optimization to 
minimize  metabolic cost for a group of  younger adults  walking at medium speed. For 
this experiment, w e scaled the HiLO torque  pattern to match our desired low, medium 
and high peaks values at  preset values of 10, 20, and 30 N -m. 
 
Participants completed testing over three sessions  walking at 1.25 m/s on an 
instrumented split -belt treadmill (CAREN, Motek, Netherlands). The sessions were 
conducted in a set order: 1) habituation, 2) gait mechanics, and 3) steady -state 
metabolic energy consumption. Waiting periods between sessions were  minimized to 
allow for learning and retention of walking patterns with exoskeleton assistance (2 -7 
days on average).  
 
Session 1 – Habituation.  
Previous work has shown the importance of habituation for the acceptance of 
assistance from exoskeletons.  In the first session, each participant walked with spring -
like assistance for three, seven -minute intervals for a total of 21 minutes. They also 
walked with motorized assistance for three, seven -minute intervals while increasing 
peak torque (10, 20, 30 Nm ) with each bout.  
 
Session 2 - Gait Mechanics.  
The primary goal for the second session was to obtain biomechanical measurements. 
Reflective markers were placed on participants’ lower limbs and torso to collect motion 
of the hip, knee and ankle joints and an instrumented treadmill was used to collect 
ground reaction forces form each limb. We instrumented participants with surface 
electromyography to record muscle activity on the right leg [tibialis anterior (TA), lateral 
gastrocnemius (LG), soleus (SOL), rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris (BF), gluteus 
medius (GMd), and gluteus maximus (GMx)]. Participants were re -habituated to the 
exoskeleton assistance for 6 -minutes prior to walking with exoskeletons without 
assistance, with spring -like assistance, and with motorized assistance. During the 
motorized assistance habituation period, we increased the peak torque every 2 minutes. 
After each condition’s habituation trial, participants walked for a [ADDRESS_1045725] calorimetry 
device (COSMED K5, Rome, Italy) to collect energy expenditure for each condition.  We 
repeated the habituation  process conducted during Session 2 - Gait Mechanics. The 
participants walked for six minutes in each of the six conditions in a randomized order with the 
respective habituation trial preceding a measurement trial.  