 
 
  
   
Tear Lipid Layer Thickness with Emollient Eye 
Drops   
 
 
THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSI TY HUMAN SUBJECTS IN STITUTIONAL REVIEW B OARD 
ID 2016H0354  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
FINAL PROTOCOL NOVEMBER 27 , 2017  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGAT OR JENNIFER FOGT, OD , MS  
 
 
THE OHIO STATE UNIVE RSITY COLLEGE OF OPT OMETRY  
INNOVATION IN VISION  AND EYE CARE RESEAR CH GROUP (IVERG)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tear Lipid Layer Thickness with Emollient Eye Drops  
 
This study will objectively evaluate two FDA approved artificial tear formulations (Allergan, 
plc) Refresh Optive and Refresh Optive MEGA -3 in subjects with dry eye symptoms and lipid 
layer thickness - LLT< 65 nm at baseline  in a randomized, cross -over (masked subject) design.  
We seek to objectively evaluate the increase in lipid layer thickness from baseline at 15 minutes  
and 1,  2 and 4 hours after an eye drop has been instilled.  
 Korb, et al (Optom Vis Sci, 2005) have pre viously shown that an emollient eye drop, will 
increase the lipid layer of the tear film from ~ [ADDRESS_627403] a baseline examination and baseline lipid layer imaging using the King -
Smith Stroboscopic Video Color Microscope (SVCM).   The baseline examination should last [ADDRESS_627404] and return between the 15 minute and later 
measurement - but will be instructed not to use any eye drops, eye makeup and not to touch or 
rub their eyes during that time.   
 
It is anticipated that up to 50 subjects may need to be screened to obtain the 20to 30subjects to 
enter into the study to complete 20 subjects.  
 
 
Eligibility and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Inclusion criteria:  • Age – at least 30 years  
• Good general health (defined by [CONTACT_488372])  
• Ability to give info rmed consent  
• Willing to spend time for the study; approximately one hour for a screening visit and 
additional 1 hour- for the study assessments. Study assessment will be conducted over 2 visit 
days, approximately 2 hours per day.  
• Either gender  
• Any r acial or ethnic origin  
• SVCM tear lipid thickness ≤ [ADDRESS_627405] refrain from lens wear for two days, including the day of the baseline 
visit, before the baseline examination and during the entire study.   
 
 Exclusion criteria:   • Use of any ocular prescription medication (such as but not limited to, glaucoma 
medications, anti -inflammatory eye drops and Restasis) used within 14 days of the screening 
visit or started prior to the measurement visit(s).   
• Currently having punctal plugs inserted in lacrimal puncta  
• Current eye disease, infection or inflammation that affects the surface of the eye such as, 
but not limited to moderate or greater blepharitis and ocular allergy. Clinically significant (active 
treatment) of blepharitis, Sjogr en’s disease or other systemic disease that could influence MGD, 
corneal, conjunctival, or eyelid abnormalities that could influence lipid layer thickness, conjunctivitis of any cause, ocular infection or systemic medication such as diuretics, SSRIs,  
that could influence tear secretion, or sensitivity to any of the ingredient in the eye drop being 
tested,  
• Past eye surgery, such as, but not limited to, refractive surgery. Subjects who have had 
cataract removal surgery more than one year ago, but less than  10 years ago may be considered 
as potential subjects.    
• Female subjects may not be pregnant or lactating. (Subject will be asked to self report 
these conditions.)  
• Infectious diseases (for example, hepatitis, tuberculosis) or an immuno -suppressive 
disease (for example, HIV). (Subjects will be asked to self -report these conditions.)  
• Inability to complete the screening and examination  
• Inability to provide analyzable data. For example, subjects who cannot keep their eye 
open during the entire meas urement interval (due to early blinking) or provide a readable eye 
image (due to eyelid laxity) or cannot sit still for [ADDRESS_627406]:  
• Refrain from using eye drops/topi[INVESTIGATOR_488370].  
• Refrain from eye rubbing prior to and during the assessment and study visit  
• Refrain from using eye makeup. If makeup was worn on the screening or measurement 
day, the subject must remove it at least one hour prior to the study v isit appointment.  
 Adverse Events  
All adverse events will be reported to the IRB and study sponsor, by [CONTACT_978], within one working 
day. Adverse Events information will be summarized in the annual report to the IRB as well as to the Sponsor at the end of the  study. Adverse events will be assessed and determined by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Jennifer Fogt or [CONTACT_488375].  
 
Subject Dismissal  
Subjects who, after study team member coaching, are not able to provide analyzable data may be 
dismissed from the study. Analyzable data is,  for example, that which is obtained for the entire 
measurement interval and provides a readable eye image. Data may not be analyzable if, for example, subjects blink at inappropriate times or have eyelid laxity, to name [CONTACT_488374]. These issue s are usually revealed at the screening assessment visit. Subjects who cannot 
provide analyzable data will be dismissed for the study. Subjects who do not keep scheduled 
visits within the required time frame will be dismissed from the study. Study team members will 
make reasonable efforts to accommodate subjects’ schedules.  
 
Monitoring Procedures  
Although the investigators are trained in Good Clinical Practice, FDA requirements for testing, 
and protected health information, the sponsor will perform a site visit and monitor data integrity at the study site at the Ohio State University College of Optometry, [ADDRESS_627407] enrolled in the study, and a 
log of all those  individuals who treat and follow subjects, complete and/or correct CRF, and any 
other documents required by [CONTACT_456], Federal regulations or IRB requirements.  
Investigator Responsibilities  
Clinical investigators are responsible for: 1) ensuring that th e study is conducted according to the 
signed agreement, investigational plan and applicable FDA regulations; 2) protecting the rights, 
safety, and welfare of subjects under the investigator’s care; 3) control of the test article under 
investigation; 4) ens ure that informed consent is obtained.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_488371], correction and maintenance of 
patient Case Report Forms, clinical supplies, and other study documents. The investigator must provide adequate time and re sources to the study protocol and must be available to the Sponsor 
and its representatives via telephone, and in person during site visits. The Investigator shall notify the sponsor of any change in the staff assigned to the study project, location of the device 
or office space utilized, or responsibility to maintain records within [ADDRESS_627408] be approved by [CONTACT_456], in advance.  
  
The Medical Monitor will review information provided by [CONTACT_431] (or designee) about 
potential study subjects who otherwise are qualified but fail to meet all eligibility criteria. All 
protocol deviations require the consent of the Medical Monitor in  advance of exposure.  
 
Protocol Violations, Discontinuation  In the event that a member of the study team or a representative of sponsor becomes aware of a 
protocol violation, the investigator and the reviewing IRB shall be informed by [CONTACT_488373]. If protocol violations continue, the sponsor may take 
disciplinary action, including probation and termination of participation in the study. All disciplinary actions will be shared with the reviewing IRB.  
 
Discontinuation of the Study  
The study may be discontinued due to the loss of instrumentation function (there is only one such 
instrument) or if patient safety is at risk or data integrity can no longer be assured.  The sponsor 
may discontinue enrollment in the study at any time  upon written notification to the clinical 
investigators. In the event the study is discontinued, sponsor will provide explicit written instruction with regard to study follow -up requirements, maintenance of clinical data, and other 
pertinent information.  
 
 