1 
   
IRB Protocol Number: [PHONE_17375] 
Clinicaltrials.gov ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP): April 12, 2016 
 
Title: Depression, Obesity and Inflammatory Markers  
 
Coordinating Center: Weill Cornell Medical College, Department of Psychiatry 
 
Collaborating Institution: Weill Cornell Medical College –Qatar 
 
Protocol Version  IRB Approval 
Version 1.0  10/17/14 
Version 2.0 (Current)  4/12/16 
 
 
     

2 
 Background: 
This project will focus on the comorbidity of bipolar disorder and obesity, a comorbidity that is also related to the 
risk of diabetes and coronary artery disease, particularly when accompanied by [CONTACT_833476] C-reactive protein(CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). Bipolar disorders are quite prevalent in both the [LOCATION_002] and Qatar. The national comorbidity survey in  the [LOCATION_002] reported a 12 month 
prevalence of 2.6% for bipolar disorder in 2005 (1). A recently  completed study of mental illness in Qatar found 
a prevalence of bipolar disorder of 4.3% (QNRF proposal number NPRP 30-6-7-38). Obesity is also quite 
prevalent in the [LOCATION_003]. According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention more than one-third of U.S. adults (35.7%) are obese. As for the rates of obesity in Qatar, a recent declaration by [CONTACT_833477] 41% of Qatari citizens were obese (Qatar Tribune , Tuesday Nov 23, 2013; p1). (HE Abdullah bin 
Khalid al Qahtani: 41% of Qataris are obese: Minister; Qatar Tribune, Tuesday Nov 23, 2013; p1).  
A secondary aim will be to pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] a novel treatment approach inv olving an anti-inflammatory antibiotic, minocycline, 
to treat depression in bipolar patients and comparing those hav ing high versus low levels of the inflammatory 
biomarker CRP. The global psychiatric and public health importa nce of inflammation in depression and bipolar 
disorder lies in the implications for health comorbidity (obesi ty and heart disease) and responsiveness of 
depression to treatment. Benefits consistent with the prioritie s of the Qatar NPRP include questions of direct 
interest to public health (bipolar disorder, obesity, heart disease), collaboration between researchers in Qatar 
and international colleagues and international recognition due to the regional and global significance of the 
proposed research. Bipolar Disorder and Obesity In a recent rev iew article McElroy and Keck (2) stated the 
following, Bipolar disorder (BD) is associated with obesity, overweight, and abdominal obesity, and BD 
individuals with obesity have a greater illness burden. Factors related to BD, its treatment, and the individual 
may all contribute to BD's association with obesity. Management strategies for the obese BD patient include use 
of medications with better metabolic profiles, lifestyle interventions, and adjunctive pharmacotherapy for weight 
loss. Obesity-related psychiatric and medical comorbidities should also be assessed and managed. Bariatric 
surgery may be an option for carefully selected patients. Great er research into the theoretical underpi[INVESTIGATOR_833463]-obesity connection is needed. Bip olar disorder has clearly been associated with 
obesity in [LOCATION_001] (3). Bond et al (4) prospectively observed the association of weight gain with symptom 
severity and degree of functioning in 19 patients with bipolar disorder and weight gain (defined as > 7% increase 
in body weight over 1 year) compared to 27 patients with bipola r disorder who did not gain > 7% body weight 
over one year. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality i n the [LOCATION_002] has recently completed 
enrollment of 484 bipolar patients into a 10 site comparative e ffectiveness trial called the Bipolar CHOICE study. 
Weill Cornell Medical College was one of the participant sites and one of us was the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_833464]. The mean Body Mass Index (BMI) of the 484 subjects enrolled was 29.6, indicating that 50% of the sample 
met the definition of obesity.  
 
 
Study Design: 
This study will take place at Weill Cornell Medical Center in N ew York and also at Weill Cornell Medical Center 
in Qatar. The protocol will be identical at both sites. Recruit ment for the study will involve local outreach to 
clinicians and advocacy groups in [LOCATION_001] and Doha. 
We plan to enroll 180 bipolar subjects (120 in Doha and 60 in N ew York over 24 months) for Aims 1-3 and 50 
subjects (30 in Doha and 20 in [LOCATION_001]) for Aim 4. (In order t o achieve our aims we will recruit 60 manic, 60 
euthymic, and 60 depressed bipolar individuals across the two sites. Depending on the local CRP results we 
may need to extend the sample of depressed subjects.) We have i n place a network of referral sources 
3 
 (including primary care providers and community mental health c linics) to facilitate enrollment of a diverse and 
representative group of patients. 
There are four primary aims to this study as follows: Aim 1 will examine relationships between the levels of the 
inflammatory markers and current clinical state (depressed, man ic or euthymic) with the hypothesis that 
Inflammatory markers will be higher in depression and mania rel ative to the euthymic state. Aim 2 will examine 
relationships between inflammatory markers and BMI in bipolar patients with the hypothesis that inflammatory markers will correlate positively with BMI. Aim 3 will examine the relationship between depression, obesity and 
inflammatory markers with the hypothesis that depressed (or manic) bipolar patients who are also obese will have higher inflammatory markers than either obese euthymic pat ients or non-obese depressed or manic 
patients. In order to achieve these aims we will need to diagnose and characterize a large sample of bipolar individuals in each of the above named clinical states, namely: -bipolar patients who are currently 
manic/hypomanic, euthymic or depressed for aim [ADDRESS_1157376] a 2-site trial of 50 subjects to examine the value of minocycline augmentation in 
bipolar depressed patients who are incompletely responsive to i nitial treatment with anti depressants and/or 
mood stabilizers. We hypothesize that the patients with high baseline CRP levels will have a significantly better response to the addition of minocycline in terms of symptoms of depression, psychosocial functioning and 
indices of immune function. If results are promising we will design a larger placebo-controlled confirmatory trial 
in the future. 
 
Primary Objectives: 
This study would measure markers of inflammation in a cohort of patients with bipolar disorder. 
Inflammation has been thought to be elevated in both depression  and obesity and to contribute to heart 
disease and poor response to antidepressants. Heart disease, ob esity and bipolar disorder have 
significant prevalence in the populations of Qatar.  
Aim 1 will examine  relationships  between the levels of the in flammatory markers and current clinical 
state with the hypothesis  that   inflammatory   markers will  be  higher  in  depression   and mania  
relative  to  the  euthymic  state. 
Aim 2 will examine relationships between inflammatory markers a nd body mass index (BMI) in bipolar 
patients with the hypothesis that inflammatory markers will cor relate positively with BMI in bipolar 
patients. Aim 3 will examine the relationship between depression, obesity and inflammatory markers with the 
hypothesis that depressed (or manic) bipolar patients who are a lso obese will have higher inflammatory 
markers than either obese euthymic patients or non-obese depres sed or manic patients. 
 
Secondary Objectives: 
A secondary  aim  will  be  to  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]  a novel treatment approa ch involving an anti-inflammatory antibiotic, 
minocycline, to treat depression in bipolar patients and compar ing those having high versus low levels of 
the inflammatory biomarker CRP. 
4 
 Statistical Considerations: 
For Aim 1, the sample size calculation is based on the comparis on of inflammatory marker prevalences 
between the three MINI-defined groups (i.e., depressed, manic, and euthymic groups). A sample size of 
approximately [ADDRESS_1157377] 80% 
power to detect pairwise effect sizes of 0.50 or greater, using  two-group t-tests with a two-sided alpha level of 
5%. Similar effect sizes can be estimated for Aim 3 with N=180 patients enrolled in the study. 
For Aim 2, 95% confidence intervals for Pearson or spearman-rank correlation coefficients (for the relationship 
between inflammatory markers and body weight/BMI) can be constr ucted to have lower limits of 0.40 with 
N=180 patients enrolled in the study (this calculation assumes expected correlation coefficients of 0.50 or greater). 
Aim 4 is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_833465]. Groups for each 
aim will be compared on demographic, clinical and biological va riables using two-sample t-tests or analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) tests for continuous variables (for nonparamet ric continuous variables, either Mann-Whitney 
tests or Kruskal-Wallis tests will be used) and chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests Page 23 of 34 5/11/20 
10:58 AM for categorical variables. Unless specified otherwise,  each of the statistical tests above will use a 
two-tailed alpha-level of 0.05.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria: 
Inclusion Criteria: 
1. Patients with Bipolar Disorder and current depressive sympto ms 
2. Hamilton Depression Scale score >[ADDRESS_1157378] the capacity to understand the nature of the study and sign the written informed consent. 
 
Exclusion criteria: 
1. Current diagnosis of Schiz ophrenia or other psychotic disorder, or Dementia Alzheimer Typ e or 
related cognitive disorders. 
2. Principal diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Anore xia or Bulimia Nervosa, Obsessive-
Compulsive Disorder. We define principal as the most pressing c linical problem.  
3 .  Pregnant or nursing 
4. Axis II diagnosis of antisocial, schizotypal or severe borde rline personality disorder (defined  as  
patients  who  are high risk for being unable  to  complete the  study due to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], suicide 
attempts, significant self-mutilation,  or other self-injurious  or destructive behavior). 
5 .  Patients  who  currently  meet   criteria for Alcohol or oth er Substance-Related Dependence 
Disorder (with the exception of nicotine dependence) who require detoxification.  
6. Patients who  are  unable to   read   and   write   English   or   Arabic. 
7. Patients having serious, unstable or terminal medical or neu rologic illness that would 
compromise study participation (i.e., metastatic or advanced ma lignancy, chronic renal failure 
requiring dialysis, recent MI or unstable angina, or end stage chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease).  
5 
 8. People with common conditions s uch as hypertension, insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, 
asthma, compensated  congestive   heart   failure, a malignancy in remission, treated 
hypothyroidism, or epi[INVESTIGATOR_833466].. 
9. Autoimmune disease or chronic inflammatory diseases such  as   psoriasis  or  Crohn’s  disease  
10. Chronic infection such  as  hepatitis  B  or C or HIV  
11. Elevated antinuclear antibody or rheumatoid factor  12. Oral glucocorticoids in the past [ADDRESS_1157379] two weeks 
 
Study Procedures 
Informed consent, psychiatric evaluation, questionnaires, diagn ostic interviews, height, weight, and urine 
pregnancy screening assessment (pi[INVESTIGATOR_833467]), lab tests, research 
blood draw, minocycline prescribed to the participants in the Aim 4 pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
 
Assessing Safety and Efficacy 
‐Side Effects: Frequency and Intensity of Side Effects Ratings  (FISER). A 3‐item self‐rated measure of medication 
side effects and burden will be obtained at each visit during t he minocycline trial. The FISER was developed for and 
successfully used in the multicenter STAR*D study of depression . 
‐ Safety: Assessments: At the beginning and end of treatment wi ll include hematology, chemistries, and urine 
pregnancy screening prior to and at the end of treatment. ‐ The  Hamilton Depression Scale  (HDS), which assesses 
depressive symptoms and severity of the depressive syndrome wil l be done by [CONTACT_833478].  
 
Interim and Complete Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_833468], if necessary, shou ld an AE or SAE occur during the time the participant is in 
the study. The event will be documented by [CONTACT_833479] w ill indicate if in response to the AE/SAE there was no 
change in procedure, procedure was interrupted, procedure was d iscontinued, other action was require, and if 
medical action was required. In the very unlikely case that sev ere SAE¿s occur due to parti cipation in the minocycline 
study, the study will be stopped.   
Termination or Dropout of Subjects 
Though not expected, if a participant reports any adverse react ion to the minocycline medication in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_62751], 
it will be stopped immediately. The standard treatment will be  continued and will not be interrupted and 
participants will be removed from the study. If a participant b ecomes pregnant during the study it may be  grounds  
for  termination of subjects fro m this research protocol. Addit ionally, if a patient became medically or psychiatrically 
6 
 unstable, termination of participation may become necessary. If  psychiatrically unstable, the patient would be 
assessed for inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_833469].  
 
Adverse Event Collection 
Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) will be collected to assure the safety of the 
participants in the study and to comply with legally applicable  documentation and regulatory requirements. 
 
An AE is any unpleasant medical or psychiatric event observed in a patient that occurs in association with 
any of the study procedures or determined by [CONTACT_15370]. Medical conditions that are present prior to the study and worsen during a study may be considered adverse e vents. Examples of AEs may include 
an abnormal laboratory finding, adverse reaction to the minocyc line, or excessive bleeding or bruising due 
to blood sample collection.  
 
An SAE is a serious adverse event that is unexpected, related t o or unrelated to  participation  in the 
research, and is harmful to the patient. SAEs include suicide a ttempt, death, a life-threatening experience, 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or as determi ned by a clinician. AEs/SAEs will be reported according to the IRB guidelines. 
 The side effects of the drug we will be using in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_1427] y are listed below: The most common side 
effects from this medicine are gastrointestinal symptoms, dizziness and skin rash. Patients who take this 
medication for a long time may notice changes in their skin col or, but this usually resolves after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_833470]. Some women who take minocycline develop vaginal yeast infections. While this can occur 
with other antibiotics,  it  seems more common with minocycline  and other tetracyclines. It is thought that 
minocycline kills bacteria that are normally present in the body and protect against yeast infections. Minocycline may increase sensitivity to sunlight, resulting in more frequent sunburns or the development of 
rashes following sun exposure. It is recommended that patients apply sunscreen (SPF 15 or greater) before 
outdoor activities or avoid prolonged exposure to the sun while  taking minocycline. More rarely, minocycline 
can affect the kidneys or liver. Doctors may recommend periodic  blood tests for long term users to check 
liver and kidney function. In equally  rare cases, minocycline can induce lupus, but this condition usually 
improves after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_56007]. 
 
Site PIs will determine the action taken, if necessary, should an AE or SAE occur during the time the 
participant is in the study. The event will be documented by [CONTACT_3433] e site staff and will indicate if in response 
to the AE/SAE there was no change in procedure, procedure was i nterrupted, procedure was 
discontinued, other action was require, and if medical action w as required.  
 
SAEs will be systematically recorded to assess any life threate ning events or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. An SAE is 
defined as any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose or  any event co nsistent with the 
underlying disease state that results in a life threatening inc luding suicide attempts (suicide attempts 
must also be coded as a psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]), death, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_135627], congenital anomaly , persistent or significant disability or incapacity, and or a required 
intervention to prevent permanent impairment or damage. 
 
The following categories identify the intensity of an Adverse Event:  
7 
 Mild: Awareness of a sign or symptom that does not interfere with t he participants usual activity or is 
transient, resolved without treatment and with no sequelae; 
Moderate : Interferes with the participants usual activity, but the pati ent is still able to function; 
Severe : Events that interrupt a patient's usual daily activity and generally require a systemic drug 
therapy or other treatment. All AEs/SAEs will be evaluated as t o its expected occurrence, or lack of 
expected occurrence: 
 Expected: An adverse event is expected when the specificity and severit y of the event is consistent with 
the study procedures and Standard of Care, (e.g., the   partici pant   fainted in response to having his blood 
drawn) or underlying disease state, (the participant’s depressi ve symptoms worsened).  
Unexpected : An adverse event is unexpected when the specificity or severi ty of an adverse event is 
not consistent with the study procedures or Standards of Care,  (e.g., the phlebotomist used the same 
blood collection needle on multiple participants, resulting in a participant acquiring Hepatitis C), or 
underlying disease state (e.g., the participant experienced a manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1863]). 
Unexpected as defined above refers to an adverse event that has not been observed before. 
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_833471]/SAEs suspected in association with any of the 
study procedures the participant engaged in. However, this must be related to our study procedures not 
just follow up information that we are collecting. AEs/SAEs will also be identified that are not related to the study procedures and indicated on the AE/SAE forms. 
 
The following conditions will be used to define the relatedness  of any study procedure to an AE/SAE. 
 
Not related : The PI [INVESTIGATOR_833472]. -Possible: The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_592648] a reasonable rela tionship to the study procedures.   
Probable: The PI [INVESTIGATOR_592649] a reasonabl e relationship  to  the study 
procedures. Definite : The PI [INVESTIGATOR_833473]. 
Unknown : The PI [INVESTIGATOR_833474].  
The clinical outcome of the AE/SAE will be characterized as fol lows:  
 Recovered/Resolved : The patient    recovered    from    the    AE/SAE.  
Not Recovered/Not resolved :  Patient did not recover and symptoms continue.  
Recovered/Resolved with Sequelae: The patient has recovered but with clinical sequelae from the  
event.  Fatal: The event resulted in death. The SAE, Death, and Exit forms m ust be completed for this outcome.  
Unknown : The clinical outcome of the patient remains unknown at the ti me of the report or the patient 
was lost to follow-up.   
All AEs/SAEs will be followed until resolution or until the end  of participation in the protocol. Participants 
may report AEs freely or in response to general questioning or through patient or clinician assessments. 
If it is determined that an AE has occurred, PI [INVESTIGATOR_833475].   
 
8 
 Events will be discussed among the PIs in the [LOCATION_003] and Qatar. AE s will be reported to the IRB according to 
the WCMC IRB guidelines. 