Page  1 of 11   
 
 
Clinical trials identifier:    [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Principal  Investigator:       [INVESTIGATOR_56720],  CARRIE  
 
Protocol  Title:                   Trauma  Induced  Coagulopathy  and Inflammation  
 
Date:      August 2, 2018  
 
Protocol  Description:        This   is  a  prospective   observational   trial  designed   to  evaluate   the  factors   that  contribute   
to  the development  of trauma  induced  coagulopathy,  post injury  inflammation  and the 
development  of organ  dysfunction  in adult  trauma  patients.  Demographic  data,  physiologic  
data,  blood  samples and  clinical  variables  will be collected  over  the [ADDRESS_61947]  
While   a  number   of  factors   are  known   to  be  associated   with  the  development   of  trauma   induced 
coagulopathy  (TIC),  inflammation,  and multi -organ  failure,  we currently  cannot  predict  which  patients 
are  at  risk  for  developi[INVESTIGATOR_56721]-threatening   conditions   with  any  certainty.   In  this  prospective 
observational  study,  we will investigate  the many  factors  that contribute  to the development  of trauma 
induced  coagulopathy,  post injury  inflammation  and the development  of organ  dysfunction  in order  to 
develop   a  multi   scale   computational   algorhythm   and  ex  vivo  models   capable   of  clinical   prediction. 
Using  a convenience  sample  technique,  demographic  data,  physiologic  data,  fresh  and residual  blood 
samples,  urine  samples,  and clinical  variables  will be collected  over [ADDRESS_61948]   the  development   of  TIC  and multi -
organ failure.  
 
Objectives  
 
Overall  objectives  
1)  Develop   a  computational   algorithm   to  predict   the  development   of  trauma   induced   coaguloapthy 
(TIC)      2)  Validate   ex-vivo  microfluidic   TIC  models   3)  Develop   ex-vivo  assays   to  predict   the 
development  of trauma -induced  inflammation  and the development  of multi -organ  failure  
 
Primary  outcome  variable(s)  
Coagulation  parameters  including  thromboelastrography  and mirocofluidic  assessment  on admission,  [ADDRESS_61949] admission.  
 
Secondary  outcome  variable(s)  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_56722],  peripheral  blood  mononuclear  cells,  and neutrophils  on admission,  [ADDRESS_61950]  admission;   Development   of  multiorgan   
failure within   30  days  of  admission;   Level   of  free  serum   free  nucleic   acids;   Expression   of  pro  
and  anti- inflammatory  proteins  and genes  and genetic  variants  in serum,  platelets,  and white  blood  cells.  
 
Backgrou nd 
Traumatic  injury  results  in 5-6 million  deaths  per year worldwide  with $[ADDRESS_61951]  resuscitation  with crystalloids   
and  stored   blood   products   causes   hypothermia,   acidosis,   tissue   hypoxia,   hypotension, inflammation,  
the activation  and consumption  of coagulation  factors  including  platelets,  the release  of free   nucleic   
acids,   the  development   of  mitochondrial   dysfunction   and  eventually   organ   failure. Importantly,  
about  a quarter  of trauma  patients  display  a coagulopathy,  (trauma  induced  coagulopathy, TIC)   which   
greatly   increases   the  risk  of  death   and/or   the  development   of  multigrain   failure.   We currently,  
however,  cannot  predict  who will develop  TIC or its associated  complications.  In fact, two patients  who 
have  the same  clinical  presentation  may have  very different  outcomes.  Developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a multi scale  
computational  model  and ex-vivo point  of care assays  would  allow  us to efficiently  identify  and 
effectively  treat at risk patients  and potentially  improve  outcomes.  
 
Study  Design  
 
Phase*  
Not applicable  
 
Design  
Prospective,  observational,  convenience  sampling  of trauma  patients  [ADDRESS_61952]  transfusion  within  1 hour of admission, 
and/or   an  ISS  of  greater   than  or  equal   to  15.  Demographic   data  including   past  medical/medication 
history  as well as clinical  data including  continuous  vital signs  (when  available)  will be recorded.  Blood 
samples  (approximately  15 ml) and urine  samples  (approximately  10 ml) will be taken  on admission,  
3hr,  6hrs,   12hrs,   [ADDRESS_61953]  admission.   Residual   blood   samples   (which   
would otherwise   be  discarded)   will  be  obtained   from   the  PPMC   clinical   laboratory   on  [ADDRESS_61954] admission.  Blood  samples  may be analyzed  for coagulation  parameters  included  ex vivo 
microfluidic
Page  3 of 11  assays,   blood   gas  analysis,   cellular   respi[INVESTIGATOR_038],   inflammatory   mediators,   free  nucleic   acids,   DNA 
polymorphisms,   and  pro/anti -inflammatory   protein   and  gene   expression.   Residual   samples   will  be 
collected  for protein  biomarker  measurements  and DNA  analyses.  Urine  samples  will be analyzed  for 
biomarkers  of organ  injury  and dysfunction.  When  the patient  is capable  of consenting,  or the patient's 
power  of attorney  is identified,  they will be approached  for consent  and for continued  participation.  If 
consent  is denied,  all collected  data/samples  will be discarded  and the subject  will not be enrolled.  
 
Study  duration  
We anticipate  enrolling  and completing  this study  within  [ADDRESS_61955]'s  maximum  participation 
will be [ADDRESS_61956]  and complete  the research.  Please  confirm  that there  are adequate  facilities  for the  
research.  
In addition  to the PI's (Sims  and Diamond ), this research  will be conducted  by [CONTACT_56730]   (PARC)   research   coordinators   and  assistants.   PARC   provides   [ADDRESS_61957] every  2 weeks.   All patients,  including  enrolled  subjects,  will be admitted to  the trauma  and 
surgical  critical  care service.  They  will be managed  according  to generally  accepted medical    standards    
for   traumatic    injury,    which    includes    surgical    interventions,    damage    control maneuvers,   and  
sub-specialty   consultation   as  needed   and  at  the  discretion   of  the  treating   trauma surgeon/surgical  
intensivist.  Blood  and urine  samples  will be processed  and analyzed  in the trauma  at PPMC  as well as at 
the PARC  facility  on 3 Mutch,  PPMC.  Blood  and urine  samples  and case report forms  will be stored  at 
the PARC  facility  on 3 Mutch,  PPMC.  
 
 
 
 
Characteristics of the Study Population  
 
Target  population  
trauma  patients  18 years  or older  who present  to the trauma  bay 
 
Subjects  enrolled  by [CONTACT_56731]  
300 
 
Subjects  enrolled  by [CONTACT_56732]  
0 
 
Accrual  
This  will  be  prospective   observational   study   using   convenience   enrollment.   Injured   patients   who 
present   to  the  trauma   bay  will  be  evaluated   by  [CONTACT_56733]  . If eligibility  criteria  are met, the research  blood  samples  will be drawn  at the 
same time   as  routine   clinical   samples.   Depending   on  the  research   expertise   available   (e.g.  
microfluidic assessments   or  cellular   respi[INVESTIGATOR_56723]),   eligible   patients   may  not  have   all  the  
research v ariables   investigated   at  each  time  point.   Given   that  we  will  be  recruiting   a  number   of  
minimally injured  patients,  as well as injured  patients  with significant  variability  (eg severity  of injury,  
age, gender, race,  and past medical  history),  a large  accrual  number  is required  in order  to develop  a 
computational model  that can accurately  determine  which  factors  predict  the development  of TIC, 
inflammation  and
Page  [ADDRESS_61958]   level   of  activation   is  reserved   for  patients   who  
meet   either physiologic   parameters   (e.g.  hypotension)   or  who  have   a  mechanism   of  injury   that  
would   suggest significant  injury  ( e.g. high speed  motor  vehicle  crash).  that being  said roughly  30% of 
trauma  alerts are  not found  to have  significant  injury.  Only  patient's  whose  age is equal  to or greater  than 
18 years  old will  be included.  
 
Key exclusion  criteria  
Transfer   to  trauma   service   of  greater   than  6  hours   Known   pregnancy   -  these   patients   are  excluded 
because  drawing  multiple  blood  samples  has an unknown  risk to the fetus.  Women  of child  bearing  age, 
however,  will be eligible.  If they are found  to be pregnant  before  enrollment,  they will be excluded  (eg. 
obvious  gravid  uterus,  + fetus  seen on trauma  ultrasound,  or + pregnancy  test, which  is routinely  done on  
all female  trauma  patients)  . If they are found  to be pregnant  after the initial  blood  draw,  this sample will   
be  processed,   but  no  additional   blood   samples   will  be  taken.   The  patient,   or  next  of  kin  if 
appropriate,  will be asked  to consent  for analysis  of the processed  sample  and for continued  clinical data  
collection.  
 
Vulnerable  
Populations  
 
Children  Form  
x  Pregnant   women   (if  the  study   procedures   may  affect   the  condition   of  the  pregnant   woman   
or fetus)  Form  
Fetuses  and/or  Neonates  Form  
Prisoners  Form  
Other  
x  None  of the above  populations  are included  in the research  study  
 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
Populations  vulnerable  to undue  influence  or coercion  
Given  the nature  of trauma  and the physiologic  consequences  associated  with hemorrhagic  shock,  many 
of the eligible  trauma  patients  in this study  would  be considered  cognitively  or decisionally  impaired. 
Obtaining  informed  consent  from  the patient  or their surrogate  at the time of the initial  blood  draw  may 
not  be  practicable   in  many   circumstances.  As  such,   we  will  be  seeking   delay   in  obtaining   informed 
consent  under  these  circumstances.  HIPAA  authorization  and consent  to continued  participation  will be 
obtained  from  the patient's  next of kin or surrogate  when  available.  If and when  the subject  becomes 
capable  of consenting  during  their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059],  he/she  will informed  of the study  including  the risks 
and benefits  and HIPAA  authorization/consent  will be obtained  from  the patient.  If he/she  declines,  he/ 
she will be de-enrolled.  All data and blood  samples  will be purged.   On occasion,  enrolled  patients  may 
become  arrested  while  in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  If consent  for enrollment  has been  obtained  prior  to the arrest,  the IRB  
will be consulted  to determine  if subjects  can continue  in the study.  If the arrest  (and not merely 
detainment  or police  presence)  occurs  prior  to obtaining  consent,  the patient  will be de-enrolled  given the   
risk  of  undue   influence   or  coercion.   On  occasion,   people   who  work   at  or  attend   school   at  the 
University  of Pennsylvania  will be trauma  victims  and there fore eligible  for enrollment.  These  patients 
and/or   their  next  of  kin  will  be  consented   as  in  private   and  data  will  be  de-identified   as  previously 
described.   Subjects   will  be  informed   in  person   and  in  the  consent   form   that  their  standing   with  
the University  will not in any way be affected  by [CONTACT_56734].  
 
Subject  recruitment  
Given   the  unexpected   nature   of  trauma,   subjects   will  not  be  recruited   for  this  study   a  priori   of  
their injury.
Page  5 of 11  Will the recruitment  plan propose  to use any Penn  media  services  (communications,  marketing,  etc.) for 
outreach  via social  media  avenues  (examples  include:  Facebook,  Twitter,  blogging,  texting,  etc.) or does 
the study  team  plan to directly  use social  media  to recruit  for the research?  
No 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
Subject  compensation*  
Will subjects  be financially  compensated  for their participation? 
No 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
If there  is subject  compensation,  provide  the schedule  for compensation  per study  visit or session 
and total  amount  for entire  participation,  either  as text or separate  document  
 
 
 
 
 
Study Procedures  
 
Suicidal  Ideation  and Behavior  
Does  this research  qualify  as a clinical  investigation  that will utilize  a test article  (ie- drug or biological)  
which  may carry  a potential  for central  nervous  system  (CNS)  effect(s)? 
No 
 
Procedures  
During  the initial  trauma  evaluation,  [ADDRESS_61959]  admission.   Blood   and  urine   sample   collection   in  unstable   patients   will  
be deferred  or delayed  if it is determined  by [CONTACT_56735].  Smaller  blood  and urine  volume  samples  maybe  taken  at each time point  (eg 10 ml rather 
than 15 ml of blood)  if research  expertise  is not available  for sample  analysis  (e.g microfluidic  or high 
resolution  respi[INVESTIGATOR_038])  at that time point.  Residual  plasma  and whole  blood  samples  will be collected 
from  the PPMC  clinical  laboratory  on day [ADDRESS_61960] enrollment.  If patients  
are discharged   or  die  prior   to  completing   the  5  days  of  blood   samples,   additional   samples   and/or   
clinic appointments   for  the  purpose   of  research   will  not  be  obtained.  After   the  last  blood   draw,   
we  will  be following   the  patient's   outcome   until  discharge.   This  data  is  routinely   extracted   as  part  
of  the Pennsylvania   Trauma   Outcomes   Study   -  a  state  trauma   center   requirement   -  and  will  not  
require additional  contact  [CONTACT_10970].  We will not personally  follow  up patients  if they are discharged  
prior to 30 days.  
Page  6 of 11  The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
Deception  
Does  your project  use deception? 
No 
 
Analysis  Plan  
Patients  who develop  coagulopathy,  altered  cellular  respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516],  or multi -organ  failure  will be compared 
using  T-tests or Mann -Whitney  tests for continuous  variables  and Chi-squared  or Fischers  exact  tests for 
dichotomous   variables.   Spearmans   rank  correlation   will  be  used  to  assess   associations   between 
continuou s  variables.   Logistic   regression   analysis   will  be  used  to  identify   risk  factors   for  the 
development  of trauma  induced  coagulopathy  or multiorgan  failure..  Receiver  operating  characteristic 
curves  will be used to assess  accuracy  of microfluidic  measurements  compared  to standard  measures  of 
coagulation   .   Continuous   deidentified   data  including   vital  signs,   laboratory   values,   and  medications 
will be shared  with collaborators  at Princeton  University  in order  to create  a mathematical  model.  The 
computational   whole -patient   systems   model   is  a  multiscale,   multi -compartment   model   whose   state- 
space  is defined  by a very large  and heterogeneous  set of variables  as well as a large  number  of input 
parameters.  It is straightforward  to make  direct  contact  [CONTACT_56736].  This comparison  first will  
be used to establish  the validity  of the model.  Here,  the model  will simply  be integrated  in time for various   
initial   trauma   conditions   in  an  attempt   to  determine   whether   the  model   can  be  predictive.   In 
particular,  we will determine  whether  it is possible  to reproduce  the variation  between  the various  time 
states  at admission,3,  6, 12, 24, [ADDRESS_61961], the classical  method  of principal  component 
analysis  (PCA)  computes  principal  components  as eigenvectors  of the covariance  matrix  of the data set 
and find a low dimensional  representation  of the data by [CONTACT_56737]  (or energy)  of the data.  Diffusion  Maps is   
a  successful   generalization   of  PCA   to  complex   nonlinear   data  sets  whose   structure   is  unknown   in 
advance:  unlike  PCA,  the diffusion  map coordinates  are nonlinear  projections  of the data;  moreover,  the 
nonlinear  embedding  is based  only upon  local  similarities  of neighboring  data points.  Diffusion  Maps first  
will be used on the multiscale  simulation  data sets. This will establish  macroscopic  observables  that define   
the  trajectory   of  the  overall   patient -scale   model.  This  is  crucial   because   it  is  much   simpler   to 
establish  a connection  to patient  outcome  when  only a few variables  are being  tracked  (instead  of the large  
variable  space  that defines  the full multiscale  model).  However,  these  variables  are generally  not 
obviously  connected  to clinical  variables  and we will use the simulation  data to establish  relationships 
between  the Diffusion  Maps  variables  and actual  measureable  quantities.  The result  of this work  will be 
to  isolate   variables   that  are  highly   predictive   of  patient   outcome   and  allow   assessment   of  different 
interventions.  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.
Page  7 of 11  Are you conducting  research  outside  of the United  States? 
No 
 
Data  
confidentiality  
 
x  Paper -based  records  will be kept  in a secure  location  and only be accessible  to personnel  involved 
in the study.  
x  Computer -based  files will only be made  available  to personnel  involved  in the study  through  the 
use of access  privileges  and passwords.  
x  Prior   to  access   to  any  study -related   information,   personnel   will  be  required   to  sign  
statements agreeing  to protect  the security  and confidentiality  of identifiable  information.  
x  Wherever  feasible,  identifiers  will be removed  from  study -related  information.  
A Certificate  of Confidentiality  will be obtained,  because  the research  could  place  the subject  at risk    
of   criminal    or   civil   liability    or   cause    damage    to   the   subject's    financial    standing, 
employability,  or liability.  
A  waiver   of  documentation   of  consent   is  being   requested,   because   the  only  link  between   the 
subject   and  the  study   would   be  the  consent   document   and  the  primary   risk  is  a  breach   of 
confidentiality.  (This  is not an option  for FDA -regulated  research.)  
Precautions  are in place  to ensure  the data  is secure  by [CONTACT_56738],  because 
the research  involves  web-based  surveys.  
Audio   and/or   video   recordings   will  be  transcribed   and  then   destroyed   to  eliminate   audible 
identification  of subjects.  
 
 
Subject  Confidentiality  
Each   patient   will  be  assigned   a  study   number.   A  protected   REDCap   database,an   institutionally 
maintained  and protected  data network,  will be used to link each patient  to their assigned  study  number. 
Only  the assigned  study  number  will be directly  connected  to patient  data and only [CONTACT_56746]  will have 
access  to this link. The database  linking  each patient  to their assigned  study  number  will be destroyed five  
years  after the conclusion  of the study.  The data collected  will only be used for the proposed  IRB study.  
Only  de-identified  patient  data will be shared  with [CONTACT_56747]  and our Princeton  collaborators using   
DataLocker,   an  encrypted   portable   data  device.    Samples   (without   patient   identifiers)   will  be labeled   
with  the  study   number.   Samples   will  be  stored   in  a  locked   laboratory   facility   on  Mutch   3. Samples  
will be stored  for [ADDRESS_61962]  protected.  
 
Sensitive  Research  Information*  
Does  this research  involve  collection  of sensitive  information  about  the subjects  that should  be excluded 
from  the electronic  medical  record?  
No 
 
Subject  Privacy  
Privacy  refers  to the person's  desire  to control  access  of others  to themselves.  Privacy  concerns  people, 
whereas  confidentiality  concerns  data.  Describe  the strategies  to protect  privacy  giving  consideration  to 
the following:  The degree  to which  privacy  can be expected  in the proposed  research  and the safeguards 
that  will  be  put  into  place   to  respect   those   boundaries.   The  methods   used  to  identify   and  contact 
[CONTACT_56739].  The settings  in which  an individual  will be interacting  with an investigator.  The 
privacy    guidelines    developed    by   [CONTACT_56740],    professional    associations    and   scholarly
Page  8 of 11  disciplines  (e.g.,  psychiatry,  genetic  counseling,  oral history,  anthropology,  psychology).  
Consent   will  only  be  obtained   in  a  private   setting   (private   family   or  consultation   room,   private   
ICU room,  etc. Consent  will only be obtained  with the next of kin or patient.  Additional  family  members/ 
friends   will  not  be  part  of  the  discussion.    Consents,   patient   notes,   CRF's   will  be  stored   in  a  
locked facility  immediately  accessible  only to the research  staff (PARC  research  space,  Mutch  3). Each  
patient will  be assigned  a study  number.  A REDCap  database  will be used to link each patient  to their 
assigned study  number.  Only  the assigned  study  number  will be directly  connected  to patient  data and 
only [CONTACT_56746]  will have  access  to this link. The database  linking  each patient  to their assigned  study  
number  will be  destroyed  at the conclusion  of the study.  Only  de-identified  and encrypted  data will be 
shared  with [CONTACT_56748]   and  our  Princeton   collaborators.     Data   will  be  entered   and  stored   using   
a  password - protected  RedCAP  file. Only  [CONTACT_56746],  [CONTACT_56747]  and the PARC  research  team  will have  
access  to this  RedCAP  file. 
 
Data  Disclosure  
Will the data be disclosed  to anyone  who is not listed  under  Personnel?  
Data  will disclosed  to members  of the research  team,  Office  of Regulatory  Affairs,  Office  of Human  
Research,  the FDA  and NIH as needed.  
 
Data  
Protection*  
 
x  Name  
[CONTACT_56745],  city, county,  precinct,  zip code,  and equivalent  geocodes  
x  All elements  of dates  (except  year)  for dates  directly  related  to an individual  and all ages over  [ADDRESS_61963]  numbers 
Health  plan  ID numbers 
Account  numbers 
Certificate/license  numbers  
Vehicle  identifiers  and serial  numbers,  including  license  plate  numbers  
Device  identifiers/serial  numbers  
Web  addresses  (URLs) 
Internet  IP addresses  
Biomet ric identifiers,  incl. finger  and voice  prints  
Full face photographic  images  and any comparable  images 
Any other  unique  identifying  number,  characteristic,  or code 
None  
 
 
Does  your research  request  both a waiver  of HIPAA  authorization  for collection  of patient  information 
and  involve   providing   Protected   Health   Information   ("PHI")   that  is  classified   as  a  "limited   data  
set" (city/town/state/zip   code,   dates   except   year,   ages  less  than  90  or  aggregate   report   for  over  
90)  to  a recipi[INVESTIGATOR_56724]?  
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  Obtained  as Part  of Research* 
Are Tissue  Specimens  being  obtained  for research? 
Yes 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - Collected  during  regular  care*  
Will tissue  specimens  be collected  during  regulator  clinical  care (for treatment  or diagnosis)? 
Yes
Page  9 of 11  Tissue  Specimens  - otherwise  discarded* 
Would  specimens  otherwise  be discarded? 
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - publicly  available* 
Will tissue  specimens  be publicly  available? 
No 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - Collected  as part of research  protocol*  
Will tissue  specimens  be collected  as part of the research  protocol? 
Yes 
 
Tissue  Specimens  - Banking  of blood,  tissue  etc. for future  use* 
Does  research  involve  banking  of blood,  tissue,  etc. for future  use? 
Yes 
 
Genetic  testing  
If genetic  testing  is involved,  describe  the nature  of the tests,  including  if the testing  is predicative  or 
exploratory  in nature.  If predictive,  please  describe  plan for disclosing  results  to subjects  and provision of  
genetic  counseling.  Describe  how subject  confidentiality  will be protected  Note:  If no genetic  testing is  
to be obtained,  write:  "Not  applicable."  
The concentration  of free nucleic  acids  in the serum  will be measured.  We will measure  the expression of  
pro- and anti-inflammatory  genes  by [CONTACT_56741]  a cDNA  library  for the gene  expression  of proteins  of interest  that will be studied.  Further, the  
DNA  sequences  of these  proteins  will be analyzed  to look for polymorphisms  associated  with organ 
failure.  The results  of these  investigations  will only be linked  to the patient's  study  number  and not their 
name.  
 
 
 
 
Consent  
 
1. Consent  Process  
 
Overview  
Given  the unpredictability  and emergent  nature  of trauma,  we will not be able to identify  potentially 
eligible   patients   until  they  arrive   to  the  trauma   bay.  All  patients   will  have   suffered   an  unexpected 
traumatic  event,  they will be in pain,  and the trauma  service  will be assessing  them  rapi[INVESTIGATOR_56725]-threatening  injuries.  In the majority  of these  cases,  the patients  will be severely 
injured,   hemodynamically   unstable   and  unable   to  consent   for  themselves.   Given   the  urgent   and 
timesensitive  nature  of the proposed  research,  we will be seeking  a delay  in obtaining  informed  consent. 
Specifically,  we will be requesting  that the initial  [ADDRESS_61964]  a Glasgow  Coma  Score  of 15 and do not appear  to be clinically  intoxicated  will be considered 
able to consent  and approached  after the initial  trauma  evaluation.  In circumstances  where  the patient  is 
unable  to consent,  we will approach  the patient's  next of kin or power  of attorney  after the trauma  team 
has had the opportunity  to update  them  regarding  the patient's  clinical  condition.  The next of kin will be 
informed  that the initial blood  sample  has been  drawn.  After  explaining  the study,  including  its risks and  
benefits,  we will ask for HIPAA  authorization  and consent.  The next of kin will be able to withhold 
consent,  in which  case we will cease  collecting  data and samples.  They  may also consent  to the initial 
blood  draw  and data collection,  but decline  further  sample  and data collection,  or they may consent  to full  
enrollment.  When  the patient  is consentable,  and after the trauma  team  has had the opportunity  to inform  
the patient  of his/her  clinical  situation,  the research  team  will inform  the patient  of any blood draws  that 
have  occurred.  At this time,  the patient  can consent  to enrollment  (and any further  sample collection)  or 
withhold  consent  (even  if the next of kin had already  authorized).  If HIPAA  authorization or  consent  is 
withheld,  all data and samples  will be destroyed.  The discussion  of the study  as well as the consent  will 
be conducted  at the level  of a 5th or 6th grade  reading  comprehension.  Consent  will only be  obtained  in a 
private  setting  with the patient  and/or  his/her  next of kin. Additionally,  in the event  that the  patient  expi[INVESTIGATOR_56726],  we will approach  the family  only after the clinicians  have  explained
Page  10 of 11  to the family  the clinical  course  and outcome.  We will explain  the purpose  of the study  and explain  that 
samples   were   collected.   We  will  then  attempt   to  consent   the  family.   If  the  family   is  in  distress   
and cannot  be consented  prior  to leaving  the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  we will obtain  the family's  contact  [CONTACT_3031].  The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_56727] a witness.  If the family  member  does not consent  to the 
patient   participating   in  the  study,   all  samples   and  clinical   data  will  then  be  destroyed.  Theoretically, 
enrolled   subjects   could   represent   as  a  trauma   alert  again.   If  they  are  30  days  out  from   their  
initial enrollment,  they would  be eligible  to participate  again.  However,  this is very,  very rare. 
 
Children  and Adolescents  
We  do  not  routinely   treat  children   or  adolescents   at  the  Penn   Presby[CONTACT_56742].    Patients 
under  the age of 18 will not be included  in this study.  
 
Adult  Subjects  Not Competent  to Give  Consent  
see above  
 
2. Waiver  of Consent  
 
Waiver  or Alteration  of Informed  Consent*  
Waiver  or alteration  of required  elements  of consent  
 
Minimal  Risk*  
This research  involves  minimal  risk. The initial  blood  sample  (15 ml) will be drawn  at the time other 
blood   samples   are  taken   for  standard   clinical   care.   As  such,   it  does  not  require   an  additional 
venipuncture.  In total,  7 blood  samples  (a max of 15 ml per sample)  will be taken  over the course  of 5 
days.  When   research   expertise   is  not  available   for  specific   assays   (e.g  microfluidics   or  respi[INVESTIGATOR_038]) 
this  blood   volume   will  be  decreased   to  10  ml. Additionally,   collections   of  research   samples   will  
be deferred  or delayed  if the clinical  team  feels  that collection  would  interfere  with the clinical  care of an 
unstable  patient.  Moreover,  a volume  of 15 ml X 7 times  over 5 days is the maximum  amount  of blood 
that  will  be  collected.   Many   of  these   patients   will  be  bleeding   and  will  require   a  number   of  
blood transfusions  because  of their injuries.  Each  blood  transfusion  is 300 ml. We do not feel that a 
maximum of  105 ml of blood  over 5 days will pose a higher  risk to our patients.  Residual  blood  collection  
(which would  otherwise  be discarded)  involves  obtaining  samples  from  the clinical  lab on day [ADDRESS_61965]  Rights  and Welfare*  
This  study   will  attempt   to  protect   the  patient's   rights   by  (1)  informing   and  consenting   the  patient   
or surrogate  prior  to the initial  blood  draw  and urine  collection  whenever  practicable  (2) informing  and 
obtaining   consent   for  continued   participation   when   a  surrogate   is  identified   and  (3)  informing   and 
consenting   the  patient   when   he/she   regains   capacity   to  make   an  informed   choice.   If  consent   is  
not obtained,  the subject  will be un-enrolled  and the data and biological  samples  will be discarded.  
 
Waiver  Essential  to Research*  
Trauma  remains  the leading  cause  of death  for those  under  the age of [ADDRESS_61966]  model,  data and biologic  samples  will need  to be collected  BEFORE  interventions  in 
order   to  determine   which   interventions   either   positively   or  negatively   influence   outcomes.   Given   
the unpredictability  and emergent  nature  of trauma,  potentially  eligible  patients  cannot  be identified  prior  
to their   arrival   to  the  trauma   bay.  Moreover,   patients   who  are  severely   injured   and/or   
hemodynamically unstable   are  unable   to  consent   for  themselves.   Frequently,   these   patients   are  
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_56728], aggressively   resuscitated   with  blood   products   and  brought   to  the  operating   room   
or  IR  suite   for hemorrhage  control  within  minutes  of initial  arrival.  In general,  the resuscitative  effort  is 
well on the way  by [CONTACT_56743]'s  family  is located  - a process  that typi[INVESTIGATOR_56729].
Page  [ADDRESS_61967]   information   from   the  patient   and/or   the  surrogate   will  be  kept  in  a  separate   file  that  is  
not associated  with any HIPPA  or study  data.  Participants  will have  the option  of receiving  a copy  of the 
study  results  or manuscript  at the conclusion  of the study  either  by [CONTACT_56744].  
 
Written  Statement  of Research*  
No 
 
If no written  statement  will be provided,  please  provide  justificiation  
 
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
 
Risk / Benefit  
 
Potential  Study  Risks  
This study  has minimal  risk. Seven  blood  and urine  samples  with a maximum  cumulative  total volume of  
[ADDRESS_61968] 
research   samples   during   routine   clinical   phlebotomy   or  from   existing   lines.   Blood   samples   will  
be collected  only by [CONTACT_41207]/medical/phlebotomy  staff in order  to minimize  the minimal  risk of pain and 
infection  associated  with routine  phlebotomy.  
 
Potential  Study  Benefits  
There  are no direct  benefits  to study  participants.  The benefit  will be toward  advancing  our knowledge of  
how severely  injured  patients  develop  complications  such as coagulopathy  and organ  failure.  This study  
will hopefully  help us develop  better  assays  to identify  and treat patients  at risk. 
 
Alternatives  to Participation  (optional)  
None.  If a subject  chooses  not to participate  he/she  will receive  standard  care.  
 
Data  and Safety  Monitoring  
After  each enrollment,  the PARC  research  coordinator  will audit  the case report  form  in order  to ensure 
proper  consent  procedures  were  performed,  that data collection  and entry  are accurate  and that personal 
data is stored  properly.  Data  analysis  will be performed  after every  50th subject  enrolled.  
 
The following  documents  are currently  attached  to this item:  
 
There  are no documents  attached  for this 
item.  
 
Risk  / Benefit  Assessment  
This study  presents  minimal  risk to patients.  