Confidential  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in 
Xerostomic Population 
___________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_68958], DMD, MS  
 
Co-Investigators:   Athena Papas, DMD, PhD  
     
Study Coordinators:  
    Elizabeth Tzavaras  , AS, CDA, CCRP  
    Joseph Cimmino, BS, CCRP  
    Tiffany Bairos, RDH  
Ann-Marie Billig  
 
 
Study Location:   Tufts University  School of Dental Medicine  
One Kneeland Street  [LOCATION_011], MA [ZIP_CODE]  
 Sponsor:         Procter & Gamble                    
 
 
Protocol Version Date:  4/14/[ADDRESS_75433] of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 2 of 22 I) Introduction  
A) Aim/Hypothesis/Objective  
Objectives:  
• Primary aim: To see a r eduction in the self- reported subjective perception of dryness in 
the oral cavity.     
• Secondary aims: To m easure self -reported sensitivity of the teeth, self- reported 
perception of teeth whiteness, and objective measurement of improvement of saliva 
production.  
 
 
II) Background and Rationale  
Xerostomia,  is a subjective sensation of dryness of the mouth, which may have a significant 
effect in a persons quality of life . The sensation of dryness of the mouth may be caused by 
[CONTACT_68969] e.g., salivary glands, 
or the sensation of dryness could be caused by [CONTACT_68970], which can destroy the 
salivary glands at the genetic level and impede the ir functions.  Additionally , there are more than 
[ADDRESS_75434] neural transmission .  Neural transmission is when  the neuro 
transmission is hinder ed reversibly leading to the salivary hypofunction that results  in dry mouth.  
It is estimated that 12 -47%  of the elderly and 10 -19.3% in their early 30's suffer from dry mouth  
(6)(7). In a study, it was found that the  prevalence of xerostomia was 10.0% (with no apparent 
gender difference) among 32 -year -olds and was significantly higher among those taking 
antidepressants (odds ratio =4.7)  (5). At risk groups may present much higher (60+ %) rates of 
xerostomia. A systemic literature review suggests a prevalence of 27 – 32% of the medicated 
population suffer from xerostomia as a side effect  (7). 
Saliva, the bulk fluid of the oral cavity is very important in maintaining the functions and 
balance in the oral cavity including candidiasis  and enamel erosion prevention. In past studies, 
residual mucosal flu id levels were seen to vary  in different oral cavity sites from an average of 
70–100 μm ( 2)(3). In addition, the  vault of the hard palate has much less mucosal fluid thickness 
than the floor of the mouth. Over the moisture layer is the lipid layer and reduction or loss of this  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 3 of 22 moisture layer can  contribute to the subjective perception of the dryness in  the mouth. A n 
addition of the lipid layer will also increase lubrication in the oral cavity.   
Unstimulated salivary flow in dry mouth patients has shown an increased clinical oral dryness 
score and mucosal wetness is at a significantly reduced rate (p<0.05) when compared with 
healthy subjects ( 4). 
Historically, various products containing methylcel lulose, water, oily emulsions etc. , have 
been used to alleviate the subjective sensation of dryness in the oral cavity in the forms of rinse, 
gel, ointment and paste.  However, t he alleviation of the dry mouth symptoms has  been varied.  
This study will inve stigate a semi solid cohesive gel (referred to as Whitening Gel)  that has 
the primary marketed  purpose of teeth whitening. We theorize that the  whitening gel’s  retention 
in the oral cavity is  longer than rinse forms and this is likely  to promote the flow of saliva  by 
[CONTACT_68971].  
 The study product contains an inert hydrophobic phase in an amount from 30% to 98%, 
preferably from 40% to 90% by [CONTACT_68972]. It also contains a n emulsifying system 
in an amount from 1% to 10%, preferably from 3% to 7% by [CONTACT_68973].  
P&G’s whitening gel emulsifying system is comprised of at least one surfactant having an 
hydrophilic -lipophilic balance (HLB) <10, preferably comprised between [ADDRESS_75435] one 
surfactant with HLB>10, preferably comprised between [ADDRESS_75436]’s teeth for [ADDRESS_75437] , known as “ Crest Whitening 
Emulsions ”, will be used as the investigative product.  There will be no active control group. This 
is not the first time P&G whitening gel will be used in humans.  We do believe this is the first 
study investigating dry mouth sensation from using a whitening gel.  
 
III) Research Plan  
A) Experimental Design  
 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 4 of 22 This will be a single center, two visit study investigating the effectiveness of dryness in the 
oral cavity, whiteness of teeth, and teeth sensitivity after one week’s use of whitening agent.  
 
B) Sample Size and Statistical Analysis  
 
Sample size  
This is a single site study. All study -related procedures will take place at TUSDM. Based  on 
our preliminary data from a previous study, we anticipate  25 subjects will be needed to 
achieve the necessary statistical power required to observe expected differ ences in relief 
of dryness in the oral  cavity. Because we anticipate the potential of many screen failures 
due to the VAS scale and saliva production requirements outlined in the exclusion/inclusion criteria section , we will screen/enroll a total of [ADDRESS_75438] , as directed on the questionnaire . The self -reported 
scores from the visual analogue scales  (VAS)  will be considered on the first and final 
visit. The salivary flow before and after the application of the product, Pre & Post -
Product Use Dry Mouth & Sensitivity Questionnaire  before and after the product 
application will be compared using a student - t test method. The s ame method will be 
used to make comparisons of these gathered data points between the first and final visits.    
 
Randomization  
This will be an open label study;  thus no randomization plan is necessary.  
 
Blinding   
There will be no blinding for this study.  
 
C) Products  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75439] to be used in this study is manufactured by P&G and called, “Crest 
Whitening Emulsions”. The amount of each dose s hould be enough to cover the entire tip of the 
whitening wand, approximately ½ a tsp. The use of the study product in this study will be for 
what they are approved for. Per the manufacturer’s instructions, study subjects will be asked to apply the study product up to [ADDRESS_75440] to be used in this study is a  hydrophobic emulsion containing agent ( a 
teeth whitening gel with emulsificatio n gel ). It contains:  
Petrolatum, Water, Hydrogen  Peroxide,  Flavor, Sucralose, Sorbitan Palmitate  
  
D) Subject Characteristics  
1) Inclusion Criteria  
− At least 18 years of age . 
− The inability to produce more than < 0.18mL/min of unstimulated saliva.  
− Score of 5  or mo re on question 1 of the VAS dry mouth scale  (How severe 
is your dryness right now?) , evaluated in the  Pre-Product Use Dry Mouth 
& Sensitivity Questionnaire  . 
− Evidence of currently taking Xerostomia- inducing medication such as , 
antihypertensives, anti -anxiety agents, psychiatric remedies, 
antihistamines . 
− Subject not currently using any teeth whitening or desensitizing products 
that contain potassium nitrate such as Sensodyne  or Pronamel.  
− Subject willing to comply with the study regimen and products.  
 
2) Exclusion Criteria  
− Subjects who are currently pregnant (self -reported ). 
− Subjects able to produce more than 0.18mL/min of unstimulated saliva   
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 6 of 22 − Subjects that have ever received therapeutic radiation in the head and 
neck area.  
− Subjects with a diagnosis of conditions that would affect salivary flow such as Sjogren’s  Syndrome . 
− Subjects with a condition the investigator believes not suitable for the 
study such as autoimmune diseases that impact salivary flow.  
− Subjects that currently use whitening toothpaste, desensitizing toothpaste, or any other products causing similar results . 
− Subjects currently participating in any other research studies . 
− Subject unable to provide consent (ex. Cognitively impaired adults) . 
− Non- English spea king  
 
3) Subject Withdrawal/Termination Criteria  
− Subjects who do not comply with the study procedures, such as use of teeth whitening products , may be withdrawn from the study.  
− The study team may terminate subjects if they no longer fulfill inclusion criteria, if an exclusion criterion is met, or if they do not show up for 
scheduled study visits.   
− Subjects who experience an unanticipated adverse drug effect will be withdrawn fro m the study.  
− Subjects unable to complete the study procedures due to a medical condition such as dry mouth and sensitivity conditions that result in the 
inability to capture meaningful data during the study procedure s.  
− Subjects may  choose to  withdraw from  the study at any time.  
 
Subjects may remain patients of TUSDM if they decide to withdraw from the study or are withdrawn by [CONTACT_3476].   
 If during the course of their participation in the study, a subject chooses to 
withdraw or is withdrawn by [CONTACT_5051], any data that has been 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75441] be involved with continued data collection.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_68959] (either withdrawn 
subjects or subjects completing the study) are in need of additional treatment 
and/or follow- up observation as a result of participation in this trial and will refer 
them to their primary care provider fo r further  care . Subjects and/or their 
insurance will be responsible for the cost of any standard of care follow -up visits 
or additional treatment that is not part of this study.  
 
4) Vulnerable Populations  
Transgend er subjects will be recruited as part of this study. All subjects will be asked 
on the Medical/Dental History Form to identify their sex, to which they will answer 
however they choose. They will not be sought out or targeted for participation and 
will not be discriminated against as a result of their sexual orientation/gender identity.  The subjects will not be asked to disclose if they are transgender or not on 
the Medical/Dental History Form.  
 
Cognitively impaired adults and pregnant adults will not be enr olled in this study. 
There would be no direct benefits to these specific vulnerable populations by 
[CONTACT_68974]. Pregnancy will be determined through self- reporting.  
 
 
Non- English speakers will be excluded from the study because the study team does 
not have validated questionnaires developed in multiple languages.  The study team 
also does not have the resources to translate the take home diary  or manufacturer’s 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75442] benefits to this population 
by [CONTACT_4907].  
 
 
E) Assessment  
1) Risk 
 
The standard risk associated with teeth whitening products   include causing gum 
irritation, gum or teeth bleaching, teeth sensitivity, and irritation of the oral mucosa 
(cheeks, lips, tongue).  In addition, there is a risk of irritation or whitening from contact 
[CONTACT_68975]. Subjects may also feel discomfort when they 
abstain eati ng or drinking before the study visit.  
 
There is the risk of loss of confidentiality  to the subject by [CONTACT_4907].  
This risk will be kept to a minimum by [CONTACT_68976].  
 
2) Benefits  
 
There is no direct medical benefit to the subject for participation in this study.  
However, the results of the study will help better understand whether the application 
of hydrophobic emulsion containing agents have a beneficial effect in alleviating 
subjective sensation of mouth dryness along with teeth whitening in a X erostomic 
population. The results of this study will help in understanding the contributing factors that alleviate dry mouth and increase esthetics through whitening of teeth.  
 
3) Alternatives  
Patients may  choose not to participate in the study and to receive the standard of 
care treatment for  dry mouth at TUSDM at normal clinic fees.  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 9 of 22  
F) Study Procedures  
 
Visit 1  (1-1.5 hours)  Screening/ Baseline (Day 0)  
1. Subject will be called [ADDRESS_75443]:  
a. Not consume alcohol for [ADDRESS_75444] had anything to eat or drink (including chewing gum or eating 
candy) for 1.5 hours prior to their visit). Water is acceptable to drink up to 
1 hour prior to the study visit.  
d. Not smoke 1.5 hours prior to their visit.  
2. The subjects will be asked  to read the informed consent form (ICF). Subjects will 
be given ampl e time to have any questions answered. If a subject decides to 
participate, he or she will be asked  to sign the ICF. A copy of the ICF will be given 
to the subject.  
3. Subject will be asked to complete demographic information and a medical history.  
4. An oral ex am, including evaluation of oral cavity, soft and hard tissues, will be 
completed following standard of care procedures in US dentistry using a mouth 
mirror and dental explorer.  
5. Subject medications with potential side effects being dry mouth will be verifi ed 
using the Physician’s Reference Desk.  
6. Saliva Collection 1 (pre -product application): Saliva will be collected by [CONTACT_68977] a pre -weighed vial for 5 minutes (referred to 
as the Drooling Method) . The post collection weig ht will be subtracted from the 
pre-weight to determine the flow rate.  The saliva samples will be discarded after 
they are weighed.  
7.  A paper questionnaire will be given to subject to complete before application of 
study product and after application of study product. Questionnaire includes Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) questionnaire on dry mouth, quantity of saliva, and perceived sensitivity of teeth.  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 10 of 22 8. Inclusion/exclusion criteria will be evaluated and eligibility for the study will be 
determined.  
9. Demonstration and application of study product:  
a.  A visual and oral demonstration of application of the whitening gel will be 
performed by a study team member.  The script for the demonstration will 
be the one provided in the information packet in each stud y product box 
so the subject can bring the instructions home.  The study team member 
will mimic the necessary steps to properly apply the gel, without using the 
product. The study team member will then have the subject complete the 
steps while applying the gel to their own teeth. Subjects will then be asked 
to sit for 5 minutes to let the gel set on their teeth.  
10. Saliva Collection 2 (post -product application): Saliva will be collected using the 
same Drooling Method as Saliva Collection 1.  The saliva samples  will be discarded 
after they are weighed.  
11. Photographs of subject teeth will be taken by a standard dental camera. The photos will only contain subject teeth and oral cavity with no subject identifiers 
visible.  In addition to the ICF, the subjects will be asked to sign a photo release 
form. If the subject does not wish to sign this form, their photographs will not be taken.  Those who do not consent to having their photos taken will be tracked in 
the enrollment log . Photographs  will be taken pre -application of the study product 
at visit 1.  
12. Distribution of study product and diary: One box of study whitening gel product ,  
(0.88Oz) toothpaste, and a toothbrush will be dispensed by [CONTACT_38991].  
This is to ensure all participants are using the exact same dental products during the trial period.  The subjects will be asked to not use any other oral tools or products during the trial period aside from the ones distributed by [CONTACT_68978]  1. A diary will also be dispensed for the record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_68960]. A study team member will again verbally tell the participant  the 
instructions that are provided with the study product and that per the 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75445] will be distributed upon successful completion of visit . 
 
Visit 2  (1-1.5 hours)  Final Visit -  7 ∓ [ADDRESS_75446]:  
a. Not consume alcohol for [ADDRESS_75447] had anything to eat or drink (including chewing gum or eating 
candy) for 1.5 hours prior to their visit). Water is acceptable to drink up to 
[ADDRESS_75448] medications with potential side effects being dry mouth will be verified using the Physician’s Reference Desk. Subjects will be asked to confirm that they have taken their medications as prescribed since Visit 1.  
5. An oral exam, including evaluation of oral cavity, soft and hard tissues, will be compl eted following standard of care procedures in US dentistry using a mouth 
mirror and dental explorer.   
6. Saliva Collection 1 (pre -product application): Saliva will be collected using the 
drooling method for [ADDRESS_75449] of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 12 of 22 includes the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) questionnaire on dry mouth, quantity of 
saliva, and perceived sensitivity of teeth.   
8. Application of study product: A study team member will ask the subjects to apply 
the gel to their teeth. Subjects will then be asked to sit for 5 minutes to allow the 
gel to set on their teeth.  
9. Saliva Collection 2 (post -product application): Saliva will be collected using the 
same drooling method as Saliva Collection 1. The saliva samples will b e discarded 
after they are weighed.  
 
10. Photographs of subject teeth will be taken by a standard dental camera. The photos will only contain subject teeth and oral cavity with no subject identifiers visible.  Photo graphs  will be taken post- application  of the study product at visit 2.  
11. The study diary and any leftover  whitening gel  product will be collected.  
12. Gift card will be distributed upon successful completion of visit . 
 
 
 
 Screening/ Baseline Visit  
Day 0  Visit 2  
Day 7  (±2 days)  
Informed Consent Form  x  
Demographics  x  
Collect and/or Review Medical History  x x 
Review eligibility and withdrawal criteria   x 
Confirmation of Xerogenic Medications  x  
Pre-Product Use Dry Mouth & Sensitivity 
Questionnaire   x x 
Post -Product Use Dry Mouth & Sensitivity 
Questionnaire  x x 
Unstimulated Salivary Test  x x 
Oral Exam  x x 
Evaluate eligibility criteria  x  
Oral Photographs  X (Pre-Application)  X (Post-Application)  
Demonstration of Product Use  x  
Product Usage  x x 
   
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75450] Distribution or Collection  x x 
Adverse Event Reporting (if applicable)  x x 
Stipend  x x 
 
 
G) Subject Safety  1) Adverse Event Reporting  
Adverse Events  
An adverse event  is any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human 
subject, including any abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding, symptom, or 
disease, temporally associated with a subject’s participation in the research.   
 
Adverse events will be recorded in source documents and on case report forms. All 
adverse events and non- serious situations will be recorded, monitored, and reported 
to the IRB at time of continuing review or at the study’s termination if this occurs 
before the study’s next continuing re view .  
 Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event is one that results in death, or is life -threatening, or results in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], or results in a persistent or 
significant disability/incapacitation, or results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect, or 
may jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed above.  
 Serious adverse events will be recorded in source documents and on case report forms. Serious Adverse Events that meet the criteria of an unanticipated problem will 
be reported to the IRB within 5 business days following the Reportable New 
Information Policy. Serious Adverse Events not meeting the criteria for an unantici pated problem will be reported to the IRB at time of continuing review or at 
the study’s termination if this occurs before the study’s next continuing review.  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 14 of 22  
Unanticipated Problems  
An unanticipated problem is an incident, experience, or outcome that meet s all of the 
following criteria: 1) The nature, severity, or frequency is unexpected for the subject population or research activities as described in the current IRB approved protocol, supporting documents, and the ICF(s); 2) it is related or possibly rel ated to 
participation in the research; 3) it suggests the research may place the subject or others at a greater risk of harm then was previously recognized.  
 
Unanticipated problems will be recorded in source documents and on case report 
forms. Unanticipate d problems will be reported to the IRB within 5  business days after 
the PI/study team becomes aware of the problem. A Reportable New Information 
Form will be submitted to the IRB no later than 5 business days after the PI/study 
team becomes aware of the pr oblem.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADEs)  
Unanticipated adverse device effect means any serious adverse effect on health or 
safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a 
device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in nature, 
severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application (including a 
supplementary plan or application), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 UADEs will be documented in source documents and on case report forms as to onset, severity, duration, management, outcome and relatedness to the test device. UADEs will be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_75451].  
 
H) Subject P articipatio n 
 
1) Screening  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 15 of 22 The PI/CO- I ([CONTACT_68984] and [CONTACT_68985] ) will conduct screening 
examinations to identify subjects who meet the inclusion / exclusion criteria for 
enrollment into the study.  
 
2) Informed Consent 
 The PI [INVESTIGATOR_68961].  Consenting will take place in a 
private clinic r oom at on the 14
th floor of Tufts University School of Dental Medicine 
(TUSDM) and the patient will be given as much time as they  need to consider 
participation or have any questions answered by [CONTACT_978]. The participant will be invited 
to include or exclude any associates (e.g., loved ones) in the consent process.  
 
Patients will be asked to read the consent form and be given ample o pportunity to 
have their questions answered.  To avoid coercion, the consenting investigator will 
read through the copy of the consent form with the participant section by [CONTACT_68979], 
making sure the participant understands each section and has an opportunity  to ask 
questions.  If at any time the participant indicates they  are not interested in 
participation, the meeting will end.   
 
If after going through the consent form, the participant indicates they  would like to 
discuss the study with associates or think about participating, then the meeting will 
be ended, and the participant will be asked to contact [CONTACT_68980]. If the participant contacts the study in the future for participation, they  will 
be invited back to the clinic, and if informed consent is given at that time, study 
activities will begin then.  
 
If the participant indicates they  may be interested in participating after going through 
the consent form with the investigator, and the investigator determines the 
participant has the capacity to provide informed consent, the participant will be asked 
to provide informed consent at that time. Written consent will be obtained following 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 16 of 22 “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)”  and we will follow the “SOP: 
Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP -090).”  Patients will certify their 
willingness to participate in the study by [CONTACT_68981].  The subject will be given a copy of the consent form.    
 If any new finding requires any change to the informed consent form, the subject will be reconsented.  
 
 
 
Study Location:  
Tufts University School of Dental Medicine  
 
3) Personnel  
 
All study personnel will be GCP and CITI certified and trained on all their roles, 
responsibilities, and study procedures.  
 
I. Ongoing communication with the IRB and sponsor – The PI  
[INVESTIGATOR_51381]. Subject Recruitment –  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_68962]. Obtaining Informed Consent – The PI , Co-I, or a study coordinator, who is CITI 
and GCP trained, will obtain informed consent.   
a. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_68963]- I will be available to answer any medical questions the 
subject may have.  
IV. Conducting inclusion/exclusion evaluation – the PI [INVESTIGATOR_68963]- I 
V. Saliva collection , questionnaire dissemination, product use demonstration 
and dissemination – The PI [INVESTIGATOR_68964]. Maintaining participant’s research records  – The PI  
[INVESTIGATOR_68965]. Monitoring and reporting of adverse events  – The PI 
 
 
4) Payment for Participation  
 
(a) Compensation 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 17 of 22 Subjects will be given a $ [ADDRESS_75452] upon successful completion of each study 
visit. In total, subjects will receive $ 150 for their full participation in the study, as long 
as they attend both visits and are not withdrawn. Subjects that withdraw before either 
study visit is completed will not be provided a parking voucher.   Subjects who fail to 
meet the inclusion criteria of the study will receive a $ [ADDRESS_75453].  
 
(b) Transportation  
− Travel reimbursement and transportation costs.   
Subjects will be provided a parking voucher to accommodate  their par king 
needs at TUSDM at the successful completion of each study visit.  
 
(c) Costs and Insurance  
 
Neither the subject, nor their insurance company, will be billed for any 
study procedures.   
 
5) Study Results  
Subjects will not receive information regarding the results of the study.  
 
A final report and results will be transferred to the sponsor when requested. Individual data will not be  transferred.  The study team will consult with Tufts 
University  Technology  Transfer  to determine whether an agreement is needed to permit 
the transfer of data/specimens, and an  agreement (e.g.,  contract, Clinical Trial 
Agreement, Collaboration  Agreement, Data Use Agreement (DUA), or Material Transfer 
Agreement  (MTA)) has been or will be established that will cover any  transfer  of 
data/specimens, and the agreement will be executed  prior to any transfer.    
 
Study records will be retained for the timeframe described in the record retention policy of the 
“SOP – Records Retention Timeframe –  Investigators”. The study team will follow the 
“Confidentiality   and Data Security Guidelines for Electronic Research Data
” for electronic data.  
 
6) Confidentiality  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75454] enrolled in the study 
will be assigned a unique alphanumeric code. Subjects’ paper files will be kept in a 
secure, locked cabinet in a secure room ( TUSDM 742 or 1418) when the files are not 
being reviewed.  Coded items will be kept in a separate locked drawer in [ADDRESS_75455] protected Tufts -encrypted computer in a 
secure, locked office.   
No information or samples collected as part of this study will be used or distributed for future research studies.  
 
 
(a) Coding  
Each subject will be assigned a subject identification number. Alphanumeric identification numbers will be assigned sequentially. This will be accessible by [CONTACT_11698].  
 
The study team  will maintain a confidential list of the subjects separate from the 
consent forms, which will serve as a means of linking the subject ID number to the 
study records. This  key between subject ID number and identifiable information 
will be kept in password protected document in Tufts BOX.  The gift card receipt 
documents and parking vouchers, which have both subject ID and identifiers on 
them, will also be kept in a password protected Tufts Box Folder  and/or in a locked 
cabinet in [ADDRESS_75456] files . All data used in analysis 
and reports will be used without identifiable reference to the subjects ; only 
Subject ID will be used. Only the research team will have access to the key code 
for the subject ID numbers, study files, and data. No identifiable  photographs will 
be recorded as part of this study. Genetic information will  not be collected from 
the subjects for the purpose of this study.   The study data entry and study 
management systems used by [CONTACT_68982], DMD, MS  
Page [ADDRESS_75457] protected. At the end of the study, all study 
databases will be arch ived at the Tufts University School of Dental Medicine.  
 
(b) Access  
Only study personnel will have access to data.  Investigators will permit monitoring, audits, and regulatory inspections and will provide direct access to study related documentation.  The study sponsor will not have access to any 
identifiable data.  
 
8) Data Safety Monitoring Plan:  
Study personnel will monitor this trial for all safety related issues to determine whether an unreasonable risk to subjects develops. Quality control measures include routine inspection of case report forms, source documents, data tabulations, and tracking of adverse events . 
 
9) New Findings : 
The subject will be informed of any significant new findings discovered during the course of this study that might influence  the subject’s continuation and participation in the study.  Subjects will 
be told at a study appointment or via telephone of new findings during the study. If new findings 
require revisions to the ICF, the subject will be re -consented.  
 
I) Record Retention  
1) Study Records  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_68966].  All paper files and documents will be kept in a locked file cabinet, 
within a locked room , 742.  For electronic records, the study team will use  Tufts 
BOX, which is HIPAA compliant, and data would only be accessible to study team 
members.  
  
2) Long Term Rete ntion 
 
All study records will be kept for a minimum of [ADDRESS_75458] retention policy of the “SOP  – Records Retention Timeframe 
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 20 of 22 – Investigators”. All research records will be kept at Tufts University School of Dental 
Medicine, de -identified, and in a locked cabinet in office 742 for a minimum of two 
years after the study close. At the end of the two years, the research material can be 
sent to Iron Mountain for the remainder of the seven years.   The study team will 
follow the “ Confidentiality   and Data Security Guidelines for Electronic Research 
Data ” for electronic data.  
 
K) Reporting  
Unanticipated problems , adverse events , and RNI  will be reported per the Tufts MC/TUHS 
IRB Reportable New Information Policy.  
The IRB will be notified of any deviations from the protocol in cases of medical 
emergencies when the change is necessary to eliminate an apparent immediate hazard to the subje ct.  
Progress reports on the investigation shall be submitted to the IRB at regular intervals, but in no event less often than yearly, e.g., at continuing review.  
 
L) Protocol Deviations  
No protocol changes or deviations will be made without prior agreement by [CONTACT_32629] B and 
study sponsor  unless implemented to prevent an immediate hazard to subjects.  All other 
protocol changes or deviations will be made by a formal amendment subject to IRB approval.  All such changes or deviations will be reported to the IRB  and sponsor  as they 
occur and included in the final study report.  
M) Study Termination  
This study may be terminated for the following reasons:  
Discovery of unforeseen risk that could jeopardize the dental/physical well -being 
of subjects.  
Enrollment or recall rates that are not likely to produce sufficient data for 
evaluation of safety and efficacy . 
Non- compliance with the clinical investigational plan, the Investigator  
Exploratory Study on Effect of Whitening Agent with Emulsion Gel in Xerostomic Population  
Mabi Singh, DMD, MS  
Page 21 of 22 Agreement, applicable FDA regulations or conditions of approval imposed by [CONTACT_68983] . 
Withdrawal of IRB approval.   
In the event of study termination, the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_68967]/or follow- up observation as a result of 
participation in this trial.  
 
N) Subject Recrui tment/Advertising  
Paper flyers will be posted throughout TUSDM and Oral Medicine Clinic . Permission is not 
required for these posting locations. Flyers will remain posted until enrollment goals are met. Subjects will be recruited through responding to posted study advertisements.  
These posted advertisements will be visible to faculty, staff, students, and patients.  
Investigators may also inform clinic patients about the study.   
All of the forms of recruitment will be submitted for IRB approval prior to use .  
A phone screening script and voicemail script will be used for recruitment. When an 
interested subject responds to the recruitment material, they will be informed of the general purpose of the study, procedures that will take place, and study time commitment. The study coordinator will conduct a brief screening via phone to 
determ ine eligibility. During this screening call, the coordinator will collect subject name, 
telephone number, email address, and  mailing address for future correspondence.  
Patients coming into the Oral Medicine Clinic for regularly scheduled visits will also be recruited. AxiUm maintains a computerized database of patient information of the Tufts 
Dental School.  Potential subjects will be identified and prescreened from the Oral 
Medicine Clinic patient list containing the ICD 10 code number # code R68.2, which is the 
diagnosis code for xerostomia. These patients will be recruited using the same phone script outlined above. In the event the subject does not answer the phone, a voicemail script will be used. Up to [ADDRESS_75459] ID # . Identifiable 
information will not be recorded in the screening log  and study sponsor will not have 
access to it.  
 
O) References/Bibliography  
1.  Apperley, O., Medlicott, N., Rich, A., Hanning, S. and Huckabee, M.L. (2017), A clinical 
trial of a novel emulsion for potential use as a saliva substitute in patients with 
radiation -induced xerostomia. J Oral Rehabil, 44: 889 -895. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/joor.[ZIP_CODE]  
2. Collins LM, Dawes C. The surface area of the adult human mouth and thickness of the 
salivary film covering the teeth and oral mucosa. J Dent Res. 1987 Aug;66(8):1300 -2. 
3. Pramanik R, Osailan SM, Challacombe SJ, Urquhart D, Proctor GB. Protein and mucin 
retentio n on oral mucosal surfaces in dry mouth patients. Eur J Oral Sci. 2010 
Jun;118(3):245- 53. 
4. Samira Osailan, Rashida Pramanik, Soha Shirodaria, Stephen J Challacombe, Gordon Burgess Proctor. Investigating the relationship between hyposalivation and mucosal 
wetness. Oral Diseases, Wiley, 2010, 17 (1), pp.109. ff10.1111/j.1601 -
0825.2010.[ZIP_CODE].xff. ffhal -00599898f  
5. Murray Thomson W, Poulton R, Mark Broadbent J, Al- Kubaisy S. Xerostomia and 
medications among 32 -year -olds. Acta Odontol Scand. 2006;64(4):249- 254. 
doi:10.1080/00016350600633243  
6. Thomson WM. Issues in the epi[INVESTIGATOR_68968]. Gerodontology. 
2005;22:65– 76. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]  
7. Guggenheimer J, Moore PA. Xerostomia etiology, recognition and treatment. JADA. 
2003;134:61 –9. 
 
 
 
 
 