Title:  Effect of Vibration Exercise on Upper Limb Strength, Function and Pain  
Clinical Trials.gov ID:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Protocol Date :  5/24/[ADDRESS_134525] injury (SCI) 
to operate manual wheeled mobility devices in order to live independently and perform activities of daily 
living such as wheelchair propulsion, wheelcha ir transfer activities, and weight relieving maneuvers. 
These activities, however, place high demands on the upper extremities and practicing them over time 
negatively impacts upper extremity health. The shoulders, elbows and wrists are all highly suscepti ble to 
degeneration, overuse injuries, and pain. The shoulder is the most common site of upper extremity pain 
in manual wheelchair users, with reported pain ranging from 32% to 78%. A range of pathological 
conditions at the shoulder have also been document ed including impi[INVESTIGATOR_20798], adhesive 
capsulitis, recurrent dislocations, rotator cuff tears, and tendinitis. Shoulder pain has been most closely 
associated with transfers, weight relieving activities, and ramp propulsion indicating that these activi ties 
may be the most demanding ones performed.  
The benefits of upper limb resistance training for wheelchair users with paraplegia have been well 
documented and include moderate to large gains in muscle strength, endurance, and performance of 
activities o f daily living. Studies among various populations ranging from children to older adults, 
untrained to elite athletes, and persons with and without disabilities have shown that when resistance 
training is paired with high -frequency whole body vibration ther e is greater potential to increase and 
coordinate muscle recruitment and build muscle strength and power more quickly. More recently vibrating 
dumbbells have been developed so that training can be localized to the upper extremities. This form of 
training c ould greatly benefit persons with paraplegia who need an effective and efficient solution to 
building muscle work capacity for weight bearing tasks and for protecting the joints from overuse and 
aging effects.  
Numerous studies have examined the effects of  varying forms of structured resistance and endurance 
training among individuals with SCI. These studies have demonstrated that engaging in structured fitness 
training, including resistance training 2 -3 times/week, of the upper limbs following SCI leads to  
improvements in muscle strength, increased performance during activities of daily living and improved 
quality of life. While a combination of endurance and resistance training is recommended for overall 
increased fitness, resistance training targets and l eads to greater gains in upper extremity work capacity, 
muscle strength, and power over endurance training. Resistance training is also recommended for 
combating muscle imbalances associated with overuse and for treating shoulder pain. In one study 
wheelch air users with SCI who concentrated on strengthening the muscles of the posterior shoulder and 
upper back while stretching the muscles of the anterior shoulder and chest reported greater pain relief 
and an easier time performing propulsion and weight relie f activities when compared to an attention 
control group who received video instruction on pain relief. The amount of strength gain achieved through 
resistance training reportedly varies from study to study (10 -60%) with larger gains found in studies that 
involve weight lifting universal systems or equipment and frequent, progressive increases in training 
loads. Most of the studies evaluating effects of training report outcomes of muscle strength, anerobic 
power, endurance, pain, and general improvement in the performance of daily tasks (e.g. Functional 
Independence Measure). Few studies have examined the effects of resistance training on propulsion 
performance and skills. We are not aware of any studies that have assessed the impact of resistance 
training o n transfer ability specifically. Therefore the present study will determine the effectiveness of 
the proposed resistance training programs (vibration and non -vibration) in improving forces generated 
during wheelchair mobility tasks and the ability to trans fer to higher and lower surfaces.  
Vibration exercise has gained recent popularity and adoption among recreational to elite athletes. This is 
because vibration training has been shown in numerous studies to increase muscle strength, power and 
performance wh en integrated into a resistance training program or when used as a supplement to 
alternative modes of training. Vibration exercise is mostly practiced in the form of whole body vibration 
(WBV), where one stands or sits on an oscillating platform. Vibrating  dumbbells have also been developed 
more recently for upper -body exercise. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_120262], multiple studies have shown that both WBV and vibrating dumbbell use elicits greater muscle 
activation not only in the muscles targeted but also in the surrounding and supporting muscle groups 
(e.g. antagonists). Using vibration above a certain threshold frequency (12 Hz for plates, and 16 Hz for 
dumbbells) elicits a stretch reflex (contraction) in the muscle. The number of contractions is equivalent 
to the vibration frequency (e.g. 20 Hz = 20 contractions per second). When frequencies exceed 20 Hz 
for plates (28 Hz for dumbbells), the muscle fibers activated do not have enough time to complete a full 
contractio n and relaxation cycle and are therefore in constant co -contraction which results in increased 
muscle force and power post -vibration. Moreover, muscle electromyographic patterns observed with 
upper limb vibration at high frequencies (44 Hz) have indicated a more efficient and effective recruitment 
of high threshold motor units during fatiguing contractions. The effects of vibration on the body have 
been extensively studied and guidelines have been developed to regulate exposure to such stimuli. The 
frequenc y, amplitudes and exposures used in previous vibration studies and the proposed study are 
considered acceptable and safe. Results from all of these studies combined suggest that vibration may 
be an effective and safe tool for enhancing resistance training among wheelchair users with SCI.  
Objective  
The primary purpose of this study is to explore the benefits of vibration dumbbell resistance improving 
upper limb strength, function and pain among manual wheelchair users with paraplegia.  
Specific Aim 1) Explore  the effects of vibration dumbbell training on improving strength, function and 
pain 
 
Hypothesis 1): Subjects will demonstrate the following changes overtime:  
Primary outcomes: Increased peak isokinetic muscle torque output as measured using a Biodex machi ne 
of the shoulder internal rotators, external rotators, shoulder abductor/adductors, and shoulder 
flexion/extension, elbow flexion/extension, forearm pronation/supi[INVESTIGATOR_20810], wrist flexion/extension, and 
hand grip measured using a handheld dynomometer at 6 w eeks (mid -way into training) and 12 weeks 
(end of training) when compared to baseline.   
Secondary outcomes:   
o Propulsion testing: Increased maximum speed and acceleration attained, peak force, and mechanical 
effective force measured using the SmartWheel d uring start -up propulsion over level and inclined 
surfaces at 12 weeks when compared to baseline  
o Transfer testing: Higher maximum and minimum attainable transfer heights to a height -adjustable 
transfer station at 12 weeks when compared to baseline;   
o Reduced upper limb pain across all joints (as recorded on the Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) and 
shoulder pain reported during activities (Wheelchair Users Shoulder Pain Index (WUSPI)) at 6 weeks 
and 12 weeks when compared to baseline;  
o Increased self -perceiv ed aspects of health and function as measured using the Short Form SF -36 
Walk Wheel scale at 6 weeks and 12 weeks and when compared to baseline.  
o Increased peak power and average power output at 12 weeks compared to baseline.  
Specific Aim 2) Assess subjec ts’ perceptions of the effectiveness of the vibration dumbbell training 
program  
 
Hypothesis 2) Subjects will report a high level of satisfaction with the training on factors of efficiency, 
tolerance, perceived strength and functional benefits.  
 
Study Desig n and Methods  
Each subject will be asked to come to HERL three times over a [ADDRESS_134526] a) Pain and Health Surveys (Baseline and Weeks 6, and 12), b) 
Muscle Strength Testing (Baseline a nd Weeks 6 and 12), c) Functional Testing (Baseline and Week 12), 
and Pre -Training Assessment and Instructions (Baseline). The 12 -week Training Phase will start after 
Visit 1  
Data will be collected electronically using redcap, or on paper as needed.  
Visit 1 (Initial Visit)  
After signing informed consent, all subjects will complete a basic information questionnaire. The 
questionnaire will survey the frequency of wheelchair usage, transfers, percentage of non -level transfers, 
basic demographics (age, gender , years since SCI, etc.), work history, history of medical problems, 
current medications, and alcohol and smoking usage.  
Pain and Health Measures  
Numerical rating scale (NRS): Subjects will complete this scale once for each upper limb joint (wrist, 
elbow,  and shoulder). The subjects will be asked to rate their average, most severe, and least severe 
wrist, elbow or shoulder pain during the past 24 hours using an 11 -point scale (i.e. 0 -10) anchored at 
the ends by “no pain” and “worst pain ever experienced.” An [ADDRESS_134527] been shown to be 
valid and re liable assessments of pain.  
WUSPI – Wheelchair User’s Shoulder Pain Index: The WUSPI [CONTACT_832] a [ADDRESS_134528] reliability of the total index score was 0.99 
and Cronbach’s alpha (internal consistency) was 0.98.  
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Self -Report Questionnaire: This self -report instrument includes two scales: a 
Symptom Severity Scale consisting of 11 questions and a Functional Status Scale evaluating 8 different 
activities. This instrument is reproducible, internally consistent, and responsive to clinical changes in 
symptom s. 
Vibration Tolerance: Participants will be screened for their tolerance to the feeling of the vibration prior 
to collecting the biomechanics outcome measures. Participants will hold the dumbbell at 25Hz for [ADDRESS_134529] from their bodies (position similar to a bicep 
curl). If they are unable to complete the assessment they will not be permitted to continue the study.  
If subjects successfully complete the vibration screening they will continue with the follow ing 
assessments during Visit 1:  
General Health and Function: The 36 -Item Short Form Health Survey Walk Wheel (SF -36 WW) is a slightly 
modified version of the original SF -36 that has been validated for persons with SCI. The SF -36 is a brief, 
multi-dimension al, self -report health questionnaire that measures eight concepts - Physical Functioning, 
Role limitation due to Physical problems, Bodily Pain, General Perception of Health, Vitality, Social 
Function, Role limitation due to Emotional problems, and Mental Health. The domain scales ranges from 
0 (worst possible health state measured by [CONTACT_120266]) to 100 (best possible health state).  
Power output: the Lode Arm Ergometer will be used to measure the maximum power output for each 
participant. This test will be done with the participant seated in their wheelchair. The arm ergometer 
height will be adjusted such that participants are able to comfortably reach and crank both pedals. 
Additionally, we will want subjects to be in a stable participation. If they  are able to, participants should 
brace their feet on their foot plate. If a participant does not feel enough stability in their wheelchair we 
will have a stable chair for them to transfer to in order to perform the evaluation. Participants will start 
out by [CONTACT_120267] a comfortable pace as a warm up. Once the participant feels as 
though they are sufficiently warmed up the test will begin. Participants will begin cycling against 
maximum resistance. Once that happens participants will be  instructed to cycle as hard and as fast as 
they can for as long as they are able to. Once they are no longer able to crank against the resistance the 
test will stop and the maximum resistance will be recorded. We will complete this process three separate 
times, with a minimum of [ADDRESS_134530] is completed, the resistance will 
return to zero and the participants will cycle at a comfortable pace to cool down. They will cycle as long 
as they need to in both the warm up and cool  down phases.  
Muscle Strength Testing  
Isokinetic strength measurements will be recorded at a torque arm speed of 60 deg/sec using an 
instrumented dynamometer (Biodex  Medical System, [LOCATION_001], [LOCATION_003]). The torque measurements will be 
recorded in a randomized fashion for both arms for the following test maneuvers: shoulder 
flexion/extension in the sagittal plane ( -30 to 50 degrees), shoulder abduction/adduction in the fron tal 
plane (10 to 70 degrees), shoulder internal/external rotation in the transverse plane (0 to 45 degrees), 
elbow flexion/extension (0 to 90 degrees), forearm supi[INVESTIGATOR_20810]/pronation ( -80 to 80 degrees) and wrist 
flexion/extension ( -45 to 45 degrees) and gri p strength. One trial of 5 practice repetitions for each 
movement tested will be completed prior to data collection. In order to ensure the maximal force 
production of the tested upper extremity subjects will be secured into the chair with three padded bel ts: 
two diagonally across their chest and one across their lap. After the practice trial, one trial of five 
repetitions will be recorded for each muscle group. In between the practice trial and data collection trial, 
participants will rest a minimum of [ADDRESS_134531] before performing the functional tests.  
Functional Tes ting 
Wheelchair Propulsion Assessment: If a subject’s wheelchair is equipped with quick release wheels, it 
will be fit with a SmartWheel (Three Rivers Holdings, Mesa, AZ), an instrumented wheel that measures 
forces and moments applied to the pushrim on the  non-dominant side of the subject’s wheelchair. A 
dummy wheel with matching inertial properties to the SmartWheel will be placed on the dominant side. 
Subjects will propel down a level hallway that is [ADDRESS_134532]. Subjects will also propel up three 
different ramp grades (3, 5 and 8 degrees) at a  comfortable pace. The ramps are [ADDRESS_134533] wheels instead of the Smart wheel. All propulsion trials will still be timed and the exertion 
recorded.  
Transfer Assessment: Subjects will be asked to transfer to a custom height adjustable transfer station. 
The platform on the station contains a [ADDRESS_134534] will repeat the attempts until their maximum transfer 
height has been found with success (e.g. defined by [CONTACT_120268]). The same procedure will be used to determine how low the 
subject can transfer. The maximum transfer heights high/low that were attainable will be recorded. In 
addition to recording the height attained, participants will be asked about their perceived exertion using 
the Borg scale. Participants will be shown a visual analog scale ranging from [ADDRESS_134535] at the follow up visit, their position 
will be recorded. This protocol has been used successfully in our previous work to measure transfer ability 
and generally involves  performing fewer than 10 transfers.  
All subjects’ one rep maximum (1RM) for each of the exercises to be performed in the training phase will 
be determined at their baseline visit with a non -vibrating dumbbell in accordance with standard 
procedures. The f ollowing exercises will be tested for a one rep max as well as will be performed during 
the study: butterflies, serratus punches, side flies, straight arm rows, bicep curls, internal and external 
rotation, front raises, triceps extension, and bent over row s. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_120263]. Dumbbell weight will be increased accordingly until the subject reaches their [ADDRESS_134536], subjects will receive education and instructions on the use of the vibrating 
dumbbell. They will start wi th holding the dumbbell at a moderate frequency (25 Hz) and experience 
how the effects of the vibration on the arm and body can change with differing arm positions and grips. 
They will be instructed to grip the dumbbell as hard/tightly as possible througho ut the course of training 
in order to concentrate the vibrations to the arm muscles and surrounding structures. Subjects will receive 
a pair of gloves to aid in maintaining a strong, firm grip during the exercises. These gloves will be for the 
personal use  of each participant during the testing and will be theirs to keep at the conclusion of the 
study. Starting with the biceps curl exercise to demonstrate what higher vibrations feel like, subjects will 
hold the bicep curl in the static training posture (90 degrees of elbow flexion, 60% 1 RM) while the 
frequency is progressively increased to 40 Hz. They will be asked to hold the position for as long as they 
can until they reach a pain -free level of muscle exhaustion. This same process will be repeated for all  
the exercises to ensure they can tolerate each position at 40 Hz. If they can hold the position for an 
exercise for longer than 60 seconds at 40 Hz, weight will be added to the dumbbell (see below Training 
Intensity Assessment and Adjustments). If a subje ct is unable to tolerate [ADDRESS_134537] who begins training at 30 Hz, the fre quency 
will be reassessed at each training session to progressively increase him/her (in increments of 5 Hz) to 
[ADDRESS_134538] (PT). Both the trai ner and PT will be masked to subjects' performance on outcome 
measurements.  
Prior to beginning each exercise session, female subjects will be reminded that they should not participate 
in vibration exercise activities if they are pregnant and should notify  the study team if they think they 
could be. Female subjects will be asked weekly if they are or could be pregnant and this will be 
documented. If pregnancy is a possibility, the subject will be offered an over the counter pregnancy test. 
Subjects will be given the test to perform themselves, unless they are physically unable to because of 
disability related functional limitations. In these circumstances, a female staff member will assist as 
needed. Any subject reporting or testing positive for pregnancy wi ll be withdrawn from the study.  
Sessions will ideally be scheduled on a Monday, Wednesday and Friday to allow time for muscles to rest 
and rebuild in between training sessions. Prior to starting the weight training, subjects will go through a 
warm -up phase  (approximately 5 -10 minutes) and stretching phase (approximately 5 minutes). The 
warm -up phase will consist of non -resisted arm movements that parallel motions of the resistance 
exercises and forward and backward arms circles. The stretching phase will co nsist of stretching exercises 
for the arms, chest and upper back.  
Subjects will perform nine training exercises. For each exercise, subjects will perform one repetition of 
each exercise at 60% of their 1 RM holding the high -frequency (40 Hz) vibrating dumb bell in a static arm 
posture. This posture will be at the point where the force generating output of the targeted muscle group 
is maximized. This point is at the 'End' range of motion (ROM) for each of the dynamic upper limb 
exercises with the exception of  the biceps curl which occurs when the elbow is flexed at [ADDRESS_134539] one and will be used to secure 
their pelvis in the wheelchair and to provide a more stable base of support while exercising. Emphasis 
will be placed on maintaining a neutral thoracic and cervical posture and avoiding scapular elevation 
during seated exercises. Depending on the amount of trunk control present, subjects may use their 
opposite limb to brace their trunk (either forearm pressed against their thighs or placed on an adjacent 
table) for exercises involving forward trunk flexion (e.g. bent over rows, triceps extensions and side fl ies). 
Verbal cuing and spotting from the trainer will be provided during the sessions to monitor positioning 
and safety with the exercises.  
The trainer will only facilitate and supervise the exercise training. The trainer who will be conducting the 
training sessions will guide the subjects through each exercise set and ensure that the correct weights, 
timing, vibration frequency, arm postures and technique are being used to maximize subject safety. 
He/she will also perform survey -based data collection and research procedures. Training procedures will 
be stopped immediately by [CONTACT_120269] a subject complains of pain or extreme discomfort during the 
exercises. The subject will be instructed to check in with his/her physician before resuming training.  
The trainer will reassess the intensity of the training parameters at the end of each session and adapt as 
necessary. He/she will keep a training log for each subject and session that documents the training 
parameters (e.g. hold times completed each session), t otal session duration time, and changes made to 
increase/decrease efforts for the next session. Health parameters, such as heart rate and blood pressure 
will be collected. An automatic blood pressure monitor will be placed on the upper arm of the subject t o 
measure their blood pressure. An automatic pulse ox monitor will be placed on the finger of the subject 
to measure their heart rate. The trainer will also take general notes on the sessions and the exercises, 
as well as the plan for the next exercise ses sion. 
Each training session is expected to take up to 1.[ADDRESS_134540] 15 seconds, the weight for the 
next session will be decreased, whereas if they are able to hold onto the dumbbell f or greater than 60 
seconds, the trainer will stop the exercise and the dumbbell weight will be increased for the next session. 
The amount of weight increased and decreased will be determined by [CONTACT_120270] a member of t he senior study personnel.  
The trainer will meet with the senior study personnel (PT and PI) at minimum once a week to review 
subjects' training progress, performance, any complications, concerns or complaints that the subject 
expresses, and any changes i n the health status of the subjects who had been seen over the course of 
the week. Senior personnel will re -assess and modify the training procedures as appropriate.  
During the last week of training (week 12), the trainer will give subjects a survey to as sess satisfaction 
with the training program to collect their feedback on factors such as tolerance, perceived strength, 
performance and health benefits, efficiency of training, choice to continue training, and if they would 
recommend this form of exercise to others.  
The follow -up outcome assessment visit, which take place at our laboratory, will be conducted by [CONTACT_120271].  
Visit 2 (midway visit)  
Participants will come back to the lab [ADDRESS_134541] visit.  
This visit is ex pected to take no more than 2 hours to complete.  
Visit 3 (end of the exercise program)  
At the end of the [ADDRESS_134542] but will not be considered protocol deviations so long as they are completing a minimal 
number of sessions (10) per six -week period. If a subject completes less than [ADDRESS_134543] that this schedule will be modified due to scheduling conf licts, illness, etc. For this reason, 
subjects will be given a 2 -week window (6 -8, 12-14 weeks) in which to complete these visits. Testing 
sessions within this window will not be considered protocol deviations.  
Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
(1) have a neurological impairment secondary to a SCI or disease at T2 or lower   
(2) greater than [ADDRESS_134544] injury  
(3) use a manual wheelchair as primary means of mobility (at least 30 hrs. per week)  
(4) 18 to 65 years of age  
(5) provide signed medical rel ease by [CONTACT_120272] a high -intensity resistance 
training exercise program  
(6) live within 60 minutes driving time (1 hour) from the research center  
(7) able to perform a transfer independently to and from a wheelchair   
(8) have norm al range of motion in the upper limbs.   
Exclusion Criteria:  
(1) history of fractures or dislocations in the shoulder, elbow and wrist from which the subject has not 
fully recovered or joint replacement of any of the joints in the upper extremities   
(2) upp er limb pain that interferes with the ability to propel or transfer   
(3) recent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_120264] (within the past three months)  
(4) pregnant women   
(5) history of coronary artery disease, coronary by[CONTACT_120273][INVESTIGATOR_120265]. Should outliers or distributions that are nonlinear in nature be 
present, appropriate transformations will be performed. Means and standard deviations, or medians and 
ranges, as appropriate, will be calculated for all variables. A repeated measures ANCOVA will be used to 
examine primary (strength) and secondary outcome measures (pain, quality of life, power, transfer 
ability, propulsion characteristic) for the three time points. For significan t models, post -hoc analyses with 
Bonferroni corrections will be used. Total number of training sessions completed will be entered as a 
covariate if necessary. The training progress (e.g. hold times) and training adaptations made and 
documented by [CONTACT_120274].  