1 PROTOCOL  TITLE:  EM/PROTECT -Hybrid : Improving  Depression  in Elder Mistreatment  
Victims  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jo Anne Sirey, PhD, Weill Cornell Medicine 
IRB Protocol  #: 19-09020854  
ClinicalTrials.gov  Identifier:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Current Version: January  6, 2023 
Prior Version  Dates: 
Version October 4, 2019 
Version November 26, 2019  
Version June 12, 2020 
Version September 1, 2020 
Version December 4, 2020 
Version  December 30, 2021  
Version January 6, 2023  
2  BACKGROUND  
 
Elder mistreatment (EM) is estimated to affect 1 in 10 older adults (60+) in the US2 (5,600,000 
victims nationwide). In NY State, the Elder Abuse Prevalence Study found that [ADDRESS_729876] high rates of 
depressive symptoms: Victims of EM have one of the highest rates of depression among older 
adults (http://www.aoa.acl.gov/). A population -based study found that mistreatment victims had 
significantly highe r rates of depressive symptoms (31.6% vs. 6.8%) and suicidal ideation (16.4% 
vs. 3.4%) than non -mistreated older adults. In our own work in NYC, 34% of victims endorsed 
significant depressive symptoms (PHQ -9≥10) and 16% reported suicidal ideation. EM/ PROT ECT 
recognizes that resignation of depression acts a barrier to the use of EM services. Thus, 
mistreatment resolution services alone, while necessary, may be insufficient. Similarly, treatment 
of depression alone may be insufficient when victims continue t o be exposed to the chronic stress 
of mistreatment. For this reason, EM/PROTECT acts in synergy with mistreatment resolution 
services. In EM/PROTECT, staff of EM services staff offer mistreatment resolution services. 
EM/PROTECT is neurobiologically informe d and simplified to fit within EM agencies. Consistent 
with our Center’s deployment focused model, EM/PROTECT has been developed through an 
iterative process with the NY City Elderly Crime Victim Resource Center (ECVRC). EM aims to 
install protection measu res, while PROTECT targets the behavioral consequences of stress on 
the CCN and the reward networks thus reducing the experience of stress. Accordingly, PROTECT 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_555883] -protective behaviors and 
expanding their meaningful rewarding activities.  
 
STUDY  DESIGN  
 
Aims: Due to the limited recruitment time available (the study ends on 8/31/21), we propose to offer Virtual  
PROTECT (video preferred) to all subjects (N=40) and test the acceptability of Virt ual PROTECT by 
[CONTACT_555884]. Our early experience during the 
COVID -[ADDRESS_729877] by 
[CONTACT_555885] -based clinicians (licensed clinical social workers, 
LCSW).  A secondary aim of the study is to examine whether V irtual PROTECT is more effective than in -
person  EM/PROTECT in reducing symptoms of depression and in improving quality of life. We expect that 
participants  receiving Virtual PROTECT will have an even greater decrease in depressive symptoms than a 
historica l comparison group (N=24) who received EM/PROTECT in person because of the enhanced 
strategies for  “reward exposure” and the introduction of behavioral economics incentives for pursuing 
rewarding activities.  EM/PROTECT did not improve quality of life more to EM/MH (elder mistreatment 
services plus mental health  referral). The reasons may be that quality of life in depressed victims of 
mistreatment abuse is influenced by  [CONTACT_555886]. We will examine, however, if 
Virtual PROTECT w ill improve quality of  life more than EM/PROTECT because of the enhanced “reward 
exposure” strategies and the adherence  incentives  of behavioral economics.  
 
Primary Hypotheses:  
H1) More than 75% of Virtual PROTECT will attend each scheduled session.  
H2) Victims will have an average satisfaction (CSQ) score greater than 3 (out of 4) at 3, 6, and 12 
weeks follow -up.  
H3) Community clinicians (LCSW) will have an average satisfaction (CSQ) score greater than 3 
(out of 4) at the end of the project.  
 
Secondary Hypotheses: Compared to EM/PROTECT (9 sessions, in -person), Virtual PROTECT 
participants will have: SH1) greater reduction (effect size) and clinically significant reduction in 
depression (Δ MADRS ≥3 pts by 12 weeks); SH2) improved quality of lif e (Primary Outcome: 
3  WHOQOL -BRF).  
In addition, to the above comparison, we will compare Virtual PROTECT with a historical 
comparison group (EM/MH, N=16) who received elder mistreatment services plus mental health 
referral as part of the first project.  
 
Power analysis: The primary goal of this study is to establish the acceptability of Virtual 
PROTECT and obtain preliminary estimates of effect sizes for the improvement in depressive 
symptoms among Virtual PROTECT participants compared to PROTECT participant s. Therefore, 
we estimated that with [ADDRESS_729878] a 95% confidence interval 
width of 24% for the acceptability (assuming a benchmark of 75%). With [ADDRESS_729879] and 
24 EM/PROTECT (in -person) participants, we can obtain  an estimate of the difference in 
reduction of depression (MADRS) over the course of treatment between the two treatment groups 
with a 95% confidence interval half -width of 3.[ADDRESS_729880] size with 
reasonable confidence in order to carry out an adequate powered trial.  
 
Aim 1. Finalize the Manual and Training: We will finalize the EM/PROTECT Manual and use it to 
train Licensed Clinical Social  Workers (LCSWs) at each EM agency. We will record the training 
hours needed to achieve certification in EM/PROTECT, the success rate of LCSWs in achieving 
certification and problems encountered during this process.  
 
Aim 2. PROTECT Operations Manual: We w ill create an Operations Manual with the staff of EM 
agencies describing how PROTECT will be integrated into the agency, i.e. communication 
between EM staff, LCSWs, and research staff, PHQ -9 tracking and hand -off, and review of 
ongoing activities.  
 
Aim 3.  Evaluate the reach, feasibility and acceptability: 1) Reach: The number of clients screened 
vs. all eligible for screening, and the number clients referred who meet study criteria. 2) 
Feasibility: Number of victims who initiate EM/PROTECT or EM/MH (elder mistreatment services 
plus mental health referral) victims who make contact [CONTACT_555887]. EM/PROTECT: session completion rate; smartphone use; 3) 
Acceptability: Victims satisfaction (CSQ)8 in bot h treatments; EM/PROTECT session completion 
at 6, 9, and 12 weeks. EM/PROTECT Benchmarks: More than 75% will attend each session. 
LCSWs staff satisfaction will be assessed throughout the study.  
 
Aim 4. Preliminary Effectiveness Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]: Primary H1 Compared to EM/MH, EM/PROTECT (9 
sessions) participants will have greater (effect size) and clinically significant reductions in 
depression (Δ MADRS ≥3 pts by 12 weeks); Primary H2 improved quality of life (Primary 
Outcome: WHOQOL -BRF).11,12 As both EM/MH and EM/PR OTECT are active conditions we will 
examine within -treatment differences in outcomes.  
 
Aim 5. Target Engagement: Secondary H (SH): The differential effect of EM/PROTECT vs. 
EM/MH in reducing depression over 12 weeks is m ediated by [CONTACT_10486]: Primary target stress 
change from baseline to 6 weeks on the Perceived Stress Scale. Secondary target exposure to 
meaningful, rewarding activities at 6 weeks [Primary Measure: Behavioral Activation Scale 
(BADS).
4   
 
INCLUSION  AND EXCLU SION CRITERIA  
 
Inclusion Criteria:  
• 55 years of age or older  
• Capacity to consent (per Elder Mistreatment staff)  
• Significant depression (per Elder Mistreatment staff) as indicated by a score of 10 or above 
on the Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ -9), a widely used screening tool routinely 
administered in Elder Mistreatment (EM) agency settings (the PHQ -9 has a sensitivity of 88% 
and a specificity of 88% for major depression)  
• Need for EM services  
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Active suicidal ideation (Mo ntgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale item 10>4)  
• Inability to speak English or Spanish  
• Axis 1 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM -5) diagnoses 
other than unipolar depression or generalized anxiety disorder (by [CONTACT_555888] -5) 
• Severe or life -threatening medical illness  
EM emergency and or referral out of EM agency (per EM staff )  
 
 
DATA  AND SAFETY  MONITORING  PLAN 
 
Some  participants  may find the questions asked as part of the research interview to  be distressing or 
tedious. Participants are given the option to refuse to answer any question and always have the right 
to withdraw from the study should they find it distressing or tedious. Participants may become  
seriously medically ill and decide  not to participate.  In addition,  if new psychiatric  symptoms  develop  or 
change  in severity,  or the abuse  situation  escalates,  we may recommend removal  from the study  and 
provide referrals  for the appropriate treatment needed. All EM victims will continue to receive EM 
resolution services from DFTA regardless  of their participation  or termination  of participation  in the 
study  intervention.  
14. Describe the anticipated adverse events and risks of study intervention(s), agent(s) and/or device(s)  
in detail  (e.g.,  potential  risk of the study  drug,  including  potential  drug interactions,  psychological  risks; 
physical risks). Assess their seriousness and incidence of complications or adverse events when known. 
Include animal data if trials in humans have not been performed.  
Cornell research staff will assess changes in depressive symptoms at regular intervals. Patient's health 
and clinical care will always take priority over study participation. Participants may not want to continue 
completing research assessments or activiti es and will be free to discontinue participation  at any 
time. 
15. Given the risks identified, describe what monitoring is needed to immediately recognize the adverse 
events that do occur.  
5   Study interviewers will be Weill Cornell research staff who  are trained  in assessments  with older  
adults.  They  will specifically  inquire  about  depressive  symptoms,  falls, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].  Referring 
elder abuse  staff are also trained  to monitor  the participant's  mental  state (in addition  to abusive  
incidents)  and will report  any notice  of falls, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602],  and increasing  symptom  severity  to Weill 
Cornell  staff and the principal  investigator.  If any  moderate  to severe  symptom  changes  (or new 
symptoms)  are noted,  we will  consider  alternative options  to maximize  the participant's  well-being.   
16. Describe  what measures  will be taken  to minimize  any negative  impact  on subjects  resulting  from 
study  closure  or a subject  being  terminated  from the study.   
All participants  will continue  to receive  elder mistreatment  resolution  services  from their referring 
agency  if they choose  to withdraw  from the study.  Referrals  to external  mental health  agencies  will 
be offered  to participants  who drop out of the study  in order  to address  any ongoing  depressive  
symptoms.  
17. Describe  the adverse  event  grading  based  on severity,  attribution,  and expectedness  (including 
frequency)  that will be used,  to whom  they will be reported  and how often.   
The study  will adhere  to the adverse event grading guidelines provided by [CONTACT_57437]'s Office of 
Research Integrity and Assurance. All adverse  events  will be reported  to the Weill Cornell  IRB in the 
timeline  indicated  by [CONTACT_555889].  
18. In addition to the IRB, specify to whom you will be reporting unexpected adverse events to 
promptly.  PLEASE NOTE all  reportable  AEs should  be reported  to the WCMC  IRB as  per WCMC  AE 
reporting  policy.   
We will periodically  report  adverse  events  to the DSMB,  in addition  to reporting  to the IRB as per Weill  
Cornell's  policy.  
19. Will you be using  a medical  monitor?   
No 
20. Please  justify  why no monitor  is being  used.   
Medical  information  will be self-reported  by [CONTACT_555890] -up research  
assessments.  
6  
7  21.  