 
 
 
  
Official title:  Clinical assessment of skin tightening and 
contour change of submental tissue using bipolar 
radiofrequency microneedling  
 
NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
IRB Approved date:  10-18-[ADDRESS_253355]. Jeffrey Kenkel  
Department of Plastic Surgery  
University of [LOCATION_007] Southwestern Medical 
Center at Dallas  
 
Study Protocol    1. Background:  
 
The human skin aging process is characterized by [CONTACT_123761], atrophy of the extracellular matrix, and reduced collagen synthesis [1]. Loss of collagen in the dermis is of 
aesthetic concern, as it is the main structural support in the dermis and its loss results in skin laxity. Photo -damaged skin, mostly due to UVR, causes degradation of elastic fibers. 
This is histologically seen as disorganized tangles of elastin. Additionally, as we age, skin tends to appear more dry due to its poor hydration and turgor capacity [1]. The use of 
minimally invasive aesthetic treatments in reducing signs of aging has been gaining in popularity over surgical treatments in recent years [2]. Several energy types including, laser, 
radiofrequency, infrared, and ultrasound, have been developed for facial rejuvenation [3]. 
These treatments induce controlled thermal damage into the dermis and cause collagen contraction and neocollagenesis resulting in skin tightening over several months [2]. The 
effects of facial rejuvenation treatments on collagen have been well defined in literature, however, the role of elastin in facial rejuvenation has not been well studied.  
 In facial skin aging, the skin loses elasticity and begins to sag. Minimally invasive bipolar radiofrequency produces a controlled thermal injury in a fractional manner without damaging the dermal -epi[INVESTIGATOR_211472], epi[INVESTIGATOR_211473] [5]. Radiofrequency, unlike 
lasers, are chromophore -independent providing better penetration than lasers, and spare 
sweat glands, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles [5,6].  
 
The Profound System is a bipolar fractional radiofrequency device which uses microneedles 
and thermal heat to stimulate neocollagenesis and neoelastosis.  
 This study intends to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the Profound System on submental tissue and its effect on skin tightening and lift , as an exploratory evaluation. This 
device has been FDA cleared and commercially available since [ADDRESS_253356] demonstrated a decrease in laxity of the facial skin. We feel that the Profound System may be able to produce clinically significant improvement in laxity of the neck skin.   This device has been used in the Department of 
Plastic Surgery clinic off -label for over three years for this purpose.  Additionally, our 
research team conducted a study using Ulthera, an ultrasound device, approximately 10 
years ago; the results of this  study led to its FDA approval for the tr eatment of lax neck skin.  
Therefore, our experience with this device and with treating lax neck skin have guided our 
decision to conduct this study.  
2. Purpose:  
 
Study Protocol    The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of bipolar fractional 
radiofrequency treatment via use of the Profound System to achieve skin tightening and contour  change in lax submental (beneath the chin) tissue.   
 Overall assessment of clinical outcome and safety will be based on clinic visits and measurements of volume difference and lift obtained by [CONTACT_211488] H2 3D Imaging System 
and Stand- up Vectra (Canfield Scientific, Parsippany, NJ).  Additionally, evaluation of pre - 
and post- procedural photos /video obtained via the 3D Imaging System s will be performed  
comparing  Baseline and 180 Days by [CONTACT_211489]. These photos will be identifiable full -
face photos, and subjects will be adequately informed of such. Two unblinded clinician’s  
assessment s of satisfaction will be characterized using the five -point Global Aesthetic 
Improvement Scale (GAIS) at the final follow up visit, one based on a live assessment and 
one based on photos .  Subjects will also undergo high -resolution ultrasonography, optical 
coherence tomography, transepi[INVESTIGATOR_211474], and/or BTC [ADDRESS_253357] core tissues before and after treatment for histological evaluation (tissue structure, elastin, collagen and hyaluronic acid expression) and gene expression assessment (elastin, other major extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules and elastin r elated genes).  
 
From these exploratory procedures the improvement in laxity of the submentum can be evaluated in comparison to pre -treatment assessments.  
3. Study Design  
 
This is a single -center, unblinded, non- randomized, non -controlled study designed to follow 
a total of up to 1 5 qualified and consenting subjects to receive one bipolar fractional 
radiofrequency microneedling treatment under an IRB approved protocol.  The Principal Investigator(s) have been selected based on his expertise, qualifications (credentials, training, and  medical specialty), subject access, previous clinical research, facilities, and 
interest in this particular field of research.  
4. Study Population  
 
Up to [ADDRESS_253358] their full- face photograph  and acknowledge 
that these photos may be used for scientific publication. If the subjects decline permission to be photographed, they may not participate in the study since the photographic documentation of treatment outcome is an important measure of eva luation.  
 Subjects should abstain from undergoing any dermatological treatments during entire study 
duration.  
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
 
5.1 Inclusion Criteria  
a. Healthy male and female adults between ages 21 -70 years of age.  
b. Desire skin laxity lift of the submental region.  
c. Confirmed BMI ≤ 35.  
d. Subjects who can read, understand, and sign the Informed Consent Form.  
e. Subjects willing and able to comply with all study requirements.  
f. Fitzpatrick skin type I -VI. 
g. Submental fat graded by [CONTACT_5256] ≥ 1 using the Clinician- Reported 
Submental Fat Rating Scale (CR -SMFRS, see Appendix D).  
h. Subject is willing not to undergo any type of aesthetic procedure that could 
confound the study device treatment effects until he/she completes the study.  
 
5.2 Exclusion Criteria:  
a. Active localized or systemic infections, that may alter wound healing.  
b. Immunocompromised subjects.  
c. Subjects with coagulation disorder.  
d. History of skin photosensitivity disorders, or use of photosensitizing drugs (e.g., tetracycline or sulfa drugs).  
e. Pregnant and/or lactating (All female volunteers will be advised 
about using birth control during the period of study).  
f. Excessive skin laxity on the submental and neck (Submental Skin 
Laxity Grade: SMSLG 4, Appendix E), or other anatomical feature for which reduction in SMF which may, in the judgment of the investigator, result in an aesthetically unacceptable outcome.  
g. Scarring in areas to be treated.  
h. Tattoos in the treatment areas to be treated.  
i. Significant open facial wounds or lesions.  
j. Severe or cystic acne in treatment areas.  
k. Current active smoker.  
l. Use of Accutane (Isotretinoin) within the past 6 months.  
m. Use of topi[INVESTIGATOR_211475] 48 hours.  
Study Protocol    n. Use of prescription anticoagulants.  
o. Pacemaker or internal defibrillator.  
p. History of skin disorders resulting in abnormal wound healing (i.e. 
keloids, extreme dry and fragile skin).  
q. Subjects on current oral corticosteroid therapy or within the past [ADDRESS_253359] has a history of allergy to lidocaine or ester- based local 
anesthetics.  
v. Subjects with significant cardiac history or rhythm disturbance 
who may be unable to tolerate lidocaine with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238].  
w. Subjects with any skin pathology or condition in the treatment area that could interfere with evaluation or with the use of typi[INVESTIGATOR_211476], during or after treatments (e.g. psoriasis, rosacea, eczema, seborrheic de rmatitis, 
vitiligo, hyper or hypo -skin pi[INVESTIGATOR_211477]).  
x. Subjects who are unwilling to shave excessive hair in the 
treatment area that might influence or impair evaluation in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_689].  
y. Subjects have undergone skin resurfacing or tightening treatments in the treatment area over the past year.  
z. Subjects have undergone dermatological treatments such as fillers and neurotoxins for the past [ADDRESS_253360] undergone superficial peel or microdermabrasion within 4 weeks.  
6. Study Endpoints  
 
6.1 Primary Endpoints  
6.1.1 Primary Efficacy Endpoint  
• Overall volume change  of treated tissue in the submental region  
o Percent change from baseline of soft tissue surface area assessments  that 
characterize the degree of stretch, compression, lift and volumization, as 
measured using the Ma rkerless Tracking feature on Canfield’s  H2 3D Imaging 
System  
 
Study Protocol    6.1.2 Primary Safety Endpoint  
• Incidence, severity, and relatedness of adverse events  
 
6.2 Secondary Endpoints  
 
• Improvement in overall lifting of treated tissue in the submental region via Blinded 
Evaluation of Baseline (pre -procedure) and Day 180 (post- procedure) photos  and 
video obtained via the H2 3D Imaging System  and Standup Vectra  
• Blinded Reviewers assessment of improvement via the GAIS (Baseline vs. Day 180).   
• Subject Assessment of Pain  
o The subjects’ assessment of pain will be completed using an 11 -point pain 
scale, where 0 = no pain, 10 = extreme pain (See Appendix A)  
• Improvement in skin texture and laxity  
o Micro -biopsies for histology/gene expression  
o High -resolution ultrasound (HRUS)  
o Transepi[INVESTIGATOR_211478] (TEWL)  
o Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) 
o BTC 2000  
 
Primary Endpoint Analysis:  
 Safety Endpoint  
 Safety will be determined based on adverse event data collected from both the Profound treatment visit and all follow -up evaluations of the treated areas.  The 
Primary Safety Endpoint will be the incidence rate, severity, and relatedness of the adverse events that are observed in the study.  All adverse events that arise during the course of the study will be recorded and summarized in the final study report.  
 
7. Study Visit Procedures  
 
7.[ADDRESS_253361] the patient with 
a research coordinator to answer any further questions and provide consent for review. 
 
7.2 Screening Visit (Visit 1)  
 
Study Protocol    The purpose of the study and specific inclusion and exclusion criteria and potential risks will 
be discussed with the potential study subject.  All interested subjects will be given the Informed Consent Form with adequate time for review. The Investigator and/or designee 
will address questions and concerns raised by [CONTACT_423]. Those subjects who elect to participate, will sign the Consent Forms prior to any study procedures.  
 Subjects will be screened to ensure that they meet all study criteria.  The following enrollment and screening activities will be performed:  
a. Discuss the bipolar fractional radiofrequency device with each subject presenting for treatment  
b. Obtain informed consent and HIPAA authorization  
c. Collect any appropriate medical and surgical history including current medications, skin type, recent sun exposure, allergies, major illnesses, etc.  
d. Close -Up and standard photography  
e. Surface area assessments via the Vectra H2 3D Imaging System  and Standup 
Vectra  
f. Images will be obtained using the optical coherence tomography, BTC 2000, Bio Aquaflux, and/or high -resolution ultrasound.  
g. Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
h. Examination of the treatment area by [CONTACT_099]  
i. Location and approximate area of treatment area (s) will be mapped  
j. Pre-existing skin conditions will be evaluated for potential study impact  
k. Other assessments may be conducted per the clinical sites standard practice  
l. Weight measurement  
 
This visit will take about 1 .5 – 2.5 hours  
 
7.3 Treatment Visit (Visit 2)  
 
The treatment visit activities may be combined with the Screening Visit.  Prior to treatment, 
the treatment area should be cleaned of all debris cosmetics with antiseptic cleanser.   
Subjects may be given subcutaneous injection with 0.5%- 1.0% lidocaine with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238] 
1:100,000 -200,000 (or carbacaine 3% for those who intolerant of epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]) to 
anesthetize the areas and for hemostasis control. Starting with lower volumes of injec table 
anesthetic and increased as needed to achieve effective pain and hemostasis control. Total injected volume to treatment area should not exceed 50cc and must be in consideration of safe weight -based dosage limits of medications with systemic and local toxic effects. During 
administration of local injectable anesthetic, provider prescribed chilled air, topi[INVESTIGATOR_15413], inha led analgesia, and/or oral sedative may be prescribed for additional 
palliative measures.  
 
The following activities will be performed on all subjects:  
 
Study Protocol    a. The study treatment (bipolar fractional radiofrequency) per study treatment 
guidelines provided  
b. Review of post treatment expectation and management for the treatment as detailed in the study device instruction for use (IFU)  
c. All expected (e.g., edema, erythema) and unexpected (e.g., burn, blister) treatment adverse events will be documented and graded  
d. During the treatment, subjects will be asked to rate any pain or discomfort using a n 
eleven -point  Numerical Pain Rating Scale (NPRS)  
 
The following activities will also be for exploratory purposes:  
 
a. Collection of two 0.33mm biopsies using WellTech Rapid -Core 0.33mm Biopsy Punch 
pre-treatment. The biopsy will be taken from the submental skin within  the 
designated area for treatment. One biopsy will be used for histological studies and the other for gene expression studies  
 
 This visit will take about [ADDRESS_253362] treatment assessment will be performed.  Subjects will be instructed that blistering, 
bleeding, oozing, strong pain, swelling persisting for more than 72 hours, or signs of infection (e.g., pus, drainage, fever) are cause for immediate concern and the y should 
contact [CONTACT_1755]/or his designee, to be evaluated.  Downtime after treatment typi[INVESTIGATOR_211479] 0 -2 days.  
 
7.4 Follow -up Visits (Visits 3  and 4 ) 
 
At a minimum, all subjects will return for follow -up at 3 months (+/ - 7 days) and 6 months 
(+/- 7 days) after treatment.   
 The following activities will be performed on all subjects during the follow -up visits:  
 
a) The physician or study staff will perform an examination of the skin of the treatment area.  
• All expected (e.g., edema, erythema) and unexpected (e.g., burn, blister) 
treatment local skin responses will be documented and graded at every visit  
b) Adverse Event Review  
• Query the subject regarding any change in health since enrollment into the 
study.  
Study Protocol    • Perform a detailed cutaneous exam of the treatment area, review and record 
any local adverse events related to cutaneous changes.  
c) Collect an updated surgical history and record any change in concomitant 
medications or treatments.  
d) Images will be obtained using the optical coherence tomography, BTC 2000, Bio 
Aquaflux, and/or high -resolution ultrasound, as was done previously.  
e) The two small biopsies within the treatment area will be taken at each visit.  
f) Take close -up and standard photography  
g) Surface area assessments via the Vectra H2 3D Imaging System  and Standup Vectra  
  
 These visits will take about 45 minutes – [ADDRESS_253363] for an Event Follow- up Visit within 24 
hours.  At this visit the Investigator or his designee will:  
 a. Obtain a complete history of the event in question as well as conduct an examination of the subject and determine if the reported event qualifies as an Adverse Event.  If the event is determined to be an Adverse Event, an Adverse Event (AE) case report form and Event Follow -up (EF) Visit case report form must be 
completed.  One AE case report form should be used to track the history of an individual AE throughout the period of the study.   
b. Collect an updated medical and surgical history along with recording of concomitant medications or treatments.  
c. Take photographs of the subject with attention to the area in question.  
d. Render treatment for the event, if any, as determined by [CONTACT_211490].  
 Additional follow -up visits may also be required after the last scheduled visit to assess 
resolution of adverse events.  
 
8. Schedule of Events  
 
Procedures  Pre-
Screening  Screening:  
Visit 1# Treatment:  
Visit 2  
(Day 0)# Follow 
Up: 
Visit 3  
(Month 3)  Follow Up:  
Visit 4  
(Month 6)  
Telephone/Telehealth Screen  X     
Informed Consent   X    
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria   X    
Demographics   X    
Study Protocol          
Medical History/Concomitant 
Medications   X X X X 
Physical Exam   X    
Urine Pregnancy   X    
Treatment    X   
Standard Photographs   X  X X 
Surface area assessment using the H2 
3D Imaging System  and Standup Vectra   X  X X 
Clinician GAIS       X 
Non -invasive Skin Tests*   X  X X 
Biopsy    X X X 
Safety Assessment    X X X 
# The treatment visit activities may be conducted at the Screening Visit  
* TEWL measurement, OCT images , BTC-2000, and/or high frequency ultrasound images will be 
taken  
9. Statistical Methods of Analysis:  
This initial  study  will include  change  from  baseline  analysis.   
 
The primary  outcome  measure  of effectiveness  will be a paired  comparison  of baseline  to all 
applicable  post -baseline  time  points  using  data  obtained  from  a trans -epi[INVESTIGATOR_211480],  high  resolution  ultrasonography,  optical  coherence  tomography,  BTC 2000  
measurements,  biopsies  results,  and 3D imaging  results.   Photographs  and 3D video  of 
treated  skin at follow -up visits  will be compared  to baseline  for blinded  scoring  evaluations.   
Mean  of the change  from  baseline  (defined  as post -baseline  value  minus  baseline  value)  will 
be estimated  at post -baseline  time  points  for applicable  parameters.  
 The following  will be calculated  and reported  for each  evaluation  parameter at the applicable  
post -baseline  time  point(s):  
 
Percent  mean  change  from 
baseline  =  (visit  mean  score  – baseline  mean  score)  
x 100 
baseline  mean  score  
 
  For clinician ’s global aesthetic  improvement  assessment,  the null hypothesis  that the mean  
score  is equal  to 4 (no change)  will be tested.   
10. Blinded Evaluation  
 
Study Protocol    Blinded evaluation will be performed by [CONTACT_211491] (dermatologist and/or plastic 
surgeons) to determine if the Profound System is effective for treatment to lift lax 
submental (beneath the chin) tissue . 
 Three qualified, non -treating clinicians will be trained to independently review Baseline and 
Follow -up photograph sfor each subject. The reviewers will be blinded to subject 
information and the temporal order of the photographs .  No information will be provided to 
the reviewers that may allow them to determine the Baseline from the Follow -up imaging .   
 The pair of scans  (labeled A and B) for each subject will include the pre -treatment 
photographs  and post- treatment photographs  (6 months follow -up).   
 The three blinded reviewers will individually be asked to review a randomized presentation of each subject’s photographs .  Each reviewer will be asked to record if he/she observes a 
difference between the pair (before and after) of the photographs . If the reviewer 
determines there is a difference, the reviewer will record which pair (A or B) he/she believes correlates to the Follow -up photographs . Improvement will be based on at least 
two of the three (2/3) blinded reviewers correctly identifying the post-t reatment 
photographs .  Secondarily, each reviewer will score the photo pairs in which they observed 
a difference for improvement via the GAIS.   
 
Assessments of 2/3 blinded reviewers selecting “no change” will be considered as “no 
improvement, neither worsening”.  Assessments of 2/3 blinded reviewers selecting 
“change” and incorrect identification of the pre and post photographs will be considered a s 
“worsened”.  
 The identified reviewers will be instructed that their participation is completely voluntary and has no impact on performance review at their institution. It will be clearly stated that consent is implied with the institution’s survey completion. No identi fying information 
about these blinded reviewers will be published but will be maintained in a secure manner to be monitored by [CONTACT_5051].   If no incentive is to be provided to the blinded 
reviewers for their participation, this will be known to the m prior to their participation. A 
waiver of documentation is requested as no subject Personal Health Information (PHI) will be collected, recorded, or shared.  Blinded reviewers will be asked to attend one visit for the purposes of evaluating pre procedure  photos and post procedure photos via a survey. 
Prior to the survey, study coordinator will ask for a verbal consent from the reviewers 
indicating approval to use their responses in the study. Reviewers will assess the  images on 
a local computer.  
11. Non -significant Risk Determination  
 
In accordance with the definition of “Significant Risk Device” provided in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations 21 CFR 812.3, the study device to be used in this research study has been determined to be a Non- Significant Risk (NSR) device based on the foll owing:  
Study Protocol     
a)  It is not an implant  
b)  It is not purported or represented to be for use in supporting or sustaining human 
life        and do not present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of a       subject c)  It is not for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or  
     treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health  
d)  Use of the device poses no risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject  
12. Device Description  
 
The device to be used in this study is an FDA cleared device [510(k), K161043] for percutaneous treatment of facial wrinkles and improvement in appearance of cellulite in subjects with Fitzpatrick skin types I -III. The Profound System (Image 1) consists of a 
reusable console which contains a radiofrequency (RF) generator and graphical user interface, two re -usable treatment handpi[INVESTIGATOR_6928], and two disposable, single use, sterile 
electrode cartridges.  
 
 
  
Study Protocol    Image 1: Profound System 
 
 
The Profound system has a powered console with a graphical user interface for adjustment of treatment parameters. The RF frequency of the Profound System is 460 +/ - 5kHz. Bipolar 
RF travels from the RF generator, through the electrodes, into the dermal lay ers beneath 
the surface of the skin. The dimensions of the treatment area vary depending on the handpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959] (Image 2). The 25° handpi[INVESTIGATOR_81883] 5 independent channels and covers a treatment area of 14mm. The 75° handpi[INVESTIGATOR_201511] 7 independent channels and covers a treatment area of 20mm. Specifically, the 25° Dermal handpi[INVESTIGATOR_211481], while the 75° SubQ handpi[INVESTIGATOR_211482] (Image 3). Additionally, the Profound System provides real- time temperature feedback through temperature sensors. For this study, only the 25° 
handpi[INVESTIGATOR_211483] . 
 

Study Protocol     
 
13. Potential Risks  
 
Blistering, burning, and infection: (Rare)  
A crust, blister or superficial wound can occur at the treatment area.  The risk of infection will be minimized by [CONTACT_211492].  
 Bruising:  (Rare)  
A mild bruising may occur at the treatment area as a result of radiofrequency exposure. This is usually transient and resolves in a few hours to few days.  
 
Transient edema and/or erythema : (Occasionally)  
May develop within the irradiated areas but are usually temporary and fade within 24 -72 hours.  
  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9491]: (Rare)  
Radiofrequency exposure can cause pi[INVESTIGATOR_211484] - (and 
hypopi[INVESTIGATOR_371]. Although this is usually temporary, it may be permanent on rare occasions. Sun avoidance and/or the use of a total sun block (SPF 30 or higher) will help minimize th e intensity and duration of any pi[INVESTIGATOR_211485].  
 
Scarring: (Rare)  
Image 2 : Dermal Handpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959]  
• Treats the Dermal layer, between 1 – 2 mm  
• Single -use cartridge with 5 pairs of micro- needles  
• Cold plate for epi[INVESTIGATOR_211486], there is a small risk of scarring. However, 
this is minimized by [CONTACT_141083].  
 Allergic Reaction: (Rare )  
There is a possibility of an allergic or toxic reaction to anesthesia used to numb the areas. Subjects will be questioned with regard to any history of allergies and carefully monitored for signs of allergic reaction.  
 
Biopsy  
Risks associated with biopsy include: 1) scarring - a small risk of scarring, which can be 
mitigated by [CONTACT_141083]; 2) allergic reaction - there is a possibility of 
an allergic or toxic reaction to anesthesia used to numb the areas. Subjects will be 
questioned with regard to any history of allergies and carefully monitored for signs of allergic reaction . 
 Photography  
The subject may be uncomfortable with sitting still for an extended period of time or from turning his/her body in various positions. Subjects may be 
sensitive to the bright and repeating flashes from the camera, which can sometimes cause headaches, irritation of the eyes, discomfort, after effects such as seeing spots, and in rare cases, could stimulate a migraine headache or epi[INVESTIGATOR_141064].  
 Photographs include a risk of identification, as these will be full face photos. Privacy will be protected to the greatest extent possible. Photos will only be 
identified by a unique subject identification number that contains no personal identifying information.  All photos will be stored on a password 
secure drive, with only access by [CONTACT_2710].  For research purposes , 
photos may be used in scientific publications . 
 Noninvasive procedures  (exploratory)  
• Biox Aquaflux will be used to measure transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] 
(TEWL) measurements which evaluate barrier function of the skin 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_211487]. The standard time for TEWL measurements should take approximately 5 minutes.  
 
• Vivosight, an Optical coherence tomography (OCT) device, will be used to noninvasively gather topographical and histologic images of pre- and post -treated skin. The standard time for OCT should take 
approximately 5 -10 minutes.  
 
• The BTC [ADDRESS_253364] advantages over existing technologies currently in use (lasers, ultrasound, etc.) because of its combination of bipolar fractional radiofrequency and microneedling technology. This technology may lead to better clinical outcomes for an understudied area.  
15. Adverse Events  
 
15.[ADDRESS_253365] clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, users or other persons, whether or not related to the investigational medical device.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
 An unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE) is any serious adverse effect (defined below) 
on health or safety, any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with a 
device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified i n nature, severity, or 
degree of incidence in the protocol; or any other unanticipated serious problem associated 
with a device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
 A serious adverse event (SAE) is any adverse event that:  
a) led to death,  
b) resulted in life -threatening illness or injury  
c) resulted in permanent impairment of a body structure or body function  
d) resulted in in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081],  
e) resulted in medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment to body structure or body function, or  
f) led to fetal distress, fetal death, congenital abnormality or birth defect  
 
Study Protocol    15.2 Reporting  
 
Adverse events, and unanticipated adverse device effects (UADE) are collected from the 
time of subject consent until the subject exits the study. A description of the adverse event or device event, date of onset, severity, action taken, relationship to study treatment and outcome are documented in the case report form.   
 The Investigator will submit to the reviewing IRB a report of any unanticipated adverse 
device effect (UADE)) as soon as possible, but in no event later than [ADDRESS_253366] learns of the event (CFR 812.150(a)(1)).  
 
16. Subject Safety and Data Monitoring  
 
For this protocol, which involves the use of a non -significant risk device, the Investigator will 
be responsible for the conduct of the study including accrual, subject experience, attrition, patterns of expected adverse events and/or unexpected adverse events, any protocol deviations or violations, and any changes in the risk/benefit analysis.   
 Subjects will be asked about any adverse events throughout the study by [CONTACT_5984]. Subjects will be asked to contact [CONTACT_211493].  An unscheduled visit will be arranged so that the Investigator can clinically evaluate and photograph these findings. All subjects will be discontinued from the study if their problem 
remains unchanged/becomes worse. The Investigator can decide to stop the study if he/she 
believes that the participants’ participation is no longe r safe or if another treatment may be 
more helpful. The IRB or FDA may stop the research for the safety of the participants.  These adverse events will be documented and reported as required for compliance with applicable regulations.   
 
All study records and information will be identified by [CONTACT_49252]. All subject identifiers will be removed from all documents. The link between subject name [CONTACT_211497] -protected files at the study site. Documents 
containing identifying information will be kept in locked files in the research staff’s locked office. All electronic study data will be password protected with access limited to members of the research team. No direct identifying information will  be shared with any outside 
entities, unless required by [CONTACT_17513] (FDA and IRB).  Electronic data (electronic data entry - Case Report Forms) if used will be password protected.   
 Photographs of the subject’s face will be taken at Enrollment/Treatment and Follow -Up  
visits. These photographs will be identified by [CONTACT_211494]. Subject confidentiality will be protected to the greatest extent possible.  Quantitative surface area assessments will be done on lateral 3D images taken at baseline and compared with 3D imag es obtained at all 
follow -up visits .  
 
Study Protocol    This study will be performed in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act. These guidelines will be followed specifically with regards to the privacy and confidentiality of subject care and study records.  Personnel associated with Investigator’s office and the governing Institutional Review Board, have the right to review the data, including photographs, collected during this study.   
 Personnel associated with Investigator’s office and the governing Institutional Review Board have the right to review the data, including photographs, collected during this study.   
 
17. Protocol Deviations  
 
Emergency deviations (deviation necessary to avoid immediate apparent harm or protect life or physical well- being of subjects or others) and major deviations as defined by [CONTACT_211495] [ADDRESS_253367] time for use of high- resolution ultrasound should take approximately 5 minutes.  
 Transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL) measurements will be used to evaluate barrier function of the skin epi[INVESTIGATOR_211487]. The standard time for TEWL measurements should take approximately 5 minutes. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) will be used to noninvasively gather topographical and histologic images of pre - and post- treated skin. The standard time for OCT should take 
approximately [ADDRESS_253368] time for BTC 2000 should take approximately 5 minutes.  
 Biopsies will be taken using 0.33mm biopsy punches of the submental area. Biopsies will allow investigators to correlate changes seen in skin measurements with histology and gene 
expression. Time for two biopsies will take approximately five minutes. Biops ies for 
histology will be fixed immediately after collection in 4% PFA followed by [CONTACT_211496]. Biopsies for gene expression will be put in RNA -Later solution and transferred 
to the Plastic Surgery Research Lab for gene expression analysis. Whole ge nome sequencing 
will not be performed, we will only be analyzing proteins and RNA expression related to collagen, elastin, and the extracellular matrix production.  
Study Protocol    19. References  
 
1. Tobin DJ. Introduction to skin aging. J Tissue Viability. Feb 2017;26(1):37- 46. 
2. Hantash BM, Ubeid AA, Chang H, Kafi R, Renton B. Bipolar fractional radiofrequency treatment induces neoelastogenesis and neocollagenesis. Lasers Surg Med. Jan 2009;41(1):1 -9. 
3. Alster TS, Tanzi EL. Noninvasive lifting of arm, thigh, and knee skin with transcutaneous intense focused ultrasound. Dermatol Surg. May 2012;38(5):754- 759.  
4. Gold MH, Sensing W, Biron J. Use of micro -focused ultrasound with visualization to lift 
and tighten lax knee skin (1.). J Cosmet Laser Ther. Oct 2014;16(5):225 -229.  
5. Alexiades -Armenakas M, Newman J, Willey A, et al. Prospective multicenter clinical trial 
of a minimally invasive temperature -controlled bipolar fractional radiofrequency system 
for rhytid and laxity treatment. Dermatol Surg. Feb 2013;39(2):263- 273.  
6. Gold M, Taylor M, Rothaus K, Tanaka Y. Non -insulated smooth motion, micro -needles RF 
fractional treatment for wrinkle reduction and lifting of the lower face: International study. Lasers Surg Med. Oct 2016;48(8):727 -733.  
7. Dayan, Steven H. MD; Humphrey, Shannon MD; Jones, Derek H. MD; Lizzul, Paul F. MD, PhD, MPH, MBA; Gross, Todd M. PhD; Stauffer, Karen PhD, CMPP; Beddingfield, Frederick C. III MD, PhD. Overview of ATX -101 (Deoxycholic Acid Injection): A 
Nonsurgical Approach for Reduction of Submental Fat. Dermatologic Surgery : November 
2016 - Volume 42 - Issue - p S263 –S270 
8.        Jones DH, Carruthers J, Joseph JH, et al. REFINE -1, a multicenter, randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled, phase 3 trial with ATX -101, an injectable drug for submental 
fat reduction. Dermatologic Surg . January 2016 - Volume 42 - Issue 1 - p 38 -49. 
 20. Appendix  
 
A. Numerical Pain Rating Scale  
 
 
  

Study Protocol     
 
B. Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (GAIS)  
 
GAIS  
 Rating  Description  
 [ADDRESS_253369]  
 [ADDRESS_253370]  
 3 Improved   Obvious improvement in appearance 
from initial condition, but a re -treatment 
is indicated  
 4 No Change   The appearance is essentially the same 
as the original condition  
 5 Worse   The appearance is worse than the 
original condition  
 
  
Study Protocol     
D. Clinician -Reported Submental Fat Rating Scale (CR -SMFRS)1 
 
Scale  Description  
0 Absent  
1 Mild  
2 Moderate  
3 Severe  
4 Extreme  
 
 
 
 
1Dermatologic Surgery: November 2016 - Volume 42 - Issue - p S263 –S270  
  

Study Protocol    E. Submental Skin Laxity Grade (SMSLG)2 
 
 
 
2Dermatologic Surgery: January 2016 - Volume 42 – Issue 1 - p S38 –S49 
 
  
 
 
